
      
         
            
            
            Fruitfull Leſſons, VPON THE PASSION, BVRIALL, RESVRRECTION, Aſcenſion, and of the ſending of the holy Ghoſt.
            GATHERED OVT OF THE FOVRE Euangelists: with a plaine expoſition of the ſame.
            BY MILES COVERDALL.
            
               IOHN. 14.6.
               I am the waie, the truth, and the life no man commeth vnto 
                     〈…〉
                   but by me.
            
            LONDON▪ Printe
                  •
                b
                  •
                Thomas 
                  〈◊〉
               . 
                  •
               593.
         
         
            
            
            The Author to the Reader.
            
               SInce our humane imperfections are ſuch, as one ſinne driueth out another and the frailtie of our natures is ſo great, as hauing touched the brim of the Ocean thereof, we neuer ceaſe till we are ouerwhelmed & drowned in the bottome of the ſame: ſince of our ſelues wee are but graftes of a corruptious tree, children of eternall darkneſſe, infidels who bowe the knee to Baal, hauing vncircumciſed hearts and lying lippes, whoſe mindes are fixed on the world, and faſtned on Mammon, I thought good (Chriſtian Reader) conſidering the ſelf loue in vs, which haue conuerted the Angels into deuilles, which (as Auguſtine witneſſeth) hath builded the verie Babylon of contempt of God, to leuell out a waie for all men to tread, a glaſſe for all men to ſee, an Adamant wherewith all ſoules may be drawen to the beholding of their vices, the loathing of the ſame, and finally the amendement and hartie conuerſion

for their miſdeeds. And for that it moſt euidently appeareth, that the iuſtest man falleth oftentimes a daie, and they that diſcerne errors in themſelues and ſeeing then that they are in the next ſtep to amendement, it behoueth vs to conſider the weakneſſe which is in vs, how farre we are fallen and d
                  •
               o fall from the protection of the iuſt, ſo that in the end we may in the ſpring▪ of repentance waſh away originall and ſucceſsive ſinnes, which haue defiled our ſoules, and cleaning to the 
                  〈◊〉
                corner ſtone, wheron our ſaith ſhould be builded, withſtand the peri
                  •
                of perdition, which our ghoſtly enemie hath raiſed againſt vs.
            And 
                  ••
               r that truth is neuer knowen but by his contrarie, and our nakedneſſe is not diſcloſed, vnleſſe our eies be opened, let vs examine our ſelues, and we ſhall find, that theſe are inſeparable errours in vs, from which the iusteſt are not exempted, namely, blindnes, and corruptnes of iudgement, 
                  〈◊〉
                ſpirit, miſtrust in GOD, to be ſlacke and wearie in Gods ſeruice, defaming of Gods truth, not to haue God before the eies, ſurmiſing, vanitie 
                  〈◊〉
                heart, curioſitie and niceneſſe, grudging in our heartes againſt the enemie, bitterneſſe, deſire of vengeance, a mans good intent, greedines to be ſeen and praiſed, vainglorie, ambition, proper election, maintaining of our owne and diſ
                  •
               lainfull, falſe, vnfaithfull wicked are, and 
                  〈…〉
                points and feats, wherwith the 
                  〈…〉
                the good men, that keepe themſelues from 
                  〈…〉
               . Theſe and other innumerable vices ſhall euery 
                  〈…〉
                good ſo euer he be) find in himſelfe, if he ſearch 
                  〈…〉
                vprightly and throughly to the bottome.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                then, that we finde our ſelues ſo vicious, altogether 
                  〈◊〉
                poiſoned, and wounded vnto death, we ought daie and night without ceaſing, to complaine and lament before God, to watch and pray vnto God for remiſsion of our ſins,

yet ſhould we not deſpaire of life. The true Phiſition of our ſoules came downe from heauen, & through his paſsion hath he made vs a plaiſter for our wounds, onely let vs vſe it and lay it to the ſore. The faithfull Samaritane poureth oile and wine into our wounds, taketh vs vp to cure and to heale vs, onely let vs follow him, & faſhion our ſelues after his image. He is the braſen ſerpent without ſinne, whome with the eyes of faith we must behold hanging, and lift vp vpon the croſſe for vs, hee taking our ſinnes vppon himſelfe, giueth vs his owne innocencie.
            If the burthen of ſinne now oppreſſeth and grieueth vs, we ought to runne vnto him, he ſhall eaſe vs & giue vs reſt, for his bloud waſheth awaie our ſinnes, him hath the father giuen vnto vs to be our righteouſneſſe and redemption.
            Beſides this great treaſure that God hath giuen vs in Chriſt, he is ſet foorth vnto vs, eſpecially in his paſsion, for a patterne or example, whereby we may learne to die from ſin, and finde a preſeruatiue against vices to come. For ſelfeloue and high eſteeming of a mans owne ſelfe is the wel-ſpring of all vice, Conſider that Chriſt was not proude himſelfe of his owne highneſſe, but tooke vpon him the ſhape of a ſeruant, & come to ſerue vs, humbled him most lowly, loued not himſelfe ſought not his owne, deſired not his honor, but the honor of his father: all deſpite and reproch fell vpon him. If we ponder this by ſaith, all greedy loue of our ſelues ſhall fall away.
            The obedience of Ieſu in true beleefe conſidered, expelleth and healeth our diſobedience, and the idolairie of our owne carnall heart. With his obedience couereth he the diſobedience of all men, ſo farre as we abide in the obedience of faith, that Chriſt be dearer vnto vs than the whole world, for the which cauſe we freely giue ouer our ſelues into his obedience,

ſuffering all things for his ſake. Pride and vaineglorie is healed through Chriſts humilitie and contempt, which he ſuffered for vs manifolde. Learne of me (ſaith he) for I am meeke and lowly of heart. Why are wee ſo greadie of temporal things, when Chriſt the Lord of heauen and earth became for vs ſo poore, hanging bare and naked vppon the croſſe? The chaſt pure life of Ieſus Chriſt expelleth in vs all vncleanneſſe of the fleſh. Alſo his martirdome, anguiſh and trouble which in his fleſh hee ſuffered for vs, quencheth the luſt and concupiſcence of the fleſh.
            O how euill doth it become a beleeuer, to be irefull and greedie of vengeance, when his fore-runner, beeing in moſt humilitie like vnto a ſheepe, praied for his enemies?
            Enuie and hatred is highly expelled, if we conſider the excellent deepe loue of Ieſu towards vs. Gluttonie and exceſſe of life ſhall fall awaie from vs, if we well remember that Chriſt for vs dranke vineger mixt with gall.
            As it is here ſhewed in certaine points, euen ſo againſt all vices and blemiſhes of the ſoule, there may remedie be
                  •
                ſound in the paſsion of Chriſt, if it bee rightly vſed in the contemplation of faith. The old Adam ought we to lay aſide, to mortifie the members vppon earth, and to put on Chriſt the Lord, as the new wedding garment. In the croſſe ought to be our exerciſe, our ioy, comfort, and life.
            Herevnto alſo helpeth vs our heauenly father, who vnto vs his children (whom he most entirely loueth) ſuffreth manifold paſsions, afflictions, troubles, and anguiſhes, ſickneſſe, pouertie, and perſecution to come: to keepe vs vppon the croſſe, leaſt we as negligent people gape for temporall earthie things. And if we will needs follow our owne lusts, he hedgeth our waie with thornes, nourturing and humbling vs through trouble, that we being tried and purified as the gold

in the fire, may crie and call vnto him, and that we may giue our earthly things, ſeeing we finde no quietneſſe in them. He bringeth vs into the land of promiſe, howbeit through the wilderneſſe, through much trauell and labour. Bleſſed are they that in patience without murmuring, ſuffer the Lorde to worke, and doo faithfully follow him.
            All this, and more than I can ſaie, ought to be the conſideration and exerciſe, when we celebrate the ſupper of the Lord Ieſu, that wee ſo ſprinkle the bloud of Chriſt in our heartes, and drinke it into vs, that it may worke in vs, and bring forth fruit. Our eies and hearts we ought to lift vp in to heauen, and conſider what the bread and wine pointeth vs vnto, namely, vnto the bodie of Chriſt, that was offered vp vpon the croſſe for our ſinnes, and to his bloud, that was ſhed for the waſhing awaie of our offences: and that we faſhion our ſelues vnto his image, and practiſe alſo ſuch loue one towardes another. This is the proofe that Paul ſpeaketh of, with the which a faithfull beleeuer ought to exerciſe himſelf before, and in the Lords ſupper examining well his faith and loue, which out of the loue of God towards vs, is kindled and increaſed. Firſt ought a man to conſider the excellent loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, who ſo loued vs, that he died for vs. And ſeeing that he biddeth vs to ſo high a feaſt of his grace we ought alſo to ponder the ſame, in ſuch ſorte, that wee bee thankfull vnto him, and prepare our ſelues thereafter.
            Saint Paul ſaith, that there is a feeding with milke, and a feeding with ſtrong meate, which is to bee obſerued according to the nature and propertie of thoſe that receiue the meate. And in the Church of God there be three ſortes of men, as the ſame, by the high illuminated goodwiſe teacher Auguſtine, and by others is written.
            Firſt, there be men, which hauing ſpent their former

time paſt, in paſtime and wantonneſſe of the world, and conſidering the carefull end thereof, (as they be inwardly moued by the grace of God) haue vndertaken to ceaſe and refraine from ſinne, and from all occaſions of ſinne, & in moſt diligent wiſe, as neere as they can, with the aſſiſtance, grace and helpe of God, to be circumſpect and warie thereof: albeit they are yet weake, and haue not ſo ſtrong a ſpirite, as to laie aſide and deſpiſe all worldly things out of hand. And theſe are the right true beginners of repentant and penitent perſons: though they be not new beginners, yet are they vnto God the Lord ſo deare, that all things cannot ſufficiently commend and praiſe it.
            This is witneſſed vnto vs by the holy Goſpell, of the vnthriftie ſonne: who when with ſhamefull riot hee had wantonly conſumed his inheritance, did in time of his extreame hunger, conuert and turne againe to his louing Father, and receiued not onely gracious forgiueneſſe of his treſpaſſe, but alſo ſpeciall tokens of his fathers loue: as the garment, the kiſſe, the fat calfe, the ſweete minſtrelſie and melodie. This is the firſt anker of true repentance. This is the firſt ſtate concerning the bleſſed ſwineheard, who forſaking the hogges wiih the coddes, (draffe or ſwillinges) that hee ſometimes greedily filled his belly withall, and returning to his louing father, is now in his firſt comming againe to his mercifull father, graciouſly taken vp, receiued and rewarded.
            Who ſo now with this vnthriftie ſonne forſaketh his ſinnes, and comming agayne in true and heartie repentance vnto God his moſt louing and gracious Father, ſaith meekely: O Father, I am not worthie to bee called thy ſonne, for I haue ſinned againſt heauen and before thee, O make nice one of thy hired ſeruants. To him ſhall the father

denie nothing. Who ſo nowe with an vnfained heart and mouth may ſpeake this vnto God, and truely and vnfainedly ſeeketh Ieſus, aſſuredly hee findeth him, and hath with him a cheerefull ſupper. Looke vnto whom God in his great mercie giueth ſuch a taſt of his geace, let him render thanks and praiſe vnto almightie GOD, let him nowe looke for it, that the Father who hath receiued him, will alſo nourture him in his owne ſchoole, and through manifolde aduerſities furniſh him, prepare him, and make him more perfect. Hee hath beene fedde with the milke, hee muſt learne alſo to knowe, what harde meate meaneth. Through aduerſitie and trouble, ſome chaunces, hee muſt bee tempted and proued, whether hee haue ought in him of the bleſſed ſeede that groweth vpwardes vnto eternall life. Which thing ſhall well appeare and bee made manifeſt, if in time of temptation and troubles, hee bee not choaked with the thornes, nor troden downe by the high waie ſide, nor withered among the ſtones, but founde fruitfull in a good and fertill ground.
            Other men there bee, which are called reformers, to whome belongeth ſomewhat more than there doth vnto the other. For like as it appertaineth to the firſt repentant or prnitent perſons, that they continually and feruently, with the confeſſion of their ſinnes vnto God, with ſorrowe and lamentation, with praier, watching, and chaſtiſing of the the bodie, doo breake out a waie from theyr olde ſinnes, harneſſing and arming themſelues agaynſt others for to come, and earneſtly withſtanding and forſaking their owne euill and naughtie cuſtomes, (if they minde to bring foorth fruite, and not to fall awaie againe:) Euen ſo the reformers in the ſeconde order and manner, after the harde

rooting out of vice and wickedneſſe, muſt ſtill exerciſe them ſelues in the will of God and in good works, ſeeking diligently experience thereof in holy Scripture, and of thoſe teachers who by reaſon of long practiſe, and by the Scriptures, can declare and teach the ſame waie. When theſe men in ſuch a ſtedfaſt purpoſe to walke and practiſe themſelues in the will of God with his grace and power, doe goe vnto the ſupper of the Lord, they inwardly with ioy and fruit of the godly feaſt are nouriſhed and refreſhed. For who ſo deſireth to cleaue vnto vertue and to a godly life, ſhall no where find the ſame ſo euidently and plaine, as in Chriſts paſsion, whereof hee is mindfull at the ſupper with faith and thankeſgiuing.
            The third ſort of men are 
                  ••
               lled perfect: not that anie man here in time may be perfect, as to lacke nothing, or to haue no ſinne in him, but therefore are they named perfect, becauſe theyr exerciſe is ſuch, that after long accuſtomate doing of vertuous deeds, after many ſpiritual fruits brought forth by them in patience, after many temptations, which they with the help of God haue ouercome. They haue ſo wholy humbled and caſt downe themſelues before God, being reconciled with him, that they are become one ſpirite with Chriſt their head, whom they cleaue vnto, whoſe croſſe and holy paſsion they follow without fainting, ſo farre as theyr wit and power may ſuffer, being dead from the world & the fleſh, following onely the Lord Ieſu Chriſt, ſuffering with him, and liuing with him. Theſe with their minds & harts ſtep ſomwhat higher than the others, hauing their dwelling in heauen, in the ſweet contemplation & beholding of Gods Almightineſſe, wiſedome, and goodnes, with feruent deuotion. Which men alſo by inioying of the ſaid feaſt, according to their beleefe and ferue
                  ••
                loue, receiue the more excellent 
                  •
               ruites, whereby they may expell the temptations that they

like not. For the deuill keepeth no holy daie, he ſleepeth not, runneth about as a roaring lion: he ceaſeth not, and therefore theſe men continually get them to their weapons, with the conſideration of the paſsion of Chriſt. Abraham the good friend of God, muſt ſtil driue awaie the rauenous birds from the ſacrifice, till the Sunne goe downe, and till a man cheerefully ſaie, In peace will I laie me downe and take my reſt, &c.
            This probation muſt be well taken heed vnto, for many men not iuſtly conſidering themſelues, neither right diſcerning this meate from others, receiue the foode of life vnto death. Not that this holy bread was inſtituted and ordained of Chriſt, to hurt any man, but becauſe the euil man doth wickedly receiue that which is wholſome, & abuſeth it thorough vnbeleefe. Therefore iuſtly doeth Paul exhort, that there be firſt had a diligent examination of a mans ſelfe, & that then he eate of this bread, and drinke of this cup. Thus let euerie man take good heed to his owne ſtate and vocation, that this banket may ſet him forward, not vnto his hurt but to eternall life.
            Who ſo taketh not heed vnto this difference, & to him ſelfe, as (alas) carnall people do, which are not ſpiritually inſtructed. The ſame faileth oft in many things, and vndertaketh to flie high, yea, higher than his knowledge & power may attaine. Hereof then it alſo proceedeth (as we ſee before our eyes) that ſo fewe folkes come to ſteadfaſt amendement, namely, euen hereof, that when men are not exerciſed in diſcerning of Gods matters from others, a mad headie motion of ſenſualtie prouoketh them inordinatly to ſitte higheſt at the table, wheras yet they are not worthie of the loweſt place, and ſo will they forthwith poſſeſſe the ſeate roiall, afore they haue found the aſſes, or kept the ſheepe, as of Dauid & Saul

in figure it is read. But thus ought it not to bee: for though the grace of the holy Ghoſt vſe not long fetches about, yet commeth no man ſodainly to the happieſt ſtep. I ſpeake after the common courſe, as it beſeemeth vs to talke and do in the Church of God, namely, after the ordinance which he hath appointed vs.
            Behold Saint Paul being ſo perfect in the law, that the world could not accuſe him, being alſo chaſt, earneſt, feruent and well exerciſed in all vertues, whom God that had ſeparated him from his mothers wombe, would cal to his ſeruice. Though he was taken vp into the third heauen, and ſaw ſecrets that no man can expreſſe, yet doth not he truſt ſo much thereto, as (by reaſon of that great grace) to magnifie himſelfe, and to take vpon him the office of preaching, before he being taught at Gamaliels feet, and baptiſed and inſtructed of Ananias, had perceiued in himſelfe, and proued, that ſame which he afterwards out of the perfectnes of the ſpirit, might distribute abrode vnto al Chriſtendome. This is peraduenture laughed to ſcorne of the vnexpert, proud, worldlyneſſe: but who ſo hath eares circumciſed with the feare of God, will thinke more vpon the matter.
            He that will ſit now at the table of the high king let him diligently conſider what hee receiueth in his ſoule through faith, namely, the body end bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, which feedeth and nouriſheth him to eternall life, and draweth him to God, altereth him, and maketh him ſteadfaſt, which the outward bread taken with the moueh, doth point and leade vnto: yea, let vs ponder, how great loue, and what an example Chriſt ther ſetteth before him, that he alſo muſt prepare the like: that is, that he to his power muſt follow the loue, life and paſsion of Chriſt, to the intent, that hee being wounded with Chriſts loue, & faſtned with him vpon the croſſe, may

abide in him vnto the end.
            For in the paſsion of Chriſt, is the inſtrustion of the way which we ought and muſt follow vnto eternall life. There alſo is information where and how the ſame waie and the euerlaſting truth is ſhewed & found. Thus the penitent ſindeth the waie, the reformer the vndoubted vnwandring truth: the perfect, the verie life eternall, which is Chriſt Ieſus, and there is eternall peace. God graunt, that all they which reade this little booke, and conſider this matter, may ſo burne in loue and feruent deuotion, that they continue and liue in Chriſt, and he in them for euer, Amen.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE PASSION OF CHRIST, Out of the holy Euangeliſts.
            
               
                  THE feaſt of ſweete bread (which is alſo called Eaſter) drue nigh, namely, after two daies. Then ſayd Ieſus to his diſciples: Know ye, that after two daies ſhall be Eaſter, and the ſonne of man ſhal be betraied and crucified. At the ſame time were the chiefe prieſts and councell gathered together in the pallace of the high Prieſt, whoſe name was Caiphas, and there they counſelled, how they might craftily apprehend take, and kill him. Howbeit they feared the people. Therfore ſayd they together, Not on the holie daie, leaſt there bee an vproare among the people. But Satan was entered into Iudas (called Iſcarioth) one of the twelue, who went out to the high Prieſts & rulers, intending to deliuer him vnto them: therefore how he would deliuer Ieſus vnto them, he told them and ſayd: What will you giue me and I will deliuer him vnto you. When they heard that, they were gladde, and agreed with him, promiſing him thirtie pence. Then promiſed hee them, & ſought from thence forth oportunity, how he might

deliuer Ieſus vnto them handſomely and without any vprour.
               But afore the feaſt which is called Paſſah, Ieſus knowing that his houre was come, and that hee ſhould depart out of this world vnto the Father, while he loued his owne that were in the world, he loued them vnto the end.
               On the firſt day of ſweet bread, when they offer paſſah, the Diſciples came to Ieſu and ſaid: where wilt thou that we go and prepare Paſſah for thee? Then ſent he two of his diſciples: namely, Peter and Iohn, ſaying: Goe and prepare for vs, that we may eat Paſſah. They ſaid: where? then ſaid he: Goe into the citie to one, beholde when yee enter in, one ſhall meet you bearing a pitcher with water, follow him into the houſe that he entreth into, and ſay vnto the houſholder: The maiſter ſaith vnto thee, my time is now heere, that I will eat Paſſah with thee: Where is now the place where the multitude ſhall be kept? Where is the Parlour that I ſhall eat Paſſah in with my Diſciples? then ſhall hee ſhewe you a great Parlour that is paued, there make ye ready.
               So the Diſciples went and found as the Lord had tolde them, and they made readie the Paſſah. At euen came Ieſus with the twelue, and when it was time he ſate him down at the table and the twelue with him.
               Now when he ſat at the table with his diſciples, and they did eate, hee ſaide: I haue greatly longed and heartely deſired to eat this Paſſah with you afore I ſuffer: For I ſay vnto you, that now from hence forth I will not eat of it till it bee fulfilled in the kingdome of God.
               Now as they did eat, Ieſus tooke the bread, gaue thankes and brake it, gaue it to his Diſciples, and ſaid: Take, eat, this is my bodie which ſhalbe betraied and deliuered for you, doe

this in remembraunce of mee. Likewiſe alſo when they had eaten, hee tooke the cuppe, rendered thankes, and gaue vnto them, ſaying: Take and diuide among you, and drinke ye all thereof. This is my bloud of the new Testament, which is ſhed for you, and for many, to the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. I ſay vnto you, that from henceforth I ſhall not drinke of the fruite of the vine, vntill the day that I ſhall drinke it new with you in the kingdome of my Father. And they all dranke therof.
               
                  Now followeth the doctrine and meditation.
                  
                     HEre ſhould we children of beleefe, diligently ponder and conſider, what Chriſt hath done for our ſakes: namely, that hee, when hee had fulfilled his miniſtration committed to him of the father, and nowe would offer vp himſelfe vpon the croſſe for the ſinnes of the world, and with his owne death deliuer mankind frō the captiuity of

Satan, and from eternall death declared, how he loued his owne vntill the end,Iohn. 13. Luk. 22. and with what deſire he longed to eate the Eaſter lambe with his diſciples, before hee ſuffered. Giuing them thereby to vnderſtand,1. Cor. 5. Eſay. 53. Iohn. 1 that he was the true paſcal lambe, which being ſlaine for vs, ſhuld take awaie the ſinnes of the world, that the figures of the olde Teſtament might bee reduced into the truth. That like as the Iews (to whom with a preſcribed ordinaunce it was commaunded, yeerely to eate the Eaſter lambe) did the ſame for a memoriall of their deliuerance out of Aegypt:Exod. 12. So we beleeuers alſo, might in the new Teſtament, haue a remembrance and exerciſe of the gracious redemption, whereas we by his death are deliuered from the power of darknes, of the deuil, & of ſinne, & brought to eternall life.
                  And to the intent now that the remembrance of ſuch excellent benefits, grace, and merites of the paſſion of Chriſt, might euer be freſh and new with his diſciples and all beleeuers, our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt, when he now would go vnto death, and paie the ranſome for the ſinnes of all the world, he then did eate the Eaſter lambe with his Diſciples, to finiſh the ſhadowe of the olde Teſtament: and that he might bee remembred thereby, he inſtituted the bread & wine, for a ſacrament and memoriall of his ho
                        •
                     ie body and bloud.
                  Seeing then, that wee are cleanſed, deliuered, and redeemed with ſo deare & worthie a treaſure; namely,
                        
                           〈◊〉
                         67. with the pretious bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, the vndefiled

lambe:1 Pet. 1. 1. Iohn 1. 1. Cor. 11. 1. Cor. 9. wee ought neuer to forget ſuch an high benefite, but at all times with thankfulnes to remember, that Chriſt our Paſchall lambe, was ſlayne and offered vp for vs vpon the croſſe,1. Pet 2. that we from hence forth ſhould walke in pureneſſe, ſinglenes and innocencie of life: and that when wee in the Supper, by true faith do eate his bodie, and drinke his bloud, we might through him be ſo ſtrengthened and fedde to eternall life, as to abide and liue in him for euer. For he is the bread of life that came downe from heauen,Iohn. 6. to nouriſh and ſtrengthen our weake and hungrie ſoules, yea to make vs dead to liue againe.
                  But then eate we his fleſh, and then drinke we his bloud, when wee through true beleefe do ponder & conſider, what hee hath doone and ſuffered for our ſakes: then are we partakers of his ſupper & feaſt, whē we for his ſake do liue, as he did for his Fathers ſake. He gaue himſelfe whole vnto vs: ſo ought we to giue our ſelues whole vnto him, and to our neighbour. To him through beleefe, to our neighbour through charitable loue. Through faith we abide in him:Iohn. 15. by working loue hee abideth in vs. The more wee loue, the more enioy we of this meate: the more wee beleeue, the more we loue. In this ſhall all men knowe that we are his Diſciples, if we loue one another.Iohn. 13. 1. Ioh 2.3.4 God is loue, and hee that abideth in loue, abideth in God,Iohn. 15. & God in him. What greater loue can there be, than to giue his owne life for vs? The death of Chriſt ought neuer to come out of our heartes: that wee may doe and ſuffer all thinges for his ſake that dyed for vs.
               
            
            
               
               The ſecond part.
               WHen ſupper was ended, after that the deuil had put in the heart of Iudas Iſcarioth Simons ſon, to betray him: Ieſus knowing that the father had giuen all things into his hands, & that he was come frō God, & went to God, he roſe from Supper, and laid aſide his vpper garments, & took a towel & girt himſelfe. After that poured he water into a Baſon, and began to waſh his Diſciples feet, and to wipe them with the towell wherewith he was girt. Then came hee to Simon Peter, and Peter ſaid vnto him: Lord, dost thou waſh my feet? Ieſus anſwered and ſaid vnto him, what I doe thou knoweſt not now, but thou ſhalt know heereafter: Peter ſaid vnto him, thou ſhalt neuer waſh my feet. Ieſus anſwered him: If I waſh thee not, thou haſt no part with me, Simon Peter ſaid vnto him: Lord, not my feet onely, but alſo my hands and my head. Ieſus ſaid vnto him, Hee that is waſhed needeth not ſaue to waſh his feete, but is cleane euery whit: and ye are cleane, but not all, for hee knew who ſhould betray him: therefore ſaid he, ye are not al clean. So after he had waſhed their feete, and receiued his clothes, and was ſet downe, he ſaid vnto them againe: w
                     •
                  t you what I haue done to you? Ye call me maister and Lord, and ye ſay well, for ſo I am. If I then your Lord and maiſter haue waſhed your feet, ye alſo ought to waſh one anothers feet: for I haue giuen you an enſample, that yee ſhould doe as I haue done to you. Verely verely I ſay vnto you: The ſeruaunt is not greater than his maister, neyther the meſſenger greater than he that ſent him. If yee vnderstand theſe thinges, happie are ye, if ye do them.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  HEere ought we diligently to conſider the vnſpeakeable and feruent loue of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt,Loue. who vntill the ende leaueth nothing vndone that may ſerue for our welfare.Humblenes. Likewiſe alſo ſhould we ponder and regard the meeke lowlines of him, in that hee the king of heauen doth humble himſelfe, euen to waſh his Diſciples feete: which thing is accounted baſe and vile amongſt men: yea euen vnto the man that betraied him, is not he aſhamed, neyther refuſeth to ſhew ſuch lowlines and worke of loue.
                  By this we learne, to declare all workes of charitable loue vnto our neighbor, and not to bee aſhamed (how high ſoeuer we be) meekly to do our neighbor ſeruice, though he be poore, baſe, and ſmall in reputation, yea, albeit hee hath already hurt and betrayed vs. We ought to learne with Chriſt our head, to doe good: not onely to our brethren and friends, but alſo to our aduerſaries, enemies, euill willers, and ſuch as loue vs not: euen vnto them ſhould wee ſhewe friendſhip, ſeruing them, being gentle, milde, and louing vnto them. We muſt pray vnto the Lorde, that he wil graunt vs grace to fulfill and do, that we heare and read of him.
                  Furthermore, conſidering that we daily perceiue in our ſelues ſpottes and blemiſhes of ſinne, ſo that our feet (that is to ſay, our affections & deſires) while wee walke in the myerie waie, are ſtill continually defiled and ſtayned: we ought therefore inceſſantly

to watch and to call vnto God, that he with the water of his grace, will vouchſafe to make cleane our feete, and waſh away the mire of earthie and carnall ſpottes: that wee in the pureneſſe of faith may abide in Chriſt our head, and he in vs.
               
            
            
               Of the Sermon that Chriſt made vnto his Diſciples after the Supper.
               
                  
                     The exhortation and warning of Chriſt.
                  
                  THen ſaide Ieſus vnto his Diſciples: This night ſhall you all bee offended becauſe of me. For it is written: I ſhall ſmite the ſhepheard, and the ſheepe of the flock ſhal be ſcattered But when I am riſen againe, I will go before you into Galilee. Peter anſwered,
                     The preſumption & raſhnes of Peter.
                   and ſaid vnto him: And though they all bee offended becauſe of thee, yet will not I be ſo. Then ſaid Ieſus to him: Verely I ſay vnto thee, that this night before the cocke crowe twiſe, thou ſhalt denie me three times. Vpon this ſpake Peter further: Though I ſhould die with thee, yet will I not denie thee: and ſo ſaid all the Diſciples likewiſe. But Ieſus ſaid: I ſpeake not of you all: I know whom I haue choſen. He that eateth bread with me, ſhall lift vp his heele against me. This I tell you afore hand, ere it come to paſſe: that when it is done, ye may beleeue, that I am he. Verely verelie I ſay vnto

you, he that receiueth him whom I ſend, receiueth me:
                     The dignitie and worthines of the diſciples. The foreknowledge of Chriſt.
                   & who ſo receiueth me, receiueth him that ſent me.
               When Ieſus had ſpoken this, he was troubled in ſpirit, & protested and ſaide: Verely verely I ſay vnto you, one of you ſhall betray me, yea euen he that eateth with me. The Diſciples looked one vppon another, and doubting of whome hee ſpake, they were very ſorie and diſmaied, and began to ſay one after another: Lord is it I? Then ſaid Ieſus: One of the twelue, euen he that dippeth his hand with me in the platter, he ſhall betray mee. The ſonne of man goeth, as it is written of him: but woe vnto him by whom the ſonne of man is betraied. Better it were for him, that he neuer had been borne.
                     The preſumptuouſnes of Iudas.
                   Then ſaid Iudas that betraied him, Lord, is it I? Then ſpake Ieſus: Thou hast ſaid.
               One whom Ieſus loued among the Diſciples, lay vpon Ieſus lappe. To him beckened Peter, and ſaid: Who is he that he ſpeaketh of? Now when he leaned on Ieſus brest, he ſayde vnto him: Lord, who is it? Ieſus aunſwered: He it is, vnto whom I ſhall reach the ſoppe. And when hee had dipped in the bread, he gaue it vnto Iudas Simon Iſcarioth:
                     Treaſon commeth of the deuill.
                   and after the ſoppe entred the deuill into him. And Ieſus ſaid vnto him: That thou doeſt, doo it quickly. None of thoſe that ſate at the table, perceiued why he ſpake this. Some thought, ſeeing Iudas had the purſe, that Ieſus had commaunded him to buy ſome thing neceſſarie at the feast, or to giue ſome thing vnto the poore. Now when hee had taken it, hee went out immediately, and it was night.
               Now when hee was gone foorth, Ieſus ſaide: Now is the ſonne of man glorified, and God is glorified in him. If God be glorified by him, then ſhall God glorifie him in himſelfe, and ſhall ſtraight way glorifie him. Little children, I am yet a

ſmall time with you. Ye ſhall ſeeke me, and as I ſaid vnto the Iewes, whither I go, ye cannot come. And now I ſay vnto you: A new commaundement I giue you, to loue one another as I haue loued you, that yee euen ſo loue one another. Herein ſhall all men know and perceiue, that yee are my Diſciples, if ye haue loue among your ſelues. Then ſaide Simon Peter: Lord, whither goest thou? Ieſus aunſwered him, and ſaid: Whither I go, thou canst not followe mee now, but thou ſhalt followe me hereafter. Then ſaid Peter vnto him: Why may not I now follow thee? I will ieopard my life for thee Ieſus aunſwered: Wilt thou ieopard thy life for mee? Verelie, verelie I ſay vnto thee: Afore the cock crow, thou ſhalt deny mee thriſe.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  GOod vertuous children ſhould harken moſt diligently vnto the wordes of their father, and faſten them in their hartes: but ſpecially thoſe wordes which hee ſpeaketh and committeth vnto them, now when hee mindeth by death to departe from them, and to take his leaue of them. For the ſame wordes (beeing the laſt) pierce verie deepe into the heart, and are neuer forgotten. Seeing then, that we are Gods children, and Chriſt heere nameth vs ſo to be, with his Diſciples: wee ought verie diligently to ponder and conſider all his words and doctrine, but ſpecially ſuch as hee vttered vnto them, when hee now would goe to his paſſion. For there ſhal we find an ardent, earneſt, and feruent doctrine, full of moſt excellent, godlie, and ineſtimable loue,

proponed and thruſt into their heartes, with wordes ſweeter than honie. In this Oration bringeth hee foorth ſpecially that ſame, which moſt of all concerneth his Diſciples. Firſt the eternal wiſedome declareth, that hee is ignorant of nothing, that vnto him there is nothing hid. Hee knoweth what ſhall happen vnto them through weakeneſſe of the fleſh, and feare of men: albeit our feeblenes and imbecillitie doth alwaies breake foorth, preſume, and brag more, than wee euer are able to performe, as wee haue example in Peter. Such headie raſhneſſe the Lorde rebuketh, admoniſhing vs of our owne weakeneſſe, and fall.
                  Moreouer, wee ought to conſider in Chriſt our head and fore-runner, how earneſtly, and louingly, he mentioneth and warneth the traytour, ſetting his great offence before his eyes, and alwaies touching him, to remoue him from his wicked purpoſe. Yet maketh hee mention of him, and of the vice, in ſuch ſort, that hee neuer deſireth his hurt, but onely his conuerſion and amendment. His deſire is, that hee were reformed, not that hee ſhould be bewrayed, or that any harme ſhould happen vnto him by him or others. Such lenitie and gentlenes ought wee alſo to ſhewe and declare vnto our enemies, and thoſe that hurt vs: if it only concerne vs, we ſhould not be deſirous of vengeaunce. And though wee all ought ſore to mourne in the Church, that is to ſaye, in the Chriſtian congregation, if there be tranſgreſſors and naughty people, applying our diligence the beſt we can, that ſuch bee not therein: yet whereas

their vices be ſecret, and as yet not opened, we ought in loue and patience to beare and ſuffer them vntill the harueſt, when the Lorde ſhall purge and cleanſe his ſtoore. Beſides this, wee ought not to ceaſe with warning and aduertiſement, with correction & doctrine, that they may leaue off from their obſtinate wickednes.
                  And when the congregation of God through his grace is quite of ſuch euill people, and diſcharged of ſuch wicked blemiſhes, God muſt bee thanked, and diligence applyed, that no wicked thing breede therein againe.
                  
                     Loue.But aboue all things muſt we regard that principall and new commaundement which Chriſt giueth vs; namely, vpon the loue, that he after a new ſorte hath declared and performed: by the which loue he reneweth thoſe that are his, and plentifully indueth them through the holy Ghoſt, whome hee giueth in their hartes. Loue comprehendeth and fulfilleth all lawes: therefore Chriſt leaueth all other commaundements, and admoniſheth vs onely of loue.
                  Loue hath he himſelfe ſhewed vs afore-hand: of him muſt we learne to loue. Loue is the aſſured and vnfailing euidence of the children of God. Who ſo hath not it, though he had all other vertues, yet hath he nothing, neither is it profitable to him that hee hath. If he haue loue, then hath he all thinges that are neceſſary for his health & ſaluation. Therfore ought we to regard nothing ſo much as loue. There is nothing more acceptable, nothing more perfect, nothing better in heauen and earth, than loue: for it is

of God, and may reſt no where elſe but in God. Onlie loue maketh vs godly, and ſhapeth vs likeſt vnto God: namely, that loue which ſpringeth and groweth out of a pure heart, out of a good conſcience, and of an vnfeined faith. Neuertheles wee muſt loue one another, not with wordes onely, and with tongues, but with the deede, and in the trueth, euen with our whole harts, as Chriſt loued vs.
               
            
            
               
                  IESVS ſaid vnto his Diſciples: Let not your hartes bee troubled. If ye beleeue in God, beleeue in mee. In my Fathers houſe are many manſions. If it were not ſo, I would haue told you. I go to prepare a place for you. And if I go to prepare a place for you, I will come againe, and receiue you euen vnto my ſelfe, that where I am, ye may be alſo: and whither I go ye know, and the way ye know. Then ſaid Thomas: Lord, we wote not whither thou goest: and how is it poſsible for vs to know the way? Then ſaid Ieſus: I am the way, the truth, and the veritie. No man commeth vnto the Father, but by me. If ye had knowne me, yee had knowne my Father alſo. And now ye know him, and haue ſeene him. Philip ſaid vnto him: Lord, ſhew vs the Father, and it ſufficeth vs. Ieſus ſaid vnto him: Haue I beene ſo long time with you, & yet hast thou not knowne me? Philip, he that hath ſeene me, hath ſeene the Father. And how ſaiest thou then: Shew vs the Father? Beleeuest thou not, that I am in the Father, & the Father in me? The words that I ſpeake vnto you, I ſpeak not of my ſelfe, but the Father that dwelleth in me, is he that doth the workes. Beleeue me, that I am in the Father, & the Father in me. At least beleeue me for the verie workes ſake. Verely verely I ſay vnto you: he that beleeueth on mee, the

workes that I do, the ſame ſhall he do alſo, and greater works than theſe ſhall he do, becauſe I go vnto my Father. And whatſoeuer ye aske in my name, that will I doo, that the Father may be glorified by the Sonne. If ye ſhall aske any thing in my name, I will do it.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  WHen the Diſciples of Chriſt heard of his death and departing, what trouble ſhould fall vpon them, and what ſhould happen vnto them through the weakenes of the fleſh, they were verie heauie and diſmayed, for they had great loue vnto the Lorde, and loath were they to departe from him, and yet might they not followe him at this time.Aduerſitie. Therfore louingly doth the Lord comfort and ſtrengthen them, ſaying; Be not afraide, let not your heart be troubled. This comfort is ſpoken vnto vs all: for while wee liue heere, wee muſt looke for much trouble and aduerſitie, whereof ſpringeth many times heauines, feare and vnpatiencie in our fleſh. Therefore Chriſt, who corporally is abſent frō vs,Patience. but preſent among vs with his grace, ſpeaketh vnto vs inwardly by his ſpirit in our hearts, or outwardly by his word and exhortation, comfortably ſtrengthening, and mightily comforting our feeblenes, giuing vs gladneſſe alſo in ſorrow.
                  To be without aduerſitie (if it pleaſe God otherwiſe) is not good for vs: to be raſh and heady is hurtfull. Therefore bringeth he vs in betweene feare & hope, that we ſhould turne neither to the right hand

nor to the left. Much aduerſitie ſuffereth he to come vnto vs, ſo that oft times fearefulnes and ſorrow falleth on vs: but this keepeth vs in his awe,Meeknes. cutteth our combe, bringeth downe our pride, and humbleth vs. Out of this wee learne, that if any humane infirmitie and feeblenes fall vppon vs, as it did vpon the Diſciples in the Lordes paſſion, wee ſhall not vtterly deſpaire, nor fall away through fearfulnes: but remember, that in this time it happeneth ſo of courſe, that wee muſt ſuffer and beare much trouble and aduerſitie, to the intent, that the glorie and power of GOD may bee opened in our weakeneſſe: and yet in all aduerſitie muſt wee bee manly and ſtout, valiauntly fighting for his names ſake. And though of weakneſſe we bee fallen in the field, yet will he haue compaſſion vpon vs, and graciouſly forgiue our fall.The feare of God. For who would not bee afraide to fall, when the earneſt and feruent Apoſtle Peter fell ſo ſore, and all the other Diſciples fledde from the Lorde? If this chaunced to the beloued Diſciples, no man need to thinke the contrary, but the like may happen vnto him. Hee that ſtandeth, let him ſtande faſt in the feare of God, and looke that he fall not.
                  Chriſt vnto his owne that ſtande in this conflict and daungerous battaile,Faith. giueth the ſhield or target of faith, which they caſt vp, and receiue all ſtrokes & ſhotte therein. Beleeue ye in mee (ſaith he.) Who ſo beleeueth in Chriſt, beleeueth in God, for Chriſt is God. This faith giueth ſtrength, and ouercommeth all aduerſitie. As if Chriſt would ſay; Bee not afraide by reaſon of my bodily abſence. Thogh ye ſee me no

more frō henceforth with bodily eyes, yet with my grace and comfort will not I forſake you, but be with you vntill the end of the world. I wil alway remaine with you: Onely looke that ye beleeue in mee, continuing and cleauing faſt vnto mee with the beleefe of the hart, ſo will I defend, deliuer, and ſaue you for euer. Be not afraid for anie aduerſitie: put your confidence in mee. After your trouble, there is prepared for you an excellent great ioy, and an exceeding vnſpeakeable reward.Eternall reward. For in my Fathers houſe are many dwellings, which from euerlaſting haue been prepared for all the elect, that beleeue in me, and follow mee vnder the croſſe. I will not deceiue you, I will ſhew you no vnfaithfull touch, I will not diſappoint you, into no fools paradiſe nor falſe hope wil I bring you. If the manſions were not prepared for you in my Fathers houſe, I would tell it you: but doubt ye not in my promiſe, fall ye not off from faith & hope, ſtay your beleefe and affiance ſtedfaſtly vppon mee, hope vndoubtedly for the dwellings to come, which are ordained and prepared of my Father for you. Heere is nothing but miſerie and trouble, here is no abiding, no dwelling, but a pilgrimage. Heere ye are among ſtraungers: but in my Fathers houſe are many dwellinges, not onely for mee, but alſo for you. And foraſmuch as now through my death I will furniſh and perfectly open and make an entraunce into the ſame dwellings, which were prepared for you of my Father afore the creation of the world: bee not you therefore diſmayed by reaſon of my death.Chriſtes death our life. My death ſhall bee your life and ſaluation. Through my

death go I before you, & make you a way vnto heauen. Looke what the Father of his gratious goodnes hath ordained for you from euerlaſting, that will not hee giue you, but through mee. Therefore muſt I die, and with my death open you the entrance vnto life.
                  And albeit that through my death and aſcenſion I ſhall corporally depart from you, yet will I not faile you, neither forſake you.The fruite of the death of Chriſt. Like as by my death I open vnto you the entrance into the heauenly manſions: ſo will I ſend you my holie ſpirite, who ſhall furniſh you, and make you meete for ſuch dwellings. That I go from you, it is doone for your wealth: therefore be not ſorie, that I open the dwellings vnto you: I wil come to you againe, and receiue you to my ſelfe, that ye may alwaies be with me in my Fathers kingdome. For he that ſerueth me, ſhall alſo bee eternally with mee in my Fathers houſe: thither will I bring you through my power and grace: feare yee not, & beleeue in me. Thus ye know whither I go, namely, vnto the Father, to worke your welfare: yee knowe alſo through what way yee muſt followe mee, euen through faith and aduerſitie. Abide yee ſtedfaſt in faith, and put your truſt in me, ſo will I be your faithfull mediatour and atturney in the preſence of God my Father.
                  And if we would ſay as Thomas did, that we know not the way, the Lord Ieſus inſtructeth vs further,Chriſt is the onely way. & ſaith: that he is the way, the truth, and the life. This ought we poore ſinners well to faſten in our hartes, that Chriſt is the onely way which bringeth vs vnto

God, and that no man may come vnto the father but by him. We ſhould not therefore erect or chooſe vnto our ſelues anie other waie. Onely by Chriſt muſt we come vnto God: this hath hee ſpoken that is the truth it ſelfe, & cannot lie. In the way is he our guide, and by it he leadeth vs vnto himſelfe, and ſo by himſelfe vnto God. Thorough this waie we come to life, and though we muſt die in aduerſitie for his ſake, yet in him we finde eternall life, for hee is the life and reſurrection, Who ſo beleeueth on him cannot die, but commeth out of death into life, and though hee die, yet ſhall he liue in him euerlaſtingly.
                  Furthermore, we muſt take ſure hold vpon Chriſts promiſe, which in life and death ſhal ſtrengthen and comfort vs, in that he promiſeth vs he will giue vs all that we deſire in his name. Wherefore in all our neceſſitie and trouble, we ought to haue recourſe onely vnto him, or vnto God his father, in his name. And then doe we praie in his name, when wee deſire that which may ſerue to the honour of his father, that the father may be honored through the ſonne, and in the ſonne, when we deſire ſuch wholeſome good things as the ſpirit of Chriſt moueth vs vnto.
                  All this doth ſtirre vp in vs patience, peace, ioy in the holy Ghoſt, beleefe in Chriſt, who is our God & h
                        •
                     ad, whom by his doctrine and wonderful miracles we haue learned to be verie good in deede. The holy Scripture alſo both of the old and new Teſtament doth ſufficiently declare the ſame, as Eſa. 7.9.42.49.62. Iere 23.33. Mich. 5. Zach. 13. Mala. 3.
                  
                  What doth hee els in his whole Goſpell, but euidently

and ſtrongly proue, that Ieſus is verie God? as in the 1.2.3.4.5.6.7. Chapters, yea, in all.
                  Chriſt calleth himſelfe the ſonne of God, & teacheth euery where, that we ought to beleue on him: now if he were not verie true God, then had hee deceiued vs, then had he taught vs wrong, & then were he himſelfe a falſe teacher, for wee muſt beleeue in none ſaue onely in God. If Chriſt nowe were not God, how ſhould wee beleeue in him? If he were a falſe teacher, then woulde not the father haue commanded vs to heare him: then had not he ſpoken frō heauen theſe wordes, This is my dearely beloued ſonne, heare him: then had not hee alſo confirmed his cauſe with miracles, raiſed him vp from death, taken him vp into heauen, and ſet him on his right hand: For he hateth all lyers, and hath no pleaſure in the wicked.
                  
                     Iohan. 8. Afore Abraham was, I am. Chriſt ſayth, that the father hath giuen him all power in heauen and earth. Matth. 28. Which ſentence alone, were ſufficient and ſtrong inough, to proue, that Chriſt is God, for God giueth his glorie and honor to none other, Eſa. 42. he ſayth alſo, that what the father hath, it is his, Ioh. 17. And Iohn. 20. ſayth Thomas vnto Chriſt: My Lord and my God, by him were all things created, Iohn. 1. Col. 1. Then muſt he needs be God, for no creature is the maker or creatour of all things. Paule ſayth, He is the wiſedome of God. 1. Corinth. 1. The wiſedome of GOD is eternall, Prouerbes. 8. Eccle. 24. Romanes, 1.9. In the Epiſtle to the Hebrues, what doth Paule elſe euen from the beginning, vntill hee come farre within it, but bring in teſtimonies,

that Chriſt is verie God? Iohn ſaith: Euerie ſpirite which confeſſeth, that Ieſus came in the fleſh, is of God. Out of the which it followeth, that as concerning his diuine nature, hee was from euerlaſting afore he came in the fleſh. Item, Paule to the Hebrews ſaith: God tooke vpon him the ſeede of Abraham: then muſt hee needes be eternall God, before the humanitie was. As alſo Iohn ſaith: The word was God, and the word became man. Item: No man hath ſeen God at any time. The ſonne of God which is in the Fathers boſome, hee hath opened it vnto vs. Iohn. 3.
Saith Chriſt: No man aſcendeth into heauen, ſaue hee that came downe from heauen. Now canſt thou not ſay, that hee came downe as touching his humane nature, for that tooke hee firſt vpon him in the Virgin Mary, Luke. 1. Then muſt it needes bee true, that he came downe concerning his Godhead: as he oft ſaith, I came forth from the father. And Paul Phil. 2. He tooke vppon him the ſhape of a ſeruant. Who? God. Alſo Iohn. 17. he ſaith: Glorifie thou me (ô Father) with the glorie and honour, which I had with thee afore the world was created. And 1. Iohn. 5. Wee knowe that the Sonne of God is come, and hath giuen vs vnderſtanding to knowe him, who is the true God. And we are in him that is true, euen in his Son Ieſus Chriſt: the ſame is the true God, and the eternall l
                        •
                     fe.
                  Seeing then that God hath giuen vs his Sonne to bee our righteouſnes, our ſanctification, ſauiour, redeemer, raunſome, life, light, and head, to beleeue & truſt in him, and finally by him to be ſaued, hee muſt

needs then be the true liuing God, els might not, neither ſhould our hart truſt nor cleaue vnto him. This ought a beleeuing heart, fully and well to take holde of, and ſteadfaſtly to ſtand therevpon.
               
            
            
               IF ye loue me keepe my commaundements, and I will pray the father, and hee ſhall giue you another comforter, that hee may bide with you for euer: euen the ſpirite of truth, whom the world cannot receiue, becauſe the world ſeeth him not, neither knoweth him: but ye know him, for he dwelleth with you, and ſhalbe in you, I will not leaue you comfortleſſe, but will come to you. Yet a little while and the world ſeeth me no more, but ye ſee me, for I liue, and yee ſhall liue. That daie ſhall ye know that I am in my father, and you in me, and I in you: He that hath my commaundements and keepeth them, the ſame is he that loueth me: and he that loueth me, ſhall be loued of my father: and I will loue him, and will ſhewe mine owne ſelfe vnto him. Iudas ſaid vnto him (not Iudas Iſcarioth) Lorde what is the cauſe that thou wilt ſhewe thy ſelfe vnto vs and not vnto the worlde? Ieſus anſwered and ſaid vnto him, if a man loue me he will keepe my ſayings, and my Father will loue him, and wee wil come vnto him, and wil dwell with him. He that loueth me not, keepeth not my ſayings: and the wordes which yee heare, are not mine, but the Fathers which hath ſent me.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  CHriſt promiſeth his Diſciples (that is, ſuch as beleeue on him) that he will giue them whatſoeuer they make peticion for, or deſire: yea, if

they loue him. For faith without loue, is dead, & hath no ſtrength. Where there is faith in man, there followeth loue. Many of vs ſay: Wee beleeue in Chriſt, and we loue him, yet we keepe not his commaundements. Such men ought well to note the wordes that Chriſt heere ſpeaketh:He that loueth worketh. Who ſo loueth me, keepeth my commaundements. The Diſciples thought, that they loued Chriſt right, becauſe they were ſorie for his departing: but Chriſt teacheth vs, that loue conſiſteth in the keeping of his commaundements. If we will declare our loue towardes GOD, it muſt not be done onely with word and tongue, but with keeping of his precepts.Pſal. 34. The eies of the Lord behold the righteous, and his eares conſider their prayers. God will not, that we (whome hee through his grace hath admitted for his own children, and purified through faith) ſhould goe idle. Faith, which God giueth vs in our heart, ſtandeth not idle: wee haue for this purpoſe receyued it, euen to keep his commandements. Now is it his commaundement,Gods commandement that wee denie and mortifie our ſelues, hate and deſpiſe the worlde, take vp our croſſe vppon vs, and followe him, ſtoutly and manfully confeſſing and acknowledging him before the wicked worlde: louing one another, as hee hath loued vs: innocently and godly leading our liues, whereby we may daily receiue the more giftes at his hande. For if wee keepe not his grace that hee giueth vs: if wee do not continually and daily reforme our ſelues, and with all diligence faſhion our liues after his life: it is but right that we looſe againe what wee haue receiued.
                  
                     And if anie man ſaith, it were vnpoſſible for man to keepe Gods commaundementes, (as it is true indeed) yet vnto vs that beleeue in Chriſt,All things poſſible to beleeuers. are all things poſſible: not in our ſelues, but in Chriſt our head. If we abide in him through faith, then hard and vnpoſſible things are light and poſſible vnto vs: for in him that ſtrengtheneth vs, we may do all thinges. And if wee loue God, then for his ſake that is beloued, wee may doe and ſuffer all thinges:Loue ouercommeth all things. for there is nothing but loue ouercommeth it. Our Lorde Ieſus Chriſt fulfilleth the commaundements and will of his heauenly Father. So farre as wee now are his members incorporated with him, and abiding in him as our head through faith, our daily exerciſe, feruentnes, and diligence ſhall bee, in vndertaking to perfourme and keepe his commaundementes. And if wee, out of a true beleefe, doe applie ſuch diligence, to keepe his preceptes, then m
                        •
                      it be perceiued, that we loue God.
                  And if that after ſuch diligence in keeping Gods commandements, there be ought lacking (as we ſhal euer heere want ſome thing) wee muſt crie vnto our heauenly Father, and pray. O Father, forgiue vs our debts and treſpaſſes. And then haue wee with him a faithfull mediatour, euen Ieſus Chriſt the righteous, who maketh interceſſion for vs, and taketh our faults vpon himſelfe: & what wee are not not able, that fulfilleth he for vs. Thus is it his firſt, & higheſt cōmaundement, which he earneſtly requireth of vs,Faith, Loue, keeping of the cōmandements. that wee beleue in him. Where the ſame faith is right, it brings with it loue, which keepeth al the commandements.

Now when we begin to breake our mindes off from earthie worldly thinges, and to ſet them vpon godlie heauenly things, which Chriſt calleth vs vnto. Then take we in hande to bee obedient vnto God the Father, after the example and patterne of Chriſt: for he loued vs firſt. If wee now alſo loue him, and practiſe our ſelues in his loue, then ſhall hee helpe vs to keepe his commaundements.
                  And to the intent that we may be able to put our truſt in him, to loue him, and to obſerue his precepts, hee promiſeth vs his holy ſpirite, to worke all ſuch things in vs.
                  Hee comforteth alſo his Diſciples and all his elect in this world: as if he would ſay: Be not yee afraide neither ſorrowfull, by reaſon of my departing. Albeit I now die, and goe corporally from you vnto the Father, yet will I alwaies haue a fatherly loue, faithfulneſſe and care for you: neither will I leaue you friendles, as thoſe that are vtterly deſtitute of al helpe and conſolation. I will pray vnto the Father, ſo that hee ſhall ſende you another to ſuccour and comfort you. While I haue been with you my ſelfe, I haue inſtructed and taught you in all thinges that were neceſſary for your welfare. Vnto all ſuch workes as are acceptable vnto my father, haue I exhorted you: vnto all good thinges haue I moued you: from all euill haue I defended you: in all trouble and aduerſitie haue I comforted you. I haue beene your teacher, your exhorter, your atturney, your aduocate, & mediatour, ſo that ye haue lacked nothing, neither hath any man hurt you. Seeing now I haue hitherto neuer

failed you, I wil alſo from henceforth not forſake you, but pray vnto my Father, who ſhall ſende vnto you the holy Ghoſt. The ſame ſhall perfectly bring to your remembrance, and be your teacher in al that I haue ſhewed you: hee ſhall exhort and admoniſh you, aide, ſuccour, and comfort you,The office of Gods ſpirite. ſo that yee ſhall not be without conſolation. He ſhall be your tutour and defender, neither ſhall he be with you onely for a time, as I haue beene, but euen in your heartes ſhall he dwell with you, and neuer depart from you.
                  Of this helper, comforter, teacher, and tutor, ſhall yee alſo haue neede: for great trouble and perſecution ſhall the world moue againſt you.Comfort & ſtrength in aduerſitie. To ouercom the ſame, is your fleſh too feeble: therefore will I ſend you downe from heauen a power, whereby in all aduerſitie ye may be able to ſtand faſt, and to haue the victorie.
                  O the vnſpeakeable loue of our Lord Ieſu Chriſt, who taketh ſuch diligent care for vs, and endueth vs with ſo excellent a gift: namely, his owne holy ſpirite. With what modeſtie and ſoberneſſe, with how pure and honeſt behauiour ought wee to walke, ſeeing that God hath into our hartes giuen his holy ſpirite, who vtterly abhorreth and loatheth all vice, and all filthines of ſinne? Great diligence ought we therfore to applie, in keeping cleane and vndefiled our bodies and ſoules, which God through his holy ſpirite hath purified, and conſecrated to bee his owne dwelling place and temple: leaſt we expell the chaſt ſpirite of God. For in no froward ſoule abideth hee, neither dwelleth hee in that bodie which maketh it

ſelfe ſlaue and thrall vnto ſin. The eares of our minde ought we to open, and to harken whereof this ſpirite admoniſheth vs, and what doctrine hee in our Sauiours words doth teach vs, and his motion ought we to followe. Afraid ought we not to be: he that is in vs, is ſtronger than all our enemies.
                  This ſpirite hath Chriſt by his prayer and merites obtained of his Father: for hee prayed with weeping and teares, and was heard for his worthines ſake.
                  He is called alſo the ſpirite of trueth, becauſe hee proceedeth of the truth, teacheth the trueth, and maketh vs true: we are elſe of our owne nature altogether lyers, inconſtant, vntrue, and diſſembling hypocrites: and whatſoeuer the world ſpeaketh, & doth, it is nothing but vanitie and lyes. Bleſſed therefore are they vnto whom God giueth the high gift of his trueth.
                  The world, that is to ſay, fleſhly men and children of the world, receiue not this ſpirite, for they deſpiſe the word of Chriſt, and laugh it to ſcorne. Therefore God ſheweth not himſelfe vnto them, for they loue him not: which thing they declare, in that they refuſe his word. But who ſo receiueth his word, ſheweth thereby, that he loueth Chriſt and God: him wil God loue againe, and open himſelfe euer more and more vnto him. This is a high reward which God giueth vnto his louers: that hee commeth vnto them, maketh his dwelling and abideth alwaie with them, working all good things in them and by them. Therfore ought wee earneſtly to heare his worde, to loue

him, and to keepe his commandements. And ſo euen the ſame his owne ſpirit which hee gaue vs at the beginning, ſhall hee ſtill graunt vnto vs more perfectly from time to time. Thus ſhall that ſpirite poure out loue in our harts, and indue them with more perfe
                        •
                     
                     tion. The loue of the world, which is not of God the Father, ſhall this ſpirit roote out and daily conſume: but the loue of God it ſhall continually plant and increaſe. The more loue there is, the more groweth the knowledge of God: yea the more Gods knowledge increaſeth, the more feruent & perfect is loue. Grant vs (ô gratious Father) thy holy ſpirit, to take poſſeſſion of our heart: that it may onely truſt in thee, loue thee aboue all things, keepe thy commandements, & cleaue ſtill vnto thee for euermore, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               THeſe things haue I ſpoken vnto you, beeing yet preſent with you. But that comfort which is the holie Ghost, (whom my father will ſend in my name) he ſhal teach you all thinges, and bring all thinges to your remembrance, whatſoeuer I haue taught you: Peace I leaue with you, my peace I giue vnto you. Let not your hart be troubled, neither feare. Ye haue heard that I ſaid vnto you: I go, and come vnto you. If ye loued me, ye would verely reioice, becauſe I ſaid: I go vnto the father, for the father is greater than I. And now haue I ſhewed you before it come, that when it is come to paſſe, ye might beleeue. Hereafter will I not talke many words with you: for the ruler of this worlde commeth, and hath naught in me. But that the world may knowe, that I loue the father: as the father gaue me commaundement, euen ſo do
                     •
                   I. Ariſe, let vs go hence.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THe Lord Ieſus continueth his Oration in comforting his Diſciples, and in telling them what the office of the holy Ghoſt ſhould be. Whereby we learne,We muſt all be 
                           •
                        aught of God, which is don by the ſpirite. that all reading and hearing, yea and al doctrine, bringeth vtterly no fruite, if the holy Ghoſt do not giue vs vnderſtanding, and teach vs the word of God. For the Diſciples were ignorant and forgetfull. Many thinges that Chriſt had tolde them, they vnderſtood not: many thinges had they forgotten: in many thinges they doubted. Such like happen alſo vnto vs: therefore ought wee at all times to pray vnto God, that he will ſend vs his holy ſpirite, to admoniſh and prouoke vs, to comfort and ſtrengthen vs, to inſtruct and teach vs all thinges that are neceſſarie for vs to ſaluation. Hee is the right heauenly ſchoolemaiſter: when hee commeth into vs, hee expelleth all ignorance away.
                  But foraſmuch as there remaineth much trouble and aduerſitie vnto all faithfull beleeuers, while they liue in this time,The peace of Chriſt through the ſpirit. Chriſt doth therefore promiſe them his peace, againſt the turmoyling, vnquietnes, and trouble of this world. In the world are many hurley burlyes and aduerſities: In Chriſt we find true peace and quietneſſe. And Chriſt vnto thoſe that are his, giueth ſuch a peace,Phil 4. as ſurmounteth all vnderſtanding: in the which peace they beeing coupled and knitte, are able valiauntly to ouercome all enemies and aduerſitie. For in as much as they knowe, and

be vndoubtedly aſſured through faith, that their ſins are forgiuen and taken awaie by Chriſt, that the father of heauen is fauorable and gracious vnto them, that they be his owne children and inheritours, they doe little paſſe, what thing outwardly happeneth vnto them. All aduerſitie and trouble that outwardlie is layde vpon them, is, through the inward ioy and peace which they haue in God, cleane ſwallowed vp and ſo forgotten. They ſettle and ſtaie their harts vppon ſaluation and eternall peace.
                  The peace of the world ſeeketh quietneſſe & reſt of the bodie, throweth awaie the croſſe,Worldly peace. & flieth from it: The peace of Chriſt reioyceth in the middeſt of aduerſitie, and ouercommeth the croſſe. For faithful beleeuers looke vnto Chriſt, who went before them vnto the father, and after his paſſion and death, tooke poſſeſſion of ſo high honor and glorie,Our nature exalted in Chriſt. and hath carryed theyr nature vp ſo high vnto the right hande of the father, where hee now ruleth as a mightie king of heauen and earth. Oh how great comfort, how ſure a hope giueth it vnto vs, when wee ſee our owne nature, our owne fleſh and bones, incorporated vnto Chriſt, the onely begotten ſonne,Comfort in aduerſitie. and eternall word of God, in ſo high honor and glorie! how can it be otherwiſe, but wee muſt needes hope, that our weake fleſh alſo ſhall be taken vp?
                  Looke what is paſt in the head, the ſame ſhall aſſuredly be fulfilled in the members, for without the members cannot the head be. Which thing conſidered, and (through true beleefe) printed in the heart, maketh a man patient and cheerefull in all aduerſity,

giueth peace and ioy in all trouble. Let the Prince of this world,The deuill hath nothing in the faithfull. through his miniſters and members, ſtirre vp all vexation againſt vs, yet hath he no vauntage of vs, if wee bee in Chriſt. Eaſily might he finde ſomewhat in our ſelues, but in Chriſt nothing, ſuch innocencie dooth Chriſt make vs partakers of. Tempt vs he may, and thruſt at vs, but to ouercome vs, hee is not able, ſo farre as we abide in Chriſt. In vs is death a puniſhment of ſinne:We muſt ſuffer, that we may bee obedient vnto the father. in Chriſt it is obedience and loue. For ſeeing the father loueth the ſonne, and of verie loue gaue him vnto death for vs, the ſon would of loue obey the father, and as hee alſo loued vs, ſo would he willingly and obediently ſuffer death for vs, that all the worlde might ſee his obedience, and that wee might learne of him to obey our heauenly Father, euen vnto the death, and faithfully folow his precept: and that likewiſe, whereas it toucheth his glorie, we ſhould be afraide neither of aduerſitie nor death, conſidering howe obediently hee dyed for our ſakes.
               
            
            
               
                  I Am a true Vine, and my Father is an husband-man. Euerie braunch that bringeth not fruite in mee, hee taketh awaie: and euerie braunch that beareth fruite, hee purgeth, that it may bring foorth more fruit. Now are yee cleare, through the wordes which I haue ſpoken vnto you. Abide in mee, and I in you. As the branch cannot beare 
                     〈…〉
                   of it ſelfe, except it abide in the vine, no more can yee, except 
                     〈◊〉
                   abide in mee. I am the vine, yee are the braunches. He that abideth in mee, and I in him, the ſame bringeth, foorth 
                     〈◊〉
                   fruite: for without mee can yee doo nothing.

If a man bide not in mee, he is caſt forth as a branch, and withered, and men gather them, and eaſt them into the fire, and they burne. If yee abide in mee, and my words alſo in you, aske what yee will and it ſhall bee done vnto you. Herein is my Father glorified, that ye beare much fruit, and become my diſciples.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  
                     VNder this fayre ſimilitude, doeth Chriſt teach his Church, that without him wee can do nothing, but in him all things. Now foraſmuch as hee through his grace, hath incorporated vs vnto himſelfe, wee ought with great diligence to apply our ſelues, that we may abide in him, and beare fruit. For as long as wee are in him, wee liue, that is,To abide in Chriſt. we receiue liuely vertue and ſappe of him, namely, his ſpirite. For who ſo cleaueth vnto the Lorde, and is incorporated vnto him through faith, the ſame is become one ſpirit with him, the firſt Epiſtle to the Corinthians, and the ſixt Chapter. For heereby knowe wee, that wee are in him, and hee in vs, in that hee hath giuen vs of his ſpirit, the firſt of Iohn and fourth Chapter. For why? the vineyard, the branches are of one nature and kinde. Thus the onely begotten ſonne of GOD tooke our nature vppon him, is become man, and giueth vs of his ſpirite, and

maketh vs to be of a godly mind and ſpiritual nature. Out of the ſame pith and ſap, doe all manner of godly vertues and good workes breake forth. Gal. 5. Pſal. 85. For through his grace, are we his operation and worke in Chriſt Ieſu,Eph. 2 created vnto good workes, wherein we are bound to walke. And ſeeing we haue receiued Ieſus Chriſt of God the father, we ought to walke in him, that in him we may be well rooted and ſtand faſt.Col. 2.
                  
                  
                     What it is to abide in Chriſt.But heereby knowe we that we are in him, if we walke as he hath walked. For who ſo ſaith, that he abideth in him, then euen as hee walked, ſo muſt wee doe. 1. Iohn. 2. But if we woulde ſaie, that wee were in him, and had fellowſhippe with him, and yet would walke in darkneſſe (ſeeing hee is the light, wherein is found no darkneſſe at all) then were wee lyars, and went not about with the truth. But if wee walke in light, as he is light, & we children of light, then haue we fellowſhip and companie with him, & the bloud of Chriſt purgeth vs from all ſinne. 1. Iohn. 1.
                  
                  In Chriſt Ieſu may no man be idle and without fruit.Puniſhment of vnthankfulnes. 
                     2. Theſ 3. who ſo now is vnthankful to the grace of God, & doth not practiſe himſelfe in good works, to Gods glorie, the ſame is cut off, and as an vnfruitfull drie branch, throwen into the fire & burnt. Faith grafteth vs into Chriſt, Loue declareth, that wee are planted in, & it knitteth the members with the head. Where the ſpirite of Chriſt followeth from the head into the members, from the ſtock into the branches; there are fruites of the ſpirite: for by the fruit is the tree knowen.
                        
                           〈1 paragraph〉
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Chriſt through his worde and ſpirit hath pacified vs: that is,How the faithfull are cleane. he hath called and ſeparated vs from the world, and from the filthines of the fleſh vnto good workes. And into his owne ſeruice, and ſchoole of godly nurtor hath hee admitted vs, and written vp our names. He hath begonne to purge and clenſe vs from carnall luſtes, and from all vncleannes of the world: accepting vs into the number of thoſe that dye from the world, and that now from hence forth will liue vnto him, and bring forth fruite.1. Pet. 1. Faith bringeth fruite. But that is not enough: we muſt alſo obediently waite vpon the grace that hee hath placed vs in: applying our diligence, watching, and praying, that from ſo high a vocation, from ſo excellent grace and honour, wee fall not away againe. 1. Cor. 10. It is not enough to haue begonne, there muſt be a ſtedfaſt continuance. Hee that forſaketh the head againe, hath neither ſpirit nor vertue: for without him wee are able to doe nothing. Therefore through faith and loue ought wee to abide in him, hauing reſpect vnto him in all thinges: ſo ſhall wee bring forth much fruite vnto him. Then abyde wee in him, when wee doe that hee commaundeth vs, and loue that which hee promiſeth vs.The good workes are not open. Howbeit, theſe fruites that wee bring forth are not ours, but the fathers: to him ought wee to bring them foorth, vnto his honour muſt they extend, Matth. 5.28.
                  
                  For when Gods light doth appeare and ſhine in our conuerſation, & many folkes thereby are drawn vnto God. The father of heauen is honoured, his

name is hallowed, and then are we his diſciples. For wee haue learned of him, howe Chriſt was obedient vnto the father, and ſought his glorie in all things, & ſo do we likewiſe.
                  
                     What wee ought to p
                           •
                        a
                           •
                        e.Heereunto ought all our praiers to extend, that we may bring and winne much vnto Chriſt. Therein is the father praiſed, whē we bring vnto him much fruit, but that might wee not, if God had giuen vs his ſonne, that wee might bee his branches, and hee our vine.
                  Where faith is, there is the holy Ghoſt, which teacheth to wiſhe and praie for that onely, which may ſerue to Gods honour, and that is the cauſe, why he that prayeth, obtayneth all his deſire: for GOD may not giue ouer his glorie. Who ſo vndertaketh to further that, him doeth hee aſſiſt and helpe.
               
            
            
               AS the Father hath loued mee. ſo haue I loued you. Continue ye in my loue. If ye keep my commandements, ye ſhall abide in my loue, as I haue kept my fathers commaundementes, and abide in his loue. Theſe things haue I ſpoken vnto you, that my ioy might remaine in you, and that your ioy might be full. This is my commandement, that yee loue together, as I haue loued you. Greater loue than this, hath no man, that a man beſtowe his life for his friendes. Yee are my friendes, if yee doo whatſoeuer I commaund you. Henceforth call I you not ſeruauntes, for the ſeruant knoweth not what his Lord doth. But you haue I called friends, for all things that I haue heard of my father, haue I opened vnto you. Yee haue not choſen mee, but I haue choſen you,

and ordained you, that ye goe and bring forth fruit, and that your fruit remain, that whatſoeuer ye ask of the father in my name, he may giue it you. This command I you, that ye loue together one another.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  OH how excellent great conſolation is this to vs all, which beleeue in Ieſus Chriſt,Entirely doth Chriſt loue thoſe that are his. and are vndoubtedly aſſured in ourſelues, that Chriſt loueth vs as his owne children and diſciples, howſoeuer the world iudge vs to be forſaken of him? If this loue came right into our heart, oh how earneſt and feruent ſhould we be to loue him agayne, to further his honour, to keepe his commaundementes, and in charitable loue to ſerue our neighbors? Then ſhould all good workes and keeping of Gods commaundements, flowe out of faith: namely, when we beleeue that God is fauourable and louing vnto vs, yea, that he is our father, and our ſonne Ieſus Chriſt our king,Iohn. 4. head, and brother. This faith worketh through loue: for wee coulde not loue God, if hee had not loued vs firſt. His grace, loue, and mercie preuenteth vs.
                  Therefore doth Chriſt euer ſtill ſet forth his loue before vs, as a light torch, to kindle vs in loue towardes him and our neighbours. If wee beleeue this grace, committing vs cheerfully vnto his loue, which he hath declared, & cōtinually doth practiſe towards

vs, if we ſtill abide therein: then ſhall this faith vpon the loue of God, worke great things in vs, and by vs, and ſhall moue vs, with good will gladly and cheerefullie to obſerue his commaundements. And if wee keepe his commaundements,Loue is an euidence of faith. euerie man ſhall haue an aſſured token, that wee bee, and continue in the loue of God: that is, that we keepe our ſelues vnto his loue.
                  
                     What foloweth out of the loue of God.Seeing then that hee loueth vs exceeding much, and we finding the ſame in our hearts, through faith, doe comfort our ſelues thereupon, there muſt needs followe loue to our neighbours, ioye, peace, ſoftneſſe of minde, gentlenes, patience, &c. Gal. 5.
                  
                  Now that Chriſt doth not ſlenderly, but moſt notably loue his Diſciple,Tokens of Gods loue to vs. and all in them, hee proueth it himſelfe diuerſe waies. Firſt, in that hee giueth his life for vs, and dyeth for vs vpon the Croſſe: for greater loue hath no man, than to dye for his friend. Thus Chriſt with his death and blood, ſealeth his loue towards vs.
                  Secondly, in that hee counteth and eſteemeth vs, not as ſeruants,Iohn. 1. but as deare friendes, bretheren, and heires with him. And the ſame declareth hee in this, that all things which hee hath heard of his father, and ſuckt out of that fatherly heart, he openeth them vnto vs, and writeth the ſame through his holy ſpirit,1. Cor. 2. in our hearts. All his ſecret, his godly will, he giueth vs to vnderſtād. For we which be in Chriſt, do know through an vndoubted faith, & feele it alſo in our hearts, that God is our father through Chriſt, & that in him he hath admitted & choſen vs, that he is

reconciled with vs through the bloud of his deare Sonne, that he loueth, preſerueth, and defendeth vs.Rom. 5. Therefore doe wee alſo paciently and chearefully beare all aduerſitie in this time for his ſake, conſidering wee knowe, that ſo is the good pleaſure of our deareſt Father.
                  Thirdly,Epheſ. 1. Rom. 5. Chriſt declareth his excellent loue towards vs, in that he did chuſe vs afore the world was created, & loued vs when we were yet his enemies,We are choſen to bring forth fruit. calling vs by his worde, and appointing vs to bring forth fruit vnto him.
                  Fourthly, in that we obtaine at the fathers hand, all that we pray and deſire in the name of Ieſu. Are not theſe ſure tokens of an exceeding loue of God towards vs?We ought to indure in loue. After that we once haue perceiued ſuch loue, ô that we alwayes remained therein. Which commeth to paſſe, when wee applie ourſelues vnto his commaundements, and when wee in obedience and patience are content to bee at his will, as hee for our ſake was obedient vnto his Father,Phil. 2. euen vntill the death of the croſſe. Now that wee might knowe what his commandements be, he concludeth them in a ſhort ſumme, and ſaith: Loue yee one another together, as I haue loued you. As if he would ſay,The commandement of God, is loue. ſeeing I haue declared my loue ſo worthily, ſo notably, and with ſo great faithfulneſſe towardes you, that I haue nor refuſed to die for you: therefore is it my will (and ſo is it reaſon alſo) that yee likewiſe ſhewe ſuch loue one towards another: for I haue giuen you example afore, that ye ſhould do as I haue done,Iohn. 13. 1. Pet. 2. and follow my foot-ſteppes.
                  
                     This ſhall not onely bee very ſeemely vnto you, but much profite alſo and greate honour ſhall it bring you. For like as my Father (as yee ſhall ſhortlie ſee) ſhall after my paſſion bring mee vnto glorie, ſo ſhall hee alſo doe vnto you, ſo farre as yee endure ſtedfaſt in aduerſitie, and continue in loue one towards another. Like as I with great trauaile and labour haue ſhewed you the way and will of GOD my Father, and therefore goe nowe vnto death, to make you liuing: ſo ought yee alſo to bee minded one towardes another. Looke that yee ſerue one another in loue, lead all men vnto God: and the grace of God which he giueth vnto the world through me, publiſh ye vnto all men, though yee muſt looſe your life therefore.
               
            
            
               IF the world hate you, yee know that it hated mee before it hated you. If yee were of the worlde, the world would loue his owne. Howbeit, becauſe yee are not of the worlde, but I haue choſen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you. Remember the word that I ſaid vnto you: the ſeruaunt is not greater than the Lord. If they haue perſecuted mee, ſo will they perſecute you. If they haue kept my ſayings, they will alſo keepe yours. But all theſe things will they do vnto you for my names ſake, becauſe they knowe not him that ſent mee. If I had not come and ſpoken vnto them, they ſhould not haue had ſinne: but now haue they nothing to cloake their ſinne withall. Hee that hateth mee, hateth my Father alſo. If I had not doone workes amongst them, which none other man did, they had not had ſinne: but nowe haue they ſeene, and haue hated both mee, and alſo my Father, euen

that the ſaying might bee fulfilled, which is written in theyr owne lawe: They haue hated mee without anie cauſe.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  LIke as Chriſt in the aforeſaid words hath giuen vnto his Diſciples, and to vs that beleeue in him, an excellent conſolation in his loue, which is infinite great towardes vs: ſo dooth he now comfort vs againſt ſuch trouble and aduerſitie to come, as outwardly happeneth vnto vs, and againſt the hate and perſecution wherewith the children of the world recompence vs for our loue and well dooing. Loue ought wee to haue towards all men: ſuch godly loue ſhall moue vs earneſtly to further Gods glorie, to bring all men to the knowledge and loue of God, and to withdraw them from fleſhly luſtes and worldly vices. When wee now of a godly zeale, beginne thus to rebuke vice, and to reprehend the carnall luſtes of the children of the world, then they that are drowned in the ſhamefull vices of the world and the fleſh, may not ſuffer it, but hate, trouble, and vexe vs, moleſt, perſecute vs, and put vs vnto death, contemning and deſpiſing the worde which wee offer them from GOD (whereby they might bee ſaued) and going about by all meanes to roote it out.
                  But all this ought not to driue vs backe,Exhortation to patienes. or diſcourage vs: For in this world muſt we ſeeke no high honour nor praiſe, but willingly humble and ſubmit

our ſelues vnder the rebuke and croſſe with Chriſt our head.1. Pet. 3. Iohn. 13. Chriſt alſo exhorteth vs to folow his footſteppes, and to doe after his example, and not to forſake the truth, and loue of our neighbour for theyr hatred, but conſtantly to proceed and do our beſt to guid all men vnto God. And if for ſuch our vnfaithfulnes and loue, there happen reproach and trouble to vs,Acts. 5. we ought to reioice, that God dooth vs ſo great honour, as to graunt vs to ſuffer ſomewhat for his name ſake. If we liued as do the children of the world wee ſhould not bee hated of them, and happily wee needed to feare but little daunger. But Chriſt hath taken vs from the world, and choſen and called vs to good works, and to innocencie of life. Nothing hath he omitted, that might ſerue to our welfare: faithfully therefore ought we to follow his vocation, & not do as the vnthankfull Iewes, that deſpiſe his doctrine and workes. He talketh yet daily with vs, prouoketh and calleth vs: therefore ought we to ceaſe from ſin, and not to faſhion our ſelues after the world.Rom. 12. For if we would liue to pleaſe the world, to ſerue it, and to hunt after the fauour and praiſe of it, wee ſhould not be faithfull Miniſters of Ieſus Chriſt. We ought not to look for worldly honor, but to haue reſpect to the eternall glorie, which wee ſhall haue with Chriſt our head, yea ſo farre as we ſuffer rebuke and diſhonour with him. When he liued in this time, and practiſed the truth againſt the Phariſies, hee was reuiled, put to ſhame and death. The ſame happeneth alſo vnto vs; for we are not aboue the Lorde. An euill token were it, if the world loued vs. Paciently therefore and with

ioy ought we to beare ſuch rebuke and ſhame, as happeneth vnto vs for his name ſake, by thoſe that hate the truth. For our honor and reward is great in heauen: but after our trouble ſhall the ſame be firſt opened, as it happened alſo vnto Chriſt our head firſt after the croſſe.
               
            
            
               BVt when the comforter is come, whom I will ſend vnto you from the father (euen the ſpirit of truth, which proceedeth of the father) he ſhall testifie of me. And yee are witneſſes alſo, becauſe ye haue beene with me from the beginning. Theſe things haue I ſaide vnto you, that ye ſhould not be offended. They ſhall thrust you out of their ſynagogues, & excommunicate you: yea the time ſhall come, that whoſoeuer killeth you, will thinke that he doth ſeruice vnto God. And ſuch thinges ſhall they doo vnto you, becauſe they knowe not the father, neither me. But theſe things haue I told you, that when the houre is come, yee may remember that I tolde you. Theſe thinges ſaid I not vnto you at the beginning, becauſe I was with you. But now I go my way to him that ſent me, & none of you asketh mee; Whither goest thou? But becauſe I haue ſaid ſuch things vnto you, your harts are full of ſorrow. But I tell you the truth: It is expedient for you that I goe awaie. For if I go not away, that comforter will not come vnto you. But if I depart, I will ſend him vnto you.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  FOr as much as it is our bounden duetie to beare witneſſe vnto Chriſt with our mouth and life, & yet our weake fleſh feareth the hatred and reſiſtance

of the worlde,Math 26. Acts. 1. Chriſt therefore promiſeth vs heere, that hee will ſende vs ſtrength from heauen: namely,Rom. 
                           •
                        . the holy Ghoſt, firſt in our harts to bear witneſſe vnto Chriſt, and then to open our mouthes, that we may teſtifie the Lord Chriſt, and his trueth manfully and without feare. Certaine it is, that all they which will liue here godly in Chriſt Ieſu,2. Tim. 3. muſt ſuffer perſecution. But ſeeing that to ſuffer ſuch aduerſitie, our fleſh is farre too ſlow, colde and feeble, God giueth vs the ſpirit of his ſon,Rom. 8. Rom. 5. Acts· 2. to mooue, ſtrengthen and preſerue vs in all goodnes. This ſpirit poureth out loue into our hartes, expelleth all feare and terror (as we ſee in Peter on Whitſonday) & maketh vs to ouercome all aduerſitie.
                  
                     Iohn. 15.We are braunches in Chriſt the true vine, albeit as yet verie weake and tender, ſoone blowne awaie with the winde, or ſmitten downe other waies: but for as much as out of Chriſt wee receiue, yet the ſap and vertue of ſpirite and life, wee are in life preſerued that wee wither not away. Of this now muſt we bee mindfull in all aduerſitie, ſo that without ceaſing we pray vnto GOD for his holie ſpirite, who is our inſtructer, comforter, and teacher. Wee ought to haue reſpect vnto our fore-goer and finiſher of our faith, remembring, that wee ſuffer not as theeues and euill dooers,1. Pet. 4. but for his ſake, yea and that of the wicked. This ſhall make our aduerſitie and croſſe the more eaſie and light, when wee feele the comfort of the ſpirite, and beholde how ſhamefull a death Chriſt ſuffered for vs. Therfore ſhould there no feare make vs to ſhrinke from the confeſſion of Chriſt, and his

trueth. Wee are not they that ſpeake, but it is the ſpirite of the Father which ſpeaketh in vs.Math. 10. Wee maye not feare thoſe that kill the bodie,Luke 9. we may not bee aſhamed of him: ſo ſhall hee alſo knowledge vs, and make vs honourable in his fathers ſight. The honour of this world ſhould not bee dearer vnto vs than the glorie of God. And though wee die for it,Iohn. 
                           ••
                        
                      yet ought we not to ſhrinke or ſtirre from the confeſſion of the trueth.
                  This ingendreth manie times much heauines and feare in vs, that wee conſider onely that which is preſent, little regarding that which is to come, and euerlaſting. And becauſe wee thinke that when GOD thruſteth vs into aduerſitie, he is farre from vs: whereas hee then is moſt of all with vs by his grace, comfort, and ſtrength, and tryeth vs through the croſſe, ſtanding behinde the wall,Cant. 
                           •
                        . and looking through the grate vppon our conflict and battaile, yea, helping vs to fight, and to ouercome. Therefore muſt we not alwayes bee children, wee muſt not hang ſtill at the breſt, ſeeking milke as children doo:1. Cor. 14. Heb. 5. but growe to a perfect age, learning to knowe Chriſt the Lord after the ſpirite, as hee now gouerneth, and is a mightie king: vnder whoſe banner wee muſt fight valiantly, and indure the croſſe vnto the death, throwing behind vs all thinges in this worlde,Pſal. 120. Iohn. 1
                           •
                        . and lifting vp our eyes and harts into heauen, whence our helpe commeth, and into the which Chriſt is gone, to prepare for vs an euerlaſting dwelling.
               
            
            
               
               ANd when the ſpirit is come, he will rebuke the worlde of ſinne, and of righteouſnes, and of iudgment. Of ſin, becauſe they beleeue not on me: of righteouſneſſe, becauſe I go to my father, and ye ſhall ſee me no more: of iudgment, becauſe the prince of this world is iudged alreadie. I haue yet many thinges to ſay vnto you, but yee cannot heare them now. Howbeit when hee is come which is the ſpirite of truth, he will lead you into all truth. For he ſhall not ſpeake of himſelfe: but whatſoeuer he ſhall heare, that ſhall he ſpeake, and he will ſhew you thinges to come. Hee ſhall glorifie mee, for he ſhal receiue of mine, and ſhal ſhew vnto you All things that the Father hath are mine. Therefore ſaid I, that he ſhal take of mine, and ſhew vnto you.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  IN theſe wordes doth Chriſt ſhew vs the office of the holy Ghoſt, and what he worketh by his diſciples,1. Iohn 5. and by all faithfull beleeuers in the worlde. The whole world is ſette vpon wickedneſſe and iniquitie, and when that is rebuked, it hateth and perſecuteth thoſe that rebuke it. Whereout it followeth oftentimes, that through imbecillitie and weakeneſſe of the fleſh, we ceaſe from rebuking of vice and ſinne.
                  Now when we find it to be thus, that the infirmitie of our fleſh, and the terrible threatening of the world will hinder vs, or vtterly drawe vs backe from the free rebuking of vice: wee ought to praye vnto God our Father, for to giue vs the ſpirit of his ſonne,

that he may powre out loue into our hearts, and expell all feare, that with ſtoute ſtomacks and wordes,1. Ioh. 4. we may reprehend the vyces of the world, and valiantly reſiſt them. This ſpirit ſhall teach vs the thing, that neither our fleſh nor the world is inſtructed in. All we of nature doe erre,Iſa. 53. and euery one wandreth his owne waie, that is, euery one foloweth his owne purpoſe and intent: and if we beleeue not in Chriſt, we periſh in our ſinnes.Ioh. 8. And this is the greateſt ſin of all, wherein the world is wrapt, afore it receiue the truth. Not to beleeue in Chriſt, is a ſinne, out of the which, all vyce and wickednes dooth grow
                        •
                     .Vnbeliefe is the originall of all vices. How great this ſinne is, no man is able to knowe, onely the ſpirit of God openeth it: therefore the ſpirite teacheth vs, how farre we goe aſtray. And if we come to Chriſt, from this erronius waie of vnbeliefe, all ſinnes are forgiuen vs through Chriſt, and not imputed vs to our damnation.
                  Neither is it enough to knowe, that wee haue erred, or doe yet erre, but wee muſt know alſo which is the right waie, wherein (when error is forſaken) wee muſt walke to attaine vnto godlines and bliſſe. This right waie,Ioh. 14. 1. Cor. 1. doth the ſpirit alſo ſhewe to be euen Chriſt, who is our waie, our righteouſnes and goodnes: which waie neuertheles the world will not goe. To beleeue in Chriſt, is the true way to attaine vnto righteouſnes and ſaluation: who ſo now departeth not from the erroneous waie of vnbeliefe and vice, and will not walke in Chriſt, the way of all vertue and goodnes, (which all the world alas ſo abhorreth) the ſame is conuict, that the iudgement of eternall

paine doth righteouſly fall vpon him, ſeeing the light is ſet before him,Ioh. 3. and he will rather abide & periſh in darkneſſe. But is not this a iuſt iudgement, that the world ſhould periſh in ſinne, and be puniſhed for euer, conſidering that God hath graciouſly ſent vnto them his owne ſonne, promiſing euerlaſting lyfe and ſaluation in him, who with his bloud hath waſhed awaie our ſinnes, mightily ouercome death, ſin, and the prince of this worlde, deliuered vs out of his power and heauie yoake, and taken poſſeſſion of the kingdome and glorie with his father: And yet they will not know, receiue, nor honour Chriſt, as theyr chiefe king and Lord, but ſtill ſerue the prince of this world in vice & ſin, & not ſubmit themſelues vnder the eaſie yoake of Chriſt, & of his loue and vertues.
                  O deare children, let vs departe out of the kingdome of darknes,Col. 1. into the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God: let vs regarde his word with diligence: let vs hearken what God ſpeaketh in vs, and though there bee many things that as yet we knowe not,Pſal. 84. many that we do not vnderſtand and perceiue, we will earneſtly praie vnto God for his ſpirite, who is the right ſchoolmaſter and teacher. Hee ſhall lead vs into all truth,Ephe. 4. he ſhall renue vs in the ſpirite of our minde, and teach vs to vnderſtand, what the good, acceptable,Rom. 12 and perfect will of God is. He ſhall plant and roote vs in loue, that we may comprehend with all Saints,Ephe. 3. what is the length, the breadth, the height, and deapth, that wee may alſo knowe the exceeding loue of the knowledge of Chriſt, that we might bee filled in all godly perfectnes. Thus the ſpirite teacheth

vs all truth, when he poureth loue into our harts.
                  This ſchoolmaſter teacheth all beleeuers here in time, euerie one as much as he can comprehend, and kindleth ſpirituall hearts with greater deſire. He that nowe increaſeth in loue, that is, who ſo loueth that whereof God giueth him knowledge, and deſireth to know that which as yet he knoweth not, him doth the ſpirite leade into al truth. For the more that loue groweth, the more perfect is knowledge. And in this ſchoole of the loue which the ſpirit poureth into our hearts, the faithfull beleeuer learneth more, than all bookes and all men can teach him: but the more a man learneth & can, the more muſt he acknowledge and confes, that he can nothing towards that which we ſhall know,1. Cor. 13. when we ſhall cleerely and perfectly ſee God face to face. Vnto vs ſhall it bee inough and ſufficient, that we in ſpirit and in the truth knowe Ieſus Chriſt, which was crucified,1. Cor. 2. 2. Cor. 
                           •
                         Iohn 4 2. Cor. 4 & that he ſhine and be glorified in our mortall body, in our harts, mouth and in our whole life.
               
            
            
               AFter a while ye ſhall not ſee me, & again after a while ye ſhall ſee me, for I go to the father. Then ſaid ſome of his diſciples among themſelues: What is this that he ſaith vnto vs, After a while ye ſhal not ſee me, & againe, after a while ye ſhal ſee me, & that I go to my father? They ſaid therfore, what is this that he ſaith, after a while? We cannot tel what he ſaith Ieſus perceiued that they would aske him, and ſaid vnto them: This is it that ye enquire off betweene your ſelues, that I ſaid, After a while ye ſhall not ſee me, & again after a while ye ſhal ſee me. Verily, verily I ſay vnto you▪
                  
yee ſhall weepe and lament, but the world ſhall reioyce: yee ſhall ſorrowe, but your ſorrow ſhall be turned into ioye. A woman when ſhe trauaileth hath ſorrow, becauſe her houre is come: But when ſhe is deliuered of the childe, ſhe remembreth no more the anguiſh, for ioye that a man is borne into the world. And yee now therefore are in ſo
                     •
                  rowe: but I will ſee you againe, and your heart ſhall reioyce, and your ioye ſhall no man take from you.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  AN excellent comfort doth Chriſt giue here vnto his Diſciples, who by reaſon of his deparparting, were in great ſorrowe and heauines. But like as the Diſciples of Chriſt, becauſe of his paſſion, abode for a little ſeaſon in great combrance, feare, and trouble, and yet receiued great ioye out of the Reſurrection, when hee ſhewed himſelfe vnto them: euen ſo in aduerſity ought not we to be faint-hearted, but comfort our ſelues in this, that the Lord doth not long leaue thoſe that are his. Though hee hide himſelfe for a time, he ſhall ſhortly ſhewe vs his gratious countenance againe, & refreſh vs with rich comfort. The aduerſities of faithful beleeuers are not only ſhort, but alſo they end with vnſpeakeable ioy. After aduerſitie and death, foloweth euerlaſting ioye and eternall life. We are here with Chriſt our head, in trouble and on the croſſe, where the world laugheth at vs, and reioyſeth. For all this ought not wee to be vnquiet in our ſelues. Very ſhortly will the matter change and turne vpſide downe: ſo that their

laughter and ioy, ſhal be altered into weeping and eternall ſorrow. But our heauineſſe ſhall God ſhortly end with great fruit and ioye, and the ſame ioy ſhall no man be able to take from vs, when we with Chriſt our head, ſhall euerlaſtingly bee gladde and reioyce, when all teares ſhall bee wiped away from our eyes, and wee diſcharged of all trauaile and labour of this time.
               
            
            
               IN that daie ſhall ye aske me no queſtion. Verily, verilie I ſaie vnto you: Whatſoeuer yee ſhall aske the father in my name, he will giue it you. Hetherto haue ye asked nothing in my name: Aske, and ye ſhall receiue, that your ioy may be full. Theſe things haue I ſpoken vnto you in Prouerbs, but the time will come, when I ſhall no more ſpeak to you in prouerbes, but I ſhall ſhew you plainly of my father. At that day ſhall ye aske in my name. And I ſaie vnto you, that I will praie vnto the father for you: for the father himſelfe loueth you, becauſe ye haue loued mee, and haue beleeued, that I am come out from God. I went out from the father, and came into the world, & I leaue the world againe and goe to the father. His diſciples ſaid vnto him, Lo, now ſpekeſt thou plainly, and thou ſpeakeſt no prouerbe. Now are we ſure, that thou knoweſt all things, and nedeſt not that anie man ſhould aske thee anie queſtion. Therefore beleeue wee, that thou cameſt from God. Ieſus anſwered them, Now ye do beleeue, beholde the houre draweth nigh and is alreadie come, that ye ſhall be ſcattered, euerie man into his owne, and ſhal leaue me alone, & yet I am not alone, for the father is with me. Theſe words haue I ſpoken vnto you, that in mee yee might haue peace. In the world ſhall yee haue tribulation, but bee of good cheere, I

haue ouercome the world.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  MAny times doth Chriſt promiſe vs, whatſoeuer wee praie, to obtaine the ſame of the father of heauen, whereby he may ſtirre vp our hearts, faithfully to crie vnto God, the gracious and louing father, whoſe loue towardes vs is exceeding great, neither can he ſaie vs nay, that hath giuen and beſtowed vppon vs his owne ſonne: yea, not onely hath hee ſent downe vnto vs his deare and onely begotten ſonne, to take the nature of man vppon him, and to die for vs, but hath alſo into our hearts giuen his holy ſpirite, with whome hee hath ſealed vs, and certefied vs of his loue, pouring the knowledge and loue of Chriſt into our heartes. How can wee then doubt of his loue and faithfulneſſe? How is it poſſible, that in all our trouble and heauineſſe, we ſhould not vnto him onely haue recourſe, ſeeking helpe and comfort at his hand? The ſonne for our ſake, came forth from the father, humbled and made himſelfe of no reputation, tooke all reproch, ſhame and trouble vppon himſelfe for our welfare. To the father was he obedient, vntil the death of the croſſe, and after that he through his bloud had waſhed awaie our ſinnes, and finiſhed the worke of our ſaluation, he aroſe againe from death, through the power & might of his father, ouercame death for vs, and with his aſcenſion, opened heauen, and prepared an enterance vnto God, carrying vp our nature and fleſh vnto the

honor and glorie, which he had from euerlaſting, & giuing vs therein a hope and ſure comfort, that wee alſo ſhal with him haue euerlaſting ioy and glory for euer.
                  Seeing then that he came out from the father, we ought to hearken vnto him, and not to deſpiſe his word: he is the eternall wiſedome of God, he is the truth, no falſe teacher can he bee, foraſmuch as hee commeth from God, and is his onely begotten ſon.Heb. 1 To contemne ſo deare an embaſſadour and meſſenger of God, muſt needs haue great puniſhment, and though we are not able, in moſt perfection to vnderſtand his doctrine, truth, and loue (for heere in this time is our knowledge vnperfect) yet ſhuld we conſider, that the father loueth vs,1. Cor. 13 and faithfully ought we to crie and praie vnto him for his ſpirite, that ſhal teach vs all truth, ſo much as is neceſſarie and profitable for vs: which knowledge from daie to daie ſhall increaſe, till we ſhal ſee him face to face, and haue the perfect knowledge of him. Our nature is weake and feeble, the nature diuine is high and incomprehenſible: we are full of darknes, God is the cleere & farre paſſing light, but when our darke miſt is taken away, then in cleere brightneſſe ſhall the godly light open vnto vs.
                  Some firſt fruits and beginnings of Gods knowledge haue we receiued alreadie. God hath caſt and planted a litle ſeed of knowledge in our harts, which through his grace and moiſture, ſhall daily grow, increaſe, and proſper. Of ſuch knowledge as we haue of God, we may not preſume, neither of our weak faith,

nor yet aſcribe too much vnto our own ſtrength He that ſtandeth, let him looke that he fall not. We think many times that we are verie ſtrong in faith, but aduerſitie ſheweth how feeble we bee, and how ſoone we ſhrinke. Therefore in all trouble and diſtreſſe of this world, we ought to comfort our ſelues, and truſt onely in the grace and ſtrength of Chriſt. In him ſhal we finde peace and quietneſſe, in him ſhall we ouercome all our enemies: for his ouercomming is our victorie, his power is our ſtrength. The world is not able to hurt and plague vs, more than of our gracious father is permitted vnto them for our wealth.
                  While we liue here, we are in miſerie, affliction, & diſtreſſe: but ſeeing the head hath ouercome, the members ought not to doubt of the victorie. Let vs with ſtedfaſt beleefe looke vnto Chriſt the fountaine of life, our foregoer, and finiſher of our faith, & let vs ſtoutly ſtep forth after him: let vs go the waie that he is gone, and hath troden, & made before. Afflictions ſhall ſerue vs vnto high honor, as they ſerued Chriſt the Lord vnto glorie. In Chriſt we finde the peace & reſt of our conſciences and ſoules: in him we knowe and find the goodnes & loue of God the father: out of him receiue we power, ſtrength, comfort, & eternall life: only let vs loke that we turne not the eies of our heart, & faith, away from him. Our welfare conſiſteth in the ſtedfaſt beleefe and loue of Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God. Though we many times ſtumble, fall, and be proued by ſundry temptations and afflictions, yet is the ſame good and profitable for vs, that we may the better learn to know our own weaknes,

and againe, the ſtrength and grace of God. If it were not profitable for vs, Chriſt had not ſuffered his Diſciples to fall ſo greeuouſly. But in all diſtreſſe, he putteth his hand vnder vs, and in aduerſitie he leaueth vs not alone, as hee alſo left not his owne Sonne alone. Though all men flie away from vs, yet haue we God with vs.
               
            
            
               THeſe wordes ſpake Ieſus, and lift vp his eyes to heauen, and ſaid. Father, the houre is come:
                     Iohn. 17.
                   glorifie thy Sonne, that thy Sonne alſo may glorifie thee, as thou haſt giuen him power ouer all fleſh, that he ſhould giue eternall life to as manie as thou haſt giuen him. This is life eternall: that they know thee the onely very true God, & whom thou haſt ſent Ieſus Chriſt. I haue glorified thee on the earth. I haue finiſhed the worke which thou gauest me to doo. And now glorifie me thou Father with thine owne ſelfe, with the glorie which I had with thee ere the worlde was. I haue declared thy name, vnto the men which thou gauest me out of the world. Thine they were, and thou gauest them mee, and they haue kept thy ſayings. Now they knowe, that all thinges whatſoeuer thou hast giuen me, are of thee: for I haue giuen vnto them the words which thou gauest me, and they haue receiued them, and know ſurely, that I came out from thee, & do beleeue, that thou didst ſend me.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  CHriſt the true, onely, & chiefe Prieſt, who now would offer vp himſelfe to the father vpon the croſſe for our ſins, after that hee had loued his

owne vnto the end, comforting and ſtrengthening them: turneth nowe himſelfe in an earneſt and feruent praier vnto his heauenly father, for an enſample and doctrine to his Diſciples and all faithfull beleeuers,How wee ſhould pray. that they in all temptations and afflictions, ſhould with an earneſt and feruent praier, haue recourſe vnto the Father of heauen. That he taught afore in wordes, the ſame declareth hee nowe in the deede. ſhewing not onely what, but alſo how, and after what ſort wee ought to pray: not onely for our ſelues, but alſo for thoſe that are giuen and committed vnto vs of God, and whom we haue comforted and exhorted. Our eyes and handes ought we to lift vp vnto heauen, from whence our helpe commeth, which doing is a token of a deuout, humble, & lowly mind. Yea, the eyes, not onely of the body, but alſo of the hart and beleefe.
                  
                     The ſanctifiyng of Gods name ſhould we chiefly deſireBut vnto this ende principally ought all our prayers to be directed, that the heauenly father may bee glorified. The deuil the prince of this world, throgh his adherents, cauſeth the name and trueth of Chriſt his doctrine and knowledge, to be rooted out & deſpiſed. Seeing then that wee are Gods children, wee ſhould in nothing bee ſo earneſt, as in ſauing the honour of our father, & in furthering his glory. Which thing commeth to paſſe,What it is to honour the Father. when we notifie to men vpon earth, his grace, faithfulnes, loue & great mercy, which he by his only begotten & deare ſon hath declared & ſhewed vnto mankind: when we lead men vnto God from earthly vices & falſe Gods ſeruice, & when we direct al things to his glorie. Thus is Chriſt

alſo honored and glorified by vs, when wee through the Goſpell doe publiſh vnto all men, his power and goodnes, his honor and glorie: when we know, that he is our ſauiour, our righteouſnes, and ſanctifiing: when we know, that the father hath giuen all things into his power: that to thoſe whom the father hath granted to him, hee may giue euerlaſting life. Which life euerlaſting conſiſteth in this, that wee knowe the liuing God, & his ſonne Ieſus Chriſt, whom he ſent into this world. For God the father cānot be known without Chriſt Ieſus his ſonne:Iohn. 14. neither is there any mo Gods but only one, on whom wee hope & truſt. The way to God is Chriſt,Chriſt is the way to God whom God therfore ſent downe, that by him the mercie and grace of the Father might be opened and appeare vnto vs. Wherefore if we wil haue eternal life, that is, the knowledge of God, we muſt beleeue in Chriſt, and knowe him: and by him as the way and mediator, we muſt know God the father. Who ſo refuſeth Chriſt, cannot haue the Father What ſhould it helpe thee to thinke, that thou knoweſt God the higheſt goodnes of all, if thou hadſt not him by whom thou art deliuered from ſin and eternall plague?
                  Whereas GOD the originall of all goodneſſe is knowne,The knowledge of God eternall life. and our minde through Chriſt his Sonne aſſured of his grace: namely, that hee is fauourable vnto vs, and that hee therefore hath ſeperated vs out of the world, to the intent that by his ſpirit he might make vs like vnto his ſonne, righteous and bleſſed: there doth there ſpring in our hartes a comfortable truſt vnto God, a loue, & ſuch ioy, as nothing in this

world may be compared vnto. There alſo doth ariſe in vs a diligence to keepe his commandements, godly and innocently to liue.The order of our health. Thus commeth our health originally out of the grace & mercie of our heauenly Father, who afore the worlde was created, did chuſe vs in Chriſt Ieſu his Sonne vnto eternall life, and in the booke of life wrote vp our names. After the ſame did the Father graunt vnto vs the Sonne, & gaue him power ouer all men. Nowe that wee are giuen vnto Chriſt, hee openeth vnto vs the name of his Father, through the outward worde, and through his ſpirite in the heart. When wee beleeue in him, (which to do cōmeth alſo of him) then increaſeth the knowledge of God in vs. Out of that knowledge, groweth an aſſured confidence in God the higheſt good: Of this aſſured truſt commeth loue towards him. And when God graunteth vs all this, he ſaueth vs, and giueth vs eternall life.
                  This is an high worthines and honour of Chriſt, in that the father giueth him all things into his hand, that he may giue euerlaſting life vnto faithful beleeuers. No man can haue life, but throgh Chriſt. Who ſo beleeueth not in Chriſt, remaineth in death, and the wrath of God-abideth vppon him. But then giueth hee vs eternall life, when we receiue his worde, and knowe, that he came out from God, and that the father ſent him the Sauiour of the world. And when wee thus are become faithfull beleeuers,What it is to keepe Gods commandements. then keepe we his commaundementes: for faith ſtudieth, and is diligent to pleaſe God. This honour and dignitie of Chriſt, his power and kingdome are firſt opened vnto

the world, after his death and croſſe in the reſurrection and aſcenſion. Of the which honour and glorie wee alſo in due time ſhall (after our meaſure) bee partakers, if we ſuffer with him. For the high Prieſt, who hath prayed for vs, is heard of the Father, and glorified with eternall honor and glorie. Wherefore we may not doubt, in the remnant that he praieth for ſtill on our behalfe: hee ſhal be, and is for his worthines ſake heard, and hath his requeſt. Of this wee will conſider more.
               
            
            
               I Pray for them and pray not for the worlde, but for them whome thou haſt giuen me, for they are thine,
                     Iohn. 17.9.
                   and al mine are thine, and thine are mine: & I am glorified in them. And nowe am I no more in the world, but they are in the world, and I come to the holy father, keep them in thy name whome thou haſt giuen me, that they may be one as we are. When I was with thē in the world, I kept them in thy name. Thoſe that thou gaueſt mee, haue I kept, and none of them is loſt but the loſt childe, that the Scripture might be fulfilled. Now come I to thee, and theſe wordes ſpeake I in the world, that they might haue my ioy full in them. I haue giuen them thy word, and the world hath hated them, becauſe they are not of the world, euen as I am not of the worlde. I deſire not that thou ſhouldeſt take them out of the world, but that thou keepe them from euill. They are not of the world, as I am not of the world. Sanctifie them with thy truth: thy ſaying is truth. As thou ſenteſt mee into the world, ſo haue I ſent them into the worlde, and for their ſakes I ſanctifie my ſelfe, that they alſo might be ſanctified through the truth. I pray not for them alone, but for thoſe alſo which ſhall beleeue on

mee through their preaching: that they all may bee one, as thou Father art in me, and I in thee. and that they may bee alſo one in vs, that the worlde may beleeue, that thou hast ſent me. And the glorie that thou gauest mee haue I giuen them, that they may be one, as we are one, I in them, & thou in me, that they may bee made perfect in one: and that the world may know that thou haſt ſent me, and hast loued them as thou hast loued me.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THIS praier of our high Prieſt and mediatour Chriſt Ieſus, is feruent, earneſt, full of the fire of godly loue, ful of great ſecrets and ſpirituall inſtructions. Herein may we learne to know, what hie honor, dignitie, and power, Chriſt by his obedience and patience, hath obtained with his father: wherein conſiſteth our peace, ioy, & welfare. What care and loue Chriſt beareth towardes thoſe that are his, and how he committeth them vnto his father. Firſt, hee praieth for his Diſciples, whome hee did chooſe to publiſh his truth: afterward praieth he for all ſuch as ſhould come to the faith by their preaching vntil the worldes end. And for aſmuch as the Diſciples had a great waightie matter in hand, full of danger and aduerſitie, for they muſt needs procure to themſelues great hatred of the world, hee firſt praieth for them, that the Father will ſtrengthen, comfort, and preſerue them thorow his power, & defend them from all euill.
                  In this are we taught diligently, chiefly, and ſpecially

to pray for thoſe vnto whome is committed the preaching of the Goſpell:How the Miniſters of the word ſhould be praied for. for a chargeable and great worke carry they vppon their ſhoulders, by meanes whereof (among all others) they haue ſpeciall neede of the grace, helpe, & aſſiſtance of God. But our prayer ought we to frame, as Chriſt hath framed his. Firſt we muſt in our praier to God, make ſpeciall mention of his owne grace and mercie, whereby hee chuſing them to ſuch an office, hath giuen them vnto Chriſt his ſonne. Foraſmuch then as they are the Miniſters of him and of his Sonne, and ſeeing the Sonne is ſo deare, worthie & beloued vnto the Father, our prayer muſt bee, that hee for his Sonnes ſake will defende and preſerue them, as in him, and by him they are worthie.
                  Secondly, conſidering that for his ſake and his word, which they declare, they are perſecuted of the worlde, it is requiſite that God preſerue them in his owne worke. For great need haue they of his fatherly protection, while they yet liue in the weake feeble fleſh, and are mortall men.
                  Thirdly, their office ſerueth to many mens health and welfare, their office is neceſſary and profitable to the whole world, which walketh in blindneſſe and darknes: for they are the light of the world,Math 5. that thorough doctrine and liuing, muſt ſhine to manie mens life: which without the aſſiſtance and helpe of God cannot come paſſe.
                  Thus ought wee to praye for the miniſters of the word, & to deſire, that God throgh his holy name, & power, will defend, ſtrength, comfort, and preſerue

them in all aduerſitie: but principally that hee will giue them grace to bee one, coupled together in the band of peace, loue and vniformitie: that they may be of one ſpirite, and of one mind: that in one ſpirite they may further and plant the honour of God:Ephe 4. Phil. 2. that like as Chriſt neither ſpake nor did anie thing but that which was acceptable and wel pleaſing vnto the father, they alſo in their ſayinges and dooinges may haue reſpect vnto Gods glorie: and that they being rooted and fortified in loue,Col. 2. bee not vanquiſhed nor ouercome of the pleaſures or threateninges of this world.
                  Secondly, that in all their labour and trauaile, in al aduerſitie and perſecutions, hee will put into theyr hartes, his owne comfort and ſpirituall ioy. For the worlde hath manifolde mirthes, paſtimes, and pleaſures: much bragging and wilfulneſſe vſeth it in the riches and fleſhly voluptuouſnes thereof.Iohn. 15. But the true Miniſters of Chriſt (ſeeing hee hath ſeuered them from the worlde) muſt and ought to refraine and abſent themſelues from all worldly ioy and voluptuouſnes: yea, it is they, that ought to diſwade the worlde from ſuch wantonneſſe and vanitie: by meanes of whoſe faithfull admonition, there falleth much hatred and trouble vpon them: Neither were it to the furtheraunce of Gods honour and our commoditie, to haue them vtterlye taken away out of this worlde. Therefore dooth Chriſt deſire (and ſo muſt wee with him) that from euill, namely from the Deuill the Prince of this worlde, who ſtirreth the world againſt them, they may of the

father in the world be defended and kept.
                  Thirdly, that he will ſanctifie and cleanſe them afore other men, that they may be holy and pure veſſels in the houſe and temple, that is, in the Church of God, for they are means & inſtruments, by whō God miniſtereth his grace and truth vnto men, therfore is it alſo conuenient, that they be pure and holy.1. Cor. 4. This commeth throgh the truth that God putteth in their mouth and heart by the holy Ghoſt, which inwardly purifieth them. But then are they holy when they teach truth, and liue godly. Into the worlde hath Chriſt ſent thē, as the father ſent him into the world. The father ſent Chriſt into the world, that he ſhould deſtroy the kingdome of the deuill and of the world, that he ſhould declare vnto the world, the grace and mercie of God towardes mankinde, that he ſhoulde bring men from ſinne, and from falſe idolatriſh faith, to the true liuing God, and to a vertuous conuerſation, that he with the light of truth, ſhould ſhine vpon thoſe which ſate in darknes: that he ſhould bring the knowledge of God into the world, & exhort men to the amendement of life. Euen this hath Chriſt giuen in commiſſion to his Apoſtles, and to all miniſters of the worde to doo. This is their office, this is their miniſtration, vnto this haue they greate neede of the grace, power, and aſſiſtance of God, therefore ought we moſt earneſtly to praie for them, for if they fail or fal, it hurteth the whole Church: yea, out of the ſame there groweth ſlaunder vnto the name of God in the ſight of the vnbeleeuers, and an occaſion of falling,Ezech. 36 to ſuch as are weake of faith. Therefore Chriſt alſo

offered himſelfe to the father for them, and ſanctified them, that they might bee pure and holy: not in outward apparance, but from the heart, and in the truth, that through their vniformity & loue, through the word of truth, which they preach, through the holynes of their doctrine and liuing, all men and the whole world might know and vnderſtand, that God hath ſent them, yea, that God ſent his ſon Chriſt into the world, vnto whome they with mouth and life beare record, and who alſo euery where ſhineth out of them with wordes and deeds.
                  Not onely for them hath Chriſt praied, but alſo for vs, as many as hearken and beleeue the worde of truth preached by them. Wherein firſt wee may perceiue and ſee, the loue, faithfulnes, and great care of Chriſt for vs, how earneſtly the truſtie ſhepheard of our ſoules, committeth his poore ſheepe into his fathers protection, how faithfully our mediatour and aduocate praieth for vs, whereby alſo he ſetteth forth a doctrine vnto vs, how and what we ſhal pray of the heauenly father.
                  Firſt, that he will make vs one by his holy ſpirite, in the truth, in the vnitie of faith, and in loue vnſeparable,Phil 2. Ephe 2. that we all may be of one mind, one body, and one ſpirit in Chriſt Ieſu our head, and to keepe the vnitie of the ſpirit in the bond of peace, that we all being illuminated by his ſpirit, may in word and deed, yea in our whole life, ſeeke and further the glorie of our heauenly father, that we all may bee one among our ſelues & with God,Iohn. 13. whereby all the worlde may ſpie, ſee, and perceiue, that we are Gods children and

Chriſts diſciples
                  Secondly, that of his fatherly goodnes, he will defend, ſaue & preſerue vs his own poore ſheep, which be in the midſt among wolues & manifold dangers:Math. 10. And ſeeing we being yet in the world, do not liue after the world, that it will pleaſe him to keepe vs from the euill, namely, frō the prince of of this world, that thogh the ſame our enemie doth tempt & plague vs, he neuer yet haue power to preuaile againſt vs.
                  Thirdly, that inaſmuch as we being in ſin conceiued and borne, haue hetherto liued in ſinne,Pſal. 
                           •
                        3. & ſeeing that albeit we are cleanſed alreadie by his word and faith, yet the vncleannes of the fleſh and of the world doth daily defile vs, it wil pleaſe him throgh his truth to purge and ſanctifie our bodies, our ſoules,1. Cor. 
                           •
                        . 2. Cor. 6 and our whole life, that wee may become an holy temple of his grace, pure, cleane, & holy veſſels, conſecrated & ſanctified to Gods own vſe. He hath once purified & hallowed vs through the bloud of his ſon, and vnto the father hath Chriſt ſanctified and offered vp himſelfe an holy acceptable ſacrifice for our ſins: but the deuill, the world, and our fleſh, is euer buſie to lead vs away againe from God & from true holines. Therefore muſt wee daily pray vnto him, that through his holy ſpirit, & through his holy truth, he wil continually purge, clenſe, & ſanctifie vs, that we be not diſſē
                     bling hypocrites, but godly and vnfained euen from our harts, & that we be not ſtained in the filthines of this world, but to refraine from all vncleannes,Iames· 
                           •
                        
                      thorogh the aſſiſtāce of his grace, that we may alſo offer vp our bodies an holy acceptable ſacrifice to 
                        •
                     od the

Lord, as he offered vp himſelfe vppon the croſſe for our ſakes.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Iohn. 17
                  FAther, I will, that they which thou hast giuen me, be with me where I am, that they may ſee my glory, which thou haſt giuen me, for thou louedſt me before the making of the world. O righteous father, the worlde alſo hath not knowen thee, but I haue knowen thee, & theſe haue knowen that thou haſt ſent me. And I haue declared vnto them thy name, and will declare it, that the loue wherewith thou haſt loued me, may be in them, and I in them.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  AFter that Chriſt had committed his vnto the father, that he will care for them, defend & keepe them, while they liue in the world: he deſireth now that it will pleaſe him, finally alſo to ſaue them, and to take them to himſelf into his kingdome. With the which praier, he giueth a great conſolation to his diſciples, and all faithfull beleeuers, that we might be the more cheerefull to ſerue him, conſidering the high reward that is prepared for vs: that for his ſake we ſhould ioyfully and ſtoutly beare all aduerſitie, ſeeing he will make vs (yea hath made vs alredy) partakers of his glory and of his kingdome.
                  Oh the great grace and incomprehenſible loue of God towards vs, who through his mercie and great loue, whereas wee were children of wrath and damnation, hath made vs his own children, elect and beloued: and when wee were dead in ſinne, hath with

his ſon raiſed vs vp from death, reuiued vs, & made vs ſit with him among thoſe of heauen in Chriſt Ieſu,Eph. 2 to declare vnto the ages to come, the riches of his grace in kindnes and loue to vs ward, through Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Foraſmuch nowe as God hath cauſed the lyght of his glorie, euen Chriſt, to ſhine into our harts, and through the light of faith, hath kindled and purified our hearts, it is meete, that in this time we liue as children of light, to the intent that men may ſee the brightnes of thoſe good workes which proceede of faith, to the praiſe of our heauenly father.Math. 5 And thogh we be not as yet bodily with Chriſt, yet our heartes and mindes are alwaies aboue,Col 3. there as Chriſt ſitteth at the right hand of God: our conuerſation and being is in heauen, albeit wee are yet in corporall miſerie, with heart we deſire to die, and to be with Chriſt.Phil. 1 2. Cor. 3 Wee are ſure if this earthly houſe were fallen and broken downe, that we haue one euerlaſting in heauen. Wee are dead, but our life is reſerued with Chriſt in GOD. It is not euident yet what wee be, but when Chriſt our lyfe ſhall ſhewe himſelfe, then ſhall wee alſo appeare with him in glorie: euen when wee ſhall riſe vp, and bee taken vp in the ayre, and bee with him for euer,1. Theſ. 
                           •
                        . and ſee his honour and glorie, which the Angelles delight to ſee and beholde.
                  Oh how great pleaſure and ioy is it, to beholde the eternall light that neuer quencheth, in the which no darkneſſe hath place: from the which ſhall bee expelled and caſt out, all they that woulde not receiue

and know the light which God hath ſent into the world to illuminate them, but are blinded by the Prince of this world,2. Cor. 4 leaſt the the light of the Goſpel ſhould ſhine vpon them? No wrong doth the righteous father vnto them, when hee plagueth them, and taketh the light from them. A righteous and iuſt iudgement is it, ſeeing the gracious Father ſo mercifully ſent them the light of the truth, and they yet ſo maliciouſly and ſtubbornly haue deſpiſed and refuſed it: yea, reaſon it is, that they periſh in vntruth, in lies,Iohn. 3. & in euerlaſting blindnes: for aſmuch as they wold receiue darknes rather than the light, lies rather than the truth. And conſidering that they haue forſaken the brightnes of the truth, and of the ſon of God: they muſt needes be caſt into vtter darkenes, and neuer enioy the light.
                  O gracious Father, graunt vnto vs, which thorow thy ſonne haue known thy name, that in ſuch knowledge and light of the truth, wee may increaſe more and more: that the loue wherewith thou loueſt thy deare ſonne, may bee and remaine in vs, and that thy onely begotten ſonne Ieſus Chriſt our head, may in vs his members continue ſtill, worke, liue, and bring forth fruit acceptable vnto thee.
               
            
            
               AND when Ieſus had ſpoken theſe words, he went out with his Diſciples (as hee was woont) ouer the brooke Cedron, vnto mount Oliuet, into a village called Gethſemani, wheras was a garden, into the which Ieſus went with his diſciples. Iudas nowe, who betrayed him, knewe alſo the place, for Ieſus vſed oft to come thether with his diſciples. Ieſus

ſayd vnto his Diſciples: Sit ye heere, till I go yonder and pray. And he tooke vnto him Peter and the two ſonnes of Zebede, and began to be heauy and ſony. And a feare and terrour came vppon him. Thus ſaid he vnto them, my ſoule is heauie vnto the death: tarrie ye heere and watch with me. And hee went from them as farre as a ſtones caſt. Then fell he downe vppon his face to the ground and praied: that if it were poſsible, that houre might depart from him. And thus hee praied: O father, vnto thee are all thinges poſsible: take this cuppe from mee: howbeit not my will, but thy will bee done.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  AFter that Ieſus hath eſtabliſhed his Diſciples in faith and loue, comforting and ſtrengthening them againſt aduerſitie and trouble to come in this world, promiſing alſo vnto them, the ſpirit, loue, defence, and protection of his father: hee goeth now to meet his traitour and enemies, and beginneth the worke of our redemption. Awake vp nowe, O thou faithfull and deuout ſoule, and go after thy redemer, followe his foot-ſteps, gather vp diligently the drops of his bloud, and ſprinckle them with a true faith in thine heart: take vp the bundle of mirrhe, and lay it at thy breaſt, O thou noble bride and ſpouſe of Chriſt: his paſſion that he ſuffereth for thee, write then in thy minde, learne to die from all ſinne, from thy ſelfe, and from the world: that thou maieſt bee crucified vnto the world, and the world vnto thee.
                  Death is vgſome, and very terrible vnto the

fleſh, but ioyfull and welcome is it vnto all ſuch as are inſtructed in the ſecrete ſcience of God, namely, that death vnto faithfull beleeuers, is an ende of all trouble, an enteraunce into a better and eternall lyfe.
                  Chriſt in that he goeth forth to meete death, declareth that he wil ſuffer, not of compulſion, but willingly, whereby he comforteth vs. But whereas he is heauie, and trembleth before his diſciples, and confeſſeth howe hee feareth death: the ſame is done for our wealth, to declare vnto vs the weakneſſe and feebleneſſe that our fleſh receiueth at the ſight of aduerſitie,Heb. 2. for in all things (ſinne except) it was his good pleaſure to become lyke vnto vs his brethren, hee would take vpon him a true man, who felte our aduerſitie in his owne fleſh, and ſo coulde haue compaſſion on vs. Beſides this, hee ſheweth alſo to whom our weakneſſe ought to reſort for comfort and helpe in aduerſitie, namely, to our father in heauen, before whome wee muſt fall downe with deuout and feruent praier, and vnto him diſcloſe and open our anguiſh and trouble.
                  To this praier, he ſeeketh and chooſeth out a place meete and conuenient for the ſame: for prayer is a lifting vp of the minde in GOD, which among the multitude of men, and confuſion of worldly matters cannot well bee done. Therefore Chriſt ſheweth vs, what greate diligence wee ought to vſe in prayer, when the enemie falleth in, that the minde maye cleaue vnto GOD conſtantly and without ſhrinking, and what ieſture the bodie ought to ſhewe

in praier, Chriſt alſo declareth, in that hee falleth downe to the earth vppon his face, and praieth with the voyce and words. God hath no need of our praier: but vnto vs is nothing more profitable and better, than oft and feruently to pray. And the greater the aduerſitie is, the more ardent and earneſt ſhould the praier bee: as we ſee heere in Chriſt our head, whoſe paſsion is verie great in bodie and in minde, for the which cauſe alſo, as a verie true man, he ſheweth the fame his paſsion, and heauines to his Diſciples.
                  The ſtrongeſt of all, is weake: and the comforter of all harts, hath need of comfort himſelfe: hee that expelleth all terror and feare, doth himſelfe feare and tremble. But al this cōmeth to paſſe for our learning, that whē we be in temptations, we ſhould not doubt in the helpe of God: and that none of vs (beeing in daunger and aduerſitie, and feeling himſelfe loth to ſuffer, or penſiue and ſlow to tame the motions and wickednes of the fleſh) ſhould therefore ſhrinke and bee faint harted: but with a conſtant faith to reſorte vnto God, complaining to him of his trouble, with hartie praier: that he will bring the hard and painful beginning, to a bleſſed and ioyfull ende: that in all aduerſitie we may conſider, as well the excellent and great fruit which proceedeth thereof, as alſo the gratious good will of our heauenly Father, to whom we ought wholly and perfectly to giue ouer, and offer vp our ſelues: that neither through the multitude of ſinnes, neither through the greatnes of aduerſitie, we deſpaire nor fall away: but with his helpe and aſſiſtance, manfully to go through.
               
            
            
               
               IEſus came againe to his Diſciples, and founde them ſleeping. Then ſaide hee vnto Peter: Simon, ſleepeſt thou? Couldest thou not watch with mee one houre? Watch yee and pray, that ye enter not into temptation: the ſpirit is willing, but the fleſh is weake.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THE loue of Chriſt towardes vs, is feruent, earneſt and great: but our fleſh is ſo weake, that we not onely conſider it not, but are alſo ſo ſlow, that wee ſleepe, and feele not for whoſe ſakes Chriſt hath ſuffered ſo great things Oft times is there in vs a ready will to take great matters in hande, as Peter and the other Diſciples did: but at the laſt wee miſſe, and haue many a ſore fall. Therefore Chriſt (who knoweth vs better than we our ſelues) willing to expell frō vs all pride and preſumptuouſnes, teacheth vs to bee lowly minded and humble, to bee euer watching, & with continual praier to cleaue only vnto him, without whom we are able to do nothing, and in whome we may do all things and euen ſo doth he alſo in his feeblenes, which aſſaulted him as a very true man: to the intent, that wee alway remembring our owne weaknes, might vnderſtand how to tame the rebellious fleſh, & in no caſe to truſt it: and that wee might bee carefull and vigilaunt, leaſt the ſubtill enemie in temptations, come behind vs, fall vppon vs, and oppreſſe vs. It is no time to ſleepe, the battaile is yet a fighting, the enemie is yet aliue, and as yet beſeegeth

hee our caſtle that Chriſt hath in keeping. All is full of ſnares and dangers, which no man is able to eſcape ſaue onely hee, which in feruent beleefe and prayer doth earneſtly watch and ſtoutly fight, yea, and that continually vnto the end.
                  Neither the preſent anguiſh and trouble, nor yet Chriſtes exhortation can bring ſo much to paſſe in the Diſciples, as to keepe them from ſleepe: ſo little it helpeth, where the ſpirite giueth not life. Neuertheleſſe Chriſtes talke and admonition vnto his Diſciples is not vtterly vnprofitable, for that they nowe vnderſtand not, the ſame afterwardes (when the ſpirite commeth) is made playne and euident vnto them, and then are they feruent and earneſt in godly prayer. Wherefore wee ſhould neuer ceaſe from comforting and exhorting the feeble and weake: for though it helpe not at this preſent, the houre ſhall come, that the ſpirite will make it to haue life, and to be fruitfull in them.
               
            
            
               HE went foorth the ſecond time, and praied like as afore: My father, if this cup may not paſſe except I drinke it, thy wil be done. Then came he againe, and found them ſleeping, for their eies were heauie, & they knew not what anſwere to make him. So he left them againe, and went and praied the third time like as afore, and kneeled downe and ſaid: Father, if thou wilt, take away this cuppe from me: Neuertheleſſe, not my will, but thine be done. And there appeared vnto him an Angell from heauen comforting him: and when he was in the agonie (diſtreſſe and conflict) he praied the longer: and his ſweat was like droppes of

bloud trickling downe to the ground. And when he roſe vp from praier, and came to his Diſciples, hee found them ſleeping for heauines, and hee ſaid vnto them: What? Sleepe ye? Sleepe on now, and take your rest. It is enough, vppe and pray that ye enter not into temptation. Behold the houre approcheth, and the ſon of man is betraied and giuen into the hands of ſinners. Vp, let vs goe: beholde, hee that betraieth me is at hand.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  IN the perfect example and mirrour of our life Chriſt Ieſus, we find an earneſt feruent loue, a doctrine how wee ought to behaue our ſelues in aduerſitie. Firſt, wee ſee that Chriſt of an exceeding great loue, taketh vpon himſelf al infirmities of mankinde, and becommeth like vnto his brethren in all thinges, ſinne except: beeing a very true man, hee is therfore not aſhamed before his diſciples to acknowledge his infirmitie, ſorrow, heauines and feare, and to complaine thereof vnto his father. A feare by reaſon of the death and paſſion, hee receiueth as a verie man: for not to feele trouble, is not the nature of mā: and paſſion is no paſſion, if it ſmart not, if it bee not felt, Chriſt therefore both in his mind and body feeleth the paſſion, hee feeleth the conflict of death, albeit in wraſtling withall, he ouerthroweth it. Oh the exceeding feruent loue of our head and foregoer Ieſus Chriſt, who for our helth, commeth into ſo great an agonie and trouble, that aboue naturall moyſture, through the fearefull conflict of the paſſion & death,

he ſheddeth his bloud and ſweateth it: but with hartie deſire runneth he to his heauenly father: to him complaineth he of his weaknes and diſtreſſe: to him giueth he ouer himſelfe in al obedience and contentation of mind: of him alſo receiueth he comfort and ſtrength. In the meane ſeaſon, he forgetteth not his Diſciples, but commeth to them, exhorteth them to watch and pray, & hath great compaſsion with their feeblenes and ſlouth.
                  If we now be the diſciples and ſchollers of Chriſt Ieſu, and haue ſurrendered our ſelues vppe into the ſchoole of the heauenly Schoolmaiſter, we ought diligently to looke, what Chriſt here in him ſelfe, doth teach and preſcribe vnto vs: that wee learning the ſame of him, and following his foot-ſteppes (when temptations of ſinne, and conflicts of aduerſitie, troble, and death fall in vpon vs) may know how to order and frame our ſelues therein.
                  Firſt, that wee know our ſelues to be poore, full of faultes; mortall men and ſinners hauing nothing of our owne but feeblenes. So when the temptation of ſinne and of the fleſh aſſault vs, we muſt not be aſhamed to open ſuch our faults and conflicts vnto God our heauenly Father, and to complaine vnto him of them. God hath not made vs to bee vtterly without temptation, but hath ſuffered the ſame to remaine in the fleſh, that we therby might be exerciſed & prouoked to ſeeke helpe at him, and to learne, in how miſerable a caſe we ſhould be, if he withdrew his hande from vs When we now feele that the ſpirit is willing and the fleſh weake,Rom. 7. Gal. 5. and that the law of the members

withſtandeth the law of God in vs, that the fleſh fighteth and ſtriueth againſt the ſpirit: we muſt not be aſhamed to confeſſe our feeblenes before our heuenly Father (yea though of weakenes wee had lyen vnder in the battaile already) deſiring his helpe, that we may riſe againe, and valiauntly to fight it out. Thus muſt wee alſo doe, when the croſſe and hatred of the world for Chriſtes ſake (or that is contrary to our nature) falleth vpon vs.
                  The cuppe which the father hath filled in, that we ſhoulde drinke it, the ſame ought wee willingly to drinke: and if there growe in our fleſh a terrour and feare to taſt it, we muſt not be aſhamed to complaine thereof vnto our Father, foraſmuch as we ſee heere, that Chriſt for our ſakes beeing in ſuch heauines and feare, did not yet (for all that) ſteppe aſide from his Fathers will. The patience therefore of Chriſtians ſtandeth not in this, that they feele no paſſion, or bee not feareful, heauy, or ſorie: but in this, that no croſſe bee ſo great, as to bee able to driue them away from Chriſt. Yea, the more the croſſe that God the Father hath laid vpon them doth make them to ſmart, & the more it preſſeth them (ſo that they yet beare it) the more pretious and more excellent is their patience: which patience we ought to declare, but not as they that ſuffer or feele no paſſion at all.
                  For heere wee are inſtructed and certified of the kindnes of our louing Father, that hee is not angrie, neyther taketh it in euill part when we complaine to him of our preſent trouble, ſo that we giue ouer our will vnto his. All they therefore that be in afflictions, 

aduerſitie and temptations, muſt ſet this example of the Lorde directly before their eyes, and ponder it in their harts. Not only is the father not angry when wee complaine vnto him in our neceſſitie, but in all trouble hee ſendeth vs his owne helpe and comfort, either by his Angell, or inwardly by his ſpirit, or outwardly by ſome other meane, he ſendeth vs ſtrength, giueth vs his hande, draweth vs, deliuereth vs, & ſuffereth vs not to be tempted aboue our power, or elſe in the middeſt of our aduerſitie, he giueth vs conſolation and ſtrength to ouercome it.
                  O how great comfort bringeth this vnto vs in our afflictions in life and death, if we ponder, weigh, and conſider the exceeding loue of GOD our heauenly Father, who giueth his deare Sonne into ſo greate trouble, that wee might bee deliuered from eternall aduerſitie and ſorrow. If we alſo remember the loue of our Lorde Ieſus towards vs, who for our ſakes taketh vppon himſelfe ſo great a feare and paſſion, how cannot wee looke for all good thinges at his hande? What thing is ſo great, that wee his members would not ſuffer for his ſake, if wee behold the head in ſuch anguiſh and trouble? And for as much as hee ſuffereth all this for the ſatisfaction of our ſins, we ought to applie great diligence, that we fall not againe into ſinne, for the which Chriſt ſuffered this, and from the which Chriſt with ſo great a paſſion hath deliuered and cleanſed vs. Wee learne heere alſo to loue our neighboures, to care for them, to pittie them if they bee impotent and ſlowe, to pray for their infirmitie, ſeeing wee are all weake and feeble: and vnto

ſuch weakneſſe muſt we ſo haue reſpect, that we bee not arrogant, nor hold much of our ſelues, when wee ſee that Peter and others are ſo full of ſleepe & ſluggiſhnes, that all the admonitions and exhortations of Chriſt, could at that time do little with them. But euer in humblenes of minde, and in the feare of God, ought wee to ſtand: to aſcribe all good thinges vnto him: to be carefull and watch, leaſt the Deuill draw vs into his temptations.
                  O mercifull Father, giue vs grace with feruent hartes to conſider the vnſpeakeable loue of thee and of thy Sonne, and neuer to forget the ſame: that our fayth and truſt in thee may bee ſtrengthened: that loue in vs towards thee and our neighbour may bee kindled: that aboue all thinges wee may loue thee, the welſpring of all goodneſſe: that wee may ſerue our neighbours in loue, care for them, and doe them good, according to the loue that thy deare Son hath beſtowed vppon vs O giue vs patience and ſtedfaſtnes in aduerſitie, ſtrengthen our weakneſſe, comfort vs in trouble and diſtreſſe, helpe vs to fight: Graunt vnto vs, that in true obedience and contentation of mind, wee may giue ouer our owne willes vnto thee our Father in all thinges, according to the example of thy beloued ſonne: that in aduerſitie we grudge not, but offer vp our ſelues vnto thee without contradiction. Giue vs ſtrength conſtantly to ſubdue the rebellious and ſtubborne fleſh, and to make it obedient vnto the ſpirit: to caſtaway al temporall and carnall feare: to reſort oft vnto prayer: to bee earneſt and feruent therein: to mortifie all our

owne wils and luſtes, and vtterly to giue them their leaue. O giue vs a willing and cheerefull minde, that vvee may gladly ſuffer, and beare all thinges for thy ſake.
               
            
            
               SO when Iudas had gotten him a companie of ſouldiers of the high Prieſts and of the Phareſies miniſters, hee came thether with lanthornes, linkes, and weapons, yea the ſame Iudas Iſcarioth one of the twelue (as Ieſus yet talked with his diſciples) and with him a great heape of people, with ſwoords & ſtaues, ſent from the high Prieſts, ſcribes and elders of the people. Now had the traitor giuen them a token, ſaying: Whom ſo euer I doo kiſſe, the ſame is he, take him and bring him warily. So Iudas went before them, and came neere vnto Ieſus to kiſſe him. And when he came, he ſtept vnto him, and ſayd: All haile maſter, and with that kiſſed him. Ieſus ſayd vnto him, Friend, whereto art thou come? Iudas, betrayeſt thou the ſonne of man with a kiſſe? Ieſus knowing all things that were to come vpon himſelfe, went forth, and ſayd vnto them: Whom ſeeke ye? They ſaid, Ieſus of Nazareth. Then ſayd he vnto them, I am he. And Iudas that betraied him, ſtood with them. Now when Ieſus ſayd, I am hee, they went backeward and fell to the ground. Then Ieſus asked them againe: whome ſeeke ye? They ſaid: Ieſus of Nazareth. Then anſwered Ieſus and ſaid: I haue tolde you that I am hee: If ye ſeeke me, then let theſe depart, that the ſaying which he ſpake might bee fulfilled: Of them whome thou gaueſt me, I haue loſt none.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  CHriſt the worthy and ſtrong Captaine, when he hath whollie giuen ouer himſelfe, ſteppeth forth weaponed, going manfully and ſtedfaſtlie againſt the prince of this world and his miniſters, yeelding and offering himſelfe willingly to ſuffer for vs,Eſa. 53 as Eſay ſaith, quia voluit: for ſo was it his will. No man had beene able to take him, or put him to death, if hee had not ſo willed himſelfe: for hee had power to leaue his owne life. Many times afore, did hee giue place to their fury,Iohn. 10 and got himſelfe out of the way: but when the houre apointed of the father was come, he goeth himſelfe willingly & meeteth death by the way. Heere ought we alſo to learne, willingly and ſtoutly to goe into aduerſity, if it bee the will of our father, if Gods honour and our neighbours welfare ſo require. For like as the father ſuffreth not his ſon to die till the houre of death come: euen ſo ſtandeth our life in his hand. The limits that hee hath ſet vnto vs, may we neither preuent, nor ouer paſſe: neither lieth it in the power of our enemies, to kill vs when they will themſelues. Chriſt careth for thoſe that are his: the enemies are able to doe vs no harme at all,Iob. 2 no neither in bodie nor goods, till the Father giue them leaue. Therfore he ſayth, Let theſe go. The father, according to his greate mercie and gracious will, thruſteth vs into aduerſitie with Chriſt his deare beloued ſonne, in ſuch wiſe, ſo much, and at what time he will himſelfe. Againſt his will ought we not

to ſtriue, but patiently and with obedience ſubmit our ſelues wholy vnto it.
                  Oh what an vnſpeakable great loue is heere! The ſhepheard dieth, to ſaue the lyfe of the poore ſheepe: the Lorde goeth vnto death, to the intent that the ſeruants ſhould not die: the creator ſpareth not himſelfe to ſaue his creature. If the ſonne of God nowe doeth not abhorre to ſuffer death for vs, why would wee then bee aſhamed, to ſuffer and die for hys ſake.
                  And though he be verie God, and ſheweth his enemies the brightnes of his godly ſtrength, in that he ſo throweth them to the grounde, yet will not he in the ſame houre vſe ſuch his diuine power to deliuer himſelf: albeit he admoniſheth them therby, to ceaſe from their conceiued mallice, for his godly ſtrength caſteth them downe, his mercie & grace lifteth them vp again. Out of the which great myracle, they ſhuld haue learned, not to laie hande on him malitiouſly, they ſhoulde haue conſidered, that if it had beene his pleaſure, hee might well haue eſcaped their handes, ſo that they had not beene able to holde him, but the vnbeleeuing rable are blinded, indurate, and hardned, that neither myracle nor kindnes can moue them.
                  Oh the high maieſtie of Chriſt! how ſhall vnbeleeuers be able to ſtand before him, when he ſhal appeare in the iudgement, whereas before his weakneſſe and humilitie (when hee was now to bee iudged himſelfe) they were not able to ſtand? If his louing voice wherewith hee ſpeaketh ſo gentlie vnto

them (and ſaith: I am hee) dooth ſo feare them and throw them down. What wil then the horrible voice of the Iudge doe, when hee ſhall ſay: depart yee curſed into euerlaſting fire? O how innocently and godly ought we to liue before him, who is among vs, and in vs, heareth all our words, ſeeth all our workes, ſercheth and looketh thorow all our thoughts, howe ſecret ſo euer they be? Chriſt at this time withdrew his high power, and in weaknes of the fleſh, and in wonderfull high patience, ſtept he forth to ſuffer. By his enſample muſt wee learne, not to take vs to our high eſtate, but with patience and humblenes of mind to meet the enemie.
                  Like patience and gentlenes vſeth he alſo towards his traitour, whome hee goeth to meet, not ſpeaking rough wordes vnto him, brawleth not with him, rateth him not, (as he was well worthy) but receiueth him with all ſoftnes of mind, and gentlenes, whereas yet hee came to deliuer & betray him into the hands of the wicked, and vnto death. Neither dooth the Lorde denie him ſo much as the kiſſe, the token of friendſhip: but louingly alſo talketh he with him: albeit he alſo maketh mention of his vnfeined and diſſembling friendſhip, telling him of it: admoniſhing him (if he had not bene hardened) to ceaſe from his conceaued treaſon. Wherefore, we alſo muſt learne of Chriſt (ſo far as concerneth our owne perſon and eſtimation) with all mildneſſe, ſoftneſſe of mind, patience and greateſt loue, to meete thoſe that hate vs and betray vs:Math. 5: 
                     Rom. 12. if peraduenture with ſuch loue and gentlenes of minde. wee may bring them away from

their malice and wickednes.
                  Heere alſo with great feare & dread ought we to conſider of the iudgement God in Iudas. that he being one of the twelue and elect Diſciples, dooth betray and ſell the Lord Ieſus his gratious louing Maiſter. Whereby wee are taught, how that amongſt all men there is nothing throughly perfect and whole, ſeeing that in ſo holy and ſmall number there is one man ſo greatly ſtuffed with wickedneſſe. Therefore he that ſtandeth, let him looke that he fall not. Lette couetouſnes blind no man: let the deſire of temporall good poſſeſſe and rule no mans heart: for out of couetouſnes the roote of all vice, groweth nothing but treaſon and deſpaire. No righteouſneſſe, no fidelity, no truth, no honeſty, can be in that hart wherin greedie couetouſnes hath taken root. Iudas for verie greedines of money, giueth ouer God & all loue: and hee that afore was a fellowe and companion of the holy congregation of Gods children, is become a mate, companion and Captaine of the wicked & vnbeleeuers: hee that was choſen to the preaching of the Goſpell, is become an enemie, perſecutor, and traitour againſt the truth. O from how high & great honour, to what ſhame, diſhoneſtie, and vile ſtate falleth Iudas, who hauing woluiſh conditions vnder ſheepes cloathing, doth vnder the token of loue, practiſe treaſon againſt the trueth? From Ieſus the true health. hee ſeperateth himſelfe to the children of the Deuill: hee getteth him amongſt the bloud-thirſtie, yea euen he that hitherto in outward appearaunce had confeſſed the trueth. Thus goeth it when

temptation breaketh in, when the truth commeth into perill and aduerſitie: then the enemies of the truth declare themſelues, and hypocrites get them to the aduerſaries againſt Chriſt: then may wee learne to know them.
                  Of theſe (the more pittie) there bee at this daie in the church of God many, which vnder the pretence and colour of truth, fight againſt the truth, and that taking the name of Chriſt in their mouth, betraye Chriſt, yea with the ſword of their venemous tungs kill Chriſt, and in ſheeps cloathing are very wolues, falſe teachers, and moſt noyſome enemies, whome couetouſnes and vaine glorie blindeth. And wheras they are not able to roote out Chriſt with the truth, they vndertake to do it with weapons and ſwords, & ſet the princes and powers of the worlde, to defende their falſhood and tyranny. Yea, many there bee of thoſe that rebuking Iudas acte, doo euen as hee did themſelues: feyning the trueth, when in very deede they perſecute the truth.
                  O our great ſlothfulnes! whereof wee are admoniſhed in the Diſciples that ſleepe, when wicked Iudas in his vngratious worke ſo diligently watcheth, and earneſtly runneth about. O that the loue & zeale of God might doe as much in vs, as the vngratious will in the wicked! O that wee which are choſen into the ſeruice of Chriſt, were ſo diligent to miniſter vnto our Father and Lorde, as the children of this world are to wait vpon Sathan their maiſter! for nothing doo they omit, that may ſerue to the perſecution of the truth.
                  
                     O mercifull God, graunt vs poore feeble men patience in aduerſitie, that ſodaine wrath ouercome vs not, and that bitterneſſe and deſire of vengeance, kindle vs not to vſe vncharitable wordes, and to doe hurt, when enemies fall vpon vs, and bragge againſt vs, telling vs our faultes, whereof wee thinke our ſelues vnguiltie. Graunt vs euer louingly to receiue all aduerſitie: and that wee may knowe thoſe to bee our beſt friendes, which ſpeake vnto vs, and rebuke vs hardeſt of all. Lette no wicked roote of enuie, malice, and euill will growe in vs: no tediouſnes, nor ſlouth. Giue vs ſtrength to bee willing and patient, and with feruent deſire to ſuffer yet more greeuous thinges for thy ſake. Pull vp the wicked root of couetouſneſſe, and the falſe ſhine of feyned ſpiritualtie out of vs. Oh ſaue vs, that Sathan bring vs not into temptation Graunt vs loue towardes friendes and enemies: that we may follow the nature of thee our Father, and the example of thy onely begotten Son Ieſus Chriſt, Amen:
               
            
            
               THen came they and laide handes on Ieſus, and tooke him. But when they that were with him ſawe what would come of it, they ſaid vnto him: Mayſter, ſhal we ſmite with the ſword? Ieſus anſwered, & ſaid: Suffer ye thus farre forth. Simon Peter had a ſword, which he drew out, & ſmote the ſeruant of the high Prieſt, & cut off his right eare. And the ſeruantes name was called Malchus. Then ſayde Ieſus vnto Peter: Put thy (word into the ſheath. Wilt thou not that I ſhall drinke the cuppe which my Father hath giuen mee? All they that drawe the ſworde, ſhall periſh

with the ſword. Thinkest thou not, that I might pray my father to ſend me now more than twelue legions of Angels? But how ſhould the Scriptures be fulfilled? It must needes be thus. And when Ieſus touched his eare, he healed it. Then began Ieſus to ſpeake vnto the multitude (that were come to him) and to the high Priests, and to the chiefe rulers of the temple, and to the elders, and ſaid: Ye are come foorth as to a murtherer with ſwords and ſtaues, to take me. whereas I yet being daily in the temple, ſate and taught, and yee tooke mee not. But this is your houre, and the power of darkneſſe. All this commeth to paſſe, that the Scriptures ſhould bee fulfilled. Then the Diſciples forſooke him, and fledde all from him. There was a yong man that followed after, who had a white linnen cloth vpon the bare, and him they tooke. But he left the linnen cloth behind him, and ranne away naked. The multiude, and the captaine and Ministers of the Iewes, apprehended Ieſus, took him, bound him, & lead him first to Annas the chiefe Priest: for he was Father in lawe vnto Caiphas, which Caiphas was high Priest, and was the ſame Caiphas which gaue counſaile vnto the Iewes, that better it were one man to die, than the whole people to periſh. And all the Priestes, and Scribes, Phariſies, and Elders came together.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  PEter declaring his earneſt loue which hee bare vnto the Lord, vndertaketh to defend him from malitious violence: but at the ſame houre it pleaſed the Lord to declare and ſhew, not onely his own might and power, but alſo his vnſpeakable goodnes

euen vnto his enemies: therefore is it not his will, that anie man on his behalfe ſhould haue harme: for he was come to bring health, and no hurt: and therfore the vncircumciſed zeale of Peter, which was not directed after the will of God, he reiected and reproued, commaunding Peter to put vp his ſworde into his ſheath: and the ſeruants eare that was ſmitten off he ſet on againe, and healed it: for hee was readie to be obedient vnto his Fathers will vnto the death, & to drinke the cup that the Father had filled for him. Yet doth he ſhew vnto his enemies, that he willingly ſuffereth, & that if it were not his wil, they ſhuld not be able to take him. But he affirmed the houre now to bee heere, that the Father had giuen him into the power of darkeneſſe, and that they ſhewed ſuch violence vnto him, that the ſcripture might be fulfilled.
                  The Diſciples flie from Ieſu their Lorde, & leaue him to tread the wine preſſe alone. In their weaknes, feare and flying, is ſignified the infirmitie of the vnperfect members of the Church, which yet when the ſpirite commeth, is ſtrengthened. Let no man builde vpon his owne ſtrength, but pray vnto God, that hee ſuffer him not to be lead into temptation.
                  The gratious Lord Ieſus is ſold vnto ſinners, that we which were ſolde vnder ſinne, bond and thrall to the prince of this world, might be redeemed, and deliuered. He is content to be bound and taken, that we might be quite and free from the ſnares and ca
                        •
                     tiuitie of ſinne.
                  O Ieſu Chriſt, the mirrour of all gentle
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      mind, the example of higheſt obedience 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
graunt vs thy ſeruantes with true deuotion to conſider, how thou innocent and vndefiled lambe wert bound, taken, and hailed away vnto death for our ſinnes:Eſay. 53. how well content thou waſt to ſuffer ſuch thinges, not opening thy mouth in vnpatiencie, but willingly offering vp thy ſelfe vnto death. O gratious God, how vilely waſt thou miſhandled for our ſakes: O Lord, let this neuer come out of our harts: expell through it, coldnes and ſlouth out of our minds: ſtir vp feruentnes and loue towardes thee: prouoke vs vnto earneſt praier: make vs chearefull and diligent in thy will: bind our ſtubborne fleſh with the cords of thy feare and nurture: yoke vs vnder thy holie worke and obedience. Yea, thy bands make quite & free from all ſinnes: thy bandes keepe vs, and drawe vs in, that we run not at large in curioſitie & worldly vanitie: they preſerue vs in thy holy ſeruice vnder continual nurture and bleſſed perſeuerance. O grant that it bee light and not greeuous vnto vs, to breake and yeelde our ſelues: that wee doo not loath nor abhorre, to bee enfourmed, taught, lead, and corrected againſt our owne ſelfe will. Graunt that wee neuer become diſobedient, vnquiet, ſtubborne, buſie, headie and contentious. that wee neuer bee found fighters, neyther ſuch as vſe brawling and ſcoulding. Make thou vs quyet, milde, ſoft minded, tractable and meeke: euer readie, and not loth to keepe thy commaundementes. Bow downe our necke vnder the yoake of thy obedience: helpe vs, through ſtraite exerciſes, to tame and ouercome our fleſh and wicked diſpoſitions, which wee are moſt

inclined vnto. O Lord Ieſus Chriſt, graunt vnto vs whome thou haſt deliuered, that fully and perfectly wee may yeelde our ſelues vnto thee, committing vs wholly vnto thy ſpirite: and to haue alwayes before our eyes and hearts, that wee are euen as ſheepe appointed to the butcherie and ſhammels: that we defende not our ſelues in ire and greedineſſe of vengeaunce: for thou haſt numbred our haires, and giuen vs thine Angels to bee our keepers. Wherefore preſerue thou our mindes from diſpleaſure and deſire of reuengement: graunt vs a milde friendly ſtomacke towardes our enemie, that we may loue him, ſpeake good vnto him, pray for him, recompence him good for euill, that wee may bee readie, to offer the other cheeke alſo. And when wee ſtand in anie daunger, O graunt vs, that we do nothing which doth euil become thy children, and that is not agreeable vnto thine example.
               
            
            
               ANd Annas ſent him ſo bounde vnto Caiphas the high Priest. The ſouldiers tooke Ieſus, and lead him vnto the high Priest Caiphas, there as the Scribes, the Elders, and Phariſies were come together. But Peter followed after a farre off into the pallace of the high Priest, and ſo did another Diſciple, the ſame Diſciple was knowne to the high Priest, and went in with Ieſu into the high Prieſts pallace. But Peter ſtood without at the doore. Then the other Diſciple (who was knowne to the high Priest) went out, and ſpake to the damoſell that kept the doore, and brought Peter in. So Peter went in, and ſate with the ſeruants to ſee the end. They had a fire, and coales kindled in the middest of the

pallace, and ſate about it. Peter alſo ſate amongſt them, and warmed him by the fire. The other ſeruants alſo ſtood round about the fire, and warmed themſelues, for it was colde: and Peter beeing with them, ſtoode and warmed himſelfe. Nowe when the high Priestes maide that kept the doore, ſawe Peter, and ſpyed him by the light of the fire, ſhe ſaide: Waſt not thou alſo with Ieſus of Nazareth the Galilean? Art not thou likewiſe one of his Diſciples? Another ſaid: he alſo was with him. Then Peter denied before them all, and ſaid: Woman, I knowe him not, I am not hee, neither wote I whereof thou ſpeakest. And when hee was gone out into the porch, the cocke crew. Then there ſpyed him another Damſell, which ſaid vnto thoſe that were there: This fellow alſo was with Ieſus of Nazareth. Then denied hee againe with an oath, and ſaide: I neuer knewe the man. After a little while, as it were about an houre, others that ſtood there, ſpyed him and ſaide: Verely thou art one of them, for thou art a Galilean: thine owne ſpeech bewraieth thee. Then ſaide one of the Priests ſeruantes, a kinſman of his whoſe eare Peter had ſmitten off: Did not I ſee thee with him in the garden? But Peter began to ſweare and to curſe himſelfe, & to make great protestation, that hee neuer knew the man. Immediately while he yet ſpake, the cocke crew againe. And the Lord turned him about, and he held Peter. Then Peter remembred the word that Ieſus had ſaid vnto him: Afore the cocke crow twiſe, thou ſhalt denie mee three times. And hee went forth, and wept bitterly.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  O The ſodaine change! O the great inconſtancie of mans weakneſſe! O the vnſearcheable iudgementes of God! Not long heretofore

would Peter haue gone with Chriſt his maiſter into priſon & death. But now he is ſo afraid at the words of one Damoſell, that hee denieth the Lord. Of the which fall, Chriſt told Peter and the other Diſciples afore for a warning: but they beleeuing it not, became preſumptuous, and aſcribed too much vnto themſelues: therfore the Lord ſuffereth them to fall, that they may learne what they haue of themſelues, and what they haue of God: yea, that we all may ſee what the Apoſtles were afore the receiuing of the holy Ghoſt, and what they became after the power that was giuen them from aboue. Afore they receiued the holy Ghoſt, they were weake, feeble, inconſtaunt and wauering: but when God hath cloathed them with power from aboue, they became feruent, earneſt and ſteadfaſt. Greeuouſly dooth Peter fall in deniyng of his maiſter: which thing yet turneth to the wealth of him & all men, to the intent that thereby we might learne, how hurtfull and daungerous it is for a man to truſt to himſelfe, to his own ſtrength, and not onely vnto God, without whome we are able to doe nothing that good is. Good godly people do fall many times, and thorow feare and greatnes of the battaile, they ſhould vtterly giue ouer, if they were not fortified and preſerued by the power of God.
                  Therefore the mercie of God which continually careth for vs, hath brought to paſſe and appointed, that ſuch examples ſhould be noted in the ſcripture, to teach vs, & to declare vnto vs his power & goodneſſe in euerie thing. Thus the ſinnes & falles of holy

and vertuous men are ſet before vs: partly to the intent that if we ſtand, we ſhould ſo continue vpright, looking well to our ſelues that we fall not: and partly that if we be fallen, we ſhould learne to riſe vp again, to amend our liues, and to bewaile our ſinnes. And ſo haue the holye Euangeliſtes perfectlie and vniformelie deſcribed the fall and deniall of Peter, not that thereby they thought to deface Peter, or to publiſhe and make knowen his treſpaſſe: but that the power of GOD in him might be knowen and praiſed.
                  As for ſuch ſinnes as holy men commit through weakneſſe and ignorance, God vſeth them to his glorie and our commoditie: that with the woundes of his Saintes, he might heale ours, and that the ſhipwracke of the godly, might bee vnto vs, a ſure port & hauen. Peters fall ſerueth firſt to the knowledge and praiſe of the power and goodneſſe of God, in that we ſee how mightily he ſetteth Peter vp again, & ſtrengtheneth him, howe graciouſly hee forgiueth him his ſinnes, that we which are fallen, ſhould not deſpaire, but hope for aſſiſtance and forgiueneſſe of God, who giueth ſtrength and power vnto thoſe that are his. Item, it ſerueth to our commoditie and profite, in that we ſee a good godly man fall and ſinne, and afterward riſe vp againe and amend, leaſt we ſhould ſaie: Alas, I am loſt, I haue done this, and I haue done that: but foraſmuch as wee ſee that Peter by repentance, weeping and conuerting agayne, doeth obtaine grace, it is meete and conuenient, that wee acknowledge our offences vnto GOD, deſire grace, weepe and complayne

of our ſinnes before GOD. For both are heere ſet before vs, the fall and the repentaunce: and this enſample is good and profitable to thoſe that are in the right waie of godlyneſſe, and alſo vnto ſinners. The godly, iuſt, and righteous, learne by this to bee circumſpect, and not to preſume. Sinners by occaſion of this doo learne, immediatly to riſe vp againe from theyr fall, and not in anie wiſe to deſpayre.
                  Yea, our owne fall learne we to knowe, by Peters fal, but alaſſe, our fall is much more grieuous & greater than Peters. Peter ſinned through weakneſſe, many a time doe wee ſinne wilfully and aduiſedly: hee once, we daily: he was conſtrained thorow feare, we many a time thorowe light occaſions, fall from the way of truth and righteouſnes: hee riſeth vp againe forth-with, we ſeldome and ſlowlie: he wept bitterly, we ſcarce doe confeſſe and knowledge the ſinne. Yea bitterlie wept he: which thing al the electought to doe, if they haue ſinned. There ſhould nothing greeue vs more, than to haue ſinned againſt GOD, than to haue diſpleaſed God. This doe not wilfull ſinners, which paſſe little or nothing vpon ſinne, and when they come into the deepenes thereof, care not for it, neither confeſſe nor acknowledge their ſinne, vntill afterwarde with diſpaire, as it is to ſee in Iudas.
                  But Peter bewailing the greeuous fall and wickedneſſe of his deniall, without further falling away into horrible deſperation, is preſerued thorow the goodnes of God: in the confidence of gods oft

prooued and accuſtomed mercie, is hee lift vp vnto bleſſed repentance, and ſo healed. Chriſts looke (the true Phiſitian) is vnto him as much as a worde or ſpeech. Wherein wee may learne to knowe the vnſpeakeable loue of GOD, who (euen in the middeſt of ſinne) forgetteth not his own, forſaketh them not: but graciouſly looketh vppon them with the eyes of his mercie, admoniſheth them, ſpeaketh vnto them through the outward and inward worde, with the which gratious countenance he diſwadeth them frō ſinne, and calleth them againe to himſelfe, prouoking them to ſorrowe, and mourning lamentation & weeping. Hee ſpreadeth out his armes and lappe of his mercie, and graciouſly taketh vs vp againe, & receiueth vs with the loſt ſonne. Therfore let vs knowledge, repent, and bitterly bewaile our ſinnes: let vs waſh them away with teares, and endeuor our ſelues with great diligence, that negligently we fall not into them againe: let vs runne to the bottomleſſe well of the mercie of God, and pray.
                  O merciful God, giue vs the wel of bleſſed teares, that from the bottome of our harts we may with Peter
bewa
                        •
                     le our ſinnes. O with how great and greeuous ſinnes are we laden and entangled? O ſuffer vs not to lie vnder the heauie burden: lette vs not ſinke downe in heauines and deſperation. Set thou vs vp againe, and conuert vs throughly: ſend grace of thy holie repentaunce into our heart, waſh away all our ſinnes and negligence: graunt vs the light of newe graces and giftes: let not the ſoules periſh, for whom thou diddeſt ſubmit thy ſelfe into ſo many paines &

rebukes, and at the laſt diddeſt ſuffer the terrible bitter death of the croſſe, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               THE high Priest asked Ieſus of his Diſciples, and of his doctrine. Ieſus anſwered him: I haue openly ſpoken vnto the world: I haue alwaies taught in the Synagogue, and in the temple, there as all the Iewes reſort together, & in corners haue I taught nothing: Why askest thou me? Aske them that heard me, what I ſaid vnto them. Behold, they can tell what I ſaid. When he had thus ſpoken, one of the ministers that ſtood by, ſmote Ieſus vpon his cheek, & ſaid. Anſwereſt thou the high Priest ſo? Then Ieſus anſwered him & ſaid: If I haue ſpoken euil, then bear record of the euil: but if I haue well ſpoken, why ſmitest thou me?
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  HEere in the high Prieſt wee ſee an example of thoſe malicious perſons, that take in hand to ouerthrow and condemne the truth afore they heare it. Great is the arrogancie of man, who dare preſume to make him ſelfe a Iudge of Gods trueth, whereas of more right, the truth and woorde of God ſhould iudge our words and workes. The vnderſtanding of man & of the fleſh, perceiueth not the thing that concerneth God, and therefore hee refuſeth it, and iudgeth it vnright, and ſo giueth ſentence, afore he know what the matter is. This (the more pitie) do al they that ſeeke their own profit and eſtimation, and not the honour of God.
                  Nowe in ſuch a falſe and temerarious ſentence,
                  
                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
            
            
               
               gaue him buffets vpon the chocke, and 
                     〈…〉
                  , and then asked him: Area
                     •
                   who hath ſmitten thee? And the ſeruants ſtroke him vpon the face, and did him 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  
                  ther villany.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  O How vniuſt people come togither againſt the fountaine of righteouſnes? What falſe witneſſe and ſentence goeth againſt the tru
                        •
                     th? And yet all their ſhifting is, that their malice and hatred may haue an appearance of iuſtice. They preuent him with falſe witnes, they preſſe him with perlous and ſubtill queſtions, and go about to vndermine and ſupplant the eternall wiſedome. The enemies are accuſers, witneſſes and Iudges. And whereas they reuile and blaſpheme Gods ſonne to the vttermoſt, they will be ſeene to be the men, that are ſorie and diſpleaſed, when God is diſhonoured. But as much as they ſeeke in the innocent lambe, yet finde they nothing, no not ſo much as any ſuſpicion of euill: ſo pure and ſincere is all his life, ſo true and conſtant are his words.
                  This example ought all faithfull beleeuers to ſet before their eies,1. Theſ. 5. Epheſ. 4. 1. Tim. 3. learning thereby, ſo to direct their life, that the enemies not onely find no vice in them, but alſo no ſuſpicion of euill: that vnto the euill ſpeaker, there be giuen no occaſion nor cauſe to ſlander, and that the name of Chriſt thorow them be not blaſphemed. But whereas the honour of God ſo requireth,Math. 15. wee muſt openly ſpeake and confeſſe the truth

before the vngodly, although they bee angry and offended: according as in this place we hear of Chriſt, who telleth them of his glorious comming in Maieſtie and power, although they take it for a blaſphemie. Heere ought wee alſo diligently and deuoutlie to conſider, what Chriſt ſuffereth for vs, what ignominie and reproch hee taketh vpon himſelfe for our ſakes, how vilelie he is reputed, and how ſhamefullie in his bodie, and in all the parts thereof he is beaten: And yet in all this, how bleſſedly hee behaueth and ſheweth him ſelfe: to the intent that it ſhould not greeue vs, for his ſake to beare vile buffets, and all vngentlenes: for all this ſuffreth he for the truthes ſake. Euen he whome the Angels 
                        •
                     oe worſhip, is blaſphemed of vnthrifts: hee that giueth true anſwere, is named a blaſphemer: the righteous Iudge is condemned of the vnrighteous, and pronounced to be worthie of death. But the gracious Lord is quietly content to keepe ſilence and dooth ſuffer: and therefore the more humble hee is, and ſubmitteth him ſelfe to bee miſ-intreated, the more glorious is his victorie.
                  With many wicked euill words is he defaced and ſcorned, ſore beaten and miſhandled. That gracious face which the Angels delight to beholde, is blindefolded, ſpitted vpon, and buffeted: the head, the face, and necke beaten with many ſore ſtrokes. Chriſt is become a ſtraunger vnto all his friends, forſaken of al his acquaintance and kinſfolkes, a mocking and ieaſting ſtocke vnto all men. Euen as if it were a dizard foole, is hee laughed to ſcorne that is wiſeſt of all: vppon

whom the cruell dogs all the night long practiſe their vnſatiable malice and pleaſure, with mocking, nipping, pulling, buffeting, ſpitting, and reuiling of him.
                  In all this doth his ſwiftnes of mind and excellent patience abide ſtill conſtant and vnmoueable: wherby we may iuſtly learne to bee aſhamed of our preſumptuous brags, in our pompe and pride which we vſe in our ſoft and coſtly apparell: where as Chriſt for our ſakes became moſt poore, and vilely reputed. Verie euill beſeemeth it vs, yea a ſhame it is for vs, (which of Chriſt are called Chriſtians, and will bee his diſciples) to ſeeke bodily pleaſure, and earthy ioy and ſenſualitie in all thinges, wheras the Lord Ieſus our head dooth beare and ſuffer all that is contrarie therunto. O how vnlike are we to our head & forgoer? How farare wee frō right & true humilitie, when for the leaſt wrong and vnaduiſed word, we bee diſpleaſed with our brethren: and whereas we ſhould giue thanks for being rebuked to our profite, we are vnpacient and miſcontent.
                  O Lord Ieſus Chriſt, graunt vs, ſo to conſider thy holy paſſion, that it bring fruite in vs: make vs pacient, when hurt and diſpleaſure is done vnto vs: teach vs after thine owne liuing example, not to feare the rayling wordes and perſecution of wicked people, neither to be diſcouraged for any wrongfull accuſation that happeneth vppon vs. Teach vs to ſee our owne vileneſſe, how iuſtly we are of the people reuiled and deſpiſed for our ſinnes. Haue mercie (ô lord) vpon our vnperfectnes: thou waſt reuiled, that thou

mightſt take from vs euerlaſting ſhame: beaten thou waſ
                        •
                     , that from the ſtripes which we with our ſinnes haue deſerued, thou mighteſt deliuer vs: ſpitted vppon and mocked, to bring vs from euerlaſting confuſion to euerlaſting honour. Wherefore ſtrengthen our minds (ô Lord) that in lowly ſhamefaſtnes wee may paciently ſuffer and beare the hard wordes and checkes that other folkes giue vs for our ſinnes and offences: for many mo falſer accuſations and rebukes haſt thou borne with higheſt patience, for vs vile ſinners.
                  O let the hard ſtrokes and knockes of thy head, be vnto vs a ſwaging of all our bodily paines: lette that ſcornfull blindfolding of thine eyes, bee vnto vs a reſtraint and keeping in of our ſight, from all wantonnes, vanitie, & lightnes of eies: let the vile ſpitting vpon thy holy face, expell out of vs all carnall luſtes: and teach vs, not to regard the outward appearance, but to holde and keepe in honour the vertues of the ſoule. That carrying about and ſcornefull deriſion, which happened vnto thee vndeſerued, driue frō vs all diſſolute manners and wanton geſtures. Let that refuſing of thy worthines quench in vs all deſires of temporall honor, let it moue vs vnto things that of the worlde are contemned, and in ſmall eſtimation. Giue vs (ô Lorde) a ſtrong victorie in all patience: that from our heart rootes wee may acknowledge and confeſſe our ſelues to be moſt worthie of al contempt and ſlaunder, of all rebuke, ſhame, and puniſhment, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
               EArlie in the morning at the break of the day, went the chiefe Prieſts and Elders of the people to counſail, 
                     〈◊〉
                   they might destroy Ieſus. And they brought him to their Counſaile, and ſaid: If thou bee Christ, tell vs? Then ſaid Ieſus vnto them: if I tell you, ye will not beleeue me: if I aske you a question, you will giue me no aunſwere, neither let me go. But from this time forth ſhal the ſonne of man ſitte at the right hand of the power of God. Then ſaid they all: Art thou then the ſonne of God? Then ſaid hee: Ye ſay it, I am. They ſaid. What need we any more witneſſe? We haue heard it our ſelues out of his own mouth. Then aroſe the whole multitude, as many as were there, and bound Ieſus, and led him from Caiphas to Pilate into the iudgement hall. And it was earely in the morning. They went not into the iudgement hall, least they ſhuld be defiled, but that they might eat Paſſah. Then went Pilate forth vnto them, and they broght Ieſus bound, and deliuered him vnto Pontius Pilate the deputie.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  SAthan ſleepeth not, but watcheth and is diligent to driue his houſhold together, to deſtroy Ieſus Chriſt, to make him ſure, and to bring him to his end. For they thought if they might haue Ieſus once deade, then had they rooted out the doctrine of the trueth. But fooliſh and vaine is their deuiſe, for the truth is immortall: the more it is oppreſt, the more it breaketh forth againe: when men vndertake for to quench it, then doth the ſhine and brightnes therof

appeare more glorious. Shame therfore and rebuke, yea eternall puniſhment bring all they vppon themſelues, that withſtanding the trueth take it priſoner, bind it, and deliuer it to the Iudge.2. Tim. 2. Iohn. 8. They thinke they bind the truth, but the truth and worde of God cannot be bound, for it maketh all thinges free, and ſuch as are tangled and wrapt in the ſnares of ſinne, thoſe it deliuereth. Who ſo goeth about to bind the truth, dooth knitte and ſnare himſelfe with vnlowſable bands, and caſteth from him the band of loue, wherwith God offereth to draw him vnto himſelfe, and to binde him vnder his yoke. Wherefore let vs be obedient vnto the truth, and not ſtriue againſt it: for if we vndertake to condemne it, it ſhall ſo appeare againe in high Maieſtie, that through the beautifull, faire, and cleare brightneſſe thereof, wee ſhall all periſh, and be blinded.
               
            
            
               WHen Iudas which had betraied him, ſawe that Ieſus was condemned, hee repented ſo, that hee tooke the money, the thirtie ſiluer pence, and brought them to the high Priestes, and to the Elders of the people, and ſaide: I haue ſinned in betraying that innocent bloud. They ſaid: What haue we to do withall? Looke thou to that. So he cast the money from him in the temple, went his way, and hanged himſelfe in a ſnare. But the high Priestes tooke the money, & ſaide: It is not lawfull to put it into the treaſurie, for it is the price of bloud. And they tooke counſell, & bought with the ſame money a potters field, to bury ſtrangers in. Wherfore the ſame field is called Acheldema, that is, the field of bloud vntill this day. Then was fulfilled that,

which was ſpoken by Ieremie the Prophet, ſaying: And they tooke thirtie ſiluer plates the price of him that was v
                     •
                  
                  lued, whom they bought of the children of Iſrael, and ga
                     ••
                   them for the potters field, as the Lord appointed me.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  LIke as we haue had in Peter, an enſample of the grace and mercie of God: ſo haue we in Iudas, a fearefull and terrible enſample of Gods righteouſneſſe. In Iudas, are deſcribed vnto vs all vnbeleeuing deſperate perſons, whom the gracious God of his bottomleſſe mercie calleth to his goodnes and ſeruice: but they deſpiſe it, and followe ſatan, who blindeth them, and entiſeth them through manifold wickednes, which they conſider not, but when they are come into the deepneſſe of vice, they force not of it. The deuill alſo, to whom they ſurrender themſelues to ſerue, and that hath taken poſſeſſion of their heart, blindeth them in ſuch ſorte, that they ponder not the vileneſſe, grieuouſneſſe, and greatnes of their ſinnes, till they haue fully finiſhed the abhomination: for if they did conſider it, they ſhould repent & amend. How many louing admonitions had Iudas heard of the Lord, to diſſuade him from his purpoſe? yet all could not helpe. At the laſt openeth hee their eies that they repent, but a godly repentaunce they receiue not. They beholde the greatneſſe and grieuouſneſſe of the ſinne and offence, but the greatnes of Gods mercie in Chriſt they ſee not, by meanes whereof they deſpaire in theyr ſinnes, and are damned.
                  
                     In the Prieſts that loath the bloud monie, and yet abhorre not to ſhed the innocent bloud, is ſet foorth before our eyes an enſample of all hypocrites, which outwardly appeare to be good and vertuous, and yet regard not the godlynes of the ſpirit: A gnat choaketh them, and a camell they ſwallow vp.
                  But vnto vs poore ſtraungers and pilgrimes, there is prepared and bought through the bloud of Chriſt a field and Church-yard, that wee beeing waſhed cleane from our ſinnes, might find eternal reſt to our ſoules.
                  Preſerue vs (O God) from couetouſneſſe and deſpaire, from falſe hypocriſie, treaſon, and blouſhedding: G lead vs not into temptation. And whereas we haue ſinned, grant vs true & fruitfull repentance, that we neuer forget thy goodnes & mercie, but immediatly ceaſe from ſinne, and ſerue thee continually vntill our end, Amen.
               
            
            
               IEſus ſtood before the deputie. Then ſaid the deputy: what accuſation bring ye againſt this man? They anſwered & ſaid, If he were not an euill doer, we had not deliuered him vnto thee. Then ſaid Pilate vnto them, Take yee him, and iudge him after your law. Then ſaid the Iewes, It is not lawfull for vs to put anie man to death: that the ſaying of Ieſus might be fulfilled, which he ſpake, ſignifieng what death hee ſhould die. Then began they to accuſe him, & ſayd, We haue found this man peruerting the people, & forbidding to giue tribute vnto the Emperor, & naming himſelf to be Chriſt, a king. Pilate asked him, & ſaid, Art thou king of the Iews? Then anſwered he and ſayd, Thou haſt ſpoken it. Then ſaid

Pilate to the chiefe Priests and to the people: I 
                     〈…〉
                   nor guiltines in the man. Then were they more earneſt and ſaid: he hath with his doctrine mooued the people to ſedic
                     •••
                   thorow out whole Iewrie, beginning in Galilee, and from thence hither vnto this place. Nowe when Pilate heard of Galilee, he asked, if he were a Galilean. And when hee perceiued that he was vnder Herods iuriſdiction, hee ſent him vnto Herode, who then was at Hieruſalem.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  ALL they that hitherto from the beginning of the world, haue at any time preached the truth were of the aduerſaries noted and accuſed to be ſedicious & deceiuers of the people: which thing was brought vpon them, to rid them out of the way. Hereof find we examples enow in the olde and new Teſtament, Ieremy 26.32.38. 3. Reg. 18. Amos 7. In Chriſt and his Apoſtles we ſee it euident. Therefore haue wee no cauſe to giue ouer the truth, for wee are no better than our maiſter.
                  And though wee bee complained vppon for the truthes ſake, it ought not greatly to greeue vs, for as much as we ſee, that the like happened vnto Chriſt, in whoſe mouth there was neuer found guile. Hee is ſet forth vnto vs for an example of moſt perfect patience. We that be ſpirituail Diſciples of Chriſt, muſt goe vnto him to ſchoole, and learne of him meeknes, obedience, patience, and lowlines of mind. Beholde our head ſtandeth before an Hetheniſh vnrighteous Iudge, wrongfully and ſore is hee accuſed, euen our

                     
                        ••
                     uiour our king & Lord, yea euen he that is iudge 
                        〈…〉
                      whole world. Why ſhould we then 
                        〈…〉
                      for Gods ſake to obey worldly 
                        〈…〉
                      though they oppreſſe vs, & do vs wrong? 
                        〈◊〉
                      innocent, as for vs, we are in many things guiltie. Neuer ſhould the patience of Ieſus ſlip out of our hearts.
                  Haue mercie vpon our impatiencie, O mercifull Father, and print in our heartes the image of thy ſon, grant vs grace to follow his footſteps: expell out of vs all feare of worldly accuſations & falſe iudgments, giue vs ſuch a gentle ſpirite, as (when we bee wrongfully accuſed, or vniuſtly puniſhed) is not ſoone vnquieted: ô driue thou out of vs all fumiſhneſſe, indignation, and ſelfe will: let thy loue increaſe and growe in vs through the contemning of our ſelues, and whatſoeuer is in vs, that ſtriueth or reſiſteth againſt thy holie will, let the ſame bee cleane extinct and die.
               
            
            
               AND when Herode ſawe Ieſus, he was exceeding glad, for hee was deſirous to ſee him of a long ſeaſon, becauſe he had heard many things of him, and he truſted to haue ſeene ſome myracle done by him. Then he queſtioned with him many wordes, but Ieſus aunſwered nothing. The high Priests and Scribes stood forth and accuſed him ſtraightly. And Herode with his men of warre deſpiſed him: And when he had mocked him, he araied him in white clothing, and ſent him againe to Pilate. And the ſame daie Pilate and Herode were made friendes together, for before they were at variance.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THe euerlaſting wiſedome of God is mocked & ieſted at, as a deſert foole, the truth is belied. Vs therefore that of nature are fooliſh and liers, it ſhuld not grieue to be reuiled for Gods ſake. No anſwere giueth Chriſt to the vngodly voluptuous king (who of a curious deſire, woulde faine haue ſeene or heard ſome new thing of Chriſt) for at that houre to anſwere, it could not edifie. It was a time wherein it pleaſed him to ſuffer, not to doo miracles. Thus the innocent Lord Ieſus, for vs guiltie is drawen and haled from one vnrighteous iudge to another▪ All reproch, ſhame, diſhonour, and deriſion, taketh he vppon himſelfe for our ſakes, euerie where is hee grieuouſly accuſed, in euery place is there hurt done vnto him, and after many queſtions and examinations, they hang him vp vpon a croſſe. Thus the high God is brought low, as if he were moſt vile, the almightie is defaced, as if he were moſt weake of all: the wiſeſt of all, is laughed to ſcorne, as if hee were a naturall foole: the moſt vnguiltie is handled as an euill doer.
                  This ſpectacle ought wee verie diligently to behold, for wee are laden with grieuous burdens of all wickedneſſe, and haue for our iniquitie deſerued ſo much, that wee are worthie of all rebuke, ſhame, and confuſion, yet are wee vnpatient, when wee bee deſpiſed. Neuertheleſſe all ſuch vile intreating doth Chriſt ſuffer for our ſakes, to deliuer vs from eternall

                     
                        〈◊〉
                      and confuſion, which wee iuſtly haue de
                     
                        •
                     .
                  O Lord take from vs all wantonneſſe and pride. 
                        〈…〉
                      vs, thy ſeruaunts, wilfully & 
                        〈…〉
                      our bodies, whereas thou Lord, king of heauen, are ſcornefully deſpiſed in a fooles coate? O Lord ſet thou before our eies and heartes the contempt and deriſion that was done vnto thee. Teach vs to followe thee thorough the contempt and hatred of our ſelues, and to reioyce when wee are deſpiſed.
                  Let vs neuer ſet our hope vpon men, vpon praiſe, vpon honour, vpon power, vppon monie: but that from the bottome of our harts, we may be able to deſpiſe all temporall things, and loue thereof, and firmly and ſteadfaſtly to followe after thee, O Lord Ieſu, our welfare, that as touching all the rebuke and contempt which thou for vs, poore vnworthie ſinners, haſt ſuffered, wee may beare the ſame in the perpetuall remembraunce of our heart, and neuer forget it, Amen.
               
            
            
               PIlate called together the high Prieſts and chiefe rulers with the common people, and ſayde vnto them: Yee haue brought this man vnto mee, as one that peruerteth the people. And behold, I examined him before you, & finde no fault in this man, of thoſe things whereof yee accuſe him, no nor yet Herode. For I ſent you to him, & lo, nothing worthie of death is done vnto him. So Pilat went againe into the iudgement hall, and called Ieſus, and ſayde vnto him: Art thou the king of the Iewes?
               
                  Then anſwered Ieſus Speakeſt thou that 
                     〈…〉
                   others tolde it thee of me? Pilate anſwered▪ 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   Iew? Thy people and thy high Prieſtes 
                     〈…〉
                   vnto me: What hast thou done? Ieſus anſwered 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  
                  dome is not of this world: if my kingdome were of this world aſſuredly my miniſters would fight for mee, that I ſhould not be giuen ouer vnto the Iewes. But now is not my kingdome from hence. Then ſayd Pilate, Then art thou a king. Ieſus aunſwered: Thou ſayeſt it, I am a king. For this cauſe was I borne, & for this cauſe came I into the world, that I ſhould beare witneſſe vnto the truth. Who ſo is of the truth, heareth my voyce. Then ſayde Pilate vnto him, What is truth? When hee ſayde this, hee went foorth againe to the Iewes, and ſayde vnto them: I finde no fault in him. But ye haue a cuſtome, that I ſhoulde deliuer one vnto you looſe at Eaſter. Will ye that I looſe vnto you the king of the Iewes? Whome will ye that I ſhall let goe? Barrabas, or Ieſus which is called Chriſt. For he knew, that the Prieſtes had of enuie and hatred deliuered him vp. Then cried they all, and ſayd: Not him, but Barrabas. As for Barrabas, he was a murtherer, who becauſe of an vproare made in the Citie, and for man-ſlaughter, was layde in priſon. Then ſpake Pilate farther with them, willing to let Ieſus looſe. But they cried, Crucifie him, crucifie him. Then ſaid he vnto them the third time: What euill then hath he don? I finde no cauſe in him. Therfore will I puniſh him, and let him go.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  FOraſmuch as the deuil knoweth, that Chriſt and his miniſters applie all diligence with their doctrine,

that the kingdome of him (who is the Prince of this worlde) 
                        〈◊〉
                      hee deſtroied, and that the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt the ſonne of God, the chiefe king of all might proſper, hee bringeth to paſſe, that Chriſt and the Miniſters of the word, are noted and ſu
                        •
                     pected of ſedition, wheras they yet ſeeke nothing leſſe than worldly power and dominion. Chriſt flyeth away, when they would make him king: now is he noted and accuſed, as one that ſeeketh to bee Emperor. Neuertheles Chriſt is a true king, whoſe kingdome conſiſteth not in corporall things, but in ſpirit and in power. Chriſt deſpiſed all honor, riches, power, and pleaſures of this world: his Miniſters therfore muſt of all the world bee contemned. But Chriſt ruleth through his ſpirite and power in their hearts, & they alſo ſhall rule with him in the reſurrection. Hee is the trueth, and giueth witneſſe vnto the trueth: & who ſo is of the truth, heareth his voyce, and beareth record alſo vnto the trueth.
                  Heere likewiſe we learne the vnſtedfaſtnes of the worlde: they that afore ranne ſtill after Chriſt, and would haue made him king, crying ioyfully Hoſanna vnto the Lorde, crie now: Crucifie him, crucifie him. So little worthie is the praiſe and commendation of the world to be regarded. They that ſaid afore: Praiſed be he that commeth in the name of the Lorde, the ſame crie nowe: Away with him, crucifie him: and ſo they choſe a murtherer, in ſtead of the Sauiour. Their requeſt is, that the murtherer may liue: as for the Sauiour & well of life, him they deſire to be put to death. If we pondered this well in our hearts, that our Sauiour

Ieſus was eſteemed worſe and more vile than a murtherer, there ſhould be nothing that wee would not be glad to ſuffer for his ſake.
                  Now when the world is in hande with vs, and caſteth manie opprobrious wordes vppon vs, we muſt not be ouercome with vnpatiencie: the falſe accuſation and threatening of wicked people, ought not to make vs ſhrinke: but if we loue Chriſt with our harts we muſt remember his patience, when he was falſely accuſed and reuyled for our ſakes: and ſo with ſtopped cares ought wee to lette all ſharpe wordes paſſe, yea to pray for them that ſpeake euill of or to vs.
                  When our good workes and meanings are taken in euill part, our enterpriſe reſiſted, our wordes reiected and refuſed of euerie man, wee ought paciently to ſuffer it. For farre inferiouis are wee vnto Chriſt our Lord, ouer whom goeth ſo horrible and wicked a crie; Crucifie him, crucifie him.
                  
                  Hereof ſhould all faithfull beleeuers bee admoniſhed, yea aſſured, if they mind to liue godly in Chriſt Ieſu, that they muſt ſuffer much perſecution, & that if they wil walke and go forward in the way of God, they muſt beare many hurtfull and noyſome things: for no man can pleaſe GOD, that for his ſake is not exerciſed in much aduerſitie. Therefore ſaith hee vnto his deare friendes: Bleſſed are yee when men reuyle you, and perſecute you, & ſhall falſely ſpeake all manner of euill againſt you for my ſake. Reioice and bee gladde, for great is your reward in heauen. Math. 5.
                  
                  
                     Wherefore deare children, let vs follow our innocent Lord Ieſus: who being refuſed of wicked men vpon earth, but choſen of God the Father, is crowned with eternall glorie, and godly honour in heauen. No euill ſaying or curſe ought to ouercome vs, conſidering that for the ſame there is ſo exceeding ioy prepared for vs of God.
               
            
            
               THen Pilate took Ieſus therfore, & ſcourged him, & the ſouldiers wound a crowne of thorns, and put it on his head. And they did on him a purple garment, and came vnto him, and ſaid: haile king of the Iewes: and they ſmote him on the face. Pilate went foorth againe, and ſaid vnto them: Behold, I bring him forth to you, that you may know that I finde no fault in him. Then came Ieſus foorth, wearing a crowne of thorne, and a robe of purple. And he ſaieth vnto them, Beholde the man. When the high Prieſtes therefore and miniſters ſaw him, they cried ſaying: crucifie him, crucifie him. Pilate ſaith vnto them: Take ye him, and crucifie him, for I finde no cauſe in him. The Iewes aunſwered and ſaid vnto him: Wee haue a lawe, and by our law hee ought to die, becauſe hee made himſelfe the ſonne of GOD. When Pilate heard that ſaying, hee was the more afraid: and went againe into the iudgement hall, and ſayth vnto Ieſus. Whence art thou? But Ieſus gaue him no aunſwere. Then ſaid Pilate vnto him: Speakeſt thou not vnto mee? Knowest thou not, that I haue power to crucifie thee, and haue power to let thee looſe? Ieſus aunſwered: thou couldest haue no power at all against me, except it were giuen thee from aboue. Therefore he that deliuered me vnto thee, hath the more ſin. And from thence forth ſou
                     •
                  ht

Pilate meanes to looſe him, but the Iewes cryed, ſaying: If thou let him go, thou art not the Emperours friend: for whoſoeuer maketh himſelfe king, is against the Emperour.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  HEre in Pilate we learne, how hurtful it is, when euery one in his office and vocation looketh not diligently about him, but ſlenderly letteth the thing ſlippe and paſſe, that he earneſtly ought to bring to effect. Pilate was the deputie of a countrey, and knew that Chriſt had wrong, wherof he himſelf alſo many times beareth him witneſſe with his owne mouth. Seeing then that he was a Iudge, it appertaineth to his office, to iudg right, & not to ſuffer the innocent to die. For though Pilate doth, as if he would diſcharge Chriſt, yet he mindeth it not earneſtly. Hee goeth about to let Chriſt looſe, neuertheles ſo farre as hee diſpleaſe not the Iewes, and the Emperour, ſo farre as hee looſe not the fauour and friendſhippe of men.
                  While Pilate now fainteth, in the righteouſneſſe that hee knoweth and is ſure of, and holdeth not on ſtoutly, as he ſhould, to deliuer Chriſt, God ſuffereth him ſtill to fall, till he come to this point, that he condemneth the innocent to death againſt his own conſcience. Thus goeth it with al thoſe, that for the grace of GOD lent vnto them, are vnthankfull & vnfaithfull in the little. It is the part of a righteous Iudge, to maintaine iuſtice, and to defend the innocent, thogh it ſhould coſt him, body, honour, and goods.
                  
                     The pride alſo of Pilate, that preſumed by reaſon of his authoritie, is brought downe with the wordes of the Lorde: there is no power but from aboue, & therefore ſhould it bee godly vſed: the higher powers are Goddes Miniſters. In the which wordes of Chriſt, the faithfull beleeuers that bee in aduerſitie, are comforted: knowing that no man hath authoritie nor power ouer them, except it bee giuen him of God.
                  Chriſt is bound to deliuer vs from the bandes of our ſinnes, and to place vs in eternall freedome. Hee is ſcourged to take from vs the ſtripes that we ſhould ſuffer by reaſon of our ſins: yea to heale our wounds, is hee ſore wounded himſelfe. Altogether ſuffereth hee for our ſakes: thorow his ſtripes are wee made whole. His backe (as Eſay ſaith, Eſay. 50.) offereth he to the ſmiters, and his cheeks to the nippers, to purge vs from all filthineſſe of ſinne. Hee became without beautie, as a leper deſpiſed, ſpitted vppon and mocked, to deliuer vs from eternall ſhame & puniſhment. Wee had deſerued all this, hee did nothing worthie thereof: wee are the cauſe of his martyrdome. Oh the great burthen of our ſinnes, that the Sonne of the eternall GOD muſt ſuffer ſo ſore ſtripes and cruell payne for vs, to reconcile vs with his Father! Oh the exceeding great loue which he declareth vnto vs, in that hee taketh all rebuke vppon himſelfe for vs! Oh that wee conſidered this with true deuotion, ſo that wee might ſay with Chriſt and Dauid: I am readie to bee ſcourged, and my plague is alwaies before mee.
                  
                     O Ieſu, kindle vs with the fire of thy exceeding loue, which thou in ſo much aduerſitie haſt well tryed towardes vs. Graunt vs the helpe of thy grace to the ſtrengthening of our weakeneſſe, when the heauie burdens of aduerſities fall vppon vs: that thorow the terrible ouercharge of them, wee be not oppreſt and throwne downe. Giue vs grace, ſo to chaſten and ſubdue our body and fleſh, that it maye bee ſubiect vnto the ſpirite, and obedient vnto thy will in all things.
               
            
            
               WHen Pilate heard that ſaying, he brought forth Ieſus, and ſate downe to giue ſentence in the place that is called the Pauement, but in the Hebrue tong Gabatha. It was the preparing of the Easter about the ſixt houre. And he ſaith vnto the Iewes: Behold your king. They cried: away with him, away with him, crucifie him. Pilate ſaith vnto them: ſhall I crucifie your king? The high Prieſts aunſwered: We haue no king but the Emperour. And the high Priestes with the Elders of the people, accuſed him in many things, but he gaue no anſwere. Pilate asked him further, and ſaid: makeſt thou no anſwere? Seeſt thou not in how many and great thinges they accuſe thee? But Ieſus moreouer gaue no anſwer, ſo that the deputie maruelled ſore at it. At the feaſt he had a custome, to let one vnto them looſe, whom they would deſire. Now while the people preſ
                     •
                  ed on, Pilate began to aske them (as hee alwaies did) & ſaid: Whom will yee that I let looſe vnto you: Barabas, or Ieſus who is called Chriſt?
               While Pilate ſate in iudgement, his wife ſent to him, & ſaid: Haue thou nothing to doo with that iuſt man, for this

night in ſleepe haue I ſuffered much for him. But the high Prieſts & the Elders perſwaded the people, & inticed them, that they ſhould aske Barrabas, & require Ieſus vnto death. Then anſwered Pilate, and ſaid vnto them: whom will ye of theſe two, that I ſhall let go looſe vnto you? They ſaid Barrabas. Then ſaid Pilate vnto them: What ſhall I then do with Ieſus, who is called Chriſt? Then ſaid they al: let him be crucified. The deputie ſaid: What euill then hath he done? Neuertheles they cried yet more: let him be crucified
               When Pilate ſaw that he profited nothing, but that the vprore was greater, he tooke water and waſhed his hands before the people, and ſaid: I am vnguiltie from the bloud of this iust man: looke ye to it. Then anſwered all the people & ſaid: His bloud be vpon vs and vpon our children. So Pilat, according to theyr deſire, let Barrabas looſe vnto them: And Ieſus (whome hee ſcourged) gaue he ouer vnto them to be crucified.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  PIlate feareth men more than God, therfore doth he againſt God, and condemneth the innocent, althogh he thinketh to be vnguilty of his bloud.
                  The Euangeliſt maketh mention of the feaſt of Eaſter or Paſſah, to the intent wee ſhoulde conſider, that Chriſt the true right Paſchall lambe, was put to death and ſlaine for vs.
                  Here we learne what the iudgement of the world is: righteouſnes is refuſed and condemned: wickedneſſe, vngratiouſneſſe, and murther, is deliuered and quite. O how lamentably periſheth the righteous, &

no man there is that conſidereth it, or that goeth about to deliuer him? The true, is giuen ouer to the lyers; the innocent, to the guiltie; the godly, to the vngratious; the murtherer is choſen, before Ieſus the annointed ſonne of God: heere the wicked is preferred before the iuſt, death before life, night & darknes before the light.
                  This nowe, in all our troubles, when wee are oppreſt and falſely condemned, ſhal comfort & ſtrengthen vs, if we ſet before our eyes the bleſſed example of Ieſus the innocent, who for vs was condemned as an euill dooer. For wee ſeruantes are not aboue our Lorde. If the Iudge of the quicke and deade bee wrongfully condemned, how much more conuenient is it, that wee poore guiltie ſhoulde ſuffer, when wee are iudged, whether it bee doone iuſtly or vniuſtly?
                  Chriſt for our ſake was falſly condemned, to take from vs the iuſt iudgement of eternall damnation, which was gone out vpon vs for our ſinnes.
                  Graunt vnto vs, O Lord Ieſu, that neither thratening nor ſlaunder driue vs away from the contemned croſſe, but that with our whole powers we may gladly follow thee, O giue vs grace, to faſten our fleſh with the temptations therof, vnto the croſſe, that we bewailing our former ſinnes, may withſtand and ouercome the temptations that are behind. Helpe vs (Lorde) in the conflict of the ſpirite, lette thy croſſe (ô Lord) bee vnto vs a medecine againſt all vice, and graunt, that we alway chearefully take vp our croſſe, and follow thee, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
               THen the ſouldiers lead Ieſus againe into the iudgment hall: And when they had mocked him, they stripped him out of the purple robe, and put his own garments vpon him, and lead him forth to be crucified. And he bare his owne croſſe himſelfe, and went on towardes the place of execution. And as they lead him, they caught one that was called Simon of Cyren, who came from the field, and was the father of Alexander and Rufus, him they compelled to carie the croſſe of Ieſus, and laid it vpon him, that he might beare it after Chriſt. And there followed him a great companie of people, and women, which bewailed and lamented him. But Ieſus turned backe to them, and ſayd: Ye daughters of Ieruſalem, weepe not for me, but weepe for your ſelues and for your children. For behold, the daies will come, in the which they ſhall ſaie: Happie are the barren, and the wombes that neuer bare, and the paps which neuer gaue ſucke. Then ſhall they begin to ſaie to the mountaines, Fall on vs: and to the hils, couer vs, for if they doo this in a greene tree, what ſhall be done in the drie? And vnto the place of execution, there were lead with him two other murtherers to be ſlaine. And they came vnto the place called Golgatha, that is, a place of dead mens skuls, (or the place of execution.) And they gaue him to drinke vinegre mixt with gall, but when he had proued it, he would not drinke it. And they crucified him, & with him two murtherers, the one on the right hand, the other on the left, and Ieſus in the middeſt. That the Scripture might be fulfilled: Hee was counted among the euill dooers.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  HEere ought we with deuout hearts to behold our Sauiour Ieſus, how meekely he taketh the croſſe vppon him for our ſakes, and patientlie beareth it, to bring the loſt ſheep again vpō his ſhoulders. Heere we ſee our king beare his kingdome vpon his ſhoulders,Eſay. 9. as Eſay the prophet ſaith. He is is not onely led foorth, but it is done with great teproch, euen as if he were a ring-leader of murtherers and vnthrifts. O how was the king of glorie blaſpemed and miſintreated for our ſakes? Hee taketh our ſins vpon him, and diſchargeth vs of our burthen.
                  In the conſideration of this his reproch, we ſhold not weepe ouer him, but ouer our ſelues. For if this be done to the innocent ſonne of God, what are we then worthie of?1. Pet. 3. By this alſo muſt wee learne, patiently to beare our croſſe, in folowing our fore-goer: for he ſheweth vs an example before, that we ſhould follow his fooſteps, euen to the death. And if we ſo conſider our croſſe, it ſhall be light and eaſie vnto vs. We haue ſworne vnder the croſſe, from the which we muſt not ſhrinke, if we will follow the Lord. The loue of Ieſu Chriſt ſhal make all aduerſitie ſweet and acceptable vnto vs. Our ioy and comfort ought to bee chiefly in the croſſe of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, by whome the world muſt be crucified vnto vs,Gal. 5. and we vnto the world. He ſhall cauſe our ſlouthfull fleſh to bee quicke and diligent, and ſhall kindle our colde heart. Hee goeth before vs in the narrowe waie, and

is a companion of our pilgrimage, a helper in all trouble, a comforter in all aduerſitie, a worker with vs in the grieuous trauaile that wee ſuffer for his ſake.
                  O Lorde helpe vs to beare the heauie burthens: that wee maye bee diligent and apt vnto all good workes. Aſſiſt vs with thy power and grace, helpe vs according vnto thy accuſtomed mercie: teach vs to breake, and vtterlie to leaue our owne will. Make vs true Croſſe-bearers and followers of thee: Take from vs all worldlie luſt and wilfulneſſe, what ſo euer hindereth vs in thy loue, that in obedience and patience wee may alwaie followe thee, and find reſt with thee after aduerſitie. Thou Lorde waſt ſtripped out of thy apparell, and ſpoyled thereof: that wee with vertues might be cloathed. The ſame that was put vppon thee to rebuke and ſhame, is vnto vs become the higheſt honour. Thou waſt lift vppe from the earth, that thou mighteſt drawe the heartes of thy faithfull beleeuers vnto thee from all earthlie thinges, and kindle them in the loue of hie heauenly things: that thou thorow thy death mighteſt reconcile & fully reſtore all that is in heauen and earth.
                  O ye righteous and faithfull, that delite to ſerue God, behold with the eies of your hart, how our God, Lord, king, and redeemer hangeth on the croſſe for vs. let vs conſider our louer, who for our ſakes hangeth naked and bare in great ſhame & reproch before the world. He ſpreadeth out his armes, to call and receiue vnto himſelfe, vs poore ſinners & loſt children,

ſaying,Math. 11. Come to me all ye that labour and are laden, and I will refreſh you. He ſheweth his woundes, out of the which floweth the plentifull riuer and fountaine of his precious deare bloud, to the waſhing awaie of all our filthyneſſe.Zach. 13 Hee boweth downe his head, to ſpeake friendly vnto vs. Boldly therfore with great comfort and confidence, ought al ſinners to reſort vnto him, where they ſhall find help & conſolation, defence and protection: there ſhould they laie downe the heauie burthens of theyr ſinnes. Vnto vs muſt al the world be a croſſe, and we vnto the world: onely let Chriſt the Lord be our life, and to die with him, our greateſt aduantage. Farre bee from vs all reioycing, ſaue onely in the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, farre be from vs al confidence in our owne workes & merites, for all our health conſiſteth in the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, wherein vndoubtedly we may well ſet all our hope. By him commeth forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, out of him floweth the riches of all deſeruing: with him is the reward of all righteouſnes. Through the contempt of our ſelues, and of all temporall things, let vs barely, nakedly, and ſimply followe the naked and crucified Lord.
                  Teach vs (O God) to haue delight in contemning our ſelues, and all temporal things: and when other folkes are in trouble, to be ſorrie and praie for them. Grant vs grace to wiſh good vnto thoſe that hurt and puniſh vs: let vs not truſt in men, for there bee fewe faithfull and conſtant friends.
                  Heere alſo ſhould we learne, not to be grieued, if we haue few louers and many enemies: for ſo happened

euen vnto Chriſt our head. He had many foes to whome yet he did none euil but much good, and receiued great vnthanke for his labour. Sweete and acceptable ſhould it bee vnto vs, to ſuffer reproch of the world, and to be deſpiſed for his ſake: yea, to auoyd all voluptuouſnes and ioy of the world, ſaying we are faſtned vnto the croſſe with Chriſt. To ſeeke much paſtime & pleaſure of the world, becommeth not him that muſt ſuffer aduerſitie. All this learne we in the paſſion of Chriſt, and in the croſſe. Bleſſed is hee that directeth his daily exerciſe and his whole life there after:Apoc. 2. Pſal. 83.
                           •
                        
                      hee ſhall enioy the fruit of the tree of life for euer.
                  O GOD heauenlie Father, looke vppon the face of thine annointed, who hanged for vs vppon the croſſe: Be merciful vnto vs poore ſinners, which bee laden with great and greeuous ſinnes: forgiue vs for the moſt worthie merites ſake of thine onelie begotten deare ſonne, who for our ſinnes was beaten and wounded: Let him ſatisfie thee for all our ſinnes.
                  He is our ſuretie in thy ſight, our faithful aduocat and mediatour: him thou gladly heareſt O father of mercie, and graciouſlie accepteſt his interceſſion for all ſinners.
                  O gracious Lord Ieſu, ſonne of the eternall God, who of verie loue towards vs, tookeſt vpon thee our weake fleſhe (vndefiled from all ſinne) and diddeſt offer vp the ſame fleſh vnto thy father vpon the Altar of the croſſe for the ſafegard of the worlde, haue mercy vppon vs thy ſeruauntes, for thy euerlaſting

goodnes, and for the infinite merites ſake of thy holie paſſion: For thy deſeruing excelleth al mens ſins, and much greater is the aboundance of thy mercie, then all our wickedneſſe. Therefore flie wee vnto thee vnder the protection of thy holy croſſe, & with ſighing hearts ſeeke we helpe, grace, and remedy for our woundes.Pſal. 119. Receiue vs that are fledde vnto thee: Heale vs that be ſick, make vs iuſt and righteous that be ſinners. Drawe thou vs vppe an high O Lord Ieſu from all worldlie thinges, binde vppe our fleſhe with thy feare, wound vs with thy ſweet loue, that nothing els take holde of our heart, ſaue onely Ieſus Chriſt.
                  Out of the woundes of Ieſu, and out of the running out of his bloud, doe wee receiue hope: There finde wee medicine for our ſoules, aboundance of grace, and perfect forgiueneſſe. Whatſoeuer we receiue of ſinfull vices, whatſoeuer wee commit with bodily ſenſualitie, the ſame is altogether waſhed and refourmed in the fountaine of Chriſts bloud. O the vnoutſpeakable loue, which the ſonne of God beareth towards his Church, that he waſheth and clenſeth it with his owne bloud,Epheſ 5. with the bloud of the new Teſtament, that it may be holy, pure, and without ſpot.3. Pet 1. Not with ſiluer and golde doth GOD redeeme his creature, but with the precious bloud of his owne ſonne. O deare children, let vs not tread vnder foote the bloud of the holie Teſtament: let vs not be vnthankefull vnto our Sauiour.
                  
                     Heb. 10.Thy holie bloud O Ieſu, make vs pure and cleane from all ſinne, and ſanctifie vs thoroweout,

that our ſpirite, ſoule, and bodie, may cheerefullie waite for thy comming, and liue with thee for euer.Theſ. 5.
                  
               
            
            
               IESVS ſaid: O Father forgiue them, for they knowe not what they doe. Pilate wrote a ſuperſcription of the matter, and faſtened it aboue at the head of the croſſe. The ſuperſcription was written in the Greeke, Latine, and Hebrew with theſe woordes: Ieſus of Nazareth king of the Iewes. This ſuperſcription did many of the Iewes read, for the place where Ieſus was crucified, was neere vnto the Citie, and the ſuperſcription was written in Greeke, Latine, and Hebrew. Then ſaid the high Prieſtes of the Iewes vnto Pilate: write not king of the Iewes, but that he called himſelfe king of the Iewes. Pilate anſwered: What I haue written, I haue written. The ſouldiers when they had crucified Ieſus, they tooke his garmentes and made foure parts, to euery ſouldier one part, and alſo his coat. The coat was without ſeam, wrought vpon thorow out. Then ſaid they together: let vs not deuide it, but caſt lottes for it, who ſhall haue it: that the ſcripture might be fulfilled, ſaying: They haue parted my raiment among them, and for my coat they caſt lots.
                     Pſal. 22.
                   And the ſouldiers did ſuch things in deed. Then ſate they downe and kept him. There ſtood alſo much people, and beheld.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  THE laſt wordes which Ieſus ſpake vppon the croſſe, ought all faithful beleeuers wel to write in their hearts, and therein diligently to keepe them. Firſt, he ſpake a louing friendly word, a word ful of grace & ſweet comfort to al ſinners, ſufficient

and enough to breake al hardnes of hart, and to prouoke fruitfull repentance: Father forgiue them. O how great goodnes and louing kindnes is this? how ready is Ieſus vnto mercy? how well willing is hee to forgiue his louers, that ſheweth himſelfe ſo mild and gracious vnto his enemies? No angrie word, no diſpleaſure poureth hee out againſt thoſe that crucified him: no vengeance nor plague deſireth he to fal vppon that vngracious people, but ſpeaketh moſt ſweet woordes, full of ardent loue: O Father forgiue them &c.
                  
                  In theſe words apeareth his exceeding great loue with vnoutſpeakable ſoftnes of mind, which thorow no mallice might bee ouerome. They (like madde and bloud thirſtie men) cried: Away with him, crucifie him, crucifie him. O the wonderfull great lenitie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt! They reuile and miſintreat him to the vttermoſt: he praieth for them, that they beeing conuerted from their wickednes, may acknowledge him the very true ſon of God to haue appeared in the fleſh.
                  
                     Eſay. 53.Here is fulfilled that Eſay ſaid: hee hath borne the ſinnes of many, and made interceſſion for the tranſgreſſours, that they ſhould not periſh.
                  Who now being in ſinne, wil deſpaire in the mercie of God, when the great offenders, that crucified and ſlewe the giuer of all remiſsion, found ſo great grace and goodnes?
                  A ſtedfaſt hope therefore ought we to conceiue and to bee ſure of, howe great ſoeuer our ſinne be: The hope of life ſtandeth yet open, the bowels

of mercie are yet readie prepared. Onely vnto him let vs reſort: full gratiouſly will hee receiue vs, ſo far as wee giue ouer our ſelues vnto him. Heere likewiſe by the example of our fore-goer, wee muſt learne to forgiue our neighbour, to pray alſo for our enemies, and for thoſe that do vs harme. If we gladly forgiue that little, God will forgiue vs the great. If we ſo do, we finde grace, and are the children of the heauenly Father. As for the recompencing of all deſpite, & taking of vengeance, wee muſt commit and refer that vnto our Father, who iudgeth righteouſly.1. Pet 2.3.
                  
                  O Ieſu, thou heauenly ſchoolmaſter, teach vs this, and graunt vs grace to doe it. Giue vs alſo an aſſured hope of thy mercie and grace, that wee fall into no deſpaire through the multitude of our ſinnes: but with faithfull minds to conſider, that for to heale ſin, thou cameſt into this world, & haſt ſhed thy bloud. O graunt vnto vs free refuge and ſure defence, vnder the ſhadowe of thy winges, and vnder the inuincible token of thy holie croſſe. Receiue vs poore ſinners, which vtterly truſt not in anie good deede or merit of our owne, but onely in thy mercie, Amen.
                  
                  Verie ſpitefull extremitie is ſhewed vnto our Sauiour, in that he muſt beholde and ſee, how the vile vnthriftes part his clothes amongſt them. By this, is there ſet forth vnto vs a doctrine, how wee ought to behaue our ſelues, if our temporall goodes bee withdrawne and taken from vs. Wee muſt bee readier to ſuffer temporal harme, than to bee reuenged, or with vnquiet ſuite at the law to require our owne. He that created the whole worlde, hath not a corner where

to reſt his head. Hee that beautifieth and decketh all things, hangeth bare and naked himſelfe. Whereby we muſt learne to be pacient, if that which is ours be taken from vs: wee muſt learne to bee content with few thinges, and to take in good part things of ſmall reputation, and not to grudge, but with quiet minds to be thankfull vnto God.
                  O Lord, grant vnto vs, that we appeare not naked and bare before thee: cloth vs with the wedding garment of faith and loue, and when wee ſuffer wrong, giue vs grace to followe thine example in patience: that no ſorrowe nor heauineſſe for loſſe of temporall goods, lead vs away from thee, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               THey that paſſed by, reuiled and blaſphemed him, wagging their heades, and ſaieng: ha, thou that breakeſt downe the temple, and ſettest it vp againe in three dayes, helpe now thy ſelfe, if thou be the Sonne of God, come downe from the croſſe. The high Priestes alſo mocked him, together with the Scribes and Elders, and ſaide amongſt themſelues: He helped others, can hee not helpe himſelfe? If he be Christ the choſen of God, the king of Iſraell, lette him come downe now from the croſſe, & we will beleeue him. He ſetteth his hope and trust in God, let him deliuer him, if hee will haue him, for hee hath ſaid: I am the Sonne of GOD. The murtherers alſo that were crucified with him, caſt the ſame in his teeth, and reuiled him. The people ſtoode there, and wayted, and the chiefe of them mocked him, and ſaide: Hath hee helped others, and cannot helpe himſelfe, and is Christ the choſen of GOD. The ſouldiers alſo mocked him, came and proffered him vineger, and ſaid: If thou be king of

the Iewes, helpe thy ſelfe. One of the murtherers that hanged by him, reuiled him alſo, and ſaid: If thou bee Christ helpe thy ſelfe and vs. But the other rebuked him, and ſaid: Feareſt thou not God, ſeeing thou art in the ſame damnation. As for vs we are iustly puniſhed, for we receiue according to our deeds: but this man hath done nothing amiſſe. And he ſaid vnto Ieſus: Lord, remember me when thou comest into thy kingdome. And Ieſus ſaid vnto him: Verely I ſay vnto thee, this day ſhalt thou be with me in paradiſe.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  IEſus for our ſake tooke vpon himſelfe the moſt extreme ſhame, rebuke & deriſion, to deliuer vs from eternall villainy, and that wee ſhould learne gladly to ſuffer reproch and ſhame, and to deſpiſe the vain-glorie of this world. He is mocked & contemned of high and lowe, of ſpirituall, temporall, and of euerie man. For they being ful of gal, bitternes, and poiſon, poure it out with their falſe tongues and outwarde geſtures, caſting out wicked ſlaundrous wordes, and ſharpening their venemous tongs againſt the innocent ſauiour. They rather ſhuld haue bewailed their owne great ſinnes: but there is no compaſſion nor mercie in them, their harts are ſtopt, Sathan hath the leading of them. Yet cannot their malice ouercome good Ieſus: Through their wickedneſſe and deſpite cannot his patience bee vanquiſhed. No opprobrious or vile word might cauſe him to omit the worke of our redemption: but hee continueth in loue, and performeth it with an honorable ende. Euen as hee

teacheth vs to endure vnto the end, ſo doth he practiſe it himſelfe,Math. 24. and declareth it vnto vs in deede and example.
                  We therfore that wil be followers of Ieſu Chriſt, ſhuld ſet before vs this excellent example of our forgoer, and learne to contemne the world, and ſtoutlie to abide in our holie vocation and purpoſe. It is the worke of Chriſt that we haue in hand, and before vs we haue an high perfect example giuer, of whom we ought to learne, euen Chriſt Ieſus, who for our ſakes was obedient to the Father, vntill the death of the croſſe.Phil. 2. Wherefore ſeeing we are become children of God throgh grace, we muſt be obedient to our heauenly father, looking to his good pleaſure, bidding the world farewell, deſpiſing the mocks and ſcorns therof, looking vp euer diligently vnto the crucified Lorde Ieſus, who waiteth for vs with outſtretched armes, calleth vs louingly vnto him, and for a ſhorte trauaile promiſeth vs eternall rewarde, and ſaith: If thou ſuffer with mee, thou ſhalt raigne with mee: If thou dye with mee,
                        
                           •
                        . Tim. 2. thou ſhalt alſo be crowned with mee.
                  O Lord Ieſu Chriſt, our fore-goer and protector graunt vs grace ſtedfaſtly to continue in our holie, vocation, and to abide in thy ſeruice: that through no tediouſnes or ſlouth we ſhrinke or ceaſe from the feruentnes of good workes and holie exerciſes: that we being alway readie furniſhed with watching and praier, may ſtedfaſtly ſtand, and with a conſtant mind deſpiſe all bodily prouocations, ſhewing patience in aduerſitie, not fearing the ſlaunders and deſpitefull

ſwordes of the people, neyther deſiring the prayſe and honour of this worlde: that in the onely eternal wealth wee may ſette all our truſt, and neuer to goe backe from the croſſe for wealth nor woe: but that vnder the ſame banner through true patience, meekneſſe and obedience, wee may finiſh our life with a bleſſed ende, Amen.
                  
                  In the offendor that receiued of Chriſt the promis of grace, there is ſet before vs a comfortable example of the mercie and loue of God: for, hee that afore had beene a murtherer, and now was become a penitent and repentaunt perſon, aſſoone as he acknowledged the treſpaſſe, and was vnfainedly ſorrie for his offences committed, confeſſing Chriſt the fountaine of life, there was promiſed vnto him forgiueneſſe of his ſinnes, and entrance into ioy. Wherby wee ſee, that no true penitent commeth too late, and that no conuerſion is vnfruitfull, if it bee doone vnfainedly from out of the heart. Here ſhould we learne to goe into our ſelues, to acknowledge and confeſſe our ſinnes, to complaine vnto GOD with lamentation, and to deſire grace at his hande: affirming alſo, that wee are well worthie of all rebuke and ſhame, all puniſhment, payne, and aduerſitie. Neuertheleſſe, in the conſideration of Gods eternal mercie, wee ought not to deſpayre, but to turne vs vnto the Biſhop and chiefe ſhepheard of our ſoules, and to ſaye: Lorde, remember vs in thy kingdome, where thou ſitteſt at the right hande of GOD thy Father: ſo ſhall wee vndoubtedly heare this chearefull voice; To day ſhalt thou bee with mee in paradiſe.

This word of conſolation, this gratious promiſe ſhall ſtrengthen & comfort our troubled hart in the carefull & terrible houre, ſo that we ſhal be able quietly to die, foraſmuch as Ieſus ſo friendly ſpeaketh to vs, and receiueth vs ſo graciouſly.
                  Great and vnſearchable is the mercie of God, that pardoneth ſo great a ſinner and offendour, and doth not caſt him off: neither will hee reiect our feruent praier, which we in true confidence make vnto him. Hee deſireth not the death of a ſinner,Ezech. 18. but willeth that hee conuert and liue.Iohn. 3 So loued hee the worlde, that hee gaue his onely begotten Sonne, that whoſoeuer beleeueth on him, ſhould not periſh, but haue euerlaſting life: neither came hee to call the righteous,Math 9. but ſinners.
                  O Ieſu, bee mindfull of thy promiſſe, thinke vpon vs thy ſeruantes: and when wee ſhall depart hence, ſpeake vnto our ſoule theſe louing wordes: To day ſhalt thou bee with mee in ioy. O Lord Ieſu Chriſt, remember vs thy ſeruauntes that truſt in thee, when our tongue cannot ſpeake, when the ſight of our eies fayleth, and when our eares are ſtopped. Suffer not the olde Serpent, and wicked enemie the Deuill, to finde anie thing in vs, though hee ſubtilly tempt vs, and craftily lay wayte for vs. In thee ſhall we ouercome him, for in thee is our ſtrength: thou takeſt al our ſinnes vppon thy ſelfe, ſo that hee ſhall finde nothing in vs, but muſt departe from vs with ſhame. Lette them bee turned backe, and ſoone confounded: but lette our ſoule alway reioyce in thee, and bee ioyfull of thy ſaluation, which thou through thy

death haſt purchaſed for vs.
               
            
            
               IT was neare hande about the ſixt houre. And beſide the croſſe of Ieſus ſtoode Marie his mother, and his mothers ſister Marie the wife of Cleophas, and Marie Magdalene. Now when Ieſus ſawe his mother, and the diſciple ſtanding whom he loued, he ſaid vnto his mother: Woman, behold thy ſonne. Afterward ſaid hee to the diſciple: Behold thy mother. And from that houre foorth, the diſciple tooke her for his owne.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  IN the paſſion of Chriſt (as is mentioned afore) it ought to be conſidered, that he was moſt extremely reuyled, and ſuffered moſt great paine for our ſakes. This now appertaineth to the increaſing of his paine, that hee ſeeth his mother in all aduerſitie, who might not helpe him, neyther hee her. Nowe doth the ſworde that Simeon ſpake of, pierce thorow her heart.
                  But Ieſus ſeeing her in ſorrowe and heauineſſe, declareth his carefull loue vppon the honour and worthineſſe of his dearely beloued mother, and giueth her a tutour, ſuch an one as will looke vnto her. On both the parties maye wee perceyue great loue, which wee ought to learne of the Lord, and to exerciſe towardes thoſe that bee committed vnto vs. Neither is it written of the Euangeliſt for naught, that ſhee ſtoode: for thereby we ſee, that though Marie was in verie greate heauineſſe and

ſorrowe, yet behaueth ſhee not he
                        •
                     ſelfe vnſeemelie nor vndiſcreetly, as carnall men doe in aduerſitie manie times. Shee ſtandeth demurely and ſoberly, beeing fortified through the ſtrength of the ſpirite that ſtayeth her.1. Theſ. 4. Whereby wee may learne when our deare friendes die, not to bee ſorie for them beyond meaſure and diſcretion. But chiefly we learne, when aduerſitie commeth, one to haue reſpect to another, to care for our owne, faithfully to cōmit them vnto others, that one may brotherly and truly looke to another: but ſpecially we ought to be carefull for thoſe which are deare vnto God.
               
            
            
               FRom the ſixt houre there was darkeneſſe vppon all the earth, till about the ninth houre, and the Sunne was darkened. About the ninth houre, Ieſus cryed with a lowd voyce, Ely, Ely, lama, ſabacthani? that is, My God, my God, why hast thou forſaken mee? Some ſtanding there, when they heard it, ſaid: He calleth to Helias. Immediately one of them ranne, and tooke a ſpunge, and filled it with vineger, and put it vppon a reede, and gaue him to drinke. Other ſaid, lette vs ſee whether Helias will come and deliuer him.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  IN all aduerſitie and deſpight, is all bodily and temporall comfort withdrawne from Chriſt, that euen when hee without all conſolation dooth ſuffer moſt greuous extremitie, wee might perceiue his loue. The Lord of all creatures that lacketh nothing,

commeth into ſo great affliction and neceſſitie for our ſake, that hee complaineth himſelfe to bee forſaken of him, who worketh all things in him. This is the voyce of the paſſible mortall fleſh, which for vs poore ſinners crieth vpon the croſſe. His patience is our comfort, his complaint is our helpe, his ſickneſſe is our health, his paine is our ſatisfaction. The Phiſitian came from heauen, that hee thorow great compaſsion, might giue ouer him ſelfe into exceeding many torments and rebukes. Therfore with the ſick, he is ſicke: with thoſe that ſuffer, hee ſuffereth. with the ſorrowfull, he is ſorie: with them that ſuffer violence, hee complaineth: for his feeble and weake members, he praieth. And the voyce of the fleſh and of naturall ſence, is neither rebellious nor deſperate. The fleſhe feeleth great paine vndeſerued, the innocent holy body ſuffereth ſore puniſhment, the Godhead neuertheleſſe vſeth the higheſt ſilence: And as for the diuine preſence, the ſenſible paine is not miniſhed by it.
                  But a merueilous ſteadfaſtnes of patience is heere declared, to performe the redemption of mankinde. This paine and ſmart is ſo great, that euen the Elements which haue no ſence, declare tokens of their compaſsion. The Sunne loſt his ſhine, and hid his cheerefull light from the wicked rabble, hauing as it were a diſpleaſure for the death of their maker. Seeing now that the ſun mourneth▪ and the earth quaketh: much more ought we reaſonable men to haue compaſsion, and to conſider the death of our maker.
                  
                     Behold O faithfull ſeruant of God, how thy foregoer in all his puniſhment and ſorrowfull trouble, indureth ſtil mild and patient, and that there is heard no bitternes out of his mouth. His praier and complaint ſendeth hee vppe vnto his heauenlie Father, neither nameth hee any other, ſaue onely God▪ To him alone hee complaineth and openeth his deſolation. Euen ſo ought wee to doe when aduerſitie, reproch, or any ſuch thing aſſaulteth vs, wee muſt not vndiſcreetly ſorrow or be angrie, but runne ſtraight way vnto the Croſſe, and at the Croſſe tarrie and abide a little while with the Lorde. If thou be forſaken, complaine of thy trouble vnto GOD the Father: Conſider, that Ieſus alſo for thy ſake, was left in great trouble and anguiſhe: Learne thou likewiſe to bee ſoft minded, and patient, without murmuring or curſing: Keepe thee to the onelie comfort of God, giue ouer all the ioy of this world, ſo ſhalt thou not bee forſaken of him. All earthlie thinges ſet apart, turne thou thy minde vppe into the Countrey of Heauen. Take GOD for thy Father, Ieſus for thy brother: Thou art of a noble high kindred, namelie, a childe of the euer liuing God.
                  O mercifull father, wee crie vnto thee in all trouble, and call vppon thee through the crucified Ieſus. Suffer vs not to ſincke in great afflictions, giue vs not ouer vnto our owne ſtrength: but the more the enemie preſſeth vppon vs, the more bee thou our aſſiſtance: For in all anguiſhe and trouble, thou art the right helper, and moſt faithfull friend. If temptation

then come vppon vs by thy fatherly will, graunt vs grace O Lord, patientlie to beare it, and to lay the burthen vpon thy mercie: that in all trouble, we being els deſtitute of all conſolatiō, may put our whole truſt onely in thee. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               AFter this, Ieſus knowing that all thinges were nowe perfourmed, that the ſcripture might be fulfilled, hee ſaith: I thirſt. So there ſtood a veſſell by, full of vineger. Therfore they filled a ſpunge with vinegar and wound it about with Iſope, and put to his mouth. Aſſoone as Ieſus then receiued of the Vinegar, hee anſwered and ſaide: It is finiſhed.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  
                     ADam ſatisfied his luſt in the forbidden Apple: which noiſome luſt was ocaſion of our death. But Ieſus for the reformation of this concupiſcence, ſuffreth alſo vpon his tongue, to reſtore vs againe from the fall, and to conquere vs in this life. His bitter drinke is vnto vs a bleſſed medicine. Such great vnthankefulneſſe of the Iewes was prophecied by King Dauid in the Pſalmes.Pſal. 
                           ••
                        . To him that fedde them in the wilderneſſe with bread from heauen, and gaue them water to drinke out of the hard ſtonie Rocke. Euen vnto him for a recompence, they giue Vineger and Gall.Eſay 
                           •
                        . O the ſower and vnnaturall fruite that the LORDE receiueth of his owne Vineyard, which he had planted and garniſhed ſo faire? To vs heere is prepared a ſoueraigne

medicine againſt glotonie and all voluptuouſnes of the fleſh, thorow the loue whereof God is forgotten and forſaken.
                  Now when Chriſt who is the fulfiller of the law, and all the Prophets, had whollie and fully perfourmed the will of his heauenlie father, hee ſaith for a concluſion and ende of his life: it is finiſhed, as hee would ſay: Now is finiſhed all that the old law hath written and ſpoken of me, all that the old Teſtament figured with oblations and ſacrifices, with glory and beautie in the Gods ſeruice. Now are truly fulfilled the holy propheſies of the Prophetes, and the long wiſhed deſires of the holye olde Fathers. Nowe is wrought and perfourmed all that belonged & concerned the redemption of mankinde. It is all (as it was promiſed of God) concluded with an honourable bleſſed end. And looke what is behinde, ſhall vndoubtedly be fulfilled in due time. I haue accompliſhed the commandement of my Father, who ſent me into this world: the worke that hee gaue mee to do,Iohn. 17. haue I finiſhed. What could I do more for thee, O my people, that I haue not done? Vppon the ſixt daye, hee finiſhed the worke of the creation of the world: And nowe vppon the ſixt day and age of the world, hee perfourmeth the bleſſed worke of mans redemption. Vppon the ſixt day hee created man, and made him of the mould of the earth: Vpon the ſixt day hee reſtored him againe, and deliuered him with his holy bloud. Thus all things are finiſhed: the great worke of his mercie and moſt excellent loue, is accompliſhed: the way vnto heauen is opened: and

the deuils power is broken.
                  In ſuch hope ought wee valiauntlie to trauaile at this time in this vnconſtant world, and not to let fall the worke of God that is begun: but by his aſſiſtance to bring it vnto a bleſſed ende, and ſtoutly to endure therein. It is well-nie come to the point, that all ſhal bee finiſhed: the euening and ende of our life commeth on apace, wherein we may ſay with glad harts, as Chriſt our foregoer did: It is all finiſhed.
                  Wherefore deare brethren, let vs euer moſt diligently and earneſtly walke in the way of the truth, and of commendable vertues begun, exerciſing our ſelues in righteouſnes. We muſt not think otherwiſe but to haue battaile againſt vice, againſt the fleſh, the world, and Satan. Daily goe we on a pace towardes death, in hope to attain eternal life. O that we might ſay with Paule: I haue fought a good fight,2. Tim. 4. I haue fulfilled my courſe, I haue kept the faith! We muſt ſuffer and haue trauaile yet a litle ſeaſon, the time of our deliuerance will ſhortly be heere.
                  O Lord Ieſu, direct thou all our works according to thy good pleaſure, illuminate & purifie our minds and thoughts. Teach vs, how wee euer to the praiſe and honour of thy holy name, may meekly beginne, diligently doo, and bleſſedly end all our workes and enterpriſes. O giue vs grace, faithfully to labour in the Vineyard of the Lord: that the heat and trauaile driue vs not back, that we faint not: that in the ſchole of heauenly exerciſe, wee may ſteadfaſtly indure till wee giue vp the ghoſt: and that through thy mercie, after many commendable battails, and long ſtriuing,

wee may ſay in the laſt houre of our life: It is all finiſhed. Vouchſafe thou to bee the finall occaſion of our whole life, and of all our woorkings: ſo ſhall it followe, that thou wilt bee alſo our eternall reward, ioy, and ſaluation. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               ANd Ieſus criyng with a loud voyce, ſaid: Father, into thy hands I commit my ſpirite. And when hee had thus ſaid, hee bowed his head, and gaue vp the ghoſt.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  THE life of all liuing dieth after the fleſhe, thorow the painefull torment of death doth Ieſus depart: But by his death hee openeth vnto vs the way of life, and taketh from vs euarlaſting death. This is a precious, dear, and victorious death, which hath ſlaine our death, and conquered vs life againe. Let this death euermore continue in our hearts, and let our death bee conſidered in the conſideration of his death. This ſhall bring vs comfortable truſt and hope, when our death ſtriueth in vs, ſo that we ſhall neither be afraid, nor deſpaire, if wee ſteadfaſtly beleeue that Chriſt died for vs, and that hee through his death, hath opened vnto vs euerlaſting life.
                  Let vs with deuout heartes conſider the death of him that hath redeemed vs, and reſtored vs againe. The gracious innocent Lorde Ieſus dieth miſerable and naked, ſo poore, ſo deſtitute as no man els: And yet vnto God is none ſo deare, although of men hee he moſt vilely intreated. This is euen the reward of

the worlde, to deſpiſe the children of God, and to recompence euil for good. If the like happen vnto vs, we muſt not thinke it ſtraunge, for the ſeruant is not aboue the Lord. The Lorde hangeth on the croſſe, hard pearced, not onely with nailes, but alſo with ardent loue towards vs: ſore beaten and hurt in euerie place, without ſuccour, without helpe, without comfort, euen as a dead man, who is forgotten and out of minde. Ponder well, O thou good ſeruant of Chriſt, who and how great hee is, that crying with a loud voyce, giueth vp the ghoſt: Verilie euen the ſonne of GOD, as Centurio likewiſe dooth teſtifie.
                  O deare brethren, let vs conſider, how great our ſinnes are, for the which the innocent ſonne of God dieth. Iuſtly ought all the world to be dead vnto vs in Chriſt, and wee vnto the world. And what is our life but a bleſſed death? Hee that learneth not to die in his life, is afraide when the houre of death commeth. Euery day goe wee one daies iourney vnto death: therefore ought wee ſo to watch, ſo to ſpeake, and ſo to worke, as if we would die euen now out of hand. Before death wee muſt learne to die, leaſt hee ſodainlie take holde vppon vs, and make vs afraide. Death vnto thoſe that faithfully beleeue, is through the death of Chriſt, become the gate to life, for their comfort and ſtrong hope is in the woordes of Ieſus,Iohn. 11, when he ſaith: he that beleeueth on me, though hee were dead, yet ſhall hee liue Item: who ſo heareth my word, and beleeueth on him that ſent me,Iohn. 3. hath euerlaſting life.
                  
                     In this promiſe ought we to liue and die, caſting away all impediments and ſuch thinges as hinder vs from his loue, beeing with heart and minde ſeperated from the world, and vndefiled from the filthines thereof.
                  Out of the paſſion of Chriſt, we muſt picke out vnto our ſelues comfortable helpe and medicine, ſo that obediently in al patience we offer vp our ſelues vnto our heauenly father, committing our ſoules into his handes. In life and in death, let the death of Chriſt be our comfort, and let vs ſet it againſt al fearfull temptations, and between the wrath of God and our ſinnes.
                  O Lord Ieſu Chriſt, who in the feeble nature of man haſt ſuffred death for vs vnworthie ſinners, graunt vs grace, feruently in our hearts to beare the pain and loue of thy moſt bitter death, and through the ſubduing and ouer-comming of al vice and wickedneſſe, to vſe and exerciſe our ſelues daily, in following thy footſteppes and dying with thee: And when the end of our life draweth nie, that wee then may depart in thy mercie and grace, and receiue the ioy of paradiſe. Aſſiſt thou vs when we die, and defend vs from the olde enemie, whom thou through thy death haſt ouer-come. O Father, wee commit our ſpirite into thy hand, thou haſt redeemed vs O God of truth. Let theſe be our laſt wordes, when we depart hence. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
               AND behold the vaile of the temple rent into two peeces, from aboue till beneath: and there was an earthquake: the ſtones claue aſunder: the graues opened: they that had ſlept roſe vp, and went out of the graues, and came after his reſurrection into the holie Cittie, and appeared vnto manie. The captaine, and they that were with him which kept Ieſus, when they ſaw the earthquake, and that he gaue vp the ghost with ſuch a crie (and other thinges that there happened) they were afraid verie ſore, and ſaide: Verely, this was Gods Sonne. Centurio likewiſe praiſed God, & ſaid: Verely this was a righteous man. And all the people that were there and ſaw it, ſmote vppon their brestes and returned.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THe Iewes alway required tokens of Chriſt, and of ſuch there hapned manie nowe in the death of the Lord: for the very earth quaketh at their wickednes and blaſpheming of God: the hard ſtony rockes with their cracking and cleauing aſunder, expreſſe a lamentation on their makers behalfe: the vaile in the temple renteth, for a declaration, that the olde couered thinges in the olde Teſtament are laid away, and the hidde ſignifications of Chriſt expreſſed and opened: for he is the holy true oblation, that taketh away the ſinnes of the world: he is the vndefiled lambe of God: hee is the true high Prieſt,Heb. 10. that entreth within the vaile into the ſanctuary, for the way of holy thinges is opened through his bloud:

hee is the high Prieſt that once entred in, and with one onely ſacrifice doth perfectly cleanſe and ſanctifie. The graues opened for an euidence of his reſurrection. Centurio knowledgeth that, which the harde harted Iewes would not confeſſe.
                  O good faithfull beleeuers: let vs not bee harder than the ſtones: let our hearts rent aſunder in repentance and ſorrow for our ſinnes, that we may enioye the fruite of the Lords death.
               
            
            
               ANd a farre of ſtood all his acquaintance, among whom were many women, that came vp from Galilee, & followed him, and miniſtred vnto him: among whome was Mary Magdalene, and Mary the mother of Iames the leſſe, and Ioſes, & the mother of Zebedes children, with manie other that were come to Hieruſalem.
               The Iewes then, becauſe it was the Sabaoth euen, that the bodies ſhoulde not remaine on the croſſe vppon the Sabaoth day (for that was the great Saboth day) beſought Pilate that their legges might be broken, and that they might be taken downe. Then came the ſouldiors, and brake the legges of the first, and of the other which was crucified with him. But when they came to Ieſus, and ſaw that he was dead alreadie, they brake not his legges, but one of the ſouldiours with a ſpeare thrust him into the ſide, and forthwith came there out bloud and water. And he that ſaw it bare record, and his record is true. And he knoweth that hee ſaith true, that yee alſo might beleeue. Theſe thinges were done, that the Scripture might b
                     •
                  e fulfilled:Exod. 12. Zach. 11. Yee ſhall not breake a bone of him. And againe, another Scripture ſaith: They ſhall looke on him whom they pierced.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  OVt of the ſide of him that ſleeepeth vpon the croſſe, runneth the fountain of wholſom water, with the which our vncleannes is waſhed away, and the whole world ſprinkled, purified, and cleanſed therewith. The heart is opened and wounded, loue floweth out, the bloud guſheth forth, to the waſhing away of all our ſins. This is the true ſtonie rocke, which being ſmitten vpon, giueth water vnto our thirſtie ſoules: like as Eue was taken & faſhioned out of the rib & ſide of her husband that ſlept: ſo is the holie Church, the ſpouſe of Chriſt,Epheſ. 
                           •
                        . ſhapen out of the ſide of her husband. This gate is opened wide to all faithfull beleeuers: hee that hideth himſelfe in this hole, is ſure from all hurt and harme. Of this holie and godly fountaine, who ſo drinketh once, or taketh a draught of the holie loue, dooth forthwith forget all his aduerſities and griefes, and ſhall bee whole from all wicked heate of temporall luſtes and bodilie prouocations: feruently ſhall hee bee kindled in loue and deſire of eternall thinges, and ſhall bee repleniſhed with the vnſpeakable goodneſſe of the holie Ghoſt: and in him ſhall bee a fountaine and well of liuing water,Iohn. 7. flowing into eternall life.
                  By this creepeth the poore ſinner into the louing heart of Ieſus Chriſt, which with exceeding great kindnes is pierced through: and there findeth hee reſt and quietnes in the ſtony rocke. Here are opened

the conduites and well pipes of life, the way of our health, wherein we finde reſt vnto our ſoules, & ſhadow for heate and trauaile: this fountaine of grace is neuer dried vp. This is the well of the godly 
                        〈◊〉
                      that floweth out of the middeſt of paradiſe, to wate
                        •
                      the whole earth, to moyſture the drie hearts, to waſh away ſinne.
                  Out of this plentifull well, ought wee with great deſire to draw and drinke, that from henceforth wee liue not in our ſelues, but in him who for our ſakes was wounded ſo deep. Our hart muſt we giue whollie vnto him, that hath opened his heart ſo wide. His heart and ours muſt bee all one. Nothing requireth he of vs but the heart. Sonne (ſaith he) giue mee thy heart. Our hart muſt we giue to the Lord, not to the world: to eternall wiſedome, not to lightnes. There do the true heardmans ſheepe find paſture, there are the water brookes of life, there may they goe in and out. Nothing is there vppon earth that ſo kindleth, draweth, and pierceth the heart of man, as dooth Chriſtes loue declared vppon the croſſe. When wee thus ſurrender our heart vnto the Lorde, when wee thus wholly and fully giue ouer our heart into the Lordes hands, that hee may keepe and poſſeſſe it for euer, then haue we bleſſed peace.
                  O Lord Ieſu Chriſt, drawe thou our hearts vnto thee, ioyne them together in vnſeparable loue, that they may feruently burne: that wee may abide in thee, & thou in vs, & that the euerlaſting couenant betweene vs may ſtand ſure for euer. O wound our hearts with the fiery darts of thy pearcing loue. Let

them pierce through all our ſlouthfull members and inward powers, that wee beeing happily wounded, may ſo become whole and ſound. Let vs haue no louer but thy ſelfe alone, lette vs ſeeke no ioy nor comfort, but onely in thee.
                  Thus haue we the paſſion and death of our Lord and redeemer Ieſus Chriſt.Heb. 12. Now (as Paule ſaith) let vs go foorth of the tentes, vnto him that for our ſake is deſpitefully crucified without the Citie of Hieruſalem, and lette vs helpe him to beare his rebuke, giuing him thankes and praiſe for his great loue. In his death ſtandeth our life, for in his death is our death ſlaine: the ſting of death and firme is taken awaye. Heere finde wee true life and eternall ſaluation: here ſinne is forgiuen, and pardon graunted A poena & culpa: heere mercie is denyed vnto no man, for the vertue and merites of the Lordes holie paſſion is bottomleſſe. Through his ſhame commeth eternall honour and glorie vnto vs. His paſſion is the wholeſome playſter for all woundes: his croſſe the ouerthrow of all enemies, and victorie againſt all vice.
                  From our whole heartes therefore ought wee to reioyce in the great and bleſſed fruites of thy holie paſſion.
                  O Lorde Ieſu, whileſt wee are in this feeble life, graunt vs ſo to liue, that wee maye direct all our workes, deſires, and intentes, according to thy godlie will and pleaſure: that this our temporall courſe may bee founde and finiſhed in thy grace: that after the ouercomming of all temptations and carefull

things, we may come to the reward of eternall ſaluation. Teach thou vs dayly to die, and by the ſpirit to ſubdue the fleſh: that when the fleſh corrupteth, the ſpirit may be taken to eternall reſt. Graunt vs grace, chearefully and continually to cleaue vnto thy holy croſſe: O giue vs bleſſed teares of true repentance, while the doore of grace ſtandeth open: graunt that we may ſtedfaſtly & bleſſedly finiſh the thing which commendably is begun.
                  Let our daily exerciſe bee in the confideration of the paſſion of Chriſt, let him be our mirrour continually: let vs not ſhrinke from the croſſe, but indure with Chriſt in life & death: with him on the croſſe, with him in the graue and death, ſo ſhal we continue in reſt, peace, and quietneſſe: that when Chriſt our life ſhall appeare, we may riſe vp with him in glorie. God the Father, Sonne, and holie Ghoſt, grant this vnto vs all. Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            THE BVRIALL OF IESVS CHRIST, OVT of the holie Euangeliſts.
            
               
                  NOW when it was late,
                     Math. 27. Marke 15. Luk. 23. Iohn. 19.
                   for as much as it was the day of preparation afore the Sabaoth, there came a rich man of Arimathia, named Ioſeph, ſuch a principall & famous Senatour, as was iust and righteous. The ſame had not conſented to their counſaile and doings: for he alſo was one of thoſe that waited for the kingdome of God, a diſciple of Ieſu, but ſecretly for feare of the Iewes. Boldly went he in vnto Pilate, and begged the bodie of Ieſu. But Pilate wondered, if he were now dead alreadie. And when hee had learned of the Captaine that it was, he graunted him the bodie of Ieſu, and commended it to bee giuen him. Ioſeph had bought a white linnen cloth, and tooke downe the bodie of Ieſus,
                     Iohn. 19.
                   and wrapt it in the faire linnen cloth. There came alſo Nicodemus (who was come to the Lord afore by night) & brought mirrhe and Aloes vppon an hundred pound, mixt together. So taking the body of Ieſu, they wound it with clothes, and prepared it with

ſweet ointments according as the maner of the Iewes was to burie. And by the place where Ieſus was crucified, there was a garden, and in the garden a new ſepulchre. There Ioſeph laid Ieſus in his owne new ſepulchre, which he had cauſed to be hewen out of a rocke, into the which no man had yet been laid. Foraſmuch then as it was the Iewes day of preparing, the ſepulchre being at hand, they laide Ieſus into it, and Ioſeph weltred a great ſtone afore the entrance of the ſepulchre and went his way.
               
                  Now followeth the doctrine and contemplation.
                  
                     IN the former little Booke, we haue heard of the paſſion of Chriſt. Nowe if our great ſinne put vs in feare, making our conſcience vnquiet, and preſſe vs with the terrour of euerlaſting death & damnation, wee ought to remember, that the lambe of GOD beeing ſlayne and hanged vp vppon the Croſſe for our ſinnes, hath himſelfe ſatisfied for them all, and waſhed them cleane awaye. This

holy ſacrifice was offred vnto God the father for our welfare, and euen the ſame it is that hath taken awaie the ſinne and wickednes of all the world.
                  Whatſoeuer is read and ſpoken concerning the paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt, it is altogether done for our eternall wealth and comfort. Now is it deſcribed of the holy Euangeliſtes, with what honour and glorie his holy body was buried: and that not of mean perſons, but of noble and famous iuſt men, Ioſeph and Nicodemus, who while Chriſt yet liued, fauored him and were ſecretly his Diſciples. But nowe after his death, they ſteppe forth ſomwhat more ſtoutly and boldly, begging of Pilate the body of Ieſu, to burie it. In the which act, is declared their worthy and valiant beliefe and loue vnto the Lord Ieſu. For their bodies, their eſtimation and goods muſt they needes put in ieopardy, and procure vnto themſelues the hatred and diſpleaſure of all the world, if they honorably burie him, who in his life time was taken to be an euill doer, a deceiuer, a ſedicious murtherer, and ſo was condemned vnto death. But thus it pleaſeth God, in weakenes:1. Cor. 1. Iohn 12. to declare his owne ſtrength and glorie: Thus the dead wheat corne bringeth foorth fruit in the death of Chriſt, and thus appeareth the power of his death. For though he verily and trulie died as touching the body, yet after the ſpirit, and in mighty power, he liueth▪ yea hee himſelfe is the life of all things.
                  This is the power and fruite of his paſſion, when a mightie and ſtrong ſpirit dooth exerciſe it ſelfe in faithfull beleeuing harts. They that afore were aſhamed

to go openly vnto the Lord, ſteppe now foorth manfully, all fearefulnes ſette apart, ieoparding their bodies and goodes. For beſides that they put themſelues in perill of looſing their life and eſtimation, they beſtow alſo great coſt in linnen cloth, & in coſtly ſweet ointment. For they bury not Ieſus as an euil doer, but as an honourable man and friend of God, according to their cuſtome. Loe, what a thing it is, to cleaue ſomewhat vnto Chriſt, how feeblie ſoeuer it bee doone: it bringeth alwaie great fruite in his time. No man therefore ought to bee reiected that cleaueth anie thing vnto Chriſt, and earneſtly ſeeketh him. Faith is ſtrengthened in affliction and aduerſitie, the death of Chriſt giueth power vnto the fearefull. In death beginneth his honour and glorie to appeare, there are all thinges faire and beautifull. Centurio giueth teſtimonie, and maketh an honourable confeſſion, and ſo doo they that were vnder him.
                  Neceſſarie it was we ſhould beleeue and confeſſe that Ieſus verilie died vpon the croſſe: therefore do the Euangeliſts deſcribe it ſo perfectly, howe his bodie was taken downe from the Croſſe by Ioſeph, and was laid in the Sepulchre: To the intent that wee alſo might beleeue and confeſſe, that he hath broken the bands of death, and is from death mightily riſen againe. For life might not bee holden captiue in death, neither might death with the rules thereof alwaies binde him, that of all thinges is the life, in whome wee liue, mooue, and haue our beeing.
                  
                     Heere we muſt learne to know the eternall infallible foreſight and prouidence of God, who for his annointed, appointeth afore hande an honourable Sepulchre, and mooueth the heartes of his elect to burie the bodie of Ieſu, which els vndoubtedly had bene vilely caſt out, & remained ſtill vnburied. How be it his buriall and reſt muſt needs bee honourable, as the Prophet ſaith, Eſa. 11. For when hee by death had finiſhed the courſe of his life, and the woorke of his father, this reſt appertained to his honour, and the father heard him as hee praied afore: Father, (make thy ſonne honourable) or glorifie thy ſonne.Iohn 17. This began in the buriall, there was the faire white linnen cloth, the new ſepulchre, the honorable men and excellent dead buriers, as witneſſes of his death, there were the hundred pounds of pretious & coſtly oyntment. All theſe thinges were euidences of a glorious, new, and immortall life, which Chriſt had in his bodie as the firſtling of his deed, and as we alſo ſhall haue according to our meaſure. The ſepulchre is newe: partly to preuent all wrong ſuſpition, (for if anie man had lyen in that ſepulchre afore, it might eaſily haue beene ſuſpected or talked, that Chriſt was not riſen againe from the dead, but ſome other) partlie to declare the newneſſe of lyfe in Chriſt, and in thoſe that are his, as it is ſayde afore.
                  By this alſo wee ſee into what pouertie Chriſt ſubmitted himſelfe: hee that in his life time had neyther houſe nor place where to lay his heade, is nowe couered with ſtraunge cloth, and layde in a

ſtraunge Sepulchre. In the which thing (though Chriſts bodie was alwaie vncorrupt) we are taught fruitfullye to conſider the corruption of our body. We are earth, and to the earth muſt wee yeelde and paie earth againe. Aſhes wee be, and into aſhes wee muſt returne. Why bragge wee then? Why are we proud and high minded, ſeeing that ſhortly we ſhall become foule doong and carrion? Why haue wee ſuch deſire to the wicked worlde, conſidering it caſteth vs out ſo vilely? We ſhould alwaie remember, that within a ſmall ſhort time, we ſhall be laid down into a foule pit. There is the harborow of all fleſhe: There lie the rich and poore together in one bedde: There is no difference betweene noble and baſe of bloud: There, neither goods helpe the rich, nor ſubtile craft, the wittie. There the tender is worms meat, and he that a little while agoe went bragging vp and downe in coſtly apparell, is now an vglie ſmell to the noſe: There the hardie Giant, is faine to play ſtoupe gallaunts parte. The praiſe and commendacion of ſuch as are puft vp in fooliſhe pride, departeth as the duſt before the wind. Thus paſſeth away all mankind and all fleſh falleth to the place whence he came, being diſſolued by reaſon of originall ſinne.
                  Wherfore let vs learne in this time ſo to liue, and ſo to ſubdue the fleſh through the ſpirite, that when the fleſh corrupteth,Rom. 6. our ſoule may bee taken into eternall peace and reſt. For all we that be baptized into Chriſt Ieſus, are baptized into his death, beeing buried with him rhrough baptiſme into death: that as Chriſt was raiſed vp from the dead through the

glory of his father, ſo we likewiſe might walke in the newneſſe of life. For if we be graſſed in him through the ſimilitude of his death, we ſhall aſſuredly alſo be partakers of his reſurrection: knowing this, that our olde man is crucified with him, that the bodie of ſin might be emptied, and that we ſhould ſerue ſinne no more, for he that is dead, is made righteous from ſin, if we now be dead with Chriſt, we beleeue, that wee ſhall alſo liue with him. Looke vpon the whole ſixte Chapter to the Romanes.
                  We muſt die from the world, and from our owne fleſh, that the world may be crucified, and dead vnto vs, as we vnto the world. The olde Adam, who in vs did liue and rule, muſt bee ſubdued and mortified, that Chriſt onely may liue and raigne in vs. We muſt burie our bodies with mirrhe and Aloes, that is, with lamentation and ſorow for our ſinnes, with weeping with faſting, and with abſtinence, which workes of repentance are bitter vnto the bodie. But lyke as thoſe bitter things, Aloes and mirrhe, doe keepe the bodie from corruption, ſo the croſſe and aduerſitie ſent of God and borne for his ſake, preſerueth our fleſh from ſinne.
                  If we thus die with Chriſt from the world, & bee buried in his death, we ſhall riſe againe to a new life, here and in the world to come: & ſo as for death, we need not be afraid of it. For the ſepulchre is new, and lieth in the garden: which noteth vnto vs, the return to the pleaſant garden of paradiſe, which is opened vs through the death of Chriſt, for hee as a guide is entered in before vs, Iohn. 14. Heb. 9.10. that we alſo

after a new ſort might eſcape from death, and riſe againe to a new life. For in the death of Chriſt, is death killed, ouercome, and wholy nenued, and as much as altered into a ſleepe. For we liue vnto God, and our bodyes (as the Scripture teſtifieth) ſhall alſo liue againe. And this is the cauſe that the Scripture affirmeth thoſe which are dead in Chriſt, to be aſleep. Eſay 26. 1. Theſſ 4.
                  Afore time had death mightily and openly raigned, euen ouer thoſe alſo that had not ſinned like vnto Adam (yet had they put on Adams image, & were therefore ſubdued vnto the curſe) but when the ſecond Adam,1. Cor. 15 namely Chriſt, appeared, & purchaſed lyfe agayne for mankind, through the death of his fleſh, deſtroying the dominion of death, and riſing from death againe. Then was death renued & changed, and became like vnto a ſleepe, for it deſtroyeth vs not for euer, but is a gate and enterance into a better and eternall life, therfore haue we a much more perfect hope of the reſurrection in Chriſt, than they of olde, which therefore buried the bodies ſo coſtly and honorably, becauſe they hoped in the reſurrection to come. As for vs, wee muſt beſtowe ſuch coſt vpon Chriſt in his members, clothing & feeding the poore, and being ready alſo to looſe all things for his ſake.
                  Graunt vnto vs, O God, that as concerning the world and the olde life, wee may die with thy ſonne our head, and be truly buried in his death, that with him and in him we may riſe againe to a new life▪ that we weak and feeble, may with Ioſeph and Nichodemu
                           •
                        
                     
                     
grow in vertue and ſtedfaſtnes, daily laying ſomwhat to the heape of godly exerciſes, being euer ſtill renued in the ſpirit, that we in our hearts laying vp Chriſt who dyed for our ſakes, may ſo in thankfull remembrance burie him, to the intent that our ſoule & bodie may ſtill remaine pure and vnſpotted, vntill the comming of our Lord, Amen.
               
            
            
               MArie Magdalene and Mary Ioſes, ſitting ouer againſt the ſepulchre, beheld where Ieſus was laide. For certaine women there were, which comming with him from Galilee, and following him, beheld the ſepulchre, and how his bodie was laide. Thoſe returned back, and prepared ſweet odors: but vpon the ſaboth they reſted, becauſe of the commandement.
               The next daie after the daie of preparation, the high Priests and Phareſies came vnto Pilate, and ſaid: Sir, we remember that this deceuer ſaid while he was yet aliue, that after three daies hee ſhould riſe againe. Cauſe therefore the graue to be kept vntill the third daie, leaſt his diſciples happily come and steale him awaie, and ſaie vnto the people, that he is riſen from the dead, and ſo ſhall the laſt error bee worſe than the firſt. Pilate ſaid vnto them: Yee haue watchmen, go and keepe it as ye know. They went and kept, & prouided the ſepulchre with watchmen, and ſealed the ſtone.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  HEre we learne to haue an earneſt, diligent, and feruent loue vnto Chriſt, hearing with what

zeale and feruentnes, that deuout women 
                        〈◊〉
                      vnto him, and ſerue him in life and death. Him whome they loued in life, will they not forſake in death, but cheerefully with conſtant mindes they ieopard their lyfe and goods. What auaileth vs then, that we cannot ſhew friendſhip, loue and ſeruice vnto Chriſt, as well as theſe women? Seeing we haue not Chriſt alwayes bodily with vs, who nowe beeing in his kingdome, needeth no corporall miniſtration & ſeruice, we ought to beſtow the ſame vppon his poore ones, whom we haue alwaies with vs. Heerein ought wee to ſpare neither goods nor money, to ſerue & pleaſe Chriſt, who vnto death did ieopard and giue his body and lyfe for vs.
                  But like as in the women there was a deuout geſture & good mind toward Chriſt: ſo in the Iewiſh prieſts and phareſies there was found a great malice and hatred againſt Chriſt. They were not ſatiſfied in perſecuting him while he was aliue, but vndertooke alſo to hinder his reſurrection. Yet God by his wiſdome vſeth their wickedneſſe to the glorie of Chriſt, that euen the enemies themſelues (albeit againſt their wil) muſt beare record of his buriall and reſurrection in that they keepe the graue with watch men, and ſeale the ſtone. The truth is immortall, the more it is oppreſt, the more it breaketh forth. Therfore ought we to beware, that wee neuer goe about to hinder the truth: for if we ſhould ſo doo, we ſhould both labor in vaine, & procure vnto our ſelues euerlaſting hurt.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE RESVRRECTION OF IESVS CHRIST, out of the holie Euangeliſts.
            
               
                  AND when the Sabbaoth was now past,
                     Marke 16.
                   euen the Sabaoth day at euen, Marie Magdalene, Marie Iames and Salome, bought ſweete ſpices, that they might come and annoint Ieſus.
                     Luk. 24. Math. 28. Iohn. 20.
                   The euening when the ſabaoth is ended, and the firſt day dawneth after the Sabaoth (namely, the first day of the weeke) while it was yet darke, and the Sun brake forth and began to ariſe, the women came to the Sepulchre, to ſee it. But there happened first a great earthquake: for the Angell of the Lord came downe from heauen, and went and rolled backe the ſtone from the mouth of the ſepulchre, and ſate vpon it. His countenance was like the lightening, and his raiment white as ſnow. And for feare of him the keepers were astonied, and became as dead men. And behold, ſome of them that had watched the ſepulchre, came into the Citie, and told the high Priests all the thinges that had happened. Then gathered they themſelues with the Elders,

and tooke counſaile, and gaue large money vnto the ſoldiers, ſaying: Say ye, that his Diſciples came by night, and ſtole him away while yee ſlept. And if this come to the rulers eares, wee will perſwade him, and ſaue you harmeleſſe. So they tooke the money, and did as they were taught. And this ſaying is noiſed among the Iewes vnto this day.
               Now as the women were in the way going, they ſaide among themſelues: Who will roule vs the ſtone away from the doore of the Sepulchre? (for it was a verie great one) & as they looked,
                     Math. 28.
                   they ſawe that the ſtone was rolled awaie. Then went they into the Sepulchre, and found not the bodie of the Lord Ieſu, but ſaw a young man ſitting at the right ſide, clothed in a long white garment, and they were afraid. But the Aungell ſayde vnto them: Feare not, I knowe whome yee ſeeke. Ye ſeeke Ieſus of Nazareth, that was crucified: Hee is not heere, he is riſen as he ſaide. Beholde the place where they laide him. But goe yee and tell his Diſciples and Peter, that he is riſen againe from the dead. Behold hee goeth before you into Galilee, as he ſaid vnto you. Lo I haue tolde you.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  THE reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt from the dead is verie diligently and perfectly deſcribed of the foure Euangeliſtes, for right profitable and neceſſarie is it for the ſtrengthening and ſtabliſhing of our beleefe in Chriſt. And whereas in the deſcription of this hiſtorie they ſpeake not all alike, the ſame happeneth to our wealth through the ordinaunce of the holie Ghoſt, that we ſhould exerciſe our faith

therein, and applie our diligence, perfectly to learne and comprehend the ſame Reſurrection of Chriſt: For where that is right conceyued and beleeued, there is faith perfect. The Euangeliſtes nowe in deſcribing Chriſtes Reſurrection, doo moſt of all declare, to what high honour Chriſt came after death, and that in one order and degree, according as our beleefe and weakeneſſe increaſeth and groweth towards perfection.
                  At the firſt, is faith in vs feeble and vnperfect, but through the grace of him that hath giuen it, it daily groweth. Verie hard alſo is it for our naturall reaſon, to receiue and beleeue the reſurrection of the dead: therefore doe the Euangeliſtes right diligently and with manie wordes ſet forth the ſame reſurrection of Chriſt, that our beleefe therein might be aſſured and ſtedfaſt. For whoſoeuer truely and conſtantly beleeueth the reſurrection of Ieſu Chriſt, is readie & prepared to beleeue all that concerneth Chriſt. Neither is there anie thing that maketh a man more ioyfull then when he beleeueth, that at the comming of the Lorde, he ſhal riſe againe, and receiue a glorified bodie after Chriſt, and with Chriſt. What can be tedious to ſuche a faithfull beleeuing man, when hee beholdeth ſo high a rewarde from God. Diligently therefore ought we to heare, what the holy Euangeliſts write of his reſurrection, and to giue credence to the witneſſes that ſaw it.
                  Firſt, wee heare agayne the great zeale, and the feruent loue and diligence of theſe deuout women, in that they deſire to ſhew honour vnto the Lorde

being dead: but the Angell a meſſenger of his reſurrection, commaundeth them to declare this ioy vnto the Diſciples, and to get them vnto the Lord nowe being aliue. Heauenly is the meſſenger and proclaimer of the reſurrection, for it paſſeth farre all natural reaſon and all fleſh. Therefore are the women alſo afraid of him, and at the faire brightnes of his countenance and apparel. For our feeble fleſh is not able to ſuſtaine the glorious ſhine of the heauenly light and godly clearenes, but is afraid at it, and feareth. Neuertheleſſe God by his Angell doth right ſoon comfort the womens weakenes, taketh from them their feare, ſpeaketh louingly vnto them, maketh them Apoſtles, that is, meſſengers and proclaimers of the ioifull reſurrection. So little doth God reiect our weaknes, that he maketh euen women to be the declarers of his reſurrection: for he euer delighteth of the laſt to make the firſt. Foraſmuch then as they were the beginners of death in ſinne, they are heere firſt afore the Apoſtles, choſen to bee declarers of that immortall life, which euen out of death is come forth vnto vs in Chriſt.
                  As Chriſt with the earthquake died on the croſſe, ſo riſeth hee with the earthquake, which alſo was heard in the ſending of the holie Ghoſt. This ſignified, that through his death and reſurrection, and by the power of the holy Ghoſt (when the Apoſtles declare the ſame in the world) the whole world ſhould be moued and chaunged. And though the vngratious falſhood of the high Prieſtes, vndertooke with their lies, to hide and ſuppreſſe the trueth of Chriſts

reſurrection, yet God did directe it an other waie. Loo
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     her with they minded to oppreſſe the truth 
                        〈◊〉
                      with the ſame haue they helped to ſet it forth: and thereby was it ſignified, how the Iewiſh people ſhould bee blinded and refuſed. And foraſmuch as they had no loue vnto the trueth, but reiected it, it it was moche that they ſhould be blinded and darkened in lyes, and that there ſhoulde errour and blindnſſe enough fall vpon them.
                  The Angel is not aſhamed to call Ieſus the crucified, for the croſſe is the token of Chriſtes victorie:The croſſe is the glorious & victorious token of the faithfull. through the croſſe beganne his honour and glorie: through the croſſe was death ouercome: the croſſe is the glorious token of all Chriſtians: In the croſſe is the exaltation of Chriſt the heade, and of all his members. Wee ought not therefore to bee aſhamed of the croſſe of our Lorde which was crucified: for therein ſtandeth our health, life, and reſurrection, all our reioicing and glorie.
                  Commiſſion is giuen, that vnto Peter before other diſciples, they ſhould declare the Lords reſurrectiō: that from the feare wherin he ſtood by reaſon of the denial, he might be deliuered, and ſo comforted.
                  He ſendeth them to Galilee (thither wil he go before them) that they might bee ſafe from the feare of the Iewes, which at that time raged horribly.
                  Grant vs (O God) an earneſt zeale and loue vnto the poore, in whom we may highly honor Ieſus thy ſon. And wheras we throgh the weaknes of the fleſh are inclined to bee faint hearted, and not able of our ſelues to behold the bright ſhine and clearnes of his

glorious Reſurrection, ſtrengthen and comfort thou vs by thy holie Angell, that wee may conſtantly beleeue the Reſurrection of thy ſonne: whereby 
                        〈◊〉
                      receiuing an holy hope of the life to come, 
                        〈…〉
                      immortall Reſurrection of our bodies, may be 
                        〈◊〉
                      alſo to comfort and ſtrengthen others that be 
                        〈◊〉
                     . O make thou this hard earth of our fleſhe to 
                        〈◊〉
                      and mooue through the power of thy ſpirit, to holie fruitfull pennaunce, amendment and confeſſion of our life. Preſerue vs, that wee neuer reſiſt the truth, nor take part with lies▪ Graunt vs loue vnto the truth, keepe vs from errour and blindneſſe. Let our ioye bee in the croſſe of Ieſu Chriſt thy ſonne, and our life in his reſurrection: that wee with him, & in him may truly riſe againe, hereto a godly righteous and ſober life, and in the world to come to the bleſſed life euerlaſting, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Marke 16.
                  AND the women went out quickly, and fled from the ſepulchre, for they trembled and were amazed: Neither ſaid they any thing to anie man, for they were affraid. Mary Magdalen ranne, and came to Simon Peter and to the other Diſciple who Ieſus loued, and ſaid vnto them:
                     Iohn 20.
                   They haue taken the Lord away out of the Sepulchre, & we wote not where they haue laid him. Then went Peter foorth, and the other Diſciple, and came to the Sepulchre. They both ranne together, and the other Diſciple out-ranne Peter, and came ſooner to the ſepulchre. And hee ſtouped downe, and ſaw the linnen cloathes lying, yet went he not in. Then came Simon Peter following him, and went into the Sepulchre, and ſaw the linnen clothes lying, and the napkin that was about his head not lying with the linen cloths,

but 
                     〈◊〉
                   togeather in a place by it ſelfe. Ther went in 
                     〈…〉
                   Diſciple, which came firſt to the Sepulchre,
                     Angus, he beleeued that the bodie was taken away.
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   and beleeued. For as yet they knewe not the 
                     〈…〉
                   hee ſhould riſe againe from death. And the 
                     〈◊〉
                   Diſciples went away againe vnto their owne home. But Marie ſtood without at the Sepulchre weeping. And as ſhee wept, ſhee bowed herſelfe into the Sepulchre, and ſaw two Aungels in white, ſitting the one at the head, the other at the feete, where they had laide the bodie of Ieſus. And they ſaid vnto her: Woman why weepest thou? She ſaid vnto them: For they haue taken away my Lorde, and I wote not where they haue laid him. When ſhee had thus ſaid, ſhe turned her ſelfe backe, and ſaw Ieſus ſtanding, and knew not that it was Ieſus. Then ſaid Ieſus vnto her: Woman, why weepest thou? Whom ſeekest thou? She ſuppoſing that he had beene a gardener, ſaide vnto him: Sir, if thou haue borne him hence, tell me where thou haſt laid him, and I will fetch him. Ieſus ſaid vnto her: Marie. She turned her ſelfe, and ſaid vnto him, Raboni: which is to ſay, Maiſter. Then ſaid Ieſus vnto her: Touch me not, for I am not yet aſcended to my Father. But go to my brethren, and ſay vnto them: I aſcend vp vnto my father and your father, vnto my God, & your God. Marie Magdalene came, & tolde the diſciples (which had been with the Lord, & now were weeping and mourning) that ſhe had ſeen the Lord, and that he had ſpoken ſuch things vnto her. But though they heard that he was aliue, & that Mary had ſeen him, yet they beleeued not.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THE Euangeliſts do moſt diligently ſet forth to vs the reſurrectiō of Chriſt, as a thing neceſſary

profitable and ioyfull vnto all faithfull beleeuers. For in the reſurrection we ſee how Chriſt 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ and what hope we haue in him. But this reſurrection do the Euangeliſts teach, according as mans 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ſtanding may comprehend it. For if Chriſt had ſodainly at once opened himſelfe to his Diſciples, ſo that other exhortations & warninges were not gone before, then ſhould they haue taken it but for a plain fantaſie and viſion,Math. 14. as they did when the Lorde appeared vnto them vppon the water. Therefore the Euangeliſtes deſcribe the matter verie diſtinctly and ſundrie wayes, ſo that no man can bee able to ſuſpect anie deceyte. Firſt, how the women and men came to the ſepulchre, looked and went in, and how they viewed euerie thing throughly, not once, but oft and manie times: the clothes wherein the Lorde was wrapped, the heade kerchiefe, euerie thing folden together in his ſeuerall place: and how they ſaw and perceyued, that the bodie was not there, that the Sepulchre was open, the ſtone rolled away, and how the Aungels and heauenly ſpirits teſtified, that hee was riſen agayne. Yet for all this, they are weak and beleeue it not ſtedfaſtly, but bee as yet in a doubt. Thus GOD permitteth them to wauer, and to bee feeble of beleefe, and doth not throughly perſwade them forthwith, and that altogether for our ſakes.
                  Hee might well ſodainely haue certified and aſſured Thomas and them at the firſt, but thus is it better both for them and vs. For the more a ſicke man feeleth his owne diſeaſe and woundes, the more

acceptable is the medicine vnto him: The weaker that our beleefe is, the more cauſe haue wee to call vpon God for the increaſe of faith: the more weakneſſe we find in our ſelues, the farther are we in debt and the more bound to praiſe God. When hee maketh vs ſtrong, and ſeeing it is his onely ſtrength that ſtaieth vs, we ought the leſſe to reioyce in our owne. Chriſt in his life time had oft tolde them afore,Math. 20. of his reſurrection, but their mind was ſo dul, that they vnderſtood it not, neither perceiued they that great myſterie. The reſurrection of the bodies they could not comprehend, but alway vnderſtood it otherwiſe There was much written thereof, and that with euident woordes, in the Scripture (as in the ſixteenth Pſalme, and in the figure of Ionas) and yet could not they vnderſtand it. Which thing neuertheles to beleeue, Chriſt had giuen them occaſion ſundrie wais: As in that hee raiſed vp Lazarus & other which were dead, and made them aliue againe.Iohn. 11. In all his preaching and doctrine he declared, that this was vnto him in no wiſe vnpoſſible, by reaſon of the diuine power working in him. For all this, the diſciples are yet ſo weake that they vnderſtand it not all.
                  Therfore doth the godly wiſedome lead them ſtill by little and little, to make them ſtronger, declaring vnto them certaine aſſured euidences: as that the bodie was not in the ſepulchre, but that the clothes lay there wrapt together: for theſe were vndoubted tokens, that he was riſen vp againe. For if any man had taken him out of the ſepulchre (as Magdalen thoght) he could not haue had ſo much time and leiſure, as

to looſe vp the bands, and to vndoo the clothes from the bodie, but had taken and carried awaie the clothes and bodie together. For the clothes dyd cleaue hard faſt to the bodie, partly by reaſon of the 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪ and partly through the Aloes and Myrrhe than the bodie was dreſſed withall. But for all this, they are weake ſtill, and in doubt, vntill ſuch time as the Lord himſelfe doth ſtrengthen them. Therefore euen Marie alſo, as feruent as ſhee is, iudgeth not the bodie to be riſen againe, but to bee ſtollen and priuily carryed awaie: thus God openeth himſelfe vnto whom and when hee will, for though wee ſee ſometimes many great and wonderfull workes, though wee reade and heare much of the Scriptures, yet remaineth our hart ſtill ignorant, neither doth the doctrine take effect, till Chriſt open it, and till he himſelfe be ſchoole-maſter within.
                  Who ſo would rather haue another and higher ſenſe or expoſition than this, it may bee vnderſtood that Chriſt appeareth vnto thoſe which mourne and weepe, and ſtande in death with Chriſt in ſubduing of the fleſh, in mortifying of the body, in abiding of the croſſe. For while they bee in aduerſitie vnder the croſſe, and buried with Chriſt, the greatneſſe of the trouble cauſeth them to thinke, that Chriſt is not riſen againe, that is, they haue nothing but heauines, and ſorrowe. Notwithſtanding Chriſt appeareth vnto them, comforteth and refreſheth them, and maketh them partakers of his reſurrection and ioy.
                  Heere may wee perceiue and ſee a great deſire and loue vnto Chriſt,Luke. 7. in the diſciples that runne, but

ſpecially in Marie Magdalene: for ſeeing that much 
                        〈◊〉
                      forgiuen her, therefore was her loue exceeding 
                        〈◊〉
                      Peter alſo and Iohn, which were more feruent 
                        〈◊〉
                      others in the loue of Chriſt, and drew nee
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      others did, when the Lorde was taken, although the one fled, and the other denied him: therfore vnto them, as to the principall, was this opened, before others.
                  
                     Marie loued Chriſt verie feruently, for many ſinnes were forgiuen her,The number of ſeauen for many. many deuils & vices were driuen out of her, therefore vnto her dyd Chriſt firſt appeare. The croſſe and trouble was not able to bring Chriſt out of her heart,Mark. 16 it could not quench her loue vnto Chriſt: the ſeede of faith was in her heart, it had taken roote, although it were not yet ripe. Verie earneſtly and with great diligence ſeeketh ſhee him whome ſhee loueth, declaring her feruentneſſe by her weeping, and her zeale by tarrying ſtill at the ſepulchre, when the two Apoſtles were gone awaie alreadie. The Lorde therefore forſaketh her not, but inſtructeth her, and comforteth her by the Angell, appeareth vnto her vnknowen, at laſt talketh with her, and maketh himſelfe knowen vnto her.
                  The Angels which are miniſters for the wealth of the elect, diſſwade her from weeping and mourning, and bring her tidinges of great ioy: for herein nowe is no iuſt cauſe to weepe, but rather to reioyce, ſeeing that Chriſt hath ouercome death for vs, deliuering and ſetting vs free from the power thereof, and placing vs in eternall lyfe. Lyke

as the Aungels at the birth of Chriſt in this mortall life, did bring tidinges of ioy: ſo doe they heere alſo when Chriſt is riſen againe into an immortall life. And hervnto alſo ſerueth the brightnes of the countenance, and whitenes of the clothes: for all ſuch are tokens of ioy.
                  But ſome man might maruaile, why Chriſt will not ſuffer Marie to touch him, ſaying: hee would afterward bee touched of the other women, of the Diſciples, and of Thomas, yea he prouoketh Thomas and the Diſciples thereto.
                  It ſeemeth that Marie, with the ointment which ſhe brought with her, thought to annoint the bodie of Chriſt (as ſhe did afore in his life time) and to reuerence him, and to deale with him as with a mortall man: which thing Chriſt forbad her to do. Hereafter ſhall wee heare how hee offreth vnto his Diſciples his hands, feete, and ſide, willing them to touch him. But with this inhibition, and that commandement he hath reſpect to one onely thing: namelie, to deliuer Marie and the Diſciples from vnbeliefe, from weake faith and doubting. Vnto Marie hee will ſay: Touch mee not of a carnall deuocion, as though thou wouldſt anoint me. I need it no more. As for ſuch corporall ſeruice, it is not neceſſary to do it vnto my body any more. The cauſe why I became man, was not that yee ſhould alway hang vppon my corporall fleſh, and honour me with bodely ſeruice. Thou ſhalt now ſhortly vnderſtand, that I haue like power with the father. I am in thy heart, not yet aſcended vp vnto the father. That is: Thou haſt as yet

no right knowledge of my Godhead, therefore canſt thou not now rightly touch me.
                  Thus learne wee alſo, to knowe and honour Chriſt nowe no more after the fleſh,2. Cor. 5 
                     God is a ſpirit, with th
                           •
                         ſpirit will h
                           •
                         be worſhipped. and to ſhew no corporall outward ſeruice vnto his perſon. In ſpirite will he be worſhipped, with the faith and loue of the inward minde. If anie thing bodily be done of vs, the ſame ſhould be done vnto the poore, & to the neighbour that hath need thereof. Thus may faith & loue well vſe ſome outwarde thinges, not to doo ſeruice therewith vnto God, but vnto our ſelues, or to our neighbour As when we take and miniſter bread and wine about in the ſupper, diſtributing and eating it, the ſame is not done principally, to the intent to declare a ſeruice vnto God: but ſomewhat to prouoke our outward ſenſes and fleſh by the exteriour ſignes, that wee may the better conſider and ponder the grace of God declared vnto vs in the death of Ieſus Chriſt, and that wee may lifte vp our mindes vnto Chriſt the heauenly foode and liuing bread, which inwardly feedeth vs with his fleſh, and nouriſheth vs with his bloud.
                  Thereto alſo hath our ſauiour Chriſt inſtituted the figuratiue tokens and ſacraments of his grace, to helpe our infirmitie: for Sacraments are gracious euidences of the faith that men haue or ſhoulde haue to God. In the which they comfortably exerciſe and practiſe themſelues towards Gods promiſes, wherein alſo they declare the obedience of theyr inwarde ſaith, and that they faithfully beleeue the words and promiſes of almightie God. For the token without

beleefe is nothing profitable, but rather hurtfull. All bodyly ſeruice that the fleſh imagineth pleaſeth not God. Hee ſitteth at the right hande of GOD, there ought we to touch him with the lifting vp of a faithfull heart, and with the worſhip which hee through his ſpirite worketh and directeth into vs: for therefore he dyed, roſe againe, and aſcended vp into heauen, that hee might fulfill all things, and raigne truely and ſpiritually in our heartes. Our heartes muſt wee lifte vp,Col 3. Phil 3. there as Chriſt ſitteth at the right hande of God, and our conuerſation ought to bee in heauen.
                  Whereas the Lorde willed his diſciples to touch him, it was done to baniſh theyr doubtfulneſſe, and to ſtrengthen theyr weake faith. Which touching was not required of them as a worſhippe, but that theyr fleſh through the outward handling of his bodie, might bee quieted & ſtilled: and ſo is it a proofe and teſtimonie (that hee verily roſe with the former bodie) rather than a worſhipping or ſeruice. Chriſt dyd not therefore take vppon him his fleſh, that we ſhould alwaie hang and depend thereon, but that we by his humanitie, ſhould aſcend vp to his godhead: for when wee knowe the high and holy myſterie of his Paſſion and Reſurrection (with the which hee hath ſerued our turne) wee ought to ſtirre vp our mindes to knowe the Godhead, wherein he is lyke vnto the father.
                  Therefore vnto Marie Magdalene alſo doeth Chriſt ſpeake of aſcending vp to the Father, which thing he commandeth to ſhew the Apoſtles, as if he

would ſay, now ſhortly beginneth mine honor, that I, as concerning the humanitie receiued, ſhall be taken vp to the glorie, which I haue had from euerlaſting, that is, the fleſh which I haue taken vpon me for your ſakes, ſhall ſitte at the right hande of my Father.
                  Oh how great a grace is this? Oh howe high is the glorie that heere is promiſed vnto vs in CHRIST? The onely begotten ſonne of God, deſcended and became man for vs, that wee (ſo much as were poſſible for our nature) ſhoulde aſcend vp vnto his Godhead. Hee deſcended downe lowe, that when wee are humbled, hee might receiue and exalte vs to his owne promotion. Hee that of nature is the Lorde, tooke vppon him the ſhape of a ſeruaunt, that of vs which naturally were bond ſeruauntes, hee might make vs Gods children.
                  Foraſmuch then as hee became man, to make vs Gods, and children of godly grace. Hee tooke vpon him that which is ours, to giue vs and to parte with vs that which is his.Pſal. 22. Therefore calleth hee vs brethren, and maketh his owne father common vnto vs, ſo that hee is alſo our Father and our God: that ſame which hee hath of nature, doeth hee of grace giue vnto vs. For his ſpirite beareth recorde vnto our ſpirite, that wee are the children of GOD,Rom. 
                           ••
                        
                      for wee haue not receiued the ſpirite of bondage to feare, but the ſpirit of adoption, in the which wee cry, Father, Father.
                  Chriſt alſo calleth thoſe that bee his,Iohn. 15. not ſeruants,

but friends and brethren: he will be our God, and wee his people:Iere. 31. our father, we his children: and his couenant which he hath made with vs, ſhall bee euerlaſting, for it is ſealed and confirmed with the bloud of his onely begotten ſonne. Now haue wee fellowſhippe and companie with God the father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt.
                  But ſuch grace and glorie, is inwardly ſeene with the eyes of faith, and felte in the ſpirite, beeing hidde heere in time vnder the ſhape of the croſſe.The glory of the faithfull is hid vnder the croſſe. For Chriſt doth not ſtraight waie by and by declare himſelfe openly vnto Marie Magdalene, as hee is in his glorie: but ſtandeth there as a gardener, and ſpeaketh vnto hir, by the which voice ſhe knoweth him: he long deferreth the comfort, permitting her a good while to weepe and lament, that the ioy and conſolation afterward may bee the greater. But the cauſe why he ſo long delaieth his helpe and comfort from theſe that bee his owne, is, that their inward deſires may bee the more feruent and earneſt, and that hee may ſtirre vp and kindle their faith. Now when the fire is kindled inough, then commeth hee with his comfort, as it is euident heere in Marie Magdalene, and in the woman of Cananee. Matthew 26.
                  Moreouer, hee ſendeth Marie Magdalene from him; to bring the Apoſtles tidings of this glorious exaltation, whereas ſhee doubtleſſe had rather haue beene longer with him, and to haue had the comfortable fruition of the ſight of him. Howbeit hee directeth her forth, to declare that felicitie, and poynteth

her to the work of charitable loue, to the ſeruice of her neighbour. For here in time wee cannot as yet come to the beholding & ſight of God face to face, it ſhall firſt begin after this time. Now while we liue heere, wee muſt ſerue our neighbour in charitable loue, and do him good.
                  O God, ſtrengthen thou our weake faith in the reſurrection of thy beloued ſon: that by it our conſciences being examined, may well anſwere: Illuminate our mindes, and expell out of vs all darkeneſſe, thorow the light and brightnes of the glorious reſurrection:Rom. 6. O ſtrengthen our weaknes throgh the power of thy ſpirite. Raiſe vs from the death of ſinne, in the ſame ſpirite and power wherein thou haſt raiſed vp thy ſon from the dead. Comfort and ſtrengthen vs in aduerſitie, and make vs conſtaunt therein: that we may preaſſe through the ſame in ſteadfaſt hope, to the ioyfull and bleſſed reſurrection. Kindle in vs the fire of thy godly loue, that with earneſt and feruent deſire wee may ſeeke and finde thee through Chriſt. Withdraw our hearts from all earthly loue of creatures, and from filthines, vp to heauen-ward, where Chriſt ſitteth at thy right hand, that wee may lead a godly and heauenly life vpon earth. Set vp the ſpirituall kingdome of Chriſt Ieſu in our hearts, that in vs thy name may be ſanctified and thy will performed: that wee may become thy vertuous children, and neuer diſpleaſe thee our gracious father. that we continuing ſtil in thy mercifull couenant,1. Iohn. 
                           •
                        . doe neuer fall away from the companie and fellowſhip of thee and thy ſonne. And where as thou haſt giuen vs ſuch

knowledge, grace, and vnderſtanding, graunt that we may make the ſame knowne vnto many, beeing alway readie through charitable loue to ſerue our brethren, Amen.
                  
                  It followeth now further in the hiſtorie, how the women that firſt were with Marie Magdalene at the ſepulchre, and being afraid, fled away (no man ſaying ought vnto them) returned now more ſtoutlie & boldly to the ſepulchre, to ſee what would come of that wonderfull terrible matter.
               
            
            
               WHen the women came to the ſepulchre & found not the bodie of Ieſu, they were ſore troubled in their minds. And behold, two men ſtoode by them in ſhining garments. And as the women were afraide & bowed down their faces to the earth, they ſaid vnto them; Why ſeeke ye the liuing among the dead? He is not heere, he is riſen. Remember how hee ſpake vnto you, when he was yes in Galilee, ſaying: that the ſonne of man muſt bee deliuered into the hands of ſinful men, and be crucified, and the third day riſe againe. And they remembred the wordes of Ieſu, & returned from the ſepulchre, and told all theſe thinges vnto thoſe eleuen, and to all the remnant. And as they went to tell his diſciples,
                     Math. 28.
                   behold, Ieſus met them, ſaying: All haile. And they came and helde him by the feete, and worſhipped him. Then ſaid Ieſus vnto them: Bee not afraide. Go tell my brethren that they go into Galilee, and there ſhall they ſee me.
               But when the women, namely; Mary Magdalene, & Ioanna, and Mary Iacob, and other that were with them, told theſe things vnto the Apoſtles, their words ſeemed vnto them fained things, neither beleeued they them.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  LOne is not idle, but diligent & zealous: which thing may well bee perceiued in theſe women, that ran againe to the ſepulchre, although they had found it empty afore. Gladly would they haue found the body, and done reuerence to their Lorde, whom they loued. This feruent zeale of the women confoundeth our coldnes & vnmercifulnes towards the poore. Oft times do they ſeeke him that is abſent, and that with great diligence: wee receiue him not, when (in the poore) he commeth vnto vs. No trauel, labour, nor coſt greeueth them: as for vs, we pitie our ſubſtance, when wee ſhoulde diſtribute to the poore which are Chriſts. O that we could rightly conſider, how pretious a treaſure we gather vnto our ſelues in heauen, when we giue of our goods into the hands of the poore, lending the ſame vnto Chriſt! Then ſhould not wee garniſh and build timber and ſtone, but the liuing temples of God, keeping them from wind and raine, and from decay: namely, that they ſuffer no extreme pouertie, nor be deſtitute of helpe. Such a treaſure had Tabitha laid vp in ſtore,Acts 9. for when ſhe died, it was not ſtones and ſtockes that commended her benefits, but the bodies of the widows, they lamented her death, and declared how mercifull ſhe had beene.
                  Chriſt openeth and ſheweth himſelfe vnto thoſe that earneſtly ſeeke him, and thoſe hee ſuffereth to touch him: to the intent that foraſmuch as they muſt

declare his reſurrection to the Apoſtles, their weake faith muſt be ſtrengthned, to know and to be aſſured that hee was verily riſen againe. For not onely the Angell, but Chriſt alſo himſelfe commandeth them ſo to do. He comforteth them, and taketh from them the fearfulnes and ſorrowe. Thus wee ought not to doubt, he ſhall in all aduerſitie and trouble meete vs, he ſhall chearfully appeare vnto vs, and with his ioyfull preſence and reſurrection ſhall hee comfort and preſerue vs.
                  But we lacke an earneſt and ſtrong faith: our harts are ſlow and cold: Diligent we be in ſeeking of temporall things, but godly things wee either deſpiſe or neglect. Loue hath no reſt, ſhe ceaſeth not to runne and ſeeke, till ſhe finde him whome ſhee loueth, and when ſhe findeth him, ſhe holdeth him faſt, that ſhee looſe him not againe: glad is ſhe alſo, to make others pertakers of the treaſure that ſhe hath found.
                  O God, kindle our colde heartes with the fire of faith and loue, that we may earneſtly ſeeke thee: and that when we haue found thee, we may feruently receiue and keepe thee, and with a right ſpirit worſhip thee. Expell all hardnes and vngentlenes out of our hearts: make vs louing and mercifull vnto the poore ones. Take from vs the terrour of all vndoubtfulnes, vnbeleefe, and feare of the world, and comfort vs in all aduerſitie. Graunt vs the faith of thy reſurrection, that we deſpiſing all tranſitory things, may ſet all our comfort and hope in the bleſſed reſurrection to come, Amen.
                  
                  Heere alſo we learne, how exceeding weake and

ignorant our fleſh is, to receiue and beleeue the truth 
                        〈◊〉
                      it of God giue not light and ſtrength. For a
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of the Apoſtles were illuminated and 
                        〈…〉
                      the holy ghoſt, they eſteemed the truth 
                        〈…〉
                      Reſurrection (opened vnto them by the women) to be a fooliſh and fained thing. Neuertheleſſe Chriſt forſaketh not thoſe whom hee hath once imbraced, but ſtill openeth himſelfe vnto them more and more, to expell out of them all dubitation & vnbeleefe.
               
            
            
               ANd behold, two of them went that ſame day to a town called Emaus,
                     Luk. 24.
                   which was from Hieruſalem about a threeſcore furlongs, & they talked together of all theſe things that had happened. And it chaunced, that while they communed together and reaſoned, Ieſus himſelf drew neare and went with them: but their eies were holden, that they ſhould not know him. And he ſaide vnto them: What manner of communications are theſe, that ye haue one to another as ye walke, and are ſad? And the one of them (whoſe name was Cleophas) anſwered and ſaid vnto him: Art thou onely a ſtraunger in Hieruſalem, & haſt not knowne the things which haue chanced there in theſe dais? He ſaid vnto them; What things? And they ſaid vnto him: Of Ieſus of Nazareth, which was a Prophet, mightie in deed and word before God & all the people, & how the high Priests & our rulers deliuered him to be condemned vnto death, & haue crucified him. But we truſted, that it had been he which ſhuld haue redeemed Iſrael. And as touching all theſe thinges, to day is euen the third day that they were done. Yea and certain women alſo of our companie made vs astonied, which came

earlie to the ſepulchrt, and found not his bodie, and came ſaying: that they had ſeen a viſion of Angels, 
                     〈…〉
                   that he was aliue. And certaine of them that 
                     〈…〉
                   went to the ſepulchre, and found it euen ſo as the 
                     〈…〉
                   ſaid, but him they ſaw not.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THE longer the more, is ſet foorth vnto vs the vnoutſpeakable loue and truſtie faithfulnes of Ieſus Chriſt our lord, who forſaketh not thoſe that anie thing loue to talke of him. For look whom he admitteth into his ſchoole, thoſe hee teacheth ſtill continually (how weake ſoeuer they bee) vntill hee bring them to perfect vnderſtanding, and expell all doubtfulnes out of their hearts. Foraſmuch now as theſe his Diſciples ſpeake of him in the way, hee getteth him to them, albeit hee holdeth their eyes that they knowe him not: that by the meanes thereof, they themſelues with their own words might knowledge & confeſſe their doubtfull wauering, & weaknes of faith: that they might open their diſeaſe vnto him, & hee to giue a conuenient medicine for theyr vnbeleefe: that through the long delay, frendly talk, and opening of the ſcripture, their harts and deſires might more and more bee kindled and ſette on fire: that their doubtfulnes might bee taken away, and theyr weake fayth ſtrengthened. For though they helde Ieſus for a great and principall Prophet, and and for an innocent good man, yet ſpeake they vncertainely of the matter, and their heart wauereth:

yet were not they aſſured that hee had ouercome death, and by his owne death purchaſed life for all the world, that hee was riſen againe into an immor
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      made vs vndoubtedly partakers of the 
                        〈…〉
                      and ioyfull reſurrection, and eternall life in himſelfe.
                  Now for as much as they gladly talke and willingly holde of him (how feebly and vnperfectly ſoeuer it bee) yet the gratious and louing Lorde approcheth neare vnto them, and inſtructeth them. It ſhall neuer bee vnfruitfull, it ſhall neuer paſſe without profite, but aſſuredly doo good, where Chriſt is gladlie and with a good heart ſpoken of. Where two or three bee aſſembled in his name, there is hee in the middeſt among them, and infourmeth them. That he doth to the Diſciples in the way by mouth, the ſame declareth hee alway vnto vs inwardly by his ſpirite in our harts, and outwardly with the ſcripture and word, and with the teachings of good godly men. He that well and faithfully vſeth the little talent, ſhall not be denied a greater, if he earneſtly deſire it.
                  Whereſoeuer he is earneſtly & feruently thought vpon, and talked of, there is he preſent, & inſtructeth and teacheth the ignorant. For he is not aſhamed to reſort vnto thoſe that lacke knowledge, and be in errour, and to talke with them.
                  This lowlie and gentle condition ought wee to learne of our head, that we ſhame not to repayre vnto ſuch as are not yet right inſtructed, that wee may infourme them, and commune with them. We

ſhould deſpiſe no man, that with a ſingle hart ſeeketh God, though as yet wee perceiue much wauering and weake faith in him. For if the eternall 
                        〈…〉
                      was not aſhamed to humble himſelfe, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      the ignoraunt, much more ought wee to doo
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     ing we are neither ſufficiently inſtructed in the ſcripture, nor yet diligent and carefull to doe that which we know.
               
            
            
               
                  
                     Luke. 24.
                  THen ſaid Ieſus vnto them: O ye fooles and ſlow of hart to beleeue all that the Prophets haue ſpoken. Ought not Chriſt to haue ſuffred theſe things, and ſo to enter into his glorie? And hee began at Moſes and all the Prophets, and interpreted vnto them in all Scriptures which were written of him. And they drewe nigh to the towne that they went vnto: and he made as though he would haue gone further. And they conſtrained him, ſaying: Abide with vs, for it draweth toward night, and the day is far paſſed, and he went in to tarrie with them. And it came to paſſe as he ſate at meate with them, he tooke bread and bleſſed it, and brake and gaue to them, and their eyes were opened, and they knew him, and he vaniſhed out of their ſight. And they ſaid betweene themſelues. did not our heartes burne within vs, while he talked with vs by the way, and opened to vs the ſcriptures? And they roſe vp the ſame houre, and returned againe to Hieruſalem, and found the eleuen gathered together, and them that were with them, ſaying: The Lorde is riſen indeed, and hath appeared vnto Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how they knewe him in breaking of bread.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  CHRIST ſayth, Iohn. 5. Search the Scriptures, 
                        〈◊〉
                      they teſtifie of mee. Alſo, If yee beleeued Moſes, ye ſhould beleeue me, for he hath written of me. Chriſt therefore willing to ſtrengthen the weake, and to teach the vnlearned, expoundeth vnto them the Scriptures, beginning at Moſes, and ſo thorough out all the Prophets. For whatſoeuer is written in the Scripture concerning the mercie, goodnes and wiſedome of God, the waſhing awaie of ſinne, and ſatisfieng for the ſame, it belongeth properly to Chriſt. For ſo worthily and euidently haue they deſcribed the paſſion & glory of Chriſt, that one would thinke them not to write of a matter which were to come, but done alreadie, as it is plaine in the Pſalmes and Prophets. Pſa▪ 
                     22. Eſa. 53. 1. Pet. 1. &c.
                  Thus out of the Scripture we learne, partlie the teſtimonies of the paſſion and reſurrection of Chriſt, partly by what waie Chriſt came to ſo high honour; and glorie of his father, that wee firſt beleeuing that Chri
                        •
                     t dyed for our ſinnes, and roſe againe for our righteouſneſſe, might by his reſurrection be ſure of a good conſcience, and conſolation of the lyfe to come.
                  Secondly, that wee in patience and obedience might learne to be obedient to our heauenly father, to take vp our croſſe, and to follow our Lord IESVS Chriſt, if wee will haue ioy with him, wee muſt alſo ſuffer and trauaile with him. Our head goeth to eternall

ioy through aduerſitie and trouble, and will we enter into it through the pleaſure of the worlde and luſt of the fleſh? It paſſeth the boundes of all 
                        •
                     nitie, and comlyneſſe and honeſtie, for 
                        〈…〉
                      to bee ſluggiſh and ſlouthfull, when the 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     keth vppon him ſuch trauell and paine, 
                        〈…〉
                      narrowe gate that wee muſt enter in at, for thorough many tribulations, vexations, and miſeryes muſt wee come into the euerlaſting kingdome of heauen: and all they that will liue godly in Chriſt Ieſu, muſt ſuffer perſecution in this world. He that will poſſeſſe an inheritance, muſt beare and ſuffer all the charges belonging to the ſame. The eternall inheritance is appointed vs of our heauenly father thorough Chriſt: but with this addition, that we receiue the poſſeſſion of it in ſuch ſort as the ſon hath done, namely with and through the croſſe and trouble. Bleſſed are they whome God the father maketh partakers of the paſſion of his onely begotten ſonne: for who ſo is a companion with him in ſuffering, ſhall haue his eternal fellowſhip in heauen, and inioy with him euerlaſting bliſſe and reſt. Hee that vnderſtandeth not this, is a foole and ſlowe of heart to beleeue the Scriptures: let that man beſeech God to open the Scripture vnto him, and to make him vnderſtand it. Where that commeth to paſſe, ignoraunce vaniſheth awaie, and the heart is feruent and receiueth vnderſtanding, for the Lorde is the right and perfect ſchoole-maſter, that toucheth the hart, and pearceth it through with the arrowes of his words and ardent loue.
                  
                     In breaking of the bread, they knowe the Lorde, 
                        〈…〉
                      life time, when he nowe woulde goe 
                        〈…〉
                      and death, tooke bread, rendered 
                        〈…〉
                      it, and gaue it them, admoniſhing 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     bit as they dyd the ſame, they ſhoulde 
                        〈…〉
                      remembrance of him. Whereby they now 
                        •
                     hin
                        ••
                     ng on the ſame wordes, and beeing admoniſhed of the act, remember that it is hee. Thus the breaking of the bread before our eyes in the ſupper, is an admoniſhing token, that Chriſts body was broken and dyed for vs on the croſſe: and the drinke an admoniſhing token, that his bloud was ſhedde for the waſhing awaie of our ſinnes. And ſo when wee breake the bread, and drinke the drinke, wee ought thereby to knowe the Lorde, thanking him for his death which is our life, being mindfull of him, and following his great loue, wherein hee dyed for our ſinnes.
               
            
            
               AS they thus ſpake, (it was verie late the ſame daie; which was the first daie in the weeke: and where the diſciples aſſembled together, the doores were ſhut for feare of the Iewes) Ieſus came while they ſate at the table, and ſtoode in the middest among them, and ſayde vnto them: Peace bee with you. But the diſciples were afraid, thinking that they had ſeene a ſpirite. Then ſayde Ieſus vnto them, Why are yee troubled? And why doo thoughts ariſe in your head? And hee ſayde yet agayne vnto them, Peace bee with you. And with that ſhewed he them his hands, feet, and ſide, and ſaid: Behold my hands and feete, that it is euen I my ſelfe, handle me and ſee, for a ſpirit hath

not fleſh and bones, as ye ſee me haue. The 
                     〈…〉
                   when they had ſeene the Lord. And 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  
                  leeued not for ioy, and wondered, he ſayd 
                     〈…〉
                   ye anie thing to eate? So they offered him a 
                     〈…〉
                   fiſh, and an honie combe. The ſame hee took
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   before them, caſting in their teeth their vnbeleefe 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •
                  nes of heart, becauſe they beleeued not them which 
                     〈…〉
                   that he was riſen againe from the dead.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  IN that the Euangeliſts deſcribe the true reſurrection of Chriſt, they declare withal, vnto whom ſuch a high myſtery was opened and ſhewed For when we heare how the diſciples were minded and behaued themſelues, we learne therby what becommeth vs, that we alſo may beleeue, that Chriſt is truly riſen againe: yea, not only to acknowledge the ſame with the mouth, but alſo to proue and feele it in the taſt of the ſpirite. So haue wee heard afore, what the deſire & ardent loue which God ſtirred vp in Mary Magdalene, dyd bring to paſſe, and what good came of the feruentneſſe and diligence of Peter. This we ſee now here, for God hath a pleſure to ſtir vp our deſire when hee will open himſelfe vnto vs. And therefore all the ſame daie from morning early vntill nyght, were the diſciples ſtill more and more endued with new ioy, that the deſire to ſee Chriſt, might be kindled more and more in them. And as they were aſſembled in loue & vniformitie (for thoſe two things pleaſe God wel) Chriſt commeth and appeareth vnro

them. He openeth himſelfe vnto thoſe, that longing after him, are coupled in loue and vniformitie, & being aſſembled, doo hold themſelues together, for where loue is, there is God: where diſcord is and diuiſion, there is the deuill.
                  O deare brethren, let vs regard charitable loue, let vs care for our brethren, that the brotherhood be not broken, and that loue be not ſpotted, for els farewel ſaith. No man needeth to boaſt himſelfe of faith that hath not charitable loue, but ſtirreth vp and ſeeketh diuiſion.
                  Moreouer, we ſee here that the diſciples of Chriſt ſtood in great danger of their bodies and life: for when the Iewes had no more power to rage agaynſt Chriſt, they raged agaynſt his diſciples. Looke what men are partakers of the croſſe and paſſion of Chriſt they verily ſhall vnderſtand the high myſterie of his reſurrection. For vndoubtedly, God with his owne conſolation ſhall viſite and comfort thoſe, that ſuffer anie danger & harme for his names ſake. Foraſmuch then as the good diſciples of Chriſt, muſt ſtill bee in conflict and battel with the Iewes, the Lord ſpeaketh vnto them with this comfortable worde, Peace bee with you: as if he ſhuld ſaie, be of good cheere, your matter ſhal ſtand in good caſe, in mee yee ſhal haue peace & be ſafe, & quiet, how hard ſo euer it go outwardly: Feare not, be not afraid, howſoeuer the Iews doo rage, ye ſhall doo right well. This ſalutation was common among the Iewes, therefore doeth Chriſt alſo vſe it. Such a charge gaue hee lykewiſe vnto his Diſciples, when hee ſent them to preach, that entering

into an houſe, they ſhould ſaie, Peace be to this houſe.Luk. 10.
                  
                  And though the diſciples were ſomewhat amazed and afraide at the firſt bluſh, yet was theyr gladneſſe great, when they were throughly inſtructed, that it was the Lorde. Now was fulfilled that which Chriſt had ſaid and promiſed vnto them afore. Io. 16 Yee ſhall mourne, and the world ſhall reioyce, but I will ſee you againe. Your ſorrow ſhall be turned into gladneſſe, your heart ſhall reioyce, and your ioye ſhall no man take from you. For the ioye of a faythfull beleeuing heart is conſtant, and endureth. If the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt were truely and rightly beleeued, and the ſame ioye comprehended as it ought to bee, all ſorrowe muſt needs vaniſh, all hurt and aduerſitie muſt needes bee little regarded. For what can bee grieuous vnto a man, when by faith & hope hee is aſſured, that hee in a glorified immortall bodie ſhall ariſe agayne with Chriſt his head, and haue euerlaſting ioy with him.
                  And this is the cauſe that Chriſt appeareth ſo ofte vnto his diſciples, inſtructing them ſo much and ſo perfectly of his reſurrection, euen to make them ſteadfaſt in this faith, and to aſſure them of this ioy. Therefore ſheweth hee them his bodie, and giueth it them to handle. The palpable bodie certifieth them, that it is a true bodie: the immortall bodie ſheweth, that it is glorified, and of higheſt honor: the printes of the woundes declare, that it is euen the ſelfe ſame bodie that it was afore. Hee ſheweth them the tokens of victorie, as a mighty ouercommer

of death, and ſo doth hee the woundes that hee had gotten for them in the battell: and likewiſe the ſide that was opened, declaring his great loue. His woundes ſheweth he to them, to heale the wounds of theyr vnbeleefe. As if hee would ſay: looke vppon mee, and fight manfullie: Without a battaile ſhall no man bee crowned.2. Tim. 2. But vnto him that ouercommeth in the conflict,Apoc. 2. will I graunt to eate of the bread of Heauen, and will crowne him for euer.
                  Where as hee eateth before them, it is done for the probation of the true humaine nature, and not for the great neceſſitie of the bodie: To them was it verie needfull, not vnto Chriſt. Euen ſo we, knowing howe to further our neighboures faith, muſt, and ought manie times to doe ſomewhat, and to leaue ſomewhat vndone, that for our ſelues wee need not.
                  O GOD graunt vs true loue and vniformitie: Take from vs all Sciſme and diuiſion: gather vs togeather through thy holie ſpirite, remooue all diſcord and variaunce out of thy holie Churche. Giue vs patience in aduerſitie: ſende thy godlie comforte and ioye vnto all ſuch as bee in diſtreſſe and trouble for thy names ſake: Strengthen the weake, lift vppe the feeble, eſtabliſh the doubtfull, and in the battaile helpe thoſe which bee thine owne: that they lie not vnder, but that in thee, they may ouercome all daunger and harme. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  THomas one of the twelue (which was called Didimus) was not with them when Ieſus came. The other diſciples therefore ſayd vnto him: We haue ſeene the Lord. But he ſaid vnto them: Except I ſee in his handes the print of the nailes, and put my finger into the print of the nailes, & thruſt my hand into his ſide, I will not beleeue. And after eight daies again his diſciples were within, and Thomas with them. Then came Ieſus when the doores were ſhut, and stoode in the midſt, and ſaide, Peace bee vnto you. And after that ſayd he to Thomas, Bring thy finger hether, and ſee my hands, and reach hether thy hand, & thruſt it into my ſide, and be not faithles, but beleeuing. Thomas anſwered, and ſaid vnto him: My Lord, and my God. Ieſus ſaith vnto him, Thomas, becauſe thou haſt ſeene mee, thou haſt beleeued, Bleſſed are they that haue not ſeene, and haue beleeued.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  THat which was ſpoken afore, is heere euident and plaine, namely, that Chriſt openeth himſelfe vnto thoſe, which are deſirous of him, and long after him aſſociating themſelues together one with another in true loue, and being partakers of the paſſion & croſſe. Foraſmuch then as Thomas is leſſe feruent, and therefore abſent from the reſt, hee ſawe not Chriſt with the other diſciples, but when he obtained a deſire to ſee Chriſt, & was aſſotiate and ioyned to the other, he became alſo partaker of the ioye that they had.
                  And here we learne the nature and condition of true beleefe (which is an illumination of the grace

of God, yea a verie godly propertie) that he maketh others partakers of his holy and glorious ioyes, and that through loue, which ſeeketh not her owne profit, neither is diſdainefull, to the intent that the glorie of God may be preferred among all men Therefore the Diſciples of the Lord make Thomas their companion partaker of ſuch gladneſſe as they had receiued of Chriſts Reſurrection opened vnto them: for hee was verie faithleſſe, and too ſtiffe in his owne opinion. Which vnbeliefe God ſuffered to happen vnto him, and to continue ſomewhat the longer, that his ſlacknes and lacke of faith might ſerue to our commoditie: that through his vnbeliefe, wee might bee prouoked vnto faith, for as much as we heare, that he ſo perfectly proouing, ſeeing and feeling the thing, came ſo to an vndoubted faith: that wee alſo might beleeue, that the bodie of Chriſt which was hanged vpon the croſſe for our ſinnes, was of the Father rayſed againe vnto life. For if wee beleeue in our heart,Acts. 2. Rom. 10. and confeſſe with our mouth, that God hath rayſed him vp from the dead, we ſhal be ſaued. Yea beleeue we muſt,Iohn 2. that Chriſt (according to his wordes afore) hath through his godly power, erected vp againe from death, the temple of his bodie. Therefore thorow the doubting of Thomas, wee learne the myſterie of the reſurrection of our own bodies. For Chriſt hath ſufficiently proued, and Thomas hath confeſſed that the bodie of Chriſt which was hanged vpon the croſſe, is verely riſen againe from death. Wherin, our faith is confirmed, to beleeue, that our bodies alſo ſhall truely and liuely riſe againe to eternall life.
                  
                     When Thomas is with the other diſciples, Chriſt ſheweth himſelfe vnto him. For they that in the vnitie of faith and of vndiuided loue, doe not aſſociate and accompanie themſelues with other faithfull beleeuers in the Church, ſhall not be partakers of heauenly ioyes. Truth it is, that to beleeue with the hart iuſtifieth: but the confeſſion that is made with the mouth, belongeth vnto health, & ſerueth vnto loue and vnitie of the Church and congregation of God, without the which there can bee no hope of health. He that ſaith he beleeueth, and doth not ioyne himſelfe vnto other Chriſtians, his faith is vaine and of none effect. And therefore did Chriſt for his church inſtitute the ſacraments, that is to ſay, exterior ſignes of his grace, that his people might be aſſociate together in the vnitie of faith. The Church of God is it, that preſerueth vs poore ones (as did the Arke of Noe afore time) in the floud, and bringeth vs thorough this raging ſea vnto the hauen of eternall ſaluation. Not that the grace and health is therefore to bee aſcribed to the elements and outwarde thinges: but that it may appeare how effectuous fayth is, and what it woorketh through charitable loue in the Church. Chriſt maketh mention of the wordes which Thomas had ſpoken afore to the Diſciples in his abſence: Namely; Except I ſee in his handes the print, &c. Therefore ſayth Chriſt: Thomas, bring thy finger hither, and ſee &c. Whereby it is euidently prooued, that Chriſt is God, and euen ſo doth Thomas vnderſtand and confeſſe.
                  
                     The woundes are ſhewed of Chriſt, ſpecially to this intent, that his paſſion might be printed and ſealed in mens mindes. For a verie deepe and high myſterie is it, that Chriſtes ſide is opened, out of the which floweth bloud and water: whereby the ſpirituall and faithfull beleeuing mindes may well perceiue Chriſtes good louing will towardes mankind. Now when we looke vpon his handes, touching his ſide inwardly with our deſire of inward fayth, and conſidering why and with what loue Chriſt ſuffered for vs, it ſhall be no hard thing vnto vs to beleeue his reſurrection. If Chriſt were deade but euen as an other pure man or Prophet, we could haue no hope of the reſurrection. Who ſo beleeueth it, commeth ſoone to this knowledge, that immortall life is giuen vnto vs. Now where there is hope of an immortall life, there is the Lorde ſerued with great diligence. For if God hath not ſpared his ſonne,Rom. 8. but giuen him for vs all, what good thing then may wee not looke for at his hand? If wee bee onely true beleeuers with Thomas, then ſhall God faithfully performe that hee hath promiſed vs. Chriſt deſireth no more of vs weake feeble ones, than that we be not faithleſſe, but ſtedfaſt beleeuers.
                  Thomas is immediately obedient vnto the voice of Chriſt, and becommeth foorth with a newe man. The Phariſies could by no doctrine, by no myracles, bee brought to giue credence vnto Chriſt, and to beleeue in him, although they ſawe Lazarus rayſed againe from death: malice and hatred

did ſo hinder them. But Thomas acknowledgeth him freely to be his Lord and God. He ſeeth and handleth man, he confeſſeth God, whom he ſaw not. Hee acknowledged, that he whom he ſaw was his God & Lord. Through the ſame faith was his vnbeleefe and ſinne forgiuen him.
                  O mercifull God, graunt vs loue, that we ſeek not our owne commoditie nor honour, but the profit of our neighbours, and thy glorie in all thinges. Expell out of vs all diſdaine, greedines, vngentlenes, headines, and flattering of our ſelues. Preſerue vs from diſcord & diuiſion, binde vs together in vniforme loue, that wee may bee one bodie, and of one minde. Stabliſh alſo our faith, that our minds may alwayes bee comforted in the reſurrection of thy ſonne, and immortall life purchaſed by him, Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               ANd many other ſignes trulie did Ieſus in the preſence of his Diſciples, which are not written in this booke. Theſe are written, that ye might beleeue, that Ieſus is Chriſt the ſonne of God, & that ye ſo beleeuing, might haue life through his name.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  LIke as Chriſt, while hee yet liued, did miracles before his death, to declare his godly power: euen ſo after his riſing again from death, he worketh manie tokens in the preſence of his Diſciples, to proue his reſurrection in the fleſh. Some of the ſame are deſcribed of the Euangeliſts, not of anie curioſitie,

or for vaine glorie, but to confirme our ſayth therewith. To write all, Iohn thought it not needful: for who could haue written all? Or who could haue faſtened and borne them all in minde? Who ſo will not beleeue theſe few that are written, ſhall neuer beleeue a greater multitude. A faithfull beleeuer is well ſatisfied with theſe. For theſe that be written of him, are therefore written, that wee ſhould beleeue, that Ieſus is Chriſt the Sonne of GOD, and that we through his fayth might haue eternall life. Seeing then that all thinges which are written, doo extende and ſerue to this ende, that wee might beleeue in him, and bee ſaued by him, what lacke wee then? Or what can we deſire more? So that hereby we learne, with great diligence to reade, to conſider, and to applie into our owne lyfe, whatſoeuer the Euangeliſtes haue written of Chriſt: as they haue written nothing but that which is altogether excellent, deare holie and godlie, and ſuch thinges as doe liuely deſcribe, ſette foorth, and print Chriſt vnto vs: that our fayth, hope, loue, patience, meekneſſe, and all good thinges might growe with bleſſed fruite: that wee in our life might become thankfull for ſuch an excellent grace, and in no wiſe to contemne or deſpiſe it.
                  A ſcornefull thing is it, and the euidence of a greate vnbeleefe, whereas ſome thinke by theſe wordes to prooue, that for as much as all thinges are not written in the booke, it is lawfull for certayne men to adde the reſt, and to deuiſe and ordayne what they will. For in theſe thinges that are written,

doth Iohn comprehend the whole ſum of fayth: which conſiſteth in this, that Ieſus is the ſon of the liuing God, who for our ſaluation came downe from heauen, died, roſe againe, & purchaſed for vs eternal life▪ Ieſus the ſon of Mary, is the annointed king and high Prieſt, the ſauior of the world promiſed of God, & ſpoken of afore by the Prophets. And euen hee it is, who being of the heauenly father annointed king euerlaſting, was to come after Dauid, & to raigne for euer. This king is the redeemer and ſauiour of mankind, & the very true ſonne of God. If we beleeue in Chriſt, we beleeue in the true God▪ one onely God we honor, one onely God we worſhip. Seeing now that we honor & worſhip Chriſt, we worſhip God, for only God is to be worſhipped. Foraſmuch now as we worſhip the ſonne no leſſe than the father, it is certaine, that Chriſt is of one nature with the father: yea this ought we to beleeue, & that he came downe into this world to die for vs, to waſh and wipe away our ſins, & to kill ſin in our mortal fleſh, when he maketh vs partakers of his paſſion, & mightily worketh in vs by his ſpirite, in mortifieng our carnall deſires. We muſt alſo beleeue, that he by his godly power aroſe againe from death, to a new, glorious & immortall life. For if we thought that hee died, & beleeued not that he were riſen againe to life, wee ſhould haue no life in him. For vs he died, for our ſakes hee roſe againe, for our welfare reigneth he for euer. A newe godly & bleſſed life worketh hee in vs with his reſurrection, and after this life haue we in him life euerlaſting.
               
            
            
               
               AFterward did Ieſus ſhew himſelfe againe at the ſea of Tiberias. And on this wiſe ſhewed he himſelfe. There were together Simon Peter, and Thomas (which is called Did
                     ••
                  us) and Nathanael of Cana in Galilee, & the ſons of Zebedee, and two other of his diſciples. Simon Peter ſaith vnto them: I will go a fiſhing▪ They ſay vnto him: We alſo will go with thee. They went their way, and entred into a ſhippe immediately, and that night caught they nothing. But when the morning was now come, Ieſus stoode on the ſh
                     ••
                  e: but the Diſciples knewe not that it was Ieſus. Ieſus ſaith vnto them: Children, haue ye any meat? They anſwered him no. And he ſaith vnto them; Cast out the net on the right ſide of the ſhip, and ye ſhal find. They cast out therfore, and anone they were not able to draw it for the multitude of fiſhes. Then ſaid the Diſciple (whom Ieſus loued) to Peter: It is the Lord. When Simon Peter heard that it was the Lord, he girt his coate vnto him (for he was naked) and ſprang into the ſea. The other Diſciples came by ſhippe, for they were not farre from lande, but as it were two hundred cubites, and they drew the nette with fiſhes. As ſoone then as they were come to land, they ſawe hote coales, and fiſh layde thereon, and bread. Ieſus ſaith vnto them: Bring of the fiſh that yee now haue caught. Simon Peter went vp, and drew the net to the land full of great fiſhes, an hundred and three and fiftie. And for all there were ſo many, yet was not the net broken. Ieſus ſaith vnto them: Come and dine. And none of the diſciples durst aske him: What art thou? For they knew that it was the Lord Ieſus then came, & tooke breade, and gaue them, and fiſh likewiſe. This is now the third time that Ieſus appeared to his Diſciples after that he was riſen againe from death.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  WE read in the holy Euangeliſts, that at the firſt Chriſt called his diſciples, namelie, Peter and the others from fiſhing, which they alſo left, and came to Chriſt, who told them that he would make them fiſhers of men. Now when hee wil ſend them out to that office, & depart from them he appeareth againe vnto them at their fiſhing. And (like as he did afore at their vocatiō) he doth before them a great miracle: in the which hee admoniſheth them of their office, and chargeth them diligently to care for his ſheepe committed vnto them. But firſt he proueth his reſurrection, to ſtabliſh and confirme their weake faith therby, commaunding them afterward, to bring other folks alſo thereto.
                  This hiſtorie in it ſelfe is euident enough, therefore ought wee firſt to conſider it after the letter, for the letter alſo teacheth for it ſelf. Chriſt like as he appeared vnto thoſe that were ſorrowful & mourned: ſo doth he heere appeare vnto thoſe that labour and trauaile. Chriſt gaue his diſciples authoritie out of the Goſpell,Math 10. 1. Cor 9. that they preach to take a competent honeſt liuing, as foode and neceſſaries of the bodie
                        •
                      and yet did not hee reſtrayne them, that they ſhould not or might not labour, when occaſion ſerueth. Therefore Paule alſo vſed not that liberty at certaine times, but labored with his owne hands and wan his meate. So did the Diſciples of Chriſt exerciſe themſelues in their labour. For when they were come

into Galelee, from the feaſt of Eaſter which they had kept at Hieruſalem, afore the holy ghoſt was giuen them, they would not goe idle, and thereby become a burthen vnto other men: (for he that goeth idle, lieth vpon other folkes, eating that theirs is, and ouerchargeth them) but vndertake to get their owne lyuing with their handy worke, which they had vſed afore. Whereby wee muſt learne to apply our ſelues vnto labour, and not to bee idle: for idlenes is the mother of many and great vices. Euery man ought to haue an honeſt traiuaile, to bee exerciſed either with the body or with the minde. Who ſo laboureth not, muſt not eat. Man was created to labour,2. Theſ. 
                           •
                        . Iob. 5. as the bird to flie. Therfore ought euery father to bring vp his children in honeſt exerciſe from their youth vp, that the deuill get no place in their hearts, which yet commeth to paſſe, if he finde them idle. The firſt commaundement giuen to our forefather Adam after the fall was this: In the ſweat of thy face ſhalt thou eat thy bread.
                  Now when we in true faith and confidence vnto God, doe take in hand the worke that he hath committed vnto our charge, we ought not to doubt, God ſhal proſper it, and giue vs his rich and gracious bleſſing in it, as it is written, Prouer. 3. In althy waies remember the Lord, and hee ſhall direct and order thy doings. Eccleſ. 5.9.
                  Heere is alſo to bee conſidered, how Chriſt vttereth his godly power before his diſciples, in the great miracle that hee did in their ſight, to confirme our faith in him. For out of the appearing of Chriſt groweth

faith, Pſal. 85. And his true reſurrection will hee print in them, in that he appeareth vnto them, & eateth with them.
                  Heere wee ſee the ardent deſire of Peter, which leapeth into the ſea, as ſoone as he heareth that it is the Lord: he that afore had denied him, maketh now ſpeedie haſt againe vnto him. Though wee of mans feebleneſſe and feare, doo fall into ſinne, yet alwaies whē we heare God in his word, we ought forth with to turne againe vnto him: and ſo ſhall hee with the loſt ſonne, graciouſly receiue and embrace is agayne.Luke. 15.
                  
                  In that Peter couereth himſelfe being naked, we learne nurture and ſhamefaſtneſſe, to walke & dwell with all honeſtie in the ſight of men, ſpecially in the preſence of our ſuperiours and gouernors.
                  In the corporall workes and deedes of Chriſt, there is nothing in vaine, nothing without effect. Beſides the outward appearance of the worke, there is deſcribed ſomewhat more excellent, where unto a faithful beleeuer ought to direct the eies of his mind as when he maketh the blind to ſee, it is an outwarde act, and a declaration of his godly power, & an alteration there is outwardly in the eyes of the blinde, in that his fight is reſtored vnto him againe: neuertheleſſe ouer and beſides the outward worke, there is giuen vs to vnderſtand, that Chriſt is the true lyght of the whole world, which driueth awaie the blindnes of our hart, and illuminateth the eyes of our mind, according to the Scriptures, Iſay. 42.49. Iohn. 1.9.12. &c.
                  
                     Chriſt taking bread and wine, giueth the ſame to his diſciples to eate and drinke. This (as no man can denie) was an outward act, and they commaunded outwardly to doo it, albeit in the remembraunce of him. Beſides and aboue the outward eating & drinking, the faithfull beleeuer muſt lift vp his heart, and looke with the eyes of faith vnto that which is ſpiritual, namely, how that Chriſt is the true liuing bread which feedeth our ſoules to eternall life, how his bodie was broken for vs vpon the croſſe, how we thorough his death are made liuing, and waſhed awaie from our ſinnes by his bloud. In this is ſet forth vnto vs the higheſt loue of all, namely, that Chriſt gaue himſelfe vnto the death for vs, whereby wee are admoniſhed of his grace, yea, not onely in this deſcribed vnto vs, but alſo the holy Ghoſt doeth mightily land fruitfully worke the ſame in the heartes of the true beleeuers, which in faith at the ſupper receyue the true body and bloud of Chriſt: whereby theyr heartes are kindled in loue towardes God and their neighbor, ſo that they dwel in Chriſt, & he in them. &c.
                  So heere likewiſe the outward fiſhing, repreſenteth a fiſhing ſpirituall. Like as in fiſhing it lyeth not in the fiſhers power or wit to take many or few, but 
                        〈◊〉
                      the power and bleſſing of God. And as the labor of the diſciples is in vaine afore Chriſt commandeth them, but when they haue his commandement, and caſt out the net vpon the ſame, they drawe vp a multi
                        ••
                     on of fiſhes: euen ſo commeth it to paſſe at this preſent day that we bring forth no fruit ſo lōg as the

holie ghoſt worketh not with vs inwardly. But when Chriſt biddeth caſt out the net: that is, when hee giueth his ſpirite, wee are able to draw vp many men, and to winne them vnto Chriſt. For all the night long had they taken nothing, till Chriſt came vnto them: Euen ſo can we doe nothing if Chriſt bee not with vs by his ſpirite.Acts. 2. On Whit-ſonday when the ſpirite came vpon his Diſciples, they brought foorth much fruit, and drue many men vnto Chriſt.
                  Heereby declareth Chriſt vnto them in this taking of fiſh, how it ſhould go in their office, and how the time was now at hand, that they ſhould ſhortlie drawe many men out of the ſea of this worlde vnto him, and that they ſhould proſper and haue good ſucceſſe therein. The world is this wilde raging ſea: the ſhore is the quietnes of eternall life that we haue in Chriſt, vnto whome we make haſt with Peter and the other Diſciples: neither doe wee bring men vnto our ſelues, but vnto Chriſt, and to the hauen of euerlaſting life. Faith is not idle, but is alwaies occupied in the Lords buſineſſe, cauſing vs to contemne all perrils, and to ſpeede vs a pace vnto Chriſt with the cloathing of vertues, eſpecially with fayth, the wedding garment: that wee appearing not naked, may make haſt vnto the land of the liuyng, where Chriſt is, the conquerour of death: For the faythfull beleeuers are not far from the land, when their conuerſation is in heauen. Without Chriſt wee muſt begynne nothing,Heb. 11. without fayth may no man pleaſe God. In the nyght of ſinne, our labour is vayne and vnprofitable:Rom. 4. yea whatſoeuer is not of fayth is ſinne.

Vpon the right hand muſt the net be caſt out: That is, in the office of preaching, muſt reſpect bee had to the onely glorie of God, and edefiyng of the church and not to our owne profit or preferment.1. Cor. 14
                  
                  Chriſt hungreth after our health, this is the meat which he deſireth: that we doe the will of his heauenly father: that wee put our truſt in him,Iohn 4. and loue one another: that wee lead a iuſt and innocent life:Iohn. 
                           •
                        . that wee keepe our ſelues from the filthineſſe of the world, & bring much people vnto God. Such meat is brought vnto Chriſt by the Apoſtles, when they through their teaching doe catche men, and bring them vnto God. Therefore doth he aske them whether they haue any thing to eat. They ſaid: nay, for afore the receiuing of the ſpirite, they could doe nothing, but when he came, they brought many profitable things to paſſe. The harueſt was ſo great, that they muſt needs haue many workmen.
                  So when God helpeth the faithfull miniſters of the worde, that they in the miniſterie of preaching haue proſperous ſucceſſe, ſo that they draw vp many men through the nette of the Goſpell, and finde much fruite: Then the Diſciples whome Chriſt loueth, and which loue him againe, doe know that it is the Lorde, and that the ſame commeth not of their owne virtue, but of the power of God. And heereof then groweth there in them a great deſire to come vnto Chriſt, and to be with him. The office therfore of Apoſtles & of all miniſters of the word is this, that when they do what Chriſt commandeth them, they turne them to Chriſt againe, and aſcribe the honour

vnto him▪ And if ought would let or hinder them to come vnto Chriſt, they ought to refuſe all the ſame, and to haſt vnto him with the loſſe of their life. Iohn knoweth Chriſt afore Peter, but Peter commeth to the Lord before him, whereby we may note the diuerſitie of miniſtrations and giftes in the Church. Though Peter bee more feruent, yet is hee not aſhamed to learne of Iohn.
                  The fiſhers come with the fiſh vnto Chriſt, the ſhepheards with the ſheepe to one manner of ſaluation, for they are not carefull onely for themſelues how they may be ſaued: but alſo for thoſe whome they haue caught, to bring the ſame with them vnto the ſhore of eternall reſt. It is our ſaluation, when we become Chriſts meat, yea when Chriſt is our foode and ſuſtenance. For they that in the ſea of this world doe faithfully labour to drawe the fiſhe vnto the Hauen, ſhall obtaine great fruit, and enioy an eternall banquet at Chriſts table in his kingdome. For Chriſt prepared them a dinner, wherein hee ſet foorth vnto the miniſters of the worde, what they ought to doe, namely, to feed the people committed vnto them. A great honor is it, to bring much people vnto Chriſt. Great commendacion, and vnſpeakable ioye ſhall thoſe teachers haue, that faithfully trauel in the ſcriptures and word of God.
                  By the multitude and great number of the fiſhes that the Apoſtles drew in the net, is figured the multitude of the Heathen, who through the preaching in the whole world, ſhould be brought into the vnitie of the faith. And although many Sciſmes and erronious

diuiſions ariſe, yet of thoſe that are ordained vnto life, there ſhall no man fall out of the net. God knoweth thoſe that be his, and they ſhall alway hearken vnto th
                        •
                      voyce of their ſhepheard. Thus ſhall there euer bee one onely Church, which cannot by vs be throughly purged: Euermore wil Ipocrites do all their diligence to continue therein, though the makers of diuiſion ſhall not be without great trauail and labour. As for ſuch vices as bee manifeſt, great, and offenſiue, they that bee in authority, are bound to ſuppreſſe them, according vnto the ordinaunce of Chriſt. Mat. 5.13.18.
                  Firſt, they that be faithful beleeuers and ordained vnto life, doe cleaue vnto Chriſt their head, and then to the members, that is to ſay, all faithfull Chriſtians. For they that are faithfull beleeuers, bee knit togeather in perpetuall vnitie. And although ſome at this preſent day bee in contention, yet ſo farre as they are of the number of the elect, they will agree together againe one with another, afore they depart hence: that they may die in the vnitie of Gods congregation and Churche, without the which, there is no health.
                  After the great labour that the miniſters of the woorde haue in the raging ſea, Chriſt rewardeth his with a very coſtly and glorious feaſt in his kingdom: there will he be the bread of life, that feedeth and ſatisfieth them for euer.
                  O mercifull GOD, graunt vnto vs all that wee may faithfully cleaue vnto thee, and follow thy commaundement. Tame thou our bodie and members

in honeſt labour, that we loyter not in vices. O draw our hearts alwaie vpward: that all temporall things ſet apart, we may haſt onely vnto thee. O gracious father, giue vs ſuch faithfull fiſhers, as beeing true and carefull in their office, may with the net of thy holie worde, drawe vs out of the raging ſea: that wee with them, and they with vs, may enioye the euerlaſting banquet. Amen.
                  
               
            
            
               SO when they had dined, Ieſus ſaith to Simon Peter: Simon Ioanna loueſt thou me more than theſe? Hee ſaide vnto him: Yea Lorde, thou knoweſt that I loue thee. Hee ſaith vnto him. feed my lambes. Hee ſaith vnto him againe the ſecond time: Simon Ioanna, loueſt thou me? He ſayth vnto him: Yea Lord, thou knoweſt that I loue thee. He ſaith vnto him: feed my ſheepe. Hee ſaid vnto him the third time: Simon Ioanna, loueſt thou me? Peter was ſory, becauſe hee ſaid vnto him the third time, loueſt thou me? And hee ſaid vnto him: Lord, thou knoweſt all things, thou knoweſt that I loue thee. Ieſus ſaith vnto him: feed my ſheepe.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  FOR as much as Peter had taken a ſpeciall greeuous fall, Chriſt lifteth him vp with a ſpeciall comforte: but ſo, that hee ſetteth forth vnto all Shepheards of his ſheepe, what theyr office is Peter had many ſinnes forgiuen him,Luk. 7. therefore was it meete that hee ſhould loue the Lord the more. And ſeeing hee had thriſe denied, hee maketh nowe a three-fold confeſſion: ſo that now the ſong doth no

leſſe ſeruice vnto loue, than it ſerued feare afore. Chriſt ſheweth him that hee is receiued againe vnto grace, ſo that hee may ſafely put his truſt in him, ſeeing he committeth vnto him his owne ſheepe. As if Chriſt would ſay: As for thy deniall, I will no more remember it. And for an euidence hereof, I put thee in truſt to keepe my ſheepe: In no wiſe doe I refuſe thee, but a ſhepheard of my ſheepe will I make thee. Neither doth he caſt him in the teeth with his deniall, but ſaith: If thou loue mee, then take vppon thee the care of the brethren. The loue that thou haſt willed to declare vnto mee in all thinges, and wherein I delight, the ſame declare thou now vnto my ſheepe, whom I ſo dearely haue bought. Thy life that thou wouldeſt haue offered for mee, giue nowe for my ſheepe. Now to the intent Peter ſhould not ſay that hee were expelled from the Apoſt
                        •
                     eſhip through his deniall, the Lorde therefore giueth him a new commiſſion to keepe his ſheepe. As for Peter, hee was no more ſo raſh and fooliſh hardie, but anſwereth more aduiſedly than afore, and taketh the Lord to witnes: for hee remembreth how it had happened vnto him alreadie, therefore ſtandeth hee not arrogantly in his owne conceite, neyther ſpeaketh hee agaynſt the Lorde, ſo wittie and circumſpect is hee become thorough the fall.
                  Arrogant had hee beene and high minded, and therefore through the denyall he fell very ſore. But his weeping through faith and ſure confidence purifieth him againe, and in loue he becommeth more feruent, pondering, that much is forgiuen him: ſo

that where ſinne was great, grace is more abundant and plentifull. Rom. 5.
                  
                  In Peter is the office of the other Apoſtles, and of all preachers of the worde deſcribed: for heere may wee ſee, who are meet to be called to guide the people, and what care and diligence they ought to take for them.
                  But here principally we muſt note this, that Chriſt minding to ſtabliſh his ſpeciall excellent doctrine, did euer firſt worke a notable token and miracle. As when he fed the fiue thouſand men with few loaues, he taught immediatly vpon the ſame,Iohn. 6. how wee muſt bee ſuſtained with the bread of heauen. Euen ſo here when the Diſciples had taken a great heape of fiſhes at Chriſtes commaundement, and were afterward fedde of him, hee tolde them immediately vpon the ſame, what their office is, and that they ſhould looke, euen ſo to nouriſh and feede thoſe that are committed vnto them. This was ſpoken vnto Peter, and in him to all others.
                  Chriſt who ſearcheth and knoweth all harts, doth not aske this queſtion as one ignorant, or as one that firſt would proue & learne, but to teach faith, and to declare it vnto others. Such a queſtion demaundeth he. Math. 16. Whō ſay the people that the ſon of man is? ſhewing therby what confeſſion & faith he requireth of thoſe that are his. Euen ſo here: the ſchoolemaiſter of the whole world, minding to put them in truſt, wil declare vnto them with this queſtion, how they ought to be, and the ſame wil hee print ſure into them with this threefold interrogation. Here alſo

will the Lord teach, how neceſſary it is, that he who is to be made a ſhepheard & teacher of chriſtian people, be firſt well knowne, proued and tried, & that in many things afore-hand he bee found faithfull. It is not requiſite to take children vnto ſuch an office, but ſuch godly and apt men, as haue beene tried & tempted: namely, ſuch men as haue proued, ſuffered and felt ſomwhat by experience, wherby they haue learned humilitie and nurture.
                  The firſt thing that Chriſt in his examination requireth of thoſe, which muſt guide the people, is a great, feruent, and notable loue to GOD. Without this loue ſhall ſoule ſhepheardes doo no good. This loue to GOD, ſhall bring with it loue towardes the ſheepe committed vnto them. For as much then as at this day the loue of Chriſt is ſo greatly quenched, therefore are manie Curates and ſoule ſhepheardes ſo faint and colde to preach and teach Chriſt. They burne not in the loue of God againſt vice, they print not vertue and godlineſſe feruently into the people, for there is no loue of Gods name in them. Seeing then that they haue no heauenly zeale vnto the glorie of GOD, and to the amplyfiyng of his name, it is no maruaile that their preaching is ſo cold and vnfruitfull.
                  Therfore ſaith our Sauiour Chriſt vnto Peter: Agapas me? Loueſt thou mee? For Agapao among the Greeks ſignifieth, feruently, earneſtly, & right hartily to loue: yea to loue with a great good will. And this word he vſeth in the two firſt queſtions. In the third queſtion he ſaith: Phileis me? Loueſt thou me? Phileo
                     
ſignifieth ſo to loue, that one be louing to another, & ſhew him friendſhip: therefore doth Peter take the Lorde himſelfe to witneſſe. As for the high excellent loue, hee dare not bragge of it, but ſaith: Philoſe: which is as much to ſay, as, I haue hitherto doone all that becommeth a friend to do. If any derogation or hinderance bee done to thy honour and name, I am hartily ſorie for it: as a friend is iuſtly greeued, if his friend be vilely intreated.
                  Thus the Lorde with the three queſtions layeth hard vnto Peter: for a notable loue is it that hee requireth of thoſe, to whom he committeth his ſheepe in his abſence. Peter had a good conſcience, & knew no falſhood or deceite by himſelfe, but bare a notable and feruent loue vnto Chriſt: yet by reaſon of his former fall, and this oft queſtioning, he was partly out of quiet, fearing leaſt peraduenture there laye yet hid in him ſome ſecret thing, that diſpleaſed the Lord, or were againſt him, or that happily he ſhould not ſtand in ſuch fauour with Chriſt. Therefore ſaid he: Lord, thou knoweſt all things, thou knoweſt the harts of all men, and woteſt, that I beare thee a good heart, and friendly mind: which wordes proceed of a meeke feruent hart. Chriſt knoweth better how we loue him, than we our ſelues. Thus a ſhepheard oght to haue an ardent loue vnto Chriſt, and yet not to ſtand high in his owne conceit, or to bragge of himſelfe, although he loue, and bee garniſhed with vertues more than other men.
                  Wherein may it bee perceiued, that a ſoule ſhepheard loueth Chriſt, and is his friend? Verely in louing

his ſheepe which Chriſt hath cōmitted to him. Therefore ſaith Chriſt alway vpon the ſame: Feede my ſheep. But Chriſt vſeth here two diſtinct words. Firſt he ſaith: Voſce, that is, feed them, paſture them, fodder them. Secondly, he ſaith: Poimene, that is, bee thou vnto them a heardman, take thou care for them as it beſeemeth a ſhepheard: be thou a ſhepheard vnto my ſheepe, keepe them from the wolfe, & from al ſuch hurt. Firſt, he requireth of him a feruent loue, then committeth hee his ſheepe vnto him, a treaſur
                        •
                      great & deare, redeemed & bought with the pretious bloud of Chriſt. As if he would ſay: If thou loue me declare the ſame in care and loue toward my ſheep, whom I commit to thy charge.
                  The ſheepe are Chriſtes, not the ſhepheards. As forſuch ſhepheards as keepe them ſo, that they make them hang vpon themſelues, thoſe loue themſelues, not Chriſt. They that ſeeke their owne glorie, profit, and lucre among them, are not faithfull ſhepheards. Againſt ſuch doth crie the threefold voice of Chriſt: Feed & keepe my ſheepe: mine (ſaith he) not thine. Feed them, oppreſſe them not, flay them not: Feede them not thy ſelfe: Seeke my glorie, not thine own.Phil. 3. For ſome there bee, which (as Paule with weeping teares complaineth) that ſeeke themſelues, not the glorie of Ieſus Chriſt. Of theſe ſpake Paule alſo afore. 2. Timoth. 3. Men ſhall be louers of themſelues, couetous, &c. Where the wicked roote of ſelfe loue is in a Curate, there followe all the vices which hee in the ſame place maketh mention of. Who ſo nowe will bee a louer of Chriſt, and a faythfull ſhepheard

                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
ſciences, that they may be fruitfull and comfortable to the whole Chriſtian congregation. If this might come to paſſe, then ſhould there be no lacke of wiſe counſellors and actiue men, profitable to be in common authoritie: and alſo amongſt chriſtian people, there ſhuld be found men meet to be made ouer-ſeeers in the miniſtery of Gods word, with which men the people ſhould be wel & worthily prouided for.
                  Good vertuous teachers bring foorth a vertuous and godlie people. And doubtleſſe, the meaning of thoſe that gaue ſuch goodes to monaſteries & churches, was at the firſt, that they thoght therby to ſerue God, and to doe good vnto the poore. If ſuch goods then as heeretofore haue beene euill beſtowed, bee now profitably and bleſſedly turned to the honour of God, and commoditie of the whole Church, then is the laſt will and meaning of the founders fulfilled. They alſo that muſt pay ſuch rentes, tithes, & goods, will be the readier ſo to doe, if they ſee, that the ſame is well and profitably beſtowed. Then ſhall not they vntruly, but faithfully performe and pay all thinges, when they conſider that they doe ſeruice vnto God himſelfe.
                  Graunt vs all (O God) to harken and be obedient vnto the voice of true ſhepheards: and giue vs hearts to haue in great honour, and worthily to eſteeme of ſuch faithfull ſhepheards as vppon earth are thy Miniſters and ſtewards, by whome and in whome thou ſpeakeſt to vs, and with vs: that wee ſhewing vnto them all reuerence and honour which they be worthie of for thy ſake, may giue them honeſt liuinges;

and conſider, howe that Chriſt thy ſonne our Lorde teacheth the ſame, Math. 10. and Paule thy ſeruaunt. 1. Cor. 9. Reaſon it is, ſeeing they ſow ſpiritual things vnto vs, that they of vs reape thinges corporall. O Lord, remooue away the contempt of thy woorde and miniſters, for the ſame neuer eſcaped without great puniſhment and harme.
               
            
            
               IESVS ſaid vnto Peter: verely verilie I ſay vnto thee: When thou wast young, thou girdest thy ſelfe, and wenteſt whither thou wouldeſt: but when thou art olde, thou ſhalt ſtretch out thine hand, and another ſhal gird thee, and lead thee thither as thou wouldeſt not. This hee ſaid, ſignifyng with what death he ſhould glorifie God. And when he had ſpoken this, he ſaid: follow me.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  IT is not ſufficient to haue begunne, except the ſoul ſhepheard continue in his office and faithfulneſſe.
                  For to take the cure and charge of the ſheepe, bringeth great danger, loſſe, trauaile, and labour with it. Many a time muſt a faithfull ſhepheard ieoperd his life for his ſheepe. Such perrill doth Chriſt promiſe vnto Peter, namely, that hee muſt die, and with what death. Afore-time when hee was young, he ſought that which pertained to the fleſh, he might not away with the croſſe: but nowe after the receiuing of the holy ghoſt, he is ſtout, and dieth for Chriſts ſake, and for his ſheepe. Beholde, ſuch an end had Peter, that of loue he dieth for him, with whome to die he raſhlie

promiſed afore. But neceſſarie it was, that Chriſt ſhould firſt die for Peters health, and that Peter afterward ſhould ſuffer death for his names ſake.
                  The preſumption and headines of man would haue ſet the cart before the horſe, but the euerlaſting truth hath appointed this order. Peter thought he would haue ieoperded his life for Chriſt, & haue redeemed the redeemer: but Chriſt came to giue his life for his ſheepe, of whom Peter was one. Now after that Chriſt died for thoſe that bee his, there is ſtrength giuen in the hearts of ſuch ſhepheards and ſheepe as be faithful, to ſuffer death for Chriſts ſake. Death is not now ſo to be feared of vs, that we wold therefore goe backe from the truth: for by death do not wee loſe life, yea Chriſt hath made death to bee the way vnto life: And by his Reſurrection he hath ſet forth vnto vs an example of another life, which is immortall. Peter was firſt afraide and feared death, and would haue diſſuaded Chriſt that he ſhould not die:Math. 16. but now that the precious treaſure of Chriſtes bloud is ſhed, hee followeth his redeemer, yea euen vnto the death of the croſſe goeth hee after him, therefore is hee nowe no more a ſatan, but a Peter.Petrus of the rocke.
                  
                  But from whence commeth ſuch ſtrength into a feeble man? Euen from God who dwelleth in the hearts of the faithfull, for elſe is the nature and fleſh of man impotent and weake, beeing afraid of death: which feare (naturall heate being abated) is the greater in them that are olde. And though we all wiſh to to be with Chriſt, and be deſirous of eternall life, yet

would we faine haue it without any griefe of death, if it might be. Thus came the conflict of death euen vpon Chriſt, whereby hee declared himſelfe verie man, but the wil of God had the maſtry aboue mans in the wraſtling: Peter alſo went not with his wil to death, but with his will he both ſuffered it, and ouercame it. Chriſt likewiſe, to comfort vs, was heauie: who neuertheles came vpon earth, that he wold die: neither was it neceſſitie that moued him to die,Iohn. 10 but his owne good will and loue: for hee had power to giue his ſoule, and take it agayne.
                  Now though the feare of death be great in nature yet is it ouercome through the ſtrength and greatneſſe of the loue,2. Cor. 5. which wee beare vnto him who is our life, euen Ieſus Chriſt. And albeit he was the life it ſelfe, yet pleaſed it him to ſuffer death for vs. Seeing then that hee alone dyed for vs, wee ought not to be aſhamed, neither ſhould it grieue vs to die alſo for him, ſpecially conſidering that the publiſhing of ſo excellent grace is committed vnto vs. When the ſhepheard dyeth for the ſheepe, it is no great matter if the ſheepe die for the ſhepheards ſake. Foraſmuch now as the faithfull ſhepheard with his loue, directeth and encourageth many of the ſheepe, to die for his names ſake: how much more meete is it, that the ſhepheards bee the firſt which ieoparde theyr liues, ſtriuing for the truth, and euen vnto bloud to reſiſte ſinne, when Chriſt hath put them in truſt to feed his ſheepe? This is now the occaſion why our Sauiour Chriſt telleth Peter of his death afore hande, and ſtrengtheneth and incourageth him therevnto: for

though the will bee conſtaunt in the ſaints, yet is the fleſh feeble and weake.Rom. 7. Math. 26. No man dieth without paine and griefe: which thing is appointed vnto vs by the wiſedome of God, to the intent no man ſhould kill himſelfe: For ſeeing the deuill doth now and then perſwade ſom to murther themſelues, how ſhould it go, if the ſoule were not ſo loth to depart frō the body? With theſe words therefore thought nor Chriſt to make Peter afraid, or to diſcourage him, but to furniſh him, and make him ripe. For Peter had a good deſire to ſuffer ſomewhat for Chriſts ſake: neuertheleſſe, beeing yet young, hee could not follow: but when he was olde, he followed him: therefore will Chriſt perfourme his deſire. As if Chriſt would ſay: Peter, thou haſt hitheto bin weake & fearful, but I wil ſtrengthen thee: ſo that hence forth thou ſhalt deny mee no more, but manfully die for mee. Thou haſt bene tender, in that thou waſt afraid at one womans voyce: but now ſhalt thou ſtretch forth thy hand to the croſſe to be bound. For by the ſtretching out of the handes, hee vnderſtandeth and ſignifieth with what death hee ſhould die, namely, vpon the croſſe. Which death afore time was moſt ſhamefull: but after that Chriſt was hanged vpon the croſſe, it is now an honorable and glorious death, with the which the faithfull doe glorifie God: and therefore ſaith the Euangeliſt, that the Lord would thereby ſignifie, with what death Peter ſhould glorifie God.
                  For in Gods quarrell, and for Chriſts ſake to die, is the higheſt honour, whereof no man ought to be aſhamed. This ought all ſoule ſhepheards to ponder

and conſider, that they faithfully and conſtantly following Chriſt the Lord,2. Tim. 4. go not from that they haue taken in hand, but proceed and bring their courſe to an honourable ende, keeping fidelitie and truſt with their Lord, and being fully appointed in themſelues, to die for the ſheepe of Chriſt. Therfore ſhould they conſider afore hand, what things they muſt ſuffer for the truth: leaſt they deſtroy that, which they haue of long time builded and taught.
                  O gracious father: ſtrengthen thou vs in thy worke and in thy truth: that in the thing which thou haſt begun in vs, we may ſteadfaſtly continue to the end. Expell out of vs the feare of death, & ſtabliſh vs thorow thy holy ſpirite, that wee manfully may deſpiſe & ieoperd this life, for the life eternall. Grant O God to the ſhepheards of thy ſheepe, a feruent loue to the truth and thy glory: ſtrengthen them with thy ſpirit that they valiantly ſtanding by the flocke, may euen with their death confirme thy people in the truth.
               
            
            
               
                  PEter turned about and ſaw the diſciple whom Ieſus loued, following (which alſo leaned on his breaſt at Supper, & ſaid: Lord, who is he that betraieth thee?) when Peter therefore ſaw him, he ſaid to Ieſus: Lord, what ſhal he heere doe? Ieſus ſaith vnto him: If I will haue him to tarrie till I come, what is that to thee? Follow thou me. Then went this ſaying abroade among the brethren, that that Diſciple ſhould not die. Yet Ieſus ſaid not to him, he ſhall not die, but if I wil that he tarry til I come, what is that to thee? the ſame diſciple is he, which testifieth of theſe things, & wrote theſe things, and we know that his teſtimony is true. There are alſo

many other things that Ieſus did, which if they ſhould bee waitten euerie one, I ſuppoſe the world could not contain the bookes that ſhould be written.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THE former wordes which Chriſt ſpake vnto Peter (Follow me) were ſpoken vnto him in this meaning, that he ſhould followe the foot-ſteps and paſſion of Chriſt, namely, with worde and deed to goe the waie that Chriſt had gone. But in aſmuch as Peter is a figure of the Church, Chriſt ſpake thoſe wordes, not onely vnto him, but vnto all faithful beleeuers. For the Church of Chriſt while ſhee dwelleth heere temporally in many troubles and afflictions, ſhe foloweth Chriſt her ſpouſe and head, who alſo deliuereth her from all aduerſitie. Shee loueth Chriſt, and in the behalfe of his truth ſhe ſtriueth vntill the death: for ſeeing Chriſt dyed for all, it is meet that they which are his, doo follow his foot-ſteppes. To followe Chriſt, is nothing elſe, than ſtoutly to ſuffer and ouercome deſpite and pouertie in this world for his ſake. And God truly, euen in his wrath (which wee with our ſinnes deſerue) cannot forget his mercie. Ouer and beſides the manifolde comfort and helpe which he otherwiſe declareth vnto vs, he hath giuen vs his own ſonne, to be our mediator: by whom, if we put our truſt in him, we ſhould be ſaued & deliuered from eternall death, that we liuing from hence forth ſtill in faith, hope, and charitable loue, as pilgrimes in this world: and beeing in all troubles &

aduerſities preſerued by the corporall and ſpirituall comfort of God, might walke innocently before his ſight, in him who is become our way vnto God. It is no vile thing to ſuffer, & to be put to death for Chriſt and his truths ſake: yea, a man cannot die a more honorable death, than when for the truth innocently, he ſuffereth with a good conſcience and with an vpright minde. No man in deede ought to put himſelfe in daunger arrogantly, wilfully, or for vaine-glorie.
                  Wheras Peter asketh a queſtion concerning the diſciple whom the Lord loued, what he ſhould doo, it is a niceneſſe and vnprofitable curioſitie, that ſerueth nothing to edification, and therefore it pleaſeth not the Lord. Whatſoeuer edifieth not, that ought not we to deſire of Chriſt. Let euery man looke to himſelfe, waiting vpon his owne buſineſſe and office and not to be curious in another mans matter: whatſoeuer is not committed vnto his charge, and belongeth not vnto him, let him not meddle withal. Peter loued Chriſt, ſo did he them alſo: therefore asked he what ſhould become of him, and whether he ſhould remayne ſtyll ot die, for hee was verie loth and vnwilling to departe from him. And ſo he paſſed more vpon Iohn, than vppon the precept and commiſſion of Ieſus Chriſt. Such curious backe looking doth the Lord rebuke.
                  Wee many and ſundrie times doo regarde and eſteeme more the thing that wee loue, than that which God commaundeth and biddeth vs. But ſuch loue is verie hurtfull, and eſpecially in thoſe

that ſhould be ſoul ſhepherds. Chriſts wil is, that they haue reſpect to his worke and commandement, and with a feruent loue to perfourme the ſame, not medling with other buſines not needfull.
                  To enquire curiouſly of other mens matters, bringeth not alway profit, but much rather vnquietnes. Therefore Chriſt remoouing Peter from ſuch curious queſtions, draweth his mind vnto a better thing, namely, to follow him. As for that which he deſireth to know, Chriſt telleth him that it is no point of his charge, as if Chriſt would ſay: what haſt thou to doo with other folkes buſines? Thou haſt heard what I haue commanded thee: look that thou faithfully do the ſame. What inquireſt thou after other mens matters.
                  Thus looking diligently and faithfully to our own charge, and expelling the affection of the fleſh, wee ſhould neither deſire, curiouſly to aske any thing beyond the will of God, neither to looke vpon any other men, but vprightly to follow the Lord.
                  Here alſo we learne, that in the commiſſion and final departure of the faithfull, there be manifold differēces. Some reſt in the Lord bleſſedly, without any ſpeciall heauy affliction: but ſome it pleaſeth God to bring through ſore trauaile and exceeding trouble, laying the greater burthen vpon him: according as it was tolde Peter afore hand, that he ſhould be crucified, but not Iohn.
                  
                  They now that are admitted to feede Chriſt his ſheepe, prepare themſelues, and bee alwaies readie, without any curioſity to follow the will of God.
                  
                     Whereas Iohn in the concluſion of his booke refuteth the erroneous opinion of ſome, it is an euidence of his meekneſſe and ſinceritie. It was not ſo ſpoken of the Lorde (ſaith hee) that the ſame Diſciple ſhould not die: whereby Iohn confeſſed, that he himſelfe alſo was mortall. His writing wil he haue credited, for he hath written nothing ſaue onely the truth, wherof he may well teſtifie that which he hath ſeene. Yet ſaith he hath not written all, but only that whereby we may obtaine eternall life: as wee haue heard ſufficiently afore.
               
            
            
               THE eleuen Diſciples went away into Galilee,
                     Math. 28.
                   into a mountaine whereas Ieſus had appointed them. And when they ſaw him, they worſhipped him: but ſome doubted. And Ieſus ſaide: Theſe are the wordes which I ſpake vnto you, while I was yet with you, that all muſt needs be fulfilled, which were written of me in the lawe of Moſes, and in the Prophets, and in the Pſalmes. Then opened hee their wittes, that they might vnderstand the Scriptures, and ſaide vnto them: Thus is it written, and thus it behooued Christ to ſuffer, and to riſe againe from death the third day, and that repentance and remiſsion of ſinne, ſhould be preached in his name among all nations, and must begin at Hieruſalem. And ye are witneſſes of theſe thinges. And behold, I will ſend the promiſe of my Father vppon you. But tarrie ye in the Cittie of Hieruſalem, till ye be endewed with power from on high.
               
                  
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THE Lorde minding to make his Diſciples aſſured of his Reſurrection, inſtructeth them firſt well in his paſſion, which hee declareth out of the Scripture, and printeth it in their hearts. He teacheth them, that it was neceſſarie, that Chriſt ſhould ſuffer and die, yea euen thus to die, namely, vppon a croſſe, vpon a tree. On the tree was the tranſgreſſion committed: vpon the tree behooued it the reſtitution to bee made: vpon the tree was death fetched, vpon the tree was life giuen: vpon the tree muſt ſatiſfaction bee made for the luſtes of the fleſh, which on the tree were firſt conceiued. And would God, that we rightly knew the paſſion and croſſe of our Lorde Ieſu Chriſt, then ſhoulde the glorie of the reſurrection be well knowne and loued of vs.
                  O Ieſu, graunt vs grace right to conſider, what, wherefore, and with what loue and feruentnes thou haſt ſuffered for vs, then ſhall our heart feele & profitably enioy the ſweete fruite of thy reſurrection: then ſhall our lyfe become new and of another ſort, if we take vpon vs true pennance, beeing ſorie for our ſinnes, conuerting vs vnto thee, amending and chaunging our conuerſation. Which with the gratious forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes, is declared and promiſed vnto vs in the Goſpell, according to thy commaundement.
                  
                     Eſay 2. Pſal. 109.O what a ioyfull meſſage is this, that ſuch greate grace ſhould out of Sion bee ſhewed vnto vs, which

come of the heathen From this grace is no man ſhut out: it is common vnto euerie man,Iohn. 5. vnleſſe the vnthankfull exclude himſelfe: as doo they that loue darkneſſe more than the light, and they that diſdainfully incloſe thy grace, and hedge in thy Church, which thou by the preaching of repentance, and forgiuenes of ſinnes, haſt commaunded to bee gathered vnto thy ſelfe in the whole world: not only at Hieruſalem, but alſo in Samaria and Galilee, euen vnto the ende of the world. O God, ſuffer vs not to be ſubiect vnto vain-glorie, and headines: remoue all contention and ſtrife out of thy holie Church. Preſerue vs from ſciſmes, and all diſſention: knitte vs together in vniforme loue, which is an vndoubted token of thy children.
                  It behooued Ieſus Chriſt to ſuffer, not for himſelfe, but for our ſakes, to become the ſacrifice for our ſinnes: that hee ſo ſatisfiyng the iuſtice of GOD, might make amends for our treſpaſſe, and deliuer vs from death. It behooued him alſo to ryſe agayne, that hee by his power might rayſe vs vp from the death of ſin to a new life, & by his own reſurrection, to make vs aſſured of ours, and of immortall life.
               
            
            
               IEſus came to his Diſciples, and ſaid vnto them:
                     Math Iohn
                   To me is giuen all power in heauen & in earth. As my father hath ſent mee, ſo ſend I you. And when hee had thus ſpoken, hee breathed vppon them, and ſayde: Receiue ye the holy Ghoſt. Whoſe ſinnes yee forgiue, they are forgiuen: and whoſe ſinnes yee reteyne, they are reteyned. Goe therefore and teach all people,
                     Marke 28.
                   baptizing them in the name of the Father,

and of the ſonne, and of the holie Ghost, teaching them to obſerue all thinges whatſoeuer I haue commaunded you. And beholde, I am with you euerie day vntill the ende of the worlde. Goe yee therefore into the whole worlde, and preach the Goſpell vnto all creatures. Who ſo beleeueth and is baptized,
                     Marke 16.
                   ſhall be ſaued: but he that will not beleeue, ſhall be condemned. The tokens which ſhall follow thoſe that beleeue are theſe: In my name they ſhall cast out deuils: They ſhall ſpeake with new tongues: They ſhall take away ſerpentes: And if they drinke anie venemous thing, it ſhall not hurt them: They ſhall lay handes vppon the ſicke, and they ſhall be whole.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  WHEN Ieſus with manie euidences had certified his Diſciples of his Reſurrection, he ſheweth them now to what excellent glorie, and how high power his heauenly father hath brought him, wherby their hearts might be ſtabliſhed: and how that all thinges are iuſtly ſubdued vnto him, who through the croſſe hath ouercome, gotten a glorious victorie, and ſuppreſſed the Prince of this world. And though ſome now declare themſelues contrary to his kingdome, and are not obedient vnto his power, but perſecute and kill him in his members (ſaying:Luke. 19. Wee will not haue him to raigne ouer vs) reſiſting and gathering themſelues together againſt God and his annointed king,Pſal. 2. how mightie ſoeuer they be: yet ſhall he bruiſe them with an iron rodde, and as an earthen veſſell all to breake them:

yea they muſt become his foot-ſtoole,Pſal. 109. and hee ſhall raigne for euer.
                  As if he would ſay: In moſt perfect humilitie, in higheſt patience, and beeing in greateſt contumelie, I haue hitherto ſerued you, and all mankinde: but now is the time come, that the Father will glorifie mee, and bring me to high honor, which I had afore the worlde was made,Iohn. 17. Phil. 2. that in my name all knees ſhould bowe: for I am ſette aboue all power, and dominion, hauing all thinges in my hande. From henceforth ſhall I bee worſhipped and honoured of the Angels in heauen, and of all men vppon earth. And foraſmuch as I haue receyued a whole power ouer all fleſh, I ſende you, not onelie vnto the Iewes as afore, but vnto all nations in the whole worlde,Math. 10. for in my ſelfe haue I ſanctified the whole nature of man. Looke therefore that yee declare this ioyfull and gratious meſſage vnto all men, and plant them in with baptiſme vnto the Father, to the Sonne, and to the holy Ghoſt. And thoſe whom ye baptize, ſee that ye teach to obſerue and keepe all that ye haue receyued of mee. Ye muſt alſo bee ſtout, and not faint harted. Many afflictions, much euill will, great perſecution, ſhal happen vnto you: but conſider how mightie a Lord ye haue, vnto whom is giuen all power in heauen and earth: hee is able enough to defend and ſaue you from all enemies. And albeit that I goe nowe from you as touching corporall habitation, yet will I bee ſtill remayning with you, with my power, grace, woorking, and protection, vntil the end of the worlde. Wherefore goe your way, ſette your

whole delight in mee, keepe your ſelues vnto me alone, ſo can ye not miſcarrie.
                  O how excellent and great conſolation is this vnto all faithfull and beleeuing hearts? O how mightie a ſtrength is it in all aduerſities and daungers of this worlde, to heare and conſider, that all power in heauen and earth is giuen vnto Chriſt our Lorde and king, vnder whoſe protection and winges wee are ſafe and well preſerued? And who cannot vnderſtand that this promiſe reacheth not onely vnto the twelue Diſciples, vnto whom it was then made, but vnto all faithfull beleeuers,Iohn. 17. which through their doctrine are come vnto Chriſt? For thoſe twelue did not continue in this life vntill the ende of the worlde: and yet hee ſayth: I will be with you vntill the end of the world. Wherefore wee may well perceiue, that Chriſt vntill the end of the world, will be with all faithfull beleeuers: that is to ſay, with his holie church, to inſtruct, teach, ſtrengthen, comfort, defend and deliuer it, againſt all malitious violence of this world.Iohn. 10 In his hand they are ſafe and well kept, & no man is able to plucke them out of his hande. Although the worlde rage, and the deuill the prince of the world, ſette all his power (as great as it is) againſt the Church of Chriſt:Math. 16. yet are not the gates of hel able to doe anie thing againſt it: for it is founded and ſtrongly builded vpon Chriſt the rocke: and he that is with it vnto the end of the world, is mightier than all enemies.
                  Now foraſmuch as the diſciples of Chriſt ſhould bring the heauenly doctrine throughout the whole

world, man being yet of himſelfe vnable to comprehend the doings of God: he therefore firſt expounded and declared the Scriptures vnto them, as Luke mentioneth: and ſeeing they were ſimple vnlearned men, hee opened to them their vnderſtanding. But to the intent they might not think: What ſhould we poore ſimple bodies doe againſt ſo many learned & wiſe men? Who wil arme vs againſt thoſe that are ſo mightie? Therfore he breatheth vpon them, & ſaith: Receyue the holie Ghoſt, whome hee there giueth them, and therewith ſtrengtheneth them inwardly, but with much more power and might vpon Whitſonday: whereupon he commandeth them to wait at Hietuſalem,Ioel 2. where he will ſend them the promiſe of the Father: cloathing the weake with heauenlie ſtrength, as with a garment, and arming them as with a ſhield.
                  What good thing then can hee lacke, or what euill thing can hurt him, which is his meſſenger (that hath all power in heauen and in earth) and with whome ſuch a king is euer abiding?
                  But when Chriſt would ſend out his diſciples, he ſaith vnto them: As my father hath ſent me, ſo ſend I you. Whereunto did the father ſend his ſonne into the world? Euen that hee ſhould open the glorie of the father vnto the world: that he ſhould declare the will of the heauenly Father: that hee ſhoulde offer health vnto the worlde. This to doe, Chriſt alſo ſent foorth his Diſciples. He ſent them not to ſeeke after vaine-glorie, after power and riches, after bodilie pleaſure and worldly pompe, but to do as he himſelf

did.Luke. 15. Chriſt ſought the loſt ſheepe, brought men vnto the knowledge and loue of the true liuing GOD, taught them to lead a vertuous and honeſt life. Hee was a Phiſition,Math. 9. went to the ſicke, helped them, and healed them:Iohn 6. Iohn. 3. he was not come to do his owne will, but the will of his Father: hee was not come to condemne the world, but to ſaue it.
                  In all this, ought the miniſters of the worde to followe Chriſt, and to do as he did. Vnto this new heauenly and godlie life and worke, Chriſt giueth them the holie Ghoſt. For like as hee himſelfe was riſen into a newe life: Euen ſo through his holie ſpirite, will hee graunt and giue a newe life vnto thoſe that are his. Therefore breatheth hee vppon them, to declare, that it is hee, who at the beginning made man, and nowe by his death had quickened him, and renewed him: and that euen he is the fountaine and giuer of the ſpirite. Thus vnto his Diſciples he gaue the firſtlinges of the promiſed ſpirite, and with it a taſte of more and greater perfection, as an earneſt pennie.
                  All this declareth, what belongeth to true Apoſtles and Miniſters of the worde, which are ſent of Chriſt (for no man ſendeth himſelfe) what their office is: and that they which ſeeke the pleaſures of the bodie, honor, praiſe, and riches, are not followers of Chriſt, and ſucceſſors of the Apoſtles Wherefore moſt diligently ought wee to pray vnto GOD, that he will giue vs faithfull Miniſters of the worde, which looking truelie to the worke of Chriſt, maye leade vs vnto God.
                  
                     But foraſmuch as without the holy Ghoſt, nothing can be fruitfully done, we muſt neuertheleſſe praie for his holy ſpirite, who may in vs ſtirre vp holy thoughts and deuout deſires, directing and mouing our will, and ſo giuing power and ſtrength to accompliſh the works of God, and ſteadfaſtly therin to continue: and that the ſame holy ſpirit may illuminate and kindle our minds, and prouoke them vnto all good and godly works. Conſidering then, that the keies which were promiſed vnto Peter, & in him to the whole Church. Matthew 16. are heere giuen of Chriſt, wee will alſo intreate ſomewhat thereof.
                  Theſe keyes are nothing elſe than the Goſpell,Of the keies. Chriſt now deduceth his oration from the common cuſtome of men. Like as things corporal are ſhut and opened with the key: ſo be the conſciences of men ſhut or bound with the Goſpell. Thus are theſe the keies which Chriſt giueth vnto the Apoſtles, vnburdening of conſciences and ſouls. And that commeth to paſſe, when the holy Ghoſt illuminateth the mind that it vnderſtandeth the miſteries of Chriſt, & committeth it ſelfe therevnto. To bee diſcharged or vnbound, is, when the minde that hath deſpaired of health or ſaluation, is lifte vp to an aſſured and vndoubted hope. To binde, is, to leaue the obſtinate & vnbeleeuing minde vnto it ſelfe. Ieſus therefore ſendeth foorth his diſciples, to publiſh this health vnto the whole world, and to exclude & ſeparate no man from this grace.
                  But firſt he giueth them the holy Ghoſt (as Iohn

ſayth) that is, he openeth their mindes that they may vnderſtand the Scriptures, as Luke ſaith: for what is it elſe to open the vnderſtanding, but to giue the holy Ghoſt? Meete is it alſo and conuenient, that they which by the Goſpell ſhould beare Chriſt throughout the whole world, ſhould receiue the holy ghoſt. For if they ſhould preach Chriſt, it was neceſſarie they had Chriſts ſpirit, ſeeing that Chriſt & they had one manner of thing in hand: as, Chriſt was ſent of God, ſo were they ſent of Chriſt. Without fruit verily ſhould the miniſters of the word preach the goſpel, if they were not endued, illuminated, and inſpired with the holy Ghoſt.
                  Preach (ſaith he) the goſpel, that is the key wherewith the gate of heauen is opened. Who ſo beleeueth the Goſpell when hee heareth it preached, and vnderſtandeth it, feeleth comfort in his conſcience, that he is deliuered from ſinne.
                  Now doth the Goſpell ſet before vs, not onely the grace of God by Chriſt, throgh the which grace our ſinnes are forgiuen vs, but alſo it teacheth and requireth a new life. Neyther doth anie man begin a new life, vnles he firſt be aſhamed of the former old and wicked life.Luk. 24 Therefore ſaith Luke, that Chriſt opened the mindes and vnderſtanding of the diſciples, that they might perceiue the Scriptures, namely, that he might thus and thus ſuffer, and riſe again: and that in his name, that is, in his commandement and power, conuerſion of life, and forgiueneſſe of ſinnes ſhould bee preached and declared among all people.
                  
                     Therefore when the poore ſinner through the preaching of the holy Ghoſt, heareth his wicked and ſinfull life (for the holy goſpel rebuketh the world of ſinne) he beginneth to knowe himſelfe a ſinner, and to be diſpleaſed, repentant and ſorrie for his ſinnes: he conſidereth alſo, that he is well worthie of eternal puniſhment and damnation. By meanes whereof, through the multitude and greatneſſe of his ſinnes, he vtterly diſpaireth in his owne power and righteouſneſſe, and eternall ſaluation. But therewithall, he heareth alſo, that Chriſt (by reaſon of his ſins) came downe from heauen, and dyed for him vppon the croſſe, waſhed away al his ſinnes with his bloud, hath reconciled him with God, made him Gods child, & an eternall inheritour of his kingdome. And this he ſtedfaſtly beleeueth: I pray you doth not ſuch a mans heart leape for ioy, when hee heareth, that thorough Chriſt he is diſcharged of all the ſinnes that ſo ſore preſſed him?
                  The keies therefore are the pure word of God, which teacheth men to know themſelues, and to put their truſt in God through Chriſt. With that word, with thoſe keies do the miniſters of the worde open. For they that ſo are taught & inſtructed by the word of God, that they put all their confidence in God, through Chriſt, thoſe verily are looſed and diſcharged of their ſins. But he that either wil not heare, or when he heareth, will not receiue and beleeue this grace declared to the world through Chriſt, & offred vnto him by the miniſters of the word, him doo the miniſters bind, that is, they leaue him ſtil in his error

according as Chriſt commandeth his diſciples, Mat. 10. that from ſuch as will not receiue and heare their word, they ſhal depart, & ſhake off the duſt from their ſhooes vpon them. Thus dyd Paul binde, Act. 13.18.
                  To bind then with the word, is nothing elſe, but (when the word of the grace of God is preached, & not receiued) to leaue ſuch impenitent people, and to haue no fellowſhip, neyther ought to do with the deſpiſers of the truth and grace. For in the daie of iudgement, it ſhall bee eaſier vnto Sodome and Gomorrha, than vnto ſuch.
                  Now although the word that the Apoſtles preach, is not theyr own, but Gods, & no man may cleanſe, vnbinde, and diſcharge from ſinne, but onely God, yet Chriſt of his grace, and (according to the propertie of the Scripture) aſcribeth ſuch vnto the Apoſtles. For the gracious father of his aboundant loue and kindneſſe (and by reaſon of the couenant that he hath made with vs) doeth oft aſcribe vnto vs many things, which can properly belong vnto none, ſaue onely to himſelfe. Neither is this any maruell, ſeeing he hath giuen vs his onely begotten and moſt deare ſonne, to be our owne: for how cannot he geue vs al things with him?
                  Notwithſtanding, we ought not by reaſon hereof to be high minded and proud, and to aſcribe vnto our ſelues, that which onely is Gods: but much rather to be thankfull for his grace, and diligent in our vocation, faythfully to employ and beſtow the high treaſure & gifts of God, and not to abuſe them. This thing therefore extendeth not ſo farre, as that euerie

one man (properly to ſpeake) doth of his owne power and authoritie forgiue ſinne. But foraſmuch as the Apoſtles and miniſters of the word, doo publiſh and declare remiſſion of ſinne, they bring the keyes and forgiue ſinnes miniſterially, and as miniſters. Neuertheleſſe, if here withal the ſpirit of God do not worke in the hearer to beleeue the word when it is prached, then is not the ſinne forgiuen: All the power therefore and working is Gods.
                  Thus the Apoſtles may damne no man, but vndoubtedly they may by the word declare damnation to the vnbeleeuers. Where an aſſured promiſe of grace is declared, there ſinnes are forgiuen.The holy Ghoſt that worketh in the Apoſtles forgiueth the ſinnes. Nowe when the Apoſtles ſhew vnto ſinners remiſſion of ſinne, they doo it out of the holy Ghoſt, and are not deceiued: for they preach, that our ſinnes are pardoned vs through Chriſt, who hath made ſatisfaction for them. If this faith vpon Chriſt, bee liuely in vs,Note this conditiō wel ſo that we abhorre ſinne, and bee deſirous of heauenly things, then are our ſinnes forgiuen vs through the holy Ghoſt, for no man can ſay, that Ieſus is the Lord but by the holy Ghoſt.
                  The key there extendeth to this end, that the miniſter declare remiſſion of ſinnes thorough Chriſte. Who ſo now beleeueth the Goſpell preached, ſhall be ſaued: hee that beleeueth not ſhall bee condemned. And ſeeing that faith is an inwarde thing in the ſoul inſpired of God, the miniſter cannot know who in the ſight of God beleeueth, or beleeueth not: for God onely knoweth the heart. Howbeit by the outward confeſſion, which is done with the mouth, & by

receiuing of the preaching, and by the fruits, the miniſter may iudge. For who ſo receiueth the word, openly confeſſing Chriſt, and doeth not outwardlie defile himſelfe with vile deedes, to ſuch the miniſter openeth with the key, and diſchargeth them: that is, he taketh them into the Church of Chriſt, numbereth them among the people of God, and receiueth thē into the kingdom of heauen. As for thoſe that wil not heare the worde preached, or that when they heare it, doo refuſe it, not confeſſing Chriſt, or vttering theyr vnbeleefe with foule groſſe and open vices, thoſe the miniſter bindeth: that is, hee ſhutteth them out of the Church, and baniſheth them out of the realme of heauen. To him that is in the Church, is forgiueneſſe of ſinnes promiſed: who ſo deſpiſeth charitable loue, hath not faith: vpon ſuch one remaineth ſinne ſtill, and the wrath of God.
                  Now what the Apoſtles & Miniſters of the word doo, that doo they not in theyr owne name, not in their own power: but as they which are ſent of God and that declare his word, the holy goſpell, out of the power of God, euen out of the holy Ghoſt, who being giuen vnto them, doth ſpeak and work by them. What theſe binde, is bound before God, and in heauen, for out of God is it that they iudge: and what they vnbinde, is vnbound before God, for God wyll ratifie and allowe what they doo, that beeing ſent of him, keepe themſelues in exerciſe, and meddle within his word and commiſſion. As for him that is not ſent of God, and declareth not his worde and Goſpell, but of his owne proper power will binde one

man, and vnbinde another, ſet this man in heauen, & that man in hell: is it any maruell if ſuch one do many times miſſe and be called a wolfe and not a ſhepheard, ſeeing his proceedings commeth not of God?
                  Heere alſo we learne, with what deſire and thankfulneſſe, wee ought to receiue the miniſters of God, that bring vs his holy word, and comfort of our conſcience: how wee ought to eſteeme them that haue the holy Ghoſt, who ſpeaketh vnto vs by them.Luke. 1
                           •
                         Heb. 13. For if we deſpiſe them, we deſpiſe God himſelfe. S. Paul therefore exhorteth vs, to be obedient vnto them, & to haue them in worthie eſtimation that ſhew vs the word of God. Worthie they be of double honour, partly, for that through them God ſpeaketh, whoſe miniſters and ambaſſadors they bee:1. Tim. 5. for the higheſt king of all ſendeth them out vnto vs with his commiſſion, partly, for that they be charged with ſo dangerous and heauie an office and trauell. For,2. Cor. 5 though as concerning themſelues they liue iuſtly, well, and blameleſſe, yet if they regarde not the life of theyr ſheepe, but neglect them, they muſt looke for greate and ſore puniſhment. Not only for themſelues muſt they giue account, but for al the ſoules that are committed vnto them, if one of them periſh throgh their negligence. Wee ſhould not therefore haue reſpect to the infirmitie or baſeneſſe of the miniſterie, but vnto him that ſent him, and whoſe commiſſion hee executeth. When a Prince or king ſendeth out a meane ſeruant with a commiſſion and charge, who will deſpiſe him without the wrath and indignation

of the prince? How can we then contemne the miniſters of the high eternall king, without plague and puniſhment?
                  This be ſpoken, not that vnworthie and vnmeet men ſhould be placed in ſo high an office, or that we ſhoulde delight in their euill: but to the intent that malitious iudgement may be auoyded, & that there be no villanie done to the annoynted of the Lorde. More reſpect and regard ſhuld we haue to the word of God that they bring vnto vs, than to their liuing and 
                        •
                     aults: more to the giuer than to the miniſter. It is not th
                        •
                     y that worke, but God worketh through his owne power, he cannot faile vs in his promiſe. The miniſter lendeth his hand and mouth, but the holie Ghoſt worketh in the harts of the beleeuers, neither can the wickedneſſe of the Prieſt diminiſh or hinder that operation. If we our ſelues haue pure, cleane and faithfull beleeuing mindes. It is not the vncleannes of the miniſter that can either defile or hurt vs.
                  This is now the ſtory of the Reſurrection of Chriſt, wherein we ſee, how the goodnes of the Lord wondefully ſtriueth with the weake faith of thoſe that are his. For when the Angels could not perſwade them that he was riſen againe, he himſelfe appeareth vnto them aliue, and proueth by many euident teſtimonies, that he is of a truth riſen againe and reuiued, talketh with them, eateth with them, offereth himſelfe vnto them, that they may ſee him and handle him, ſendeth the women and certaine diſciples for witneſſes, and leaueth nothing vnattempted that may perſwade them. For in the faith and beleefe of the reſurrection

of Ieſus Chriſt lieth all our welfare. We muſt therefore beſeech Almightie God to eſtabliſh in vs this faith, and by his ſpirite mightilie to worke, that we from ſinne may truely riſe againe, to a newe and godlie life, and afterward with our bodies to enter into an immortall and euerlaſting life. Hereunto helpe vs God the Father, the Sonne, and the holie Ghoſt. Amen.
                  
               
            
            Heere endeth the Sermons vpon the Reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt, according to the true copie of the Author: and now followeth the Sermons of the Aſcenſion.
         
         
            
            
            THE ASCENSION OF IESVS CHRIST, out of the holie Euangeliſts.
            
               
                  IESVS lead his Diſciples out into Bethanie. And when he had brought them together, hee ſpake vnto them of the kingdome of God, & commanded them that they ſhould not depart from Ieruſalem: but to waite for the promiſe of the father. For Iohn (ſaith he) baptized with water, but ye ſhall be baptized with the holy Ghost after theſe few dayes. When they therefore were come together, they asked of him▪ ſaying: Lorde, wilt thou at this time restore againe the kingdome to Iſrael? And he ſaid vnto them: It is not for you to knowe the times and the ſeaſons, which the Father hath put in his owne power: But yee ſhall receiue power after that the holie Ghost is come vpon you, and yee ſhall be witneſſes vnto mee not onely in Ieruſalem, but alſo in all Iurie, and in Samaria, and euen vnto the worlds ende. Now when Ieſus had ſpoken theſe words vnto them, he lifted vp his handes, and bleſſed them, and was taken vp, and a clowd receiued him out of

their ſight: ſo that hee departed from them, and was carried vp in heauen, and ſitteth on the right hand of God. And whilest they looked ſtedfastly vp towards heauen, as he went behold two men ſtood by them in white apparrell: which alſo ſaid: Ye men of Galilee, why ſtand ye gazing vp into heauen? The ſame Ieſus which is taken vp from you into heauen, ſhal ſo come euen as you haue ſeene him go into heauen: So when they had worſhipped him, they returned with great ioy into Hieruſalem from Mount Oliuet: which is from Hieruſalem a Sabaoth daies iourney. And when they were come in, they went vp into a parlour where abode Peter and Iames, Iohn and Andrew, Philip and Thomas, Bartholmew and Mathew, Iames the ſonne of Alpheus and Simon Zelotes, and Iudas the brother of Iames. Theſe all continued ſtill with one accord in the temple, lauding & praiſing God, and making their praiers with the women, and Mary the mother of Ieſu, and with his brethren.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  
                     Iohn. 13.
                     CHriſt who loued his Diſciples, declareth vnto them his loue, euen vnto the ende:Math 28. yea he neuer ceaſeth to loue them For though hee leaue them as concerning

his bodilie preſence: yet with his loue, grace, and power, he is euer ſtill with them. Foraſmuch now as after ſufficient proofe of his reſurrection, he will depart from them, and goe to his Father that had ſent him: he taketh them forth with him vnto the place, from whence he mindeth to depart from them. And manifeſtly before their eyes, hee aſcendeth into heauen into the glorie of his father: that they might be witneſſes, as well of his glorious aſcenſion, as of all other things which they had heard & ſeene before. O how feruent words ſpake hee then vnto them? How deepely entred he into their hearts? How earneſtly printed hee thoſe his laſt wordes into them? The eternall wiſedome ſpeaketh nothing vainely, nothing ſlenderly, nothing without profite. Although the Diſciples (as men yet ſomewhat carnall) doe aske queſtions concerning the reſtitution of a bodily and temporall kingdome: yet maketh hee no aunſwere vnto their demaund, but directeth them vnto that which is for their profie, and belongeth to their office, drawing their hearts from the earthly kingdom, (from the which they ought to bee mortified) vnto the kingdome of heauen, euen vnto the kingdome of God: in the which he himſelfe is king, & into the which they now were receiued as citizens, that they ſhuld declare the ſame throughout the whole world and offer it vnto all men.
                  This is the goſpell of the kingdom of God, which for a teſtimonie vnto all nations, muſt bee preached in the whole world, to witneſſe the grace of GOD vnto the elect. But to the damned and vnbeleeuers,

a teſtimonie of their damnation: in that they are conuinced of their owne infidelitie, and ſhall haue no excuſe, if they contemne and deſpiſe the grace offered vnto them. By this ought wee alſo to learne, to ſee ſuch thinges which are moſt profitable, and wholeſome vnto vs: and which bring vs the neareſt way to put our truſt in God, and to loue our neighbours, for that part of the play is ours. As for vnprofitable and contentious queſtions, if we meddle not with them▪ then the leſſe diuiſion, and the more loue and edifieng in the Church of God ſhall follow. Manie times are wee too much carefull, for ſuch things as wee deſire our ſelues: as what ende this thing or that will come vnto, when God will ſet vp our proſperitie, and what ſhall bee done hereafter, when and how God will puniſh thoſe that are againſt vs. And this temptation, carnall zeale, and curioſitie, chaunceth oft euen in the hearts of the faythfull: as we ſee heere in the Diſciples of Chriſt. Sometimes there bee froward and wicked mindes, which pretending to bee Chriſtians, ſeeke out of the Goſpell nothing but honour, lucre, and profite. but ſuch bee both falſe and fained. Notwithſtanding (all theſe ſet apart) wee ought to commit and refer all things vnto our mercifull creator and gracious father, who can right well order and diſpoſe them, how & when he will, as he thinketh beſt to further his glorie, and to edifie his elect children. Our care ought rather to bee, how we may lead a godly life, and beautifie the faith of Chriſt with good woorkes. Wee muſt looke, that wee bee neither vngodlie, nor hypocrites:

but to liue vertuouſly and innocently in his ſight, and paciently at his hande to wayte for our deliuerance. The kingdome of Chriſt that is publiſhed and offered through the Goſpell, is not a corporall but a ſpirituall kingdome: neither conſiſteth it in outward things, but in a pure and faithfull beleeuing heart, and yet reacheth it throughout the whole worlde, and amongſt all nations. In the hearts of all faithfull beleeuers doth Chriſt raigne through his ſpirite, and there ouercommeth hee the deuill, ſinne, and death.
                  And to the intent they ſhoulde well vnderſtande this kingdome, he commaundeth them to waite for the holy ſpirite, whom he had promiſed them: as if he would ſay; Now goe I to my Father, now enter I into my kingdome, that I may mightily raigne vpon the earth: this thing yee vnderſtand not, but when the ſpirite is giuen you, yee ſhall perceyue it well. All thinges in heauen and in earth, are giuen into my power: In thoſe that are mine ſhall I raigne, and make them righteous through fayth: yea inuincible ſhall I make them againſt all enemies: heereof ſhall yee beare witneſſe when yee are baptized through the holie Ghoſt.
                  This my kingdome ſhall ye publiſh in all nations, from one ende of the world to another. Thus ſhall I raigne from ſea to ſea, of the which my kingdome the Prophetes ſpake ſo much before. Of this kingdome dooth Chriſt take poſſeſſion through his aſcending vp to the Father, at whoſe right hande, and in this kingdome hee ſitteth: raigning much more

mightily in his Church, and working more effectuouſly in thoſe that be his, than hee did before when he liued yet corporally with him.
                  Thus taking his leaue, hee giueth them louing wordes, comforteth them, and admoniſheth them of their office, that they all may be diligent therin, that they continually direct and lift vp their heartes into that kingdome. and that they take in hand to bring all men to the ſame into the obedience of Chriſt. His bleſſing hee giueth them, ſaluting them, wiſhing them good, and praying hartily vnto his Father for them.
                  Thus was hee taken from them, and carryed into heauen. By the heuen we vnderſtand the incomprehenſible light in the which God dwelleth: & which no mortall man can attaine vnto. From thence came Chriſt vnto vs, and thither is hee gone againe, euen into the inuiſible glorie and clearenes of God. For the eternall worde and power of GOD, dwelling in Gods incomprehenſible light from euerlaſting, became man: and had his conuerſation vpon earth in all partes (ſinne excepte) as a verie true man. But when hee had fullie finiſhed and throughly ended the worke that was giuen him in commiſſion of his heauenly Father, and had obeyed him euen vnto the death, for as much as in all thinges hee had honoured and glorified his Father vppon earth: it was conuenient that the Father alſo ſhoulde glorifie his Sonne. And therefore rayſed hee him from death, and tooke him vp into heauen: not after the Godhead (for ſo was hee alwaies in heauen) but

after the manhoode. For his true humane nature which hee tooke vppon him for our ſakes, is carryed and taken vp out of this world into the inuiſible honour and glorie, into the higheſt incomprehenſible, and into the perfect fruition of the Godhead.
                  In this honour and glorie Chriſt dwelleth and raigneth, and yet amongſt thoſe that are his, doth he finiſh and performe all things by his ſpirite, hauing gouernance in the harts of the faithfull, through beliefe, through loue, through patience, and innocencie of life.
                  To the intent now that this kingdome might be erected in the hearts of men, it was neceſſarie that he ſhould giue his diſciples commiſſion to publiſh the ſame, and to prepare mens minds thervnto through the preaching of the Goſpell. But firſt hee made the mindes of his diſciples readie and apt to receiue the holy ghoſt, whom he afterwards poured into others by them, and therefore he commaunded them (vntill the ſpirite appeare and open the worke) to waite ſtill at Hieruſalem: from the which place the kingdome of Chriſt was afterwardes planted in all the world. Of the promiſe of the ſpirite, reade Eſay. 44. Iere. 31. Ezech. 36. Ioel. 2. Iohn. 19.16.
                  Conſidering that the myſterie of Chriſts aſcention is great and excellent, and that there is notable power contained therein to thoſe that be faithful beleeuers: the Euangeliſts doe therefore deſcribe verie perfectly, the time, the place, the perſons, with all circumſtances and aſſured teſtimonies thereof. Hee aſcendeth vp before his diſciples, that they might openly

and euidently ſee it with theyr eyes: there did appeare Angels, as meſſengers and witneſſes from heauen, euen two of them, that in the mouth of two all trueth might bee eſtabliſhed. The white apparrell ſignifieth the euident glorie, into the which Chriſt is taken vp, as a noble, royall, and mightie king and conquerour, entring into his heauenlie kingdome.
                  Thus the high and glorious king, cloathed with our nature, is entred into our royall pallace, as one that mindeth faithfully to diſpatch our matters. Hee is our owne mediatour and aduocate in the preſence of the Father: notwithſtanding our ſinnes committed, wee haue a free entraunce vnto GOD by him. Our fleſh hath hee in himſelfe carryed vp, and exalted our nature vnto the right hande of GOD the Father. Wherefore wee that are bones of his bones and fleſh of his fleſh, doe iuſtly conceyue a comfortable and aſſured hope, that our mortall bodyes alſo ſhall bee taken vp, and haue immortall and eternall ioye.
                  The earneſt pennie of his ſpirite hath hee giuen and left behinde him vnto vs, and contrariwiſe hee hath of vs taken an earneſt pennie and pledge: namely our ſinfull and wicked fleſh, which hee in himſelfe hath carryed vp into the kingdome of heauen. Nowe where the parcell is, there ſhall alſo bee the whole ſumme.
                  By this, wee that are fleſh and bloud, haue a comfortable and aſſured truſt, that in Chriſt wee ſhall haue the poſſeſſion and inheritaunce of heauen. Our

ſinnes in him are recompenced, heauen in him is opened, in him is the hope of immortall life ſealed and made ſure vnto vs: Chriſt the victorious & glorious conquerour is able to defend his church. So that from henceforth no man ſhall haue power, to condemne his elect and faithfull beleeuers. Rom. 8. Heb. 5.7.8.10.
                  
                  That his fleſh is with-drawne from vs, and taken into heauen: it is our great profite, to the intent that all our deuotion and Gods ſeruice may bee directed vpwardes in the ſpirite: and that the mindes of faythfull beleeuers maye bee drawne from earthlie vnto heauenly thinges, euen vnto the place where Chriſt ſitteth on the right hande of GOD the Father.
                  When the Diſciples ſawe that theyr Schoolemaiſter was taken away from them into heauen: they perceiued and conſidered the thing that they knewe not before, although Chriſt had told it them. Iohn. 6. Namely, that by the Aſcenſion they ſhould receyue vnderſtanding. Therefore they worſhipped Ieſus Chriſt, and according vnto his commaundement, they returned to Hieruſalem: where they kepte themſelues vntill the time that the ſpirite came: neyther were they idle, but continued in the holie fellowſhippe and godlie exerciſes, with praier and deuotion, preparing and making themſelues readie vnto the comming of the ſpirite.
                  By occaſion heereof (all niceneſſe, curioſitie, and contentious queſtions, all pride, vaine-glorie, and fonde affections and deſires ſette aparte) wee

ought with vpright mindes, and with the eyes of faith to be alway taken vp into heauen, and there to haue our dwelling, where Chriſt our head ſitteth at the right hand of God, king and Lord of all thinges, our faithfull aduocate and mediatour. Then ſhall true godlyneſſe increaſe, then ſhall vertue bleſſedlie grow and bring forth fruit in vs, if wee with ſteadfaſt faith doe conſider, that our Lord Ieſus Chriſt dyed for our ſakes, roſe againe from death, and is exalted at the right hand of God, raigning mightily aboue all things in heauen, and finiſhing our ſaluation, if wee in ſpirite and in the truth worſhip and honour him, as the eternal God: confeſſing with a true faith, that all power is giuen vnto him of God the father, that he careth for vs, and that for our healths ſake hee ruleth and ſhall raigne, vntill all things be brought vnder his feet. In the meane time he dayly in his church purifieth al his members by his ſpirit, cleanſing them ſtill more and more from all their ſinnes. And when hee ſhall haue rooted out all ſinne in his elect, ouercomming death the laſt enemie, ſo that God ſhall be all in all, then ſhall Chriſt alſo giue vp his kingdome vnto God the father, namely, the mediation for our ſinnes, the purging of the ſame, defence againſt the deuill, and deliueraunce from death. For then ſhall there be no more ſinne in the elect, ſo that he ſhal not need to be mediator for them, to purge from ſinne, to defend againſt the deuil, or to deliuer from death.
                  Oh mercifull father, graunt vs perfectly to know thy bleſſed and glorious kingdome of Chriſt thy ſonne, drawe vp our hearts in ſuch ſort, that we with

all obedience maye yeelde our ſelues into this kingdome, ſeeing and regarding onely thoſe thinges that are aboue, and wholy applying our ſelues vnto this ende, that the ſame heauenly kingdome may be farre ſpread abroad, and knowne vnto all men. To the intent, that as for all worldly things, wherin many fooliſh people ſet all their ſaluation, but in vaine: men may vtterly refuſe them, and hartily with bodie and ſoule, and with their whole life, may giue ouer themſelues perfectly vnto the onely Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the true God. For thy good pleaſure it was (O God) that in him all perfectnes ſhould dwell, and that by him al things towards thee, ſhould be reconciled and pacified through his bloud, whether they be in heauen or in earth. Graunt vs (O God) vnitie and brotherly loue in thy holie Church, kindle our harts to feruent and deuout prayer: make vs diligently to watch & circumſpectly to waite for the comming of thy beloued ſonne, that we neither be drunken in exceſſe and bodilie luſt, nor intangled with the ſnares of this world: but that we hauing alwayes the eyes of our heart open, and praying with vpright mindes, may chearefully meet our redeemer, & ioy with him for euer. To him be eternall praiſe and honor. Amen.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            
            THE SENDING OF THE HOLY GHOST.
            
               
                  WHen the fiftie daies were come to an end,
                     Acts. 
                           •
                        .
                   they were all with one accord together in one place, and ſodainely there came a ſound from heauen, as it had beene the comming of a mightie winde, and it filled all the houſe where they ſate. And there appeared vnto them clouen tongs, like as they had bin of fire, and it ſate vpon each one of them: and they were all filled with the holy Ghoſt, and beganne to ſpeake with other tongues, euen as the ſame ſpirit gaue them vtterance.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  
                     HEere the Euangliſt Luke deſcribeth how that after Chriſt entered into his glorie, the Goſpell (euen the heauenly doctrine and grace) was opened vnto the

world downe from heauen, by a glorious and great miracle. For though the lawe (which is the will of God) and alſo the Goſpell, that is his grace, hath from the beginning beene alwayes in the worlde: namelie, in the heartes of Gods elect children: yet was each one of them at ſeuerall times, gloriouſly vttered vnto the worlde by manifeſt and apparant myracle. And like as the holie Ghoſt was in the heartes of the faythfull beleeuers (for after the Reſurrection hee gaue the ſpirite vnto the Diſciples) euen ſo heere hee giueth them the ſpirite, with an open myracle, and with a more perfect woorking and power. For the ſpirite which Chriſt gaue them after his Reſurrection when he breathed vpon them, was euen this day with more perfection: that is to ſay, his operation and ſtrength declared it ſelfe more euidently, and more perfectly, and ſhewed his preſence by the viſible miracle.
                  Thus is it heere deſcribed, how the promiſe of Chriſt and of the Prophets made as concerning the holie Ghoſt, were fulfilled: and how the ſame holie Ghoſt, who is the teacher of the trueth, the earneſt pennie of ſaluation, the wedding ring of grace, and ioye of the minde was giuen. Nowe when it is ſaide that the holie Ghoſt is giuen vnto men, the ſame may bee vnderſtood of the giftes and operations of the holie Ghoſt: for though GOD may bee comprehended of mans minde, yet can he not bee included or ſhut therein. Neuertheleſſe, his giftes according to his will and pleaſure, are poured and meaſured into our heartes, vnto euerie

one ſo much as maye ferue
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     fite.
                  Who ſo is deſirous to knowe 
                        〈…〉
                      Ghoſt is promiſed vnto faithfull bele
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      reade Ezech. 36.39. Ioel. 2. Math. 3. Now 
                        〈…〉
                      God the Father hath promiſed by his Mini
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      ſame alſo doth Chriſt his ſonne promiſe: where
                        •
                     , wee may ſee that the ſonne hath like power with the father, and that there is but one onely ſpirite of them both: as wee may reade Luk. 12. Iohn. 7.14.15.16.20.
                  
                  But before wee come to the ſending of the ſpirite, wee will firſt ſubſtantially and well peruſe the ſtorie, and looke what maye bee gathered thereof: For heere is nothing written or ſette downe in vaine.
                  The Euangeliſt doth heere make mention of the fift day, vpon the which this great wonder was don. In the which there lyeth hidde a notable myſterie.Ezod. 25. Deut. 16 The Iewes from the day that they offered the Eaſter Lambe, told fiftie dayes, and vpon the fiftith day was the feaſt of weekes: In the which feaſt they kept holyday, offering vnto GOD a willing ſacrifice of the firſt fruites when they cutte them downe: Wee beginne to number from the reſurrection of Chriſt our Eaſter lambe, who alſo was offered vp. Vpon the fiftith day when the fruites began now to be ripe & readie to be reaped, the harueſt alſo being great,Math. 9. and the labourers few, then ſent God his ſpirit to prepare and furniſh the Diſciples,Iohn. 4. that they from amongſt the heathen might gather fruite togeather vnto

                     
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ore time when the children 
                        〈…〉
                      out of Egypt, the law was gi
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      people vpon the fift day: euen 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     nient that vpon the fift day the holie 
                        〈…〉
                      be giuen to the Diſciples: which ho
                     
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      is both an interpreter and fulfiller of the 
                        •
                     we. The place where the holie Ghoſt was giuen, is Sion, for there Chriſt commaunded his Diſciples to waite:
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . 2. Mich. 4. and from that place ſhould the law of GOD (according to the ſaying of the Prophets) proceede foorth into the whole world. Therefore like as afore time the law was giuen vpon mount Sinay: euen ſo was the ſpirit giuen vpon mount Sion. Vppon Sinai did God at that time with ſome terrible thinges declare his might and power, his plague alſo and vengeance, which ſhould fall vppon thoſe that deſpiſed his lawe: and therefore was there ſuch fearefulnes through lightnings, thunderings, and other like terrible thinges. Here there is heard a noyſe, mightie & vehement,Note. but not horrible & feareful: in the which winde is ſignified, that the doctrine of the ſpirit ſhuld ſpeedily & with power breake in through the world▪ and bring fruit: and that no man ſhould be ſo mightie as to hinder the ſtrength therof, euen as the wind in his courſe can by no man be kept backe.
                  Whereas fierie tongues do appeare, and are ſeen, it ſignifieth the manifolde ſpeeches and inſtruction, which the ſpirit giueth to Chriſts Diſciples, the zeal alſo & feruentnes that he worketh in their harts: making them altogether fire, and kindling them in ſuch ſort, that euen their words are feruent, and pierce afterwards

into the hearts of others. A
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      feare and coldnes remoueth he out of the 
                        〈…〉
                      they are not afraid manfully to ſteppe foorth 
                        〈…〉
                      all the people, although not long before 
                        〈…〉
                      not abide, but fledde from the Lord.
                  Now they confeſſe him to bee the Sauiour of all the world, whom they before had denyed. Whereas the tongues were diuided, it ſignifieth the diuerſitie of the giftes of the ſpirite. Chriſt promiſed them in Marke. 16. that they ſhould ſpeake with other tungs, or with a new ſpeech or language: which promiſe is now performed vnto them.Epheſ. 4. Col. 4. The tongues of Chriſtian men ought to be garniſhed with gentleneſſe, and with the holie Ghoſt, that no foule or wanton talke proceed out of their mouth. The tongues that pronounce and confeſſe Chriſt the eternall truth, & his ſincere ſpirit, muſt not lie, neither talke anie vnclean, hurtfull, nor venemous thing: for vnto all ſuch is the ſpirite enemie. Therefore are they not fleſhly but fierie and ſpirituall tongues: out of the which the fire of the ſpirite hath conſumed all moiſture of worldly and carnal wantonnes, and God with his owne loue hath kindled them. How could the Apoſtles elſe haue been inſtructors of the whole world, if the ſpirite had not taught them the diuerſitie of tongues?Of ſignes. Oh the great wiſedome and grace of God, who at all times for our wealth hath ſet forth and offered vnto vs poore men, his high, ſpirituall, & heauenly things, vnder corporall and viſible tokens! For how might we carnall men els vnderſtand godly matters, if they were not exhibited with viſible and bodily thinges.

                     
                        〈…〉
                      God alwaies this cuſtome, that hee 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     nto vs his high gifts vnder thoſe tokens, 
                        〈…〉
                      moſt knowen of vs, and likeſt vnto thoſe 
                        〈…〉
                      which hee offereth vs: and ſo with humaine 
                        〈◊〉
                     , hee couereth diuine and godly thinges. Not that God is cloſed or ſhut in with things of men, but that celeſtiall and heauenly things forſoorth vnto vs by ſuch as bee earthly, might be of vs the better vnderſtood. For els euery man of knowledge wotteth well, that the holy Ghoſt is not a dooue, neither a winde, a tongue, fire, nor water: For GOD is not a thing corporall, neither a thing that can bee felt or comprehended, with outward ſenſes. Notwithſtanding things inuiſible are the better knowen and perceiued of vs, when they be ſet forth and repreſented by viſible thinges: namely, by ſuch as haue ſome ſimilitude with the inuiſible and ſpiritual things: And (ſo farre as naturall things may ſet foorth heauenlie matters) doe perfectly deſcribe before our eies, the nature and propertie of them. Therefore doth the ſpirite appeare in the fourme of firie tongues, and with a ſound, that thereby the two principall ſenſes of man might bee mooued, namely, his hearing and ſeeing: for the ſound toucheth the eares, and the fire mooueth the ſight.
                  Like as Chriſt alſo in the ſupper with bread and wine, to mooue the outward ſenſes of man: thought to repreſent his body and bloud. For by bread is ſignified vnto vs, the true body of Chriſt which died for vs vppon the croſſe, and by wine the bloud that was ſhed for our ſinnes, which true fleſh and bloud,

they that beleeue, doe at the ſupper eate and drinke through faith. By the which foode and ſuſtenance, their ſoules are vpholden to the gratious and eternal life.
                  Thus with exterior tokens it pleaſed the wiſedom of God, to guide the outward ſenſes of his Diſciples into the obedience of faith, and vnder the ſame, to ſignifie and declare the ſtrength & operation of the holie Ghoſt. For like as the winde bloweth through the whole earth, piercing, moouing and altering all priuie and ſecrete places: Euen ſo the ſpirit of God goeth through all things, ſearching all ſecret corners and inward mindes of men. Mightily alſo hee woorketh in mens hearts, kindling and chaunging them. He is the cleare, pure, and hote fire, that conſumeth all filthines of ſinne, inſpiring mens harts, and drawing them vpward to God.
                  Without this ſpirit may a man worke no fruitfull thing, yea thinke no good thing: For man is nothing but fleſh, neither conſidereth hee of himſelfe ought that is ſpirituall or godly, but onely carnall thinges. Foraſmuch now as the wiſeſt & moſt gratious God, knoweth this ſo to bee, whereas hee hath made man his creature, to haue fruition of himſelfe: he wil not ſuffer him to corrupt in the fleſh, but giue him his owne holie ſpirite.
                  God the father, through Chriſt his eternal word, did ſhape man out of the mould of the earth, & created him after his owne ſimilitude and li
                        ••
                     nes. Now is God a ſpirite, therefore the image of God in man muſt needs be ſpirituall: which image in the inward

man is ſuch a thing, as partly dooth expreſſe and declare God that created him.
                  But when man being deceiued through the deuil fell into ſinne, and loſt this image: then the proportion of Gods pure ſpirite (in whome his image was printed) was defaced, and the image of God loſt his beautie. So that the noble man who at the firſt was of God, ſo faire and goodly faſhioned and beautified in the ſimilitude of God: became after ſinne like vnto the deuill, filthie, and ſhamefull, yea altogether carnall, hauing nothing more of the ſpirite in him, as the ſcripture in the booke of creation teſtifieth.Geneſ. 6. For as much now as the miſerable man was degenerate from the noble, ſpirituall, and godly nature, to an vncleane, carnall, and diueliſh diſpoſition, becomming altogether fleſh: hee was able no more eyther to thinke or woorke any ſpirituall or godlie thing.
                  All his thoughts and imaginations are carnall, in that he is fallen into eternall death, and hath loſt the life of the ſpirite: for the affections and luſtes of the fleſh are death; but the deſires of the ſpirite are life and peace.Rom. 8. The affections of the fleſh are enmitie againſt God, for the fleſh is not ſubiect vnto the lawe of GOD, neyther can bee: they therefore which are in the fleſh, cannot pleaſe GOD. Nowe when man who had taken ſo hurtfull a fall, was brought downe from life vnto death, from the grace of God into his wrath: life might not bee giuen him againe but by the ſpirite of God, whome man by ſinne hath loſt.
                  
                     Therefore like as the Father at the beginning had created man: ſo faſhioneth hee him againe by his Sonne▪ who ouercommeth and deſtroyeth death, and giueth vnto vs againe the way of immortalitie.Sap. 1. For into a froward ſoule entereth not the ſpirite of GOD: therefore is it conuenient and neceſſarie, that ſuch ſoule and corrupt fleſh bee purged and cleanſed againe. By Chriſt the eternall worde were all thinges created, by him therefore after the fall muſt all things be reſtored againe: for this cauſe died Chriſt vppon the croſſe, to baniſh the ſinne of the worlde, and to make ſatisfaction for it. From death alſo hee riſeth agayne, to giue vs a certaine and aſſured hope, and an vndoubted pledge of an immortall and eternall life, and that hee hath ouercome death and ſinne for vs.
                  Immediately after the reſurrection,Iohn. 20. he breatheth vpon his diſciples, and giueth them the holy Ghoſt: to declare that he is the ſame, who at the beginning created our nature, and ſealed it it with his ſpirite, and that it is euen hee who now in the beginning of a new life, muſt by his ſpirite renew and reſtore our decayed nature againe,Heb. 1. Col. 1. that thus Chriſt who is the liuing and expreſſe image of the inuiſible GOD, may bee faſhioned and fourmed of the newe in vs:Gal. 4. now cannot Chriſt the image of GOD bee right proportioned and renewed in vs but by the holie Ghoſt. Nowe like as Chriſt after the reſurrection gaue his Diſciples the ſpirite, to print into them a newe life, whereby they knewe and were aſſured, that hee was the fountaine and giuer of the ſpirite,

(and therefore hee ſaide,Iohn. 16. Math. 28. All that the Father hath is mine: Item, All power is giuen vnto mee in heauen and in earth) euen ſo immediately after the ſame, hee aſcended vp into heauen, to declare vnto them, that he was the Lord of all thinges.Col 3. Out of the high and reall throne where he ſitteth at the right hand of God his Father, Chriſt the eternall king ſent downe his holie ſpirite vpon all fleſh,Epheſ 4. that we by him might obtaine the old innocencie and ſaluation againe: & that the Image of God ſtained and defiled by ſinne, might be reſtored vnto vs, and that wee thus might become partakers of eternall life. What they be vnto whom God giueth his ſpirit, that ſee we well heere: namely, euen vnto thoſe, that in vnitie of faith, and feruent loue, are gathered togither with one accord; for of all vnitie he is the fountaine and originall. In contentious and proud hearts dwelleth not the holy Ghoſt: therefore is it meet that we pray.
                  Come (O holie ſpirite) repleniſh the harts of thy faithfull beleeuers, and kindle in them the fire of thy loue; thou that through manifolde tongues haſt gathered together all the nations of the heathen in vnitie of faith: O take all diſſention and diſcord out of thy holie Church, and make vs to be of one mind in vnfained loue, without the which wee cannot pleaſe thee.
               
            
            
               THere were dwelling at Hieruſalem Iewes, deuout men out of euerie nation of them that are in heauen: now when this was noyſed about, the multitude came together, and were aſtonied, becauſe that euerie man heard them

ſpeake with his owne language. They wondered all & maruelled ſaying amongst themſelues: Beholde, are not all theſe which ſpeake of Galilee? and how heare wee euerie man his owne tongue, wherein we were borne? Partheans & Medes, and Elemytes, and the inhabiters of Meſopotamia, and of Iewrie, and of Capadocia, of Pontus and Aſia, Phrigia & Pamphilia, of Egypt, and of the parties of Lybia, which is beſides Siren, and ſtrangers of Rome, Iewes and Proſelytes, Greekes and Arabians: wee haue heard them ſpeake in our owne tongues the great works of God.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THE eternall wiſedome hath indued all good minds diligently to learne and ſearch the thing wherein they thinke to finde that which they deſire: and what can be more worthie to be deſired, or more acceptable to the mind of man, than eternal life and ſaluation, which onely conſiſteth in God the higheſt good of all. Now was the ſacred ſcripture giuen of the holie Ghoſt, that man thereby might bee guided and lead vnto ſaluation, and to moſt excellent felicity. For they that exerciſe themſelues in holie ſcripture, ſtudying and peruſing it, ought thus to doe; euen to direct themſelues and others vnto life. Therefore by the ordinance of God, there hath been euer men in all nations, which to inſtruct others, haue applyed themſelues to the ſcripture: as among the Iewes wee finde Leui, of whome in the Prophet Malachie it is written,Mal. 2. that the lawe of the truth was in his mouth, and no wickednes in his lippes, that he

walked before God in peace and equitie, and conuerted many from vngodlines: for the lippes of the Prieſt are ſure of knowledge, and the law is required at his mouth, for hee is a meſſenger of the Lorde of hoſts. Thus as it may wel be coniectured, there were at Ieruſalem congregations of learned men, that exerciſed themſelues in the holy ſcripture. For though all wiſedome come of God (as the fountaine & wel) & no man can be learned whom God himſelfe teacheth not: yet will not he giue his grace, ſpirite, and knowledge, to the idle, ſlouthfull, and vnthankfull, neither to the proud, but vnto thoſe that with meeknes & feare of God practiſe themſelues in the ſcripture, and that applying vnto feruent praier, doe not deſpiſe the meanes and gratious giftes granted them of God.
                  And if any man will ſay, that all falſhood and deſtruction, all erroneous doctrine and diſcorde were come into the church by ſuch as be learned, let him conſider, that the thing which in himſelfe is good, ought not for the abuſes ſake to bee refuſed, remoue the abuſe, and then the thing is good and profitable. Wine is a profitable and wholeſome thing, created of GOD for the behoofe of man, and is neuer diſpraiſed of any witty man to bee euill, becauſe many doe abuſe it, and is drunken: Euen ſo is holie ſcripture and other profitable ſciences, to be eſteemed as high giftes, although many men puft vp with pride, blinded in couetouſnes, and intangled with other affections, haue miſuſed the ſame ſcriptures.
                  In the Papiſtry, the Vniuerſities, Colleges, cathedrall

Churches, and Monaſteries, haue highly exalted the Pope and his falſe faith, and by falſe interpretation of the ſcripture brought him ſo farre, that the doctrine of the faith and Chriſt is vtterly darkened. Now whereas lewd learned with falſe ſcience, with wrong vnderſtanding of ſcripture, haue broght ſuch high thinges, great goodes, and plentifull riches to paſſe, drawing ſo much people vnto themſelues: we ought not therefore to ceaſe from reading and exerciſing of the ſcripture, but to take vppon vs to further the true religion, and fayth of Chriſt, and to ſette it foorth againe with no leſſe diligence than they doo theirs. If wee will that the true fayth of Chriſt ſhall growe, continue, and increaſe, then wee muſt bring the ſame to paſſe by true vnderſtanding of the ſcripture, by pure, ſounde, and wholeſome doctrine. With the trueth muſt lyes bee baniſhed, with ſound doctrine muſt falſe bee rooted out, with the light muſt darkneſſe bee expelled. But how can the true vnderſtanding of the ſcripture, the vndoubted, wholeſome, and ſound doctrine bee had: when men doo neyther exerciſe and imploy themſelues, nor applye theyr endeuour, ſtudie, and diligence therein?
                  All the charges therefore and expences, which heretofore haue been beſtowed vpon the vnprofitable and noiſome learned men, ought now to be conuerted to godly Colleges and ſtudies, to the intent that litle ſeeds which God hath laid vp in yong wits, may fruitfully growe, be planted and brought forth. If thou ſeeke wiſedome as the golde (ſaith Salomon)

thou ſhalt finde it. Gold is with great trauaile and labour digged out of the inward and ſecrete veines of the earth, and of the high hilles, it raineth not downe vpon mens heads: euen ſo muſt knowledge & wiſedome bee gotten with great trauaile and diligence, not with loytering and idleneſſe. But when God giueth vs his giftes, wee muſt looke that we be not vnfaithfull in them, but vſe and beſtow them to his glorie, and edifiyng of his Church. Where godlineſſe commeth to knowledge, or where they two are together in one man, God is highly to bee thanked for ſo excellent a gift and grace, and greatly is ſuch a gift to bee had in eſtimation: but whereas pride, heauines, contention, greedines, and ſelfe loue, is in a learned man, there is not a more hurtfull poyſon found vpon the earth.
                  O God, thou that of thy grace and fatherly loue, haſt giuen ſo good and excellent giftes with ſingular light of all ſciences: graunt vnto ſuch as be learned a heart and mind, that in all things they may haue reſpect onely to thy glorie, & that in all their readings, writings, teachings, and doctrines, they may prefer the ſame.1. Cor. 8. For knowledge puffeth a man vp, but loue edifieth. O ſuffer not thy holy and excellent gifts to be ſtayned, defiled, and marred, with the filthy durt of mens affections. Graunt that our ſtudies bee not heatheniſh, but godly and Chriſtian. Preſerue the tender and good youth from wicked and vngodly ſchoolmaiſters, that the pure hartes which thou haſt conſecrated to be a temple for thee and thy holy ſpirit, be not polluted with vice and filthines.
               
            
            
               
               To teſtimoniall amazed and wondered,
                     Acts. 2.
                   ſaying one to an
                  
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   What meaneth this? Other mocked, ſaying: 
                     〈…〉
                   of new minds. But Peter ſtept forth 
                     〈…〉
                  , and lift vp his voice, and ſaide vnto them: 
                     〈…〉
                  , and all ye that dwell at Hieruſalem, be this 
                     〈…〉
                   you, and with your eares heare my wordes, for theſe are not drunken as yee ſuppoſe, ſeeing it is but the third 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the day: but this is that which was ſpoken by the Prophet Joel. And it ſhall be in the last daies (ſaith God) I will poure out of my ſpirite in thoſe daies, and your ſonnes and your daughters ſhall propheſie, and your yong men ſhall ſee viſions, and your olde men ſhall dreame dreames. And on my ſeruantes, and on my hand-maides I will poure out of my ſpirite in thoſe daies, and they ſhall propheſie, and I will ſhew wonders in heauen aboue, and tokens in the earth beneath, bloud and fire, and the vapor of ſmoke, the ſunne ſhal bee turned into darkneſſe, and the moone into bloud, before before that great and notable day of the Lord come. And it ſhall come to paſſe, that whoſoeuer calleth on the name of the Lord, ſhall be ſaued.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  WHen the truth is publiſhed in the church of Chriſt, & the power of God vttereth it ſelfe, there be alwaies ſome ſimple people, that of good minde ſeeke to knowe that which they vnderſtand not, and therefore they demaund queſtions▪ vnto thoſe the Lorde dooth gladly open himſelfe. But again there be others that deſpiſe, ſlander,

mocke, and abhorre all holy things, as in the old and new Teſtament we haue many witneſſes of the ſame. Ierem. 20.26.32. Iohn. 8.10.11. Acts. 17. For the naturall man vnderſtandeth not the thinges that appertaine vnto God.1. Cor. 2. And thus doe they moſt of all which beeing puffed vp in the wiſedome and ſcience of man, haue nor yet attained to the ſpirite and right kernell of the ſcripture: in the ſight of which men,1. Cor. 1. Math. 11. the wiſedome of God, and preaching of the croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, is but a deriſion and fooliſhnes. But bleſſed are they that in the ſinglenes of their heart, with pure minds in meeknes, obedience, and in the true feare of God, ſubmit themſelues vnto his doctrine:Math. 11. Luk. 24. from them cannot God hide himſelf, but openeth their mindes, that they may vnderſtand the ſcriptures. For they that of a good mind do here aske the queſtion; What meaneth this? are afterwardes conuerted by Peters preaching. Peter the feruent Diſciple of Chriſt, the faithful ſhepheard of Chriſts ſheepe, as ſoone as he receiueth the ſpirit, is bolde to ſteppe foorth, and to confeſſe him, whom before he had denied.
                  But firſt hee perſwadeth that the Diſciples were not drunken; for if ſuch vice were in the Miniſters of Chriſt, & they truly conuinced thereof, it ſhould bring vnto the Goſpell and name of Chriſt, great hinderaunce, ſtaine his doctrine, & make it to be deſpiſed and ſubiect. Moſt diligent therefore ought we to bee, in keeping vs from ſuch vices, whereby our office, mniiſtration, and doctrine, might bee ſuſpect and ſet at naught. Yet muſt we not deferre too long

in aunſwering ſuch euill reports; for more diligence muſt we apply in ſetting foorth the name and glorie of GOD, than in defending and maintaining our owne eſtimation.
                  Thus the Apoſtle Peter in anſwering that obiection concerning drunkennes, dooth ſhortly paſſe ouer, and ſaith: Brethren, theſe are not drunken, as ye ſuppoſe, for why the time doth not permit, it is yet too earely in the morning. Immediately vppon the ſame, he proceedeth forth, to admoniſh them of the excellent graces and gifts, which the God of mercie had promiſed before, and now performed them. But this ſatisfaction concerning drunkennes, and this inſtruction of the ignorant, is made with all meeknes, and yet with ſinceritie and ſtedfaſtnes, not lordly, or braggingly; although he was highly endewed with the holy Ghoſt.
                  Thus we that be Miniſters of Chriſt, and teachers of his congregations, ought not by reaſon of our office or high giftes, to take too much vppon vs, that with bragging or arrogancie wee would outface the weake: but worthily and valiantly with ſinceritie & truth of the ſcripture, to inſtruct ſuch as be ignorant and out of the way. Our mouth is an inſtrument of the holy Ghoſt, and of the truth, not of any lightnes, bragging, or preſumption.
                  This word prophecie is taken not onely to tell & ſhew before of godly and high thinges, but alſo to harken vnto the ſame, and to perceiue them▪ & this maketh for the vnderſtanding of this place. For the holy Ghoſt declareth by Ioel, and promiſeth alſo (as

he dooth by Ieremie) that the knowledge of GOD ſhould bee common in all the world,Ioel. 2. Ierem 31. and that from the leaſt vnto the moſt euerie one ſhould be inſtructed in Gods knowledge, through the guiding of the ſpirit: which knowledge before time was common onely to the Iewes and Scribes, but by Chriſt is ſuch abundant and plentifull knowledge of God, powred out in all the world, through his holy ſpirit: who worketh in the Church vntill the ende, not onely in Scribes,Math. 11. from whome ſuch high myſteries of Gods wiſedome are oftentimes hidde, but vnto ſimple vnlearned fiſhers, and to others that in the ſight of the world are not eſteemed.
                  
                     1. Cor. 12. Eſay. 11.Yea richly powreth he out of his holie ſpirite vppon all fleſh, vnto euerie one his meaſure, as it beſt pleaſeth him, no man excludeth hee from his grace, his knowledge ſuffereth he to flow ouer all the earth as a water floud, vnto all thoſe that are his ſeruantes and hand maides. This is the deare and excellent treaſure, which in ſtead of it that was giuen before by the incarnation of Chriſt, is now offered, that the knowledge of God, which by the holy Ghoſt is the preaching of the Goſpell, is come forth into all the world,Pſal. 75. Iohn. .11. whereas before it was manifeſt only amongſt the Iewes. For after the death of the Lorde finiſhed vpon the croſſe, was the Goſpell publiſhed in all the world; by the which preaching, the children of God diſperſed abroad are gathered together.Eſay 40. The holie Ghoſt alſo who was before in the godly, did by his giftes and operations worke much more mightily & ſtrongly after the death and aſcenſion of Chriſt,Ierem. 31. than

before: by the which holy Ghoſt, the captiuitie of of the law and ceremonies is taken away, & heauenly freedome giuen to the children of God.
                  For as much as to know Chriſt & his kingdome, it miniſ
                        ••
                     eth true godlines and eternall life: Peter in his oration trauelleth eſpecially to this end, that the Iewes being there preſent, which helde Chriſt for a wicked doer, and put him to death, might know him to be the true ſauiour of the world, and to be riſen againe from death: and therefore hee alleadgeth the prophecies which in Chriſt were fulfilled. As if I would ſay, Behold Ioel tolde before of the time that theſe your children ſhould prophecie, now ye ſee it performed in them: whereby ye may well perceiue that the kingdome of Meſſias (which is a ſpirituall thing) is now begun already. In the which kingdom muſt bee not onely Iewes (which haue the outward temple & ceremonies) but all as call vpon the name of the Lord, whereſoeuer they be in the world. Vnto the Iew was promiſed a ſauiour, neuertheles ſuch one as ſhuld not onely ſaue them, but alſo the whole world, and whoſe kingdome ſhould be euerlaſting, that hee alſo ſhould deliuer and bring them, yea all mankind, from the captiuitie of the prince of this world. Of theſe things there were amongſt the Iewiſh people many ſignes and figures, whereby in bodily and corporall thinges God did partly ſet foorth theſe thinges ſpirituall: which they alſo which are ſpirituall and elect amongſt the people of the Iewes, vnderſtood right well (though darkely) in that they with the eyes of inward fayth had a further reſpect

than to gaze onely vppon the outwarde corporall things. Thus God the holie Ghoſt by viſible thinges lead and taught them (euen as a yong ſcholler is firſt taught by letters and ſyllables vnder the ſchoolmaiſter) vntill the time that the glorious kingdom came that in Chriſt the true Meſſias, all things were reformed, and became ſpirituall.
                  Thus had the Iewes the corporall kingdome of Dauid and of other kinges, and thus for their ſinnes they were brought vnto Babylon into captiuity. By the which captiuitie was figured the greeuous bondage and thraldome of mankind, vnder the violent power of the deuill. But when they were in captiuitie at Babylon, God comforting them by his Prophets, promiſed to bring them thence, and to reſtore them to their owne land: in the which deliuerance was figured the redemption of the world by Chriſt. This cuſtome had all the Prophets, that when they told the people before hand, and promiſed of Gods behalf, deliuerance out of the captiuity before they came into it: they alwaies made mention alſo of the puniſhment of the ſinnes that ſhould go before. Proſperitie ſhall come (ſaid they) but firſt there muſt bee an horrible plague for ſinne, the iuſtice of God muſt firſt be ſatisfied. Thus doth Ioel heere alſo, in whom partly we learne, that God will not ſuffer our ſinnes to paſſe without puniſhment, as wee ſee alſo in the greeuous captiuity of all mankinde, that God will haue the ſinne ſo worthily ſatisfied, that euen his only begotten ſonne, by whom no ſinne was committed, muſt therefore die, and by his innocent death

                     
                        〈…〉
                      ſinnes. If God now ſpared not his onely 
                        〈…〉
                     , how may we then think that he will 
                        〈…〉
                      ſinfull life, to paſſe without puniſh
                     
                        ••••
                      
                     
                        〈…〉
                      we paciently, and with good will beare the 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        ••
                     niſhment of our ſins, ſent vnto vs of God: and conuerting from our ſinnes, doe turne vs to the gratious father that beateth vs, God vndoubtedly ſhall ſend vs grace, proſperitie, and welfare, and help vs out of all miſerie. Once we muſt eyther liue a godly and innocent life, and throghly amend our ſelues or els ſinne muſt bee puniſhed, and euery vncleane thing muſt in the fire & puniſhment of Gods wrath be conſumed. Againe, though we were vertuous & godly, yet is God of this nature, that he maketh his choſen to bee like faſhioned vnto the image of his ſonne, and by much aduerſitie and trouble hee leadeth them vnto ioy:Luk. 24. Euen as it behooued Chriſt to ſuffer, & ſo to enter into his glory. The puniſhment of ſinne is harde, and the iudgement of the Lorde, as often as he commeth to recompence ſinne, is ſharp: which the Prophet partly by bodily thinges dooth deſcribe, as other Prophets do alſo.Eſay. 13. Ierem. 15. Amos. 
                           •
                        . The ſunne ſhall be turned into bloud, &c: and euen ſo is it in the opinion of thoſe, that muſt beare the iudgement of God. For as much now as the Apoſtle Peter (according as the matter required) did neceſſarily alledge teſtimony out of the Prophet, concerning the holy Ghoſt (who is giuen to the good children of God) he thought alſo to ſpecifie that which was written in the Prophet, as touching the puniſhment of the wicked, that deſpiſe the grace of God: giuing a warning

thereby vnto the Iewes, to ceaſe from theyr vnbeleefe and ſhamefull life: declaring vnto them, that if they proceed foorth in wickednes, it ſhould happen vnto them, as it did before vnto theyr forefathers, vnto whome Ioel opened the puniſhment of God. Whereby wee muſt learne, paciently to beare it, and to take it in good part, when our ſinnes are rebuked, our vices ſpoken againſt, and we told that the puniſhment is at hande. For this cuſtome had the Apoſtles in their preaching and declaring of the Goſpell, that they not onely made mention of the grace of God offered vnto the world by Chriſt: but therwithall likewiſe, they threatned ſore puniſhment to thoſe that eyther deſpiſed ſuch excellent grace, or hauing knowledge of the truth did cleaue vnto vice, which thing in the worde of Peter is yet more euident.
                  The Goſpell alſo preacheth amendment of lyfe, and not remiſſion of ſinnes onely through the bloud of Chriſt. But nowe at this preſent time there bee many dainty Chriſtians, as certaine Princes and Senates in the countreys, and citties, whoſe opinion is, that the grace of the Goſpell is to bee preached, yea, and they permit Chriſt and his grace, gently & worthily to be ſpoken of: but if the falſe Gods ſeruice, as the honoring of Images, and all that is crept in and erected vp in the Papiſtry agaynſt Gods word be reprooued, or if the preacher ſpeake agaynſt theyr tyranny, vniuſt actes, theyr malitious violence and wilfulnes, whereby they oppreſſe poore widowes and fatherleſſe children, dooing right vnto no man, or if

the preacher touch them on the gald backs for their exceſſiue pompe and pride, for their rioting, whoredome, adulterie, gluttony, drunkennes, fighting, and extortion, if ſuch vices (I ſay) wherein they ſtill lead their liues, be touched to the quicke, then is all fauor gone, then burne theſe preachers (ſay they) drowne them, they be ſeditious fellowes, they will ſet vs together by the eares, and bring the common people in our necks. But ſuch men ſhould conſider, that vnto this office of the preacher it belongeth to crye againſt vice, leaſt he bee called of God a blind watchman, a dumbe dogge,Eſay. 56.57. Ezech. 5. and leaſt all the ſoules which periſh through his ſilence be required at his handes: their wilfulnes, pride, and vaine lyfe they ſhould forſake, and reforme themſelues, and ſo needed not the preacher to crye out agaynſt them. Now conſidering that the Prophets vſed (as I ſaid before) to make mention of the kingdome of Ieſu Chriſt, and of the calling of the heathen to the grace and knowledge of God, eſpecially in their orations when they ſpeak of captiuity, and deliuerance from the ſame. Ioel in his prophecie doth alſo keepe that order. For ſeeing that the Iewes were euer ſtill continually as ſtifnecked, rebellious, and vnbeleeuing people, vnthankful to the grace of God: the holy Ghoſt foreſawe theyr reiection, declaring it by the Prophets, and that another people, namely the heathen, ſhould bee receyued in their ſtead. For in as much as they deſpiſed the grace of God, which firſt was offered vnto them, it was meet that the kingdome of God ſhould bee taken from them, and giuen to another nation. Seeing

they thought ſcorne to come to the marriage, & to the royall feaſt whereunto they were bidden, it behooued others to be called vnto the ſame. Therfore is Peter earneſt vpon this ſentence: Whoſoeuer calleth vpon the name of the Lord ſhall be ſaued. As if he would ſay; O ye Iewes, bragge not of circumciſion, of Abraham, of the temple, or of other ceremonies, thinke not that ye onely are the people of God, the time is now come, that God wil beſtow his grace vpon thoſe whom ye eſteeme to bee vncleane. God is no accepter of perſons, but among all people who ſo calleth vpon him ſhall be ſaued.
                  Of this ſentence dooth Peter now take occaſion more manifeſtly to ſpeak of the kingdom of Chriſt: for much more pithily, and with more euidence doth the Apoſtles deſcribe the kingdome of Chriſt, than do the Prophets. Who ſo calleth vppon Gods name, muſt knowe God: Now can no man knowe God but by Chriſt: Therefore in this little worde (to call vpon the name of the Lorde) is comprehended the whole ſumme of the Chriſtian faith. Like as oftentimes in the Prophets, bee theſe: to ſweare by God, is contained his whole religion. But foraſmuch as the Iewes knew not Chriſt, by whome commeth the true knowledge of God, therfore beginneth Peter, and declareth with ſtrong argumentes, how the name of God is to be called vpon: namely, through true faith in Chriſt, who is the true Meſſias, the annointed king and ſonne of God, which was promiſed in the Prophets. This doth Peter prooue by the ground of the reſurrection of Chriſt from death, by

his aſcenſion into heauen, and by that he now ſitteth at the right hand of God, Lord & king of al things. Firſt let vs heare the text.
               
            
            
               YEe men of Iſrael heare theſe words▪ Ieſus of Nazareth a man approued of God among you, with miracles, wonders, and ſignes, which God did by him in the midſt of you (as ye your ſelues knowe) him haue yee taken by the hands of vnrighteous perſons, after hee was deliuered by the determinate councell and foreknowledge of God, & haue crucified and ſlaine him, whom God hath rayſed vp & looſed the ſorrowes of death, becauſe it was vnpoſsible that he ſhould be holden of it. For Dauid ſpeaketh of him, aforehand I ſawe God alwayes before mee, for hee is on my right hand, that I ſhould not be mooued. Therefore did my heart reioice, and my toong was glad: moreouer alſo my fleſh ſhal re
                     •
                  t in hope, becauſe thou wilt not leaue my ſoule in hell, neither wilt thou ſuffer thine holie one to ſee corruption. Thou hast ſhewed me the waies of life, thou ſhalt make mee full of ioy with thy countenance.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  TO the intent now that no man ſhould bee offended at the death and croſſe of Chriſt: Peter ſheweth firſt, that in the councel of God it was concluded, foreſeene, and determined, that the ſon of God, the true Meſſias, ſhould and muſt die: and how that the ſame ſacrifice was ordained from the beginning of the world, to bee ſlaine and offered vp vpon the croſſe for our ſins. And that no man ſhould

make any ſtoppe by reaſon of his death, Peter therefore declareth, that he was no miſſe-doer, which had deſerued his death by any tranſgreſſion, but that hee was ſent vnto vs by GOD the father, to dye for vs; whereby we might perceiue the loue of our Father in heauen. And if they now would thinke; well, if it were ſo concluded in the councell of God, then are not we guiltie of his death? hee aunſwereth vnto the ſame, & ſayth; Vnrighteous men broght him therto, & it is ye your ſelues that ſlew him & crucified him. As if he would ſay, yea euen ſo behoued it to be, that the righteouſnes of God for the ſinne of mankinde, might be ſatisfied. Chriſt muſt needs die, to recompence and waſh away with his bloud the ſinne of all the world. And yet yee Iewes which haue betrayed Chriſt, and brought him to the croſſe, are not vniuſtly accuſed: yee cannot through the fore ordinance of God diſcharge your ſelues that ye be without ſin, ſeeing ye haue ſlaine the ſauiour of the worlde, hee being guiltles. By this now we learne, that when we do wrong and euill, wee may not excuſe our ſelues, with the free ordinaunce of God, for it is not God, but the deuill and our owne wickednes that prouoketh vs to ſinne.
                  And heere we ſee, that when the grace of GOD through the Goſpell is offered vnto the worlde, the ſinne and vice alſo wherein the worlde is intangled, muſt be ſpoken of and touched, for no man can bee iuſtified, and come to the helth of his ſoule through Chriſt, which doth not firſt know & confeſſe his ſin & wickednes. How can he be made whole, that will

will not know his owne diſeaſe and ſicknes? Therefore doth Peter ſette before their eyes their great ſin which they had committed againſt the innocent ſonne of God, ſaying: The innocent and righteous whom God had giuen vnto you, haue ye ſlaine and crucified, which is a great wickednes & ſinne. Now go to, on your behalfe it was euill done, and greuouſly offended, but on his behalfe it was ſo ordayned before. Therefore at his death, which in the ſight of the world was ſo ſhamefull and vile, yee ought not to bee offended, that yee therefore would holde the leſſe of him, or not receiue and know him for a ſauiour. For if you looke vpon his former conuerſation, the ſame was innocent, pure, and holie: therefore cannot yee doubt but hee was ſent of God. Beſides this, ye haue perceyued and ſeene God to be euerie where in his workes: for the tokens and wonders which hee ſhewed and declared amongſt you, giue euident knowledge that God was in him, & wroght in him preſently, for no man had beene able to doe the tokens that he did, vnleſſe God had beene with him. Which tokens alſo were ſpoken of before by the Prophets concerning Chriſt, and by thoſe tokens muſt ye know and confeſſe, that he is euen the true Meſſias, of whom the Prophets ſpake. Wherefore conſidering that by his former doctrine & godly power, ye knowe that hee is the true Meſſias, yee ought not to bee offended that hee as an euill dooer was crucified vpon the croſſe; for it was the ſpeciall determination of God, that Meſſias ſhould be crucified, according to the foreſayings of the Prophets.

Conſider yee alſo, that the Prophets likewiſe ſpake of his reſurrection from death, by the which ye may well perceiue that he is the true Meſſias.
                  Thus earneſt is Peter, beating into them the reſurrection from the dead, and that out of the Scripture. For Chriſts reſurrection from death, is a ſtrong argument to proue his godhead, as it is taught. Rom. 1. Iohn. 20.
                  
                  Yea he died (ſaith Peter) for our ſinnes, but nowe he is aliue and riſen againe from death: death hath no more power ouer him, for he liueth for euer, and his kingdome is euerlaſting. Yea vnpoſſible it was, that the ſonne of God ſhould corrupt in the earth & ſepulchre: namely, he that is the firſtling riſen from the dead, and that from his owne godly power. Seeing that theſe wordes of Peter concerning the reſurrection and life of Chriſt, were little credited among the Iewes: he alleadgeth the 15. pſalm of Dauid, who amongſt them was in great reputation.
                  But now might the Iewes ſay or thinke, Dauid ſpeaketh theſe words of himſelfe, and not of Chriſt: that weapon therefore dooth Peter take from them, and proueth, that the ſame words may in no wiſe be referred vnto Dauid; but that Dauid as a Prophet hauing knowledge of things to come, ſpake them of Chriſt, in whom they be now fulfilled, and thus hee ſaith.
               
            
            
               YEe men and brethren, let me freely ſpeake vnto you of the Patriarch Dauid▪ for he is both dead and buried, and his ſepulchre remaineth with vs vntill this day:

Therefore ſeeing he was a Prophet, and knew that God had ſworne vnto him with an oath, that Christ (as concerning the fleſh) ſhould come of the fruites of his loynes, and ſhoulde ſitte on his ſeate, he knowing this before ſpake of the reſurrection of Christ, that his ſoule ſhould not bee left in hell, neyther his fleſh ſhould ſee corruption. This Ieſus hath God raiſed vp, whereof we all are witneſſes.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  THe Prophet Dauid ſpeaketh of one whoſe fleſh ſhould not corrupt; now could not hee haue ſpoken this of himſelfe, for his fleſh corrupted in the ſepulchre, which wee yet haue, and his bones lie yet in the ſepulchre, by the which it may well bee perceiued, that Dauid as a Prophet knowing of things to come, ſpake of another, which ſhould bee borne out of his owne loynes and ſeede,Pſal 88. 2. Reg 7. whom God with a ſolemne oath had promiſed to ſitte vpon his ſeate, and raigne after him: not onely for a ſeaſon, but alſo that his gouernance, kingdome, and dominion ſhould be perpetuall and endure for euer. And this king is Chriſt the true Meſſias, who as concerning the fleſh was borne of the ſeede of Dauid, and is his ſonne.
                  If this ſonne now of Dauid had after death remained ſtill in death, and not riſen from death againe, how could hee then raigne for euer? It is euident therefore, that Dauid out of the holy Ghoſt (who had opened this vnto him) prophecied it of the reſurrection of Chriſt his ſonne, the eternall king. For

though hee as a verie man died indeede vppon the croſſe, and was then buried: yet his ſoule or life remained not in death: neither did his body reſolue into corruption as other mens, but on the third day he roſe again from death to life. This muſt we needs teſtifie: for after his reſurrection he appear doſt vnto vs. We ſaw him, we heard him, we handled him, we did eate and drinke with him. Heere wee learne, that the Saintes in the old Teſtament, vnderſtood & knew by faith, the reſurrection and eternal kingdom of Chriſt, ſeeing they prophecied of it ſo euidently. Here is alſo proued, that Chriſt died in very deed, & yet abode not ſtill in death, foraſmuch as hee ouercame it. Alſo, that the power and vertue of his holie paſſion and death, came not onely to the liuing vpon earth, but vnto all thoſe that died before him, according as Saint Peter in his Epiſtle, and the Article of our beleefe (He deſcended into hel) declareth. Wherof in the Catechiſme vpon the Creed there is made mention ſufficient.
               
            
            
               SIthens now that he by the right hand of God is exalted and hath receiued of the Father the promiſe of the holie Ghost: he hath ſhed foorth this gift, which yee now ſee and heare. For Dauid is not aſcended into heauen, but he ſaith:
                     Pſal. 109.
                   The Lorde ſaide to my Lorde: Sit thou on my right hand, till I make thine enemies thy foot ſtoole.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  WE beleeue, that Ieſus Chriſt our king and Sauiour, is not onely riſen againe from

death to life, but alſo is aſcended vp into heauen, ſitteth at the right hand of God, and raigneth for euer.Pſal. 11
                           •
                        
                      For though hee heere a ſeaſon was deſpiſed and refuſed (as the ſtone of the builders) yet hath the ſtrong hand of God exalted him, and mightily wrought in him. Which thing may well bee perceiued by this, (as Saint Peter heere valiantly concludeth) that hee ſendeth downe from on high ſuch an excellent gift of the holy Ghoſt vpon thoſe that are his. This is a ſure euidence that he mightily raigneth at the right hand of God, and hath all things in his hand, ſeeing he hath power of the ſpirite of God, whom he poureth into the hearts of his, and that ſometime in viſible manner. For the glorious triumpher aſcending vp to heauen with great victorie,Eph. 4 did after the cuſtome of great kings, and let fall his giftes downe vppon vs, and parted them among vs, namely, the gifts of the holy Ghoſt, whom he as man, receiued of the Father, but after the godhead he had him alwaie, for of the father and of the ſonne there is one onely ſpirite.
                  Neither may this bee applied vnto Dauid, for though hee as a iuſt friend of GOD, bee ſaued and come to heauen, yet did not hee immediatly after death aſcend into heauen with bodie and ſoule, that he might be reported to ſit at the right hand of God:Math. 22. for his wordes ſpeake of another, whome he calleth his Lord, namely in the hundreth and ninth Pſalme he ſaith: God the Father ſayd vnto my Lorde, euen the Sonne, Sit thou on my right hand.
                  
               
            
            
               
               So therefore, let all the houſe of Ieruſalem know for a ſuretie, that God hath made this Ieſus (whom ye haue crucified) Tord and Meſsias.
               
                  Doctrine and fruit.
                  WIth theſe wordes doth Peter conclude his Oration, exhorting them not to doubt Ieſus Chriſt to be the ſame annointed ſauiour and king, who of God the father was firſt promiſed, & then giuen for the deliuerance of the people of the Iewes, and of all nations.
                  In this concluſion is comprehended the ſumme of the whole Chriſtian faith, namely, that wee beleeue, that Ieſus, who was borne of the virgine Marie, and crucified of the Iewes, is the true Chriſt, that is to ſaie, Meſſias, euen the king that was ordained & annointed of God, to raigne foreuer ouer all faithful beleeuers, Lorde of the whole world, and ſauiour of all ſuch as put their truſt in him. This hath God the Father opened and ſet forth vnto vs by myracles, by the reſurrection, by the aſcenſion, & by the power of the holy Ghoſt, that wee might beleeue it, and not doubt thereof. Therefore ſaith Iohn, Who ſo beleeueth that Ieſus is Chriſt, the ſame is borne of God.
               
            
            
               WHen they heard this, they were prickt in their hearts, and ſaid vnto Peter, and to the other Apoſtles, Ye men and brethren, what ſhall we doe? Peter ſaid vnto them: Repent of your ſinnes, and be baptiſed euerie one of you in the name of Ieſus Chriſt, for

the remiſsion of ſinners, and yee ſhall receiue the gifte of the holy Ghoſt. For the promiſe was made vnto you, & to your children, and to all that are a farre off, euen as many as the Lord our God ſhall call. And with many other words bare he witneſſe, and exhorted them, ſaying: Saue your ſelues from this vntoward generation. Then they that gladly receiued his preaching, were baptiſed: And the ſame daie there were added vnto them about three thouſand ſoules.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  THis is the fruit and end which followeth out of the preaching of the worde of God, that they whoſe heartes God toucheth, are ſo ſorrie for theyr ſinnes, that it euen pearceth them: for Gods word is euen a ſharpe two edged ſword, and entreth through to the depth. Bleſſed are all they which ſo reade and heare the word of God, that they begin to be aſhamed of their ſinnes and wickedneſſe, beeing repentant and ſorrie therefore. A bleſſed and wholſome ſorrow is that, which riſeth and groweth out of the truth, which is opened vnto the heart by the holy Ghoſt. Which ſpirite in the heart giueth hope vpon the mercie of God, and driueth awaie all deſpaire. Then beginneth a man to aske, What ſhall I doo? Then enquireth he after the will of God: and ſuch a man that ſo asketh is eaſie to be helped: ſoone is he healed, that knowing his diſeaſe would faine be made whole.
                  Vnto ſuch a man doth the faithfull Miniſter of

Chriſt giue counſell out of the Scripture▪ and ſheweth him the fruit of Chriſt preached and knowen. He doth not bid him beſtow monie on ſolemnities and Diriges, on Images, Moniſteries, or co
                        •
                     les, in
                        •••
                     ying of pardons: He doth not will to runne vnto Rome, or to Lawret, but requireth of him the beſt and moſt profitable thing of all, namely, amendement & conuerſion of life. Our mindes, our workes, and maners muſt be altered, if we will pleaſe God. Who ſo ſaith with his heart, that he beleeueth in Chriſt, holding Chriſt for his ſauiour and king, muſt forſake his euil waie, eſchuing euill, and doing good. Iere. 7.11. Iſa. 1 Niniue ſtood ſtill vpright, when they tooke vppon them true conuerſion and amendement. As for Hieruſalem, though they offered many ſacrifices, & faſted much, it helped not, becauſe there was no true reformation and forſaking of ſinne, needs muſt they be deſtroied and miſerablie periſh. To botch or patch the matter it will not helpe, there is no remedie, wee muſt become godly and vertuous of life: it auaileth not to diſſemble, God looketh into the heart, which he will haue pure and vnfained. Foraſmuch then as we through baptiſme in the faith of Chriſt, haue receiued Chriſt, and are marked out for him▪ hauing once forgiueneſſe of ſinnes, through the grace and gift of Chriſt, let vs be of a vertuous lfe, walking innocently and in the feare of God: Let vs die therefore to the innocencie which is reſtored vnto vs againe through Chriſt: let vs daily remember to harken & follow the admoniſhment of the ſpirit, which teacheth vs all good things. We are they vnto whom

God hath promiſed his grace of the ſpirite, yea, and vnto our children alſo, ſo farre as we abide in his couenants. Let vs thankfully receiue ſuch excellent grace (deare brethren) being ware, that we ſtain not the temple of Ieſus Chriſt, and of his holy ſpirit with filthineſſe of the worlde, that wee neuer make our ſelues partakers in the iniquitie of wicked and faithleſſe men, but to leade here a pure and cleane conuerſation with a good conſcience before GOD our moſt louing father, and alwaie lift vp our minds vnto the place, where Chriſt our Lord and king raignneth at the right hand of God,Col. 1 from whence he ſhall come and take vs vnto himſelfe. At all times therefore ought we to watch and wait for his comming, that we may ioyfully receiue him, and bee partakers with him in eternall bliſſe.
                  Heere alſo we learne, how faithfull beleeuers vſe themſelues in the outward Sacraments. They that being moued by the inſpiration of the holy Ghoſt in theyr hearts, doo heare the eternall word preached, giuing credite vnto it, & gladly receiuing it, theſe doo not afterward deſpiſe the outward Sacraments, which GOD hath inſtituted for the welfare of his Church: but vſe the ſame with all obedience, good will and reuerence. To vſe the Sacraments without faith profiteth not, but rather hurteth: to be loth to vſe them, declareth a compulſion and vnbeleefe.
                  For though the water in baptiſme be an outward thing, and cannot cleanſe the ſoule from ſinne, yet the faithfull doo know right well, that Chriſt the eternall wiſedome in whom they beleeue, did not inſtitute

it in vaine, and therefore will not they contemne or leaue vnexerciſed the ordinance of theyr head, to whome they as members are incorporated by faith. For they knowe, that Chriſt with theſe outwarde tokens, thought to couple and knit together the members of his holy Church, in obedience and loue one towards another, whereby they knowing one another among themſelues, might by ſuch exteriour things, ſtirre and prouoke one another to loue and godlyneſſe. They know alſo, that the ſacraments are euidences of the promiſe & grace of God, which they after a viſible and palpable manner, do ſet forth declare, and repreſent vnto vs. Theſe tokens of grace doth no man vſe more deuoutly and with more reuerence, than he that in himſelfe is certified and aſſured of the gracious fauour of God, as we ſee in Cornelius, in Paul, and in Queene Candaces chamberlaine.
                  What fruite followeth the preaching of the Goſpell, it is heere euidently ſeene: for in one daie at Peters preaching, by the working of the holy Ghoſt, there came three thouſand men to the Church of God. God ſuffereth not his word to paſſe voide and vnfruitfull. Verie earneſt therefore & diligent ought we to be, and to ſpare no trauell, coſt, and labor, that the pure and ſincere Goſpell, the word of truth, may euerie where be preached by good and faithful men, not doubting, God wil giue bleſſed ſucceſſe thereto, that the ſeed ſowen by the miniſter, ſhall bring forth fruit.
               
            
            
               
               AND they continued in the Apoſtles doctrine, in the fellowſhip, in the breaking of bread, and in praiers.
               
                  Doctrine and fruite.
                  TO indure, crowneth and rewardeth all workes: who ſo indureth vnto the end ſhall bee ſaued: without continuance may no good thing bee brought to end and fruit. Therefore is it now declared, how the word preached in the Church of God, bringeth fruit, and what the ſame fruites be, wherein faithfull beleeuers do exerciſe themſelues.
                  Saint Luke mencioneth foure thinges that proceed out of the faith in Chriſt: for faith is not voide nor idle, but worketh without ceaſing in them that beleeue. Therefore here we finde a patterne & myrrour, how it ought to goe in the Church of Chriſt: for where theſe foure things bee, there is Chriſtes Church. Firſt, the Church of Chriſt, which is the felowſhip of all Saintes and faithfull beleeuers, indureth, abideth, and continueth in the doctrine of the Apoſtles: for euerie thing is preſerued with that out of the which it is borne: now is the Church of God borne firſt of the word of truth, therfore in the word of truth alſo muſt it indure and be kept, daily muſt it be planted, nouriſhed, and watered with the worde and doctrine: the ſucceſſe & the increaſe doth God giue.
                  The doctrine of the Apoſtles is nothing elſe but the boly Goſpell,Iohn. 1. Mark. 16. Rom. 
                           •
                        . which the ſonne of God committed vnto them, & which they receued of him, which

alſo the Prophets before Chriſt ſpake of by the holy Ghoſt. What Goſpel was preached by the Apoſtles it is eaſie to perceiue by the aforeſayd Sermon of Peter and of others in the Acts, by the Euangeliſts and Epiſtles of the Apoſtles: namely, that God ſo loued the world, that he gaue his only begotten Sonne for it, that whoſoeuer beleeueth on him, ſhould not periſh, but haue eternall life. Alſo, he dyed for vs, roſe agayne from death, aſcended vp to heauen, and ſitteth there at the right hand of God, being king and high Prieſt for euer, in whoſe name all knees muſt bow, & without whom there is none other name giuen vnto men, in whome wee muſt bee ſaued, than the onely name of Ieſus,1. Ioh. 2. 1. Tim. 
                           •
                        . whoſe bloud waſheth awaie our ſins and he is the onely perpetuall mediation betweene God and vs.
                  In this doctrine continueth the Church, beeing builded vpon the ſure rocke Ieſus Chriſt, and is not moued or driuen awaie by euerie winde of ſtrange and inconſtant doctrine.Mat. 7.16
                           •
                         Eph. 4. Shee hearkneth not to the voice of anie other, but of Ieſus her ſhepheard. In the doctrine of the Apoſtles, there is no deceit, no guile, no poiſon. And in this doctrine is found none of thoſe things, which certayne yeres after the Apoſtles were brought in by Romiſh Biſhops, as Maſſes, Diriges, Cloiſters, worſhipping of Idols, ſetting vp of Images, buying of pardons, forbidding of this or that meate.
                  Firſt now doth faith in Chriſt bring forth this fruit in the Church, namely, in faithfull beleeuers, that it draweth them to the doctrine of the truth, by

the which they became beleeuers: and in the ſame it maketh them to continue, that they neyther hearken nor giue credite to anie falſe errronious doctrine: for they do verie aſſuredly know, that ſuch doctrines are not wholeſome, but venimous and hurtfull. But in the Goſpell of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and in the doctrine of the holie Apoſtles, they are ſure to finde the truth, which nouriſheth and preſerueth them vnto eternall lyfe.
                  The Church of God abhorreth all vntruth, for ſhe knoweth it is of the deuill: but of the trueth is ſhe deſirous, for ſhe knoweth that the ſame commeth of God, and bringeth vnto GOD againe.
                  This Euangelicall truth and doctrine of the Apoſtles, in the which the Church of God, and all the members of Chriſt muſt continue, hath beene of long time, euen from the beginning, comprehended in certayne Articles, which wee call the Creede, whereof there is ſufficient mention made in the Catechiſme. Among the true children and ſeruauntes of God alſo, there is no ſchiſme, doubt, nor diuiſion, concerning the head and chiefe Articles, in the which they are well and firmely eſtabliſhed, fully perſwaded, and of one minde and conſent.
                  And whereas there be ſome men which ouerreach and goe beyond this marke, willing other men, and compelling Chriſtians, as farre as in them lyeth, thereto, teaching thoſe to bee heretikes

and damned, that cleaue to the onely doctrine of the Apoſtles. The ſame commeth and proceedeth of the preſumptuous arrogancie of fleſh, who eſteemeth his owne inuention, more than that which God ſpeaketh: As when they ſaie that Images muſt bee had in Churches, that pardons muſt bee bought with money, and ſuch lyke things, which are not grounded in the doctrine of Chriſt nor of the Apoſtles, nor mencioned in the Articles of the right and true auncient beleefe, but inuented by the fantaſie & couetouſnes of men.
                  The ſecond thing that muſt bee conſtantly and inuiolably kept in the Church of God, is the communion and fellowſhippe, namely, that none looke vnto his owne ſingular profite, that no man ſeeke himſelfe, but that euerie member looking one to another what hee lacketh, ſupplye the ſame, helping him, and comforting him, and giuing him the beſt counſell he can. This friendly loue and louing fellowſhippe ought to bee among Chriſtians.
                  All temporall and outwarde goods ought to bee common among them. Not as ſome fondly thinke, that I muſt defraud another of that which is his, or take it agaynſt his will, whether hee wyll or no, or that I ſhoulde goe idlely and loytering, eating and conſuming that which other men labour and trauaile for, or to thinke, that when I doo ſeruice and am profitable to no man, euery

man ſhall giue and ſerue mee. Chriſtian loue which groweth out of the beleefe and doctrine of the Goſpell, muſt diſtribute the goods and make them common: it muſt not bee anie mans greedie deſire, preſumption, nor wilfulneſſe that ſhall doo it.
                  All faithfull beleeuers are one bodie: nowe lyke as in the bodie, one member ſerueth to the profite and wealth of another, ſo ought one Chriſtian to helpe and ſerue another in loue. The eye looketh not to himſelfe onely, but vnto the whole bodie: the mouth eateth for the whole bodie, and for all the other members: the ſtomacke digeſteth for all the whole bodie, and for all the members. Thus ought it to bee lykewiſe among the ſpirituall members of the bodie of our ſauiour Ieſus Chriſt. No man muſt bee wiſe and learned for himſelfe onely: no man ought to be rich for himſelfe, but euerie mannes giftes muſt ſerue to the profite one of another, and to the edyfieng and ſuſtaining of the whole bodie. Euery one is bound to ſerue the bodie, according to the gift and meaſure which the ſpirit of God hath diſtributed vnto him.
                  Among all liuing creatures, there is none created to a more louing and friendly ſocietie and fellowſhippe than man. Heerevnto ſerue all ſciences and handie crafts, that men after a friendly manner agreeing among themſelues, may relieue one anothers neceſſitie and want, and helpe

beare one anothers burthen. Heereunto ſerue all inwarde giftes of the minde, as reaſon and iudgement, will, and remembraunce. Alſo the ſpeech giuen of God vnto man, whereby one is knowen, and diſcerned, and made priuie one to another. And therefore is man borne into this world without anie defence or weapon, bare, naked and feeble: whereas all other creatures liuing in this worlde, bring with them euerie one his weapon and defence. The Beare hath his clawes and teeth, the horſe his hoofe, the oxe his hornes, the hedghegge his prickes, and the ſerpent his poyſon. &c.
                  Onely man is borne ſmooth and vnweaponed, to ſignifie, that hee muſt not bee madde, furious and terrible, but milde, louing, and gentle, there muſt bee one minde, one meaning, and one will. Man alſo commeth into the worlde bare and naked, weake, feeble, and impotent, not able to doo anie manner of thing to helpe himſelfe, but muſt ſtande vnto the curteſie of another; for if he be not helped, releeued, and ſuccoured, he coulde not chooſe but periſh, there were no remedie. Whereby almightie God will declare, that there is no man that eyther may or can liue without the helpe and comfort of another. Thus the poore wretched and diſtreſſed childe, lying vppon all foure, (whome if it were not for pittie, no man woulde take vp, but let it lye ſtill) is helped, nouriſhed, and brought vp of the mother,

nourſe, &c. Other folkes muſt cheriſh it, by other folkes helpe muſt it liue, for nothing doeth it bring with it into this worlde wit muſt begge and borrowe euerie thing, and therefore it weepeth and crieth.
                  This teacheth vs to doo good, to bee obedient, louing, and thankfull to our parents, and vnto thoſe which bring vs vp and doo cheriſhe vs, that wee recompence them according to our power. By this alſo wee learne to helpe others, and to haue compaſſion of them when they are in need, remembring and conſidering out of what miſerie and pouertie other folks haue helped and brought vs.
                  Who is hee that is at this preſent ſo rich, ſo mightie and ſtrong in this worlde (if hee wyll liue) but hee muſt vſe the helpe and ſeruice of poore and feeble folkes, as the Husbandman, the Miller, the Baker, the Shepheard, the Weauer, &c. yea, the higher and greater anie man is in office or authoritie, ſo much the more muſt he vſe and haue the helpe of other people that are not ſo great as himſelfe. Therefore doeth GOD ſette vp ſome ſo high, that they muſt make prouiſion and helpe all thoſe which are ynder them, ſeeing that they muſt haue the vſe of them all. For the poore and they that bee vnder, muſt ſupporte and beare vp the rich and mightie (as pillers doo the houſe) that they fall not: For without the helpe and ſeruice of ſuch, are not

they able to liue in theyr dignitie and calling one daie. Therefore it is ordayned of Almightie God in his ſecrete wiſedome, that certayne Countries lacke ſome things, whereof others haue ſufficicient and too much, that one might bee ſuſtayned by another, and that no man ſhal be inough to him ſelfe.
                  GOD hath giuen vnto man remembraunce, to the intent that hee ſhoulde neuer forget the benefites, which hee from his youth vpwardes hath receiued of others, and dayly doth receiue, without the which hee cannot liue. And alſo agayne remember and forget not, howe and in what manner hee ought to behaue himſelfe in loue, in compaſſion, in ſuccour, and in faithfulneſſe towardes thoſe that haue anie wayes neede of his helpe. To this is hee moued, when he conſidereth and pondereth in his thoughts the weakneſſe, feebleſſe, and neceſſitie of mannes corrupt nature, which conſtraineth vs to lacke ſo manye things.
                  Heereof groweth vnitie, loue, and fellowſhip among men, when we caſt and call to our minds thus: eyther hee hath beene, or is nowe profitable vnto vs, or he doth good vnto ours, of whom wee haue profite, or heereafter hee may doo vs ſome good. This to bee ſo, there is not anie man that can denie. And whereas wee perceiue not this, and are not of one minde, friendly and fellowes in loue and good wyll one towardes another,

but giuen vnto ſuch variaunce, diſſention, ſtrife, and diſcorde, it commeth through the darkneſſe of our owne wicked and frowarde natures and diſpoſitions.
                  Foraſmuch now as our eies are ſo blinded, that wee ſee not Gods ordinance and creation in man, our eares are ſo ſtopped, that wee will not heare the playne and perfect voyce of nature: our vnderſtanding and remembrance ſo dull and blunt, that wee will not once regard or thinke anie ſuch thing, whereby wee might the ſooner forſake the diuiſion and ſtiffeneſſe of our heart, and in friendly vnitie and brotherly loue, to doe good one vnto another. Chriſt therefore, the reſtorer of our decayed nature, and the onely true and eternall light, came into this worlde, to illuminate and lighten our blinde eyes, to crie with his voyce vnto vs that bee dumbe, and to ſette that agayne before our eyes, which wee our ſelues haue made darke and dimme. Hee cryeth vnto vs in his Goſpell, with a loude voyce, ſo that no man canne ſaie hee hath not heard it. Hee is the heauenly ſchoolemaſter, the eternall wiſedome, the fountayne of all knowledge, the onely and true teac
                        •••
                     
                     ▪ the whole building of his Church, the foundation and roofe, the beginning and ende of all his commaundementes, hath hee ſette and comprehended in onely loue, exhorting vs to loue, vnitie, and friendſhippe, and ſaying, that men heereby ſhall knowe vs to bee his diſciples, if we loue

                        〈1 page missing〉
                     
                     
                     
                        •
                     hem vnto that, which faith inwardly conſidereth and looketh vpon. Theſe tokens are inſtituted, to ſignifie and repreſent vnto vs high and greate things, to gather together and vnite the Church, that beeing diſpearſed euerie where ouer the face of the whole earth, might gather together into one communion and fellowſhippe in Chriſt, and bee made partakers of his promiſes, and inioye thoſe comfortable bleſſings which hee hath promiſed from the beginning, namely, ſuch as bee faithfull and true beleeuers, and that the exteriour and outwarde ſenſe, might from all corporall thinges bee withdrawen to that which is ſpirituall, for the eyes ſee the bread, which repreſenteth the bodie of Chriſt: they ſee, as the bread is broken, ſo was the bodie of Chriſt broken vpon the croſſe for our ſinnes: and that as the wine is poured in and out, ſo was the precious bloud of Ieſus Chriſt ſhedde to waſh awaie all our ſinnes. The eares doe heare Chriſtes wordes ſpoken by the Miniſter in the perſon of Chriſt Ieſus, by the which the promiſe is renewed, by which meanes thoſe that are his, and of his Church, are by a certaine feeling and comfort in their ſoules and conſciences refreſhed. The taſt vppon the tongue, the ſmell in the noſe, and lykewiſe the handling, and ſo each other member in his ſeuerall office, euerie one of them hath his delight and operation in confeſſing, acknowledging, and dooing his ſeruice vnto ſaith.
                  
                     But for what cauſe our ſauiour Chriſt dyd ſpecially vſe bread and wine before anie other corporall things, to ſignifie his death and ſhedding of his bloud, it may well and eaſily bee perceiued by the nature of faith. With bread is the bodie fedde and ſuſtayned, with wine are mennes heartes made merrie. Foraſmuch then as faith, the life of our ſoules, through the fleſh of Chriſt ſpiritually eaten, is nouriſhed and ſuſtained: and ſeeing our minde is moiſtened and refreſhed with true and perfect ioy thorough the bloud of Chriſt ſhedde for vs, there was nothing more meere, nothing more expedient, nothing more neceſſarie for this Sacrament than bread and wine.
                  Moreouer, through the bloud of Chriſt, are all other oblations and ſacrifices cleane layde aſide: and therefore Chriſt minding to finiſh the high ſacrifice vppon the croſſe, teſtified and declared before hand that his bodie beeing offered vp and his bloud ſhed, ſhoulde bee ſufficient to waſh awaie all mens ſinnes, and that from thence forth there ſhoulde not neede anie other ſinne offering, in the which there muſt bloud bee ſhedde. Therefore woulde hee with euident and plaine wordes teſtifie and ſaie, This is my bodie which is giuen for you: doo this in remembrance of mee: This is the cuppe of the new Teſtament in my bloud, which ſhall bee ſhedde for many to the forgiueneſſe of ſinnes. To the inten
                        •
                      th
                        •
                     n that this excellent and worthie propitiation and ſacrifice ſhould not out of theyr eyes and heartes, he

added viſible ſignes, not bare ſignes, but ſeales of his couenant (as was the Circumciſion and Paſſah) and common tokens of loue and friendſhippe amongſt men, euen bread and wine, which haue no bloud, to declare that all bloud for ſinne is onely in Ieſus Chriſt,
                  Chriſts minde was alſo, in one bodie to couple and knit together in one bodie the whole multitude of his Church. To ſignifie this, that there was nothing more apt and ſit than wine and bread: for like as out of many cornes, is made one paſte and one bread: and like as out of many grapes, one wine floweth together, euen ſo by faith and loue become they all one bodie, that eate of one bread and drinke of one cup.
                  And euen from the beginning of the world, it hath alwnyes beene the vſe among men, that with breade and wine, they haue made and confirmed great friendſhippe and league: And euen ſo Chriſt with the diſtributing of the bread among his diſciples, would eſtabliſh an euerlaſting friendſhip with them.
                  The fourth thing now in the Church of Chriſt is prayer: namely, as Chriſt taught them to praie vnto the father of heauen, that the kingdome of his Sonne might ſtill growe and increaſe, that his glory might ariſe, and ſpread it ſelfe throughout all the worlde, that his name might bee hallowed, and his will fulfilled, &c.
                  This is the neceſſarieſt thing of all, and if we lacke

this, in vaine are all our good workes, in vaine are all the honeſt actions of a ciuill lyfe, in vaine are all godly exerciſes, nothing proſpereth wee goe about, no oblation is ſanctified, all is impuritie that wee eyther doo or thinke, the holy Apoſtle Paule willeth vs to praie continually: God graunteth not the preſence of his ſpirite to anie thing but vnto praier. Without the preſence of Gods ſpirite vnprofitable is the worde preached, vnprofitable are the Sacraments miniſtred, vnprofitable ſhall all thinges bee vnto vs, ſo that praier is moſt requiſite. Let vs therefore praie vnto almightie God, to increaſe in vs the ſpirite of Prayer, that with our ſoule and ſpirite wee may praie continually for ſpirituall giftes, that they may dayly increaſe in vs to his glorie. Graunt this the great giuer of all good giftes, for his mercie ſake. To whom bee all honour, glorie, power, dominion, and thankes, for euer and euer, Amen.
               
            
            
               A Praier.
               O Mercifull God, preſerue our heartes from pride, from vaineglorie, and from ſhamefull couetouſneſſe, giue vs grace to abide in thy holy vocation, and to be thankfull for thy grace, that the fall of thine Apoſtle beeing alwayes before our eies, we may walke in thy feare before thee. For if we ſtand, we muſt take heed that we fall not, neither deſpiſe thoſe that as yet doo not ſtand. Make vs to continue thy grace for nothing haue wee ſauing onely

tha
                     •
                   which we haue receued of thee. And if of weakneſſe we fall, put thy hand vnder vs (O Lorde) and ſuffer vs not to deſpaire in ſinne, but cauſe vs with repentance and ſorow for our offence, to reſort vnto thee. Oh keepe vs, that we neither deſpaire, nor betraie thy dearely beloued ſonne, whome thou thorough thy Goſpell doeſt ſend vnto vs, for without him is no ſafegard, but eternall death & damnation. From which keep vs (good Lord) for thy mercies ſake, Amen.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   