
      
         
            
            
            THE LIFE,
APPREHENSION
Arraignement, and Execution of CHARLES
COVRTNEY, alias Hollice, alias Worſley, and
Clement Slie Fencer: with their Eſcapes and
Breaking of Priſon:
As alſo
the true and hearty Repentance of Charles Courtney with
other paſſages, worthy the note and Reading.
               
                  depiction of execution
               
            
            LONDON
Printed for Edward Marchant, and are to bee ſold in Pauls
Churceyard ouer againſt the Croſſe. 1612.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE APPREHENSION
AND ARRAIGNMENT
of CHARLES COVRTNEY, alias
Hallice, gentleman, with the
forme of his Life.
            
               HE, that as in a glaſſe, will behold
the picture of a wretched
Life, or the liuely repreſentation
of the myſeries incident to
Mankind, the image of both
may be ſéene in this man: here
may be diſcerned, the mutations
of Fortunes, the inconſtancie
of things, and the vncertaintie of daies, ſince ſinne
hath ſpred it ſelfe like a leproſie ouer all fleſh, and iniquitie
hath ſo gotten the vpper hand, that a Spider
is able to choake vs, a haire to ſtifle vs, and a tyle falling
on our heads to extinguiſh vs, euen in that momēt,
when we leaſt ſuſpect ſo ſuddaine a calamitie.
            Our life then ſo momentanie, that in that minute
we breath (if not defended by our Maker) in that minute
we are breathleſſe. Why ſhould any fleſh, endowed
with that heauenly reaſon, which God hath onely
giuen to men and Angels, ſo forget his vncertaintie?
as for a little gold, which is but the dregges of the
earth, for vanitie, the pleaſures of the world, or for the
world it ſelfe; poſſeſt with an exterior appearance of
goodneſſe, and within lined with loathſome corruption,
which is but like to réeds, who when they ſhoot out

firſt, in the ſpring of the yeare, intice, and with their
freſh greene colour, delight the eye for a while; but if we
breake, and looke within them, we find nothing but
emptineſſe and hollowneſſe) neglect his Maker, and the
dignity of his creation, who being ordained for vertuous
diſpoſitions, conducts his whole life to vitious actions;
beeing men but in ſhew, and like birds in their
courſe, who gréedily flee to pecke vp corne, till they bée
caught in the ginne: or like fiſhes, who earneſtly
ſwimme to catch the baite, till they be choaked with the
hooke.
            But why doe I talke of the frenſie of others, when
no mans madneſſe hath beene equall to mine? or who
will receiue a homely counſel from that tongue, whoſe
folly hath brought him to be condemned himſelfe?
            Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum.
            Then let me forget the world, pittie her infirmities,
and with my ſoules ſorrow, and heartie repentance,
build me vp a ladder, on the ſteppes of whoſe petitions
I might climbe toward heauen. Yet alas words vttered
from mee, are but like birds feathers, who ſerue
their bodies vſe to flée withall, whilſt they are aliue,
and others regardleſſe lie downe vpon them, when
they are dead. The repetition of my ſinnes, is but with
the winnowerand the wind, to fanne away the chaffe,
and leaue the growth of the graine to liue: with my
ſhame, I may ſay, I haue ſinned, and doe ſing I repent,
yet the Law muſt haue his power, and the liuing giue
their verdict: my griefe is the ſpring, which my ſorrow
lets out, and Iuſtice is the pipe, which doth take, and
can ſtoppe, whilſt the world, as a ſpunge that ſuckes vp
the ſuperfluous, is of power to be ſquéezd forth, as the
multitude pleaſe: what though I ſigh, yet my ſinnes
muſt be ſtrucke, the Law requires it, and mine iniquities
haue deſerued it: what though I dying complaine,
the liuing muſt haue their willes, and they haue willes
can reprooue whatſoeuer I ſay (then ſince the Law, as

frō y• fountaine of my offences, hath had power to draw
my life from me, and the world, euen after death, may
haue ſtrength to condemne mée, words vttered with
teares, but requeſts of them thus: That ſince my body
ſhall haue power to blunt the edge of affliction, my vntimely
fall may haue force to abate the kéene ſharpnes
of their rumouring tongues; and if any thirſtie or vnſatiſfied
ſpleen, either reioycing at my death, or bemoning
my ruine, ſhall deſire to ſée vnraueld the whole web
of my life, he ſhall here behold the péece of my Trauels:
in reading which, I deſire him to waſh from his memorie
the ſtains of my name: here ſhall he reade my diurnall
tranſgreſſions, which I requeſt him to pardon, and
not to reprooue (ſince no Curre is ſo cruell to bite the
dead:) heere as in a Mirror, ſhall hée looke into my miſeries,
hand-workes, my ſinnes, my ſorrow, my life, my
death, and the building of mine owne labour, began
from the time of my apprehenſion at Dunſtable in Bedfordſhire,
from whence I was conuaid to Bedford
Gaole, from thence to Newgate▪
                where, after my ſeueral
eſcapes, it was moſt vntimely concluded at Warwicke
lane end, néere Newgate to die. For my birth and education,
it was fortunate, and commendable. It was a
credit to my carefull and louing Father, and he was obeyed
by me, as a dutifull ſonne. In my youth I grewe
vp like a ſtraight plant, and was expected of the worthieſt,
and hoped for of the beſt of my countrey, to haue
prooued the Timber of a fruitfull tree: my company to
the beſt of the Gentrie was accounted ſo welcome, that
they eſtéemed mée more for pleaſure, then expences; and
the contempt I held to aſſociate with the baſe, had
brought my faire demeanure to bee beloued with the
beſt, that my fellowſhip entirely deſired, and my condition
held honeſt▪ my Father was proud to call mée his
happy ſonne. In my prime, and fitting yeares, my Father
endeauoured to ioyne mée in mariage, as well to
ioy in the poſteritie of his ſonne, as a wife by bringing a

dowrie with her, ſhould ſtrengthen my eſtate: which
deſire of his, was equalled by diuers Gentlemen of
good worſhip in our Countrey: and to mine owne loue
and liking, with the ioy and wiſhes of our Parents, I
was ioyned in wedlocke with a vertuous Gentlewoman;
with whom, during the liues of our Fathers,
whoſe eyes were like carefull Sentinels, watchfull of
our ſafeties, I liued decently and orderly, as did befit a
ſonne, and a huſband, and ſhée louing and dutifull, as
ſhould a daughter and a wife. But Time, the parent
of Death, and finiſher of all things, calling them our
Nouriſhers to their graues, and I entred the gappe of
wilfulneſſe, and libertie; the which, before▪ either their
graue diſcretions had rained mée from, or I had not
leiſure to find out: I grewe now to be a worſer man,
and did not ſéeme in any thing, like that which before
I had béene: my ciuilitie was turned to diſorder, my
temperance to drunkenneſſe, my thrift to ryot, my honeſtie
to miſbehauiour; and my whole life to thoſe vnſéemely
acts, that I ſhould bluſh to record.
            In which tide of expences, conſuming my meanes
reſerued by my Parents to defend my reputation, and
vpholde our houſe, want, the Enemie to ſuperfluitie,
Tauerns, Dyce, and whores came on like a greedy
purſeuant to arreſt me, with whoſe gripe I beeing
toucht, and finding my ſtate ſo infeebled, that I
could not continue in the courſe I had begun: my
vndertakings grue deſperate, feareleſſe to attempt,
and careleſſe of the headlongſt danger that could
enſue. To rob I was reſolued, not fearing the law,
and to perſiſt I grew bolde, not regarding my ruine.
            To recken vp now all the Robberies I haue done,
were but to adde griefe to a number, that ſhould heare
of the accompt, and little benefit to me, that am going
to my graue. A many they are, which particularly to
expreſſe would beget doubt to the Readers beleefe,
yet thus much Reader for thy ſatiſfaction, I haue

beene too proſperous in theſe Aduentures, ſo that I
neuer failed in any purchaſe I went about, I neuer
ſtood vpon the way to watch for any paſſengers, nor
neuer vndertooke any Robberie, but what was appoynted
and certaine notice giuen vs which way they
would paſſe, and what ſtore of Coyne they carried, by
ſome who were truſted, more then miſtruſted. I neuer
tooke from the néedy, or thoſe whoſe pouertie
might cauſe them to complaine, but all my aime either
at houſe or highway, were at ſuch Curmugions, who
care not who ſtarues ſo themſelues bee Corne fed.
            In the effecting of all my Robberies and Burglaryes,
neuer (to my ſoules Comfort) did I ſhed any
blood, but ſtill my care was how to preuent that
ſtayne to my ſoule, onely it was my ill Fate to ſtumble
vpon one Robberie, for which I heartily wiſh I
had beene taken and receiued the law, according to my
deſerts, I had then preuented the vntimely end of
two worthie gentlemen, whoſe names I forbeare.
For the reputation of their houſe that were apprehended,
endited, arraignd, condemned, iudged and moſt
innocently hanged for a Robbery which I did, Oh
that my cradle had béene my graue, I had not then
offended my maker. For the blood of the Innocents,
for which I doe firſt moſt earneſtly on the knées of my
heart begge forgiueneſſe of the Lord, hoping through
my vnfained and harty repentance to obtaine remiſſion
of that grieuous ſin, next of thoſe friēds, which were by
me made friendleſſe of two hopefull gentlemen, which
in time might haue prooued fruitfull vines to defend
their poſteritie, yet thus much Reader for thy ſatiſfaction,
theſe gentlemen were apprehended, iudged and
dead ere I knew of it, for I proteſt (as I thinke) had
I known thereof before their execution, I ſhould haue
yéelded, my owne life, and haue thought it chiefe
meanes to obtaine remiſſion of God, for my manifold
tranſgreſſions to ſaue the Innocents. This warning

péece ſhould haue Chaſtiſed me, foreuer vndertaking the
like Enterpriſe.
            My Conſcience for the time was greeued, complayned
on it, yet my wilfulneſſe regarded it not, but like
a Dog, Redi
                     •
                  t ad vomitum, I was ſtill the ſame and
perſiſted. Inſomuch, that my conſcience being Clogged
with the blood of Innocents, I retired my ſelfe for releefein
London.
            In which Denne of acquaintance, I met with many,
who had béene my Conſorts, with whom we Reuelled,
while we had money, drancke while we had Credit,
whored whilſt we had health, regardles of any good
wee applied our ſelues to all villanies whatſoeuer, but
theſe being weake ſinewes to maintaine ſtrength
without ſupplie, and none of vs all hauing meanes
to relieue himſelfe, in the worſt of our Credit, we began
to Conſult, our Reſolue was thus, he that is borne
muſt be kept, we are borne and therefore muſt be kept,
& will find Nurſes in the world though to other mens
charge. Briefly we ſtood not long vpon it, but our
Conference was, how we might come by a Purſe on
the highway, that was worth the taking, or enter ſome
houſe that might benefit the breaking. Euery man
gaue his Reſolue, ſome that the highway was the beſt,
hauing Oſtlers ready to furniſh them with horſes, and
euerie Countrie in the whole Kingdome for their free
eſcape. Others knowing me a better théefe then the
reſt, ſwore they would be ruled by me, and deſired me
to ſet downe ſome Courſe what ſhould be done, I neuer
pauſed on it, but finding them all fit Fry for the
gallowes as my ſelfe was, I deſired to bee heard, and
told them this, that there was a Gardner in the towne
that ſowed ſéede, and gathered the Croppe for himſelfe.
A man, an vſurer, one that would take much in paune,
and lend little on it. One that would keepe a houſe of
great vſe, yet haue no hoſpitalitie in it, neere about
Temple Barre was this Gardners Orchard: One

whoſe fruitewe muſt plucke for our profit, the courſe
was likte, the Plot approued, and my ſelfe beſt knowing
the conueyance of the houſe, hauing oftentimes reſorted
thither, when my Pockets were Lancke, both to
pleaſure my ſelfe, and other of my friends with a good
Pledge, I muſt be the mā muſt bring the matter to Act.
            Two ſeuerall times we had vndertooke this Enterpriſe,
and were as often preuented, entending to breake
into the houſe, but finding the houſe too ſtrong for our
weake purpoſes, hopeles to effect, we were about to
giue it ouer, till on the ſudden, it came in my minds
that this Gardner, was ſo ielous of his ſubſtance, and
ſo diſtruſtfull of euery one (nay euen of his wife) her
ſelfe, that he would neuer goe abroad, but he would
take his Key of his doore with him, reſeruing to himſelfe
certaine houres in the day, when he would not
faile to be at home, to meete with his cuſtomers, and
to furniſh them with money. So that ſome Certaine
meanes muſt be found out for the getting of his Key,
or all our Labour was loſt, and we had vndertooke abooteles
attempt. In breefe I hauing by this time ſo
inſinuated my ſelfe into his loue by faire words,
and as faire behauiour, that no man was more welcomer
to his houſe then my ſelfe, neither could any
draw him forth ſooner then I: ſtill baiting the booke
of my plot, with beſtowing euery morning a pinte
of wine or two on him, as they vſe to ſay, for his firſt
draft, but neuer ſuffering him to ſpend a Penie, as
we ſatebibling together oftentimes, thus hand to hand
turning ouer the Cuppes, with no other Complement
then this, here father Gardner, heeres to you, and
ſonne Courtney to you. I warrant you an oath 
                  〈…〉
               ew
not out of my mouth for the world, and Circumſtance
was ſeldome of any thing elſe but of thrift, and thriuing,
how we might get wealth and hoord it vp, being
got, I knew now that buttermilke would ſerue in ſummer
both for meat and drinke, as well as himſelfe,

that a good ſauer might ſtand Chéeke by Iole with a
great getter, and could now tell how to multiply a
hundred to a thouſand, with the beſt of them all, ſo that
I ſtood in doubt at laſt he would make me his heire.
            Our familiaritie thus linckte, and the reſt of our
Crue being nine or tenne in number, acquainted,
therewith, it was by generall Conſent agréed vpon
that at ſome Tauerne or other, a ſolemne ſupper ſhould
be prepared, and M. Gardner and his wife inuited and
brought thither as my gueſts. I ſtood not much vpon
the vndertaking of it, and the rather, becauſe I knew
good chéere, and of frée Coſt, was both baite and line,
and would draw my Gudgeon at eaſe. The time is
come, ſupper ready, the Cloath is laid, my gallants
in the roome attending for M. Gardener his wife, and
my ſelfe, who at the houre appointed, made our appearance,
when according to Courſe, to ſome that were
there before, and the worthieſt in ſhew, I muſt entreate
of them to bid theſe friends welcome, who are
eſpecially mine, and what Curteſie ſoeuer they extended
towards them, I ſhould euer approue it manifeſted
towards me, whereby the good woman is with
al Curteſies placed at the vpper end of the Table, and a
chaire with a ſoft Cuſhion, prouided for the good man,
euery one is ready to carue vnto her, and all are as
forward to quaffe vnto him.
            Supper ended and the ſigne of the wine beganne to
ſhew in his face, a noiſe of Fidlers was prouided to
come in, iuſt in the Nicke, and now in the Deuils
name, we muſt needs goe daunce, when in proteſting
of Loue, imbracing and hugging of him, one of the
Crue whoſe fingers were nimbler then the reſt, had
daunced the Key out of his pocket, Intelligence was
ſtraight giuen to me of that which was done, and by
meas priuately borne to the reſt with ſtrickt warning
to kéepe him vp in his mirth, for by his wealth we were
in hope to be euer made.
            
               
About then ſlippe the healthes, more Iouiall then before,
whilſt three of vs on the ſudden ſlunke downe
the ſtares, haſt to the houſe, open the doore, and vp
into the Chambers, where we found that we came for,
and ſtoode not long a Culling out, but like craftie Marchants,
taking vp our Commodities by the great, we
were now onely puzled how, and in what, to Carry it
from thence. But I being my Crafts-Maſter puld off
a fetherbed, ript vp the ticke, powred out the Fethers,
and in this Caſe for Conueiance, wee put as much plate
and Iewels as wee could find, and conueniently
carry away, Onely one bagge of monie of ſome thirty
pound was ſcattered about the Roome, the bagge
brooke. It was not farre off but for the inſtant we had
a warehouſe prouided for the Harbouring of it. My
Confederates all this while kept them at the tauerne,
excuſing mine, and the others ſuddaine departure to
ſome extraordinarie buſineſſe which wee had to doe.
When they thought we had our purpoſe, call for a reckoning,
paid it, and ſo like honeſt, louing, familiar
friends, wee quietly and peaceably departed the Tauerne.
            By this, Maſter Gardner with his wife come
home to their houſe, find their doore ſhut, there was no
hurt in that, bids his wife light a candle, there was no
hurt in that, but miſſing his key, was forced to breake
the doore open: comming vp into his chamber, eſpying
the feathers ſcattered all about one roome, and money
about another, the windows ſhut, and walles ſafe, (not
without cauſe) my old friend began to wonder at that:
and béeing ſuddainly affrighted, flées to his Counting-houſe,
where, when he ſaw what ranſacke was made,
what a pittifull heat was my olde Grandfire in, let enery
one iudge.
            It was no time for him to delay, Enquiry was
made amongſt the neighbours, what paſſengers they

had ſeene goe into his houſe ſince his departure, ſuſpition
was had of vs; ſearch euery where was made for
vs, Hue and Crie into all places ſent after vs, all ports
and hauens laid for vs, our habits and perſonages deſcribed,
warning left at all Gold-ſmithes and Iewellers,
if any ſuch plate came to be ſold, to make ſtay of it:
all Newgate Coniurers ſet a worke, with promiſe of
great reward, if by their Art they could find any of vs
out. But wée béeing lodged ſecure from preſent danger,
began to conſult what meanes might be vſed for
our frée eſcape. Some were ſo fearefull (as it hath bin
ſtill my happe to robbe with cowards) that they would
haue giuen one legge, and their ſhares in the Robbery,
to haue had the other legge ſafe in France. I knew my
ſelfe as ſafe here as in France, but ayming at the full
purchaſe, holding it no ſinne to deceiue the deceiuers,
perſwaded them how dangerous it was to abide here,
and told them that I knew the malice of Gardner to be
ſuch nothing could ſatiſfie him but life, or reſtitution:
this feare infected them all, & they that before thought
ſcorne of my company, now became ſutors to mee, to
plot their eſcape. I conueyed them with ſpéed to an
old Sea-thiefe, an acquaintance of mine, which dwelt
néere the Sea coaſt, that would at any time for a ſmall
gratuitie, conuey a Fellon, or one in danger, out of this
land; told them he muſt haue a great reward for his
paines, and for the plate & iewels, we would ſhare thē
there where hée tooke ſhippe: for I made them beléeue
this Sea-thiefe was ſtill full of money, to furniſh theſe
occaſions. Hée béeing acquainted with my purport,
perſwaded them their ſecureſt harbour was on ſhipboord,
till he could prouide me money vpon theſe
pawnes. They béeing all ſhipt, one night I cauſed a
falſe alarme to be ſent, that they were purſued, my ſelfe
taken, the towne laid for their apprehenſions. This
newes made them forget what they ſtaied for, preferring

their liues before any thing elſe, cried Hoiſt ſayle,
away to France: the wind béeing then good, away they
went, and left me with my old Sea-thiefe, reuelling in
the towne. So all the plate and iewels which we tooke
from Gardner, which amoūted to a good round ſumme,
of which ſome nine or tenne ſhould haue ſhared, I ſhared
to my ſelfe; onely ſome money they got from mee,
nothing to their expectations, and ſome charge they put
me to, in ſending them away.
            Now hauing conueyed them ſafe away, I muſt vſe
a courſe to protect my ſelfe: I knew all places where it
was knowne I had any acquaintance, was laid for
mée, with promiſe of reward to them that could apprehend
mée: ſo that my ſafeſt refuge was where I was
leaſt knowne. In one place I would neuer abide long,
but courſing the countries, I happened to lodge at
Dunſtable, where I was taken vpon Suſpition of Felonie,
béeing knowne by my horſe, was committed to
Bedford Gaole: and notice of my apprehenſion was
giuen vnto Gardner, who procured authoritie to fetch
mée from Bedford to London. Whither I was ſafely,
and with great care conueyed. And béeing brought
to Newgate, was lodged on the Maſters ſide: where
my ſmooth tongue, ciuill carriage, and friendly courteſie
(not onely to the worthieſt and beſt eſtéemed on that
ſide, but euen to the worſt boy in the houſe) had gotten
me ſuch a good opinion amongſt them, that I was of euery
one beloued, and pittied: and euery one behind
my backe commended mée to the Kéeper, and would often
produce me for example to others. But all this
was but a curtaine to ſhadow my villanie: for when I
ſéemed fréeſt from thought of wrong, I was moſt buſie
to worke my eſcape. My life, I knewe, was forfeit
to the Law, which at the next Seſſions I was ſure
to pay, vnleſſe it were ventured by breaking out of priſon.
I found the Gaole to be of that approoued

ſtrength, as it was impoſſible to be broken: beſides, being
lodged in a chamber with other priſoners, I could
not haue time to doe it. Yet ſtill perſiſting in my Reſolue,
and taking hold of any occaſion that might further
my attempt, I did perceiue a doore which did leade
out of a gentlemans chamber, that was a priſoner, into
the Leades, which doore was continually lockt, this
was the doore muſt leade me to my pardon, I let no time
ſlippe, but by meanes of a déere friend, I had a Iacke
line conueied vnto me, and a Chiſſell of Iron, and that
night I purpoſed to get away, being in the Hall at
ſupper, with the reſt of the priſoners, I made excuſe,
to goe vp to my Chamber, to write a letter. To worke
I went, where without long labour, as it ſéemed to
me, being a cunning workeman, I had opened the
doore that led into the Leades, and finding an olde doore
in the gutter, on the backe of which were faſtened
barres to kéepe cloſe the boordes, and with the helpe
thereof, I climed vp to the Battlements, where my
eye meaſuring the way that I held beſt for my diſcent,
I faſtened my cord to the toppe of one Battlement, on
the weſt ſide of the gate, and beganne to ſlide downe,
but ſee the will of our iuſt God, that giues preuention
to euill, for the proſperitie of honeſt and good men,
(which I now heartily pray for) that I that had the
Contriuing to open the Lockes, the Cunning how to
ſort out the time, ſhould not for this which I held my
aduantage, haue had the foreſight to haue laid ſome
cloath, or other helpe, betwixt the edge of the wall,
whereunto I had faſtened the cord, and the ſtay of the
rope. So that in my ſlipping downe, ſtriuing to vntangle
the cord being ſmall, it cut my right hand to the
bone, and the force of my body, with the ſharpenes
of the ſtone cut in ſunder the cord, by the breaking of
which I fell downe into the gutter, belongiug to a
Linnen Draper adioyning to Newgate, lying a quarter

of an houre aſtonied, ere I recouered my ſelfe.
            Being come to my remembrance, and ſeeing my
hope fruſtrate, and no helpe for me to be gone, at laſt
I groaped out a garret window, the doore of which opened
into the gutter, but being bolted in the inſide, I
was as much in a maze as I was before, where preſently
my inuention helping me againe, and by the
ſhaking of the doore, learnt whereabout the ſtaple was
faſtened, I had in a trice with my nayles ſcraped out
a hole, yet no bigger but where I might thruſt two of
my fingers, ſo thruſting backe the boult, I opened the
gutter doore, hauing a cord about my middle, wherewith
I ment to get out of the gutter ino the ſtréete. But
the maiſter kéeper whoſe diligence, and care in his well
gouerning of the Priſon, I muſt with modeſtie commend,
hauing béene forth with ſome friends of his,
and comming in againe, at the time they vſe to locke
vp, demaunded if the Gaole were ſafe, and all well
with the Priſoners, and being anſwered yes, I knew
not by what meanes, but ſure God had a hand in it,
hauing a ſtrange impreſſion on the ſudden in his minde,
came vp into the maiſters ſide, and the firſt he aſkt for
was me, where receiuing a ſtrange anſwere from euery
one, as that he was here euen now, or ſuch like,
going into euery roome, ſtill calling, ſtill calling,
Maiſter Courtney, Maiſter Courtney, but Maiſter
Courtney could not heare. It was perfectly euident, I
had wrought my eſcape. In what a conflict was this
gentleman in, the danger I had brought him in, let
euen Charitie iudge. But it was no time for delay,
ſearch round about the houſe was made, which way
I might eſcape, ſome perſwaded him, I was gone out
of the doore in ſome diſguiſe, ſome that I had got out
at the leades, the leades were viewed, at laſt they
found the cord tied about the Battlements. Linkes
then were ſent for, the Cunſtable and his watch beſet

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
euery houſe on that ſide, from Newgate to Pie Corner,
the Leades were likewiſe beſet with linckes. All this
I did ſée though to my great gréefe, into the garret then
I crept, and there hid my ſelfe vnder a table, couered
with a cloake, this Drapers houſe being ſearcht, as
the likelieſt place, I ſhould take for my refuge, till
the hurry was ouer. In the garret where I lay, they
came, and found me not, but God would not ſuffer
me to eſcape, nor would ſuffer them to giue ouer their
ſearch in that houſe. Into the garret the Kéeper came
againe, with a cudgel in his hand turning vp the cloake,
eſpied me lying as it were a ſleepe waking me without
blowes or ſigne of anger, called to me, come Maiſter
Courtney, will you goe, when looking heauily vp, and
ſeeing it was he, I fell downe on my knees aſking him
forgiueneſſe, who moſt mildly without afflicting me
gaue me this anſwere, nay neuer aſke forgiueneſſe of
me, there is no hurt done Maiſter Courtney, for I
am the gladdeſt to ſee you of any man aliue.
            So from thence being carried vp to the common
Gaole, and ſeſſions comming on, I was called vp to
triall according to my merit. Conuict, but by the fauour
of the bench, ſome promiſes of mine owne to
helpe ſome to their goods, who had béene robbde of a
number, and at the eſpeciall ſute of my friends, I was
for that ſeſſions repreeued without iudgement, the ſeſſions
following, I had my ſentence of death, but in the
diſtance betwixt my conuiction and ſentence, my remaine
being ſtill in the common Gaole. I had ſearching
eies touching the ſtrength of the priſon, the condition
and humor of the officers, and where and what
hower it was fitteſt for me to labour my deliuerance,
whoſe pollicie failing, I was certaine of death. In briefe
I had found the way, and manner of my conueiance,
and had I not beene preuented, by my vnexpected ſentence,
at the following ſeſſions after my conuiction,

and that night according to the cuſtome due to Condemned
and Iudged men, being lodged in a dungeon,
which is called the Limbord, that inſtant night, with
one Clement Sli
                     •
                  
                a fencer by title, and lay condemned
for Murther, whome I had wrought to bee an agent
with me, I had him as forcibly as after I performed,
confirmed by eſcape.
            Now ſéeing I was preuented, and knowing I muſt
die with the reſt of the priſoners, I found now there
was no refuge left, but to labour our repreeue, which
cunningly, and not ordinarily, I thus brought to effect,
there was a gentleman, and at that time a priſoner
for debt, whom I had vnderſtood his intreats would
preuaile with ſome honourable perſonages in this land,
I commended me to him, to his conference with me,
and in this manner ſolicited him, that I was a gentleman,
as himſelfe was, and for lacke of meanes, and
neglect of friends, compeld to take offending courſes,
the which himſelfe knew the law had taken hold of,
to the marke of my life I importune him to conſider of
me, yet in no kind whereby himſelfe, whom I labour,
ſhould be brought into danger, neither thoſe whom he
ſhould mooue for mee, ſhould receiue diſcredit but
gaine.
            For when I ſtoode condemned, for this apparent
robbery of Gardner, I deſired him to be certaine, that
I had euer this care in the euill of my life, not ſo to ouerthrow
the ſtate of my being, but in ſpight of calamitie,
I would alwaies ſome what reſerue, ſhould be
as a fence to my health, in ſpight of my ſin, namely, that
of the ſame I ſtand conuicted for, being moſt of it in
plate, I had at that time, as much, the which in one
moneth I would make mony of, as ſhould amount to
the ſumme of ſixe hundred poundes, foure of which I
would aſſure to any honourable or worſhipfull friends
ſhould labour my repréeue, and effect my pardon, and

the other hundred poundes ſhould be to gratifie him,
that ſhould trauel in the cauſe ſince himſelfe was a priſoner)
till it were fully confirmed. And if within foure
daies, after my repreeue, I did not anſwere my word,
I would willingly yeelde to my ſentence of death.
            This made my gentleman labour, this drew a friend
of his to queſtion with me, and was ſatiſfied with my
promiſe. So that the vntimely morning I was expected
by the gaze of the multitude to haue gone to
execution with the reſt, I had my repréeue brought
in hope of my promiſe, which indeede was onely coyned
for another end.
            The effect was this, that I being ſtill continued in
the Gaole, and night coming on, I began to argue
with Slie of our former plot, whom I found to bee the
man, whome I wiſhed to be, namely, to goe forward
in the attempt, which before we had enterpriſed, whom
I finding to be confident, and reſolute ſtill, that night
we made a vow, to confirme our purpoſe.
            It is heere to be noted, that in the ſame ward where
we lay, namely the Maiſters Chamber was alſo lodged
one Woodward for ſuſpect of Coyning, whom wee
taking down into the ſeller, amongſt other priſoners,
we made ſo abſolutely drunke, that hee was forced
vpon mens ſhoulders to be carried vp ſtaires, this fellow
thus drunke, and we were ſure now, in a dead
ſleepe, in the dead of the night, we fell to worke, and
preuailed ſo farre, that we came vp through a ſeeling,
and a planke that was broken in a roome, that is commonly
called the high hall, with a rope that vſeth to
draw vp, and let downe the beere into the Taphouſe,
hauing beene vſed, then time out of minde, and dreadleſſe
of that, by which we made vſe of it, we determined
our eſcape. But being both aboue, and out of the
roome where we lay, all the pollicie and actiuitie wee
had, could not clime vp to the beame, to vnroofe the

houſe, whereby we were forſt to come downe quietly
to bed, but the next day, and two or three nights together,
hauing conueied to vs a line, and a darke
lantorne, by a friend which was ſent to vs, which
before we wanted, with certaine ſtickes, which we
had priuily conueyed out of the kitchen Iaole, we
made vs a ladder of roapes, with the helpe of which
the Satturday night following, being the laſt of Februarie,
as before Sly climing vp the beame, with my
helpe faſtened the ladder of Roapes, whereon I getting
vp into the high hall, got vp to the beame, where being,
we vntiled a hole in the toppe, which led into the
leades, and the ſame rope which he had taken from the
Pullice, we faſtened to the Battlements, and ſo ſlidde
downe into the preſſe yard, and there by meanes of a
ladder, which by chaunce we found there, got into
the ſtréete, went downe warricke lane, ſo to Saint
Giles, from thence into Hide-Parke, where we lay
in a hole, or a hogſtie all Sunday, without any ſuſtenance.
On ſunday night, we were directed of a letter
ſent, vnto me, whilſt I was in priſon, if we eſcapte,
to come into a gentlemans Chamber in the Temple,
which we ſhould know by a light burning in the window,
and by the ſame letter, we were directed the way,
which candle burnt there thrée nights a fore, and ſhould
haue done thrée nights longer, if we had not come, to
which place we went on Sunday night, and there with
others plotted to robbe a worſhipfull gentleman at
Layton on munday night, wée tooke water at the Temple
ſtares, and landed at Saint Katterns, where we
ſpent our time, till the night following, and then with
ſome foure or fiue more effected this Robberie, and repaired
againe to the Temple, where, by what meanes,
we were betrayed and taken, God knoweth beſt, for
we doe not, but I doe applie it the worke of God to
cléere a great many, which were moſt vniuſtly accuſed,

for conſenting to our eſcape, of whom I doe aſke pardon,
there we were taken the thurſday night after our
eſcape, and from thence brought bound to Newgate,
where we temained till the day of our execution.
            On fryday mourning, being the thirteenth of this inſtant
moneth of March, I was ſent for to Sir Henry
Mountegues in Alderſgate ſtréete, where being examined
of ſome poyntes concerning the Robbery done
at Layton, after a worthy & zealous exhortation made
vnto me to forget the world, & all hope of life, & to ſpend
that litle time I had to liue, in praier. For you are (quoth
he) appointed to morrow with your companion Sly, to
yéelde your liues to the law, which ſo many waies you
haue offended, and ſo ſent me backe againe to Newgate,
where all that after noone, I ſpent my time onely
in praier, being ſtill frequented with diuers good & godly
men, who laboured zealouſly for the good of my ſoule,
and who I hope can teſtifie to the world, that I died
a true penitent & ſeruant of God. God for his mercie
grant vnto at other offenders the like vnfained contrition,
and true féeling of his benefits, and vnto me life
euerlaſting, A men.
            On Satterday morning was two gibbets ſet vp one
within the gate, néere warricke lane end, whereon was
hanged Charles Courtney gentleman, & one other without
the gate at the olde Baily end, where on was hanged
Clement Slie a Fencer, for killing a Fencer néere about
Kentiſh towne. The body of Charles Courtney,
was begd by the Barbar Surgeons, for an anatomie.
The body of Clement Slie was buried in Chriſts
Church in Chriſtian Burial.
         
         
            
            Courtneis repentance.
            
               THe ſilent night that ſhadoweth euery tree,
               And Phoebus in the Weſt was ſhrowded low,
               Each hiue had home her buſie labouring Bee,
               And Birds their nightly harbour gan to know,
               And all things did from weary labour linne,
               And I began to weigh my ſtate and ſinne.
            
            
               Men worne with worke, betooke them to their reſt.
               The Sunne had left to ſhew his glorious beames,
               Titan had fully hid him in the Weſt,
               To coole the fetlockes of his weary teames,
               When ſunke with ſorrow, being captiuate.
               I ſhed forth teares lamenting much my ſtate.
            
            
               My head on hand, my elbow on my knee,
               And teares did trickle downe my countenance then,
               My countenance as ſad, as mans might be,
               My dumps befitting well a Captiue man,
               Fettered in priſon, paſſionate alone,
               My ſighes wrought teares, and thus I gan to mone.
            
            
               I that of late did liue a ſouldiers life,
               And ſpent my ſeruice in my Countries good,
               Now captiue lie, where nought but cares are rife,
               Where is no hope, but loſſe of deareſt blood,
               This is befallen me, cauſe I did miſ-ſpend,
               That time which God to better vſe did lend.
            
            
               Had I but ſtopt my eares where Syren ſung,
               And bound my ſelfe vnto Vliſſes maſt,
               Or had I thought, alas I am but young,
               Too much tis all to venture on a caſt,
               I might haue liued from all dangers free,
               Where now I die, for life is not for me.
            
            
               
               But I doe follow what I knew was vaine,
               Inſtead of vertue, I did vice imbrace,
               My former pleaſures now procure my paine,
               And cauſe I lackt one ſparke of timely grace,
               The poyſoned Aconite of death and woe
               Reſolues to ſend a fatall ouerthrowe.
            
            
               This makes my eies to guſh out floods of teares,
               My fleſh to melt, my eies and arteris rend
               My ſoule to ſeeke redreſſe, to cure her feares,
               For now my cauſe cannot afford one friend,
               I that of late did number many a friend,
               Now find them fled, and no man comfort lende.
            
            
               The Leafeleſſe tree, with wrath of winters wind,
               Beſt repreſents my wretched waſting ſtate,
               Fortune the wind, the leaues my friends I find,
               My ſelfe the tree, that thus am eroſt by fate,
               And yet in this we greatly differ may,
               That it reuiues and I ſtill pine away.
            
            
               Villaines auaunt, you baſtards are by kind,
               That doe perturbe the countries quiet ſtate,
               Shame to offend, ſhun a corrupted minde,
               And learne by me, your former liues to hate,
               Liue of your owne, and braue it not with brags,
               Leaſt law condemne you in your proudeſt rags.
            
            
               Drinke not the Harueſt of your neighbours ſweat,
               Steale not at all, thy God doth thee commaund
               Whoſe law to keepe your ſoueraigne doth intreate,
               Thy health it is Gods lawe to vnderſtand,
               Obeying God, God ſhall all harmes preuent,
               Keeping Kings peace, thy King is well content.
            
            
               
               Like to the Woolfe in euery place you range,
               Preying on lambe, that neuer went aſtray,
               And like Camelions muſt your ſuits be ſtrange,
               Who doth by kind change Colours euery day,
               Without reſpect, forgetting what you be,
               Maſking in ſinne, as if God could not ſee.
            
            
               Abate preſumption, ſinne is not a I eſt,
               Though God forbeare, yet he will ſtrike at length,
               God made thee man, make not thy ſelfe a beaſt,
               But ſeeke to loue thy God, with ſoule and ſtrength,
               Ill gotte, Ill ſpent, your hopes (in theft) pretended,
               Are griefe and ſhame, and life in ſorrowes ended.
            
            
               Might ſorrowing ſobs, with teares redeeme whats paſt
               Or floods of teares ſuffice for foredone ils,
               Behold my lookes with diſcontent orecaſt,
               Whoſe heart doth rend, whoſe eies freſh fountaines ſtill,
               And yet all this, and all that I can doe,
               Is ſmall to that which I haue neede to doe.
            
            
               My ſoule ſhall mourne for all my ill done deedes,
               And I will weepe, ſole author of ſoules woe,
               Repentance ſhall be my blacke mourning weedes,
               Ile bath my ſelfe in teares, from top to toe,
               And while life laſts, which cannot now be long,
               Grant mercie Lord, this ſhall be all my ſong.
            
            
               My heart through fleſh ſhall iſſue ſweating griefe,
               And ſcald my bones with ſalt and briniſh teares,
               Through fleſh and bone, my heart ſhall begge reliefe,
               On bended knees till bone my fleſh out-weares,
               All that I am Ile ſpend in mourne for ſinne,
               And where I end, afreſh I will beginne.
            
            
               
               If Maudlins teares did euer Christs feete wet,
               And ſweete her ſoule with true repentant teares.
               If Peters mourning ſtreames did mercy get
               For all his ſinnes, though he his Chriſt for ſweares,
               My ſad laments abounding from my eies,
               Sweete God accept, and heare my mourne fullcries.
            
            
               A wouuded ſoule a broken contrite heart,
               Creepes in great'ſt throng, thy mercies throne to touch,
               The oyle of life, King of my life impart,
               Though ſinne be great, thy mercy's thrice as much,
               Oh thou that art in power and mercy great,
               Send downe thy mercy from thy mercies ſeat.
            
            
               My coloured ſuits I now exchange for blacke,
               Till ſcarlet ſinne be all as white as ſnow,
               On me ſweete time ſhall neuer turne his backe,
               Nor ſhall his taſke be more, my tares to mow,
               But with repentance furrow hopes for lorne,
               Till God giue grace, I ſheafe vp better Corne.
            
            
               This little remnant of my life ſo poore,
               Ile teach to ſhun all ſinne and vices all,
               Giuer of all grace, grant grace I ſinne no more,
               Eſtabliſh me that I may neuer fall,
               To thee my heart, my ſoule and life I giue,
               Who after death eternally may liue.
            
            
               Direct my path euen for thy mercies ſake,
               Guide thou my ſteppes to keepe repentant waies,
               Keepe me from ſleepe, in thee ſtil let me wake,
               To laud thy name during theſe earthly daies,
               And when from earth I ſhall diſſolue to duſt,
               Grant that my ſoule may liue among the iuſt.
            
            
               Ch. Courtney.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   