
      
         
            
            
            THE MIRROR OF MARTYRS. IN A SHORT VIEVV lively expressing the force of their Faith, the feruency of their Loue, the wisedome of their Sayings, the patience of their Suffrings, &c. With their Prayers and preparation for their last farewell. Whereunto is added two godly Letters written by M. BRADFORD, full of sweet consolation for such as are afflicted in conscience.
            ¶ They loved not their liues vnto the death. 
                  Reuel. 12.11.
            
            
               AT LONDON, ¶ Printed by T. P. for Io: Budge, and are to be sold at his Shop at the great South doore of S. Paules, and at Brittaines Bursse. An. 1613.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Deut. 15.15.
               ¶ Remember that thou wast a bond-man in the Land of EGYPT: and that the Lord thy God redeemed thee.
            
            
               
                  Deut. 16.3.
               ¶ Remember the day thou camest out of the Land of EGYPT, all the dayes of thy life.
               
            
         
         
            
            TO ALL SVCH as from a true heart delight to see the mightie power of CHRIST magnified in his Martyrs, salvation.
            
               DEare Christian Reader, who either wantest leisure to read, or abilitie to buye that rich and plentifull Store-house of Storie, Doctrine, and

Comfort, the Acts and Monuments: penned by the most innocent hearted man of God, and true NATHANAELL, Mr. IOHN FOXE: and yet knowing th'incomparable worth of the things contained therein, doest often wish thy selfe some of that pretious store for thy present vse, Loe here, a Mirror fitched thence, which how so euer in regard of the smalnesse, it cannot shew thee all; yet mayest thou here behold the choice of many memorable things, which will yeeld thee sound comfort, and profitable delight.
            Accept then (good Reader I praye thee in stead of the greater) this little Institution of a Christian Martyr, with the same mind with

which it is now offered vnto thee, & vse it to the same ends for which it was at the first framed into this so smal a Volume & if in reading the whole or any part therof, thou, or any of thine, doe reape but the least good; be thankefull therfore to thy good God, and helpe mee with thy prayers.
            
               
                  Thine ever in Christ, C. C.
            
         
         
            
            THE FAYTHFVLL Soule, to her spouse CHRIST.
            
               
                  Cant. 6.I Am my welbeloveds, & my welbeloved is mine.2.
            
            
               
                  Cant. 8.Set me as a seale on thine heart,6. and as a signet vpon thine arme: for Loue is strong as death: Ielousie is cruell as the graue: the coles therof are fiery coles, and a vehement flame.
            Much water cannot quench Loue,
               
                  Verse. 7. neither can the flouds drowne it: if a man should giue all the substance of his house for Loue, they would greatlie contemne it.
         
         
            
            A PREAMBLE before the Booke.
            HAppy, happy, yea thrise, and everlastingly happy is that Soule which by Faith feeles it selfe handfasted vnto Christ! Thogh it meet with a prosperous estate in this world, it easily swels not: and if it meet with th'adverse things of the world, it easily quailes not. For it hath the word of Christ, and the Spirit of

Christ residing and dwelling in it. Shee is not to learne in whome shee hath beleeued: neither can she ever be finally forced from beleeving. Bring her to triall, and prooue whether of the two, Christ or Belial she will embrace; offer her Gold to forgoe CHRIST shee greatly contemns it: Let the mighty terrify with threats, shee feares not their feare, nor is carefull vpon the perill of life, to giue them a direct answere: she regards not whippings; she dreads not rackings: vpon honorable conditions shee esteems the prison a Pallace; fetters of jron, Ornaments of fine Gold: the darkest dungeon, a delightsome

dwelling; rather then shee will violate the chastitie of her faith to CHRIST her onely Spouse, she will willingly endure headding and hanging; yea burning and broyling: In a word, nothing can be able to separate this sweet soule from that loue of GOD to her; which is in CHRIST Iesus her Lord. Now the jmage of such a soule who desires to see, and by sight thereof to be transformed inro the same jmage: Let him often with a spirituall eye prie into this Mirrour of Martyrs, following: Where he shall behold their Faith victorious, their Hope liuely, their peace passing al vnderstanding, their Ioy vnspeakable

and glorious: their Speach alwaies gracious, their prayers full of Fervor, their liues full of Beautie, their ends full of Honor: This Honor shalbe to all the Saints.
            
         
         
            
            
               Revel. 7.13.
               WHat are these? And whēce come these?
            
            
               Verse 14.
               THese are they that came out of great tribulation, and haue washed their long white Robes in the bloud of the Lambe.
            
            
               Verse 15.
               THerefore are they in the presence of the throne of

God, and serue him day and night in his Temple, and hee that sitteth on the throne will dwell among them.
            
            
               Verse 16.
               THey shal hūger no more, neither thirst any more, neither shall the sunne light on them, neither heat.
            
            
               Verse 17.
               FOr the Lambe which is in the midst of the thron shal governe them, and shall lead them to the liuely fountaines of waters, and GOD shall wipe away all teares from their eies.
            
            
               Revel. 14.12.
               HEere is the patience of Saints: heere are they

that keepe the Commandemets of God, and the Faith of Iesus.
            
            
               Verse 13.
               ANd I heard a voyce from Heauen saying vnto mee, write, Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord from henceforth; yea saith the spirit, that they may rest from their labours; and their works do follow them.
            
            
               Psal. 116.15.
               PRecious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.
            
            
               
               Psal. 72.14.
               ANd deare shall their bloud bee in his sight▪
               
            
            
               Reuel. 6.10.
               HOw long Lord, which art holy & true! doest thou not judge and auenge our bloud on thē that dwel on the earth?
            
            
               Verse 11.
               ANd it was sayd vnto thē that they should rest for a little season, vntill their fellow servants & their brethren that should bee killed even as they were, were fulfilled.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE RIGHT Noble and Vertuous Princesse, the Lady ELIZABETHS Grace, Eldest daughter to our Soveraigne Lord King Iames.
            
               THat neither this poore and weake seruice which is heere to be offred to the Church of Christ, nor the memorie of his faithfull Martyrs which in this small Briefe I endevor to reviue, and celebrate, might bee the lesse esteemed of the good, or any way vilified of the bad, by comming abroad without the Patronage and protection of some person of Eminencie in the sayd Church: it was needfull for me most Noble

Lady, to make choyse of such a Patron as for Eminencie of place, and vertues, might h
                  •
               ue large romth in the hearts of the former; and also whose sole authoritie might suffice to put to silence the jgnorance of the foolish. All which meeting togeather in your Grace, my humble sute is, that through your Princely hands this poore Mite may now be cast into the Lords Treasurie. Wherein your Grace shall walke in her Royall stepps, who (though dead,
                  Qu: Eliz.
                yet now seemes to liue in you) by her sacred hands did first consecrate the larger volume, whence this Epitome is extracted, to the vse of the Church and people of God.
            Be pleased then most Gratious Lady (for the matter belongeth vnto you) to receiue vnder your favorable protectiō this Mirrour or memorial of the Martyrs, who living, had the protection of Angels: and when the Lord shall haue perfourmed to your Grace

all the good that hee hath promised, and of all loyall hearts is earnestly expected, it shall then bee no offence vnto your Princely mind that you haue so doone.
            That great GOD who by his Omni-presence filleth Heaven and Earth with his Glorie, fill and replenish your Graces heart with all the gifts and graces of his blessed Spirit; which may beautifie and adorne your person in the sight of God and Man in this life: and heereafter Crowne you with jmmortall Glorie for ever and ever in his Kingdome of Glory, Amen.
            
            
               
                  Your Graces most humbly devoted In all humble and dutifull affection, CLEM: COTTON.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            THE MIRROR OF the Martyrs. ¶ In a short view liuely expressing and shewing the force of their Faith, the feruencie of their Love, the wisedome of their Sayings, the patience of their Suffrings, their Constancy, Comforts, and sweet meditations in the middest of all their Conflicts.
            ¶ With their Prayers and preparation for their last farewell.
            
               Bishop Hooper.
               
                  THE Godly Bishop HOOPER being brought vnto the place

where he should suffer, seeing a Pardon lying vpon a stoole to be tendered vnto him if he would recant, cryed to them that stood by, If you loue my soule, away with it: If you loue my soule, away with it.
               
               A blind Boye being suffered to come vnto him (after much entreaty) to conferre with him: Mr. HOOPER hearing his talke, the water stood in his eyes: Ah poore Boy sayd he, GOD hath taken from thee the sight of thy bodilie eyes, for what cause he best knoweth: but hee hath giuen thee another sight much more pretious; for he hath endued thy soule with the eye of knowledge and faith. GOD giue thee grace that thou loose

not that sight: for thē should'st thou be blind both in body and Soule.
               
               The day before his Martyrdome, he spent the most of the day in prayer, vnlesse any were licenced to speake with him, amongst the which Sr. Anthony Kingston was one: who being brought into his Chā
                  ber found him at prayer, and at the first view of him, burst foorth into teares. Mr. HOOPER at the first blush knew him not. Then sayd Sr ANTHONY why my Lord, know you not me, an old friend of yours, Anthony Kingston?
               
               Yes Mr. Kingston I know you well sayd Mr. HOOPER

and I am glad to see you in good health, & doe praise GOD for it.
               KINGSTON, But I am sorie to see you in this case: for as I vnderstand, you are come hither to die: But alas consider that life is sweet, and death is bitter. Therefore seeing life may be had, desire to liue: for life hereafter may do good.
               HOOPER. Indeed it is very true M. Kingston I am come hither to die, and to end this life heere; because I will not gainesay the former truth I haue heeretofore taught in this Diocesse amongst you: and I thanke you for your friendly counsaile, though not so friendly as I could haue

wished it. Life indeed is sweet, and death is bitter; but alas cōsider that the death to come is more bitter, and the life to come more sweet. Therefore for the desire & loue I haue to the one, & the feare and terror I haue of th'other, I do not so much regard this death, nor esteeme this life: but haue setled my selfe through the strength of Gods Spirit, patiently to passe through the torments and extremities of the fire now prepared for me; rather then to deny Gods word and truth.
               
               The night before he suffred, his desire was to go to bed that night betimes, saiing, that he had many things to thinke on: and so did at 5 of the clock, and slept one

sleepe soundly, and bestowed the rest of the night after in prayer. Being got vp in the morning, hee desired that none should come vnto him, that hee might bee solitary till the hower of his death.
            
            
               Bishop Ridley.
               WOrthie Bishoppe RIDLEY going to his burning at Oxford, looking backe, espyed Mr. LATIMER coming after: to whome he sayd, Oh be ye there? yea sayd Father LATIMER, haue after as fast as I can. Bejng come to the stake, he ranne to Mr. LATIMER, jmbraced him and

kissed him, and as they that stood neere reported) comforted him, saying: Bee of good comfort Brother; for GOD will either asswage the furie of the fire, or else strengthen vs to abide it.
               
               Being at the stake, he held vp both his hands to Heaven, and sayd: Oh heauenly Father, I giue thee most heartie thankes, that thou hast called me to be a professor of thee euen vnto death.
               
               A Fagot being brought which was kindled with fire and laid downe at M. RIDLEYS feet, Father LATIMER spake on this manner to him: Be of good comfort M. RIDLEY, and playe the man: wee shall by Gods grace light such a Candle this day in
                  
ENGLAND, as I trust shall neuer be put out.
               
               By reason the fire was ill made, M. RIDLEY continued long in his torments, in so much as he often cryed, I cannot burne, I cannot burne: for Christs sake let the fire come to mee: Lord haue mercie vpon mee: let the fire come to me, I cannot burne.
               
            
            
               M. Iohn Philpot.
               THE valiant servant of Christ M. Iohn Philpot having the newes of his death brought him by one of the Sheriffes men, that hee must the next day bee burned at a stake, sayd, I am ready: God grant me strength,

and a ioyfull resurrection. And so went to his chamber and powred out his spirit vnto the Lord, giving him most heartie thankes, that had made him worthy to suffer for his truth.
               As hee was entring into Smithfield, the passage was somewhat foule, and twoo Officers tooke him vp to beare him to the stake. Thē he sayd merilie, What? will ye make me a Pope? I am content to go to my iourneys end on foote. But first comming into Smithfield, hee kneeled downe there, saying these words, I will paye my vowes in thee O Smithfield.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn Bradford.
               HOly BRADFORD having newes brought him in great haste by the Keepers wife of the Counter, that hee should be burned the next day, and that his Chayne was a buying: with that put off his Cap, and lifting vp his eyes to Heaven, said: I thanke God for it: I haue long looked for this time, and therefore it commeth not to me now sodainlie; but as a thing expected euery houre, the Lord make me worthy thereof. After which he went alone, and prayed secretly a long time.
               A little before they carried

him from the Counter to Newgate, he made a notable prayer of his farewell, with such plentie of teares, and aboundance of the spirit of praier, that it ravished the minds of the hearers.
               Also when he shifted himselfe with a cleane shirt that was made for his burning, hee made such a prayer of the wedding Garment, that some there present so admired him, that their eies were no lesse thorowly occupied in beholding him, thē their eares gaue place to the hearing of his prayers.
               At his departing the chā
                  ber, hee made in like sort a prayer, in which hee vehemently desired of God that his wordes might not bee

spoken in vaine.
               
                  ¶ His behauiour at his death.
                  MR. Bradford cōming to the stake fell flat vpon his face, praying the space of one minute of an hower, the Sheriffe willed him to make an end, because the presse was great: at that word standing vpon his feet, he tooke a Fagot in his hand and kissed it, and so likewise the Stake: so putting off his rayment, he went to the Stake holding vp his hands, and casting vp his countenance to heaven, sayd thus, O England, Englād, repēt thee of thy sins, repent thee of thy sins, &c.
                  
                  
                     To the young man that suffered with him hee sayd, Be of good comfort Brother, for we shall haue a merry Supper with the Lord this night, and spake no more wordes that any man heard, but jmbracing the Reeds, sayd thus, Straight is the way and narrow is the gate that leadeth vnto life eternall, and fewe there be that find it.
                  
               
            
            
               M. William Tims.
               
                  WIlliam Tims being convented before Bonner & Winchester: Tims said the Bishops; thou hast a good fresh spirit, it were well if thou had'st learning to thy spirit: Yea my Lords

sayd TIMS, and it were well also that as you bee Learned men; so yee had a good Spirit to your learning.
               
            
            
               Bishop Latimer.
               
                  REuerend LATIMER writes thus to Bishop RIDLEY, Lo Sir, I haue blotted your papers and play'd the foole egregiously: but so I thought it better, then not to fulfill your request at this time. Pardon me, and pray for me: pray for me, pray for me I say. For I am sometimes so scarefull that I could creepe into a mouse hole: Sometimes God doth visit me againe with his Comforts. So he is comming

and going, comming and going; to teach me to know mine owne infirmitie, that I might thanke him who is worthy, least I should rob him of his glorie, as many doe, and almost all the world, fare yee well.
               
                  ¶ The 3 requests which Father Latimer was wont to make.
                  THe first was, that as GOD had appointed  him to be a preacher of his word;His blood violently gushed out of his heart, at his burning at Oxford. so also he would giue him grace to stand to his doctrine vnto the death, and that he might giue his heart blood for the same.
                  
                  The second was, that GOD of his mercie would 
                     
restore his Gospell to Enggland once againe: and these words once againe, once againe, hee did so inculcate and beat into the eares of the Lord, as though hee had seene god face to face, and would haue no nay.
                  
                      His third request was for the Lady ELIZABETH our late Soueraigne, whō in his prayer hee was wont to name, & euen with teares begged of God, that shee might liue to be a comfort to this comfortlesse Realme.
                  
               
            
            
               Bishop Ridley.
               
                  RIDLEY writes thus in a Letter to Bradford, wee looke euery day to be

called on: I weene I am the weakest many waies of our company: and yet I thanke our Lord God and heauenly Father through Christ, that since I heard of our deere Brother ROGERS departing, and his stout Confession of Christ and his truth euen vnto death, mine heart blessed be God reioyced so in it, that since that time (I say) I never felt any lumpishnesse nor heauinesse of heart, as I grant I haue felt sometimes before: O good Brother Bradford blessed bee God for thee, and blessed be the time that euer I knew thee.
            
            
               
               Iohn Rogers.
               MAISTER ROGERS that Morning hee should be burned, being in a sound sleepe, was hardly awaked with much shogging, whē the keepers wife came sodainely vp to giue him warning of his burning. At length beeing awaked, and bid to make hast, Nay then sayd hee, and if it be so, I shall not need to tye my points.
               
               The Sunday before hee suffred, hee dranke to M. HOOPER being then in a Chamber vnderneath him in Newgate, and bad them commend him to him, and

to tell him, that there was never little fellow would better sticke to a man, then he would sticke to him: supposing they should haue beene burned together.
               
            
            
               Laurence Saunders.
               MR. SAVNDERS at the time of his first examination before STEVEN GARDINER, reporto his bed-fellow that lay with him the night following, that in the time of his examination, he was so wonderfully comforted, that not onely in his spirit, but also in body hee receiued a certaine tast of that holy Communion of Saints; whilst a most pleasant

refreshing issued from euery part and member of his body vnto the seat of the heart, and from thence did ebbe and flow to & fro vnto all the parts againe.
               
               In a Letter to his Wife: faine would this flesh make strange of that which the spirit doth imbrace. Oh Lord how loth is this loytring sluggard to passe foorth into Gods path? It fancieth forsooth much feare of fraybugs? and were it not for the force of Faith, which pulleth it forwards by the raines of Gods most sweet promise; and hope which pricketh on behind; great aduenture there would be of fainting by the way. But blessed & euerlastingly blessed be that heauenly Father of

ours, who in his Christ our sufficient Sauiour, hath vouchsafed to shine in our hearts by the light of his knowledge in the face of Iesus Christ.
               
               His Wife comming to visit him in prison, was forbidden to enter the prison; by reason whereof the keeper tooke the little babe shee had in her armes and caried him to his Father. LAVRENCE SAVNDERS seeing him reioyced greatly, saying, that hee esteemed more of such a boy, then if 2000 pound should be giuen him. And to the standers by which praysed the goodlinesse of the child, he sayd, what man fearing God, would not loose this life presently, rather then by preserving

it heere, hee should adiudge this boy to be a bastard, and his wife an Whore, and him-sefe an Whoremonger, yea were there no other cause why a man of my estate should loose his life, yet who would not giue it to avouch this child to be legitimate, and his mariage to be lawfull and holy.
               
               Beeing come to the stake where hee was burned, hee fell prostrate to the groūd and prayed: And rysing vppe againe, hee tooke the stake in his armes to which he should be chained, and kissed it, saying, Welcome the Crosse of Christ: Welcome euerlasting life.
               
            
            
               
               Robert Glouer Gen.
               MR. GLOVER a day or twoo before hee should bee burnt, felt his heart so lumpish and heavy, that hee found in himselfe no aptnes not willingnesse to die, but rather a dulnesse of Spiritfull of much discomfort to beare the bitter Crosse of Martyrdome ready now to bee layd vppon him: Wherevpon, fearing in himselfe least the Lord had vtterly withdrawen his wonted favour from him; he made his moane to one AVGVSTINE BERNHERE his deere friend, signifying vnto

him how earnestly hee had praied vnto the Lord, and yet could receiue no motion nor sence of any comfort from him.
               To whome the sayd Austen answering, desired him patiētly to waite the Lords leisure, howsoeuer his present feeling was; and to play the man, nothing doubting but the Lord in due season would satisfie his desire with plentie of Consolation, whereof hee sayd hee was right certaine and sure: and therefore desired him whensoeuer any feeling of GODS heavenly mercies should begin to touch his heart, that hee would giue him some signe thereof.
               
                  The next day when the time of his Martyrdome was come, and as hee was going to the stake & come to the sight of it, albeit all the night before prayjng for comfort and courage, hee felt no answere of his praier: sodainely he was so mightily replenished with the comfort of Gods holy Spirit and heavenly joies, that hee cried out clapping his hands to Austen sayjng these words, hee is come Austen, hee is come, hee is come: and that with such joy and alacritie as one seeming rather to bee risen from some deadly danger to liberty of life, then as one passing out of this world by any paines of

death.
            
            
               M. Iohn Lambart.
               IOHN LAMBART having his nether parts consumed with fire, lifting vp such hands as hee had, and his fingers ends flaming with fire, cryed to the people, None but Christ, None but Christ.
               
            
            
               Adam Damplip.
               THIS good man beejng advertised by his keeper that his execution drew neere, was never seen to quaile, but was as merrie, and eate his supper

that night as chearefully as ever hee did in all his life; at which his keeper and the rest of the prisoners wondring, asked him how hee could take such newes so chearefully: Ah my Maisters sayth he, doe yee thinke I haue beene thus long Gods prisoner in the Marshalsey, and haue not yet-learned to die? Yes, yes, I doubt not but God will strengthen me therein.
               
            
            
               Kerby Martyr.
               ONE KERBY beeing councelled by M. WINKFIELD to pittie himselfe, and to take no more vppon him then hee

should bee able to performe: the fire saith hee is hot, the terrour is great, the paine wilbe extreame, and life is sweet. To whom KERBY answered, M. WINKFIELD be at my burning, and you shall say, there standeth a Christian Souldier in the fire. For I know that Fire, and Water, Sword, and all other things are in the hāds of God, who will suffer no more to bee layd vppon vs then hee will giue strength to beare.
               
            
            
               Thomas Bilney.
               MR. THOMAS BILNEY beeing put in mind, that though the fire which he should suffer the

next day should be of great heat vnto his body, yet the comfort of GODS spirit should coole it to his euerlasting comfort and refreshing: At those words putting his finger towards the flame of the candle thē burning before them (as also hee diuers times did) and feeling the heat thereof, O sayd hee I feele by experience and haue knowne it long by Philosophy, that fire by gods ordinance is naturally hot, but yet I am perswaded by Gods holy word, and by th'experience of some spoken of in the same, that in the flame they felt no heat, and in the fire they felt no consumption: And I constantly beleeue▪ that howsoeuer the stubble of this my body

shalbe wasted by it, yet my Soule and Spirit shall be purged thereby. A paine for the time: after which notwithstanding followeth vnspeakeable Ioy. And then entreated notably vpon the first and second verses of the 43 Chap. of Isaias, which sentēces for the joy & cōfort some of his friends tooke in them, caused them to be faire written out; the comfort whereof they left not to their dyjng day. The sayd BILNEY beeing visited by certain of his friēds the night before he suffred, they found him eating an Alebrew with such a cherefull heart and quiet minde, as made them wonder thereat, sayjng, they were

not a little glad to see him at that time so cheerefully to refresh himselfe. To whome hee made this answere, Oh sayd he, I follow the example of the Husbandmen in the Countrie, who hauing a ruinous house to dwell in, doe yet bestow cost as long as they remaine in it, to vphold the same: And so do I now with this ruinous house of my body; refreshing the same as you see, with these good creatures of God.
               
            
            
               Iames Baynam.
               THis BAYNAM as hee stood at the stake in the midst of the flaming fire, which fire had halfe

consumed his armes and his legges, hee was heard to speake these words, O yee Papists. Behold yee looke for Miracles, and heere yee may see a Miracle: for in this fire I feele no more paine then if I were in a bed of down; but it is to me as sweet as a bed of Roses.
               
            
            
               
                  An. 1525.
                  Henry Voes.
               THe like speach I finde of a young man burnt at Bruxels, who when the fire was kindled at his feet, sayd, me thinks you strew Roses vnder my feete.
               
            
            
               
               Hugh Laverocke.
               THis Laverocke a lame Creple, & IOHN APPRICE a blind man, being chained both of them to the stake; LAVERCOCK casting away his Crutch, and comforting his fellow. Martyr, fayd, Be of good comfort my brother, for my L. of London is our good Phisition, Hee will shortly cure vs both: thee of thy blindnes, and me of my lamenesse.
               
            
            
               William Hunter.
               WILLIAM HVNTER apprētice of

the age of 19 yeares standing at the stake, sayd, Son of God shine vppon me: and jmediately the Son in the Element shone out of a darke cloud (for it was a glomie day) so full in his face, that hee was constrained to turne his face an other way. The sayd WILLIAM HVNTER beeing brought downe from London to be burnt: remained by the way two dayes at Burntwood, whether his Father and Mother came to comfort him, who heartely desired of GOD that hee might cōtinue in the good way hee had begun, vnto the end; and his mother sayd vnto him, that shee was glad shee was euer so happy as

to beare such a Sonne who could find in his heart to loose his life for Christs sake. Then said WILLIAM to his mother: For my little paine which I shall suffer which is also but for a moment, Christ hath promised me Mother (saith he) a Crowne of life. And may not you bee glad of that Mother? With that his Mother kneeled downe on her knees, sayjng, I pray GOD strengthen thee my Sonne vnto the end. And I thinke thee as well bestowed as any Child that euer I bare. At which words M. HIGBED (one that was then to suffer for the same cause) tooke her in his armes, sayjng, I rejoyce much to see you in this mind, and you haue

good cause so to doe.
            
            
               Robert Samuel.
               MR. ROBERT SAMVEL Minister, was kept in streight prison by the Bishops Chancellor of NORVVICH: Wherein hee was chained boult vpright to a great post, in such sort, that standing only on tip-toe, hee was faine to stay vp the whole poyse of his body thereby. And to make amends, they added a far greater torment, keeping him without meat and drinke, whereby hee was miserablie vexed with hunger and thirst, saving that hee had allowed him

every day 2 or 3 mouthfuls of bread and 3 spoonfuls of water, rather to reserue him to further torment, then to preserue his life. O the worthy constancy of the Martyr! O pitilesse hearts of the Papists, worthy to be complained of before god & nature! O the wonderfull strength of Christ in his Martyrs! How oft-times would hee haue drunke his owne water, but his body was so dryed vp with long emptines, that hee was not able to make water, no not so much as one drop.
               Now after he had beene thus long famished with hunger (see a strange thing that happened to him, of

which himselfe was the reporter) he fell as it were into a slumber, at which time one clad all in white, seemed to stand before him: which ministred comfort vnto him, by these words, Samuell, Samuell be of good cheare, and take a good heart vnto thee: for after this day, thou shalt never hunger nor thirst: Which thing came even to passe accordingly: for speedily after hee was burned, and from the time till hee should suffer he felt neither hunger nor thirst.
            
            
               Cut. Simpson, Deacon.
               
                  CVtbert Sympsons patience was thus commended

by Bishop Boner: ye see saith BONER what a personable man this is: & touching his patience, I say vnto you, that if hee were not an Hereticke, I would affirme that he were a man of the greatest patience that ever yet came before me. For I tell you, hee hath been thrice racked in one day. Also in my house hee hath felt some sorrow, and yet I never saw his patience broken.
               The day before he was cō
                  dēned (being in the stockes in the Bish: colehouse) Cloney his keeper came in with the keyes about 9 of the clocke at night after his vsuall manner, to view his prison, and to see whether

all were present: who when he spied the sayd Cutbert to be there, departed again, locking the dores after him.
               Within 2 houres after at a 11 of the clocke towards midnight (whether awake or in a slumber I cannot say) hee heard one comming in, first opening the outward doore, then the second, and after the third doore, and so looking in to the said CVTBERT, having no Candle nor Linke that hee could see, but giving a brightnes and light most cōfortable & joyfull to his heart, saying, Ha, vnto him; and departed away againe. Who it was hee could not tell. But this

hee declared 4 or 5 times with his owne mouth to one M. AVSTEN, to his wife, & THOMAS SAMPSON, besides many others in Newgate, a little before his death. At the sight whereof hee received such a joyfull comfort, that hee also expressed no little joy and solace in telling of it.
            
            
               Iohn Rough.
               MR. IOHN ROVGH Minister, having bin at the burning of one AVSTO in Smithfield, returning homeward mette M. FARRAR a Marchant of Halifax, who asked where hee had beene? I haue bin

saith he where I would not for one of mine eyes but I had bin. Where haue you been sayd M. FARRAR? Forsooth saith hee, I haue been to learne the way. And so told him the whole matter of the burning of AVSTO, where shortly after hee was burned himselfe.
            
            
               D. Rowland Taylor.
               MR. Doctor TAYLOR beeing come to Chelmesford in the way towards his Martyrdome, was receiued there of the Sheriffe of SVFFOLKE to conduct him to HADLEY to be burnt. At supper the Sheriffe of ESSEX labored

him with might and maine to haue him returne to the vnitie of the Catholique Romish Church, affirming that that which he spake proceeded of a good heart & good will towards him, and therevpon drank to him: The Yeomen of the Guard also sayd, vpon that condition M. Doctor we all drink to you. When they had all dranke, and the Cup was come to him, hee stayed a while as one studyjng what answere hee might giue. At length he spake thus to them, M. Sheriffe, and my Maisters all, I heartely thanke you of your good will. I haue given eare to your words. And to be plaine with you

I doe perceiue that I haue bin deceiued my selfe, and am like to deceiue a great many at HADLEY of their expectation. At which speach they all reioyced, yea good M. Doctor sayd the Sheriffe, jt is the comfortablest word you spake yet. Why should yee cast away your selfe in vaine, play a wise mans part, and I dare warrant you, you shall haue favour. And then they began to pray him to explaine his meaning further vnto them.
               Then sayd Doctor Taylor, I will tell you how I am deceiued my selfe, and how I thinke I shall deceiue a great many. I am as you see a man that hath a great Carkasse

whicht I though should haue beene buried in Hadley Church-yard, had I dyed in my bed as I well hoped I should haue done: but therein I see I was deceiued: And there are a great many of Wormes in HADLEY Church-yard that should haue had iolly feeding vppon this Carkasse, which they haue long looked for. But now I know wee bee deceiued, both I and they: for this Carkasse must be burnt to ashes, and so shall they loose their bait and feeding which they expected.
               
               The same Morning in which he was called vp by the Sheriffe to goe to his burning about 3 of the clocke in the morning, being sodainely awaked out

of his sound sleepe, he sate vp in his bed and putting on his Shirt, hee had these words; speaking somewhat thicke after his accustomed manner, Ah horson theeues, ah horson theeues, robbe God of his honor, robbe God of his honor.
               
               Beeing risen and tyjng his points, he cast his arms about a balke which was in the chamber between M. BRADFORDS bed and his, and clasping his hands about it; o M. BRADFORD sayd he, what a great swing should I giue, if I were hanged?
               
               Beejng come within 2 miles of HADLEY, he desired to light off his horse to make water: Which

done, hee lept and fecht a friske or twaine as men cō
                  monly do in daunsing, why M. Doctor sayd the Sheriffe, how doe ye now? well I thanke God M. Sheriffe sayd he, never better, for now I know I am almost at home, I lacke but 2 stiles to go ouer and I am euen at my Fathers house. But M. Sheriffe, shall wee not goe through HADLEY? Yes, you shall sayd the Sheriffe. Thē said he, O God I thanke thee that I shall yet once ere I dye see my flocke, whom thou Lord knowest I haue most deerely loued, & truly taught. Good Lord blesse them, and keepe thē stedfast in thy truth.
               
               At the time of his degrading by Bishop Boner,
                  
bejng furnished fully with all his attire according to their ridiculous custome, hee set his hands by his side walking vp and down, and sayd: How say ye now my Lord, am I not a goodly foole? How say ye my maisters? If I were now in Cheap, should I not haue boyes enough to laugh at these apish toyes, and toying trumperies? when all his trinkets were taken from him, hee sayd, good Lord deliver me from you: and gojng from them vp to his chamber, hee sayd, good Lord deliuer me from you, good Lord deliuer mee from you.
               
            
            
               
               Iohn Leafe.
               THis IOHN LEAFE a prentise to one HVMPHREY GAVVDY tallow Chandler, who was burned with M. IOHN BRADFORD, had 2 bils sent him into the Counter in breadstreet after his judgement, th'one containing a recantation, th'other his confession: to know to which of them hee would subscribe. Hearing first the bill of his recantation read vnto him, (because hee could nether write nor read himselfe) that hee refused: and when hee heard th'other read vnto him, which

hee liked well off, in stead of a pen, he tooke a pinne, and so pricking his hand, sprinkled the blood vppon the sayd bill, willing the reader thereof to shew the Bishop, that hee had sealed the same with his blood already.
               
            
            
               Richard Woodman.
               THe conflicts whieh Richard Woodman had with the feare of death, recorded in his owne words, as followeth.
               Then 3 daies after, my Lord Chamberlain sent 3 of his men to take mee, whose names were Deane, Ieffrey,, and Frauncis, I being at plough with my

folkes, right in the way as they were comming to my house, least mistrusting them of all other, came vnto them and asked them how they did. And they said they arrested me in the King and Queenes name, and that I must goe with them to my Lord Chamberlaine their Maister. Which words made my flesh to tremble and quake in regard the thing was sodaine. But I answered them, that I would goe with them. Yet I desired them to go with me to my house that I might break my fast, and put on some other geare: And they sayd I should. Then I remembred my selfe, saying in my

heart, why am I thus afrayd? They can lay none euill to my charge, If they kill me for well dooing, I may thinke my selfe happy. I remembred how I was contented gladly to dye before, in that quarrell, and so haue continued euer since, and should I now feare to die? God forbid I should, for then were all my labour in vaine. So by and by I was perswaded I praise god, cōsidering it was but the frailtie of my flesh which was loth to forgoe my wife, children, & goods: for I saw nothing but present death before mine eies. And as soone as I was perswaded in mine heart to die, I regarded nothing in this world, but was as merrie, glad, and ioyfull I praise God as euer

I was. This battaile lasted but a quarter of an houre, but it was sharper for the time then death I dare say.
               
            
            
               M. Glouer.
               ROBERT GLOVER had a contrarie effect in his troubles, as his owne words testifye. After I came into prison sayth hee and had reposed my selfe a while, I wept for joy and gladnes my bellyfull, musing much of the great mercies of GOD, and as it were, saying thus vnto my selfe, O Lord who am I, on whome thou should'st bestow thus thy great mercie, to bee numbred among thy Saints,

which suffer for thy Gospell sake? And so beholding on the one side my jmperfection, vnablenes, sinnefull miserie, and vnworthines; and on th'other side the greatnes of Gods mercie, to be called to so high promotion, I was as it were amazed and overcome for a while with joy and gladnes, concluding thus with my selfe in mine heart, O Lord thou shewest power in weakenes, wisedome in foolishnes, Mercie in sinfulnesse: who shall let thee to choose where and whom thou wilt? As I haue euer zealously loued the profession of thy word, so haue I euer thought my selfe vnworthie to bee partaker of th'afflictions of the same.
               
               
                  The same ROBERT GLOVER, at an other time was much discouraged by Satan, not to persevere in his suffring, suggesting to him his vnworthines to suffer for Christ and his Gospell, but these his suggestions were thus repelled by him.
               
                  What were all those whome GOD in former time chose to be his witnesses? were they not men subiect to sinne and imperfection as other men bee? All wee sayth Iohn haue receiued of his fulnes. They were no bringers of any goodnes to GOD: they were altogether receiuers. They chose not GOD first, but hee chose them. They loued not GOD first, but hee loued them, yea,

when they were enemies to him, and full of sinne. Hee is and wilbe the same God still. As rich in mercie, as mighty, as ready, as willing to forgiue sinnes now without respect of persons, as hee was then; and so wilbe to the worlds end, to all that call vppon him. It is no arrogancie, nor presumption in any man to burthen God with his promise, chalenging his ayd and assistance in all perils and daungers; Calling vpon him in the name of Christ, for whose sake, whosoeuer commeth to the Father, is sure to receiue more then hee can wish or desire.
               
               I also answered the enemie on this manner: I am a sinner, and therefore vnworthy to be a Martyr. What

then? must I deny GODS word, because I am a sinner; and not worthy to professe it? What bring I to passe in so dooing, but adding sinne to sinne? What is a greater sinne, then to deny the truth af Christs Gospell? I might also by the like reason, forbeare to doe any of GODS commaundements, when I am prouoked to pray, th'enemie may say vnto mee, thou art not worthy to pray, and therefore I shall not pray. I shall not forbeare to steale, &c. because I am not worthy to do any of GODS commaundements. These be delusiōs of the Deuill, which must be ouercome by continuance of prayer, and with the word of GOD applied according to the measure of euery mans gift.
               
            
            
               
               George Wise-heart.
               THis WISE-HEART a Scottishman (rightly so called in regard of that true wisedome of the spirit wherewith his heart was filled,) beejng come to the place of execution, the hangman came vnto him vppon his knees, craving forgiuenesse of him. To whome he answered, come hether to me: when hee was come nie him, hee kissed his cheeke, and sayd, loe here is a signe that I forgiue thee; my heart doe thine office. And by and by hee was put vpon the Gibbet and martyred.
               
            
            
               
               Walter Mill.
               WALTER MILL a Scottish Minister beejng disturbed in his praier in the time of his examination, having ended the same, sayd; wee ought more to obay GOD then Men. I serue one more mightie, even th'omnipotent Lord. And where ye call me Sr. Walter, they vsually call mee WALTER, and not Sr. WALTER. I haue beene one of the Popes Knights too long.
               
               Beejng threatned with the sentence of death: I know I must die once saith he, and therefore as Christ

said to Iudas, Quod facis, fac citius. Ye shall know, that I will not recant the truth; for I am Corne, I am no Chaffe: I will not be blowne away with the wind, nor burst with the flaile: I will abide both.
               
            
            
               Patrick Hamleton.
               MR. Patrick Hamleton beejng in the fire, was heard by certaine faithfull men of credit then aliue, there to cite and appeale the black frier campbell that accused him, to appeare before the high GOD as generall Iudge of all men, to answere to the innocency of his death, and whether his accusation were iust or no, between

that and a certaine day of the next moneth which hee there named. Moreouer, by the same witnesse it is testified, that the sayd Fryer dyed immediately before the same day came, without remorse of conscience that hee had persecuted the poore Innocent.
               
            
            
               Robert Farrar.
               BIshop FARRAR being visited of a Knights sonne called RICHARD IONES a little before his death, the sayd RICHARD seemed much to lament the painfulnes of the death he had to suffer. To whom the Bishop answered, that if hee saw him once to st
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     e

in the paines of his burning, he should giue no credit to his doctrine. And as he sayd, so he right well performed the same: For so patiently hee stood, that hee neuer mooued, but even as hee stood holding vp his stumps of his hands, so hee still continued, till one RICHARD GRAVELL with a staffe dashed him vppon the head, and so stroke him downe into the fier.
               
            
            
               Rawlins Whight.
               THis Whight a fisherman, a very aged man in the Towne of Cardiffe in Wales, grew very expert in the Scriptures by the helpe of

a little boy he had, beejng his owne Sonne, who dayly read the same, to him every night after supper, Sommer and Winter, and now and then some other good Booke. In which kind of vertuous exercise the old man had such delight and pleasure, that as it seemed, hee practised himselfe rather in the studie of the Scripture, then in the trade or Science which before time hee had vsed: so that RAVVLINS within few yeares, in the time of King EDVVARD, by the helpe of his little boy, as a speciall Minister no doubt appointed by GOD for that purpose, profited and went forward in such sort, that

hee was not onely able to resolue himselfe touching his former blindnes and jgnorance (for by all likelihood hee was before King EDVVARDS dayes a Papist) but was also able to admonish and jnstruct others. So as when occasion serued, hee would go from one place to another visiting such as he had best hope in. And thus in that Countrey became a notable professor of the truth, beejng at all times and in all such places not without the helpe of his little boy. And to this his jndustrie GOD added to him a singular guift of memorie, so that by the benefit thereof hee could and would doe

that in alleadging and rehearsing the text, which men of riper knowledge by their notes and other helps of memorie could hardly accomplish. In so much that vpon alleadging some place of Scripture, hee was able very often to cite the Booke, the leafe, yea and the very sentence: such was the wonderfull worke of GOD in this simple and vnlearned Father.
               In the daies of Queene MARIE it so fell out, that GOD called him not onely formerly to beleeue in him, but then to suffer for his sake: in which his suffrings, the Lord endued him with inuincible cōstā
                  cie, in so much as beeing

convented before the Bishop of Landaffe, The Bishop would needs with his company fall to prayer in his Chappell, to see (as he sayd) if GOD would turne the poore Mans heart: which RAVVLINS hearing, sayd, now you deale well my Lord, and like a good Bishop indeed. Go to therefore my Lord, pray you to your God, and I wil pray to my GOD: I know that my GOD will heare my prayer, and performe my desire. By and by the Bishop and his men fell to prayer. And RAVVLINS turning him to a pew somewhat neere, fell downe vppon his knees; covering his face with his hands.

Bejng all risen from praier: The Bishop sayd, now Rawlins how is it with thee? wil't thou revoke thine opinions, or no? Surely said Rawlins; my Lord, Rawlins you left mee, and Rawlins you find me, and by GODS grace Rawlins I will continue.
               
               The Bishop seejng his prayers tooke none effect, was perswaded by some about him (before hee read the sentence) to haue a Masse, thinking that GOD would thereby worke some Miracle vpon the old man, when RAVVLINS heard the sacring bell ring, (as the vse is) hee rose out of his place and came to the quier doore, and there standing

a while turned himselfe to the people, speaking these words, Good people, if there be any brethren amongst you, or at the least, if there bee but one brother amongst you, l
                        •
                     t that same one beare witnesse at the day of iudgement, that I bow not to this Idol, meaning the host the Priest held over his head.
               Hearing that the time of his burning drew neere, he sent to his wife willing her to provide him his wedding garment, in which he ment to be burned, meaning his Shirt. Beejng brought out of prison and seejng himselfe guarded with a great company of bils and gleaues, he sayd, alas what

needs all this adoe? I will not start away by GODS grace: but with al my heart and mind I giue vnto GOD most hearty thank th
                        •
                     t hath made mee worthy to abide all this for his holy names sake.
               
               At the light of his Wife and Children whome hee saw in the way as he went to be burnt, it so pierced his heart, that the teares trickled downe his cheekes: but sodainely misliking his jnfirmitie, he began to be angrie with himselfe, and striking himselfe on the brest with his hand, vsed these words, Ah flesh, stayest thou me so? would'st thou faine preuaile? well, I tell thee doe what thou canst, thou shalt not by GODS grace get the

victorie.
               
               When hee came to the sight of the stake, hee set himselfe forwards very boldly, but in going towards it, he fell downe vppon his knees and kissed the ground, and in rising againe, the earth a little sticking vpon his nose, he sayd these words, Earth vnto Earth, and dust vnto dust: thou art my Mother, and vnto thee shall I returne. Then went hee cheerefully and very joyfully vnto the stake, setting his back close vnto it, and when hee had stood there a while, casting his eye vpon the Reporter of this historie, and call
                     •
                  ng him to him, sayd, I feele a great fighting betweene the

flesh and the Spirit, and the flesh would very faine get the masterie: And therefore I pray, if you see mee any thing tempted, hold vp but your finger to mee, and I trust I shall remember my selfe.
               
               
                  The reporter.
                  THere was observed in this good Father going to his death, and standing at the stake, a wonderfull change in nature. For whereas hee was wont before to goe stooping, or rather croked through the jnfirmitie of age: and having a sadde countenance, and feeble complexion, & withall a feeble and soft voice and gesture: Now he

went and stretched vp him selfe & bare withall a most pleasant countenance, not without great courage, both in speach and behauiour.
               
            
            
               Thomas Spurdance.
               THis SPVRDANCE being asked of the Bish. when hee was at masse, and received the ceremonies of the Church, answered,
               Neuer sayd hee since I was borne.
               No? sayd the Bishop, how old art thou?
               He sayd, I thinke forty.
               Why, how vsed you your selfe 20 yeares agone sayd the Bishop?
               
                  as ye doe now, sayd hee.
               And even now quoth the Bishop, he sayd, he vsed not the ceremonies since hee was borne.
               
                  No more I haue my Lord sayd hee, since I was borne againe. Iohn. 3.
            
            
               Elizabeth Folkes.
               ELIZABETH bejng examined if she beleeued not that Christs body was in the Sacrament Substantially, and really, yes sayth she I beleeue it is a reall lye, and a substantiall lye indeed.
               
            
            
               
               Iulius Palmer.
               PALMER shewing his vnmoueable constancy in standing to the truth, and beejng now ready to yeeld vppe his life for the same truth, Sr. RICHARD ABRIDGES said vnto him, well PALMER sayth the Knight, I perceiue that one of vs two must bee damned, for wee be of 2 sundrie faiths, and sure I am there is but one Faith that leadeth to life and salvation.
               
                  Pal.
                  
                     O sir I hope that both of vs shalbe saved.
                  
               
               
                  Brid.
                  How may that be PALMER?
               
               
                  
                  Pal.
                  Very well sir. For as it hath pleased our Mercifull Saviour according to the Gospels parable, to call me at the third houre of the day, even in my flowers, at the age of 24 yeares; even so I trust hee hath called, and will call you at the 11 houre, in this your old age, and giue you everlasting life for your portion.
                  
               
               
                  Brid.
                  Sai'st thou so? well Palmer, well, I would I might haue thee but one moneth in mine house, I doubt not but I would cō
                     vert thee, or thou shouldst convert me.
               
            
            
               
               Bradbegs Wife.
               THis good woman had 2 children named Patience and Charitie. At the time of her condemnation shee told the Bishop that if he would needes burne her, yet shee trusted hee would take and keepe Patience and Charitie, (meaning her two children) Nay by the Faith of my body sayth the Bishop will I not:
                  
                     The Bi: of Dover.
                   
                  I will meddle with neyther of them both.
               
            
            
               M. Frith.
               
                  IOhn Frith after much trouble, bejng at length

sent for to CROYDON from the tower to appeare before th'archbishoppe of Canterbury, Thomas Cranmer, sitting therewith other Bishops, to receiue his last doome; was earnestly laboured withall by one of his Gentlemen, and his Porter, who were the messengers that set him, to free himselfe out of the Bishops hands. For they greatly lamented FRITHS case, beejng sure if hee came to CROYDON he would bee cast away, such was his cō
                  stancie: in regard whereof vppon Bristow Causie, the Gentleman plotted a way for FRITH to escape, and drew the porter to his part. In the end they acquaint

                  Frith with their purpose, who with a smiling countenance made them this answere, And is this the effect of your secret consultation so long continued betweene you? Surely you haue lost a great deale more time then this ere now: and so are yee like to doe at this time, for if you both should leaue me heere alone, and should goe tell the Bishops that you had lost FRITH, and that he had escaped away from you, I would surely follow you as fast as I could, and would bring them newes of Friths finding. Do ye thinke (sayd he) I am afrayd to declare mine opinion to the Bishops of England in a manifest truth?
               
            
            
               
               Agnes Bongeor.
               THis deere Servant of Christ bejng condemned to be burned, had prepared her selfe to goe with her fellowe Martyrs to the stake, the same morning they went: but it was her happe of all the rest to bee kept backe, in regard her name was wrong written, to wit, Agnes Boyer, for Agnes Bongeor: What piteous moane this good woman made, how bitterly shee wept; what strāge thoughts came into her mind, how naked and desolate shee esteemed her selfe, into what plunge of dispaire &

care her poore Soule was cast; it was lamentable to behold; because she went not with her fellows to giue her life in the defence of her Christ and his Gospell, for of all things in the world shee least expected this restraint. For that very Morning in which shee was kept backe from burning, shee had put on a smocke which she had prepared onely for that purpose: and also having a little jnfant sucking on her, shee likewise sent it away to another nurse; So little looked she for life. Bejng in this great perplexitie of mind, a friend of hers came to her, demaunding of her whether ABRAHAMS obedience

was accepted before GOD, for sacrificing his Sonne ISAAK, or in that hee would haue offred him, vnto which she made this answere, I know that Abrahams will before God was allowed for the deede, for he would haue done it, if the Angell of the Lord had not stay'd him: but I sayd shee am vnhappy, the Lord thinks mee not worthy of this dignitie, and therefore ABRAHAMS case and mine is not alike.
               
                  Friend.
                  Why? you were resolved to goe with your company, if GOD had beene so pleased.
               
               
                  Agnes.
                  Yes with all my heart, and for that I went not with them, it is my

chiefest griefe.
               
               
                  Friend.
                  Deere sister I pray thee consider ABRAHAM and thy selfe well, & thou shalt see, thou nothing differest from him at all.
               
               
                  Agnes.
                  Alas sir, there is a farre greater matter in ABRAHAM then in me: for Abraham was tryed with the offring of his Child, but so am not I; our cases therefore are not alike.
               
               
                  Friend.
                  Good sister weigh the matter jndifferently: Abraham I graunt would haue offred his owne Son: and haue not you done the like in your little sucking babe, which you were content to part with? But consider that whereas Abraham

                     was commaunded but to offer his Sonne, you are heavy and perplexed because you cannot offer your selfe; which goeth somewhat more neere you, then Abrahams obedience did, and therfore in Gods sight and acceptation is assuredly no lesse allowed. After which talke between them she began a little to stay her selfe, and gaue her selfe wholy to th'exercises of prayer, and reading, wherin shee found no little comfort, waiting for the time of her Martyrdome, which at length she obtained.
               
            
            
               
               Thomas Hudson Martyr.
               
                  SEaman, Carman, and Hudson, beejng all three fastened to the stake in a pit called the Lolards pit without Bishops-gate in NORVVICH: HVDSON suddainely slippeth from vnder the chame from his two fellowes, to the wonder of many, whereby arose much doubtfulnes in mens minds. But sweet HVDSON felt not his Christ. He felt more in his heart and conscience, then they could conceiue off. In the meane while his 2 cō
                  panions at the stake cried out to him to cōfort him,

what they could: exhorting him in the bowels of Christ, to be of good comfort. But alas good soule hee was compassed (GOD knoweth) with great dolour and griefe of mind, not for his death, but for lacke of feeling the comfort of the holy ghost, the comforter. And therefore beejng very carefull, hee humbly fell on his knees praying vehemently and earnestly vnto the Lord, who at length according to his mercies of old sent comfort, and then rose he with great joy, as a man new changed even from death to life, saying, Now I thank God I am strong and passe not what man can doe vnto mee.
                  
So went hee to the stake to his fellowes againe, who all suffred together most joyfully.
            
            
               Roger Holland.
               
                  HOLLAND having leaue giuen him to speake after sentence pronounced by BONER Bishop of LONDON, vttered these words. I told you even now that your authoritie was from God, and that by his sufferance you doe these things: and now I tell you, God hath heard the prayers of his servants, which hath beene poured out with teares for his afflicted Church which daily you persecute, as now ye doo vs.

But this I dare be bold in God to say, (which by his spirit I am mooued to speake) that God will shorten your hand of cruelty, that for a time you shal not molest his Saints: and this shall you in short time well perceiue my deere brethren to bee most true: for after this day in this place,
                     This was spoken in the Moneth of Iune 15 8, and Q. Mary dyed Sep. following the 1.7.
                   shall there not be any by him (Boner he meanes, put to the tryall of fire and Faggot. And after that day, was there never any that suffred in Smithfield for the testimonie of the Gospell, God be thanked.
               
            
            
               
                  WIlliam Pickes somewhat before his

apprehension, went into his Garden and tooke with him a Bible of Rogers translation, where hee sitting with his face towards the South, reading on the said Bible, suddenly fell downe vppon his Booke betweene 11 and 12 a clocke at noone, 4 drops of fresh blood, not knowing from whence they came. Then he seeing the same was sore astonished, and could by noe meanes learne from whence they should fall: and wiping out one of the drops of blood with his finger, called his wife & said, In the vertue of God wife what: me
                        •
                     neth this? Will the Lord haue 4 Sacrifices? I see well enough the Lord will haue

blood. His will be done, and giue mee grace to abide the triall. Afterward hee looked dayly to be apprehended of the Papists, which came to passe accordingly.
            
            
               Prests Wife.
               
                  ONe PRESTS Wife of Exeter, beeing asked of the Bishop whether she had an husband & childrē, or not, answered, I haue an husband and Children, and I haue them not. So long as I was at libertie, I refused neither husband nor children: but standing heere as I doe in the cause of Christ and his truth, where I must eyther forsake Christ, or my husband, I am

content to sticke onely to Christ my spirituall Husband, and to forsake th'other.
               
                  Beeing oft-times offred money to relieue her necessities, shee would for the most part refuse it, saying, That she was going to a Countrey, where Money beares no Masterie.
            
            
               Elizabeth Yong.
               ELIZABETH YONG beejng committed to close prison, the keeper was charged by Doctor MARTIN in her hearing, to giue her one day bread & an other day Water, to which shee made this answere, Sir, If you take away

my meat, God I trust will take away my hunger.
               
            
            
               Iohn Cardmaker.
               MR. CARDMAKER disputing with one about the Real presence, asked the partie whether the Sacrament whereof he spake had a beginning or no. Which hee affirmed. The sayd Mr. CARDMAKER thus inferred therevppon: If the Sacrament (sayd hee) as you confesse haue a beginning and an ending, then it cannot be God: for GOD hath neither beginning nor ending, and so willing him to note it well, hee departed from him.
            
            
               
               Iohn Bradford.
               MR. BRADFORD beejng solicited by one PERCIVALL CRESVVEL to make sute for him, after many words, said.
               
                  Cres.
                  I pray you let me labor for you.
               
               
                  Brad.
                  You may do what you will.
               
               
                  Cres.
                  But tell me, what sute I should make for you.
               
               
                  Brad.
                  Forsooth that that you will doe, doe it not at my request, for I desire nothing at your hands. If the Queene will giue me life, I will thanke her. If she will banish

me, I will thanke her. If shee will burne me, I wil thanke her. If shee will condemne mee to perpetuall prison, I will thanke her.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Out of a Letter of Bradfords, to Crā
                        mer, Ridley, and Latimer.
                  
                  
                     THis day I thinke, or to morrow at the vttermost. Hearty HOOPER, sincere SAVNDERS, and trusty TAYLOR, end their course, and receiue their Crowne. The next am I, which hourely looke for the porter to open mee the gates after them, to enter into the desired rest.
               
            
            
               
               Cranmer Archbishop.
               SVch was the patience & mildnes of that worthy Martyr Thomas Cranmer towards his enemies, that it was grown to a common proverb: Doe my L. of Canterbury a shrewd turne, & thē you may be sure to haue him your friend for your labor, while you liue.
               
            
            
               Laurence Saunders.
               
                  ¶ Out of a Letter written to his wife.
                  
                     TO number the mercies of God vnto me in perticular,

were to number the drops of water which are in the Sea, the sands on the shore, the starres in the skie. O my deere wife, and ye the rest of my friends, rejoyce with mee I say, reioyce with thanksgiving for this my present promotion, in that I am made worthy to magnifie my God, not onely in my life by my slow mouth, & vncircumcised lippes, bearing witnes vnto his truth: but also by my blood to seale the same to the glory of my GOD, and confirmation of his true church. And as yet I testify vnto you, that the comfort of my sweet Christ, doth driue from my fantasie the feare of death. But

if my deere Husband Christ do for my tryall, leaue mee alone a little to my selfe, alas, I know in what case I shall bee then: but if for my proofe hee doe so, yet am I sure he will not be long or farre from mee. Though hee stand behind the wall and hide himselfe as Salomon sayth in his misticall song, yet will hee peepe in by a crest to see how I doe. Hee is a very tender hearted Ioseph: though he speke roughly to his brethren, and handle them hardly, yea & threaten greeuous bondage to his best beloved Beniamin: yet can hee not contain himselfe from weeping with vs, and vpon vs, with falling on our necks, and sweetly 
                        •
                     issing vs▪ Such, such a brother is our Christ vnto all &c.
               
               
                  
                  ¶ Out of another Letter to his wife.
                  WE be shortly to be dispatched hence to our good Christ, Amen, Amen. Wife, I would haue you to send mee my Shirt: you know wherevnto it is consecrated, let it be sowed downe on both sides, and not open. O my heauenly Father looke vpon me in the face of thy Christ, or else I shall not bee able to abide thy countenance, such is my filthines. He will doe so, and therefore I will not be affrayd what sin, death, hell, and damnation, can do against me.
                  
               
            
            
               
               ¶ Out of a Letter written to M. ROBERT GLOVER the same morning hee was burned.
               OH deare Brother, whome I loue in the Lord, being loved also of you in the Lord, be merrie and rejoyce for mee, now ready to goe vppe to that mine jnheritance, which I my selfe jndeede am most vnworthy of, but my deare Christ is worthy, who hath purchased the same for me with so deare a price. Oh wretched sinner that I am, not thankfull vnto this my Father, who hath vouchsafed mee woorthy to bee a

vessell vnto his honour. But O Lord, now accept my thankes, though they proceed out of a (not enough) circumcised heart. Salute all that loue vs in the truth, Gods blessing bee with you alwayes, Amen. Euen now towards the offring vp of a burnt Sacrifice. O my CHRIST helpe, or else I perish.
               
            
            
               Bishop Hooper.
               
                  ¶ Out of a Letter consolatory, which he writ to certain godly Brethren taken in Bow Church-yard at prayer, and layd in the Counter in Bread-streete.
                  REmember what lookers on you haue to

see and behold you in your fight; God and all his holy Angels, who are ready alwaies to take you vp into Heaven, if you be slaine in his fight. Also you haue standing at your backes all the multitude of the faithfull, who shal take courage, strength, and desire to follow such noble and valiant Christians as you be. Be not afrayd of your adversaries: for he that is in you, is stronger then hee that is in them. Shrinke not although it be paine to you: your paines be not now so great, as hereafter your joyes shall bee. Read the comfortable Chapters to the Rom. 8 10.15. Heb. 11.12. And vppon your

knees thanke God that ever you were accounted worthy to suffer any thing for his names sake. Read the second of Lukes Gospell, and there you shall see how the Sheapheards that watched vppon their Sheepe all night, as soone as they heard that Christ was borne at Bethlem, by & by they went to see him. They did not reason or debate with themselues, who should keepe the Wolfe from the sheep in the mean time, but did as they were commanded, and committed their Sheepe vnto him, whose pleasure they obayed. So let vs, now wee bee called, commit all other things to him that calleth

vs. Hee will take heede that all things shall be well. He will helpe the Husband, hee will comfort the Wife. Hee will guide the Seruants, hee will keepe the house, hee will preserue the goods. Yea, rather then faile, if it should lye vndone, he will wash the Dishes, and rocke the Cradle. Cast therefore all your care vppon him, for he careth for you.
                  
               
               
                  ¶ Out of another Letter of Mr. HOOPERS to his friends, perswading them to constancy.
                  
                     IT was an easie thing to hold with Christ whiles the Prince and the World held with him, but now the

world hateth him, it is the true tryal who be his. In the name and in the vertue thē of his holie spirit prepare your selues to adversity & constancy. Let vs not run away when it is most time to fight. Remember none shall bee crowned but such as fight manfully. You must now turne all your cogitati
                        •
                     ns from the perill you see: and marke the felicitie that followeth the perill: either victorie of your enemies in this World, or else a surrender for euer of your right in the inheritance to come. Beware of beholding to much the felicite or miserie of this world: for the consideration and too earnest loue or feare of either of them draweth from God. Thinke with your

selues: the felicitie of the world is good: but yet none otherwise then it standeth with the fauor of God. It is to be kept: but yet so farre forth as by keeping of it wee loose not God. It is good abiding and tarrying still among our friends here: but yet so that we tarrie not therwithall in Gods displeasure, and to dwell hereafter with Deuils in fire euerlasting. There is nothing vnder God but may bee kept, so that God, being aboue all things we haue, be not lost.
                  Of Aduersity iudge the same. Long imprisonment is painfull, but yet libertie vppon euill conditions is more painfull. The prisons stincke: but yet not so much as sweet houses whereas the feare and true honour of God lacketh: losse of goods is

great, but losse of Gods grace and fauour is greater. I must bee alone and solitarie: it is better to bee alone and haue God with mee, then to bee in company with the wicked, and want his presence. I am a poore simple creature, and cannot tell how to answere before such a great sort of Noble and learned wen: it is better to make answere before the pompe and pride of wicked men, then to stand naked in the sight of all heaven and Earth, before the iust GOD at the latter day. I shall die then by the hands of the cruell man: hee is blessed that looseth his life full of miseries, and findeth the life of eternall ioyes. It is paine and griefe to depart from life and friends: but yet not so much as to

depart from grace and Heauen it selfe. Felicitie nor adversitie then can apreare to be great, if it be wayed with the joyes or paine of the life to come.
                  
               
            
            
               ¶ The last will and testament of Doctor Rowland Taylor.
               
               I Say to my wife, and to my Children: the Lord gaue you vnto mee, and the Lord hath taken me from you, and you from mee: blessed be the name of the Lord. I beleeue they are blessed that dye in the Lord. God careth for sparrowes, and for the haires of our heads. I haue euer found him more faithfull and fauorable,

then is any Father or husband. Trust yee therefore in him by the meanes of our deere Sauiour Christs merits: beleeue, loue, feare and obay him: pray to him, for hee hath promised to helpe. Count me not dead for I shall certainely liue, and neuer die. I goe before you, and you shall follow after to our long home. I goe to the rest of my childrē 
                  Susan, George, Ellen, Robert, Zacharie: I haue bequeathed you to the onely omnipotent.
               I say to my deare friends of HADLEY, and to all other which haue heard me preach: that I depart hence with a quiet conscience, as touching my doctrine: for the which I pray you thanke God with

me, for after my small tallent, I haue declared to you those lessons I gathered out of Gods blessed booke the Bible. If I therefore or an Angell from Heaven should preach vnto you any other Gospell then that ye haue received, Gods great curse vppon that preacher.
               
               Beware for gods sake that ye deny not God, neither decline from the woord of Faith, least GOD decline from you, and so ye doe everlastingly perish.
               
                  For Gods sake beware of Poperie, for though it appeare to haue in it vnitie, yet the same is in vanitie, and Antichristianitie, and not in Christs faith and veritie.
               
               Beware of the sin against

the holy Ghost, now after such a light opened so plainlie and simplie, truelie, thorowlie, and generally to all England.
               
               The Lord grant all men his good and holy spirit; increase of his wisdome, contemning this wicked world, heartie desire to bee with God & the heavenly company, through Iesus Christ our onely Mediatour, advocate, righteousnes, life, sanctification, and onelie hope. Amen, Amen, pray, pray.
               
                  Rowland Taylor, departing hence in sure hope without all doubting of eternall salvation, I thanke God my heavenly father

through his Sonne Iesus Christ my certaine Saviour.
            
            
               Iohn Warren.
               IN the confession of his Faith hath this sweete speach, Without Christ no heauenly guift is giuen, nor sin forgiuen.
               
               
                  Iohn Warren Vpholster.
            
            
               Alice Binden.
               
                  Of the Parish of Staple Hurst in 
                        •
                     he Coū
                     
                     
                        •
                     y of Kēt.SHee beeing at the stake, tooke forth a shilling of Phillip and Marie, which her Father had bowed and sent her, (when she was first

sent to prison) desiring her Brother (there present) to returne the same to her father againe, with obedient salutations: and to tell him It was the first peece of money that he sent her after her troubles began, which (as she protested) shee had kept, and now sent him: to doe him to vnderstand, that shee neuer lacked mony while she lay in prison.
               
               And yet what extremity she endured in prison, this briefe Relation following may testifie. Her constancy beeing such in the profession of the trueth, that shee could no waye bee remooved from it, her fond husbād (who first had procured her jmprisonmēt, & had also taken money of

the Constable to carrie her to prison himselfe) told the Bishop that she had a Brother called Richard Hale,
                  
                     Ian. 22. 1556. who if his Lordship could keepe from her, she would turne: for he comforteth her (sayd hee) and giveth her mony, and perswadeth her not to relent.
               This councell beeing as soone apprehended as tendered; was forth-with put also in execution. For thervpon the Bishop gaue cō
                  mandement she should bee committed to his prison called Mondayes hole, giving also straight charge that if her Brother at any time came at her, he should be layd hold on.
               This prison was within a

Court where the Prebends Chambers were, beeing a vault beneath the ground, and the window beeing jnclosed with a pale; of height by estimation 4 foot and a halfe, and distant from the same three foot, so that she looking frō beneath might onelie see such as stoode at the pale. Her Brother in the meane while sought her, with no lesse danger of life, then diligēce. But in regard of many impediments hee could never know where she lay, till comming by gods vnsearchable providence very earlie thither in a morning (her Keeper being thē gone to Church to ring, for he was Bel-ringer) chanced to heare her

voice as she poured out her sorrowfull complaints vnto God; saying the psalmes of David: in which place hee could none otherwise releeue her, but by putting money in a loafe of bread, and sticking the same on a pole, and so reached it vnto her; for neither with meate nor drinke could hee sustaine her. And this was 5 weekes after her cō
                  ming thither. All which time no creature was knowne to come at her, more then her keeper.
               Her lyjng in that prison was onely vppon a little short straw, between a paire of stocks and a stone wall: beeing allowed 3 farthings a day; that is a halfe peny

bread, & a farthing drinke: neither could shee get any more for her money: wherfore she desired to haue her whole allowance in bread, and vsed water for her drinke. Thus did she lye 9 weekes, during all which time, shee never chaunged her apparell: whereby she became at the last a most piteous & loathsome creature to behold.
               At her first comming into this place, shee did greevously bewaile her state with great sorrow and lamentation, reasoning with her selfe: Why her Lord God did with so heauie iustice suffer her to be sequestred from her louing fellowes, into so extreame miserie. In these dolorous

mournings did she continue, till on a night, as shee was in her sorrowfull supplications, rehearsing this verse of the Psalme: why art thou so heauie O my soule? And againe, The right hand of the Lord can change all this: she received comfort in the middest of her miseries: and after that, continued very joyful vntill her deliverance from the same.
               
                  
                     Ma. 25 Anno 1557.In March following the Bishoppe called her before him: demaunding of her whether shee would goe home and goe to Church or no, promising her great favour if shee would be reformed.
               To whom she answered, I thinke, and am throughly

perswaded by the great extremitie that you haue already shewed mee, that you are not of God, neither can your dooings bee godly, and I see sayth she, that you seeke my vtter destruction, shewing how lame she was of the cold shee had taken, and for lacke of foode while she lay in that painefull prison.
               Then did the Bishop deliuer her from that filthie hole, and sent her to West-gate, where after shee had been changed, and for a while been cleane kept, her skinne did wholly pill and scale off, as if shee had been poysoned with some mortall venom, where shee continued till the 19 of Iune, on which day shee was bereaved

of life by the terrible fier.
               One thing more touching this good woman is to be noted, that while she was in prison shee practised with a prison fellow of hers, the wife of one Potkin, to liue both of them with 2 pence halfe-penny a day, to try thereby how wel they could sustaine penurie and hunger, before they were put to it, for they had heard, that when they should remoue from thēce to the Bishops prison, their allowance should be but 3 farthings a day a peece, and thus they lived 14 daies ere shee was remoued.
            
            
               
               ¶ Thomas Wats his farewell to his Wife and children.
               AFter his priuate praier made to himselfe, hee came to his Wife and sixe Children being there, and sayd these words in effect: Wife and my good Children, I must now depart away from you. Therefore hencefoorth know I you no more: but as the Lord hath giuen you vnto me, so I giue you againe vnto the Lord; whom I charge you see you obay, and feare him: aad beware yee turne not to this abhominable Papistrie, against the which anon you shall see mee by Gods

grace giue my blood. Let not the murthering of Gods Saints cause you to relent, but take occasion therby to be the stronger in the Lords quarrell, and I doubt not but hee will bee a mercifull Father vnto you. In the end hee bad them farewell, and kissed them all & was carried to the fier.
            
            
               ¶ BRADFORDS Mementoes to the Lord RVSSELL, afterwards called the good Earle of Bedford.
               
               REmember LOTS Wife which looked backe. Remember that none are Crowned, but such as striue lawfully.

Remember FRAVNCIS SPIRA. Remember that all you haue, is at Christs commaundement. Remember he lost more for you, then you can loose for him. Remember that it is not lost which you loose for his sake, for you shall find much more heere, and elsewhere. Remember you shall dye; when, where, and how, ye cannot tel. Remember that the death of sinners is terrible. Remember that the death of Gods Saints is precious in his sight. Remember the multitude goeth the wide way, which windeth to wo. Remember the straight way which leadeth to life, hath but few trauellers. Remember Christ biddeth you enter in thereat. Remember hee that trusteth in the Lord, shall receiue

strength to stand against all the assaults of his enemies.
               
                  Be certaine, all the haires of your head are numbred. Be certain, your good Father hath appointed your bounds, over which the devill dare not looke. Commit your selfe to him: hee is, hath been, and will bee your keeper. Let Christ be your marke and scope to prick at: Let him be your patterne to worke by: Let him be your ensample to follow: giue him as your heart, so your hand: as your mind, so your tongue: as your Faith, so your feet: And let his word be your Candle to goe before you in al matters of Religion. Blessed is he that Walketh not

to these Popish praiers, nor standeth at them, nor sitteth at them: glorifie God both in soule and body.
               
            
            
               ¶ Fifteene short sentences left by Robert Smith Martyr, to ANNE SMITH his wife.
               1 SEEke first to loue God deere wife with your whole heart, and then it shall be easie for you to loue your neighbour.
               2 Be friendly to all creatures, but especially to your owne Soule.
               3 Be alwaies an enemie to the Deuill & the world, but chiefely to your owne flesh.
               
                  4 In hearing of good things, ioyne the eares of your head and heart together.
               5 Seeke vnitie and quietnesse with all men, but specially with your conscience: for it will not easily be pacified.
               6 Loue all men, but specially your enemies.
               7 Hate the sinnes that are past, but especially those to come.
               8 Be as ready to further your enemie, as hee is to hinder you, that yee may bee the child of God.
               9 Defile not that which Christ hath cleansed, least his blood bee layd to your charge.
               10 Remember that god

hath hedged in your tongue with the teeth and lippes, that it might speake vnder correction.
               11 Be ready at all times to looke to your brothers eye, but especially to your owne eye. For he that warneth an other of that hee himselfe is faultie, giueth his neighbour the cleere Wine, and himselfe the dregges.
               12 Beware of riches and worldly honor: for without vnderstanding, prayer, and fasting, it is a snare, & like to consuming fier, of which if a man take a little it will warme him, but if too much, it will consume him.
               13 Shew mercie to the Saints for Christs sake, &

Christ shall reward you for the Saints sake.
               14 Among all other prisoners, visit your owne Soule: for it is inclosed in a perillous prison.
               15 If you loue GOD, hate euill, &c.
               
                  
                     Your Husband RO: SMITH.
               
               
                  
                     
                        If yee will meet with me againe,
                        Forsake not Christ for any paine.
                     
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            CERTAINE deuout Prayers, which some of the godly Martyrs made at the hower of their death.
            
               ¶ The Prayer which Mr. HOOPER Bishop of Glocester, made at his death.
               
                  LORD, sayd he, I am Hell, but thou art Heaven: I am swill and a sincke of sinne, but

thou art a gracious GOD, and a merciful Saviour and Redeemer. Haue mercie therefore vppon me most miserable and wretched offender, after thy great mercie, and according to thine jnestimable goodnes: thou art assended into Heaven; receiue me Hell to be partaker of thy joyes, where thou sittest in equall glory with the Father. For well thou knowest Lord wherefore I am come hither to suffer, and why the wicked doe persecute this thy poore seruant: not for my sinnes and transgressions committed against thee, but because I will not allow of their wicked doings, to the contaminating of

thy blood, and to the deniall of the knowledge of thy truth wherwith it did please thee by thy holy spirit to jnstruct mee: the which with as much diligence as a poore wretch might (being called thereto) I haue set forth to thy glory. And well thou seest my Lord & God what terrible paynes and cruel torments be here prepared for thy poore Creature: such Lord as without thy strength none is able to beare or patiently to passe. But all things that are jmpossible with man, with thee are possible. Therefore strengthen me of thy goodnesse, that in the fire I breake not the bounds of patience; or else

asswage the terrour of the paines as shall seeme most to thy glory.
               
                  Heere the party who heard thus much of his prayer, beeing espied of the Maior, was commaunded away and could be suffred to heare no more.
               
            
            
               ¶The Prayer of Doctor CRANMER Archbishop of Canterburie: when it was thought he would haue made his Recantation.
               O Father of Heauen: O Sonne of GOD, redeemer of the world: O holy Ghost three persons and one GOD haue mercy vppon me most wretched

Caytiffe, and miserable sinner: I haue offended both against Heauen and Earth, more then my tongue can expresse. Whether then may I goe, or whether should I flee? To heauen I am ashamed to lift vppe mine eyes, and in Earth I find no place of refuge or succour. To thee therefore o Lord do I runne; to thee do I humble my selfe, saying. O Lord my GOD, my sinnes be great, but yet haue Mercie vppon mee for thy great Mercie. The great mistery that God became man, was not wroght for small or few offences. Thou didst not giue thy Sonne O Heauenly Father vnto death for little sinnes

onely, but for all the greatest sinnes of the world: so that the sinner returne to thee with his whole heart, as I doe heere at this present. Wherfore haue mercie vppon mee ô GOD, whose property it is always to haue mercie: haue mercie vpon mee ô Lord, for thy great mercie. I craue nothing for mine owne merits, but for thy names sake, that it may be hallowed thereby, and for thy deere Sonne Iesus Christs sake. And now therefore, O our Father, &c.
               His repentance for subscription; vttered a little before his death.
               And now I come to the great thing, that so much

troubleth my conscience more then any thing that ever I did or sayd in my whole life, and that is, the setting abroad of a writing contrarie to the truth: which now I heere renownce & refuse as things written with my hand contrary to the truth which I thought in mine heart, and written for feare of death, and to saue life if it might be; and that is, all such bils and papers which I haue written or signed with mine hand since my degradatiō: wherein I haue written many things vntrue. And for as much as my hand offeded in writing cōtrary to my heart; mine hand shalbe punished therefore: for may I come to

the fire, it shall first be burned: which accordingly he did. For being at the stake, whē the fire began to flame, hee put his right hand vnto it, which hee held so stedfast and jmmoueable (saving that once with the same hand hee wiped his face) that all men might see his hand burned before it touched his body.
            
            
               ¶ The Prayer of Steven Knight, made vppon his knees at his death.
               O Lord Iesus Christ, for whose loue I willingly leaue this life, and desire rather the bitter death of the Crosse, with

the losse of all earthly things, then to abide the blaspheaming of thy most holy name, or to obay men in breaking thy holy Commandemēt. Thou seest (oh Lord) that where I might liue in worldly wealth to worshippe a false God and honour thine enemy, I choose rather the torment of the body and losse of this my life, and haue counted all things but vild, dust, and dunge, that I might winne thee: which death is dearer vnto me then thousands of Gold and Silver. Such loue (oh Lord) hast thou layd vppe within my breast, that I hunger for thee as the Deere that is wounded desireth the soile.

Send thy holy Comforter (O Lord) to ayd, comfort, and strengthen this weake peece of earth, which is empty of all strength of it selfe. Thou remembrest (Oh Lord) that I am but dust, and able to doe nothing that is good. Therefore (O Lord) as of thine accustomed goodnesse and loue, thou hast bidden me to this banket, & accounted me worthy to drinke of thine owne cup amongst thine elect: even so giue me strength (Oh Lord) against this thine element, which as to my sight it is most yrksome and terrible: so to my mind it may at thy commandent (as an obedient servant) bee sweet

and pleasant, that through the strength of thy holy spirit, I may passe through the rage of this fire into thy bosome according to thy promise: and for this mortall, receiue an jmmortall; and for this corruptible, may put on jncorruption. Accept this burnt offring (O Lord) not for the sacrifice, but for thy deare Sonnes sake my Saviour. For whose testimonie I offer this free-will offring, with all my heart, and with all my soule. O heauenly Father forgiue mee my sinnes, as I forgiue all the world: O sweet Son of God my sauiour, spread thy wings ouer me. O blessed Holy Ghost, through whose mercifull inspiration I come

hither to dye: conduct me into euerlasting life. Lord into thine hands I commend my spirit. Amen.
            
            
               ¶ A Prayer which Master George Marsh vsed daily to say,
               O LORD Iesus Christ which art the onely Phisition of wounded consciences, wee miserable sinners trusting in thy gracious goodnesse, doe briefly open to thee the evill tree of our hearts, with all the rootes, boughes, leaues, knots and snags, all which thou knowest: for thou throughly perceiuest as well th'jnward lusts, doubtings,

and denyings of thy prouidence; as these grosse outward sinnes which wee commit in words & deeds. Wherefore wee beseech thee according to the little measure we haue receaued, we being farre vnable and vnapt to praye, that thou wouldest mercifully circumcise our stonye hearts, and for these old hearts, create within vs and replenish vs with a new spirit: & water and moysten vs with the juice of heauenly grace and Wels of spirituall waters, whereby the jnward venome and noisome juice of the flesh, may be dryed vp, and custome of the old man changed: and our hearts alwayes bringing

forth Thornes and Bryars to be burned with fire; frō hence forth may beare spirituall fruits in righteousnes and holinesse vnto life euerlasting, Amen.
               
               Beloued, among other exercises I doe daily on my knees vse this confession of sinnes, willing and exhorting you to doe the same, and daily to acknowledge vnfainedly to God your vnbeliefe, vnthankfulnes, and disobedience against him. This shall you doe if you will diligently consider and looke vppon your selues, first in the pure glasse of Gods Commandements, & there see your jnward euils, filthines, and vncleanesse, and so learne

to vanquish the same, that is to wit, to fall into hearty displeasure against sinne, and thereby be provoked to long after Christ. For we truely are sinners: but he is just and the justifier of all them that belieue in him. If wee hunger and thirst after righteousnesse, let vs resort to his table, for he is a liberall feast-maker. Hee will set before vs his own holy body, which was giuē for vs to be out meat, and his pretious bloud which was shed for vs, and for many, for remission of sinnes, to be our drinke. He biddeth, willeth, calleth for guests which hunger and thirst: Come (sayth he) all yee that are laden and labour

vnto mee and I will refresh, coole and ease you, and you shall find rest vnto your soules.
               
            
            
               ¶ A Prayer of Nicholas Sheterden before his death.
               O Lord my God and Saviour, which art Lord in heauen and earth, maker of all things visible and jnvisible. I am thy creature & worke of thine hands. Lord looke vpon mee and other thy people which at this time are oppressed of the worldly minded men, for thy lawes sake, yea; for thy Law it selfe is now trodden vnderfoote, and mens jnventions

exalted aboue it; and for that cause do I, and many of thy creatures refuse the glory, praise, and commodities of this life, and do chose to suffer adversitie, and to be banished, yea to be burnt with the Books of thy word, for the hopes sake that is layd vppe in store. For Lord thou knowest, if wee would but seeme to please men in things contrarie to thy word, wee might by thy permission enioy these comodities as other men do; as Wife, Children, goods, and friends, which all I acknowledge to be thy gifts, given vnto the end I shold serve thee. And now Lord, that the world will not suffer

mee to enioy them except I offend thy Lawes, behold I giue vnto thee my whole Spirit, Soule, and body. And lo I leaue heere all the pleasures of this life, and doe now leaue th'vse of them, for the hopes sake of eternall life purchased in Christs blood, and promised to all that fight on his side, and are content to suffer with him for his truth, whēsoever the world and the Deuill shall persecute the same. O Father, I presume not to come heere to thee trusting in mine owne righteousnes: No, but in the onely merits of thy Sonne my Saviour. For the which excellent gift of Salvation, I

cannot worthilye prayse thee, neither is any sacrifice worthy or to be accepted with thee, in comparison of our bodies mortified and obedient to thy wil. And now Lord whatsoever rebellion hath been, or is found in my members against thy will, yet doe I heere giue vnto thee my body to the death, rather then I will vse any strange worshipping, which I beseech thee accept at my hands for a pure sacrifice. Let this torment be to me the last enemie destroyed, even death the end of miserie, and the beginning of all joy, peace, and solace: And when the time of the resurrection commeth, let

me enjoy againe these mē
                  bers then glorified, which now be spoyled and consumed by the fier. O Lord Iesus receiue my spirit into thine hands. Amen.
            
            
               George Tankerfield.
               
                  GEorge Tankerfield sitting before a fier, a little before his death at ST. ALBANS, after he had put off his hose and shooes, stretched out his legge to the flame and when it had touched his foot, he quickly withdrew his leg, shewing how the flesh did perswade him one way, and the spirit an other. The flesh sayd, ô thou foole,

wilt thou burne and needst not? The spirit sayd, be not afrayd, this burning is nothing to eternall fier. The flesh sayd, do not leaue the company of thy friends and acquaintance which loue thee, and will let thee lacke nothing. The spirit sayd, the company of Iesus Christ and his glorious presence, doth farre exceed all fleshly friends. The flesh sayd, doe not shorten thy time now, for thou maist if thou wilt, liue much longer. The spirit sayd, this life is nothing to that which is to come, which lasteth for euer and ever.
               
            
            
               
               ¶ The Prayer of Richard Browne,
                  
                     Anno. 1518. who standing at the stake and holding vp both his hands sayd.
               
                  O Lord I yeild mee to thy grace,
                  Graunt mee pardon for my trespasse.
                  Let neuer the feend my soule chase.
                  Lord I will bow, and thou shalt beat,
                  Let neuer my soule come in hell heat.
               
               Into thy hands I commend my spirit.
            
            
               
               ¶ A Godly and deuout Prayer mentioned in the storie of Mr. Philpot Martyr, fit for such as suffer at the stake.
               MErcifull God and father to whome approached our Sauiour Christ in his feare & need by reason of death, and found comfort: Gracious God, and most bounteous Christ, on whome Steuen called in his extreame need and receiued strength: Most benigne and holy spirit, who in the midst of all crosses and death did'st comfort th'Apostle

ST. Paul with more consolations in Christ thē hee felt sorrows & terrors; haue mercie vpon me miserable, vild, and wretched sinner, who now draweth neere vnto the gates of death, deserued both in body and soule eternall, by reason of my manifold, horrible, old, and new transgressions, which to thine eies ô Lord are open and knowne. Oh be mercifull vnto mee for the bitter death and bloodshedding of thine onely sonne Iesus Christ. And though thy justice do require in respect of my sinnes, that thou shouldst not heare me, measuring mee with the same measure I haue measured

thy Maiestie, contē
                  ning al thy gracious calls: yet let thy mercie which is aboue all thy works, and wherwith th'earth is filled, let thy mercy I say prevaile towards mee through and for the Mediation of onr Saviour, for whose sake it hath pleased thee now to bring mee foorth as one of thy witnesses, and a record bearer to thy veritie and truth taught by him, to giue my life therefore; (To which dignitie ô Lord and deere father I acknowledge there was never any so vnfit nor vnworthy, no not the theefe that hanged vppon the Crosse) so I therfore most humbly beseech thee, that thou woldst

accordingly aid, helpe, and assist me with thy strength and heavenly grace, that with Christ thy Sonne I may find comfort: with Steven I may see thy presence and gracious power: with Paul and all others which for thy names sake haue suffred affliction and death, I may find thy sweet consolation so present with mee, that I may by my death glorifie thy name, propagate and ratifie thy truth, comfort the hearts of the heavie, confirm thy Church in thy veritie, convert some to be converted, & so depart foorth of this miserable life, where I doe nothing but heape sinne dayly vppon sinne, and so

enter into the fruition of thy blessed presence and mercie: whereof giue and encrease in mee a liuely trust, sence, and feeling, where through the terrors of death, the torments of the fire, the pangs of sinne, the darts of Satan, and the dolours of hell, may never depresse mee; but may bee driven away through the working of thy most gratious spirit, which now plenteously endew mee withall that I may offer (as I now desire to do in Christ by him) my selfe wholy, Soule and body, to be an holy, liuely, and acceptable sacrifice in thy sight. Deere Father whose I am, and alwaies haue been even from my

Mothers wombe, yea even before the world was made to whom I commend my selfe, soule, and body, familie, friends, Countrey, and all thy whole Church, yea, even my very enemies according to thy good pleasure: beseeching thee entirely to giue once more to this Realme of England the blessing of thy word againe, with godly peace, to the teaching and setting foorth of the same. Oh deare Father now giue me grace to come vnto thee, purge and so purifie mee by this fire in Christs death & passion, through thy spirit, that I may bee a burnt offring of sweet smel in thy sight, who liuest and

raignest with the son and holy Ghost, now and for ever more, Amen.
            
            
               M. Bartlet Greene.
               ¶ A Sweet description of the miseries of this life, and of the ioyes of the life to come, written by Mr. Bartlet Greene.
               
               
                  BEtter is the day of death (sayth Salomon) then the day of birth. Man that is borne of a woman liueth but a short time, and is replenished with many miseries, but happy are the dead that dye in the Lord.
               
               Man of a woman is borne

in trauell to liue in miserie: man through Christ doth dye to liue. Straight as he commeth into this world, with cries hee vttereth his miserable estate: straight as he departeth, with songs hee praiseth God for ever. Scearce yet in his cradle, 3 deadly enemies assaile him: after death no adversarie can annoy him: whilst he is heere, hee displeaseth GOD: when hee is dead, hee fulfilleth his will. In this life hee dyeth through sinne: In the life to come he liueth in righteousnesse. Through many tribvlations on earth he is still purged: with joy vnspeakable in heaven, hee is made perfect

for ever. Heere hee dyeth every houre: there hee liveth continually. Heere is sinne; there is righteousnes. Here is time, there is eternitie. Heere is hatred: there is loue. Heere is paine: there is pleasure. Heere is miserie: there is felicitie. Heere is Corruption: there is jmmortalitie. Heere we see vanitie: there we shall behold the Maiestie of God, with triumphant & vnspeakable joy, in glory everlasting. Seeke therefore the things that are aboue, where Christ sitteth on the right hand of GOD the Father, to whom with the holy Ghost be all glory and houour world without

end, Amen.
               
            
            
               Lady Iane.
               ¶ An effectuall Prayer made by the Lady IANE in the time of her trouble.
               O Lord thou god & father of my life, heare me poore and desolate woman, who flyeth vnto thee onely in all troubles and miseries. Thou (O Lord) art the onely defender and deliuerer of those that put their trust in thee: & therfore I beeing defiled with sinne, encombred with affliction, vnquieted with troubles, wrapped in cares, over-whelmed with miseries, vexed with temptations, and grieuously tormented

with the long jmprisonment of this vilde masse of Claye my sinfull body: do come vnto thee O mercifull Saviour crauing thy mercie and helpe: with the which so little hope of deliuerance is left, that I may vtterly despaire of any libertie. Albeit it is expedient, that seeing our life standeth vpon trying, we should be visited sometime with some adversity, whereby we might be tried whether wee be thy flocke, or no, and also know thee and our selues the better: yet thou that sayd'st thou would'st not suffer vs to be tempted aboue our power, be merciful vnto me now a miserable wretch I beseech

thee; that I may neither bee too much puffed vppe with prosperity, neither to much pressed downe with adversity: least I beeing too full should denye thee my God, or being too low brought, should despaire & blaspheme thee my Lord and Saviour. O mercifull God, consider my miserie, best knowne to thee, and bee thou now vnto mee a strong Tower of defence, I humbly require thee, Suffer me not to bee tempted aboue my power, but either be thou a deliuerer to mee out of this great misery, or else giue me grace patiently to beare thy heauy hand and sharpe correction. It was t
                     •
                  y right hand

that deliuered the poore people of Israell out of the hāds of Pharaoh, which for the space of Fortie yeares did oppresse and keepe thē in bondage. Let it therefore seeme good to thy fatherly goodnesse to deliuer me sorrowfull wretch (for whome thy Sonne Christ shedde his pretious bloud on the Crosse) out of this miserable captiuitie and bondage wherein I now am. How long wilt thou bee absent, for ever? Oh Lord hast thou forgotten to bee gracious, and hast thou shut vppe thy loving kindnesse in displeasure? wilt thou bee no more entreated? Is thy mercy clean gone for ever, and thy promise

come vtterly to an end for evermore? Why doest thou make so long tarrying? Shall I despaire of thy mercy O God? farre be that from me. I am thy workemanship created in Christ Iesus: giue mee grace therfore to tarrie thy leisure, and patiently to beare thy workes: assuredly knowing that as thou caust, so thou wilt deliuer me when it shal please thee, nothing doubting or mistrusting thy goodness towards me: for thou knowest better what is good for me, then I doe: therefore doe with mee in all things what thou wilt. Onelie in the meane time arme me I beseech thee with thy armor,

that I may stand fast, my loines being girt about with veritie, having on the breast-plate of righteousnes, and shodde with the shoes prepared in the Gospell of peace, aboue all things taking vnto me the shield of Faith, wherewith I may be able to quench al the fiery darts of the devil, and taking the helmet of Hope, and the sword of the Spirit, which is thy most holy word: praying alwaies with all manner of Prayer and Supplication, that I may referre my selfe wholly to thy will, abyding thy pleasure, and comforting my selfe in those troubles that it shall please thee to send: seeing such troubles

be profitable for mee, and seeing I am assuredly perswaded, that it cannot but bee well, all that thou dooest. Heare mee ô mercifull Father for his sake whome thou would'st should bee a sacrifice for my sinnes, to whome with thee and the holy Ghost bee all honour and glorie, Amen.
            
            
               ¶ A Prayer of the Lord Cromwell which he at the houre of his death.
               O Lord Iesu which art the onely health of all men living, and the everlasting life of them

which die in thee: I wretched sinner do submit my selfe wholy vnto thy most blessed will, beejng sure that the thing cannot perish which is committed vnto thy mercie: willingly now I leaue this fraile and wicked flesh, in sure hope that thou wilt in better wise raise it vp & restore it to me at the day of the resurrection of the just. I beseech thee most mercifull Lord Iesus Christ that thou wilt by thy grace make strong my soule against all temptations, and defend mee with the buckler of thy mercie against al the assaults of Satan. I see and acknowledge that ther is in my selfe no hope of

Salvation, but all my hope and trust is in thy most mercifull goodnes. I haue no merits nor good works which I may alleadge before thee: of sinnes and evill works alas I see a great heape: but yet thorow thy mercie I trust to be in the nūber of thē to whom thou wilt not jmpute their sins, but wilt accept me for just and righteous, and to bee th'inheritor of everlasting life. Thou mercifull Lord wastborn for my sake, thou didst suffer both hunger & thirst for my sake: thou didst teach, pray, and fast for my sake: all thy holy actions and workes thou wroughtest for my sake: Thou suffred'st most greeuous

paines and torments for my sake: finally, thou gavest thy most precious body and blood to be shed vppon the Crosse for my sake. Now most merciful Saviour, Let all these things profit mee, that thou freely hast doone for mee. Let thy blood clense & wash away the spots and foulenes of my sinnes. Let thy righteousnesse hide and couer my vnrighteousnes. Let the merits of thy passion and blood shedding bee a satisfaction for my sinnes. Giue me Lord thy grace, that the faith of my salvation in thy blood waver not, but may be ever firme and constant: that the hope of thy mercie and life everlasting

never decay in me. that loue may not bee cold in mee.
               Finally, that the weakenes of my flesh bee not ouercome with the feare of death. Graunt me mercifull Sauiour, that when death hath shut vp the eies of my body, and hath taken away the vse of my tongue, yet the eyes of my Soule may still behold and looke vppon thee, and my heart may still cry and say vnto thee, Lord Iesu into thine hands I commed my Soule, Lord receiue my spirit. Amen.
            
            
               
               ¶ The Prayer that Martin Luther sayd at his death.
               MY Heavenly Father and eternall & mercifull GOD, thou hast manifested to mee thy deere son our Lord Iesus Christ. I haue taught him, I haue knowne him, I loue him as my life; my health, and my redemption: whome the wicked haue persecuted, maligned, and with jniurie afflicted. Draw my soule to thee. After this hee sayd, I commend my spirit into thine hands, thou hast redeemed mee ô GOD, of truth God so loved

the world, &c.
            
            
               Anne Askew.
               ¶ The Prayer of Anne Askew.
               
               O Lord I haue more enemies then there bee haires on my head: yet Lord let them never overcome mee with vaine words, but fight thou Lord in my stead, for on thee cast I my care. With all the spight they can jmagine they fall vppon me which am thy poore creature: Yet sweet Lord let me not set by them, which are against mee: for in thee is my whole delight. And

Lord I heartely desire of thee, that thou wilt of thy mercifull goodnesse forgiue them that violence which they doe and haue done to me. Opē also their blind hearts that they may heereafter do that thing in thy sight which is only acceptable before thee, and to set foorth thy veritie aright without all fantasies of sinnefull men. So be it O Lord, so be it.
               
                  
                     By me Anne Askew.
               
            
            
               
               William Flower.
               ¶ The Prayer and confession which William Flower made at his death.
               OH Eternall God, most mightie and mercifull Father, who hast sent down thy sonne vppon the earth to saue mee, and all mankind, who ascended vp into heaven againe, and left his blood heere vppon the earth behind him, for the redemption of our sinnes: haue mercie vppon mee, haue mercie vpon me, for thy deere Sonne our Saviour Christs sake, in whom I confesse onely to bee all

salvation, and justification, and that there is none other meane nor way, nor holinesse, in which, or by which any man can be saved in this world. This is my faith, which I beseech men heere to beare witnes off. Then sayd hee the Lords Prayer, and so made an end. Fier beeing set vnto him and burning therein, he cried thrise with a loud voice, O Sonne of GOD haue mercy vpon mee, O Sonne of GOD receiue my soule: and so his speach beeing taken from him, hee spake no more, lifting vp notwithstanding his stumpe with his other arme as long as he could.
            
            
               
               ¶ Here followeth two worthy and godly Letters full of heavenly consolation, written by that holie man of God M. Iohn Bradford Martyr: fit for all such to read and obserue as feele in them a wounded spirit.
               
                  ¶ The first Letter written to Mistres H. a godly Gentlewoman, comforting her in that common and godly sorrow which the feeling and sence of sinne worketh in Gods children.
                  I Humblie and heartilie praye the everlasting

good God and Father of mercie to blesse and keepe your hart and mind in the knowledge and the loue of his truth, and of his Christ through th'jnspiration & working of the holy spirit, Amen.
                  
                  Although I haue no doubt but that you prosper and goe forwards daily in the way of Godlinesse, more and more drawing towards perfection, and haue no need of any thing that I can write; yet because my desire is that you might be more fervent and persevere vnto the end, I could not but write something vnto you, beseeching you both often and diligentlie to call vnto your

mind as a meane to stirre you hervnto, yea, as a thing which god most straightly requireth you to belieue, that you are the beloued of God, and that hee is your deare Father, in, through, & for Christ & his deaths sake▪ This loue and tender kindnesse of God towards vs in Christ is aboundantlie herein declared, in that he hath to the godly worke of Creation of this world, made vs after his jmage, redeemed vs being lost, called vs into his church, sealed vs with his marke and signe Manuel of Baptisme, kept and conserved vs all the daies of our life, fedde, nowrished, defended, and most mercifullie chastised

vs, and now hath kindled in our hearts the sparkles of his feare, faith, loue, and knowledge of his Christ & truth: and therefore we lament because wee can lament no more our vnthankefulnesse, our frailenes, our diffidence, and wavering in things whereof we should be most certain.
                  All these things we should vse as meanes to confirme our faith of this, that God is our God and Father, and to assure vs that he loueth vs as our Father in Christ▪ to this end I say, should we vse the things before touched, especiallie in that of all things God requireth this faith and perswasion of his Father by goodnesse

as his chiefest seruice. For before he aske any thing of vs, he saith, I am the Lord thy God, giuing himselfe, and all he hath to vs, to be our own. And this he doth in respect of himselfe, of his owne mercie & truth, and not in respect of vs, for then were grace no more grace. In consideration wherof, when he saith, Thou shalt haue none other Gods but mee, thou shalt loue mee with all thy heart, &c. Though of dutie wee are bound to accomplish all that he requireth, and are culpable and guiltie if wee doe not the same, yet he requireth not these things further of vs, then to make vs more in loue, and more certaine of this his covenant

that hee is the Lord our GOD. In certaintie whereof, as he hath giuen this world to serue our need and commoditie: so hath he giuen vs his son Christ Iesus, and in Christ, himselfe to be a pledge and gage: wherof the Holie Ghost doth now and then giue vs some tast and sweet feeling and smell to our eternall ioye.
                  
                  Therefore as I said, because God is your Father in Christ, and requireth of you straightly to belieue it, giue your selfe to obedience, although you doe it not with such feeling as you desire.
                        Note.
                      First must faith goe before, and then feeling will follow. If our jmperfection, frailty, & many

evils should bee occasions whereby Satan would haue vs doubt; as much as in vs lyeth let vs abhorre that suggestion as of all others most pernicious: for so indeed it is. For whē we stand in doubt whether God bee our Father or no, we cannot bee thankfull to God, we cannot heartily pray, or thinke any thing we do acceptable to God; we cannot loue our neighbours and giue ouer our selues to care for them, and doe for them as we should do: and therfore Satā is most busie hereabouts, knowing full wel that if we doubt of gods eternall sweet mercies in Christ, wee cannot please God, or doe any thing as

we should to man. Continually casteth he into our memories our jmperfection, frailty, folly, and offences, that we shold doubt of gods mercie and fauour towards vs.
                  Therefore my good Sister, we must not bee sluggish herein, but as Satan laboreth to loosen our faith, so must we labour to fasten it by thinking on the promises and covenant of god in Christs bloud, namelie, that God is our God with all that ever he hath; which Covenant dependeth and hangeth vpon Gods owne goodnes, mercie, and truth onely, and not on our obedience and worthines in any poynt; for then should

we never bee certaine.
                        Note.
                      Indeed God requireth of vs obedience and worthines, but not that thereby wee might be made his childrē, and he our Father: but because he is our Father and wee his children through his own goodnes in christ, therfore requireth he faith and obedience. Now, if we want this obedience & worthinesse which hee requireth, should wee therefore doubt whether he bee our Father? Nay, that were to make our obedience & worthines the cause, and so to put Christ out of place, for whose sake God is our Father. But rather because hee is our Father and wee feele our selues to want

such things as he requireth wee should be stirred vppe to an holy blushing and shamfastnesse, because wee are not as wee should bee: and therevpon should wee take occasion to go to our father in prayer on this manner.
                  
                     Deare Father, thou of thine owne Mercie in Christ Iesus hast chosen me to bee thy child, and therefore thou would'st I should be brought into thy Church and faithfull company of thy children: wherein thou hast kept me hitherto, thy name bee praised therefore. Now I see my selfe to want faith, hope, loue &c. which thy children

haue and thou requirest of me; wherethrough the deuill would haue me doubt, yea, vtterly to despaire off thy Fatherly goodnesse, favour and mercie.
Therefore I come to thee as to my merciful father through thy deare Sonne Iesus Christ, and pray▪ thee to helpe me: good Lord helpe me, and giue mee Faith, Hope, loue, thankfulnesse, &c. and graunt that thy holy spirit may be with me, for ever, and more and more to assure mee that thou art my father: that this mercifull couenant that thou madest with mee in respect of thy grace in Christ, and for Christ,

and not in respect of any my worthinesse, &c.
                  
                  On this sort I say you must pray and vse your cogitatiōs when Satan would haue you to doubt of your Salvation. He doth all he can to prevaile heerein against you. Do you all yee can to prevaile heerein against him. Though you feele not as you would, yet doubt not, but hope beyond hope as Abraham did. For alwaies as I sayd, faith goeth before feeling. As certaine as God is Almightie, as certaine as GOD is mercifull, as certaine as God is true, as certaine as Iesus Christ was crucified, is risen, and sitteth on the right hand of God his Father,

as certaine as this is Gods commandement, I am the Lord thy GOD, &c. so certaine ought you to beleeue that God is your Father. As you are bound to haue none other Gods but him: so are ye no lesse bound to beleeue that god is your God. What profit shold it be to you to belieue this to be true, I am the Lord thy god, to others; if you should not beleeue that this is true to your selfe? The Devill beleeueth on this sort.
                        Note.
                      And whatsoever it be that wold moue you to doubt of this whether God be your God through Christ, that same commeth vndoubtedly of the Deuill. Wherefore did god make you, but because

hee loved you? might hee not haue made you blind, dumb, deafe, lame, frantick? might hee not haue made you a Iew, a Turk, a Papist? And why did he loue you? what was there in you to mooue him to loue you? surely nothing moued him to loue you, and therefore to make you, and so hitherto to keepe you, but his owne goodnes in Christ. Now thē in that his goodnesse in Christ still remaineth as much as it was that is, even as great as himselfe (for it cannot bee lessened) how should it bee but that he is your God & Father? Beleeue this, beleeue this my good sister, for god is no changeling:

them whome hee loueth, hee loveth to the end.
                  
                     Cast therefore your selfe wholly vppon him, and thinke without all wauering, that you are Gods child, that you are a Citizen of heaven, that you are the temple of the holy Ghost &c. If heereof you bee assured as you ought to bee, then shall your conscience be quietted, then shall you lamēt more and more that you want many things which God loueth: then shall you labour to be holy in soule and in body: then shall you endeavour that Gods glorie may shine in all your words and works: then shall you

not be afraid what man can doe vnto you: then shall you haue wisedome to answere your aduersaries, as shal serue for their shame, and to your comfort: then shall you bee certaine that no man can touch one haire of your head further then it shall please your father, to your everlasting joy: then shal you be most certaine, that God as your good father will be more carefull of your children and make better prouision for thē, if al you haue were gone, then you can: then shall you (beeing assured I say of Gods fauour towards you) giue over your selfe wholly to helpe & care

for others that bee in need: then shall you cō
                        temne this life, and desire to be at home with your good and sweet Father: then shall you labour to mortifie all things that would spot either soule or body.
All these things spring out of this certaine perswasion and faith,
                        Note.
                      that God is our Father and wee his children by Christ Iesus. Al things should helpe our faith herein: but Satan goeth about in all things to hinder vs.
                  Therefore let vs vse earnest  and hearty prayer: let vs oftē remember this covenant 
                     I am the Lord thy God: let vs looke vppon  Christ and his precious

bloud shed for th' obsignation and sealing of this covenant: let vs remember  all the free promises of god in his Gospell: let vs set  before vs GODS benefits generally in making this world, in ruling it, in governing it, in calling and keeping his Church, &c. Let vs set before vs Gods benefits particularly, how he hath made vs his Creatures after his jmage, how he hath made vs of perfect lyms, forme, beauty, memory, &c. How hee hath made vs Christians, and given vs a right judgement in his Religion: how ever since wee were born, he hath blessed, kept, norished and defended vs:

how hee hath often beaten chastised, and fatherly corrected vs: how he hath spared vs, and now doth spare vs, giuing vs time, space, place, & grace. This if you do and vse earnest and often prayer, and so flee from all things which might troble the peace of your conscience, giving your selfe to diligence in your vocation, you shall at length find that (which god grant mee with you) a sure certaintie of Salvation, without all such wavering as should hinder your peace with GOD in CHRIST, to your eternall joye and comfort, Amen, Amen.
                  
                  
                     
                        Yours to be vsed in Christ Iohn Bradford.
                  
               
               
                  
                  ¶ The second Letter written to a faithfull Woman in her heauinesse and trouble of mind: most comfortable for all to read that are afflicted or broken hearted for their sinnes.
                  GOD our Father for his mercies sake in Christ, with his eternall consolatiō so comfort you, as I desire to be comforted in my most need: yea, hee will comfort you my deare Sister, only cast your care vppon him, and hee neuer can nor will forsake you. Whom he loueth, hee loueth to the end: none of his chosen can perish. Of

which nūber I know your selfe to be one my dearely beloved Sister. GOD jncrease the faith thereof daily more and more in you: hee giue vnto you to hang whollie on him, and on his providence and protectiō. For who so dwelleth vnder that secret thing and helpe of the Lord, hee shall bee Cocke-sure for evermore. He that dwelleth I say: for if we be flitters as was Lot a flitter from Zoar, where God promised him protectiō if he had dwelled there still, we shall remoue to our losse, as hee did into the Mountaines.
                  Dwell therefore, that is trust, and that finally to the end in the Lord, my

deare Sister; and you shall be as Mount Syon. As the Mountaines compasse Ierusalem: so doth the Lord all his people. How then can he forget you who are as deare to him as the apple of his Eye, for his deare Sons sake. Ah deare heart that I were now with you to bee a Symon to you, to helpe & carry your Crosse with you. God send you some good Symon to bee with you and helpe you.
                  You complaine in your Letters of the blindnesse of your mind & the troubles you feele. My dearly beloued, GOD make you thankefull for that which God hath given you: he open your eyes to see what

& how great benefits you receiued, that you may be lesse covetous or rather jmpatient for so (I feare me) it should be called, and more thankfull. Haue you not receiued at his hands sight to see your blindnes, and thereto a desirous and seeking heart to see where he lyeth in the midde day, as his deare Spouse speaketh of her selfe in the Canticles? Ah Ioyce, my good Ioyce, what a guift is this? many haue some sight, but none this sighing, none this sobbing, none this seeking which you haue (I know) but such as hee hath married to himselfe in his eternall sweet mercies. You are not content

with the Magdalen to kisse his feet, but you wold with Moses see his face: forgetting how he biddeth vs seeke his face, Psalme 27. yea, and that euer more, Psa. 105. which signifieth no such sight as you desire to haue in this life, who would see God now face to face, whereas he cannot be seen, but covered vnder some thing, yea, somthing which is as you would say cleane contrary to God: as to see his mercie in his anger. In bringing vs to Hell, Faith seeth him bringing vs to Heaven: in darkenesse it beholdeth brightnesse: in hyding his face from vs, it beholdeth his merry countenance. How did Iob see

God, but you would say vnder Satans cloake? For who cast the fire from Heaven vpon his goods? who overthrew his house, and stirred vppe men to take away his Cattle, but Satan? And yet Iob pierced thorough all these and sawe Gods working, saying, The Lord hath giuen, the Lord hath taken, &c.
                  
                  In reading the Psalmes, how often do you see that Dauid in the shaddowe of death saw Gods sweet loue? And so my dearely beloued I see that you in your darknes & dimnes by faith do see charity & britnes: by faith I say, because faith is of things absent, of things hoped for, of things which

I appeale to your owne conseience whether you desire not. And can you desire any thing which you know not? And is there of heauenly things any other true knoledge, thē by faith?
                  Therfore my deare heart, bee thankefull, for before God I writte it, you haue great cause. Ah my Ioyce how happye is that state in which you are. Verilie, you are in the blessed state of gods deare children: for they mourne, and doe not you so? and that not for worldly weale, but for spirituall riches; Fayth, Hope, and Charitie. Do not you hunger and thirst for righteousnes? And I pray you, sayth not Christ, happie are

such. How should GOD wipe away the teares from your eyes in heaven, if on earth you shed no teares? How could Heaven bee a place of rest, if on Earth you did find it? How could you desire to be at home, if in your journey you found no griefe? How could you so often call vpon God & talke with him as I know you doe, if your enemie should sleepe all the daye long? How should you elsewhere bee made like vnto Christ, I meane in joye, if in sorrow you sobbed not with him? If you will haue joye and felicity, you must needs feele sorrow and misery. If you will go to heaven, you must saile by hell.

If you will imbrace Christ in his robes, you must not thinke scorne of him in his ragges. If you will sitte at Christs table in his Kingdome, you must first abide with him in his temptations. If you will drinke of his Cup of glorie, forsake not his cup of jgnominie.
                  Can the head corner stone be reiected, and the other more base stones in Gods building bee in this world set by? you are one of his living stones in this building: be content therfore to be hewen and snagged at, that you may bee made more meet to be joyned to your fellowes which suffer with you Satans snatches, and freats of the

flesh, wherethrough they are enforced to crie, Oh wretches that wee are, who shall deliuer vs? you are of Gods corne, feare not therefore the flayle, the fanne, milstone, nor oven. You are one of CHRISTS Lambs: looke therefore to bee fleeced, halled at, and even slaine. If you were a market sheepe, you should goe in more fat pasture. If you were for the faire, you should be stalled and want no meate: but because you are for GODS owne vse, therfore you must pasture vppon the bare common, abiding the stormes and tempests that will fall. Happy & twice happy are you my deare sister, that

God haleth you now whither you would not, that you might come whither you would. Suffer a little and be still. Let Satan rage against you, let the world crie out, let your conscience accuse you, let the law leade you, and presse you downe, yet shall they not prevaile, for Christ is Emanuell, that is, GOD with vs. If God be with vs, who canne bee against vs. The Lord is with you; your Father cannot forget you; your spouse loveth you. If the waues and surges arise, crie with Peter, saue Lord I perish, and hee will put out his hand and helpe you. Cast out your ankor of Hope, and it will

not cease for al the stormie surges, till it take hold on the rocke of Gods truth and mercie.
                  Thinke not that hee which hath given you so many things corporally, as jnductions of spirituall & heavenly mercies, and that without your deserts or desire, can deny you any spirituall thing desiring it. For if he hath given you to desire, hee will giue you to haue and enioy the thing desired. The desire to haue, and the going about to aske, ought to certifie your conscience, that they bee his earnests of the things which you asking, hee will giue you: yea, before you aske, and whilst you are about

to aske, hee will grant the same as Isaiah saith, to his glorie and your eternal consolation. He that spared not his owne Son for you, will not, nor cannot think any thing too good for you, my heartely beloved. If he had not chosen you as certainly he hath, he would not thus haue called you: hee would never haue justified you: hee would never haue so glorified you with his gratious gifts which I know to be in you, praysed be his name therefore: hee would never haue so exercised your faith with temptations as he hath done, and doth, if I say hee had not chosen you. If hee haue chosen

you (as doubtlesse deere hart he hath don in Christ, for in you I haue seene his earnest, and to me you could not deny it, I know both where and when) if I say hee haue chosen you, then neither can you, nor ever shall you perish. For if you fall, hee putteth vnder his hand: you shall not lie still: so carefull is Christ your keeper over you. Never was Mother so mindfull over her child, as he is over you. And hath hee not alwaies been so?
                  Speake woman, when did he finally forget you? And will he now trow ye in your most need doe otherwise, you calling vpon him and desiring to please him? Ah

my Ioyce, thinke you God to bee mutable? Is hee a changeling? Doth not he loue to the end thē whom hee loveth? Are not his gifts and calling such as he cannot repent him off thē, for els were he no God. If you should perish, then wanted hee power: For I am certain his will towards you is not to bee doubted off. Hath not the spirit, which is the spirit of truth, told you so? And will you hearken with Eue to the liing Spirit which would haue you to despaire? God forbid it, for to doubt and stand in a māmering, would cause you that you should never truely loue God, but ever serue him of a servile

feare, least hee should cast you off for your vnworthinesse and vnthankfulnesse, as though your thankfulnes, or worthines, were any causes with God why hee hath chosen you, or will finally keepe you.
                  Ah my owne deare heart, Christ onely, Christ onely, and his mercie and truth. In him is the cause of your election. This Christ, this Mercie, this Truth of God remaineth for euer, is certaine for euer, I say for euer. If an Angell from Heaven should tell you contrarie, accursed bee he. Your thankefulnes and worthinesse are fruits and effects of your election, they are no causes. These fruites and effects shall be so much the more fruitfull

and effectuall, by how much the more you wauer not.
                  
                  Therefore dearely beloved, arise and remember from whence you are fallen. You haue a Sheapeheard who neither slumbereth nor sleepeth, night nor day. No Man, nor Deuill can pull you out of his hands. Night and day hee commandeth his Angells to keepe you. Haue you forgotten what I read to you out of the Psalme, The Lord is my Sheepheard, I can want nothing. Doe you know that GOD sparred Noah into the Arke on the one side, so that hee could not get out? So hath hee done to you my good Sister, so hath hee done to you. Tenne Thousand shall

fall on your right hand, & two Thousand on your l
                           •
                        ft hand yet no euill shall touch you. Say boldly therefore, Many a time from my youth vppe haue they fought against mee, but they haue not preuailed, no nor neuer shall preuaile, for the Lord is round about his people. And who are the people of God, but such as hope in him? Happie are they that hope in the Lord: and you are one of those my deare heart, for I am sure you haue hoped in the Lord: I haue your wordes to shewe most manifestly, & I know they were written vnfainedly.
                  I need not say, that euen before God you haue simply confessed to mee, and

that oftentimes no lesse. And if once you had this hope, as you doubtles had it, thogh now ye fele it not, yet shall ye feele it againe: for the anger of God lasteth but for a moment, but his mercy lasteth for euer. Tell mee my deare heart, who hath so weakned you? surely not a perswasion which came of him that called you. For why should ye wauer? Why should ye wauer, & be so heauie hearted? whome looke yee on? on your selfe? on your worthines? on your thankefulnesse? on that which God requireth of you, as Faith, Hope, Loue, Feare, Ioye, &c. Then can yee but wauer indeed: for what haue you as God requireth? Belieue

you, hope you, loue you, &c. as much as ye should doe? No, no, nor neuer can in this life. Ah my dearely beloued, haue you so soone forgotten that which should bee had in memory? namely, that when you should bee secure and quiet in conscience, thē should your faith burst throghout all things, not onely that you haue in you, or else are in Heaven, Earth, or Hell, vntill it come to Christ crucified, and th'eternall sweet mercies of God, and his goodnesse in Christ. Heere, heere is the resting place, heere is your Spouses bed: Creepe into it, and in your armes of faith embrace him, bewaile your weakenesse, your vnworthines,

your dissidence: and you shall see he will turne to you. What sayd I you shall see? Nay, I should haue said you shall feele he will turne to you.
                  
                  You know that Moses when hee went into the Mount to talke with God, hee entred into a darke cloud: and Helias had his face couered when GOD passed by. Both these deare friends of God heard God, but they saw him not, but you would bee preferred before them. See now my deare heart, how couetous you are? Ah, be thankefull be thankefull; but God be praised your couetousnes is Moses couetousnes: well with him you shall be satisfied, but when? Forsooth

when hee shall appeare. Heere is not the time of seeing, but as it were in a glasse▪ 
                     Isaak was deceived because hee was not content with hearing onely.
                  Therefore to make an end of these many words, wherewith I feare me I do but hinder you from better exercises: in as much as you are indeed the child of God, elect in Christ before the beginning of all times: in as much as you are given to the custody of Christ, as one of GODS most precious jewels: in as much as Christ is faithfull, and hitherto and for euer hath and shal haue al power, so that you shall never

perish, no; one haire of your head shall not be lost: I desire you, I craue at your hands with all my very heart, I aske of you with hand, pen, tongue & mind, in Christ, through Christ, for Christ, for his names sake, bloud, mercies, power, and truths sake (my most entirely beloued sister) that you admit no doubting of gods final mercies towards you, howsoeuer ynu feele your selfe: but complaine to God, and craue of him as of your tender Father, all things and in that time which shal be most opportune, you shall find & feele farre aboue that your hart or the heart of any creature can conceiue, to your

eternall joy, Amen, Amen, Amen.
                  
                  The good spirit of God alwaies keep vs as his deere children: he comfort you as I desire to be comforted my deerely beloved for evermore. The peace of Christ dwell in both our harts for ever Amen. Gods holy spirit alwaies comfort & keepe you Amen, Amen. This 1. of Ianuarie by him that in the Lord wisheth to you as well and as much felicitie, as to his owne heart.
                  
                     IOHN BRADFORD.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A TABLE DIRECting to the names of the Martyrs, and to the speciall matters that are mentioned in this Booke.
            
               
                  A
                  
                  
                     Fol.
                  
                  Adam Damplip, his speach to his keeper.
                  
                     27.
                  
                  Agnes Bongeor, her complaint.
                  
                     80, 81.
                  
                  She is comforted.
                  
                     83.
                  
                  Alice Bindon, her straight handling.
                  
                     110, 118.
                  
                  Anne Askew, her prayer.
                  
                     170.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  B
                  Bartlet Greene, his description of temporall miseries, &c.
                  
                     155, 156, 157.
                  
                  Bradbegges Wife, shee commends her two children Patience and Charitie, to the Bishop.
                  
                     76.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  C
                  
                  
                     Fol.
                  
                  Cutbert Simpson. Boner commends his patience.
                  
                     39.
                  
                  His comfortable vision.
                  
                     40.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  D
                  Doctor Taylor, Pag.
                  
                     44.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  E
                  Elizabeth Folks, her answere, pretily retorted.
                  
                     73
                  
                  Eliza: Yong, her sweet speech.
                  
                     90, 91.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  F
                  Father Latimer.
                  
                     7, 14, 15.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  G
                  George Wise-hart, his speach to his executioner.
                  
                     58.
                  
                  George Marsh, his prayer.
                  
                     140.
                  
                  George Tankerfield, his conflicts with the flesh.
                  
                     147.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  H
                  Hugh Latimer, his speach to M
                        r. Ridley

at the stake.
                  Fol. 7.
                  
                  His comforts were going & cōming.
                  
                     14.
                  
                  His 3 requests.
                  
                     15.
                  
                  Hugh Laverocke, his speach.
                  
                     33.
                  
                  Henry Voes, his speach.
                  
                     32.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  I
                  Iames Baynham, his speach at his death.
                  
                     32.
                  
                  Iohn Hooper, his speach at the stake.
                  
                     2.
                  
                  His speach to a blind boy.
                  
                     2.
                  
                  His answere to S
                        r. Ant: Kingston.
                  
                     3, 4, 5▪
                     
                  
                  Notes out of his letters, frō 
                     99, to 227.
                  
                  
                  Iohn Bradford, how he tooke the newes of his death.
                  
                     10.
                  
                  With what efficacie hee made his prayers in the Counter.
                  
                     11.
                  
                  His behauiour at his death.
                  
                     12.
                  
                  His answere to Creswell.
                  
                     92, 93.
                  
                  His Mementoes.
                  
                     120
                  
                  A note out of a Letter of his to Cranmer.
                  
                     93.
                  
                  His two Letters.
                  
                     174, 193.
                  
                  Iohn Cardmaker, his question and answere

to it.
                  Fol. 91.
                  
                  Iohn Philpot, how he tooke the newes of his death.
                  
                     8.
                  
                  His speach he vsed in Smith-field.
                  
                     9.
                  
                  A Prayer mentioned in his storie.
                  
                     149.
                  
                  Ioh: Rough, his speach to one Farrar.
                  
                     42.
                  
                  Iohn Warren, his sweet sentence.
                  
                     100.
                  
                  Iohn Frith, his answere to them that would haue wrought his escape.
                  
                     78.
                  
                  Iohn Lābart, his speach at the stake.
                  
                     26.
                  
                  Iohn Rogers, his saying when hee heard of his burning.
                  
                     18.
                  
                  His saying to Bishop Hooper.
                  
                     19.
                  
                  Iohn Leafe, hee liked better the bill of his confession, then that of his recantation.
                  
                     50.
                  
                  Iulins Palmer, his charitable answere to Sir Richard Abridges.
                  
                     74, 75.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  K
                  Kerby, his speach to M. Wink-field.
                  
                     28.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  L
                  Laurence Saunders Preacher, his comfort

at his first convention.
                  Fol. 19.
                  
                  What a sluggard he found of his flesh.
                  
                     20
                  
                  His speach vpon the sight of his child.
                  
                     21
                  
                  His speach at the stake.
                  
                     22.
                  
                  Notes out of a Letter to his wife.
                  
                     95.96, 97.
                  
                  Out of a Letter to M. Glouer.
                  
                     98.
                  
                  Lady Iane, her Prayer.
                  
                     158
                  
                  Lord Cromwell, his Prayer.
                  
                     164.
                  
                  Letters of M. Bradfords.
                  
                     174, 193.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  M
                  Martin Luther, his Prayer.
                  
                     169.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  N
                  Nicholas Ridley, his saying to Latimer.
                  
                     6, 7.
                  
                  His mournefull complaint in the fier.
                  
                     8.
                  
                  What comfort hee felt after the newes of M. Rogers burning.
                  
                     17.
                  
                  Nicholas Sheterden, his Prayer.
                  
                     142.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  P
                  Patrik Hamleton, he foretels the death

of his persecut
                        •
                     r.
                  Fol. 60.61.
                  
                  Prests Wife, her answers.
                  
                     89, 90.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  R
                  Rawlins White, expert in the Scripture.
                  
                     64.
                  
                  Sundrie of his speaches.
                  
                     68.69.70.
                  
                  Richard Woodman, his conflict with the feare of death.
                  
                     51.
                  
                  Richard Browne, his Prayer.
                  
                     148.
                  
                  Robert Farrar, his speach to M. Richard Iones.
                  
                     61.
                  
                  Robert Glover, his lumpishnes before his death.
                  
                     23, 24.
                  
                  With supplie of comfort.
                  
                     25.
                  
                  His comfort & conflict.
                  
                     53, 55, 56, 57.
                  
                  Robert-Samuell, his extreame handling.
                  
                     36, 37.
                  
                  His vision of comfort.
                  
                     38.
                  
                  Robert Smith, his sentences
                  
                     23.
                  
                  Roger Holland, his prophesie.
                  
                     86, 87.
                  
                  Rowland Taylor, his pleasant answere to the Sheriffe.
                  
                     44.
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  Fol.
                  His speach when he came neere Hadley.
                  
                     47.
                  
                  To Boner when he was degraded.
                  
                     48.
                  
                  His last will and Testament.
                  
                     106, to 109.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  S
                  Steven Knight, his Prayer.
                  
                     134.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  T
                  Thomas Bilney, his saying to his friends.
                  
                     29, 31.
                  
                  Hee putteth his finger in the Candle to trie his strength.
                  
                     28.
                  
                  Thomas Spurdance, his answere to the Bishop.
                  
                     72, 73.
                  
                  Thomas Hudsons conflict and comfort.
                  
                     84, 85.
                  
                  Thomas Wats, his farewell.
                  
                     199.
                  
                  Thomas Crāmer, a proverb of him.
                  
                     94.
                  
                  His Prayer.
                  
                     130.
                  
                  His Repentance.
                  
                     132, 133.
                  
                  He burns his right hand first.
                  
                     133.
                  
               
            
            
               
               
                  W
                  
                  
                     Fol.
                  
                  William Hunter, his Mother thinks him well bestowed on Christ.
                  
                     35.
                  
                  Walter Mill, he would not be called Sir Walter, and why.
                  
                     59.
                  
                  His constancie.
                  
                     60.
                  
                  William Pickes, foretels his troble.
                  
                     88.
                  
                  
                  
                     89.
                  
                  William Flower, his Prayer.
                  
                     172.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   