
      
         
            
            A MIRROVR OF MERCIE OR The Prodigals conuersion, briefely, and learnedly expounded, and full of comfortable consolations for all penitent sinners.
            By William Cooper, Minister of Gods word, and B. of Galloway.
            
            LONDON Printed by Edward Griffin for Iohn Budge, and are to be sold at his shop, at the South doore of Pauls, and at Britaines Burse. 1615.
         
         
            
            To the right worshipfull, Dauid Arkenhead, Deane of Gild, Thomas Ingles, of Edernie, Mongo Macala, Edward 
                     ••
                  r, Iames Dennistorne, with others his worshipfull Councellors and Assessors.
            
               IT is no great wonder though these parts of Africk which are vnder Torrida Zona, abound in many kindes of vnkindly monsters, seeing they are distempered with

such extremity of hea
                  •
                that their b
                  •
               astes prouoked by raging lust, mixe themselues with others, not of of their owne kind. But in this soile wherin the S
                  •
               nne of the world sends out his beames in most temperate manner, and the Sunne of Righteousnesse, shineth most fauourably: it may much more be admired to see so many, who looke like men, but indeed are monsters. Of whom that may be spoken, which story records of Constantinus surnamed Coprominus, Eum nec Christianum, nec Iudaeum, nec Paganum fuisse, that he was neither a Iew, nor a Pagan, nor a Christian: Sed colluuiem

quandam impietatis, but a certaine masse or heape of all impiety: with the Iewes they salute Christ as their King, and yet buffet him, they professe him with the Christian, and persecute him with the Pagan, at one word they blesse him, and at another blaspheme him. They are named Israelits and liue like Ethiopians:Amos. they speake with the voice of Iacob, but worke with the hands of Esau, and walke with the feet of Ioab, that any man may perceiue, not by their coate, but their party-coloured conditions that sundry parents haue begotten them.
            The nature of man distemperate with the heate

of vnrulie desires, and affections, refuseth not the 
                  •
               nlawfull 
                  •
               ompany of any euil that will 
                  •
               ome with it: for sinne is nothing else, but a childe gotten in a most vnhappy and vnkindly coni
                  •
               nction betweene Apostat spirits, and the corrupt nature of man, whereof proceeds such manifold deformities in the liues of men, that ye may see one and the selfe same man to be but a mixed monster, made vp, and mishapen of sundry sorts of vices. Hee is begotten of Concupiscence, and hath 
                  •
               ies of Adultery: hee is nourished and rocked in the cradle of Intemperance, bee groweth vp by Couetousnesse to such excesse,

that his little finger is bigger then by iust measure his body should bee: his motion is from anger, his greatnesse from his pride, he is made strong to euill by his malice, hee wa
                  •
               eth old with wickednesse, consumed with lecherie, and worne with enuy. Thus hee ends worse then hee began, & in al these he is boulstred vp by hypocrisi
                  •
               , and sheweth himselfe as if hee were a Christian.
                  Malac.
                
               And so couers the iniurie vnder the garment of God: but they are deceiued, God will not bee mocked, Let them not say wee haue Abraham for our father, The answer our Sauiour gaue the carnall Iewes is

fitting for them, Yee are of your father the Deuill, for yee doe his workes. Partus patrem iudicat, the birth bewraies the begetter, and their image declares they are not the generation of Christ.
            But iudgements are prepared for scorners: strange sinnes will bee repaid with strange punishments proportionable to them, They that sow the winde, shall reape the whirlewinde, they who sow to the flesh shall of the flesh reape corruption. They turne not from their sinnes to the Lord, and the Lord most iustly wraps them in their sinnes as in a wind
                  •
               ng sheet, which

cannot bee consumed, thus are they laid in the graue, and Their bones full of the iniquity of their youth. O fearefull, recompence, but yet rigteous, their needes no more to plague them but that the Lord turne their own waies vpon their owne heades, and giue them to drinke of the cup themselues haue prepared. For howsoeuer wickednesse bee sweet in the mouth, yet in the bowels it turnes into gall. They shall know in the ende, it was an euill thing and a bitter that they forsooke the Lord. Oh that they who forget him, could consider this in time.
            To waken them if it bee possible. I haue presented

to them heere a two-fold mirrour, in the one if they looke into it, they may see how miserable a man maketh himselfe by departing from the Lord. In the other how gratious the Lord is, and ready to receiue such as returne vnto him. And this haue I published vnder your honourable names, who as yee liue in your selues Exemplars of a godly life vnto others: so I am sure it shall be contentment to you if by this treatise dedicate to you, others may be made better. Receiue it as a token of my best affection toward you, for your louing acceptation of mee into the honourable fellowship of your Burgiship of Edenborough,
               
which howsoeuer by birth it was due to me, yet was it conferred by you with such willingnesse of minde, as bindes mee to account my selfe obliged to your fauours while I liue. So wishing the multiplication of the grace of Iesus Christ vnto you, I rest.
            
               Yours in the Lord Iesus W. B. of Galloway.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A MIRROVR OF MERCIE.
            
               LVKE 15.
               
                  VERSE 11. He said moreouer, A certaine man had two sonnes.
               
                  Ver. 12. And the yonger of them said to his father, Father giue me the portion of the goods that falleth to mee. So hee diuided

vnto them his substance.
               
                  Vers. 13. So not long after, when the yonger sonne had gathered all together, he tooke his iourney into a far countrey, and there hee wasted his goods with riotous liuing.
               
                  Ver. 14. Now when hee had spent all, there arose a great dearth throughout that land, and hee began to bee in necessity.
               
                  Ver. 15. Then he went and claue to a Citizen of that countrey, and hee sent him to his

farme to feede Swine.
               
                  Ver. 16. And he would faine haue filled his belly with the huskes, that the Swine ate, but no man gaue them him.
               
                  Ver. 17. Then he came to himselfe, and said, How many hired seruants at my fathers haue bread enough, and I die for hunger?
               
                  Vers. 18. I will rise and goe to my father, and say vnto him, Father I haue sinned against heauen and before thee
               
                  Vers. 19. And am no

more worthy to bee called thy sonne: make me as one of thy hired seruants.
               
                  Vers. 20. So hee arose and came to his father, and when hee was yet a great way off, his father saw him, and had compassion, and ran, and fell on his necke, and kissed him.
               
                  Vers. 21. And the Son said vnto him, Father I haue sinned against heauen, and before thee, and am no more worthy to hee called thy sonne.
               
                  Vers. 22. Then the Father

said to his seruants, bring foorth the best robe, and put it on him, and put a ring on his hand, and shooes on his feet.
               
                  Ver. 23. And bring the fat calfe, and kill him and let vs eat, and be merry.
               
                  Vers. 24. For this my sonne was dead, and is aliue againe: and hee was lost but he is found, and they beegan to be meery.
            
         
         
            
            My helpe is in the name of the Lord.
            
               This parable intituled a Mirrour of Mercy. and why?
               THis Parable may properlie bee called, A mirrour of Mercy: for in it the Lord laieth opē vnto vs the bowels of his fatherly loue and compassion toward penitent sinners, hee proclaimed once by word his name to Moses, The Lord, strong, mercifull,
               
                  Ex. 34 6.7. 
               and gracious,

slow to anger, aboundant in mercy and truth, reseruing mercy for thousands, forgiuing iniquity, transgressions, and sins. By many proofes sensiue hath hee declared it, & heere most clearly he shadowes it. Setting downe to vs one, a most miserable sinner worthy to bee condemned, yet vpon his repentance, gratiously pardoned, for an example of the like mercy to bee shewed vnto all, who after this manner repenting of their sins,

shall returne vnto the Lord their God.
            
               Why the Parable is tripled.To this purpose hath our Sauior deliliuered before two Parables. One of the wandring sheepe, an other of the lost peece of mony, and now hee adioynes the third of the Prodigall child. It is not without great cause that our Sauior takes such paines to confirme vs in this point. For it is a difficill thing, yea a supernaturall worke, to perswade a guilty sinner

of Gods mercy: the reason is, because the law, which threatens a curse against the transgressors of her commandements is naturally written in euery mans heart,The sentence of damnation is written by nature in euery mans h
                     •
                  art. and the sentence of death due to sinne, by capital letters is grauen in the conscience, so that it is true of all sinners which the Apostle speaketh of one sort that they are 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                such as haue within themselues,
                  Tit. 3.11. against themselues pronounced a ditty of damnation,

and euery man may feele in himselfe a conscience armed not vn.
                  Gen. 3.24. like that Cherubin with a sword of wrath, shaking against him, and telling him that his sinne hath made him vnworthy to enter in the paradise of God.
            Whereof it comes to passe,Men vnder the bondage of sinne, either perish in the deadsleep of Atheisme, that miserable man abiding vnder the bondage of sinful nature perisheth in one of these two fearfull sickenesses of the soule, atheisme, or desperation. The first is a most dangerous and

deadly disease,
                  Hermes.
                
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , and opens a dore to all kind of impiety, for what wickednesse will not that man commit who beeing blinded by the deceit of sinne is brought to thinke there is no God nor iudgement to come. But against this dangerous and deuouring poison, the Lord hath prouided most effectuall Antidots,
               
                  Psa. 14.3 for besides the works and the word of God wch cry out that there is a God, hee preserueth

euen in the most corrupt conscience such a light as forces the deepest contemner to feare that same God-head which he denies, and so proues it true in all Atheists, which Cicero spake of one Metrodorus. Nec quenqnam vidi qui magis ea timeret, quae timenda esse negaret. I neuer saw any more feared, for which he said was not to be feared at all.
            
               Or then being wakned are oppressed with dessperation.And thus the Atheist being wakened out of the sound sleep of Atheisme, and

brought to some sense and feare of a Diuinitie is incontiuent sore oppressed with the other euill of desperation; for the first thing that a guilty soule apprehends in God is iudgement, and wrath, the conscience sending out, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
                  Rom. 2.15 accusing cogitatiōs, which conclude within thē, against themselues a condemnatory sentence, and in this hee that hath escaped the first shall not faile to perish, if 
                  •
                doore of

mercy be not opened vnto him.
            
               On the other extremity many are deceiued by presumptionAnd heere againe, many are deceiued by presumption, who thinke the way of mercy plaine, easie, well enough known, and that they are sure they haue it. But alas they flatter themselues with a conceit of it, who had neuer the certainty of it. All haue no faith, who speake of it.2. Thes. 3.2 Many are called,
                  Mat. 20.16. Mat. 11.12. Gen. 3.8. few are chosen. The kingdome of heauen suffers violence. If Adam after

one transgression ran away from the Lord afraid at his voice and presēce in whō he delighted before: what maruel his sinful children guilty of so many transgressions like perturbed and confounded men, fearing his iudgements, runne from him and fall into the gulfe of despaire. And if Ioseph and Mary hauing lost the cōpany of Christ but for one day not regarding him as they should,
                  Luk. 2.46 were three daies in seeking,

before they could finde him againe, shal men who so long a time liued strangers from the life of God,
                  Eph. 4.18. bee so foolish as to thinke it requires no paines, no labour to seeke him, to finde, and to bee reconciled with him? But if they can get onely in their ending day one word to cry for mercy, they are sure to obtaine it Let vs not be so farre deceiued, it is no wisdome to hazard so great a matter, as is our eternall saluation

vpon so small an aduenture.
            To cure therefore these great euils,To cure these euils many waies vseth the Lord to perswade vs of mercie. specially, the last two, of desperation and presumption, by many waies doth the Lord draw vs to an experience and sense of his mercy, and then to a conscience of our dutie towards him, for where before the Cherubin, an Angell was set at the entry of Paradise with a shaking sword to hold out man, wee haue now the Christ the Lord

of Angels with the keies of Dauids house to open Paradise vnto vs, and as conscience within vs cries condemnation to vs for sinne, so the spirit of adoption sent into our hearts from the Father, cries with a stronger voice, absolution from sinne.
                  Rom. 8.1. Christ set ouer against the excluding Cherubin, the Comfo
                     •
                  
                  ter ouer against the accusing cōscience a tripled Parable against our manifold doubtings. No condemnation to thē which are in Christ. And against the terrour of the Law and curses thereof wee haue the grace of the Gospell full of sweet b
                  •
               essings, both promised,

and practised toward penitent sinners. And for this one purpose it is that our Sauiour here triples the Parable to make vp vnto vs the stronger preseruatiue against our naturall disease of distrust and desperation. For so, as Ioseph spake to Pbaroah of his doubled visiō.
                  Gen. 41.32 
               The dreme is doubled to Pharao the secōd time, because the thing is established by God, & God hastes to performe it. May we also speake of this tripled parable

Iesus hath done it, to shew the heires of promise the stability of his Counsell,
               Heb. 6.27 for it is a decree established with God to shew mercie to the penitent, and he will hasten to performe it.
            
               For the sense of mercy is an effectuall motiue to repentance.Now as it is a great worke to make the soule, guilty of sinne, conceiue any sense of of mercy, so the soule once hauing conceiued it, is easily moued through the sense of mercy to return vnto the Lord, as we may see in this example.

Many are the arguments whereby wee are mooued to repentance, but among thē all, none goes so neere the hearts of his kindly children,Three degrees of Gods mercies. to pricke them with a godly sorrow for their sins, as the sense of Gods mercie,1 He vvas good to his children before they sinned. Ier. 2.5. when they consider how good the Lord was vnto them before they sinned. Haue I beene vnto you as a wildernesse, or land of darknesse: what iniquity haue yee found in me, that yee are gone from me. When they

consider how patiently the Lord bare with them when they sinned against him,2 Good to them whē they sinned. 
               might haue done vnto thee as thou hast don
                     •
                   vnto mee,
               
                  Hos. 11.
                     •
                  8. 
               but for my names sake I will refrain my wrath, I might mak
                     •
                   thee like Admah and Zeboim, but my heart is turned within me, and will not execute th
                     •
                   fiercenesse of my wrat
                     •
                   vpon thee. And whe
                  •
                againe they consider▪ how willingly he receiued them into his fauour after they had sinned,3 Good to them after they had sinned. they are

wounded and grieued in their spirits for that they offended him. Seruants feare him for his iudgements, if hee had no plagues they would not regard him,
                  Psal. 130. but his Sonnes feare him for his mercies, according to that of the Psalmist, Mercie is with thee that thou maiest be feared. And therefore the Apostle puts this in the forefront of his reasons, when he exhorteth vs to a godly life.
                  Rom. 12.
                     •
                  . 
               I beseech you brethren by

the mercies of God.
            
            The Lord stands not now vpon Mount Sinai,
               In the Gospell, God discouers the bovvels of his mercies. with burning fire and blacknesse o
                  •
                darknes, proclaiming the law with the fearful sound of trumpet▪ threatning vs with death if wee fulfill it not. No maruell the people did tremble at that sight;
                  Heb. 12.21 for Mose
                     •
                  
                himselfe did quaile & feare to behold it, but now hee stands on Mount Sion, a fathe
                  •
                alluring vs with mercies, not affraying vs with iudgemēts, speaking

to vs not by a terrible trumpet, but by the meeke mediator of the new Testament Iesus,
                  Heb. 12.24. whose bloode cryes for better things then the bloud of Abel.
               Miserable are they vvho are not moou
                     •
                  d vvith mercy to repent. O how inexcusable are they whom this mercie of God moues not to repent, are they not worthy of a double condemnation? The sinnes done against the Law, may be cured by the grace of the Gospell: but where this grace also is despised, and men

who may receiue mercy for repenting will not repent, wherwith shall this impiety be cured? remaineth there any more sacrifice for sinne? shall any new sauiour bee sent to saue these men? No, no, there abides nothing for such, but a fearefull looking for of iudgement and violent fire?
               
                  Heb. 10.27. 
               which shall deuoure them.
            
            
               
               A certaine man had two Sonnes.
               NOw to enter into the Parable,This man in the Parable represēteth God. in it we haue three persons introduced with three seuerall actions. The Prodigall childe sinning, & repenting his father pitying, & pardoning him, his elder brother grudging and mumuring. We haue first then to see who is meant by this man, & his two sons. This man in the Parable 
                     ••
                  esents God

the Father of our Lord Iesus, and our Father in him,We must beware that wee diminish not the maiesty of GOD in our thoughts, to thinke him like man. where we must bee ware to assigne vnto God with the Anthropomorphits and Papists, any visible shape, though hee demitte himselfe to our capacity, and shadow himselfe like vnto vs: let vs not diminish in our hearts the glorie of his maiesty, as to fashion him in our imagination to be like vnto vs. For God is no
                        •
                      as man. Eies, & eares, ielousie, anger, and

repentance are ascribed vnto him. But hee hath not carnall eies, nor eares, to see and heare, as man doth. If he hath with such wonderfull wisdome made some of his cretures that they are,
                     Macar. h
                           •
                        m. 24. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   incomprehensible to man,
                     H
                           •
                        m. 12. yea the very soule of man whereby he knoweth all other things, yet knoweth not its owne selfe in many things, how shall we know him that made it, or conceiue of him

as he is, he beeing in himselfe infinite, in regard of his creatures incomprehensible, in regard of place, incircumscriptible, in regard of time euerlasting, and shall wee then imagine him to be like one of vs.
               
                  The reason why he figures himselfe like a manBut why then will you say, is hee called a man? doubtlesse for our comfort and instruction, because we cannot conceiue of his maiestie as hee is, hee speakes to vs of himselfe as we are, insinuating his loue towards

vs. Among all creatures none more familiar to a man then a man, and among all men none more kindlie and louing then a father; therfore when the Lord will signifie his loue, he shadowes himselfe vnto vs like a man, and such a man as is our father. And this is for our instruction, as oft as the Lord expresse
                     •
                   himselfe vnder the name of a man, it is not because he is so indeed, but because it is needfull for vs that so his

maiesty should be expressed. Looke then what goodnesse God hath created in man,Euery good and excellent thing in man is a witnesse of the incomparable goodnesse and excellēcy of God and then goe vp, and consider by it what a good creatour is hee that made him. Hath man an eie to see, and an eare to heare; can man being an earthly father haue compassion on his children and prouide good things for them. Thē let vs gather with the Psalmist,
                     Psal. 94. 
                  Vnderstundye vnwise, hee that made the eye, doth he not see, or hee that planted the

eare doth hee not heare: and againe with our Sauiour,
                     Mat. 7.11 
                  If ye which are euill can giue to your children good gifts:
                  Atheists are iniurious to the Lord, for they doe not thinke him so good as themselus 
                  how much more shall your Father which is in heauen giue good things to them that aske him. But here is the fault, that as Anthropomorphites ascribe vnto God such a shape as themselues haue. So Atheists do abase his maiesty so farre, as to thinke hee is not so good as they are, he hath not such knowledge and power as a man hath,

other deny his prouidence, and saie hee hath eies and seeth not, they deny his mercy, and distrust that hee will shew kindnesse, and compassion to his owne,But makes him like an Idol of of the nations that hath eies and sees not. Psal. 115. they deny his iustice, whiles as they thinke hee will not punish transgressors, and so setting his maiestie lesse then one of them selues, they make him in their mind like the Idols of the Nations, that haue eies and see not, eares and heare not, hands and worke

not, feet that walke not, and in a word, such a one as can neither doe good nor euill: but their wickednesse shall reprooue them, and they shall finde the contrarie by miserable experience in the end. Thus haue wee seene for what cause it is that the Lord expresseth himselfe vnto vs by the similitude of a man.
               Many waies hath God honoured the nature of man:
                     Hovv god hath honoured mans nature, appeares
                     1 In creatiō
                     
                   First, in our creation that when hee made man

hee beautifieth him with his image.
                     2 In redemption.
                     3 In the word.
                   Next in our redemption, wherein hee sheweth himselfe so enamoured with the loue of man, as to marry our nature with his owne in the person of his Sonne Christ Iesus. And thirdly, in his word, that when hee speakes of himselfe he borrowes comparisons from man to expresse himself; once he made man to his own similitude, but often describes himselfe according to mans similitude

                  Plerunque a corporibus hominum in se similitudinem trahit Deus, And this serues,
                     Gregor. mor. l. 32. shortly to make man ashamed, who spares not to dishonour his owne nature,
                     Rom. 6. giuing the members of his body as weapons of vnrighteousnesse to sinne, subiecting to Satans slauery that nature, which God hath so highly honoured aboue the nature of Angels, and all other creatures whatsouer.
            
            
               
               Had two sonnes.
               
                  The two sonnes in this Parable represent, not Iewes and Gentiles.
                  Hauing seene who is meant by this father in the parable, we come now to see who are his two sons. By the younger some vnderstand the Gentiles, and by the elder the Iewes. It is true indeede they are our elder brethren, and were in the couenant before vs, and shall againe returne vnto it, we haue to pitie them and pray to God for them that hee would

                  take the vaile from their eies,
                  2. Car. 3. and bring them home againe,
                     Ioh. 10.16 that there may be one Sheepeheard, and one sheepefold. But they cannot bee figured heere by this eldest sonne, because they haue forsaken their fathers familie, and are now strangers from the tents of Sem.
                  Nether yet Angels and men. Others againe by these two sonnes vnderstand elect angels and men, it is true also that they triumphant in heauen are our elder brethren called therfore by the

Apostle The congregation of the first borne.
                  
                     Heb. 12. Like as they againe call the Church militant on earth their little sister.
                  
                     Cant. 8.8. But by this elder brother they cannot bee represented, for they murmur no
                     •
                   at any compassion shewed vs, or louing intertainement made to vs by our heauenly father, they grudge not,Nor yet Pharisees and Publicanes. but rather reioyce at the conuersion of a sinner. There are yet the third who by this elder brother vnderstand

                  pharisees & iustiti
                        •
                     rs, by the younger publicans and sinners. Truth it is the Pharisees grudging at Christ for his familiaritie with Publicans gaue him occasion to vtter this parable, and by it also hee conuinces them. But the doctrine herein deliuered extendeth further, as now we shall heare.
               These two sonnes then represent two sortes of Gods children in the militant Church:But the tvvo Sons represent sorts of Gods children vpon earth. some not only chosen but effectually

called by grace, and these are figurate by the elder sonne, some chosen, but yet not called nor renewed by grace, and these are figurate by the younger sonne.The 
                        •
                     lder sonne represents such as are chosen & called. The first sort of these will not go from their father, they resolue to abide in his house, and are willingly content to liue vnder their fathers gouernment & correction, their desire is with Dauid,
                     Psal. 27. 
                  One thing haue I desired of
                        •
                      the Lord, and I still require it, that I may dwell

all my daies in his house, to behold his beauty.
               
               Their resolution is with Iosua,
                     Iosh. 24.17. 
                  Though all the world should forsake the Lord, I will worship him. And their protestation is with Peter,
                     Ioh. 6.68. 
                  whither shall we go from thee, thou hast the words of eternall life. I haue not said that these sort of men sinne not, if they fall, they fall in their Fathers floore, whose mercifull hand raiseth them vp again, but it is farre from them to professe a departure from him, &

for such as these are in the Church we giu
                     •
                   thankes to God.
               
                  The yoner son rep
                        •
                     esents such as a
                        •
                     e chosen, but not yet called.As to the other represented by the younger sonne, they are Gods children in regard of election, but not yet called, no
                     •
                   sanctified by grace. These in their ignorance care not to shake of the yoke and discipline of their Father, they will not abide with him, as they promised in baptisme to be ruled by him, and liue vnder his commandement;

but they will doe their owne will, walking after the lyberty of their owne lusts with the wicked in the way of reprobation, their heauenly father suffering thē with long patience to prooue their owne weakenesse,These are disobedient chilchildren till they be called. that his mercy may bee the more manifest towards them, when by his effectuall grace he cals them out of this snare of the deuill, as heere at length he did to this Prodigal child. And these in the

Church whom all men may see like vnto this yonger sonne in departing from God: wee pray the Lord they may also be like him in returning: but alas, wee
                     •
                   haue many like the one, few like the other. For which we may complaine with Augustine.Aug. In occulto est vnde gaudeam, in publico vnde torquear. The matter of our ioy in such as cleaue vnto the Lord for the most part is hidden in secret: but the matter

of our griefe in such as depart from him is publike and manifest. Alwaies sure it is that they that liue most licentiously, if they be the elect children of God, shall once ere they die bee effectually called by grace, and so renewed and made obedient children vnto their heauenly father.This learneth vs to looke vvith pity to men in their sin, it may be they are our brethren in regard of election.
               
               And this should learne vs compassion towards men in their sins, for thou knowest not, whether, if or not in Gods secret counsell

he be an elect child of God, thy brother and an heire of grace with thee, who in regard of his present euil conuersation, liues as an enemy and a stranger from grace. Ananias feared Saint Paul,
                  
                     Act. 9.13.17. as an aduersarie, whom shortly after, he fauoured and embraced as a brother; and many such no doubt there are in the Church, concerning whom the commandement is giuen.2. Tim. 15. 
                  Instruct with meekenesse them which are contrary

minded, waiting if at any time God will bring them out of the snare of the Deuill.
               
            
            
               And the younger:
               Wee haue first to consider this Parable according to the letter:This Parable being first considered according to the letter, teacheth vs. for it is certaine that our Sauiour borrowes no similitude from that which is not. Parabola enim de nullo non conuenit. It will let vs see that often times good and godly fathers haue wicked & vngratious

children.That good fathers oftentimes haue euill children. Esa. 1. Seeing God who is the Father o
                     •
                   vs all, complaines o
                     •
                   it. I haue nourished an
                        •
                      brought vp children, bu
                        •
                      they haue rebelled agains
                        •
                      me. It becomes other fathers to beare this crosse the more patiently.
               
                  And all to declare that grace is Gods free gift & comes not by nature.Neither is it without cause, that oftentime
                     •
                   so it fals out, for if wise and godly fathers had alwaies wise and godly children, i
                     •
                   might bee thought grace were heritable flowing from nature not giuen of God frō
                  
aboue; but we see the contrary, as circumcised parents begate vncircumcised children, so regenerate fathers, vnregenerate children. Adam hath a Cain, Noah a Cham, Abram an Ismael, Isaack an Esau, Ezechiah a Manasse.
                  For godly fathers beget natural children not out of new grace but out of old nature The reason heereof is, that the goodnesse which is in man, he hath it not by nature, but by grace of regeneration and in begetting children according to nature, he communicats to them that which

he hath of nature, not that which he hath aboue nature by grace. Homo liberos gignit ex carne vetusta,
                  
                     Aug. cont. Pelag. lib. 2. ca. 9. 
                  & peccatrice non ex spiritu, quocircamini me mirum, si iustus iustos non gignat, sicut peccator peccatorē. A man begetteth children of sinfull flesh, not of the spirit. No maruel therefore that a righteous man begette not righteous children, as a sinneful man begetteth sinners. The Graines of wheat which are sowen in the earth purged

from all their superfluities, hauing neither stalke, nor eares, nor chaffe,This is cleared by similitudes. Aug. cont. In
                           •
                        ian. lib. 6. cap. 6. yet grow vp againe with them all, Quia purgatio illa, non natura contigit granis, sed hominum arte. Because that purgatiof the corne is not made by nature, but by the arte of man. Cum autem frumenta non nascantur ab his principijs artis, & industria, sed naturae, necesse est vt nascentia sequantur non rationem humanae industriae, sed naturae. Therefore is it

they grow vp not such as the art and industry of man hath made them, but such as they are by n
                     •
                  ture. Et sicut gignitur ex oleastri semine oleaster,
                  
                     August. de nuptijs & concupis. lib. 2. c. 19 
                  & ex oleae semine non nisi oleaster, Cum inter oleastrum & oleam plurimum distet, ita & de carne peccatoris, & de carne iusti vtrinque peccator, quam vis inter peccatorem & iustum multum distet. And as the seed of the wilde Oliue bringeth out a wilde oliue, and the seede of the oliue brings out

also a wilde oliue: albeit betweene the oliue and the wilde oliue in themselues there is a great difference:No matter of gloriation in flesh. euen so out of the flesh, both of iust men and sinners, sinners are begotten, albeit in themselues great difference bee betweene the righteous and the sinner. That all matter of gloriation may be taken from flesh, and he who glories may glorie in the Lord, boast as thou wilt of the priuiledges of nature,

they are but the matter of thy mourning. Comfort canst thou haue none, but in that which grace hath giuen thee aboue nature.
               
                  Parents should take heed that in their ovvn default children bee not crosses vnto thē 1. Sam. 3.13.Onely let parents take heede that in their owne default their children become not crosses vnto them. Iustly was Adonijah a scourge to Dauid in his olde daies, because he would not displease him from his youth.1. King. 1.6 And Ophni and Phinees a crosse to their father Eli, because

he suffered thē to run into a slander. A threefold dutie therefore,A threefold dutie parents owe to their children. should fathers discharge to their children; first, by a godly life giue them good example,1 First, to giue them good example. doe not that which thou wouldest not wish thy children to follow; it is an euill great enough that thou hast deriued sin vnto them by propagation, let them not also draw it from thee by imitation. Secondly, haue a care of their education,
                  
                     Ephes. 6.4. 
                  to bring them

vp in the information of the Lord. Foolishnesse is bound in the heart of a childe,
                  
                     Pro. 22.15 
                  but the rod of correction driues it away.
                  2. Secondly to haue a care of their education. Nazian. orat. 48. in Iulian.
                   
                  Nazian records, that the Lacedaemonians learned their children to excell in fortitude, and tollerance of sorrowes by frequent beating them. Licurgus taught the Spartans what power was in good education. Whē of two dogs procreat of the same parents by his paines he made the one a hound for the fields,

the other, not so trained vp, remaining but a curre for the kitchin. And Socrates was wont to say that many children, for want of good education were like vnto couragious horses,st who for lacke of gouernment become no better then Asses. It is a shame for Christians to come behinde Ethnickes in this duty. And yet that education will not alway doe it is euident in Isaac and Ismael, both brought vp in the

house of Abram; yea in Iacob and Esau both gotten of one father borne of one mother, that lay together in one belly, their education was alike, their dispotition vnlike.Thirdly, to be instant in praier to God for them. Therfore besides the ordinary meanes of information and correction, the last duty fathers ought to their children is earnest praier vnto God for them: euen as Iob euery morning sacrifised for his children, that GOD would frame their hearts to

his holy loue and obedience, that the corruption of nature which in the first generation they communicate to their children, may be taken away, and they by the grace of regeneration sanctified and renewed vnto his holy image.
               Hauing noted these things in the parable,Children in grieuing their Parents prepare griefes for themselues. according to the letter in the point of the father: two things also occurre to bee marked in the part of the sonne: first, his

vile ingratitude to his Father, that vpon no necessity, onely to the end he might follow his owne will and enioy the perishing pleasures of his sinfull lusts, he forsakes him. And that all children may learne to flee this fault: let them marke that because this young man became a crosse to his father, he becoms at length a crosse also to himself.Children cannot requite the good they haue of their parents.
               
               It is the first dutie of godlinesse in children (said Cyrill) to be thankfull to their

parents, to wait vpon them, serue thē, cōfort thē, especially in their old age, Quamvis enim illis plurima eiusmodirediderimus, rursus tamen eos generare non possumus, for albeit in some things we may be able to requite them,
                     Cyrill. 
                           •
                        at. 7. as Ioseph being fed 17. yers by his father Iacob in Canaan fed his father againe other 17. yeres in Aegypt;
                     Gen▪
                      47. yet are we neuer able to beget them againe,
                     Nazian. ad Vitalianum filios suos auersantem.
                   
                  Ab illis primam viuendi causam accepimus, adeo vt parentes velut dij quidam

sint, hoc est liberis vice Dei, hos Deus increatus & immortalis, nobis creratos & mortales deos dedit, vt homines honore afficeret.
                  For parents are as little Gods vnto their children. For vnder God we haue our being of them, he who is the father immortall and increated, for the honouring of mankind hath communicated his name to mortall and created creatures, to make them also fathers and begetters of others, thus are they to their children like little gods, or in God his

steed, which as it should waken in fathers a care to be answerable to there name and place, in wise and louing dealing with their children; so warnes it children of that loue, thankefulnesse and obedience, they ought euery way vnto their parents.
               But such is the iniquitie of this age,The vnrighteous dealing of Children with their parents in this age. that many parents would willingly bee content to forgo all the good they may haue by their children, vpon

condition they were quit of their euil. This prodigall child failed in omissiō of his duty, his fault was in the desertiō of his father, we heare not that other waies he did him any euill, or was vnreuerent toward him either in word or deed, like vnnaturall children now, who are not ashamed to be mockers, cursers, and oppressors of their parents. A fearefull impietie, a beastly stupiditie, doubtlesse a forerunner of great

wrath to fall vpon these, who fall into such sins. There was infirmities in Noah, when Cham mocked his wickednesse, but did he not for that incurre the curse? and thinkest thou that the faults of thy parents shall excuse thine vnnaturall contempt of them?The fearful punishment of vndutifull children to their parents. Wilt thou look into the law, thou shalt see an heauy penaltie laid on euery iniurie, that either by word or deed thou dost to thy father.
                     Ex
                           •
                        . 21.17 
                  He that curseth his father

or his mother shall die the death.
                  
                     Eu. 21.15 
                  He that smiteth his father or his mother shall die the death. Yee shall feare euery man his father and his mother.
                  
                     Leu. 19.3 
                  If any man haue a sonne which is stubborne and disobedient, who will not hearken to the voice of his father, nor the voice of his mother,
                  
                     Deut. 21.18. &c. Then all the men of the citie shal stone him with stones vnto death.
                  
                     De. 27.16 
                  Cursed be he that curseth his father, or his mother.
                  
                     Pro. 30. 17. 
                  The eie that mocketh his father, & despiseth the instruction of

his mother, let the rauens of the valley picke it out, and the young Eagles eat it.
               
               And if we shal come downe lower to looke into nature, we shall finde this vile ingratitude condemned by her decree also, Filius cum patre quoquo modo ne expostulet,
                  
                     Nazian. senten. Natures decree, cōdemns such impiety. 
                  cum hoc lex interdicat, tum ante leges ipsa natura. Let not a sonne any manner of way contend with his father, seeing this is forbidden by the Law, and by nature it selfe, before

any Law was giuen, The young Ciconia (supposed by some to be the Storke) which lappeth her wings about her parents whē thorow age they become naked, spoiled of their owne feathers, feedes them, and carries them from place to place vpon their winges; may condemne,
                     Basil. hex. hom 8. said Basil, the barbarous inhumanity of vnnaturall children, who eithe
                     •
                   will forsake their parents in time of age, or then abide with

them onely to oppresse them, pulling from them their feathers, that is, the meanes of their life, to make vp themselues, these are not men, but beastly creatures like Lions,
                     Hom 9. and vipers which are borne to the destruction of their parents. Let these bee out of doubt, that with the same measure it shall bee measured againe vnto them, if a worse doe not ouertake them.
               The other thing to

be marked heere is,Why this sonne is called the younger sonne. that this childe who here casts off his fathers yoke is called the younger. Doth learne vs that as Satan hath his tentations for euery age: So the age whereupon hee workes most busilie, and preuailes most mightily is youth.Satan hath tentations meet for euery age of man. The affections then being strongest, are impatient of correction, they will not submit their shoulders to the yoke of God,
                     Ier. 2.24 but like wilde shee Asses they snuffe vp the

winde, and despise the hunter. Therefore said Nazian.
                  
                     Nazien, orat. 46 in Ecclesiast. Amb. li. de viduis.
                   
                  Inuentutis assecla est stultitia, as a Page followes his master: so folly followes youth. Vicina lapsibus est adolescentia. It is the age whereunto men are neerest and most ready to fall. In the Lawe God required vnto himselfe the first fruits,
                     Leu. 2.14. 
                  Wheate beaten out of the greene eares, to signifie, that God will be serued with the first fruits of our green and flourishing age:Youth should be consecrat vnto God but alas, men remember

not how far they dishonour the Lord, when their yong and lusty yeres they will giue vnto Sathan, promising their old, whithered and decrepit age, as good enough to serue the Lord. Such iniquity many times is repaied with a proportionable plague, that because they will not giue there young yeares vnto the Lord, he will not accept the seruice of their old age, but cuts them away, (yea, which is

most fearefull in their sinnes) and lets them neuer come to the honour of a hoarie head.
               Sometimes it falles out that yonger men are the Nazarites of God,
                  A great blessing when younger ones are Gods Nazarites. Amos 2. Lam. 3.27 and a great blessing where so it is; for it is good for a man to beare the yoke in his youth. Then may a man see youth beautified with great graces, with Chastity like Iosephs, with temperance like that of Daniel, who was not delighted with the

Kings delicates, with ripe vnderstanding, and knowledge (a rare grace in young yeares) like Samuel or Salomon; But alas, how small is the number of Gods Nazarits, purer then the snow,
                  
                     Sam. 4.7. 
                  whiter then the milke, who separate themselues from all filthynesse of the flesh and spirit,
                  2. Cor. 7.1. that they may adhere vnto the Lord in regard of these whom iustly I may call Satans Nazarites,
                  But many of them may bee iustly termed Satans Nazarites. who deuiding themselues from God doe

in most execrable maner deuote themselues to Satan by drunkennesse, harlatry, and deboshing in all kind of impietie.
               Now,Somtime also aged men in yeares are found young in manners. as these lusts of the flesh are noy some in youth, so also in old age, it is a double sin and shame both, wher men with grouth in yeres, haue made no grouth in knowledge and godlinesse, be what they will in regard of their yeares, if they be not Morum grādaeuitate maturi,
                  
aged in manners,
                     Gregor, Mor. li 19 Philo. Bern. in Can.ser. 44. they are, Longaeui pueri, they are but old children, in aquibus nullus succus virilis sapientiae, maturitatis & forti
                     
                        •
                     udinis, in whom there is no sappe of manly wisdome, maturity, nor strength.
                     Athan. in ep.ad Tim.
                   
                  Carnalibus desiderijs etiam senex ad inuentlem redit aetatem, for by carnall desires an aged man shews himselfe to be but foolish and yong, such were these elder men that first vainely tempted Susa
                        ••
                     
                   to sin, and then wrongfully

accused her,
                     Ignat. ad Magnesianos.
                   
                  Ca. niciem vanam habentes, let such aged men know that in this Parable, they are also figured by the yonger sonne,These are vvorse then this yong for
                     
                        •
                     ome childe and much more miserable then he, that where he in his younger yeres returned to the Lord, they in their old daies are yet vnder the seruitude of sinne, carying in a weak and impotent body, strong affections wickedly inclined vnto euill, wherein if they dye as they were borne,

and ly downe in the graue, their bones being full of the sinnes of their youth,
                  
                     Iob 20.11. It had beene better for them they had neuer been born.
               But now leauing the letter,The pararable cō
                     sidered according to the sense, lets vs see our manifold faults, whereunto man by nature is subject Ephes. 2. we come to search the sense of the Parable. This Prodigal childe is proposed to vs as a type of all the Children of disobedience, that in him we may see what are the sins by which a man deuides himself from God, and drawes vpon himselfe perdition vnlesse he returne againe

by vnfained repentance.
               First,I Ignorāce of God maketh a man to dissteeme of God. then in that he is called a young man, there is noted in him want of knowledge and experience as the ground and fountaine of all his folly, he knew not as yet what his father was worth vnto him. And therefore hee is not afraid to forsake him. This is to teach vs that none forsakes the LORD, but such as doe knowe him not, and vnderstands not that in

so doing, they forsake their owne mercy.
                  
                     Ionas 2.8. 
                  My people perisheth for want of knowledge, saith the Lord: and againe, they are a nation void of counsell, neither is their any vnderstanding in them.
                        Deut. 32. 28.29. Oh that they were wise, then they should vnderstand this, they would consider their later end. And our Sauiour when hee came neere Ierusalem, wept for it, and said,
                     Luk. 19. 42. 
                  Oh if thou hadst knowne, at the least in this thy day these things which belong to thy peace. All

these cōplaints make cleere vnto vs that it is only the ignorance of God which makes men to despise him & cast of his yoke.No otherwise thē beasts disesteem of most pretious things, because they know them not. As beasts that know not the valew of pearles care not to trample them vnder their feet, or as young children laugh at the death of their parents, because they know not for the present, what they loose thereby, but afterward remember it with griefe, so blinded man without remorse

runnes away from God, not knowing what hee lost by departing from the Lord, for hee is light, and they goe into vtter darkenesse that goe from him: he is life, and they are but dead who abide not in fellowship with him.
                     Ps. 73.27. 
                  For lo, they that withdraw themselues from thee shall perish, thou destroiest all them that goe a whoring from thee.
                  
                     Gen. 3.7. But afterward, When their eies are opened, they shall know that they are naked, and that

it was an euill and a bitter thing that they did forsake the Lord.
                  
                     Ier. 2.9. But such as haue felt the sweetnesse of the Lord, and Tasteed how gratious he is, the more they know him,Such as know the Lord can not bee cōte
                        •
                     t to liue without the Lord. 2, K. 2.6. the better they loue him; and the neerer their soules cleaue vnto him without separation, as Ehsha said to Elijah, as the Lord liueth, and thy soule liueth I will not leaue thee, so they went both together: so speaketh vnto the Lord euery soule that knows the Lord.
               
                  
                  This is euident in elect Angels.One example of this wee haue in the elect angels they are neuer wearie to behold his excellent maiesty they find euer new matter of ioy in his face when they come foorth as his messengers to execute his will vpon the creatures, they come so to vs, that they depart not from him,
                     Gregor. M
                           •
                        ral.
                   
                  nunquam sie for as exe
                     
                        ••
                     nt vt interne contemplationis gaudijs priuentur, for they are ful of eies before and behind, they neuer so looke to the creature,

that they lose sight of their Lord the Creator,
                  In men also called and sanctified by grace. & so it is with his saints on earth, thogh they bee farre from that perfection, yet prease they to it by daily imitation, that the will of God may bee done on earth by them as it is done in heauen by the holy Angels, euery one of them resolues for himselfe.
                     Psal. 73. 28.25. 
                  It is good for me to draw neere vnto God, whom haue I in heauen but thee, and I haue desired none in earth with thee, yea in comparison of the

Lord all things seeme as dung vnto them,
                     Phil. 3.8. Math. 13. 44. 
                  he is that precious treasure, they who once haue found him are content to sell all that they haue to the end they may enioy him.
               
                  2 Vpon ignorance follow
                        •
                     s rebellion whereby mā s
                        •
                     aks of Gods yoke and vsurps his glory.Secondly, in this Prodigall child is noted heere, that natural rebellion which is in all men, that they will not submit themselus to the will of God their heauenly father, but will follow their owne wils, for in this onely stands the question betweene God

and man, Whose will should be done, where God with all reason craues that his holy will may be done, man against all reason preferres his will to the will of God. It is the onely glory of almighty God, and his proper priuiledge, which hee will not giue vnto an other, that hee is supreme ruler and gouernour of all, hauing none aboue him, onely apostat Angell and man vsurps his glory, for man not content to haue all

al the cretures of God subiect vnto him, refuse also to be subiect vnto God, and doth what he can to set his throne aboue the throne of God, and to subdue the will of God vnto his own.
               
                  This is that peruerse imitation of GOD, which Satan taught our first parents.Vnto this rebellion Sathan was the first tempter of man promising to make him equall with God, which he no lesse foolishly then wickedly vsu
                     •
                  ped,
                     A
                           •
                        gus. d v
                           •
                        rb d. m
                   
                  Peruersa enim haec imitatio dei, vt quemad
                        •
                     odum de
                        •
                     s non habet alium à quo formetur, & regatur, it a & homo velit sua vti potestate: for this is a peruerse imitation of God, that as hee hath none aboue him who made him and rules him: so man also will haue none aboue him this is not the right way to be like to him, but a pert aspiring to that which he should not,Man vsurping more then God gaue him, lost that which he had, but attained not to more. and neuer shall be able to attaine vnto. By this presumption man was not aduanced to a better, but in most miserable manner abased to a

worse estate, seeking more dignity then he had, he obtained not that which he sought but lost that which he had, for euery creature,
                     Bern. de subiect. u
                           •
                        s
                           •
                        re voluntaris.
                   
                  velit, nolit subiect a est creatori, whether it will, or will not, must be subiect to the creator.
                     Aug de Corrept. & gra. 14. 
                  Et de his qui faciunt quae non vult faci
                        •
                      ipse quae vult, and o
                     •
                   them who doe that which he will not, the Lord doth that which hee will, the pride of man may empaire
                     •
                   himselfe, but cannot preiudge the priuiledge

of the almighty, Woe bee to him that contends with his maker,
                  
                     Es
                           •
                        
                      45.9. wo to euery wil which is against Gods will, for it shall neuer obtaine that which it willeth, but shall for euer sustaine that which it will not. As we pray,3 With these two is conioined hypocrisie, man in word cals God his father when no such thought is in his heart. so let vs practise that Gods will may be done, and not our owne.
               The third euill noted heere in this Prodigall, is his hipocrisie he cals him in word Father, but in deed did not so account of

him, he caried not toward him the heart o
                     •
                   achilde, this is a part of that poison,
                     Pisid. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                   where with Satan hath infected our nature. C
                        ••
                      deciperet, consiliarium se
                        •
                      exhibebat, & s
                        •••
                     laba
                        •
                      amicum, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   cō
                  ming to our parents of purpose to be a deceiuer,Satan a notable distembler. he shewed him selfe as if hee were a counsellor, a deadly enemy, yet professing friendship; hee hath spou
                     •
                  ed this poison o
                     •
                   hypocrisie into our first Fathers to couer their wickednes with

faire shewes and sensiue, Omnem illorum posteritatem haereditarium hoc virus infecit.
                  
                     Ber. in C
                           •
                        t. S
                           •
                        rm. 82. This heritable poison hath poisoned all their posterity. Quem enim dabis de filijs Adam, qui quod est, non dico velit, sed vel patiatur se videri. Whom will ye get among all the sonnes of Adam, who willingly desires,By hypocrisie man couers the 
                        •
                     u
                        ••
                      which he hath, and simulate
                        •
                      the good which he hath not. yea or can suffer himselfe to be known for such as he is.
               And this euil of hipocrisie is then worst, when not onely men

by it will couer the euill which they haue not.
                     Bet. in C
                           ••
                        t. ser. 66. 
                  Boni videri, non esse muli non videri, sed esse volunt, they wil be euill, and yet will not seeme to be euill, they will not be good and godly, and yet will make a shew as if they were good and godly. But bee not dec
                        •
                     iued,
                  
                     Gen. 27. 
                  God will not bee mocked. Rebecca in subtil manner decked vp Iacob vnder Esau his apparell, and Isaac being olde
                     •
                   and dimme of sight, misknew him. Now Satan more cunninglie

buske vp Esau vnder Iacobs apparell. O how this leauen of of hypocrisie hath sowred the whole masse of mankinde,But by no shadow of dissimulation can the Lord be deceiued. the world is full of carnall men walking vnder the couering of Christians; they haue reiected the yoke of God, walking after their owne lusts, and yet with this forlorne childe they will come and call God their father being indeed but counterfets, they looke as if they were Christians, but

is our Lord like Isaac, weake of sight to mistake them; No, no, they may mourne and shed many teares they may confesse their sinnes, they may put on sack cloth, they may offer sacrifice: So Esau mourned, so Iudas confessed, so Achab humbled himselfe in dust, so Cain sacrificed, but by none of these shewes will the Lord be deceiued.
               
                  Hipocrits cōuinced by their owne words.Out of thine owne mouth shalt thou bee iudged, ô hipocrite.

                  For if I be your Father (as thou callest mee) where is my honour,
                  
                     Malac. 1. 
                  and if I be your Master, wher is my feare:1. Pet. 1.17. and againe, If ye call him father, who without respect of persons iudgeth euery man according to his works, passe the time of your dwelling heere in feare: But thy works conuince thy tongue of a lie; thou callest him Father, but doest not resemble his image: shall we thinke that God begetteth children to an other image then his owne.

Yea, beside the euill of a wicked conuersation, the very shew of a good profession shall also improue thee:A meet question for hypocrites. for tell me (hypocrite) why wilt thou not hee indeede, which in shewe thou wouldst seeme to be, if it bee a good thing to appeare to be godly, is it not better to bee godly indeed? and if thou thinke shame to appeare to be of an euill life, shouldst thou not much more think shame to bee euill indeed.

Thus as the fish Sepia is bewraied by the blacke colour which she casteth out to couer her: sō is the hypocrite conuinced by the very shew of godlines, vnderwhich hee hoped to haue lurked.
               And truly,The iust and proportional punishment of hypocrits. most iust and fearefull is that recompence, wherewith God paieth home such hypocrites; for as they take the name of God in their mouth, when the loue and reuerence of God is not

in their hearts, so shal not they bee in the heart of God,
                  
                     Esa. 62.3. as Dauid was, nor grauen on the palmes of his hand, as his Church is,1. Sam. 13.14. 
                  Nor written in the beoke of life, as his elect are, but God shall haue them in his mouth,
                     Ps. 69.28. like luke-warme Laodicaeans to spew them out of it;
                     Reuel. 3. their doome is set downe by Ieremy, Will yee steale,
                  
                     Ier. 7.9. 
                  murther, and commit adultery, and sweare falsly, and burne incense vnto Baal, and walke after other Gods whom yee

knowe not. And come and stand before mee in this house wher my name is called vpon before your eies, and therefore will cast you out of my sight.
               
               The fourth euill pointed out heere in him is a great presumption 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,Man is so presumpteous by nature, as to make God a debtor vnto him. 
                  giue me the portion of goods that befals me. Men not regenerate by grace make the Lord a debtor to them, not content to receiue good things from the Lord, they challenge, Patris bona

quasi sibi debita, their fathers goods as debts dew to them for their merits, and good deseruings.Doctrine of merit is learned in the Scoole of Nature. Of the which it is euident that the doctrine of merite is learned out of the schoole of nature, wherein all proud Iust
                        •
                     tiars what euer shew of externall pietie they haue, are but condisciples with this forlorne childe, for if the Lord should giue vnto man the portion that is due vnto him,
                     Psa. 11.6. then hee should raine sire and

brimstone vpon him, for that is the portion of his cuppe. Thou art neuer able to recompence the Lord for the good hee hath giuen thee already, and how then shalt thou deserue that which hee hath promised. Is there any comparison betweene that which thou giuest the Lord, and that which thou gettest from him: for from thee that hast no more he will gratiously accept the sacrifice of one cuppefull of cold water, or a

tribute of teares,No proportion betvveene our work and the Lords revvard. and shalt thou for this brag of thy merit, and make him a debtor to thee of eternal life. Si quis a diebus Adami vsque ad consummationem saeculi,
                  
                     Macar. hom. 15. 
                  viueret, & fortiter contra Satanam pugnaret, non posset tamen, tantam gloriam promereri, quato minus qui tam breui tempore militat. If a man should liue from the daies of Adam to the end of the world, and strongly fight against Satan, yet were he not able to merit

so great a glory, farre lesse are we able to do it, who so short a space are militant on earth.The vanity of such as trust in their merits, is discouered. Ber. in annunt. Mar. Serm. 1.
               
               Our reioicing saith the Apostle is the testimony of our conscience; this testimonie, saith Bernard, consisteth in these three. Necesse enim primo omniū credere quod remissionem peccatorum habere non potes, nisi per indulgentiam Dei. For first of all, thou must beleeue that thou canst not obtaine remission of sinnes except

onely by the indulgence and mercy of God,. Deinde quod nihil prorsus habere queas operis boni, nisi & hoc dederit ipse. Secondly, that thou art not able to do any good work except God giue it vnto thee. For wee are not of our selues sufficient to thinke a good thought Postremo,
                  2. Cor. 3.5 
                  quod aeternam vitam nullus potest operibus promereri nisi gratis, detur & illa. And last, that no man is able by good works to merit eternal life, it is the free gift of God.

If we do any good, let vs say with the Apostle Not I but the grace of God in me. If we get any good, ascribe it not to our merits but let the praise of it alway be returned to his mercies.
               Fiftly,5 Man naturally esteemes more of the comfort of the creature, then fauour of the creatour. that he seeks a portion of his fathers goods, but not his fathers fauour & blessing, represents to vs, the earthly minds of naturalists, who preferre the gifts of God to God himselfe. all creatures that the Lord made, he made

them for man, and man for himselfe; but this is a fearefull contempt of God, and vile disestimation of his maiesty, when the creature which God hath subiected vnto man in the heart of man is preferred vnto God, and better loued then God himselfe,
                     Gen. 3
                        •
                     
                   as Euah for the loue of an apple lost the loue of the Lord;
                     Ge. 25.32. and Esau for a messe of pottage sould his birthright which hath annexed the blessing, and the Gadarans,
                  
counted their swnine more precious then the Sonne of God Christ Iesus.
               
               It is written of them who tame the Tigre,The folly of man in so doing declared by an example. that when they haue taken away the yong one, knowing that incontinent they will bee pursued by the old, they set looking glasses in the way by which they flie, wherunto when the olde Tigresse comes, and seeth some representation of themse
                     •
                  ues, lingreth about them a good space, deceiued

by the shaddow and deteined in a vain hope to recouer their young againe, and in the meane time the hunter most speedily posts away with his pray.
               So dealeth Satan with the men of this world, hee castes before them the deceitfull baites of worldlie pleasures and profits, beeing indeed no other thing but shadowes and representations of good; yet are men so delighted with these that they

dote about them, hauing no care to pursue their enemy for recouerie of that image of God which Satan hath stolen from them. Not without a sore and vnrecouerable losse to themselues.
                     Aug. epist. 162. Pittifull blindnes so to loue the world that for it a man should lose himselfe. 
                  Cum vsque adeo hominibus charus est hic mundus, vt sibi ipsis vilescant, When this world is so much esteemed of man, that to obtaine it, hee debaseth, yea he loseth himselfe, liuing like a drudge of the earth, and a vile

slaue to euery creature, hauing a reasonable soule captiued vnder subiection to vnreasonable creatures. A most pittifull estate,
                     Chris
                           •
                        an Mat. hō. 9. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , then the which to speake with Chrysostom, what can befall more shamfull and vnhonourable to man, for if wee ouercome not sensible things, how shall wee encounter with insensible enemies, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   or how shall wee subdue principalities,

powers, and spirituall wickednesse.
               But the children of God,It is farre otherwise with the godly. illuminate with his light renewed by his grace, hauing there eies opened in a part to see that high prise of the calling of God,
                  
                     Phi. 3.13. 
                  and the riches of that glorious inheritance prepared for the Saints. beginnes to account with the Apostle the most excellent things of this world to bee but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   dung in respect of our Lord Iesus Christ, and haue a ready answer to giue

their aduersarie when he tempts them with the loue of the world, what is it thou canst offer to me comparable to that which thou wouldest steale from me. When wee come to age of perfect men we laugh at those things we were wont to doe when we were children.As they grow in the knowledge of Christ: so they increase in a contempt of the world They build to themselues in the streets houses of shels, stones, clay, and such like, wherein they delight for a time, no lesse then wiser and more ancient

men doe, in the building of their sumptuous Palaces, but they rush to the ground as soone as they are raised, yea, albeit they could continue, yet are they vnprofitable, and when we come to riper vnderstanding, wee set light by them as childish trifles of no importance: so is it with the childe of God as he growes in the age of Christ, he growes also in a contempt of the world, and all the perishing pleasures

thereof hee will haue nothing for his portion that cannot continue with him, all the works of God cannot content him, the desire of the soule is vpon the Lord, to enioy him.
               And truly happy is that soule,The soule of the godly cōpared to Iacobs tabernacle Ambr de sugasaeculi cap. 5. which is like vnto the house of Iacob. Beata anima quae est instar domus Iacobi, in qua nulla simulachra, nulla effigies vanitatis. Wherein there is no image, no representation of vanity. For doubtlesse it is a miserable

thing so to bee bewitched with the shadowes of good, that we lose the substance. Fugiamus hine vbi nihil est, vbi inane est omne quod magnisicum putatur. Let vs flie from this world, wherein there is nothing but vanity, yea that which is most magnificke after triall is found most impotent.
                     Ibid.
                   
                  Nihil siquidem a somni vanitate dissert rerum praesentium sigura, siue illae tristes sint, siue prosperae. The most excellent shews

of this life are but dreames, which may affect for a time, but doe vanish so soone as the man awaketh,Exhortation to a contempt of this word. let such as know no better, and haue no hope, but in this present life reioice in that which they haue, let vs endeauour to that which is to come. Oh (saith Dauid) if I had the wing of a Doue,
                  
                     Ps. 55.6. 
                  then would I flee away and rest. So long as we abide fixed in our affection to the earth wee shall finde no rest. All the workes done vnder

the Sunne,
                  
                     Eccl. 1.14. (said Salomon) are but vanity & vexation of spirit. Hee searched all, he found them so, what then? Let vs goe aboue the Sunne, let vs flie vpward towards the Lord, let vs goe vp after the Eagle, who hath ascended on high,
                  
                     Can. 2.10. he calles and cries vpon vs to follow him. Arise my loue, my f
                        •
                     ire one, and come thy way. Why linger we? what should we doe heere. Now the Lord, who calles vs, draw vs, that wee may runne after

him, so shall we finde ioy and peace, and rest vnto our soules.
            
            
               So he deuided vnto them his substance.
               
                  Why the Lord suffers for a time his children to follow their own will.That the Father heere in this Parable giueth to his childe that which he seeketh and lets him goe his way, figures vnto vs how God for a time leaues his children to themselues, suffering them to doe what they will, not of purpose to let them perish in sinne; but that

by the experience of the bitter fruit of sin, hee may draw them out of their sinnes, and make them the more humble in thē
                  selues when they look to their former folly, and the more thankefull to God who of his mercy hath recouered them. Seeing earthly parents will not giue a Scorpion to their children whē they seeke bread, shal wee thinke our heauenly father will doe it? No indeed, If hee permit them to fall

into sinne, it is for a respect which God hath to good, which out of euill hee can worke to his owne glory and their saluation. Potentius & melius esse iudicans etiam de malis benefacere,
                  
                     Aug. de ciuit. Dei lib. 22, c. 1. 
                  quā mala esse non sinere. For so wonderfully wise and good is our God that euen by sinne he can destroy sinne in his owne, as by the bussets of Satan hee subdued pride in the Apostle Saint Paul.
                  
                     Ephes. 2.3. Thus the Apostle considering how hee

                  had his conuersation in time past in fulfilling the lusts of his flesh,
                  To wit, that after their conuersation they may know how much they are bound to his grace. 
                  no lesse then other children of disobedience and wrath; and that he was a blasphemer, & a persecutor, and an oppressor, doth so much the more magnifie the Lord who receiued him to mercy, whose grace was exceeding aboundant toward him with faith and loue in Christ Iesus.
                  1. Tim. 1. 13.14. For in this that elect men before their calling, walke with the reprobate in the course of disobedience,

it manifestly appeares that it is not by nature, but by grace that they are saued, and the Lord in making a difference by his grace, where there was no difference by nature, vindicates vnto himselfe the praise and glory of saluation in all such as are saued.
               
                  For in respect of nature there is no difference bevveene the elect &c repro
                        •
                      bate, till grace mak it.And this grace of God declared vpon his owne shal the better appeare if we consider the elect and reprobate to bee like vnto two men, walking

in one way, with one mind, of one purpose to one proposed end, and God suddenly comes in and sundres them, causing the one to come back againe, letting the other goe forward till he fall into the pit: so in his iust iudgements hee giues the wicked vp to their own harts desire,
                     Rom. 1.26. he lets thē fulfill the cup and measure of their iniquity: he lets down the loose reines vnto them, and suffers them without controlment to doe

what they will. Then man commits sinne with greedinesse,
                     Eph. 4.19. and drinkes in iniquity like water,
                     Iob 15.16. making out a iust ditty of his own damnation.
                     Aug. Mar. epist. 5. 
                  Peccata cum impunita dimittit Deus, tunc punit infestius. When the Lord lets sinne be vnpunished, then hee punisheth most seuerely. Vides quia tunc magis irascitur Deus, cum non irascitur. God is then most angrie when he he is not angry. Let vs say with Bernard, Miserceor diā hanc nolo,
                  
                     Ber▪ in Cāt. Se
                           •
                        m. 42.
                  
such a mercy I will not haue: or rather, from such a misery the Lord deliuer vs, that he neuer suffer vs to go on in the course of our sinnes till wee perish.
            
            
               So not long after.
               This younger son as yee see,Man left to himselfe cannot stand long. beeing left vnto himselfe, incontinent manifests his owne weakenesse, and in him all of vs may see what a fearefull thing it is to be forsaken of God and left

vnto our selues, for then quickly wee become a prey vnto our enemy. As a staffe if a man takes his hand from it, fals incontinent to the ground: so man if he bee not sustained by grace, cannot stand in a good estate. All the benefites which God created for Adam in sixe daies, hee lost them in six hours.Proofe of this in Adam, his fall should make vs humble. 
                  Augustine and Theophilact thinkes that he fell the sixth houre. Thomas Aquinas that he fel the ninth houre

others the twelfe, most of all agree that hee fell the same day hee was made. What cause then hath his sinfull posterity to distrust themselues & to pray earnestly with Dauid. Direct me in the path of thy Comm
                        •
                     ndements,
                  
                     Psal. 119. 
                  stablish me that I may liue, and let no iniquity haue dominion ouer me.
               
            
            
               When he had gathered all.
               This is also a point of the cursed corruption

of our nature
                     •
                   that when God is best vnto man,Man cō
                     monly is most vndutifull to God, whē that is most beneficial to him. then man is worst, and most vnthankfull to his God. For this, the Lord complained on the Israelites, That as they encreased,
                  
                     H
                           •
                        s. 4.7. 
                  they sinned. As Pharao when the plague was vpon him spake,
                     Gen. 9.27. and looked somewhat like a penitent man, but beeing releeued of it, like iron taken out of the fire, returned to his wonted hardnesse, so naturall men when they are pinched and straited

with pouerty, sickenesse, or any other sort of affliction they make then some shew of godlinesse, but when God changes there estate and giues them prosperitie and health, it becomes their ruine.
                     Pro. 1.32. 
                  the prosperity of fooles destroies them: and their table becomes a snare vnto them:
                  
                     Psa. 69.22 as is daily seene by lamentable experience, for then are the hearts of men, most empty of thankfulnesse, and their mouths most filled

with the blasphemies of Gods name when their tables and their stomacks are most replenished with Gods benefits, most like this forlorne sonne, who then went away from his father, when his father was most beneficiall to him and had giuen him his portion.
            
            
               He tooke his iourney into a farre Countrey.
               
                  What is meant by t
                        •
                     e farre Countrey in this parableWe haue here, first, to consider what is this far country: and

next, how this Prodigall childe went vnto it. This country is said to be farre, not in regard of the distance of place: the Lord measures the earth in his fist, and no part of it is farther from the Lord then an other.
                     Psa. 46.12 
                  Dauid knewe this,
                     Ps. 139.7 and therfore said he,Euery part of the vvorld is a like neere to the Lord. 
                  Where away shall I slie from the presence of of the Lord. Ionas at the first considered it not in the darkened cogitations of his minde, hee tooke his iourney from Ioppe to

                  Tarsus, thinking so to flie from the presence of the Lord, but hee found himselfe deceiued, for euen in the Sea did God erect a tribunall for iudgement, and made him there to finde the presence of the Lord, where he looked least for it.
                     Gen. 4.16. 
                  Cain also went out from the presence of the Lord, but goe where he would God sate in his conscience.This farre countrey is not to be estimat by distāce of place.
               
               This farre country then is to be estimate by the distance of

man his will and assections from the Lord, this is,
                     Ber. parab. de prod.
                   
                  Longinqua regio dissimilitudinis, for then is a man farthest from God, when hee is most vnlike vnto God: so the Lord himselfe expounds it. What iniquity haue your Fathers found in mee,
                  
                     Ier. 2.5. 
                  that they are gone farre from me, walking after vanity, and are become vaine. And the Apostle to the Ephesians,
                  But by distance of affection from the Lord. comparing their former estate by nature with that which now they were renewed

by grace he saith. Yee which once were farre off, are now made neere by the bloud of Iesus Christ. Whereof we see it is sin that makes vs to bee farre from the Lord, grace againe that bringeth vs neere vnto him. Otherwise Satan is not neerer the Lord in the aire, then in the helles, and the wicked no neerer the Lord in the Temple, then in the tents of wickednesse: so no longinquity nor distance of place, maketh men

further from him.
               The superstition of will-worshippers bindes the Lord to particular places at the pleasure of their conception,No place makes a man neerer the Lord then another. but it is not so.
                     Aug. ad frat. her. Ser. 27. 
                  Locus non facit sanctos, sed operatio sancta, & locum sanctificat & nos, peccauit angelus in Caelo, peccauit Adam in Paradiso, si locus hominem beare possit, nec homo, nec angelus dignitate sua corruissent. It is not the place which sanctifies men, but men by holy exercises, sanctifie both

the place and themselues, the Angels sinned in heauen, Adam sinned in Paradise, if the place might haue blessed the creature, neither man nor Angell should haue fallen from their dignity. To this purpose Gregorie Nyssen disputing the question,Pilgrimage to Ierusalem for sanctification is but a superstious conceit. whether pilgrimage to Ierusalem sanctifie a man or not? answered it doth not. Many reasons he giueth, among which this is one,
                     Greg. Nissen.
                   
                  Loci mutatione ad deum non acceditur, sed

vbi locorum fueris, ad te veniet dom
                        •
                     nus, si modo tale in venerit animae tuae diuerrium vt possit in te inhabitare dominus. By the change of place men come not vnto God, but in what place soeuer thou bee God shall come vnto thee, if so be the harbour of thy soule bee such that God may dwell in it.Not warranted by the iourney of Gregorie Niss
                           •
                        n to Ierusalem.
                   And it beeing obiected vnto him, that himselfe had iournied to Ierusalem, hee answereth, and telleth

them how, and vpon what occasion, not to acquire any sanctity by so doing, but that at the will of the Emperour Theodose and vpon his charges hee went to reforme the Churches of Arabia, and thereafter composed a scisme that had entered in Ierusalems Church, but wherewithall he protests. Nec hoc itinere imminuta est, fides nostra, nec aucta. That by this iourney, neither was his faith empaired, nor augmented. For

I beleeued said he the incarnation of Christ before I saw Bethleem, and the resurrection of Christ, before the sight of the sepulchre, his ascention also before that I saw the mount of Oliues.
               To returne then,They are neerest the Lord, who are likest vnto him, & bee the contrary. this countrey farre from God, is not to be estimate by the eleuation of the Pole, or our distance from it, which way the distance of people from people are measured on earth, but by the disposition of our

harts, as they are in similitude with God: so are wee accounted farre or neere vnto the Lord, and hereby shall wee try it. Things that are farre off were they neuer so precious, and excellent, either else we see them not at all, or then they seeme farre lesse to vs then they are. The Sunne is many times more then the earth, yet doe we account it lesse then our selues. The reason is that it is farre from vs when men trauaile

so farre to the South,
                  How a man may discerne whether hee bee neere or farre frō the Lord, by two tokens. that the North pole in there sight comes neere to the earth, & at length the sight thereof is intercepted from them by the earth, it is a sure argument they are farre from it: euen so whē men esteeme the incomprehensible maiesty of God who by infinite degrees surmounts the beuty of the Sunne to bee but small in their eies, or when in their imagination they drawe down the Lord to assilate,

or compare him to any thing in earth,1 Such as are neere him, esteeme him a great God. or when in their affections the earth coms in betweene their soules and the sight of the Lord, and the loue of the earth preuailes, it is an argument such miserable soules are farre from the Lord.
               Looke then if your eies bee set to behold him; and if yee can say with the Prophet Dauid. I set the Lord alwaies in my sight,
                  
                     Psal. 16. looke how your affections account of him

Is he your light, your life, your ioy, your portion? is the delight of your soule vppon him?2 They feel his effectual vertue in themselus is againe the power of his vertue effectuall in you, that as the sunne ascending brings a florishing spring, so by it ye finde a reuiuing of your hearts to his holy loue, the dead winter, the cold season, the hard, frostie and barren heart goes away, and the soule warmed with the loue of God, beginnes to budde, to florish and bring out

fruit. Then may ye haue this comfort
                     •
                   that the Lord hath drawne neere vnto you, and ye also are become neere vnto the Lord.
               
                  Not by their feet but by affections goe men from the Lord.And this also serues to cleere the second point proposed by vs. How is it that a man goes, or commeth to the Lord, to wit, non pedibus, sed affectibus, not by feete of the body, but by affections of the soule. So this young man Egressus de paradiso bonae conscientiae,
                  
                     Ber. parab. de prod.
                   
                  per campos

licentiae, per nemora luxuriae, per paludes carnalis concupiscentiae, per fluctus secularium curarum caepit vagari. Departing out of the Paradise of a good conscience, goeth a wandring through the fields of liberty, through the woods of luxurie, through the lakes of carnall cōcupiscence, throgh the flouds of worldly cares, Not resting in one sinne, but from one falling into an other. Erranti enim nullus terminus. It is much

easier to stop the beginnings of sin, then to stay the course of it if it once breake forth.
                     Nazian. Orat.
                   
                  Sicut lapidē initio inhibe re facilius est, quā motū retorquere.
                  7 Multiplication of sinnes is like multiplicatiō of steps which at length make a long iourney. As it is lesse labour to stay a stone before it be mooued, then turne it backe againe when it is in the tumbling. Thus then goeth a man away further and further from the Lord by multiplication of his sinnes, as a man by multiplication of his steps goeth a further away from the

place wherein he was. It should therefore be our first care to beeware of the beginnings of sinne, and the next to beeware we multiply not our sinne, least by so doing we go farre from the Lord.
            
            
               And there he wasted all his goods.
               There is the fruit of his departure from his father.The fruit of a mans departure from God. A man that will forsake the Lord, and refuse to bee gouerned by him, can

neither keepe himselfe nor yet the good things which God hath giuen him. The seruice of sinne is a costly seruice, all the portion of goods thou hast, is not sufficient for it. Sinne is a profused and vnthriftie spending of al that God hath giuen thee, yea of thy body and soule also at the length. Vnto euery man God hath giuen his owne portion of gifts, of body and minde, of these also which are externall,

prophanely called by Ethniques, Fortunae bona, wilt thou abide with the Lord, and serue him, hee shall teach thee to vse his gifts,The seruice of sinne is very coastly and expensiue. to his glory and thy good; for the seruice of the Lord is easie, honorable, profitable, nothing is wasted, nothing is lost, that thou spendest in it. But if thou wilt forsake the Lord, experience shall prooue that no good thing hee hath giuen thee, will bide with thee. Thy yeares goe away

in vanity, the strength of thy body cōsumed in the way of iniquity, thy quicke ingenie, thy memory, and all the gifts of the minde are spent, without any fruit to thy selfe, or to others, for the present time, or the time to come. Thus all being wasted thou shalt in the end bee ashamed of thy selfe when thou lookest backe to thy former waies.
               
                  That which mē gather wickedly shall be scattered vainly.The word our Sauiour heere vseth, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   signifieth to scatter, there is not

long (ye see) between his gathering and his scattering in the beginning of this verse, he gathereth his portion, and in the end thereof he scatters it, that which men gather with offence of God shall not faile to be scattered ere it bee long. Carnal couetousnesse made Iudas take from the high Priest thirty peeces of siluer, the wages of iniquity, to betray Christ; but a tormenting conscience forced him shortly to cast it backe againe.

No better shall it be with them, who gather where they should not, They shall vomit their substance,
                  
                     Iob 20.15. euen as a stomacke casteth out that disdainfully which wickedly & superfluously men haue ingested into it.Though there were none but themselues to doe it. Worldlings may enlarge their desire as the bel and death which cannot bee satisfied, but against them shall the parable be taken vp,
                     Abac. 2. 
                  Ho, he that increaseth that which is not his? how long? and he that loadneth himselfe

with thicke clay. Shall they not rise vp suddenly that shall bite thee? and awake that shall stirre thee, and thou shalt bee their prey? Yea truly, though there were no Chaldean, nor Sabaean, no oppressour, no robber to doe it, thy owne hand shall scatter that which thou hast wickedly gathered.
               It is lamentable to see the vaine security of worldlings,Worldlings delight in aboundance of wealth as if their life were in it. they delight in aboundance, as if their life were in it; when they

haue, they looke neuer to want; when they die, they dispone with confidence as if their decrees were certaine, and God would not reuoke them. In their legacies they leaue their soules vnto God and their goods vnto men, as best pleaseth them. But consider not with what warrant they doe this. For as to the first,How foolish they are in making their legacies how canst thou be assured that GOD in death will receiue thy spirit: seeing thou in

thy life would neuer giue him the reasonable seruice thereof. And as to the second, how oft is it seen that God annuls the decrees concerning the distribution of their goods: that either their portion perisheth before themselues, or soone after them, and what they leaue vnto one, God disposeth it to an other, crossing them in the same thing wherthey offended him, that as they gathered not according to

Gods will, so God scatters and distributs it not according to their will.
            
            
               
                  Vers. 14
               Now when he had spent all.
               
                  After the descriptiō of his sin followes a description of mercy.Hitherto wee haue heard his sinne described, and the degrees thereof. Now followeth a description of that miserable estate whereunto his sinne carrieh him.
            
            
               
               Spent all.
               Hee sought a portion of his fathers goodes,3. sorts of goods bestovved by God vpon men. hee sought not his fathers fauour and blessing. Now all is spent. There are two sorts of goods that God distributes to men: the one I call his moueables: the other I call, the goodes of the permanent inheritance. The first sort he giues indifferently to all men: The second sort he reserues

for his own children, and there is the difference betweene the earthly and heauenportion, the one is spended by vsing, the more ye take of it, the lesse ye haue, they refresh not vs vnlesse they bee diminished in themselues, if wee be increased by them, they are empaired by vs:Spirituall goods of the best sort can not bee spent. but the goods of our heauenly inheritance are not spended by vsing, the more we vse them, the more wee are increased by them, and the more

also are they increased by vs, by frequent praier wee learne to pray more feruently, from the beginning of faith we make progresse to the fulnesse of faith, our light, our loue, our life, once begunne haue their own increasings till they come to perfection, but they can neuer be lost nor wasted by vsing. It cannot bee good for vs to rest in that which decaies by seruing vs: if we loue eternity, and seeke to be blessed for euer, let

vs weane our hearts from perishing things and make choise of that portion which endureth for euer.
            
            
               There arose a dearth.
               
                  Pleasures of sinne ends in most fearful paines. The ende of sinfull pleasures is paine, the wealth of worldlings ends in feareful want. As the image which Nabuchadnezer saw in his dreame, had an head of gold, but feet of clay: so the glorious shew of this miserable life of sinneful men concludes with

shame. The plenty which Egypt had in seuen yeares was eaten vp by the seuen yeres of famine following it. The pleasant riuer of Iorden is at length swallowed vp by the salt Sea or loach of Sodome. It shalbe executed vpon all the wicked which theatned against cursed Babel. The apples after which thy soule lusted,
                  
                     Reu. 18.14. 
                  all the fat and excellent things are departed from thee, and thou shalt finde them no more. There the wine shall drie

vp and the Figge tree shall decay,
                  
                     Ioel. 2.12. 
                  the Pomegranate, the Palme tree, and the Aple tree, all the trees of the field shall wither away from the sonnes of men. Then shall arise a dearth & fearefull famine to them, when all the obiects of their sinfull delights shal be taken from them.The present paine of the godly end in pleasures. Oh that men were wise to think vpon their end, how comfortlesse will their state bee, who because they will not comfort themselues in God shall at length

be banished from the presence of his glory, and depriued of the comfort of all his cretures. It is farre otherwise with the godly, their murning shall end in comfort. the end of their labour is rest, their light and momentany afflictions shall be swallowed vp by that eternal weight of glory, let vs neuer drinke with the wicked in the cup of their sinfull pleasures, the dregs thereof is intollerable bitternesse.
                     Psalm.
                   
                  Waters of a

full cup are wrong vnto them for the present, but want and feareful famine shall ouertake them. Not so much as a droppe of water shall be giuen them to comfort them, and let vs neuer refuse to beare the rebuke of Christ,
                  
                     Heb. 13.13 the end wherof is ioy vnspeakeable and glorious.
                  1. Pet. 1.
               
            
            
               He began to be in necessitie.
               
                  Comfort of the Creatures now blinds the vvicked that cannot they see their misery.This man was miserable before, but he felt not his misery till

now. And in him we see an image of worldlings, who albeit they be most miserable in regard they are strangers from the life of God, yet doe they not know their misery, till through the want of earthly comforts they be redacted to necessitie. So long as they enioy Gods creatures, they feele not what losse it is to want himselfe the vaine shew of the creaturs so bewitches them, that they are not touched with the

misery of their fearefull deuorcemēt from God; and this is the very cause why reprobate men ordained to wrath, who in hell shall mourne continually (where shal be weeping and gnashing of teeth,)
                  
                     Math. 22. doe vpon earth spend their daies in laughing and vaine reioieing. The reason, I say, is partly because the iudgement due to their sins is restrained from them by the patience of God, the viall of his wrath is not as yet

poured out vpon thē,But their eies shall be opened when the obiect of their pleasures shall be taken from thē. & partly, because the vse of his creatures which belongs not to them, is of his goodnesse licentiate to them, but when the obiects of these pleasures shall bee taken from them, when the earth shall refuse to beare them, and the Sunne shall no more shine vpon them, when all the creatures shal forsake them, and none of them render either comfort, or seruice to them; then shall they be in necessitie,

and then wofull misery shall be manifested to them.
               And of this,And this they may learne if they could marke it by present experience. some taste wicked men may haue out of their present experience, if they could obserue it. For in the middest of their worldly pleasures, when by eating and drinking they are filling their bellies, when the harmony of musicke delights their eares, and the company of solatious friendes refresheth them: euen then, faith Salomon,
                  
                     Pro. 14.13 
                  In laughing

their heart is sorrowfull: yet doth not the terour of an euill conscicience trouble them, vnlesse God intend it against them, as hee did against Beltazar,
                  
                     Dan. 5.6. But when company is gone, and they are solitary, when lights are put out and they left in darkenes, when Musicall instuments are silent, then conscience beginnes to speake, Nunquam enim conscientia oculatior, quā in tenebris. For conscience seeth best in darkenesse, and speaks

most lowdly in siilence, then their inward feares proceeding from her iust accusations forewarnes them of a more fearefull estate abiding them if they could consider it.
            
            
               Vers. 15.
               Then hee went and claue to a Citizen of that countrey.
               
                  They who vvill not serue the Lord shal serue a vvorse master.He refused to serue his Father, and now he is forced to serue a worse master. This is it which the Lord

threatned to his people Israel,
                  
                     Psal. 137. 
                  I will put your necke vnder the yoake of the King of Babel, And yee shall know what difference there is between my seruice and the seruice of other Kings, and Lords of the earth, and so indeed they found it, when they were caried into captiuity, and sate mourning at the riuers of Babel, they remembred what a sweete liberty they had lost, when sitting peaceably in Sion they were

wont to sing the praises of the liuing God. And let it stand for a warning to vs that we cast not off the yoke of the Lord our God: for if we refuse to serue the Lord we shall be compelled to serue others, whose wages shall bee found vngratious at the length. O quam multos dominos habet ille,
                  
                     Ambros.
                   
                  qui vnum non habet. O how many masters hath that man, who hath not God for his master.
               But now wee haue

to see who this is that here is stiled a Citizen,
                  Citizens of the country far from God, are Satan and the reprobates. the farre countrey as we heard, is the region of sinne: this Citizen represens as Ambrose expounds it. The prince of darknesse, with his cursed confederats, reprobate angels and men, they are called Citizens in the kingdome of sinne, because not onely haue they sinned, but they abide and continue in sinne, they dwell in it, and wil not come out of it. These are the two fearefull

sinnes of apostate Angels; Presumption,2. feareful sinnes of Apostate Angels. and Obstinacy, by presumption they fel, obstinacy holds them impenitent, that they cannot rise, yea they haue not so much as a desire of reconciliation, but are obdurat in a perpetuall rebellion against God, despising mercy, because they know they shall neuer obtain it, trembling at iudgement, which they knowe they cannot eschew. Therefore they are not called soiourners,

or pilgrimes in that countrey, which is farre from God, but citizens, because they make perpetuall residēce in it. A most cursed and vnhappy condition, Peccare humanum est, perseuerare in peccato diabolicum. To sinne is common to all men, to perseuere in sinne is a property of Deuils and reprobates.
               To cleare this,Two cities Ierusalem and Babel cō
                     pared together. let vs compare these two Cities and there inhabitants together, Ierusalem and Babel; for

vnder one of these two societies, is comprehended the whole masse of mankinde. Citizens in the one are all the elect of God, Citizens in the other, are the reprobate. And yet it is to be marked,Citizens of Ierusalem, are somtimes also in Babel, but trari
                        •
                      not in it. that sometimes the Citizens of Ierusalem are found in the streets of Babel, the elect for a time may walk in the way of the wicked, so Paul in the way of Idolatry, Dauid in the way of adultery, Noah in the way of drunkennesse, Lot
                  
in the way of incest; but they are in it as soiourners, not as citizens, they dwell not in Babel, but at the voice of the Lord come out of it, and are drawne home to Ierusalem.
               
               Sometime againe,
                     Babels Citizens are sometime also in Ierusalem, but tarry not in it. ye shall see many citizens of Babel walking in the streets of Ierusalem, wicked and impenitent men making a shew, as if they were religious; but their heart is not vpright before God.2. Tim. 3.5. 
                  Hauing a shew of godlinesse

they deny the power therof. They taste of the powers of the life to come,
                     Heb. 6.5. by the hearing of the word, but digest it not in their hearts by faith, their soules feed not vpon it, they are like the Corne that gowes vp in the blade, but comes neuer to the fruit, because it tooke no roote. These are not citizens in Ierusalem, but soiourners; they are carried out of it like chaffe, with euery kind of vanity, their goodnes vanisheth

like the morning dew, they are weary at length of Ierusalem,
                  2. Pet. 2.22. and goe home againe to Babel, like dogges returning to their vomit and swine to their puddle againe.
            
            
               And he sent him to his Farme to feed swine.
               In this part of the Parable is figured vnto vs,How Satan abasheth his captiues to most vile seruitude. how the seruice wherein Satan imploies his miserable captiues is vile and vnhonest. What baser imploiment can

be, then to take the sonne of a freeman borne vnto honour, and make him a swine heard? for the sow is a filthy and vnhonest beast, that likes the puddle better then the palace, and counts more of the dung then of the most precious pearles; and yet this is Satans dealing with all these wretches, that come vnder his commandement, hee waltereth them in the depth of filthy and vncleane cogitations and affections,

hee plungeth them in the stinking puddle and mire of sinne,An image thereof thereo
                        •
                      in Israels bondage vnder Pharao.
                   abusing them farre worse then Pharao did the Israelites of God; for he oppressed their bodies compelling them to worke in bricke and clay, an vnseemely seruitude indeede for so honorable a people, yet he could not detaine their mindes from sighing and crying to God for the bondage. But Satan oppresseth his captiues in such sort that they haue no

minde of God, no thought of liberty, no wearinesse of the bondage, no desire of any heauēly or excellent thing is in them, they are beastly in all their motions, affections, and actions. O fearfull exchange that a man once made to the image of God, and to rule all the creatures of God should so farre mismake himselfe, as to become a companion to the beasts, and a slaue vnto Satan.
            
            
               
               And hee would faine haue filled his belly with the huskes.
               This now is the highest degree of his miserie that hauing offered to serue in the most vile seruitude,Satan his best delicates are shadowes without substance. he cannot get meate for his seruice; yea not so much as the huskes of acornes to fill his belly withall. The word 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifieth a little horne, as also the skin or codde, or hull, within which is the

kirnell. Now so great was this mans penury, that not onely hee could not get the kirnell of any fruite whereupon he might sustaine his miserable life, but could not get so much as the huske or shell wherewith to fill his belly. By this kinde of speech the Lord will let vs see, that the best delicates which Satan hath to giue his captiues are shadows without substance, husks without kernels, burdenable, when they are eaten,

no way profitable but as to inward pleasure, solide ioy, or any thing that is truly good, Satan hath it not to giue.
               Hee is but a iugler and a false deceiuer,What a iugler and deceiuer Satan is. promising much whē hee tempts, performing nothing. O pitifull blindnesse that our soules should bee deceiued with such a seducer, and that other mens losse cannot learne vs to become wise. He promised much to Adam & Euah, Yee shall bee as

Gods. But what got they. He bewitched this prodigall childe with great hopes, but they euanished and proued vaine; and still hee abuseth the world after the same manner. Euer from the beginning hee hath prooued a lier, yet men will credit him, he is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   an alluring Serpent, and that in most miserable manner. It is true which Pisida saith of him,
                     Pisid. 
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , he allures vs to serue him for

nothing, without giuing any kinde of good vnto vs.
               For if a man shall cast his eies on the multitude,How miserably Satan intertaines his guests. what shall ye see? Doe they not dote after Satans allurements:
                     Psal. 4. like Israel doting after Ashur & Aegypt, louing lies and following vanities? Some deceiued one way, and some another, but all delighting in things that profit not. Naturalists write that the Chamelion a little spotted beast, neither eats

nor drinkes but liues on the ayre. The Ostrich eateth yron and is able to digest it. The Viper liues on venemous things. The Sow on filth, and vile vncleanesse. No better, yea, not so good as these are Satans banqueters, some hee feeds as he did Ephraim with the wind.
                  
                     Hos. 12. Some hee feeds like the Chamelion, some like the Osstrich, and some as the Viper, &c. Men vaine glorious who waxe proud in themselues for the blast of another mans breath Others, like the Ostrich whose hearts ar
                     •
                   delighted with their

treasures of siluer and gold, as if it were a portion meet for the soule of man: but they cannot digest it. They shall vomit the substance,
                  
                     Iob 20.15 
                  which they haue deuoured. Some againe are worse, who with the Viper, liue vpon hatred, enuie, maliciousnesse, louing all such things as may destroy. These also are Satans delicats which nourishe not, but rent, and consume the belly which receiues them. But most part of his miserable

guestes feede like the sow, they hanch vp all sort of vncleannesse with greedinesse they take it for food, but death is in their pot.
                  2. Ki. 4.20
               
               
                  
                     
                        Cyp. 8.2. epist.
                     
                     2. The svvetnesse of sin is sensible but the poisō secret.
                  
                  Malorum blandientium virus occultum est & arridentis nequiliae facies laeta instar veneni poculum esse videtur, quod sumitur, vbi epotaueris pernicies hausta grassatur. The poison of slartering sinne is secret, the face of it smiling, it seemes to be a cup of pleasant drinke, but when it is

drunke out it destroieth.
                     I
                           •
                        b. 20.12 
                  Wickednesse was sweet in his mouth, he sauoured it, and would not forsake it, but the gall of Aspes was in the middest of him.
               
               But this doth more augment their misery that by no seruice of Satan can they finde satisfaction to themselues,The more a man seru 
                        •
                     s the pleasures of sinne, the lesse is he satiate with thē. euen when they enioy the obiects of their sinnes, yet haue they not their desired ioy and contentmēt, He would faine haue filled his belly with the huskes, and hee

could not, saith the parable. What then? can not the hunger of sinne, begotten satisfie? No doubtlesse, no more then the graue, or the fire, or the barren wombe, giue them as ye please still they cal for more. Will couetousnesse, will concupisence say ho, it is enough? No, though thou couldst liue Methusalems daies, & hadst the strength of all bodies into one bodie, the more thou serue the pleasures of sinne, the lesse shalt

thou bee satiate by them. O miserable seruitude, wherein doe what thou wilt, an insatiable hunger still oppresseth thee. Euery wicked man by vnhappy experience shall at length prooue in himself, that which now he heares in this Prodigall.
            
            
               
                  Vers. 17.
               Then hee came to himselfe againe:
               Now followeth theThe repentance of the Prodigal. second & most comfortable part of the

Prodigall, wherein is set downe how this Prodigall sonne returneth home againe to his Father, we haue all beene like him in wandring, happy are they who are also like him in returning.A man in his sinnes is as a mad man or one out of his vvits. The word whereby his repentance is expressed is worthy obseruation, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   hee came to himselfe. What was he then before, when hee was in his sinnes? Nought else, but a man out of himselfe, out of his wits, as repentance in

the Scriptures is frequently described to bee a returning vnto God: so also a returning to our selues, returne to your minde O transgressors,
                  
                     
                        
                           •
                        sa 46.8. Gregor. M
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     l. l. 2 When he r
                        •
                     pents he comes to himselfe againe. in true repentance. Electorum corda ad 
                        •
                     eredeunt, the hearts of the elect returne to themselues, for a man going from the Lord goeth also from himselfe, if hee grieues the Lord, hee hurts himselfe in forgetting and forsaking the Lord, hee forgets and forsakes himselfe also, and is but like a

mad man, a phrentike a possessed man with vncouth furies, with vncleane spirits: hee is not (as our prouerb is) his owne man, this should waken in vs a pitty and commiseration of men walking in their sinnes, euen to pray to God for them as our Sauiour and Saint Stephen did for the persecuting Iewes. Father forgiue them,
                  
                     Lu 23 34. Act. 7.60. 
                  for they know not what they are doing. The Lord open their eies to see it.
            
            
               
               And he said:
               Before his resolution, the motiues of his resolution are set down, and these are two:The tvvo eies of a penitent sinner, the one seeth misery, the other mercy. First, the sense of his owne misery, next the hope and trust of mercy in his father. These are the two eies of a penitent sinner: one whereby he seeth his miserie, and that chaseth him out of himselfe: another whereby hee seeth Gods mercy, and that maketh him bold to

come to the Lord, hee can not taste the sweetnesse of Gods mercy, who in some measure is not first touched with the sense of his misery: indeed miserie may bee felt without mercy, but not mercy without some sense of misery: some thinke themselus 
                     ••
                  re of mercy, th
                     •
                  t were neuer humbled with the sense of misery, these are deceiued by presumption: others againe, feeles their misery and see no mercy, and these if they

abide, so fall in desperation.
               This esperance of mercy is nourished in his heart by consideration of his fathers liberall dealing,Esperance of mercy is 
                        •
                     orished by examples of mercy shewed vnto others. euen towards hired seruants, which maketh him confident to looke for goodnesse toward himselfe that was his sonne: How many hired seruants in my fathers house hath bread enough. This house of his father represents the Church of God,
                  
                     Eph. 3. this is The family of God, distinguished

in two houses: in the vpper house there are none but the sonnes of God, in the lower house, besides sonnes, there are also hired seruants, which shall not abid in the house foreuer and euer, vnto these the Lord is good and gratious, how much more vnto his owne children. He that maketh his Sunne to shine,
                  
                     Math. 6. 
                  and the raine to fall on the vniust, he that cloatheth the Lillies of the field, and feedeth the foules of heauen, will he not be

fauourable to his owne.Seeing the Lord is good to his seruants in generall, much more vvill hee bee good to his children. 
                  Are not ye much better then they? But to goe further, the mercy of God which hee sheweth to his children, is not onely to comfort them who receiue it, but to conuert and confirme others also. It is true of all his mercies, which Saint Paul speakes of the mercies shewed himselfe: they are exemplar mercies, euery time that Gods shewes mercie, there is a boxe of precious ointment powred out

not only for the good of him vpon whom it descends, but that the sweet smell thereof may allure others to come and get the like.
                     C
                           •
                        m. 1.2. In all the Gospel 
                        •
                     e reade not of one that went cō
                     fortl
                        •
                     sse from Christ. 
                  Thy name is as an ointment powred out, therefore the Virgins loue thee. Let vs goe then to the Poole of Bethesda there wee shall see a great multitude of all sorts of diseased men, made whol by the waters of Siloā,
                  
                     Io
                           •
                        . 5.1. all of thē allure vs, & assure vs, that if wee will doe as they haue done, wee shall be healed as they

were, whatsoeuer be our di
                        •
                     ease. Looke all the hystory of the Gospel we shall not finde one touched with a sense of their misery that came to Christ, and went away comfortlesse. The lepers, the lunaticks, the Adulterers, the Demoniacks, the Paraliticks, the Publicans, and all sort of miserable sinners, stand vp as a clowde of witnesses to confirme thee, that if thou wilt also returne to the Lord and seeke mercy, thou shalt finde it.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
                  Crosses chase men to the Lord.The other motiue of his repentance, is the sense of his present miserie, in these words, And I die of hunger. It is the wisdome of God by crosses to correct our corruption,
                  
                     Es
                           •
                        . 28.19 
                  feare or trouble shall make you to vnderstand the hearing. What they cannot learne by the word, he causeth them to learne it by affliction. When all these things shall come vpon thee,
                  
                     Deu
                           •
                        . 30.1 
                  then shalt thou turne in thy heart and returne vnto the Lord thy God.
                  
It is a great blessing of God,Happy thing where crosses become corrections. when his crosses beecome corrections. Corrigunt, maketh a man better then he was, and chaseth him homeward towards the Lord. It is needfull, it is profitable for vs to drinke of this cup. I neuer knew any that learned true religion without some grieuous affliction, inward or outward. A sore famine sent the Lord vpon Canaan in the daies of Iacob,
                  
                     Gen. 41. was it because hee loued

not Iacob?
                     Exod. 1. No, but that he might chase him to Ioseph. Sore affliction laid he on Iacobs children in Aegypt by the hands of Phar
                        ••
                     , was it because he loued them not? No, but that he might make them weary of Aegypt, and draw thē to Canaan againe. Manasse his bonds, M
                        •
                     riam her leprosse, Pauls blindnesse, the Prodigall his pouerty, among many moe may witnesse what great good GOD workes by his crosse.

in the hearts of his children.
               Therefore the Prophet Dauid said,
                     Psal. 119. 
                  It was good for me that I haue beene afflicted. And good were it for impenitent wanton ones that God would make them beare the yoake in their youth,
                  
                     Ier. Lam. 3.27. and would doe to them as hee promiseth to doe to his Church, that is by his rods bring her home againe to himselfe. I will stop thy way with thorn
                        •
                     s,
                  
                     Hos 2.6.7 
                  and make an hedge that she shall not finde her pathes, though

shee follow after her louers,
                  The felicitie of men prospering in their sins is great infelicitie. 
                  yet shall shee not come neere them, then shee shall say, I will goe and returne to my first husband for I was better then, then now. The felicity of men prospering in their sinnes is great infelicity.
                     Aug.
                   
                  Nihil infaelicius faelicitate peccantium: therefore said Nazianzen peccatum fructum esse stultae sanitatis.
                  
                     Nazian. orat. 27. d
                        •
                      
                     Pauper.
                   That sinne is the fruit of vnhappy health, and that holy sicknes is to be preferred vnto it, & the same is to be thought of

all other crosses, being sanctified to our vse.
            
            
               
                  Vers. 18.
               I will rise and goe to my Father, and I will say.
               These being his motiues;As sinne is a falling so repentance is a rising. now followeth his resolution, wherein, first wee see that true repentauce is a rising, we fall by sinne, we rise. by repentance, in the godly there is a death, and a resurrection, and an ascention, euen

while they liue in the body,Repentance is a 
                        〈◊〉
                      death 
                        〈◊〉
                      resurrection and first ascention by the first death sinne dies in them. By the first resurrection they arise from their sinnes, by the first ascention they go vp after their Lord, though they walke vpon earth. They haue their conuersation in heauen,
                  
                     Phil. 3.20. 
                  and their affections are set on these things which are aboue at the right hand of God.
                  
                     Col. 3. 
                  Blessed is he that hath part in the first resurrection, for vpon him the second death shal haue no power.
                  
If the soule, while it is in the body rise not out of the graue of sinne, sure it is the body shall neuer rise out of the earth, but to shame and confusion. Awake therefore,
                  
                     Eph. 5.14. 
                  thou that sleepest, and stand vp from the dead, and Christ shall giue thee light.
               
               But we must knowRepentance is a worke of diuine power. that this rising of a sinner from his sinnes is not a worke that can be wrought by the power of nature, the second resurrection will bee

wroght by the mighty power of God, and much more the first,
                     Ber. annūt. Mariae serm. 1. It innocent Adam stood not, how shall sinful Adam rise of himselfe. 
                  Si stare perse non potuit humana natura adhuc integra, multo minus per se resurgere potestiam corrupta. Euery man by nature is a vessell replenished, & loadned heauy with sinne, not vnlike that Ephah wherein wickednesse was couered,
                     Zach. 5.6. and prest downe with a talent of lead, how shall he thē rise if grace come not from aboue to remoue the talent: he cannot so

much as lift vp the head, no more then that man diseased of the Palsey till the Sauiour come and giue the command, and with the command, grace.
                     Iob. 5.8. The work of repentance no lesse miraculous then the raising of the dead. 
                  Arise and walke. Lazarus was dead but foure daies, he stunke already, but should haue lien still till hee had rotted, if Iesus had not stood ouer his graue, and called vpon him, and no better is it with vs, we are dead in sinne, till the Lord quicken vs. Vtinam ad hoc monumentum

meum digneris accedere domine Iesu voca me de monumento huius corporis,
                  
                     Ambr. de paenit. li. 2. cap 7. 
                  si illachrymaueris prome, saluus ero. It was the desire of Ambrose alluding to Lazarus his resurrection, & shold be ours also: Oh Lord Iesus that thou wouldest draw neere this sepulchre of mine, that thou wouldest raise me out of the graue of this body, and command me to come out, that my cogitations and affections he not inclosed

in darkenesse, but I may see thy light, and being set at liberty may walke after thee.
            
            
               And goe to my father.
               He sinned by going from his father,Penitent men keep a course plaine contrarie to that which they kept while they walked in their sin. when he repents he returnes to his father againe, this repentance hath a course plaine contrary to that, which men kept, while they walked in their sinnes. So Chrysostome alluding to the doings of wise men, who went home an other way,

then the way they came to the field: obserues it in al penitent men, they come home to the Lord an other way then they went from him. Hast thou gone from the Lord by the way of anger, or hatred, returne againe by the way of meekenesse, and loue. Hast thou sinned by intemperance, amend by abstinence. Wentst thou astray by the way of concupiscence, returne by continence. Hast thou sinned by

couetousnesse, taking from thy neighbour what thou shouldest not, make restitution with Zaccheus.
                  
                     Luk. 19.8 This is that effect of repentance, which Saint Paul calleth reuenge,
                  2. Cor. 7.11 When a man grieued in himselfe, for that hee hath grieued the Lord, resolues to bee reuenged on his sins, by following a course plaine contrary vnto them.
               Againe,No rest for a sinner till he returne to the Lord. we see here, goe a sinner where he will, he can neuer find rest and contentment

till he come home to God his heauenly Father. Seeke it as thou wilt in the creature thou shalt neuer find it. God made all his creatures for man, but man he made for himselfe, and he is content, all that is his bee thine prouiding thou wilt be his. All things are yours,
                  1. Cor. 3. 22. 
                  things present and things to come, and yee are Christs, and Christ is Gods. God calleth vppon vs to come to himselfe. My Son giue me thine heart. Come vnto me,
                  
                     Math. 11. 
                  I will refresh

you.
                  Iiuery creature in their kind sends vs to the creator. Psal. 4. And euery creature in their kinde sends man backe vnto the Lord, this is their voice, Why wander yee in vanity. Why follow ye after lies: for your sinnes we our selues are subiect to vanity,
                  
                     Rom. 8. seeke not your good in vs, seeke it in him that made vs, by your restitution to his fauour, Wee looke for deliuerance from this bondage of corruption,
                  
                     Rom. 8.21 
                  in to the glorious liberty of the Sonnes of God. By your going a whoring after vs yee may

increase bondage, and ours also but cannot procure to your selfe wished contentment. All that euer tasted the pleasure of the creature before vs,All that euer haue sought pleasure in the creture witnesseth to vs that it a vame thing to doe so. witnesse the same vnto vs. But alas, so foolish is man that hee dreames of a possibilitie to finde contentment for himselfe, wher neuer one could find it before him, he regards not the testimony of others; hee will not be taught of any, till experience the the Schoolemaster

of fooles teach him, and then though hee were ten times more wise and wealthie then euer Salomon was, and would lay downe his head and his heart to seeke desired comfort in the creature, yet shall hee be forced to acknowledge, that All the labour vnder the Sunne is but vanity and vexation of Spirit:
                     Eccles. 1. there is a short abridgement of our life.
                     Iob. Eccles. 64. 
                  Man commeth into vanity and goeth into darkenesse: it is no better if we doe no

more but follow the course of nature: let vs therefore go aboue the Sunne, seeke rest, ioy, and contentment in our God in whom onely it is to bee found.
            
            
               And I will say:
               
                  Both vertues and vices goe together in bands. When hee was in the way of his sinnes, he went from one sin to another, till hee came ad profunaum, to the deepth of sinne. Now when hee comes to the way of repentance:

repentance: yee see from one grace hee proceeds and steppes forward to an other;As 
                        •
                     irtues ioyn
                        •
                     , one w
                        •
                     th another among the
                        •
                     dues, So vices. for both vertues and vices haue their owne fellowship. Vices are linked together like the links of a chaine, any one of them preuailing ouer a miserable man deliuers him to another. Ope vicaria fugitiuum seruum vitia ret nent. Thus is hee carried as a capt
                     •
                  ue from hand to hand in that cursed fellowship, till hee come to their common

master the prince of darkenesse. Vertues also and graces haue their owne society, and a man comming in amongst them is sent from one of them to an other, till he be deliuered into the hands of their Lord and master Iesus Christ; for no vertue nor vice is solitary, but haue euer some of their owne kind in company with them.They who seek from the LORD should offer vnto him.
               
               As he resolueth to rise and returne to his father: so hee forethinkes

what to say, when he comes teaching vs not to appeare before the Lord without reuerend preparation. Resolue what thou hast to say, what to seeke, what to offer before thou come to him. If thou seeke and haue nothing to offer, it is a token thou seekest thy selfe and not the Lord. If thou offer other things to the Lord, but not thy selfe,
                     Eccl. 4 17. thou offerest The sacrifice of sooles, for it is thy selfe the Lord

doth seeke, and he offereth himselfe to thee againe, if thou seeke anything from him, and offer not thy selfe vnto him, thou shalt lose thy selfe, thou shalt not obtaine what thon seekest, neither yet shalt thou enioy him.
               
                  Two sacrifices which this penitent prod
                        •
                     g
                        •
                     ll offieth to the Lord.This Prodigall prepares a twofold sacrifice: first the sacrifice of confession of his sinnes, doubtlesse from a heart truly penitent.
                     Psal. 51. 
                  The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit a broken heart the

Lord despiseth not. Next, the sacrifice of oblation of himselfe, he offereth his seruice vnto the Lord. Make me as one of thy seruants.
               
               
                  The carelesnesse of professors in this age whē they appeare before God, reproned. But in this the carelesse negligence of men of this age is exceeding great, they pray, but without preparation, neither considering themselues how they are, as Abraham said,
                     Gen. 19. but dust and ashes: Yea, viler then the earth, in asmuch as they are vncleane, through

their sinnes, neither yet, what a great maiesty the Lord is, before whom they appeare: they forethink not what they haue to seeke, neither prouide they a sacrifice to offer, they enter into Gods house, as if it were a priuate house, forgetting Salomons precept.
                     Eccl. 4.17. 
                  Take heede vnto thy feete when thou entrest into the house of God. The Courts of the Lord, and a common causey are a like vnto them, yea euen vpon

most solemne daies, neither are they sanctified to offer praier, praise, seruice, which God craues, neither yet are they ready to receiue mercy, and peace which God offers; they come without preparation, they sit without sense or deuotion, they goe away without answer or edification. But as those beasts which entred vncleane into the Arke, went out vncleane: so come they to the house of GOD vnpenitent,

and goeth out vnpenitent.
               
                  Such as will not confesse their sins are Satans Secretaries.Some will not confesse their sinnes at al, but hide them as Achan did the accursed thing, vnder the earth in his tent: these may be called Satans Secretaries, by so doing they deminish not the knowledge of God, but debarre themselues from the mercy of God, while they seeke to Conceale the iniquity of their bosome as Adam did, they doe but reueale their own shame, and

hasten the declaration of Gods iudgement vpon them.
                     Pro. 29.13 
                  Hee that hideth his sins shall not prosper.
                  
                     Ier. 2.35. 
                  Behold I will enter in iudgement with thee, because thou saiest,
                  Cousession of sin without amendment, is professiō. 
                  I haue not sinned. Others againe, confesse their sinnes, but yet continue in their sins, not like this Prodigal, I will rise and say I haue sinned: these men will say, they haue sinned, but will not rise out of their sinnes, such a confession is but a profession of sinne, which will neuer obtaine

mercy, it may wel increase guilt, and draw on the greater damnation.
            
            
               I haue sinned against heauen, and before thee.
               Penitent sinners illuminate with the light of faith,How the godly amplifie their sins. amplifie their sinnes two manner of waies: First, that their sinnes are done against God: next, that they are done before GOD. Dauid in his confession,
                     Psal 51. as likewise the

Prodigall here ioines, both these two together.Euery sin is against God, but not done in the sight of God, in respect of the committer. Euery sinne is against God, but euery sin is not done in the sight of God (I meane in respect of the sinner,) for there are many that sinne, and yet know not that they sinne as Turks in their adultery, Pagans in Idolatry, simple Papists in their cruelty, when they are persecuting sincere worshippers, they thinke they are doing good seruice vnto God. But such

as haue the light shining vnto them, who knowe the will of GOD, and yet will doe against it, they sinne not onely against God, but before him and in his sight. And this shews the greatnesse of sins,The greatnesse of sinne committed now vnder this clere light of the Gospel. which are now committed vnder this cleare light of the Euangell, they are not done in the night but in the day; not onely against the Lord, but before him, vnder his eye, and in his very face

hee is a bold theese that will steale, and the Iudge looking vpon him, hee is a shamelesse Adulterer that seeketh not the twilight, but will worke villeny in the noone tide of the day, and men beholding him. He that knoweth his Masters wil and doth it not, shall haue double stripes;, saith our Sauiour. What then? hee that doth not onely leaue his Masters will vndone, though he know it, but also doth directly

against him, shall he not haue triple stroakes? And which is worst of all, hee that transgresseth his masters will, and his Master looking vpon him, are not quadruple plagues due vnto him. From such high high impiety, and proud rebellion, the Lord deliuer vs.
            
            
               
               
                  Verse 19.
               And am no more worthy to be called thy Sonne make me as one of thy hired seruants.
               When hee had the place and honour of a Sonne he set lightly by it,The worth of Gods benefits is not knowen till we want them. he abused it, now is hee faine to seeke the roome of a seruant. The worth and value of Gods benefites are not knowne till men want them, and be touched with a sense of their misery, then the least

of his mercies are esteemed great mercies euen to be a Doore keeper in Gods house, or to haue the place of a seruant in it,
                     Math. 25. or to haue the benefit of little dogs to eate of the crumbes of bread that fall from the table of his children: so thought Dauid, so this Prodigall, so the Cananitish woman, whē they were humbled It is greater wisdome to ponder the goodnesse of God in time, that we may esteeme of it, and be thankeful

to God for it, hee made vs his sonnes by the first creation, wee become his enemies by our transgression, we lost all the holinesse of our nature, all the happinesse of our state by our own folly. If we had died in that estate wee should haue accounted the vse of water a great benefit: yea, greater then we doe the abundance of all his creatures, which now of his goodnesse, hee communicates. But the Lord had

mercy vpon vs,Miserable is man for that hee lost his first grace, more miserable, if now he despise grace offered againe. Ioh. 15.15 1. Ioh. 3. and hath restored vs, not to the place of seruants onely. Hencefoorth I call you not seruants, but to the dignity of sinnes. Behold what a loue the Father hath shewed, you that yee should bee called his sonnes: so that now we are aduanced to a greater, surer, and more enduring honour, then that which we had by our first creation, shall we not feare to hazard it againe by walking after our sinnes, if wee

doe so, the second errour shall bee worse then the first: Miserable is man already by his first fall, more miserable shall he be by the second, if hee despise the grace of the Gospell, and trample the bloud of the new Couenant vnder his feet,
                  
                     Heb. 10.27 
                  what remaines but a fearefull looking for of iudgement, and violent fire. Let vs take heed in time, and learne to be wise by this Prodigall child, when we heare him glad to get the roome of a seruant,

shall not we reioice in our God, who hath giuen vs the place of his children. Lord make vs thankfull for it, and giue vs grace to Walke worthy our heauenly vocation,
                  
                     Eph. 4.1. that in our life we may expresse our vertue,
                     Col. 1.13. who hath Translated vs out of darkenesse into maruellous light.
               
            
            
               VERSE 20.
               
                  The godlie as they are blessed with grace to begin, so also to perseuere.As hee concluded before, so he performeth now. In the

godly, resolutions are first, but actions follow. In the wicked sometimes there are resolutions to amend their liues, but no execution followeth, their motions of repentance are like to the Morning dew, or the false conception of a woman, which commeth neuer to the birth: but the Lord blesseth his own children, both with the first and latter raine; that is grace to beginne well, and grace to perseuere

vnto the ende.
            
            
               And when hee was yet a farre off.
               
                  A i
                        •
                     isull meeting between a mercifull God and a miserable sinnerNow followeth the last part of this Pararable: figuring vnto vs how gratious the Lord is, how ready to shew mercy to poore sinners, whensoeuer they repent of their sinnes, and returne vnto him. Here then is a ioyfull meeting betweene a mercifull God, and a miserable sinner. Blessed is the soule (saith

                  Bernard) wherein mercy & truth meet together and euery one of them kisses one another: Here is truth in the prodigal child, no guile,
                  
                     Psal. 32 no deceit in him, simply and sincerely hee confesseth his sinne, and the Lord who loueth truth in the inward affections, meets him with mercy.How far the louing affection of God tovvards vs, exceedeth ours towards him.
               
               But howsoeuer these two meet together, yet you see there is no comparison betweene them in the measure of their affections,

the one would fainer shew mercy, then the other would haue it, the childe is not so willing to returne as the father is ioyfull to receiue. He ariseth, and is comming, but the father seeth him a farre off, and runnes, he falleth on his necke and kisseth him. Non Pari vbertate s
                        •
                     uune,
                        Ber. in Cāt. Serm. 8. amans, & amor, sponsus & spon
                        •
                     a; creator; & creatura; non magis quam sitiens, & fons. As there is great difference betweene the

flowing of the Ocean and the flowing of a little riuer:No lesse then theflowing of the 
                        •
                      ceedes cean, exthe running of a riuer. and as there is great oddes betweene that which the thirsty man drinkes, and that which the fountaine hath to giue him: so is there betweene the creature louing GOD, and GOD who is loue it selfe. What then? shal we not loue him, because we cannot equal him in loue? shal wee not goe to him, because we cannot go so fast as he commeth

to vs. No, no, Nam etsi minus diligit creatura, quia minor est,
                  
                     Ibid.
                   
                  tamen si tota diligis, nihil deest vbi totum est. For albeit the loue of the creature bee lesse, because it selfe is lesse: yet if wee loue him with our whole hearts, nothing is lacking where the whole is.
               
                  The very beginning of our conuersiō is acceptable to the Lord.And most comfortable is it that hee saith, when hee was yet a farre off, he had compassion vpon h
                     •
                  m, he had not yet come, he had fallen

downe, he had not confessed, and yet the Father sheweth mercy vpon him. See then how the very first motions of repentance, if they bee vnfeined, euen the beginnings of our conuersion, if they be from the heart are acceptable to GOD, He bruseth not the brused reed,
                        Esa 42 3 M
                              •
                           . 12.20. hee quencheth not the smoaking flaxe. Though our repentance be but in a beginning, yet if it bee true, God will meete it with mercy, there

is the nature of Gods compassions.
                     Dan. 9. In the beginning of Daniel his supplication God sent him an answere, and at the beginning of our turnings to God,
                     Esa. 65.1. God turnes vnto vs. I haue been sound of them that sought mee not saith the Lord, will he then hide his face from them that seeke him.
                     Rom. 5.9.10. 
                  If when we were sinners, Christ died for vs, much more beeing now iustified by his bloud: shall wee bee saued from wrath through him, and if when wee

were enemies, wee were reconciled to God: much more beeing reconciled, we shall bee saued by his life. If he ranne to this childe when he was a farre off, will he not embrace his children that are come neere vnto him.
               
                  Non persuadet nudo verbo,
                  
                     B
                           •
                        sil. de Paenit.
                   
                  sed & exemplo. Hee will assure vs of mercy, not by his naked word onely, but by example also.
                     Ier. 7.8. 
                  I wil speake against a Nation to destroy it, but if this Nation turne from their wickednesse, I will repent

of the plague that I thought to bring vpon them.
                  The Lord perswads vs of mercy. What can bee more cleare, will we turne from our sinnes God will turne from his iudgements.1 By his word. Neither is there any place here to speake of the greatnesse of our sins, as though they were not curable by his mercies.
                     Esa. 1.28. 
                  Though your sinnes were as Crimson they shall be made white as snow, though they were red like Scarlet, they shall bee made as woll. Howsoeuer thou haue done them, and

made them many and great, and they are double dipped: wilt thou repent, the strength of his mercy shall vndoe them, shall change them, and make them,2 By his worke. as if they had neuer beene done. And if yet thou beleeue him not whē he speakes, at least beleeue him when hee sweares.
                     Ezech. 33.11. 
                  As I liue, saith the Lord, I desire not the death of a sinner, but that he should turne and liue.
                  
                     Basil. Ibid
                   
                  Estne Deus cum iur at indignus cui credatur? Is not the Lord

when he sweares worthy to bee credited. But:3 By the example of his mercy shevved to others. if neither his word, nor his oath can mooue thee, yet looke to his workes, and for them beleeue his word. Were not the Niuiuites spared when they repented. Was not Achab spared when hee was humbled. Who euer turned to the Lord, and found not the Lord turning to him. When the Leaper cried, If thou wilt thou canst make mee cleane: The Lord Iesus

answered, I will, be thou cleane.
                  
                     Math. 8. When the Centurion besought him to come to his house, and heale his seruant.
                     Luk. 7. Iesus answered I wil come and heale him. There is a cloud of witnesses, all prouing this one point. Quidenim? forte peccasti in saeculo nunquid amplius Paulo?
                     Bern. in festo Pet. & Paul.
                   
                  Quod si in ipsa religione, nunquid plus Petro. For why? hast thou sinned before thy calling, so did Saint Peter, and though thy sinnes were greater then

theirs, yet are they not so great as his mercy, who hath promised to pardon. Thus then in this Prodigall child, haue we not onely mercy shewed to himselfe, but exemplar mercy, proposed to all such, as repenting of their sinnes returne vnto him.
            
            
               His Father saw him.
               Albeit this be
                     •
                   put heere in the last roome, yet is it to be referred to the first

time of his conuersion. The Lord looked vpon him as he looked to Peter, after he had denied him, hee made him to goe out and weepe bitterly for his sinnes; grace was sent with the looke. This is the looke of Gods face, that Dauid praies for Looke vpon me and bee mercifull vnto mee,
                  
                     Psa. 25.15 
                  as thou doest vnto those that feare thy name. And it is this looke that brought home againe the Prodigall childe, for as the Image

which the glasse represents, lifts not vp the eies till hee that lookes into it lift vp his eies first: So man who is the Image of God, cannot lift vp his eies vnto heauen till God first looke down with the eies of mercy vpon him. And therefore Bernard expounding this Parable of the forlorn
                     •
                   Sonne, hauing declared the depth of the misery wherein to hee had falle
                     •
                   by falling from his father. Hee describes

the beginning and progresse of his restitution and home comming vnto the Lord, for so saith hee Et vbi nunc est pater ille,
                  
                     Bern. parabol. de filio Regis.
                   
                  potentissimus, dulcissimus, & liberalissimus, nunquid potest obliui
                        •
                     ci filium vterisui? Absit, absit. And where now is the most powerful, sweete, and liberall father, can hee forget his childe, the fruit of his wombe? No, no, Non obliuiscitur, ed miseretur, dolet & conqueritur de absentia & perditione silij sui.
                  
He forgets not, but hee hath compassion, he mourneth and lamenteth for the want and losse of his sonne: yea, he sends out his seruants to seeke him. The first seruant, is Feare, which following and finding the Kings sonne in most miserable case, beates him, and prickes him with terrors 
                     ••
                   chase him to his 
                     •
                  ather. But the second seruant, Hope, comming foorth to seeke him, findes him rather hurt, then helped by

feare, cast downe, not raised vp: therefore hope puts her hand louingly vnder his head, and raiseth him out of despaire; it wipes away the dung from his eies, & then beginnes to see, O how many hired seruants in my fathers house haue bread enough, and I die for hunger. Arise, saith Hope, Goe home to thy Father, I haue brought thee heere, The horse of desire. Thus is he no sooner mounted vppon the Horse of desire, but

incontinent, wisdome cometh with the bridle of discretion. Goe not, saith he, too fast, lest the Kings Sonne fall into the hands of his enemies, hold you in the high way, for the enemies are not in the path way, but in the by rodes lurking in ambushment. Then came in the valien
                     •
                   warriour Fortititude, and he drawing out the sword of gladnesse and ioy, be not troubled, saith he, they are moe with vs then with them.

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
are signified by these but the riches of Gods manifold mercies, whereby he supplies all our wants, fulfilleth all our necessities, for their confimation in the state of grace, that once are conuerted to it. And it is to be noted, that all these good things are taken out of our fathers treasure, they are giuen vs freely, we haue them not of our selues. The third perfiting grace is figured here that being taken in into his Fathers

house, he is set downe to a banquet, they are meery together, repesenting the mutuall ioy, that is betweene God and his children, the Lord reioicing in the conuersion of a sinner, and the sinner reioycing in the saluation of his God.
               See what a difference is here between his former estate whē he went from his father, and the estate whereunto hee is aduanced now after his returning. How farre is his satisfaction aboue

his desire, hee sought but the roome of a seruant, and he is honoured with the dignity of a sonne; the mourning weede is taken from him and he is made to reioice, in steed of his former scarsity, wealth, and abundance of al good things is giuen vnto him. As men see it in the Parable, so is it to be wished, they wold proue it in the practise. If they would forsake the pleasures of sinne, and come and taste how graciou
                        •
                     
                     
the Lord is, they should see the one are but huskes of Acornes, meeter for beasts then for men, and are no way to bee ma
                     •
                  ched with the delicates of GOD, whereby he refresheth his children.
               The Lord worke this change in vs, that as we haue wandred with this Prodigall, we may repent and returne with him, and the Lord who hath giuen vs the beginning of conuersion, confirme vs more
               
            
         
      
   