
      
         
            
            
            THE INTERPRETER: OR BOOKE CONTAINING the Signification of Words: Wherein is ſet foorth the true meaning of all, or the moſt part of ſuch Words and Termes, as are mentioned in the Lawe VVriters, or Statutes of this victorious and renowned Kingdome, requiring any Expoſition or Interpretation.
            
            A Worke not onely profitable, but neceſſary for ſuch as deſire throughly to be inſtructed in the knowledge of our Lawes, Statutes, or other Antiquities.
            Collected by IOHN COWELL Doctor, and the Kings Maieſties Profeſſour of the Ciuill Law in the Vniuerſitie of Cambridge.
            
            
               In Legum obſcuritate captio.
            
            
               HINC LVCEM ET POCVLA SACRA 
               ALMA MATER CANTABRIGA
               printer's or publisher's device
            
            AT CAMBRIDGE Printed by IOHN LEGATE. Anno 1607.
         
         
            
            
               
                  Collegium Ieſu Cantabrigienſe 1700
               
            
         
         
            
            
               To the moſt reuerend Father in God, his eſpeciall good Lord, the Lord Archbiſhop of Canterburie, Primate and Metropolitan of all England, and one of his Malesties most Honourable Priuy Councell.
            
               AFTER long deliberation, I hardly induced my ſelfe to craue your gracious protection toward this ſimple worke: valewing it at ſo lowe a price, as I thinke it hardly woorth the reſpect of any graue man, much leſſe the fauourable aſpect of ſo honorable a perſonage. Yet the remembrance of thoſe your fatherly prouocations, whereby; at my comming to your Grace from the Vniuerſitie, you firſt put me vpon theſe ſtudies, at the laſt by a kind of neceſſitie inforced me to this attempt: becauſe I could not ſee how well to auoide it, but by aduenturing the hatefull note of vnthankfulneſſe. For I cannot without diſſimulation, but confeſſe my ſelfe perſwaded, that this poore Pamphlet may proue profitable to the young Students of both Lawes, to whoſe aduancement that way, I haue of late addicted mine indeuours: elſe were I more then madde to offer it to the world: and to offer it without mention of him, that by occaſioning of this good, more or leſſe, deſerueth the prime thankes, were to proue my ſelfe vnworthie of ſo graue advice.
            And therefore howſoeuer I accompt this too much boldneſſe in reſpect of the ſubiect yet could I be exceedingly glad, it might pleaſe your Grace to aſcribe mine intention to the integrity of my duty. For he that meaneth truly wel, & cannot perform much: muſt

needes reioyce at the good acceptance of that litle which he 
                  •
               erformeth.
            All I craue for 
                  〈◊〉
                at your Graces hands, is patience and pardon for this enterpriſe, with the continuance of thoſe your many fauours, that hitherto to inygreat comfort I haue enioyed. And ſo my long obſeruation of your iudicious diſpoſition, hauing caught me, what ſmall delight you take in affected complements and verball commendation, without more words, in all true humblenes, I beſeech the Almighty long to continue your Grace in health and proſpetitie, to his glorie, and the good of his Church.
            
               Your Graces at all Commaundment,
IO. COWELL.
            
         
         
            
            To the Readers.
            
               GENTLE Readers, I heere offer my ſelfe to your cenſures, vvith no other deſire, then by you to be admoniſhed of my faults. For though I doe profeſſe the amplifying of their vvorkes, that haue gone before me in this kinde, and haue both gathered at home, and brought from abroade ſome ornaments for the better embelliſhing of our Engliſh lavves: yet am I neither ſo vaine, as to denie mine imperfections, nor ſo paſsionate, as to be offended at your charitable reformation. Nay, my true ende is the advauncement of knovvledge; and therefore haue I publiſhed this poore vvorke, not onely to impart the good thereof to thoſe young ones that vvant it: but alſo to dravve from the learned the ſupply of my defects: and ſo by degrees, if not my ſelfe to finiſh this modell, yet at the least, by the heate of emulation to incenſe ſome skilfuller architect thereunto. Yea, I ſhall thinke my paines ſufficiently recompenſed, if they may be found but vvorthy to ſtirre vp one learned man to amend mine errours.
            The Ciuilians of other nations, haue by their mutuall induſtries raiſed this 
                  〈◊〉
                of worke in their profeſsion, to an inexpected excellencie. I haue ſeene many of them that haue beſtowed very profitable and commendable paines therin and laſtly one Caluinus a Doctor of Heidelberge, like a laborious Bee, hath gathered from all the former, the beſt iuyce of their flowers, and made vp a hiue full of delectable honie. And by this example would I gladly incite the le arned in our common lawes and antiquities of England, yet to lend their aduice to the gayning of ſome comfortable lights & proſpects toward the beautifying of this auncient palace, that hitherto hath bene accoumpted (howſoeuer ſubſtantiall) yet but darke and melancholy.
            Whoſoeuer will charge theſe my trauiles with many 
                  〈…〉
               
               ſights,

he ſhall neede no ſolemne paines to prooue them. For I will eaſily confeſſe them. And, vpon my view taken of this booke ſithence the impreſsion, I dare aſſure them that ſhall obſerue moſt faults therein, that I by gleaning after him, will gather as many omitted by him, as he ſhall ſhew committed by me. But I learned long ſithence out of famous Tullie; that as no mans errours ought to be folowed, becauſe he ſayeth ſome things well: ſo that which a man ſaith well, is not to be reiected, becauſe he hath ſome errours. No man, no booke is voide of imperfections. And therefore reprehend who will, in Gods name: that is, with ſvveetnes, and vvithout reproche. So ſhall he reape hartie thankes at my hands: and by true imitation of the most iudicious that euer vvrote, more ſoundly helpe on this pointe of learning to perfection in a fevve monethes, then I by toſsing and tumbling my bookes at home, could poſsibly haue done in many yeares. Experience hath taught me this in mine Institutes lately ſet forth: by publiſhing vvhereof I haue gained the iudicious obſeruations of diuers learned gentlemen vpon them, vvhich by keeping them priuate I could neuer haue procured. By vvhich meanes I hope one day to commend them to you againe in a more exact puritie, and ſo leaue them to future times for ſuch acceptance, as it ſhall pleaſe God to giue them.
            
               I haue in ſome tovvardnes a tract (de regulis iuris) vvherein my intent is, by collating the caſes of both lavves, to ſhevve, that they both be raiſed of one foundation, and differ more in language and termes then in ſubſtance, and therefore vvere they reduced to one methode (as they eaſily might) to be attained (in a maner) vvith all one paines. But my time imparted to theſe ſtudies, being but ſtolne from mine emploiments of greater neceſsitie, I cannot make the haſt I deſire, or perhaps that the diſcourſe may deſerue. VVherefore vntill my leiſure may ſerue to performe that, I intreate you louingly to accept this.
            One thing I haue done in this booke, vvhereof, becauſe it may ſeeme ſtraunge to ſome, I thinke to yeld my reaſon: and that is the inſerting not onely of vvords belonging to the art of the lavve, but

of any other alſo, that I thought obſcure, of vvhat ſort ſoeuer; as Fiſh, Cloth, Spices, Drugs, Furres, and ſuch like. For in this I follovv the example of our Ciuilians, that haue thought it their part to expound any thing they could meete with in their vvalke. And in deede a Lavvyer profeſſeth true Philoſophy, and therefore ſhould not be ignorant (if it vvere poſsible) of either beaſtes, foules, or creeping things, nor of the trees from the Cedar in Lebanon, to the Hyſſop that ſpringeth out of the vvall. And therefore, if I haue either omitted any hard vvord vvithin my circuit, or ſet it dovvne not expounded; I giue you good leaue to impute the one to my negligence, the other to mine ignorance: and ſo cōmend theſe my paines to your beſt profit, and you vnto God.
            
               
                  Nouember. 3. 1607.
               
               IO. COVVELL.
            
         
         
            
            Theſe faults I haue noted (according to the words alphabetically) which of neceſſitie require emendation.
            IN the word Rawnge, for Pouralleeſes, read Pourallees. In the word Reaſonable ayde, reade Claimeth of his tenents, houlding &c. For the word Remittere, read Remitter. In the word Returno habendo, for Expleuied, reade Repleuied. In the word Scot and Lot, for Aulote & Auſcote, reade Anlote & Anſcote. For the word Statutum de laboriis, reade Laborariis. In the word Terme, for Certifie, reade Rectifie. For the word Thrid with hawan man, reade Thrid nith. For the word Toſt, read Toft In the word Tolle, for 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , or 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . For 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , read 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               . In the word Verdour, for Verdioir, read Verdeur. For the word Vicountie, reade Vicountiel. In the word Watlingſtreat, for Toſſe, read Foſſe: in the word Widow, for Vide, read Vuide. For the word Woolferthfod, read Wolferhefod.
         
      
      
         
            
            The ſignification of Words.
            
               A B
               
                  
                     ABATE (Iutrudere) ſeemeth to be taken from the French Abatre, i. decutere, deſtruere, proſternere. It is in the Writers of the Common law vſed both actiuely and paſſiuely, or rather neuterly: as to abate a caſtell or a fortlet, Old. Nat. br. fo 45. which in Weſtm. 1. cap. 17. is plainely interpreted to be as much, as to beate downe. And to abate a Writ, is by ſome exception to defeate or ouerthrow it, Britton. cap. 48. And in this Actiue voice it hath two ſignifications: one generall, another ſpeciall: generall, as in the former examples: and againe in Kitchin fol. 173. Abater meaſon, is to ruine or caſt downe a houſe: eſpeciall, as in the Old. Nat br. fol. 115. A ſtranger abateth, that is, entreth vpon a houſe or lād void by the death of him that laſt poſſeſſed it, before the heire take his poſſeſſion, and ſo keepeth him out. Wherefore as he that putteth out him in poſſeſſion, is ſaid to diſſeiſe: ſo he that ſteppeth in betweene the former poſſeſſor and his heire, is ſaid to abate. In the neuter ſignification it is vſed, ann. 34. Edw. 1. ſtat. 2. of ioynt tenants, viz. the Writ of the demandant ſhall abate, that is, ſhall be diſabled, fruſtrated or ouerthrowne. So in Stawnfords plees of the crowne, fol. 148. In this caſe a man may ſay, that the appeale abateth by covin, that is, that the accuſation is defeated by deceit. See Intruſion.
               
               
                  Abatement (Intruſio) cōmeth alſo of the French (abatement) i. deiectio, decuſſio, proſtratio, and is likewiſe vſed as the verbe (abate) both actiuely and paſſiuely: ſomtime ſignifying the act of the abator; as the abatement of the heire into the land before he hath agreed with the Lord. Old nat. br. fol. 91. Sometime the affection or paſſion of the thing abated, as abatement of the writ. Kitchin. fol. 214. And in this ſignification it is as much as exceptio dilatoria with the Civilians, Brit. cap. 51. or rather an effect of

it. For the exception alledged, and made good, worketh the abatement. And this exception may be taken either to the inſufficiencie of the matter, or to the incertaintie of the allegation by the miſnaming of the plaintiffe, defendant, or place, to the variance betweene the Writ and the ſpecialtie, or record, to the incertaintie of the VVrit, count, or declaration, or to the death of the plaintiffe or defendant: new tearmes of the law, verbo, Abatement of Writ. And he that will reade more of this, may looke vpon the new booke of Entries, verbo, Briefe.
               
               
                  Abatour (Intruſor) is he that abateth, that is, thruſteth into a houſe or land, void by the death of the former poſſeſſor, and not yet entred or taken vp by his heire. Old. nat. br. fol. 115. Perkins fol. 76. If there be a diſſeiſſor, abator, or intrudor vpon any land by the deceipt of the woman, &c.
               
                  Abbot (Abbas) in French Abbè, is by skilfull Linguiſts ſaid to come from the Syriacke word (Abba) i. pater, and in our common law is vſed for him that in the covent or fellowſhip of Canons hath the rule and preheminence. He is by Iuſtinian. novel. conſtitut. 115. §. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . tearmed Archimandrita, of others Coenobiarcha, vel Archimonachus, Hoto. in verbis feuda. Of theſe ſome here in England were mitred, ſome not: Stowes annals, pa. 442. And thoſe that were mitred, were exempted from the iuriſdiction of the dioceſan, hauing in themſelues epiſcopal authoritie within their precincts, and being alſo Lords of the Parlament. Of this kind thus ſaith Coraſius; Aliqui Abbates habent iuriſdictionem epiſcopalem, ad quos cum Eccleſia pleno iure pertineat, in eorum Monaſteriis Epiſcopus nihil exercet, cap. Ea quae. Vbi Panor. extra de ſtatu Monacho. Haec dictus author in Paraphraſi de ſacerdotio. materia, parte pri. cap. 9. And theſe were called Abbots ſoueraigne, anno 9. R. 2. cap 4. and Abbots generals, as M. Fearne noteth in his glory of generoſitie. pag. 126. The other ſort were ſubiect to the dioceſan in all ſpirituall gouernement, cap. Monaſteria, 18. quaeſt. 2. cap. Abbas. & cap. viſit andi, cum quatuor ſequentibus ibidem. ca. Omnes. 16. quaeſt. 7. & cap. Cùm venerabilis. extra de religîoſis domibus. And as Abbots, ſo were there Lord Priors alſo, who both had exempt iuriſdiction, & were Lords of the Parlament, as appeareth by S. Edward Cooke de iure Eccleſiaſtico, fol. 28. a.
               
               
                  Abeyance, ſeemeth to be deriued from the French (Abayer. i. allatrare,) to barke at, as dogs do againſt a ſtranger, or ſpaniels

at a Feſant put to the pearke. So children are ſaid (bayer à la mamme) when ſeing the dug, they ſtruggle and make meanes towards it. And they likewiſe (bayer a l'argent) qui ſpe atque animo incumbunt pecuniae. This word in Litleton, cap. Diſcontinuance, is thus vſed. The right of Fee-ſimple lyeth in abeyance: that is, (as himſelfe interpreteth) all onely in the remembrance, intendmēt, and conſideration of the law. Alſo in the ſame place: the Francke tenement of the glebe of the parſonage, is in no man during the time that the parſonage is void, but is in abeyance. And againe: It is a principle in lawe, that of euery land there is Fee-ſimple in ſome man, or the Fee-ſimple is in abeyance. Conſidering theſe places, and comparing them with the ſignification of the French word, I am driuen to thinke, that our auncient Lawyers would ſignifie hereby a kind of hope, or longing expectance: becauſe that thoſe things that be in abeyance, though for the preſent they be in no man, yet they are in hope and expectation belonging to him that is next to enioy them. For I find alſo in the French, that vn bayard, is avidus ſpectator, a greedy beholder. I cannot in mine owne opinion better compare this, then to that which the Civilians call haereditatem iacentem. For as Bracton ſaith (lib. 1. cap. 12. nu. 10.) Haereditas iacens nullius eſt in bonis ante aditionem. Sed fallit in hoc quia ſuſtinet vicem perſonae defuncti, vel quia ſperatur futura haereditas eius qui adibit. So that (as the Civilians ſay) goods and lands do iacere, whileſt they want a poſſeſſor, and yet not ſimply, becauſe they had lately one, and may ſhortly haue another: ſo the common Lawyers do ſay, that things in like eſtate are in abeyance. Reade farther of this in the new tearmes of lawe, and in Plowdens reports, caſu VValſingham, fol. 554. a.
               
               
                  Abet (Abettare) may without abſurditie be ſaid to proceed frō the French (bouter) i. ponere, apponere, impellere, propellere. It ſignifieth in our common law as much as to encourage or ſet on. The ſubſtantiue (abetment, abettum) is vſed for an encouraging or ſetting on, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 105. And alſo (abettour) for him that encourageth or ſetteth on, Old nat. br. fol. 21. But both verbe and noune is alway vſed in the euill part.
               
                  Abiſherſing (according to Raſtall in his Abridgement, titulo Expoſition of law words) is to be quit of amerciaments before whom ſoeuer of tranſgreſſion. The author of the new tearmes calleth it otherwiſe (Miſherſing)
                  
and ſaith it is to be quit of amerciaments before whom ſoeuer of tranſgreſſion proued. I am of opinion that the word originally ſignifieth a forfeiture, or an amerciament, and that it is much tranſformed in the writing by miſpriſion and ignorance of Clerkes: thinking it very probable, that it proceedeth from the Germane verbe (Beſchetzen) which is as much as fiſco addicere vel confiſcare. It ſeemeth by the former authors to be tearmed a freedome or libertie, becauſe he that hath this word in any charter or grant, hath not onely the forfeitures and amerciaments of all others within his fee for tranſgreſſions, but alſo is himſelf free from all ſuch controule of any within that compaſſe.
               
                  Abiuration (Abiuratio) ſignifieth in our common law aſworne baniſhment, or an oath taken to forſake the realme for euer. For as Stawnford pl. cord. li. 2. cap. 40. ſaith out of Polydore Virgils eleuenth booke of Chronicles, the deuotion toward the Church firſt in S. Edward a Saxon king, and ſo conſequently in al the reſt vntil anno 22. H. 8. was ſo earneſt that if a man hauing committed felonie, could recouer a church or church yard before he were apprehended, he might not be thence drawne to the vſuall trial of lawe, but confeſſing his fault to the Iuſtices at their comming, or to the Coroner, before them, or him giue his oath finally to forſake the realme. Of this you may reade a touch, anno 7. Hen. 7. cap. 7. But the forme and effect of this you may haue in the old abridgement of Statutes, titulo. Abiuration. nu. 3. taken out of the auncient Tractate intituled, De officiis coronatorum: as alſo in Cromptons Tractate of the office of the Coroner, fol. 206. b. and in the new booke of entries, verbo, Abiuration: and in Andrew Horus myrror of Iuſtices, lib. 1. cap. del office del coroner. This part of our lawe was in ſome ſort practiſed by the Saxons, as appeareth by the lawes of king Edward ſet out by M. Lamberd, nu. 10. but more directly by the Normans, as is euident by the grand cuſtomarie, cap. 24. where you haue theſe words in effect: He that flyeth to a Church, or holy place, may ſtay there for eight dayes. And at the ninth day he muſt be demaunded, whether he will yeeld himſelfe to ſecular iuſtice, or hold him to the Church. For if he will, he may yeeld himſelfe to the lay Court: if he will cleaue to the Church, he ſhall forſweare the countrie before the Knights and other people of credit, which may witneſſe the act, if need require. The forme of the oath is likewiſe there ſet downe with

the reſt of the proceeding in this matter very agreable with ours. This mercie as well of the Saxōs as Normans deriued vnto vs, ſomething reſembleth that of the Romaine Emperors toward ſuch as fled to the Church, lib. 1. Co. titulo 12. or to the images of themſelues, eodem. titulo 25. And alſo that of Moſes touching the cities of refuge, Exod. cap. 21. verſ. 13. Numb. cap. 35. verſ. 6. 11 12. Deut. 19. verſ. 2. Ioſ. 20. verſ. 2. But as it was in our aunceſtors dayes larger by great oddes in this realme, ſo had it leſſe reaſon, as it may appeare to all that will compare them. Of all circumſtances belonging to this abiuration, you may farther reade the new tearmes of lawe: Stawnford vbi ſupra, and ſuch others. But this grew at the laſt vpon good reaſon to be but a perpetual confining of the offender to ſome Sanctuarie, wherein, vpon abiuration of his liberty and free habitations, he would chuſe to ſpend his life, as appeareth, anno 22. Hen. 8. cap. 14. And this benefite alſo by other ſtatutes is at the laſt wholly taken away. So that abiuration at this day hath place but in few caſes: and if it be inflicted vpon any, it is not a confining to a Sanctuarie (for there be no Sanctuaries remaining amongſt vs) but a ſworne baniſhment out of the Kings dominions. This the Civilians call exilium, or deportationem, lib. 28. Digeſt. titulo 22. de interdictis, relegatis & deportatis.
               
               
                  Abridge (Abbreniare) cōmeth of the French (abreger) and in one generall language ſignifieth as much as to make ſhorter in words, holding ſtill the whole ſubſtance. But in the common lawe it ſeemeth (at the leaſt for the moſt part) to be more particularly vſed for making a declaration or count ſhorter by ſubtracting or ſeuering ſome of the ſubſtance therein compriſed. As for example: a man is ſaid to abridge his plaint in an Aſſiſe, or a woman her demaund in an action of dower, that hath put into the plee or demand any land not in the tenure of the tenant or defendant: and finding that by his anſwer, razeth thoſe parcels out of the plee, praying anſwer to the reſt. So that here (abridger) is not (contrahere) but rather ſubtrahere. Termes of the lawe. Broke. titulo, Abridgement. and anno 21. Hen. 8. cap. 3. Of this the Civilians haue no vſe, by reaſon of certaine cautelous clauſes, they ordinarily haue at the end of euery poſition or article of their libell or declaration to this effect: Et ponit coniunctim, diviſim, & de quolibet, & de tali & tanta quantitate vel ſumma qualis & quanta per confeſſionem partis adverſae,

vel per probationes legitimas in fine litis apparebit. And againe, in the concluſion of all: Non aſtringens ſe ad ſingula probanda, ſed potens, vtquatenus probauerit in praemiſſis, aut eorum aliquo, eatenus obtineat. By vertue of which clauſes the plaintiffe faileth not in the end by any ouer or vnder demand, neither is driuen to begin his action againe, but obtaineth for ſo much as he proueth to be due, though not to the heithe of his demaund.
               
                  Abridgement (abbreuiamentum) ſee Abridge.
               
            
            
               A C
               
                  ACcedas ad Curiam, is a Writ that lieth for him, who hath receyued falſe iudgement in a court Baron, being directed to the Sheriffe, as appeareth by Dyer, fol. 169. nu. 20. Like as the writ De falſo iudicio lyeth for him that hath receiued falſe iudgement in the county Court: the forme whereof you may ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 18. d. and in the Regiſter fol. 9. b. where it is ſaid, that this writ lyeth for iuſtice delayed, as well as falſly giuen. It is a ſpecies of the writ called (Recordare) Regiſter originall, fol. 5. b. and Fitzh. vbi ſupra.
               
               
                  Accedas ad Vicecomitem is a writ directed to the Coroner cō
                  manding him to deliuer a writ to the Sheriffe, that hauing a (pone) deliuered vnto him, doth ſuppreſſe it, Regiſt. origin. fol. 83.
               
                  Acceſſory (Acceſſorius vel Acceſſorium) is vſed in our common lawe, otherwiſe then among the Ciuilians. For whereas with them it is generally takē for any thing depending vpon another: here though it be ſo likewiſe, yet moſt commonly and notoriouſly it ſignifieth a man that is guiltie of a fellonious offence, not principally, but by participation: as by commandement, aduice, or concealement. And a man may be acceſſorie to the offence of another after two ſorts: by the common lawe, or by ſtatute: and by the common lawe two waies alſo: that is, before or after the fact. Before the fact, as when one commaundeth or aduiſeth another to commita felony, and is not preſent at the execution thereof. For his preſence maketh him alſo a principall: wherfore there cannot be an acceſſorie before the fact in manſlaughter, becauſe man-ſlaughter is ſodaine and not prepenſed, Cooke lib. 4. fol. 44. a. Acceſſorie after the fact, is when one receiueth him, whom he knoweth to haue committed felonie. Acceſſorie by ſtatute is he that abetteth, councelleth, or hideth any man committing or hauing committed an offence made felony by ſtatute. For though the ſtatute make no mention of abettours,

&c. yet they are by interpretation included. Of all theſe conſult with Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 45. 46. 47. 48. There is alſo an acceſſorie of an acceſſorie, as he that wittingly receiueth an acceſſorie to felonie. lib. Aſſiſ. 26. pl. 51. Coron. Fitzh. 196. Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 1. cap. 48. And the lawe of England is, that ſo long as the principall is not attainted, the acceſſorie may not be dealt with, Stawnf. vbi ſupra. The reaſon whereofyou may ſee, Cooke lib. 4. fol. 43. b. And this is alſo true by the ciuill lawe. Claudius de Battandier. in pract. crim. regula 101. at the leaſt vntill the principall be certainely knowne. Of this ſubiect reade M. Cromptons Iuſtice, fol. 37. b. 38. 39.
               
                  Acceptance, is a receiuing of a rent, whereby the receiuer bindeth himſelfe for euer to allow a former fact done by another, whether it be in it ſelfe good or not new tearmes of law.
               
                  Accompte (computus) is in the cō
                  mon lawe taken for a writte or action brought againſt a man, that by meanes of office or buſineſſe vndertaken, is to render an account vnto another: as a bailife toward his Maſter, a guardian in ſocage toward his ward, & ſuch others, as you ſhall find particularly named by Fitzh. in his nat. br. fo. 116. where you may alſo haue the forme and further vſe of this writte. See ex parte talis.
               
               
                  Accroche. See enchrochement. This word accroche is vſed. ann. 25. Ed. 3. Stat. 3. ca. 8.
               
                  Achat. commeth of the french (achet. 1. emptio, nundinatio) and is vſed for a contract or bargain. Broke. tit. contract.
               
               
                  Acquitall, ſignifieth in our cō
                  mon law moſt ordinarily a deliuerance & ſetting free from the ſuſpicion or guiltines of an offence: and is twofold: acquitall in law, or acquital in fact. Acquitall in law is, when two be appealed or endicted of felony, one as principall, the other as acceſſorie, the principall being diſcharged, the acceſſorie by conſequent is alſo freed. And in this caſe as the acceſſorie is acquitted by law, ſo is the principall in fact. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 168.
               
                  Acquittance (Acquietantia) cō
                  meth from the french (quicter or quitter. i. acceptò ferre, or quictance. i. acceptitatio, apocha.) and ſignifieth a releaſe or diſcharge from a dept formerly due. But the verbe (acquite), the participle (acquited) & the nowne (acquital) ſignifie alſo a diſcharge or cleering from an offence obiected, as: acquited by proclamation. Smith de rep. Anglo. pa. 76. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 168. Broke. tit. Acquitall. See the new tearmes of lawe. verbo, acquitall & acquittance.
               
                  
                  Acquietandis plegiis, is a Writ lying for a ſuretie againſt the creditour that refuſeth to acquite him, after the debt is paid by the debtour, Regiſter ori. fol. 158. where it appeareth that this is a Iuſticies.
               
                  Acre (acre) is a certaine quā
                  titie of land containing in length 40. perches, and foure in breadth, or to that quantitie, be the length more or leſſe. And if a man erect any new cotage, he muſt lay 4. acres of land to it after this meaſure, anno 31. Eliza. cap. 7. and with this meaſure agreeth M. Crompton in his iuriſdiction of Courts, fol. 222. though he ſay alſo, that according to the diuers cuſtomes of diuers countries the perche differeth, being in ſome places, and moſt ordinarily, but 16. foot dimid. But in the Counties of Stafford 24. foote, as was adiudged in the caſe betweene Sir Ed. Aſton, and S. Iohn B. in the Exchequer. In the Statute made of ſowing of Flaxe, ann. 24 H. 8. cap. 4. eight ſcore perches make an acre, which is 40. multiplied by 4. See alſo the ordinance of meaſuring land, made anno 34. Ed. 1. Stat. 1. which agreeth with this accompt. The word (acre) ſeemeth to come from the Germane word (acker) which is all one with the Latine (ager.)
               
               
                  Action (actio) is defined by Bracton lib. 3. cap. 1. as it is by Iuſtinian. li. 4. Inſtit. titulo. de actionibus, viz. Actio nihil aliud eſt quàm ius perſequēds in iudicio quod alicui debetur. Action is principally diuided by Iuſtinian, in perſonalem & realem: by Bracton, into perſonall, reall, and mixt: action perſonall is that, which belongeth to a man againſt another by reaſon of any contract, offence, or cauſe of like force to a contract or offence made or done by him or ſome other, for whoſe fact he is by law to anſwer, Bract. lib. 3. cap. 3. nu. 2. Action reall is defined to be that which is giuen to any man againſt another, that vpon any cauſe poſſeſſeth or occupieth the thing required or ſiewed for in his owne name, and none other mans: and in this onely reſpect, that he poſſeſſeth or occupieth the thing, and none other. Bract. ibid. nu. 3. and his reaſon is this: quia habet rem vel poſſidet, quam reſtituere poteſt vel dominum nominare. This definition & reaſon he farther exēplifieth in the words there following, which he that wil may reade at large. Action mixt is that, which lyeth aſwell againſt or for the thing which we ſeeke, as againſt the perſon that hath it: and is called mixt, becauſe it hath a mixt reſpect both to the thing & the perſon, Bract. lib. 3. cap. 3. nu. 5. For

example, the diuiſion of an inheritance betweene coheyres or copartners, called in the ciuill lawe (actio familiae exciſcunde:) ſecondly, the diuiſion of any particular thing being common to more, called likewiſe (actio de communi dividundo:) this kind of action (ſaith Bracton) doth ſeeme to be mixt, becauſe it lyeth as well againſt thing, as the perſon: and indeed ſo do other excellent Civilians, as Cuiacius and Weſenbecius in their Paratitles. Π. finium regund. And though Iuſtinian in his firſt diuiſion omitteth the third member: yet afterward in the ſame title, §. 20. he ſaith as theſe men do, viz. that there be certaine actions (naming theſe and other of like nature) that ſeeme to haue a mixture, &c. Of this you may alſo reade Britton at large in his chapter 71. And this diuiſion of action ſpringeth frō the obiect or matter, wherabout it conſiſteth, Weſenb. parat. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . de actio. & obliga. The author of the new tearmes of law defineth a mixt action to be a ſuite giuen by the lawe to recouer the thing demaunded, and alſo the dammages for wrong done: as in Aſſiſe of nouel diſſeyſin: the which writ, if the diffeiſour make a feofment to another, the diſſeiſeur ſhall haue remedie againſt the diſſeiſour and the feoffer, or other land tenant, to recouer not onely the land, but the dammages alſo. See the reſt. Theſe words occaſion me to ſhew, that actio is by the ciuill lawe called mixta in two reſpects: Nam quaedam miſtae ſunt quòd in ſe, & actionis in rem, & actionis perſonalis natur am habeant, & in iis, & actor & reus vterque ſit, l. actionis verbo. §. fina. Π. de obliga, & actio. Tales ſunt actio familiae erciſe. communi diuidun. & finium regun. quaedam verò miſtae ſunt, quòd remſimul & poenam perſequantur, vt in actione vi bonorum rapt. legis Aquiliae, & ea quae datur contra eos qui legata vel fidei commiſſa ſacroſanctis Eccleſiis relicta ſoluere diſtulerunt. And of this later ſort is the example that the ſaid author bringeth of a mixt action.
               
                  Action, is alſo by the Civilians divided, of the efficient cauſe, in civilem & praetoriam. Whereof the one riſeth out of the common civil lawe, the other from ſome edict of the Pretour. Who being cheife Iuſticer, had authoritie for his yeare, to ſupply the defects of the general law by his eſpecial edicts. And a diviſion not vnlike this may be made in the common law of England, one growing from the auncient quſtomary law, the other from ſome ſtatute. Broke. tit. Action ſur le ſtatut.
               
               
                  Action of the finall cauſe, is divided into civil, poenal, & mixt.

Cooke vol. 6. fo. 61. a. Action civile is that, which tendeth onely to the recouerie of that which by reaſon of any contract or other like cauſe, is due vnto vs: as if a man by action ſeeke to recouer a ſumme of money formerly lent, &c. Action penall is, that aimeth at ſome penaltie or puniſhment in the partie ſued, be it corporall or pecuniarie. As in the action legis Aquiliae in the civile lawe: whereby in our common lawe the next frends of a man feloniouſly ſlaine or wounded, ſhall perſue the law againſt the murderer, or him that wounded him, to condigne puniſhment. Bract. li. 3. ca. 4. Action mixt is that, which ſeeketh both the thing whereof we are depriued, and a penaltie alſo for the vniuſt deteyning of the ſame: as in an action of tithe vpon the ſtatute. anno. 2. & 3. Ed. 6. ca. 13.
               
                  Action is alſo, according to the forme of petion divided into ſuch as are conceiued to recouer either the ſimple value of the thing chalenged, or the double, the triple, or quadruple. Bract. li. 3. ca. 3. nu. 6. So doeth Decies tantum lie againſt embracers. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 171. and againſt iurours that take mony for their verdict of one part, or the other, or both. And to be ſhort, any other action vpon a ſtatute that puniſheth any offence by reſtitution, or fine proportionable to the tranſgreſſion.
               Action is preiudiciall (otherwiſe called preparatorie) or els principall: preiudiciall is that which groweth from ſome queſtion or doubt in the principall: as if a man ſue his younger brother for land deſcended from his father, and it be obiected vnto him that he is a baſtard. Bract. li. 3. ca. 4. nu. 9. For this pointe of baſtardie muſt be tried before the cauſe can farder proceede, & therefore is termed preiudicialis, quia prius iudicanda.
               
               
                  Action is either awnceſtrell, or perſonall. Stawnf. pl. cor. 59. Aunceſtrel ſeemeth to be that, which we haue by ſome right deſcending from our aunceſter vpon vs: and that perſonall, which hath the beginning in and from our ſelues.
               
                  Action vpon the caſe (actio ſuper caſu) is a generall action giuen for redreſſe of wrongs done without force againſt any man, and by lawe not eſpecially provided for. For where you haue any occaſiō of ſuite, that neither hath a fitte name, nor certaine forme alreadie preſcribed: there the clerkes of the chauncerie in auncient time conceiued a fitte forme of action for the fact in queſtiō: which the Civilians call actionem infactum, & our common lawyers action vpon the

caſe. In factum actiones dicuntur ideo, quia quod nomine non poſſunt exprimere negotium, id rei geſtae enarratione declarant citra formulā ac ſolennitatem vllā: Cuiacius & Gothofredus ad Rubricam de praeſcriptis verbis. And whereas in the civile lawe there are two ſorts (actionis in factum) one tearmed actio in factum ex praeſcriptis verbis, the other actio in factum praetoria. We ſemb. parat. de praeſcrip. verb. the former growing vpon words paſſed in contract, the other more generally vpon any fact touching either contract or offence formerly not provided againſt, this action vpon the caſe ſeemeth in vſe to bemore like to the pretours action in factum, then to the other: becauſe in the peruſall of the new booke of entries, and Brookes his abridgement heerevpon, I perceiue that an action vpon the caſe lieth as well againſt offenſes, as breach of contract. Of this ſee more in the word Trespas.
               
               
                  Action vpon the ſtatute (actio ſuper ſtatuto) is an action brought againſt a man vpon breach of a ſtatute: to be reſembled in mine opinion to any action giuen in the lawe imperiall, either vpon edictum praetoris, plebiſcitum, or ſenatuſconſultum. For as the Pretour, ſo the common people in comitijs tributis, & the Senatours or nobility in curia vel ſenatu, had power to make lawes, wherevpon the Pretour or other Iudges permitted action. And euen ſo our high court of Parlament maketh Statutes againſt ſuch offēces, as are either newly grown, or more and more increaſed: and our Iudges intertaine their plees, that commence actions againſt the breakers of them.
               Action is perpetuall or temporall (perpetua vel temporalis) and that is called perpetuall, the force whereof is by no time determined. Of which ſort were all ciuill actions among the auncient Romaines, viz. ſuch as grew from lawes, decrees of the Senate, or conſtitutions of the Emperors: whereas actions granted by the Pretor, died within the yeare, de perpet. & tempor. actio. in Inſtitut. So we haue in England perpetuall and temporarie actions: and I thinke all may be called perpetuall, that are not expreſly limited. As diuers Statutes giue actions, ſo they be purſued within the time by them preſcribed, namely, the Statute anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 1. giueth action for 3. yeares after the offences therein ſhall be committed, and no longer: and the Statute anno 7. H. 8. cap. 3. doth the like for foure yeares, and that anno 31. Eliz. cap. 5. for one yeare & no more. But as by the ciuill lawe no actions were at the laſt ſo perpetual,

but that by time they might be preſcribed againſt: as actiones in rem, decem aut viginti terminantur annis, perſonales verò triginta. §. 1. de perpet. & temp. actio. in Inſtitutio. & l. 3. Co. de praeſcript. 30. annorum: ſo in our common law, though actions may be called perpetual in compariſon of thoſe that be expreſſely limited by ſtatute: yet is there a means to preſcribe againſt reall actions within fiue yeares, by a fine leuied, or a recouerie acknowledged, as you may ſee farther in the word, Fine, and Recouerie. And for this alſo looke Limitation of aſſiſe.
               Action is farther diuided, in actionem bona fidei & ſtricti iuris. Which diuiſion hath good vſe in our common lawe likewiſe, though the tearmes I find not in any of their writers. But of this, and ſuch like diuiſions, becauſe they haue as yet no apparent acceptance amongſt our Lawyers, but onely a hidden vſe, I referre the reader to the Ciuilians, and namely to Weſenb. in his Paratitles. Π. De obligatio. & actio.
               
               
                  Addition (additio) is both the Engliſh and French word made of the Latine, and ſignifieth in our common law a title giuen to a man ouer and aboue his Chriſtian and ſurname, ſhewing his eſtate, degree, occupation, trade, age, place of dwelling, &c. For the vſe wherof in originall writs of actions perſonale, appeales, and indictments, it is prouided by Statute anno 1. H. 5. cap. 5. vpō the penaltie therein, expreſſed. Tearmes of the lawe. Broke farder addeth, that it is likewiſe requiſite in townes, and gates of townes; pariſhes in great townes and cities, where there may be any doubt, by reaſon of more townes, gates, or pariſhes of the ſame name, titulo Addition. See alſo M. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 95. 96.
               
                  Adeling was a word of honor among the Angles, properly apertaining to the Kings children, whereupon king Edward being himſelfe without iſſue, and intending to make Eadgare (to whome he was great Vnkle by the mothers ſide) his heire to this kingdome, called him Adeling. Roger Houedine, parte poſter. ſuorum Annal. fol. 347. a.
               
               
                  Adiournment (adiurnamentum) is almoſt all one with the French (adiounrement. i. denunciatio vel diei dictio) and ſignifieth in our commō law an aſſignement of a day, or a putting off vntill another day, Adiournment in eyre, (anno 25. Ed. 3. Statute of pourveyers, cap. 18.) is an appointment of a day, when the Iuſtices in eire meane to ſit againe. Adiourn. anno 2. Edw. 3. cap. 11. hath the like ſignification. And this whole title in Broke his abridgement

proueth the ſame. The baſtard Latine word (adiurnamentum) is vſed alſo among the Burgundians, as M. Skene noteth in his booke De verbo ſigni, verbo, Adiurnatus, out of Chaſſaneus de conſuet. Burg.
               
               
                  Ad inquirendum, is a writ iudiciall, commanding inquirie to be made of any thing touching a cauſe depending in the Kings court, for the better execution of iuſtice, as of baſtardie, of bondmen, and ſuch like: whereof ſee great diuerſitie in the Table of the Regiſter iudiciall, verbo, Ad inquirendum.
               
               
                  Admeaſurement (admenſuratio) is a writ, which lyeth for the bringing of thoſe to a mediocritie, that vſurpe more then their part. And it lyeth in two caſes: one is tearmed admeaſurement of dower (admenſuratio dotis) where the widow of the deceaſed, holdeth from the heire or his guardian more in the name of her dower, then of right belongeth vnto her. Regiſter orig. fol. 171. a. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 148. The other is admeaſurement of paſture (admenſuratio paſturae) which lieth betweene thoſe, that haue common of paſture appendant to their free-hold, or common by vicenage, in caſe any one of them, or more, doe ſurcharge the common with more cattell then they ought, Regiſter. orig. fol. 156. b. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 125.
               
                  Adminiſter (adminiſtrator) in our common law is properly taken for him, that hath the goods of a man dying inteſtate, committed to his charge 
                     〈…〉
                  y the ordinary, & is accountable for the ſame, whenſoeuer it ſhall pleaſe the ordinarie to call him thereunto. I finde not this word ſoe vſed in all the civile or canon lawe, but more generally for thoſe, that haue the gouernment of any thing, as the Decrees. can. 23. quaeſt. 5. c. 26. Adminiſtratores plane ſaecularium dignitatum. &c. and extrava. com. ca. 11. Grangias autem, & alia loca Ciſtercienſium ordinis, & aliorum Regalium, in quibus Gubernatores, ſeu cuſtodes vel adminiſtratores ponuntur, &c. Howſoeuer the ſignification of this word grew to be reſtrained amongſt vs, it greatly booteth not. But there was a ſtatute made anno. 31. Ed. 3. ca. 11. whereby power was giuen to the ordinarie to appointe theſe adminiſtratours, and to authorize them as fully as executors, to gather vp, and to diſpoſe the goods of the deceaſed: alway provided, that they ſhould be accountable for the ſame, as executors. And before that, viz. Weſtm. 2. anno 13. Ed. 1. ca. 19. it was ordeined, that the goods of thoſe that died inteſtate, ſhould be committed to

the ordinarie his diſpoſition, and that the ordinarie ſhould be bound to anſwer his debts, ſo far forth as the goods would extēd, as executors. And I perſwade myſelfe that the committing of this burden vnto Biſhops, & to thoſe that deriue eccleſiaſticall authoritie from them, grew firſt from the conſtitution of Leo the Emperour. Co. de Epiſco. & cleri. l. nulli licere. 28. Where it is ſaide, that if a man dying bequeath any thing to the redeeming of captives, &c. and appoint one to execute his will in that point, the partie ſoe appointed ſhall ſee it performed: and if he appointe none to doe it, then the Biſhop of the citie ſhall haue power to demaund the legacie, and without all delay performe the will of the deceaſed.
               
                  Admirall (Admiralius) cometh of the frenche (amerall) and ſignifieth, both in France and with vs, an high officer or magiſtrate that hath the gouernement of the Kings navie, and the hearing and determining of all cauſes, as well civile as criminall belōging to the ſea. Cromptons diuers iuriſd. fo. 88. and the ſtatutes anno 13. R. 2. ca. 5. & anno. 15. eiuſdem. ca. 3. & an. 2. H. 4. ca. 11. & anno. 2. H. 5. ca. 6. & an. 28. H. 8. ca. 15. with ſuch like. This officer is in all kingdomes of Europe that border vpon the ſea: and his authoritie in the kingdome of Naples is called, magna Curia Admirariae quae habet iuriſdictionem in eos qui vivunt ex arte maris. Vincent de Franch. deſciſ. 142. nu. 1. This Magiſtrate among the Romanes was called praefectus claſſis, as appeareth by Tully in Verrem. 7. but his authoritie was not continuall, as the Admirals is in theſe daies, but onely in time of warre. Neither doe I finde any ſuch officer belonging to the Emperours in our Code. And M. Guyn in the preface to his reading, is of opinion that this office in England was not created vntill the daies of Edward the third: His reaſon is probable. Britton that wrote in Edw. the firſts time, and in the beginning of his booke taking vpon him to name all the courts of Iuſtice, maketh no mention of this courte or magiſtrate. And againe Richard the ſecond finding the Admirall to extend his iuriſdiction over farre, ordeined by ſtatute made the 10. yeare of his reigne, that the limits of the admirals iuriſdiction ſhould be reſtrained to the power he had in his grandfather Edward the thirds daies, whereby the ſaide Maſter Gwin coniectureth that he did nought els but reduce him to his originall. But contrarily to this it appeareth by auncient records, the copies whereof I have ſeene, that not onely in the daies of

                  Ed. the firſt, but alſo of King Iohn, all cauſes of Merchants and mariuers, and things happening within the fludde marke, were ever tried before the Lord admirall.
               
                  Adiura Regis, is a writ for the Kings Clerke againſt him that ſeeketh to eiect him to the preiudice of the Kings title in the right of his crowne. Of this you may ſee diuers formes vpon divers caſes. Regiſter. orig. fo. 61. a.
               
               
                  Admittendo clerico, is a writte graunted to him that hath recouered his right of preſentation aagainſt the Biſhop in the common bank: the forme whereof read in Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 38. & the Regiſter. orig. fo. 33. a.
               
               
                  Admittendo in ſocium, is a writ for the aſſociation of certaine perſons to Iuſtices of aſſiſes formerly appointed, Regiſter. orig. fol. 206. a.
               
               
                  Ad quod damnum, is a writ that lyeth to the eſcheater to inquire what hurt it will be to the King, or other perſon, to graunt a Faire or market, or a mortmaine for any lands intended to be giuen in fee ſimple to any houſe of religion, or other body politicke. For in that caſe, the land ſo giuē is ſaid to fal into a dead hād, that is, ſuch an eſtate and condition, that the chiefe Lords do leeſe all hope of heriots, ſeruice of court, and eſcheates vpon any traiterous or felonious offence committed by the tenant. For a bodie politicke dieth not, neither can performe perſonall ſeruice, or commit treaſon or felonie, as a ſingular perſon may. And therefore it is reaſonable, that before any ſuch grant be made, it ſhould be knowne, what preiudice it is like to worke to the graunter. Of this reade more in Fitzh. nat. breu. fol. 221. and look Mortmaine.
               
               
                  Ad terminum qui praeteriit, is a writ of entrie, that lyeth in caſe where a man hauing leaſed lands or tenements for terme of life or yeers, and after the terme expired, is held from them by the tenant, or other ſtranger that occupieth the ſame, and deforceth the leaſſour. Which writ belongeth to the leaſſour and his heire alſo, Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 201.
               
                  Aduent (aduentus) is a certaine ſpace of time compriſing a moneth or thereabout, next before the feaſt of Chriſts natiuitie. Wherein it ſeemeth that our anceſtors repoſed a kind of reuerence for the neereneſſe of that ſolemne feaſt: ſo that all contentions in lawe were then remitted for a ſeaſon. Whereupon there was a ſtatute ordained Weſtm. 1. cap. 48. anno 3. Ed. 1. that notwithſtanding the ſaid vſuall ſolemnitie and time of reſt, it might be lawfull in reſpect of

iuſtice and charitie, which ought at all times to be regarded) to take aſſiſes of nouell diſſeiſin, mort d'aunceſter, and darrein preſentment, in the time of Aduent, Septuageſima, and Lent. This is alſo one of the times, from the beginning whereof vnto the end of the Octaues of the Epiphany, the ſolemnizing of mariage is forbidden, by reaſon of a certain ſpiritualioy that the church, & ſo conſequently euery member thereof, for that time, doth or ought to conceiue in the remembrance of her ſpouſe Chriſt Ieſus, and ſo abandon all affections of the fleſh. See Rogation weeke, and Septuageſima.
               
                  Advocatione decimarum, is a writ that lyeth for the claime of the fourth part or vpward, of the tythes that belong to any Church, Regiſter orig. fol. 29. b.
               
               
                  Advow, aliâs avowe (advocare) commeth of the French (advoüer, aliâs avoüer, and ſignifieth as much as to iuſtifie or maintaine an act formerly done. For example, one taketh a diſtreſſe for rent or other thing, and he that is deſtreyned, ſueth a Replevin. Now he that tooke the diſtreſſe, or to whoſe vſe the diſtreſſe was taken by another, iuſtifying or maintaining the act, is ſaid to avowe. Tearmes of the lawe. Hereof commeth advowant, Old. nat. br. fol. 43. and advowrie, eodem folio. Bracton vſeth the Latine word in the ſame ſignification, as (advocatio diſſeiſiuae) li. 4. cap. 26. And I find in Caſſauaeus de conſuet. Burg. pa. 1210. (advohare) in the ſame ſignification, and pag. 1213. the Subſtantine (deſavohamentum) for a diſavowing or refuſall to avowe.
               
                  Advowzen (advocatio) ſignifieth in our common law a right to preſent to a benefice, as much as (ius patronatus) in the canon lawe. The reaſon why it is ſo tearmed, proceedeth from this, becauſe they that originally obtained the right of preſenting to any Church, were maintainers and vpholders, or great benefactors to that Church, either by building or increaſing it: and are thereupon tearmed ſometime patroni, ſometime Advocati, cap. 4. & cap. 23. de iure patronatus in Decretal. And advowzen being a baſtardly French word is vſed for the right of preſenting, as appeareth by the Statute of Weſtm. the ſecond anno 13. Ed. 1. ca. 5.
               
                  Advowſen is of two ſorts: advowſen in groſſe, that is, ſole or principall, not adhering or belonging to any maner as parcell of the right thereof: advowzen dependant, which dependeth vpon a maner as appertinent vnto it, tearmed of Kitchin an incident, that may be ſeparated from the ſubiect. Of this M. Iohn Skeene

de verbo. ſig. hath theſe wordes: dicitur advocatio Eccleſiae, vel quia patronus alicuius Eccleſia ratione ſui iuris advocat ſe ad candem Eccleſiam, & aſſerit ſe in eadem habere ius patronatus, 
                        •
                     amque eſſe ſui quaſi clientis loco, vel potiùs cùm aliquis (nempēpatronus) advocat alium iure ſuo ad Eccleſiam vacantē, eumque loco alterius (veluti defuncti) praeſentat & quaſi exhibet. See Advowè next following:
               
                  Advowè, alias avowè (advocatus) is vſed for him that hath right to preſent to a benefice, an. 25 Ed. 3. ſt at. 5. ca. vnico. There haue you alſo (Advowe paramount) which is as much as the higheſt patron, and is ſpoken of the King. Advocatus eſt ad quem pertinet ius advocationis alicuius eccleſia, vt ad eccleſiam, nomine proprio non alieno, poſſit praeſentare. Fleta li. 5. ca. 14. §. i. Fitzh. in his nat. br. fo. 39. vſeth it in the ſame ſignification. See Advowſen. and Avowé.
               
               
                  Aetate probanda, is a writ that the Kings tenent holding in chiefe by chivalrie, and being warde by reaſon of his nonage, obteineth to the eſchetour of the countie where he was borne, or ſome time, where the land lyeth, to enquire, whether he be of full age to haue deliverie of his lands into his owe hand. Regiſter orig. fo. 294. & 295. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 253. Who alſo fo. 257. ſaith that this writ is ſome time directed to the Shirei
                     ••
                   to empanell a iurie for this enquirie againſt a day certaine, before commiſſioners authorized vnder the broad ſeale to deale in ſuch a cauſe.
               
                  Aërie of Goſhawkes (aëria accipitrum) commeth from the french (aiëre) ſignifiing ſo much as (par) in latine or (a paire) in Engliſh For the french man ſaying that one is (vn houme de boun aiere) ſignifieth that he commeth of a good paire, that is, a good father and a good mother. It is in our language the proper word in hawkes, for that which we generally call a neſt in other birds. So is it vſed anno 9. H. 3. ca. 13. in the charter of the foreſt, and in divers other places.
               
                  Affeerours (afferatores, aliàs affidati) may probably be thought to proceede from the french (affier. i. confirmare, affirmare) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, thoſe that be appointed in court leetes, &c. vpon oath to mulct ſuch as haue committed faults arbitrablely puniſhable, & haue no expreſſe penaltie ſet downe by ſtatute. The forme of their oathe you may ſee in Kitchin. fo. 46. The reaſon of this appellation mayſeeme to be, becauſe they that be appointed to this office, do affirme vpon there oathes, what penaltie they think in conſcience the offendour hath deſerued. It may likewiſe probably

be thought, that this commeth from (feere) an olde engliſh word ſignifying a companion, as (gefera) doeth among the Saxons by M. Lamberds teſtimonie, verbo (contubernalis) in his explication of Saxon words. And ſo it may be gathered that M. Kitchin taketh it. ca. Amercements. fo. 78. in theſe words. (Mas ſi le amercement ſoit affire per pares) where pares) be put for affeerors. And there may be good reaſon of this, becauſe they are in this buſines made companions and equals. You ſhall finde this word vſed. an. 25. Ed. 3. ſta. 7. viz. And the ſame Iuſtices before their riſing in every ſeſſions, ſhall cauſe to be affeered the amercements, as pertaineth, & alſo to the ſame effect. an. 26. H. 8. ca. 6. Kitchin. fo. 78. ioyneth theſe. 3. wordes togither as ſynonyma. (Affidati, amerciatores, affirours. Affidare in the canon lawe is vſed for fidem dare. ca. fina. de cognatio. ſpiritua. in Decretal. & ca. ſuper eo. de teſtibus. Bracton hath affidare mulierem, for to be betrothed to a woman. li. 2. ca. 12. But I finde in the cuſtomarie of Normandie. ca. 20. this word (affeurer) which the latine interpretour expreſſeth by (taxare) that is, to ſet the price of a thing, as (aſtimare, indicare, &c.) which etymologie of all the other pleaſeth me beſt, leauing euery man to his own iudgemēt.
               
                  Affirme (affirmare) commeth either of the latine, or frenche (affirmer) It ſignifieth in our common law, as much as to ratifie or approue a former law or iudgement. So is the ſubſtantiue (affirmāce) vſed anno. 8. H. 6. ca. 12. And ſo is the verb it ſelfe by M. Weſt. parte. 2. ſymbolai. titulo, Fines. ſect. 152. And if the iudgement be affirmed, &c. as alſo by M. Crompton in his diuers Iuriſd. fo. 166.
               
                  Afforeſt (afforeſtare) is to turne ground into foreſt. charia de foreſta. ca. 1. & 30. an. 9. H. 3. What that is, look more at large in Foreſt.
               
               
                  Affraye (affreia) commeth of the french (effraier. i. horrificare, terrere) It ſignifieth in our common lawe a skirmiſh or fighting betweene two or more. M. Lamberd in his eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 3. faith, that it is often times confounded with an aſſault, but yet he is of opinion that they differ in this, that where an aſſault is but a wrong to the partie, an affray is a common wrong: and therefore both enquirable and puniſhable in a leete. It might be ſaid likewiſe, that an aſſault is but of one ſide, and an affray of two or more. I thinke this word (affray) to be two wayes vſed, one, as I haue alreadie deſcribed it, another, for a terror wrought in the ſubiects by any vnlawfull ſight of violence, or armor, &c. tending toward violence. For ſo

is it vſed, anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 3.
               
                  Age (atas) commeth from the French (aage) and ſignifieth in our language that part of a mans life, which is from his birth vnto his laſt day. But it is in the common lawe particularly vſed for thoſe eſpeciall times, which enable men or women to do that, which before for want of age, and ſo conſequently of iudgement, they might not do. And theſe times in a man be two, in a woman ſixe. The age of 21. yeres is termed the full age in a man, the age of fourteene yeares, the age of diſcretion, Litleton li. 2. ca. 4. In a woman there are ſixe ſeuerall ages obſerued, that ſeuerally enable her to do ſixe ſeuerall things. Broke. Gard. 7. Firſt, at 7. yeares of age the Lord her father may diſtraine his tenents for ayde to marry her: for at thoſe yeares ſhe may conſent to matrimonie, Bract. lib. 2. cap. 36. nu. 3. Secondly, at the age of nine yeares ſhe is dowable: for then, or within halfe a yeare after, is ſhe able promereri dotem, & virum ſuſtinere. Fleta li. 5. cap. 22. Litleton lib. prim. cap. 5. which Bracton loco citato doth notwithſtanding limit at 12. yeares. Thirdly, at twelue yeares ſhe is able finally to ratifie and confirme her former conſent giuen to matrimonie. Fourthly, at 14. yeares ſhe is enabled to receiue her land into her owne hands, and ſhall be out of ward, if ſhe be of this age at the death of her anceſtor. Fiftly, at ſixteene yeares ſhe ſhal be out of ward, though at the death of her aunceſtor ſhe was within the age of fourteen yeres. The reaſon is, becauſe then ſhe may take a husband able to performe Knights ſeruice. Sixtly, at 21. yeares ſhe is able to alienate her lands and tenements, Inſtit. iure com. cap. 24. Touching this mater, take further theſe notes perſpicuouſly gathered. At the age of 14. yeares a ſtriplin is enabled to chuſe his owne guardian, and to claime his land holden in ſocage, Dyer fol. 162. which Bracton limiteth at fifteene yeares, li. 2. cap. 37. num. 2. with whom Glanvile alſo agreeth, lib. 7. cap. 9. And at the age of fourteene yeares, a man may conſent to mariage, as a woman at 12. Bracton. vbi ſupra. At the age of fifteene yeres a man ought to be ſworne to keepe the kings peace, anno 34. Edw. 1. Stat. 3. The age of 21. yeares compelleth a man to be knight, that hath twentie pounds land per annum in fee, or for tearme of life, anno 1. Edw. 2. ſtat. 1. and alſo enableth him to contract and to deale by himſelf, in all lawfull cauſes appertaining vnto his eſtate. Which vntill that time, he cannot with the ſecurity of thoſe that deale with him.

This the Lombords ſettle at 18. yeares, as appeareth by Hotomans diſputations in libros feudorum, l. 2. c. 53. ver. decimo. octauo anno. which power the Romans permitted not vſque ad plenam maturitatem, and that they limited at 25. yeares. lib. 1. in fine Π. de maior. 25. an. l. fin. Co. de Legit. tut. in principio, titulo de curat. in Inſtitut. The age of twelue yeares bindeth to appearance before the Sheriffe and Coroner for enquirie after roberies, an. 52. H. 3. cap. 24. The age of 14. yeares, enableth to enter an order of religion without conſent of parents, &c. anno 4. H. 4. cap. 17.
               
                  Age prier (aetatem precari) or (aetatis precatio) is a petition made in count by one in his minoritie, hauing an actiō brought againſt him, for lands coming to him by diſcent, that the action may reſt vntill he come to his full age: which the Court in moſt caſes ought to yeeld vnto. This is otherwiſe in the ciuill lawe, which inforceth children in their minoritie to anſwer by their tutors or curatours, Π. de minor. 25. an.
               
               
                  Agenhine. See Haghenhine.
               
               
                  Agiſt (agiſtare) ſeemeth to come of the French (gift. 1. iacet) hauing (gaſir) in the Infinitiue moode, whence commeth the nowne (giſme) a lying in childbed: or rather of (giſter. i. ſtabulari) a word proper to a Deare, cùm ſub menſem Maium è locis abditis in quibus delituit emigrans, in loco delecto ſtabulari incipit, vnde commoda & propinqua ſit pabulatio. Budaeus in poſteriori libro philologiae. Where alſo he ſaith, that (giſte) eſt idem quod luſtrum vel cubile. Or it may be probably deduced from the Saxon word (Gaſt. 1. hoſpes.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, to take in and feede the 
                     ••
                  tell of ſtraungers in the kings foreſt, and to gather the money due for the ſame to the kings vſe, Charta da Foreſta, an. 9. H. 3. cap. 9. The Officers that do this, are called (agiſtors) in Engliſh, Gueſt-takers, eodem. cap. 8. Cromptons iuriſdic. fol. 146. Theſe are made by the kings leters patents vnder the great ſeale of England: of whom the King hath foure in number within euery foreſt, where he hath any pawnage, called agiſtors, or Giſt-takers. And their office conſiſteth in theſe foure points: (in agiſt ando, recipiendo, imbreviando, certificando) Manwood parte prima. Of Foreſt lawes, p. 336. & 337. whome you may reade more at large. Their function is tearmed Agiſtment, as agiſtment vpon the ſea banks, anno 6. H. 6. cap. 5.
               
                  Agreement (agreamentum. i. aggregatio mentium) is the aſſent or cōcord of more to one thing: & this by the author of the newe tearmes of lawe, is either executed

or executory: which you may read more at large in him exempified by caſes.
               
                  Ayde (auxilium) is all one in ſignification with the French (aide) and differeth in nothing, but the onely pronunacitiō, if we take it as it is vſed in our vulgar language. But in the common lawe, it is applied to divers particular ſignifications, as ſometime to a ſubſidie. anno. 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 1. ſometime to a preſtation due from tenents to their Lords, as toward the releife due to the Lord Paramount, Glanvile li. 9. cap. 8. or for the making of his ſonne knight, or the marying of his daugnter, idem, eodem. This the King, or other Lord by the auncient lawe of England, might lay vpon their tenents, for the knighting of his eldeſt ſonne at the age of 15. yeares, or the mariage of his daughter at the age of ſeuen yeares, Regiſt. orig. fol. 87. a. and that at what rate them ſelues liſted. But the Statute, Weſtmin. 1. anno 3. Edw. 1. ordained a reſtraint for to large a demand, made by common perſons being Lords, in this caſe, and tyed them to a certaine rate. And the Statute made anno 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 5. cap. 11. prouideth, that the rate ſet downe by the former Statute, ſhould hold in the King, as well as in other Lords. Of this I find mention in the Statute, an. 27. H. 8. ca. 10. This impoſition ſeemeth to haue deſcended to vs from Normandie: for in the grand cuſtumarie, cap. 35. you haue a Tractate intituled (des aides chevelz. 1. de auxilys capitalibus) whereof the firſt is (a faire l'aynè filz de ſon ſeigneur chevalier. i. ad filium primogenitum militem faciendum) the ſecond, (ſon ainee fille marier. i. ad filiam primogenitam maritandam.) And the third, (a rechapter le corps de ſon ſeigneur de priſon quand il eſt prius per la guerre an Duc. i. ad corpus dominiſui de priſona redimendum cùm captus fuerit pro bello Ducis Normandiae. Alſo I find in Caſſanaeus de cō
                     ſuet. Burg. Quòd dominus accipit à ſubditis pro dotanda filia, pa. 122. which ſeemeth to be all one with this our impoſition: and alſo in Vincentius de Franchis deſciſ. 131. where he calleth it adiutorium pro maritanda filia. Whence it appeareth, that this cuſtome is within the kingdome of Naples alſo. Touching this likewiſe, you may reade theſe words in Maenochius, lib. 2. de arbitrat. Iud. quaſt. centuria. 2. cap. 181. Habent ſaepiſſimè feudorum poſſeſſores & Domini multa in carum ditionibus privilegia, multaſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cum locorum incolis connentiones: inter quas, illa vna ſolet nominari, vt poſſit Dominus collectam illis indicere, pro ſolutione dotium ſuarum filiarum, cura matrimonio collocantur.

Hoc aliquando Romae obſervarum à Caligulafuiſſe, in illius vita ſcribit Suetonius, cap. 42. Hodiè hic vſus in ſubalpina regione eſt frequens, vt ſcribit Iacobinus de Sancto Georgio, in tractu de homagiis. col. 8. Etiam pro filia quae religionem ingreditur: & non modò pro vna filia, ſed pluribus filiabus, non tamen pro ſecundis nuptijs exigitur. In which place, the ſaid author maketh mention of diuers other Civilians and feudiſts, that record this cuſtome to be in other places. Of this aide, our Fleta writeth thus: ſicutetiam quaedam conſuerudines quaeſervitia non dicuntur, nec concomitantia ſeruitiorū, ficut rationobilia auxilia ad filium primogenitum militem faciendum, vel ad filiam primogenitā maritandam: quae quidem auxilia ſunt de gratia & non de iure, pro neceſſitate & indigentia dominicapitalis. Et non ſunt praedialia ſed perſonalia, ſecundùm quod perpendi poterit in breui ad hoc prouiſo, &c.
               
               This word (ayde) is alſo particularly vſed in matter of pleading, for a petition made in court for the calling in of helpe from another, that hath an intereſt in the cauſe in queſtion, and is likely both to giue ſtrength to the party that prayeth in aide of him, and alſo to auoide a preiudice growing toward his owne right, except it be preuented. For example: when a tenent for terme of life, by courteſie, tenent in taile after poſſibility of iſſue extinct, for tearme of yeares, at will, by elegit, or tenent by ſtatute merchant being impleaded touching his eſtate, may petere auxilium, that is, pray in ayde of him in the reuerſion (that is) deſire or intreate the court, that he may be called in by writ, to alledge what he thinketh good for the maintenance both of his right, and his owne. Termes of the lawe. Fitzh. mentioneth both (prier en ayde) and (prier ayde de patron, &c.) auxilium petere à patrono, nat. br. fol. 50. d. and the new booke of entries, verbo, Ayde de parcener, auxilium de parcionario, fol. 411. columna 4. This the later practitioners in the ciuill lawe, call authoris laudationem vel nominationem. Emericus in pract. titulo. 48. This ayde prier, is alſo vſed ſometime in the kings behoofe, that there be no proceeding againſt him, vntill the kings Councell be called, and heard to ſay what they thinke good, for the auoyding of the kings preiudice or loſſe, touching the cauſe in hand. For example: if the kings tenent holding in chiefe, be demaunded a rent of a common perſon, he may pray in ayde of the king. Alſo a citie or borough that hath a fee ferme of the king, any thing being demaunded againſt them which belongeth the reunto, may pray in ayde of

the King, &c. Tearms of the law. of this thing you may read the ſtatute (de big amis. a. 4. Ed. 1. ca. 1. 2. & 3. & anno. 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. ca. 14. The civile law in ſuites begunne betweene two, alloweth a third to come in (pro intereſſe) and he that commeth in for his interreſt, commeth either aſſiſtendo or opponendo, &c. The former is like to this (ayde prier) the other to that which our common lawyers call Receyte. Looke Receyte.
               
               
                  Aile (avo) commeth of the French (aieul. i. avus) & ſignifieth a writ that lieth, where the grādfather or great grandfather called of our common lawyers (beſayle) but in true French (biſaieul) was ſeiſed in his demaines as of fee, of any land or tenement in fee ſimple, the day that he died, and a ſtranger abateth or entreth the ſame day, and diſpoſſeſſeth the heire. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 221.
               
                  Alderman (aldermannus) is borrowed from the ſaxon (Ealderman) ſignifying as much as Senator in latine. Lamb. in his explica of Saxon words. verbo ſenator. See Roger Hoveden parte poſter. ſuorum. annal. fo 346. b.
               
               
                  Aler ſans. iour, is verbatim, to goe without day: the meaning whereof is, to be finally diſmiſſed the courte: becauſe there is no day of farder appearāce aſſigned, Kitchin. fo. 140.
               
                  Ale-taſtor, is an officer appointed in every court leete, and ſworne to looke to the aſſiſe, and the goodnes of bread and ale or beere, within the precincts of that Lordſhip. Kitchin. fo. 46. where you may ſee the forme of his oath.
               
                  Alias v. Capias alias.
               
               
                  Alien (alienare) commeth of the French (aliener) and ſignifieth as much as to transferre the propertie of any thing vnto another man. To alien in mortmaine, is to make over lands or tenements to a religious companie, or other body politike. Stawnf. praero. fo. 48. looke Mortmayn. To alien in fee, isto ſel the fee ſimple of any land or tenement, or of any incorporeall right, Weſt. 2. ca. 25. anno. 13. Ed. 1.
               
                  Alien alias alion (alienigena) commeth of the latine (alienus) and ſignifieth one borne in a ſtraunge country. It is ordinarily taken for the contrarie to (Denizen) or a naturall ſubiect, that is, one borne in a ſtraunge country, and neuer heere infranchiſed. Broke. Denizen. 4. &c. And in this caſe, a man born out of the land, ſo it be within the limits of the Kings obedience, beyond the ſeaſe, or of Engliſh parents, out of the Kings obedience (ſo the parents at the time of the birth, be of the Kings allegiance) is no alien in account, but a ſubiect to the King. Statute. 2. a. 25. Ed. 3. ca.

vnico. commonly called the Statute, De natis vltra mare. Alſo if one borne out of the kings allegiance, come and dwell in England, his children (if he beget any heere) be not aliens, but denizens. Termes of the lawe. See Denizen.
               
               
                  Allaye (Allaia) is vſed for the temper and mixture of ſiluer and gold, anno 9. H. 5. Stat. 2. cap. 4. & Stat. 1. eiuſdem anni, cap. 11. The reaſon of which allay is, with a baſer mettall to augment the waight of the ſiluer or gold ſo much, as may counteruaile the Princes charge in the coining. Antonius Faber de nummariorum debitorum ſolutionibus, cap. 1.
               
                  Allocatione facienda, is a writ directed to the Lord Treaſurer, and Barons of the Exchequer, vpō complaint of ſome accountant, commaunding them to allow the accountant ſuch ſums, as he hath by vertue of his office lawfully and reaſonably expended, Regiſter. orig. fol. 206. b.
               
               
                  Alluminor, ſeemeth to be made of the French (allumer, i. accendere, incendere, inflammare) it is vſed for one that by his trade coloureth or painteth vpon paper or parchment. And the reaſon is, becauſe he giueth grace, light, and ornament by his colours, to the leters or other figures coloured. You ſhall find the word, an. 1. R. 3. ca. 9.
               
                  Almaine riuets, be a certaine light kind of armor for the body of a man, with ſleeues of maile, or plates of iron, for the defence of his armes. The former of which words, ſeemeth to ſhewe the countrie where it was firſt invented: the other, whether it may come from the French verb (reveſtir, 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ſuperinduere) to put on vpon another garment, I leaue to farther conſideration.
               
                  Almner (elecmoſinarius) is an officer of the kings houſe, whoſe function is, fragmenta diligenter colligere, & ea diſtribuere ſingulis diebus egenis: agrotos & leproſos, incarceratos, paupereſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      viduas, & alios egenos vagoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in patria commorantes, charitative viſitare: item equos relictos, robas, pecuniam, & alia ad eleemoſynae largita, recipere & fideliter diſtribuere. Debet etiam regem ſuper eleemoſynae largitione crebris ſummonitionibus ſtimulare, & praecipuè diebus Sanctorum, & rogare ne robas ſuas quae magni ſunt pretii, hiſtrionibus, blanditoribus, adulatoribus, accuſatoribus vel meneſtrallis, ſed and eleemoſinae ſuae incrementum iubeat largiri, Fleta. lib. 2. cap. 2.
               
                  Almoine (eleemoſina.) See Frank almoyne.
               
               
                  Almond (amygdalum) is well knowne to euery mans ſight: it is the kirnell of a nut or ſtone, which the tree in Latine called (amygdalus) doth beare

within a huske in maner of a wal nut, of whoſe nature, and diuerſities, you may reade Gerards Herball, lib. 3. cap. 87. This is noted among merchandize that are to be garbled, anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Alnegeor, aliâs, aulnegeor (vlniger vel vlnator) cometh from the French (aulne) an elle, or elwand, and ſignifieth an officer of the Kings, who by himſelfe or his deputie, in places conuenient, looketh to the aſſiſe of wollen cloth made through the land, and to ſeals for that purpoſe ordained vnto them, an. 25. Ed. 3. Stat. 4. cap. 1. anno 3. R. 2. cap. 2. who is accomptable to the king for euery cloth ſo ſealed in a fee or cuſtome therunto belonging, anno 17. R. 2. cap. 2. Reade of this more, anno 27. Ed. 3 cap. 4. anno 17. R. 2. cap. 2. & 5. anno 1. H. 4. cap. 13. anno 7. eiuſdem. cap. 10. anno 11 eiuſd. cap. 6. anno 13. eiuſd. cap. 4. anno 11. H. 6. cap. 9. anno 31. eiuſdem. cap. 5. anno 4. Ed. 4. ca. 1. anno 8. eiuſdem, cap. 1. & an. 1. R. 3. cap. 8.
               
                  Ambidexter is that iurour or embraceour, that taketh of both parties for the giuing of his verdict. He forfeiteth ten times ſo much as he taketh, anno 38. Ed. 3. cap. 12. Cromptons iuſtice of peace, fol. 156. b.
               
               
                  Amendment (emendatio) commeth of the French (amendement) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a correction of an error committed in a proceſſe, and eſpyed before iudgment. Terms of the lawe. Broke, titulo Amendement per totum. But if the fault be found after iudgment giuen: then is the party that wil redreſſe it, driuen to his writ of errour. Tearmes of the lawe, Broke titulo Error.
               
               
                  Amerciament (amerciamentum) ſignifieth the pecuniarie puniſhment of an offendor againſt the King or other Lord in his court, that is found to be (in miſericordia) i. to haue offended, and to ſtand at the mercie of the King or Lord. There ſeemeth to be a difference betweene amerciaments and fines, Kitchin fol. 214. And I haue heard cōmon Lawyers ſay, that fines, as they are taken for puniſhments, be puniſhments certaine, which grow expreſly from ſome ſtatute, and that amerciaments be ſuch, as be arbitrably impoſed by affeerors. This is in ſome ſort confirmed by Kitchin fol. 78. in theſe words: (l'amerciamēt eſt affire per pares.) M. Manwood in his firſt part of Foreſt lawes. pag. 166. ſeemeth to make another difference, as if he would inferre an amerciamēt to be a more eaſie, or more mercifull penaltie, and a fine more ſharpe and grieuous. Take his wordes: If the pledges for ſuch a treſpaſſe (ſaith he) do appeare

by common ſummons, but not the defendant himſelfe: then the pledges ſhall be impriſoned, for that default of the defendant: but otherwiſe it is, if the defendant himſelfe do appeare, and be ready in Court before the Lord, Iuſtice in eyre, to receiue his iudgment, and to pay his fine. But if ſuch pledges do make default, in that eaſe the pledges ſhall be amerced, but not fined, &c. The author of the new tearmes of lawe, ſaith, that amerciament is moſt properly a penalty aſſeſſed, by the peeres or equals of the partie amercied for an offence done, for the which he putteth himſelfe vpon the mercie of the Lord. Who alſo maketh mentiō of an amerciament royal, and defineth it to be a pecuniarie puniſhment laid vpon a Sheriffe, Coroner, or ſuch like Officer of the kings, amercied by Iuſtices for his offence. See Miſericordia.
               
               
                  Amoveas manum. Looke ouſter le r
                        •
                     aiue.
               
               
                  An, tour, & waſte (annus, dies, & vaſtum.) Looke yeare, day, and waſte.
               
                  Ancaling of tile, anno. 17. Ed. 4. ca 4.
               
                  Annats, (Annates) ſeemeth to be all one with firſt fruites. anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 20. looke, Firſt fruites. The reaſon is, becauſe the rate of firſt fruites payed of ſpirituall liuings, is after one yeares profite. Of which Folydore Virgil, de inuē
                     tione rerum, lib. 8. cap. 2. ſaith thus: Nullum inuentum m
                        •
                     iores Romano Pontifici cumulavit opes, quàm annatum (quas vocant) vſus, qui omnino multò antiquior eſt, quàm recētiores quidam ſcriptores ſuspicantur. Et annates more ſuo appellant primos fructus vnius anni ſacerdatii vacantis, aut danidiam eorum partem. Sanè hoc vectigal iam pride, cùm Romanus Pontifex non habuerit tot poſſeſſiones quot nunc habet, & eum oportuerit pro dignitate, pro officio, multos magnoſque facere ſumptus, paulatim impoſitum fuit ſacerdotiis vacantibus quae ille conferret: de qua quidem re vt gravi, ſaepe reclamatum fuiſſe teſtatur Henricus Hoſtienſis, qui cum Alexandro 4. Pontifice vixit, ſic vt Franciſcus Zabarellus tradat poſt hac in concilio Viennenſi, quod Clemens quintus indixit (qui factus eſt Pontifex anno ſalutis humanae, 135.) agitatum fuiſſe, vt, eo depoſito, annatum onere vigeſima pars vectigalium ſacerdotalium penderetur quotannis Romano Pontifici, & id quidem fruſtrà: Quare Pontifex annatas in ſua naſſa retinuit, vt ne indidem exire poſſent: lege caetera.
               
               
                  Anniented, commeth of the French (aneantir. i. ſe abiicere, atque proſternere) It ſignifieth with ourlawyers, as much as fruſtrated or brought to nothing, Litlet
                        •
                     n lib. 3. cap. warrantie.
               
               
                  Annua penſione, is a writte,

wherby the king hauing due vnto him an annuall penſion from any Abbot or Prior for any of his Chaplaines, whom he ſhal think good to name vnto him, being as yet vnprouided of ſufficient liuing, doth demaund the ſame of the ſaid Abbot or Prior for one, whoſe name is compriſed in the ſame writ, vntill, &c. and alſo willeth him, for his Chaplaines better aſſurance, to giue him his leters patents for the ſame. Regiſter orig. fol. 265. & 307. & Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 231. where you may ſee the names of al the Abbeyes and Priories bound vnto this, in reſpect of their foundatiō or creation: as alſo the forme of the leters patents vſually graunted vpon this writ.
               
                  Annuitie (annuus reditus) ſignifieth a yearely rent to be paide for tearme of life or yeres, or in fee, and is alſo vſed, for the writ that lyeth againſt a man for the recouerie of ſuch a rent, either out of his land, or out of his cofers, or to be receiued of his perſon, at a day certaine euery yere, not ſatisfying it according to the graunt. Regiſter. orig. fol. 158. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 152. The author of the new tearmes of law defineth (annuitie) to be a certaine ſumme of money graunted to another in fee ſimple, fee taile, for tearme of life, or of yeares, to receiue of the graunter, or his heires, ſo that no Free-hold be charged therewith, whereof a man ſhall neuer haue aſſiſe or other action, but a writ of annuitie. Saintgerman in his booke intituled (The Doctor and Student) dialogo primo, cap. 3. ſheweth diuers differences betweene a rent and an annuitie, whereof the firſt is, that euery rent, be it rent ſeruice, rent charge, or rent ſeck, is going out of land: but an annuity goeth not out of any land, but chargeth onely the perſon: that is to ſay, the graunter, or his heires that haue aſſets by deſcent, or the houſe, if it be granted by a houſe of religion, to perceiue of their coffers. The ſecond difference is, that for the recouerie of an annuity, no action lyeth, but onely the writ of annuitie againſt the graunter, his heires, or ſucceſſors: but of a rent, the ſame actions lye as do of land, as the caſe requireth. The third difference is, that an annuitie is neuer taken for aſſets, becauſe it is no Free-hold in lawe, neither ſhall be put in execution vpon a ſtatute Merchant, ſtatute Staple, or elegit, as a rent may. Dyer fol. 345. num. 2. ſpeaketh alſo to this effect:
               
                  Anniſe ſeede (ſemen Aniſi) is a medicinall ſeed not vnknowne, ſo called of the hearbe aniſum, whereof it is the fruite. Of this he that liſteth may reade Gerad
                        •
                     
                     
herball li. 2. ca. 397. It is noted among the garbleable drugs and ſpices. anno. 1. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Anoiſance, aliàs Noiſance, aliàs Nuſance (nocumentum) commeth of the French (nuiſance. i incommodum, noxa) and hath a double ſignification, being vſed as well for any hurt done either to a publike place, as (high way, bridge, or common river) or to a private, by laying any thing, that may breede infection, by incroaching, or ſuch like means: as alſo, for the writ that is brought vpon this tranſgreſſion: whereof ſee more in Nuſance. The word (anoyſance) I finde, anno 22. H. 8. ca. 5.
               
                  Apoſtata capiendo, is a writ that lyeth againſt one, that hauing entred and profeſſed ſome order of religon, breaketh out againe, and wandereth the country, contrarily to the rules of his order. For the Abbot or Prior of the houſe, certifying this into the chawncerie, vnder their common ſeale, and praying this writ directed to the Shyreeue for the apprehenſiō of ſuch offend our, and for the delivery of him again to his Abbot or Prior, or their lawful atturney, were wont to obtaine the ſame. The forme whereof, with other circumſtances, you ſhall finde in the Regiſter. orig. fo. 71. & 267. and Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 233. C.
               
               
                  Apparelment, commeth of the French (pareiſement. i. ſimiliter, perinde, itidem) and ſignifieth a reſemblance: as apparelment of warre. anno 2. R. 2. ſtat. 1. ca. 6.
               
                  Appeale (appellum) commeth of the French (appeller. i. accire, accerſere, nominare, evocare, clamore aliquem flagitare) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, as much as (accuſatio) with the civilians. For as in the civile lawe, cogniſance of criminal cauſes, is taken either vpon inquiſition, denunciation, or accuſation: ſo in ours, vpon indictment or appeale, indictment comprehending both inquiſition, and denunciation. And accuſation or apeale, is a lawfull declaration of another mans crime (which by Bracton muſt be felonie at the leaſt in the common lawe) before a competent Iudge, by one that ſetteth his name to the declaration, and vndertaketh to prooue it, vpon the penaltie that may enſue of the contrary. To declare the whole courſe of an appeale, weare to much for this treatiſe. Wherefore for that, I muſt referre you to Bracton. li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 18. cum ſequent. Britton. ca. 22. 23. 24. 25. and to S. Thomas Smith. li. 3. de repub. Anglo. ca. 3. and laſtly to Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 2. ca. 6. 7. &c. vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   17. An appeale is commenced two waies: either by writte, or by bill. Stawnf. vbi ſupra fo. 46. And it may be gathered

by him. fo. 148. that an appeale by writ is, when a writ is purchaſed out of the chauncerie by one to another to this ende, that he appeale a third of ſome felonie committed by him, finding pledges that he ſhall doe it, and deliuer this writ to the Shyreeue to be recorded. Appeale by bill is, when a man of himſelfe giueth vp his accuſation in writing to the Vicount or Coroner, offering to vndergoe the burden of appealing another therein named. This pointe of our lawe, among others, is drawne from the Normans, as appeareth plainly by the grand cuſtumarie. ca. 68. where there is ſet downe a ſolemne diſcourſe of both the effects of this appeale. viz. the order of the cōbate, & of the tryall by enqueſt: of which by the common lawe of England, it is in the ioyce of the defendant, whether to take. See the newe booke of entriſe. verbo Appel. & the booke of Aſſiſes. fo. 78. Appel.
               
               
                  Appeale of mahem (appellum mahemij) is an accuſing of one that hath maymed another. But that being no felony, the appeale thereof is but in a ſort, an action of treſpas: becauſe there is noe thing recouered but dammages. Bracton calleth this (appellum de plagis & mahemio) and writeth of it a whole chapter. li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 24. See S. Ed. Cook. 4. vol. fo. 43. a.
               
               
                  Appeale of wrong impriſonment (appellum de pace & impriſonamento) is vſed by Bracton, for an action of wrong impriſonment, whereof he writeth a whole itactat. li. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 25.
               
                  Appeale (appellatio) is vſed in our common law diuers times, as it is taken in the civile lawe: which is a remouing of a cauſe from an inferiour iudge to a ſuperiour as appeale to Rome. an. 24. H. 8. ca. 12. & an. 1. Elix. ca. 1. But it is more cōmonly vſed, for the priuate accuſation, of a murderer by a party, who had intereſt in the partie murdered or of any felon by one of his complices in the fact. See Approver.
               
               
                  Appendant (appendens) is any thing belonging to another, as acceſſorium principali, with the Civilians, or adiunctum ſubiecto, with the logicians. An hoſpitall may be appendant to a Maner. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 142. Common of fiſhing appendant to a free hold. Weſtm. 2. ca. 25. anno. 13. Ed. 1.
               
                  Appertinances (pertinentiae) commeth of the French (appartenir. i. pertinere) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, things both corporal, belonging to another thing, as to the more principal: as hamlets to a chiefe Maner, common of paſture, turbarie, piſcarie, and ſuch like; and incorporeal, as liberties and ſervices of tenents. Brit. ca. 39. where I note by the

way, that he accounteth common of paſture, turbarie, and piſcary, to be things corporal looke Common.
               
               
                  Apporcu
                        ••
                     ent (Apportion
                        〈…〉
                     tū) is a dividing of a rent into parts, according as the land, whence the whole rent iſſueth, is divided among two or more. See the new termes of lawe.
               
                  Apprentice (Apprenticius) commeth of the French (aprenti. i. tyro & rudis diſcipulus) or of the verb (apprendre. i. addiſcere, diſcere) and ſignifieth with vs, one that is bound by couenant in word or writing, to ſerue another man of trade for certaine yeares, vpon condition, that the artificer or man of trade, ſhall in the meane time endeavour to inſtruct him in his art or miſterie. S. Thomas Smith, in his booke de rep. Ang. li. 3. ca. 8. ſaith, that they are a kinde of bond men, differing onely, in that they be ſeruants by couenant and for a time. Of theſe you may reade divers ſtatutes made by the wiſedome of our realme which I thinke ſuperfluous heere to mention.
               
                  Appropriation (appropriatio) proceedeth from the French (approprior. i. apeare, acc
                        〈…〉
                     re) and properly ſignifieth, in the lawe of England, a ſevering of a benefice eccleſiaſticall (which originally and in nature is, iuris diuini & in p
                        〈…〉
                      nullius) to the proper and perpetuall vſe of ſome Religious houſe or Deane, &c. and Chapter, Biſhop rick or Colledge. And the reaſon of the name I take to be this: becauſe that whereas perſons ordinarily be not accounted (domini) but (vſufructuarij) hauing no right of fee ſimple. Littleton. titulo Diſcontinuance: theſe, by reaſon of their perpetuitie, are accounted owners of the fee ſimple, and therefore are called proprietarij. And before the time of Richard the ſecond, it was lawfull (as it ſeemeeth) ſimply, at the leaſt by mans lawe, to appropriate the whole fruites of a benefice to an abbey or priory, they finding one to ſerue the cure. But that King made ſo euill a thing more tolerable by a lawe, whereby he ordeined, that in euery licence of appropriation made in chauncerie, it ſhould expreſly be contained, that the dioceſan of the place ſhould prouide a conuenient ſumme of money yearely to be paide out of the fruites, toward the ſuſtenance of the poore in that pariſh, and that the Vicar ſhould be well and ſufficiently endowed. anno. 15. Rich. 2. ca. 6. Touching the firſt inſtitution, & other things worth the learning about appropriations, reade Plowden in Grendons caſe. fo. 496. b. & ſeqq. as alſo the new termes of lawe, verbo Appropriation. To

an appropriation, after the licence obteined of the King in chauncerle, the conſent of the Dioceſan, Patron, and incumbent are neceſſarie, if the Church be full: but if the Church be voide, the Dioceſan and the Patron vpon the Kings licence may conclude it. Plowden vbi ſupra. To diſſolue an appropriation, it is enough to preſent a Clerke to the Biſhop. For, that once done, the benefice returneth to the former nature. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 35. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  Approvour (approbator) commeth of the French (approuver. i. approbare, comprobare, calculum albo adijcere) It ſignifieth in our common law, one that cōfeſſing felony of him ſelf, appealeth or accuſeth another, one or more, to be guilty of the ſame; & he is called ſo, becauſe he muſt prooue that which he hath alleadged in his appeale. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 142. And that proofe, is by battell or by the countrey, at his election that appealed. The forme of this accuſation, you may in part gather by M. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fo. 250. & 251. that it is done before the coroner, either aſſigned vnto the ſelon by the court, to take and record what he ſaith, or els called by the felon himſelfe, and required for the good of the Prince & common wealth, to record that which he ſaith, &c. The oath of the approuer, when he beginneth the combate, ſee alſo in Crompton in the very laſt page of his booke, as alſo the proclamation by the Herald. Of the antiquity of this law, you may reade ſomething in Horns myrror of Iuſtices, l. 1. in fine cap. del office del coroner. Of this alſo ſee Bracton more at large, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 21. & 34. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 52. cum ſeq.
               
               
                  Approuers of the king (Appruatores regis) be ſuch as haue the ſetting of the kings demeaſne
                     •
                   in ſmal Manors to the kings beſt aduantage, anno 51. H. 3. stat. 5. See Approue.
               
               
                  Approue (appruare) commeth of the French (approuer, i. approbare, comprobare, calculum albo adiicere) it ſignifieth in the common lawe to augment, or (as it were) to examine to the vttermoſt. For example: to approue land, is to make the beſt benefite thereof by increaſing the rent, &c. So is the Subſtantiue (approuement) vſed in Cromptons iuriſd. fol. 153. for the profits them ſelues. So is it likewiſe in the ſtatute of Merton cap. 4. anno 2. H. 3 land newly approued, Old. nat. br. fol. 79. So the Sheriffes called themſelues the kings approuers, anno 1. Ed. 3. cap. 8. which is as much in mine opinion as the gatherers or exactors of the kings profits. And anno 9. H. 6. cap. 10.

Bailiffes of Lords in their franchiſes be called their approuers. But anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 12. Approuers be certaine men eſpecially ſent into ſeuerall counties of the Realme, to increaſe the Fermes of hundreds and wapentakes, which formerly were ſet at a certaine rate to the Sheriffes, who likewiſe dimiſed them to others, the countie Court excepted.
               
                  Approuement (appruamentum) ſee Approue. See the Regiſter iudiciall. fol. 8. br. & 9. a. See the new tearmes of lawe, verbo (Approuement.)
               
               
                  Arbitratour (arbiter) may be taken to proceede from either the Latine (arbitrator,) or the French (arbitre) it ſignifieth an extraordinarie iudge in one or moe cauſes, betweene party and partie, choſen by their mutuall conſents, Weſt. parte 2. Symb. titulo Compromiſe. Sect. 21. who likewiſe diuideth arbitrement, into generall, that is, including all actions, quarels, executions, and demands, and ſpecial, which is of one or moe matters, facts, or things ſpecified, eodem ſect. 2. 3. 4. T
                     〈…〉
                  vilians make a difference betweene (arbitrum & arbitratorem) l. 76. Π. pro ſocio. For though they both ground their power vpon the compromiſe of the parties: yet their libertie is diuers. For arbiter is tyed to proceede and iudge according to lawe with equitie mingled: arbitrator is permitted wholy to his owne diſcretion, without ſolemnitie of proceſſe, or courſe of iudgement, to heare or determine the controuerſie committed vnto him, ſo it be iuxta arbitrium boniviri.
               
               
                  Arches court (Curia de arcubus) is the chiefe and auncienteſt Cō
                  ſiſtorie, that belongeth to the Archbiſhop of Canterburie, for the debating of ſpiritual cauſes: and is ſo called of the Church in London dedicated to the bleſſed Virgin, commonly called Bow church, where it is kept. And the Church is called Bow church of the faſhion of the Steeple or clocher thereof, whoſe toppe is raiſed of ſtone pillars builded arch-wiſe, like ſo many bent bowes.
               The Iudge of this Court, is termed the Deane of the Arches, or the officiall of the Arches court. Deane of the Arches, becauſe with this officialtie, is commonly ioyned a peculiar iuriſdiction of thirteene pariſhes in London tearmed a Deantie, being exempted from the authoritie of the Biſhop of London, and belonging to the Archbiſhop of Canterburie: of which the pariſh of Bow is one & the chiefe, becauſe the Court is there kept. Some others ſay, that he was firſt called Deane of the arches, becauſe

the officiall to the Archbiſhop, being many times employed abroad, in ambaſſages for the king and realme, the Deane of the Arches was his ſubſtitute in his court, and by that meanes the names became confounded. The iuriſdiction of this Iudge is ordinarie, and extendeth it ſelfe through the whole Prouince of Canterburie. So that vpon any appeale made, he foorthwith, and without any farder examinatiō of the cauſe, ſendeth out his citation to the party appealed, and his inhibition to the Iudge, from whome the appeale is made. Of this he that will, may reade more in the booke intituled. De antiquitate Ecceleſiae Britānicaehiſtoria.
               
               
                  Arma moluta, ſeeme to be ſharpe weapons that doe cut, & not blunt that doe onely breake or bruiſe. Bracton. li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 23. & Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 78. & 79. whereof Bracton hath theſe words: arma moluta plagam faciunt, ſicut gladius, biſacuta, & huiuſmodi: ligna verò & lapides bruſuras, 
                        〈…〉
                     bes, & ictus, qui iudicari non poſſunt ad plagam ad hoc, vt inde veniri poſſit ad duellum.
               
               
                  Armour (arma) in the vnderſtanding of our common lawe, is extended to any thing, that a man in his anger or furie taketh into his hand, to caſt at or ſtrike another. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fo. 65. a. So, armorum appellatio, non vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſcuta & gladios & galeas ſignificat, ſed & fuſtes & lapides. l. 42. Π. de verbo. ſignificatione.
               
               
                  Array (arraia, aliàs arraiamentum) commeth of the French (array. i. ordo.) which is an old word out of vſe: or it may be well deduced from (raye. i. linea) It ſignifieth in our commō lawe, the ranking or ſetting forth of a iurie or enqueſt of men impaneled vpō a cauſe. a. 18. H. 6 c. 14. Thence is the verb to array a panel. owld. nat. br. fo. 157. that is, to ſet forth one by another, the men empaneled. The array ſhalbe quaſhed. owld. nat. br. fo. 157. By ſtatute, every array in aſſiſe, ought to be made foure daies before. Broke. titulo Panel. nu. 10. to chalenge the array. Kitchin. fo. 92.
               
                  Arreyers, ſeemeth to be vſed in the ſtatut. anno. 12. Rich. 2. ca. 6. for ſuch officers, as had care of the ſouldiers armour, to ſee them duly appointed in ther kindes.
               
                  Arraine (arraniare) commeth of the French (arranger. i. aſtituere, ordinare,) that is, to ſet a thing in order, or in his place, and the ſame ſignification it hath in our common law. For example, he is ſaide to arraine a writ of novel diſſeiſin in a countie, that fitteth it for triall, before the Iuſtices of that circuit. owld nat. br. fo. 109. Litleton. fo. 78. vſeth the ſame word in the ſame ſence. viz. the leaſe arraineth an aſſiſe of nouel

diſſeiſin. Alſo a priſoner is ſaid to be arrained, where he is indighted and brought forth to his triall. Arrained within the verge vpon murder. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 150. The courſe of this arrainment, you may read in S. Thomas Smith. de repub. Anglo. li. 2. ca. 23.
               
                  Arrearages (arreragia) commeth of the French (arrierages. 1. reliqua) It ſignifieth the remaine of an account, or a ſumme of mony remaining in the hands of an accoūtant. It is vſed ſometime more generally, for any mony vnpaide at the due time: as arrearages of rent. That this word is borowed from France, it appeareth by Tiraquel de vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      retractu. tomo. 3. pa. 32. nu. 10.
               
                  Arreſt (areſtum) commeth of the French (arreſter. i. retinere, retare, ſubſiſtere) or rather, it is a French word in it ſelfe, ſignifying a ſetling, ſtop, or ſtay, and is metaphorically vſed for a decree or determinatiō of a cauſe debated or diſputed to and fro, as (arreſt du Senat. i. placitum curiae) In our comon law, it is taken moſt of all for a ſtay or ſtoppe: as a man apprehended for debt, &c. is ſaid to be arreſted. To pleade in arreſt of iudgment, is to ſhew cauſe why iudgment ſhould be ſtayed, though the verdict of the 12. be paſſed. To plead in arreſt of taking the enqueſt vpon the former iſſue, is to ſhew cauſe why an enqueſt ſhould not be taken, &c. Broke. tit. Repleder. Take this of learned M. Lambard in his eirenarch. li. 2. ca. 2. pa. 94. Budae. (ſaith he) in his greeke commentaries is of opinion, that the French word (arreſt) (which with them ſignifieth a decree or iudgment of court, tooke beginning of the Greeke (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. placitum) and as we might ſay, the pleaſure and will of a court. And albeit it were not out of the way to think that it is called an arreſt, becauſe it ſtayeth or arreſteth the partie: yet I beleeue rather, that we receiued the ſame from the Normane lawes, becauſe we vſe it in the ſame ſence with thē. For commonly with vs, au arreſt is taken for the execution of the commaundement of ſome court, or of ſome officer in iuſtice. But howſoeuer the name began: an arreſt is a certaine reſtraint of a mans perſon, depriuing him of his owne will and libertie, and binding it to become obedient to the will of the lawe. And it may be called the beginning of impriſonment. Precepts & writs of the higher courts of lawe, do vſe to expreſſe it by two ſundry words: as (capias) and (attachies) which ſignifie to take or catch hold of a man. But this our precept noteth it by the words (duci facias) that is, cauſe him to be conueyed, &c. For that the officer

hath (after a ſort) taken him before, in that he commeth vnto him, and requireth him to go to ſome Iuſtice of the peace. Thus farre M. Lamberd. And by like this word is ſpred farder then France. For Gaile a Germaine writer ſheweth by his Tractate (de arreſtis imperii) that it is vſed alſo in the imperiall territories, & in the ſame ſignificatiō, c. 1. n. 1.
               
                  Arreſtandis bonis ne diſſipentur, is a writ which lyeth for him, whoſe catell or goods are taken by another, that, during the controuerſie, doth, or is like to make them away, and will be hardly able to make ſatisfaction for thē afterward, Reg. orig. fol. 126. b.
               
               
                  Arreſtando ipſum qui pecuniam recepit ad proficiſcendum in obſequium Regis, &c. is a writ that lieth for the apprehenſion of him, that hath taken preſt money towards the kings warres, and lieth hidden when he ſhould goe. Regiſter. orig. 24. b.
               
               
                  Arreſto facto ſuper bonis mercatorum alienigenorum, &c. is a writ that lyeth for a denizen againſt the goods of ſtrangers of any other countrie, found within the kingdome, in recompence of goods taken frō him in the ſaid countrie, after he hath hene denied reſtitution there. Regiſter. orig. fo. 129. a. This among the aū
                  ciēt Civilians was called (clarigatio) now barbarouſly (repreſali
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Arretted (arrectatus) is he that is conuented before a Iudge, and charged with a crime. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. 45. quaſi ad rectum vocatus. It is vſed ſomtime, for (imputed or laid vnto) as, no folly may be arretted to him being vnder age. Litleton cap. Remitter. The Latine ſubſtantiue (Rettum) is vſed in the Regiſter orig. Chawcer vſeth the verb (arretteth) id eſt, layeth blame, as M. Speight interpreteth it. I may probably coniecture, that this word is the Latine (rectum.) For Bracton hath this phraſe (ad rectum habere malefactorem) i. to haue the malefactor foorth coming: ſo as he may be charged, and put to his triall. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. and in another place (rectatus de morte hominis) i. charged with the death of a man, eod. cap. 1. num. 3.
               
                  Articles of the Cleargie (articuli Cleri) be certaine ſtatutes made touching perſons and cauſes eccleſiaſticall, anno 9. Ed. 2. Like vnto which there were other made, anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 3.
               
                  Aſſay of meaſures and waights (aſſaia menſurarum & ponderum) Regiſter. orig. fol. 279. is the examination vſed by the Clerke of the market.
               
                  Aſſayer of the king, is an officer of the mint, for the due triall of ſiluer, indifferently appointed betwixt the maiſter of the Mint,

and the merchants that bring ſiluer thither for exchange. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 12.
               
                  Aſſault, in ſultus, commeth of the French verb (aſſailir. i. adormi, appetere, invadere) which French alſo proceedeth from the Latine (aſſilire. i. vim afferre, oppugnare.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a violent kind of iniurie, offered to a mans perſon, of a higher nature then batterie. For it may be committed by offering of a blowe, or by fearefull ſpeech. M. Lamberd in his eirenar. lib. 2. cap. 3. whome reade. The feudiſts call this (aſſultum) and define it thus: Aſſultus, eſt impetus in perſonam aut locum, fiue hoc pedibus fiat vel equo, aut machinis, aut quacunque alia re aſſiliatur. Zaſius de feud. parte 10. nu. 38. And (aſſilire) eſt, vim adferre, adoriri, oppugnare, li. feud. 1. tit. 5. §. 1.
               
                  Aſſach, ſeemeth to be a Welch word, and to ſignifie ſo much, as a kind of excuſe, or ſtrange kind of purgation by the oathes of three hundred men. anno 1. H. 5. cap. 6.
               
                  Aſſart (aſſartum) in M. Manwoods iudgement, parte. 2. ca. 9. ru. 5. of his foreſt lawes, commeth of the French (aſſortir) ſignifying (as he ſaith) to make plaine, or to furniſh; but rather indeede, to ſet in order and handſomly to diſpoſe. Aſſartum eſt, quod redactum eſt ad culturam. Fleta. li. 4. ca. 21. §. Item reſpondere. It ſignifieth, as the ſaid M. Manwood ſaith. nu. 1. vbi ſupra, an offence committed in the foreſt, by plucking vp thoſe woods by the rootes, that are thickets or coverts of the foreſt, and by making them plaine, as eatable land, where he alſo faith, that an aſſart of the Foreſt, is the greateſt offence or treſpaſſe of all other, that can be done in the foreſt, to vert or venifon, containing in it as much as waſte or more. For whereas the waſte of the Foreſt, is but the felling and cutting downe of the couerts, which may grow againe in time: an aſſart, is a plucking them vp, &c. which he confirmeth out of the redde booke in the Exchequer, in theſe words: Aſſarta verò, occaſiones nominantur, quando ſc: foreſtae nemora vel dumeta, paſcuis & latibulis ferarum oportuna, ſucciduntur: quibus ſucciſis & radiciti
                        •
                      avulſis, terra ſubvertitur & excolitur. And again out of the Regiſter originall. fo. 257. a. b. in the writ (ad quod damnum) ſent out in caſe, where a man ſueth for a licence, to aſſart his grounds in the Foreſt, and to make it ſeverall for tillage. Soe that it is no offence, if it be done with licence. To this, may Bracton alſo be added. li. 4. ca. 38. nu. 11. where he ſaith, that theſe words (boſcus eſ
                        •
                     icitur aſſartum) ſignifie as much, as (redactus

in culturam) of this you may read more in Cromptons Iuriſdictions. fo. 203. and in charta de foreſta, anno. 9. H. 3. ca. 4. where the engliſh word is not (aſſart) but aſſert, & in Manwood, parte. 1. of his Foreſt lawes. pa. 171. The word is vſed. anno. 4. Ed. 1. ſtat. 1. in the ſame ſignification. That which we call (aſſartum) is els where tearmed Diſboſcatio. Deciſ. Genu. 74.
               
                  Aſſembly vnlawfull, (illicita aſſemblata) cōmeth of the French (aſſembler. i. aggregare) whence alſo is the ſubſtantiue (aſſemblee. i. coitio, congregatio) It is in our common lawe (as M. Lamberd defineth it, eiren. li. 1. ca. 19.) the companie of 3. perſons (or more) gathered together to doe an vnlawfull act, although they doe it not. See vnlawfull aſſemblie.
               
                  Aſſets (quod tantundem valet) Bract. li. 5. tract. 3. ca. 8. nu. 2. is nothing but the French (aſſez. 1. ſatis) For though this word maſque vnder the vizard of a ſubſtantiue, it is in truth but an adverb. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, goods enough to diſcharge that bruden, which is caſt vpon the executour or heire, in the ſatisfying of the teſtators or aunceſtors debts or legacies. See Brooke, titulo Aſſets per diſcent: by whome you ſhall learne, that whoſoeuer pleadeth aſſets, ſayeth nothing, but that he againſt whome he pleadeth; hath enough deſcended or come to his hands, to diſcharge that which is in demaūd. The author of the newe tearmes of lawe, maketh. 2. ſorts of aſſets, viz. aſſets par diſcent, & aſſets enter mains. the former, being to be alleaged againſt an heire, the other, againſt an executor or adminiſtrator.
               
                  Aſſigne (aſſignare) both it ſelfe, and the French (aſſigner) come of the latine. It hath two ſignifications: one generall: as to appoint a deputè, or to ſet ouer a right vnto another. In which ſignification, Britton. fo. 122. ſaith this word was firſt brought into vſe, for the fauour of Baſtards; becauſe they cannot runne vnder the name of heires to their fathers, and therefore were, & are compriſed vnder the name of (aſſignees) The other ſignification of this word is eſpecial, as to appointe at, or ſet forth. viz. to aſſigne errour. old. br. nat. fo. 19. is to ſhew in what part of the proces errour is committed. To aſſigne falſe iudgement. eodem. fo. 17. that is, to declare how and where the iudgement is vniuſt. To aſſigne a falſe verdict. eodem. fo. 112. and to aſſigne an oath to be falſe. anno. 9. R. 2. ca. 3. To aſſigne the ceſſor, old. nat. br. fo. 134. 1. to ſhew how the plaintife had ceſſed, or giuen ouer. To aſſigne waſt, is to ſhewe, wherein eſpecially the waſt is cōmitted. Reg. orig f. 72.
               
                  
                  Aſſigne, in the generall ſignification is vſed. anno 20. Ed 1. & anno 11. H. 6. cap. 2. in theſe words: Iuſtices aſſigned to take aſſiſes. And the Subſtantiue (aſſignement) hath the ſame ſignification. Weſts ſymb. parte 1. lib. 2. ſect. 496. & ſeq. In which maner is alſo vſed the adiectiue (aſſignee, aſſignatus) viz. for him that is appointed or deputed by another to do any act, or performe any buſineſſe, or enioy any commoditie. And an aſſignee may be either in deed, or in law. Aſſignee in deed, is he that is appointed by a perſon, an aſſignee in lawe is he, whom the lawe ſo maketh without any appointment of the perſon. v. Dyer fol. 6. num. 5. Perkins in Grauntes ſaith, that an aſſignee is he, that occupieth a thing in his owne right, and deputè, he that doth it in the right of another.
               
                  Aſſiſe (aſſiſa) commeth of the French (aſſiſe) which in the grand cuſtumarie of Normandy, cap. 24. is defined to this effect. Aſſiſe is an aſſembly of Knights and other ſubſtantiall men, with the Bailiffe or Iuſtice in a certain place, and at a certaine time appointed. And againe, cap. 55. Aſſiſe is a court, in the which whatſoeuer is done, ought to haue perpetuall ſtrength. This Normane word (aſſiſe) commeth of the French (aſſeoir. 
                        •
                     . collocare) to ſettle or beſtow in ſome place certaine: as (ſ
                        •
                     aſſeoir) is to ſit downe by another. And metaphorically it is vſed of things incorporeall: as (aſſeoir ſon iugement ſur quelque lieu) is, interponere iudicium ſuum. Of this verbe commeth the participle (aſſis) as (eſtre aſſis) i. ſedere. And this Participle in the grand cuſtumarie of Normandie, cap. 68. is vſed, as we would ſay: appointed, limited, or determined, viz. (au iour qui eſt aſſis à faire la battaille, ſe doibuent les champions offrir á la iuſtice) that is: at the day which is appointed for the combat, the champions ought to offer themſelues to the Iuſtice. So that by all theſe places compared together, it is euident whence the original of this word (aſſiſe) floweth. How diuerſly it is vſed in our common lawe, it followeth that we declare. Firſt Litleton in the chapter, Rents. ſaith, that it is aequivocum: where he ſetteth downe three ſeuerall ſignifications of it: one, as it is taken for a writ: another, as it is vſed for a Iurie: the third, as for an ordinance. And him, he that liſteth, may reade more at large. My collections haue ſerued me thus: firſt (aſſiſe) is taken for a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the recouerie of poſſeſſion of things immoueable, whereof your ſelfe, or your aunceſtor haue bene

diſſeiſed. And this is as well of things corporall as incorporeall rights, being of foure ſorts: as here they follow in their order.
               
                  Aſſiſe of novel diſſeiſin (aſſiſa nova diſſeiſina) lyeth where a tenent in Fee-ſimple, Fee-taile, or for tearme of life, is lately diſſeiſed of his lands or tenements, or elſe of a rent ſeruice, rent ſeck, or rent charge, of common of paſture, of an office, of tolle, tronage, paſſage, pownage, or for a nuſance leuied, and diuers other ſuch like. For confirmation whereof, you may reade Glanvile lib. 10. cap. 2. Bracton lib. 4. tract. 1. per totum. Britton. cap. 70. & ſeqq. Regiſter orig. fol. 197. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 177. 178. 179. new booke of entries. fol. 74. col. 3. Weſt. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. 1. And to this may aptly be added the Bill of freſh force (friſcae fortiae) which is directed to the officers or magiſtrates of Cities or Townes corporate, being a kinde of aſſiſe for recovery of poſſeſſion in ſuch places within 40. daies after the force, as the ordinarie aſſiſe is in the countie. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 7. c. This the Civilians call, iudicium poſſeſſorium recuperandi.
               
               
                  Aſſiſe of mort d' aunceſter (aſſiſa mortis anteceſſoris) lyeth, where my father, mother, brother, ſiſter, vncle, aunte, &c. died ſeiſed of lands, tenements, rents, &c. that he had in ſee ſimple, and after his death a ſtraunger abateth: an it is good, as well againſt the abatour, as any other in poſſeſſion. How likewiſe this is extended, ſee Bracton. li. 4. tract. 3. per totum. Britton. ca. 70. cum multis ſequent. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 114. Regiſter. orig. fo. 223. This the Civilians call, Iudicium poſſeſſorium adipiſcendi.
               
               
                  Aſſiſe of darrein preſentment (aſſiſa vltima praeſentationis) lieth, where I, or mine aunceſtor haue preſented a Clerke to a Church, and after (the Church being voide by the death of the ſaid Clerke or otherwiſe) a ſtraū
                  ger preſenteth his Clerke to the ſame Church, in diſturbance of me. And how otherwiſe this writ is vſed; See Bracton. li. 4. tract. 2. Regiſter. orig. fo. 30. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 195.
               
                  Aſſiſe de vtrum (aſſiſa vtrum) lieth either for a parſon againſt a lay man, or a lay man againſt a parſon, for land or tenement doubtfull, whether it be lay ſee, or free almes. And of this, ſee Bracton. li. 4. tract. 5. cap. 1. & ſeqq. Brit. ca. 95. The reaſon why theſe writs be called aſſiſes, may be diuers. Firſt, becauſe they ſettle the poſſeſſion, and ſo an outward right in him that obteineth by them. Secondly, they were originally ſpedde and executed at a certaine time and place formerly appointed. For by the Norman law, the time and place

muſt be knowne 40. daies before the Iuſtices ſate of them: and by our lawe, there muſt be likewiſe 15. daies of preparation, except they be tried in thoſe ſtanding courts of the king in Weſtminſter: as appeareth by Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 177. D. E. Laſtly, they may be called aſſiſes, becauſe they are tried moſt commonly by eſpecial courts, ſet & appointed for the purpoſe: as may be well proved not onely out of the cuſtumarie of Normandie, but our bookes alſo: which ſhew, that in auncient times, Iuſtices were apointed by eſpeciall commiſſion, to diſpatch controverſies of poſſeſſion, one or more, in this or that onely countie, as accaſion fell out, or diſſeiſins were offered, & that as well in terme time, as out of terme: whereas of later daies, wee ſee that all theſe commiſſions of aſſeſes, of eyre, of oyer & terminer, of gaol deliuerie, and of niſi prius, are diſpatched all at one time, by two ſeverall circuits in the yeare; out of terme, and by ſuch as haue the greateſt ſway of Iuſtice, being al of them, either the Kings ordinarie Iuſtices of his benches, Sergeants at the lawe, or ſuch like.
               
                  Aſſiſe, in the ſecond ſignification (according to Litleton) is vſed for a Iurie. For (to vſe his owne example) it is ſet downe in the beginning of the record of an aſſiſe, of novel diſſeiſin. Aſſiſſa venit recognitura; which is as much to ſay, as Iuratores veniunt recognituri. The reaſon why the Iurie is called an aſſiſe, he giueth to be this: becauſe by the writte of aſſiſe, the Shyreeue is commaunded, quòd faciat duodecim liberos & legales homines de viceneto &c. videre tenementum illud, & nomina eorum imbreviari, & quod ſummoneat eos per bonas ſummonitiones, quòd ſint coram Iuſtitiarijs, &c. parati inde facere recognitionem, &c. This is (as if he ſhould haue ſpoken ſhorter) metonymia effecti. For they are called the aſſiſes, becauſe they are ſummoned by vertue of the writ ſo termed. And yet the Iurie ſummoned vpon a writ of right, is likewiſe called the aſſiſe, as himſelf there confeſſeth: which writ of right is not an aſſiſe. But this may be ſaid to be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or abuſiuely ſo tearmed. Aſſiſe, in this ſignification, is diuided in magnam & paruam. Glanvile lib. 2. ca. 6. 7. &c. and Britton. c. 12. where it appeareth, wherein the great aſſiſe differeth from the petit aſſiſe: whome I wiſh to be read, by thoſe that would be furder inſtructed in this point. For this place, thus much in ſhort. The former 4. kindes of aſſiſes vſed in actions only poſſeſſory, be called petit aſſiſes, in reſpect of the graund aſſiſe. For the law of feeſe

is groūded vpon two rights: one of poſſeſſion, the other of propertie: and as the grand aſſiſe ſerueth for the right of property, ſo the petit aſſiſe ſerueth for the right of poſſeſſion. Horns myrror of Iuſtices, lib. 2. cap. de novel. diſſeiſin.
               
               
                  Aſſiſe in the third ſignification according to Litleton, is an ordinance or ſtatute: as the ſtatute of bread and ale made, anno 51. H. 3 is termed the aſſiſe of bread and ale (aſſiſa panis & ceruiciae, Regiſt. orig. fol. 279. b. The aſſiſe of Clarendon, (aſſiſa de Clarendon) wherby thoſe that be accuſed of any hainous crime, and not able to purge themſelues by fire and water, but muſt abiure the realme, had libertie of 40. daies to ſtay, and trie what ſuccour they could get of their friends, toward their ſuſtenance in exile. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 118. out of Bracton li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 16. num. 2. Of this alſo Roger Hoveden maketh mention, and more particularly then any that I haue read, parte poſter. ſuorum annalium, fol. 313. b. in Henrico ſecundo. Aſſiſe of the Foreſt, (aſſiſa de Foreſta) which is a ſtatute or conſtitution touching orders to be obſerued in the kings foreſt. Manwood parte. 1. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 35. Crompton in the Court of the Iuſtices of the Foreſt per totum, fol. 146. & ſeq. And the aſſiſe of the king, anno. 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. called the ſtatute for view of Francke pledge. And theſe be called aſſiſes, becauſe they ſet downe and appoint a certaine meaſure, rate, or order in the things which they concerne. Of aſſiſe in this ſignification doth Glanvil alſo ſpeake, lib. 9. cap. 10. in fine. Generaliter verum eſt quod de quolibet placito quod in comitath deducitur & terminatur, miſericordia quae inde prouenit, vicecomiti debetur: quae quanta ſit, per nullam aſſiſam generalem determinatum eſt. And thus much touching Litletons diuiſiō. But if we marke well the writers of the lawe, we ſhall find this word (aſſiſe) more diuerſly vſed, then this author hath noted. For it is vſed ſometime for the meaſure or quantity it ſelfe, (and that per Metonymiam effecti) becauſe it is the very ſcantline deſcribed or commaunded by the ordinance: as for example we ſay, when wheate, &c. is of this price, then the bread, &c. ſhall be of this aſſiſe. This word is furder taken, for the whole proceſſe in court vpon the writ of aſſiſe, or for ſome part therof, as the iſſue or verdict of the Iury. For example, aſſiſes of new diſſeiſin, &c. ſhall not be taken, but in their ſhires, and after this maner, &c. mag. char. cap. 12. And ſo it ſeemeth to 
                     〈…〉
                  nifie, Weſtm. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. 1. in theſe words:

let the diſſeiſiours alledge no falſe exceptions, whereby the taking of the aſſiſes may be deferred, &c. And anno 34. Ed. 1. ſtat. 2. if it be found by aſſiſe: the aſſiſe in arrained: to averre by the aſſiſe: the aſſiſe by their default ſhal paſſe againſt them: and alſo an. 1. H. 6. cap. 2. aſſiſes awarded by default of the tenents, &c: Laſtly, by Merton, cap. 4. anno 20. H. 3. certified by the aſſiſe, quite by the aſſiſe, &c. And in this ſignification, Glanvile calleth it, magnam aſſiſam domim regis: quae ex duodecim ad minus legalium hominum ſacramentis conſiſtit. lib. 2. cap. 7. Bracton vſeth it in like ſort: as aſſiſa cadit in tranſgreſſionem. lib. 4. cap. 30. & aſſiſa cadit in perambulationem. codem. cap. 31. num. 2. Fleta defineth an aſſiſe in this ſignification, thus: Aſſiſa in iure poſſeſſorio, eſt quaedam recognitio duodecim hominum iuratorum, per quam Iuſticiary certiorantur de articulis in breui contentis. An aſſiſe alſo thus ſignifying, is ſaid ſometime to paſſe, (per modum aſſiſae) and ſometime in modum 
                        〈…〉
                     ata. in maner of an aſſiſe, when onely the diſſeiſin in queſtion, is put to the trial of the twelue in maner of a iurie, when as any exception is obiected to diſable the intereſt of the diſſeiſee, and is put to be tryed by the twelue, before the aſſiſe can paſſe. As for example: Quaeſtio ſtatus, cauſa ſucceſſionis, cauſa donationis, pactum ſiue conditio vel cō
                     nentio, voluntas & diſsimulatio, tranſactio, vel quietaclamatio vel remiſsio, confirmatio ſiue conſenſus, propria vſurpatio rei propriae, difficultas iudicij, iuſtum iudicium, finis, chirographum, intruſio in rem alienam, vel diſſeiſina, ſi in continenti reijciatur, negligentia quae per tranſitum temporis excludit actunem. Fleta. lib. 4. cap. 10. §. 1. whome reade alſo to this point, cap. 11. §. Siautem à Domino: and at large, cap. 16. eiuſdem libri. & lib. 5. cap. 6. §. Item. vertitur aſsiſa & ſeq. And note that aſſiſe in this ſignification, is taken foure waies, Old nat. br. fol. 105. The firſt, is aſſiſe at large, which is taken aſwell vpon other points, as vpon the diſſeiſin. For example, where an infant bringeth an aſsiſe, and the deed of his aunceſtor is pleaded, whereby he claimeth his right or foundeth his title: then the aſſiſe ſhall be taken at large: that is, the Iurie ſhall enquire, not only whether the plaintiffe were diſſeiſed or not by the tenent, but alſo of theſe other points: viz. whether his aunceſtor were of full age, of good memorie, and out of priſon, when he made the deed pleaded. Another example out of Kitchin, fol. 66. The tenent pleadeth a forraine releaſe, in barre to an aſsiſe, whereupon the cauſe was adiourned. At the

day the tenent maketh default. Therefore the aſsiſe was taken at large: that is, not onely whether the plaintiffe were diſſeiſed, but alſo whether there be any ſuch forraine releaſe. A third example you may reade in Litleton. cap. Eſtates vpon condition. The ſecond maner of aſsiſe in point of aſsiſe (aſſiſa in modum aſſiſae) which is, when the tenent, as it were, ſetting foote to foot with the demandant, without furder circumſtance, pleadeth directly contrarie to the writ, no wrong, no diſſeiſin. The third manner is, aſsiſe out of the point of aſsiſe (aſsiſa extra aſsiſam, vel in modum iuratae.) viz. when the tenent alledgeth ſome by exception, that muſt be tried by a Iurie, before the principall cauſe can proceed: as if he pleade a foreine releaſe, or foreine mater tryable in another countie. For in this caſe, the Iuſtices referre the record to the Court of common plees, for the triall of the foreine plee, before the diſſeiſin can come to be diſcuſſed. Of this ſort reade diuers other examples in Bracton, lib. 4. part. 1. cap. 34. For there be of them (as he ſaith) and Britton alſo, cap. 52. both dilatorie and peremptorie. The fourth and laſt manner is: aſsiſe of right of dammages, and that is, when the tenent confeſsing a putting out, and referring it to a demurter in lawe, whether it were rightly done or not, is adiudged to haue done wrong. For then ſhall the demandant haue a writ to recouer dammages, which is called aſsiſe to recouer dammages, as alſo the whole proceſſe.
               
                  Aſſiſe, is further taken for the court, place, or time, where and when the writs and proceſſes of aſsiſe be handled or taken. And in this ſignification aſsiſe is generall: as when the Iuſtices paſſe their ſeuerall circuits, euery couple with their commiſsion, to take all aſsiſes twice in the yeare. For he that ſpeaketh of any thing done, at that time, and in that place, will commonly ſay, that it was done at the generall aſsiſe. It may likewiſe be ſpeciall, in this ſignification: as if an eſpeciall commiſsion ſhould be granted to certaine (as in ancient times they often were, Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 11. in fine) for the taking of an aſsiſe vpon one diſſeiſin or two: any thing done in the court before them, a man would ſay, it was done at ſuch an eſpeciall aſsiſe. And in this very ſignification doth Glanvil vſe it, lib. 9. cap. 12. in theſe words: Si contra dominum ſuum & non infra aſsiſam, tunc diſtringitur ipſe occupator, &c. and lib. 13. cap. 32. in theſe words: cum quis itaque infra aſsiſam domini regis. i. infra tempus à domino rege de conſilio procarum

ad hoc conſtitutum, quod quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      maius, quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      minus cenſetur, alium iniuſtè & ſine iudicio diſſeiſiver
                        〈…〉
                     , &c. Of this word aſsiſe, you may reade in M. Skene, de verbo. ſignif. verbo. Aſsiſe, and by him vnderſtand, that in Scotland alſo it is diuerſely vſed, viz. in 5. ſeuerall ſignifications. And touching the fifth ſignification, he hath theſe words: An aſſiſe is called a certaine number of men lawfully ſummoned, receiued, ſworne and admitted to iudge and diſcerne in ſundrie civil cauſes, ſyke as perambulations, cognitions, moleſtations, pourpreſture, diviſion of lands, ſeruing of brieues, and in all and ſundrie criminall cauſes decided and tried by an aſsiſe: whereof there are two kinds: one ordinarily in vſe, which may be called a litle aſsiſe of the number of 13. or 15 perſons: the other, called a great aſsiſe, which conſiſteth of 25. perſons, &c. The reſt is very worthe the reading.
               
                  Aſſiſa continuanda, is a writte directed to the Iuſtices aſſigned to take an aſſiſe, for the continuance of the cauſe, in caſe where certaine records alleaged, cannot in time be procured by the party that would vſe it. Reg. orig. f. 217.
               
                  Aſſiſa proroganda, is a writ directed to the Iuſtices of aſſiſe, for the ſtay of proceeding, by reaſon of the Kings buiſnes, wherein the partie is imploied. Regiſter. orig. fo. 208. and fo. 221.
               
                  Aſſociation (aſſociatio) is a patent ſent by the King, either of his owne motion, or at the ſuite of the plaintife, to Iuſtices appointed to take aſſiſes of novel diſſeiſin, or of oyer and terminer, &c. to take others vnto them as felowes and collegues in that buſines. The dirivation is plaine: the examples, and ſundrie vſes hereof you may finde, in Fitz
                        •
                     . nat. br. fo. 185. E. & fo 111. B. but more particularly in the Reg. orig. f. 201. 202. 205. 206. 207. 223. 224.
               
                  Aſſoile (abſolvere) commeth of the French (abſouldre) and ſignifieth to deliuer or ſet free from an excommunication. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 72. in words to this effect: Otherwiſe the defendāt ſhould remaine in priſon, vntill the plaintiffe were aſſoyled, that is, deliuered from his excommunication.
               
                  Aſſumpſit, is a voluntarie promiſe made by word, whereby a man aſſumeth or taketh vpon him to performe or pay any thing vnto another. This word containeth any verball promiſe made vpon conſideration, which the Civilians expreſſe by divers words, according to the nature of the promiſe, calling it ſometime pactum, ſometime ſponſionē, ſometime promiſſionem, pollicitationem or conſtitutum, the word ſeemeth to be drawne from the latine

                  (aſſumptio) quae ſignificat profeſſionem. l. Π. ad municipalem.
               
               
                  Attache (attachiare) cōmeth of the French (attacher. i. figere, nectere, illigare, defigere, alligare.) In our common lawe it ſignifieth, to take or apprehend by commaundement or writte. And M. Lamberd in his eirenarch. li. 1. cap. 16. maketh this difference betweene an arreſt and an attachement, that an arreſt proceedeth out of lower courts by precept, and an attachment out of higher courts by precept or writ: and that a precept to arreſt hath theſe formall words (duci facius &c) and a writ of attachment theſe words: (praecipimus tibi quòd attachies talem, & habeas eum coram nobis &c. whereby it appeareth, that he which arreſteth, carieth the party arreſted to another higher perſon to be diſpoſed of forth with, he that attacheth, keepeth the party attached, and preſenteth him in court at the day aſſigned in attachement. yet I obſerue out of Maſter Kitchin, that an attachement iſſueth out of a court baron, which is a lowe court. cap: Attachment in court baron, fo. 79. Another difference there is, that an arreſt lieth onely vpon the body of a man, and an attachement ſome time vpon his good, as ſhalbe ſhewed in the ſequele. It may be likewiſe asked how an attachement and a (capias) doe differ: & how an attachement and a (cape) and an attachement and a diſtreſſe. Firſt that an attachement differeth from a (capias) it appeareth by Kitchin in theſe words: fo. 79. Note that in a court Baron a man ſhalbe attached by his goods; and a (capias) ſhall not goe out thence. wherby I gather, that an attachement is more generall, taking hold of a mans goods, and a (capias) of his body onely. Then an attachement differeth from a (cape) in this, becauſe a (cape) be it (cape magnum) or (cape parvum) taketh hold of immoveables, as lands or tenements, and are properly belonging to action reall: as you may gather out of their formes, in Fitzh. nat. br. whereas attachemēt hath rather place in actions perſonall, as Bracton plainly ſetteth downe. li. 4. tracta. 4. ca. 5. nu. 3. Where neuertheleſſe it appeareth, that a (cape) may be likewiſe vſed in an action perſonall. An attachement (as it is formerly ſaid) taketh hold of moueable goods or the bodie. For it appeareth, by Kitchin. fo. 263. that a man may be attached by a hundred ſheepe. Reade Skene, de verbo. ſignific. verbo attachiamentum.
               
               Now it followeth to ſhew how attachement differeth from a diſtreſſe. For ſo it doth, as may be ſhewed out of Kitchin, fo. 78.

where he ſaith, that proceſſe in court baron, is ſummons, attachment, and diſtreſſe, out of the owld. nat. br. fo. 27. where it is ſaid, that a proceſſe in a (quare impedit) is ſummons, attachement, and one diſtreſſe, and, againe fo. 28. wheare (ſpeaking of the writ) ne admittas) he ſaieth thus: and the proceſſe is one prohibition, and vpon the prohibition an attachment and diſtreſſe, and fo. 32. in a writ of (Indicauit) you haue theſe words: and after the attachment returned, the diſtreſſe ſhall goe out of the rols of the Iuſtices. Bracton on the other ſide, li. 5. tract. 3. ca. 4. nu. 2. ſheweth, that both (attachiamentum, & magnum cape, diſtrictiones ſunt). of which opinion Fleta alſo is, li. 5. ca. 24. §. ſi autem ad. But there alſo he ſaith, that (attachiamentum eſt diſtrictio perſonalis, & cape magnum diſtrictio realis. So that by his opinion, diſtrictio is (genus) to attachement. Britton in his 26. chapter, hath words to this effect: but in attachement of felony, there commeth no diſtreſſe, otherwiſe then by the body. And if the Shyreeue return in the caſes aforeſaid, that the treſpaſſours haue nothing in his bayliwick, by the which they may be diſtreined, it muſt be awarded that he take their bodies, &c. In which place, an attachement is plainly vſed, for an apprehenſion of an offender by his goods. So that to conclude, I finde no difference between an attachment, and a diſtreſſe, but theſe two
                     •
                   that an attachement reacheth not to lands, as a diſtreſſe doth, and that a diſtreſſe toucheth not the bodie (if it be properly taken) as an attachement doth. yet are they diuers times confounded, as may appeare by the places formerly alleadged, and by Glanvile. li. 10. ca. 3. and Fleta. li. 2. ca. 66. & ſeqq. How be it, in the moſt common vſe, an attachment is an apprehēſion of a man by his body, to bring him to anſwer the action of the plaintiffe: a diſtreſſe is the taking of another mans goods, for ſome reall cauſe, as rent, ſeruice, or ſuch like, whereby to driue him to replevie, and ſo to be plaintiffe in an action of treſpas, againſt him that diſtreined him. And ſo much for the difference, and coherēcie of theſe words. See alſo Diſtres.
               I finde in Weſt. parte. 2. ſymbolaio. titulo. proceedings in chauncerie. ſect. 22. 23. that attachemēt out of the chaūcery is two-fold, one ſimple, and originally decreed for the apprehenſion of of the partie: the other, after return made by the Shyreeue quod defendens non eſt inventus in baliva ſua, with proclamations made through the whole courtie, in ſuch places, as he ſhall thinke

meete, that the partie appeare by a day aſſigned, and that he attached never the leſſe, if he may be found. This ſecond kinde hath an affinitie with the canoniſts (vijs & modis) at the which if the partie appeare not, he is excommunicate: or with the Civilians (vijs & modis vnâ cum intimatione) For in the chaūcerie, if he com not vpō this, he is forth with preſſed with a writ of rebellion.
               There is an attachment of priviledge, which is a power to apprehend a man in a priviledged place, or els, by vertue of a mans priuiledge, to call another to this or that courte, whereunto he himſelfe belongeth, and in reſpect whereof, he is priviledged. Newe booke of entriſe. verbo priviledge. fo. 431. col. 2. There is alſo a foreine attachement, which is an attachement of a foriners goods found within a libertie or citie, to ſatisfie ſome creditour of his within the citie. There is alſo an attachement of the foreſt, which is a court there held. For (as M. Manwood ſaith) in his firſt parte of foreſt lawes, p. 90. 92. 99. there be three courts of the foreſt, wherof the loweſt is called the (Attachement) the meane, the (ſwaynemote) the higheſt, the (Iuſtice ſeate in eyre.) This court of attachement ſeemeth ſo to be called, becauſe the verderours of the foreſt haue therein no other authoritie, but to receiue the attachements of offenders againſt vert and veniſon, taken by the reſt of the officers, and to enrol them, that they may be preſented and puniſhed at the next Iuſtice ſeate. Manwood. parte. 1. pa. 93. And this attaching is by three meanes, by goods and catels, by body, pledges, and mainpriſe, or by the body onely. The courte is kept euery. 40. daies throughout the yere. And he that hath occaſion to learne more of this, I refer, him to M. Manwood, loco quo ſupra, & to M. Crompton in his courte of the foreſt. Attachement is commaunded in writs, the diverſitie whereof you may ſee, in the Regiſter originall vnder the word Attachiamentum in indice.
               
               
                  At large, ſee aſſiſe at large in the word aſſiſe, and owld nat. br. fo. 105. Verdict at large. Littleton. fo. 98. To vouch at large. owld. nat. br. fo. 108. To make title at large. Kitchin. fo. 68. See Barre.
               
               
                  Attaint (attincta) commeth of the French, as you ſhall ſee in the word (attainted) But as it is a ſubſtantiue, it is vſed for a writ that lyeth after iudgement, againſt a Iurie that hath giuen a falſe verdict in any court of record (be the action reall or perſonall) if the debt or dammages ſurmount the ſumme of 40. ſhillings: what the forme of the writ is, and how

in vſe it is extended, ſee Fitzena. br. fol. 105. and the new booke of entries, fol. 84. colum. 1. The reaſon why it is ſo called, ſeemeth to be, becauſe the partie that obtaineth it, endeuoureth thereby to touch, deprehend, or ſtaine the Iurie with periurie, by whoſe verdict he is grieued. What the puniſhment of this periurie is, or of him that bringeth the writ againſt the Iurie, if he faile in his proofe, ſee Glanvile lib. 2. cap. 19. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 109. K. Io. & 110. A. B. C. D. &c. the termes of the lawe, verb. Attaint. Forteſcue cap. 26. Smith de rep. Anglo. lib. 3. cap. 2. and anno 11. H. 7. cap. 21. & an. 23. H. 8. cap. 3. and others. In what diuerſitie of caſes this writ is brought, ſee the Regiſter orig. in Indice.
               
               
                  Attainted (attinctus) commeth of the French (teindre. i. tingere: the participle whereof is (teinct: i. tinctus,) or elſe of (attaindre. i. aſſequi, attingere.) It is vſed in our common lawe, particularly for ſuch as are found guiltie of ſome crime or offence, and eſpecially of felonie or treaſon. How be it a man is ſaid to be attainted of of diſſeiſin. Weſtm. 1. cap. 24. & 36. anno 3. Ed. 1. And ſo it is taken in French likewiſe (as eſtre attaint & vayncu en aucun cas) is to be caſt in any caſe. Which maketh me to thinke that it rather cōmeth from (attaindre) as we would ſay in engliſh catched, ouertaken, or playnly deprehended. And Britton ca. 75. vſeth the participle (attaint) in the ſence that we ſay (attained vnto) A man is attainted by two meanes: by appearance or by proces. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 44. Attaynder by by apparence, is by confeſſion, by battelll, or by verdict. idem. fo. 122. Confeſſion whereof attaynt groweth, is double: one at the barre before the iudges, when the priſoner vpon his endictment read, being aſked guilty or not guilty, anſweareth guilty, neuer putting himſelfe vpon the verdict of the Iurie: the other is before the coroner in ſanctuarie, where he vpon his confeſſion was in former times conſtreyned to abiure the Realme. which kinde alſo of the effect, is called attaynder by abiuration. Idem. fo. 182. Attaynder by battel is, when the party appealed by another, and chuſing to trie the the truth by combat rather then by Iurie, is vanquiſhed. Idem. fo. 44. Attaynder by verdict is when the priſoner at the barre anſwering to the endictment not guilty: hath an enqueſt 
                     〈◊〉
                   life and death paſſing vpon him and is by their verdict or doom
                     •
                   pronounced guiltie. Idem fo. 108. & 192. Attainder by proceſſe (otherwiſe called attainder by

default, or attainder by outlagarie) is where a partie flieth, and is not found vntill he haue bene fiue times called publikely in the countie, and at the laſt out-lawed vpon his default. Idem. fol. 44. I find by the ſame author. fol. 108. that he maketh a difference between attainder and conuiction, in theſe words: And note the diuerſitie betweene attainder and conuiction, &c. And with this agreeth the Statute, anno 34. & 35. H. 8. cap. 14. in ipſo principio, and anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 12. in theſe words: that then euery ſuch offender being duly thereof convicted or attainted, by the lawes of this realme, &c. And againe, in theſe words: Euery woman that is, or ſhall fortune to be wife of the perſon ſo attainted, convicted, or outlawed, &c. To this you may likewiſe adde the flat. anno 2. & 3. Edw. 6. cap. 33. And I find by Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 66. that a man by our ancient lawes, was ſaid to be conuicted preſently vpon the verdict (guiltie) but not to be attainted, vntill it appeared that he was no clerke: or being a clerke, and demanded of his ordinarie, could not purge himſelfe. So that a man was not attainted vpon conuiction, except he were no Clerke: and, in one word, it appeareth, that attainder is larger then conuiction; conuiction being onely by the Iurie.
               And attainder is not before iudgement, Perkins Graunti. num. 27. 29. Yet it appeareth by Stawnf. fol. 9. that conuiction is called attainder ſometime. For there he ſaith, that the verdict of the Iurie doth either acquit or attaint a man: and ſo it is, Weſtm. pr. cap. 14. anno 3. Ed. 1. This auncient lawe touching the conuiction and purgation of Clerkes, is altered, by anno 23. Eliz. cap. 2. as you may farder reade in Clergie.
               
               
                  Attainder (Attinctus) though it be moſt vſed in matters of felonie and treaſon: yet is it likewiſe applied to inferior tranſgreſſions, as to diſſeiſin, Weſtm. 1. cap. 36. anno 3. Ed. 1. and Britton cap. 26. See Attaint, and Attainted.
               
               
                  Attendant (attendens) cōmeth of the French (attendre. i. demorari, opperiri, expectare, praeſtolari,) it ſignifieth in our common law, one that oweth a dutie or ſeruice to another, or after a ſort dependeth of another. For example, there is Lord, meſn, and tenent: the tenent holdeth of the meſn by a peny; the meſn holdeth ouer by two pence. The meane releaſeth to the tenent all the right he hath in the land, and the tenent dyeth. His wife ſhall be endowed of the land, and ſhe ſhall be attendent to the heire of the third part of the peny, and

not of the third part of the two pence. For ſhe ſhall be endowed of the beſt poſſeſſion of her huſband. Another hath, Kitchin, fol. 209. in theſe words: where the wife is endowed by the gardian, ſhe ſhal be attendant to the gardian, and to the heire at his full age: with whome agreeth Perkins alſo, in Dower. 424.
               
                  Atturney (atturnatus) cōmeth of the French (tourner. i. vertere) as, tourner ſon eſprit à faire quelque choſe, i. animum ad rem aliquam inclinare.) Thence commeth the participle (tournè. i. verſus, converſus,) and the Subſtantiue (tour. i. vices, viciſſitudo) as, chacun à ſon tour, i. quilibet ſua vice.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, one appointed by another man to do any thing in his ſteade, as much as (procurator) or (fyndicus) in the ciuill lawe, Weſt. parte 1. Symbolayogr. lib. 2. ſect. 559. defineth it thus: Atturneys be ſuch perſons, as by the conſent, commandement, or requeſt, do take heed, fee to, and take vpon them the charge of other mens buſines in their abſence, by whome they are commaunded or requeſted. And where it ſeemeth that in auncient time, thoſe of authoritie in Courts, had it in their arbitriment, whether they would ſuffer men to appeare, or ſue by any other then themſelues, as is euident, by Fitz. nat. br. fol. 25. in the writ. Dedimus poteſt atem de atturnato facundo, where it is ſhewed, that men were driuen to procure the kings writs or letters parents to appoint Atturneys for them: it is ſithence prouided by Statutes, that it ſhould be lawfull ſo to do without any ſuch circuit, as by the Statute. anno 20. H. 3. cap. 10. anno 6. Ed. 1. cap. 8. anno 27. eiuſdem. ſtat. 2. an. 12. Ed. 2. 1. anno 15. eiuſdem cap. vnico. anno 7. Ric. 2. cap. 14. anno 7. H. 4. cap. 13. anno 3. H. 5. cap. 2. anno 15. H. 6. cap. 7. & anno 17. H. 7. cap. 2. is to be proued. And you may ſee great diuerſitie of writs, in the table of the Regi. origin. wherein the king by his writ commaundeth the Iudges to admit of Atturneys. Wherby there grew at the laſt ſo many vnskilfull Atturneys, and ſo many miſchiefes by them, that prouiſion for reſtraining them was requiſite. Wherefore anno 4. H. 4. cap. 18. it was ordained, that the Iuſtices ſhould examine them, and diſplace the vnskilfull. And againe, anno 33. H. 6. cap. 7. that there ſhould be but a certaine number of them in Northfo
                        〈…〉
                     
                   and Southfolke. In what caſes a man at this day may haue an Atturney, and in what not, ſee F
                        ••
                     . vbiſupra. Atturney is either generall or ſpeciall: Atturney generall is he, that by generall authoritie is appointed to all our affaires

or ſuites: as the Atturney generall of the king. pl. cor. fol. 152. which is as much as (Procurater Caeſaris) was in the Romane Empire. Atturney general of the Duke, Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 105. Atturney ſpeciall or particular is he, that is employed in one or more cauſes particularly ſpecified. Atturneys generall be made after two ſorts: either by the kings leters patents before him or the Lord Chancelour, or by our appointment before Iuſtices in eyre in open court, Glanvile li. 11. cap. pri. Britton. cap. 126. whome of this thing you may reade more at large. There be alſo in reſpect of the diuers courts, Atturneys at large, and Atturneys ſpecial, belonging to this or that court onely. The name is borrowed of the Normanes, as appeareth by the cuſtumarie, cap. 65. And I find the word (attornati) or as ſome reade (tornati) in the ſame ſignification in the title (de ſtatu regularium) ca. vnico. §. Perrò i. n ſexto.) where the gloſſe ſaith, that Atturnati dicuntur Procuratores apud acta conſtituti. Our old Latine word for this ſeemeth to be (reſponſalis) Bract. lib. 4. cap. 31. & lib. 5. parte 2. cap. 8. and ſo it is in Scotland at this day, but eſpecially for the Atturney of the defendant, as (prolocutor) is for the perſewer. M. Skene de verb. ſignificatione. Reſponſalis, as Sig
                        •
                     nius witneſſeth, in his firſt booke de regno Italie, was in auncient time, the title of the Popes ambaſſadour, pag. 11.
               
                  Atturney of the court of wards and Liueries (Atturnatus regis in curia Wardorum & Liberaturarū) is the third officer in that Court, who muſt be a perſon learned in the lawes of the land, being named and aſſigned by the king. At his admiſſion into the office, he taketh an oath before the Maſter of the ſaid court, well and truly to ſerue the king, as his Atturney in all courts, for and concerning any mater or cauſe, that toucheth the poſſeſſions and hereditaments limited to the ſuruey and gouernement of this court, and to procure the kings profite thereof: truly to councell the king, and the Maſter of the Court, in all things concerning the ſame, to the beſt of his cunning, witte, and power: and with all ſpeed and diligence from time to time at the calling of the Maſter, to endeuour himſelf for the hearing and determination indifferently of ſuch matters & cauſes, as depend before the Maſter: not to take any gift or reward in any mater or cauſe depending in the court, or elſe where, wherein the king ſhall be partie, whereby the king ſhall be hurt, hindred, or diſinherited: to do to his power,

wit, and cunning, all and euery thing that appertaineth to his office.
               
                  Atturney of the Court of the Duchie of Lancaſter, (Atturnatus curia Ducatus Lancaſtriae) is the ſecond officer in that Court, and ſeemeth, for his skill in law; to be there placed as (aſſeſſor) to the Chanceler of that court, being for the moſt part, ſome honorable man, and choſen rather for ſome eſpeciall truſt repoſed in him to deale betweene the king and his tenents, then for any great learning, as was vſuall with the Emperors of Rome, in the choice of their Magiſtrates.
               
                  Attournment (attornamentum) commeth of the French (tourner. i. vertero) and in our common lawe, is an yeelding of the tenent to a new Lord, or acknowledgement of him to be his Lord. For otherwiſe he that buyeth or obtaineth any lands or tenements of another, which are in the occupation of a third, cannot get poſſeſsion: yet ſee the ſtatute, an. 27. H. 8. cap. 16. The words vſed in atturnment are ſet downe in Litleton. I agree me to the graunt made to you, &c. But the more common atturnment is to ſay: Sir, I attourn to you by force of the ſame graunt: or, I become your tenent, &c. or elſe deliuer vnto the grauntee a peny, halfepeny, or farding, by way of attournment, Litleton lib. 3. cap. Attournment. 10. whome you may reade more at large, and find that his definition proceedeth from more lawe then Logicke
                     •
                   becauſe he ſetteth downe diuers other caſes in the ſame chapter, whereto attournment appertaineth as properly as vnto this. But you may perceiue there, that attournment is the tranſpoſing of thoſe duties that the tenent ought to his former Lord, vnto another, as to his Lord: and alſo, that attournment is either by word or by act, &c. Alſo attournment is voluntarie, or elſe compulſorie, by the writ tearmed Per quaeſeruitia, Owld. nat. br. fol. 155. or ſometime by diſtreſſe. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 147. Laſtly, attournment may be made to the Lord himſelfe or to his Steward in Court, Kitchin. fol. 70. And there is attournment in deede, and attournment in lawe. Coke vol. 6. fo. 113. a. Attournment in lawe, is an act, which though it be no expreſſe attournment, yet in intendment of law is all one.
               
                  (Atturnato faciendo vel vecipiendo) is a writ which a man oweing ſuite to a countie, hundred, weapon take, or other court, and deſiring to make an attourney, to appeare for him at the ſame court, whome he doubteth whether the Shyreeue or bailiffe will admit or not for his Attourney

there, purchaſeth, to commaund him to receiue ſuch a man for his attourney, and admit his appearance by him. The forme and other circumſtances whereof, ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fo 156.
               
                  Audiendo & terminando, is a writ, but more properly tearmed a commiſſion, directed to certaine perſons, when as any great aſſembly, inſurrectiō, or heinous demeanure or treſpaſſe is committed in any place, for the appeaſing, and puniſhment thereof. which you may read at large, in Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 110. See alſo oyer & terminer.
               
               
                  Andience courte (Curia audientiae Cantuarienſis) is a court belonging to the Archbiſhop of Canterburie, of equall authoritie with the Arches court, though inferior both in dignity and antiquitie. The originall of this court was, becauſe the Archeb. of Canterbury heard many cauſes extra iudicially at home in his owne palace, in which, before he would finally determine any thing, he did vſually commit them to be diſcuſſed by certaine learned men in the ciuile & canon lawes, whome thereupon be termed his auditors. And ſo in time it grew to one eſpeciall man, who at this day is called (Cauſarum negotiorum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      audientiae Cantuarienſis auditor ſeu officialis. And with this office hath heretofore commonly bene ioyned the Chancelerſhip of the Archbiſhop, who medleth not in any point of cō
                  tentious iuriſdiction, that is, deſciding of cauſes betweene party and party (except ſuch as are ventilated pro forma onely, as the confirmation of biſhops elections, or ſuch like) but onely of office, and eſpecially ſuch as are voluntariae iuriſdictionis, as the granting of the cuſtody of the ſpiritualties, during the vacation of Biſhoprickes, Inſtitutions to benefices, diſpenſing with banes of matrimonie, and ſuch like. But this is now diſtinguiſhed in perſon from the Audience. Of this Audience court, you may reade more in the booke, intituled De antiquitate ecclaſiae Brittannicae hiſtoria.
               
               
                  Audita querela, is a writ, that lieth againſt him, who hauing taken the bond called (ſtatute Merchant) of another, and craving or hauing obteined execution of the ſame at the Maior & Bayliffes hands, before whome it was entred, at the complaint of the partie who entred the ſame, vpon ſuggeſtion of ſome iuſt cauſe why execution ſhould not be graunted; as a releaſe, or other exception. This writ is graunted by the Chaunceler of England, vpon veiwe of the exception ſuggeſted, to the Iuſtices of the common banke, or of

the Kings benche, willing them to graunt ſummons to the Shyrecue of the countie, where the creditour is, for his appearance at a certain day before them. See more in owld. nat. br. fo. 66. and Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 102.
               
                  Auditour (auditor) commeth of the French (auditeur) and in our lawe, ſignifieth an officer of the king, or ſome other great perſonage, which yearely by examining the accounts of all vnder officers accountable, maketh vp a generall booke, that ſheweth the difference betweene their receipts or burden, and their allowances, commonly called (allocations): as namely, the auditours of the exchequer, take the accounts of thoſe receiuers, which receiue the revenewes of the augmentation: as alſo of the Shyrceues, eſcheatours, collectours, and cuſtomers, and ſet them downe and perfect them. Him that will read more of this, I referre to the Statut. anno. 33. H. 8. c. 33.
               
                  Auditours of the Preſts, are alſo officers in the exchequer, that doe take and make vp the great accounts of Ireland, Berwick, the mint, & of any mony impreſted to any man.
               
                  Auditour of the receipts, is an officer of the exchequer, that fileth the Tellers bils, and maketh an entrie of them, and giueth to the Lord Treaſurer a certificate of the mony receiued the weeke before. He maketh alſo (Debenturs) to euery Teller, before they pay any mony, & taketh their accounts. He keepeth the blacke booke of the receipts, and the Treaſurers key of the treaſurie; and ſeeth euery Tellers monies locked vp in the new treaſury.
               
                  Auenture. is a miſchance, cauſing the death of a man without felony: as when he is ſodenly drowned, or burnt, by any ſoden diſeaſe falling into the water or fire. Britton. ca. 7. where you may ſee, what it differeth from Miſadventure. See Miſadventure.
               
               
                  Average (averagium) by M. Skenes opinion (verbo arage) de verborum ſignificatione, commeth of the word (averia.) i. a beaſt, and ſo conſequently ſignifieth ſervice which the tenent oweth to to the Lord, by horſe or cariage of horſe. I haue heard others probably deriue it from the French (euvrage) or (euvre. i. opus.) It ſeemeth with vs to haue two diuers ſignifications; for the firſt, Raſtall. titulo Expoſition of words. maketh mention of the Kings averages, which I take to be the kings cariages by horſe or cart. Then. anno. 32. H. 8. ca. 14. and anno. 1. Iacobi, ca. 32. it is vſed for a certaine contribution that merchants and others doe every man

proportionably make toward their loſſes; who haue their goods caſt into the ſea for the ſafegard of the ſhippe, or of the goods and liues of them in the ſhippe in time of a tempeſt. And this contribution ſeemeth to be ſo called, becauſe it is proportioned, after the rate of euery mans average or goods caried.
               
                  Averijs captis in withernam, is a writ for the taking of catell to his vſe, that hath his catell taken vnlawfully by another, and driuen out of the countie where they weretaken, that they cannot be repleuied. Regiſter. originall. fo. 82. a. b. See Withernam.
               
               
                  Averment (verificatio) cōmeth from the French (averer. i. teſtari) as averer quelque meſchācete. i. extrahere ſcelus aliquod in lucem ex occultis tenebris. It ſignifieth (according to the author of the termes of lawe) an offer of the defendant to make good, or to iuſtifie and exception pleaded in abatement or barre of the plaintifs actiō. But me thinketh it ſhould rather ſignifie the act, thē the offer of iuſtifying the exception, by diuers places where I finde it vſed. For example. an 34. Ed. 1 ſtat. 2. And the demaundant will offer to averre by the aſſiſe or Iurie. where to offer to averre and to averre muſt needes differ: and againe in the ſame ſtaint. and the demaundaunt will offer to averre by the countrie, &c. thirdly in the engliſh nat. br. fo. 57. Theſe errours ſhall be tried by averment, &c.
               
                  Averpennie (quaſi Averago pennie,) is mony contributed toward the Kings averages. Raſtall expoſition of words. See Average.
               
               
                  Augmentation (augmentatio) was the name of a court, erected the 27 yeare of H. 8. as appeareth by the 27. chapter of that yeares parlament. And the end thereof was, that the king might be iuſtly delt with touching the profits of ſuch religious howſes and their lands, as weare giuen vnto him by an act of parlament the ſame yeare not printed. For the diſſolving of which courte, there was authoritie giuen to Queene Mary, by the parlament held the firſt yeare of her raigne. ſeſ. 2. ca. 10. which ſhee afterward put in execution by her leters patents. The name of the courte grewe from this, that the revenewes of the crowne were augmented ſo much by the ſuppreſſion of the ſaid houſes, as the king reſerved vnto the crowne, and neither gaue nor ſold away to others.
               
                  Aulne of Reniſh wine. a. 1. Ed. 6. ca. 13. aliàs, Awme of Reniſh wine. 1. laco. ca. 33. is a veſſell that conteineth 40. gallons.
               
                  Aulnegeowr. See Alneger.
               
               
                  Avo, is the name of a writ for

the which ſee (Ayle).
               
               
                  Awncell weight, as I haue beene informed, is a kinde of weight with ſcoles hanging, or hookes faſtened at each end of a ſtaffe, which a man lifteth vp vpon his forefinger, or hand and ſo diſcerneth the equalitie or difference betweene the weight and the thing weied. In which, becauſe there may, and was wont to be great deceipt, it was forbidden. anno. 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 5. ca. 9. & anno. 34. eiuſdem. ca. 5. and the euen ballance onely commanded, yet a man of good credit, once certified me, that it is ſtill vſed in leaden hall at London among butchers &c. In the deriuation of this word, I dare not be ouer confident. But it may probably be thought to be called (awnſell weight, quaſi hand ſale weight) becauſe it was and is performed by the hand, as the otheris by the beame. And if I ſhould draw it from the greeke, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. cubitus. the parte of the arme from the elbowe to the fingers ends, I might chalenge a good warrand of this from the Romaines; whoe thence derived their (ancile). i. the luckie ſhield, that was ſaide to be ſent from heauen in a tempeſt to Numa Pompilius, together with a voice, that the citie of Rome ſtould be the mightieſt of all others, ſoe long as that ſhield remained in it.
               
                  Auncient, d
                        〈…〉
                     , (antiquum dominicum) is called (more at large anncient demeaſn of the king or of the crowne. Fazb. nat. brifo. 14. d. It cōmeth of 2. French words (auncien. 1. veter, vetus, veteranus, antiquus) and of (demaine, alias domaire. i. publicum vectigal) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a certaine tenure, whereby all the maners belonging to the crowne, in the daies of Saint Edward the Saxon king, or of William the conquerour, did hold. The number & names of which maners, as all other, belonging to common perſons, he cauſed to be written into a booke, after a ſurvey made of them, now remaining in the exchequer, and called Domes day looke. And thoſe, which by that booke doe appeare, to haue belonged to the crowne at that time, and at 
                     〈◊〉
                   conteined vnder the title (Terrae regis) be called aunciēt demeaſn. Kitchin. fo. 98. and M. Gwin. in the preface to his readings. Of theſe tenents there were two ſorts, one that held their land frankely, by charter, and another that held by copy of court rolle, or by verge, at the will of the Lord, according to the cuſtome of the maner. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 14. d. of which opinion alſo Brittonis, ca. 66. nu. 8. The benefite of this tenure, conſiſteth in theſe points; firſt, the tenents of a manner holding

freely by charter in this ſort, cannot be impleaded, out of the ſame maner: and if they be, they may abate the writ, by pleading their tenure before or after anſwer made. Secondly, they be free of tolle for al things concerning their ſuſtenāce & husbā
                  dry. Thirdly, they may not be ē
                  paneled vpō any ēqueſt. Terms of the law. but more at large by Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 14. d. whome reade, as alſo fo. 128. a. &c. And as it appeareth by him. eodem. fo. 4. B. C. theſe tenents held by the ſervice of plowing the kings land, by plaſhing his hedges, or by ſuche like, toward the maintenance of the kings houſehold; in which regard they had ſuch liberties giuen them, wherin, to avoide diſturbance, they may haue writs to ſuch as take the duties of tolle in any market or feire; as likewiſe for immunitye of portage, paſſage, & ſuch like. Fitzh. nat. br. f. 228. A. B. C. D. by which author it alſo appeareth, that no lands be to be accompted auncient demeaſn, but ſuch as are holden in ſocage. fo. 13. D. et. 14. B. C. See Monſtraverunt, and Firtzh. fo. 14. and Deſſendo quietum de telonio. fo. 226. Fleta maketh three tenures holding of the crowne: auncient demeaſn, by eſcheate, & by purchaſe. li. 1. ca. 20. See Demaine.
               
               
                  Auncient Demeſn arere (antiquum dominicum àretro) is that aū
                  cient demeſn, which the king graunteth ouer to hold of a maner. Kitchin. fo. 67. b.
               
               
                  Avowè (advocatus) ſee Advowè. Britton ſaith that Avowè is he, to whome the right of advowzen of any Church appertaineth, ſo that he may preſent thereunto in his owne name, and is called avowè for a difference from thoſe, that ſometime preſent in another mans name: as a gardiā that preſenteth in the name of his warde, and for a difference alſo from them, which haue the lands whereunto an advowzen appertaineth, but onely for tearme of their liues, or of yeares, or by intruſion or deſſeiſin. ca. 92.
               
                  Avowrie. See Advowrie.
               
               
                  Avoir de pois, is in true French (avoir du poix. i. habere pondus, aut iuſti eſſe ponderis) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, two things: firſt, a kinde of weight divers from that, which is called Troy weight conteining but 12. ounces to the pound, where as this conteineth ſixteene. And in this reſpect it may be probably coniectured, that it is ſo called, becauſe it is of more weight then the other. Then alſo it ſignifieth ſuch merchandize, as are waied by this weight, and not by Troy weight. as in the ſtatute of York anno 9. Ed. 3. in prooem. anno. 27. Ed. 3. Statuto 2 ca. 10. at anno. 2

                  Rich. 2. cap. 1. See Weights.
               
               
                  Auxilium ad filium militem faciendum, & filiam maritandam, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue of euery countie, where the king or other lord hath any tenents, to leuye of them reaſonable ayde toward the knighting of his ſon, and the mariage of his daughter. See Ayde, and Fitz. nat. br. fol. 82.
            
            
               B
               
                  BAcheler (Bachalaureus) cō
                  meth of the French (Bachalier. i. tyro) and thereupon I thinke, thoſe that be called Bachelers of the Companies in London, be ſuch of each company, as be ſpringing toward the eſtate of thoſe that be imployed in Coūcel, but as yet are inferiors. For euery cōpany of the twelue, conſiſteth of a Maſter, two Wardens, the Liuerie, which are aſſiſtants in matter of Councell, or at the leaſt, ſuch as the Aſſiſtants be choſen out of, and the Bachelers, which are yet but in expectance of dignitie among them, and haue their function onely in attendance vpon the Maſter and Wardens. I haue read in an old monument, this word Bacheler, attributed to the Lord Admirall of England, if he be vnder a Baron, in French words to this effect: and it is to weet, that when the Admirall rideth to aſſemble a ſnippe of warre, or other, for the buſineſſe and affaires of the Realme, if he be a Bacheler, he ſhall take for his day wages, 4. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . ſterling: if he be an Earle or Baron, he ſhall take wages after the rate of his eſtate and degree. This word is vſed, anno 13. R. 2. ſtat. 2. cap. i. & ſignifieth as much as Bacheler Knight doth, anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. that is, a ſimple Knight, not a Knight baneret. See Banaret. Touching the farder etymologie of this word, Bachalarii, teſte Renano, à bacillo nominati ſunt, quia primi ſtudii authoritatem, quae per exhibitionem baculi concedebatur, iam conſecuti fuiſſent. Vt fuerit velut quoddam mancipationis ſignum in huiuſmodi aliquod ſtudium baculi traditio. Alciat writeth the word (baccalaurei, eoſque dicit viſos à bacca laurea nomen ſumpſiſſe. in l. cui praecipua 57. Π. de verbo. ſignifica.
               
               
                  Backberond. is a Saxon word. and almoſt Engliſh at this day, ſignifying as much as bearing vpon the backe, or about a man. Bracton vſeth it for a ſigne or circumſtance of manifeſt theft, which the Civilians call, furtum manifeſtum. For dividing (furtum, in manifeſtum, & non manifeſtum) he defineth (furtum manifeſtum) in this ſort: Furtum verò manifeſtū eſt, vbi latro deprehenſus eſt ſeiſitus de aliquo latrocinio: ſc. hand habend & backberend, & inſecutus fuerit per aliquem cuius res illa fuerit. li. 3

                  tract. 2. cap. 32. Maſter Manwood in the ſecond part of his foreſt lawes, noteth it for one of the 4. circumſtances or caſes, wherein a Foreſter may arreſt the bodie of an offender againſt vert or veniſon in the Foreſt. For by the aſſiſe of the Foreſt of Lancaſter (ſaith he) taken with the maner is, when one is found in the kings Foreſt in any of theſe foure degrees: ſc. ſtable ſtand, dogge drawe, backe beare, and bloudie hand. In which place you may find all theſe interpreted.
               
                  Badger, cōmeth of the French (bagage, i. ſarcina, impedimentū,) It ſignifieth with vs, one that buyeth corne or victuals in one place, and carieth it into another. See Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 69. & 70.
               
                  Baye or penne is a pond head made vp of a great heith, to keep in a great quantitie or ſtore of water, ſo that the wheeles of the fornace or hammer belonging to an Iron mill, may ſtand vnder them, and be driuen by the water comming out of them by a paſſage or flud-gate (called the penſtocke) and falling vpon the ſaid wheeles. This word is mentioned in the ſtatute, anno 27. El. cap. 19.
               
                  Bayle (Ballium, plevina, manucaptio) commeth of the French (bailler, i. attribuere, tradere, tribuere.) It is vſed in our common lawe, properly for the freeing or ſetting at liberty of one arreſted or impriſoned vpon action either civill or criminall, vnder ſuretie taken for his apparence at a day and place certainely aſſigned. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 8. num. 8. & 9. The reaſon why it is called Bayle, is, becauſe by this meanes the party reſtrained, is deliuered into the hands of thoſe that bind themſelues for his forth-comming. There is both common and ſpeciall baile. Cō
                  mon baile, is in actions of ſmall preiudice, or flight proofe: being called common, becauſe any ſureties in that caſe are taken: whereas vpon cauſes of greater weight or apparent ſpecialtie, ſpeciall baile or ſuretie muſt bee taken: as ſubſidie men at the leaſt, and they according to the value. Maſter Manwood in his firſt part of Foreſt lawes, pag. 167 maketh a great difference betweene bayle and mainpriſe, in theſe words: and note that there is a great diuerſitie betweene bayle and mainpriſe. For he that is mainpriſed, is alwaies ſaid to be at large, and to go at his own libertie out of ward, after that he is let to mainpriſe, vntill the day of his appearance, by reaſon of the ſaid common ſummons or otherwiſe. But otherwiſe it is, where a man is let to bayle, by foure or two men, by the Lord

chiefe Iuſtice in eyre of the Foreſt, vntill. a certaine day. For there he is alwaies accompted by the lawe, to be in their ward and cuſtodie for the time. And they may, if they wil, keepe him in ward or in priſon at that time, or otherwiſe at their will. So that he which is ſo bailed, ſhall not be ſaid, by the lawe, to be at large, or at his owne libertie. See Lamberds eirenarcha. lib. 3. cap. 2. pag. 330. Bayle, is alſo a certaine limit within the foreſt, accordingly as the Foreſt is diuided into the charges of ſeuerall Foreſters. Crompton in the oath of the bow-bearer, fol. 201. See Maynpriſe.
               
               
                  Baylife (ballivus) commeth of the French (bailif. i. diaecetes, nomarcha, praefectus Prouinciae) and as the name, ſo the office it ſelfe, in auncient time, was very aunſwerable to that of Fraunce and Normandie: for as in France there be ſixteene Parlaments, (Lupanus de Magiſtratibus Francorum, lib. 2. cap. Parlamentum) which be high courts, whence lyeth no appeale: & within the preeincts of thoſe ſeuerall parts of that kingdome, that belong to each Parlament, there be ſeueral prouinces, vnto which, within themſelues, iuſtice is miniſtred by certaine officers called bayliffes: ſo in England we ſee many ſeuerall counties or ſhires, within the which iuſtice hath bene miniſtred to the inhabitants of each countie, by the officer whome we now call Shyreeue or Vicount (one name deſcending frō the Saxons, the other from the Normans.) And though I cannot expreſſely proue, that this Shyreeue was euer called a bailiffe: yet is it probable, that that was one of his names likewiſe, becauſe the countie is called many times (balliva) that is a Bayliwicke: as namely, in the returne of a writ with (non eſt inuentus,) he writeth thus: (A. S. infra ſcriptus, non eſt inventus in balliva mea, poſt receptionem huius brevis) Kitchin returna brevium. fol. 258. and againe in Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 33. num. 3. and anno 5. Eliz. cap. 23. and anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. cap. 6. And I thinke the word (bailife) vſed cap. 28. of Magna charta, compriſeth as well Shyreeues, as bailiffes of hundreds: as alſo anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. cap. 9. But as the realme is diuided into Counties: ſo euery Countie is againe diuided into hundreds, within the which it is manifeſt, that in auncient times, the kings ſubiects had iuſtice miniſtred vnto them, by the ſeuerall officers of euery hundred, which were called bailiffes, as thoſe officers were and are in Fraunce and Normandie, being chiefe officers of iuſtice within

euery Prouince. Lupanus de Magiſtratibus Francorum, lib. 2. cap. Balivi. and the grand cuſtumary of Normandie, cap. 1. And that this is true among many others, I bring Bracton for my witnes, li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 34. n. 5. where it appeareth that bailiffes of hundreds might hold plee of appeale and approuers. But fithence that time, theſe hundred courts (certain franchiſes excepted) are by the ſtatute anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. cap. 9. ſwalowed into the Countie courts, as you may reade in countie and hundred. And the Bailiffes name & office is growne into ſuch contempt, at the leaſt, theſe bailiffes of hundreds, that they are now but bare meſſengers and mandataries within their liberties to ſerue writs, and ſuch like baſe offices: their office conſiſting in 3. points onely, which ſee in Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 49. a. Yet is the name ſtill in good eſteeme ſome other way. For the chiefe Magiſtrates in diuers townes corporate be called Bailiffes, as in Ipſewitch, Yarmouth, Colcheſter, and ſuch like. And againe, there be certaine, to whom the kings caſtels be committed, which are called Bailifs, as the Bailiffe of Dover caſtell.
               Theſe ordinary bayliffes are of two ſorts: baylifs errant, and baylifs of franchiſes. Baylifes errant (ballivi it inerantes) be thoſe which the Shyreeue maketh, and appointeth to goe hither & thither in the countie to ſerue writs, to ſummon the countie, ſeſſions, aſſiſes, and ſuch like. Baylifs of franchiſes (ballivi francheſiarum aut libertatum) be thoſe, that are appointed by euerie lord within his libertie, to doe ſuch offices within his precincts, as the baylife errant doth at large in the countie. Of theſe read S. Thomas Smith, de repub. Anglo. li. 2. ca. 16. There be alſo baylifes of the foreſt. Manwood parte 1. pa. 113. There be likewiſe baylifes of husbandrie, belonging to priuate men of great ſubſtance, who ſeeme to be ſo called, bycauſe they diſpoſe of the vnder ſervants every man to his labour and taske, check them for miſdoing their buiſenes, gather the profits of their lord and maſter, and deliuer an accompt for the ſame at the yeares end, or otherwiſe as it ſhallbe called for. The word baylife or balivus, is by Rebuffus deriued from (Baal. i. dominus, quia ballivi dominantur ſuis ſubditis, quaſi eorum magiſtri & domini. Rebuf. in conſtitut. regias. de ſenten. executionis. art. 7. gloſ. 1. The office or dutie of a bayliffe of a maner or houſehold (which in aunciēt time ſeemeth to haue beene all one) Fleta well deſcribeth, li. 2. ca. 72. & 73. This word

is alſo vſed in the canon lawe, ca. dilect
                        •
                     . de ſentent. excom. in ſexto. & ca. pri. de poenis in clement. wher the gloſſographer ſaith, it is a French word, ſignifiing as much as (praepoſitus) & (balia) or (balivatus) is vſed among our later interpreters of the civile & canon law, for provincia, as balliua heere in England, is vſed for a countie or ſhire.
               
                  Balkers See Conders.
               
               
                  Ballivo amovēdo, is a writ to remooue a baylife out of his office, for want of ſufficient liuing with in his bayliwick. Reg. orig. f. 178.
               
                  Bane, ſeemeth to ſignifie the deſtruction or ouerthrow of any thing. Bracton. li. 2. tracta. 2. ca. 1. nu. 1. as he which is the cauſe of of another mans drowning, is ſaid there to be la bane. i. malefactor. In that Bracton, in the place aforeſaid, prefixeth a French article to this word, it ſhould ſeeme by his opinion, that the word is French, but I finde it not in any French writer that euer I read.
               
                  Baneret (banerettus) in M. Skenes opinion, ſeemeth to be compounded of (baner) and (rent) whome reade more at large of this, verbo. Baneret. de verbo. ſigni. but our M. Camden, rather draweth the word from the German (bannerheires. Brittan. pae. 109. in meo libro. S. Thomas Smith de repub. Auglo. li. 1. ca. 18. ſaith, that baueret is a Knight made in the field, with the ceremonie of cutting of the point of his ſtandard, and making it, as it were, a baner. And they being before bachelers, are now of greater degree, allowed to diſplay their armes in a baner in the Kings armie, as barons doe. M. Camden vbi ſupra, hath theſe words of this matter, Baneretti, cùm vaſallorum nomen iam deſierat, a baronibus ſecundi erant: quibus inditum nomen a vexillo. Conceſſum illis erat militaris virtutis ergo, quadrato vexillo (perinde ac barones) vti. vnde & equites vexillarii a nonnullis vocantur, &c. Of creating a knight baneret, you may read farder, in M. Segar. Norrey his booke. li. 2. ca. 10. That they be next to barons in dignitie, it appeareth by the ſtatut. an. 14. R. 2. c. 11. & by anno. 5. R. 2. ſtat. 2. ca. 4. it may be probably coniectured, that they were aunciently called by ſummons to the court of parlament. and anno. 13. R. 2. ſtat. 2. ca. 1. we finde, that a baneret for praying a pardon for a murderer, contrarie to that ſtatut, is ſubiect to all one puniſhment with a baron. Iohan: Gregorius Tholoſanus. li. 6. ca. 10. ſui ſyntagmatis. nu. 9. hath theſe words: In Gallia ſunt duae ſpecies affines nobilium & feudorum, quas dicunt de benneretz & barons. Benneretus iure ſuae dignitatis, antequam talis dici mereatur, nobilis eſſe debet genere, in quarto gradu, poſſidens

in ditione decem ſcutarios bachalarios armorū: id eſt, decem vaſallos habens ſufficiens patrimonium, quo poſſit ſecum ducere quatuor aut quinque nobiles comites continuos, cum equitibus duodecim aut ſexdecim. Fit autem Benneretus, cùm princeps huiuſmodi perſonae concedit vexilli ius, & ex vexillo peditum in acie, vel extra, die ſolenni, ſacris peractis, admit acumina. Vocant la queve de pennon, fit
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      labarum, id eſt, equitum vexillum, vocant cornette eum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      equitem facit, ſi iam non eſt. Quòd ſi ditior his fiat benneretus, & habet vnam benneretam, aut ſex equites bachalarios, qui poſſideant ſinguli in cenſum ſexcentas libras ex eius ditione ſeu feudo, tunc poſſunt ex licentia principis, baronis nomen ſibi adſciſcere.
               
               Bans (bannus vel bannum) ſignifieth a publike notice giuen of any thing. The word is ordinarie among the feudiſts, and growne from them to other vſes: as to that which we heere in England call a proclamation, whereby any thing is publikely commaunded or forbidden. Vincentius de Franchis. deſciſ. 521. & 360. Hotoman verbo bannus, in verbis fendalibus ſaith that there is both (bā
                     nus) and (bannum) and that they ſignifie two divers things. His words are theſe: Bannus ſiue bannum duo ſignificat: Edictū, qua die vaſalli equis armiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inſtructi, ad comitatum adeſſe debent: & ſanctionē, hoc eſt, mulctam edicto non parentis. which he confirmeth by divers authorities. This word (bans) we vſe heere in England, eſpecially in the publiſhing of matrimoniall contracts in the church, before mariage, to the end that if any man can ſay againſt the intē
                  tion of the parties, either in reſpect of kindred or otherwiſe, they may take their exception in time. And in the canon lawe, Banna, ſunt proclamationes ſponſi & ſponſae in eccleſijs fieri ſolitae. ca. 27. extra de ſponſal. & ca. vlt. qui matrimonium. accuſ. poſ. & ca. vlt de clan. desponſ. Yet our word (banning) ſeemeth to come thence, being nothing but an exclamation of another. Onely Bracton, once maketh mention of bannus regis, for a proclamation, or ſilence made by the crier, before the congreſſe of the champions in a combate. li. 3 tracta. 2. ca. 21.
               
                  Bank (bancus) commeth of the French (banque. i. menſa) In our common lawe, it is moſt vſually taken for a ſeate or bench of iudgement, as bank leroy the kings bench. bank de commō plees: the bench of comon plees, or the common bench. Kitchin. fo. 102. called alſo in latine bancus regius, & bancus communium placitorum. Crompt. iuriſ. fo. 67. & 91. Camden in his Britannia. pa. 112. & 113. in meo. calleth them alſo bancum regium & bancum communem.
                  
See frank bank.
               
               
                  Bankrupt, (aliàs bankrowte.) cō
                  meth of the french (banque route) and (faire banqueroute) with the French, is as much as (foro cedere, ſol
                        ••
                      vetere) with the Romanes. The compoſition of the French word I take to be this (banque. i. monſa) & (route. i. veſtigium) metaphorically taken from the ſigne left in the earth, of a table once faſtened vnto it, & now taken away. So that the original ſeemeh to haue ſprung frō thoſe Romain (menſary) which (as appeareth by many wrighters) had their (tabernas & menſas) in certaine publique places, whereof, when they were diſpoſed to flie, & deceiue men that had put them in truſt with their monies, they left but the ſignes or carcaſes behinde them. I know that others of good learning (and M. Skene for one) bring this (a banco rupto) but the French word worketh in me this other opinion, for after their ſence, the French ſhould rather be banque rompu. Bankrupt with vs ſignifieth him or his act, that hauing gotton other mens goods into his hands, hideth him ſelfe in places vnknowne, or in his owne priuate houſe, not minding to pay or reſtore to his creditours their duties. anno. 34. H. 8. ca. 4. where the french phraſe (faire banque route) is tranſlated to the word, to make bankrupt. A bankrupt, anno. 1. Iacobi. ca. 15. is thus deſcribed: All and euery ſuch perſon and perſons, vſing, or that ſhall vſe the trade of merchandiſe, by way of barg aining, exchange, bartrey, cheuiſance, or otherwiſe in groſſe, or by ſeeking his, her, or their trade of liuing by buying and ſelling, and being a ſubiect borne of this Realme, or any the kings dominions, or denizen, who at any time ſithence the firſt day of this preſent parlament, or at any time hereafter, ſhall depart the Realme, or begin to keepe his or her houſe or houſes, or otherwiſe to abſent him or her ſelfe, or take ſanctuarie, or ſuffer him or her ſelfe willingly to be arreſted for any debt or other thing, not growne or due for mony deliuered, wares ſould, or any other iuſt or lawful cauſe, or good conſideration or purpoſes, or hath or will ſuffer him or her ſelfe to be outlawed, or yeld him or her ſelfe to priſon, or willingly or fraudulently hath or ſhall procure him or her ſelfe to be arreſted, or his or her goods, money, or chatels to be attached or ſequeſtred, or depart from his or her dwelling houſe, or make, or cauſe to be made any fraudulent graūt or conueyance of his, her, or their lands, tenements, goods or chatels, to the intent or whereby his, her, or their creditours being ſubiects borne, as aforeſaide,

ſhall or may be defeated or delayed forthe recouery of their iuſt and true dept: or being arreſted for debt, ſhall after his other arreſt, lye in priſon fixe monethes or more, vpon that arreſt, or any other arreſt or detention in priſon for debt, and lye in priſon ſixe monethes vpon ſuch arreſt or detention, ſhall be accompted and adiudged a bankrupt to all intents and purpoſes.
               
                  Baniſhment (exilium, abiuratio) commeth of the French (banniſſement) and hath a ſignification knowne to euery man. But there be two kinds of baniſhments in England: one voluntarie and vpō oath, whereof you may reade (Abiuration:) the other vpon cō
                  pulſion for ſome offence of crime: as if a lay-man ſuccor him that, hauing taken ſanctuarie for an offence, obſtinately refuſeth to abiure the realme, he ſhall looſe his life and member: if a Clerke do ſo, he ſhall be baniſhed, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 117. This puniſhment is alſo of our moderne Civilians called (bannimē
                     tum) which was aunciently tearmed (deportatio) if it were perpetuall, or (relegatio in inſulam,) if for a time. Vincentius de Franchis. Petrus de Belluga in ſuo ſpeculo. fol. 125. num. 4.
               
                  Barbaries (Oxyeantha) is a thornie ſhrub knowne to moſt men to beare a bery or fruite of a ſharpe taſte. Theſe beries (as alſo the leaues of the ſaid tree) be medicinable, as Gerara in his herball ſheweth, lib. 3. cap. 21. You find them mentioned among drugs to be garbled, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Bard, aliâs, Beard. See Clack.
               
               
                  Bargaine and ſale, as it ſeemeth by Weſt. part. 1. ſymb. lib. 2. ſect. 436. is properly a contract made of maners, lands, tenements, hereditaments, and other things, transferring the propertie thereof from the bargainer to the barganee. But the author of the new termes of lawe addeth, that it ought to be for money: ſaying farder, that this is a good contract for land, &c. and that fee-ſimple paſſeth thereby, though it be not ſaid in the deed (To haue and to hold the land to him and to his heyres,) and though there be no liuerie and ſeiſin made by the ſeller, ſo it be by deed indented, ſealed, and enrolled, either in the Countie where the land lyeth, or within one of the kings courts of Records at Weſtminſter, within ſixe moneths after the date of the deed indented, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 16.
               
                  Barkarie (Barkaria) is a heath houſe. New booke of Entries, titulo. Aſſiſe corp. polit. 2. Some call it a Tanne houſe.
               
                  
                  Baron (Baro) is a French word, and hath diuers ſignifications here in England. Firſt, it is taken for a degree of Nobilitie next vnto a Vicount. Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 8. num. 4. where he ſaith, they be called Barones, quaſi robur belli. And in this ſignification it is borowed from other nations, with whom Baroniae be as much as Prouinciae. Petrus Belluga in ſpeculo princip. fol. 119. So Barones be ſuch, as haue the gouernment of Prouinces, as their fee holden of the king: ſome hauing greater, ſome leſſer authoritie within their territories, as appeareth by Vincentius de Franchis in diuers of his deſceiſions, and others. Yet it may probably be thought, that of old times here in England all they were called Barons that had ſuch Seigniories, as we now call court-barons, as they be at this day called Seigneurs in France, that haue any ſuch manor or lordſhip. Yea, I haue heard by men very learned in our Antiquities, that neere after the conqueſt, all ſuch came to the Parlament, and ſate as Nobles in the vpper houſe. But when by experience it appeared, that the Parlament was too much peſtered with ſuch multitudes: it grew to a cuſtome, that none ſhold come but ſuch, as the king, for their extraordinarie wiſedome or qualitie, thought good to call by writ; which writ ranne (hac vice tantùm.) After that againe men ſeeing this eſtate of Nobilitie to be but caſuall, and to depend meerly vpon the Princes pleaſure, they ſought a more certain hold, and obtained of the King, leters patents of this dignitie to them and their heyres male. And theſe were called Barons by leters patents or by creation: whoſe poſterity, be now by inheritance and true deſcent of Nobilitie, thoſe Barons that be called Lords of the Parlament: of which kind the king may create more at his pleaſure. It is thought neuertheleſſe, that there are yet Barons by writ, as wel as Barons by leters patents, and that they may be diſcerned by their titles: becauſe the Barons by writ are thoſe, that to the title of Lord haue their owne ſurnames annexed, as Compton, North, Norice, &c. whereas the Barons by leters patents, are named by their Baronies. Theſe Barons which were firſt by writ, may now iuſtly alſo be called Barons by preſcription, for that they haue continued Barons in themſelues and their aunceſtors time, beyond the memorie of man. The originall of Barons by writ Maſter Camden in his Britannia pag. 109. in meo. referreth to Henry the third Barons by leters patents or creation, (as I haue heard among

our Antiquaries) were firſt created about the dayes of Henry the ſixth▪ the maner of whoſe creation reade in Maſter Stowes Annales, pag. 1121. Of all theſe you may alſo reade Maſter Ferui glorie of Generoſitie, pa. 125 & 126. And ſee M. Skene de ver. ſignif. verb. Baro. with Sir Thomas Smith, lib. 1. de rep. Anglor. cap. 17. who ſaith, that none in England is created Baron, except he can diſpend a thouſand pound by yeare, or a thouſand markes at the leaſt. To theſe former, Maſter Seager (by office) Norrey, lib. 4. cap. 13. of Honour ciuill and militarie, addeth athird kind of Baron, calling them barons by tenure, and thoſe be the Biſhops of the land: all which by vertue of baronries annexed to their biſhoprickes, haue alwaies had place in the vpper houſe of Parlament, and are tearmed by the name of Lords ſpirituall.
               Baron in the next ſignificatiō is an Officer: as barons of the Exchequer be to the king: of which the principall is called Lord chiefe Baron (capitalis Baro) and the three other (for ſo many there be) are his aſſiſtants in cauſes of iuſtice, betweene the king and his ſubiects, touching cauſes appertaining to the Exchequer.
               The Lord chiefe Baron at this day, is the chiefe Iudge of the court, and in matter of lawe, information, and plea, anſwereth the barre, and giueth order for iudgment thereuppon. He alone in the terme time doth ſit vpon Niſi prius, that come out of the Kings Remembrancers office, or out of the office of the clerke of of the pleaſe, which cannot be diſpatched in the mornings for want of time. He taketh recogniſances for the Kings debts, for appearances, and obſeruing of orders. He taketh the preſentation of all the officers in court vnder himſelfe, and of the Mayor of London, and ſeeth the Kings Remembrancer to giue them their oathes. He taketh the declaration of certaine receiuers accompts of the lands of the late augmentation, made before him by the Auditors of the ſhires. He giueth the two parcel makers places by vertue of his office.
               The ſecond Baron in the abſence of the Lord chiefe baron, anſwereth the barre in matters aforeſaid: he alſo taketh recogniſances for the kings debts, apparences, and obſeruing of orders. He giueth yearely the oath to the late Maior and eſcheatour of London for the true accompt of the profits of his office. He taketh a declaration of certaine receyuers accompts. He alſo examineth the letters and ſummes of ſuch Shyreeues foraine accompts,

as alſo the accompts of Eſcheatours and Collectours of Subſidies and Fifteens, as are brought vnto him by the auditors of the Court.
               The third Baron, in the abſēce of the other two, anſwereth the barre in matters aforeſaide, he alſo taketh recogniſances, as aforeſaide. He giueth yerely the oath of the late Mayor and gawger of London for his true accōpting. He alſo taketh a declaration of certaine receiuers accompts: and examineth the leters and ſūmes of ſuch of the former accountants, as are brought vnto him.
               The fourth barons is alwaies a courſetour of the court, and hath bene choſen of ſome one of the clerks in the remembrancers offices, or of the clerke of the pipes office. He at the daies of prefixion, taketh oth of al high ſhyreeus and their vnderſhyreeues, and of all eſcheatours, baylifs, and other accountāts, for their true accounting. He taketh the oath of al collectours, controllers, ſurueyours and ſerchers of the cuſtome houſes, that they haue made true entrances in their bookes. He appoſeth all ſhyreeues vyon their ſū
                  mons of the pipe in open court. He informeth the reſt of the Barons, of the courſe of the court in any mater that concerneth the kings prerogatiue. He likewiſe, as the other Barons, taketh the declaration of certaine receiuers accompts: and examineth the leters and ſummes of ſuch of the former accountants, as are brought vnto him.
               Theſe barons of the exchequer, areauncient officers for I finde them named, weſtm. 2. ca. 11. anno. 13. Ed. 1. and they be called barons, becauſe barons of the realme were wont to be employed in that office. Fleta. li. 2. ca. 24. S. Thomas Smith ſaith of them, that their office is to looke to the accompts of the Prince: and to that end they haue auditors vnder them: as alſo to deſcide all cauſes, appertaining to the Kings profits, comming into the exchequer by any meanes. This is in part alſo proued, by the ſtatut anno. 20. Ed. 3. ca. 2. &. anno. 27. eiuſdem. ſtat. 2. ca. 18. & anno. 5. R. 2. ſtat. 1. ca. 9. & 12. & anno. 14. eiuſd ca. 1
                     •
                  . And hereupon they be of late, men learned in the common lawe of the realme: wheras in auncient times, they were others: viz. maiores & diſcretiores in regno, ſiue de clero eſſent, ſiue de curea. Ockam in his lucubrations de fiſci regij ratione. Horn in his mirrour of Iuſtices ſaieth, that barons were wont to be two, and they Knights. ca. De la place del Eſchequer.
               
               Then be there in this ſignification, Barons of the Cinque portes. anno. 31. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 2.

                  et anno. 33. H 8. ca. 10. which are two of euery of the ſeuen towns, Haſtings, Winchelſey, Ry, Rumney, Hithe, Douer, & Sandwiche, that haue places in the lower houſe of Parlament. Cromptons iuriſd. fo. 28. Baron in the the third ſignification, is vſed for the huſband in relation to his wife: which is ſo ordinary in all our lawe writers, that wright in french, as it were ſuperfluous to confirme it by any one.
               
                  Baronet. I reade this word, anno. 13. R. 2. ſtat. 2. ca. 1. but I hould it falſely printed for Baneret, or els to ſignifie all one with it.
               
                  Baronye (baronia, baronagium) is the fee of a baron. In which accompt are not only the fees of temporall Barons, but of Biſhops alſo: who haue two reſpects: one, as they are ſpirituall men, without poſſeſſions, as was the tribe of Levy among the Iſraelites, being ſuſteined by the only firſt frutes and tenthes of the other tribes. Ioſue. ca. 13. verſue. 14. The other reſpect they haue, groweth from the bountie of our engliſh Kings, whereby they haue baronies at the leaſt, & are thereby Barons or Lords of the Parlament. This baronie (as Bracton ſaith, li. 2. ca. 34. is a right indiuiſible: and therefore if an inheritance be to be divided among coparceners: though ſome capitall meſſuages may be divided: yet, ſi capitale meſſuagium ſit caput Comitatus, vel caput Baroniae, he ſaith they may not be parcelled, The reaſon is, ne ſic caput per plures particul as diuidatur, & plura iura comitatuum & baroniarum deveniant ad nihilum: per quod deficiat Regnum, quod ex Comitatibus & Baronys dicitur eſſe conſtitutum.
               
               
                  Barre (barra) commeth of the French (barre) or barriere (. i. repagalum, obex, vectis) It is vſed in our common law, for a peremptory exception againſt a demaūd or plaint: and is by the author of the Termes of law, defined to be a plee brought by the defendant in an action, that deſtroieth the action of the plaintiffe for euer. It is divided into a barre to common intent, and a barre ſpeciall. Abarte to a common intendment, is an ordinarie or generall barre, that ordinarily diſableth the declaration or plee of the plaintiffe: a barre ſpeciall is that, which is more then ordinarie, & falleth out in the caſe in hand or queſtion, vpon ſome ſpeciall circumſtance of the fact. Plowden. caſu Colthirſt. fo. 26. a. b. For exāple, an executor being ſued for his teſtators debt, pleadeth that he had no goods left in his hands, at the day when the writ was purchaſed or taken out againſt him. This is a good barre to common intendment, or (prima

ſacie) But yet the caſe may ſo fall out, that more goods might come to his hands ſithence that time: which if the plaintiffe can ſhew by way of replication, then excep the haue a more eſpeciall plee or barre to alleadge, he is to be condemned in the action. See alſo Plowden in the caſe aofre named. fo. 28. a. b. and Brooke. titulo. Barre. nu. 101. & Kitchin. fo. 215. Barre alſo in the ſame ſignification, is devided into barre materiall, and barre at large. Kitchin. fo. 68. A barre materiall (as it ſeemeth) may otherwiſe be called a barre ſpeciall: as when one in the ſtoppe of the plaintiffes action, pleadeth ſome particular mater, as a deſcent from him that was the vndoubted owner, a feofment made by the aunceſter of the plaintiffe, or ſuch like. A barre at large is, when the tenent or defendant by way of exception, doth not traverſe the plaintifes title by pleading not guiltie, nor confeſſe and avoid it, but onely maketh to himſelfe a title in his barre. As if in an Aſſiſe of novel diſſeiſin, the tenent pleade a feoſment of a ſtraunger vnto him, and giues but a colour onely to the plaintiffe. Of this there is an apt example to be found. 5. H. 7. fo. 29.
               
                  Barre, is alſo in regarde of the effect, diuided into barre perpetuall & barre pro tempore. Perpetuall is that, which overthroweth the actiō for euer. Barre pro tempore is that, which is good for the preſent, and may faile heereafter: looke an example or two in Broke titulo. Barre. nu. 23. where he ſaith, that to plead (plene adminiſtrauit) is good, vntill it may appeare, that more goods come to the executors hands afterward, which alſo holdeth for an heire, that in an action of his aunceſters debt pleadeth (rien per diſcēt.) This word is alſo vſed for a materiall bar: as the place where Se
                     •
                  geants or Coūcelers ſtand to pleade cauſes in courte, or priſoners to aunſwere to their endictments. Of which our cōmon lawyers, that be lycēced to plead, in other contries called licentiati) are termed barriſters. anno. 24. H. 8. ca. 24.
               
                  Barrator (barectator) commeth from the French (barat. i. aſtutia) and is neere the French it ſelfe in ſignificatiō. For (barateur) in that tong betokneth a deceiver: and a barator in our common law, is a common wrangler, that ſetteth men at ods, and is himſelfe never quiet, but at brawle with one or other. To this effect you may read M. Lamberds eirenarcha. pa 342. who ſaith likewiſe, that barettor (for ſo he writeth is) may ſeeme to come from the latine (baratro) or (balatro) that is, a 
                     〈◊〉
                   knaue or vnthrift, and (by a metaphor)

a ſpot in a cōmon wealth See. the ſtatute of champerty. an. 33. Ed. 1. ſtat. 2. ca. vnico and Weſt. 1. ca. 32. anno. 3. Ed. i. M. Skene de verb. ſignif. verbo barratr
                        •
                     , ſaith that barratours be Symoniſts called of the Italian word (barrataria) ſignifying corruption or briberie in a Iudge giuing a falſe ſentence for mony: whome you may read more at large: as alſo Hortenſius Cavalcanus, in his tractat de brachio reg 10. parte. 5. nu. 66. whoſe words are: Barataria veròdicitur, quando Iudex aliquid petit indebitum, vt iuſtitiam faciat. Who alſo. nu. 195. partis 5. ſaith thus: barraterii appellātur, qui praetorium nimis frequentāt. And in another place of the ſame worke. Baratria dicitur, quia fit quoddam barratrum. i. commutatio pecuniae cum iuſtitia, &c. See alſo Aegidius Boſſius in practica criminali. titulo de officialibus corrupt. &c. nu. 2. & 6. Baratariam committunt, Iudices, qui iuſticiā auro vendunt. Paris Puteola. de ſyndicatu. verbo Barataria. pa. 217.
               
                  Barre fee, is a ſee of 20. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . that every priſoner acquited of felonie payeth to the gaoler. Crompt. Iuſtice of peace. fo. 158. b.
               
               
                  Barrell, is a meaſure of wine, oyle, &c. conteining the 8. parte of a tonne, the 4. of a pipe, and the ſecond of a hogſehead, that is, 31. gallons and a halfe. anno. 1. R. 3. ca. 13. But this veſſel ſeemeth not to conteine any certaine quantitie, but differeth according to the liquor, for a barrell of beere conteineth 36. gallons, the Kilderkin, 18. and the firkin, 9. a barrell of ale 23. gallons the kilderkin 16. and the firkin. 8. gallons. anno. 23. H. 8. ca. 4.
               
                  Barriers, commeth of the French (barres) and ſignifieth with vs that which the French men call (ieu de barres. i. palaſtrā.) a martial ſport or exerciſe of mē, armed and fighting together with ſhort ſwords, within certain limits or liſts, whereby they are ſevered from the beholders.
               
                  Barter, may ſeeme to come of the French (barater. i. circumv
                        •
                     nire.) It ſignifieth in our ſtatutes, exchange of wares with wares. an. 1. R. 3. ca. 9. & ſo bartry the ſubſtantiue. anno. 13. Eliza. ca. 7. The reaſon may be, becauſe they that choppe and change in this maner, doe what they can for the moſt part, one to ouer-reach the other. See barratour.
               
               
                  Baſe eſtate, is in true French (baſeſtat) It ſignifieth in our cō
                  mon law, that eſtate which baſe tenents haue in their lands. Baſe tenents be they (as M. Lamberd ſaith in his explica. of Saxōword
                     •
                  . verbo Paganus) which do to their lords villeinous ſervice. The author of the termes of law in his Tractat of old termes, ſaith that to hold in ſee baſe, is to hold at

the will of the lord. Kitchin. fo. 41. ſeemeth to make baſe tenure and franck to be contraries: where it appeareth, that he putteth copy holders in the number of baſe tenents. And out of theſe, I thinke, that it may be probably coniectured, that everie baſe tenent holdeth at the will of the lord, but yet, that there is a difference betweene a baſe eſtate, and and villenage, which Fitzh. in his nat. br. fo. 12. B. C. ſeemeth to cō
                  found. For the aboue named author of the termes of law ſaith in the place before cited, that to hold in pure villenage, is to doe all that the lord will commaund him. So that if a copie holder haue but baſe eſtate, he not holding by the performance of everie commandement of his lord, cannot be ſaide to hold in villenage. Whether it may be ſaid, that copy holders, be by cuſtome and continuānce of time, growne out of that extreame ſervitude, wherein they were firſt created, I leaue to others of better iudgement: but Fith. loco citato ſaith, tenure by copie is a terme but lately invented.
               
                  Baſe courte, is any court that is not of record, as the court baron. Of this read Kitchin. f. 95. 96. &c.
               
                  Baſe fee, See baſe eſtate.
               
               
                  Baſelard (baſlerdus) in the ſtatut. anno. 12. R. 2. ca. 6. ſignifieth a weapon, which M. Speight in his expoſition vpon Chancer, cal-leth pugimem vol 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
               
               
                  Baſtard (baſtardus) See Baſtardy, and See Skeene de verbo ſiguif. verbo Baſtardus.
               
               
                  Baſtardy (baſtardia) commeth of the French (baſtard. i. 
                     
                        •
                     othu
                        •
                     ) Caſſanans de conſuetis. Burg. pa. 1116. ſaith (baſtard) and (ſilius naturalis) be all one. Baſtardy in our common law, ſignifieth a defect of birth, obiected to one begotten out of wedlock. Bract. li. 5. ca. 19. per totum. How baſtardie is to be prooued, or to be inquired into, if it be pleaded, ſee Raſtalls booke of Entriſe. tit. Baſtardie. fo. 104. Kitchin. fo. 64. maketh mention of baſtardie ſpeciall, and baſtardie generall. The difference of which is, that baſtardie generall is a certificate from the Biſhop of the dioces to the Kings Iuſtices, after iuſt enquiry made, that the party inquired of, is a baſtard or not a baſtard vpon ſome queſtion of inheritance. Baſtardy ſpeciall, is a ſuite commenced in the Kings court, againſt him that calleth another baſtard: ſo termed (as it ſeemeth) becauſe baſtardy is the principall and eſpeciall caſe in triall, and no inheritance contended for. And by this it appeareth, that in both theſe ſignifications, baſtardy is rather taken for an examination or triall, whether a mans birth be defectiue or illegitimat▪
               
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
               
                  
itſelfe. See Broke titulo. Baſtardy. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . 29. and Docter Ridlies booke. pa. 203. 204.
               
                  Baſton, is in french a ſtaffe, club, or couleſtaffe. It ſignifieth in the ſtatuts of our realme, one of the warden of the fleets his ſeruants or officers, that attendeth the Kings court with a red ſtaffe, for the taking of ſuch to warde, as be committed by the court. So it is vſed. anno. 1. R. 2. ca. 12. anno 5. Eliz. ca. 23.
               
                  Batable ground, ſeemeth to be the ground in queſtion heretofore, whether it belōged to England or Scotland, lying betweene both the kingdomes. anno. 23. H. 8. ca. 16. as if we ſhould ſay debatable ground. For by that name. M. Skene. de verbo. ſign. verbo Plegius. calleth ground, that is in controuerſie betweene two.
               
                  Battell (duellum) commeth of the French (bataille. i. bellum, praelium) and ſignifieth in our cōmon lawe, a triall by combate. The maner wherof becauſeit is long, and full of ceremonies, I doe for the better and more full vnderſtanding of it, referre you to Glanvile, lib. 2. cap. 3. 4. 5. to Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2 cap. 21. fol. 140 to Britton, cap. 22. and to S. Thomas Swith de repub. Anglorum, li. 2. cap. 7. & lib. 3. cap. 3. See Bombat.
               
               
                  Battery cōmeth of the French batre. i. verberare, cudere, percutere) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a violent ſtriking of any man, which the Civilians call iniuriam perſonalem, quia perſonae infertur per verbera, cruciatū, &c. Weſemb. parat. Π. de Iniur. & fam. libel.
               
               
                  Baubels (baubella) is an old word, ſignifying Iewels. Ro. Hoveden parte poſter. ſuorum annal. fo. 449. b.
               
               
                  Bearding, aliâs, Barding of wooll See Clack.
               
               
                  Bearers, ſignifie all one with Maintainers, anno 20. Edvar. 3. cap. 5.
               
                  Beconage (Beconagium) ſignifieth money paid for the maintenance of Becons.
               
                  Bewpleder (pulchrè placitando) is made of. 2. french words (beau. 1. decorus, formoſus, pulcher) and (pleder. 1. diſputare, & cauſam agere) It ſignifieth in our common law, a writ vpon the ſtatute of Marlbridge or Marlborow, made the 52. yeare of H. 3. ca. 11. whereby it is provided, that neither in the circuit of Iuſtices, nor in Counties, Hundreds, or Courts-baron, any fines ſhall be taken of any man for faire pleading, that is, for not pleading fairely or aptly to the purpoſe. Vpon which Statute, this writ was ordained againſt thoſe, that violate the lawe herein. See Fitz. nat. br. fol. 270. A. B. C. whoſe definition is to this effect: The writ vpon

the Statute of Marlebridge for not faire pleading, lyeth where the Shyreeue or other Bailiffe in his court, will take fine of the party plaintiffe or defendant, for that he pleadeth not fairely, &c.
               
                  Bedell (Bedellus) commeth of the French (bedeau. i. apparitor) & it ſignifieth with vs, nothing elſe but a meſſenger or ſeruitour belonging to a Court, as a Court-baron or Leet, Kitchin fol. 46. where you may ſee his oath: or to the Court of the Foreſt, Manwood parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 221. in theſe words: A Bedell is an officer or ſeruant of the Foreſt, that doth make all maner of garniſhments of the Courtes of the Foreſt, and alſo all maner of Proclamations, as well within the Courts of the Foreſt as without: and alſo doth execute all the proceſſes of the Foreſt. He is like to a Bailiffe errant of a Shyreeue in a countie, &c.
               
                  Benefice (Beneficium) is generally taken for all eccleſiaſticall liuings, be they dignities or other, as anno 13. R. 2. ſat. 2. ca. 2 where benefices are diuided into electiue, and benefices of gift. So is it vſed in the Canon lawe alſo. Duarenus de beneficiis. lib. 2. cap. 3.
               
                  Beneficio primo eccleſiaſtico habendo, is a writ directed from the King to the Chanceler, to beſtow the benefice that firſt ſhall fall in the kings gift, aboue or vnder ſuch a valew, vpon this or that man, Regiſt. orig. fol. 307. b.
               
               
                  Benevolence (Benevolentia) is vſed both in the Chronicles and Statutes of this realme, for a voluntarie gratuitie giuen by the ſubiects to the King. Looke Stowes annals pag. 701. That it hath bene ſomething aunciently accuſtomed, it appeareth by him and by the Statute anno 1. Ric. 3. cap. 2. where it is called a newe impoſition: and in that reſpect reprehended by that tyrant in his predeceſſors: whether iuſtly or not I cannot ſay, nor mind to diſpute. But Stowe, pag. 791. ſaith, that the inuention grewe from Edward the fourths dayes. You may find it alſo, anno 11. H. 7. ca. 10. to haue bene yeelded to that worthy Prince, in regard of his great expences in wars and otherwiſe. This is alſo mentioned and excepted out of the pardon, anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 15. It is in other nations called (ſubſidium charitativum) giuen ſomtime to Lords of the fee, by their tenents, ſomtime to biſhops by their Clergy. Matthaeus de Afflictis, de ſciſ. 136. Caſſan. de conſeut. Burg. pag. 134. 136. Baldus conſitio. 120. vol. 6. pag. 230. Of this Maenochius maketh mention, lib. 2. centur. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ca. 178. & 179. ſhewing, when it is lawful for a Prelate charitativum ſubſidium à ſibi ſubditis exigere, &

quanta debeat eſſe eius ſumma, ſetting downe eight iuſt cauſes of this exaction.
               
                  Beſaile (proavus) is horowed of the French (biſayeul. i. le pere de man pere grand) the father of my grandfather. In the common law it ſignifieth a writ, that lieth, where the great grandfather was ſeiſed in his demeſne as of fee, of any lands or tenements in fee-ſimple, the day that be dyed, and after his death a ſtrā
                  ger abateth, or entreth the ſame day vpon him, and keepeth out his heyre, &c. The forme and farder vſe of this writ, reade in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 221. D. E. F. &c.
               
               
                  Beaſtes of chace (Ferae campeſtres) be fiue of the Foreſt, chace, or parke: that is, the Bucke, the Doe, the Foxe, the Martron, and the Roe, Manwood parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 342. & parte 2. cap. 4. num. 2.
               
                  Beaſtes of the foreſt (ferae ſylveſtres) are the Hart, the Hind, the Hare, the Boare, and the Wolfe, Manwood parte 2. of his Foreſt lawes, cap. 4. num. 1.
               
                  Beaſts and Fowles of Waren, are the Hare, Conie, Feſant, and the Pertridge, Manwood parte 2. cap. 4. num. 3.
               
                  Beſtaile, commeth of the French (beſtial. i. pecus) it ſeemeth with vs to ſignifie all kind of catell taken for the kings proviſion, anno 4. Ed. 3. cap. 3. And beſtiall is generally vſed for all kind of catell, anno 1. Iacobi cap. 33.
               
                  Bidding of the bedes, was a charge or warning, that the pariſh Prieſt gaue to his pariſhioners, at certaine eſpeciall times, to ſay ſo many Pater noſters, &c. vpon their beades, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 26.
               
                  Bigamie (bigamia) ſignifieth a double mariage. It is vſed in the common lawe, for an impediment that hindreth a man to be a Clerke, by reaſon that he hath bene twice maried. For vpon thoſe words of S. Paule to Timothie the firſt. cap. 3. verſ. 2. (Opertet ergo Epiſcopum irreprehenſibilem eſſe, & vnius vxoris virum:) the Canoniſts haue founded their doctrine, that he that hath bene twice maried, may not be a Clerke. And alſo him that hath maried a widow, they by interpretation, take to haue bene twice maried. And both theſe they do not onely exclude from holy orders, but alſo deny them all priuiledges that belong vnto Clerkes. But the author of the new termes of lawe well ſaith, that this lawe is aboliſhed by anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 12. And to that may be added the ſtatute, anno 18. Elizab. cap. 7. which alloweth to all men that can read as Clerkes, though not within

orders, the benefite of Clergie in caſe of felonie not eſpecially excepted by ſome other ſtatute.
               
                  Bilanciis deferendis, is a writ directed to a corporation, for the carying of weights, to ſuch or ſuch a hauen, there to weigh the wools that ſuch a man is licenced to trāſport, Reg. orig f. 270. a.
               
               
                  Bilawes, are orders made in court leets or court Barons by common aſſent, for the good of thoſe that make them, farder then the publique lawe doth binde. Coke vol. 6. fo. 63. a. Kitchin fo. 45. & 79. Theſe in Scotland are called (burlawe) or (birlawe) Skene de verbo: ſign. verbo Burlawe: where he ſaith thus: Lawes of burlawe, are made and determined, by conſent of neighbours elected and choſen by common conſent, in the courts called birlawe courts. In the which cognition is taken of compleints betwixt neighbour and neighbour: which men ſo choſen, are iudges and arbitratours to the effect aforeſaide, and are called birlawe men, For (bawr) or (bawrſman) in Dutch is (ruſticus) and ſo (birlaw) or (burlaw) leges ruſticorum. Hetherto M. Skene.
               
               
                  Bilinguis, though it ſignifie in generality a double tounged man; yet in our common lawe, it is vſed for that Iury, that paſſeth betweene an engliſh man and an alien. Wherof part muſt bee Engliſhmen, and part ſtraungers. anno. 28. Ed. 3. ca. 13.
               
                  Bille (billa) is diuerſly vſed among our cōmon lawyers. Firſt (as Weſt. ſaith pa. 1. ſymb. li. 2. ſect. 146. it is al one with an obligation, ſauing that whē it is in ēgliſh, it is commonly called a bill, and when it is in latine, an obligation. But I heare other good lawyers ſay, that a bill, though it be obligatorie, yet is without condition or forfeiture for non payment: and that the obligation hath both. Bille ſecondly, is a declaration in writing, that expreſſeth either the griefe and the wrong that the complaynant hath ſuffered, by the party complained of, or els ſome fault, that the party complayned of, hath committed againſt ſome lawe or ſtatute of the common wealth. This bille is ſometime offered vp to Iuſtices errants in the generall aſſiſes: ſometime, and moſt of all, to the Lord Chanceler of England, eſpecially for vnconſcionable wrongs done, ſometime to others hauing iuriſdiction, accordingly as the law, wheruppon they are grounded, doeth direct. It containeth the fact complained of, the dammages thereby ſuffered, and petition of proceſſe againſt the defendant for redreſſe. Weſt. parte. 2. Simbol. titulo ſupplications. ſect. 52. whom you may reade at large touching

this mater.
               
                  Billa vera, is (as it were) a word of arte in our common lawe. For the grand enqueſt empaneled and ſworne before the Iuſtices in eare &c. indorſing a bill, whereby any crime puniſhable in that court, is preſented vnto them, with theſe two words; do ſignifie thereby, that the preſentor hath furniſhed his preſentment or denunciation with probable euidence, and worthy of farder conſideration. And thereuppon, the party preſented by the ſame bill, is ſaid to ſtand indicted of the crime, and ſo tyed to make anſwer vnto it, either by confeſſing, or trauerſing the indictment. And if the crime touch the life of the party indicted, it is yet referred to another enqueſt, called the enqueſt of life and death: who if they finde him guilty, then he ſtandeth conuicted of the crime, and is by the Iudge to be cōdemned to death. See Ignoramus, ſee Indictment.
               
               
                  Billets of gold, commeth of the french (billot. 1. maſſa auri. anno. 27. Ed 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 14.
               
                  Bynny peper. anno. 1. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Blacke maile, is halfe engliſh, halfe french. For in french (maille) ſignifieth a ſmal peece of mony, which we cal a halfepeny. It ſignifieth, in the counties of Comberlād, Northumberland, Weſtmerland, and the biſhopricke of Duriſme, a certaine rate of mony, corne, catell, or other conſideration, paide vnto ſome inhabiting vpon or neare the borders, being men of name and power, allied with certaine, knowne to be great robbers and ſpoile-takers within the ſaide counties, to the end thereby to be by them freed, protected, and kept in ſafty, from the daunger of ſuch as doe vſually robbe and ſteale in thoſe partes. an. 43. Eliza. ca. 13.
               
                  Blacke rodde, is the huiffier belonging to the order of the Garter, ſo called of his blacke rodde that he carrieth in his hand. He is of the kings chamber, and alſo huiſſier of the parlament.
               
                  Blanks, cōmeth of the french (blanc. 1. candidus, albus) It ſignifieth a kind of coine that was coined in the parts of Frāce 5. by K. H. that were ſubiect to England: the valew whereof was eight pence. Stowes annals. pa. 586. Theſe were forbidden to be current within this realme. a. 2. H. 6. ca. 9. The reaſon why they were called blankes may be, becauſe at the time theſe were coyned in France, there was alſo a peece of gold coyned, which was called a (Salus) of the value of 22. ſhillings from which this ſiluer was in name diſtinguiſhed by the colour.
               
                  Bloody hand. See Backberend.
               
               
                  Blomary, is one of the forges

belonging to an iron mill (which alſo ſeemeth otherwiſe to be tearmed a Finary.) The vſe wherof if you will vnderſtand, you muſt knowe, that firſt there is a fornace, wherin the mine-ſtones are melted and caſt into a raw iron, faſhioned into long wedges three ſquare. that be called ſows. Then be there two forges like vnto ſmithes forges, but much bigger, the one whereof is called the blomary or (as it ſeemeth) the finary, into the which being maintained with a charcole fire blowne with bellowes, made to goe by water, are caſt the ſaide ſowes of raw iron, and melted againe, and by a workman called the finary man, are wounde and wrought rounde, and afterwarde beaten by a hammer into little wedges about a yarde long, which are called bloomes. Then is there another forge called the Hammer, into which theſe bloomes are caſt, and by a workman (called the hammer man) againe chafed and made ſoft in a charcole fire, blowne likewiſe with bellowes cauſed to goe by the water: and after caried by the ſaide hammer man, and put vnder the great hammer driuen alſo by the water. And ſo the ſaide bloomes are drawen, faſhiōed, and made into ſuch barres of iron of diuers ſortes and formes, as we ſee commonly ſould. Of theſe you may reade in the ſtatut. anno. 27. Elizab. ca. 19. See Baye.
               
               
                  Bloodwit (blodwita) is compoū
                  ded of 2. Saxon words (blout. i. ſanguis) and (wit) for the which we haue the word (wite) ſtill in the Weſt parts of England ſignifying a charging of one with a fault, or an vpbraiding. And Speight in his expoſitions vpon Chawſer ſaith, that (to wit) is as much as to blame. (To twit) in ſome other places of this land ſignifieth as much as (to hitte in the teeth) or to vpbraide. This bloodwit is a wot
                     •
                   vſed in charters of liberties aunciently graū
                  ted, and ſignifieth an amercement for ſhedding of blood. So that whoſoeuer had it giuen him in his charter, had the penaltie due for ſhedding of blood graunted vnto him. Raſtall in his expoſition of words. Skene de verbo. ſignif. writeth it (bludveit) and ſaith that (veit) in engliſh is iniuria vel miſericordia: and that (bludveit) is an amercement or (vnlawe) as the Scottiſhmen call it, for wrong or iniurie, as bloodſhed is. For he that is infeſt with (bludveit) hath free libertie to take all amercements of courts for effuſion of blood. Fleta ſaith, quod ſignificat quietantiam miſericordiae pro effuſione ſanguinis. li. 1. ca. 47.
               
                  Bockland, See Charterland. See

                  Copie bould and Free hould.
               
               
                  Bonis arreſtandis, is a writ, for the which See Arreſtandis bonis.
               
               
                  Bonis non amovendis, is a writ to the Shyreeues of London, &c. to charge them, that one condemned by iudgement in an action, and proſecuting a writ of errour, be not ſuffered to remooue his goods, vntill the errour be tried. Regiſter. orig. fo. 131. b.
               
               
                  Borow (burgus vel burgum) may either come from the French (burg. i. pagus) or from the Saxon (borhoe. i. vadium, pignus.) It ſignifieth here in England a corporate towne that is not a Citie. anno. 2. Ed. 3. ca. 3, namely all ſuch as ſend Burgeſſes to the Parlament: the number whereof you may ſee in M. Cromptons Iuriſd. fo. 24. It may probably be thought, that it was aunciently taken for thoſe companies conſiſting of ten families, which were combyned to be one anothers pledge or borhoe: See Bracton. li. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 10. See Headborowe, and Borowhead, and M. Lambard in the duties of conſtables. pa. 8. Lynwood vpon the prouinciall (vt ſingula de cenſibus), ſpeake to this effect: Aliqui interpretātur burgum eſſe caſtrum, vel locum vbi ſunt crebra caſtra. vel dicitur burgus, vbi ſunt per limites habitacula plura conſtituta.) But then ſetting downe his owne opinion, he defineth it thus: Burgus dici poteſt villa quacun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      un
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      alia a ciuitate, in qua eſt vniuerſit as approbata. And that he proueth oute of the 11. booke of Iuſtinians Godex. titulo de fund. rei priuatae. 65. et. l. 6. eius tituli. where burgus is termed corpus. ſome deriue it from the greeke (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. turris) ſee M. Skene de verbo. ſignif. verbo. Borghe. The late author M. Verſlegan in his reſtitution of decaied intelligences, ſaith, that (burg) or (burnh) whereof we ſay yet (Borough) or (Bourrow) metaphorically ſignifieth a towne, hauing a wall, or ſome kinde of cloſure about it: alſo a Caſtell. All places that in old time had among our aunceſters the name of borrough, were places one way or other fenſed or fortified.
               
                  Bordlands, ſignifie the demeaſns, that lords keepe in their hands, to the maintenance of their bord or table. Bract. li. 4. tractat. 3. ca. 9. nu. 5.
               
                  Borowhead alias Headborowe, (capitalis plegius) by M. Lamberds opiniō in his treatiſe of Cōſtables, is made vp of theſe two words. (borhoe. i. pledge and (bead) and ſignifieth a head orchiefe pledge. And in explication of this, and other Saxon words of this nature, he maketh an excellent rehearſall of ſome auncient cuſtomes of England, during the reigne of the Saxons, which you may reade. This borowhead (in ſhort)
                  
was the head or cheife man of the Decurie or Borhoe, that there he ſpeaketh of, choſen by the reſt to ſpeake, & to doe in the name of the reſt, thoſe things that concerned them. See Borowholders.
               
               
                  Borowhowlders, aliàs Burſholders, be quaſi borboe ealders, ſignifing the ſame officers that be called borowheads. (Lamb. in the duties of Conſtchles.) Bracton calleth them (Borghie Aldere) li. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 10.
               
                  Borow engliſh, is a cuſtumarie deſcent of lands or tenements, whereby in all places where this cuſtome holdeth, lands and tenemenrs deſcend to the yongeſt ſonne: or, if the owner haue no iſſue, to his yongeſt brother: as in Edmunton. Kitchin. fo. 102. And the reaſon of this cuſtome, as (Litleton ſaith) is, for that the yongeſt is preſumed in lawe, to be leaſt able to ſhift for himſelfe.
               
                  Borow goods diviſable, I finde theſe words in the ſtatute of Acton. Burnel. anno 11. Ed. 1. ſtatute vnico. and dare not confidently ſet downe the true meaning of them. But as before the ſtatute of 32. & 34. H. 8. no lands weare diuiſable at the common law, but in auncient baronies: ſo perhaps, at the making of the foreſaide ſtatute of Acton burnel, it was doubtfull, whether goods were deuiſable but in auncient borowes For it ſeemeth by the writ. de rationabili parte bonorum, that aunciently the goods of a man were partible betwene his wife and children.
               
                  Bote, ſignifieth compenſation. Lamb, explication of Saxon words. Thence cōmeth (manbote, aliâs monbote) that is compenſation or amends for a man ſlaine, which is bound to another. For farder vnderſtanding whereof, it is to be ſeene in K. Inas lawes, ſet out by M. Lamberd. ca. 96. what rate was ordeined for the expiation of this offence: See Hedgebote, Plowbote, Howſebote. & reade M. Skenede verbo. ſignif. verbo. Bote.
               
               
                  Botiler of the king (pincerna regis) anno 43. Ed. 3. ca. 3. is an officer that prouideth the Kings wines: who (as Fleta li. 2. ca. 21. ſaith) may by vertue of his office out of every ſhippe loaden with ſale wines, vnum doleum eligere in prora navis ad opus regis, & aliud in puppi, & pre qualibet pecia reddere tantùm 20. ſolid. mercatori. Si autem plura inde habere volucrit, bene licebit: dum tamen precium fide dignorum iudicio pro rege appenatur.
               
               
                  Bowbearer, is an vnder officer of the foreſt (as M. Crompton in his iuriſdict. fo. 201, ſetteth down, ſworne to the true performance of his office in theſe words: I will true man be to the maſter foriſter

of this foreſt, & to his lieuerenent: and in the abſence of them, I ſhall truly overſee, and true inquiſition make, as well of ſwornemen as vnſworne in euerie bayliwick, both in the north bayle. and ſouth bayle of this foreſt, and of all maner of treſpaſſes done, either to vert or veniſon, I ſhall truly endeavour my ſelfe to attach, or cauſe them to be attached, in the next court Attachement, there to be preſented, without any concealment had to my knowledge: ſo helpe me God, &c.
               
                  Bracton (otherwiſe called Henry of Bracton) was a famous lawyer of this land, renowmed for his knowledge both in the common and civill lawes, as appeareth by his booke every where extant. He liued in the daies of Henry the third. Stawn. praero fo. 5. b. and as ſome ſay, Lord cheife Iuſtice of England.
               
               Bread of treate, and bread of coket. anno. 51. H. 3. ſtatuto. 1. of bread and ale.
               
                  Bred, ſignifieth broade. This word Bracton vſeth, li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 15. nu. 7. proverbially thus to lange and to bred the meaning whereof you may there finde, word for word it is, as we now ſpeake two long and two broad: or two in length, and two in breadth.
               
                  Breuibus, & ra
                        〈…〉
                      liberandis, is a writ or mandat to a Shyreeue to deliuer vnto the newe Shyreeue choſen in his roome, the county with the appertenances, together with the rols, briefes, remembrances, and all other things belonging to that office. Regiſter. original. fo. 295. a.
               
               
                  Bribours, commeth of the french (bribeur. i. mendicus) It ſeemeth to ſignifie with vs, one that pilfreth other mens goods. anno 28. Ed. 2. ſtat. 1. ca. vnico.
               
               
                  Brief (breve) commeth from the French (brefou breif. i. brevis) and in our common lawe, ſignifieth a writ, whereby a man is ſummoned to anſwer to any action: or (more largely) any precept of the king in writing; iſſuing out of any court, whereby he commaundeth any thing to be done, for the furtherance of iuſtile or good order. The word is vſed in the ciuile lawe, ſome time in the ſingular number, and maſculine gender, as l. vlt. Coa. de conueniendis fiſci debitoribus. li. 10. tit. 2. you haue theſe words: Inter chartulas confiſcati brevis, quidam adſeueratur invētus, qui nomina cō
                     tineba
                        •
                      debitorū. Where it is vſed for a ſhort note. Again, I finde a title reſtored by Gothofred; in the firſt booke of the Code. de quadrimenſtruis brevibus. Quadrumenſtrus autem breves erant, qui de ſingulis indictionum penſionibus, quarte quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      menſe fo
                        •
                     utis, confic
                        •
                     e
                        •
                      antur.
                  
Alſo Lampridius in Alexandro hath it ſingularly thus: notarium, qui falſum cauſae brevem in conſilio imperatorioretuliſſet, &c. And in the Authētiques. Novel. 105. ca. 2. you haue this word (breviatores. i. brevium proſcriptores). Breves autem, brevia, brevicula, ſunt chartae ſive libelli breves, as Galbofred. there noteth. Where he noteth likewiſe out of Zonaras in Garthagin: Cōcilio, that this is a greeke word, thus: 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . See Skene de verbo. ſignif. verbo Breue. Of theſe breifes ſee alſo Bracton. li. 5. tract. 5. ca. 17. nu. 2. Breve quidem cùm ſit formatum ad ſimilitudinem regula iuris, quia breviter & paucis verbis intentionem proferentis exponit & explanat, ſicut regula iuris rem quae eſt breviter charrat. Non tamen ita breve eſſe debet, quin rationem & vim intentionis contineat. &c.
               
               
                  Brigandine (lorica) is the french (brigandine) that is a coate of maile. This is vſed. anno 4. & 5. Ph. & Mar. ca. 2.
               
                  Brigbote, ſignificat quietantiam reparationis pontium. Fleta, li. 1. ca. 47. It is compounded of (brig) a bridge and (bote) which is a yeelding of amends or ſupplying a defect. See (Bote) and Bruckbote.
               
               
                  Britton, was a famous Lawyer, that liued in the daies of K. Edward the firſt, at whoſe commandemēt, & by whoſe authority he writ a learned booke of the lawe of this realme. The tenure wherof runneth in the Kings name, as if it had beene penned by himſelfe, anſwerably to the Inſtitutions, which Iuſtinian aſſumeth to himſelfe, though compoſed by others. Stawnf. prare fo. 6. & 21. S. Edward Cooke ſaith, that this Britton writ his booke in the fifte yeare of the ſaid King reigne. li. 4. fo. 126. a. & lib. 6. fo. 67. a. M. Guin. in the preface to his reading, mencioneth, that this Iohn Britton was biſhop of Hereford.
               
               
                  Broke, commonly called S. Robert Broke, was a greate lawyer and lord chiefe Iuſtice of the cōmon plees in Queene Mar. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   time. Cromptons Iuſtices of peace. fo. 2
                        •
                      b. he made an abbridgement of the whole lawe, a booke of highe accoumpt.
               
                  Broker (brocarnis) ſeemeth to come from the French (broieur tritor) that is a gryneder or breaker into ſmall peaces. Becauſe he that is of that trade, to deall in maters of mony and marchandiſe betwene Engliſhe men and Strangers, doth draw the b
                     •
                  rgaine to particulars, and the parties to concluſion, not forgetting to grinde out ſomthing to his owne profit. Thoſe men be called broggers. anno. 10. R. 2. ca. i. It may not improbably be ſaid, that this word commeth from
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
               
                  
                  carder. i. cavillari.) becauſe theſe kinde of men, by their deceitfull 
                     〈…〉
                  ches and abuſing their true made, many times inuegle others: In Scotland they be called (broccary) and in their owne idiome, blockers or brockers, that is, mediators or interceſſors in any trāſaction, paction, or contract: as in buying or ſelling, or in contractting mariage. Skene de verbo. ſigni. verbo broccarij.
               
               He that will know what theſe brokers were wont & ought to be let him read the ſtatut. anno. 1. Iacobi. ca. 21. Theſe in the civile lawe are called (proxenetae) as alſo of ſome (licitatores & mediatores titulo de proxeneticis. in Digeſtis. This kind of dealer is alſo of the Romanes called (pararius) Senece. li. 2. de benef. ca. 22. Caelius Rhideginus, libro. 6. ca. 32. & li 3. cap. 35.
               
                  Broderers (commeth of the French (brodeur) and that commeth of (bordure. i. fimbria, limbus) the edge or hemme of a garmet. And that becauſe it is diſtinguiſhed frō the reſt, moſt cōmōly, by ſome conceipted or coſtly worke; he that worketh it, is called (brodeur) in French, and broderor or embroderer with vs.
               
                  Brode halpeny, commeth of the three Saxon words (bret, or bred,) 
                        〈◊〉
                      aboord: and (halve) that is, for this or that cauſe (cuius rei gratie) as the Latiniſts ſpeake, and (penning) it ſignifieth a tolle or cuſtome for ſetting vp of tables or boords in a Faire or Market. From the which they that are freed by the Kings Charter, had this word mentioned in there leters patents. In ſo much, as at this day the freedome it ſelfe (for ſhortneſſe of ſpeech) is called by the name of brodehalpenie.
               
               
                  Broggers. See Brokers.
               
               
                  Bruckbote (Pontagium) is compounded of two German words (bruck. i. pons,) and (bote. i. compenſatio.) It ſignifieth with vs, a tribute, contribution, or ayde toward the mending or reedifiing of bridges; whereof many are freed by the kings charter. And thereupon the word is vſed for the very libertie or exemptiō from this tribute. See Pontage & Brigbote.
               
               
                  Bull (bulla) ſeemeth to come from the Greeke, (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ). i. conſilium) as Polidorus Virgilius ſaith, de inventio. rerum. lib. 8. cap. 2. It ſignifieth the leters, by the Canoniſts called Apoſtolique, ſtrengthened with a leaden ſeale, and containing in them the decrees or commandements of the Pope or biſhop of Rome. The word is vſed many times in our Statutes: as anno 28. H. 8. cap. 16. & anno 1. & 2. Ph. & Ma. ca. 8.
               
                  Bullion, cometh of the French (billon) that is, the place where gold is tried. It ſignifieth with

vs, gold or ſiluer in the maſſe or billet, anno 9. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 2. and ſometime the Kings exchange or place, whether ſuch gold in the lumpe is brought to be tryed or exchanged, anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 14. & anno 4. H. 4. cap. 10. See Skene de verbo. ſignif. verbo Bullion.
               
               
                  Burghote, commeth of (burg. i. caſtellum) and (bote. i. compenſatio) and ſignifieth a tribute or contribution toward the building or repairing of caſtels, or walles of defence, or toward the building of a borow or city. Frō this diuers had exemption by the auncient charters of the Saxon kings. Whereupon it is taken ordinarily for the exemption or libertie it ſelfe. Raſtals expoſ. of words. Fleta hath theſe words of it: Significat quiet antiam reparationis murorum civitatis vel burgi li. 1. cap. 47.
               
                  Burgh Engliſh. See Borow Engliſh.
               
               
                  Burgage (burgagium) is a tenure proper to cities & townes, whereby men of cities or borowes, hold their lands or tenements of the King, or other Lord for a certaine yearely rent. Old Tenures: It is a kind of ſocage. Swinborn. parte 3. §. 3. nu. 6.
               
                  Burglarie (burglaria) is compounded of two French words, (bourg. i. pagus, villa) and (larecin, i. furtum,) or of (bourg & laron) Coke lib. 4. fol. 39. b. It is, according to the acceptance of our common lawe, thus defined: Burglarie is a felonious entring into another mans dwelling houſe, wherein ſome perſon is, or into a Church in the night time, to the end to commit ſome felonie therein: as to kill ſome man, or to ſteale ſomewhat thence, or to do ſome other felonious act there, albeit he execute not the ſame. If the intent, or fact of this offender, be to ſteale, this is like robberie, if to murder, it differeth not much from murder, and ſo of other felonies. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo. Indictments. Sect. 56. Burglarie in the naturall ſignification of the word, is nothing, but the robbing of a houſe: but as it is (vox artis) our common Lawyers reſtraine it to robbing a houſe by night, or breaking in with an intent to robbe, or to do ſome other felonie. The like offence committed by day, they call houſe-robbing, by a peculiar name. How many wayes burglarie may be committed, ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 28. b. & fol. 29. 30.
               
                  Butlerage of wines, ſignifieth that impoſition of ſale wine brought into the land; which the Kings butler, by vertue of his office, may take of euery ſhippe, anno 1. H. 8. cap. 5. For

the which ſee more in Botyler.
               
            
            
               C
               
                  CAbliſh (cablicin) among the writers of the Foreſt lawes, ſignifieth bruſh wood, Manwood parte pag. 84. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 165.
               
                  Calamus, is a cane, reed, or quill, the diuers kinds wherof, you haue ſet downe in Gerards Herball. lib. 1. cap. 24. This is comprized among merchandize and drugs to be garbled, in the ſtatute anno 1. Iacobi, cap. 19.
               
                  Calendrin of Worſſeds. anno 5. H. 8. cap. 4. & anno 35. eiuſdem. cap. 5.
               
                  Cantred, is as much in Wales, as an hundred in England. For Cantre in the Britiſh tongue ſignifieth centum. This word is vſed anno 28. H. 8. cap. 3.
               
                  Cape, is a writ iudiciall touching plee of land or tenements, ſo tearmed (as moſt writs be) of that word in it ſelfe, which carieth the eſpecialleſt intention or end thereof. And this writ is diuided in (Cape magnum, & Cape parvum:) both which (as is before ſaid in Attachment) take hold of things immoueable, and ſeeme to differ betweene themſelues in theſe points. Firſt, becauſe (cape magnum) or the (grand Cape) lyeth before appearance, and (Cape parvum) afterward. Secondly, the (Cape magnum) ſummoneth the tenent to aunſwer to the default, and ouer to the demaundant: (Cape parvum) ſummoneth the tenent to aunſwer to the default onely: and therefore is called (Cape parvum) or in French Engliſh (petit Cape.) Old. nat. br. fol. 161. 162. Yet Ingham ſaith, that it is called (petit Cape) not becauſe it is of ſmal force, but that it conſiſteth of few words. (Cape magnum) in the old nat. br. is thus defined. This writ is a iudiciall, and lyeth where a man hath brought a (Praecipe quod reddat) of a thing that toucheth plee of land, and the tenent make default at the day to him giuen in the writ originall: then this writ, ſhall goe for the king, to take the land into the kings hands: and if he come not at the day giuen him by the (grand Cape) he hath loſt his land, &c. A preſident and forme of this writ you may ſee in the Regiſter iudiciall, fol. 1. b. It ſeemeth after a fort to containe in it the effect (unſſionis in poſſeſſionem ex primo & ſecundo decrete) among the Civilians. For as the firſt decree ſeiſeth the thing, and the ſecond giueth it from him, that the ſecond time defaulteth in his appearance: ſo this (Cape) both ſeiſeth the land, and alſo aſſigneth to the partie a

farder day of appearance, at which if he come not in, the land is forfeited. Yet is there difference betweene theſe two courſes of the ciuill and cō
                  mon lawe: firſt, for that (miſſio in poſſeſſionem) toucheth both moueable and immoueable goods, whereas the (cape) is extended only to immoueable: ſecondly, that the partie being ſatisfied of his demaund, the remanet is reſtored to him that defaulted: but by the (cape) all is ſeiſed without reſtitution: thirdly, (miſſio in poſſeſſ:) is to the vſe of the partie agent, the (cape) is to the vſe of the king. Of this writ, and the explication of the true force and effect thereof, reade Bracton lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 1. num. 4. 5. & 6. See Cape ad valentiam.
               
               
                  Cape parvum, in the Old. na. br. fol. 162. is thus defined: This writ lyeth, in caſe where the tenent is ſummoned in plee of land, and commeth at the ſummons, and his appearance is of record, and after he maketh default at the day that is giuen to him: then ſhall goe this writ for the king, &c. Of this likewiſe you haue the form in the Regiſter iudiciall, fol. 2. a. Why it is called cape parvum, ſee in cape magnum. Of both theſe writs, reade Fleta lib. 6. cap. 44. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Magnum & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Cape ad Valentiam, is a ſpecies of cape magnum, ſo called of the end whereunto it tendeth. In the Old nat. br: fol. 161. 162. it is thus defined or deſcribed: This writ lyeth, where any impleaded of certaine lands, and I vouch to warrant another, againſt whom the ſummons ad warrantizandum, hath bene awarded, and the Shyreeue commeth not at the day giuen: then if the demandant recouer againſt me, I ſhall haue this writ againſt the vouchee, and ſhall recouer ſo much in value of the land of the vowchee, if he haue ſo much: and if he haue not ſo much, then I ſhall haue execution of ſuch lands and tenements, as deſcend vnto him in fee-ſimple: or if he purchaſe afterward, I ſhall haue againſt him a reſummons: and if he can nothing ſay, I ſhall recouer the value. And note ye, that this writ lyeth before apparence. Thus farre goeth the booke. Of theſe, and the diuers vſes of them, ſee the Table of the Regiſter iudiciall, verbo. Cape.
               
               
                  Capias, is a writ of two ſortes, one before iudgement called (Capias ad reſpondendum) in an action perſonall, if the Shyreeue vpon the firſt writ of diſtreſſe returne (nihil habet in baliua noſtra:) and the other is a writ of execution after iudgement, being alſo

of diuers kindes (viz. Capias ad ſatiſfaciendum, Capias pro fine, Capias vtlagatum, Capias vtlaga
                     
                        〈…〉
                      & inquiras de bonis & catallis).
               
               
                  Capias ad ſatiſfaciendum, is a writ of execution after iudgement, lying where a man recouereth in an action perſonall, as debt, or dammages, or detinew in the kings court: and he againſt whome the debt is recouered, and hath no lands nor tenemēts, nor ſufficient goods, wherof the debt may be leuied. For in this caſe, he that recouereth, ſhal haue this writ to the ſhreue, commanding him that he take the body of him, againſt whome the debt is recouered: and he ſhalbe put in priſon, vntill ſatiſfaction be made vnto him that recouered.
               
                  Capias pro fine, is where one being by iudgement fined vnto the king, vpon ſome offence committed againſt a ſtatut, doth not diſcharge it according to the iudgement. For by this is his body taken, and committed to priſon, vntill he content the king for his fine. Coke. li. 3. fo. 12. a.
               
               
                  Capias vtlagatum, is a word of execution, or after iudgement, which lyeth againſt him that is outlawed vpon any ſuite: by the which the ſhyreue vpon the receite thereof, apprehendeth the party outlawed, for not appearring vpon the (exegend) and keepeth him in ſafe cuſtodie vntill the day of returne aſſigned in the writ: and then preſenteth him vnto the court, there farder to be ordered for his contempt.
               
                  Capias vtlagatum, & inquiras de bonis & catallis, is a writ al one with the former, but that it giueth a farder power to the ſhyreeue, ouer and beſide the apprehenſion of the body, to inquire of his goods and cattels. The forme of all theſe writs ſee in the ould nat. br. fo. 154. and ſee the Termes of law, verbo Proces. Laſtly you may finde great variety of this kinde, in the table of the Regiſter iudiciall. verbo Capias.
               
               
                  Capias in Withernamium de averijs, is a writ lying for catell in Withernam. Regiſter orig. fo. 82. &. 83. ſee Withernam.
               
               
                  Capias in Withernamium de homine, is a writ that lyeth for a ſeruant in Withernam. Regiſt. or. fo. 79. &. 80. ſee Withernam:
               
               
                  Capias conductos ad proficiſcendum, is a writ that lieth for the taking vp of ſuch, as hauing receiued preſt mony to ſerue the king, ſlink away, and come not in at their time aſſigned. Regiſter. orig. fo. 191.
               
                  Captaine, aliàs capitayne (capitaneus) commeth of the French (capitaine) and ſignifieth with vs, him that leadeth, or hath charge

of a companie of ſouldiers: and is either generall, as he that hath the gouernance of the whole hoſt: or ſpeciall, as he that leadeth one only band. The word (capitanei) in others nations ſignifieth more generally thoſe, that are in latine called (principes) or (proceres) becauſe, as Hottoman ſaith in verbis feudalibus: tanquā caput reliquo corpori, ſic hij reliquis civibus praeſunt. He divideth them into two ſorts: and to vſe his words. alii ſunt capitanei regni: quo verbo Duces, Comites, Marchiones intelligūtur. li. 1. feudo. tit. 1. §. 1. & ti. 7. Alii impropriè, qui vrbiū praefecti ſunt, quibus plebs ab aliquo ſuperiorum gubernanda committitur: qui & vallaſores regit, & maiores appellantur. l. 1. feud. tit. 1. §. 1. & tit. 7. & tit. 17. So we haue captaines of caſtels heere in England, and other places, as of the Iſles of Gearſey and Gearnſey, of the Iſle of Weight, &c.
               
               
                  Capite, is a tenure, which holdeth immediately of the king, as of his crown, be it by knights ſeruice or ſocage: Broke. tit. Tenures. 46. 94. Dyer. fo. 123. nu. 38. & fo. 363. nu. 18. & not as of any Honour, caſtell, or maner: and therefore it is otherwiſe called a tenure, that holdeth meerely of the king, becauſe as the crowne is a corporation, and ſeigneury in groſſe (as the common lawyers terme it) ſo the King that poſſeſſeth the crowe, is in accōpt of lawe, perpetually King, and neuer in his minoritie, nor neuer dieth: no more then (populus.) doth, whoſe authoritie he beareth. See Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 5. F. Note by the way, that a man may hold of the king, and not (in Capite) that is, not immediately of the crowne in groſſe, but by meanes of ſome Honour, caſtel, or maner belonging to the Crowne, wherof I hold my land. Whereof Kitchin ſaith well, that a man may hold of the King by Knight ſeruice, and yet not in capite, becauſe he holdeth happily of ſome honour by Knights ſeruice, which is in the kings hands (as by deſcent from his aunceſters) and not immediately of the king, as of his crowne. fo. 129. with whome agreeth Fitzh. nat. br. f. 5. K. whoſe words are to this effect: So that it plainely appeareth, that lands which be held of the king, as of an honour, caſtell, or maner, are not held in capite of the King: becauſe that a writ of right, in that caſe, ſhallbe directed to the bayliffe of the honour, caſtell, or maner, &c. but when the lande be held of the King, as of his crowne, then they be not held of honour, caſtell, or maner, but meerely of the King, as King, and of the Kings crowne, as of a ſeigneury of it ſelſe in groſſe, and the cheife aboue all other ſeigneuries,

&c. And this tenure in capite is otherwiſe called tenure holding of the perſon of the King. Dyer. fo. 44. n. 37. Author of the new termes. verb. Tenure in capite. Broke. titulo. Tenures. nu. 65. 99. And yet M. Kitchin. fo. 208. ſaith, that a man may hould of the perſon of the King, and not in capite. His example is this: if the King purchas a maner that I. S. houldeth, the tenent ſhall hould as he held before, and ſhall not render liuery or primier ſeiſin, nor hould in capite: And if the king graunt that maner to W. N. in fee; excepting the ſeruices of I. S. then I. S. holdeth of the king, as of the perſon of the king, and yet houldeth not in caepite, but as he held before. So that by this booke, tenuere houlding of the perſon of the king, and tenure in capite, are two diuers tenures. To take away this difficulty, I thinke M. Kitchin is in that place to be taken, as if he ſaide, not in capite by Knights ſeruice, but by ſocage, folowing the vſuall ſpeech: becauſe moſt commonly where we talke of tenure in capite, we meane tenure by Knights ſeruice.
               
                  Carno, Cromptons iuriſd. fol. 191. is an imunity
               
                  Carke, ſeemeth to be a quantititie of wolle, whereof thirtie make a Sarpler. anno. 27. H. 6. ca. 2. See Sarpler.
               
               
                  Carrack, aliàs Carrick, ſeemeth to be a ſhippe of burden, ſo called of this Italian (carrico) or (carco) a burden or charge, or of the ſpaniſh (cargo) you haue this word. anno 2. R. 2. ca. 4. & anno 1. Iaco. ca. 33.
               
                  Carroway ſeedes, aliàs Carruway ſeedes (ſemen cari vel carei) is a ſeed ſpringing of the herbe ſo called, of whoſe operation you may read in Gerards herball. li. 2. ca. 396. It is reckoned among the merchandize, that ought to be garbled. anno. i. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Carue of land (carucata terrae) commeth of the French (charue. i. aratrum) and with vs is a certaine quantitie of land, by the which the ſubiects haue ſome time bene taxed: wherevpon the tribute ſoe leuied, is called (Carvage Caruagium.) Bracton. li. 2. ca. 16. nu. 8. It is all one with that; which the ſame author. lib. 2. ca. 17. calleth (carucatam terrae) For Litleton ca Tenure in ſocage. ſaith, that (haec ſoca ſocae, idem eſt quod caruca) ſc, one ſok or one plow land. Yet one place I finde in Stowes annals, that maketh me doubt. pag. 271. where he hath theſe words: The ſame time king Henry tooke carvage, that is to ſay, two merks of ſiluer of euery knights fee, toward the mariage of his ſiſter Izabell to the Emperor: where caryage cannot be taken for a plow land, except

there were ſome other farder diviſion, whereby to raiſe of euery plowe land ſo much: and ſo conſequently of euery Knights fee: that is, of euery 680. acres, two merkes of ſiluer. Raſtall in his Expoſition of words ſaith, that caruage is to be quite, if the lord the King ſhall taxe all the land by carues: that is, a priuiledge, whereby a man is exempted frō carvage. Skene de verb. ſignif. ver. Carucata terrae, deriueth it from the French (charon. i. a plough, and ſaith, that it containes as great a portion of land, as may be tilled and laboured in a yere and day with one plough: which alſo is called (hilda) or (hida terrae) a word vſed in the old Britaine lawes. M. Lamberd among his precedents, in the end of his Eirenarcha, tranſlateth (carucatū terrae) a plough land.
               
                  Caruage (caruagium,) ſee Carue.
               
               
                  Caſſia Fiſtula, is a tree that beareth certaine blacke, round, and long cods, wherein is contained a pulpe, ſoft & pleaſantly ſweet, ſeruing for many vſes in Phiſick. This tree with her vertues you may find deſcribed in Gerards Herball, lib. 3. cap. 77. The fruite is mentioned in the ſtatute, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19. among drugges and ſpices, that be to be garbled.
               
                  Caſſia lignea, is a ſweet wood not vnlike to Cynamom, and ſometime vſed in ſteede of Cynamom. Whereof you may read in Gerards Herball, lib 1. ca. 141. This is called Caſſia lignum, in the Statute anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19 and is compriſed among merchandize that are to be garbled.
               
                  Caſtellain (caſtellanus) is a keeper or a Captaine, ſometime called a Conſtable of a caſtell, Bracton lib. 5. tractat. 2. cap. 16. & lib. 2. cap. 32. num. 2. īn like maner is it vſed, anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 7. In the bookes (de feudis) you ſhall find (guaſtaldus) to be almoſt of the ſame ſignification, but ſomething more large: becauſe it is alſo extended to thoſe that haue the cuſtodie of the Kings manſion houſes, called of the Lumbards (curtes) in England (Courts,) though they be not places of defence or ſtrength. M. Manwood, part. 1. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 113. ſaith, that there is an officer of the Foreſt called Caſtellanus.
               
               
                  Caſtelward (caſtelgardum, vel wardum caſtri) is an impoſition laide vpon ſuch of the kings ſubiects, as dwell within a certaine compaſſe of any caſtell, toward the maintenance of ſuch, as doe watch and ward the caſtell. Magna charta, cap. 20. & anno 32. H. 8. cap. 48. It is vſed ſometime, for the very circuit it ſelfe, which is inhabited by ſuch as are ſubiect

to this ſeruice, as in Stowes annals, pag. 632.
               
                  Caſu conſimili, is a writ of entrie, graunted where the tenent by courteſie, or tenent for terme of life, or for the life of another, doth alien in fee, or in tayle, or for tearme of anothers life. And it hath the name of this, for that the Clerkes of the Chauncerie did, by their common conſent, frame it to the likeneſſe of the writ, called (In caſu prouiſo) according to their authoritie giuen them by the Statute, Weſtm. 2. cap. 24. which, as often as there chanceth any new caſe in Chancerie, ſomething like to a former caſe, and yet not eſpecially fitted by any writ, licenceth them to lay their heads together, and to frame a new forme aunſwerable to the new caſe, and as like ſome former caſe as they may. And this writ is graunted to him in the reuerſion, againſt the party to whom the ſaid tenent ſo alienateth to his preiudice, and in the life time of the ſaid tenent. The forme and effect whereof reade more at large in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 206.
               
                  Caſu proviſo, is a writ of entry, giuen by the Statute of Gloceceſter, cap. 7. in caſe where a tenent in dower alieneth in fee or for tearme of life, or in taile, and lyeth for him in reuerſion againſt the alienee. Whereof reade F
                        〈…〉
                     . cat. br. more at large, fol. 205.
               
                  Catals (catalla) aliâs chatels, cō
                  meth of the Normans. For in the 87. chapter of the grand Cuſtumarie you ſhal find, that al moueable goods with them, are called chatels: the contrary whereof is (fief) ibid. which we do call fee. But as it is vſed in our common law, it comprehendeth all goods moueable and immoueable, but ſuch as are in the nature of free hould, or parcell thereof, as may be gathered out of Sawnf. praero. ca. 16. and anno. Eliza. 1. ca. 2. How be it Kitchin in the chapter catalla. fo. 32. ſaith, that ready mony is not accompted any goods or catels, nor haukes, nor houndes. The reaſon why hawks and hounds be not, he giueth, becauſe they be (ferae naturae) why money is not, though he ſet not downe the cauſe: yet it may be gathered to be, for that money of it ſelfe, is not of worth, but as by cōſent of men, for their eaſier traficke, or permutation of things neceſſary for common life, it is reckoned a thing rather conſiſting in imagination, then in deede. Catals be either perſonall or reall. Perſonall may be ſo called in two reſpects: one, becauſe they belong

immediatly to the perſon of a man, as a bowe, horſe, &c. the other, for that being any way withheld iniuriouſly from vs, we haue no meanes to recouer them, but by perſonall action. Chatels reall be ſuch, as either appertain not immediatly to the perſon, but to ſome other thing, by way of dependencie: as a boxe with charters of land, the body of a ward, apples vpon a tree, or a tree it ſelfe growing on the ground. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fo. 33. B, or els ſuch as are neceſſary iſſuing out of ſome immoveable thing to a perſon: as a leaſe or rent for tearme of yeares. Alſo to hould at will, is a chatell reall. New tearmes. verbo Chatell. The ciuilians comprehend theſe things, as alſo lands of what kin de or hould ſo euer, vnder bona; bona autē diuiduntur in mobilia & immobilia: mobilia verò in ea quae ſe movent vel ab aliis moventur. v. legem. 49. &. l. 208 
                        〈◊〉
                     . de. verb. ſignifica. & interpretes ibidem. Bract. alſo ca. 3. li. 3. nu. 3. & 4. ſeemeth to be of the ſame iudgement.
               
                  Catallis captis nomine diſtrictionis, is a writ which lyeth within a borowe, or within a houſe, for rent going out of the ſame, and warranteth a man to take the doores, windowes, or gates, by way of diſtreſſe, for the rent. Old nat. br. fo. 66.
               
               
                  Catallis reddendis, is a writ, which lyeth where goods being deliuered to any man to keepe vntill a certaine day, and be not vpon demande deliuered at the day. And it may be otherwiſe called a writ of detinew. See more of it in the Regiſter orig. fo. 139. and in the ould nat. br. fo. 63. This is anſwerable to actio depoſiti, in the ciuile lawe.
               
                  Catchepolle, though it now be vſed as a word of contempt, yet in auncient times, it ſeemeth to haue bene vſed without reproch, for ſuch as we now call ſergeants of the mace, or any other that vſe to arreſt men vpon any cauſe. anno. 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 4. ca. 2.
               
               
                  Cathedrall. See church.
               
                  Caſu matrimonii praelocuti, is a writ which lyeth in caſe where a woman giueth lands to a man in fee ſimple, to the intent he ſhall mary her, and refuſeth ſo to doe in reaſonable time, being required thereunto by the woman. The forme, and farder vſe hereof, learne in the Regiſter orig. fol. 233. and in Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 205.
               
               
                  Cauſam nobis ſignifices, is a writ which lyeth to a Mayer of a towne or city, &c. that formerly by the kings writ being commaunded to giue ſeiſin vnto the kings grantee of any land or tenements, doth delay ſo to

do, willing him to ſhew cauſe, why he ſo delayeth the performance of his charge. Coke. li. 4. caſu communalty des Sadlers. fo. 55 b.
               
               
                  Cautione admittenda, is a writ that lyeth againſt the Biſhop, houlding an excommunicate perſon in priſon for his contempt, notwithſtanding that he offereth ſufficient caution or aſſurance to obey the commandments and orders of holy church from thence forth: The forme and farder effect whereof, take out of the Regiſt. orig. pa. 66. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 63.
               
               
                  Century (centuria) See Hundred.
               
               
                  Cepi corpus, is a returne made by the Shyreue, that vpō an (exigēd) he hath taken the bodie of the partie. Fitzh nat. br. fo. 26.
               
               
                  Certiorari, is a writ iſſuing out the chauncerie, to an inferiour courte, to call vp the records of a cauſe therein depending, that conſcionable iuſtice therein may be miniſtred, vpon complaint made by bill, that the partie which ſeeketh the ſaid writ, hath receiued hard dealing in the ſaid court. Termes of the lawe. See the diuers formes and vſes of this, in Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 242. as alſo the Regiſter, both originall and iudiciall in the tables. verbo. Certiorari. Cromptō
                   in his Iuſtice of peace. fo 117. ſaith, that this writ is either returnable in the Kings bench, and then hath theſe wordes (nobis mittatis): or in the chauncerie, and then hath (in cancellaria noſtra) or in the common bench, and then hath (Iuſticiariis noſtris de banco.) The word (certiorare) is vſed diuers times in the digeſt of the ciuile lawe: but our later Kritiques think it ſoe barbarouſe, that they ſuſpect it rather to be foiſted in by Tribonian, thē to be originally vſed by thoſe men, of whoſe workes the ſaide digeſt is compiled. Prataeus in ſuo lexico.
               
               
                  Certificat (certificatoriū) is vſed for a wirting made in any courte, to giue notice to another courte of any thing done therein. As for example, a certificate of the cauſe of attainte, is a tranſcript made briefely and in few words, by the clerke of the Crowne, clerke of the peace, or clerke of aſſiſe, to the courte of the Kings benche, conteying the tenure and effect of everie endictment, outlawrie, or conviction, and clerke attained, made or pronounced in any other court. an. 34. H. 8. c. 14. Of this ſee more in Certificat d'eveſque. Broke. f. 119.
               
               
                  Certification of aſſiſe of novel diſſeſſin, &c. (Certificatio aſſiſae novae diſſeiſinae. &c.) is a writ graunted for there examining or reuew of a mater paſſed by aſſiſe before any Iuſtices, and is called (certificatione novae diſſeiſine) Old. nat. br. fo. 181. Of this ſee alſo the Regiſter.

Original. fo. 200. and the newe booke of entriſe, verbo. Certificat of aſſiſe. This word hath vſe, where a man appearing by his bayliffe to an aſſiſe brought by another, hath loſt the day: and hauing ſomething more to pleade for himſelfe, as a deede of releaſe, &c. which the bayliffe did not, or might not pleade for him, deſireth a farder examination of the cauſe either before the ſame Iuſtices, or others: and obteineth leters patents vnto them to that effect. (The forme of theſe leters patents, you may ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 181.) and that done, bringeth a writ to the Shyreeue, to call both the party for whome the aſſiſe paſſed, and the Iurie that was empaneled vpon the ſame, before the ſaid Iuſtices at a certaine day and place. And it is called a certificate, becauſe in it there is mention made to the Shyreeue, that vpon the parties complainte of the defectiue examination, or doubts yet remaining vpon the aſſiſe paſſed, the King hath directed his leters patēts to the Iuſtices, for the beter certifiing of themſelues, whether all points of the ſaid aſſiſe were duly examined, yea or not. See farder old. nat. br. and Fitzh. vbi ſupra. Of this alſo you may reade Bracton. li. 4. ca. 19. nu. 4. in fine. & 5. 6. where he diſcuſſeth the reaſon of this pointe very learnedly and laſtly Horn in his Myrrour of Iuſtices. li. 3. ea. finali. §. en eyde des memoyres, &c.
               
               
                  Certificando de recognitions Stapulae, is a writte directed to the Mayor of the ſtaple, &c. cōmaunding him to certifie the chaunceler of a ſtatute of the ſtaple, taken before him betweene ſuch and ſuch, in caſe where the partie himſelfe detaineth it, and refuſeth to bring it in. Regiſt. orig. fo. 152. b. In like maner may be ſaid of (certificando de ſtatuto mercatorio) eodem. fo. 148. and (de certificando in cancellarium de inquiſitione, de idemptitate nominis) fo. 195. and (certificando quando recognitio,) &c. and (certificando quid actum eſt de breui ſuper ſtatutum mercatorium.) fo. 151 & certificando ſi loquela Warantiae. fo. 13.
               
                  Ceſſor, is he that ceſeth or neglecteth ſo long to performe a dutie belonging vnto him, as that by his ceſſe or ceſſing he incurreth the daunger of lawe, and hath, or may haue the writ (ceſſavit) brought againſt him. Old. nat. br. fo. 136. And note, that where it is ſaide in diuers places (the tenent ceſſeth) without any more words, ſuch phraſe is ſo to be vnderſtood, as if it were ſaid: the tenent ceſeth to doo that which he ought, or is bound to doe by his land ortenement.
               
                  
                  Ceſſavit, is a writ that, lyeth in diuers caſes, as appeareth by Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 208. vpon this generall grounde, that he againſt whome it is brought, hath for 2. yeares foreſlowne to performe ſuch ſeruice, or to pay ſuch rent, as he is tied vnto by his tenure, and hath not vpon his land or his tenement, ſufficient goods or catells to be diſtreined. Conſult more at large with Fitz. vpon this vbi ſupra. with Fleta. li. 5. ca. 34. §. viſa ſunt. and with the Termes of lawe. See Ceſſauit de cantaria. Regiſter orig. fo. 238. Ceſſavit de feodi firma. eodem fo. 237. Ceſſavit per biennium. eodem. folio etiam eodem. See the newe booke of entriſe. verbo Ceſſavit.
               
               
                  Ceſtui qui vie, is in true French (ceſtui a vie de qui). i. he for whoſe life any land or renement is graunted. Perkins graunts. 97.
               
                  Ceſtui qui vſe (ille cuius vſui vel ad cuius vſum) is broken french, and thus may be bettered: (Ceſtui al vſe de qui) It is an ordinarie ſpeech among our common lawyers, ſignifying him, to whoſe vſe any other man is infeoffed in any lands or tenements. See the newe booke of entriſe. verbo. vſes. and in Replevin. fo. 508. colum. 3. & verbo Treſpas. fo. 606. & fo. 123. a. b. colum. 3. n
                        •
                     . 7.
               
                  Chafe waxe, is an officer in chauncery, that fitteth the waxe for the fealing of the writs, and ſuch other inſtruments as are there made to be ſent out. This officer is borowed from the French. For there (calefactores cerae ſunt, qui regiis literis in Cancellaria ceram imprimunt. Coraſius.
               
               
                  Chaſe (chacea) commeth of the French (chaſſer. 1. ſectari belluas, apros, cervos) It ſignifieth two things in the commō lawe. Firſt, as much as (actus) in the civil lawe, that is a dryving of catell to or from any place: as to chaſe a diſtreſſe to a fortlet, Old nat. br. fo. 45. Secondly, it is vſed for a receite for deere and wilde beaſts, of a middle nature betweene a foreſt, and a parke: being commonly leſſe then a foreſt, and not endued with ſo many liberties, as the courtes of attachment, Swaine mote, and Iuſtice ſeate: and yet of a larger compas, and ſtored with greater diuerſity both of keepers and wilde beaſts or game, then a park. And Crompton in his booke of Iuriſdictions. fo. 148. ſaith, that a foreſt cannot be in the hands of a ſubiect, but it forthwith looſeth the name, and becommeth a chaſe. and yet. fo. 197. he ſaith, that a ſubiect may be lord and owner of a foreſt. which though it ſeeme a contrariety, yet be both his ſayings, in ſome ſort, true. For the king may giue or alienate a foreſt to a ſubiect: yet ſo,

as when it is once in the ſubiect, it leeſeth the true property of a Foreſt: becauſe that the courts, called the Iuſtice ſeate, the Swain mote, and Attachment, foorthwith doe vaniſh: none being able to make a Lord chiefe Iuſtice in Eyre of the Foreſt, but the king: as M. Manwood well ſheweth parte 2. of his Foreſt lawes, cap. 3. & 4. And yet it may be granted in ſo large a maner, that there may be Attachement and Swainemote, and a court equiualent to a Iuſtice ſeat, as appeareth by him in the ſame chapter, num. 3. So that a chaſe differeth from a Foreſt in this, becauſe it may be in the hands of a ſubiect, which a Foreſt in his proper & true nature cannot: and from a Parke, in that that it is not incloſed, and hath not onely a larger compaſſe, and more ſtore of game, but of Keepers alſo and ouerſeers. See Foreſt.
               
               
                  Chalenge (calumnia) commeth of the French (chalanger, i. ſibiaſſerere) and is vſed in the commō lawe for an exception taken either againſt perſons or things: perſons, as in aſſiſe to the Iurors, or any one or more of them: or in a caſe of felonie by the priſoner at the barre. Smith de rep. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 12. Britton. ca. 52. Bracton lib. 2. tract. 2. cap. 22. Againſt things, as a declaration, old nat. br. fol. 76. Chalenge made to the Iurours, is either made to the array, or to the polles. Chalenge to the array is, when the whole number is excepted againſt, as partially empaneled: chalenge to or by the polle, when ſome one, or more are excepted againſt, as not indifferent. Termes of the law. Chalenge to the Iurours, is alſo divided into Chalenge principall, and Chalenge per cauſe. i. vppon cauſe or reaſon. Chalenge principall (otherwiſe by Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 157. & 158. called (peremptorie) is that, which the lawe alloweth without cauſe alledged or farder examination. Lamberd. Eirenar. lib. 4. cap. 14. as a priſoner at the barre, arraigned vpon felonie, may peremptorily chalenge to the number of 20. one after another, of the Iurie empaneled vpon him, alledging no cauſe, but his owne diſlike: and they ſhall be ſtill put off, and new taken in their places. But in caſe of high treaſon no Chalenge peremptorie is allowed, an. 33. H. 8. cap. 23. Forteſcue ſaith, that a priſoner in this caſe may chalenge, 35. men c. 27. but that law was abridged by anno 25. H. 8. cap. 3. I cannot here omit to note ſome difference, that (in mine opinion) I obſerue betweene Chalenge principall, and Chalenge peremptorie, finding peremptorie

to be vſed onely in maters criminall, and barely without cauſe alledged more then the priſoners owne phantaſie, Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 124. but principall in ciuill actions for the moſt part, and with naming of ſome ſuch cauſe of exception, as being found true, the lawe alloweth without farder ſcanning. For example: if either partie ſay, that one of the Iurors is the ſonne, brother, couſin, or tenent to the other, or eſpouſed his daughter, this is exception good and ſtrong enough (if it be true) without farder examination of the parties credit. And how farre this chalenge vpon kinred reacheth, you haue a notable example, in Plowden, caſu Vernon. againſt Maners. fol. 425. Alſo in the plee of the death of a man, and in euery action reall, as alſo euery action perſonall, where the debt or dammages amount to 40. merks, it is a good chalenge to any man, that he cannot diſpend 40. ſhillings by the yeare of Free-hold, anno 11. H. 7. cap. 21. and Termes of the lawe, verbo Chalenge. The ground of this chalenge you may ſee farder in Fleta lib. 4. cap. 8. Chalenge vpon reaſon or cauſe is, when the partie doth alledge ſome ſuch exception againſt one or more of the Iurors, as is not forthwith ſufficient vpon acknowledgement of the truth thereof, but rather arbitrable and conſiderable by the reſt of the Iurors: as, for example: if the ſonne of the Iuror haue maried or eſpouſed the daughter of the aduerſe partie. Termes of lawe, vbi ſupra. This chalenge per cauſe, ſeemeth to be tearmed by Kitchin, chalenge for fauour, fol. 92. or rather Chalenge for fauour is ſaid there to be one ſpecies of chalenge per cauſe: where you may read what chalenges be commonly accounted principall, and what not. See the new booke of Entries, verbo, Chalenge. and the old nat. br. fol. 158. & 159. That this word (chalenge) is long ſithence latined by the word (calumnia) appeareth by Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 18. & li. 4. tract. 3. cap. 6. & lib. 5. cap. 6. But I doubt, Priſcian will neuer forgiue him that firſt ſtrooke this blowe at him. Of chalenge you may farder read Fleta. lib. 1. cap. 32. §. Ad quem diem, & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Chamberdekins, are Iriſh beggers, anno 1. H. 5. cap. 8.
               
                  Chamberer, is vſed for a chamber maide, anno 33. H. 8. cap. 21.
               
                  Chamberlaine (camerarius vel camberlingus) commeth of the French (chambellan. i. cubicularius, vel praefectus cubiculi.) It is diverſly vſed in our Chronicles, Lawes, and Statutes: as Lord

great Chamberlaine of England, Lord Chamberlain of the kings houſe, the kings Chamberlaine, anno 13. Ed. 1. cap. 41. anno 17. R. 2. cap. 6. to whoſe office it eſpecially appertaineth to looke to the kings chambers and wardrobe, and to gouerne the vnder miniſters belonging vnto the ſame. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 6. & 7. Chamberlaine of any of the kings courts, anno 7. Ed. 6. cap. 1. Chamberlaine of the Exchequer, anno 51. H. 3. ſtat. 5. & anno. 10. Ed. 3. cap. 11. & anno 14. eiuſdem. cap. 14. & anno 26. H. 8. cap. 2. Chamberlaine of north Wales, Stow. pag. 641. Chamberlaine of Cheſter. Cromptons iuriſd. fol. 7. This Officer is commonly the receiuer of all rents and reuenues belonging to that perſon or citie, whereunto he is chamberlaine. v. Fletam li. 2. cap. 70. §. Si autem. The Latine word ſeemeth to expreſſe the function of this officer. For (camerarius dicitur à camera. i. teſtudine ſive fornice.) quia cuſtodit pecunias quae in cameris praecipuè reſervantur. Onyphrius de interpret. vooum eccleſiaſticarum. It ſeemeth to be borowed from the Feudiſts, who define the word (camera) thus: Camera eſt locus in quem the ſaurus recolligitur, vel conclave in quo pecunia reſervatur. Zaſius de feudis. part. 4. num. 7. and Peregrinus, de iure fiſci. lib. 6. tit. 3. ſaith, that camerarius vel camberlingus, (quē quaeſtorem antiqui appellârunt,) in rebus fiſci primum locum tenet, quia theſauraruis & cuſtos eſt publicae pecuniae. Sane officium hoc primipilatus fuiſſe nonnulli ſenſerunt. There be two officers of this name in the kings Exchequer, who were wont to keepe a controlment of the pels of receipt and exitus, & kept certaine keyes of the treaſure cofers, which is not now in vſe. They keepe the keyes of the Treaſurie, where the leagues of the Kings predeceſſors, and diuers auncient bookes doe remaine. There is mention of this officer, in the Statute anno 34. & 35. H. 8. cap. 16. There be alſo vnder-chamberlaines of the Exchequer, which ſee in Vnder-chamberlaine.
               
               
                  Champartie, (cambipartita) aliàs champertie, ſeemeth to come from the french (champart. 1. vectigal) and ſignifieth, in our common lawe, a maintenance of any man in his ſuit depending, vpon condition to haue part of the thing (be it lands or goods) when it is recouered. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 171. and champertours be they, that moue plees or ſuites, or cauſe to be moued, either by their owne procurement, or by other; and perſyew at their proper coſts, for to haue part of the land in variance, or part of the gaines. anno. 33. Ed. 1. ſtat. 2. in

                  fine. Whereunto adde the third ſtatut made the ſame yeare. This ſeemeth to haue bene an auncient fault in our realme. For notwithſtanding theſe former ſtatutes, and a forme of writ framed vnto them, yet anno. 4. Ed. 3. ca. 11. it was againe inacted, that whereas the former ſtatute prouided redreſſe for this in the kings bench onely (which in thoſe dayes folowed the court) from thence forth it ſhould be lawfull for Iuſtices of the common plees likewiſe, and Iuſtices of aſſiſes in their circuits, to inquire, heare, and determine this and ſuch like caſes, as well at the ſuite of the king, as of the party. How farre this writ extendeth, and the diuers formes therof, applied to ſeuerall caſes, ſee Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 171. and the Regiſter orig. fo. 183. and the new booke of entriſe. verbo. Champertie. Euery champertie employeth maintenance. Cromptons iuriſd fo. 39. See alſo his Iuſtice of peace. fo. 155. b. &c. Theſe with the Romans were called redemptores litium, qui ſc. quotidianas lites mercantur, aut quipartem litis paciſcuntur. l. ſi remunerandi. §. Maurus. Π. Mandati. l. ſi contra. &. l. per diuerſas. Co. eodem. 13.
               
                  Champion, (campio) is thus defined by Hotoman, in verbis feudalibus. Campio eſt certator pro alio datus in duello: a campo dictus, qui circus erat decertantibus definitus. In our common lawe, it is taken no leſſe for him that trieth the combat in his owne caſe, then for him that fighteth in the place or quarell of another. Bracton li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 21. nu. 4. who alſo ſeemeth to vſe this word for ſuch, as hould by ſergeanty, or ſome ſervice, of another, as: cā
                     piones faciunt homagium domino ſuo. li. 2. ca. 35. Of this reade more in Battell and Combat. 30.
               
                  Chanceler, (cancellarius) commeth of the french (chaneelier) Vincentius Lupanus de magiſtratibus Francorum ſaith, that (cancellarius) is no latine word: how be it he citeth diuers latine writers that doe vſe it. With him agreeth that excellent man Petrus Pithaeus, libro. 2. aduerſariorum. ca. 12. and whereas Lupanus would deriue it from the verb (cancello) Pithaeus confeſſeth, he hath good colour for his opinion, though he thinke it not ſound; and therefore rather deduceth it (a cancellis). (Cancellare) is (literas vel ſcriptum linea per medium ducta damnare) and ſeemeth of it ſelfe likewiſe to be deriued (a cancellis) which ſignifie all one with (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ) in greeke, which we in our tong call a letis: that is, a thing made of woode or iron barrs laide croſſe waies one ouer another, ſo that a man may ſee through

them in and out. And it is to be thought, that iudgement ſeates in ould time, were compaſſed in with thoſe barres, being founde moſt neceſſary to defend the iudges and other officers from the preſſe of the multitude, and and yet neuer the more to hinder any mans view, that had a deſire or cauſe to obſerue what was done. Cancellarius at the firſt by the opinion of Lupanus, ſignified the regiſters or actuaries in court, (grapharios ſc: qui conſcribendis & excipiendis iudicum actis dant operam) Pithaeus ſaith, they were ſuch as we now call (Secretarios) But this name in our daies is greatly advanced, and not onely in other kingdomes, but in ours alſo, is giuen to him, that is the cheife man for mater of iuſtice (in priuate cauſes eſpecially) next vnto the prince. For whereas all other Iuſtices in our common wealth, are tied to the lawe, and may not ſwerue from it in iudgement: the Chanceler hath in this the kings abſolute power, to moderate and temper the written lawe, and ſubiecteth himſelfe onely to the lawe of nature and conſcience, ordering all things iuxta aequum & bonum. And therefore Stawnford in his Prerogatiue. ca. 20. fo. 65. ſaith, that the Chanceler hath two powers: one abſolute, the other ordinary: meaning that though by his ordinary power in ſome caſes, he muſt obſerue the forme of proceeding, as other ordinarie Iudges: yet that in his abſolute power he is not limited by the written law, but by conſcience and equitie, according to the circumſtances of the mater in queſtion. But how long he hath had this power, ſome would doubt. For Polidorus Virgilius, lib. 9. hiſtoriae Anglica. hath theſe words of William the Conqueror: Inſtituit item Scribarum Collegium, qui diplomata ſcriberent, & eius Collegii magiſtrum vocabat Cancellarium, qui paulatim ſupremus factus eſt Magiſtratus, qualis hodie habetur. And ſee Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 13. This high Officer, ſeemeth to be derived from Fraunce vnto vs, as many other Officers and vſages be. For of this thus writeth Boërius in his Tractate De authoritat. Magni Concilii. num. 8. Conſiſtorio Franciae poſt. Principem Dominus Franciae Cancellarius, cui velut excelſum iudicii tribunal hoc in regno (ſub Principe tamen noſtro) moderanti, ſigillum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      authenticum, quo ſine publicis & patētibus regiis literis nulla fides adhibetur, liberam adminiſtrationem habenti, omnes & ſinguli regii Iuſticiarii, quocunque nomine nuncupentur, ac quavis authoritate fungantur, e
                        •
                      inferiores ſunt. Et meritò: Succedit enim in quaeſtoris locum, &c.
               
               
                  
He that beareth this magiſtracie, is called the Chanceler of England. anno 7. R. 2. cap. 14. and by the Statute anno 5. Eliz. cap. 18. the Lord Chanceler and Keeper haue all one power. Note farder that diuers inferior Officers, are called Chancelers, as Chanceler of the Exchequer. an. 25. H. 8. cap. 16. whoſe office hath bene thought by many, to haue bene created for the qualifying of extremities in the Exchequer. He ſitteth in the court, and in the Exchequer chamber, and with the reſt of the court ordereth things to the kings beſt benefit: he is alwaies in cōmiſſion with the Lord Treaſurer for the letting of the lands that came to the crowne by the diſſolution of Abbeyes: and hath by priuie ſeale from the king, power with others to compound for forfeitures of bonds, and forfeitures vpon penall ſtatutes. He hath alſo much to doe in the reuenue come by the diſſolution and firſt fruites, as appeareth by the acts of vniting them to the Crowne. Chanceler of the Duchie of Lā
                     caſter, anno 3. Ed 6. cap. 1. & an. 5. eiuſdem. cap. 26. whoſe office is principall in that court to iudge and determine all controuerſies betweene the king and his tenents of the Duchie land, and otherwiſe to direct all the kings affaires belonging to that court. Chanceler of the Order. 1. of the Garter, Stowes annals pag. 706. Chanceler of the Vniverſity, anno 9. H. 5. cap. 8. & anno 2. H. 6. cap. 8. Chaunceler of the court of Augmentations, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 27. & anno 32. eiuſdem. cap. 20. & anno 33. eiuſd. cap. 39. Chaunceler of the firſt fruites, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 45. Chaunceler of courts, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 28. Chaunceler of the Dioceſſe, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 15.
               
                  Chancerie (cancellaria) is the court of equitie and conſcience, moderating the rigour of other courtes, that are more ſtreightly tyed to the leter of the lawe, whereof the Lord Chancelor of England is the chiefe Iudge. Cromptons iuriſd. fol. 41. or elſe the Lord Keeper of the great Seale, ſithence the ſtatute 5. Eliz. cap. 18. It taketh the name from the Chaunceler, as M. Camden noteth in his Britannia, pag. 114. in meo. The Officers belonging to this court, are (as is aboueſaid) the Lord Chaunceler or Keeper of the broade Seale, twelue Maſters of the Chancerie, whereof the Maſter of the rolles is one and the chiefe, the ſixe Clerkes, the Examiners, a Sergeant at armes, the Marſhall, and cryer of the court, the clerks of the courts, otherwiſe called Courſeters, the clerkes of the petie bagge, the clerke of the crowne, the

clerk of the hanaper, the protonotary or regiſter, the controller of the hanaper, the clerk of appeales, the ſealer, the ch
                     〈…〉
                  axe, the clerke of the facult
                     〈…〉
                   the clerk of the patents, clerk of the ſtarre chamber, clerk of preſentations, clerk of diſmiſſions, clerk of licenſes to alienate, clerkes of the enrolments, clerk of the protections, clerk of the court of wards, clerk of the ſub penaes, which ſee deſcribed in their places.
               
                  Chapell, (capella) commeth of the French (chapelle. i. aedicula) and is of 2. ſorts, either adioining to a Church, as a parcel of the ſame, which men of worth doe build, vt ibidem familiaria ſepulchra ſibi conſtituant, to the vſe of the Romans. l. 5. Π. de religio. or els ſeparate from the mother church, where the pariſh is wide, and is commonly called a chappell of caſe: becauſe it is builded for the caſe of one or more pariſhioners that dwell ouer farre from the Church, and is ſerued by ſome inferiour curate prouided at the charge of the rector, or of them that haue benifite by it, as the compoſition or cuſtome is. Whence the word is deriued the Canoniſts differ in opinion. Rebuffus de pacif. poſſeſ. nu. 104. ſaying, that ſome take it (à capiendo laicot) others (à capra) becauſe it repreſenteth thoſe cotages, which men were wont to couer ouer with goates skins. Petrus Gregorius in ſuo ſyntagma. te. li. 15. ca. 29. hath theſe words of this thing: Capellanus à capellania & capella, cui praeficitur, nominatur: item ab officio ſeu beneficio & capellania. Capella aliquibus dicta, quaſi capiens 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  ſeu populos, vel capiens laudem: vel ſecundùm praepoſitum, a cappa Diui Martint, aut a capriuis pellibus, quibus olim altaria tegebantur ſecundùm Archidiaconum. Arbitrarer & a ſimplici tecto, quo oratorium campeſtre operitur, lateribus vndiquaque patentibus & patulis. Tectum enim Gallis ſimpliciter dicitur (chapelle) a capite. Vnde & formata aliqua nomina (chapean, cape, &c) Aut capella locus qui minoris ſpatii ſit quam eccleſia, quòd tot homines non capiat, vt eccleſia. Ita altare capella eſt. ca. quaeſitum, & ca. penult. i. quaeſt. 3. Iohan. Andraeas. in ca. i. de ſucceſ. ab inteſta. & praebenda cum onere quotidie celebrandi ſacram liturgiam. ca. ſignificatum. 11. de praebend & oratorium. ca. authoritate: de privilegiis. in 6. quòd in co loco orationes non aliae res profanae peragi debeant. ca. pen. & fina. 42. diſtinct. The ſame author in his booke de beneficiis. ca. 11. nu. 10. hath theſe words: Dicti porro primitùs capellani, a cappa Sancti Martini, quam Reges Francorum ob adiutorium in praelus ſolebant ſecum habere: quam ferentes

& cuſtodientes cum caeteris ſanctorum reliquiis clerici, capellani caeperunt vocari. vr omnia refert Valafridus Strabo. Abbas Augenſis. ca. fina. de incrementis rerum eccleſiaſtica.
               
               There is of theſe chapels one kinde called a free chapell, which ſeemeth to be ſuch as hath maintenance perpetuall toward the vphoulding thereof, and wages of the curate, by ſome land charitablely beſtowed on it, without the charge of the rector or pariſhe. anno. 37. H. 8. cap. 4. anno. 1. Ed. 6. ca. 14.
               
                  Chapellaine, (capellanus) is he that performeth diuine ſeruice in a chappell. and therefore in our common law, it is vſed moſt ordinarily for him, that is depending vpon the king, or other man of worth, for the inſtruction of him and his family, the executing of praiers and preaching in his priuate houſe, where commonly they haue a chappell for that purpoſe. as anno. 21. H. 8. ca. 13. where it is ſet downe what perſons may priuiledge one or moe chaplaines, to diſcontinew from their benefices, for their particular ſeruice.
               
                  Chapiters, (capitula) commeth of the French (chapitre. 1. caput libri) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a ſummary or content of ſuch matters, as are to be inquired of or preſented before Iuſtices in Eyre, Iuſtices of aſſiſe, or of peace in their ſeſſions. Soe is it vſed., anno. 3. Ed. 1. ca. 27. in theſe words: and that no clerke of any Iuſtice, Eſcheatour, or Commiſſioner in Eyre, ſhall take any thing for deliuering chapiters, but onely clerkes of Iuſtices in their circuits: and againe anno. 13. eiuſdem. ca. 10. in theſe words: and when the time commeth, the ſhyreeue ſhall certifie the chapiters before the Iuſtices in Eire, how many writs he hath and what &c. Britton likewiſe vſeth the ſame worde in this ſignification. ca. 3. Chapiters or (capitula) be now called articles moſt ordinarily, and are deliuered as well by the mouth of the Iuſtice in his charge, as by the clerks in wrighting to the enqueſt; whereas in auncient times (as appeareth by Bracton and Britton) they were after an exhortation giuen by the Iuſtices for the good obſeruation of the lawes and kings peace, firſt red diſtinctly and opēly in the whole court, and then deliuered in writing to the grand enqueſt. And the ſame order doth M. Lamberd wiſh to be kept in theſe daies alſo. Eirenar. li. 4. ca. 4. pa. 393. Horn in his mirrour of Iuſtices calleth them articles, and expreſſeth what they were wont to containe. li. 3. ca. des. articles in Eire. An exāple of theſe

chapters or articles, you haue in the booke of aſſiſes, fo. 138. nu. 44. as alſo in Roger Houeden, parte poſter. ſuorum annal. in Richardo primo. fo. 423.
               
                  Chapter. (capitulum) ſignifieth in our common lawe (as in the canon lawe, whence it is borowed) congregationem clericorum in eccleſiae cathedrali, conuentuali, regulari, vel collegiata: and in another ſignification, locum in quo fiunt communes tractatus collegiatorum. It hath other ſignifications, though not greatly worth the repeating in this place, which you may read in Linwods prouineials. gloſ. in ca. quia in continētiae. de conſtitutionibus. verb. Capitulis. Why this collegiat companie ſhould be called (capitulum) of the canoniſts, a man may make a queſtion: and for anſwer, it may be ſaid, that it is metaphorically ſo termed the word originally ſignifiing a litle head. For this companie or corporation is a kinde of head, not onely to rule and gouerne the dioces in the vacatiō of the Biſhoprick, but alſo in many things to adviſe the Biſhop, when the See is full. See Panormitan. in ca. capitulum. extra de reſcriptis.
               
               
                  Charta perdonationis ſe defendendo, is the forme of a pardon for ſlaying another in a mans owne defence. Regiſter. original. fo. 287.
               
                  Chartae perdonationis vtlagariae, is the forme of a pardon for a man thatis outlawed. Reg. orig. fo. 288. 38
                     •
                  .
               
                  Charter (charta) commeth of the French (chartres. i. inſtrumenta) It is taken in our lawe, for written evidence of things done betweene man and man, whereof Bracton lib. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                      ca. 16. num. 1. ſaith thus: Fiunt aliquando donationes in ſcriptis, ſicut in chartis, ad perpetuam rei memoriam, propter brevem hominum vitam, &c. & a litle after: nu. 12. Et ſciendum, quòd chartarū alia regia, alia privatorum; & regiarum alia privata, alia communis, & alia vniuerſalis. Item priuatorum, alia de puro feoffamento & ſimplici, alia de feoffamento conditionali ſive conventionali: & ſecundùm omnia genera feoffamentorum fieri poteſt. Item privatorum alia de recognitione puravel conditionali. Item alia de quiete-clamantia: Item alia de confirmatione, &c. and ſo thorough the chapter. Britton likewiſe in his 39. chapter, diuideth charters into the charters of the King, and charters of priuate perſons. Charters of the King are thoſe, whereby the King paſſeth any graunt to any perſon or more, or to any bodie politique: as a charter of exemption that a man ſhall not be empaneled vpon any Iurie. Kitchin. fo. 114. & fo. 177. charter

of pardon, whereby a man is forgiuen a felonie, or other offence committed againſt the Kings crowne and dignitie. Broke. tit. charter of pardon. Charter of the foreſt, wherein the lawes of the foreſt are compriſed. anno. 9. H. 3. Cromptons Iuriſd. fo. 
                        〈◊〉
                      47. Pupilla oculi. parte. 5. ca. 22. Manwood. parte. 1. of his foreſt lawes. fo. i. where he ſetteth downe the charters of of Canutus. and fo. 17. where he hath ſet downe that which was made. anno 9. H. 3. with the charter of the foreſt which we vſe, M. Skene ſaith, that the lawes of the foreſt in Scotland doe agree. de verbo. ſignif. verbo. Veniſon. Charter of land. Broke. codem titulo. That which we call a charter, the Lombards in libris feudalibus, call praeceptū (praeceptionem) Hotama. verbo praeceptū. in verbis feudalibus. Of theſe charters you haue alſo a long diſcourſe in Fleta. li. 3. ca. 14. who expoundeth euery ſubſtantiall part of a deede of gift particularly in order.
               
                  Charter land, (terra per chartam) is ſuch sa a man holdeth by charter, that is, by euidence in writing; otherwiſe called free-hold. anno 19. H. 7. ca. 13. and Kitchin. fo. 86. & theſe in the Saxons time, were wont to be called (bockland) Idem. fo. 89. and Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words. verbo Terra ex ſcripto which was held, as he there ſaith, with more commodious & eaſier conditions, then (folkland) was: that is land held without writing. And the reaſon he giueth, becauſe that was haereditataria, libera, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      immunis: whereas fundus ſine ſcripto cenſum penſitabat annuum, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      officiorum quadam ſervitute eſt obligatus. Priorēviriplerun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nobiles atque ingenui, poſteriorem ruſtici ferè & pagani poſſidebant. Illam nos vulgò freehold & per chartam, hanc ad voluntatem domini appellamus. Thus farre M. Lamberd.
               
               
                  Charter partie (charta partita) is nothing but that which we call a paire of indentures, conteining the covenants and agreements made betweene merchants, or ſea faring men touching their marine affaires. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14.
               
                  Chartis reddendis, is a writ, which lyeth againſt him that hath charters of feofment deliuered him to be kept, and refuſeth to deliuer them. old. nat. br. fo. 66. Regiſter orig. fo. 159.
               
                  Chaſe. See Chace.
               
               
                  Chatell. See Catell.
               
               
                  Chawnce medley (Infortunium) commeth of 2. french words (chance. i. lapſus) and (meſler. i. miſcere) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, the caſuall ſlaughter of a man, not altogether without

the fault of the ſlayer. Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 1. ca. 8. calleth it homicide by miſaduenture, Weſt. calleth it homicide mixt. parte. 2. ſymbol. titulo Indictments. ſect. 50. and there defineth it thus: Homicide mixt is, when the killers ignorance or negligence is ioyned with the chaunce: as if a man loppe trees by an high way ſide, by which many vſually trauell, and caſt doune a bowe, not giuing warning to take heede thereof, by which bowe one paſſing by is ſlaine: In which caſe he offendeth, becauſe he gaue noe warning, that the party might haue taken heede to himſelfe. See Skene de verbo: ſignifi. verbo Melletum.
               
               
                  Chaungeour, is an officer belonging to the Kings mint, whoſe function ſeemeth eſpecially to conſiſt, in exchanging coine for gold or ſiluer in the maſſe, brought in by merchants or others. anno 2. H. 6. ca. 12.
               
                  Chawntery, (cantaria) is a Church or chapell endewed with lands or other yearely revenewe, for the mantenance of one or moe prieſts, daily to ſing maſſe for the ſoules of the donours, and ſuch others, as they doe appointe. anno 37. H. 8. ca. 4. anno 1. Fd. 6. ca. 14.
               
                  Check rolle, ſeemeth to be a rolle or booke, that conteineth the names of ſuch, as are attendants and in pay to great perſonages, as their houſhold ſervants. It is otherwiſe called the chequer rolle. anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13. anno 3. H. 7. ca. 13. & ſeemeeth to haue one etymologie with eſchequer. Which ſee.
               
                  Chevage, (cheuagium) commeth of the French (chef. i. caput) It ſignifieth with vs, a ſumme of money paid by villeins to their Lords, in acknowledgment of their ſlauerie. Whereof Bracton li. 1. ca. 10. ſaith thus: chevagium dicitur recognitio in ſignum ſubiectionis & dominij de capite ſuo. It ſeemeth alſo to be vſed, for a ſumme of a mony, yearely giuen by a man to another of might & power, for his avowement, maintenance, and protection, as to their head or leader. M. Lamberds li. 2. ca. 5. etrenarch. writeth it (chivage) or rather (chiefage)
               
               
                  Cheviſance, commeth of the French (chevir. i. venir a chef de de quelque choſe) to come to the head or end of a buſines, to perfect a mater. This word is vſed for bargayning. anno 37. H. 8. ca. 9. & anno. 13. Eliza. ca. 5. & 8. an. 10. R. 2. cap. 1. & anno 3. H. 7. cap. 5.
               
                  Chief. See Capite.
               
               
                  Chiefe pledge (plegius, vel vas capitalis) an. 20. H. 6. ca. 8. For the vnderſtanding of this word, See Borowhead.
               
               
                  
                  Childwit, commeth of the Saxon word (child), and (wit) which ſome ſay, in that tongue, is a terminatiō of certain words without ſignification, as (dom) in (chriſtendom) or (hood) in (childehood) with vs. But for the ſignification of (wit) ſee Bloodwit) Childwit ſignifieth a power to to take a fine of your bondwoman begotten with child without your conſent. Raſtall. expoſit. of words.
               
               
                  Chimin, (chiminus) commeth from the French (chemin. i. aditus, via) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a way. It is diuided into two ſorts: the Kings high way, and a priuate way. Kitchin. fo. 35. The Kings highe way (chiminus regius) is that, by which the Kings ſubiects, and all others vnder his protection, haue free libertie to paſſe, though the propertie of the ſoyle of each ſide, where the way lieth, may perhaps belong to ſome priuate man. A way priuate is that, by which one man or more haue libertie to paſſe, either by preſcription or by charter, through another mans ground. And this is diuided into chymin in groſſe, and chymin appendant. Kitchin. fo. 177. Chymin in groſſe is that way, which a man holdeth principally and ſolely in it ſelfe: chimin apendant is that, which a man hath adioyned to ſome other thing as appertinent thereū
                  to. For example, if a man hire a cloſe or paſture, and couenāt for ingreſſe and egreſſe to and from the ſaid cloſe, through ſome other ground, by the which otherwiſe he cannot paſſe. Or chimin in groſſe may be that, which the Civilians call perſonall: as when one covenanteth for a way through another mans ground, for himſelfe and his heires: chimin appendant, on the otherſide, may be that which they call reall: as when a man purchaſeth a way through another mansground, for ſuch as doe or ſhall dwell in this or that houſe for euer, or be owners of ſuch a maner.
               
                  Chiminage, (chiminagium) ſignifieth a tolle for wayfarage thorough the foreſt. Cromptons. Iuriſd. fo. 189. and Manwood. farte. 1. of his foreſt lawes. pa. 86. See Chimin. The Feudiſts call it, pedagium. See Chimin.
               
               
                  Chirographer of fynes (chirographus finium & concordiarum) commeth of the greeke (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) which ſignifieth a wrighting of a mans owne hand, whereby he acknowledgeth a dept to another. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, him in the common bench office, that ingroſſeth fines in that court acknowledged, into a perpetuall record, after they be acknowledged,

and fully paſſed by thoſe officers, by whome they are formerly examined; and that writeth and deliuereth the indentures of them vnto the party anno. 2. H. 3. ca. 8. and. Weſt Symbol: parte. 2. titulo. fines. ſect. 114. & 129. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 147. A. This officer alſo maketh two indentures, one for the buier, another for the ſeller; and maketh one other indented peece, containing alſo the effect of the fine, which he deliuereth ouer to the cuſtos breuium, that is called the foote of the fine. The Chirographer alſo, or his debuty, doth proclaime all the fines in the court euery tearme, according to the Statute; and then repayring to the office of the cuſtos breuium, there indorſeth the proclamations vpō the backſide of the foot thereof: and alwaie keepeth the writ of couenant, as alſo the note of the fine.
               
                  Chivage. See Chevage.
               
               
                  Chivalrie, (ſervitium militare) commeth of the French (chevalier. i. eques) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a tenure of land by knights ſeruice. For the better vnderſtanding whereof, it is to be knowne, that there is noe land, but is holden mediatly or immediatly of the Crowne, by ſome ſeruice or other: and therfore are all our free-houlds that are to vs and our heires, called (feuda) feeſe, as proceeding frō the benefit of the King, for ſome ſmall yearely rent, and the performance of ſuch ſeruices, as originally were laid vpon the land at the donation thereof. For as the king gaue to the great Nobles his immediat tenents, large poſſeſſions for euer, to hold of him for this or that rent and ſeruice: ſo they againe in time parcelled out to ſuch as they liked, their lands ſo receiued of the kings bountie, for rents and ſeruices, as they thought good. And theſe ſeruices are all by Litleton diuided into two ſorts chivalry, and ſocage. The one is martiall and military, the other clowniſh and ruſticall. Chivalrie therefore is a tenure or ſeruice, whereby the tenent is bound to performe ſome noble or military office vnto his Lord, and is of two ſorts: either regall, that is, ſuch as may hold onely of the king: or ſuch as may alſo hold of a common perſon, as well as of the king. That which may hold onely of the King, is properly called ſervitium, or ſergeantia: and is againe diuided into grand or petit, i. great or ſmall. Great, commonly called grand ſergeantie, is that where one holdeth lands of the King by ſeruice, which hee ought to doe in his own perſon vnto him as to beare the kings

baner or his ſpeare, or to leade his hoaſt, or to be his Marſhall, or to blow a horne, when he ſeeth his enemies inuade the land, or to find a man at armes to fight within the foure Seaſe, or elſe to do it himſelfe, or to beare the kings ſword before him at his coronation, or at that day to be his ſewer, caruer, butler, or chamberlaine. Litleton tit. Sergeantie. Petit Sergeantie, is where a man holdeth land of the king, to yeeld him yearely ſome ſmall thing toward his warres, as a ſword, dagger, bowe, knife, ſpeare, paire of gloues of maile, a paire of ſpurs, or ſuch like. Litleton. titulo petit Sergeanty. Chivalry, that may hould of a common perſon as well as of the king, is called (ſcutagium) eſcuage, that is ſeruice of the ſhield. And this is either vncertaine or certaine. Eſcuage vncertaine is likewiſe two-fold: firſt, where the tenent by his tenure, is bounde to follow his lord going in perſon to the kings wars againſt his enemies, either him ſelfe, or to ſend a ſufficient man in his place, there to be maintained at his coſt ſo many daies, as were agreed vpon betweene the lord and his firſt tenent at the graunting of the ſee. And the daies of ſuch ſeruice ſeeme to haue bene rated by the quantity of the land ſo houlden: as if it extend to a whole knights fee, then the tenent was bounde thus to follow his lord fourty dayes. And a knights fee, was ſo much land, as in thoſe dayes was accoumpted a ſufficient liuing for a knight: and that was 680 acres, as ſome opinion is, or 800 as others thinke: or 15 pounds per annum. Camdens Brittan. pa. 110. in meo. S. Thomas Smyth ſayeth, that cenſus equeſtris is 40. poundes reuenew in free lands. If the law extend but to halfe a knights fee, then the tenent is bounde to follow his lord, as aboue is ſaid, but twenty dayes. If to a fourth part, then ten daies. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 83. C. & 84. C. E. The other kinde of this eſcuage vncertaine is called caſtelward: where the tenent by his land is bound, either by him ſelfe, or by ſome other, to defend a caſtell, as often as it ſhall come to his courſe. Eſcuage certaine, is where the tenent is ſet at a certaine ſumme of money, to be paide in lieu of ſuch vncertaine ſeruice, as that a man ſhall yerely pay for a Knights Fee, 20. ſhillings, Stow annal. pag. 238. for halfe a Knights Fee, tenne ſhillings, or ſome like rate. And this ſeruice, becauſe it is drawne to a certaine rent, groweth to be of a mixt nature: not meerely ſocage, for that it ſmelleth not of the plough, and yet ſo cage in

effect: being now neither perſonall ſeruice, nor vncertaine, Litleton, titulo Secage. This tenure called chiualry, hath other conditions annexed vnto it; as homage, fealty, wardſhip, reliefe, and mariage. Bracton. li. 2. ca. 35. which what they ſignifie, looke in their places. Chilualry is either generall or eſpeciall. Dier. fo. 161. nu. 47. Generall ſeemeth to be, where only it is ſaid in the feofment, that the tenent houldeth per ſeruitium militare, without any ſpecification of ſergeanty, eſcuage, &c. Speciall, that which is declared particularly what kinde of knights ſeruice he houldeth by.
               
                  Chorall, (choralis) ſeemeth to be any that by vertue of any of the orders of Clergie, was in auncient time admitted, to ſit and ſerue God in the Quier, which in Latine is tearmed Chorus.
               
               
                  Choſe, (res) is the French word as generall as (thing) is with vs. It is in the common lawe, vſed with diuers epithites worthie the interpretation: as, choſe locall, is ſuch a thing as is annexed to a place. For example: a mill is choſe locall, Kitchin fol. 18. Choſe tranſitorie, in the ſame place ſeemeth to bee that thing which is moueable, and may be taken away, or caried from place to place. Choſe in action, is a thing incorporeall, and onely a right: as an annuitie, an obligation of debt, a couenant, or vowcher by warrantie. Broke titulo. Choſe in action. And it ſeemeth, that choſe in action, may be alſo called choſe in ſuſpence, becauſe it hath no reall exiſtence or being, neither can be properly ſayde to bee in our poſſeſſion. Broke ibid.
               
               
                  Churchwardens (Eccleſiarum gardiani) be Officers yearely choſen, by the conſent of the Miniſter and pariſhioners, according to the cuſtome of euery ſeuerall place, to looke to the church, church-yard, and ſuch things, as belong to both, and to obſerue the behauiours of their pariſhioners for ſuch faults as appertaine to the iuriſdiction or cenſure of the court eccleſiaſticall. Theſe be a kind of corporation, inabled by lawe, to ſue for any thing belonging to their church, or poore of their pariſh. See Lamberd in his pamphlet of the duty of Churchwardens.
               
               
                  Churcheſſet, is a word that I find in Fleta. lib. 1. cap. 47 in fine. whereof he thus writeth: Certam menſuram bladi tritici ſignificat, quam quilibet olim ſanctae Eccleſiae die Sancti Martini tēpore tam Britonum quàm Anglorum contribuerunt. Plures tamen magnates, poſt

Romanorum adventum, illam contributionem ſecundum veterem legem Moyſi nomine primitiarum dabant: prout in brevi regis Knuti, ad ſummum Pontificem tranſmiſſo, continetur, in quo illam contributionem, (chirchſed) appellant, quaſi ſemen Eccleſiae.
               
               
                  Cinamom (cinamomum) is a tree, whereof the barke is knowne to be a pleaſant, comfortable, and medicinall ſpice, which you haue deſcribed in Gerards Herball. lib. 3 cap. 142. This is reckoned among garbleable ſpices, an. 1. Iac. cap. 19.
               
                  Cinque portes (quinque portus) be thoſe ſpeciall hauens, that lye toward Fraunce, and therfore haue bene thought by our kings, from time to time, to be ſuch as ought moſt vigilantly to be obſerued againſt invaſion. In which reſpect, the places where they be, haue an eſpeciall gouernor or keeper, called by his office Lord Warden of the Cinque ports: and divers priuiledges graunted vnto them, as a particular iuriſdiction, their Warden hauing the authoritie of an Admirall among them, and ſending out writs in his owne name. Crompton in his Iuriſdictions, fol. 28. nameth the Cinque ports, Douer, Sandwich, Rye, Haſtings, Winchelſea, Rumney, Hithe: whereof ſome, becauſe the number exceedeth fiue, muſt either be added to the firſt inſtitution, by ſome later graunt, or be accompted as appendents to ſome of the reſt. See Gardein of the Cinque ports: and the Statute anno 32. H. 8. cap. 48.
               
                  Circuit of action, (circuitus actionis) is a longer courſe of proceeding, to recouer the thing ſued for, then is needfull. See the new Tearmes of lawe.
               
                  Circumſtantibus, is a word of art, ſignifying the ſupply or making vp of the number of Iurors, (if any empaneled appeare not, or appearing, be chalenged by either partie) by adding vnto them ſo many other of thoſe that are preſent or ſtanding by, as will ſerue the turne, v. ann. 35. H. 8. cap. 6. and anno 5. Elizab. cap. 25.
               
                  Citie (civitas) commeth of the French (citè) and ſignifieth with vs, as it doth in other regions, ſuch a towne corporate, as hath a Biſhop and a cathedrall church. For Lucas de Penna lege vnica, tituli, De Metropol. Beryto. ti. 21. lib. 10. Cod. hath theſe words: Idem locus, vrbs, civitas, & oppidum appeliatur. (Pro quo eſt etiam infra. De ſpectaculis. l. Nemo.) Civitas enim dicitur, quatenus cum iuſtitia & magiſtratuum ordine gubernatur, oppidum, quaetenus eſt ibi copia incolarum: & vrbs, quatenus muris debito more cingitur. Proprie autem

dicitur civitas, quae habet Epiſcopū. Supra de Epiſcop. & Cleri. l. Nulli. Aliâs dicitur generaliter omnis habitatio plurimorum, quae muro cingitur. Π. de verb. ſignif. lib. 2. & de penu lega. l. Nam quod. §. St ita. Sed ſtricte loquendo, ſi Epiſcopo caret, dicitur vrbs. Π. de verb. ſignif. l. Pupillus. §. Oppidum, &c. Yet M. Crompton in his Iuriſdictions, where he reckoneth vp the cities, leaueth out Elye, though it haue a biſhop and a cathedrall Church, and putteth in Weſtminſter, though now it haue no biſhop. And anno 35. Eliza. ca. 6. Weſtminſter is called a citie, anno 27. eiuſd. cap. 5. Of the Statutes not printed, it is alternatiuely tearmed a citie or borow. It appeareth by the Statute, 35. H. 8 cap. 10. that then there was a biſhop of Weſtminſter. Civitas, according to Ariſtotle, lib. 3. politicorum. ca. pri. is defined to be a certaine or vniforme gouernment of the inhabitants. & Caeſar ciuitatem vocat populum eodem iure vtentem. Camd. Brittan. pa. 310. But this is the generall definition of a common wealth, and not of a city, at the leaſt, as we now a daies particularly take it. For ouer and beſide that which is aboue ſaide, Caſſanaeus in conſuetudi. Burg. pa. 15. ſaith, that France hath within the teritories of it, 104. cities, and giueth reaſon of this his ſaying, becauſe there be there ſo many ſeates of Archbiſhops and biſhops.
               
                  Clack, as to clack, force, and bard, alias, beard good wools. anno. 8. H. 6. ca. 22. whereof the firſt, viz. to clack wooll, is to cut of the ſheepes marke, which maketh it to waigh leſſe, and ſo yeld the leſſe cuſtome to the king, to force wooll, is to clip of the vpper and more heary part of it, to bard or beard it, is to cut the head and necke from the reſt of the fleece.
               
                  Clamea admittenda in itinere per Atturnatum, is a writ whereby the king commandeth the Iuſtices in eyre to admitte of ones claime by Atturney, that is employed in the kings ſeruice, and cannot come in his owne perſon. Regiſt. orig. fol. 19. b.
               
               
                  Clayme (clameum) is a chalenge of intereſt in any thing that is in the poſſeſſion of another, or at the leaſt out of his owne: as, claime by charter, clayme by deſcent, old nat. br. fol. 11. Si dominus infra annum clameum qualitercunque appoſuerit: Bracton. lib. 1. cap. 10. See the definition & diuers ſorts of claime in Plowden. Caſu Stowel. fol. 359. a.
               
               
                  Clarentius. See Herald.
               
               
                  Clorgie (clerus, clericatus) is diuerſly taken: ſometime for the whole number of thoſe, that are

                  de Clero domini) of the Lords lot or ſhare, as the tribe of Leuy. was in Iudaea: ſome time for a plee to an indictment, or an appeale, and is by Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 2. ca. 41. thus defined. Clergie is an auncient liberty of the church, which hath bene confirmed by diuers parlaments, and is, when a prieſt, or one within orders, is arraigned of felony, before a ſeculer iudge, he may pray his clergie. which is as much, as if he prayed to be deliuered to his ordinarie, to purge him ſelfe of the offence obiected. And this might be done in caſe of murder. Coke. li. 4. fo. 46. a. This liberty is mentioned in articulis cleri. anno. 9. Ed. 2. ca. 16. and what perſons might haue their clergy, and what not, ſee Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 2. ca. 42. & 43. Howbeit there be many ſtatuts made ſithence he writ that booke, wherby the benefite of clergy is abridged. as anno. 8. El. ca. 4. anno. 14. eiuſdem. ca. 5. anno. 18. eiuſd. cap. 4. 6. 7. & anno 23. eiuſd. cap. 2. a. 29. eiuſd. c. 2. anno 31. eiuſd. ca. 12. a. 39. eiuſd. ca. 9. & ca. 15. Of this ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fo. 102. 103. 104. 105. and Lamberds Eirenarcha. li. 4. ca. 14. pa. 543. And note by the way, that the auncient courſe of the law in this point of clergy, is much altered. For by the ſtatute anno. 18. Eliza. ca. 7. clerks be no more deliuered to their ordinaries to be purged, but now euery man, though not within orders, is put to reade at the barre, being founde guilty, and conuicted of ſuch felonie as this benefit is ſtill granted for: and ſo burnt in the hand and ſet free for the firſt time, if the ordinaries commiſſioner or depute ſtanding by do ſay: (legit vt clericus) or otherwiſe ſuffereth death for his tranſgreſſion.
               
                  Clerico addmittendo, is a writ directed to the biſhop, for the admitting of a clerk to a benefice vpon a (Ne admittas) tryed & founde for the party that procureth the writ. Regiſt. orig. fo. 31. 6.
               
                  Clerico captoper ſtatutū mercatorum, &c. is a writ for the deliuery of a clerk out of priſon, that is impriſoned vpon the breach of a ſtatut merchant. Regiſter orig. fo. 147.
               
                  Clerico conuicto commiſſo gaolae in defectu ordinarii deliberando, &c. is a writ for the deliuery of a clerk to his ordinary, that formerly was conuicted of felony, by reaſon his ordinary did not chalenge him according to the priuiledge of clerks. Regiſter. orig. fo. 69. a.
               
               
                  Clerico infra ſacros ordines conſtituto non elegendo in officium, is a writ directed to the bay lifs, &c. that haue thruſt a bayliwick or bedelſhip vpō one in holy orders, charging them to releaſe him againe.

                  Regiſter orig. fo. 187. b.
               
               
                  Clerk (clericus) hath two ſignifications: one, as it is the title of him, that belongeth to the holy miniſtery of the church, that is (in theſe daies) either miniſter, or deacon, of what other degree or dignity ſoeuer: though according to former times, not only ſacerdotes & diaconi, but alſo, ſubdiaconi, cantores, acolyti, exorciſtae, & oſtiarii were within this accoumpt, as they be at this daye, where the canon law hath full power. And in this ſignification, a clerk is either relegious (otherwiſe called regular) or ſecular. anno. 4. H. 4. ca. 12. The other ſignification of this word, noteth thoſe, that by their function or courſe of life, practiſe their penne in any court or other wiſe; as namely, the clerk of the rolles of parliament, clerks of the Chancery, and ſuch like, whoſe peculiar offices I purpoſe to ſet downe in order, according to that knowledge that I could procure of them.
               
                  Clerke of the parlament rolles, (clericus rotulorum Parlamenti) is he that recordeth all things done in the high court of Parlament, and engroſſeth them fairely into parhement rolles, for their better keeping to all poſteritie. Of theſe there be two, one of the higher, another of the lower or common houſe, Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 4. & 8. Smith de rep. Anglor. pag. 38. See alſo Vowels booke touching the order of the Parlament.
               
                  Clerke of the crowne in the chā
                     cerie (clericus Coronae in Cancellaria) is an officer there, that by himſelfe or his deputie, is continually to attend the Lord Chanceler, or Lord Keeper, for ſpeciall matters of eſtate by commiſſion, or the like, either immediatly from his maieſtie, or by order of his priuy councell, as well ordinary as extraordinary. viz. commiſſions of lieuetenancies, of Iuſtices errant, and of aſſiſes, of oyer and terrainer, of gaol deliuery, of the peace, and ſuch like, with their writs of aſſociation, and dedimus poteſtatem, for taking of oathes. Alſo all generall pardons vpon graunts of them at the kings coronation, or at a parlament, where he ſitteth in the higher houſe at the Parlament time; the writs of parlament, with the names of knights and burgeſſes, which be to be returned into his office. He hath alſo the making of all ſpeciall pardons, and writs of execution, vpon bonds of ſtatute of the Staple forfeited: which was annexed to his office in the raigne of Queene Mary, in conſideration of his continuall and chargeable attendance: both theſe before being common

for euery courſitour, and clerk of court to make.
               
                  Clerk of the Crowne (clericus Coronae) is a clerk or officer in the Kings bench, whoſe function is to frame, reade, and record all indictments againſt traitours, felons, and other offenders there arraigned vpon any publique crime. He is otherwiſe termed Clerke of the Crowne office. And anno. 2. H. 4. ca. 10. he is called clerk of the crowne of the kings bench.
               
                  Clerk of the extreates (clericus extractorum) is a clerk belonging to the exchequer, who termely receiueth the extreats out of the Lord treaſurers remembrancer his office, and writeth them out to be levied for the king. He alſo maketh ceduls of ſuch ſummes extreated, as are to be diſcharged.
               
                  Clerk of aſſiſe (clericus aſſiſae) is he, that writeth all things iudicially done by the Iuſtices of aſſiſe in their circuits. Cromptons Iuriſd. fo. 227.
               
                  Clerke of the pele (clericus pellis) is a clerk belonging to the exchequer, whoſe office is, to enter euery tellers bille into a parchement rolle called (pellis receptorum) and alſo to make another rolle of paiments, which is called (pellis exituum) where in he ſetteth downe, by what warrent the monie was paid.
               
                  Clerk of the warrants (clericus warrantorum) is an officer belonging to the court of common plees, which entreth all warrants of atturney for plantiffe and defendant, and enrolleth all deedes of indentures of bargaine and ſale, which are acknowledged in the court, or before any iudges out of the court. And he doth extreate into the exchequer, all iſſues, fines, and amercements, which growe due to the king any way in that court, and hath a ſtanding fee of ten pound of the king, for making the ſame extreats. See Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 76. in prin.
               
               
                  Clerk of the petit bagge (clericus parvae bagiae) is an officer of the chawncerie, of which ſort there be three, and the maſter of the Roles their cheife. Their office is to record the returne of all inquiſitions out of euerie ſhire, all liveries granted in the courte of wardes, all ouſter les mains, to make all patents of cuſtomers, gawgers, controllers, and aulnegers, all conge d' eſlires for Biſhops, all liberateis vpon extents of ſtatute ſtaples, the recouerie of Recogniſances forfeited, and all Elegits vpon them, the ſummons of the nobilitie, clergie, and burgeſes to the Parlament; commiſſions directed to knights and other of euery ſhire for ſeaſſing of the ſubſidies. Writs for the

nominations of collectours for the fiftenthes, and all traverſes vpon any office, bille or otherwiſe, and to recieue the money due to the king for the ſame. This officer is mentioned. anno 33. H. 8. ca. 22.
               
                  Clerk of the Kings great wardrobe (clericus magnae garderobae regis) is an officer of the Kings houſe, that keepeth an account or Inventarie in writing, of all things belonging to the kings wardrobe. This officer is mentioned. anno 1. Ed. 4. ca. 1.
               
                  Clerk of the market (clericus merketi) is an officer of the kings houſe. anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 1. & anno 13. R. 2. ca. 4. whoſe dutie is to take charge of the kings meaſures, and to keepe the ſtandards of them, (that is) the examples of all the meaſures that ought to be through the land: as of elns, yards, lagens, as quarts, pottels, gallons, &c. of weights, buſhels, and ſuch like, and to ſee, that all meaſures in euerie place, be anſwerable vnto the ſaid ſtandard, Fleta. li. 2. ca. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. of which office, as alſo of our diuerſitie of weights and meaſures, you may there finde a treatiſe worth the reading. Britton alſo in his 30. chapter ſaith in the Kings perſon, to this effect: we will that none haue meaſures in the realme but we our ſelues: but that every man take his meaſures and weights from our ſtandards: and ſo goeth on with a tractat of this mater, that well ſheweth the auncient law and practiſe in this poynt. Touching this officers dutie, you haue alſo a good ſtatut. anno 13. R. 2. cap. 4.
               
                  Clerk of the Kings ſiluer (clericus argenti Regis) is an officer belonging to the court of common plees, vnto whome euerie fine is brought, after it hath beene with the cuſtos brevium, and by whome the effect of the writ of couenant is entred into a paper booke; and according to that note, all the fines of that terme are alſo recorded in the rolles of the court. And his entrie is in this forme: He putteth the Shire ouer the margen, and then ſaith. A. B. dat domino regi dimidiam merkam (or more, according to the value) pro licentia concordandi. C. cum C. D. pro talibus terris, in tali villa, & habet chirographum per pacem admiſſum &c.
               
               
                  Clerk of the peace (clericus pacis,) is an officer belonging to the ſeſſions of the peace: His dutie is, in the ſeſſions to reade the endictments, to enrolle the acts, and drawe the proces: to record the proclamations of rates for ſervants wages, to enrolle the diſcharge of apprentices, to keepe the counterpaine of the indenture of armour, to keepe

the regiſter booke of licences, giuen to badgers and laders of corne, & of thoſe that are licenſed to ſhoote in guns, & to certify into the kings bench tranſcripts of indictments, outlawries, attainders, and convictions had before the Iuſtices of the peace, within the time limited by ſtatute. Lamberds eirenarcha. li. 4. ca. 3. fo. 379.
               
                  Clerk of the ſignet (clericus ſignetti) is an officer attendant continually on his maieſties principall ſecretary, who alwaies hath the cuſtodie of the priuie ſignet, as well for ſealing his maieſties priuate leters, as alſo ſuch graunts as paſſe his maieſties hands by bill aſſigned. Of theſe there be fower that attend in their courſe, and haue their diet at the Secretaries table. More largely you may reade of their office, in the ſtatute made anno 27. H. 8. ca. 11.
               
                  Clerk of the priuie ſeale (clericus priuati ſigilli) is an officer (whereof there be foure in number) that attendeth the Lord keeper of the priuie ſeale, or if there be none ſuch, vpon the principal Secretarie, writing and making out all things that be ſent by warrant from the ſignet to the priuie ſeale, and are to be paſſed to the great ſeale: as alſo to make out (as they are tearmed) privie ſeales, vpon any eſpeciall occaſion of his maieſties affaires; as for loane of mony, or ſuch like. Of this officer, and his function, you may read the ſtatute anno. 27. H. 8. ca. 11. He that is in theſe daies called the Lord keeper of the privie ſeale, ſeemeth in auncient time to haue beene called clerke of the priuie ſeale, and to haue beene reckoned in the number of the great officers of the realme. Read the ſtatute. anno. 12. R. 2. ca. 11.
               
                  Clerk of the Iuries or iurata writs (clericus iuratorum) is an officer belonging to the court of the common plees, which maketh out the writs called (habeas corpora) and (diſtringas) for appearance of the Iurie, either in court or at the aſſiſes, after that the Iurie or panell is returned vpō the (venire facias). He entreth alſo into the rols the awarding of theſe writs, and maketh all the continuance from the going out of the (habeas corpora) vntill the verdict be giuen.
               
                  Clerk of the pipe (clericus pipae) is an officer in the kings exchequer, who hauing all accounts and debts due to the king delivered and drawne downe out of the Remembrancers offices, chargeth them downe into the great rolle: who alſo writeth ſū
                  mons to the Shyreeue, to levie the ſaid debts vpon the goods and catels of the deptors: and if

they haue no goods, then doth he drawe them downe to the L. treaſurers remembrancer, to write extreats againſt their lands. The awncient revenew of the Crowne, remaineth in charge afore him, & he ſeeth the ſame anſwered by the fermers & ſhyreeues to the King. He maketh a charge to al Shyreeues of their ſummons of the pipe and greenwax, and ſeeth it anſwered vpon their accompts. He hath the drawing and ingroſſing of all leaſes of the Kings land.
               
                  Clerk of the hamper or hanaper (clericus hanaperij) is an officer in chawncerie, anno 2. Fd. 4. ca. 1. otherwiſe called warden of the hamper, in the ſame ſtatute, whoſe functiō is, to receiue al the mony due to the kings maieſtie, for the ſeales of charters, patēts, commiſſions, and writs, as alſo feeſe due to the officers for enrolling & examining the ſame, with ſuch like. He is tied to attendance on the lord Chanceler, or lord keeper, daily in the terme time, and at all times of ſealing: hauing with him leather bags, wherein are put all charters, &c. after they be ſealed by the Lord Chanceler, and thoſe bags being ſealed vp with the lord Chancelers priuate ſeale, are to be deliuered to the controller of the hanaper, who vpon receipt of them, doth as you ſhall reade in his office. This hanaper repreſenteth a ſhadowe of that which the Romanes termed (fiſcum) that conteined the Emperours treaſure.
               
                  Clerk of the plees (clericus placitorum) is an officer in the exchequer, in whoſe office all the officers of the court (vpon eſpeciall priuiledge belonging vnto them) ought to ſiew or be ſiewed vpon any action.
               
                  Clerk of the treaſurie (clericus theſaurariae) is an officer belonging to the common plees, who hath the charge of keeping the records of the courte, and maketh out all the records of Niſi prins, hath the fees due for all ſearches, and hath the certifiing of all records into the the kings bench, when a writ of errour is brought; and maketh out all writs of (Superſideas de non moleſtando) which are graunted for the defendants, while the writ of errour hangeth. Alſo he maketh all exemplications of records being in the treaſurie. He is taken to be the ſervant of the chiefe Iuſtice, and remoueable at his pleaſure: whereas al other officers are for terme of life. There is alſo a Secondarie, or vnder clerk of the treaſurie for aſſiſtance, which hath ſome allowances. There is likewiſe an vnder keeper, who alway keepeth one key of the treaſury doore, & the

chiefe clerke of the Secundarie another: ſo the one cannot come in without the other.
               
                  Clerk of eſſoines, (clericus eſſoniorum) is an officer belonging to the courte of common plees, who onely keepeth the eſſoines rolle, and hath for entring everie eſſoine, ſixe pence, and for euery exception to barre the eſſoine, in caſe where the partie hath omitted his time, ſixe pence. He hath alſo the providing of parchment, and cutting it out into rols, and marking the numbers vpon them, and the deliuerie out of all the rols to euerie officer, and the receiuing of them againe, when they be written, and the binding and making vp of the whole bundels of euerie terme: and this he doth as ſeruant to the cheife Iuſtice. For the cheife Iuſtice is at charge for all the parchemēt of all the rols.
               
                  Clerk of the outlawries, (clericus vtlagariarum) is an officer belonging to the court of common plees, being onely the ſeruant or deputie to the kings atturney generall, for making out the writs of (capias vtlagatum) after outlawrie. And the kings atturneis name is to euerie one of thoſe writs. And whereas ſeuen pence is paide for the ſeale of everie other writ betwixt partie & party, there is but a peny paid for the ſeale of this writ, becauſe it goeth our at the Kings ſuite.
               
                  Clerk of the ſewers, (clericus ſucraerum) is an officer apperteining to the commiſſioners of ſewers, writing all things that they doe by vertue of their cō
                  miſſion, for the which See Sewers: and ſee the ſtatute anno 13. Elizabe. ca. 9.
               
                  Clerk controller of the kings houſe, (whereof there be two) is an officer in court, that hath place and ſeate in the compting houſe and authoritie to allow or diſallow the charges and demands of purſuivants or meſſengers of the greene cloth, purveiours, or other like. He hath alſo the ouer-ſight and controlling of all defaults, defects and miſcariages of any the inferiour officers, and to ſit in the counting houſe with the ſuperiour officers, viz. the L. Steward, treaſurer, controller and coferer. either for correcting or bettering things out of order; and alſo for bringing in country proviſion requiſite for the Kings houſhold: and the cenſure for fayling of cariages and carts warned & charged for that purpoſe. This officer you haue mentioned. anno. 33. H. 8. ca. 12.
               
                  Clerk of the Nihils (clericus nihilorum) is an officer in the Exchequer, that maketh a rolle of all ſuch ſummes, as are nihiled by the ſhyreeues vpon their eſtreats of greene waxe, and dilivereth

the ſame into the Lord treaſurers remembrancer his office, to haue execution done vpon it for the king.
               
                  Clerk of the check, is an officer in court, ſo called, becauſe he hath the check and controlment of the yeomen of the gard, and all other ordinary yeomen and huiſſiers belonging either to his maieſty, the Queene, or Prince, either giuing leaue, or allowing their abſences or defects in attendance, or deminiſhing their wages for the ſame. He alſo nightly by himſelfe or depute, taketh the view of thoſe that are to watch in the court, and hath the ſetting of the watch. This officer is mentioned. anno. 33. H. 8. ca. 12.
               
                  Clerk marſhiall of the kings houſe, ſeemeth to be an officer that attendeth the marſhiall in his court, and recordeth all his proceedings, anno 33. H. 8. cap. 12.
               
                  Clothe of raye. anno 27. Ed. 3. ſta. 1. cap. 4.
               
                  Cloſhe, is an vnlawfull game forbidden by the ſtatute, anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 3. which is caſting of a bowle at nine pinnes of wood, or nine ſhanke bones of an oxe or horſe.
               
                  Clove is the 32. part of a weigh of cheeſe i. 8. pound, anno 9. H. 6. cap. 8.
               
                  Cloues (caryophylli) are a ſpice knowne by ſight to euery man. They be flowers of a tree called (caryophyllus) gathered and hardened by the Sunne. Of their nature you may reade in Gerards Herball. lib. 3. cap. 144. This is cō
                  priſed among ſuch ſpices, as be to be garbled, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Cocket (cokettum) is a ſeale appertaining to the kings cuſtome houſe, Regiſt. orig. fol. 192. a. & alſo aſcrow of parchement ſealed and deliuered by the officers of the cuſtome houſe to merchants, as a warrant that their merchandize be cuſtomed, anno 11. H. 6. cap. 16. which parchment is otherwiſe called literae de coketto, or literae teſtimoniales de coketto. Regiſt. vbi ſupra. fol. 179. a. So is the word vſed. anno 5. & 6. Ed. 6. cap. 14. and anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. cap. 21. This word is alſo vſed for a diſtinction of bread in the ſtatutes of bread & ale, made anno 51. H. 3. where you haue mention of bread coket, waſtell bread, bread of trete, and bread of common wheate.
               
                  Coferer of the Kings houſhold, is a principal officer of his Maieſties court, next vnder the Controller, that in the counting houſe and elſewhere at other times, hath a ſpeciall charge and ouerſight of other officers of the houſhold, for their good demeanure and cariage in their offices, to all

which one and other, being either Sergeants, Yeomē, groomes, pages, or children of the kitchin, or any other in any roome of his Maieſties ſeruants of houſhold, and payeth their wages. This officer is mentioned. anno 39. Elixab. cap. 7.
               
                  Cogs anno 23. H. 8. cap. 18.
               
                  Coniſour of a fine, is he, that paſſeth or acknowledgeth a fine in lands or tenemēts to another: Cogniſe
                        •
                     
                   is he to whom the fine is acknowledged, Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 2.
               
                  Cognizance, commeth from the French (cogniſance. i. intelligentia, intellectus, notio, cognitio,) with vs it is vſed diuerſly: ſome time ſignifying a badge of a ſeruingmans ſleeue, whereby he is diſcerned to belong to this or that Noble or Gentleman: ſomtime an acknowledgement of a fine, or confeſſion of a thing done: as cognoſcens latro, Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. 20. 32. cognoſcere ſe ad villanum. Idem lib. 4. tractat. 3. cap. 16. As alſo to make cogniſance of taking a diſtreſſe: ſomtime as an audience or hearing of a mater iudicially, as to take cogniſance: ſometime a power or iuriſdiction, as cogniſance of plee, is an habilitie to call a cauſe or plee out of another court: which no man can doe but the king, except he can ſhew charter for it. Manwood parte 1. Of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 68. See the new tearmes of the lawe, and the new booke of Entries, verbo, Conuſance.
               
               
                  Cognatione. See Coſenage.
               
               
                  Cogniſour, ſee Coniſour.
               
               
                  Cognitionibus mittendis, is a writ to a Iuſtice, or other, that hath power to take a fine, who hauing taken knowledgement of a fine, deferreth to certifie it into the court of common plees, commanding him to certifie it. Regiſt. orig. 68. b.
               
               
                  Coin (cuneus, vel cuna) ſeemeth to come from the French (coin. i. angulus) which probably verifieth the opinion of ſuch, as doe hould the auncienteſt ſort of coyne to be cornered and not round. Of this Lawyers ſubſtantiue (cuna) commeth the Lawyers verbe (cunare) i. to coyne. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace fol. 220.
               
                  Coliander ſeede, or rather Coriander ſeede (Semen coriandri) is the ſeede of an herbe ſo called, medicinable and wholeſome for diuers good purpoſes, which ſee in Gerards Herball. lib. 2. cap. 3. 79. It is numbred among the drugges that be to be garbled, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Collaterall (collateralis) commeth of the Latine (laterale) i. that which hangeth by the ſide. Lateralia viatoria. Π. de lega. & fideium, tertio l. 102. ſeeme to

ſignifie a budget or capcaſe to hang by a ſaddle pomel. Collaterall, is vſed in the common law, for that which commeth in, or is adhering of the ſide: as, collaterall aſſurance, is that which is made ouer and beſide the deede it ſelfe. For example, if a man couenant with another, and enter bond for the performance of his couenant, the bond is termed collaterall aſſurance: becauſe it is externall, and without the nature and eſſence of the couenant. And Crompton in his Iuriſd. fol. 185. ſaith, that to be ſubiect to the feeding of the kings Deere, is collateral to the ſoyle within the Foreſt. In like maner may we ſay, that the libertie to pitche boothes or ſtandings for a Faire in another mans ground, is collaterall to the ground. The priuate woods of a common perſon within a Foreſt, may not be cut without the kings licence. For it is a prerogatiue collaterall to the ſoyle. Manwood parte 1. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 66. Collaterall warrantie. See Warrantie.
               
               
                  Collation of a benefice (collatio beneficii) ſignifieth properly the beſtowing of a benefice by the Biſhop, that hath it in his owne gift or patronage: and differeth from Inſtitution in this, for that Inſtitution into a benefice, is performed by the Biſhop at the motion or preſentation of another, who is patron of the ſame, or hath the patrons right for the time. Extra de Inſtitutionibus. & De conceſſione praebendarum. &c. And yet is collation vſed for preſentation. anno. 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 6.
               
                  Collatione facta vni poſt mortem alterius, &c. is a writ directed to the Iuſtices of the cō
                  mon plees, commanding them to direct their writ to a Biſhop, for the admitting of a clerk in the place of another preſented by the king, that during the ſuit betweene the king and the Biſhops clerk, is departed. For iudgment once paſſed for the kings clerk, and he dying before he be admitted, the king may beſtow his preſentation vpon another, Regiſter orig. fo. 31. b.
               
               
                  Collatione heremitagii, is a writ whereby the king conferreth the keeping of an ermitage vpon a clerk. Regiſter orig. fo. 303 308.
               
                  Colour, (color) ſignifieth in the common law, a probable plee, but in truth falſe, and hath this end, to draw the triall of the cauſe from the Iury to the Iudges. Of this ſee two apt examples in the author of the new tearms. Verbo Colour. who alſo referreth you to the Doctor and ſtudent. fo. 158. &c. See Broke tit. Colour in aſſiſe, treſpas &c.

fo. 140.
               
                  Colluſion, (colluſio) is in our common law, a deceitfull agreemēt or compact between two or more, for the one party to bring an action againſt the other to ſome euill purpoſe; as to defraude a third of his right, &c. See the new tearms. and Broke titulo. Colluſion. See alſo one caſe of colluſion in the Regiſter orig. fo. 179. a.
               
               
                  Combat, (duellum) is a french word ſignifiing as much as (certamen, decertatio, dimicatio, diſcrimen, praelium, pugna) but in our common law, it is taken for a formall triall of a doubtfull cauſe or quarrell, by the ſword or baſtons of two champions. Of this you may reade at large both in diuers ciuilians, as Paris de Puteo, de remilitari & duello. Alciat de duello, Hotomam diſputatio. feudalium. ca. 42. and others: as alſo in our common lawyers of England, namely Glanuile. li. 14. ca. 1. Bracton. li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 3. Britton ca. 22. Horns mirrour of Iuſtices li. 3. ca. des exceptions in fine proxime ante c. Iuramentū duelli. Dier. fo. 301. nu. 41. & 42. That this alſo was aunciently the law of the Lombards, before they inuaded Italy (which was about the yeare of our Lord 571 appeareth by Sigonius, in his hiſtorie De regno Italiae. lib. 2. de Ari
                        •
                     aldo rege. who there reporteth, that the ſaid king, hauing put away his wife Gundeberga, vpon a ſurmiſe of adulterie with Tato Duke of Etruria, at the priuate ſuggeſtion of Adalulphus, a great man among the Lombards, and being charged by Clotharius the king of France his Ambaſſadors, of whoſe bloud ſhe was, that he had done her wrong: he anſwered, that he had done her no wrong. Whereupon Anſoaldus one of the ambaſſadors replyed, that they would eaſily beleeue him, if he would ſuffer the truth to be tried by combat, betweene ſome one of the Queens friends, and her accuſer, according to the cuſtome of the Lombards. And the king yeelding vnto this, Adalulphus was vanquiſhed by one Pitto, otherwiſe called Charles, ſet foorth for the Queenes chā
                  pion, and ſhe reſtored to her former place and honour.
               
                  Cominſeede, aliâs, Cumin ſeed, (Semen cumini) is a ſeede brought foorth by an hearbe ſo called, which you may ſee deſcribed in Gerards Herball, lib. 2. cap. 416. This is placed among the garbleable drugges, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Comitatu commiſſo, is a writ or a commiſſion, whereby the Shyreeue is authorized to take vpon him the ſwaye of the countie. Regiſt. orig. fol. 295. a. & b. and Co
                        〈…〉
                      Reports, li. 3. fol. 72. a.
               
               
                  
                  Comitatu & caſtro commiſſo, is a writ whereby the charge of a countie, together with the keeping of a caſtell, is committed to the Shyreeue, Reg orig. fol. 295. a.
               
               
                  Commaundrie (praeceptoria) was by ſome mens opinion, a maner or chiefe mefuage, with which lands or tenements were occupied, belonging to the Priorie of S. Iohns in Hieruſalem in England: and he which had the gouernement of any ſuch maner or houſe, was called the commaunder, who had nothing to diſpoſe of it, but to the vſe of the Priorie, taking onely his ſuſtenance thence, according to his degree, and was vſually a brother of the ſame Priorie. Author of the new tearmes of lawe. verbo, Commaundrie. By ſome other bookes it appeareth, that the chiefe Prior of S. Iohns, was a cō
                  maunder of a Nunnerie, and cō
                  ſtituted the Priores of the ſaid Nunnerie, who was vnder his obedience, and remoueable at his will, notwithſtanding that ſhee had covent, and common ſeale, and had her poſſeſſions ſeuerall, and was wont to leaſe the land for terme of yeares. Fulbecks Paralels, fol. 2. a. Of theſe commā
                  dries alſo Petrus Gregorius lib. de beneficiis cap. 11. num. 11. hath theſe words: Praeceptoriae dictae commendae ſacrorum militum, 
                        〈…〉
                     eluti ordinis hoſpitalii Sancti Ioannis Hieroſolymitani, beneficia quidem ſecundum quid Eccleſiaſtica dic untur à Barbatia ad Clement. cauſam col. 51. de Electione. Tamen non propriè dicuntur ex genere communium beneficiorum, eo quòd perſonae conferentes, & quibus conferuntur, non ſunt laicae vel eccleſiaſticae, ſed tertu ordinis. De hiis beneficiis 
                        •
                     fit mentio. cap. exhibita de priuilegiis. in extravag. com. in cap. Dudum, de decimis. Theſe in many places of our realme are termed by the name of temples, becauſe they ſometime belonged to the Templers. Of theſe you reade ann. 26 H. 8. cap. 2. & anno 32. eiuſd. ca 24. And of theſe the ſaid Gregorius Toloſanus. li. 15. ſui ſyntagmatis. cap. 34. hath theſe words: Monuimus ſuperiori capite, creſcente numero peregrinorum, iuxta Tē
                     plum Hieroſolymitanum Xenodo. chium aedificatum, tit. Diui Iohannis, quo exciperentur peregrini, quos coenobia capere non poſſent. Huius ergo miniſterio quoque viri pij nobiles ſe devoverunt, qui & peregrinos tutarentur, & à latronum ſeu Agarenorum incurſu defenderent. Horum profeſſio eſt votum ſolenne paupertatis, & abdicationis propriorum, caſtitatis, & obedientiae. Proinde propter primum votum nihil proprii habent, vel habere debent, ſed accipiunt annonam, quàm diu vivunt, vel praeceptorias (quas vocant Commanderies) adminiſtrant, quàm diueas poſſident, & optione mutant;

vel ex magiſtri licentia permutant reddituri morientes quae apud eos reperiētur, ſocietati Of theſe Coraſius in his paraphraſe Ad ſacerd. mat. parte prim. cap. 3. ſaith thus: Praeceptoriae Rhodienſes, cùm non niſi fratribus Hieroſolymitanis, atque it a perſonis eccleſiaſticis conferantur; beneficiis eccleſiaſticis annumerari meritò debent.
               
               Commaundement (praeceptum) is vſed diuerſely in the common lawe: ſome time for the commaundement of the king, when vpon his meere motion, and from his owne mouth, he caſteth any man into priſon. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 72. or of the Iuſtices. And this commādement of the Iuſtices, is either abſolute or ordinary: abſolute, as when vpon their owne authority in their wiſedome and diſcretion, they commit a man to priſon, for a puniſhment: Ordinary is, when they commit one rather for ſafe cuſtody then puniſhment. And a man committed vpon an ordinary commandemēt, is repleuiſable. pl. cor. fo. 73. Cōmandement is againe vſed for the offence of him, that willeth another man to tranſgreſſe the lawe, or to doe any ſuch thing, as is contrary to the lawe, as murder, theft, or ſuch like. Bract. li. 3. tra. 2. ca. 19 And this the ciuilians call (mandatum) Angelus de maleficiis.
               
               
                  Commen (communia) commeth from the french (commun. i. quod ad omnes pertinet) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, that ſoile or water, whereof the vſe is common to this or that towne, or lordſhip; as common of paſture (communia peſturae.) Bract. ls. 4. ca. 19. & 40. commen of fiſhing. communia piſcariae. Idem. li. 2. ca. 34. commen of turbary. i. of digging turues (communia turbariae) Idem. li. 4. ca. 41. cōmen of eſtouers (communia eſtoueriorum.) Kitchin. fo. 94. Comen, is deuided into commen in groſſe, commen appendant, commen dppertinent, and commen per cauſe de vicinage. i. by reaſon of neighbourhood. Cōmen in groſſe, is a liberty to haue cōmen alone (that is) without any land or tenement, in another mans land, to him ſelfe for life, or to him and his heires. And this is commonly paſſed by deede of graunt or ſpecialty. Old nat. br. fo. 31. & 37. Commen appendant and common appertinent, be in a maner confounded: as appeareth by Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 180. and be defined to be a liberty of common, appertaining to, or depending of ſuch or ſuch a freehould. Onely Kitchin. fo. 94. ſeemeth to make this difference, that he which hath commen appertinēt, hath it without limitation of this or that kinde of beaſtes: but that is controlled by Dyer. fo. 70. b.

nu. 19. He that hath commen appendant, hath it but for beaſtes commenable, as horſes, oxen, kine, and ſheepe, being acompted fitteſt for the plowman: and not of goates, geeſe and hogs. whereunto the author of the new teaams of law addeth another difference: which is, that common appertinent may be ſeuered from the land, wherunto it is appertinent, but not common appendant. The originall of common appendant S. Ed Coke li. 4. fo. 37. thus expreſſeth: Common appendant, by the auncient lawe, had beginning in this maner, when a lord infeoffed another in erable lands, to hould of him in ſocage (ideſt, per ſeruicium ſocae) as all tenure in the beginning (according to Litleton) was: the feoffee, to mamtaine the ſeruice of his plough, had commō in the waſts of his Iord, for his neceſſary beaſts to gaine and compas his land: & that for two cauſes: one for that, as then it was taken, it was (tacitè) implyed in the feofment, by reaſon the feoffee could not gaine or compas his land without catell, and catell could not be ſuſtained without paſture. anb ſo by conſequent the feoffec had (as a thing neceſſary and incident) common in the waſtes and land of the lord. And this appeareth by aunciēt books tempore. Ed. i. tit. common 24. & 17. E. 2. tit. common. 23. & 20. Ed. 3. tit. Admeſurement. 8, & 18. Ed. 3. and by the reherſall of the ſtatute of Merton. ca. 4. The ſecond reaſon was for maintenance, and aduancement of tillage, which is much regarded and fauoured in the lawe, Thus farre S. Edward.
               
               
                  Commen per cauſe de vicinage, is a libertie, that the tenents of one lord in one towne, haue to common with the tenents of another lord in another towne which kinde of common they that chalenge, may not put their catell into the common of the other towne. For then they be diſtremable. But turning them into their owne fields, if they ſtrey into the neighbours commen, they muſt be ſuffered. See the termes of lawe. Common of paſture the Civilians call ius compaſcendi, cum ſc: plures ex municipipibus qui diverſa praedia poſſiáebant, ſaltum communem, vt ius compaſcendi haberent, mercarentur. l. penul. Π. ſi ſervit, vendicetur. It is alſo called ius compaſcuum. ibidem.
               
               
                  Commendam (commenda) is a benefice, that being voide, is cōmended to the charge & care of ſome ſufficient clerk, to be ſupplied, vntill it may be conveniently provided of a paſtor. And that this was the true originall of this practiſe, you may

read at large in Duarenus de ſacris eccleſiae miniſteriis & beneficiis li. 5. ca. 7. And whereas the gloſſe, in verbo commendare. in ca. Nemo deinceps: de electione. in ſexto. defineth commendam eſſe eccleſiae cuſtodiam al icui commiſſam: Iohannes Andraeas therevpon ſaith thus: huic definitioni neceſſariò haec aditcienda putem: in tempus gratiâ evidentis neceſſitatis & vtilitatis. Id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      docuit textus in dicto capite. Nemo. Corraſius in his paraphraſe de ſacerdotiorum materia parte prima. ca. 6. nu. 3. & ſeqq. thus deſcribeth the mater: In commendam conceditur beneficium, cùm Romanus Pontifex, Legatus, aut Epiſcopus (Neque enim inferioribus, qui ex privelegio aut alio iure ſpirituals conferunt, conceſſum eſt, ca. cum omnes baſilicae. 16. quaeſt. 7.) eccleſiae vacantis cuſtodiam alicui committit, adminiſtratorem generalem eius templi eum conſtituens, ca. nemo. de electio. in ſexto. Commendare enim aliud eſt nihil, quàm deponere. l. publius. Π. depoſiti. l. cōmē
                     dare. Π. de verb: ſignif.) Hoc autē, ad tempus ſex menſium, & pro evidenti neceſſitate aut vtilitate eccleſiae lex permittit, (d. ca. Nemo.) Quaere commendatarius qui eccleſiae vacantis & fructuum, ad tempus duntaxat cuſtodiā habet, nec tenere beneficiū, iuſve habere in beneficio, aut canonicum titulum cenſebuur: vti nec depoſitarius in re depoſita. wherof alſo Petrus Gregorius de beneficiis, ca. 10. nu. 13. thus writeth. In hac quarta diviſione, poteſt adds tertium genus beneficii, quod citra praeſcriptionem qualitatis a perſona alterius qualitatis quàm beneficium exigat naturâ, poſſidetur, ſed ſine praeiudicio naturae beneficii, & per diſpenſationem, eo commendato olim ad tempus certum certae perſonae, hodie, vt plerun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , quàm diu commendatarius vixerit. Vocant hoc beneficium commendatum commendam: vt ſi regulare beneficium á Summo Pontiſice conferatur, nomine commē
                     dae, ſaeculari. Nam ideo non mutatur beneficii natura, nec fit ideo ſaeculare, &c. And a little after, Interim annotabimus duplici de cauſa fieri commendam eccleſiae, nempe vel in vtilitatem eccleſiae, vel commendatarii. In primo commenda titulum non dat beneficii commendatario, & dicitur potius cuſtodia quae revocari poteſt: quod repugnat naturae beneficii, quod eſt perpetuum. In ſecundo autem caſu beneficium cenſetur in vtilitatem commendatarii commēda facta, quam poſſidere poteſt quàm diu vixerit, &c. whome you may alſo read. ca. 2. li. 13.
               
                  Commiſſarie (cōmiſſarius) is a title of eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction, appertaining to ſuch a one as exerciſeth ſpirituall iuriſdiction (at the leaſt, ſo farre as his commiſſion permitteth him) in places of the dioces ſo farre diſtant from the cheife citie, as the chanceler cannot call the ſubiects

to the Biſhops principall conſiſtorie, without their to great moleſtation. This commiſſarie is of the canoniſts termed commiſſarius or officialis foraneus. Lyndwoods provin. ca. 1. de accuſatio. ver. bo. Mandatum archiepiſcopi. in gloſ. and is ordeined to this eſpeciall end, that he ſupply the biſhops iuriſdiction and office in the out places of the dioces, or els in ſuch pariſhes as be peculiars to the biſhop, and exempted from the iuriſdiction of the Archdeacon. For where either by preſcription or compoſition, there be archedeacons that haue iuriſdiction within their archdeaconries, as in moſt places they haue, there this commiſſarie is but ſuperfluous, and moſt commonly, doth rather vexe and diſturb the country for his lucre, then of conſcience ſeeke to redreſſe the liues of offenders. And therefore the Biſhop taking preſtation mony of his archdeacons yearely pro exteriori iuriſdictione, as it is ordinarily called, doeth by ſuperonerating their circuit with a commiſſarie, not onely wrong archdeacons, but the poorer ſort of ſubiects much more, as common practiſe daily teacheth to their great woe.
               
                  Cōmiſſion, (commiſſio) is for the moſt part, in the vnderſtanding of the common lawe, as much as (delegatio) with the Civilians. (See Broke. titulo commiſſion.) and is taken for the warrant or letters patents, that all men exerciſing iuriſdiction either ordinarie or extraordinarie, haue for their power to heare or determine any cauſe or action. Of theſe ſee diuers in the table of the Regiſter originall. verbo. Commiſſio. yet this word ſometime is is extended farder, then to maters of iudgement: as the commiſſion of purveiours or takers. anno. 11. H. 4. ca. 28. But with this epitheton (high) it is moſt notoriouſly vſed for the honourable commiſſion court, inſtituted and founded vpon the ſtatute 1. Eliza. ca. 1. for the ordering and reformation of all offences, in any thing appertaining to the iuriſdiction eccleſiaſticall: but eſpecially ſuch as are of higher nature, or, at the leaſt, require greater puniſhment, then ordinarie iuriſdiction can afford. For the world being growne to that looſenes, as not to eſteeme the cenſure of excommunicatiō, neceſſitie calleth for thoſe cenſures of fynes to the prince and impriſonment, which doe affect men more neerely.
               
                  Commiſſion of rebellion (Commiſſio rebellionis) is otherwiſe called a writte of rebellion, (breue rebellionis) and it hath vſe, when a man after proclamation made by the Shyreeue vpon an order

of the channcerie, or court of Starre chamber, vnder penaltie of his allegance, to preſent himſelfe to the court by a certaine day, appeareth not. And this commiſſion is directed by way of commaund to certaine perſons, to this end, that they, or three, two, or one of them, doe apprehend, or cauſe to be apprehend, the party as a rebell and contemner of the kings lawes, whereſoeuer they find him within the kingdome, and bring him, or cauſe him to be brought to the courte, vpon a day therein aſſigned. The true copie of this commiſſion or writ, you haue in Cromptons diuers Iuriſdictions. Court de Starre chamber: as alſo in Weſt. tractat. touching proceedings in Chancerie, Sectio 24.
               
                  Commiſſioner (commiſſionarius) is he that hath commiſſion, as leters patents, or other lawfull warrant, to execute any publike office: as commiſſioners of the office of fines and licenſes. Weſt. parte. 2. ſymbol: titulo Fines. ſect. 106. commiſſioners in eyre. an. 3. Ed. 1. ca. 26. with infinite ſuch like.
               
                  Committee, is he to whome the conſideration or ordering of any mater is referred, either by ſome court, or conſent of parties, to whome it belongeth. As in Parlament, a bille being read, is either conſented vnto and paſſed, or denied, or nether of both, but referred to the conſideration of ſome certaine men, appointed by the houſe farder to examine it: who thereupon are called committees. Committee of the King Weſt. par. 2. ſymbo. titulo Chancerie. ſect. 144. This word ſeemeth to be ſomething ſtrangely vſed in Kitchin. fo. 160. where the widow of the kings tenent being dead, is called the cōmittee of the king. that is, one committed by the auncient law of the land, to the kings care and protection.
               
                  Common bench (bancus communis) is vſed ſome time for the court of common plees. anno. 2. Ed. 3. ca. 11. So called, as M. Camden ſaith in his Britannia. pa. 113. quia communia placita inter ſubditos ex iure noſtro, quod communae vocant, in hoc diſceptantur, that is, the plees or controuerſies tryed betweene common perſons.
               
                  Common fine (finis communis) of this Fleta hath theſe words: Quibus expeditis (ſpeaking of the buſineſſe finiſhed by Iuſtices in eyre) conſueverunt Iuſticiarii imponere villatis, iuratoribus, hundredis, & toti comitatui concelamē
                     tum, & omnes ſeparatim amerciare: quod videtur voluntarium, cùm de periurio & concelamento non fuerint convicti, ſed potius diſpenſandum

eſſet cumeis quod animas in ſtatera poſuerint pro pacis conſervatione. li. 1. cap. 48. §. Quibus. And a litle following. §. Et proviſum, he hath theſe words: Et proviſum eſt, quòd communes miſericordiae vel fines comitatuum amerciatorumin finibus itinerum Iuſticiariorum ante receſſum ipſorum Iuſtitiariorum per ſacramenta militum, & aliorum proborum hominum de commitatu eodem, affidentur ſuper eos qui contribuere debent: vnde particulae Iuſticiariis liberentur, vt cum aliis extractis ſuis ad Scaccarium liberare valeant. Theſe laſt words of his haue relation to the ſtatute, Weſtminſt. pr. cap. 18. which reade. See Fine.
               
               
                  Common plees (communia placita) is the kings Court now held in Weſtminſter hall, but in auncient time moueable, as appeareth by the ſtatute called Magna charta. cap. 11. as alſo anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 11. and Pupilla oculi, parte 5. cap. 22. But M. Gwin in the Preface to his readings ſaith, that vntill the time that Henry the third granted the great charter, there were but two courts in all, called the Kings courts: whereof one was the Exchequer, and the other, the kings bench, which was then called (curia Domini regis) and (aula regia) becauſe it followed the court or king: and that vpon the grant of that charter, the court of common plees was erected and ſetled in one place certaine: viz. at Weſtminſter. And becauſe this court was ſetled at Weſtminſter, whereſoeuer the king lay: thereupon M. Gwin, vbi ſupra, ſaith, that after that, all the writs ranne, Quòd ſit coram Iuſticiariis meis apud Weſtmonaſterium: whereas before the partie was cōmanded by thē, to appeare coram me vel Iuſticiariis meis, ſimply without addition of place, as he well obſerueth out of Glanvile and Bracton, the one writing in Henry the ſeconds time, before this court was erected, the other in the later end of Henry the thirds time, who erected this court. All ciuill cauſes both reall and perſonall are, or were in former times, tryed in this court, according to the ſtrict lawe of the realme: and by Forteſcue, cap. 50. it ſeemeth to haue bene the onely court for reall cauſes. The chiefe Iudge thereof is called the Lord chiefe Iuſtice of the common plees, accompanied with 3. or 4. aſſiſtants or aſſociates, which are created by leters patents from the king, and (as it were) enſtalled or placed vpon the bench, by the Lord Chaunceler and lord chiefe Iuſtice of the court, as appeareth by Forteſcue, cap. 51. who expreſſeth all the circumſtances of this admiſſion. The reſt of the officers

belonging to this court, are theſe: the cuſtos breuium, three Protonotaries, otherwiſe called Prenotaries, Chirographer, Filazers 14. Exigenters, 4. Clerke of the warrants, Clerke of the Iuries or iurata writs, Clerke of the Treaſurie, Clerke of the kings ſiluer, Clerke of the eſſoins, Clerke of the outlawries. Whoſe diſtinct functions looke in their places. See Common bench.
               
               
                  Common day in plee of land, an. 13. R. 2. ſtat. 1. cap. 17. ſignifieth an ordinarie day in the court as Octavis Michaelis, quindena paſcae. &c. as you may ſee in the ſtatute made anno 51. H. 3. concerning generall dayes in the bench.
               
                  Common houſe of parlament, is vſed for the nether houſe: becauſe the commōs of the realme, that is, the knights of the ſhires and burgeſes, poſſeſſe that houſe. Crompton iuriſd. 9.
               
                  Commotes, ſeemeth to be compounded of the prepoſitiō 
                  (con) and (mot. i. dictio, verbum) and ſignifieth in Wales a part of a ſhire, as a hundred. anno. 28. H. 8. ca. 3. It is written commoithes. anno. 4. H. 4. ca. 17. and is vſed for a gathering made vpon the people (as it ſeemeth) of this or that hundred, by welſh minſtrels.
               
                  Common law (comunis lex) hath three diuers ſignificatiōs. which ſee in the author of new termes of law. verbo. Common law.
               
               
                  Communi cuſtodia, is a writ that lyeth for that lord, whoſe tenent houlding by knights ſeruice, dyeth, and leaueth his eldeſt ſonne vnder age, againſt a ſtraunger that entreth the land, and obtaineth the ward of the body. It may ſeeme to take the name from the common cuſtom or right in this caſe: which is, that the lord haue the wardſhip of his tenent, vntill his full age, or becauſe it is common for the recouery both of land and tenent, as appeareth by the forme thereof. Old nat. br. fo. 89. See alſo the Regiſter orig. fo. 161. a.
               
               
                  Communi placito non tenendo in ſcaccario, is a writ directed to the treaſurer and barons of the exchequer, forbidding them to hould plee betweene two common perſons in that court, neither of them belonging toward the ſaid court. Regiſter orig. fo. 187. b.
               
               
                  Companion of the garter, is one of the knights of that moſt noble and honourable order. anno. 24. H. 8. ca. 13. See Garter.
               
               
                  Compromis, (compromiſſum) is a mutuall promiſe of two or more parties at difference, to referre the ending of their controuerſies, to the arbitriment and equitie of one or more arbitratours. Weſt. defineth is thus, parte. 2. Symbol. titulo Compromiſe. ſect.

pri. A compromiſe or ſubmiſſion (arbitrium, compromiſſum, ſubmiſſio) is the faculty or power of pronouncing ſentence betweene perſons at controuerſie, giuen to arbitratours by the parties mutuall priuate conſent, without publique authority.
               
                  Computo, is a writ ſo called of the effect: becauſe it compelleth a baylife, chamberlaine, or receiuer to yeld his accoumpt, Old nat. br. fo. 58. It is founded vpon the ſtatut of Weſtm. 2. ca. 2. anno. 13. Ed. i. which for your beter vnderſtanding you may read. And it lyeth alſo for executours of executours. anno. 15. Ed. 3. ſtatut. de prouiſ. victuall. ca. 5. Thirdly, againſt the garden in ſocage for waſte made in the minority of the heire. Marlb. ca. 17. And ſee farder in what other caſes it lyeth. Regiſter orig. fo. 135. old nat. br. vbi ſupra. & Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 116.
               
                  Concealers, be ſuch as finde out concealed lands, that is, ſuch lands as priuily are kept from the king by common perſons, hauing nothing to ſhew for them. anno. 39. Eliza. ca. 22. They be ſo called a concelando, as mons a mouendo. per antiphraſin.
               
               
                  Concord, (concordia) is in the common law, by a peculiar ſignification, defined to be the very agreement betweene parties, that intend the leuying of a fine of lands one to the other, how and in what maner the land ſhall paſſe. For in the forme thereof many things are to be conſidered. Weſt. parte. 2. Symbol. titulo. Fines and concords, ſect. 30. whome read at large. Concord is alſo an agreement made vpon any treſpas cōmitted betweene two or more: and is diuided into a concord executory, and a concord executed. See Plowden. caſu Reniger, & Fogaſſa fo. 5. & 6. where it appeareth by ſome opinion, that the one bindeth not as being imperfect: the other abſolute and tyeth the parties: and yet by ſome other opinion in the ſame caſe, it is affirmed that agreements executory be perfect, and doe noe leſſe binde, then agreements executed. fo. 8. b.
               
               
                  Concubinage, (concubinatus) is an exception againſt her, that ſieweth for her dower, whereby it is alleadged, that ſhee was not a wife lawefully maried to the party, in whoſe lands ſhee ſeeketh to be endowed, but his concubine. Britton. ca. 107. Bract. li. 4. tract 6. ca. 8.
               
                  Condition, (conditio) is a rate, maner, or lawe, annexed to mens acts, ſtaying or ſuſpending the ſame, and making them vncertaine, whether they ſhall take effect or no, Weſt. parte 1. ſymb. li. 2. Sect. 156. In a leaſe there may

be two ſorts of conditions: condition collaterall, or condition annexed to the rent. Sir Edward Coke. lib. 3. Pennants caſe. fol. 64. Collaterall condition is that, which is annexed to any collaterall act: as that the leaſſee ſhall not go to Rome, ibi fol. 65. Condition is alſo diuided, into condition in deed or fact, and condition in lawe: which otherwiſe may be tearmed, condition expreſſed, and condition implyed. Perkins. Conditions. 722. Theſe and other like diuiſions of conditions you may reade in the author of the new Tearmes of law. verbo. Condition. and in Litleton. li. 3. cap. 5.
               
                  Conders, may ſeeme to proceed from the French, (conduire. i. deducere, gubernare) they be ſuch as ſtand vpon high places neere the ſea coaſt, at the time of herring fiſhing, to make ſignes with bowghes, &c. in their hand vnto the fiſhers, which way the ſhole of herrings paſſeth. For that may beter appeare to ſuch as ſtand vpon ſome high cliffe on the ſhore, by a kind of blew colour, that the ſaid fiſh cauſeth in the water, then to thoſe that be in the ſhippes. Theſe be otherwiſe called huers, by likelihood of the French (huyer. i. exclamare) and balkers: as appeareth by the ſtatute, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 23.
               
                  Cone & key. Bracton. lib. 2. ca. 37. num. 3. looke Cover and Key.
               
               
                  Confirmation (confirmatio) is a ſtrengthening of an eſtate formerly had, and yet voydable, though not preſently voide. For example, a Biſhop graunteth his Chancelerſhippe by patent for the terme of the patentee his life: this is no voide graunt, but voydable by the biſhops death, except it be ſtrengthened by the confirmation of the Deane and chapter. See more of this, in Weſt. parte prim. ſymb. lib. 2. ſect. 500. and Fitz. nat. br. fol. 169. B. 226. H. 271. D. 163. G. and Litleton lib. 3. cap. 9.
               
                  Confiſcate (confiſcatus) may be ſaid to come either from the Latine (confiſcare) or the French (confiſquer. i. in publicum addicere.) All theſe words are drawne from (fiſcus) which originally ſignifieth a hamper, pannyer, basket, or freyle: but metonymically the Emperours treaſure: becauſe it was anciently kept in ſuch hampers, &c. And though our king keepe not his treaſure in ſuch things: yet as the Romanes ſaid, that ſuch goods as were forfeited to the Emperors treaſurie for any offence, were bona confiſcata: ſo do we thoſe that are forfeited to our kings Exchequer. See more of theſe goods confiſcate. in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 24.
               
                  
                  Conge d'eſlire (venia eligendi) is very French, and ſignifieth in our common lawe, the kings permiſſion royall, to a Deane and chapter in time of vacation, to chuſe a biſhop: or to an Abbey or Priorie of his owne foundation, to chuſe their Abbot or Prior. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 169. B. 170. B. C. &c. Touching this mater, M. Gwin in the preface to his readings ſaith, that the king of England, as ſoueraigne patron of all Archbiſhoprickes, Biſhoprickes, and other Eccleſiaſticall benefices, had of auncient time, free appointment of all eccleſiaſticall dignities, when ſoeuer they chaunced to be voide: inueſting them firſt (per baculum & annulum) and afterward by his leters patents: and that in proces of time he made the election ouer to others, vnder certaine formes and conditions: as namely, that they ſhould at euery vacation before they chuſe, demaund of the king (congè d'eſlire) that is, licence to proceede to election, and then after the election, to craue his royall aſſent, &c. And furder he affirmeth by good proofe out of common lawe bookes, that King Iohn was the firſt that graunted this, and that it was afterward confirmed by Weſtm. pri. ca. i. which ſtatute was made anno. 3. Ed. pri. and againe by the ſtatut (Articuli cleri) ca. 2. which was ordained. anno. 25. Ed. 3. ſtatuto tertio.
               
               
                  Congeable, cōmeth of the french (conge i. venia) It ſignifieth in our common law, as much as lawfull or lawfully done; as the entry of the diſſeiſee is congeable. Litleton. fo. 91. in meo.
               
               
                  Coniſance, See Cogniſance.
               
               
                  Conizour, aliàs cognizour (recognitor) commeth of the French (cognoiſtre. i. cognoſcere, cernere) and is vſed in the paſſing of fynes for him, that doth acknowledge the fyne; and the conizee is hee, to whome it is acknowledged. Weſt. parte. 1. ſymbol. li. 2. ſect. 49. & parte 2. titulo. Fines ſectio. 114. See Recognizour.
               
               
                  Coniuration (coniuratio) is the very French word drawne from the latine, which as it is compounded of (con & iuro) ſo it ſignifieth a compact or plot, made by men combining themſelues together by oath or promiſe, to doe ſome publique harme. But in our common lawe, it is eſpecially vſed for ſuch as haue perſonall conference with the deuill or evill ſpirit, to knowany ſecret, or to effect any purpoſe. anno 5. Eliza. ca. 16. And the difference that I haue obſerued (how truly let thoſe iudge that be beter skilled in theſe maters) betweene coniuration and witch craft, is becauſe

the one ſeemeth, by prayers and invocation of Gods powerfull names, to compell the devill, to to ſay or doe what he commandeth him: the other dealeth rather by a friendly and voluntarie conference or agreement betweene him or her and the deuill or familiar, to haue her or his deſires and turnes ſerued in lien of blood, or other gift offered vnto him, eſpecially of his or her ſoule. And both theſe differ from inchawntments or forceries, becauſe they are perſonall conferences with the deuill, as is ſaid: but theſe are but medicines and cerimoniall formes of words (called commonly charmes) without apparition.
               
                  Conſanguineo, is a writ, for the which See Avo: and See the Regiſter orig. De auo. proavo, & conſanguineo. fo. 226. a.
               
               
                  Conſeruatour of the truce and ſafe conduicts (conſervator induciarum & ſaluorum regis conductuum) was an officer appointed in euery port of the Sea, vnder the Kings leters patents, and had 40. pound for his yearely ſtipend, at the leaſt. His charge was to enquire of all offences done againſt the Kings truce & ſafe conduicts, vpon the maine ſea out of the countries, and out of the franchiſes of the Cinque ports of the king, as the admirals of cuſtome were wont and ſuch other things as are declared. anno 2. H. 5. ca. 6. Touching this mater you may read another ſtatut. anno 4. H. 5. cap. 7.
               
                  Conſeruatour of the peace (conſeruator vel cuſtos pacis) is he that hath an eſpeciall charge by vertue of his office, to ſee the kings peace kept. which peace learned M. Lamberd defineth, in effect, to be a withholding or abſtinence from that iniutious force and violence, which boyſterous and vnruly perſons are in their natures prone to vſe toward others, were they not reſtrained by lawes and feare of puniſhment. Of theſe conſervators he farder ſaith thus: that before the time of K. Edward the third, who firſt erected Iuſtices of peace, there were ſundrie perſons, that by the common lawe had intereſt in keeping of the peace. Of thoſe ſome had that charge as incident to their offices, which they did beare, and ſo included within the ſame, that they were neuer the leſſe called by the name of their office only: ſome others had it ſimply as of it ſelfe, and were thereof named cuſtodes pacis, wardens or conſervators of the peace. The former and later ſort he againe ſubdivideth. Which read in his eirenarcha. li. 1. ca. 3.
               
                  
                  Conſideration, (conſideratio) is that with vs, which the Grecians called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : that is, the materiall cauſe of a contract, without the which no contract bindeth. This conſideration is either expreſſed, as if a man bargain to giue 20. ſhillings for a horſe: or els implyed, as when the law it ſelfe inforceth a conſideration; as if a man come into a common Inne, and there ſtaying ſometime, taketh both meat and lodging, or either for himſelfe and his horſe: the lawe preſumeth, that he intendeth to pay for both, though nothing be farder couenanted betweene him and his hoſt: and therefore if he diſcharge not the houſe, the hoſt may ſtay his horſe. Fulb: parel: tracta. Contracts. fo. 6. a. b.
               
               
                  Conſiſtory (conſiſtorium) is a word borowed of the Italians, or rather Lombards, ſignifing as much as (praetorium) or tribunal. vocab. vtriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iur. It is vſed for the place of iuſtice in the courte chriſtian.
               
                  Convocation houſe (domus convocationis) is the houſe, wherein the whole clergie is aſſembled, for conſultation vpon maters eccleſiaſticall in time of parlament. And as the houſe of Parlament, ſo this conſiſteth of two diſtinct houſes, one called the higher conuocation houſe, where the Archebiſhops and Biſhops ſitte ſeuerally by themſelues: the other the lower conuocation houſe, where all the reſt of the clergy are beſtowed. See Prolocutor.
               
               
                  Conuſance. See Cogniſance.
               
               
                  Conuzour, See Cognizour.
               
               
                  Conſolidation (conſolidatio) is vſed for the combining, and vniting of two benefices in one. Brooke titulo. Vnion. This word is taken from the civile lawe, where it ſignifieth properly an vniting of the poſſeſſion, occupation, or profit with the propertie. For example, if a man haue by legacie vſumfructum fundi, and after ward buy the propertie or fee ſimple (as we call it) of the heire, hoc caſu conſolidatio fieri dicitur. §. 3. De vſufructu. in Inſtitut. See Vnion, and Vnitie of poſſeſſion.
               
               
                  Conſpiracie (conſpiratio) though both in Latine and French, it be vſed for an agreement of men, to doe any thing either good or bad: yet in our lawyers bookes, it is alway taken in the evill part. It is defined. anno. 34. Ed. pri. ſtatut. 2. to be an agreement of ſuch, as doe confedre or binde themſelues by oath, covenant, or other allyance, that everie of them ſhall beare and ayde the other falſly and malitiouſly to indight, or falſly to mooue ormaintaine plees, and alſo ſuch as cauſe childrē within age, to appeale mē
                  
of felonie, whereby they are impriſoned, and ſore grieued: and ſuch as reteine men in the contries with liueries or feeſe, to maintaine their malitious enterpriſes. And this extendeth as well to the takers, as to the givers. And Stewards and baylifes of great lords, which by their ſeignorie, office, or power, vndertake to beare or maintaine quarels, plees, or debates that concerne other parties, then ſuch as touch the eſtate of their lords, or themſelues. anno 4. Ed. 3. cap. 11. anno. 3. H. 7. ca. 13. & of this ſee more. an. 1. H. 5. c. 3. & & an. 18. H. 6. c. 12. as alſo in the new book of ētries. ver. Cōſpiracy.
               
               
                  Conſpiracie, in the places before mentioned, is taken more generally, and is confounded with maintenance and champertie. But in a more ſpeciall ſignification, it is taken for a confederacie of two at the leaſt, falſly to endict one, or to procure one to be indicted of felonie. And the puniſhment of conſpiraciē, vpon an endictment of felonie, at the kings ſuyte, is that the partie attainted, leeſe his franke lawe, to the intent that he be not empaneled vpon iuries or aſſiſes, or ſuch like employments, for the teſtifiing of truth. And if he haue to doe in the kings court, that he make his atturney: and that his lands, goods and chatels be ſeyſed into the kings hands, his lands eſtreaped (if he finde no better fauour) his trees raced, and his body committed to priſon. 27. lib. aſſiſ. 59. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fo. 156. b. This is called vilanous iudgement or puniſhment. See Vilanous iudgement. But if the partie greiued ſiew vpon the writ of conſpiracie, then ſee. Fitzh. nat. br. f. 114. D. 115. I. Conſpiracie may be alſo in caſes of leſſe weight. Idem. fo. 116. A. &c. See Franke law.
               
               
                  Conſpiratione, is a writ that lieth againſt conſpiratours. Fitz. nat. br. fo. 114. d. Cromptons iuriſd. fo. 209. See alſo the Regiſt. fo. 134.
               
                  Conſtable (conſtabularius vel coneſtabulis) is a Saxon word, compounded of (cuning or cyng) and (ſtaple) which doe ſignifie the ſtay and hold of the king. Lamb. duties of conſtables. nu. 4. But I haue heard it made heretofore of theſe two words, (comes ſtabuli) which ſeemeth to me the more probable, becauſe we haue this officer from France, as moſt others, and not from the Saxons. And Tilius in his commentaries (de rebus gallicis) li. 2. ca. de coniſtabili, hath the ſame etymologie, giuing the reaſon thereof, (quia praeeſt ſtabulo. i. equiliregis) which office is auncient heere in England, and mentioned by Bracton, ſeeming

to anſwere him, that was called (tribunus celervm) vnder the firſt kings of Rome, and (Magiſter equitum) afterward. The Germans that inhabite the ſide of the riuer Rhene, note him by this title (die conſtofler) and in counterfeit latine (conſtofelerus) and in owlder time (conſtafolarius) that the Romanes were wont to tearme (aſſeſſorem iudicij) And (as Spiegelius in his lexicon noteth, deriue the word (a ſtafolo comitis. i. gradu Iudicis fiſcalis. For ſtaffel in their language (as he ſaith) ſignifieth a grees or ſteppe of a paire of ſtaires. And therevpon (ſtaffelſtein) being a word vſed in their very awncient writings, ſignifieth as much as praetorium. But a man many times may ſhew in this kinde more curioſitie then diſcretion: as perhaps ſome will iudge me heere to haue done. And therefore enough of this. This word is diuerſly vſed in our common law: firſt forthe cunſtable of England, who is alſo called marſhiall. Stawn. pl. cor. fo. 65. of whoſe great dignitie and authoritie a man may find many arguments and ſignes both in the ſtatutes and chronicles of this realme. His ſway conſiſteth in the care of the common peace of the land, in deedes of armes, and maters of warres. Lamb. vbi ſupra with whome agreeth the ſtatut. anno. 13. R. 2. ca. 2. ſtatu. 1. Smith de Repub. Anglo. li. 2. c. 25. Of this officer or magiſtrate M. Gwyn in the preface to his readings ſaith to this effect: The court of the conſtable and marſhiall determineth cōtracts touching deeds of armes out of the realme, and handleth things cōcerning wars within the realme, as combats, blaſōs of armorie, &c. But it may not deale with battel in appeales, nor generally with any other thing that may be tried by the lawe of the land. And reade Forteſcue ca. 32. This office was belonging heeretofore to the lords of certaine maners, iure feudi: and why it is diſcontinued, ſee Dyer. fo. 258. nu. 39. Out of this high magiſtracie (ſaith M. Lamberd) were drawen theſe lower conſtables, which we call conſtables of hundreds & franchiſes, and firſt ordeined by the ſtatute of Wincheſter, anno. 13. Ed. 1. which appointeth for the conſeruation of the peace, and view of armour, two conſtables in euerie hundred and franchiſe, which in latine are called conſtabularii capitales. And theſe be nowe a daies called high conſtables: becauſe continuance of time, and increaſe both of people and offenfes, hath againe vnder theſe made others in euery towne called petit conſtables, in latine (ſubconſtabularios) which

are of like nature but of inferiour authoritie to the other, as you may read at large in that learned mans treatiſe before named. Of theſe alſo read S. Thomas Smith li. 2. ca. 22. Beſide theſe there be officers of particular places, called by this name; as conſtable of the tower. Ssawnf. pl. cor. fol. 152. & anno. 1. H. 4. ca. 13. Stowes annals pa. 812. iuriſdict. fo. 132. conſtable of the exchequer. anno. 51. H. 3. ſtatute. 5. Conſtable of Douer caſtel. Camdeni Britan. pa. 239. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 240. otherwiſe called caſtellane. Weſtm. i. ca. 7. anno. 3. Ed. i. But theſe be caſtellani properly. as M. Lamberd. noteth, though conioined in name with the others. See the ſtatute. anno. 32. H. 8. ca. 38. M. Manwood parte. prima. ca. 13. of his foreſt lawes, maketh mention of a conſtable of the foreſt.
               
                  Conſuetudinibus & ſeruities, is a writ of right cloſe, which lyeth againſt the tenent, that deforceth his lord of the rent or ſeruice dew vnto him. Of this ſee more at large the Old nat. br. fo. 77. Fitzh. eodem. fo. 151. and the Regiſter orig: fo. 159.
               
                  Conſultation, (conſultatio) is a writ whereby a cauſe, being formerly remoued by prohibition from the eccleſiaſticall court, or court chriſtian, to the kings court, is returned thither againe. For the Iudges of the kings court, if vpon comparing the libell with the ſuggeſtion of the party, they do find the ſuggeſtion falſe, or not proued, and therefore the cauſe to be wrongfully called from the court chriſtian; then vpon this conſultation or deliberation, they decree it to be returned againe, wherevpon the writ in this caſe obtained, is called a conſultation. Of this you may reade the Regiſter orig. fo. 44. 45. &c. vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fol. 58. Old nat. br. fo. 32. & Fitzh. eodem. fo. 50.
               
                  Contenement, (contenementum) ſeemeth to be the free hould land, which lyeth to a mans tenement or dwelling houſe, that is in his owne occupation. For in magna charta. ca. 14. you haue theſe words: A free man ſhall not be amerced for a ſmall fault, but after the quantity of the fault: and for a great fault, after the maner thereof, ſauing to him his contenement or free hould. And a merchant likewiſe ſhalbe amerced ſauing to him his merchandies: and any other villaine then owers, ſhalbe amerced ſauing his wainage, if he take him to our mercy. And Bracton. li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 1 nu. 3. hath theſe words: & ſciendum, quòd miles & liber homo non amerciabitur, niſi ſecundùm modum delicti. ſeoundùm quod delictum

fuit magnum vel parvum, & ſaluo contenemento ſuo: mercator verò non niſi ſalua merchandiza ſua, & villanus niſi ſaluo Waniagio ſuo. which mercy ſeemeth to haue bene learned from the ciuile lawe: whereby (executio non poteſt fieri in boues, aratra, aliaue inſtrumenta ruſticorum. l. executores & Authen. Agricultores. Co: quae res pign. obliga nec in ſtipendia, arma, & equos militum. l. ſtipendia. Co. de executio. rei indica. & ibi doctores. nec in libros ſcholarium. gloſ. in. l. Nepos Proculo. verbo. dignitate. Π. de verbo: ſignifica. Quae tamen ruſticorum, militum, & ſcholarium priuilegia circa executionem vera eſſe, & eatenus obtinere intelligenda ſunt, quatenus alia bona habent. Iohan. Eimericus in proceſſu indiciario: cap. de Executione ſenten. 79. num. 11.
               
                  Continuance, ſeemeth to bee vſed in the common law, as prorogatio is in the ciuile lawe. For example: Continuance vntil the next aſſiſe. Eitz. nat. br. fol. 154. F. and 244. D. in both which places it is ſayde, that if a record in the treaſurie be alledged by the one partie, and denyed by the other: a (certiorari) ſhall be ſiewed to the Treaſurer, and the chamberlaine of the Exchequer: who, if they certifie not in the Chauncerie, that ſuch a record is there, or that it is likely to be in the Tower: the king ſhall ſend to the Iuſtices repeating the (certificate) and will them to continue the aſſiſe. In this ſignification it is likewiſe vſed by Kitchin. fol. 202. & 199. and alſo anno 11. H. 6. cap. 4.
               
                  Continuall claime (continuum clameum) is a claime made from time to time. Within euery yere and day, to land or other thing, which in ſome reſpect we cannot attaine without daunger. For example, if I be diſſeiſed of land, into which, though I haue right vnto it, I dare not enter for feare of beating: it behooueth me to hold on my right of entry to the beſt oportunitie of me & mine heyre, by approching as neare it as I can, once euery yere, as long as I liue: and ſo I ſaue the right of entry to mine heire. Termes of law. Againe, if I haue a ſlave or villein broken from me, and remaining any where within the auncient demeſn of the king, being in the handes of the king, I cannot maintaine the writ de nativo habendo, as long as he continueth there: but if I claime him within the yeare and the day, and ſo continue my claime, vntill I can find him within that compaſſe: I may lawfully lay hold of him as mine owne. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 79. See more in Litleton, verbo Continuall claime. And the new booke of Entries. Ibid. and Fleta. lib. 6. cap. 53.
               
                  
                  Contract (contractus) is a covenant or agreement with a lawfull conſideration or cauſe. Weſt. parte prim. ſymbol. lib. 1. Sect. 10. and lib. 19. Π. de verbo: Significa. with other places, it is thus defined: Contractus eſt negotium inter duos plureſve data opera geſtum, vt vel vterque invicem, vel alteruter obligetur. Who ſo will throughly examine the difference betweene this and (pactū) and ſuch other words ſomething like in ſignification: let him ſearch the civilians, and he ſhall find worke both pleaſant and profitable, and well fitting the common lawe alſo.
               
                  Contra formam collationis, is a writ that lyeth againſt an abbot or his ſucceſſor, for him (or his heire) that hath giuen land to an Abbey, to certaine good vſes, and findeth that the Abbot or his ſucceſſour hath made a feofment thereof, with the aſſent of the tenents, to the diſheriſon of the houſe or church. This is founded vpon the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 41. And of this ſee the Regiſt. orig. fol. 238. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 210. And note that the author of the Termes of law ſaith, that this is not brought againſt the tenent or alience.
               
                  Contra formam feoffamenti, is a writ, that lyeth for the heire of a tenent infeoffed of certain lands or tenements, by charter of feofment by a Lord, to make certain ſeruices and ſuites to his court, and is afterward diſtreined for more, then is contained in the ſaid charter. Regiſt. orig. fol. 176. old nat. br. fol. 162. and the Tearmes of the lawe.
               
                  Contributione faciendae, is a writ that lieth in caſe where more are bound to one thing, & one is put to the whole burden. Fitz. nat. br. fo. 162. bringeth theſe examples. If tenēts in cōmon or ioynt, hold a mill (pro indiviſo) & equally take the profits therof, the mill falling to decay, & one or more of thē, refuſing to contribute toward the reparation therof, the reſt ſhall haue this writ to cōpell thē. And if there be 3. coparceners of land, that owe ſuite to the lords court, & the eldeſt perform the whole: then may ſhe haue this writ to compell the other two to a cōtributiō of the charge or to one of them, if one only refuſe. The old. nat. br. frameth this writ to a caſe, where one onely ſuite is required for land, & that land being ſold to diuers, ſuite is required of them all, or ſome of them by diſtreſſe, as intirely, as if all were ſtill in one. fol. 103. See the Regiſt. orig. fol 176.
               
                  Controller (contrarotulator) cō
                  meth of the French (contrerouleur. i. antigraphus, gracè 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) which in Rome was vſed for him, cui id muneris iunctum erat,

vt obſervaret pecuniam, quam in vſum Principis vel civitatis colligerunt exactores. Budaeus in annota. prio. in pand. titulo De officio quaeſtoris. In England we haue diuers officers of this name: as controller of the kings houſe, pl. cor. fol. 52. & anno 6. H. 4. cap. 3. controller of the nauie. anno 35. Elizabeth. cap. 4. controller of the cuſtome. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 105. controller of Calis. anno 21 Rich. 2. cap. 18. controller of the Mint. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 12. controller of the hamper, (Contrarotulator Hamperii) which is an officer in the Chauncerie attending on the Lord Chaunceler or Keeper daily in the terme time, and dayes appointed for ſealing. His office is to take all things ſealed from the clerke of the hanaper, incloſed in bags of lether, as is mentioned in the ſaid clerkes office, and opening the bags to note the iuſt number, & eſpeciall effects of all thinges ſo receiued, and to enter the ſame into a ſpeciall booke, with all the duties appertaining to his Maieſtie, and other officers for the ſame, and ſo chargeth the clerke of the hanaper with the ſame. Controller of the Pipe, (contrarotulator Pipae) who is an officer of the Exchequer that writeth out ſummons twice euery yeare to the Shyreeues, to levie the Fermes and debts of the Pipe, and alſo keepeth a contrarolment of the Pipe. Controller of the pell, is alſo an officer of the Exchequer, of which ſort there be two, viz. the two chamberlaines clerkes, that do or ſhould keepe a controlment of the pell of receipts and goings out. And in one word, this officer was originally one, that tooke notes of any other officers accompts or receipts, to the intent to diſcouer him, if he dealt amiſſe, and was ordained for the Princes beter ſecuritie, howſoeuer the name ſithence may be in ſome things otherwiſe applyed. To the proofe whereof you may take theſe few words out of Fleta. lib. 1. cap. 18. in prin. Qui cùm fuerint ad hoc vocati & electi, (ſpeaking of the coroners) attachiari praecipiant appella: qui & capitula coronae in comitatu praeſentēt: contra quos vicecomes loci habeat contrarotulum, tam de appellis & inquiſitionibus, quàm aliis officium illud tangentibus, &c. Which (contrarollum) is nothing elſe, but a paralel of the ſame quality and contents with the 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or originall. This alſo appeareth by anno 12. Ed. 3. ca. 3. And this ſignification it ſeemeth to haue alſo in Fraunce. For there the king hath his receyuers of taylles in euery prouince, and controllers, qui ad maiorem fidem ſuſceptoribus accedunt, deſcribunt
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                     
in tabulis quae colliguntur. Gregorii ſyntagn. lib. 3. cap. 6. num. 6.
               
                  Conuentione, is a writ, that lyeth for the breach of any couenant in writing. Regiſter orig. fo. 185. Old nat. br. fo. 101. Fitzh. calleth a writ of couenant. nat. br. fo. 145. who deuideth couenants into perſonall and reall, making a ſufficient diſcourſe of them both: as alſo how this writ lyeth for both.
               
                  Conuict, (conuictus) is he that is founde guilty of an offence by the verdict of the iurie. Stawnf. pl. cor. fo. 186. yet Maſter Crompton out of Iudge Dyers commentaries 275. ſaith, that conuiction is, either when a man is outlawed, or appeareth and confeſſeth, or els is founde guilty by the inqueſt. Crompt. Iuſt. of peace. fo. 9. a. Conuiction and attainder are often confounded. li. 4. fo. 46. a. b. See Attaint.
               
               
                  Coparceners, (participes) be otherwiſe called parceners: and in common law, are ſuch as haue equall portion in the inheritance of their aunceſtour. and, as Litleton in the beginning of his third booke ſaith, parceners be either by law or by cuſtome. Parceners by law, are the iſſue femall, which (noe heyre male being) come in equality to the lands of their aunceſtours. Bract. li. 2. ca. 30. Parceners by cuſtome, are thoſe that by cuſtome of the country, chalenge equall part in ſuch lands: as in Kent by the cuſtome called (Gauel Kinde) This is called adaequatio among the Feudiſts. Hot. in verbis feuda. verbo. Adaequatio. And among the ciuilians it is tearmed familiae erciſcundae iudicium. quod inter cohaeredes ideo redditur, vt & haereditas diuidatur, & quod alterum alteri dare facere oportebit, praeſtetur. Hotoman. Of theſe two you may ſee Litleton at large in the firſt and ſecond chapters of his third booke, and Britton cap. 27. intituled De heritage diuiſable. The crowne of England is not ſubiect to coparcinory. anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 22.
               
                  Copie, (copia) commeth from the french copia. i. le double de quelqut eſcripture, latinè deſcriptio, graece 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and ſignifieth in our common language, the example of an originall writing: as the copie of a charter, the copie of a court rolle.
               
                  Copia libelli deliberanda, is a writ that lyeth in caſe where a man cannot get the copie of a libell at the hands of the Iudge eccleſiaſticall. Regiſter orig. f. 51.
               
                  Copiehould, (tenura per copiam rotuli curiae) is a tenure, for the which the tenent hath nothing to ſhew, but the copie of the rols made by the ſteward of his lords court. For the ſteward, as he inrolleth, and maketh remembrances

of all other things done in the lords court: ſo he doth alſo of ſuch tenents, as be admitted in the court, to any parcell of land or tenement belonging to the maner: and the tranſcript of this, is called the court rowle: the copie whereof the tenent taketh from him, and keepeth as his onely euidence. Coke. li. 4. fo. 25. b. This tenure is called a baſe tenure, becauſe it houldeth at the wil of the lord. Kitchin. fo. 80. chap: copihoulds. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 12. B. C. who there ſaieth, that it was wont to be called tenure in villenage, and that this copihould is but a new name. Yet is it not ſimply at the will of the lord, but according to the cuſtome of the maner. So that if a copiehoulder breake not the cuſtome of the maner, and thereby forfeit his tenure, he ſeemeth not ſo much to ſtand at the lords courteſie for his right, that he may be diſplaced hand ouer head at his pleaſure. Theſe cuſtomes of maner be infinit, varying in one point or other, almoſt in euery ſeuerall maner. Firſt, ſome copiehould is fineable, and ſome certaine: that which is fineable, the lord rateth at what fine or incom he pleaſeth, when the tenent is admmitted vnto it: that which is certaine, is a kinde of inheritance, and called in many places cuſtumary: becauſe the tenent dying, and the hould being void the next of the blood paying the cuſtumarie fine, as two ſhillngs for an acre or ſuch like, may not be denied his admiſſion. Secondly, ſome copihoulders haue by cuſtome, the wood growing vpon their owne land, which by law they could not haue. Kitchin vbiſupra. Thirdly, copi-holders, ſome be ſuch as hold by the verge in ancient demeſn: & although they hold by copy, yet are they in accompt a kind of Free-holders. For if ſuch a one commit felonie, the king hath (annum, diem, & vaſtum) as in caſe of Freehold. Some other hold by common tenure, called meere copy hold: and they committing felonie, their land eſcheateth to the Lord of the maner foorthwith. Kitchin fol. 81. chap. Tenents per verge in auncient demeſn. What auncient demeſn is, ſee in the right place. See Tenent by copie of court rolle. This is the land that in the Saxons time, was called Folk land. Lamberd, explicat. of Saxon words. verbo, Terra ex ſcripto. Weſt. parte prim. ſymbol. lib. 2. Sect. 646. defineth a copi-holder thus: Tenent by copie of court rolle, is he which is admitted tenent of any lands or tenements within a maner, that time out of the memory of man,

by vſe and cuſtome of the ſaid maner, haue bene dimiſable, and dimiſed to ſuch, as will take the ſame in fee, in fee-taile, for life, yeares, or at will, according to the cuſtome of the ſaid maner, by copie of courtrolle of the ſame maner. where you may read more of theſe things.
               
                  Coraage (coraagium) is a kinde of impoſition extraordinarie, & growing vpon ſome vnuſuall occaſion, and it ſeemeth to be of certaine meaſures of corne. For corus tritici, is a certaine meaſure of corne. Bracton libro 2. ca. 16. nu. 6. who in the ſame chapter. nu. 8. hath of this mater theſe words: Sunt etiam quaedam communes praeſtationes, quae ſeruitia non dicuntur, nec de conſuetudine veniunt, niſi cùm neceſſitas interuenerit, vel cùm rex venerit: ſicut ſunt hidagia, coraagia, & caruagia, & alia plura de neceſſitate & ex conſenſu communitotius regni introducta, & quae ad dominum feudi non pertinent, & de quibus nullus tenetur tenentē ſuū acquietare, niſi ſe adhoc ſpecialiter obligauerit in charta ſua. &c.
               
               
                  Cordiner, commeth of the French (cordoüannier. i. ſutor calcearius) a ſhoomaker, and is ſo vſed in diuers ſtatutes. as anno. 3. H. 8. ca. 10, & anno. 5. eiuſdem. ca. 7. and others.
               
                  Cornage (cornagium) commeth of the French (cor. i. cornu) and in our common law, ſignifieth a kinde of grand ſergeantie, the ſeruice of which tenure, is to blow a horne, when any invaſion of the northern enemie is perceiued. And by this many men hold their land northward, about the wall, commonly called the Picts walle. Camd. Britan. p. 609. hence commeth the word (cornuare) to blow a horn. pupil. oculi, parte. 5. ca. 22. in charta de Foreſta. This ſeruice ſeemeth to haue proceeded from the Romanes. For I finde (cornicularios) mentioned in the ciuile lawe. viz. li. 1. Cod. de officio diuerſo. Iud. 48. lege. 3. &. lib. 12. titulo de apparitoribus praefectorum praetorio. 53. lege. 1. & 3. where Lucas de Penna defineth them (eos qui cornu faciunt excubias militares. And Briſſonius. libro. 3. de verbo ſignificat. ſaith thus of them: (hi militum quoddam genus fuere, qui corniculo merebant, vnde nomen habent. Where it appeareth by him out of Suetonius, Plinie, and Livie, that the horne was an honour & reward giuen for ſeruice in war.
               
                  Corner tile. See Gutter tile.
               
               
                  Corodye (corodium) commeth of the Latine verb (corrodo) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a ſumme of mony or allowance of meate and drinke due to the king from an abbey, or other houſe of religion, whereof he is the founder, toward the reaſonable

ſuſtenāce of ſuch a one of his ſeruants, being put to his penſion, as he thinketh good to beſtowe it on. And the difference betweene a corodie and a penſion ſeemeth to be, that a corodie is allowed toward the maintenance of any the kings ſeruants, that liueth in the abbey: a penſion is giuen to one of the kings chaplaines, for his better maintenance in the kings ſeruice, vntill he may be prouided of a benefice. Of both theſe read Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 230. 231. 233. who there ſetteth downe all the corodies and penſions certaine, that any abbey, when they ſtoode, was bound to performe vnto the king. There is mention alſo of a corodie in Stawnf. praerogatiue. fo. 44. And this ſeemeth to be awncient lawe. For in Weſtm. 2. ca. 25. it is ordeined, that an aſſiſe ſhall lie for a corodie. It is alſo apparent by the ſtatute. anno. 34. & 35. H. 8. ca. 16. that corodies belonged ſome time to Biſhops from monaſteries: & by the new termes of lawe, that a corodie may be due to a common perſon by graunt from one to another, or of common right, to him that is founder of a religious houſe, not holden in frank almoyn. For that tenure was a diſcharge of all corodies in it ſelfe. By which booke it appeareth alſo, that a corodie is either certaine or vncertaine, and that it may be for life, yeares, in taile, or in fee.
               
                  Corodio habendo, is a writ whereby to exact a corodie of any abbey or religious houſe. See Corodie. See the Regiſter originall. fo. 264.
               
                  Coronatore eligendo, is a writte which after the death or diſcharge of any coroner, is directed to the ſhyreeue out of the Chācery, to call togither the free holders of the countie, for the choice of a new coroner, to certifie into the chanceries both the election, and the name of the partie elected, and to giue him his oath. See Weſtm. 1. ca. 10. and Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 163. and the Regiſter orig. fo. 177.
               
                  Coroner (coronator) is an auncient officer of this land, ſo called, becauſe he dealeth wholly for the king and crowne. There be fower of them commonly in euery countie, and they are choſen by the freeholders of the ſame vpon writ, and not made by leters patents. Crompt. Iuriſd. fo. 126. This officer, though now he be ſome inferiour gentleman, that hath ſome ſmattering in the lawe: yet if we looke to the ſtatute of Weſtm. 1. ca. 10. we ſhall finde, that he was wont, and ought to be, a ſufficient man: that is, the moſt wiſe and diſcreete knight, that beſt will andmay

attend vpon ſuch an office. Yea there is a writ in the Regiſter, Niſi ſit miles. ſo. 177. b. whereby it appeareth, that it was fufficient cauſe to remooue a coroner choſen, if he were not a knight, and had not a hundred ſhillings rent of freehold. And the Lord cheife Iuſtice of the kings bench, is the ſoueraigne coroner of the whole realme in perſon. i. whereſoeuer he remaineth. libro aſſiſarum. fo. 49. 5. coron. Coke. li. 4. caſu. de Wardens, &c. of the Sadlers. fo. 57. b. His office eſpecially concerneth the plees of the crowne: but if you will reade at large, what aunciently belonged vnto him: reade Bracton. li. 3. tra. 2. c. 5. de officio coronatorum circa homicidium. and ca. 6. de officio coronatoris in the ſauris inventis. & ca. 6. de officio coronatorum in raptu virginium. and ca. 8. de officio coronatorum de pace & plagis. and Britton in his firſt chapter, where he handleth it at large. Fleta alſo in his firſt booke cap. 18. and Andrew Horns mirrour of Iuſtices. li. 1. ca. del office del coroners. but more aptly for the preſent times, Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 1. ca. 51. Note there be certaine coroners ſpeciall within diuers liberties, as well as theſe ordinarie officers in euerie countie: as the coroner of the verge, which is a certaine compas about the kings court. whome Crompt. in his iuriſd. fo. 102. calleth the coroner of the kings houſe: of whoſe authoritie ſee S. Ed. Cokes reportes. lib. 4. fo. 46. a. b. And I know certen charters belonging to colledges and other corporations, whereby they are licēſed to appoint their coroner within their owne precincts. Farder of this office ſee alſo Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 76. A. B. S. Thomas Smith. li. 2. ca. ca. 21. de repub. Anglo. and Lamb. eirenarcha. li. 4. ca. 3. pa. 380. And the office of the coroner in Scotland. what it is, read M. Iohn. Skene de verbo. ſignifi. verbo. Iter.
               
               
                  Corporation (corporatio) is that which the civile law calleth vniverſitatem, or collegium. a bodie politique authoriſed by the kings charter, to haue a common ſeale, a head officer, one or more, and members able by their common conſent, to graunt or to receiue in law any thing within the compas of their charter: euen as one man may doe by law all things, that by lawe he is not forbidden: and bindeth the ſucceſſours, as a ſingle man bindeth his executour or heyre. See Brokes his abridgment. titulo Corporation, and the newe Tearmes of lawe. eodem.
               
               
                  Corpus cum cauſa, is a writ iſſuying out of the Chauncerie, to remoue both the bodie and

the record touching the cauſe of any man lying in execution, vpō a iudgement for debt into the Kings bench, &c. there to lye vntill he haue ſatisfied the iudgement. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 25
                        •
                     . E.
               
               
                  Corrector of the ſtaple, is an officer or clerke belonging to the ſtaple, that writeth and recordeth the bergains of Merchants there made, anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 22. & 23. The Romanes called them Menſarios.
               
               
                  Corruption of blood, is an infection growing to the eſtate of a man attainted of felonie or treaſon, and to his iſſue. For as he leeſeth all to the Prince, or other lord of the fee, accordingly as his caſe is, ſo his iſſue cannot be heires to him, or to any other aunceſter, of whom they might haue claimed by him. And farder if he were noble, or a gentleman before, he and his children are made vnnoble and vngentle in reſpect of the father. Newe Tearmes of the lawe.
               
                  Corſe preſent, are words borowed from the French, ſignifying a mortuarie. anno 21. H. 8. ca. 6. The true French is (corps praeſentè) i. the bodie preſented or tendered. The reaſon why the mortuarie is thus alſo tearmed, ſeemeth to be, for that where a mortuarie was wont to be due, the bodie of the beſt beaſt was according to the law or cuſtome offered or preſented to the prieſt.
               
                  Corſelet, is a French word ſignifying a litle bodie, in Latine (corpuſculum.) It is vſed with vs, for an armor to couer the whole bodie, or trunke of a man. anno 4. & 5. Ph. & Mar. cap. 2. where with the pikemen, commonly ſet in the front and flanks of the battaile, are armed, for the beter reſiſtance of the enemies aſſaults, and the ſurer guard of the gunners placed behind or within them, being more ſleightly armed, for their ſpeedier iſſuing in and out to diſcharge their peeces. See Barrets diſcourſe of Warre. lib. 3. dialog. 2.
               
                  Cofenage, (cognatione) is a writ, that lyeth where the treſaile (that is, tritavus, the father of the beſaile, or of the great grandfather) is ſeyſed in his demeſn as of ſee, at the day of his death, of certaine lands or tenements, and dyeth: and then a ſtraunger entreth and abateth. For then ſhall his heyre haue this writ of coſenage: the forme whereof ſee in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 221. Of this alſo reade Britton at large. cap. 89.
               
                  Coſening, is an offence vnnamed, whereby any thing is done guilefully in or out of contracts, which cannot be fitly termed by any ſpeciall name. Weſt. parte. 2. ſimbolaeogr. titulo. Indictments. ſect. 68. It is called ſtellionaius in the ciuile lawe of (ſtellio) the

beaſt, which is lacertae genus virſutiſſimum, as Cuiacius in his paratitles calleth it, and, quo nullum animal homini invidet fraudulentius. Plinie li. 3. ca. 10.
               
                  Cotage (cotagium) is a houſe without land belonging vnto it. anno. 4. Ed. pri. ſtatut. primo. And the inhabitant of ſuch a houſe is called a cotager. But by a later ſtatute, no man may builde a cotage, but he muſt lay 4. acres of ground vnto it. 31. Eli. ca. 7.
               
                  Cote, is a kind of reſuſe wolle clung or clotted together, that it cannot be pulled aſunder. anno. 13. R. 2. ſtat. 1. ca. 9. It ſignifieth alſo as much as cotage in many places, as alſo it did among the Saxons. Verſlegan in his Reſtitut. of decayed intelligēce in antiquities.
               
               
                  Covenable (rationabilis) is a French word, ſignifying fitte or convenient, or ſuteable. covenably endowed anno. 4. H. 8. ca. 12. It is aunciently written (convenable) as in the ſtat. an. 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 17.
               
                  Couenāt, conuētio, is the conſēt of two or more in one ſelf thing, to doe or giue ſomwhat. Weſt. part. 2. ſymbol. li. 1. ſect. 4. It ſeemeth to be as much as (pactum. conventum) with the ciuilians. which you read often times in Tullie. Pactum conuentum, quod & vulgo veſtitum vocant, opponitur nudo pacto, velut ab omni iuris ſolennitate deſtituto. Huius exempla ponere difficile eſſe Iaſon exiſtimavit. Conventum aiunt, quod veſtitur, aut re, aut verbis, aut literis, aut contractus cohaerentiâ, aut rei interuentu. Oldendorpius. And couenant in this ſignification, is either a covenant in lawe, or a couenant in fact. Coke. lib. 4. Nokes caſe. fo. 80. or couenant expreſſe & couenant in lawe. idem. li. 6. fo. 17. ae. Couenant in law is that, which the law intendeth to be made, though in words it be not expreſſed: as if the leſſour doe dimiſe and graunt, &c. to the leaſſee for a certaine tearme, the lawe intendeth a couenant of the leſſours part, that the leſſee ſhall, during his whole terme, quietly inioy his leaſe againſt all lawfull encumbrance. Covenant in fact is that, which is expreſſely agreed betweene the parties. There is alſo a couenant meerely perſonall, and a couenant reall. Fitz. nat. br. fo. 145. And he ſeemeth to ſay, that a couenant reall is, whereby a man tieth himſelfe to paſſe a thing reall, as land or tenements, as a couenant to levie a fyne of land, &c. a couenant meerely perſonall of the other ſide, is where a man couenanteth with another by deede, to build him a houſe, or any other thing, or to ſerue him, or to infeoffe him &c. Couenant is alſo the name of a writ, for the which ſee Conuentione. Inſtruments

of couenants you may ſee good ſtore in Weſt parte. i. Symbolaeog. li. 2. ſectio. 100. See alſo the new booke of entries. verbo. Couenant.
               
               
                  Couent, (conuentus) ſignifieth the ſociety or fraternity of an abbie or priorie, as (ſocietas) ſignifieth the number of fellowes in a colledge. Bracton. li. 2. ca. 35. It commeth of the french (conuent. i. coenobium).
               
               
                  Couerture, is a french word ſignifying any thing that couereth, as apparell, a couerlet, &c. and deduced from the verb (couvrer. i. tegere) It is particularly applied in our common lawe, to the eſtate and condition of a maried woman, who by the lawes of our realme, is in (poteſtate viri) and therefore diſabled to contract with any, to the preiudice of her ſelfe or her huſband, without his conſent and priuity; or at the leaſt, without his allowance and confirmation. Broke. hoc tit. per totum. And Bracton ſaith, that omnia quae ſunt vxoris, ſunt ipſius viri, nec habet vxor poteſtatem ſui, ſed vir. li. 2. ca. 15. and that (vir eſt caput mulieris) li. 4. ca. 24. and againe, that in any law mater, ſine viro reſpondere non poteſt. li. 5. tract. 2. ca. 3. and tract. 5. ca. 25. eiuſdem libri. he hath words to this effect: vir & vxor ſunt quaſi vnica perſona: quia caro vna & ſanguis vnus. Res licet ſit propria vxoris, vir tamen eius cuſtos, cùm ſit caput mulieris. and li. 1. ca. 10. nu. 2. Vxores ſunt ſub virga viri. And if the husband alienate the wifes land, during the mariage, ſhee cannot gaineſay it during his life. See Cui ante diuortium. and Cui in vita.
               
               
                  Covine, (covina) is a deceitfull aſſent or agreement betweene two or more, to the preiudice or hurt of another. New tearms of lawe. It commeth of the french verb (conuenancer. i. depaciſci.) or rather (conuenir. i. conuenire.)
               
               
                  Cowcher, ſignifieth a factour that continueth in ſome place or country for trafique. anno. 37. Ed. 3. ca. 16. It is vſed alſo for the generall booke, into which any corporation entreth their particular acts for a perpetuall remembrance of them.
               
                  Counte, cōmeth of the french (coumpte. i. ſubductus, cōputatio, ratio) or of (cōte. i. narratio.) It ſignifieth as much as the originall declaratiō in a proces, though more vſed in reall actions then perſonall, as declaration is rather applied to perſonall then reall. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 16. A. 60. D. N. 71. A. 191. E. 217. A. (Libellus) with the ciuilians comprehendeth both. And yet count and declaration be confounded ſometimes; as count in debt. Kitchin: fo. 281. count or declaration in appeale. pl. cor. fo. 78.

Count in trefpaſſe. Britton. cap. 26 count in an action of treſpaſſe vpon the caſe for a ſlaunder. Kit. fol. 252. This word ſeemeth to come from France & Normandy. For in the grand Cuſtumarie, c. 64. I find (conteurs) to be thoſe, which a man ſetteth to ſpeake for him in court, as aduocates: & cap. 63. (pledeurs) to be another ſort of ſpokes men, in the nature of Atturneys, for one, that is him ſelfe preſent, but ſuffereth another to tell his tale. Where alſo in the 65. chapter, Atturney is ſaid to be he, that dealeth for him that is abſent. See this text and Gloſſe vpō thoſe 3. chapters. Countours (by Horn in his Myrror of Iuſtices. li. 2. ca. Des loyers) are Sergeants skilfull in the lawe of the Realme, which ſerue the cō
                  mon people, to pronounce and defend their actions in iudgement for their fee, when occaſiō requireth: whoſe duty, if it be as it is there deſcribed, and were obſerued, men might haue much more comfort of the lawe then they haue.
               
                  Countenance, ſeemeth to be vſed for credit or eſtimation, old na. br. fol. 111. in theſe words: Alſo the attaint ſhall be graunted to poore men that will ſweare, that they haue nothing whereof they may make fine, ſauing their countenance, or to other by a reaſonable fine. So is it vſed, anno 1. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 4. in theſe words: Shyreeues ſhall charge the kings depters with as much as they may leuie with their oathes, without abating the depters countenance.
               
                  Cownter (computatorium) feemeth to come of the Latin (computare) or the French (counter.) For we vſe it for the name of a priſō, wherinto he that once ſlippeth, is like to accompt ere he get out.
               
                  Counter plee, is compounded of two French words (contre. i. contra, adverſus) and (pleder. i. cauſam agere.) It ſignifieth properly in our common lawe, a replication to (ayde prier.) For when the tenent by courteſie, or in dower, prayeth in ayde of the king, or him in the reuerſion, for his beter defence: or elſe if a ſtranger to the action begun, defire to be receiued to ſay what he can for the ſafegard of his eſtate: that which the demandant alledgeth againſt this requeſt, why it ſhuold not be admitted, is called a counter plee. See Broke
                        〈…〉
                     t. And in this ſignification it is vſed. anno. 25. Ed. 3. ſt at. 3. cap. 7. See alſo the new termes of the law, and the ſtatute anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 39.
               
                  County, (comitatus) ſignifieth as much as (ſhire,) the one deſcending from the French, the other from the Saxons, both conteining a circuit or portion of the realme, into the which the whole

land is diuided, for the beter gouernment thereof, and the more eaſie adminiſtration of iuſtice. So that there is no part of the kingdome, that lieth not within ſome countie, and euery county is gouerned by a yerely officer, whom we cal a Shyreeue, which among other duties belonging to his office, putteth in execution all the commandements & iudgments of the kings courts, that are to be executed within that compaſſe. Forteſcue cap. 24. Of theſe counties there be foure of eſpeciall marke, which therefore are tearmed countie Palatines, as the county Palatine of Lancaſter, of Cheſter, of Durham, & of Ely, ann. 5. Eliz. 1. c. 23. I read alſo of the county Palatine of Hexam. an. 33 H. 8. ca. 10. Vnde quaere. And this county Palatine is a Iuriſdiction of ſo high a nature, that whereas all plees touching the life or mayhem of man, called plees of the crowne, be ordinarily held & ſped in the kings name, & cannot paſſe in the name of any other; the chiefe gouerners of theſe, by eſpeciall charter from the king, did heretofore ſend out all writs in their owne name, and did all things touching iuſtice, as abſolutely as the Prince himſelf in other counties, only acknowledging him their ſuperiour and Soueraigne. But by the ſtatute. anno 27. H. 8. c. 25. this power is much a bridged, vnto the which I refer the reader, as alſo to Crom. Iuriſ. fo. 137. for the whole courſe of this court. Beſides theſe counties of both ſorts, there be likewiſe counties corporate, as appeareth by the ſtatute. anno 3. Ed. 4. 5. and theſe be certaine cities, or auncient boroughs of the land, vpon which the Princes of our nation haue thought good to beſtow ſuch extraordinary liberties. Of theſe the famous city of London is one, and the principall, Yorke another, an. 32. H. 8. cap. 13. the city of Cheſter a third, an. 42. Eliz. cap. 15. Canterburie a fourth. Lamb. Eiren. l. 1. cap. 9. And to theſe may be added many moe: but I haue onely obſerued out of the ſtatutes & other writers, the county of the towne of Kingston vpon Hull, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 13. the county of the towne of Havorford. Weſt. anno 35. H. 8. cap. 26. and the county of Litchfield. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fo. 59. a. County is in another ſignificatiō vſed for the County court, which the Shyreeue keepeth euery moneth within his charge either by himſelfe or his deputie, anno 2. Ed. 6 ca. 25. Cromptons Iuriſ. fo. 221. Bract. li. 3. c. 7. & li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 12. Of theſe counties or ſhires one with another, there are reckoned in England 37. beſide twelue in Walet.
               
               
                  〈1… pages missing〉
               
               
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                  . The word (comitatus) is alſo vſed for a iuriſdiction or territorie among the Feudiſts.
               
                  Countie court (curia comitatus) by M. Lamberd is otherwiſe called (conuentus) in his explication of Saxon words, and diuided into two ſorts: one retaining the generall name, as the county court held euery moneth by the Shyreeue, or his deputie the vnder-ſhyreeue, whereof you may reade in Cromptons iuriſd. fol. 231. the other called the Turne, held twice euery yeare, which ſee more at large in his place: and Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 231. This countie court had in auncient times the cognition of theſe and other great maters, as may appeare by Glanvile. lib. 1. cap. 2 3. 4. by Bracton and Britton in diuers places, and by Fleta. li. 2. cap. 62. But that was abridged by the ſtatute of Magna charta. cap. 17. and much more by 1. Ed. 4. cap. vnico. It had alſo, and hath the determination of certaine treſpaſſes, and debts vnder forty ſhillings. Britton. cap 27. & 28. what maner of proceeding was of old vſed in this court, ſee Fleta vbi ſupra.
               
               
                  Courſitour. See Curſetour.
               
               
                  Court (curia) commeth of the French (court) which ſignifieth the kings palace or manſion, as (curtis) doth among the Lombards. All theſe ſpring of the Latine (curia) which ſignifieth one of thirty parts, into which Romulus diuided the whole number of the Romaines: ſometime alſo the Senate houſe, as appeareth by Tully in his Offices (nihil eſt quod dignum nobis, aut in foro aut in curia agere poſſumus: which in his oration (pro Milone) he calleth, Templum ſanctitatis, amplitudinis, mentis, conſilii publici, caput vrbis, &c. Court, with vs, ſignifieth diuerſly: as the houſe where preſently the king remaineth with his ordinarie retinue, and alſo the place where iuſtice is iudicially miniſtred: of which you finde 32. ſeueral ſorts in M. Cromptons booke of Iuriſdictions well deſcribed. And of them moſt be courts of record: ſome be not, and therefore are accompted baſe courts in compariſon of the reſt. Beſide theſe alſo there are courts Chriſtian. Smith de repub. Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 9. which are ſo called, becauſe they handle maters eſpecially appertaining to Chriſtianitie, and ſuch as without good knowledge in diuinity cannot be well iudged of, being held heretofore by Archb. and Biſhops, as from the Pope of Rome: becauſe he chalenged the ſuperioritie in all cauſes ſpirituall: but ſithence his eiection, they hold them by the kings authoritie (virtue magiſtratus ſui) as the Admirall of England doth his court. Whereupon

it proceedeth, that they ſend out their precepts in their owne names, and not in the kings, as the Iuſtices of the kings courts doe. And therefore as the appeale from theſe courts did lie to Rome: now by the ſtatute an. 25. H. 8. cap. 19. it lyeth to the king in his Chauncerie.
               
                  Court baron (curia baronis) is a court that euery lord of a maner (which in auncient times were called barons) hath within his owne precincts. Barons in other nations haue great territories and iuriſdiction from their Soueraignes: as may be proued out of Caſſanaeus de gloria mundi. parte 5. conſideratio. 56. by Vincentius de Franchis deſciſ. 211. and many others. But here in England what they be, and haue bene heretofore, ſee in Baron. Of this court Baron you may reade your fill in Kitchin, that writeth a large booke of it, and of a court leete. S. Edward Coke in his fourth booke of Reports, amongſt his copyhold caſes. fol. 26. b. ſaith, that this court is two after a ſort: and therefore if a man hauing a maner in a towne, and do graunt the inheritance or the copyholders thereunto belonging, vnto another: this grantee may keep a court for the cuſtumarie tenents, and accept ſurrenders to the vſe of others, and make both admittances and graunts: the other court is of Freeholders, which is properly called the court baron, wherein the ſuyters, that is, the Freeholders be Iudges: whereas of the other the Lord or his ſteward is Iudge.
               
                  Court chriſtian (curia chriſtiana) See Court.
               
               
                  Court of Pypowders. See Pypowders.
               
               
                  Court of Requeſts (curia requeſtarum) is a court of equitie, of the ſame nature with the Chancerie, principally inſtituted for the helpe of ſuch petitioners, as in conſcionable caſes deale by ſupplication with his Maieſtie. This court, as M. Gwin ſaith, in the preface to his readings, had beginning from commiſſion firſt graunted by Henry the 8. to the maſters of Requeſts: whereas before that time (by his opinion) they had no warrant of ordinary iuriſdiction, but trauelled betweene the king and the petitioner by direction from the kings mouth. But Sir Iulius Caeſar in a Tractate of his, painefully and very iudiciouſly gathered from the records of the ſame court, plainely ſheweth that this court was 9. Henrici ſeptimi, though then following the king, and not ſetled in any certaine place, neither ſwayed particularly by the Maſters of requeſts, (as now it is) but more at large by others

of the kings moſt Honourable Councell, whom he pleaſed to employ in this ſeruice. For pag. 148. of the ſaid Tractate, you haue the forme of the oath then miniſtred to thoſe that were Iudges in this court: and à pag. prim. vſque ad pag. 46. cauſes of diuers natures, which in the ſaid kings dayes were there handled and adiudged. This court, as that right Honorable and learned Knight in a briefe of his vpon the ſame court plainely proueth, was and is parcell of the kings moſt Honorable Councell, and ſo alwaies called and eſteemed. The Iudges thereof were alwaies of the kings moſt Honourable Councell, appointed by the king to keepe his Councell board. The keeping of this court was neuer tyed to any place certaine, but onely where the Councell ſate, the ſuyters were to attend. But now of late for the eaſe of ſuiters, it hath bene kept in the White hall at Weſtminſter, and onely in the Tearme time. It is a court of Record, wherein recognizances are alſo taken by the kings Councell. The forme of proceeding in this court, was altogether according to the proceſſe of ſummarie cauſes in the ciuile lawe. The perſons plaintiffes and defendants, were alwaies either priviledged, as officers of the court, or their ſervants, or as the kings ſeruants, or as neceſſarie attendants of them: or elſe where the plaintiffes pouertie, or meane eſtate was not matchable with the wealth or greatneſſe of the defendant: or where the cauſe meerely contained mater of equitie, and had no proper remedie at the common law: or where it was ſpecially recommended from the king to the examination of his Councell: or concerned Vniuerſities, Colledges, Hoſpitals, and the like. The cauſes wherwith they deale, and wherof they iudge, are of all ſortes: as maritime, vltra marine, eccleſiaſticall, temporall; but properly temporall cauſes, and onely of the other ſort, as they are mixt with temporal. The maner of proceeding in the ſaid court, is firſt, by privie ſeale, leters miſſiue, or Iniunction, or meſſenger, or bond. Secondly, by attachement. Thirdly, by proclamation of rebellion. Fourthly, by commiſſion of rebellion: fiftly, by Sergeant at armes. The effect of the defendants apparence is, that he attend de die in diem on the councell, till he haue made his anſwer to the plaintiffes bill, and be licenced to depart vpon caution de iudicio ſiſti & indicato

ſolvendo, and conſtitution of his Atturney and councell by name. The authoritie of this court is ſuch, as vppon cauſe to graunt iniunctions for barring the defendant from ſyewing the plaintiffe at the common lawe: and to ſtay the ſuyte at the common lawe before commencement, and not to arreſt the bodie of the plaintiffe, till furder order be taken by the Kings councell: and the execution of a decree in this court may be done, either by impriſonment of the perſon diſobeying, being partie, or claiming vnder the partie: or by levie of the ſumme adiudged vppon his lands.
               
                  Courteſie of England (lex Angliae) commeth of the french (Courteſie. i. benignitas, humanitas) but with vs hath a proper ſignification, being vſed for a tenure. For if a man marie an inheretrice, that is, a woman ſeiſed of land in fee ſimple, or fee taile generall, or ſeiſed as heire of the taile ſpeciall, and getteth a childe of her that commeth aliue into the world, though both it and his wife die forthwith, yet, if ſhe were in poſſeſſion, ſhall he keepe the land during his life, and is called tenent per legem Angliae, or by the courteſie of England. Glanvil. li. 7. ca. 18. Bracton. li. 5. tracta. 5. ca. 30. nu. 7. 8. 9. Britton. ca. 51. fo. 132. Fleta. li. 6. ca. 56. §. lex quaedam. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 149. D. Litleton. li. 1. ca. 4. It is called the law of England. Weſtm. 2. ca. 3. This is in Scotland called (curialitas Scotiae. Skene de verbo. ſign. verbo Curialitas: who there ſaith that this is vſed in theſe two realmes onely, and maketh a large diſcourſe of the cuſtome.
               
                  Coutheutlaughe, is he that wittingly receiueth a man outlawed, and cheriſeth or hideth him. In which caſe he was in auncient times ſubiect to the ſame puniſhment, that the outlawe himſelfe was. Bracton. li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 13. nu. 2. It is compounded of (couthe. i. knowne, acquainted, familiar, and (vtlaughe) an outlaw, as we now call him.
               
                  Courtilage, aliâs curtilage (curtilagium, aliâs curtilegium) ſignifieth a garden, a yard, or a feeld, or peece of voide ground lying ne ere and belonging to a meſuage, Weſt. parte. 2. Symbolaeo. titulo fines. ſect. 26. And ſo is it vſed anno. 4. Ed. i. ca. vnico. anno. 35. H. 8. ca. 4. & anno. 39. Eliza. ca. 2. and Coke vol. 6. fo. 64. a. Of this alſo Lindwood thus writeth. Curtilegium vulgare nomen eſt, non omnium patriarum, ſed certarum. Eſt enim curtis manſio vel manerium ad habitandum cum terris, poſſeſſionibus, & aliis emolumentis ad tale manerium pertimentibus,

prove ſatis colligitur in libro feudorum, titulo. de controuerſia inveſtiturae. § ſi quis de manſo. Coll. 10. Vnde curtilegium dicitur locus adiunctus tali curti, vbi leguntur herbae vel olera: ſic dictus a (curtis) & (lego legis) pro collig ere. Thus farre Linwood. titulo de decimis. ca. Sancta. §. omnibus, verbo Curtelegiorum. So that in effect, it is a yard or a garden adioyning to a houſe.
               
                  Creanſour, (creditor) commeth of the french (croyance. i. perſuaſio) and ſignifieth him, that truſteth another with any debt, be it in mony or wares. Old nat. br. fo. 67.
               
                  Cranage, (cranagium) is a liberty to vſea crane for the drawing vp of wares from the veſſels, at any creek of the ſea or wharfe, vnto the land, and to make profit of it. It ſignifieth alſo the mony paide and taken for the ſame. New booke of Entries. 
                     〈◊〉
                  . 3. col. 3.
               
                  Creeke, (creca, crecca, vel crecum) ſeemeth to be a part of a hauen, where any thing is landed or disburdened out of the ſea. So that when you are out of the mayne ſea within the hauen, looke how many landing places you haue, ſo many creeks may be ſaid to belong to that hauen. See Cromptons iuriſdictions. fo. 110. a. This word is mencioned in the ſtatute, as anno 5. El. ca. 5. and diuers others.
               
                  Creaſt Tile. See Roofe tile.
               
               
                  Croft, (croftum) is a litle cloſe or pitle ioyning to a houſe, that ſometimes is vſed for a hemp ground, ſometime for corne, and ſometime for paſture, as the owner liſteth. It ſeemeth to come of the ould engliſh word (Creaft) ſignifiing handy craft: becauſe ſuch groundes are for the moſt part extraordinarily dreſſed and trimmed by the both labour and ſkill of the owner.
               
                  Croiſes, (cruce ſignati) be vſed by Britton. ca. 122. for ſuch as are pilgrimes: the reaſon may be, for that they weare the ſigne of the croſſe vpon their garments. Of theſe and their priuileges reade Bracton. li. 5. parte 2. ca. 2. & parte 5. ca. 29. and the grand cuſtumary of Normandy ca. 45. Vnder this word are alſo ſignified the knights of the order of Saint Iohn of Ieruſalem, created for the defence of pilgrims. Grego. Syntag. li. 15. ca. 13. & 14.
               
                  Cucking ſtoole, (tumbrella) is an engine inuented for the puniſhment of ſcolds and vnquiet women, called in auncient time a tumbrell. Lamb. eirenarcha. li. 3. ca. 12. po. 62. in meo. Bracton writeth this word (tymborella.) Kitchin, where he ſaith, that

euery one hauing view of Erankpledge, ought to haue a pillorie and a tumbrell, ſeemeth by a tumbrell to meane the ſame thing. cap. Charge in court leete. fol. 13. a.
               
               
                  Cuth, other vncuth (privatus vel extraneus.) Theſe be old Engliſh words, not yet worne out of knowledge, for the which ſee Roger Hoveden. parte poſter. ſuorum annalium. fol. 345. a.
               
               
                  Cudutlaghe. See Conthutlaughe.
               
               
                  Cui ante divortium, is a writ, that a woman diuorced from her husband, hath to recover lands or tenements from him, to whome her husband did alienate them during the mariage: becauſe during the mariage, ſhe could not gaineſay it. Regiſt. ori. fol. 233. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 204.
               
                  Cuinage, is a word vſed for the making vp of tinne, into ſuch faſhion, as it is commonly framed into for the cariage thereof into other places, anno 11. H. 7. cap. 4.
               
                  Cui in vita, is a writ of entrie, that a widow hath againſt him, to whome her husband aliened her lands or tenements in his life time: which muſt containe in it, that during his life time, ſhe could not withſtand it. Regiſt. orig. fol. 232. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 193. See the newe booke of Entries. ver ho. Cut in vita.
               
               
                  Cuntey cuntey is a kind of triall, as appeareth by Bracton in theſe words: Negotium in hoc caſu terminabitur per cuntye cuntey, ſicut inter cohaeredes. Bracton. lib. 4. tra. 3. cap. 18. And againe, in the ſame place: In brevi de recto negotium terminabitur per cuntey cuntey. And thirdly, lib. 4. tract. 4. cap. 2. Terminabitur negotium per breve de recto: vbi nec duellum, nec magna aſſiſa, ſed per cuntey cuntey omnino: which in mine opinion is as much, as the ordinarie Iurie.
               
                  Curfew, commeth of two French words, (couvrir. i. tegere,) and (feu. i. ignis.) We vſe it for an euening peale, by the which the Conquerour willed euery man to take warning for the raking vp of his fire, and the putting out of his light. So that in many places at this day, where a bell cuſtomably is rung toward bed time, it is ſaid to ring curfew. Stowes annals.
               
               
                  Curia aviſare vult, is a deliberation, that the court purpoſeth to take, vpon any point or points of a cauſe, before iudgement be reſolued on. For this, ſee the new booke of Entries. verbo. Curia aviſare vult.
               
               
                  Curia claudenda, is a writ, that lyeth againſt him, who ſhould fence and cloſe vp his ground, if he refuſe or deferre to doe it.

                  Regiſter. orig. fo. 155. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 127. See alſo the newe booke of Entriſe. verbo. Curia claudenda.
               
               
                  Curſiter (clericus de curſu, vel curſiſta curiae cancellariae) is an officer or clerke belonging to the chancerie, that maketh out originall writs. anno. 14 & 15. H. 8. ca. 8. They be called clerks of courſe in the oathe of the clerks of the chancerie appointed anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. 5. ca. vnico. There be of theſe 2
                     •
                  . in number, which haue allotted vnto every of them certaine ſhires, into the which they make out ſuch originall writs, as are by the ſubiect required, and are a corporation among themſelues.
               
                  Curteyn (curtana) was the name of king Edward the ſainct his ſword, which is the firſt ſword, that is caried before the kings of this land at their cotonation. Mathaeus Pariſienſan Henrico tertio. And I haue heard ſay, that the point thereof is broken: which may argue an embleme of mercie.
               
                  Curtilage. See Courtelage.
               
               
                  Cuſtode admittendo, & Cuſtode amouendo, are writs for the admitting or remouing of gardians. Regiſter. original. in indice.
               
               
                  Cuſtom (conſuctudo) is all one in ſignification with our common lawyers and Civilians, being by them both accounted a part of the lawe. Conſuetudo quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pro lege ſeruatur (faith Bracton) in partibus vbi fuerit more vtentium approbata. Longaevi enim temporis vſus & conſuetudinis non eſt vilis authoritas. li. 1. ca. 3. It may be thus not vnaptly defined: Cuſtom is a lawe. or right not written, which being eſtabliſhed by long vſe and the conſent of our awnceſters, hath beene and is daily practiſed: our awnceſters, that is (maiores,) and thoſe of our kindred that are vltra tritavum. li. 4. §. parentem. Π. de in ius vocando. l. vlt. §. parentes. Π. de gradibus & affini. & nominibus eorum. So that allowing the father to be ſo much owlder then his ſonne, as (pubertas) or the years of generation doe require, the grandfather ſo much elder then him, and ſoe forth vſque ad tritavum: we cannot ſay that this or that is a cuſtom, except we can iuſtifie, that it hath continued ſo one hundred yeares. For tritavus muſt be ſo much elder then the party that pleadeth it: yet becauſe that is hard to proone: it is enough for the profe of a cuſtom by witneſſes in the common lawe (as I haue credibly heard) if two or more can depoſe, that they heard their fathers ſay, that it was a cuſtome all their time, and that their fathers heard their fathers alſo ſay, that it was likewiſe a cuſtome in their time. If it

be to be prooved by record, the continuance of a hundred yeares will ſerue. Cuſtom is either generall or particular: generall I call that, which is current thorough England: whereof you ſhall read diuers in the Doctor and Student. li. pri. ca. 7. very worthy to be knowne. Particular is that, which belongeth to this or that countie, as Gavelkind to Kent, or to this or that Lordſhip, citie, or towne. Cuſtom differeth from preſcription, for that cuſtom is common to more, and preſcription (in ſome mens opnion) is particular to this or that man. Againe, preſcription may be for a farre ſhorter time then a cuſtom, viz. for fiue yeare, or for one yeare, or leſſe. Example of fiue yeares preſcription you haue in the levying of a fine. For if a fine duly levied of lands & tenements be not impugned within fiue yeres, it excludeth all claime for euer. And if a man omit his continuall claime for a yeere and a day: then the tenent in poſſeſſion preſcribeth an immunity againſt the entrie of the demandant and his heyre. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 79. Terms of the law, verbo. Continuall clayme. Out of our ſtatutes you may haue greater diuerſitie, which ſee collected in mine Inſtitutes. titulo de Vſucapio: & longi tempo. praeſcript. So that Briſſonius in his 14. de verbo fignif. ſeemeth to ſay truly, that preſcription is an exception founded vpon ſo long time runne and paſt, as the lawe limiteth for the purſuite of any action. An example may be taken from thoſe ſtatutes. anno. 1. H. 8. ca. 4. which inacteth, that in all actions populer, information ſhall be made within three yeares after the offence committed, or els be of no force. Of like nature is the ſtatute. anno 7. H. 8. ca. 3. which in ſome caſes maketh one yeeres preſcription ſufficient againſt informations. Cuſtome is alſo vſed for the tribute or tolle, that merchans pay to the king for carying in and out merchandiſe. anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. ca. 21. in which ſignification it is latined (cuſtuma) Regiſter. orig. fo. 138. a. 129. a. and laſtly for ſuch ſeruices, as tenents of a maner owe vnto their lord. New booke of entries, verbo Cuſtome.
               
               
                  Cuſtomary tenents, (tenentes per conſuetudmem) are ſuch tenents, as hould by the cuſtome of the maner, as their eſpeciall euidence, See Copihoulds.
               
               
                  Cuſtos breuium, is the principall clerk belonging to the court of common plees: whoſe office is to receiue and keepe all the writs, and put them vpon files, euery returne by it ſelfe, and at the end of euery terme to receiue

of the protonotaries all the records of (Niſiprius) called the (poſtea) For they are firſt brought in by the clerk of aſſiſe of euery circuit to the protonotarie that entred the iſſue in that mater, for the entring of the iudgement. And then doe the protonotaries get of the court peremptory day, for euery party to ſpeake what he hath to alleage in arreſt of iudgement: which day being paſt, he entreth the verdict and iudgement thereupon into the rols of the court: and that done, he doth in the end of the tearme deliuer ouer to the cuſtos breuium, all the records of (Niſi prius) which came to his hand that terme: which receiued he bindeth into a bundle and beſtoweth them. The cuſtos breuium alſo maketh entry of the writs of couenant, and the concord vpon euery fine: and maketh forth exemplifications and copies of all writs and records in his office, and of all fines leuied. The fines after they be ingroſſed, the parts therof are diuided betwen the cuſtos breuium and the chirogropher: whereof the chirogropher keepeth alwaies with him the writ of couenant and the note, the cuſtos breuium keepeth the concord and the foote of the fine, vpon the which foote the chirographer doth cauſe the proclamations to be indorſed, when they be all proclaymed. This office is in the princes gift.
               
                  Cuſtos placitorum coronae. Bracton. li. 2. ca. 5. This ſeemeth to be all one with him, whome we nowe call (cuſtos rotulorum) of this officer I finde mention in the writ (odio & atia) Regiſter. original. fo. 133. b.
               
               
                  Cuſtos rotulorum, is he, that hath the cuſtodie of the rols or records of the ſeſſions of peace: and (as ſome thinke) of the commiſſion of the peace it ſelfe. Lamb. Eirenarch. li. 4. ca. pa. 3. 373. He is alway a Iuſtice of Peace and Quorum, in the countie where he hath his office. Idem. eodem. and by his office he is rather termed an officer or miniſter then a iudge: becauſe the commiſſion of the peace layethe, by expreſſe words this eſpeciall charge vpon him: quòd ad dies & locapraedicta, breuia, praecepta, proceſſus, & indictamenta praedicta coramte & dictis ſociis tuis venire facias. Idem. eodem. where read a competent tract of other things belonging to this office.
               
                  Cuſtos of the ſpiritualties (cuſtos ſpiritualitatis vel ſpiritualium) is he that exerciſeth the ſpirituall or eccleſiaſticall iuriſdiction of any dioces, during the vacancie of the See: the appointment of whome by the canon lawe apperteineth

to the deane and chapter. ca. ad abolendam, Extra. Ne ſede vacante aliquid innovetur. but with vs in England to the Archbiſhop of the province by preſcription. How be it divers deanes and chapters (if M. Gwin ſay truly in the preface to his readings) doe chalenge this by awncient charters from the kings of this land.
               
                  Cutter of the talyes, is an officer in the exchequer, that provideth wood for the talyes, and cutteth the ſumme paid vpon them, and then caſteth the ſame into the Court to be written vpon.
            
            
               DA
               
                  DAmmage, commeth of the french (dam) or (domage) ſignifiing generally any hurt or hinderance, that a man taketh in his eſtate: But in the common lawe, it particularly ſignifieth a part of that the Iurours be to inquire of, paſſing for the plaintiffe or demandant in a ciuile action, be it perſonall or reall. For after verdict giuen of the principall cauſe, they are likewiſe asked their conſciences touching coſts (which be the charges of ſuite, called of the Civilians (expenſae litis) and dammages, which conteine the hindrance that the plaintiffe or demandant hath ſuffered by meanes of the wrong done to him by the defendant or tenent.
               
                  Dane guilt, Danegold, or Danegelt (Danegeldum) is compounded of (Dane and gelt. i. pecunia) and was a tribute laide vpon our anceſters of 12. pence for euerie hide of land through the realme by the Danes, that once got the maſterie of vs, in regard (as they pretended) of clearing the ſeaſe of pyrates, which greatly annoyed our land in thoſe daies. Cambd. Brittan. 83. with whome agree the lawes of Edward ſet out by M. Lamberd. ca. 11. Stowe in his annals, pa. 118. ſaith, that this tribute came to 40000. pownds by the yeare, and that it was releaſed by Edw. the confeſſour. The author of the newe Terms of law ſaith, that this tribute began in the time of king Etheldred, who being ſore diſtreſſed by the continuall inuaſion of the Dane, to procure his peace, was compelled to charge his people with importable payments. For firſt he gaue them at fiue ſeverall paiments 113000. poundes, and afterward graunted them 48000. poundes yeerely. See Roger Houeden parte. poſter. ſuorum annalium in Henrico ſecundo. fo. 344. a.
               
               
                  Dareyn continuance, See Continuance. Darein is a corrupt word

of the French (dernier. i. vltimu
                        •
                     .)
               
               
                  Darrein preſentment (vltima praeſentatio.) See Aſſiſe or darreyn preſentment.
               
               
                  Dates (dactyli) is the plumme or fruite of the tree in latine called palma, in engliſh the Date tree well knowne to moſt men by ſight. And he that will farder vnderſtand the nature or diuerſities of this fruite, may repaire to Gerards herball. li. 3. ca. 131. They be numbred among ſpices and drugs to be garbleled. 1. Iaco. 19.
               
                  Day (dies) is ſometime vſed in the lawe, for the day of appearance in court, either originally, or vpon aſſignation; and ſometime for the returnes of writs. For example, daies in bank, be daies ſet downe by ſtatute or order of the court, when writs ſhall be returned, or when the partie ſhall appeare vpon the writ ſerued. And of this you may read the ſtatutes, anno 51. H. 3. ca. 1. & 2. Marlb. ca. 12. anno. 52. H. 3. and the ſtatute de anno biſſextili. anno 21. H. 3. and laſtly anno 32. H. 8. ca. 21. To be diſmiſſed with out day, is to be finally diſcharged the court. Kitchin. fo. 193. He had a day by the rolle. Kitchin. fo. 197. that is, he had a day of appearance aſſigned him. Day, yeere, and waſte. Sea Dies, and yeare.
               
               
                  Deadly feude (feuda) is a profeſſion of an vnquencheable hatred, vntill we be reuenged, euen by the death of our enemie. It is deduced from the German word (Feed) which, as Hotoman ſaith, in verbis feudalibus, modo bellum, modo capitales inimicitias ſignificat. This word is vſed. anno. 43. Eliz. cap. 13.
               
                  Dead pledge (mortuum vadium) See Mort gage.
               
               
                  Deane, (decanus) is an eccleſiaſticall magiſtrate, ſo called of the greeke (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) becauſe he hath power ouer ten Canons at the leaſt. How be it in England we vſe to call him a deane, that is next vnder the biſhop, and cheife of the chapter ordinarily in a cathedrall church: and the reſt of the ſocietie or corporation we call Capitulum, the chapter. But this word how diuerſly it is vſed, read Lindwood. titulo de iudiciis ca. pri. verbo Decanirurales. where deane rurals are ſaide to be certaine perſons that haue certaine juriſdiction eccleſiaſticall ouer other miniſters and pariſhes neere adioyning, aſſigned vnto them by the Biſhop and archdeacon, being placed & diſplaced by them. As there be two foundations of cathedrall churches in England, the old, & the new (the new bethoſe which Henry the 8. vpon ſuppreſſion of abbeyes transformed from

abbot or prior & couēt to deane and chapter) ſo be there two meanes of creating theſe deanes. For theſe of the old foundation, are brought to their dignitie much like Biſhops: the king firſt ſēding out his congè d' eſlire to the chapter, the chapter then chuſing, the king yeelding his royal aſſēt, and the Biſhop confirming him, and giuing his mandate to inſtalle him. Thoſe of the newe foundation are by a ſhorter courſe inſtalled by vertue of the kings leters patents, without either election or confirmation. This word is alſo applyed to diuers, that are the chiefe of certaine peculiar Churches, or chapels, as the deane of the kings chapell, the deane of the Arches, the deane of Saint George his chapell in Windſour, the deane of Bockin in Eſſex.
               
               
                  Debet & ſolet: Theſe words are diuers times vſed in the writers of the common lawe, and may trouble the minde of a young ſtudent, except he haue ſome aduertiſement of them. For example, it is ſaide in the old. nat. br. fo. 98. This writ (de ſecta molendini) being in the (debet) and (ſolet) is a writ of right, &c. and againe. fo. 69. A writ of Quod permittat) may be pleaded in the countie before the ſhyreeue, and it may be in the (debet) and in the (ſolet) or the (debet) with out the (ſolet) according as the Demandāt claymeth. wherfore note, that thoſe writs that be in this ſort brought, haue theſe words in them, as formall words not to be omitted. And according to the diuerſity of the caſe, both (debet) and (ſolet) are vſed, or (debet) alone: that is, if a man ſiew to recouer any right by a writ, whereof his awnceſter was diſſeiſed by the tenent or his awnceſter, then he vſeth onely the word (debet) in his writ: becauſe (ſolet) is not fit by reaſon his awnceſter was diſſeiſed, and the cuſtome diſcontinued: but if he ſiew for any thing, that is now firſt of all denied him, then he vſeth both theſe words (debet & ſo'et) becauſe his awneeſters before him, and he him ſelfe vſually imoyed the thing ſiewed for: as ſuite to a mille, or common of paſture vntill this preſent refuſall of the tenent. The like may be ſaide of (debet) and (detinet) as appeareth by the Regiſter. orig. in the writ de debito. fo. s 40. a.
               
               
                  Debito, is a writ which lieth, where a man oweth to another a certaine ſumme of mony-vpō an obligation or other bargain, for any thing ſold vnto him. Fitz. nat br. fo. 119. This writ is made ſomtime in the Detinet, & not in the Debet. which properly falleth out, where a man oweth an annuitie: or a certaine quantity of

wheat, barley, or ſuch like, which he refuſeth to pay. old. nat. br. fo. 75. See Debet & Solet.
               
               
                  Denelage (denelagia) is the law that the Danes made heere in England, out of which and Merchenlage, and Weſt Sexonlage, the Conquerour compounded certaine ordinances for his ſubiects. Camdeni Britan. pa. 94. & pa. 183.
               
                  Decem tales. See Tales.
               
               
                  Decies tantum, is a writ that lieth a gainſt a Iurour, which hath taken mony for the giuing of his verdict, called ſo of the effect, becauſe it is to, recouer ten times ſo much as he tooke. It lieth alſo againſt embracers that procure ſuch an enqueſt. anno 38. Ed. 3. ca. 13. Reg. orig. fo. 188. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 171. New booke of Entriſe. verbo Decies tantum.
               
               
                  Deceyte (déceptio fraus, dolus) is a ſubtile wilie ſhift or deuiſo, hauing noe other name. Hereunto may be drawen all maner of craft, ſubtiltie, guile, fraude, wilynes, ſlightnes, cunning, couin, colluſion, practiſe, and offence, vſed to deceiue another man by any means, which hath none other proper or particular name, but offence. Weſt parte. 2. ſymbol. titulo. Indictments. ſect. 68. See Coſening.
               
               
                  Decenniers. See Deciners.
               
               
                  Deceptione, is a writ that lieth properly againſt him, that deceitfully doth any thing in the name of another, for one that receiueth harme or dāmage therby. Fuzh. nat. br. fo. 95. This writ is either originall or iudiciall, as appeareth by the old. nat. br. fo. 50. where you may reade the vſe of both. For ſome ſatisfaction, take theſe words of that booke: This writ of deceit, when it is original, then it lieth in caſe, where deceit is made to a man by another, by which deceit he may be diſherited, or otherwiſe euill intreated: as it appeareth by the Regiſter, &c. And when it is iudiciall, then it lieth out of the rols of record: as in caſe where (ſcire facias) is ſent to the Shyreeue, that he warme a man to be before the Iuſtices at a certaine day, and the Shyreeue returne the writ ſerued; whereas the ſaid man was not warned, by which 
                     〈◊〉
                   partie that ſieweth tho (ſcire 
                        〈…〉
                     as) recouereth, then the party which ought to haue beene warned, ſhall haue the ſaide writ againſt the Shyreeue. The author of the termes of lawe. verbo Deceite, ſaith that the originall writ of deceite lieth, where any deceit is done to a man by another, ſo that he hath not ſufficiently performed his bargaine or promiſe, In the writ iudicial he concurreth with the former booke. See the Reg. orig. fo. 112. and the Reg. iudiciall in the table. verbo. Deceptione.
               
               
                  
                  Decimis ſolvendis pro poſſeſſionibus alienigenarum, is a writ or leters patents, yet extant in the Regiſter, which laye againſt thoſe, that had fermed the Priors aliens lands of the king, for the Rector of the Pariſh, to recouer his tythe of them. Regi. orig. fol. 179.
               
                  Deciners, aliâs, deſiners, aliâs, doziners, (decennarii) commeth of the French, (dizeine. i. decas) tenne in number, or elſe of (diſenier. i. decearchus.) It ſignifieth, in the auncient monuments of our lawe, ſuch as were wont to haue the ouerſight and checke of ten friburgs, for the maintenance of the kings peace. And the limits or compaſſe of their iuriſdiction was called (decenna) Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15. of whom you may alſo reade, Fleta lib. 1. cap. 27 and a touch in the Regiſt. orig. fol. 68. b. Theſe ſeemed to haue la
                     〈…〉
                   authoritie in the Saxons time, 
                     〈◊〉
                   king knowledge of cauſes within their circuite, and redreſſing wrongs by way of iudgement, as you may reade in the lawes of king Edward, ſet out by M. Lambard. num. 32. In later times I find mention of theſe, as in Britton cap. 12. who ſaith in the kings perſon (as he writeth his whole booke) in this maner: We will, that all thoſe which be 14. yeares old, ſhall make oath, that they ſhall be ſufficient and loyall vnto vs, and that they will be neither felons, nor aſſenting to felons: and we will, that all be (en dozeine & plevis per dozeniers) that is, profeſſe themſelues to be of this or that dozein, and make or offer ſuretie of their behauiour by theſe or thoſe doziniers: except religious perſons, clerks, knights, and their eldeſt ſonnes, and women. Yet the ſame author in his 29. chapter, ſome thing toward the end, doth ſay, that all of 12. yeares old and vpward, are puniſhable for not comming to the Turne of the Shyreeue, except Earles, Prelats, Barons, religious perſons, and women. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 37. out of Fitzh. hath theſe wordes: The like lawe is, where the dozeniers make preſentment, that a felon is taken for felonie, and deliuered to the Shyreeue, &c. And Kitchin, out of the Regiſter, and Britton, ſaith thus. Religious perſons, clerkes, knights, or women ſhall not be deceniers. fol. 33. So that hereby I gather, that of later times, this word ſignifieth nothing but ſuch an one, as by his oath of loyaltie to his Prince, (for ſuretie none ordinarily findeth at theſe dayes) is ſetled in the combination or ſocietie of a dozein. And a dozein ſeemeth now to extend ſo farre, as euery leete extendeth: becauſe in leetes onely this oathe is

miniſtred by the ſteward, and taken by ſuch as are twelue yeares old and vpwards, dwelling within the compaſſe of the leete where they are ſworne. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 161. A. The particulars of this oath you may reade in Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. num. 1. in theſe words: Quibus propoſitis (that is, the commiſſion of the Iuſtices being read, and the cauſe of their comming being ſhewed) debent Iuſticiarii ſe tranſferre in aliquem locum ſecretum, & vocatis ad ſe quatuor vel ſex, vel pluribus de maioribus de comitatu, qui dicuntur Buſones Comitatus, & ad quorum nutum dependent vota aliorum, et ſic inter ſe tractatum habeant Iuſticiarii ad muicem, & oſtendant qualiter a Domino Rege & eius concilio. prouiſum ſit, quod omnes tam milites, qùam alii qui ſunt quindecim annorum & ampliùs, iurare debent, qùod vtlagatos, murditores, robbatores, & burglatores non receptabunt, neceis conſentient, nec eorum receptatoribus, & ſi quos tales nouerint, illos attachiari facient, & hoc Vicecomiti & baliuis ſuis monſtrabunt: & ſi huteſium vel clameum de talibus audiverint, ſtatim audsto clamore, ſequantur cum familia & hominibus de terra ſua. Here Bracton ſetteth downe 15. yeares, for the age of thoſe that are ſworne to the kings peace, but lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. num. 5. he nameth 12. yeares. See Inlaughe. A man may note out of the premiſſes, diuerſities betweene the auncient and theſe our times, in this point of law and gouernement, as well for the age of thoſe that are to be ſworne, as alſo that Decennier is not now vſed for the chief man of a Dozen, but for him him that is ſworne to the kings peace: and laſtly, that now there are no other Dozens but leetes, and that no man ordinarily giueth other ſecurity for the keeping of the kings peace, but his owne oathe: and that therefore none aunſwereth for anothers tranſgreſſion, but euery man for himſelfe. And for the general ground this may ſuffice. See Frankepledge.
               
               
                  Declaration (declaratio) is properly the ſhewing foorth, or laying out of an action perſonall in any ſuite, howbeit it is vſed ſometime and indifferently for both perſonall and reall actions. For example, anno 36. Ed. 3. c. 15. in theſe words: By the auncient termes and formes of declarations, no man ſhall be preiudiced: ſo that the mater of the action be fully ſhewed in the demonſtration & in the writ: See the new Termes of lawe. See Cownte.
               
               
                  Dedimus poteſtatem, is a writ, whereby commiſſion is giuen to

a priuate man for the ſpeeding of ſome act appertaining to a Iudge. The Civilians call it (Delegationem) And it is graunted moſt commonly vpon ſuggeſtiō, that the partie, which is to doe ſomething before a Iudge, or in court, is ſo feeble, that he cannot trauell. It is vſed in diuers caſes: as to make a perſonall aunſwer to a bill of complaint in the Chaunceric, to make an Atturney for the following of a ſuite in the Countie, Hundred, Wapentake, &c. Oldnat. br. fol. 20. To levie a fine. Weſt. part. 2. ſymbol. titulo. Fines. ſect. 112. and diuers other effects, as you may ſee by Fitzh. nat. br. in diuers places noted in the Index of the booke: In what diuerſitie of caſes this writ or commiſſion is vſed, ſee the table of the Regiſt. orig. verbo Dedimus poteſtatem.
               
               
                  Deedes, (Facta) ſignifie in our commō law wrighungs that containe the effect of a contract made betweene man and man, which the ciuilians call (literarum obligationem). And of deeds there be two ſorts, deeds indented and deeds poll. Which diuiſion, as M. Weſt. ſaith parte. i. Simbol: lib. 1. ſect. 46. groweth from the forme or faſhion of them; the one being cut to the faſhion of teeth in the toppe or ſide the other being plaine. And the definition of a deede indented he expreſſeth thus Sect. 47. A deed iudented, is a deede conſiſting of two partes or more, in which it is expreſſed, that the parties to the ſame deede, haue to euery parte thereof interchangeabely, or ſeuerally ſet there ſeuerall ſeales. See the reſt, where at the laſt he ſheweth: the cauſe of the name: viz: for that conſiſting of more partes, eche parte is indented or cut one of them into the other, that by the cut it may appeare, they belonge to one buſines or contract. A deede poll or polled he deſcribeth thus: Sect. 46. Q. A polled deede, is a deede teſtifying, that onely the one of the parties to the bargaine, hath put his ſeale; thereunto after the maner there by him deſcribed: which reade for your beter vnderſtanding. See the newe Tearmes of lawe, verbo Fait, where he ſheweth, that each deed conſiſteth of 3. points: writing, ſealing, and deliuerie.
               
                  Deere Hayſe. anno 19. H. 7. cap. 11. ſeemeth to be an Engine. of cords, to catch Deere.
               
                  De eſſendo quieium de relovio, is a writ that lyeth for them which are by priuiledge freed from the payment of tolle, which reade at large in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 226.
               
                  Defalt (defalta) commeth from the French (Defaut) and is an offence in omitting that,

which we ought to doe. Weſt. part. 2. ſymbol. titulo. Indictment. ſect. 2. Of this hath Bracton a whole tractats, lib. 5. tractat. 3. By whome it appeareth that a default is moſt notoriouſly taken for non appearance in court, at a day aſſigned. Of this you may reade alſo in Fleta. lib. 6. cap. 14.
               
                  Defeiſance (defeiſantia) commeth of the French (Deſfaire) or Deffaire) i. infectum reddere quod factumeſt, and ſignifieth in our common lawe, nothing but a condition annexed to an act, as to an obligation, a recognizance or ſtatute, which performed by the obligee or recognizee, the act is diſabled and made voide, as if it neuer had bene done, whereof you may ſee Weſt at large, part. 1. ſymb. li. 2. ſect. 156.
               
                  Defendant (defendens) is he that is ſiewed in an action perſonall: as tenent, is he which is ſiewed in an action reall. Tearmes of the lawe.
               
                  Defendemus, is an ordinarie word in a feofment or donation, and hath this force, that it bindeth the donour and his heyres, to defend the Donee, if any man goe about to laye anie ſeruitude vpon the thing giuen, other then is contained in the donation. Bract. lib. 2. cap. 16. num. 10. See alſo Warrantizabimus & Acquietabimus.
               
               
                  Defender of the faith (defenſor fides) is a peculiar title giuen to the King of England by the Pope, as (Catholicus) to the king of Spaine, and Chriſtianiſſimus to the French king. It was firſt giuen by Leo decimus to king Henry the 8. for writing againſt Martin Luther, in the behalfe of the Church of Rome, then accounted Domicilium fidei Caholicae. Stowes annals. pag. 863.
               
                  Deforſour, (Deforciator) commeth of the french (For ceur. i. expugnator). It is vſed, in our common law, for one that ouercommeth and caſteth out by force, and differeth from diſſeiſour firſt in this, becauſe a man may diſſeiſe another without force, which act is called ſimple diſſeiſin. Britton. ca. 53. next, becauſe a man may deforce another, that neuer was in poſſeſſion: as for example: if more haue right to lands, as commō heires and one entring keepeth out the reſt, the law ſaith, that he deforceth them, though he doe not diſſeiſe them. Old nat: br: fol: 118. and Litleton in his chapter (Diſcontinuance) fol. 117. faith, that he which is infeoffed by the tenent in taile, and put in poſſeſſion, by keeping out the heire of him in reuerſion being dead, doth deforce him, though he did not diſſeiſe him; becauſe he entred, when the tenent in taile

was liuing, and the heire had noe preſent right. And a deforſour differreth from an Intrudour, becauſe a man is made an Intrudour by a wrongfull entry only into land or tenement voide of a poſſeſſour. Bracton li: 4: ca: pri. and a deforſour is alſo by houlding out the right heire, as is aboueſaide.
               
                  Deliuerance, See Repligiare.
               
               
                  Demaund, (Demanda vel Demandum) commeth of the french (Demande. i. poſtulatio, poſtulatus) and ſignifieth a calling vpon a man for anything due. It hath likewiſe a proper ſignification with the common lawyers oppoſite to plaint. For the purſiute of all ciuill actions are either demaunds or plaints: and the perſyewer is called demaundant or plaintife: Viz: Demandaundant in actions reall, and plaintife in perſonall. And where the party perſiewing is called demaundāt, there the party perſiewed is called tenent: where plaintife, there defendant. See terms of law, verbo Demaundant.
               
               
                  Demy haque, See Haque, and Haquebut.
               
               
                  Demaine, (Dominicum) is a french word, otherwiſe written (Domaine) and ſignifieth (Patrimonium domini) as Hotoman ſaith in verbis feudalibus. verbo Dominicum. where by diuers authorities he proueth thoſe lands to be dominicum, which a man holdeth originally of himſelfe, and thoſe to be feodum, which he holdeth by the benefite of a ſuperiour Lord. And I find in the ciuill law (Rem dominicam) for that which is proper to the Emperour. Cod. Ne rei dominicae vel templorum vindicatio temporis praeſcriptione ſubmoueatur, being the 38. title of the 7. booke. And (res dominici iuris. i. reipub. in the ſame place. And by the word (Domanium) or (Demanium) are properly ſignified the kings lands in Fraunce, appertaining to him in propertie, Quia Domanium definitur illud, quod nominatim conſecratum eſt, vnitum, & incorporatum Regiae coronae, vt ſcripſit Chopinus de domanio Franciae tit. 2. per legem. Siquando 3. Cod. de bon. vacan. lib. 10. & Mathaeus de Afflict is in conſtit. Siciliae li. 1. tit. De locatione Demanii. 82. which may be called Bona incorporata & in corpus ſiſci redacta. Skene de verborum ſignif. verb. Terrae Dominicales. In like maner doe we vſe it in England: howbeit, we here haue no land (the Crowne land onely excepted) which holdeth not of a ſuperior. For all dependeth either mediatly or immediately of the Crowne, that is, of ſome honour or other belonging to the Crowne, and not graunted in fee to any inferior perſon. Wherefore no common perſon

hath any demaynes, ſimply vnderſtood. For when a man in pleading would ſignifie his land to be his owne, he ſaith, that he is or was ſeiſed thereof in his demaine as of fee. Litleton li. 1. cap. 1. Whereby he ſignifieth, that though his land be to him and his heyres for euer, yet it is not true demaine, but depending vpon a ſuperior Lord, and holding by ſeruice, or rent in liewe of ſeruice, or by both ſeruice and rent: Yet I find theſe words vſed in the kings right, anno 37. H. 8. cap. 16. and 39. Eliz. cap. 22. But the application of this ſpeech to the king and crowne land, is crept in by errour and ignorance of the word (Fee,) or at leaſt by vnderſtanding it otherwiſe then of the Feudiſts it is taken. But Britton. cap. 78. ſheweth, that this word (Demeyne) is diuerſly taken: ſometime more largely, as of lands or tenements held for life, &c. and ſometime more ſtrictly as for ſuch onely as are generally held in fee. This word ſomtime is vſed for a diſtinction between thoſe lands, that the Lord of a maner hath in his owne hands, or in the hands of his leaſec, dimiſed vpon a rent for tearme of yeares or life, and ſuch other lād appertaining to the ſaid maner, which belongeth to free or copy-houlders. Howbeit, the copyhold belonging to any maner, is alſo in the opiniō of many good lawyers accounted Demeines. Bracton in his fourth booke tract. 3. ca. 9. nu. 5. hath theſe words: Item dominicum accipitur multipliciter. Eſt autē dominicum quod quis habet admenſam ſuam & propriè, ſicut ſunt Bordlands anglie. Item dicitur dominicum villenagium, quod traditur villanis, quod quis tempeſtiuè & intempeſtiue reſumere poſſit pro voluntate ſua, & reuocare. Of this Fleta likewiſe thus writeth: Dominicum eſt multiplex. Eſt autem Dominicum propriè terra admenſam aſſignata, & villenagium quod traditur villanis ad excolendum, & terra precariò dimiſſa, quae tempeſtiuè & pro voluntate domini poterit reuocari: & ſicut eſt de terra commiſſa, tenenda quam diu commiſſori placuerit. poterit & dici Dominicum, de quo quis habet liberum tenementum, & alius vſumfructum: & etiam vbiquis habet liberum tenementum, & alius curam, ſicut de cuſtode dicipoter it & curatore; & vnde vnus dicitur a iure, alius quoque ab homine. Dominicum etiam dicitur ad differentiam eius quod tenetur in ſeruitio. Dominicum eſt omne illud tenementum, de quo anteceſſor obiit ſeiſitus vt de feudo, nec refert cum vſufructu vel ſine, & de quo ſi eiect us eſſet, ſi viueret, recuperare poſſet per aſſiſſam nomine diſſeiſina, licet alius haberet vſum

fructum: ſicut dici poterit de illis qui tenent in villenagio, qui vtuntur, fruuntur non nomine proprio ſed nomine Domini ſui. Fleta: l. 5. c: 5. §. Dominicū autē. And the reaſō why copyhold is accoūted Demeanes, is becauſe they that be tenents vnto it, are iudged, in law, to haue nor other right, but at the will of the lord. Soe that it is reputed ſtill after a ſort to be in the Lords hands. And yet in common ſpeach, that is called ordinarily Demeanes, which is neither free nor copy. It is farder to be noted, that Demaine is ſometime vſed in a more ſpeciall ſignification, and is oppoſite to Franck fee. For example, thoſe lands, which were in the poſſeſſion of King Edward the confeſſor, are called auncient Demaine, & all others be called Franck fee. Kitchin. fol: 98. and the tenents which hould any of thoſe lands, be called tenents in auncient demaine, the others tenents in franck fee. Kitchin vbi ſupra. And alſo tenents at the common lawe. Weſt. parte 2. Simbol: titulo Fines. Sect 25. The reaſon is, becauſe tenents in auncient Demaine, cannot be ſyewed out of the Lords court: Tearmes of the Lawe. verbo Auncient Demaine. And the tenents in aunciēt demaine, though they hould all by the verge, and haue none other euidēce but copy of court rolle, yet they are ſaide to haue free hould. Kitchin. fol. 81. See Awncient demaine.
               
               
                  Demayne cart of an Abbot, ſeemeth to bee that cart, which the Abbot vſeth vpon his owe Demaine: Anno. 6. H. 3. cap. 21.
               
                  Demurrer (Demorare) commeth of the French (Demeurer. i. manere in aliquo loco vel morari) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a kinde of pawſe vpon a pointe of difficultie in any action, and is vſed ſubſtantiuely. For in euery action, the controverſie conſiſteth either in the fact, or in the lawe, if in the fact, that is tried by the Iurie, if in lawe, then is the caſe plaine to the Iudge, or ſo hard and rare, as it breedeth iuſt doubt. I call that plaine to the Iudge, wherein hee is aſſured of the lawe, though perhaps the partie and his councell yeeld not vnto it. And in ſuch, the Iudge with his Aſſeſſors proceedeth to Iudgement without farder worke: but when it is doubtfull to him and his Aſſociates, then is there ſtay made, and a time taken, either for the court to thinke farder vpon it, and to agree if they can: or els for all the Iūſtices to meete together in the Chequer chamber, and vpon hearing of that which the ſergeants ſhall ſay of both partes, to adviſe and ſet downe what is lawe. And whatſoeuer they conclude,

ſtandeth firme without farder remedie. Smith. de Repub. Angliae. lib. 2. cap. 13. Weſt. calleth it a Demurrer in chauncery likewiſe, when there is queſtion made whether a parties anſwer to a bille of complaint, &c. be defectiue or not: and thereof reference made to any of the bench for the examination therof, & report to bee made to the court. parte. 2. ſymb. tit. Chauncery. ſect. 29.
               
                  Denariata terrae. See Farding deale of land.
               
               
                  Denizen, commeth of the French (Donaiſon. i. Donatio) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, an Alein that is infrāchiſed here in England by the Princes charter, an dinabled, almoſt in all reſpects, to doe as the kings natiue ſubiects doe: namely to purchas, and to poſſeſſe lands, to be capable of any office or dignitie. Yet it is ſaide to be ſhort of naturaliſ
                     ••
                  ion, becauſe a ſtraunger naturaliſed, may inherit lands by deſcent, which a man made onely, a denizen cannot. And againe, in the charter whereby a man is made denizen, there is commonly conteined ſome one claufe or other, that abridgeth him of that full benefite, which naturall ſubiects doe inioy. And when a man is thus infránchiſed, he is ſaide to bee vnder the kings protection, or, eſſe ad fidem Regis Angliae, before which time he can inioy nothing in England. Bracton. lib. 5. tractat. 5. cap. 25. nu. 3. Nay, hee and his goods might bee ſeiſed to the kings vſe. Horn in his mirrour of Iuſtices. li. 1. ca. de la Venue de franc plege.
               
               
                  Deodand (Deodandum) is a thing giuen or forſeited (as it were) to God for the pacification of his wrath in a caſe of miſaduenture, whereby any Chriſtian ſoule commeth to a violent ende, without the fault of any reaſonable creature. For example, if a horſe ſhould ſtrike his keeper and ſo kille him; if a man in dryuing a cart, and ſeeking to redreſſe any thing about it, ſhould ſo fall, as the cart wheele running ouer him, ſhould preſſe him to death: if one ſhould be felling of a tree, and giuing warning to one cōming by, whē the tree were neere falling, to looke to themſelues, and any of them ſhould bee ſlaine neuertheleſſe by the fall of the tree. In the firſt of theſe caſes the horſe, in the ſecond the cart wheele, carte and horſes, and in the third the tree is to be giuen to God: that is, to be ſold and diſtributed to the poore, for an expiation of this dreadfull euent, though effected by vnreaſonable, yea ſenſles & dead creatures. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. ca. 2. whereof

alſo read Bracton. lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 5. and Britton. cap. 7. and Weſt parte. 2. ſymbolaeog. titulo Indictments. ſect. 49. And though this be giuen to God: yet is it forfeited to the king by lawe, as ſuſteining Gods perſon, and an executioner in this caſe, to ſee the price of theſe diſtributed to the poore, for the appeaſing of God ſtirred vp euen againſt the earth and place, by the ſhedding of innocent blood thereupon. Fleta, ſaith that this is ſould, and the price diſtributed to the poore for the ſoule of the king, his aunceſters, and of all faithfull people departed this life. lib. 1. cap. 25. verbo. De ſubmerſis. And it ſeemeth that this law hath an imitation of that in Exodus. cap. 21. Si cornu petierit bos virum vel mulierem, ita vt moriatur, lapidabitur bos, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      comedetur caro eius, at Dominus eius erit innocens.
               
               
                  De Deonerando pro rata portionis, is a writ that lieth where one is diſtrained for a rent, that ought to be paid by others proportionally with him. For exāple, a man holdeth ten; Oxegangs of land by fealty, and ten ſhillings rent of the king, and alienateth one Oxegang thereof to one, another, to another in fee. Afterward the Shyreeue or other Officer, commeth and diſtraineth onely one of them for the Rent: he that is diſtrained may haue this writ for his helpe. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 234.
               
                  Departer, is a word properly vſed of him, that firſt pleading one thing in barre of an action, and being replied thereunto, doth in his reioynder ſhew another mater contrary to his firſt plea. Plowden in Reniger and Fogaſſa, fo. 7. & 8. And of this ſee diuers examples in Brooke. titulo Departer de ſon plee &c.
               
               
                  Departers of gold and ſiluer. See Finours.
               
               
                  De quibus ſur diſſeiſin, is a writ of entry. See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 191. C.
               
                  Dereyne (Diſrationare, vel Dirationare) may ſeeme to come of the French (Diſarroyer. i. confundere, turbare) to confound or turne out of order, or (deſranger. 1. to ſet out of order, or laſtly of the Norman word (deſrene) for with the Normans (deſrene) is nothing elſe but a proofe of the deniall of a mans owne fact. For Rubigineus in his grand cuſtumarie cap. 122. & 123. maketh mention of (lex probabilis) and (lêx deraiſnia) legem probabilem or (probationem) he defineth to bee a proofe of a mans owne fact, which he ſaith he hath done, & his aduerſarie denieth. His example is this: A. ſieweth R. for a hogge: ſaying, thou ſhouldeſt deliuer mee a hogge for 2. ſhillings

ſixe pence: which mony F. paid thee: wherefore I demande my hogge. R. anſwereth. It is true that thou ſaieſt, and I deliuered thee thy hog, which I am ready to prooue. Deraiſniā
                   he defineth, to be a proofe of a thing that one denieth to be done by himſelfe, which his aduerſarie ſaith was done, defeating or confounding his aduerſaries aſſertion (as you would ſay) and ſhewing it to be without and againſt reaſō or likelyhood, which is avouched. In our commō lawe it is vſed diuerſly, firſt generally, for to prooue: as Dirationabit ius ſuum haeres propinquior. Glanuile li. 2. cap. 6. and Habeo probos homines, qui hoc viderunt & audierunt, & parati ſunt hoc dirationare. Idem lib. 4. cap. 6. and (Dirationauit terram illam in curia mea) Idem lib. 2. cap. 20. 1. hee prooued that land to bee his owne, &c. and (peroinentiam eam dirationauit in vita ſua, vel alio modo iuſte perquiſivit) Idem, lib. 6. cap. 12. and Bracton vſeth it after the ſame ſort, in theſe words: Habeo ſufficientem diſratiocinationem & probationem. lib. 4. tracta: 6 cap. 16. and ſo he vſeth (diſrationare) lib. 4. cap. 22. and ſo in Weſtm. 2. anno. 13. Ed. pri: ca. 32. an to dereine the warrantie old. nat. br. f. 146. & to dereine the warrāty paramoūt. an. 31. H. 8. c. primo. And dereigner le Warranty in Plowd. caſu Baſſet in fine. 2. partis fo. 6. 7. & 8. a. hath the ſame ſignification. So it is vſed, Weſtm. 2. cap. 5. anno. 13. Ed. 1. in theſe words: And when the perſon of any Church is diſturbed to demaund tithes in the next pariſh, by a writ of (Indicauit) the patron of the Parſon ſo diſturbed to demaund tithes, ſhall haue a writ, to demaund the Advowſen of the tithes being in Demaund: and when it is deraigned, then ſhall the plee paſſe in the court chriſtian, as farre forth as it is deraigned in the kings court. Bracton alſo, li. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 3. nu. 1. ſpeaking of him that appealeth another for any treaſon orfelonie, hath theſe words. Proponat accuſans appellum ſuum in hunc modum, ſc: debet dicere ſe interfuiſſe, & vidiſſe certo loco, certo die, certa hora, & ſciviſſe ipſum accuſatum praelocutum fuiſſe mortem regis, vel ſeditionem ſuam, vel exercitus ſui, vel conſenſiſſe, vel auxilium & conſilium impendiſſe, vel ad hoc authoritatem praeſtitiſſe: & hoc ego iuxta conſiderationem curiae diſrationare paratus ſum. He vſeth it likewiſe as the Normans vſe (Deraiſniam) for him, that offereth to iuſtifie his deniall: as lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 28. nu. 1. in theſe words. Rex conſilio epiſcorum & bonorum miſit propter comitem, vt ſtatuto die veniret ad curiam, ad diſrationandum vel defendendum

ſe, ſi poſſet. Laſtly, in ſome places I find the ſubſtantiue (deremement) vſed in the very literall ſignification of the french (Diſrayer) or (deſranger) that is, as a man wold ſay, turning out of courſe, diſplacing or ſetting out of order: as dereinement or departure out of religion. anno 31. H. 8. cap. 6. and dereinment or diſcharge of their profeſſion. anno 33. H. 8. cap. 29. which is ſpoken of thoſe religious men, that forſooke their orders and profeſſions: as alſo anno 5. & 6. Ed. 6. cap. 13. Soe doth Kitchin vſe the verb fo. 152. in theſe words: the leaſſee entreth into religion, and afterward is dereigned. And Britton vſeth theſe words (Semounſe deſrenable) for a ſummons that may be chalenged as defectiue or not lawfully made, cap. 21. Of this you may reade ſomething more in Skene de verb. ſignif. verbo Diſrationare, where in one ſignification he confoundeth it with our waging and making of lawe.
               
                  De ſon tort demeſne, ſeeme to be certaine words of forme in an action of treſpaſſe, vſed by way of reply to the plee of the Deſendant. For example: A. ſieweth B. in action of treſpaſſe. B. anſwereth for himſelfe, 
                     •
                  hat he did that which A calleth a treſpaſſe, by the commaundement of C. his maiſter. A ſaith againe, that B. did it de ſon tort demeſne, ſans ceo que. C. luy commaunda modo & forma, that is: B. did it of his owne wrong, without that that C. commaunded him in ſuch forme, &c.
               
               
                  Detin et. See Debito and Debet.
               
               
                  Detynew (detinendo) is a writ that lyeth againſt him, who hauing goods or chatels deliuered him to keepe, refuſeth to deliuer them againe. See of this Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 138. To this is anſwerable in ſome ſort (actio depoſiti) in the ciuile lawe. And hee taketh his action of ditinew, that intendeth to recouer the thing deliuered, and not the dammages ſuſtained by the detinew. Kitchin fol. 176. See the new booke of Entries. verbo, Detinew.
               
               
                  Devaſtaverunt bona teſtatoris, is a writ lying againſt executors, for paying Legacies and debts without ſpecialties, to the preiudice of the creditours that haue ſpecialties, before the debt vpon the ſaid ſpecialties be due. For in this caſe, the executors are as lyable to action, as if they had waſted the goods of the teſtatourriotouſly or without cauſe. New termes of lawe.
               
                  Deveſt (deveſtire) is contrarie to Inveſt. For as Inveſtire ſignifieth poſſeſſionem tradere. So (deveſtire) is (poſſeſſionem auferr
                        •
                     ) feud.

libro primo cap. 7.
               
                  Deviſe, aliâs, diviſe commeth of the French (diviſer, i. diſper
                        •
                     iri, diſcernere, ſeparare, diſtinguere) as (diviſer par ci & par la, diſtribuere.) This word is properly attributed in our common lawe to him, that bequeathes his goods by his laſt will or teſtament in writing: and the reaſon is, becauſe thoſe that now appertain onely to the Deviſour, by this act are diſtributed into many parts. Wherefore I thinke it better written diviſe thē 
                  deuiſe, howbeit, it were not abſurd, to deriue this word from the French (deuiſer) i. ſermocinari, fabulari, conſilium conferre. For in this ſence it agreeth in ſome ſort with the nature of the act of the teſtator, and with the Etymologie of a teſtament ſet downe by Iuſtinian, who ſaith, that teſtamentum is (quaeſi mentis teſtatio. titulo. de Teſta. ordinan. in Inſtitut. and teſtatio mentis cannot be ſo well, as by talke and conference with our wiſe and skilfull friends.
               
                  Devoires of Cales, anno 2. R. 2. Stat. 1. cap. 3. & anno 5. eiuſdem, ſtat. 2. cap. 2. were the cuſtomes due to the king for merchandize brought to or caried out from Caleis, when our Staple was there. The word is French, ſignifying as much as (officium) dutie.
               
                  Devorce, aliâs, divorce (divortium) is with our common Lawyers, accompted that ſeparation betweene two de facto maried together, which is à vinculo matrimonii, non ſolùm à menſa & thoro. And therefore the woman ſo divorced, receiueth al againe that ſhee brought with her. This is not, but onely vpon a nullitie of the mariage through ſome eſſentiall impediment, as conſanguinitie or affinity within the degrees forbidden, precontract, impotencie, or ſuch like. See the new Tearmes of lawe.
               
                  Diem clauſit extremum, is a writ that lyeth for the heyre of him that holdeth land of the Crowne, either by Knights ſeruice or in ſoccage, and dyeth, be he vnder or at full age, directed to the eſcheatour of the county for inquirie to bee made by him, of what eſtate the partie deceaſed was ſeiſed, and who is next heyre vnto him, and of what valew the land is. The forme thereof and other circumſtances, you may learne in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 251.
               
                  Dyer, was a learned Lawyer, and Lord chiefe Iuſtice of the Common plees, in the dayes of Queene Elizabeth: who writ a booke of great accompt, called his Commentaries or Reports.
               
                  Dies datus, is a reſpight giuen to the tenent or defendant before

the court. Brooke titulo. Continuance.
               
               
                  Dicker of lether, is a quantitie conſiſting of tenne hides. The name may ſeeme to come from the Greeke (decas) which is alſo a Latine word ſignifying tenne in number.
               
                  Dignitie eccleſiaſticall (dignitas eccleſiaſtica) is mentioned in the ſtatute anno 26. H. 8. cap. 3. and is by the Canoniſts defined to be (adminiſtratio cum iuriſdictione & poteſtate aliqua coniuncta. Gloſ. in cap. 1. de conſuet. iu ſexto.) whereof you may reade diuers examples in Duarenus de ſacris eccleſ. miniſt. & benefic. lib. 2. cap. 6.
               
                  Dioces (dioeceſis) is a Greeke word compounded of (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) and (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,) and ſignifieth with vs, the circuit of euery Biſhops iuriſdiction. For this realme hath two ſorts of diuiſions, one into Shyres or Counties, in reſpect of temporall policie, another into Dioceſſes in reſpect of iuriſdictiō eccleſiaſticall.
               
                  Dieta rationabilis, is in Bracton vſed for a reaſonable daies iourney. lib. 3. parte. 2. chap. 16. It hath in the ciuile law diuers other ſignifications, not needfull heere to be ſet downe. v. vocab: vtiruſque iuris.
               
               
                  Dimy haque. See Haque.
               
               
                  Diſalt, ſignifieth as much as to diſable. Litleton in his chapter of Diſcontinance.
               
               
                  Diſceite, See deceite and deceptione. See the new booke of Entry, verbo Diſceit.
               
               
                  Diſcent, (Diſcenſus) in the french (Deſcente) ſignifieth in the common law, an order or means whereby lands or tenements are deriued vnto any man from his aunceſtours: as to make his diſcent from his Aunceſtours. Old nat. br. fol. 101. is to ſhew how, and by what degrees, the land in queſtion cam to him from his aunceſtours: as firſt from his great grandfather to his grandfather, from his grandfather to his father, and ſo to him. Or in ſuch other like ſort: This diſcent is either lineall or collaterall. Lineall diſcent is conueied downeward in a right line from the Grandfather, to the father, and from the father to the ſonne, and from the ſonne to the Nephew, &c. Collaterall diſcent is ſpringing out of the ſide of the whole blood: as Grandfathers brother, fathers brother, &c. See the new Tearmes of law.
               
                  Diſclamer, (Diſclamium) is a plee containing an expreſſe deniall or refuſall: as if the tenent ſiew a replevin vpon a diſtreſſe taken by the lord, and the lord avow the taking of the diſtreſſe, ſaying that he houldeth of him as of his Lord, and that he diſtreined for rent not paid, or ſeruice not perfourmed: then the

tenent denying himſelfe to hould of ſuch Lord, is ſaid to diſclaime: and the Lord prouing the tenent to hould of him, the tenant leeſeth his land. Tearmes of law. Of this ſee Skene de verb: ſignif: verbo Diſclamation. Alſo if a man deny himſelfe to be of the blood or kindred of another in his plee, he is ſaid to diſclaime his blood: Eitzh: nat: br: fol, 197. G. See Brooke, titulo Diſclaimer If a man arraigned of felonie do diſclaime goods, being cleared he leeſeth them. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 186. See the new booke of Entries. verbo, Diſclamer.
               
               
                  Diſcontinuance, (Diſcontinuatio) commeth of the french (Diſcontinuer). i. ceſſare, intermittere) and ſignifieth in the common law, nothing els but an interruption or breaking of: as diſcontinuance of poſſeſſion, or diſcontinuance of proces. And the large diſcourſe that Litleton hath about this (Diſcontinuance) is rather to ſhew caſes wherein it is, or wherein it is not, then to define the thing. The effect of diſcontinuance of poſſeſſion is this, that a man may not enter vpon his owne land or tenement alienated, whatſoeuer his right be vnto it, of his owne ſelfe, or by his owne authority, but muſt bring his writ, and ſeeke to recouer poſſeſſion by law. Examples you may haue ſtore in his Terms of law, verbo Diſcontinuance. And in Litleton eodem capite, with whom agreeth another in theſe words: But diſcontinuance of poſſeſſion is indeed an impediment to a man for entring into his owne land or tenements, cauſed by the fact of one, that alienated them contrary to right, and gaue Liuery and ſeiſin of them, whereby the true owner is left only to his action. See the new tearmes of law, and the Inſtitutes of the Common Law. ca: 43. & ſee S. Ed. Cokes reportes. l. 3. the caſe of Fines. fo. 85. b. The effect of diſcontinuance of plee is, that the inſtance is fallen, and may not be taken vp again, but by a new writ to begin the ſuite a freſh. For to be diſcontinued, and to be put without day, is all one; and nothing els, but finally to be diſmiſſed the court of that inſtance. Weſt. parte 2. Simbol: titulo. Fines. ſect: 115. So Crompton in his diuers Iuriſdictions, fol: 131. vſeth it in theſe words: If a Iuſtice ſeate be diſcontinued by the not comming of the Iuſtices, the king may renew the ſame by his writ, &c. In this ſignification Fitzh: in his nat. br. vſeth the word diuers times: as diſcontinuance of a corody, f. 193. A. To diſcontinew the right of his wife, fol. 191. L. &. 193. L. Diſcontinuance of an aſſiſe, fol. 182. D. 187. B.
               
               
                  
                  Diſgrading, (Degradatio) is the puniſhment of a Clerk, that being deliuered to his Ordinary, cannot purge himſelfe of the offience, whereof he was conuicted by the Iury: and is nothing but the depriuation of him from thoſe orders of Clerkſhip that he had, as Preiſtehood, Deaconſhip. &c. Stawnf. pl: cor: fol. 130. & 138. There is likewiſe diſgrading of a knight. Stowes Annals. pag. 865. And it is not to be omitted, that by the Canon law, there be two ſorts of diſgrading: one ſummary by word onely, and another ſolemne by deueſting the party degraded of thoſe ornaments and rites, which be the enſignes of his order or degree.
               
                  Diſmes (Decimae) is made of the french (Decimes) and ſignifieth tithe or the tenth part of all the fruites, either of the earth, or beaſtes, or our labour, dew vnto God, and ſo conſequently to him that is of the Lords lot, and hath his ſhare: viz. our paſtour. It ſignifieth alſo the tenthes of all ſpirituall liuings, yearly giuen to the Prince (called a perpetuall Diſme. anno. 2. & 3. Ed. 6. ca. 35) which in auncient times, were paid to the Pope, vntill Pope Vrbane gaue them to Richard the ſecond, to aide him againſt Charls the french king, and thoſe other that vpheld Clement the ſeuenth againſt him. Polidor Virgil. Angl. hiſt: lib. 20. Laſtly it ſignifieth a tribute leuied of the Temporalty. Holinſhed. in Henry. 2. fol. 111.
               
                  Diſparidgment, Diſparagatio, is by our common lawyers, vſed eſpecially for matching an heire in mariage vnder his or her degree. or againſt decencie. See my Inſtitutes. titulo de nuptiis. §. 6.
               
                  Diſſeiſin (Diſſeiſina) commeth of the french (Diſſeiſir) and ſignifieth in the common lawe, an vnlawfull diſpoſſeſſing of a man of his land, tenemēt or other immoueable or incorporeall right, Iuſtitut. of the the com. lawe. ca. 15. And how farre this extendeth, See Bracton, libro quarto, cap. tertio. And therefore the Aſſiſes bee called writs of diſſeiſin, that lie againſt diſſeiſours in any caſe. whereof ſome bee termed little writs of diſſeiſin. being vicontiel, that is, ſiewable before the Shyreeue in the countie court, old. nat. br. fol. 109. becauſe they are determined by the Shyreeue without aſſiſe. Regiſter Original. fo. 198. b. as for Nuiſſances of no great preiudice. Diſſeiſin is of two ſorts; either ſimple diſſeiſin, committed by day without force and armes. Bracton. li. 4. ca. 4. Britton. ca. 42. & 43. & 44. where you ſhall finde in what eſpecially it is lawfull, in what not Britton. ca. 53. And Diſſeiſin by

force, for the which ſee Deferſour. See freſh Diſſeiſin. See Rediſſeiſin, and Poſtdiſſeiſin. See Skene de verbo. ſignificat. verbo Diſſaiſina. Diſſeiſin how many waies it is committed. See Fleta. li. 4. ca. 1. §. Fit autem, &c. & when it is lawfull. ca. 2.
               
                  Diſtreſſe (Diſtrictio, Diſtrictus) cōmeth of the French (Diſtreſſe, auguſtiae) It ſignifieth moſt commonly in the common law, a compulſion in certaine reall actions, whereby to bring a man to appearance in courte, or to pay debt or dutie denied. The effect whereof moſt commonly is, to driue the party diſtreined to replevie the diſtreſſe, and ſo to take his action of treſpaſſe againſt the diſtreiner, or els to compound neighbourly with him for the debt or dutie, for the which he diſtreineth. In what caſes a diſtreſſe is lawfull, ſee the newe termes of lawe. The Civilians call it (pignorum captionem) Briſſonius de verbo. ſignifica. lib. 14. This compulſion is by Britton. ca. 71. diuided into a diſtreſſe perſonall and diſtreſſe reall: diſtreſſe perſonall, is made by ſurpriſing a mans moueable goods, and deteining them for the ſecuritie of his appearance to the ſuite, and to make him plantiffe. A diſtreſſe reall, is made vpon immoveable goods, as the Grand Cape & Petit Cape. And thus it is interpreted by Hotoman de verb. feudal: verbo Diſtrictus. This differeth from an attachement in this point (among others) that a diſtreſſe cannot bee taken by any common perſon, without the compaſſe of his owne fee. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 904 except it bee preſently after the catell or other thing is driuen or borne out of the ground by him that perceiueth it to bee in danger to be diſtreined. New termes of the lawe. verbo diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  Diſtrictus, is ſometime vſed for the circuit or territorie within the which a man may be thus compelled to apperance. Ca. ne Romani. de electione in Clem: and Caſſan. de conſuetud: Burgand. pa. 90. Britton. ca. 120. and ſo likewiſe is Diſtrictio in the Regiſter originall. fol. 6. b. And ſo it ſeemeth to bee vſed in pupilla oculi. parte. 5. c. 22. Charta de foreſta. See alſo Mynſing. in the chapter. licet cauſam. 9. extra de probationibus. nu. 5. & Zaſius in his 16. councell. nu. 47. Diſtreſſe, in the former ſignification, is diuided firſt into finite and infinite. Finite is that which is limited by lawe, how often it ſhall be made to bring the partie to triall of the action, as once, twice. Old nat. br. fo. 43. Diſtreſſe infinite is without limitation vntill the partie come: as againſt a Iurie that refuſeth to appeare ſuper certificatione Aſſiſae,
                  
the proceſſe is a (venire facias) (habeas corpora) and diſtreſſe infifinite. Old. nat. br. fol. 113. Then it is diuided into a graund diſtreſſe. anno. 52. H. 3. ca. 7. which Fitzherbert calleth in latine magnam diſtrictionem. nat. br. fol. 126. A. and an ordinarie diſtreſſe. A graund diſtreſſe is that, which is made of all the goods and catels, that the partie hath within the Countie. Britton. ca. 26. fol. 52. but ſee whether it be ſometime not all one with a diſtreſſe infinite. Idem. fol. 80. with whom alſo the Statute of Marlbridge ſeemeth to agree. anno 52. H. 3. ca. 7. & ca. 9. & ca. 12. See old. nat. breu. fol. 71. b. See grand diſtreſſe, what thngs bee diſtreinable, and for what cauſes. See the newe Termes of lawe. verbo Diſtreſſe. Of this alſo ſee more in Attachment.
               
               
                  Diſtringas, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, or any other ofofficer, commanding him to diſtreine one for a debt to the king, &c. or for his appearance at a day. See great diuerſitie of this writ in the table of the Regiſter iudicial, verbo Diſtringas.
               
               
                  Diviſe. See Deviſe.
               
               
                  Dividends in the Exchequer, ſeemeth to be one part of an Indenture. anno 10. Ed. 1. ca. 11. & anno 28. eiuſdem. Stat. 3. ca. 2.
               
                  Dyvorce. See. Devorce.
               
               
                  Docket, is a brife in writing. anno. 2. & 3. Ph. & Mar. ca. 6. Weſt writeth it (Dogget) by whome it ſeemeth to be ſome ſmall peece of paper or parchement, conteining the effect of a larger writing. Symbol. parte. 2. titulo Fines. ſect. 106.
               
                  Doctor and Student, is a booke conteining certaine dialogues, betweene a D. of Diuinitie, and a Student at the common Law, wherein are conteined queſtions and caſes, as well of the equitie and conſcience vſed in the common Lawe, as alſo a compariſon of the Civile, Canon, and common lawe together, very worthy the reading. The author is ſaid by D. Coſin in his Apologie, to bee a gentleman, called Saint German, The booke was written in the daies of H. 8.
               
                  To do lawe (facere legem) is as much as to make lawe. 23. H. 6. ca. 14. See. Make.
               
               
                  Dogge drawe, is a manifeſt deprehenſion of an offender againſt veniſon in the foreſt. There bee foure of theſe noted by M. Manhood. parte. 2. of his foreſt lawes. ca. 18. nu. 9. viz. Stableſt and Dogge drawe, Back beare, and Bloodie hand. Dogge drawe, is when one is found drawing after a deere, by the ſent of a hound, that he leadeth in his hand.
               
                  Dogger, a kinde of ſhippe. an. 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 3. ca. pr
                        •
                     .
               
               
                  Doggerfiſh, ibid. c. 2. ſeemeth to

bee fiſh brought in thoſe ſhips to Blackcney hauen, &c. Dogger men. anno 2. H. 8. ca. 4.
               
                  Dogget, See Docket.
               
               
                  Domo reparanda, is a writ that lyeth for one againſt his neighbour, by the fall of whoſe houſe he feareth hurt toward his owne houſe. Regiſter originall. fol. 153. for this point. The ciuilians haue the action de damno infecto.
               
               
                  Dole fiſhe, ſeemeth to be that fiſh, which the fiſher men, yerely imployed in the north ſeaſe, doe of cuſtome receiue for their allowance, See the ſtatute. a. 35. H. 8. ca. 7.
               
                  Donatyue, is a benefice meerely giuen and collated by the Patron to a man, without either preſentation to the Ordinary, or Inſtitution by the Ordinarie, or Induction by his commandement. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 35. E. See the ſtatute, anno 8. R. 2. cap. 4. Of this Petr. Gregor. de beneficiis cap. 11. nu. 10. hatl. theſe words: Si tamen Capellaniae fundatae per Laicos non fuerint a Dioeceſano approbatae, & vt (loquuntur) ſpiritualizatae, non cenſentur beneficia, nec ab Epiſcopo conferri poſſunt, ſed ſunt ſub pia diſpoſitione fundatoris. Ioh. Faber ad §. Nullius. De rerum divis: Ideo fundatores & haeredes eorum, poſſunt tales Capellanias donare ſine Epiſcopo, cui voluerint, tanquam profona beneficia. Guido Papaeus deſcis. 187. See alſo Gregorius. lib. 15. ca. 29. ſui ſyntagmatis. nu. 11. I finde in the preface of M. Gwins readings, that as the king might of auncient times found a free Chapell, and exempt it from the iuriſdiction of the Dioceſan: ſo hee might alſo by his leters patents licence a common perſon, to found ſuch a chapell, and to ordeine, that it ſhalbe donatiue & not preſentable, and that the Chaplaine ſhall be depriueable by the founder and his heires, and not by the Biſhop. And this is likeſt to bee the originall of theſe Donatiues in England. Fitzh. ſaith, that there be certaine Chauntries, which a man may giue by his leters patents. nat. br. fol. 33. C. See him alſo, fol. 42. B. All Biſhopricks were donatiue by the king, Coke. li. 3. fo. 75. b.
               
               
                  Doomes day, (Rotulus Wintoniae) (domus Dei. Coke in Praefatione ad librum ſuum) is a booke that was made in king Ed. the Confeſſors dayes, as the author of the old. nat. br. ſaith, f. 15. containing in it not onely all the lands through England, but alſo all the names of thoſe, in whoſe hands they were at that time when the book was made. M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon wordes (verbo, Ius Dacoru, &c.) proueth out of Gervaſius Tilburienſis, that this booke was made in William the Conquerors time: with whome agreeth M. Camden in

his Britan. pag. 94. prouing it out of Ingulphus, that flouriſhed the ſame time. And for the beter commendation of the booke, it is not amiſſe to ſet downe the words of Ingulphus, touching the contents thereof. Totam terram deſcripſit. Nec erat hyda in tota Anglia, quin valorem eius & poſſeſſorem ſcivit, nec lacus nec locus aliquis, quin in Regis rotulo extitit deſcriptus, ac eius reditus & proventus, ipſa poſſeſſio, & eius poſſeſſor regiae notitiae manifeſt atus, iuxta taxatorum fidom qui electi de qualibet patria territorium proprium deſcribebant. Iſte rotulus vocatus eſt Rotulus Wintoniae, & ab Anglis pro ſua generalitate, quòd omnia tenementa totius terrae continuit (Domeſday) cognominatur. So it is called in the Statute anno pri. Ric. 2. cap. 6. And in Ockhams lucubrations de fiſci Regii ratione, which ſeemeth to be taken out of the Booke called (Liber rubeus) in the Exchequer. It is termed (liber Iudicatorius) and the reaſon why quia in eo totius Regni deſcriptio diligens continetur: & tam de tempore Regis Edwardi, quàm de tempore Regis Willielmi, ſub quo factus eſt, ſingulorum fundorum valentia exprimitur.
               
               
                  Dorture (Dormitorium) anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 11. is the common roome, place or chamber, where all the friers of one couent ſlept, and lay all night.
               
                  Dote aſſignanda, is a writ that lieth for a widowe, where it is found by office, that the kings tenent was ſeiſed of tenements in fee, or fee taile, at the day of his death, &c. and that hee holdeth of the king in cheife, &c. For in this caſe the widowe commeth into the Chauncerie, and there maketh oath, that ſhee will not mary without the kings leaue. Anno 15. Ed. 3. ca. 4. and herevpon ſhee ſhall haue this writte to the Eſcheatour, for which ſee the Regiſter originall fol. 297. and Fitzh. nat. br. f. 263. And this ſort of widowes is called the kings widowe. See Widowe.
               
               
                  Dote vnde nihil habet, is a writ of dower, that lyeth for the widow againſt the tenent, which hath bought land of her huſband in his life time, whereof he was feiſed ſolely in fee ſimple, or fee taile, in ſuch ſort as the iſſue of them both might haue inhereted it. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 147. Regiſter fol. 170.
               
                  Dotis admenſuratione, See Admē
                     ſurement. See the Regiſter. fol. 171.
               
                  Dotkins, a kinde of coine. pl: cor: fol: 37. It ſeemeth to come of the Dutch word Duythen, that is, the eight part of a Stufer, or French Shilling, which in lat ne is called Solidus Gallicus.
               
               
                  
                  Doubles. anno 14. H. 6. cap. 6. ſignifie as much as leters patents, being as it ſeemeth a French word made of the Latine (diploma.)
               
               
                  Double plee, (duplex placitum) is that, wherein the defendant alledgeth for himſelfe two ſeuerall maters, in barre of the action, whereof either is ſufficient to effect his deſire in debarring the plaintiffe. And this is not to be admitted in the common lawe: wherefore it is well to be obſerued, when a plee is double, and when it is not. For if a man alledge ſeuerall maters, the one nothing depending of the other, the plee is accounted double. If they be mutually depending one of the other, then is it accompted but ſingle. Kitchin fo. 223. See Broke hoc titulo. But why this doublenes (for ſo Kitchin calleth it, fol. 234.) ſhould bee debarred, I ſee no reaſon (vnder correction all things being ſpoken.) For a man may haue two good defences: and happily in the iſſue he ſhall contrarily to his hope faile in prouing the one, and yet be able to carie the cauſe by the other. And therefore not onely the Civilians, but Bracton alſo ſaith: Pluribus exceptionibus uti nemo prohibetur. lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 5. num. 4. whom alſo reade, libro, 4. cap. 17. And Sir Thomas Smiths reaſon of this ſcantly ſatisfieth me, alledging this to be the courſe of our proceeding, becauſe the triall is by twelue rude men, whoſe heades are not to be troubled with ouer many things at once. lib. 2. de Repub. Anglor. cap. 13.
               
                  Double quarell (duplex querela) is a complaint made by any Clerke or other vnto the Archbiſhop of the Prouince, againſt an inferiour ordinarie for delaying of iuſtice in ſome cauſe ecclefiaſticall: as to giue ſentence or to inſtitute a clerke preſented, or ſuch like. The effect whereof, is that the ſaid Archbiſhop taking knowledge of ſuch delay, directeth his leters vnder his authenticall ſeale, to all and ſingular clerkes of his Prouince, therby commaunding and authorizing them and euery of them, to admoniſh the ſaid Ordinarie, within a certaine number of dayes, namely, 9. dayes, to doe the iuſtice required, or otherwiſe to cite him to appeare before him or his officiall, at a day in the ſaid leters prefixed, and there to alledge the cauſe of his delay. And laſtly, to intimate to the ſaid Ordinarie, that if he neither performe the thing enioyned, nor appeare at the day aſſigned, he himſelfe will, without farder delay, proceed to perform the iuſtice required. And this ſeemeth to be tearmed a double quarell,
               
                  
becauſe it is moſt commonly made againſt both the Iudge, and him at whoſe petition iuſtice is delayed.
               
                  Dower (dos) commeth of the French (douaire) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, two things: firſt, that which the wife bringeth to her husband in mariage, otherwiſe called maritagiū, mariage good: next, and more commonly, that which ſhe hath of her husband, after the mariage determined, if ſhe out-liue him. Glanvile. lib. 7. cap. 1. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 38. Britton. cap. 101. in princ. And in Scotland, (dos) ſignifieth iuſt as much. Skene de verb. ſignif. verbo. Dos. The former is in French called (dot) the other doüayre, and by them latined doarium. I likewiſe once thought it not vnreaſonable, to call the former a Dowrie, & the other a Dower: but I find them confounded. For exāple: Smith de rep. Anglo. p. 105. calleth the later a dowrie, and dower is ſometime vſed for the former: as in Britton vbi ſupra. yet were it not inconuenient to diſtinguiſh them being ſo diuers. The Civilians call the former (dotem) and the later (donationem propter nuptias.) Of the former the common law bookes ſpeake very litle. This onely is to be noted, that whereas by the ciuile lawe, inſtruments are made before mariage, which containe the quantitie of the wiues dowrie, or ſubſtance brought to her husband, that he hauing the vſe of it, during mariage, may, after certaine deductions, reſtore it againe to his wiues heires or friends, after the mariage diſſolued: the common lawe of England, whatſoeuer chatels moueable or immoueable, or readie money ſhe bringeth, doth make them foorthwith her husbands owne, to be diſpoſed of, as he will, leauing her at his courteſie, to beſtow any thing or nothing of her at his death. The reaſon whereof is ſaid to be, the holding of the wife in obedience to her husband. Onely if ſhe be an inheretrice, her husband holdeth the land but during her life, except he haue iſſue by her: but then he holdeth it by the courteſie of England during his owne life. See Courteſie. And againe, if he haue any land in fee, wherof he was poſſeſſed during the mariage, ſhe is to haue a third therof during her life, though ſhe bring nothing to him, except ſhe doe by fine releaſe her right, during the mariage. So that here is no great mater to bee ſpoken of, but touching dower in the later ſignification. You muſt know therfore, that vpon ſpeech of mariage betweene two, the parents of both ſides are commonly

more carefull in prouiding each for his childe, then the parties themſelues: and that by their meanes there bee diuers bargaines made, ſometime for the conueiance of lands, &c. to them and their iſſue: and this is ſaid to be giuen in franke mariage: ſometime to her during her life, and that before, or at the mariage: if before mariage, then it is called a Ioynture. For a Ioynture is a couenant, whereby the huſband, or ſome for him is tyed (ratione iuncturae) in conſideration of the mariage, that the wife ſurviuing him, ſhall haue during her life, this or that tenement or lands, or thus much rent yearely paylible out of ſuch land, &c. with clauſe of diſtreſſe: and this may be more or leſſe, as they doe accord. Britton, cap. 101. whome read alſo ca. 102. 103. 104. for conventio vincit legem. Bracton. lib. 5. tract. 4. cap. 9. The diuerſitie of theſe Ioyntures, you may ſee in Weſt. parte prima ſymbol. lib. 2. ſect. 128. 129. 130. 131. 132. 133. But if none of theſe former bargaines paſſe before mariage, then muſt the wife ſtick to her Dower: and that is ſometime giuen at the Church doore or the Chappell doore, if the mariage bee by licence, but not the chamber doore; and may bee what the husband will: ſo it exceede not a third part of his lands. G lanvile libro. 6. cap. pri. Or the halfe, as ſome ſay. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 150. N. P. And this Dower is either certainly ſet downe and named, or not named but onely in generalitie, as the law requireth: if it be not named, then is it by lawe, the third part, and called (dos ligitima) Bracton. lib. 4. tracta. 6. cap. 6. nu. 6. & 10. Magna. Charta. c. 7. or the halfe by the cuſtome of ſome countries, as in Gavelkinde. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 150. O. And though it bee named, it ſeemeth that it cannot bee aboue halfe the lands of the husband. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 150. P. And the woman that will chalenge this dower, muſt make 3. things good, viz. that ſhee was maried to her husband, that he was in his life time ſeiſed of the land, whereof ſhee demaundeth dower, and that he is dead. Cokesreportes li. 2. Binghams caſe. fo. 93. a. Of theſe things ſee Glanvile. li. 6. cap. 1. 2. & 3. Bracton lib. 2. ca. 38. 39. & lib. 4. tracta. 6. cap. 1. & 6. and Britton cap. 101. 102. 103. 104. and Fitzherb. natur. brev. fol. 147. 148. 149. & 150. And this cuſtumary, dower, ſeemeth to be obſerued in other nations, as well as in ours. Hotoman verbo Dotalitium in verbis feudal: Caſſan. de conſuetud. Burg. pag. 580. 676. 677. & de conventionali. p. 720. And to theſe

ioyne the graund Cuſtumarie of Normandie, cap. 102. where you ſhall perceiue, that in a maner all our lawe in this point is taken from the Normans: See Endowment. Of dower reade Fleta likewiſe, who writeth largely thereof, and hath many things worth the learning. li. 5. ca. 22 & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Dozenne. See Decennier.
               
               
                  Drags. ano. 6. H. 6. ca. 5. ſeeme to be wood or timber ſo ioyned together, as ſwimming or floting vpon the water, they may beare a burden or load of other wares downe the river.
               
                  Drawe latches. anno. 5. Ed. 3. ca. 14. & anno. 7. Rich. 2. ca. 5. Maſter Lamberd, in his Eirenarch lib: 2. ca. 6. calleth them miching theeues, as Waſters and Roberdſemen mighty theeues, ſaying that the words be growne out of vſe.
               
                  Dreit Dreit, ſignifieth a double right, that is ius poſſeſſionis, & ius Domini. Bracton. lib: 4. cap. 27. & lib. 4. tracta. 4. cap: 4. & lib. 5. tracta. 3. cap. 5.
               
                  Drye exchaunge. an. 3. H. 7. ca. 5. (Cambium ſiccum) ſeemeth to be a clenly terme inuented for the diſguiſing of foule vſury, in the which ſome thing is pretended to paſſe of both ſides, wheras in truth, nothing paſſeth but on the one ſide: in which reſpect it may well be called drie. Of this Ludouicus Lopes tractat: de contract: & negotiatio. lib: 2. ca. pri. §. Deinde poſtquam: writeth thus: Cambium eſt reale vel ſiccum. Cambium reale dicitur, quod conſiſtentiam veri Cambit realem habet, & Cambium per trans, & Cambium minutum. Cambium autē ſiccum eſt Cambium non habens exiſtentiam Cambii, ſed apparentiam ad inſtar arboris exſiccatae, quae humore vitali iam carens apparentiam arboris habet, non exiſtentiam. Summa Sylv: Verbo Vſura. quaeſt: 6. Eſt ergo Cambium ſiccum iuxta hanc acceptionem (in qua etiam accipitur in Extrau. Pii quinti) idem quod Cambium fictū. Non autē habet propriam naturam Cambii, ſed mutui & vſurae. At verò ſecundum Laurentium de Nauarra in Cōmento de vſuris & Cambiis citatam, Cambium ſiccum in alia acceptione minùs communi ſumptum eſt Cambium, in quo Campſor prius dat quam accipiat. Dicitur autem iſto modo ſiccum, quia ſine praeuia acceptione dat Campſor. Quod tamen, vt fic acceptum (autore Silueſtro) licitè celebratur aliquando. Quia tunc verum & reale Cambium eſt differens genere ab eo Cambio, in quo Campſor prius recipit. Quia in iſto Campſor ſemper primò dat & deinde accipit.
               
               
                  Drift of the Foreſt, ſeemeth to be nothing but an exact view or examination, what catell are in the foreſt: that it may be known, whether it be ouercharged or

not, and whoſe the beaſtes be. This drift, when, how often in the yeare, by whome, and in what maner it is to be made, ſee Manwood parte. 2. of his foreſt lawes. cap: 15.
               
                  Droit d' Advowzen. See Recto de aduocatione Eccleſiae.
               
               
                  Droit cloſe. See. Recto clauſum.
               
               
                  Droit de dower. See Recto dotis.
               
               
                  Droit ſur Diſclaimer. See Recto ſur diſclaimer.
               
               
                  Droit patent. See Rectopatens.
               
               
                  Duces tecum, is a writ commaunding one to appeare at a day in the chauncery, and to bring with him ſome peece of euidence, or other thing, that the court would view. See the new booke of Entries, verb. Duces tecum.
               
               
                  Duke (Dux) commethe of the french (Duc) It ſignifieth in auncient times among the Romaines Ductorem exercitus) ſuch as led their armies, who if by their prowes they obteined any famous victory, they were by their ſouldiers ſa'uted (Imperatores) as Hotoman verbo Dux, de verbis feud il: proueth out of Lyvy, Tully, and others. Sithence that they were called (Duces) to whome the king or people committed the cuſtodie or regiment of any province. Idem. eod. And this ſeemeth to proceede from the Lombards or Germans, Sigon de regno Ital. l. 4. In ſome natiōs at this day, the Soveraignes of the country, are called by this name, as Duke of Ruſſia, Duke of Swethen. Heere in England, Duke is the next in ſeculer dignitie to the Prince of Wales. And as (M. Camden ſaith) heretofore in the Saxons times, they were called Dukes, without any addition, being but meere officers, and leaders of armies. After the Conquerour came in, there were none of this title vntil Edward the thirds daies, who, made Edward his ſon Duke of Cornwayle. After that there were more made, and in ſuch ſort, that their titles deſcended by inheritance to their poſteritie. They were created with ſolemnitie (per cincturam gladii, cappae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      & circuli aurei in capite impoſitionem, vide Camd. Britan. pa. 166. Zaſium de feudis parte. 4. nu. 7. & Caſſan. de conſuetud. Burg pag. 6. & 10. and Ferns glory of generoſity. pag. 139.
               
                  Dutchy court, is a court, wherein all maters appertaining to the Dutchy of Lancaſter, are deſcided the decree of the Chauncelour of that Court. And the originall of it was in Henry the fourthes daies, who obtaining the crown, by depoſing Richard the ſecond, and hauing the Dutchy of Lancaſter by diſcent in the right of his mother, he was ſeiſed thereof as king, and not as Duke. So that all the liberties, fraunchiſes, and

Iuriſdictions of the ſaid Dutchy paſſed from the king by his graund ſeale, and not by liverie, or attournment: as the poſſeſſions of Everwicke, and of the Earldome of March, and ſuch others did, which had deſcended to the king, by other Aunceſters then kings. But at the laſt, Henry the 4. by authoritie of Parlament paſſed a charter, whereby the poſſeſſions, liberties, &c. of the ſaid Dutchy were ſeuered from the Crowne: Yet Henry the 7. reduced it to his former nature, as it was in Henry the fifts daies. Crompton Iuriſdict. fol. 136. The officers belonging to this Court are the Chauncellour, the Atturney, Receiuer generall, Clerke of the court, the Meſſenger. Beſide theſe, there be certain Aſſiſtantes of this Court: as one Atturney in the Exchequer: one Atturney of the Dutchy in the Chauncery, foure learned men in the lawe, reteined of councell with the King in the ſaid court. Of this Court M. Gwin. in the preface to his readings thus ſpeaketh: The court of the Duchy (or Countie Palatine of Lancaſter) grew out of the graunt of king Edward the third, who firſt gaue the Dutchy to his ſonne Iohn of Gawnte, and endowed it with ſuch royall right, as the Countie Palatine of Cheſter had: and for as much, as it was afterward extinct in the perſon of king Henry the fourth, by reaſon of the vnion of it with the Crowne: the ſame king ſuſpecting himſelfe to bee more rightfully Duke of Lancaſter, then king of England, determined to ſaue his right in the Dutchy, whatſoeuer ſhould befal of the Kingdome: and therefore hee ſeparated the Dutchy from the Crowne, and ſetled it ſo in the naturall perſons of himſelfe and his heires, as if he had bin no king or Politique bodie at all: In which plight it continued, during the reigne of K. Henry the 5. and Henry the 6. that were deſcended of him. But when King Edw. the 4. had (by recouery of the Crowne) recontinued the right of the houſe of Yorke, hee feared not to appropriate that Dutchy to the Crowne againe: and yet ſo, that hee ſuffered the Court and Officers to remaine as he founde them. And in this maner, it came together with the Crowne, to King Henry the 7. who liking well of that policy of King H. the 4. (by whoſe right alſo hee obteined the Kingdome) made like ſeparation of the Dutchy, as hee had done, and ſo left it to his poſterity which doe yet inioy it.
               
                  Dumfuit infra aetatem, is a writ which lyeth for him, that before hee came to his full age, made

a feofment of his land in fee, or for terme of life, or in taile, to recover them againe from him, to whome he conveied them. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 192.
               
                  Dum non fuit compos mentis, is a writ that lieth for him, that being not of ſound memory, did alien any lands or tenements in fee ſimple, fee tayle, for terme of life, or of yeeres, againſt the alienee. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 202.
               
                  Duplicat, is vſed by Crompton, for a ſecond leters patent graū
                  ted by the Lord Chauncelour, in a caſe, wherein he had formerly done the ſame: and was therefore thought void. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 215.
               
                  Dures (Duritia) commeth of the French (dur. i. durus, vel durete. i. duritas) and is in our common lawe, a plee vſed in way of exception, by him that being caſt in priſon at a mans ſuite, or otherwiſe by beating or threats hardly vſed, ſealeth any bond vnto him during his reſtraint. For the lawe holdeth this not good, but rather ſuppoſeth it to be conſtrained. Brooke in his Abridgement ioyneth Dures and Manaſſe together. i. duritiam & minas, hardnes and threatning. See the newe booke of Entries, verbo Dures. and the new Termes of law.
               
            
            
               E A
               
                  EAlderman (Aldermannus) among the Saxons, was as much as Earle among the Danes. Camden. Britan. pag. 107. If yee goe to the true etimologie of the word, mee thinketh, it ſhoud ſound more generally, ſo much as 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   with the Graecians, or Senator with the Romanes: who were rather Councellers at large, then beſtowed vpon any particular office, as Comites were. See Countie. And that ſignification we retaine at this day almoſt in all our Cities, and Borowes, calling thoſe Aldermen, that are Aſſociates to the Chiefe Officer in the common councell of the Towne. anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13. or ſometime the cheife officer himſelfe, as in Stawnford.
               
               
                  Earle (Comes) in M. Camdens opinion. pag. 107. is a word made by the Danes of (Ealderman) a word of the Saxons. M. Lamberd ſeemeth notwithſtanding to acknowledge, that Earle is originally a Saxon word. Explica. of Sax. words. verbo Paganus: and interpreteth it (Satrapam) which word the Romaines borowing of the Perſians, applied to thoſe that were praefecti provinciarum. M. Verſlegan in his reſtitution of decaied intelligence, deriueth it from two Netherland words (ear. i. honor) and (ethel i. nobilis) wherein I leaue the reader to his owne iudgement. This title in auncient time, was giuen to thoſe, that were aſſociates to the king in his

councels and Marſhall actions (as Comes was to thoſe that folowed the Magiſtrates in Roome, and executed their offices for them as their deputies, and died alwaies with the man. Zaſius hath of this word thus much. Comitū originem in Doctoribus non invenimus: ſed noveris cam dignitatem vetuſtiſſimam eſſe. Nam Cor. Tacitus in libello de Germania ſcribit apud priſcos vſu fuiſſe receptum, vt cuilibet principi ſeu Duci exercitus duodecim comites aſſignarentur: ideo dictos, quia comitarentur eos, & à Ducum latere non decederent. Comitū ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      originē Germanis moribus ortum eſſe, dictus receptiſſimus autor testis eſt. Quapropter quod in duodecimo libro Codicis aliqui tituli de Comitibus largitionum &c. inſcribuntur, uſurpationem Imperatoris ex Germanorum ritibus ſumptam credo. But the Conquerour (as M. Camd. ſaith) gaue this dignitie in fee to his nobles, annexing it to this or that countie or province, and allotted them, for their maintenance, a certaine proportion of monie riſing from the Princes profits, for the pleadings and forfeitures of the province. For example, he bringeth an aunent Record in theſe words. Henricus 2. Rex Anglie his verbis Comitem creauit: Sciatis nos feciſſe Hugonet Bigot Comitē de Nortfolk. ſc: de tertio denario de Norwic. & Northfolke, ſicut aliquis comes Angliae liberiùs comitatum ſuum tenet. Which words (ſaith the ſame author) an ould booke of Battell Abbie thus expoundeth: Conſuetudinaliter per totam Angliammos antiquitùs inoleverat, Comites provinciarum tertium denarium ſibi obtinere, inde Comites dicti. And another booke without name more fully. Comitatus a Comite dicitur, aut vice verſa. Comes autem eſt, quia tertiam portionem eorum, quae de placitis proveniunt, in quolibet Comitatu percipit. Sed non omnes Comites iſta percipiunt: ſed hii quibus Rex haereditariò aut perſonaliter conceſſit. You may reade M. Fern in Lacyſe nobility, ſomething to this effect. pa. 12. But he ſaith, that one Duke or Earle had diuers Shires vnder his gouernment, as a viceroy, and had lieuetenants vnder him in euery particular Shire, called a Shyreeue. That one Earle was dignified by the appellation or more rhen one Shyreeue, it appeareth by diuers of our auncient Statutes, as namely by the ſentēce of excommunication pronounced by the Biſhops againſt the infringers of the great Charter & charter of the foreſt. anno. 38. H. 3. Roger Bigot is named Earle both of Northfolke and Southfolke, and anno 1. Ed. 3. Thomas Earle of Lancaſter and Leyceſter. Humſrey Bohum. Earle of Hereford

and Eſſex. Dyer. fo. 285. nu. 39. At theſe daies, as long ſince, the kings of England make Earles by their charters, of this or that Countie, giuing them no authoritie ouer the Countie, nor any part of the profit riſing of it, but onely ſome annuall ſtipend out of the Exchequer, rather for honours ſake, then any great commoditie. And theſe bee in other nations accompted Earles improperly. Quia illi dicuntur verè Comites, quibus datur Comitatus in feudum: illi Comites abuſivè, qui non habent adminiſtrationem. Vincentius de Franchis. deſcis. 115. nu. 7. The maner of creating Earles is by girding them with a ſword. Camden. pag. 107. but ſee the ſolemnitie thereof deſcribed more at large in Stowes annals. pa. 1121 The occaſion why theſe Earles in later time haue had no ſwaye ouer the Countie, whereof they beare their name, is not obſcurely ſignified in Sir Thomas Smith. lib. 2. cap. 14. Where he ſaith, that the Shyreeue is called Vicecomes, as (Vicarius Comitis) following all maters of iuſtice, as the Earle ſhould do: and that becauſe the Earle is moſt commonly attendant vpon the king, in his warres or otherwiſe. So that it ſeemeth that Earles by reaſon of their high employments, being not able to follow alſo the buſineſſe of the countie, were deliuered of all that burthen, and onely enioyed the honour, as now they doe. And the Shyreeue, though he be ſtill called Vice-comes, yet all he doth, is immediatly vnder the king, and not vnder the Earle. See Countie, & ſee Hetoman. de verb. feudal. verbo Comes: and Caſſan, de conſuetud. Burg. p 12.
               
               
                  Eaſement, (eſamentum) is a ſeruice that one neighbour hath of another by charter or preſcription, without profite, as a way through his ground, a ſinke, or ſuch like. Kitchin. fol. 105. which in the ciuill lawe is called Seruitus pradii.
               
               
                  Eele fares, aliâs, Eele Vare. an. 25. H. 8. cap. 7. be the frie or brood of Eeles.
               
                  Egyptians (Egyptiani) are in our ſtatutes and lawes of England, a counterfeit kinde of roagues, that being Engliſh or Welch people, accompany thē
                  ſelues together, diſguiſing themſelues in ſtraunge roabes, blacking their faces and bodies, and framing to themſelues an vnknowne language, wander vp and downe, and vnder pretence of telling of Fortunes, curing diſeaſes, and ſuch like, abuſe the ignorant common people, by ſtealing all that is not too hote or too heauie for their cariaage. anno 1. & 2. Phi. & M. cap. 4. anno 5. Eliz. cap. 20. Theſe are very like to thoſe, whom the Italians

call Cingari: of whom Franciſcus Leo in ſuo the ſauro fori eccleſiaſtici parte prim. cap. 13. thus writeth: Cingari, qui corrupte vocabulo, quandoque etiam Saraceni nominantur, & permiſſione principū ac aliorum dominorum, per Italian vagantur, nec vnquam viderunt partes infidelium, minuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      legem Mahome it noverunt: ſed ſunt ferè omnes Itali, & male habituati, ex rebus furtivis vivunt, ac fraudulentis earum permut ationibus & ludis, in quibus vt plurimum fraudes committunt, & ſunt baptizati.
               
               
                  Eiectione cuſtodiae, Eiectment de gard, is a writ which lyeth properly againſt him, that caſteth out the Gardian from any land, during the minority of the heire. Regiſter origin. fol. 162. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 139. Tearmes of the law. verbo. Gard. There be two other writs not vnlike this: the one is tearmed Droit de gard, or right of guard, the other Rauiſhment de Gard. Which ſee in their places.
               
                  Eiectione firmae, is a writ, which lyeth for the Leaſſee for terme of yeares, that is caſt out before the expiration of his tearme, either by the leaſſour, or a ſtraunger. Regiſter fol. 227. Fitz. nat. br. fo. 220. See Quare eiecit infra terminum. See the new booke of Entries. verbo Eiectione firmae.
               
               
                  Einecia, is borowed of the French (Aiſne. i. primogenitus) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, Elderſhip. Statute of Ireland. anno 14. Hen. 3. Of this ſee M. Skene deverb. ſignif. verbo. Eneya.
               
               
                  Eyre, aliâs, Eyer, (Iter. Bracton lib. 3. cap. 11. in Rubrica) commeth of the old French word (Erre. i. iter) as (à grand erre. i. magnis itineribus.) It ſignifieth in Britton cap. 2. the court of Iuſtices itinerants: and Iuſtices in Eyre, are thoſe onely, which Bracton in many places calleth (Iuſticiarios itinerantes) of the Eyre, reade Britton vbi ſupra, who expreſſeth the whole courſe of it. And Bracton. lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 1. & 2. The Eyre alſo of the Foreſt is nothing, but the Iuſtice ſeate otherwiſe called: which is or ſhould by auncient cuſtome, be held euery three yeare by the Iuſtices of the foreſt, iourneying vp and downe to that purpoſe. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 156. Manmood parte prima of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 121. See Iuſtice in Eyre. Reade Skene de verborum ſignifica. verbo. Iter: whereby, as by many other places you may ſee great affinitie betweene theſe 2. Kingdomes in the adminiſtration of Iuſtice and gouernment.
               
                  Election de Clerke (Electione clerici) is a writ, that lyeth for the choyce of a clerke, aſſigned to take and make bonds called ſtatute Merchant: and is graunted out of the Chauncerie vpon ſuggeſtion

made, that the Clerke formely aſſigned, is gone to dwell in another place, or hath hinderance to let him from following that buſineſſe, or hath not land ſufficient to anſwer his tranſgreſſion, if he ſhould deale amiſſe, &c. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 164.
               
                  Elegit, is a writ Iudiciall, and lyeth for him, that hath recouered debt or dammages in the kings court, againſt one not able in his goods to ſatiſfie: and directed to the Shyreeue, commaunding him that he make deliuery of halfe the parties lands or tenements, and all his goods, oxen and beaſts for the plough excepted. Old nat. br. fol. 152. Regiſter originall fol. 299. & 301. and the Table of the Regiſter Iudiciall, which expreſſeth diuers vſes of this writ. The author of the new terms of law ſaith, that this writ ſhould be ſiewed within the yeare, whom read at large for the vſe of the ſame.
               
                  Elk a kinde of ewe to make bowes of. anno 33. H 8. cap. 9.
               
                  Empanel (Impanellare, Ponere in aſſiſis & Iuratis) commeth of the french (Panne. 1. pellis) or of (Pannequ) which ſignifieth ſome time as much as a pane with vs, as a pane of glaſſe, or of a windowe. It ſignifieth the wrighting or entring the names of a Iury into a parchment ſchedule or Rolle or paper, by the Shyreeue, which he hath ſommoned to appeare for the perfourmance of ſuch publique feruice, as Iuries are imployed in. See Panell.
               
               
                  Emparlance, commeth of the french (Parler) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a deſire or petition in court of a day to pauſe, what is beſt to doe. The ciuilians call it (petitionem induciarū) Kitchin fol. 200. interpreteth it in theſe words: If he imparle or pray continuance. For praying continuance is ſpoken interpretatiuè in that place, as I take it. The ſame author maketh mention of Emparlance generall. fol. 201. and Emparlance ſpeciall fol. 200. Emperlance generall ſeemeth to be that which is made onely in one word, and in generall terms. Emparlance ſpeciall, where the party requireth a day to deliberate, adding alſo theſe words: ſaluis omnibus aduantagiis tam ad iuriſdictionem Curia quàm ad breue & narrationem, or ſuch like: Britton vſeth it for the conference of a Iury vpon the cauſe committed vnto them. ca. 53. See Imparlance.
               
               
                  Emprouement, See Improuement.
               
               
                  Encheſon. A. 50. Ed. 3. ca. 3. is a french word, ſignifiing as much as occaſión, cauſe, or reaſon wherefore any thing is done, See Skene de verbo. ſignifica: verbo Encheſon.
               
               
                  
                  Encrochement or Accrochemēt, commeth of the french (Accrocher. 1. apprehendere, inuncare, harpagare) and that commeth of (Crochure. 1. aduncitas) or (crochu. 1. aduncus) Encrochement, in our common law, ſignifieth an vnlawfull gathering in vpon another man. For Example, if two mens grounds lying togither, the one preſſeth too farre vpon the other: or if a tenent owe two ſhillings rent ſeruice to the Lord, & the Lord taketh three: So Hugh and Hugh Spencer encroched vnto them royall power and authoritie, annoprim. Ed. 3. in prooem.
               
               
                  Enditement (Indictamentum) commeth of the French (Enditer. i. deferre nomen alicuius, indicare) or from the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , becauſe M. Lamberd will haue it ſo. Eirenar. lib. 4. cap. 5. pag. 468. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, as much as (Accuſatio) in the ciuile lawe, though it haue not in all points the like effect. Weſt parte 2. ſymb. titulo, Inditements) defineth it thus: An Inditement is a Bill or declaration made in forme of lawe, (for the benefite of the common wealth) of an accuſation for ſome offence, either criminall or penall, exhibited vnto Iurours, and by their verdict found and preſented to be true, before an Officer hauing power to puniſh the ſame offence. It is an accuſation, becauſe the Iury that inquireth of the offence, doth not receiue it vntill the party that offereth the Bill, appeare ſo farre in it, as to ſubſcribe his name, and offer his oth for the truth thereof. It differeth from an Accuſation in this, that the preferrer of the Bill is no way tyed to the proofe thereof vpon any penalty, if it be not proued, except there appeare conſpiracy. Wherefore, though moued by M. Weſts authority, I call it an Accuſation: yet I take it to be rather (Denuntiatio) becauſe it is of office done by the great enqueſt, rather then of a free intent to accuſe. Of this you may reade. S. Tho. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 19. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 23. 24. 25. 26. &c. Vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   34. and M. Lamberds Eirenarcha. li. 4. ca. 5. whence you may receiue good ſatiſfaction in this mater.
               
                  Endowment (Dotatio) commeth of the french (Doüare) and ſignifieth the beſtowing or aſſuring of a Dower. See Dower. But it is ſometime vſed metaphorically, for the ſetting forth or ſeuering of a ſufficient portion, for a vickar toward his perpetuall maintenance, when the benefice is appropriated. See Appropriation. And the ſtatute A. 15. R. 2. cap. 6.
               
                  
                  Endowment de la plus Belle part. is where a man dying ſeiſed of ſome lands, houlding in knights ſeruice, and other ſome in ſocage, the widow is ſped of her dower, rather in the lands houlding in ſocage, then knights ſeruice. Of this reade Litleton more at large. li. 1. ca. 5.
               
                  Enfranchiſement, cōmeth of the french (Franchiſe. 1. libertas) and is in a maner a french word of it ſelfe: It ſignifieth in our common law, the incorporating of a man into any ſocietie, or body politicke. For example, he that by charter is made Denizen of England, is ſaid to be enfranchiſed; and ſo is he that is made a citizen of London, or other city, or Burges of any towne corporate, becauſe he is made partaker of thoſe liberties that appertaine to the corporation, whereinto he is enfranchiſed. So a villaine is enfranchiſed, when he is made free by his Lord, and made capable of the benefites belonging to freemen.
               
                  Englecerie (engleceria) is an old abſtract word, ſignifying nothing elſe but to be an Engliſh man. For example, if a man bee priuily ſlaine or murthered, he was in old time accompted (Francigena) which word comprehendeth euery alien, vntil Englecerie was proued: that is, vntill it were made manifeſt, that he was an Engliſhman. A man may maruell, what meaning there might be in this: but Bracton cleareth the doubt, who in his third booke tract. 2. cap. 15. num. 3. telleth vs, that when Canutus the Daniſh king, hauing ſetled his eſtate here in peace, did at the requeſt of our Barons, disburden the land of his armie, wherein he accompted his greateſt ſafetie: and conditioned with them, that his countrimen which remained here, ſhould continue in peace: and the more to ſecure that, that for euery Francigena (vnder which word (as is aboue ſaid) he comprehended all outlandiſh men and women, and eſpecially Danes) that was ſecretly murthered, there ſhould be leauied to his Treaſurie 66. merkes out of the village, where the murder was cō
                  mitted, or out of the hundred, if the village were not able to pay it: and further, that euery man murdered ſhould be accompted Francigena, except Englecery were proued: which how it was to be proued, looke the 7. number in the ſame chapter. And ſee alſo Horns myrror of Iuſtices. lib. 1. cap. del office del coroner, and Fleta lib. 1. cap. 30. This Englecerie for the abuſes and troubles that afterwarde were perceiued to grow by it, was cleane taken away, by a ſtatute made anno
                  
14. Ed. 3. capite quarto.
               
               
                  Enheritance: See Inheritance.
               
               
                  Enqueſt (Inquiſitio) is all one in writing with the french word, and all one in ſignification both with the French and Latine. Howbeit, it is eſpecially taken for that Inquiſition, that neither the Romanes, nor French men euer had vſe of, that I can learne. And that is the Enqueſt of Iurors, or by Iurie, which is the moſt vſuall triall of all cauſes both ciuile and criminall in our realme. For in cauſes ciuill after proofe is made of either ſide, ſo much as each partie thinketh good for himſelfe, if the doubt be in the fact, it is referred to the diſcretion of twelue indifferent men, empaneled by the Shyreeue for the purpoſe: and as they bring in their verdict, ſo iudgement paſſeth. For the Iudge ſaith, the Iurie findeth the fact thus: then is the law thus: and ſo we iudge. For the enqueſt in cauſes criminall, ſee Iurie. and ſee Sir Thomas Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 19. An enqueſt is either of office, or at the miſe of the partie. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 12.
               
                  Entendment, commeth of the French (entendement. i. intellectus, ingenium.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe ſo much, as the true meaning or ſignification of a word or ſentence. See of this Kitchin, fol. 224.
               
                  Entayle (feudum talliatum) commeth of the French (entaille. i. inſciſus) and in our cō
                  mon lawe, is a ſubſtantiue abſtract, ſignifying Fee-tayle, or Fee-intayled. Litleton in the ſecond chapter of his book, draweth Fee-tayle from the verbe Talliare, (which whence it commeth, or whether it will I know not) whereas in truth it muſt come from the French (taille. i. ſectura,) or (tailler. i. ſcindere, ſecare) And the reaſon is manifeſt, becauſe fee-tayle in the law, is nothing but fee abridged, ſcanted or curtelled, (as you would ſay,) or limited and tyed to certaine conditions. Taille in Fraunce is metaphorically taken for a tribute or ſubſidie. v. Lupanum de Magiſtratibus Francorū. lib. 3. cap. Talea. See Fee. See Tayle.
               
               
                  Enterpleder (Interplacitare) is compounded of two french words: (entre. i. inter) and (pleder. i. diſputare) and it ſignifieth in our common law, as much as cognitio praeiudicialis in the ciuile law: that is, the diſcuſſing of a point incidently falling out, before the principall cauſe can take end. For example, two ſeuerall perſons being found heires to land by two ſeuerall offices in one countie, the king is brought in doubt to whether liuery ought to be made: and therefore before

liuery be made to either, they muſt enterpleade, that is, formerly try betweene themſelues, who is the right heire. Stawnf. praeroga: chap. 19. See more examples in Brooke. titulo Enterpleder.
               
               
                  Entiere tenancie, is contrary to ſeuerall Tenency, ſignifiing a ſole poſſeſſion in one man: wheras the other ſignifieth ioynt or common in more. See Brooke ſeuerall tenancy. See the new booke of Entries, verbo Entier tenancy.
               
               
                  Entry (Ingreſſus) commeth of the french (Entree. i. introitus ingreſſus, aditus) and properly ſignifieth in our common lawe, the taking poſſeſſion of lands or tenements. See Plowden. Afſiſe of freſh force in London. fo. 93. b. It is alſo vſed for a writ of poſſeſſion, for the which See Ingreſſu. And read Weſt alſo, parte. 2. Symbol. titulo Recoueries. ſect: 2. &. 3. Who there ſheweth for what things it lyeth, and for what it lyeth not. Of this Britton in his 114. chapter writeth to this effect. The writs of entrie ſauour much of the right of propertie. As for example: ſome be to recouer cuſtomes and ſeruices: in the which are contained theſe twoe words (ſolet & debet) as the writs Quo iure, Rationabilibus diuiſis, rationabili eſtoverio, with ſuch like. And in this plee of entrie there be three degrees: The firſt is, where a man demandeth landes or tenements of his owne ſeiſin, after the terme is expired. The ſecond is, where one demaundeth lands or tenements let by another after the terme expired. The third, where one demaundeth lands or tenements of that tenent, that had entry by one, to whom ſome aunceſtor of the plaintife did let it for a term now expired. According to which degrees the writs for more fit remedie are varied. And there is yet a fourth forme, which is without the degrees, and in caſe of a more remote ſeiſin, whereunto the other three degrees do not extend. The writ in the ſecond degree is called a writ of entrie in le per: and a writ in the third degree is called a writ of entrie in le per & cui: and the fourth forme without theſe degrees, is called a writ of entry in le poſt, that is to ſay, after the diſſeiſin which ſuch a one made to ſuch a one. And if any writ of entry be conceiued out of the right caſe, ſo that one forme be brought for another, it is abatable. The form of the firſt degree is ſuch. Praecipe Willielmo quod reddat Petro manerium de B. cum pertinentiis quod ille dimiſit pro termino, qui eſt elapſus. The ſecond is ſuch: Praecipe Petro quod reddat Willielmo manerium

&c. in quod ille non habuit ingreſſum niſi per patrem a
                        〈…〉
                      matrem, avunculum, vel amitam, vel cognatum, avum vel proavum dicti Petri, qui dictum manerium danifit pro termino qui eſt elapſus. The third forme is ſuch: Praecipe Iohanni quod reddat Petro manerium de S. in quod ille non habuit ingreſſum niſi per T. cui talis pater vel mater, vel alius anteceſſor aut cognatus idem dimiſit, cuius haeres eſt ipſe Petrus, pro termino, qui eſt elapſus. And the forme without the degrees is ſuch: In quod non habuit ingreſſum, niſi poſt leſſam, quam talis pater aut mater (ſic vt ſupra) cuius haeres ille eſt, inde fecit pro termino, qui eſt elapſus. And in thoſe foure degrees be comprehended all maner writs of entry, which be without certaintie and number. Thus farre Britton: by whome you may perceiue, that thoſe words (ſolet & debet) and alſo thoſe other words (in le per) (in le per & cut) and (in le poſt) which we meete with many times in bookes ſhortly and obſcurely mentioned, do ſignifie nothing elſe, but diuers formes of this writ, applyed to the caſe, whereupon it is brought; and each forme taking his name from the ſaid words contained in the writ. And of this reade Fitz. in his nat. br. fol. 193. & 194. This writ of entry differeth from an aſſiſe, becauſe it lyeth for the moſt part, againſt him, who entred lawfully, but houldeth againſt lawe: whereas an aſſiſe lyeth againſt him that vnlawfully diſſeiſed: yet ſometime a writ of entrie lyeth vpon an intruſion. Regiſt. orig. fol. 233. b. See the new booke of Entries, verbo. Entre Brevis. fol. 254. colum. 3. I reade of a writ of entry in the nature of an aſſiſe. Of this writ in all his degrees, reade Fleta lib. 5. cap. 34. & ſeqq. 5.
               
                  Entruſion (Intruſio) in our cō
                  mon lawe, ſignifieth a violent or vnlawfull entrance into lands or tenements, being vtterly voide of a poſſeſſour, by him that hath no right nor ſparke of right vnto them. Bracton lib. 4. cap. 2. For example, if a man ſteppe in vpon any lands, the owner whereof lately died, and the right heire, neither by himſelfe nor others, as yet hath taken poſſeſſion of them. What the difference is betweene Abator and Intrudor, I do not well perceiue, except an Abatour be he that ſteppeth into land voide by the death of a tenent in fee, and an Entrudour that doth the like into lands, &c. voide by the death of the tenent for termes of life or yeares. See Fitz. nat. br. fol. 203. F. The authour of the new Termes of law would haue abatement latined, (Interpoſitionem, aut Introitionem per interpoſitionem) and to be reſtrained

to him that entreth before the heyre after the deceaſe of a tenent for life, though the new booke of Entries fol. 63. C. & 205. D. & 519. C. by his confeſſion doth Latine (Abatement) by this word (Intruſionem.) See Abatement. See Diſſeiſin. See Britton, cap. 65. Entruſion is alſo taken for the writ brought againſt an Intrudour, which ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 203.
               
                  Entruſion de gard, is a writ, that lyeth where the Infant within age entred into his lands, and houldeth his Lord out: for in this caſe, the Lord ſhall not haue the writ (De communi cuſtodia) But this. Old nat. br. fol. 90.
               
                  Envre, ſignifieth to take place or effect, to be avaylable, Example: A Releaſe ſhall envure by way of extinguiſhment. Litleton. cap: Releaſe: And a releaſe made to a tenent for terme of life, ſhall inure to him in the Reuerſion.
               
                  Erius, alius Iris, is the flower de. luce. whoſe diuers kindes you haue expreſſed in Gerards herball. lib. 1. ca. 34. The roote of this is mentioned among merchandize or drugs to be garbled. anno. 1. laco. ca. 19.
               
                  Ermins, ſeemeth to come of the french (Ermine. i. mus araneus) it ſignifieth a furre of great price.
               
                  Erminſtreate. See Watlingſtreate.
               
               
                  Errant (Itinerans) commeth of the french (Errer). i. errare) or the ould word (Erre. i. iter) It is attributed to Iuſtices of circuit. pl. cor: f: 15. and Baylifes at large. See Iuſtices in Eyre. and Baylife. See alſo Eyre.
               
               
                  Errour (Error) commeth of the french (Erreur) and ſignifieth more ſpecially in our common law, an errour in pleading or in the proces. Brooke, titulo Errour. And thereuppon the writ, which is brought for remedy of this ouerſight, is called a writ of error, in Latine, De errore corrigendo: thus defined by Fitz. in his nat. br. fol. 20. A writ of errour is that properly, which lyeth to redreſſe falſe iudgement giuen in any court of record, as in the common bench, London, or other citie, hauing power (by the kings charter or preſcription) to hold plee of debt. See the new booke of Entries. verbo. Error. or treſpaſſe aboue the ſumme of twenty ſhillings. This is borowed from the French practiſe, which they call (propoſition d'erreur.) Wherof you may reade in Gregorius De appellation. pag. 36. In what diuerſitie of caſes this writ lyeth, ſee the Regiſter originall in the Table, verb. Errore corrigendo, and Regiſter iudiciall. fol. 34. There is likewiſe a writ of errour to reuerſe a fine. Weſt parte 2 ſect. ſymbol. titulo. Fines 151.
               
                  
                  Errore corrigendo. See Errour.
               
               
                  Eſcambio, is a licence graunted to one, for the making over of a Bill of Exchange to a man ouer Sea. Regiſter. original. fol. 194. a.
               
               
                  Eſcape (Eſcapium) commeth of the French (Eſchapper.. i. aufugere effugere): and ſignifieth in the lawe, a violent or priuie evaſion out of ſome lawfull reſtraint. For example, if the Shyreeue vpon a Capias directed vnto him, take one, and indeavour to carie him to the Gaol, and he in the way, either by violence or by ſlight, breake from him: this is called an Eſcape. pl. cor. fol. 70. Many examples might bee brought out of him and others, but the thing is plaine: Stawnford lib. 1. ca. 26. pl. cor. nameth two kindes of Eſcapes, voluntarie & negligent: Voluntarie is, when one areſteth another for felonie or ſome other crime, and afterwards letteth him goe whither he liſteth. In which eſcape the partie that permitteth it, is by lawe guiltie of the fault committed by him that eſcapeth, be it felonie, treaſon, or treſpas: Negligent eſcape is, when one is arreſted, and afterward eſcapeth againſt his wil that arreſted him, and is not purſued by freſh ſuite, and taken againe, before the partie purſuing hath loſt the fight of him: Idem, cap. 27. but there read more of this mater, for there be doubts worth the conſideration. And of the courſe of puniſhment by the ciuill lawe in this point, reade in practica criminali Claudii de Battandier. reg. 143. reade alſo Cromptons Iuſtice. fol. 35. b. & fol. 36. & 37. and read the newe Termes of lawe. There is an eſcape of beaſts likewiſe: and therefore he that by charter, is quietus de eſcapio in the foreſt, is deliuered of that puniſhment, which by order of the foreſt, lieth vpon thoſe whoſe beaſts be found within the land forbidden: Cromptons Iuriſdict. fo. 196.
               
                  Eſchequer (Scaccarium) commeth of the French (Eſchequier. i. abacus, tabula luſoria) and ſignifieth the place or court of all receipts belonging to the crowne, and is ſo termed, as I take it, by reaſon that in auncient times, the accomptants in that office vſed ſuch tables as Arithmeticians vſe for their calculations, for that is one fignification of (Abacus) amonſt others. Polidor. Virgil. lib. 9. hiſto. Anglo. ſaith that the true word in latine is Statarium, and by abuſe called Scaccarium. In mine opinion, it may well ſeeme to be taken from the German word (ſchatz) ſignifiing as much as (the ſaurus) or (fiſcus) And from this fountaine (no doubt)

ſpringeth the Italian word (Zeccha) ſignifiing a mynt: and Zeccherii aliàs Zecchieri) the officers thereunto belonging, Deſciſ. Geruen 134. M. Cam. in his Britan. p. 113. ſaith that this court or office tooke the name à tabula ad quam aſſidebant, proouing it out of Geruaſius Tilburienſis, whoſe words you may read in him. This court is taken from the Normans, as appeareth by the grand Cuſtumarie. cap. 56. where you may finde the Eſchequier thus deſcribed. The Eſchiquier is called an aſſemblie of high Iuſticiers, to whome it appertaineth to amend that which the Baliffes and other meaner Iuſticiers haue euill done, and vnaduiſedly iudged: and to doe right to all men without delaie, as from the princes mouth: Skene de verbo. ſignificatione: verbo (Scaccarium) hath, out of Paulus Aemilius theſe words: Scaccarium dicitur quaſi Statarium, quòd homines ibi in iure ſiſtantur, vel quòd ſit ſtataria & perennis Curia, cum ceterae curiae eſſent indictivae, nec loco nec tempore ſtatae: where he ſaith alſo of himſelfe, that in Scotland the Eſchequer was ſtable, but the other ſeſſion was deambulatorie, before Iames the 5. qui inſtituit Statariam curiam, cum antea eſſet indictiva: he addeth farder: Others thinke that Scaccarium is ſo called a ſimilitudine ludi Scaccorum, that is the play of the cheſts: becauſe many perſons meete in the Chequer, pleading their cauſes one againſt the other, as if they were fighting in an arraied battaile: Others think that it commeth from an old Saxon word (Scata) as writeth S. Thomas Smith, which ſignifieth treaſure, taxation, or impoſts, whereof accompt is made in the Chequer: This court conſiſteth, as it were, of 2. parts: whereof one is conuerſant eſpecially in the iudiciall hearing and deciding of all cauſes appertaining to the princes cofers, aunciently called Scaccarium computorum, as Ockam teſtifieth in his lucubration: the other is called the receipt of the Eſchequer, which is properly imploied in the receiuing and paiment of money. Crompton in his Iuriſdictions, fo. 105. defineth it to be a court of record, wherein al cauſes touching the reuenewes of the crown are handled. The officers belonging to both theſe, you may find named in M. Camdens Britannia, ca. Tribunalia Angliae, to whome I referre you. The kings exchequer which now is ſetled in Weſtminſter, was in diuers countries of Wales, anno 27. H. 8. ca. 5. but eſpecially ca. 26.
               
                  Eſcheate (Eſchaeta) cōmeth of the French (eſcheoir, i. cadere, accidere,

excidere, and ſignifieth in our common lawe, any lands or other profits, that fall to a Lord within his maner by way of forfeiture, or the death of his tenēt, dying without heire generall or eſpeciall, or leauing his heire within age or vnmaried, Magna chart. ca. 31. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 143. T. &c. Eſcheate is alſo vſed ſome time for the place or circuit within the which the king or other Lord hath eſcheates of his tenents. Bracton li. 3. tract. 2. cap. 2. & pupilla oculi parte 5. ca. 22. Eſcheate thirdly, is vſed for a writ, which lieth, where the tenent hauing eſtate of ſee ſimple in any lands or tenements holden of a ſuperiour lord, dieth ſeiſed without heire generall or eſpeciall. For in this caſe the Lord bringeth this writ againſt him that poſſeſſeth theſe lands after the death of his tenent, and ſhall thereby recouer the ſame in liew of his ſeruices. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 144. Theſe that we call Eſcheats, are in the kingdome of Naples called Excadentiae or bona excadentialia: as: Baro locat excadentias eo modo quo locatae fuerūt ab antiquo: it a quod in nullo debit a ſervitia minuantur, & non remittit gallinam debitam: Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludiis ad feudorum vſum, tit. 1. nu. 29. & nu. 23. v. Maranta ſingularia, verbo Excadentia. And in the ſame ſignification, as we ſay the fee is eſcheated, the Feudiſts vſe (feudum aperitur. li. 1. feud. titulo. 18. §. 2. ti. 15. & ti. 26. §. 4.
               
                  Eſcheatour (Eſcaetor) commeth of (Eſcheate) and ſignifieth an officer that obſerueth the Eſcheates of the king in the countie, whereof he is Eſcheatour, and certifieth them into the Eſchequer: This officer is appointed by the L. treaſurer, and by leters patents from him, and continueth in his office but one yeare, neither can any be Eſcheatour aboue once in 3. yeares. anno. 1. H. 8. cap. 8. & anno 3. eiuſd. ca. 2. See more of this officer and his authoritie in Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. See an. 29. Ed. 1. The forme of the Eſcheatours oath, ſee in the Regiſter original. fol. 201. b. Fitzh. calleth him an officer of record. nat. br. fol. 100. C. becauſe that which he certifieth by vertue of his office, hath the credit of a record. Officium eſcaetriae, is the eſcheatourſhip. Regiſter. orig. fo. 259. b.
               
               
                  Eſcuage (Scutagiū) commeth of the French (Eſcu. i. clypeus) a bucler or ſneild. In our common lawe, it ſignifieth a kinde of knights ſeruice, called ſeruice of the ſhield, whereby the tenent holding is bound to follow his Lord into the Scottiſh or Welſh warres, at his owne charge: for

the which ſee Chyvalrie. But note that Eſcuage is either vncertaine or certaine. Eſcuage vncertaine, is properly Eſcuage, and knights ſeruice, being ſubiect to homage fealtie, ward and mariage, ſo called, becauſe it is vncertaine how often a man ſhalbe called to followe his lord into thoſe wars, and againe what his charge wilbe in each iourney. Eſcuage certaine, is that which yearely payeth a certaine rent in lieu of all ſeruices, being no further bound then to pay his rent, called a knights fee, or halfe a knights fee, or the fourth part of a knights fee, according to his land & this leeſeth the nature of knights ſeruice, though it hold the name of Eſcuage, being in in effect, Soccage. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 84. C.
               
                  Eſnecy (Aeſnecia) is a prerogatiue giuen to the eldeſt coparcener, to chooſe firſt after the inheritance is diuided. Fleta. li. 5. ca. 10. §. in diuiſionem.
               
               
                  Eſplees (Expletia) ſeeme to be the full profits that the ground or land yeldeth, as the hay of the medowes, the feede of the paſture, the corne of the earable, the rents, ſeruices, and ſuch like iſſues: Ingham. It ſeemeth to proceede from the latine (expleo) The profits compriſed vnder this word, the Romans call properly acceſſiones. Nam acceſſionum nomine intelligūtur ea generaliter omnia, quae ex re, de qua agitur, orta ſunt, veluti fructus, partus, & omnis cauſa rei, & quaecunque ex re procedunt. l. 2. Π. De in diem adiectio. li. 50. Π. Ad Trebel. l. 61. §. hiis etiam. Π. de furt. See the new Terms of law.
               
                  Eſquier (Armiger) is in leters little altered from the french (Eſcuier. i. ſcutiger) It ſignifieth with vs a gentleman, or one that beareth armes, as a teſtimony of his nobilitie or gentrie. S. Thomas Smith is of opinion, that at the firſt, theſe were bearers of armes to Lords and Knights, and by that had their name and dignity. Indeede the french word is ſometime tranſlated (Agaſo) that is, a boy to attend or keepe a horſe, and in ould Engliſh writers, it is vſed for a lackey or one that carieth the ſhield or ſpeare of a knight. Maſt. Camden in his Britannia pag: 111. hath theſe words of them: hauing ſpoken of Knights: Hiis proximi fuere Armigers, qui & ſcutiſeri, homines
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad arma dicti, qui vel a clypeis gentilitiis, qua in nobilitatis inſignia geſtant: vel quia principibus & matoribus illis nobilibus ab armis erant, nomen traxerunt. Olim enim ex hiis duo vnicuique militi ſeruiebant, galeam clypeumque geſtabant. &c. Hotoman in the ſixth chapter of his diſputatiōs vpon the feods ſaith, that theſe which the

French men call Eſcuiers) were a militarie kinde of vaſſall haueing ius ſcuti, which is as much to ſay (he there interpreteth him ſelfe) as that they bare a ſhield, and in it the enſignes of their family, in token of their gentility or dignity.
               
                  Eſſendi quietum de telonio, is a writ that lieth for Citizens or burgeſſes of any city or towne, that haue a charter or preſcription to exempt them from tolle, through the whole realme, if it chaunce they be any where exacted the ſame. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 226. Regiſter fol. 258.
               
                  Eſſoine (Eſſonium) commeth of the French (Eſſoniè or exonniè. i. cauſarius miles) he that hath his preſence forborne or excuſed vpon any iuſt cauſe, as ſickneſſe or other incumbrance. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, an alledgement of an excuſe for him that is ſummoned, or ſought for to appeare and anſwer to an action reall, or to performe ſuite to a court baron, vpon iuſt cauſe of abſence. It is as much as (excuſatio) with the Ciuilians. The cauſes that ſerue to Eſſoine any man ſummoned, be diuers & infinite: yet drawne to fiue heads, whereof the firſt is (vltra mare) the ſecond (de terra ſancta) the third (de malo vemendi) which is alſo called the common Eſſoine the fourth is (de malo lecti) the fifth (de ſeruitio Regis) For further knowledge of theſe, I referre you to Glanvile in his whole firſt booke, and Bracton li. 5. tractat. 2. per totum. and Brittan ca. 122. 123. 124. 125. and to Horns mirrour of Iuſtices, li. 1. ca. des Eſſoinis, who maketh mention of ſome more Eſſoines touching the ſeruice of the king celeſtiall, then the reſt doe, and of ſome other points not vnworthie to be knowne. Of theſe eſſoines you may reade farder in Fleta l. 6. c. 8. & ſeqq. & that theſe came to vs frō the Normans, is well ſhewed by the Grand Cuſtumarie, where you may find in a maner all ſaid, that our lawyers haue of this mater, cap. 39. 40. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45.
               
                  Eſſoines and profers, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 21. See Profer.
               
               
                  Eſſonio de malo lecti, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the ſending of 4. lawfull knights to view one that hath eſſoined himſelfe de malo lecti. Regiſter. orig. fol. 8. b.
               
               
                  Eſtabliſhment of dower, ſeemeth to be the aſſurance of dower, made to the wife by the huſband or his freinds, before or at mariage. And aſſignement is the ſetting it out by the heire afterward, according to the Eſtabliſhment. Britton. cap. 102. & 103.
               
                  Eſtandard or Standard, commeth

of the French (Eſtandart) or Eſtendart. i. ſignum, vexillum. It ſignifieth an Enſigne in warre, as well with vs as with them. But it is alſo vſed for the principall or ſtanding meaſure of the King, to the ſcantling whereof, all the meaſures through the land, are or ought to be framed by the Clerk of the market, Aulneger, or other officer according to their functions, For it was eſtabliſhed by the ſtatute of Magna charta. anno 6. H. 3. ca. 9. that there ſhould be but one ſcantlin of weights or meaſures thorough the whole realme, which is ſit hence confirmed by Anno 14. Ed. 3. ca. 12. and many other ſtatutes, as alſo that all ſhould be fitted to the Standard ſealed with the kings ſeale. It is not called a Standard without great reaſon: becauſe it ſtandeth conſtant and immoueable, and hath all other meaſures comming toward it for their conformitie, euen as ſouldiours in field haue their Standard or colours for their direction in their march or skirmiſh. Of theſe Standards and meaſures, reade Britton. cap. 30.
               
                  Eſtate, commeth of the French (Eſtat. i. conditio) and ſignifieth eſpecially in our cō
                  mon lawe, that title or intereſt, which a man hath in lands or tenements, as eſtate ſimple, otherwiſe called fee ſimple, and eſtate conditionall or vpon condition, which is (as Litleton ſaith, li. 3. ca. 5.) either vpon condition indeede, or vpon condition in lawe. Eſtate vpon condition in deede is, where a man by deede indented infeoffeth another in fee, reſeruing to him and to his heires yearelie a certaine rent paiable at one feaſt or at diuers, vpon condition that if the rent be behind, &c. that it ſhall be lawfull to the feoffour and to his heires, to enter in the lands or tenements, &c. Eſtate vpon condition in lawe, is ſuch as hath a conſideration in the lawe annexed to it, though it be not ſpecified in writing. For example, if a man graunt to another by his deed, the office of a Parkerſhip for terme of his life, this eſtate is vpon condition in the lawe, or imploied by lawe. viz. if the Parker ſo long ſhall wel and truly keepe the parke, &c. I reade alſo of an eſtate particular, which is an eſtate for life or for yeares. Parkins Surrenders. 581.
               
                  Eſtopel, ſeemeth to come from the French (eſtouper. i. oppilare, obturare, ſtipare, obſtipare) and ſignifieth

in our common lawe, an impediment or barre of an action growing from his owne fact, that hath or otherwiſe might haue had his action: for example: A tenent maketh a feofment by colluſion to one: the Lord accepteth the ſeruices of the feoffee: by this he debarreth himſelfe of the wardſhip of his tenents heire. Fitz. nat. br. fo. 142. K. Diuers other examples might be ſhewed out of him and Brooke h. titule Sir Edward Cooke. lib. 2. caſu Goddard fol. 4. b. defineth an eſtopel to be a barre or hindrance vnto one to pleade the truth, and reſtraineth it not to the impediment giuen to a man by his owne act onely, but by anothers alſo. li. 3. The caſe of Fines. fol. 88. a.
               
               
                  Eſtovers (Eſtoverium) commeth of the French (eſtouver. 1. fovere) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, nouriſhment or maintenance: for example: Bracton. lib. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 18. num. 2. vſeth it for that ſuſtenance, which a man taken for felonie, is to haue out of his lands or goods for himſelfe and his family, during his impriſonment: and the ſtatute anno 6. Ed. prim. cap. 3. vſeth it for an allowance in meate or cloath. It is alſo vſed for certaine allowances of wood, to be taken out of another mans woods. So is it vſed Weſt. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Edw. 1. M. Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 26. ſaith, that the name of Eſtovers containeth houſebote, hay-bote, and plow-bote: as if he haue in his graunt theſe generall words: De rationabili eſtoverio in boſcis, &c. he may thereby clay me theſe three.
               
                  Eſtrepement, or Eſtripament, (eſtrepementum) commeth of the French word (eſtropier. i. mutilare, obtruncare) the which word the French men haue alſo borowed of the Italians, or rather Spaniards, with whome (Eſtropear) ſignifieth to ſet vpon the racke. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, ſpoile made by the tenent for terme of life, vpon any lands or woods, to the preiudice of him in the reverſion, as namely in the ſtatute anno 6. Ed. 1. ca. 13. And it may ſeeme by the deriuation, that Eſtrepament is properly the vnm eaſurable ſoaking or drawing of the heart of the land by ploughing or ſowing it continually, without manuring, or other ſuch vſage as is requiſite in good husbandrie. And yet (Eſtropier ſignifying mutilare) it may no leſſe conueniently be applied to thoſe, that cut downe trees or loppe them farder then the lawe will beare. This ſignifieth alſo a writte, which lieth in two ſorts, the one is, when a man hauing an action depending

(as a fordom, or dum fuit infra aetatem, or writ of right, or any ſuch other) wherein the demandant is not to recouer dammages, ſieweth to inhibite the tenent for making waſte, during the ſuite. The other ſort is for the demaundant, that is adiudged to recouer ſeiſin of the land in queſtion, and before executiō ſiewed by the writ Habere facias ſeiſinam, for feare of waſte to be made before he can get poſſeſſion, ſieweth out this writ: See more of this, in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 60. & 61. See the Regiſter orig. fol. 76. and the Regiſt. iudicial. fol. 33.
               
                  Eſtreate (extractum vel extracta) commeth of the French (Traict) which among other things ſignifieth a figure or reſemblance: and is vſed in our common lawe, for the copie or true note of an originall writing. For example, of amerciaments or penalties ſet downe in the rolles of a court, to be leauied by the Bay liffe or other officer, of euery man for his offence. See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 75. H. I. K. & 76. A. And ſo is it vſed Weſtm. 2. cap. 8. anno 13. Edw. 1.
               
                  Eſtrey (extrahura) in our common law ſignifieth any beaſt not wilde, found within any Lordſhip, and not owned by any man. For in this caſe, if it being cried, according to lawe, in the market townes adioyning, ſhall not be claimed by the owner within a yeare and a day, it is the Lords of the ſoyle. See Britton cap. 17. See Eſtrayes in the Foreſt, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 7. New booke of Entries. verbo. Treſpas concernant eſtrey.
               
               
                  Evidence, (Evidentia) is vſed in our lawe generally for any proofe, be it teſtimonie of men or inſtrument. Sir Thomas Smith vſeth it in both ſortes. lib. 2. cap. 17. in theſe words: Evidence, in this ſignification, is authenticall writings of contracts after the maner of England, that is to ſay, written, ſealed, and deliuered. And lib. 2. cap. 23. ſpeaking of the priſoner that ſtandeth at the barre, to pleade for his life, and of thoſe that charge him with felonie, he ſaith thus: then he telleth what he can ſay: after him likewiſe all thoſe, who were at the apprehenſion of the priſoner, or who can giue any Indices or tokens, which we call in our language (Evidence) againſt the malefactour.
               
                  Examiner in the Chauncerie or Starre-chamber, (examinator) is an Officer in either Court, that examineth the parties to any ſuite vpon their oathes, or witneſſes producted of either ſide: whereof there be in the Chauncerie two.
               
                  Exception (exceptio) is a ſtoppe

or ſtay to an action, being vſed in the ciuill and common lawe both alike, and in both diuided into dilatorie and peremptorie. Of theſe ſee Bract. lib. 5. tract. 5. per totum, and Britton cap. 91. 92.
               
                  Exchaunge, (excambium, vel cambium) hath a peculiar ſignification in our common lawe, and is vſed for that compenſation, which the warrantor muſt make to the warrantee, valewe for value, if the land warranted be recouered from the warrantee. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 16. & li. 1. cap. 19. It ſignifieth alſo generally as much as (Permutatio) with the Civilians, as the Kings Exchaunge, anno 1. H. 6. cap. 1. & 4. & anno 9. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 7. which is nothing elſe, but the place appointed by the king for the exchaunge of bullion, be it gold or ſiluer, or plate, &c. with the Kings coine. Theſe places haue bene diuers heretofore as appeareth by the ſaide ſtatutes. But now is there only one, viz. the tower of London conjoyned with the mint. Which in time paſt might not be, as appeareth by anno 1. Henrici 6. ca. 4.
               
                  Exchequer, ſee Eſchequer.
               
               
                  Excheatour, ſee Eſcheatour.
               
               
                  Excommunication, (excommunicatio) is thus defined by Panormitan: Excommunicatio eſt nihil aliud, quàm cenſura à Canone, vel Iudice eccleſiaſtico prolata & inſticta, privans legitima communione ſacramentorum, & quandoque hominum. And it is diuided in maiorem & minorem, Minor eſt, per quam quis à Sacramentorum participatione conſcientia vel ſententia arcetur. Maior eſt, quae non ſolùm à Sacramentorum, verùm etiam fidelium communione excludit, & ab omniactu legitimo ſeparat & di vidit. Venatorius de ſentent. excom.
               
               
                  Excommunicato capiendo, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the apprehenſion of him that ſtandeth obſtinately excommunicated for fortie dayes: for ſuch a one not ſeeking abſolution, hath or may haue his contempt certified or ſignified into the Chauncerie, whence iſſueth this writ, for the laying of him vp without baile or mainpriſe, vntill he conforme himſelfe. See Fitz. nat. br. fol. 62. & anno 5. Eliz cap. 23. and the Regiſt. orig. fol. 65. 67. & 70.
               
                  Excōmunicato deliberando, is a writ to the vnder ſhyreeue, for the deliuery of an excōmunicate perſon out of priſon, vpon certificate from the Ordinary of his conformitie to the iuriſdiction eccleſiaſticall. See Fitzh. nat. br: fol. 63. A. and the Regiſter fol. 65. & 67.
               
                  Excommunicato recipiendo, is a writ whereby perſons excommunicate, being for their obſtinacie committed to priſon, and vnlawfully

deliuered thence, before they haue giuen caution to obey the authority of the church, are commaunded to be ſought for and laide vp againe. Regiſter orig. fo. 67. a.
               
               
                  Executione facienda, is a writ commaunding execution of a iudgement: the diuers vſes wherof, ſee in the table of the regiſter iudiciall. verbo Executione facienda.
               
               
                  Executione facienda in Withernamium, is a writ that lyeth for the taking of his catell, that formerly hath conueyed out of the county the catell of another, ſo that the bayliffe hauing authority from the ſhyreeue, to repleuy the cattell ſo conueighed away, could not execute his charge. Regiſter originall, fol. 82. b.
               
               
                  Execution (Executio) in the common law, ſignifieth the laſt performance of an act, as of a fine, or of a iudgement. And the execution of a fine, is the obtaining of actuall poſſeſſion of the things contained in the ſame, by vertue thereof: which is either by entry into the lands, or by writ: whereof ſee Weſt at large, parte. 2. Symbol. titulo Fines. ſect: 136. 137. 138. Executing of iudgements, and ſtatutes, and ſuch like, ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. in Indice. 2. Verbo Execution. S. Ed. Coke. vol: 6. caſu Blumfield. fo. 87. a. maketh two ſorts of executions, one finall, another with a (quouſque) tending to an end. An execution finall is that, which maketh mony of the defendants goods, or extendeth his lands, and deliuereth them to the plaintife. For this the party accepteth in ſatiſfaction: and this is the end of the ſuite, and all that the kings writ commaundeth to be done. The other ſort with a (Quouſque) is tending to an end, and not finall, as in the caſe of (capias ad ſatiſfaciendum &c.) this is not finall: but the body of the party is to be taken, to the intent and purpoſe to ſatiſfie the demaundant: and his impriſonment is not abſolute, but vntill the defendant doe ſatiſfie. Idem. ibidem.
               
               
                  Executour (Executor) is he, that is appointed by any man, in his laſt will and teſtament, to haue the diſpoſing of all his ſubſtance, according to the content of the ſaid will. This Executor is either particular or vniuerſall. Particular, as if this or that thing onely be committed to his charge. Vniuerſall, if all. And this is in the place of him, whom the Ciuilians call haeredem, and the law accounteth one perſon with the party, whoſe executor he is, as hauing all aduantage of action againſt all men, that he had, ſo likewiſe being ſubiect to euery mans action, as farre as himſelfe was. This executor had

his beginning in the ciuill lawe, by the conſtitutions of the Emperours, who firſt permitted thoſe, that thought good by their wils to beſtowe any thing vpon good and godly vſes, to appoint whome they pleaſed, to ſee the ſame performed, and if they appointed none, then they ordained, that the biſhop of the place ſhould haue authoritie of courſe, to effect it. l. 28. C. de Epiſcopis & clericis. And from this in mine opinion, time and experience hath wrought out the vſe of theſe vniuerſall executors, as alſo brought the adminiſtration of their goods that die without will, vnto the Biſhop.
               
                  Exemplificatione, is a writ granted for the exemplification of an originall, ſee the Regiſter original. fol. 290.
               
                  Ex gravi querela, is a writ that lieth for him, vnto whome any lands or tenements in fee within a city, towne or borough, being deviſable, are deuiſed by will, and the heire of the deuiſour entreth into them, and detaineth them from him. Regiſter originall. fol. 244. Old nat. br. fol. 87. See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 198. L.
               
               
                  Exigendarie of the common banke (Exigendarius de banco comuni) is otherwiſe called Exigenter. anno 10. H. 6. cap. 4. and is an officer belonging to that court, for the which ſee Exigenter.
               
               
                  Exigent (Exigenda) is a writ, that lyeth where the defendant in an action perſonall, cannot be found, nor any thing within the county, whereby to be attached or diſtrained, and is directed to the Shyreeue, to proclaime and call fiue county daies one after another, charging him to appeare vnder the paine of outlawrie. Termes of the law. This writ lyeth alſo in an indictment of felony, where the party indicted cannot be found: Smith de Rep. Angl. li. 2. ca. 19. It ſeemeth to be called an Exigent: becauſe it exacteth the party, that is, requireth his expearance or forth-comming, to anſwer the lawe, for if he come not at the laſt daies proclamation, he is ſaide to be quinquies exactus, and then is outlawed. Crompton Iuriſd. fol. 188. and this M. Manwood alſo ſetteth downe for the law of the foreſt. parte. i. of his foreſt lawes pag. 71. See the new booke of Entries, verbo Exigent.
               
               
                  Exigenter (Exigendarius) anno 18. H. 6. ca. 9. is an officer of the court of common plees, of whom there be foure in number: They make all Exigents and proclamations in all actions, where proces of outlawrie doth lie, and writs of ſuperſedeas, as

well as the protonotaries, vpon ſuch exigents, as were made in their offices.
               
                  Ex mero motu, are words formally vſed in any charter of the Prince, whereby he ſignifieth, that he doth that which is cōtained in the charter of his owne will and motion, without petition or ſuggeſtion made by any other. And the effect of theſe words are to barre al exceptions, that might be taken vnto the inſtrument wherein they be contained, by alledging that the Prince in paſſing that charter, was abuſed by any falſe ſuggeſtion: Kitchin fol. 151.
               
                  Exoneratione ſectae, is a writ that lyeth for the kings ward, to be disburdened of all ſuite, &c. to the Countie, Hundred, Leet, or court Baron, during the time of his wardſhip. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 158.
               
                  Exparte latis, is a writ that lyeth for a Bayliffe or Receiuer, that hauing Auditours aſſigned to heare his accompt, cannot obtaine of them reaſonable allowance, but is caſt into priſon by them. Regiſt. fol. 137. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 129. The maner in this caſe is, to take this writ out of the Chauncerie directed to the Shyreeue, to take foure mainperuours to bring his bodie before the Barons of the Echequer at a day certaine, & to warn the Lord to appeare at that time: Newe Tearmes of the lawe. verb. Accompt.
               
               
                  Expectant, is vſed in the common lawe with this word (fee) and thus vſed, it is oppoſite to Fee-ſimple. For example, lands are giuen to a man and his wife in franke mariage, to haue and to hold to them and their heires. In this caſe they haue Fee ſimple. But if it be giuen to them and the heires of their body, &c. they haue tayle and ſee expectant. Kitchin fol. 153. Mathaeus de afflictis vſeth the Adiectiue (expectativa) ſubſtantiuely in the ſame ſignification. Deſciſ. 292. num. 2. pag. 412.
               
                  Explees. See Eſpleeſe.
               
               
                  Expeditate (expeditare) is a word vſuall in the Foreſt, ſignifiing to cut out the balles of the great dogges feet, for the preſeruation of the Kings game. Euery one that keepeth any great dogges not expeditated, forfeiteth to the king 3. ſhillings 4. pence. Crompt. iuriſd. fol. 152. M. Manwood vſeth the ſame word, parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 205. and pag. 212. he ſetteth downe the manner of expeditating dogges heretofore, viz. Quòd tres ortelli abſcindantur ſine pellota de pede anteriori. i. that the three clawes of the ſorefoot on the right ſide, ſhall be cut off by the skinne, whereunto he alſo

addeth out of the ſame ordinance, called the Aſſiſe of the Foreſt, that the ſame maner of expeditating of dogges, ſhall be ſtill vſed and kept, and none other. Quaere whence it groweth, that M. Crompton and hee differ: the one ſaying, that the ball of the foote it cut out, the other that the three foreclawes are pared off by the skinne.
               
                  Expenſis militum levandis, is a writ directed to the ſhyrecue, for levying the allowance for Knights of the Parlament. Regiſter original. fol. 191. b.
               
               
                  Expenſis militum non levandis ab hominibus de antiquo dominico, nec à natiuis, is a writ whereby to prohibite the Shyreeue from levying any allowance for the Knights of the Shire, vpon thoſe that hold in auncient demeſn, &c. Regiſt. orig. fol. 261. b.
               
               
                  Extend (extendere) commeth of the French (eſtendre. i. dilatare, diſpandere, diſtendere) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, to valew the lands or tenements of one bound by ſtatute, &c. that hath forfeited his bond, to ſuch an indifferent rate, as by the yearely rent the obligour may in time be paide his debt. The courſe and circumſtances of this ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 131. Brief d'execution ſur ſtatut Merchant.
               
               
                  Extendi facias, is a writ ordinarily called a writ of extent, whereby the valew of lands, &c. is commaunded to be made and leavied in divers caſes, which ſee in the table of the Regiſter originall.
               
               
                  Extent (extenta) hath two ſignifications, ſometime ſignifiing a writ or commiſſion to the ſhyreeue for the valuing of lands or tenements. Regiſter iudiciall in the Table of the booke: ſometime the act of the Shyreeue or other Commiſſioner, vpon this writ. Brooke titulo. Extent. fol. 313.
               
                  Extinguiſhment, in our common law, ſignifieth an effect of conſolidation. For example, if a man haue due vnto him a yearely rent out of any lands, and afterward purchaſe the ſame lands, now both the property and rent are conſolidated, or vnited in one poſſeſſour, and therefore the rent is ſaid to be extinguiſhed. In like maner it is, where a man hath a leaſe for yeares, and afterwards buyeth the property: this is a conſolidation of the property and the fruites, and is an extinguiſhment of the leaſe, See the terms of lawe.
               
                  Extirpatione, is a writ Iudiciall, that lyeth againſt him, who after a verdict found againſt him for land, &c. doth maliciouſly ouerthrow any houſe vpon it, &c. and it is two-fold, one ante iudicium,
                  
the other poſt iudicium: Regiſter iudiciall fol. 13. 56. 58.
               
                  Extortion (Extortio) ſignifieth in our common law, an vnlawfull or violent wringing of mony or mony worth from any man. For example, if any officer by terrifiing any the kings ſubiects in his office, take more then his ordinary duties, he committeth, and is inditeable of extortion: To this (by M. Weſts iudgment) may be referred the exaction of vnlawfull vſurie, winning by vnlawfull games, and (in one word) all taking of more then is due, by colour or pretence of right; as exceſſiue tolle in milners, exceſſiue prices of ale, bread, victuals, wares, &c. Weſt parte. 2. Simbol. titulo. Indictments ſect: 65. M: Manwood ſaith, that extortion is Colore officis, and not virtute officii. parte. 1. of his foreſt lawes, pag. 216. M. Crompton in his Iuſtice of peace fol. 8. hath theſe words in effect: wrong done by any man is properly a treſpas: but exceſſiue wrong done by any is called extortion: and this is moſt properly in officers, as Shyreeues, Maiors, Baylifes, Eſcheatours, and other officers whatſoeuer, that by colour of their office worke great oppreſſion, and exceſſiue wrong vnto the Kings ſubiects, in taking exceſſiue rewarde, or fees, for the execution of their office. Great diuerſity of caſes touching extortion, you may ſee in Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 48. b. & 49. & 50. See the difference betweene colore officij, & virtute vel ratione officij. Plowd. caſu. Dives. fol. 64. a. This word is vſed in the ſame ſignification in Italy alſo. For Cavalcanus de brachio regio, parte 5. num. 21. thus deſcribeth it. Extortio dicitur fieri, quando Iudex cogit aliquod ſibi dari quod non eſt debitum, vel quodeſt vltrà debitum: vel ante tempus petit id, quod poſt adminiſtratam iuſtitiam debetur.
               
               
                  Extreats. See Eſtreats.
               
               
                  Eyre. See Eire.
               
            
            
               F
               
                  FAculty, (facultas) as it is reſtrained from the original and actiue ſignification, to a particular vnderſtanding in lawe, is vſed for a priuiledge, or eſpeciall power graunted vnto a man by fauour, indulgence, and diſpenſation, to do that which by the common lawe he cannot doe: as to eate fleſh vpon daies prohibited, to mary without bans firſt asked, to hold two or more eccleſiaſticall liuings, the ſonne to ſucceede the father in a benefice; and ſuch like. And for the graunting of theſe, there is an eſpeciall officer vnder the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, called (Magiſter ad facultates) the Maſter of the faculties.
               
                  
                  Fag. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.
               
                  Faint and falſe action, ſeeme to be Synonima in Litleton. fol. 144. For (faint) in the French tongue ſignifieth as much as (fained) in Engliſh.
               
                  Faint pleader (falſa placitatio) commeth of the French (feint) a participle of the verbe (feindre. i. ſimulare, fingere) and (pledoir. i. placitare.) It ſignifieth with vs, a falſe covenous, or colluſory maner of pleading, to the deceipt of a third partie. anno 34. & 35. H. 8. cap. 24.
               
                  Faire, aliás, Feire, (feria) commeth of the French (foire) and ſignifieth with vs, as much as (Nundinae) with the Civilians: that is a ſolemne or greater ſort of market, granted to any towne by priuiledge, for the more ſpeedie and commodious prouiſion of ſuch things, as the ſubiect needeth, or the vtterance of ſuch things, as we abound in, aboue our owne vſes and occaſions: both our Engliſh and the French word ſeeme to come of (Feriae) becauſe it is alwaies incident to the priuiledge of a Faire, that a man may not be areſted or moleſted in it for any other debt, then firſt was contracted in the ſame, or at leaſt was promiſed to be payed there. an. 17. Ed. 4. cap. 2. & anno 1. R. 3. cap. 6.
               
                  Faire pleading, ſee Beau pleader.
               
               
                  Faitours, ſeemeth to be a French word antiquated, or ſomething traduced. For the moderne French word is (faiſeur. i. factor) It is vſed in the ſtatute anno 7. R. 2. cap. 5. And in the euill part, ſignifying a bad doer. Or it may not improbably be interpreted an idle liuer, taken from (faitardiſe) which ſignifieth a kind of numme or ſleepy diſeaſe, proceeding of too much ſluggiſhneſſe, which the Latines call (veternus.) For in the ſaid ſtatute it ſeemeth to be a Synonymon to Vagabound.
               
                  Falke land, aliâs, Folke land. See Copi-hold and Free-hold.
               
               
                  Falſe impriſonment, (falſum impriſonamentum) is a treſpaſſe cō
                  mitted againſt a man, by impriſoning him without lawefull cauſe: it is alſo vſed for the writ which is brought vpon this treſpaſſe. Fitz nat. br. fol. 86. K. & 88. P. v. Broke h. t. See the new booke of Entries. verbo. Falſe impriſonment.
               
               
                  Falſo iudicio, is a writ, that lyeth for falſe iudgement giuen in the county, Hundred, Court Baron, or other courts being no court of record, be the plea reall or perſonall. Regiſter originall fol. 15: Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 17. See the new booke of Entries. verbo Falſe iudgement.
               
               
                  Falſe prophecies. See Prophecies.
               
               
                  Falſo returno bre
                        ••
                     im. is a writ

lying againſt the Syreeue, for falſe returning of writs. Regiſter iudic. fo. 43. b.
               
               
                  Falſifie, ſeemeth to ſignifie as much, as to proue a thing to be falſe. Perkins Dower. 383. 384. 385.
               
                  Farding, or farthing of golde. ſeemeth to be a come vſed in auncient times, containing in valew the fourth part of a noble. viz. twenty pence ſiluer, and in weight the ſixth part of an ounce of gould, that is, of fiue ſhillings in ſiluer, which is threepence and ſomething more. This word is is found anno 9. H. 5. ſtat. 2. ca. 7. thus: Item that the king doe to be ordained good and iuſt weight, of the noble, halfe noble, and farthing of gould, with the rates neceſſary to the ſame, for euery city, &c. by which place it plainly appeareth, to haue bene a coine, as well as the noble and halfe noble.
               
                  Farding deale aliâs Farundell of land (Quadrantata terrae) ſignifieth the fourth part of an acre. Crompt. Iuriſd fol. 220. Quadrantata terrae. is read in the regiſter orig. fol. 1. b. where you haue alſo Denariata & 
                        •
                     bolata, ſolidata, & librata terrae, which by probabilitie muſt riſe in proportion of quantitie from the farding deale, as an halfepeny, peny, ſhilling, or pound riſe in valew and eſtimation: then muſt 
                     
                        •
                     bolata be halfe an acre, denariata the acre, ſolidata twelue acres, & librata twelue ſcore acres, and yet I find (viginti libratas terrae vel reditus. Regiſt. original. fol. 94. a & fol. 248. b. Whereby it ſeemeth, that librata terrae, is ſo much as yeeldeth twenty ſhillings per annum, and centum ſoliditas terrarum tenement orum & redituum. fol. 249. a. And in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 87. F. I find theſe words: viginti libratas terrae vel reditus, which argueth it to be ſo much land as twenty ſhillings per annum. See Furlong.
               
               
                  Fate or Fat: is a great wooden veſſell, which among brewers in London, is ordinarily vſed at this day, to meaſure mault by, containing a quarter, which they haue for expedition in meaſuring. This word is read anno 1. H. 5. cap. 10. & anno 11. H. 6. cap. 8.
               
                  Fealtie (fidelitas) commeth of the French (feaulte. i. fides) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, an oath taken at the admittance of euery tenent, to be true to the Lord, of whom he holdeth his land. And he that holdeth land by this onely oath of fealty, holdeth in the freeſt maner, that any man in England vnder the king may hold: becauſe all with vs that haue fee, hold (per fidem & fiduciam) that is, by fealtie at the leaſt. Smith de Repub. Anglor. li. 3.

                  cap. 8. for, fidelitas eſt de ſubſtantia feudi, as Dwarenus ſaith de feud. cap. 2. num. 4. and Mathaeus de afflictis deciſ. 320. num. 4. pag. 465. ſaith, that fidelitas eſt ſubſtantiale feudi, non ſervitium. The particulars of this oath, as it is vſed among the feudiſts, you may reade well expreſſed by Zaſius in his Tractate de feudis. part. 7. num. 15. & 16. which is woorth the comparing with the vſuall oath taken here in our part of Britannie. This fealtie is alſo vſed in other nations, as the Lombards and Burgundians. Caſſanaus de conſuet. Burgund. pag. 419. & 420. And indeed the very firſt creation of this tenure, as it grew from the loue of the lord toward his followers, ſo did it bind the tenent to fidelitie, as appeareth by the whole courſe of the feods. And the breach thereof is loſſe of the fee. Duarenus in Commentariis feudorum cap. 14. num. 11. & Weſenbecius in tract. de feudis cap. 15. num. 4 & ſeqq. Antonius Contius in methodo feudorum cap. Quibus modis feudum amittitur. Hotoman in his Commentaries (De verbis feudalibus) ſheweth a double fealtie: one generall, to be performed by euery ſubiect to his prince: the other ſpeciall, required only of ſuch, as in reſpect of their fee are tyed by this oath toward their landlords: both we may reade of in the grand Cuſtomary of Normandy, being of courſe performed to the Duke, by all reſient within the Dutchie. The effect of the words turned into latine by the Interpreter, is this: Fidelitatem autem tenentur omnes reſidentes in Provincia Duci facere & ſervare: Vnde tenentur ſe ei innocuos in omnibus & fideles exhibere, nec aliquid ipſum incommodi procurare: nec eius inimicis praebere contra ipſum conſilium vel iuvamen: & qui ex hoc inventi fuerint ex cauſa manifeſta, notabiles & traditores Principis reputantur. Et omnes eorum poſſeſſiones perpetuae Principi remanebunt, ſi ſuper hoc convicti fuerint vel damnati: Omnes enim in Normania tenentur Principi fidelitatem obſervare. Vnde nullus homag ium vel fidelitatem alicuius poteſt recipere, niſi ſalva Principis fideliiate. Quod etiam eſt in eorum receptione ſpecialiter exprimendum. Inter Dominos autem alios & homines fides taliter debet obſeruari, quòd neuter in perſonam alterius perſonalem violentiam, ſeu percuſſionis iniectionem cum violētia, debet irrogari. Si quis e
                        ••
                     m eorū ex hoc fuerit accuſatus in curia & conuictus, feudum omne debet amittere &c. This fealty ſpeciall, is with vs performed either by free men or by villeines. The forme of both ſee anno 14. Ed. 1. ſtat. 2. in theſe words: when a freeman ſhall doe fealty to his

lord, he ſhall hould his right hand vpon a booke, and ſhal ſay thus: Heare you my lord R. that I. P. ſhalbe to you both faithfull and true, and ſhall owe my fealty to you for the land that I hould of you at the terms aſſigned: So help me god and all his ſaints. When a villaine ſhall doe fealty vnto his lord, he ſhall hould his right hand ouer the booke, and ſhall ſay thus: Heare you my lord. A. that I. B. from this day forth vnto you ſhalbe true and faithfull, and ſhall owe you fealty for the land that I hould of you in villenage, and ſhalbe iuſtified by you in body and goods: So helpe me god & all his Saints. See the Regiſter originall. fol. 302. a.
               
               
                  Fee (Feodum, aliâs Feudum) commeth of the French) Fief. i. praedium beneficiarium, vel res clientelaris) and is vſed in our common lawe, for all thoſe lands which we hold by perpetuall right: as Hotoman well noteth verbo Feodumide verbis f
                        •
                     udalibus: our auncient lawyers either not obſeruing whēce the word grew, or at the leaſt not ſufficiētly expreſſing their knowledge, what it ſignified among them, from whome they tooke it, Feudum whence the word (Fief) or fee commeth, ſignifieth in the German language (beneficium cuius nomine opera quaedam gratiae teſtifieandae cauſa debentur, Hotoman diſput. ca. 1. And by this name goe all lands & tenements, that are held by any acknowledgement of any ſuperioritie to a higher Lord. They that write of this ſubiect, doe diuide all lands and tenements, wherein a man hath a perpetuall eſtate to him and his heires, &c, into Allodium & Feudum. Allodium is defined to be euerie mans owne land, &c. which he poſſeſſeth meerely in his owne right, without acknowledgement of any ſeruice, or paiment of any rent vnto any other, and this is a propertie in the higheſt degree, and of ſome it is called (allaudium ab a privatiua particula, & laudum vel laudatio, vt ſit praedium cuius nullus author eſt niſi deus. Eſt enim laudare, vel Nouio teſte, nominare. Quod & Budaeus docuit ad Modeſtinum. l. Herennius 63. Π. de haere. inſtitu. Prataeus. verbo. Allaudium. Hotoman in verb. feuda. Feudum is that, which we hold by the benefite of another, and in the name whereof we owe ſeruice, or pay rent, or both, to a ſuperior lord. And all our land here in England (the Crowne land which is in the kings owne hands in the right of his crowne, excepted) is in the nature of Feudum or fee, for though many a man hath land by deſcent from his Aunceſtors, and many another hath

dearely boughtland for his money, yet is the land of ſuch nature, that it cannot come to any, either by diſcent or purchaſe, but with the burthē that was laid vpon him, who had novel fee, or firſt of all receiued it as a benefite from his Lord, to him and to all ſuch, to whome it might diſcend, or any way be conueied from him. So that if we will reckon with our hoſt (as the proverbe is) there is no man here, that hath directum dominium. i. the very propertie or demaine in in any land, but the prince in the right of his crowne. Camd. Britan. pag. 93. for though he that hath fee, hath ius perpetuum, & vtile dominium: yet he oweth a dutie for it: & therefore is it not ſimply his owne. Which thing I take thoſe words, that we vſe for the expreſſing of our deepeſt right in any lands or tenements, to import: for he that can ſay moſt for his eſtate, ſaith thus: I am ſeiſed of this or that land or tenement in my demaine, as of fee. Seiſitus inde in dominico meo vt de feudo, and that is as much, as if he ſaid, it is my demaine or proper land after a ſort: becauſe it is to me and mine heires forever: yet not ſimply mine, becauſe I hold it in the nature of a benefite from another. yet the ſtatute anno 37. H. 8. ca. 16. vſeth theſe words of lands inveſted in the crowne: but it proceedeth from the ignorance of the nature of this word (fee) for fee cannot be without fealty ſworne to a ſuperiour, as you may reade partly in the word (Fealtie) but more at large in thoſe that write de feudis: and namely Hotoman, both in his commentaries and diſputations. And no man may graunt, that our king or Crowne oweth fealty to any ſuperior but God onely. Yet it may be ſaid, that land, &c. with vs is termed fee in two reſpects; one, as it belongeth to vs and our heires for ever: and ſo may the Crowne land be called Fee: the other, as it holdeth of another, which is and muſt be farre from our Crowne. Britton ca. 32. defineth fee to this effect. Fee is a right conſiſting in the perſon of the true heire, or of ſome other, that by iuſt title hath, purchaſed it. Fleta ſaith that Feudum eſt quod quis tenet ex quacun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cauſa ſibi & haeredibus ſuis, ſiue ſit tenementum, ſiue reditus, qui non proveniunt ex camera, & alio modo dicitur feudum, ſicut eius quifeoffat, & quod quis tenet ab alio: ſicut dicitur: talis tenet de tali tot feuda per ſervitium militare. li. 5. ca. 5. §. Feudum autem. And all that write de feudis, doe hold that (Feudatarius) hath not an entire propertie in his fee: Nay, it is held by right learned men, that theſe fees were at the firſt invention or creation

of them, either all or ſome of them temporarie, and not perpetuall and hereditarie. Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludio fend. ca. 2. nu. 133. The diuiſions of (fee) in diuers reſpects are many, and thoſe though little knowne to vs in England, yet better worthie to known, then we commonly thinke. But for our preſent purpoſe, it is ſufficient to diuide Fee into two ſorts: Fee abſolute, otherwiſe called ſimple: and Fee conditionall, otherwiſe termed fee tayle: Fee ſimple (Feudum ſimplex) is that, whereof we are ſeiſed in theſe generall words (to vs and our heires for ever.) Fee tayle (Feudum talliatum) is that, whereof we are ſeized to vs and our heires with limitation, that is, the heires of our body, &c. And fee taile is either generall or ſpeciall. Generall is, where land is giuen to a man and the heires of his body. The reaſon whereof is giuen by Litleton ca. 2. li. 1. becauſe a man ſeiſed of land by ſuch a gift, if he marie one or more wiues, and haue no iſſue by them, and at the length marie another, by whome he hath iſſue, this iſſue ſhall inherit the land: Fee taile ſpeciall is that, where a man and his wife be ſeiſed of lands to them, and the heires of their two bodies. The reaſon is likewiſe giuen by Litleton in the ſame place, becauſe in this caſe, the wife dying without iſſue, and he marying another, by whome he hath iſſue, this iſſue, cannot inherit the land, being ſpecially giuen to ſuch heires, &c. this Fee taile hath the originall, from the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 1. which was made anno 13. Ed. 1. yet ſee Bracton. li. 2. ca. 5. nu. 3. hiis verbis. Item quaedam abſoluta & larga, & quaedam ſtricta & coarctata, ſicut certis haeredibus to whome adde Plowden, caſu Willion. fo. 235. a. b. & ſeqq. for before that ſtatute, all land giuen to a man and his heires, either generall or ſpeciall, was accompted in the nature of fee: and therefore held to be ſo firmely in him to whome it was giuen: that, any limitation notwithſtanding, he might alienate and fell it at his pleaſure: much like that which the Civilians call (Nudum praeceptum) binding rather by way of counſell and aduice, then compulſion or reſtrainte: And this thing ſeeming vnreaſonable to the wiſedome of our realme, becauſe ſo a man meaning well to this or that poſterity of himſelfe or his freinds, might be forthwith deceiued of his intention, the ſaid ſtatute was made for redreſſe of this inconvenience, wereby it is ordained, that if a man giue lands in fee, limiting the heires to whome it ſhall deſcend, with a reverſion

to himſelfe or his heires for default, &c. that the forme and true meaning of his gift, ſhalbe obſerued. Wherefore in what conſcience our lawyers haue invented meanes, ſo eaſily to cut off this forme of gift, it is to be conſidered. He that hath fee then, holdeth of another by ſome dutie or other, which is called ſeruice, and of this ſeruice and the diuerſitie thereof, See Chivalrie and Seruice. He that will learne from what fountaine theſe feuds or fees did firſt ſpring let him read Antonius Contius his firſt chapter de methodo feudorum, where he ſhal receiue great light for his guide into ſo obſcure a dungeon. See Liege. This word, (Fee) is ſometime vſed with vs, for the compas or circuit of a Lordſhip or maner. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 5. in theſe words: In eadem villa & de eodem feodo. Thirdly it is vſed for a perpetuall right incorporeall: as to haue the keeping of priſons in fee. old. nat. br. fol. 41. Foſter in fee eod. fol: 6. Rent granted in fee. eod. fo. 8 Shyreeue in fee. ann 28. Ed pri. ſtat. 3. ca. 8. Laſtly fee ſignifieth a reward or ordinarie dutie, that a man hath giuen him for the execution of his office, or the performance of his induſtrie in his art or ſcience: as the lawyer or the phiſitian is ſaid to haue his fee, when he hath the conſideration of his paines taken, the one with his client, the other with his patient.
               
                  Fee expectant, is by the feudiſts termed feudum expectativum, or expectatiua, ſubſtantiuely vſed, Mathaeus de Afflictis deciſ. 292. nu. 2. pag. 417. See expectant.
               
               
                  Fee fcrm (feudi firma) is a compound of Fee. whereof ſee (Fee) and (ferm. i. coloma, villa, praedium ruſticum, of (Ferme) commeth Fermier du prince. i. manceps, redemptor publicorum vectigalium, Publicanus,) Feeferm ſignifieth in our common lawe, land held of another in fee, that is in perpetuitie to himſelfe and his heires, for ſo much yearely rent, as it is reaſonably worth, more or leſſe, ſo it be the fourth part of the worth, old tenurcs, See expoſition of the ſtatute of Gloceſter anno 6. Ed. pri. without homage, fealtie or other ſeruices, other then be eſpecially compriſed in the feofment, but by Fitzh. it ſeemeth that the third part of the value may be appointed for the rent, or the finding of a chaplaine to ſing diuine ſeruice, &c. nat. br. fol. 210. C. And the nature of it is this, that if the rent be behind and vnpaid for the ſpace of two yeares, then the feoffour or his heires haue action to recouer the lands as their demeſnes: Britton ca. 66. nu. 4. but obſerue out of Weſt. ſymbol. parte 1. lib. 2. ſect. 463.

that the feofment may containe ſeruices and ſuite of court, as well as rent: and the author of the new terms of law, ſaith, that Feeferm oweth fealtie, though not expreſſed in the feofment, for that fealtie belongeth to all kind of tenures: This is neere the nature of that, which among the Civilians is called (ager vectigalis, qui in perpetuum licetur. i. hac lege vt quam diu pro eo vectigal pendatur, tam diune
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ipſis qui conduxerunt, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iis qui in locum eorum ſucceſſerunt, auferri eum liceat. l. 1. Π. ſiager vectigalis, &c.
               
               
                  Feede (Feida alias Faida) ſignifieth in the German toung Guerram. i. (capitales inimicitias vel bellum) Hotoman diſputat: de feudis ca. 2. B. Foemina dicitur faidam non facere. gloſſ: in §. vlt. De lege Conradi lib. 2. de feudis, by reaſon that women by the law, are not ſubiect to warfare, to battell or proclamatiō made for that cauſe. Skene de verbo: ſignif. verbo Aſſidatio. M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words writeth it (Feeth) and ſaith likewiſe, that it ſignifieth capitales inimicitias, and alſo that (Feud) vſed now in Scotland and the north parts of England, is the ſame, and that is, a combination of kindred to reuenge the death of any of their blood againſt the killer and all his race.
               
                  Felonie (Felonia) ſeemeth to come of the french (Felonnie. ā. impetuoſitas, atrocitas, immiſericordia) Felonia (ſaith Hotomande verbis feudalibus) non praeſcisè contumaciam vaſalli in dominum, huiuſue in vaſallum perfidiam ſignificat, verum quoduis capitale facinus. And againe. Felonia Gothis & Longobardis dicitur quod Germanis hodie Schelmarey, latinis Scelus. S. Ed. Cooke ſaith thus. Ideo dicta eſt felonia qua fieri debet felleo animo. li. 4. fo. 124. b. Hoſtienſis in ſua ſumma titulo, De feudis, and others ſpeak of this to this effect. Felonia, aliàs Fallonia eſt culpa vel iniuria, propter quam vaſallus amittit feudum. Sedhec reſpicit dominum feudi. Eſt & alia fallonia quae non reſpicit dominum, ſc. quando vaſallus interficit fratrem vel filium ſuum, vel filium fratris, vel aliud crimen commiſit quod parricidii appellatione continetur. & plures aliae falloniae tam reſpicientes dominum, quàm alios propter quas feudum amittitur ibi not antur. We account any offence felonie that is in degree next vnto petit treaſon, and compriſeth diuers particulars vnder it, as murder, theft, killing of a mans ſelfe, Sodometrie, rape, wilfull burning of houſes, and diuers ſuch like, which are to be gathered eſpecially out of ſtatutes, whereby many offences are dayly made felonie, that before were not. Felonie is diſcerned from lightter

offences by this, that the puniſhment thereof is death. How be it this is not perpetuall. For petit larcenie (which is the ſtealing of any thing vnder the valew of twelue pence) is felony, as appeareth by Broke titulo Coron. num. 2. his reaſon is, becauſe the indictment againſt ſuch a one muſt runne with theſe words, (felonicè cepit) and yet is this not puniſhed by death though it be loſſe of goods. Any other exception I know not, but that a man may call that felony, which is vnder petit treaſon, and puniſhed by death. And of this there be two ſorts: one lighter, that for the firſt time may be releeued by cleargie, another, that may not. And theſe you muſt alſo learne to know by the ſtatutes: for Cleargie is allowed, where it is not expreſſely taken away. Of theſe maters reade Stawnfords firſt booke of his pl. cor. from the end of the ſecond Chapter, to the 39. and the ſtatutes whereby many offences be made felonie, ſince he writ that learned booke. See alſo Lamberds Iuſtice of peace, lib. 2. cap. 7. in a Table drawne for the purpoſe. As alſo lib. 4. cap. 4. pag. 404. and Crompton in his iuſtice of peace. fol. 32. &c. Felonie is alſo puniſhed by loſſe of lands not entayled, and goods or chatels, as well real as perſonall: and yet the ſtatutes make difference in ſome caſes touching lands, as appeareth by the ſtatute, anno 37 H. 8. cap. 6. Felonie ordinarily worketh corruption of bloud, though not, where a ſtatute ordaineth an offence to be felonie, and yet withall ſaith, that it ſhall not worke corruption of bloud. As anno 39. Eliz. cap. 17. How many wayes felonie is comitted, ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. pag. 32. &c.
               
               
                  Feyre. See Fayre.
               
               
                  Felo de ſe, is he that committeth felonie by murthering himſelfe. See Cromptons Iuſtice of peace fol. 28. and Lamberds Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 7. pag. 243.
               
                  Fencemoneth, is a moneth, wherein it is vnlawful to hunt in the Foreſt, becauſe in that moneth the female Deere do faune: and this moneth beginneth 15. dayes before Midſomer, and endeth 15. dayes after. So that to this moneth there be 31. daies. See Manwood parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 86. but more at large parte ſecunda. cap. 13 per totum. It is alſo called the defence moneth, that is, the forbidden moneth, and the word defence is vſed in like ſort. Weſt. 2. cap. 47. anno 13. Ed. 1. in theſe words: All waters where Salmons be taken, ſhall be in defence for taking of Salmons from the Natiuitie, &c.
               
                  
                  Fennycricke, or rather Fenegreeke, (Foenum Graecum) is a medicinall plant or herbe, ſo called, becauſe it groweth like hey, and commeth out of Greece. Of this you may reade more in Gerrards herball. lib. 2. cap. 483. The ſeede therof is reckoned among drugs, that are to be garbled. an. 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Feofment (feoffamentum) by the opinion of Sir Thomas Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 3. cap. 8. and M. Weſt part. prim. ſymbol. lib. 2. ſect. 280. is deſcended from the Gottiſh word (feudum) which you haue interpreted in (fee) and ſignifieth (donationem feudi) But (as M. Weſt alſo addeth) it ſignifieth in our common lawe, any gift or graunt of any honors, caſtels, maners, meſuages, lands, or other corporall and immoueable things of like nature, vnto another in ſee ſimple, that is to him and his heires for euer, by the deliuerie of ſeiſin and poſſeſſion of the thing giuen, whether the gift be made by word or writing. And when it is in writing, it is called a deed of feofment, and in euery feofment the giuer is called the Feaffour feoffator,) and he that receiueth by vertue thereof, the Feoffee (feoffatus) and Litleton ſaith, that the proper difference betweene a feoffour and a donour is, that the feoffour giueth in fee-ſimple, the donour in fee-taile. lib. 1. cap. 6.
               
                  Feodarie, aliâs, Feudarie, aliâs, feudatarie, (feudatarius) is an officer authorized and made by the maſter of the Court of wards and liueries, by leters patents vnder the ſeale of that office. His function is to be preſent with the Eſcheater at the finding of any office, and to giue euidence for the king as well cō
                  cerning the valew, as the tenure, and alſo to ſuruey the land of the ward, after the office found, and to rate it. He is alſo to aſſigne the kings widowes their dowers and to receiue all the rents of the wards lands, with in his circuit, and to anſwer them to the Receiuer of the court of wardes and liueries. This officer is mentioned anno 32. H. 8. cap. 46.
               
                  Ferdfare, ſignificat quietantiam eundi in exercitum. Fleta libr. pri. cap. 47.
               
                  Ferdwit, ſignificat quietantiam murdri in exercitu. Fleta libr. prim. cap. 47.
               
                  Ferm (firma) commeth of the French (Ferme, i. colonia, villa, praedium,) and ſignifieth with vs, houſe or land, or both, taken by Indenture of leaſe, or leaſe parol. It may likewiſe not vnaptly be coniectured, that both the French and Engliſh word came from the Latine (firmus) for

                  (locare ad firmum) I find ſomtime to ſignifie with others, as much as (to ſet or let to farme) with vs. The reaſon whereof may be in reſpect of the ſure hould they haue aboue tenents at will. v. vocabul. vtriuſque iuris. verbo Afflictus. The authour of the new Termes of lawe, deriueth this word from the Saxon (feormian) which ſignifieth to feed or yeeld victuall. For in auncient time the reſeruations were as well in victuals as money, which I leaue to the iudgemet of the Reader. How many wayes ferme is takē, ſee Plowden. caſu Wrotheſley. fol. 195. a. b.
               
               
                  Feudarie. See Feodarie.
               
               
                  Fieri facias, is a writ iudiciall, that lyeth at all times within the yeare and day, for him that hath recouered in an action of debt or dammages, to the Shyreeue, to commaund him to leuie the debt or the dammages of his goods, againſt whome the recouerie was had. This writ hath beginning from Weſtm. 2. cap. 18 anno 13. Ed. 1. See old nat. br. fol. 152. See great diuerſitie thereof in the Table of the Regiſter iudiciall. verbo. Fieri facias.
               
               
                  Fifteenth (Decimaquinta) is a tribute, or impoſition of mony laide vpon euery city, borough, and other towne through the realme, not by the polle, or vpon this or that man, but in general, vpon the whole city or towne, ſo called, becauſe it amounteth to one fifteenth parte of that, which the city or towne hath bene valued at of ould. This is now a dayes impoſed by parlament: and euery towne through the realme, great or leſſe, knoweth what a fiftenth for themſelues doth amount vnto, becauſe it is perpetuall: whereas the ſubſidie, which is raiſed of euery particular mans lands or goods, muſt needs be vncertaine, becauſe the eſtate of euery ſeuerall man is ſo tickliſh and vncertaine. And in that regard am I driuen to thinke that this fifteenth is a rate aunciently laide vpon euery towne, according to the land or circuit belonging vnto it. whereof M. Camden hath many mentions in his Britannia. In ſtead of the reſt take a fewe page. 168. of Wels in Somerſet ſhire he writeth thus. Quo tempore, vt teſtatur ceaſualis Angliae liber, Epiſcopus ipſum oppidum tenuit, quod pro quinquiginta hidis geldauit: And pag. 171. of Bathe. Geldabat pro viginti hidis, quando Schira geldabat. thirdly, pa. 181. of ould Sariſbury thus pro quinquaginta hidis geldabat. and theſe rates were taken out of Domes day in the Eſchequer. ſo that this ſeemed in ould time, to be a yearely tribute in certainty, whereas now, though the rate be

certaine, yet it is not leuied but by Parlament. See Taſke, ſee Quinſie me.
               
               
                  Filazer (Filazarius) commeth of the french (Filace. i. filum, filacium) it is an officer in the common plees, whereof there be 14. in number: they make out all originall proces, as well reall as perſonall and mixt: and in actions meerely perſonall, where the defendants be returned or ſommoned, there goeth out the diſtreſſe infinite vntill apparence. If he be returned Nihil, then proces of Capias infinite, if the plaintife will, or after the third Capias, the plaintife may goe to the Exigenter of the Shire, where his originall is grounded, and haue an Exigent and proclamation made: And alſo the Filazer maketh foorth all writs of viewe in cauſes, where the view is prayed: he is alſo allowed to enter the imparlance, or the generall iſſue in common actions, where apparence is made with him, and alſo iudgement by confeſſion in any of them before iſſue be ioyned, and to make out writs of execution thereupon. But although they entred the iſſue: yet the protonotarie muſt enter the iudgement, if it be after verdict. They alſo make writs of Superſedeas, in caſe where the defendant appeareth in their offices, after the Capias awarded.
               
                  Filctale. See Sothale.
               
               
                  File (filacium) is a threed or wyer, whereon writs, or other exhibits in courts, are faſtened for the more ſafe keeping of them.
               
                  Finders. anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. cap. vnico. anno 14. R. 2. cap. 10. ſeeme to be all one with thoſe, which in theſe dayes we call ſearchers.
               
                  Fine (finis) commeth of the French (fin. i. finis) and hath diuers applications in our commō lawe: ſometime being vſed for a formall or ceremonious conueyance of lands or tenements, or (as Weſt ſaith, titulo Fines. ſect. 25.) of any thing inheritable, being in eſſe tempore finis, to the end to cut off all controuerſies. Weſt parte 2. ſymb. ſect. 1. defineth a fine in this ſignification: couenants made before Iuſtices, and entred of Record. And out of Glanvile thus lib. 8. cap. 1. Finis eſt amicabilis compoſitio & finalis concordia, ex conſenſu & licentia Domini Regis, vel eius Iuſticiariorum. And lib. 9. cap. 3. Talis concordia finalis dicitur, eo quod finem imponit negotio, adeò vt neutra pars litigantium ab eo de caetero poterit recedere. And out of Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 28. num. 7. thus: Finis ideò dicitur finalis concordia, quia imponit finem litibus, & eſt exceptio peremptoria. The authour of

the new termes of lawe, defineth it to be a finall agreement had betweene perſons concerning any land or rent, or other thing, whereof any ſuite or writ is betweene them hanging in any court. See the new booke of Entries, verbo Fines. This fine is of ſo high a nature, that Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 7. num. 3. hath theſe words of it. Item immediate pertinet ad Regem querela finis factae in curia Domini Regis, & non obſervatae. Et eſt ratio, quia nemo poteſt finem interpretari niſi ipſe Rex, in cuius curia fines fiunt. See alſo anno 27. Ed. prim. ſtat. prim. cap. prim. The Civilians would call this ſolemne contract tranſactionem iudicialem de re immobili, becauſe it hath all the properties of a tranſaction, if it be conſidered in his originall vſe. v. Weſemb. parat. titulo de tranſact. For it appeareth by the writers of the common lawe aboue named, that it is nothing but a compoſition or concord acknowledged and recorded before a competent Iudge, touching ſome hereditament or thing immoueable, that earſt was in controuerſie betweene thoſe, that be parties to the ſame concord: and that for the better credit of the tranſaction, being by imputation made in the preſence of the king, becauſe it is leuied in his Court: and therefore doth it bind women couert being parties, and others whom ordinarily the lawe diſableth to tranſact, onely for this reaſon, that all preſumption of deceipt or euill meaning is excluded, where the king is priuy to the acte. But diſcourſe of wit and reaſon, hath in time wrought other vſes of this concord, which in the beginning was but one: as namely, to ſecure the title that any man hath in his poſſeſſion againſt all men: to cut off intayles, and with more certaintie to paſſe the intereſt or the title of any land or tenement, though not controuerted, to whome we thinke good, either for yeares or in fee. In ſo much that the paſſing of a fine, in moſt caſes, now is it but mera fictio iuris, alluding to the vſe for the which it was invented, and ſuppoſing a doubt or controuerſie, where in truth none is: and ſo not onely to worke a preſent preſcription againſt the parties to the concord or fine, and their heires, but within fiue yeares againſt all others, not expreſly excepted (if it be leuied vpon good conſideration, and without Couin) as women couert, perſons vnder 21. yeares, or priſoners, or ſuch as be out of the realme at the time when it was acknowledged.

Touching this mater, ſee the ſtatutes. anno 1. Rich. 3. cap. 7 anno 4. H. 7. cap. 24. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 36. & anno 31. Elizab. ca. 2. This fine hath in it fiue eſſentiall parts: the originall writ taken out againſt the conizour: the kings licence giuing the parties libertie to accord, for the which he hath a fine called the Kings ſiluer, being accompted a part of the Crownes reuenew. Thirdly, the concord it ſelfe, which thus beginneth: Et eſt concordia talis, &c. Fourthly, the note of the fine, which is an abſtract of the original concord, and beginneth in this maner: Sc. Inter R. querentem. & S. & E. vxorem eius, deforciantes, &c. Fifthly, the foot of the fine, which beginneth thus: Hac eſt finalis concordia facta in Curia domini Regis, apud Weſtm. à die Paſchae in quindecim dies, anno &c. So as the foote of the fine includeth all, containing the day, yeare, and place, and before what Iuſtice the concord was made. Coke vo. 6. caſu Teye. fol. 38. & 39. This fine is either ſingle or double: A ſingle fine, is that by which nothing is graunted or rendred backe againe by the Cognizeeſe to the Cognizours, or any of them. A double fine containeth a graunt and render backe againe, either of ſome rent, common, or other thing, out of the land, or of the land it ſelfe, to all or ſome of the Cognizours, for ſome eſtate, limiting thereby many times Remainders to ſtraungers, which be not named in the writ of couenant. Weſt vbi ſupra, ſect. 21. Againe, a fine is of the effect, deuided into a fine executed, and a fine executory. A fine executed is ſuch a fine, as of his owne force giueth a preſent poſſeſſion (at the leaſt in law) vnto the Cognizee, ſo that he needeth no writ of (Habere facias ſeiſinam) for the execution of the ſame, but may enter; of which ſort is a fine (ſur cognizance de droit come ceo que il ad de ſon done) that is vpon acknowledgement, that the thing mentioned in the concord be ius ipſius cognizati, vt illa quae idem habet de dono Cognitoris. Weſt. ſect. 51. K. and the reaſon of this ſeemeth to be, becauſe this fine, paſſeth by way of releaſe of that thing, which the cognizee hath already (at the leaſt by ſuppoſition) by vertue of a former gift of the cognizour. Cokes reports li. 3. the caſe of fines fo. 89. b. which is, in very deed, the ſureſt fine of all. Fines executorie be ſuch, as of their owne force doe not execute the poſſeſſion in the Cognizeeſe, as fines ſur cognizance de droit tantùm. fines ſur done, graunt, releaſe, confirmation, or render. For if ſuch fines be not leuied, or ſuch render made vnto

them, that be in poſſeſſion at the time of the fines leuied, the cognizees muſt needs ſiew writs of (Habere facias ſeiſinam) according to their ſeuerall caſes, for the obtaining of their poſſeſſions, except at the leuying of ſuch executory fines, the parties, vnto whom the eſtate is by them limited, be in poſſeſſion of the lands paſſed thereby: for in this caſe ſuch fines doe inure by way of extinguiſhment of right, not altering the eſtate or poſſeſſion of the Cognizee, but perchaunce bettring it. Weſt. vbi ſupra, ſect. 20.
               Touching the forme of theſe fines, it is to be conſidered vpon what writ or action the concord is to be made, and that is, moſt commonly, vpon a writ of couenant: and then firſt there muſt paſſe a paire of indentures betweene the Cognizour and Cognizee, whereby the Cognizour couenanteth with the cognizee, to paſſe a fine vnto him, of ſuch or ſuch things by a day ſet down. And theſe indentures, as they are firſt in this proceeding, ſo are they ſaide to lead the fine; vpon this couenant, the writ of couenant is brought by the Cognizee againſt the cognizour, who therevpon yeeldeth to paſſe the fine before the Iudge, and ſo the acknowledgement being recorded, the cognizout and his heires are preſently concluded, and all ſtraungers not excepted, after fiue yeares once paſſed. If the writ wherevpon the fine is grounded, be not a writ of couenaunt, but of warrantia chartae, or a writ of right, or a writ of meſn, or a writ of cuſtome and ſeruices (for of all theſe fines may alſo be founded. (Weſt. vbi ſupra, ſect: 23.) then this forme is obſerued: the writ is ſerued vpon the party that is to acknowledge the fine, and then he appearing doth accordingly: See Dier, fo. 179. nu. 46.
               This word (fine) ſometime ſignifieth a ſumme of money, paide for an Income to lands or tenements let by leaſe: ſometime an amends, pecuniarie puniſhment, or recompence vpon an offence committed againſt the king and his lawes, or a Lord of a maner. In which caſe, a man is ſaid facere finem de tranſgreſſione cum Rege, &c. Regiſt. Iud. fol. 25. a. and of the diuerſity of theſe fines with other mater worth the learning, ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 141. b. 143. 144. and Lamberds Eirenarcha libro. 4. ca 16. pa. 555. But in all theſe diuerſities of vſes, it hath but one ſignification; and that is a finall concluſion or ende of differences betweene parties. And in this laſt ſence, wherein it is vſed for the ending and remiſſion of an offence, Bracton
                  
hath it li. 2. ca. 15. nu. 8. ſpeaking of a common fine that the Countie payeth to the king, for falſe iudgemēts or other treſpaſſes, which is to be aſſeſſed by the Iuſtices in Eyre before their departure, by the oath of knights and other good men, vpon ſuch as ought to pay it: with whome agreeth the ſtatute anno. 3. Ed. pri. ca. 18. There is alſo a common fine in leetes. See Kitchin. fo. 13. a. v. common fine. See Fleta. l. 1. ca. 48.
               
                  Fines pro licentia concordandi, anno 21. H. 8. c. 1. See Fine.
               
               
                  Fine force, ſeemeth to come of the french adiectiue (fin) and the ſubſtantiue (force. i. vis) The adiectiue (fin) ſignifieth ſometime as much as craftie, wilie or ſubtill, ſometime as much as, artificiall, curious, ſingular, exact, or perfect. as (Rien contrefaict fin. i. nihil ſimulatum aut adimitationem alterius expreſſum, poteſt eſſe exactum, vel ita abſolutum, quin reprehenſionem vel offenſionem incurrat, as is ſet downe in that worke, truly regal, intituled 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . pa. 115. ſo that this (fine force) with vs, ſeemeth to ſignifie an abſolute neceſſitie or conſtreint, not avoidable. and in this ſence it is vſed, old. nat. br. fol. 78. and in the ſtatute anno. 35. H. 8. ca. 12. in Perkins Dower. fo. 321. and Plowden. fo. 94. Coke. vol. 6. fol. 111. a.
               
               
                  Fine adnullando levato de tenemento quod fuit de antiquo dominico, is a writ to Iuſtices, for the diſanulling of a fine levied of lands holding in auncient demeſn, to the preiudice of the Lord: Regiſter originall. fol. 15. b.
               
               
                  Fine capiendo pro terris, &c. is a writ lying for one, that vpon conviction by a Iury hauing his lands and goods taken into the kings hand, and his body committed to priſon, obteineth fauour for a ſumme of money &c. to be remitted his impriſonment, and his lands and goods to be redeliuerd vnto him. Regiſter. orig. fo. 132. a.
               
               
                  Fine levando de tenementis tentis de Rege in capite, &c. is a writ directed to the Iuſtices of the cōmon plees, whereby to licence them to admit of a fine for the ſale of land holding in capite, Regiſt. originall, fol. 167. a.
               
               
                  Fine non capiendo pro pulchre placitando, is a writ to inhibit officers of courts, to take fines for faire pleading, Regiſter original. fol. 179. See Beau pleder.
               
               
                  Fine pro rediſſeiſina capienda, &c. is a writ, that lieth for the releaſe of one laid in priſon for a rediſſeiſin, vpon a reaſonable fine. Regiſter. originall fol. 222.
               
                  Finarie. See Blomarie.
               
               
                  Finours of gold and ſiluer, be thoſe that purifie and part thoſe metals from other courſer, by

fire and water. anno. 4. H. 7. ca. 2. They be alſo called parters in the ſame place, ſometime departers.
               
                  Fireboote, for the compoſition looke Hayboote. It ſignifieth allowance or Eſtovers of woods, to maintaine competent fire for the vſe of the tenent.
               
                  Firſt fruites (primitiae) are the profits of every ſpirituall liuing for one yeare, giuen in auncient time to the Pope throughout all Criſtendome: but by the ſtatute anno 26. H. 8. cap. 3. tranſlated to the Prince, for the ordring wherof, there was a court erected, an. 32. H. 8. ca. 45. but this court was diſſolued. anno. pri. Mar. ſeſſ. 2. ca. 10. & ſithence that time, though thoſe profits be reduced againe to the crowne, by the ſtatute anno 1. Eliz. ca. 4. yet was the court neuer reſtored, but all maters therein wont to be handled, were transferred to the Exchequer. See Annats.
               
               
                  Fiſhgarthe, anno 23. H. 8. ca. 18. Fitche, See furre.
               
               
                  Fitzherberd, was a famous lawyer in the daies of King Henry the eight, and was chiefe Iuſtice of the common plees, he wrot two worthie bookes, one an abridgement of the common lawes, another intituled de Natura brevium.
               
               
                  Fled
                        •
                     it, commeth of the Saxon word (Fled) that is a fugitiue, & wit, which ſome make but a termination, ſignifiing nothing of it ſelfe: how be it others ſay, it ſignifieth a reprehen ſion, cenſure, or correction: It ſignifieth in our auncient lawe, a diſcharge or freedome from amercements, when one hauing been an outlawed fugitiue commeth to the peace of our Lord the King, of his owne accord. Raſtall, Expoſition of words: or being licenſed: Newe termes of lawe. See Bloodwit, and Childwit: See Fletwit.
               
               
                  Fleete (Fleta) is a famous priſon in London, ſo called (as it ſeemeth) of the riuer, vpon the ſide whereof it ſtandeth, Camden Britannia, pag. 317. Vnto this none are vſually committed, but for contempt to the king and his lawes, or vpon abſolute commaundemēt of the king, or ſome of his courts, or laſtly vpō debt, when men are vnable, or vowilling to ſatisfie their creditours.
               
                  Flemeſwit or rather (Fleherſwit) commeth of the Saxon word (Flean) which is a contract of (Flegen) that is, to flie away. It ſignifieth with our lawyers, a libertie or charter, whereby to chalenge the catel or amercements of your man a fugitiue: Raſtall Expoſition of words. See Bloodwit. Fleta writeth this word two other waies, as (Flemenesfree

vie or Flemesfreicthe, and interpreteth it, habere catalla fugitivorum. li. 1. ca. 47.
               
                  Fleta, is a feigned name of a learned lawyer, that writing a booke of the common lawes of England and other antiquities in the Fleete, termed it thereof Fleta: He ſeemeth to haue liued in Ed. the 2. time and Edw. the 3. idem, li. 1. ca. 20. §. qui ceperint. li. 2. ca. 66. §. item quod nullus.
               
               
                  Fletwit, aliâs Fredwit. Skene de verborum ſignificatione. verb. Melletum. ſaith, that (Flichtwit) is a libertie to courts, and to take vp the amercements pro melletis. he giueth the reaſō becauſe (Flicht) is called Fliting in french (Melle) which ſometime is conioyned with hand-ſtrookes: And in ſome bookes Placitum de melletis, is called the moote or plee of beating or ſtriking.
               
                  Flight See Finer.
               
               
                  Florences, anno 1. R. 3. ca. 8. a kinde of cloth ſo called.
               
                  Flotſen aliâs (Flotzam) is a word proper to the ſeaſe, ſignifiing any goods that by ſhipwrecke be loſt, and lie floting or ſwimming vpon the toppe of the water, which with Ietſon and lagon and ſhares be giuen to the Lord Admirall, by his leters patents. Ietſon is a thing caſt out of the ſhippe being in daunger of wrecke, and beaten to the ſhore by the waters, or caſt on the ſhore by the marriners. Coke vol. 6. fo. 106. a. Lagon aliâs Lagam vel Ligan, is that which lyeth in the bottome of the ſea, Coke ibi. Shares are goods due to more by proportion.
               
                  Foder (fodrum) ſignifieth in our Engliſh tongue, a courſe kinde of meate for horſes and other catell. But among the Feudiſts, it is vſed for a prerogatiue that the prince hath, to be provided of corn and other meate for his horſes by his ſubiects towards his wars, or other expeditions. Arnoldus Clapmarius. de arcanis imperii. lib. 1. ca. 11. And reade Hotoman de verbis feudalibus. litera. F.
               
                  Folgheres, or rather Folgers, be folowers, if we interpret the word according to the true ſignification: Bracton ſaith it ſignifieth, eos qui alii deſerviunt. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10.
               
                  Folkmoote, is a Saxon word, compounded of Folk. i. populus & Gemettan. i. convenire. It ſignifieth (as M. Lamberd ſaith in his explication of Saxon words, verbo (Conuentus) two kind of Courts, one nowe called the countie court, the other called the Shyreeues turne: This word is ſtill in vſe among the Londoners, and ſignifieth celebrem ex omni ciuitate conuentum: Stowe in his Suruey of London. but M. Manwood in his firſt part of foreſt

lawes. pag. 111. hath theſe words. Folkemote is the court holden in London, wherein all the folke and people of the citie did complaine on the Mayor and the Aldermen, for miſgouernment within the citie.
               
                  Forbarre, is for euer to depriue. an. 9. Ric. 2. ca. 2.
               
                  Force (Forcia) is a french word, ſignifiing (vim, nervoſitatem, fortitudinem, virtutem) in our common lawe, it is moſt vſually applied to the euill part, and ſignifieth vnlawfull violence. Weſt thus defineth it: Force is an offence, by which violence is vſed to things or perſons. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo. Inditements. ſect. 65. where alſo he diuideth it thus: Force is either ſimple or compound. Simple is that which is ſo committed, that it hath no other crime adioyned vnto it; as if one by force doe onely enter into an other mans poſſeſſion, without doing any other vnlawfull act there. Mixt force, is that violence, which is committed with ſuch a fact, as of it ſelfe onely, is criminall; as if any by force enter into another mans poſſeſſion, and kill a man, or raviſh a woman there, &c. he farder diuideth it into true force, and force after a ſort, and ſo proceedeth to diuers other braunches worth the reading, as forcible entry, forcible deteining, vnlawfull aſſembly, Rowtes, Riets, Rebellions, &c.
               
               
                  Forcible deteining or withholding of poſſeſſion, is a violent act of reſiſtance by ſtrong hand of men weaponed with harnes, or other action of feare, in the ſame place or elſe where, by which the lawfull entrie of Iuſtices or others is barred or hindred. Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditements, ſect. 65. M. of this ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, f. 58. b &c. vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad 63.
               
                  Forcible entrie (Ingreſſus manu fortifactus) is a violent actuall entrie into an houſe or land, &c. or taking a diſtreſſe of any perſon, weaponed, whither he offer violence or feare of hurt to any there, or furiouſly driue any out of the poſſeſſion thereof: Weſt parte 2 ſymbol. titulo Inditements, ſect. 65. L. of this ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 58. b. 59. &c. vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     
                   63. It is alſo vſed for a writ grounded vpon the ſtatute. anno 8. H. 6. ca. 9. whereof reade Fitz. nat. br. at large, fol. 248. See the newe booke of Entries, verbo Forcible Entrie, ſee Lamb. definitiō in certen caſes. Eiren. l. 2. c. 4. p. 145.
               
                  Forein (Forinſecus) commeth of the french (Forain. i. exterus, externus) it is vſed adiectiuely in our common lawe, and ioyned with diuers ſubſtantiues in ſences not vnworthy the expoſition, as Forein mater, that is mater triable in another countie, pl. cor.

fo. 154. or mater done in another countie, Kitchin. fol. 126. Foreinplea (forinſecum placitum). i. a refuſal of the Iudge as incompetent, becauſe the mater in hand was not within his precincts, Kitchin. fol. 75. & anno 4. H. 8. ca. 2. & anno 22. eiuſdem. ca. 2. & 14. Forein aunſwer, that is, ſuch an anſwer, as is not triable in the countie where it is made. anno 15. H. 6. ca. 5. Forein ſeruice (forinſecum ſervitium) that is ſuch ſervice, whereby a meane Lord holdeth ouer of another, without the compaſſe of his owne fee. Brooke. titulo Tenures. f. 251. nu. 12. & 28. & Kitchin, fol. 209. or elſe that which a tenent performeth, either to his owne Lord, or to the Lord paramount out of the fee. For of theſe ſeruices, Bracton ſpeaketh thus, lib. 2. cap. 16. nu. 7. Item ſunt quaedam ſeruitia, quae dicuntur forinſeca, quamvis ſunt in charta de feoffamento expreſſa & nominata: & quae ideo dici poſſunt forinſeca, quia pertinent ad Dominum Regem, & non ad dominum capitalem, niſi cum in propria perſona profectus fuerit in ſeruitio: vel niſi cum pro ſeruitio ſuo ſatisfecerit domino Regi quocun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      modo, & fiunt in certis temporibus, cùm caſus & neceſſitas evenerit, & varia habent nomina & diuerſa: Quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim nominantur forinſeca, large ſumpto vocabulo, quoad ſeruitium domins Regis, quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſcutagium, quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſeruitium domini Regis, & ideo forinſecum dici poteſt, quia fit & capitur foris, ſiue extra ſeruitium quod fit Domino capitali. v. Broke Tenures 28. 95. Forein ſeruice, ſeemeth to be knights ſeruice or Eſcuage vncertaine. Perkins Reſeruations 650. Forein attachement (Attachiamentum forinſecum) is an attachement of foriners goods, found within a libertie or citie, for the ſatisfaction of ſome citizen, to whome the ſaid foriner oweth money.
               
                  Forein Appoſer (forinſecarum oppoſitor) is an officer in the exchequer, to whom all ſhyreeues and baylifes doe repaire, hy him to be oppoſed of their greene waxe, and from thence draweth downe a charge vpon the ſhyreeue and baylife to the clerk of the pipe.
               
                  Foreſt (Foreſta) is a french word, ſignifiing a great or vaſt wood. Lieu foreſtier & ſaüuage: locus ſylueſtris & ſaltuoſus. The writers vpon the common law define it thus: Foreſta eſt locus vbi ferae inhabitant vel includuntur. gloſ. in ca. cum dilecti. extra. de donatio. & Felinus in ca. Rodolphus. verſu, quid autem Foreſta. extra de reſcriptis. ſpeaketh to the ſame effect. Some other writers doe ſay, it is called foreſta, quaſi ferarum ſtatio, vel tuta manſio ferarum. But as it is taken with vs, M.

Manw. in his ſecōd part of foreſt lawes, cap. 1. nu. 1. thus defineth it: A Foreſt is a certaine territorie of wooddy grounds & fruitfull paſtures, priviledged for wild beaſts, and foules of foreſt, chace, and warren, to reſt and abide in, in the ſafe protection of the King, for his princely delight and pleaſure: which terrioritie of ground ſo priuiledged, is meered and bounded with vnremoueable markes, meeres, and Boundaries, either knowne by mater of record, or elſe preſcription, and alſo repleniſhed with wild beaſts of Venerie, or chaſe, and with great coverts of vert, for the ſuccour of the ſaid wild beaſts, to haue their aboad in: for the preſeruation & continuance of which ſaid place, togither with the vert and veniſon, there are certaine particular lawes, priviledges, and officers, belonging to the ſame, meete for that purpoſe, that are onely proper vnto a foreſt, and not to any other place. The ſame definition he hath parte 1. pag. 139. which though it haue many ſuperfluities, yet it well expreſſeth the nature of the thing, eſpecially the explication adioyned, which there is ſet downe by the ſaid author in both places in his firſt part. pag. 16. where he fetcheth a foreſt from ſuch overgrowne antiquitie, alledging for it the ſecond booke of Kings, ca. 2. ver. 24. & ca. 19. verſ. 23. and the 104. pſalme verſ. 20. the 131. ver. 6. he taketh licence to ſport himſelfe. for though our engliſh tranſlation haue the word foreſt, to expreſſe the vaſtnes of the deſert, yet if we looke to the originall Idiome, we ſhall finde no more reaſon to call thoſe places foreſts, thē either chaſes or parks.
               The maner of making foreſts, as the ſame author well ſetteth downe, parte. 1. pag. 142. is this. The king ſendeth out his commiſſiō vnder the broad ſeale of England, directed to certaine diſcreete perſōs, for the view, perrambulation, meering & bounding of the place, that he mindeth to afforeſt; which returned into the chauncerie, proclamation is made throughout all the Shire, where the ground lieth, that none ſhal hunt or chace any maner of wilde beſts within that precinct, without the kings ſpeciall licence, after which he appointeth ordinances, lawes, and officers, fit for the preſeruation of the vert and veniſon: and ſo becommeth this a foreſt by mater of record. The properties of a foreſt are theſe in ſpeciall, firſt, a foreſt, as it is truly and ſtrictly taken, cannot be in the hands of any but the king: the reaſon is giuen by M. Manwood, becauſe none hath power to graunt commiſſion to a Iuſtice in Eire for the foreſt, but the king. parte. 1.

                  pag. 87. The ſecond propertie, be the courts, as the Iuſtice ſeate every three yeare, the Swainemoote thrice every yeare: Idem eodem pag. 90. & parte 2. ca. 1. nu. 4. & 5. and the attachement, once every fortie daies. Idem eod. pag. 92. The third propertie may be the officers belonging vnto it, for the preſervation of the vert and veniſon, as firſt the Iuſtices of the foreſt, the warden or keeper, the verders, the foriſters, Agiſtours, Regarders, Bailiffes, Bedels and ſuch like, which you may ſee in their places. See Manwood part. 2. ca. 1. nu. 4. & 5. But the cheife propertie of a foreſt, both by M. Manwood. parte 1. pa. 144. and M. Crompton pag. 146. is the Swainmote, which (as they both agree) is no leſſe incident vnto it, then the court of Pyepowders to a faire. Other courts and offices are not ſo requiſite, in thoſe foreſts that are in the hands of ſubiects, becauſe they be not truly foreſts: but if this faile, then is there no thing of a foreſt remaining, but it is turned into the nature of a chace. See Chace. I reade of thus many foreſts in England. The foreſt of Windſour in Berkshire: Cambd. Britan. pag. 213. of Pickering. Crompton 190. of Shirwood idem fol. 202. of Englewood in Cumberland. anno. 4. H. 7. ca. 6. & Crompton fol. 42. of Lancaſter. Idem. fol. 196. of Wolemore. Stowes Annals. pag. 462. of Gillingham Idem. pag. 113. of Knareſborow. anno. 21. H. 8. ca. 17. of Waltham. Camd. pag. 328. of Breden. Idem, pag. 176. of Whiteharte Idem, pag. 150. of Wierſdale. Idem pag. 589. and Lownſedall ibidem. of Deane. Idem. pag. 266. & & anno 8. H. 6. ca. 27. & anno 19. H. 7. cap. 8. of Saint Leonards in Southſex. Manwood parte. 1. pa. 144. of Waybridge & Sapler. Idem. eodem. pa. 63. of Whitvey. pag. 81. of Fekenham, Camd. pa 441. of Rockingham. Idem pag. 396. Foreſt de la mer. Idem, pag. 467. of Huckstowe. Idem pa. 456. of Haye. Manwood part. 1. pag. 144. of Cantſelly, eadem pag. of Aſhdowne in the county of Suſſex. anno. 37. H. 8. ca. 16. Foreſts of Whittilwood and Swaſie in the countie of Northampton. anno 33. H. 8. ca. 38. of Fronſelwood in com. Somerſet. Cooke li. 2. Cromw. caſe. f. 71. b. I heare alſo of the foreſt of Exmore, in Deuonſhire. There may be more which he that liſteth, may looke for.
               
                  Foreſter (foreſtarius) is a ſworn officer of the Foreſt, appointed by the Kings leters patents, to walke the foreſt both earely and late, watching both the vert and veniſon, attaching and preſenting all treſpaſſers againſt them, within their owne bayliwicke or walke: whoſe oath you may ſee in Crompton.

fol. 201. And though theſe leters patents be ordinarily graunted, but quam diu bene ſe geſſerint, yet ſome haue this graunt to thē and their heires, and thereby are called Foriſters or Foſters in fee. Idem, fol. 157. & 159. Et Manwood parte prima. pag. 220. whome in Latine Crompton calleth Foriſtarium feudi. fol. 175.
               
                  Foreiudger, (foriſiudicatio) ſignifieth in the common lawe, a iudgement, whereby a man is depriued, or put by the thing in queſtion. It ſeemeth to bee compounded of (fors. i. praeter) & (iuger. i. iudicare.) Bracton lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. 5. hath theſe words: Et non permittas quòd A. capitalis dominus feudi illius, habeat cuſtodiam haeredis, &c. quia in Curia noſtra foriſiudicatur de cuſtodia, &c. So doth Kitchin vſe it. fol. 209. and old nat. bre. fol. 44. & 81. and the ſtatute. anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 9. and anno 21. R. 2. cap. 12. Foriudicatus with authors of other nations ſignifieth as much as (baniſhed) or as (deportatus) in the auncient Romaine lawe, as appeareth by Vincentius de Franchis, deſciſ. 102. Mathaeus de Afflictis. lib. 3. feudorum. Rub. 31. pag. 625.
               
                  Foregoers be pourveyours, going before the king or queene, being in progreſſe, to prouide for them, anno 36. Ed. 3. cap. 5.
               
                  Forfeiture, (forisfactura) commeth of the French word (forfaict. i. ſcelus) but ſignifieth in our language, rather the effect of tranſgreſſing a penall lawe, then the tranſgreſſion it ſelfe: as forfeiture of Eſcheates. anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. Statut. de Proditionibus. Goods confiſcate, and goods forfeited differ. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 186. where thoſe ſeeme to be forfeited, that haue a knowne owner, hauing committed any thing whereby he hath loſt his goods; and thoſe confiſcate, that are diſavowed by an offendour, as not his owne, nor claymed by any other. I thinke rather, that forfeiture is more generall, and confiſcation particular, to ſuch as forfeit onely to the Princes Exchequer. Reade the whole chapter. lib. 3. cap. 24. Full forfeiture (plenaforisfactura) otherwiſe called (plena vita) is forfeiture of life and member, and all elſe that a man hath. Manwood parte prim. pag. 341. The Canon Lawyers vſe alſo this word. For forisfacta ſunt pecuniariae poenae delinquentium. Gloſ. in cap. Praesbyteri, extra. de poenis.
               
               
                  Forfeiture of mariage, (forisfactura maritagii) is a writ lying againſt him, who houlding by knights ſeruice, and being vnder age and vnmaried, refuſeth her, whome the Lord offereth him, without his diſparagement, and marieth another. Fitzh. nat. br. fol.
                  
141. H. I. K. L. Regiſter orig. fol. 163. b.
               
               
                  Forfeng, quiet antiam prioris priſae deſignat: in hoc enim delinquunt Burgenſes Londonenſes, cum priſas ſuas ante priſas regis faciunt. Fleta lib. 1. cap. 47.
               
                  Forgerie. See here next following, Forger of falſe deeds.
               
               
                  Forger of falſe deedes, commeth of the french (Forger). i. accudere, fabricare, conflare, to beate one an anvile, to faſhion, to bring into ſhape, and fignifieth in our common law, either him that fraudulently maketh and publiſheth falſe writings, to the preiudice of any mans right, or elſe the writ that lyeth againſt him, that committeth this offence. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 96. B. C. calleth it a writ of deceite. See Tearmes of law, verbo Forger. and Weſts Simbol. parte. 2. Indictments, ſectio. 66. See the new booke of Entries. verbo Forger. de faits. This is a branch of that which the ciuilians call crimen falſi: Nam falſarius eſt, qui decipiendi cauſa ſcripta publica falſificat. Speculator. de crimine falſi. Falſi crimen propriè dicitur, quod vtilitatis priuatae cauſa factum eſt. Connanus li. 5. ca. 7. nu. 4. Ad eſſe falſitatis tria requiruntur: mutatio veritatis, dolus, & quod alteri ſit nocivum. Quorum ſi alterum deſit, falſitas non eſt punibilis. Hoſtienſis, & Azo in ſuis ſummis.
               
               
                  Foriſter. See Foreſter.
               
               
                  Formdon (Breve formatum donationis) is a writ that lyeth for him, that hath right to any lands or tenements by vertue of any entayle, growing from the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 1. It lyeth in three ſorts, and accordingly is called forma donationis, or formdon in the deſcender: formdon in the reverter, or formdon in the remainder. Formdon in the deſcender lyeth for the recouery of lands, &c. giuen to one and the heyres of his bodie, or to a man and his wife, and the heyres of their two bodies, or to a man and his wife being coſin to the donour, in franke mariage, and afterward alienated by the Donee. For after his deceaſe his heyre ſhall haue this writ againſt the tenent or alience. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 211. He maketh three ſorts of this formdon in the deſcender: The firſt is, in the maner now expreſſed: the ſecond is, for the heire of a coparcener, that alienateth and dieth. fol. 214 The third is called by him (In ſimul tenuit) fol. 216. which lyeth for a coparcener or heire in Gauelkind, before partition againſt him, to whome the other coparcener or heire hath alienated and is dead. Formdon in the reuerter, lyeth for the donour or his heires, where land entayled to certaine and their iſſue, with

condition for want of ſuch iſſue to reuert to the donour and his heires, againſt him to whom the Donee alienateth, after the iſſue extinct, to which it was entayled. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 219. Formdon in the remainder lyeth, where a man giueth landes in tayle, the remainder to another in tayle, and afterward the former tenent in tayle dieth without iſſue of his bodie, and a ſtranger abateth, then he in the remainder ſhall haue this writ. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 217. See the Regiſter original. fol. 238. 242. 243. of this ſee the new booke of Entries. verb. Formdon.
               
               
                  Forſechoke, ſeemeth to ſignifie originally as much as forſaken in our moderne language, or (derelictum) with the Romaines. It is eſpecially vſed in one of our ſtatutes, for land or tenements ſeiſed by the Lord, for want of ſeruices due from the tenent: and ſo quietly held and poſſeſſed beyond the yeare and day. As if we ſhould ſay, that the tenent which ſeeing his land or tenements taken into the Lords hand, and poſſeſſed ſo long, taketh not the courſe appointed by lawe to recouerthem, doth in due preſumption of lawe diſavow or forſake whatſoeuer right he hath vnto them. See the ſtatute anno 10. Ed. 1. cap. vnico.
               
               
                  Forſtall, is to be quit of amerciaments and catels arreſted within your land, and the amerciaments thereof comming. New termes of lawe.
               
                  Forſtalling (forſtallatio) is partly french, for (Eſtaller) is in that tongue, as much as (merces exponere, expedire, explicare) or to ſhew wares in a market or faire. It ſignifieth in our common law, the buying or bargaining for any victuals or wares comming to be ſould toward any faire or market, or from beyond the ſeas toward any city, port, hauen, creeke, or roade of this realme, and before the ſame be there. anno. 51. H. 3. ſtat. 6. Weſt. parte 2. Simbol. titulo indictments. ſect. 64. Forſtaller, in Cromptons Iuriſdiction, fol. 153. is vſed for ſtopping of a deere broken out of the foreſt, from returning home againe, or laying betweene him and the foreſt, in the way that he is to returne: See Regratours and Engroſſers. See Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 69. a. The author of the new terms of law defineth it thus. Forſtalling (Forſtallamentum) is the buying of corne, cattell, or other merchandies by the way, as it commeth toward the faire or market to be ſould, to the intent to ſell the ſame againe at a more high and deere price. Fleta ſaith thus of it, ſignificat obtruſionem vtae vel impedimentum

tranſitus & fugae aueriorum, li. 1. cap. 47.
               
                  Forteſcue, was a learned Lawyer, & Lord Chauncelor in Henry the 6. dayes: who writ a booke in the commendation of our common lawes.
               
                  Fortlet (forteletum) commeth nete the french (fortelet. i. valenticulus, forticulus) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a place of ſome ſtrength. old nat. br. fol. 45. This in other countries is written (fortalitium) and ſignifieth (caſtrum.) Scraderus ſelect. & practabil. queſt. §. 12. nu. 7. & 8.
               
                  Fother, is a weight of twenty hundred, which is a waine or cartloade. Speight in his Annot. vpon Chawcer.
               
               
                  Fourche (Aſſorciare) ſeemeth to come of the french, (fourcher. i. titubare liuguà) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, a putting off, prolonging, or delay of an action. And it appeaſieth no vnpleaſant metaphor: for as by ſtammering we draw out our ſpeech, not deliuering. that we haue to ſay in ordinary time, ſo by ſourching we prolong a ſuite that might be ended in a ſhorter ſpace. To ſourch by eſſoine. Weſtm. 1. cap. 24. anno 3. Ed. prim. where you haue words to this effect: Coparceners, Iointtenants, and Tenents in common, may not ſourch by eſſoine to eſſoine ſeuerally, but haue only one eſſoine, as one ſole tenent may haue. And anno 6. Ed. 1. ca. 10. you haue it vſed in like ſort.
               
                  Foutgeld, is a word compounded of theſe two German words (fous. i. pes, and (gyldan. i. ſolvere) and it ſignifieth an amercement for not cutting out the balles of great dogges feet in the foreſt. See Expeditate. And to be quit of footegeld is a priuiledge to keepe dogges within the foreſt, vnlawed, without puniſhment or controlment. Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 197. Manwood parte pri. of his foreſt lawes, pag. 86.
               
                  Fowles of warren. See Warren.
               
               
                  Founder, is he that melteth mettall, and maketh any thing of it, by caſting it into a mold, &c. anno 17. Rich. 2. cap. 1. deriued of the verbe (fundere) to powre.
               
                  Franchiſe, (libertas, francheſia) commeth of the french (franchiſe) ſo ſignifiing: it is taken with vs for a priuiledge, or an exemption from ordinarie iuriſdiction, and ſometime an immunitie from tribute. It is either perſonall or reall. Cromp. Iuriſd. fol. 141. that is belonging to a perſonimmediatly, or elſe by meanes of this or that place, or court of immunitie, whereof he is either chiefe or a member.

In what particular things franchiſes commonly conſiſt, See Britton cap. 19. Franchiſe royall anno 15. R. 2. cap. 4. & anno 2. H. 5. cap. 7. in fine, ſeemeth to bee that, where the kings writs runne not: as Cheſter and Durham, they are called Seignories royall. an. 28. H. 6. cap. 4. The authour of the new Termes of lawe ſaith, that franches royall is, where the King graunteth to one and his heires, that they ſhall be quit of tolle or ſuch like: See franchiſe in the new booke of Entries. See Bracton lib. 2. cap. 5. See Sac.
               
               
                  Frauk almoine (libera Eleemozyna) in french (frank Auſmone) ſignifieth in our common lawe, a tenure or title of lands. Britton cap. 66. nu. 5. ſaith thus of it: Franke almoyne is lands or tenements beſtowed vpon God, that is, giuen to ſuch people, as beſtow themſelues in the ſeruice of God, for pure and perpetuall almes: whence the feoffours or giuers cannot demaund any terreſtriall ſeruice, ſo long as the lands. &c. remaine in the handes of the feoffees. With this agreeth the grand cuſtumary of Normandie. cap. 32. Of this you may reade Bracton at large. lib. 2. cap. 5. & 10. See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 211. See the new booke of Entries. verbo. Franke Almoine. But Britton maketh another kind of this land, &c. which is giuen in almes, but not free almes: becauſe the tenents in this are tyed in certain ſeruices to the feoffor, Pritton vbiſupra.
               
               
                  Frank bank (francus bancus) in true french, (franc banc) ſignifieth, word for word, a free bench or ſeate: and among our lawe writers, it ſeemeth to be vſed for copyhold lands, that the wife being eſpouſed a virgin, hath after the deceaſe of her husband for her dower. Kitchin fol. 102. Bracton lib. 4. tract. 6. cap. 13. nu. 2. hath theſe wordes: Conſuetudo eſt in partibus illis, quòd vxores maritorum defunctorum habeant francum bancum ſuum de terris ſockmannorum, & tenent nomine dotis. Fitzher. calleth it a cuſtome, whereby in certaine cities the wiſe ſhall haue her husbands whole lands, &c. for her dower. Nat. br. fol. 150. P. See Plowden caſu Newis. fol. 411.
               
                  Frank chaſe, (Libera chaſea) is a libertie of free chaſe, whereby all men hauing ground within that compaſſe, are prohibited to cut downe wood, or diſcouer, &c. without the view of the foreſter, though it be his owne demeſne. Cromptons Iuriſdictions, fol. 187.
               
                  Frank fee (feudum francum, ſeu liberum) is by Brooke tit. Dimeſn. num. 32. thus expreſſed: That which is in the hand of the King or Lord of any maner,

being auncient demeſn of the Crowne (viz. the Demeſnes) is called frank fee, and that which is in the hands of the tenents, is auncient demeſn onely: ſee the Regiſter original. fol. 12. a. Whereby it ſeemeth, that that is frank ſee, which a man holdeth at the common lawe to himſelfe and his heires, and not by ſuch ſeruice as is required in auncient demeſn, according to the cuſtome of the maner. And again, I find in the ſame booke fol. 14. b. a note to this effect, that the lands which were in the handes of king Edward the Saint, at the making of the booke called Doomeſday, is auncient demeſn: and that all the reſt in the realme is called frank fee: with the which note Fitzherb. agreeth, na. br. fol. 161. E. So that all the land in the realme, by this reaſon, is either auncient demeſn, or frank fee. The new expounder of the lawe termes defineth frank fee, to be a tanure in fee ſimple, of lands pleadable at the common lawe, and not in auncient demeſn: See Fachineus. lib. 7. cap. 39. who defineth feudum francum eſſe, pro quo nullum ſeruitium praeſtatur Domino: with whom agreeth Zaſius de fendis. parte 12. ſaying, that therefore it is feudum improprium, quia ab omni ſeruitio liberum.
               
               
                  Frank ferme (Firma libera) is land or tenement, wherein the nature of fee is chaunged by feofment, out of knights ſeruice, for certaine yearely ſeruices, and whence neither homage, wardſhip, mariage, nor releife may be demaunded, nor any other ſeruice not contained in the feofment. Britton. ca. 66. nu. 3. ſee Fee ferme.
               
               
                  Frank law (libera lex) See Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 156. b. where you ſhall finde what it is, by the contrary. For he that for an offence, as conſpiracy, &c. leeſeth his franke lawe, is ſaid to fall into theſe miſchiefs: firſt, that he may neuer be impaneled vppon any iury, or aſſiſe, or otherwiſe vſed in teſtifiing any truth. Next, if he haue any thing to doe in the kings court, he muſt not approch thither in perſon, but muſt appoint his attourney. Thirdly, his lands, goods, and chatelsmuſt be ſeiſed into the kings hands: and his lands muſt be eſtreaped, his trees rooted vp, and his body committed to priſon. For this, the ſaid authour citeth the booke of Aſſiſes fo. 59. Conſpiracy. F. 11. 24. Ed. 3. fo. 34. See Conſpiracy.
               
               
                  Frank mariage (liberū maritagiū) is a tenurein taile ſpeciall, growing from theſe words in the gift compriſed: Sciant &c. me M. H de W. dedrſſe & conceſſiſſe, & praeſenti charta mea confirmaſſe I. A. filio

meo & Margeriae vxori eius, filiae verae T. N. in liberū marit agium vnum meſſuagium &c. Weſt parte i. Symbol. li. 2. ſect. 303. The effect of which words is, that they ſhall haue the land to them, and the heires of their bodies, and ſhall doe no fealty to the donour, vntill the fourth degree. See new Terms of law. Glanuile li. 7. ca. 18. & Bracton li. 2. ca. 7. nu. 4. where he diuideth maritagium, in liberum & ſeruitio obligatum. See Mariage. Fleta giueth this reaſon why the heires doe no ſeruice vntill the fourth diſcent, ne donatores vel eorum haeredes, per homagii receptionem, a reuerſione repellantur. And why in the fourth diſcent and downeward, they ſhall doe ſeruice to the donour, quia in quarto gradu vehementer praeſumitur, quòd terra non eſt pro defectu haeredum donatariorum reverſura, libro tertio. ca. 11. in princ.
               
               
                  Frankpledge (Franoiplegium) is compounded of (Franc. i. liber) and (pleige. i. fideiuſſor) and ſignifieth in our common law, a pledge or ſurety for free men. For the auncient cuſtome of England for the preſeruation of the publique peace, was that euery free borne man, at fourteene yeares of age, after Bracton (religious perſons, clerks, knights, and their eldeſt ſonnes excepted) ſhould finde ſuerty for his truth toward the King and his ſubiects, or elſe be kept in priſon, whereupon a certaine number of neighbours became cuſtomably bound one for another, to ſee each man of their pledge forthcomming at all times, or to anſwere the tranſgreſſion committed by any broken away. So that whoſoeuer offended, it was forthwith inquired in what pledge he was, and then they of that pledge, either brought him forth within 31. daies to his aunſwere, or ſatiſfied for his offence. This was called Frank pledge, cauſa qua ſupra. and the circuit thereof was called Decenna, becauſe it commonly conſiſted of 10. houſhouldes: And euery particular perſon thus mutually bound for himſelfe and his neighbours, was called Decennier, becauſe he was of one Decenna or another: This cuſtome was ſo kept, that the ſhyreeues, at euery county court, did from time to time take the oaths of yonge ones, as they grew to the age of 14. yeares, and ſee, that he were combined in one dozen or another. whereupon this braunch of the ſhyreeues authority was called viſus Franciplegu, view of frankpledge. See the ſtatute for view of Frankpledge, made anno. 18. Ed. 1: See Deoennier, Leete vew of Frankpledge, and Freoborghe. That this diſcipline

is borowed by vs of the Romane Emperours or rather Lombards, appeareth moſt manifeſtly in the ſecond booke of Feuds. ca. 53. vpon which if you reade Hotoman, with thoſe authors that he there recordeth, you will thinke your labour well beſtowed. Reade more of this. viz. what articles were wont to be inquired of in this court, in Hornes mirrour of Iuſtices li. 1. ca. de la veneudes francs pleges, and what theſe articles were in auncient times, ſee in Fleta. li. 2. ca. 52.
               
                  Fredwit See Fletwit.
               
               
                  Free chapell (libera Capella) by ſome opinion, is a chapell founded within a pariſh for the ſeruice of God, by the deuotion and liberalitie of ſome good man, ouer and aboue the mother Church, vnto the which it was free for the pariſhioners, to com or not to come, & ēdowed with maintenance by the founder, and therevpon called free: I haue heard others ſay, and more probably, that thoſe only be free chapels, that are of the Kings foundation, and by him exempted from the Iuriſdiction of the Ordinarie: but the King may licence a ſubiect to found ſuch a chapell, and by his charter exempt it from the Ordinaries viſitation alſo. That it is called free in reſpect it is exempted from the iuriſdiction of the Dioceſan, appeareth by the Regiſter originall. fol. 40. & 41. Theſe chapels were all giuen to the King: with chaunteries anno. 1. Ed. 6. ca. 14. Free chapell of Saint Martin le grand. anno. 3. Eduardi 4. capite quarto. & anno. 4. Eduard. quarti ca. 7.
               
                  Free hould (liberum tenemētum) is that land or tenement, which a man holdeth in ſee, ſee taile, or at the leaſt, for terme of life, Bract. li. 2. ca. 9. The newe expounder of the lawe termes ſaith, that free hold is of 2. ſorts. Freehould in deede, and freehold in lawe: Freehold in deede, is the reall poſſeſſion of land or tenements in fee, fee tayle, or for life. Freehould in lawe, is the right that a man hath to ſuch land or tenements before his entry or ſeiſure. I haue heard it likewiſe extended to thoſe offices, which a man holdeth either infee or for terme of life. Britton defineth it to this effect. Frank tenement is a poſſeſſion of the ſoile, or ſeruices iſſuing out of the ſoile, which a free man holdeth in fee to him and his heires, or at the leaſt, for tearme of his life, though the ſoile be charged with free ſervices or others. ca. 32. Free hold is ſometime taken in oppoſition to villenage. Bract. li, 4. ca. 37. & 38. M. Lamberd (in his explication

of Saxon words, verbo Terra ex ſcripto) ſaith, that land in the Saxons time was called either Bockland, that is holden by booke or writing: or Folcland, that is holden without writing: The former, he reporteth, was held with farre better conditions, and by the beter ſort of tenents, as noble men and gentlemen, being ſuch as we nowe call free hould: the later was commonly in the poſſeſſion of clownes, being that which wee nowe call at the will of the Lord: I finde in the Regiſter iudiciall. fol. 68. a. and in diuers other places, that he which holdeth land vpon an execution of a Statute merchant, vntill he be ſatisfied the debt. tenet vt liberum tenementum ſibi & aſſignatis ſuis. and fol. 73. b. I reade the ſame of a tenent per elegit; where I thinke the meaning is not, that ſuch tenents be free-houlders, but as freehoulders for their time, that is vntill they haue gathered profits to the value of their debt. Freehoulders in the auncient lawes of Scotland, were called Milites. Skene de verb. ſignif. verb. Milites: The D. & Student ſaith, that the poſſeſſion of land, after the lawe of England, is called franck tenement, or free hould. fol. 97. a.
               
               
                  Frenchman (Francigena) was wont to be vſed for euerie out-landiſh man. Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15. See Englecerie.
               
               
                  Frendwite, vel Infeng, ſignificat quietantiam prioris priſae ratione convivii, Fleta li. 1. ca. 47.
               
                  Frendles maen, was wont to be the Saxon word for him, whome we call an outlawe. And the reaſon thereof I take to be: becauſe he was vpon his excluſion from the kings peace and protection, denied all helpe of freinds; after certaine daies. Nam foriſfecit amicos. Bract. li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 12. nu. 1. whoſe words are theſe. Talem vocant Angli (vtlaugh) & alio nomine antiquitùs ſolet nominari, ſc: Frendles man: & ſic videtur quod forisfecit amicos: & vnde ſt quis talem poſt vtlagariam & expulſionem ſcienter paverit, receptaverit, vel ſcienter cōmunicaverit aliquo modo, vel receptauerit, veloccultauerit, eadem paenâ puniri debet, quâ puniretur vtlagatus: ita quòd careat omnibus bonis ſuis & vita, niſi Rex et parcat de ſua gratia. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Freſh diſſeiſin (Friſca diſſeiſina) commeth of the french (Fraiz. 1. recens) and (diſſeiſir. i. poſeſſione eiicere) It ſeemeth to ſignifie in our common law, that diſſeiſin that a man may ſeeke to defeate, of himſelfe, and by his owne power, without the helpe of the king or his iudges, Britton. ca. 5. & that is ſuch diſſeiſin, as is not aboue 15. daies olde. Bract. li. 4. ca. 5. whome you may reade at

large of this mater, concluding that it is arbitrarie, and ſo doth Britton ca. 65. but ca. 43. he ſeemeth to ſay, that in one caſe it is a yeare. See him alſo ca. 44.
               
                  Freſh fine, is that which was levied within a yeare paſt, Weſtm. 2. cap. 45. an. 13. Ed. 1. Freſh force (Friſca fortia) is a force done within 40. daies, as it ſeemeth by Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 7. C. For if a man be diſſeiſed of any lands or tenements, within any city or borough, or deforced from them after the death of his aunceſter, to whome he is heire: or after the death of his tenent for life or in taile: he may within 40. daies after his title accrued, haue a bille out of the chauncerie to the Mayor, &c. See the reſt.
               
                  Freſh ſuite (recens inſecutio) is ſuch a preſent and earneſt following of an offendour, as neuer ceaſeth from the time of the offence committed or eſpied, vntill he be apprehended. And the effect of this, in the purſuite of a felon, is, that the partie perſiewing ſhall haue his goods reſtored him agine: whereas otherwiſe they are the kings. Of this ſee Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 3. ca. 10. & 12. where you ſhall finde handled at large, what ſuite is to be accounted freſh, and what not. And the ſame author in his firſt booke, cap. 27. ſaith, that freſh ſuite may continue for ſeuen yeres, See Cookes reportes. l. 3. Rigewaies caſe. Freſh ſuite, ſeemeth to be either within the view or without: for M. Manwood ſaith, that vpon freſh ſuite within the view, treſpaſſers in the foreſt may be attached by the efficers perſiewing them, though without the limits and boundes of the foreſt. parte 2. ca. 19. nu. 4. fol. 121.
               
                  Freoborgh: aliâs Fridburgh: aliâs Frithborg (Frideburgum) commeth of two Saxon words (Freo. i. liber, ingenuus) and (borgh. i. fideiuſſor) or of (Frid. i pax) & (Borgha. i. ſponſor) This is otherwiſe called after the French (Franck pledge) the one being in vſe in the Saxons time, the other ſithence the Conqueſt: wherefore for the vnderſtanding of this, reade Franck pledge. That it is all one thing, it appeareth by M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words, verbo Centuria and againe in the lawes of King Edward ſet out by him, fol. 132. in theſe words: Praeterea eſt quaedam ſumma & maxima ſecuritas, per quam omnes ſtatu firmiſſimo ſuſtinentur: viz. vt vnuſquiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſtabiliat ſe ſub fideiuſſionis ſecuritate, quam Angli vocant (Freoborghes) ſoli tamen Eberacenſes, dicunt eandem (Tienmannatale) quod ſonat latine decem hominum numerum. Haec ſecuritas hoc modo fiebat, quòd de omnibus villis

totius regni ſub decennali fideiuſſione debebant eſſe vniuerſi: ita quòd ſi vnus ex decem forisfecerit, novem adrectum eum haberēt: quòd ſi aufugeret, daretur lege terminus ei 31. dierum: vt quaeſitus interim & inventus, ad iuſtitiam Regis adduceretur, & de ſuo illico reſtauraret damnum quod fecerat. Etſi ad hoc foriſfaceret, de corpore ſno iuſtitia fieret. Séd ſi infra praedictum terminum inveniri non poſſet, &c: as in the booke: Bracton maketh mention of (Fridburgum. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. in theſe words: Archiepiſcopi, Epiſcopi, Comites, & Barones, & omnes qui habent Soc, & Sak. Tol, & Team, & huiuſmodi libertates, milites ſuos & proprios ſervientes, armigeros ſc. dapiferos, & pincernas, camerarios, coquos, piſtores, ſub ſuo Fridburgo habere debent. Item & iſti ſuos Armigeros, & alios ſibi ſervientes. Quòd ſi cui forisfecerint, ipſi domini ſui habeant eos adrectum, et ſi non habuerint, ſolvant pro eis forisfacturam. Et ſic obſeruandum erit de omnibus alits, qui ſunt de alicuius manupaſtu. Out of theſe words, I learne the reaſon, why great men were not combined in any ordinarie dozeine, and that is, becauſe they were a ſufficient aſſurance for themſelues and for their meniall ſeruants: no leſſe then the tenne were one for another in ordinarie dozeins. See Frank pledge: ſee Skene de verborum ſignificatione. verbo. Freiborgh. Fleta writeth this word (frithborgh) and vſeth it for the principall man, or at the leaſt, for a man of euery dozein. Frithborgh (ſaith he) eſt laudabilis homo teſtimonii liber vel ſervus, per quem omnes iuxta ipſum commorantes firmiori pace ſuſtententur ſub ſtabilitate fideiuſſionis eius vel alterius per denarium numerum, vnde quilibet quaſi plegius alterius: it a quod ſi vnus feloniam fecerit, novem tenentur ipſum ad ſtandum recto praeſentare. lib. 1. ca. 47. §. Frithborgh. See Roger Hoveden, parte poſter. ſuorum annal. in Henrico ſecundo. fol. 345. a. b.
               
               
                  Frier (frater) commeth of the French (fiere) there be foure orders reckoned of them. anno 4. H. 4. cap. 17. viz. Minours, Auguſtines, Preachers, and Garmelites, the foure principall orders, of which the teſt deſcend. See in Zechius de rep. ecc. pag. 380 Looke Linwood. titulo de relig. demibus. cap. 1. verb. Sancti Auguſtin.
               
               
                  Frier obſervant (frater obſervans) is an order of Franciſcans: for the better vnderſtanding of whom, it is to be noted, that of thoſe 4. orders mentioned in the word (Frier,) the Franciſcans, are minores tam Obſeruantes quòm Conventuales & Capuchini. Zecchus de Repub. Eccl. tract. de regular. cap. 2. Theſe Friers obſervant, you find ſpoken of anno 25.

                  H. 8. cap. 12. who be called obſervants, becauſe they are not combined together in any cloyſter, covent, or corporation as the Conuentuals are: but only tye themſelues to obſerue the rites of their order, and more ſtrictly then the Conuentuals doe: and vpon a ſingularitie of zeale, ſeparate themſelues from them, liuing in certaine places, and companies of their owne chuſing. And of theſe you may reade Hoſpinian. de orig. & progr. Monachatus. fol. 878. cap. 38.
               
                  Friperer, is taken from the French (fripier) interpolator, one that ſcowreth vp and cleanſeth old apparell to ſell againe. This word is vſed for a baſtardly kind of broker. anno 1. Iaco. cap. 21.
               
                  Frithborgh, ſee Freeborgh.
               
               
                  Frithſoken, ſignifieth ſurety of defence, as Saxon ſaith in the deſcription of England, cap. 12. It ſeemeth to come of theſe two Saxon words, frith, or frid, or (fred.) i. pax, & (ſoken. i. quaerere.) Fleta tearmeth it frithſokne, vel forſokne, yeelding this reaſon, Quòd ſignificat libertatem habendi franci plegii.
               
               
                  Fuer (fuga) commeth of the French (fuir, i. fugere) though it be a verbe, yet it is vſed ſubſtantiuely in our common law, and is twofold: fuer in feit, (in facto) when a man doth apparently and corporally flie, and fuer in ley, (in lege) when being called in the countie, he appeareth not vntill he be outlawed: for this is flight in interpretation of law. Staw nf. pl. cor. lib. 3. c. 22.
               
                  Fugitiues goods, (bona fugitiuorum) be the proper goods of him that flyeth vpon felonie, which after the flight lawfully found, do belong to the king. Coke vol. 6. fol. 109. b.
               
               
                  Furlong, (ferlingum terrae) is a quantitie of grounde containing twenty lugs or poles in length, and euery pole 16 foote and a halfe, eight of which furlongs make a mile, anno 35. Fd. 1. cap. 6. It is otherwiſe the eighth part of an acre. See Acre. In the former ſignification the Romanes call it (ſtadium,) in the later (iugerum.) This meaſure which wee call a pole, is alſo called a perch, & differeth in length, according to the cuſtome of the countrey. See Perch.
               
               
                  Furre (furrura) commeth of the French (fourrer. i. pelliculare) to line with skinnes. Of furre I find diuers ſtrange kinds in the ſtatute. anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13. as of ſables, which is a rich furre of colour betweene blacke and browne, being the skinne of a beaſt called a Sable, of quantitie betweene a Polecat and an ordinarie cat, and of faſhion like a Polecat,

bred in Ruſcia, but moſt and the beſt in Tartaria. Lucerns; which is the skinne of a beaſt ſo called, being nere the bignes of a wolfe, of colour betweene red and browne, ſomething mayled like a cat, and mingled with blacke ſpottes, bred in Muſcovie and Ruſcia, & is a very rich furre. Genets, that is the skinne of a beaſt ſo called, of bignes betweene a cat and a weſell, mayled like a cat, and of the nature of a cat, bred in Spaine. Whereof there bee two kinds, blacke, and gray, and the blacke the more precious furre, hauing blacke ſpots vpon it hardly to be ſeene. Foines, is of faſhion like the Sable bred in Fraunce for the moſt part: the toppe of the furre is blacke, and the ground whitiſh. Marterne, is a beaſt very like the Sable, the skinne ſomething courſer, it liueth in all countries that be not too cold, as England, Ireland, &c. and the beſt be in Ireland. Miniuer, is nothing but the bellies of Squirels, as ſome men ſay: others ſay, it is a litle vermin like vnto a Weſell milke white, and commeth from Muſcovie. Fitch, is that which we otherwiſe call the Polecat here in England. Shankes, be the skinne of the ſhanke or legge of a kind of Kidde which beareth the furre, that we call Budge. Calaber, is a litle beaſt, in bignes about the quantitie of a ſquirell, of colour gray, and bred eſpecially in high Germanie.
               
            
            
               G
               
                  GAbell (gabella, gablum) commeth of the French (gabelle. i. vectigal) and hath the ſame ſignification among our old Writers, that (gabelle) hath in Fraunce, for M. Camden in his Britannia. pag. 213. ſpeaking of Wallingford, hath theſe words: Continebat 276. hagas. i. domos reddentes novem libras de gablo: and pag. 282. of Oxford, theſe: Haec vrbs reddebat pro telonio & gablo, & aliis conſuetudinibus per annum, Regi quidem viginti libras, & ſex ſextarios mellis: Comiti verò A'garo decem libras. Gabella (as Caſſanaeus defineth it, de conſuetu. Burgund. pag. 119. Eſt vectigal quod ſolvitur probonis mobilibus, id eſt, pro hiis quae vehuntur, diſtinguiſhing it from Tributum, quia Tributum eſt propriè, quod fiſco vel Principi ſolvitur pro rebus immobilibus.
               
               
                  Gage, (vadium) commeth of the French (gager. i. dare pignus, pignore certare) and is it ſelfe a French word nothing chāged, but in pronunciation. It ſignifieth with vs alſo a pawne o
                     •
                   pledge. Glanvile lib. 10. cap. 6. where he ſaith thus: Quandoque

res mobiles ponuntur in vadium, quandoque res immobiles, and a litle after that, thus: Invadiatur res quandoque ad terminum, quandoque ſine termino. Item quandoque invadiatur res aliqua in mortuo vadio, quandoque non. And from that chapter to the end of the twelfth in the ſame booke, he handleth this only thing. Though the word (gage) be retained as it is a ſubſtantiue, yet as it is a verbe, the vſe hath turned the G. into W. ſo as it is oftener written (wage:) as to wage deliuerance, that is, to giue ſecuritie that a thing ſhall be deliuered. For if he that diſtrained, being ſiewed, haue not deliuered the catell that were diſtrained, then he ſhall not onely avow the diſtreſſe, but (gager deliuerance) i. put in ſuretie, that he will deliuer the catell diſtrained. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 74. D. & 67. F. whome ſee alſo fol. 67. F. G. yet in ſome caſes, he ſhall not by tyed to make this ſecuritie: as if the catell died in pound. Kitchin fol. 145. or if he claime a propertie in the catell ſiewed for. Termes of the lawe. To wage lawe what it is, ſee in his place. verbo. Lane. See Mortgage.
               
               
                  Gager deliuerance. See Gage.
               
               
                  Gayle. See Gaoll.
               
               
                  Gainage, (Wainagium) is neere to the French (Gaignage. i. quaeſtus, lucrum,) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, the land held by the baſer kind of Sokemen or villeines. Bract. lib. 1. cap. 9. where he hath theſe words, ſpeaking of ſeruants: Et in hoc legem habent contra dommos, quòd ſtare poſſunt in iudicio contra eos de vita & membris propter ſaeuitiam dominorum, vel propter intolerabilem iniuriam. Vt ſi eos diſtruant, quòd ſalvum non poſſit eis eſſe Wainagium ſuum. Hoc autem verum eſt de illis ſervis, qui tenent in antiquo dominico coronae. And againe, lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 1. Miles & liber homo non amerciabitur niſi ſecundum modum delicti, ſecundum quod delictū fuit magnum vel parvum, & ſalvo contenemento ſuo: Mercator verò, non niſi ſalva mercandiza ſua: & villanus, non niſi ſalvo Wainagio ſuo. This in Weſtm. 1. cap. 6. an. 3. Ed. prim. is called Gaynure: and againe, cap. 17. and in magna charta, cap. 14. it is called wainage. I find it in the old. nat. br. fol. 117. called Gainor. viz. in theſe words: The writ of Aile was praecipe, &c. quòd reddat vnam bovatam terrae, & vnam bovatam mariſci: and the writ was abated for that the oxegang is alwaies of a thing that lyeth in gainor. I thinke this word was vſed of lands vſually plowed, becauſe they that had it in occupation, had nothing of it but the profit and fruite raiſed of it by their owne paines, toward their ſuſte

nance, nor any other title, but at the Lords will. Gainor again in the ſame booke, fol. 12. is vſed for a Sokeman, that hath ſuch land in his occupation. In the 32. chapter of the Grand Cuſtumarie of Normandie: Gaigneurs be ruricolae qui terras eleemozin at as poſſident: and Britton vſeth gainer, for to plow or till, fol. 65. a. & 42. b. Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo, Recoueries. ſect. 3. hath theſe words: A praecipe quòd reddat, lyeth not in Bovata mariſci. 13. Ed. 3. fol. 3. nor de ſelione terrae. Ed. 1. for the vncertaintie: becauſe a ſelion, which is a land, ſometime containeth an acre, ſometime halfe an acre, ſometime more, and ſometime leſſe. It lyeth not of a garden, cotage, or croft. 14. Aſſiſ. 13. 8. H. 63. 22. Ed. 4. 13. de virgata terrae. 41. 43. 13. Ed. 3. de fodina, de minera, de mercatu. 13. E. 3. for they bee not in demeſn: but in gaine, &c. Laſtly, in the ſtatute of Diſtreſſes in the Exchequer. anno 51. H. 3. I find theſe words. No man of religion, nor other, ſhall be diſtreined by his beaſts that gaine the land.
               
                  Galege, (galicae) ſeemeth to come of the French, (galloches) which ſignifieth a certaine kinde of ſhoo worne by the Gaules in ſoule weather of old times. I find it vſed for ſome ſuch implement. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 7. & anno 14. & 15. H. 8. cap. 9. where it is written plainely. Galochet.
               
               
                  Galingal (cyperus) is a medicinall herbe, the nature and diuerſitie whereof is expreſſed in Gerards herball. lib. 1. cap. 22. The roote of this is mentioned for a drugge to be garbled. anno 1. Iaco. cap. 19.
               
                  Gallihalpens, were a kind of coine forbidden by the ſtatute. anno 3. H. 5. cap. 1.
               
                  Galloches. See Galege.
               
               
                  Gals, (Gallae) be a kind of hard fruite like a nutte, but rounder, growing of the tree called in latine (galla.) The diuers kinds and vſes whereof Gerard expreſſeth in his Herball. lib. 3. cap. 34. This is a drugge to be garbled. anno 1. Iaco. cap. 19.
               
                  Gaol, (gaola) commeth of the French (Geole. i. caveola) a cage for birds, but is metaphorically vſed for a priſon. Thence commeth (Geolier) whome we call Gayler or Gaoler.
               
               
                  Garbe (garba) commeth of the French (garbe, aliâs, gerbe. 1. faſcis.) It ſignifieth with vs, a bundle or ſheafe of corne. Charta de foreſta. cap. 7. and garba ſagittarum, is a ſheafe of arrowes. Skene de verb. ſignif. verbo, Garba.
               
               
                  Garbling of bow-ſtaues. anno 1. R. 3. cap. 11. is the ſorting or culling out the good from the

bad. As garbling of ſpice, is nothing but to purifie it from the droſſe and duſt that is mixed with it. It may ſeeme to proceed from the Italian (garbo) that is, fineneſſe, neatneſſe.
               
                  Gard, (Cuſtodia) commeth of the French, (garde) being all of one ſignification. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a cuſtodie or care of defence: but hath diuers applications: ſometimes to thoſe that attend vpon the ſafetie of the Prince, called Yeomen of the Guard: ſomtime to ſuch as haue the education of children vnder age, or of an Idiot: ſometime to a writte touching wardſhippe. Which writs are of three ſorts: one called a right of guard or ward, in French, droit de gard, Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 139. the ſecond is eiectment de gard. Idem fol. 139. L. the third, is rauiſhment de gard. Idem fol. 140. F. G. See Gardem, ſee Ward.
               
               
                  Gardein (Cuſtos) commeth of the French (gardien,) and yet the German (Warden) is neare vnto it. It ſignifieth generally him, that hath the charge or cuſtodie of any perſon or thing: but moſt notoriouſly him, that hath the education or protection of ſuch people, as are not of ſufficient diſcretion, to guide themſelues and their owne affaires, as children and Idiots: being indeede as largely extended, as both (Tutor and Curator) among the Civilians. For whereas Tutor is he, that hath the gouernment of a youth, vntill he come to 14. yeares of age, and Curator, he that hath the diſpoſition and ordering of his ſubſtance afterward, vntil he attaine to 25. yeares: or that hath the charge of a franticke perſon during his lunacie: the common Lawyers vſe but onely Gardien or Gardian for both theſe. And for the better vnderſtanding of our Engliſh lawe in this thing, you muſt know, that as tutor is either teſtamentarius, or à Praetore datus ex lege Atilia, or laſtly, legitimus: ſo we haue three ſortes of Gardeines in England: one ordained by the father in his laſt will, another appointed by the Iudge afterward, the third caſt vpon the Minor by the lawe and cuſtome of the land. Touching the firſt, a man hauing goods and chatels neuer ſo many, may appoint a gardein to the bodie or perſon of his child, by his laſt will and teſtament, vntill he come to the age of fourteene yeares, and ſo the diſpoſing or ordering of his ſubſtance, vntill what time he thinketh meet, and that is moſt commonly to the age of 21. yeares. The ſame may he do, if he haue lands to neuer ſo great a valew, ſo they

hold not in capite of the king, nor of any other Lord, by knights ſeruice. And in the former caſe, if the father appoint no Gardein to his child, the Ordinarie may appoint one to order his moueables and chatels, vntill the age of 14. yeares: at which time he may chuſe his guardian, accordingly as by the the ciuill lawe he may his Curator. For we hold all one rule with the Civilians in this caſe: and that is, Invito curator non datur. And for his lands, if he hold any by copie of court rolle, commonly the Lord of the fee appointeth him a guardian, vntill he come to the age of 14. yeres, and that is one, next of kind to the Minor of that ſide, that can hope for leaſt profitby his death. If he hold by charter in ſocage, then the next of kind on that ſide by which the land commeth not is the guardian: and hereupon called guardian in ſocage. And that which is ſaid here of ſocage ſeemeth to be true likewiſe in petit ſergeantie. anno viceſimo octauo. Edvardi primi. ſtatuto primo. And the reaſon of this, Forteſcue giueth in his booke, intituled, A commendation of the politique lawes of England. cap. 44. viz. becauſe there might be ſuſpition, if the next kinſman on that ſide by which the land deſcendeth, ſhould haue the cuſtody and education of the child, that for deſire of his land, he might be entiſed to worke him ſome miſchiefe. Laſtly, if a man dye ſeiſed of lands, holding by knights ſeruice, leauing his heire in minoritie, that is, vnder 21. yeares: the Lord of the fee hath, by law, the cuſtodie both of the heire and his land, vntill he come to age. See the ſtatute, anno 28. Ed. prim. ſtatut. prim. And the reaſon of this, Forteſcue likewiſe giueth, for that hee to whom by his tenure he oweth knights ſeruice, when he can performe it, is likelieſt to traine him vp in martiall and ingenious diſcipline, vntill he be of abilitie. But Polidore Virgil in his Chronicle, lib. 16. ſaith, that this was Movum vectigalis genus excogitatum, to helpe Henry the third, being oppreſſed much with pouertie, by reaſon he receiued the kingdome much waſted by the wars of his aun ceſtours: and therefore needing extraordinarie helpe to vphold his eſtate: yet the 33. chapter of the Grand Cuſtumary maketh mention of this to haue bene vſed by the Normans: and I thinke this the truer opinion. Here it is to be obſerued, whether land in knights ſeruice hold in capite, or of another Lord, or ſome of the King, and ſome of another. If of the king, whether of the king alone or not, all is

one. For the king in this caſe is guardian to the heires both perſon and land by his prerogatiue. Stawnf praerog. cap. 1. If he hould of a common Lord, it is either of one alone or more; if of one onely, then is he guardian of both perſon and lands; if of more, then the Lord of whome he houldeth by the elder tenure, is guardian of the perſon, and euery one of the reſt hath the cuſtodie of the land holden of him ſelfe. If the prioritie of the tenure cannot be diſcerned, then is he guardian of the perſon, that firſt happeth him. Termes of the lawe. Stawnf. vbi ſupra. whom you may reade more at large: which Author fol. 19. maketh mention of gardeyn in feit, and Gardeyn in droit: that is, in deed, and in lawe: I take the firſt to be him that hath purchaſed, or otherwiſe obtained the ward of the Lord of whom the land holdeth: the ſecond, him that hath the right by his inheritance and ſeignorie. old. nat. br. fol. 94 Then is there gardein per cauſe de gard, which is he that hath the wardſhip of a Minor, becauſe he is guardian of his Lord being likewiſe in minoritie. Stawnf. vbi ſupra. fol. 15. Of this you may reade Skene de verb. ſignif. verbo Varda. by whom you may learn great affinitie, and yet ſome difference betweene the lawe of Scotland, and ours in this point.
               
                  Guardia, is a word vſed among the Feudiſts, for the Latine (cuſtodia,) and guardianus ſeu guardio dicitur ille, cui cuſtodia commiſſa eſt. lib. Feudo. 1. titulo. 2. & tit. 11.
               
                  Gardeyn of the ſpiritualties, (Cuſtos ſpiritualium, vel ſpiritualitatis) is he to whom the ſpirituall iuriſdiction of any Dioceſſe is committed, during the vacancy of the ſee. anno 25. H. 8. cap. 21. And I take, that the guardeyn of the ſpiritualties, may be either Guardeyn in lawe, or Iure Magiſtratus, as the Archbiſhop is of any Dioces within his prouince, or guardian by delegation, as he whom the Archbiſhop or Vicar generall doth for the time depute.
               
                  Gardeyn of the peace, (Cuſtos pacis.) See Conſervatour of the peace.
               
               
                  Gardeyn of the Cinque ports, (Gardianus quinque portuum) is a Magiſtrate that hath the iuriſdiction of thoſe hauens in the eaſt part of England, which are commonly called the Cinque ports, that is, the fiue hauens: who there hath all that iuriſdiction, that the Admirall of England hath in places not exempt. The reaſon why one Magiſtrate ſhould be aſſigned to theſe few hauens, ſeemeth

to be, becauſe they in reſpect of their ſituation, aunciently required a more vigilant care, then other hauens, being in greater daunger of invaſion by our enemies, by reaſon that the ſea is narrower there then in any other place. M. Camden in his Britannia, pag. 238. ſaith, that the Romaines, after they had ſetled themſelues and their Empire here in England, appointed a Magiſtrate or gouernour ouer thoſe Eaſt partes, whom they tearmed Comitem littoris Saxonici per Britanniam, hauing another that did beare the ſame title on the oppoſite part of the ſea: whoſe office was to ſtrengthen the ſea coaſts with munition, againſt the outrages and robberies of the Barbarians. And farder ſignifieth his opinion, that this Warden of the Cinque ports, was firſt erected amongſt vs, in imitation of that Romaine policie. See Cinque ports.
               
               
                  Gare, anno 31. Fd. 3. cap. 8. is a courſe wooll full of ſtaring haires, as ſuch as groweth about the peſill or ſhankes of the ſheepe.
               
                  Garniſhment, commeth of the French (Garnir. i. inſtruere.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a warning giuen to one for his appearance, and that for the beter furniſhing of the cauſe and court. For example, one is ſiewed for the detinew of certaine euidences or charters, and ſaith, that the euidences were deliuered vnto him not onely by the plaintiffe, but by another alſo: and therefore prayeth, that that other may be warned to pleade with the plaintiffe, whether the ſaid conditions bee performed yea or no. And in this petition he is ſaid to pray garniſhment. New booke of Entries. fol. 211. colum. 3. Termes of the lawe. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 211. which may be interpreted either warning of that other, or elſe furniſhing of the court with parties ſufficient, throughly to determine the cauſe: becauſe vntill he appeare and ioyne, the defendant (as Fitzh. ſaith) is, as it were, out of the court. nat. br. fol. 106. G. and the court is not prouided of all parties to the action. I am the bolder thus to interpret it, becauſe I find Britton in the ſame mind. cap. 28. where he ſaith, that contracts be ſome naked, and ſans garnment, and ſome furniſhed, or to vſe the literall ſignification of his word, appareled: but a naked obligation giueth no action, but by common aſſent. And therefore it is neceſſarie or needfull, that euery obligation be appareled. And an obligation ought to be appareled with theſe fiue ſortes

of garnements, &c. Howbeit, I reade it generally vſed for a warning in many places, and namely, in Kitchin fol. 6. Garniſher le court, is to warne the court. And reaſonable garniſhment in the ſame place, is nothing but reaſonable warning: and againe, fol. 283. and many other authours alſo. But this may be well thought a Metonymie of the effect, becauſe by the warning of parties to the court, the court is furniſhed and adorned.
               
                  Garrantie. See Warrantie.
               
               
                  Garter (Garterium) commeth of the french (Iartiere or Iartier. i. periſcelis, faſcia poplitaria) It ſignifieth with vs both in diuers ſtatutes, and otherwiſe, one eſpeciall garter, being the enſigne of a great and noble ſocietie of knights, called knights of the garter. And this is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , as Poeta among the Graecians was Homer, among the Romanes Virgill, becauſe they were of all others the moſt excellent. This high order (as appeareth by M. Camden pag. 211) and many others, was firſt inſtituted by that famous king Edward the third, vpon good ſucceſſe in a ſkirmiſh, wherein the kings garter (I know not vpon what occaſion) was vſed for a token. I know that Polidore Virgill caſteth in an other ſuſpition of the originall: but his groundes by his owne confeſſion grew from the vulgar opinion: yet as it is, I will mention it as I haue read it. Edward the third king of England after he had obtained many great victories: King Iohn of Fraunce, King Iames, of Scotland, being both priſoners in the tower of London at one time, and king Henry of Caſtile, the baſtard expulſed, and Don Pedro reſtored by the prince of Wales, did vpon no weighty occaſion firſt erect this order in anno 1350. viz. He dauncing with the Queene, and other ladies of the court, tooke vp a garter that happened to fall from one of them: whereat ſome of the lords ſmiling, the king ſaid vnto them, that eare it were long, he would make that garter to be of high reputation, & ſhortly after inſtituted this order of the blew garter, which euery one of the order is boūd daily to weare, being richly decked with gold and pretious ſtones, and hauing theſe words written, or wrought vpon it: Honi ſoit qui mal y pence. which is thus commonly interpreted: euill come to him that euill thinketh: but I thinke it might be better thus: Shame take him that thinketh euill. See knights of the garter. M. Fearne in his glory of generoſity agreeth with M. Camden, and expreſſier ſetteth

downe the victories, whence this order was occaſioned: whatſoeuer cauſe of beginning it had, theorder is inferiorto none in the world, conſiſting of 26. martiall and heroicall nobles, whereof the king of England is the cheif, and the reſt be either nobles of the realme or princes of other countries, friends and confederates with this realme; the honour being ſuch, as Emperours and Kings of other nations, haue deſired and thankfully accepted it: He that will reade more of this, let him repaire to M. Camden, and Polidore, and M. Fern. fol. 120. vbi ſupra.
               
               The Ceremonies of the chapter proceeding to election, of the inueſtures and robes: of his inſtallation, of his vowe with all ſuch other obſeruances, ſee in M. Segars new booke, intituled Honour militarie and ciuile. li. 2. ca. 9. fo. 65. Garter alſo ſignifieth the principall king at armes, among our Engliſh Heralds created by king Henry the 5. Stow. pa. 584.
               
                  Garthman, anno 13. R. 2. ſtat. 1. ca. 19. & anno. 17. eiuſd. cap. 9.
               
                  Gavelet, is a ſpeciall and auncient kinde of Ceſſauit vſed in Kent, where the cuſtome of Gavill kind continueth: whereby the tenent ſhall forfeit his lands and tenements to the Lord of whome he holdeth, if he withdraw from him his due rents and ſeruices. The new Expounder of lawe Termes, whom reade more at large: I reade this word, anno 10. Ed. 2. cap. vnico. where it appeareth to be a writ vſed in the Huſtings at London. And I find by Fleta, that it is vſed in other liberties, as the Huſtings of Wincheſter, Lincolne, Yorke, and the Cinque ports. lib. 2. cap. 55. in principio.
               
               
                  Gavelkind, is, by M. Lamberd in his Expoſition of Saxon words, verbo. Terra ex ſcripto, compounded of three Saxon words, gyfe, cal, cin: omnibus cognatione proximis data. But M. Verſtegan in his reſtitution of decayed intelligence, cap. 3. calleth it (Gavelkind) quaſi, giue all kind, that is, giue to each child his part. It ſignifieth in our common lawe a cuſtome, whereby the lands of the father is equally diuided at his death amongſt all his ſons, or the lād of the brother equally diuided among the brethren, if he haue no iſſue of his owne, Kit. fol. 102. This cuſtome is ſaid to be of force in diuers places of England, but eſpecially in Kent, as the ſaid Authour reporteth, ſhewing alſo the cauſe why Kentiſh men rather vſe this cuſtome, then any other province. viz. becauſe it was a compoſition made betweene the Conquerour and them, after all,

                  England beſide was conquered, that they ſhould enioy their auncient cuſtomes, whereof this was one. For M. Camden in his Britannia, pag. 239. ſaith in expreſſe words thus: Cantiani eâ lege Gulielmo Normano ſe dediderunt, vt patrias conſuetudines illaeſas retinerent, illam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inprimis quam Gavelkind nominant. Hac terrae quae eo nomine cenſentur, liberis maſculis ex aequis portionibus dividuntur: vel foeminis, ſi maſculi non fuerint: adding more worth the noting, viz. Hanc haereditatem, cùm quintum decimum annum attigerint, adeunt, & ſine Domini conſenſu, cuilibet, vel dando, vel vendendo alienare licet. Hac filii parentibus furti damnatis in id genus fundis ſuccedunt, &c. This cuſtome in diuers gentlemens lands, was altered at their owne petition, by Act of Parlament. anno 31. H. 8. cap. 3. But it appeareth by 18. H. 6. cap. pri. that in thoſe daies there were not aboue thirty or forty perſons in Kent, that held by any other tenure. See the new Termes, Gavelet, and Gavelkinde.
               
               
                  Gawgeour, (gaugeator) ſeemeth to come of the French (Gawehir. i. in gyrum torquere.) It ſignifieth with vs an Officer of the Kings appointed to examin all tunnes, hogſheades, pipes, barels, and tercians of wine, oile, hony, butter, and to giue them a marke of allowance, before they bee ſold in any place. And becauſe this marke is a circle made with an iron inſtrument for that purpoſe: it ſeemeth that from thence he taketh his name. Of this office you may find many ſtatutes: the firſt whereof is, anno 27. Ed. 3. commonly called the ſtatute of prouiſion, or Purveyours. cap. 8.
               
                  Geld, ſignifieth with the Saxons, pecunia vel tributum. See Gyld.
               
               
                  Genets, aliâs, Ienets. See Furre.
               
               
                  Gentleman, (generoſus) ſeemeth to be made of two words, the one French, (gentil. i. honeſtus, vel honeſto loco natus:) the other Saxon (Mon) as if you would ſay, a man well borne. The Italian followeth the very word, calling thoſe (gentil homini) whom we call Gentlemen. The Spaniard keepeth the meaning, calling him Hidalgo, or Hyod'algo, that is, the ſon of ſome man, or of a man of reckoning. The Frenchmen call him alſo gentil houme: ſo that gentlemen bee thoſe, whom their bloud and race doth make noble and knowne. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , in Greeke, in Latine, Nobiles. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 1. cap. 20. vnder this name are all compriſed that are aboue Yeomen: ſo that Noblemen be truly called gentlemen.

But by the courſe and cuſtome of England, Nobilitie is either maior or minor: the greater containes all titles and degrees from Knights vpward: the leſſer all from Barons downward. Smith vbi ſupra. cap. 21. The reaſon of the name, as I take it, groweth from this, that they obſerue gentilitatem ſuam, that is, the race & propagation of their blood, by giuing of armes, which the cō
                  mon ſort neither doth, nor may doe. For by the coate that a gentleman giueth, he is knowne to be, or not to be deſcended from thoſe of his name, that liued many hundred yeares ſince. Howbeit, that this is neglected, where ſubſtance faileth to maintaine the countenance. For many of great birth fall to pouerty, whoſe poſteritie liuing and labouring in want, haue ſmall encouragement to looke after the titles of their aunceſters, and ſo in time ſlippe into the number of the ignoble ſort: yet if they by their vertue or fortune, can againe aduaunce themſelues to ſufficient abilitie, the Herald out of his obſeruations can reſtore them to the coat of their progenitors, and now and then helpe them to one, that their aunceſtors neuer ware. Gentiles homines, ſee in Tiraquel. de Nobilitate. cap. 2. pag. 53. Tully in his Topickes thus ſaith of this mater. Gentiles ſunt, qui inter ſe eodem ſunt nomine ab ingenuis oriundi, quorum maiorum nemo ſervitutem ſervivit, qui capite non ſunt diminuti. And in the firſt booke of his Tuſc. queſtions, hee calleth Tullum Hoſtilium, one of the kings of Rome, gentilem ſuum.
               
               
                  Generall Iſſue. vid. Iſſue.
               
               
                  Geſtu & fama, is a writ. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 4. ca. 14. pag. 531.
               
                  Gygge milles, were for the fulling of woollin cloth and forbidden, anno 5. Edward. 6. cap. 22.
               
                  Gild: alias Geld (Gildare) commeth from the Saxon word (Gildan) i. ſoluere, Lamb. in his explica: of Saxon words ſaith verb. Contubernalis. It is vſed as a verb, and as a ſubſtantiue alſo, and as it is a ſubſtantiue, it is latined Gilda and ſignifieth a tribute, or ſometime an amercement, or thirdly a fraternity or company, combined together by orders and lawes made among themſelues by the princes licence. M. Camden citeth many antiquities, by which it appearreth to ſignifie a tribute or taxe, as pa. 135. 139. 159. 168. 178. M. Crompton in his iuriſdictions, fol. 191. ſheweth it to be an amercement, as footgeld, and fol. 197. he interpreteth it to be a preſtation within the foreſt, in theſe words: To be quit of all manner of Gelds. is to be diſcharged of all

manner of preſtations to be made for gathering of ſheues of corne, of lambe, and of wolle to the vſe of Foreſters. Againe M. Camden pag. 349. diuiding Suffolke into three parts, calleth the firſt Gildable, becauſe tribute is thence gathered; the ſecond libertatem S. Edmundi: The third libertatem S. Etheldredae. And the ſtatutes: anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 13. & anno 11. H. 7. ca. 9. vſe Gildable in the ſame ſenſe, and ſo doth the ſtatute anno 27. H. 8. ca. 26. From this M. Lamberd, vbi ſupra, is likewiſe perſwaded, that the common word (Gild) or (Gildhall) doth proceede, being a fraternity or communalty of men gathered into one combination, ſupporting their common charge by a mutuall contribution: And in the regiſter originall, fol. 219. b. I reade Gildam mercatoriam, that is the Gilde merchaunt, which I haue heard to be a certaine liberty or priuiledge belonging to Merchants, whereby they are enabled to hould certaine plees of land within their owne precincts. This word (Gildes) or (Guildes) is ſo vſed anno 37. Ed. 3. ca. 51. & anno 15. R. 2. cap. 5. And Gildhalda Teutonicorum, is vſed for the fraternity of eaſterling merchaunts in London, called the ſtilyard anno 22. H. 8. cap. octauo.
               
               
                  Ginger (Zinziber) is a ſpice well knowne, being the roote of a plant that groweth in hot countries, as Spaine, Barbary, &c. The true forme whereof you haue expreſſed in Gerards herball. li. 1. ca. 38. This is a ſpice whoſe roote is to be garbled. anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Ginny peper (piper de Ginnea) is otherwiſe called Indian peper, of the place whence it commeth. The nature and farder deſcription whereof you haue in Gerards herball. lib. 2. ca. 66. This you haue mentioned among drugs and ſpices to be garbled, in the ſtatute. i. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Giſarms: anno 13. Ed. 1. ſtat. 3. cap. 6. is a kinde of weapon. Flet a writeth it Siſarmes. lib. 1. ca. 24 §, item quod quilibet.
               
               
                  Glaunce Ore, Plowden caſu Mines. fo. 320. b.
               
               
                  Glanuill was a learned lawyer, that was Chiefe Iuſtice in Henry the ſeconds dayes, and writte a booke of the common lawes of England, which is the auncienteſt of any extant touching that ſubiect. Stawnf. praerog. cap. prim. fol. 5. He was then called in Latine Ranulphus de Glanvilla. He died in Richard the firſt his daies at the citie of Acres in the coaſt of Iury, being with him in his voyage to the holy land. Plowden. caſu. Stowel. fol. 368. b.
               
               
                  
                  Goe, is vſed ſometime in a ſpeciall ſignification in our cō
                  mon lawe: as to go to God, is to be diſmiſſed the court. Broke titulo. Fayler de records. num. 1. Goe forward, ſeemeth alſo to be a ſigne giuen by a Iudge to the Sergeant or Counceler, pleading the cauſe of his client, that his cauſe is not good. For when he ſtandeth vpon a point of lawe, and heareth thoſe words of the Iudges mouth, he taketh vnderſtanding, that he looſeth the action. Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 13. To go without day, is as much as to be diſmiſſed the court. Kitchin fol. 193.
               
                  Good behauiour. See Good abearing
               
               
                  Good abearing, (Bonus geſtus) is, by an eſpeciall ſignification, an exact cariage or behauiour of a ſubiect, toward the king and his liege people, whereunto men vpon their euill courſe of life, or looſe demeanure are ſometimes bound. For as M. Lamberd in his Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 2. ſaith: he that is bound to this, is more ſtrictly bound then to the peace: becauſe, where the peace is not broken without an affray, or batterie, or ſuch like: this ſuretie (de bono geſtu) may be forfeited by the number of a mans company, or by his or their weapons or harneſſe: Where of ſee more in that learned Writer in the ſame chapter, as alſo in M. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 119. b. 120. 121. 122. 123. 124. 125. 126. 127.
               
                  Good country, (Bona patria) is an Aſſiſe, or Iury of country men or good neighbours: Skene de verbo. ſignif. verbo, Bona patria.
               
               
                  Graffer (grafarius) ſignifieth as much as a notarie or ſcriuener. It commeth of the French (greffier. i. ſcriba, actuarius.) This word is vſed in the ſtatute anno. 5. H. 8. c. 1.
               
                  Graines (grana paradiſi, aliâs Cardamomum) is a ſpice medicinable and wholeſome, whereof you may ſee diuers kindes in Gerards herball, l. 3. ca. 148. Theſe are cōpriſed among merchādiſe that be to be garbled. an
                        •
                     . I. c. 19.
               
                  Grand aſſiſe. See Aſſiſe. and Magna aſſiſa.
               
               
                  Grand Cape. ſee Cape and Attachment.
               
               
                  Grand Sergeanty: See Chyvalrie. & Seargeantye.
               
               
                  Grand diſtreſſe: (Magna deſtrictio) is a diſtreſſe taken of all the lands, and goods, that a man hath within the county or bayliwicke, whence he is to be diſtrained: Fleta. li. 2. ca. 69. §. penult: See Diſtreſſe. This word is vſed anno 51. H. 3. ca. 9. This falleth out when the defendant hath been attached, and yet appeareth not vpō his attachment; or whē he appeareth & afterward makes default. For then the Shyreeue is commanded to diſtreine the Defendant, by all his goods

and chatels, and to anſwer the king the iſſues of his lands.
               
                  Grange (grangia) is a houſe or building, not onely where corne is laide vp, as barns be, but alſo where there be ſtables for horſes, ſtalles for oxen and other catell, ſties for hogs, and other things neceſſary for husbandry, Lindwood ca. item omnes de iudiciis verbo, Graungus, in gloſſa:
               
               
                  Graunt (Conceſſio, grantum) Glanvile. ſignifieth ſpecially in our common law, a gift in writing of ſuch a thing, as cannot aptly be paſſed or conueyed by word only: as rent, reverſions, ſeruices, advowſens in groſſe, common in groſſe, villein in groſſe, tythes, &c. or made by ſuch perſons, as cannot giue but by deede, as the king and all bodies politique: which differences be often in ſpeech neglected, and then is it taken generally for euerry gift whatſoeuer, made of any thing by any perſon, and he that graunteth it, is named the grauntour, and he to whome it is made, the Grauntee. Weſt. parte. i. ſymbol. lib. 2. ſect. 334. A thing is ſaid to lie in graunte, which cannot be aſſigned with out deede. Coke l. 3. Lincolnes Coll. caſe. f. 63. a.
               
               
                  Greate men, are ſometimes vnderſtood of the laity of the higher houſe of parlament, as anno. 43. Ed. 3. ca. 2. & anno 8. R. 2. in prooem. and ſometime of the knights &c. of the lower houſe, as anno 2. R. 2. ſtat. 2. in princip.
               
               
                  Gree, commeth of the French (Grè). i. ſententia, beneplaecitum. It ſignifieth in our common law, contentment or good liking: as to make gree to the parties, is to ſatisfie them for an offence done. anno 1. Rich. 2. cap. 15.
               
                  Greachbreach, is breaking of the peace. Saxon in the deſcriptiion of England. ca. 11. v. Raſtal. titulo expoſition of words. The new expounder of lawe termes writeth it (Grichbreach) and giueth it the ſame ſignification. See Greve.
               
               
                  Greene hewe, is all one with vert. Manwood parte 2. of his foreſt lawes. cap. 6. nu. 5. See Vert.
               
               
                  Greene waxe, ſeemeth to be vſed for eſtretes deliuered to Shyreeues out of the exchequer, vnder the ſeale of that court, to be levied in the county, anno 42. Ed. 3. ca. 9. & anno 7. H. 4. cap. 3. See Forein appoſer.
               
               
                  Greue (praepoſitus) is a word of power and authoritie, ſignifiing as much as Dominus, or praefectus. Lamberd in his expoſi. of Saxon words, verbo Praefectus. Where he ſeemeth to make it all one with (Reve) as I thinke vndoubtedly it is: The Saxon word is Gerefa whereof we haue diuers words compounded, as Shyreeue. Portgreave, &c. which were wont of the Saxons to be written Scyrgerefa:

Portgerefa See. Shyreeue and Portgreve. See Roger Hoveden parte poſter. ſuorum annal. fo. 346. b. where he ſaith thus: Greue dicitur, ideo quod iure debeat grithe. i. pacem ex illis facere, qui patriae inferunt Vae. i. miſeriam vel malum.
               
               
                  Grithbreach, is a breach of peace. For Grith is a word of the old Angles, ſignifiing peace. Roger Hovedin parte poſter ſuorum annal. fo. 346. b. See Greachbreach.
               
               
                  Grills anno 22. Ed. 4. ca. 2.
               
                  Grocers, be merchants that ingroſſe all merchandize vendible anno 37. Ed. 3. ca. 5.
               
                  Groome, anno 33. H. 8. ca. 10. (Valletus) is the name of a ſeruant that ſerueth in ſome inferiour place. M. Verſlegan in his reſtitution of decayed intelligence ſaith, that he findeth it to haue beene in times paſt a name for youths, who albeit they ſerued, yet were they inferiour to men ſeruants, and were ſometimes vſed to be ſent on foote of errands, ſeruing in ſuch manner as lackies doe nowe.
               
                  Growme, anno 43. E. ca. 10. ſeemeth to be an engine to ſtretch wollen cloth withall after it is wouen.
               
                  Guydage (Guydāgium) is that which is giuen for ſafe conduct through a ſtrange territorie. Caſſan: de conſuet. Bourg. pag. 119. whoſe words be theſe. Eſt Guidagiū quod datur alicui, vt tutò conducatur per loca alterius.
               
               
                  Guylde, See Gyld.
               
               
                  Guylhalda Teutonicorum. See Gild.
               
               
                  Gule of Auguſt (Gula Auguſti) anno. 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 3. cap. vnico Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 62. I. aliâs Goule de Auguſt. Plowd. caſu Mines, fo. 316. b. is the very day of Saint Peterad vincula, which was wont, and is ſtill within the limits of the Roman church, celebrated vpon the very Kalends of Auguſt. Why it ſhould be called the gule of Auguſt, I cannot otherwiſe coniecture, but that it commeth of the latine (gula) or the French (gueule) the throate. The reaſon of my coniecture is in Durands rationali diuinorum li. 7. ca. de feſto Sancti Petri ad vincula, who ſaith that one Quirinus a tribune, hauing a daughter that had a diſeaſe in her throat, went to Alexander then Pope of Rome the ſixt from Saint Peter, and deſired of him to borow or ſee the cheines that Saint Peter was cheined with vnder Nero: which requeſt obteined, his ſaid daughter kiſſing the ſaid cheine, was cured of her diſeaſe and Quirinus with his family was baptiſed. Tunc dictus Alexander papa (ſaith Durand hoc feſtum in Kalendis. Auguſti celebrandum inſtituit, & in honorem beali Petri eccleſiam in vrbe fabricavit, vbi vincula ipſa repoſuit, & ad

vincula nominavit; & Kalendis Auguſti, dedicauit. In qua feſtivitate, populus illic ipſa vincula hodie oſculatur. So that this day being before called onely the Kalends of Auguſt, was vpon this occaſion afterward termed indifferently either of the inſtrument that wrought this miracle, Saint Peters day ad vincula, or of that part of the maiden, wheron the miracle was wrought, the Gule of Auguſt.
               
               
                  Gultwit, ſeemeth to be compounded of (Gult. i. noxa) and wit, which is ſaid by ſome skilfull men, to be an auncient termination of the words in the Saxon tongue, ſignifiing nothing in it ſelfe, but as (dom) or (hood) and ſuch like be in theſe engliſh words (Chriſtendom) and (Manhood) or ſuch others: others ſay, and it is true, that wit ſignifieth blame or reprehenſion. Gultwit (as Saxon in his deſcription of England ca. 11. doth interpret it) is an amends for treſpas.
               
                  Gust (Hoſpes) is vſed by Bracton for a ſtraunger or gueſt, that lodgeth with vs the ſecond night: lib. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 10. In the lawes of Saint Edward ſet forth by M. Lamberd, num. 27. it is written Gest: of this ſee more in Vncothe.
               
               
                  Gumme (gummi) is a certaine clammie or tough liquor that in maner of a ſwetie excrement, iſſueth out of trees, and is hardened by the ſunne. Of theſe ther be diuers ſorts brought ouer ſeas, that be drugs to be garbled, as appeareth by the ſtatute anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Gutter tyle, alias corner tyle, is a tile made three cornerwiſe, eſpecially to be laid in gutters, or, at the corners of tyled houſes which you ſhall often ſee vpon douehouſes at the foure corners of their rofes. anno 17. Eduardi 4. ca. 4.
            
            
               H A
               
                  HAbeas corpus, is a writ, the which a man indited of ſome treſpas before Iuſtices of peace, or in a court of any franchiſe, and vpon his apprehenſion being laid in priſon for the ſame, may haue out of the kings bench, thereby to remooue himſelfe thither at his owne coſts, and to anſwer the cauſe there, &c. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 250. H. And the order is in this caſe, firſt to procure a (Certiorari) out of the Chaūcerie directed to the ſaid Iuſtices for the remoouing of the Inditemēt into the kings bench, and vpon that to procure this writ to the Shyreeue, for the cauſing of his body to be brought at a day, Regiſter iudiciall. fol. 81. where you ſhall finde diuers caſes, wherein this writ is vſed.
               
                  Habeas corpora, is a writ that lieth

for the bringing in of a Iurie, or ſo many of them, as refuſe to come vpon the (venire facias) for the tryall of a cauſe brought to iſſue. old nat br. fol. 157. See great diuerſitie of this writ, in the table of the Regiſter Iudiciall. verbo, habeas corpora. & the new booke of Entries. verbo eodem.
               
               
                  Habendum, is a word of forme in a deede of conueyance, to the true vnderſtanding whereof you muſt knowe, that in euery deede of conueyance, there be 2. principall parts, the premiſſes, and the habendum. The office of the premiſſes is, to expreſſe the name of the grauntour, the grauntee, and the thing graunted or to be graunted. The office of the (habendum) is to limite the eſtate, ſo that the generall implication of the eſtate, which by conſtruction of lawe paſſeth in the premiſſes, is by the (habendum) controlled and qualified. As in a leaſe to two perſons, the (habendum) to one for life, the remainder to the other for life, altereth the generall implication of the ioynt tenancie in the freehould, which ſhould paſſe by the premiſſes, if the (Habendum) weare not. Cooke. vol. 2. Bucklers caſe. fo. 55. See Vſe.
               
               
                  Habere facias ſeiſinam, is a writ Iudicial, which lyeth, where a man hath recouered lands in the kings court, directed to the Shyreeue, and commaunding him to giue him ſeiſin of the land recouered. old nat. br. fol. 154. Termes of the lawe: whereof ſee great diuerſity alſo in the table of the Regiſter Iudiciall, verb. Habere facias ſeiſinā. This writ is iſſuing ſometime out of the Records of a fine executorie, directed to the Shyreeue of the countie, where the land lyeth, & commanding him to giue to the Cognizee or his heires, ſeiſin of the land, whereof the fine is levied. which writ lyeth within the yeare after the fine, or Iudgemēt vpon a (ſcire facias) and may be made in diuers formes. Weſt. parte. 2. ſymb. titulo Fines. ſect. 136. There is alſo a writ called Habere facias ſeiſinam, vbi Rex habuit annum, diem, & vaſtum, which is for the redeliuery of lands to the Lord of the fee, after the king hath taken his due of his lands, that was conuicted of felonie. Regiſter. orig. fol. 165.
               
                  Habere facias viſum, is a writ that lyeth in diuers caſes, where view is to be taken of the lands or tenements in queſtion. See Fitzh. nat. br. in Iudice. verbo, (View) See Bracton. li. 5. tract. 3. ca. 8. & lib. 5. parte. 2. ca. 11. See vi
                        〈…〉
                     
                   See the Regiſter. Iudiciall, fol. 1. 26, 28. 45. 49. 52.
               
                  Haberiects (Hauberietus pannus)

magn. chart. ca. 25. & pupilla oculi. parte. 5. ca. 22.
               
                  Hables, is the plurall of the French (hable) ſignifiing as much as a porte or hauen of the ſea, whence ſhips doe ſet forth into other countries, and whether they doe arriue, when they returne from their voyage. This word is vſed. anno 27. Hen. 6. cap. 3.
               
                  Haerede deliberando alii qui habet cuſtodiam terrae, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, willing him to commande one hauing the body of him, that is ward to another, to deliuer him to him, whoſe ward he is by reaſon of his land. Regiſter. originall. fol. 161. b.
               
               
                  Haerede abducto, is a writ that lyeth for the lord, who hauing the wardſhip of his tenent vnder age by right, cannot come by his body, for that he is conueyed away by another. old. nat. br. fol. 93. See Raviſhment de Gard, and Haerede rapto, in Regiſt. orig. fol. 163.
               
                  Haeretico comburendo, is a writ that lyeth againſt him, that is an heretike. viz. that hauing beene once conuinced of heriſy by his Biſhop, and hauing abiured it, afterward falleth into it againe, or into ſome other, and is therevpon committed to the ſecular power. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 269.
               
                  Haga, is vſed as a kinde of latine word for a houſe. I finde in an auncient booke ſometime belonging to the abbey of Saint Auguſtines in Canterbury, that king Stephen ſent his writ to the Shyreeue and Iuſtices of Kent, in this maner. Stephanus Rex Anglorum vicecomiti & Iuſticiariis de Kent ſalutem. praecipio quòd faciatis habere eccleſiae ſancti Auguſtini & monachis hagam ſuam quam Goſceoldus eis dedit, it a bene & in pace & iuſtè & quietè & liberè, ſicut eam eis dedit in morte ſua coram legalibus teſtibus, &c.
               
               
                  Hagbut, See Haque and Haquebut.
               
               
                  Haye boote, ſeemeth to be compounded (Haye. i. Sepes) and (Bote. i. compenſatio) The former is french, and the ſecond is Saxon. And although it doe fall out ſometime, that our words be ſo compounded: yet is it rare. wherefore it may be thought peraduenture to come as well from (Hag) and (boote) which be bothe ſaxon words. It is vſed in our common lawe for a permiſſion to take thorns and freeth to make or repaire hedges.
               
                  Halfe haque, See Haque.
               
               
                  Half merk (dimidia merka) ſeemeth to ſignifie a noble. Fitzh: nat: br: fol: 5. where he ſaith that in caſe a writ of right be brought and the ſeiſin of the Demaundant, or his aunceſter alleaged, the ſeiſin is not traverſable by

the Defendant, but he may tender or proferre the halfe merke for the inquirie of this ſeiſin, which is as much to ſay in plainer termes, that the Defendant ſhall not be admitted to deny, that the Demandant or his aunceſter, was ſeiſed of the land in queſtion, and to proue his deniall: but that hee ſhal be admitted to tender halfe a merke in money, to haue an inquirie made, whether the Demandant, &c. were ſo ſeiſed or not. And in this ſignification I reade the ſame words in the old Engliſh natura breuium, fol. 26. b. viz. Know ye, that in a writ of right of Advouzen brought by the king, the defendant ſhall not proferre the halfe merke, ne iudgement finall ſhall be giuen againſt the king, &c. Wherof Fitz. vbi ſupra. M. giueth the reaſon, becauſe in the kings caſe, the defendant ſhall bee permitted to trauerſe the ſeiſin by licence obtained of the Kings Sergeant. To this effect ſee Fitz. nat. br. fol. 31. C. D. E.
               
               
                  Halfe ſeale, is vſed in the Chauncerie for the ſealing of Commiſſions vnto Delegates, appointed vpon any appeale in eccleſiaſticall or marine cauſes, an. 8. Elizab. cap. 5.
               
                  Halfe tongue. See Medietas linguae.
               
               
                  Halymote, aliâs, Healgemot, is a Court Baron. Manwood parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 111. and the etymologie is the meeting of the tenents of one hall or maner. M. Gwins preface to his reading, which for the eſteeme thereof, is by copies ſpred into many mens hands.
               
                  Hallage, is a ſee due for cloths brought for ſale to Blackwell hal in London. Coke vol. 6. fol. 62. b.
               
               
                  Hamlet (Hameletum) is a diminutiue of (Ham) which ſignifieth habitationem. Camden. Brit. pag. 149. & 354. The French (hameau. i. viculus) is alſo nere vnto it. Kitchin hath Hamel in the ſame ſence. fol. 215. who alſo vſeth hampſel for an ould houſe or cotage decayed. fol. 103. Hamlet (as Stowe vſeth it in Ed. 3.) ſeemeth to be the ſeate of a Free holder. For there he ſaith, that the ſaid king beſtowed two maners and nine hamlets of land vpon the monaſterie of Weſtminſter, for the keeping of yearely obits for his wife Queene Eleanor deceaſed.
               
                  Hameling of dogges, or hambling of dogges, is all one with the expeditating of dogges. Manwood parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 212. & parte 2. cap. 16. num. 5. where he ſaith, that this is the auncient terme that Foriſters vſed for that mater, whence this word might

be drawne, I dare not reſolue: but it is not improbable, that hameling is quaſi, hamhalding, that is, keeping at home, which is done by paring their feete ſo, as they cannot take any great delight in running abroade. See Expeditate.
               
               
                  Hampſell. See Hamlet.
               
               
                  Hamſcken, ſee Homeſoken. M. Skene de verb: ſignifica: writeth it Haimſuken, and deriueth it from (Haim) a German word, ſignifiing a houſe or dwelling, and (Suchen) that is to ſeeke, ſearch, or perſiew. It is vſed in Scotland for the crime of him, that violently, and contrary to the kings peace, aſſaulteth a man in his owne houſe: which (as he ſaith) is puniſhable equally with rauiſhing of a woman. ſignificat quietantiam miſer
                        ••
                     rdiae intrationis in alienam domum vi & iniuſtè. Fleta. lib. pri. cap. 47. See Homeſoken.
               
               
                  Hand in and Hand out. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 2. is the name of an vnlawful game.
               
                  Hand full, is foure inches by the ſtandard. anno 33. H. 8. cap.
               
               
                  Hankwit alias (Hangwit) or (Hengwit) commeth of the Saxon words (Hangen. i. pendêre) and (wit) whereof reade in Gultwit: Raſtall in the title, Expoſition of words faith, it is a liberty graunted vnto a man, wherby he is quit of a felon or theeſe hanged without iudgement, or eſcaped out of cuſtodie. I reade it interpreted, mulcta pro homine iniuſtè ſuſpenſo. Or whether it may be a libertie, whereby a Lord chalengeth the forfeiture due for him, that fordoeth himſelfe within his fee or not, let the Reader conſider. See Bloodwit.
               
               
                  Hanper, (haneperium) haueper of the Chauncerie. anno 10. R. 2. cap. prim. ſeemeth to ſignifie as fiſeus originally doth in Latine. See Clerke of the Hanaper.
               
               
                  Hanſe, (as Ortelius in the Index of his Additament to his Theater, verb. Anſiatici. ſaith,) is an old Gothiſh word. Where he ſheweth not the interpretation. It ſignifieth a certaine ſocietie of Merchants, combined together for the good vſage and ſafe paſſage of merchandies from kingdome to kingdome. This ſocietie was, and (in part) yet is, endued with many large priuiledges of princes, reſpectiuely within their territories. It had foure principall ſeates, or ſtaples: where the Almaine or Dutch Merchants being the erectours of this ſocietie, had an eſpeciall houſe, one of which was here in London, called Gildhalda Teutonicorum, or in our common language, the Steelyard. Of this you may reade more in

the place of Ortelius aboue mentioned.
               
                  Happe, commeth of the french (Happer. i. rapio, cum quadam velocitate capio) and the french ſeemeth to come from the greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . It ſignifieth in our common lawe the ſame thing: as to happe the poſſeſſion of a deede poll. Litleton. fol. 8.
               
                  Haque, is a handgunne of about three quarters of a yard long, anno. 33. H. 8. ca. 6. & a. 2. et. 3. Ed. 6. ca. 14. There is alſo the halfe haque or demy hake. See Haquebut.
               
               
                  Haquebut, is that peece of artilery or gunne, which we otherwiſe call an harquebuſe, being both french words. anno. 2. & 3. Ed. 6. ca. 14. & anno 4. & 5. Ph. & Ma. ca. 2.
               
                  Hariot, aliâs, Heriot (heriotum) is the ſaxon (heregeat) a litle altered, which is drawn from (here. i. exercitus) and a (heriot) in our Saxons time ſignified a tribute giuen to the lord for his better preparation toward war. Lamb. in his expl. of Saxon words. verbo. hereotum. The name is ſtill reteined, but the vſe altered: for whereas, by M. Lamb. opinion vbi ſupra, it did ſignifie ſo much as Releife doth now with vs: now it is taken for the beſt cha
                     •
                  ell that a tenent hath at the houre of his death, due vnto the lord by cuſtome, be it horſe, oxe, kettle, or any ſuch like. M. Kitchin diſtinguiſheth betweene heriot ſeruice and heriot cuſtom. fol. 133. & 134. for interpretation whereof, you ſhall finde theſe words in Brooke. titulo hariot. nu. 5. Hariot after the death of the tenent for life, is hariot cuſtome. For hariot ſervice is after the death of tenent in fee-ſimple. The new Expounder of the lawe termes ſaith, that hariot ſeruice (in ſome mans opinion) is often expreſſed in a mans graunt or deed, that hee holdeth by ſuch ſeruice to pay hariot at the time of his death, that holdeth in fee ſimple. Hariot cuſtome is, where hariots haue bin payed time out of mind by cuſtome. And this may be after the death of the tenent for life. See Plowden. fol. 95. b. 69. a. b. Braston ſaith, that heriotum, eſt quaſi Releuium. lib. 2. cap. 36. See Reliefe. But Britton. cap. 69. ſaith, that heriot is a reward made by the death of a tenent, to any Lorde, of the beſt beaſte found in the poſſeſſion of the tenent deceaſed, or of ſome other according to the ordinance or aſſignement of the party deceaſed, to the vſe of his Lord, which reward toucheth not the Lord at all, nor the heire, nor his inheritance, neither hath any compariſon to be Releife: for it proceedeth rather of grace or

goodwill then of right, and rather from villeins then free men. See Dyer, fol. 199. nu. 58. to the ſame effect. This in Scotland is called Herrezelda. compounded of herr. i. dominus, herus. and zeild.. i. gift. Skene de verbo. ſignif. verbo Herrezelda.
               
               
                  Hart, is a ſtagge of 5. yeares old compleate. Manwood parte 2. of his foreſt lawes. cap. 4. nu. 5. which he hath out of Budaeus de philologia. li. 2. And if the King or Queene doe hunt him, and he eſcape away aliue, then afterward he is called a Hart royall. And if the beaſt by the Kings or Queenes hunting be chaſed out of the foreſt and ſo eſcape: proclamation is commonly made in the places there about, that in regard of the paſtime, that the beaſt hath ſhewed to the King or Queene, noneſhall hurt him, or hinder him from returning to the foreſt; and then is he a Hart royall proclaimed. Idem. eodem.
               
               
                  Hauberk, commeth of the French (Haubert. i. lorica) wherevpon he that holdeth land in France by finding a coate or ſhirt of mayle, and to be readie with it, when he ſhall be called, is ſaid to haue Hauberticum feudum. whereof Hotoman writeth thus: Hauberticum feudum gallicâ linguâ vulgò dicitur pro (loricatum). i. datum vaſallo ca conditione, vt ad edictum loricatus ſiue cataphractus praeſto ſit. Nam vt lorica latinis propriè & minus vſitatè eſt tegmen de loro factum, quo maiores in bello vtebantur, quemadmodum Seruius Honoratus ſcribit in libro Aeneidū 11 frequentiſſimè autem pro aenea armatura in tegravſurpatur. ſic apud Gallos Haubert propriè loricam annulis contextam ſignificat, quam vulgus Cotte de maille appellat. Haec Hot. in verbis feudal. verbo Hauberticum feudum. Hauberk with our awnceſters ſeemeth to ſignifie, as in France, a ſhirt or coate of mayle and ſo it ſeemeth to be vſed, anno 13. Ed. pri. ſtat. 3. ca. 6. Though in theſe daies the word is otherwiſe written as (Halbert) and ſignifieth a weapon well enough knowne.
               
                  Haward aliâs Hayward, ſecmeth to be componnded of two french word (Hay. i. ſepes) & Garde.. i. cuſtodia) It ſignifieth with vs, one that keepeth the common heard of the towne: & the reaſon may be, becauſe one part of his office is to looke that they neither breake nor croppe the hedges of incloſed grounds. It may likewiſe come from the german (herd. i. armentū
                   & (bewarren. i. cuſtodire). He is a ſworne officer in the Lords court: and the forme of his oath you may ſee in Kitchin. fol. 46.
               
                  
                  Hawkers, be certaine deceitfull felowes, that goe from place to place, buying & ſelling, braſſe, pewter, and other merchandiſe, that ought to be vttered in open market. The appellation ſeemeeth to growe from their vncertaine wandering, like thoſe that with hawkes ſeeke their game, where they can finde it. You finde the word. anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 6. & anno 33. eiuſdem. cap. quarto.
               
               
                  Headborow, is compounded of two words: (Heofod. i. caput) and (Bor-he. i. pignus) It ſignifieth him, that is chiefe of the franckpledg: and him that had the principall gouernment of them within his owne pledge. And as he was called Headborowe, ſo was he alſo called Borowhead, Burſholder, Thirdborow, Tithing man, Chiefe pledge, or Borowelder, according to the diuerſitie of ſpeach in diuers places. Of this ſee M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words. verbo Centuria. and in his treatiſe of Conſtables. and Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 22. It nowe ſignifieth Conſtable. See Conſtable.
               
               
                  Healfang, is compounded of two Saxon words (Hals. i. collū) and (fang. i. capere, captivare). See Pylorie.
               
               
                  Heire (Haeres) though, for the word, it be borowed of the latine; yet, it hath not altogether the ſame ſignification with vs, that it hath with the Civilians, for whereas they call him (haeredem) qui ex teſtamento ſucced
                        〈…〉
                      in vniuerſum ius teſtatoris: the cō
                  mon lawyers call him heire, that ſucceedeth by right of blood, in any mans lands or tenenients in fee, for there is nothing paſſeth with vs iure haereditatis, but onely fee. Moueables, or chatels immoueable, are giuen by teſtament, to whom the teſtator liſteth, or elſe are at the diſpoſition of the Ordinarie, to be diſtributed as he in conſcience thinketh meete, Gloſſa in Provinciali conſtitut. Ita quorundam. De teſtamentis. verbo. Ab inteſtato. And whether a man enioy moueable goods and chatels, by will or the diſcretion of the Ordinarie, he is not with vs called an heire: but onely he that ſucceedeth either by teſtament, or right of bloud in fee. Caſſanaeus in conſuetud. Burg. pag. 909. hath a diſtinction of haeres, which in ſome ſort well accordeth with our lawe: For he ſaith, there is haeres ſanguinis, & haereditatis. And a man may be haeres ſanguinis with vs, that is, heyre apparent to his father, or other aunceſter: and yet may vpon diſpleaſure, or meere will be defeated of his inheritance, or at the leaſt, the greateſt part thereof.
               
                  Heyre loome, ſeemeth to bee

compounded of (heire) and (loome) that is, a frame, namely to weaue in. The word by time is drawne to a more generall ſignification, then at the firſt it did beare, comprehending all implements of houſhold, as namely, tables, preſſes, cupbords, bedſteedes, wainſcots, and ſuch like, which by the cuſtome of ſome countries, hauing belonged to a houſe certaine deſcents, are neuer inventaried after the deceaſe of the owner, as chatels, but accrew to the heyre with the houſe it ſelfe. This word is twice metaphorically vſed in that diuine ſpeech, made by that moſt worthy & complete noble man the Earle of Northampton, againſt that helliſh, vgly, and damnable treaſon of gunpowder, plotted to conſume the moſt vertuous King that euer raigned in Europe, together with his gratious Queene, and pretious poſteritie, as alſo the three honorable eſtates of this renowned kingdome.
               
                  Heck, is the name of an Engine, to take fiſh in the riuer of Owſe by Yorke. anno 23. H. 8. cap. 18.
               
                  Heinfare, alias, hinefare, (diſceſſiofamuli à domino) the word is compounded of (hine) a ſeruant, and (fare) an old Engliſh word, ſignifiing a paſſage.
               
                  Henchman, or heinſman, is a German word ſignifying (domeſticum, aut vnum de familia.) It is vſed with vs, for one that runneth on foote attending vpon a man of honour or worſhip. anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. anno 24. Henric. 8. cap. 13.
               
                  Hengwite, ſignificat quiet antiā miſericordiae de latrone ſuſpenſo abſque conſideratione. Fleta lib. prim. cap. 47. See Hankwit.
               
               
                  Herauld, (heraldus) is borowed by vs of the French (herault) and in M. Verſtegans iudgement proceedeth originally from two Dutch words (here. i. exercitus) and (healt. i. pugil magnanimus,) as if he ſhould be called (the Champion of the armie) hauing by eſpeciall office to chalenge vnto battell or combate. With vs it ſignifieth an officer at armes, whoſe function is to denounce warre, to proclaime peace, or otherwiſe to be employed by the King in martiall meſſages or other buſineſſe. The Romaines called them plurally (Feciales.) M. Stow in his Annals deriueth them from heroes. pag. 12. which hee hath from other that writ of that ſubiect, whoſe coniecture I leaue to the reader. Their office with vs, is deſcribed by Polydore. lib. 19. in this ſort: ſpeaking of the knights of the Garter, hee ſaith: habent inſuper Apparitores miniſtros, quos heraldos dicunt: quorum praefectus armorum Rex vocitatur:

hy belli & pacis nuncii. Ducibus, Comitibuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      à Rege factis inſignia aptant, ac eorum funera curant. He might haue added farder, that they be the Iudges and examiners of gentlemens armes, that they marſhall all the ſolemnities at the coronations of princes, manage combats, and ſuch like. There is alſo one and the ſame vſe of them with vs, and with the French nation, whence we haue their name. And what their office is with them, ſee Lupanus lib. prim. de Magiſt. Francorum, ca. Heraldi. There be diuers of them with vs: whereof three being the chiefe, are called Kings at armes. And of them Garter is the principall, inſtituted and created by Henry the fifth. Stowes annals. pag. 584. whoſe office is to attend the knights of the Garter at their ſolemnities, and to marſhall the ſolemnities of the funerals of all the greater nobility, as of Princes, Dukes, Marquiſes, Earles, Vicounts, and Barons, yet I finde in Plowden, caſu Reniger, & Fogaſſa, that Ed. the fourth graunted the office of the king of Heralds, to one Garter cum feudis & proficuis ab antiquo, &c. fol. 12. b. The next is Clarentius, ordained by Edward the fourth. for he attaining the Dukedome of Clarence by the death of George his brother, whom he beheaded for aſpiring to the crowne, made the Herald, which properly belonged to the Duke of Clarence, a King at armes, and called him Clarentius. His proper office is, to marſhall and diſpoſe the funerals of all the leſſer nobility, as knights, and Eſquires, through the Realme of the ſouth ſide of Trent. The third is Norroy, or Northroy, whoſe office is the ſame on the north ſide of Trent, that Clarentius hath on this ſide, as may well appeare by his name, ſignifiing the northern king, or king of the north parts. Beſide theſe, there be ſixe other properly called Heralds according to their originall, as they were created to attend Dukes, &c. in marſhall executions. viz. York, Lancaſter, Somerſet, Richemond, Cheſter, Windleſour. Laſtly there be foure other called marſhals or pourſwivants at armes, reckoned after a ſort, in the number of Heralds, and doe commonly ſucceede in the place of the Heralds as they dye, or be preferred: and thoſe be Blew Mantle, Rougecroſſe, Rougedragon, and Percull
                        ••
                     . The (feciales) among the Romans were prieſts, Nam N
                        〈…〉
                      Pompilius diuini cultus inſt
                        〈…〉
                     
                     nem in octo partes diuiſit, & ita itiam ſacerdotum octo ordines conſtunit, &c. Septimā partem ſacrae conſtitutionis collegio corum adiccit, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Feciales vocantur. Erant autem ex

optimis domibus viri electi, per omne ipſi vitae tempus ſacrati, quorum partes in eo verſabantur, vt fidei publicae inter populos praeeſſent: ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iuſtum aliquod bellum fore cenſebatur: niſi id per Feciales eſſet indictum. Qui vt Feſtus ait, a faciendo, quòd belli paciſque faciendae apud cos ius eſſet, Feciales dicti ſunt. Coraſius miſcel. iuris ciui. li. 1. ca. 10. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 12.
               
                  Herbage (herbagium) is a french word, and ſignifieth in our common lawe, the fruit of the earth prouided by nature for the bitte or mouth of the catell. But it is moſt commonly vſed for a liberty that a man hath to feede his catell in another mans ground, as in the foreſt, &c. Cromptons Iuriſdiction. fol. 197.
               
                  Herbenger commeth of the french (Heberger) or (Eſberger) (heſberger). i. hoſpitio excipere. It ſignifieth with vs, an officer of the princes court, that allotteth the noble men, and thoſe of the houſehold their lodgings. It ſignifieth alſo in Kitchin, an Inkeeper. fol. 176.
               
                  Hereditaments (hereditamenta) ſeeme to ſignifie all ſuch things immoueable, be they corporeall or incorporeall, as a man may haue to himſelfe and his heires, by way of inheritance. v. anno 32. H. 8. ca. 2. or not being otherwiſe bequeathed, doe naturally and of courſe deſcend to him which is our next heire of blood, and fall not within the compas of an executour, or adminiſtratour, as chatels doe.
               
                  Heriot. See Hariot.
               
               
                  Hide of land (Hida terrae) Saxonicè (Hidelandes) is a certaine meaſure or quantitie of land, by ſome mens opinion, that may be plowed with one plowe in a yeare: as the author of the newe Termes ſaith, verbo Hidage. by other men, it is an hundred acres. By Beda (who calleth it familiā) it is as much as will maintaine a familie. Crompton in his Iuriſdict. fol. 220. ſaith, that it conſiſteth of an hundred acres: euery acre in length 40. perches, and in breadth 4. perches, everie perch 16. foote and a halfe. and againe, fol. 222. A hide of land conteineth an hundred acres, & 8. hides or 800. acres, conteine a knights fee. Of this reade more in M. Lamberds Explica: of Saxon wordes, verbo Hyda terrae. See Carue.
               
               
                  Hide and gaine. old. nat. br. fol. 71. Coke. lib. 4. Tirringhams caſe. ſignifieth carable land. See Gainage.
               
               
                  Hidage (Hidagium) is an extraordinarie taxe, to be paide for euery hide of land, Bracton li. 2. c. 6. writeth thus of it: Sunt etiam quaedam communes praeſtationes, quae ſeruitia non dicuntur, nec de conſuetudine veniunt, niſi cum neceſſitas intervenerit,

vel cum Rex venerit: ſicut ſunt Hidagia, Coragia, & Carvagia: & alia plura de neceſſitate & ex conſenſu communi totius Regni introducta, & quae ad Dominum feudi non pertinent, &c. of this reade the new expounder of lawe termes, who ſaith that hidage is to be quit, if the king ſhall taxe all the lands by hides, and yet alſo graunteth it to be the taxe it ſelfe, ſaying that it was wont to be an vſuall kind of taxing as well for prouiſion of armour, as payments of money.
               
                  Hinefare. See Heinfare.
               
               
                  Hidel. i. H. 7. ca. 6. ſeeemeth to ſignifie a place of protection, as a Sanctuarie.
               
                  Hierlome, See Heirlome.
               
               
                  Hine, ſeemeth to be vſed for a Seruant at husbandrie and the maſter hine a ſeruant that ouerſeeth the reſt. anno. 12. R. 2. ca. quarto.
               
               
                  Hoblers (Hobellarii) are certaine men, that by their tenure are tyed to maintaine a little light nagge, for the certifiing of any inuaſion made by enemies, or ſuch like perill toward the Sea ſide, as Porchmouth, &c. of theſe you ſhall reade. anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 7. & anno 25. eiuſdem. ſtat. 5. ca. 8.
               
                  Hoghenhine, is he that commeth gueſtwiſe to a houſe, and lieth there the third night. After which time he is accounted of his familie in whoſe houſe he lieth: and if he offend the kings peace, his hoſt muſt be anſwerable for him. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 10. In the lawes of King Edward ſet forth by M. Lamberd, he is called agenhine. wheare you may reade more of this mater.
               
                  Hithe (Hitha) is a petit hauen to land wares out of veſſels or boates. new booke of Entriſe. fol. 3. colum. 3.
               
                  Hoggeſhead, is a meaſure of wine or oyle containing the fourth parte of a tunne. that is 63. gallons. anno. i. R. 3. ca. 13.
               
                  Hoiſtings. See Huſtings.
               
               
                  Homage (Homagium) is a french word, ſignifiing (fidem clientularem.) for in the originall grants of land and tenements by way of fee, the lord did not onely tie his tenents or feed men to certaine ſeruices: but alſo tooke a ſubmiſſion with promis and oathe, to be true and loyall to him, as there lord & benefactour. This ſubmiſſion was and is called homage: the forme wherof you haue in the ſecond ſtatute anni. 17. Ed: 2. in theſe words: when a free man ſhall doe homage to his Lord, of whome he holdeth in chiefe: he ſhall hold his hands together betweene the hands of his lord, and ſhall

ſay thus: I become your man from this day forthe for life, for member, & for wordly honour, and ſhall owe you my faith for the land I hold of you: ſauing the faith, that I doe owe vnto our Soueraigne Lord the king, and to mine other Lords. And in this maner the Lord of the fee, for which homage is due, taketh homage of euery tenent, as he commeth to the land or fee. Glanvile. lib. 9. ca. 1. except they be women, who performe not homage but by their husbands, (yet ſee Fitzherbert. that ſaith the contrary in his natura br. fol. 157. F.) Reade Glanuile more at large in the ſaid firſt chapter, with the ſecond, third & fourth; The reaſon of this M. Skene giueth de verbo. ſignificatione, verbo Homagium. viz. becauſe Homage eſpecially concerneth ſeruice in warre. He ſaith alſo, that conſecrated Biſhops, doe no homage, but onely fidelitie: the reaſon may be all one. And yet I find in the Regiſter. orig. fol. 296. a. that a woman taking liuerie of lands holden by knights ſeruice, muſt doe homage, but not being ioyntly infeoffed, for then ſhee doth only fealtie. And ſee Glanuile in the ende of the firſt chapter of his nineth booke touching Biſhops conſecrated, whome he denieth to performe homage to the king for their Baronie, but onely fealty. Fulbeck reconeileth this, fol. 20. a. in theſe words. By our lawe a religious man may doe homage, but may not ſay to his Lord. Egodevenio homo veſter, becauſe he hath profeſſed himſelfe to be onely Gods man, but he may ſay, I doe vnto you homage, and to you ſhall be faithfull & loyall. See of this Britton. cap. 68. Homage, is either new with the fee, or aunceſtrell: that is, wheare a man and his aunceſters, time out of minde, haue held their lands by homage to their Lord, whereby the Lord is tied to warrant the land vnto his tenent. newe Termes of the lawe. This homage is vſed in other countries as well as ours, & was wont to be called Hominium. See Hotom. de verbis feudalibus, verbo. Homo. Skene diuideth it into liegium & non liegium. de verb. ſignifi. verbo Homage. for the which ſee Leige, and Hotoman, diſputatione de feudis tertia. Homage is ſometime vſed for the Iurie in the Courte Baron, Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. cap. 27. The reaſon is, becauſe it conſiſteth moſt commonly of ſuch, as owe homage vnto the Lord of the fee. And theſe of the Feudiſts are called pares curiae, ſive ourtis, ſiue domus, ſic dicuntur enim conuaſſalli ſiue compares, qui ab eodem patrono feudum receperunt, vel qui in eodom territorio feudum

habent. Hotoman. Of this homage you may read in the 29. c. of the Grand Cuſtumarie of Normandie, where you ſhall vnderſtand of other ſorts of homage vſed by them, & ſtraunge vnto vs. whereunto ioyne Hotoman. diſputat. de feudis, in diuers places & namely columna 860. C. hiis verbis. Deinceps de nota hominii & feudalitiae ſubiectionis videamus. Omnium quidem video eſſe commune, vt dexteras tanquam in foederibus iungerent: plerum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      etiam vt dexteris averſis, oſculum praeberent, interdum, vt ambas manus iunctas patrono contrectandas praeberent: ſupplicum & dedititiorum nomine, qui velatas manus porrigebant. and pag. 861. hiis verbis. Multis Galliae at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      etiam Angliae moribus conſtitutum eſt (Quod ex Anglico Litletonio intelleximus) vt hominium ſeruili & ſupplici veneratione, ac plane tanquam a dedititiis praeſtetur. Nam vaſallus diſcinctus, nudo capite, ad pedet ſedentis patroni proiectus, ambas manus iunctas porrigit: quas dum Dominus ſuis manibus amplectitur, haec verba pronunciat. Here, venio in tuum hominium & fidem, & homo tuus fio ore & manibus; tibi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iuro ac ſpondeo fidelem me tibi futurum eorum feudorum nomine, quae tuo beneficio accepi, &c. Whereunto you may adde him, colum. 819. G. 822. F. & 857. B. & D. & F. Of homage in Scotland, reade M. Skene, de verb. ſignif. verbo Homagium. to whome you may alſo ioyne a plentifull diſcourſe in ſpeculo Durandi. commonly called (ſpeculator) among the Civilians, titulo De Feudis.
               
               
                  Homagio reſpectuando, is a writ to the Eſcheatour commaunding him to deliuer ſeiſin of lands to the heire, that is at full age, notwithſtanding his homage not done, which ought to be performed before the heire haue liuerie of his lands, except there fall out ſome reaſonable cauſe to hinder it. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 269.
               
                  Homine eligendo ad cuſtodiendam peciam ſigillipro Mereatoribus aediti, is a writ directed to a corporation, for the choice of a new man to keepe the one part of the ſeale, appointed for ſtatutes Merchant, when the other is dead, according to the ſtatute of Acton Burnel. Regiſter. orig. fol. 178. a.
               
               
                  Homine replegiando, is a writ for the bayle of a man out of priſon: which, in what caſes it lyeth, and what not, See Fitz. nat. br. fol. 66. See alſo the Regiſter orig. fol. 77. See the new booke of Entries. verb. Homine replegiando.
               
               
                  Homine capto in Withernamium, is a writ to take him, that hath taken any bondman or woman, and led him or her out of the countie, ſo that he or ſhee cannot

be repleuied according to lawe. Regiſter orig. fol. 79. a. See Withernam.
               
               
                  Homicide (homicidium) is the ſlaying of a man: and it is diuided into voluntarie, or caſuall: homicide voluntarie is that, which is deliberated, and committed of a ſet mind, and purpoſe to kill: homicide volūtary, is either with precedent malice, or without. The former is murder, and is the felonious killing through malice prepenſed of any perſon liuing in this realme vnder the Kings protection. Weſt. part. 2. ſimbol: tit. Inditment. ſect: 37. &c. vſque ad 51. where you may ſee diuers ſubdiuiſions of this mater. See alſo Glanuile. lib 14. cap: 3. Bract. l: 3. tra: 2. c. 4. 15. & 17. Brit. c. 5. 6. 7. See Muder. Mans ſlaughter & Chaūce medley.
               
               
                  Homeſoken, aliâs Hamſoken (Hamſoca) is compounded of (Ham. i. habitatio) and (Soken. i. quaerere). It is by Bracton. lib. 3. tract: 2. c: 23. thus defined. Homeſoken dicitur inuaſio domus contra pacem Domini Regis. It appeareth by Raſtall in the title. Expoſitiō of of words: that in auntient times ſome men had an immunitie to doe this: for he defineth Homeſoken to be an immunitie from amercements for entring into houſes violently, and without licence. which thing ſeemeth ſo vnreaſonable, that me thinketh he ſhould be deceiued in that his expoſition. I would rather thinke it ſhould be a libertie, or power graunted by the king to ſome common perſon, for the cogniſance or puniſhment of ſuch a trangreſſion. for ſo I haue ſeene it interpreted in an old note that I haue giuen me by a freind, which he had of an expert man toward the Exchequer, but of what authoritie I know not. See Hamſoken.
               
               
                  Hondhabend, is compounded of two Saxon words (Hond. i. hand, and habend. i. hauing) and ſignifieth a circumſtance of manifeſt theft, when one is deprehended with the thing ſtollen in his hand. Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 31. & 54. who alſo vſe the (handberend) for the ſame, eodem cap. 8.
               
                  Honour (honor) is, beſide the generall ſignification, vſed ſpecially for the more noble ſort of ſeigneuries: whereof other inferiour Lordſhips, or maners doe depend by performance of cuſtomes and ſeruices, ſome or other, to thoſe that are Lords of them. And I haue reaſon to think that none are honours originally, but ſuch as are belonging to the King. How be it they may afterward be beſtowed in fee vpon other nobles. The maner of creating theſe honours may in part be gathered out of the ſtatutes

                  anno 31. H. 8. cap. 5. where Hampton court is made an honour. and anno 33. eiuſdem. cap. 37. & 38. whereby Amptill and Grafton be likewiſe made honours. and anno 37. eiuſdem ca. 18. whereby the King hath power giuen by his leters patents, to erect foure ſeuerall honours. Of Weſtminſter, of Kingſton vpon Hull, Saint Oſithes in Eſſex, and Dodington in Berkshire. This word is alſo vſed in the ſelfe ſame ſignification in other nations. See ca. licet cauſam. extra de probationibus. and Minſinger vpon it. nu. 4. In reading I haue obſerued thus many honours in England: The honour of Aquila. Camden. Britan. pag. 231. of Clare. pag. 351. of Lancaſter. pag. 581. of Tickhill. pag. 531. of Wallingford, Notingham, Boloine. Magna charta. cap: 31. of Weſt Greenewiſh, Camd: pag. 239. of Bedford. pupil. oculi. parte. 5. cap. 22. of Barhimſted. Brooke, titulo Tenure. nu. 16. of Hwittam. Camd pag. 333. of Plimpton. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 115. of Creuecure, and Hagenet Febert. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 48. of Eaſt Greenewiſh. of Windſour in Berk ſhire, and of Bealew in Eſſex. anno 37. H. 8. ca. 18. of Peverell in the county of Lincolne. Regiſter orig. fol. 1.
               
                  Horngeld, is compounded of Horn and Gildan or Gelder. i. Soluere. It ſignifieth a taxe within the foreſt to be paid for horned beaſts. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 197. And to be free thereof, is a priuiledge graunted by the king vnto ſuch as he think eth good. Idem, ibidem. and Raſtall in his expoſition of words.
               
                  Hors de ſonfee, is an exception to auoide an action brought for rent, iſſuing out of certaine land by him that pretendeth to be the Lord, or for ſome cuſtomes and ſeruices. for if he can iuſtifie that the land is without the compas of his fee, the action falleth. v. Brooke. hoc titulo.
               
               
                  Hoſpitallers (Hoſpitalarii) were certaine knights of an order, ſo called, becauſe they had the care of hoſpitals, wherein Pilgrims were receiued to theſe Pope Clement the fift tranſferred the Templers, which order, by a councell held at Vienna in Fraunce, he ſuppreſſed for their many and great offences, as he pretended. Theſe Hoſpitallers be now the knights of Saint Iohn of Malta. Caſſan: gloria mundi. parte. 9. conſiderat. 5. This conſtitution was alſo obeyed in Ed. the 2. time here in England, and confirmed by Parlament. Tho. Walſing ham. in hiſtoria Ed. 2. Stawes annals. ibidem. Theſe are mentioned anno 13. Ed. 1. ca. 43. & anno 9. H. 3. ca. 37.
               
                  
                  Hoſtelers (Hoſtellarius) commeth of the french (Hoſteler. i. Hoſpes) and ſignifieth with vs, thoſe that otherwiſe we call Inkeepers, an. 9. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. c. 11.
               
                  Hotchepot (in partem poſitio) is a word that commeth out of the lowecountries, where (Hutſpot) ſignifieth fleſh cut into pretie peeces, and ſodden with herbs or roots, not vnlike that which the Romans called farraginem. Feſtus. Litleton ſaith that literally it ſignifieth a pudding mixed of diuers ingredients: but metaphorically a commxtion or putting together of lands, for the equall diuiſion of them being ſo put together. Examples you haue diuers in him. fo. 55. and ſee Briton, fol: 119. There is in the Ciuile law collatio bonorum anſwerable vnto it, whereby if a child aduaunced by the father in his life time, doe after his father deceaſe, chalenge a childs part with the reſt, he muſt caſt in all that formerly he had receiued, and then take out an equall ſhare with the others. De collatio: bonorum. Π. lib: 37. titulo. 6.
               
                  Houſebote, is compounded of Houſe, and Bote. i. compenſatio. It ſignifieth eſtovers out of the Lords wo
                     •
                  de to vphould a tenement or houſe.
               
                  Houſerobbing, is the robbing of a man in ſome part of his houſe, or his booth, or tēt in any faire or market, and the owner, or his wife, children, or ſeruants, being within the ſame. for this is felonie by anno. 23. H: 8. cap. i. and. anno. 3. Ed. 6. cap 9. yea, now it is felonie thoughe none be within the houſe. anno. 39. Eliz: ca. 15. See Burglarie. ſee Weſt. part. 2. ſym. tit. Inditemēts, ſect: 67.
               
                  Hudegeld, ſignificat quiet antiam tranſgreſſionis illatae in ſeruum tranſgredientem. Fleta lib. i. ca: 47. Quare whether it ſhould not be Hindegeld.
               
               
                  Hue, and Crie (Huteſium & Clamor) come of 2. french words: (Huier) and (Crier) both ſignifiing to ſhoute or cry a loude. M. Manwood, parte. 2. of his foreſt lawes. ca: 19. nu. 11. ſaith, that Hew is latine, meaning belike the Interiection: but vnder reformation, I think he is deceiued; this ſignifieth a purſuite of one hauing committed felonie by the high way, for if the party robbed, or any in the companie of one murdered or robbed, come to the Conſtable of the next towne, and will him to raiſe Hiew and Crie, or to make purſuite after the offēdour, deſcribing the partie, and ſhewing as neere as he can, which way he is gone: the Conſtable ought forthwith to call vpon the pariſhe for aide in ſeeking the felon: and if he be not found theare, then to giue the next Conſtable

warning, and he the next, vntill the offender be apprehended, or at the leaſt, vntill he be thus perſued to the ſea ſide. Of this reade Bracton. lib: 3. tracta: 2. ca. 5. Smith de Repub: Anglo: lib: 2. cap: 20. and the ſtatute anno. 13. Ed. 1. ſtatute of Wincheſt. c. 3. &. a. 28. Ed: 3. c: 11. & anno. 27. El: c: 13. The Normans had ſuch a perſuite with a Crie after offenders as this is, which they called Haro: whereof you may reade the Grand Cuſtumarie, cap. 54. Some call it Harol: the reaſon whereof they giue to be this, that there was a Duke of Normandy called Rol, a man of great iuſtice and ſeruerity againſt grieuous offenders: and that thereupon when they follow any in this perſuite, they crie Ha-Rol, as if they ſhould ſay, Ah Rol where art thou that wert wont to redreſſe this, or what wouldſt thou doe againſt theſe wretches, if thou now wert liuing. But in truth I thinke it commeth, from Harier. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  flagitare, inquiet are, vrgere. Hue is vſed alone. anno 4. Ed. pri. Stat. 2. This the Scots call Hueſium and M. Skene de verbo. ſignif. verb. Hueſium, ſaith, that it commeth of the french Oye
                        •
                     . i. Audite. making one etymologie of this and the crie vſed before a proclamation, The maner of their hue and cry, as he there deſcribeth it, is that if a robberie be done, a horne is blowne, and an out crie made: after which, if the partie flie away, and not yeeld himſelfe to the Kings Bayliffe, he may be lawfully ſlaine, and hanged vp vpon the next gallowes. Of this Hue and crie, ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 160. b.
               
               
                  Huiſſers. See Vſhers.
               
               
                  Hundred (Hundredum) is a part of a ſhire, ſo called originally, becauſe it conteined ten tithings called in latine Decennas. Theſe were firſt ordeined by king Alfred the 29. king of the Weſt Saxons. Stowes Annals pag. 105. of theſe thus ſpeaketh M. Lamb. in his explica. of Saxon words. verbo, Centuria
                        •
                      Aluredus rex, vbi cum Guthruno Daca foedus inierat, prudentiſſimum illud 
                        •
                     lim a Ietr
                        ••
                      Moyſi datum ſecutus conſilium, Angliamprimus in ſatrapias, Centurias, & Decurias, partitus eſt. Satrapiam, ſhire a ſhyran (quod parti
                        •
                      ſignificat) nominavit: Centuriam, Hundred: & Decuriā, Toothing ſiue Tienmantale. i. Decemvirale collegium appellavit: at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iiſdem nominibus vel hodie vocantur, &c. And againe afterward: Decrevit tum porro Aluredus liberae vt condicionis quiſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in Centuriam aſcriberitur aliquam, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in Decemviralt aliquod coniiceretur collegium. De minoribus negotiis Decurionet vt tudicarent: ac ſi
                        •
                     quae eſſet re
                        •
                      difficilior, ad Centuriam deferrent: diffi
                        •
                     illimas deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      & maximi mo
                        ••
                     enti

lites, Senator & praepoſitus in frequenti illo ex omni ſatrapia conventu componerent. Modus autem iudicandi quis fuerit, Ethelredus Rex, legum, quas frequenti apud Vanatingum ſenatu ſancivit, capite 4. hiis fere verbis exponit. In ſingulis centuriis comitia ſunto, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      liberae condicionis viri duodeni, aetate ſuperiores, vnà cum praepoſito, ſacra tenentes iur anto, ſe adeo virum aliquem innocent em haud damnaturos ſortemve abſoluturos. This forme of diuiding counties into Hundreds for beter gouernment, howſoeuer it is attributed to King Alfred here with vs: yet he had it from Germanie, whence he and his came hither. For there centa or centena is a iuriſdiction ouer a hundred townes, and conteineth the puniſhment of capitall crimes. Andraeas Kitchin. in his tractate, de ſublimi & regio territorii iure. ca. 4. pa. 123. where he alſo ſheweth out of Tacitus, de ſitu & moribus Germa. that this diuiuiſion was vſuall amongſt the Germans before his daies. By this you vnderſtand the original and old vſe of Hundreds, which hold ſtill in name, and remaine in ſome ſort of combination, for their ſeuerall ſeruices in diuers reſpects, but their iuriſdiction is aboliſhed, and growne to the countie court, ſome few excepted, which haue beene by priuiledge annexed to the crowne, or graunted vnto ſome great ſubiect, and ſo remaine ſtill in the nature of a Fraunchiſe. And this hath beene euer ſithence the ſtat. anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. ca. 9. whereby theſe Hundred courts formerly fermed out by the Shyreeue to other men, were reduced all, or the moſt part, to to the countie court, and ſo haue and doe remaine at this preſent. So that where you read now of any hundred courts, you muſt know, that they be ſeuerall fraunchiſes, wherein the Shyreeue hath not to deale by his ordinarie authoritie, except they of the Hundred refuſe to doe their office. See Weſt. parte. 1. ſymbol. lib. 2. ſect. 288. See. Turn. The newe expounder of lawe termes ſaith, that the latine Hundredum is ſometime vſed for an immunitie or priviledge, whereby a man is quit of mony or cuſtomes due to the gouernours, or Hundreders.
               
                  Hundreders (Hundredarii) be men empaneled or fit to be empaneled of a Iurie vpon any controverſie, dwelling within the Hundred where the land lieth, which is in queſtion, Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 217. & anno 35. Henrici 8. cap. 6. It ſignifieth alſo him that hath the Iuriſdiction of a hundred, and holdeth the hundred court. anno. 13. Ed. pri.

ca. 38. anno. 9. Ed. 2. ſtat. 2. & anno 2. Ed. 3. ca. 4. and ſometime is vſed for the Bayliffe of an hundred. Hornin his mirrour of Iuſtices, li. 1. ca del office del coroner.
               
               
                  Hundredlaghe, ſignifieth the Hundred courte, from the which all the officers of the Kings foreſt were freed by the charter of Canutus. ca. 9. Manwood. parte. 1. pag. 2.
               
                  Huors, See Conders.
               
               
                  Huſeans, commeth of the French (houſeaux) i. ocrea, aboote. It is vſed in the Statute anno. 4. Ed. 4. ca. 7.
               
                  Huſtings (Huſtingum) may ſeeme to come from the French (Haulſer. i. tollere, attollere, ſuberigere) for it ſignifieth the principall and higheſt court in London. anno 11. H. 7. ca. 21. & Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 23. See anno. 9. Ed. pri. ca. vnico. Other Cities and townes alſo haue had a court of the ſame name, as Wincheſter, Lincolne, Yorke, and Sheppey, and others, where the Barons or Citizens haue a record of ſuch things as are determinable before them. Fleta. libro 2. cap. 55.
               
                  Husfaſtene, is he that holdeth houſe and land, Bracton lib. 3. tractat. 2. ca. 10. His words be theſe, Et in franco plegio eſſe debet omnis, qui terram tenet & domum, qui dicuntur Husfaſtene, & etiam alii qui illis deſerviunt, qui dicuntur Folgheres, &c.
               
            
            
               I A
               IArrock: anno 1 Rt. 3. ca. 8. is a kinde of cork ſo called.
               
                  Identitate nominis, is a writ that lyeth for him who is vpon a Capias or Exigent, taken and committed to priſon for another man of the ſame name: whereof ſee the forme and farder vſe, in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 267. ſee the Regiſter originall, fol. 194.
               
                  Idiot, and he that afterward becometh of inſane memory, differeth in diuers caſes, Coke. fol. 154. b. lib. 4. See here following Idiota inquirenda.
               
               
                  Idiota inquirenda vel ex aminanda, is a writ that is directed to the excheatour or the Shyreeue of any county, where the king hath vnderſtanding that there is an Idiot, naturally borne ſo weake of vnderſtanding, that he connot gouern or mannage his inheritance, to call before him the partyſuſpected of Idiocie, & examin him: And alſo to inquire by the oaths of twelue men, whether he be ſufficiently witted to diſpoſe of his owne lands with diſcretion or not, and to certifie accordingly into the Chauncery: For the king hath the protection of his ſubiects, & by his prerogatiue the gouernmēt of their lands and ſubſtance, that are naturally

defectiue in their owne diſcretion: ſtatut. de praerogatiua Regis editum anno 17. Ed. 2. cap. 8. wherof read Stawnf. praerog. cap. 9. and of this writ, read Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 232. ſee the regiſter orig. fol. 267.
               
                  Ietzon ſe Flotzon.
               
               
                  Ieofaile, is cōpoūded of 3. french words, I' ay faille: i. ego lapſus ſum: & ſignifieth in our commō lawe, an ouer-ſight in pleading, touching the which you haue a ſtatute anno 32. H. 8. cap. 30. whereby it is enacted, that if the Iury haue once paſſed vpon the iſſue, though afterward there be found a Ieofaile in the pleading, yet iudgement ſhall likewiſe be giuen according to the verdict of the Iury. See Brooke, tit. Rrepleder: the author of the new tearms of law ſaith, that a Ieofaile is when the parties to any ſuite, haue in pleading proceeded ſo farre, that they haue ioyned iſſue, which ſhalbe tried or is tried by a Iury or inqueſt: and this pleading or iſſue is ſo badly pleaded or ioyned, that it will be errour if they proceed: then ſome of the ſaid parties may by their councell ſhew it to the court, as well after verdict giuen and before iudgement, as before the Iury be charged: the ſhewing of which defects before the Iury charged, was often when the Iury came into the court to trie the iſſue, then the councell which will ſhew it, ſhall ſay: this inqueſt you ought not to take, and if it be after verdict, then he may ſay: to Iudgement you ought not to goe: and becauſe of this many delayes grew in ſuites, diuers ſtatutes are made to redreſſe them: viz. 32. H. 8. c. 30. & others in Q. Elizabethes daies, and yet the fault litle amended.
               
                  Ignoramus, is a word properly vſed by the grand Enqueſt empaneled in the inquiſition of cauſes criminall and publique: and writen vpon the bill, whereby any crime is offered to their cōſideration, when as they miſlike their euidence, as defectiue or to weake to make good the preſentment. The effect of which word ſo written is, that all farder inquiry vpon that party for that fault, is thereby ſtopped, and he deliuered without farder aunſwer. It hath a reſemblance with that cuſtome of the auncient Romans: where the Iudges, when they abſolued a perſon accuſed, did wright A. vpon a litle table prouided for that purpoſe. i. Abſoluimus: if they iudged him guilty, they writ C. id eſt. Condemnamus: if they found the cauſe difficult and doubtfull, they writ. N. L. id eſt. Non liquet. Aſconius Pedianus in oratio. pro Milone. Alexander ab Alexandro. Genial. dierum, li. 3. ca. 14.
               
                  
                  Ikenildſtreate, is one of the four famous wayes that the Romans made in England, taking the beginning ab Icenis, which were they that inhabited Northf. Southf. and Cambridg ſhyre, Camd. Britan. fol. 343. See Watlingſtreat.
               
               
                  Imparlance (interlocutio vel interloquela) is a petition made In court vpon the count of the Demanndant by the tenent, or declaration of the plaintife, by the defendant, whereby he craueth reſpight, or an other day to put in his aunſwer, See Brooke, titulo Continuaence: See Dies datus: Imparlaunce ſeemeth to be generall or ſpeciall: ſpeciall imparlaunce is with this clauſe ſaluis omnibus aduantagiis tam ad iuriſdictionem curiae, quàm breue & narrationem. Kitchin: fol. 200. Then generall in reaſon muſt be that, which is made at large without inſerting that or the like clauſe. See Emperlaunce
               
               
                  Impeachment of Waſte, (impetitio vaſti) commeth of the french (empeſchement. i. impedimentum) and ſignifieth with vs, a reſtraint from committing of waſte vpon lands or tenements: See Waſte.
               
               
                  Implements, commeth of the french (emploier, i. inſumere in re aliqua) it ſignifieth with vs, things tending to the neceſſarie vſe of any trade or furniture of houſehould.
               
                  Impost, is a french word ſignifiing tribute, comming of the verb (impoſer) i: iniungere, irrogare, it ſignifieth with vs, the taxe receiued by the prince for ſuch merchandiſe, as are brought into any heauen from other nations: anno. 31. Elizabeth. cap: 5. and I thinke it may in ſome ſort be diſtinguiſhed from cuſtoms, bicauſe cuſtom is rather that profit, which the prince maketh of wares ſhipped out of the land: yet may they be confounded:
               
                  Improuement, See Approue.
               
               
                  In caſu conſimili. is a Writt: See caſu conſimili.
               
               
                  In caſu prouiſo: is a Writt: See caſu prouiſo.
               
               
                  Incident (incidens) ſignifieth a thing neceſſarily depending vpon another as more principall: for example, a court Baron is ſoe incident to a maner, and a court of piepowders to a faier, that they cannot be ſeuered by graunt: for if a maner or faire be graunted, theſe coutts cannot be referued. Kitchin. fol: 36.
               
                  Incroche (incrociare) Se encrochments. Admirals, and their deputies doe incroche to themſelues Iuriſdictions, &c: anno. 15. Rich: 2. ca: 3.
               
                  Indenture (indentura) is a writing compriſing ſome contract betwene two, and being indented in the toppe aunſwerably to another, that likewiſe

conteineth the ſame contract: this the Latines called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which among the ciuilians, is defined to be ſcriptura inter creditorem & debitorem indentata, in cuius ſciſcura literis capitalibus haec dictio 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , or plurally 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  ſcribitur. and it differeth from 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , quia hoc manu vnius tantùm, puta debitoris ſcribitur, & penes debitorem relinquitur pruinc. conſttut. de offic: archidiaco: cap: pri: verbo In ſcriptis. vid. Gothoſr: in notis ad l. 27 §. 3. Π. ad leg. Corn. de falſ.
               
               
                  Indicauit, is a writ or prohibition that lieth for a patron of a church, whoſe Clerk is defendant in court Chriſtian, in an action of tithes commenced by another clerke, and extending to the fourth part of the church, or of the tithes belonging vnto it. for in this caſe, the ſuite belongeth to the kings court, by the ſtatute Weſtm: 2: cap: 5. wherfore the patron of the defendant, being like to be preiudiced in his church and aduowzen, if the plaintife obteine in the court Chriſtian, hath this means to remoue it to the kings court; the Regiſter originall fol. 35. b. ſee ould. nat: br. fol. 31. & the regiſter fol: 35. and Britton. cap: 109. fol. 
                        •
                     60. A.
               
               
                  Indictment (Indictamentum) ſee indightment.
               
               
                  Indiuiſum, is vſed in the common law, for that which two houlde in common without particiō. Kitchin. fol. 241. in theſe words: he houldeth pro indiuiſo, &c:
               
               
                  Indorſment (indorſamentum, ſignifieth in the common law, a condition writen vpon the other ſide of an obligation: Weſt: part: 2. ſimbol: ſect: 157.
               
                  Infang, alias infeng, ſignificat quietantiam prioris priſae ratione conuiuij, Fleta l: i. cap: 47.
               
                  Infangthef, or Hinfangthefe, or Infangtheof, is compounded of 3. Saxon words: the prepoſition (In) (fang or fong) to take or catch, & (thef) it ſignifieth a priuiledge or libertie graunted vnto Lords of certaine maners, to iudge any theeife taken within there fee. Bracton. lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 8. In the lawes of King Edward, ſet out by M. Lambard: nu. 26: you haue it thus deſcribed: Infangthefe, Iuſtitia cognoſcentis latronis ſua eſt, de homine ſuo, ſi captus fuerit ſuper terram ſuam: Illiverò qui non habent has conſuetudines, coram inſticia regia rectum faciant in Hundredis, vel in Wapentachiis, vel in Scyris: The definition of this ſee alſo in Britton: fol: 90. b. and Roger Houeden. parte poſter. ſuorū annalium. fol. 345. b. & M. Skene de verborum ſignificatione, verbo Infangthefe, who writeth of it at large, reciting diuerſitie of opinions touching this and

                  outfangthefe: Fleta ſaith that (infangtheef) for ſoe he writeth it, dicitur latro captus in terra alicuius ſeiſitus aliquo latrocinio de ſuis propriis hominibus. libro 1. cap: 47: § Infangtheefe.
               
               
                  Information, See Enditement: See the new termes of lawe.
               
               
                  Informer (informator) in french (informateur) is an officer belonging to the exchequer or kings bench, that denounceth or complaineth of thoſe that offend againſt any penall ſtatute. They are otherwiſe called promotors, but the men being baſhfull of nature, doe bluſh at this name: theſe among the Ciuilians are called delatores.
               
               
                  Informatus non ſum, is a formall aunſwer or of courſe made by an atturney, that is commaunded by the court to ſay what he thinketh good in the defence of his client, by the which he is deemed to leaue his client vndefended, and ſo iudgement paſeth for the aduerſe party. See the new booke of Entries. titulo Non ſum informatus. and Iudgement 12.
               
                  Ingreſſu, is a writ of entrie, that is, whereby a man ſeeketh entry into lands or tenements; it lyeth in many diuers caſes wherit hath as many diuerſities of formes. See Entry: this writ is alſo called in the particular, praecipe quod reddat: becauſe thoſe be formall words in all writs of entry. The writs as they lye in diuers caſes, are theſe deſcribed in the old natura breu: Ingreſſu ad terminum qui praetertit, fol. 121. originall Regiſt. ſol. 227. which lyeth where lands or tenements are let to a man for terme of yeares, and the tenent houldeth ouer his terme: Ingreſſu dum non fuit compos mentis. fol. 223. original: regiſt: fol. 228. which lyeth where a man ſelleth land or tenement when he is out of his wits, &c. Ingreſſu dum fuit infra aetatem, fol. 123. Regiſter originall fol. 228. which lyeth where one vnder age ſelleth his lands, &c. Ingreſſu ſuper deſeiſina in le quibus fol. 125. Regiſt. orig. fol. 229. which lyeth where a man is diſſeiſed and dyeth, for his heire againſt the diſſeiſour. Ingreſſu in per fol. 126. original regiſter fol. 229. Ingreſſu ſur cui in vita, fol. 128. originall Regiſter fo. 239. both which ſee in Enrry: Ingreſſu cauſe matrimonii praelocuti. fol. 130. original regiſter fol. 233: which ſee cauſa matrimonii praelocuti. Ingreſſu in caſu proviſo, f. 132. Regiſter original. fo. 235. which ſee caſu pro viſo. Ingreſſu cui ante diuortium. fol. 130. original regiſter fol. 233. for which ſee, cui ante diuorium. Ingreſſu in conſimili caſu, fol. 233. originall Regiſter fol. 236. for which ſee Confimili caſu. Ingreſſu ſine conſenſu capituli, fol. 128. original

regiſter, fol. 230: for which ſee Sine aſſenſu capituli. Ingreſſu ad communem legem. fol. 132. originall regiſter, fol. 234. which lyeth, where the tenent for terme of life or of anothers life, tenent by curteſie, or tenent in Dower maketh a feofment in fee, & dyeth; he in the reuerſion ſhall haue the foreſaid writagainſt whomſoeuer that is in the land, after ſuch feofment made.
               
                  Ingroſſing of a fine, is making the indentures by the chirographer, and the deliuery of them to the party vnto whom the cogniſance is made. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 147. A.
               
               
                  Ingroſſer (ingroſſator) commeth of the frence Groſſeur: i. craſſiiudo. or Groſier. i. Solidarius venditor, it ſignifieth in the common law, one that buieth corne growing, or dead victuall, to ſell againe, except barly for mault, oats for oatemeale, or victuals to retaile, badging by licence, and buying of oiles, ſpices, and victualls, other then fiſh or ſalte. anno. 5. Edward: 6. cap: 14. anno. 5. Elizab: cap: 14. anno. 13. Elizab. cap: 25. theſe be M. Weſts. words, parte. 2. ſimbol: titulo Inditements: ſect. 64. howbeit this definition rather doth belong to vnlawfull ingroſſing, then to the word in generall. ſee Forstaller.
               
               
                  Inheritance (hareditas) is a perpetuity in lands or tenements to a man and his heirs. For Litleton cap: i. lib: i: hath theſe words: and it is to be vnderſtand, that this word (inheritance) is not onely vnderſtand, where a man hath inheritance of lands and tenements by diſcent of heritage, but alſo euery fee ſimple or fee taile that a man hath by his purchaſe, may be ſaid inheritance: for that, that his heires may inherit him: Seuerall inheritance is that, which two or moe hould ſeuerally, as if two men haue land giuen them to them and the heires of their two bodies, theſe haue ioynt eſtate during their liues, but their heires haue ſeuerall inheritance. Kitchin. fol: 155. See the new terms of law. verbo Enheritance:
               
               
                  Inhibition (Inhibitio) is a writt to inhibit or forbid a Iudge from farder proceding in the cauſe depēding before him: See Fitzh: nat: br: fol: 39. where he putteth prohibition and inhibition together: inhibition is moſt commonly a writ iſſuing out of a higher courte Chriſtian to a lower and inferiour, vpon an Appeale. anno. 24. H. 8. cap: 12. and prohibition out of the kings courte to a court Chriſtian, or to an inferiour temporall court.
               
                  Iniunction (iniunctio) is an interlocutory decree out of the Chā
                  cerie, ſometimes to giue poſſeſſion vnto the plaintife, for want

of apparence in the defendant, ſometime to the Kings ordinary court, and ſomtime to the court Chriſtian, to ſtay proceeding in a cauſe vpon ſuggeſtion made, that the regour of the law, if it take place, is againſt equitie and conſcience in that Caſe. ſee Weſt: parte. 2. ſimb: titulo Proceeding in Chauncery ſect: 25.
               
                  Inlawgh (Inlagatus) vel homo ſub lege) ſignifieth him that is in ſome frank pledge, of whome take Bractons words, l. 3. tracta: 2. cap. H. nu. 5. Minor verò, & qui infra aetatem duodecim annorū fuerit, vtlagari non poteſt nec extra legem poni: quia ante talem aetatem non eſt ſub lege aliqua, nec in decenna, non magis quam foemina. quae vtlagari non poteſt quia ipſa non eſt ſub lege. i. Inlowghe anglicè: ſc: in franco plegio ſiue decenna ſicut maſculus duodecim annorum & vlteriūs, &c. Inlaughe, ſignificat hominem ſubiectum leg i, Fleta li. i. cap. 47.
               
                  Inlagary (Inlagatio) is a reſtitution of one outlawed, to the kings protection, and to the benifite or eſtate of a ſubiect. Bracton: lib. 3 tracta: 2 cap. 14. nu. 6. 7. 8. Britton cap: 13.
               
                  Inmates, are thoſe that be admitted to dwell for their mony iointly with another mā, though in ſeuerall roomes of his mantiō houſe, paſſing in and out by one doore, and not being able to maintaine themſelues, which are inquiralle in a leete. Kitchin. fol: 45 where you may reade him at large who be properly Inmates in intendment of law, and whoe not.
               
                  Impriſion, anno 18 Ed: 3 ſtatu: 4: cap. vnico. ſeemeth to ſignifie ſo much as an attempt, comming of the french empris) which is all one with (enterpris) an enterpriſe.
               
                  Inquirendo, is an authoritie giuen to a perſon or perſons, to inquire into ſome thing for the kings aduantage, which in what caſes it lieth, ſee the Regiſter originall, fol. 72. 85. 124. 265. 266. 179. 267.
               
                  Inquiſition (Inquiſitio) is a maner of proceeding in maters criminall, by the office of the Iudge, which Hoſtienſis defineth thus: Inquiſitio nihil aliud eſt quàm alicuius criminis manifeſti ex bono & aquo Iudicis compeientis canonicè facta inveſtigatio, ca. qualiter. de accuſatio. In the Decretales: this courſe we take here in England by the great Enqueſt before Iuſtices in Eyre: See Eyre. and the places in Bracton and Britton there noted; Inquiſition is alſo with vs, vſed for the King in temporall cauſes and profits, in which kinde it is confounded with Office: Stawnf praerog. fo. 51. See Office.
               
               
                  Inrolement (Irrotulatio) is the

regiſtring, recording or entring of any lawful act in the rowles of the chauncerie, as recogniſance acknowledged, or a ſtatute or a fine leuied. See Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 133.
               
                  Inſimul tenuit, is one ſpecies of the writ called a Formdon. See Formdon.
               
               
                  Intakers, be a kinde of theeues in Rideſdall. anno. 9. H. 5. ca. 8. ſo called, as it ſeemeth, becauſe they dwelling within that libertie, did receiue in ſuch booties of catell or other things as the out parters brought in vnto them. See Out parters.
               
               
                  Interdiction (Interdictio) is vſed in the common lawe, in the ſame ſignification that it hath in the canon lawe, where it is thus defined: interdictio est cenſura eccleſiaſtica prohibens adminiſtrationem diuinorum: c. quod in te: de paenitent: & remiſſ. in the Decretals: and thus is it vſed. anno. 24. H. 8. cap. 12.
               
                  Interpleder, See Enterpleder.
               
               
                  Intruſion (Intruſio) by Bracton lib. 4. cap. 2. is thus defined. Intruſio eſt, vbi quis (cui nullum ius competit in re nec ſcintilla Iuris, poſſeſſionem vacuam ingreditur, quae nec corpore nec animo poſſidetur, ſicut haereditatem iacentem antequam adita fuerit ab harede, vel ſaltem a domino capitals ratione, cuſtodiae, vel ratione eſchaeta ſi forte heredes non exiſtant, vel ſi poſt mortem alicuius per finem factum, vel per modum donationis, vbi ſucceſſio ſibi locum vendicare non poſſit, vel ſi poſt mortem alicuius qui tenuit ad vitam, debeat tenementum reverti ad proprietariū, ponat quis ſe in ſeiſinā antequā tenemētū illud veniat ad illū ad quem pertinere deberet ex praedictis cauſis, with whome agreeth Fleta, lib. 4. cap. 30. §. 1. & 2. See Britton cap. 65. to the ſame effect. See the newe booke of Entries. verbo Entruſion. See Entruſion. See diſſeiſin: the author of new Terms of lawe would haue intruſion eſpecially after the tenent for life is deceaſed. verbo, Abatement. and abatement in all other caſes: But I finde not any latine word for abatement but intruſio, ſo that I rather thinke theſe 2. engliſh words to bee ſynonyma: and Fleta cap. ſuprà citato, ſeemeth direct againſt this his opinion.
               
                  Intruſione, is a writ that lyeth againſt the intruder: Regiſter: fol. 233.
               
                  Inuentarie (inuentarium) is a deſcription or repertory orderly made of all dead mens goods and catels prized by foure credible men or more, which euery executor or adminiſtrator ought to exhibite to the Ordinary, at ſuch times as he ſhall appoint the ſame. Weſt. parte prim: Simb: lib: 2. ſect: 696. where likewiſe

you may ſee the forme: This Inuentary proceedeth from the ciuill law; for whereas by the auncient law of the Romans, the heire was tyed to aunſwer all the teſtators debts, by which meanes heritages were preiudiciall to many men and not profitable: Iuſtinian to encorage men the better to take vppon them this charitable office, ordained, that if the heire would firſt make and exhibite a trew Inuentary of all the teſtatours ſubſtance comming to his hand, he ſhould be no furder charged, then to the valew of the Inuentarie: l. vlt. Cod. de Iure de liberando.
               
               
                  Inueſt (Inueſtire) commeth of the french word (Inueſter) and ſignifieth to giue poſſeſſion. He are Hotoman de verbis fendalibus, verbo Inueſtitura: Inueſtitura barbarum nomen, barbaricam quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      rationem habet. Nam vt ait Feudiſta, lib. 2. titulo. 2. Inueſtitura propriè dicitur quando hasta vel aliquod corporeum traditur à domino; with vs we vſe likewiſe to admit the tenents by deliuering them a verge or rodd into their hands, and miniſtring them an oath, which is called Inueſting: others define it thus: Inueſtitura, eſt alicuius in ſuumius introductio.
               
               
                  Inure, ſignifieth to take effect: as the pardon inureth: Stawnf: praerog: fol. 40. See Enure.
               
               
                  Ioynder, is the coupling of two in a ſuite or action againſt another: Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 118. H. 20
                     •
                  . H. 221. & H. in many other places, as appeareth in the Index. verbo Ioynder.
               
               
                  Ioynt tenents (ſimul tenentes) liber intrationum, titulo Formdon in vieu. 3. be thoſe that come to and hould lands or tenements by one title pro indiuiſo, or without partition. Litleton lib. 3. cap. 3. and termes of law: See Tenents in common.
               
               
                  Ioyning of iſſue (Iunctio exitus) See Iſſue.
               
               
                  Iointure (Iunctura) is a couenant, whereby the husband or ſome other freind in his behalfe aſſureth vnto his wife, in reſpect of mariage, lands or tenements for terme of her life, or otherwiſe, See Weſt: part: 2. Symbol. lib. 2. titulo Couenants. ſect. 128. and the new expoſitiō of the law terms: it ſeemeth to be called a Ioynture, either becauſe it is granted ratione iuncturae in matrimonio, or becauſe the land in franke mariage, is giuen ioyntly to the husband and the wife, and after to the heirs of their bodies, whereby the husband and wife be made ioynt tenents during the couerture. Coke li. 3. Butler & Bakers caſe. f. 27. b. See franckmariage. Ioynture, is alſo vſed as the abſtract of ioynt tenents. Coke lib. 3. the Marques of Wincheſters caſe. fol. 3. a. b. Iunctura, is alſo by

                  Bracton and Fleta vſed for ioyning of one bargaine to another. Fleta lib. 2. ca. 60. touching the ſelfe ſame thing: and therefore ioynture in the firſt ſignification, may be ſo called, in reſpect that it is a bargaine of liuelyhood for the wife: adioyned to the contract of mariage.
               
                  Iourn Choppers, anno 8. Hen. 6. cap. 5. be regraters of yarn. Whether that we now call (yarne) were in thoſe daies called (iourn) I cannot ſay: but (choppers) in theſe daies are well knowne to be chaungers. as choppers of churches, &c.
               
                  Iourneyman, commeth of the French (Iournee) that is a day or dayes worke. which argueth that they were called Iourneymen, that wrought with others by the day, though now by ſtatute it be extended to thoſe likewiſe, that couenant to worke in their occupation with another by the yeare. anno quinto Elizabeth. cap. quarto.
               
               
                  Iſſue (Exitus) commeth of the French (Iſſir: i. emanare) or the ſubſtantiue (Iſſue: i. exitus, euentus) It hat diuers applications in the common lawe: ſometime being vſed for the children begotten betweene a man and his wife: ſometime for profits growing from an amercement or fine, or expenſes of ſuite: ſometime for profits of lands or tenements: Weſt: 2. anno. 13. Edw. prim. cap. 39. ſometime for that point of mater depending in ſuite, wherupon the parties ioyne and put their cauſe to the triall of the Iury: and in all theſe it hath but one ſignification, which is an effect of a cauſe proceeding. as the children be the effect of the mariage betweene the parents: the profits growing to the king or Lord from the puniſhment of any mans offence, is the effect of his tranſgreſſion: the point referred to the triall of twelue men is the effect of pleading or proceſſe. Iſſue, in this laſt ſignification, is either generall or ſpeciall: Generall iſſue ſeemeth to be that, whereby it is referred to the Iury to bring in their verdict, whether the defendant haue done any ſuch thing, as the plaintife layeth to his charge. For example: if it be an offence againſt any ſtatute, and the defendant pleade: not culpable: this being put to the Iury, is called the generall iſſue: and if a man complaine of a priuate wrong which the defendant denieth, & plead, no wrong nor diſſeiſin, and this be referred to the 12. it is likewiſe the generall iſſue. Kitchin. fol. 225. See the Doctor and Student, fol. 158. b. the ſpeciall iſſue then muſt be that, where ſpeciall mater being alleadged by the defendant for his defence; both

the parties ioyne therevpon, and ſo grow rath er to a demurrer, if it be quaeſtio Iuris, or to tryall by the Iurie, if it be quaeſtio facti; ſee the new booke of Entries: verbo, Iſſue.
               
               
                  Iuncture ſee Iointure.
               
               
                  Iure patronatus, See the newe booke of Entries, verbo Iure patronatus in quar
                        •
                      impedit. fol. 465. col. 3.
               
                  Iurie (Iurata) commeth of the french (Iurer: i iurare.) it ſignifieth in our common lawe, a companie of men as 24. or 12. Sworne to deliuer a truth vpon ſuch euidēce, as ſhalbe deliuered them touching the matter in queſtion. Of which triall who may and who may not be empaneled, ſee Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 165. D. And for beter vnderſtanding of this point, it is to be knowne, that there be. 3. maner of trials in England: one by Parlament, another by battle, and the third by Aſſiſe or Iurie: Smith de repub. Anglorum. lib: 2. cap: 5. 6. 7. touching the 2. former reade him, and ſee Battell, and Combat, and Parlament: the triall by Aſſiſe (be the action ciuile or criminall, publick or priuate, perſonall or reall) is referred for the fact to a Iurie, and as they finde it, ſo paſſeth the Iudgement. and the great fauour that by this the King ſheweth to his ſubiects more then the princes of other nations, you may reade in Glanuil. lib: 2: cap: 7. where he called it Regale beneficium clementis principis de conſilio procerum populis indultum, quo vitae hominū, & ſtatus integritati tam ſalubriter conſulitur; vt in iure, quod quis in libero ſoli tenemento poſſidet, retinendo, duells caſum declinare poſſint homines ambiguum, &c: ſee the reſt. This Iury is not vſed onely in circuits of Iuſtices errant, but alſo in other courts and maters of office, as if the Eſcheatour make inquiſition in any thing touching his office, he doth it by a Iury or inqueſt: if the Coroner inquire how a ſubiect found dead, came to his end: he vſeth an inqueſt. the Iuſtices of peace in ther quarter Seſſions, the Shyreeue in his county and Turne, the baylife of a Hundred, the Stewarde of a court Leete or court Baron, if they inquire of any offence, or deſcide any cauſe betweene party and party, they doe it by the ſame maner. So that where it is ſaid that all things be triable by Parlament, Battell, or aſſiſe; Aſſiſe in this place is taken for a Iury or Enqueſt, empaneled vpō any cauſe in a court, where this kind of triall is vſed: and though it be commonly deemed, that this cuſtome of ending and deſciding cauſes proceede from the Saxons and Brittons, and was of

fauour permitted vnto vs by the Conquerour: yet I finde by the grand Cuſtomarie of Normandie. cap: 24. that this courſe was vſed likewiſe in that countrie. For Aſſiſe is, in that Chapter, defined to be an aſſembley of wiſe men, with the Bailife in a place certaine at a time aſſigned 40. daies before. wherby Iuſtice may be done in cauſes heard in the court: of this cuſtome alſo and thoſe Knights of Normandie Iohannes Faber maketh mention, in the Rubrique of the title de militari teſtamento, in Inſtitut. this Iury, though it appertaine to moſt courts of the common law, yet is it moſt notorious in the half yeare courts of the Iuſtices errants, commonlie called the great aſſiſes, and in the quarter Seſſions, and in them it is moſt ordinarily called a Iurie. And that in ciuile cauſes: wheras in other courts, it is oftener tearmed an enqueſt, and in the court Baron the Homage. In the generall Aſſiſe there are vſually many Iuries, bicauſe there be ſtore of cauſes both ciuil and criminall commonly to be tried, wherof one is called the Grand Iury, and the reſt petit Iuries: whereof it ſeemeth there ſhould be one for euery Hundred, Lamb. Eirenar. l. 4. cap. 3. pa. 384. The Grand Iurie conſiſteth ordinarily of 24. graue and ſubſtantiall gentlemen, or ſome of them yeomen choſen indifferently out of the whole ſhyre by the Shyreeue, to conſider of all bils of Inditement preferred to the court: which they doe either approoue, by writing vpon them theſe words, billa vera: or diſallowe, by writing, Ignoramus: ſuch as they doe approoue, if they touch life and death, are farder referred to another Iury to be conſidered of, becauſe the caſe is of ſuch importance: but others of lighter moment, are vpon their allowance, without more worke fined by the bench, except the party travers the Inditement, or chalenge it for inſufficiencie, or remooue the cauſe to a higher court by certiorarie, in which 2. former caſes it is referred to another Iurie, and in the latter tranſmitted to the higher. Lamb. Eire. l. 4. c. 7. & preſently vpon the allowance of this bill by the Grand Enqueſt, a man is ſaid to be indighted. Such as they diſſalowe, are deliuered to the benche, by whome they are forthwith cancilled or torne. The petit Iury conſiſteth of. 12. men at the leaſt, & are Empanelled, as well vpon criminall as vpon ciuile cauſes. thoſe that paſſe vpon offences of life and death, doe bring in their verdict either guiltie or not guiltie, wherevpon the priſoner, if he

be found guiltie, is ſaid to be conuicted, and ſo afterward receaueth his iudgment and condemnation: or otherwiſe is acquited and ſett Free: of this reade Forteſ: cap: 27. thoſe that paſſe vpon ciuile cauſes reail, are all, or ſo many as can conueniently be had, of the ſame hundred, where the land or tenement in queſtion doth lie, and 4. at the leaſt: And they vpon due examination bring in their verdict either for the demaundant, or Tenent. of this ſee Forteſc. cap. 25. 26. according vnto which, iudgement paſſeth afterward in the court where the cauſe firſt began: and the reaſon hereof is, becauſe theſe Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, are in this caſe, for the eaſe of the cuntry, onely to take the verdict of the Iurie, by the vertue of the writ called (niſi prius) and ſo returne it to the court where the cauſe is depending. See (Niſi prius.) Ioyne with this the chapter formerly cited out of the cuſtumary of Normandie, and that of King Etheldreds lawes mentioned by Maiſter Lamberd, verbo Centuria. in his explication of Saxon words; and by theſe two words you ſhall perceiue, that as well among theſe Normans, as the Saxons, the men of this Iuty were aſſociats and Aſſiſtants to the Iudges of the court, in a kind of equality; where as now a daies they attend them in great humility, and are, as it were, at their commaund for the ſeruice of the court: the words ſet downe by M. Lamberd are theſe: In ſingulis centuriis comitia ſunto, at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      liberae condicionis viri duodeniaetate ſuperiores, vnà cum praepoſito ſacra tenentes, iuranto, ſe adeo virum aliquem innocentem haud condemnaturos, ſontemve abſoluturos: to this ioyne alſo the 69. chapter of the ſaide cuſtumarie. See Enqueſt. See 12. men. See Lamberds Eurenarch. lib. 4. cap. 3. p. 384.
               
                  Iuris vtrùm, is a writ, that lyeth for the incumbent, whoſe predeceſſour hath alienated his lands or tenements. the diuers vſes of which writ, ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 48.
               
                  Iuriſdiction (Iuriſdictio) is a dignity which a man hath by a power to doe Iuſtice in cauſes of complaint made before him. And there be two kinds of Iuriſdictions, the one that a man hath by reaſon of his fee, and by vertue thereof doth right in all plaints concerning his ſee: The other is a Iuriſdiction giuen by the prince to a baylife: this diuiſion I haue in the Cuſtumary of Normandy, cap. 2. which is not vnapt for the practiſe of our common welth, for by him whom they call a baylife, we may vnderſtand all that haue

commiſſion from the prince to giue iudgement in any cauſe: The ciuilians diuide iuriſdictionem generally vnderſtand in imperium & iuriſdictionem: and imperium in merum & mixtum. Of which you may reade many eſpeciall tractats writen of them, as a mater of great difficulty and importance.
               
                  Iuſtes, commeth of the French (Iouſtes. i. decurſus) and ſignifieth with vs, contentions betweene Martiall men by ſpeares on horſbacke, anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13.
               
                  Iuſtice (Iuſticiarius) is a French word, and ſignifieth him, that is deputed by the king, to do right by way of iudgement. the reaſon why he is called Iuſtice and not Iudex, is becauſe in auncient time the latine word for him was (Iuſticia) and not (Iuſticiarius) as appeareth by Glan. lib. 2. cap. 6. Roger Houeden parte poſter. ſuorum annalium, fo. 413. a. and diuers other places, which appellation we haue from the Normans, as appeareth by the grand cuſtumary. cap. 3. and I doe the rather note it, becauſe men of this function ſhould hereby conſider, that they are or ought to be, not (Iuſti) in their iudgements, but in abſtract (ipſ
                        •
                      iuſticia) how be it I hould it well, if they performe their office in concreto. Another reaſon why they are called Iuſticiary with vs and not Iudices, is, bicauſe they haue their authority by deputation, as Delegates to the king, and not iure magiſtratus; and therefore cannot depute others in their ſteed, the Iuſtice of the Foreſt onely excepted, who hath that liberty, eſpecially giuen him by the ſtatute anno. 32. H. 8. cap. 35. for the Chanceller, Marſhall, Admirall, and ſuch like are not called Iuſticiarii but Iudices: of theſe Iuſtices you haue diuers ſorts in England, as you may perceaue heare following. The maner of creating theſe Iuſtices, with other appertenences reede in Forteſcu. cap. 51.
               
                  Iuſtice of the Kings bench (Iuſticiarius de Banco regis) is a Lord by his office, and the cheife of the reſt. wherefore he is alſo called Capitalis Iuſticiarius Angliae, his office eſpecially is to heare and determine all plees of the crowne: that is, ſuch as concerne offences committed againſt the crowne, dignitie, and peace of the King; as treaſons, felonies, may hems and ſuch like, which you may fee in Bracton, lib. 3. tractat. 2. per totum▪
                   and in Stawnf. treatiſe intituled the plees of the crowne, from the firſt chapter to the 51. of the firſt Booke. But either it was from the beginning, or by time it is come to paſſe, that he with his aſſiſtans, heareth all perſonall actions, and

reall alſo, if they bee incident to any perſonall action depending before them: See Cromptons Iuridict. fol. 67. &c. of this court Bracton lib. 3. cap. 7. nu. 2. ſaith thus: placita verò ciuilia in rem & perſonam in Curia Domini Regis terminanda, coram diuerſis iuſticiarus terminantur: Habet enim plures curias in quibus diverſae actiones terminantur; & illarum curiarum habet vnam propriam, ſicut aulam regiam, & iuſticiarios capitales qui proprias cauſas Regis terminant, & aliorum omnium per querelam vel per priuilegium ſiue libertatam; vt ſi ſit aliquis qui implacitari non debeat, niſi coram Domino rege. This Iuſtice (as it ſeemeth) hath no patent vnder the broad ſeale. For ſo Crompton ſaith vbi ſupra. He is made onely by writ, which is a ſhort one to this effect. Regina Iohanni Popham militi ſalutē. Sciatis quod conſiſtuimus vos Iuſticiarium noſtrum capitalem, ad placita coram nobis terminandum, durante beneplacito noſtro, Teste, &c. And Bracton in the place nowe recited, ſpeaking of the common plees, ſaith, that ſine warranto inriſdictionem non habet, which (I thinke) is to be vnderſtood of a commiſſion vnder the great Seale. This court was firſt called the kings bench, becauſe the King ſate as Iudge in it in his proper Perſon, and it was moueable with the court. See anno 9. H. 3. cap. 11. more of the Iuriſdiction of this court ſee in Crompton vbi ſupra. See Kings bench. The oath of the Iuſtices ſee in the ſtatute. anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. 4. See Oathe.
               
               
                  Iuſtice of common plees (Iuſticiarius communium placitorum) is alſo a Lord by his office, and is called (Dominus Iuſticiarius communium placitorum) and he with his aſſiſtants originally did heare and determine all cauſes at the common lawe, that is, all ciuil cauſes betweene common perſons, as well perſonall as reall, for which cauſe it was called the court of common plees, in oppoſition to the plees of the Crowne or the Kings plees, which are ſpeciall and appertaining to him onely. Of this, and the Iuridiſdiction hereof, ſee Cromptons Iuriſdiction. fo. 91. This Court was alwaies ſetled in a place, as appeareth by the ſtatute anno 9. H. 3. cap. 11. The oath of this Iuſtice and his aſſociats, ſee anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. 4. See Oath.
               
               
                  Iuſtice of the Foreſt (Iuſticiarius Foreſtae) is alſo a Lord by his office, and hath the hearing and determining of all offences, within the Kings foreſt, committed againſt Veniſon or Vert, of theſe there bee two, whereof the one hath Iuriſdiction oueral the foreſts, on this ſide Trent:
                  
the other of all beyond. the cheifeſt point of their Iuriſdiction, conſiſteth vpon the articles of the Kings Charter, called Charta de Foreſta, made anno 9. H. 3. which was by the Barons hardly drawne from him, to the mitigation of ouer cruell ordinances made by his predeceſſors. Reade M. Camdens Britan. Pag. 214. See Protoforeſtarius. The Court where this Iuſtice ſitteth and determineth, is called the Iuſtice ſeate of the Foreſt, held euery three yeares once, whereof you may reade your fill in M. Manwoodes firſt part of Foreſt lawes. pag. 121. & 154. & pag. 76. He is ſometimes called Iuſtice in Eyre of the foreſt. See the reaſon in Iuſtice in Eyre. This is the only Iuſtice that may appoint a deputy per ſtatutum anno 32. H. 8. cap. 35.
               
                  Iuſtices of Aſſiſe (Iuſticiarii ad capiendas Aſſiſas) are ſuch as were wont by ſpeciall commiſſion to be ſent (as occaſion was offered) into this or that county to take Aſſiſes; the ground of which polity, was the eaſe of the ſubiects: For whereas theſe actions paſſe alway by Iury, ſo many men might not without great hinderance be brought to London, and therefore Iuſtices for this purpoſe were by commiſſion particularly authoriſed, and ſent downe to them. And it may ſeeme that the Iuſtices of the common plees had no power to deale in this kinde of buſines, vntill the ſtatute made anno 8. Rich. 2. cap. 2. for by that they are enhabled to take Aſſiſes, and to deliuer Gaols. And the Iuſtices of the kings Bench haue by that ſtatute ſuch power affirmed vnto them, as they had one hundred yeares before that: Time hath taught by experience, that the beter ſort of Lawyers being fitteſt both to iudge and plead, may hardly be ſpared in terme time to ride into the country about ſuch buſines: and therefore of later yeares it is come to paſſe, that theſe commiſſions (ad 
                        •
                     apiedas Aſſiſas) are driuen to theſe two times in the yeare out of terme, when the Iuſtices and other may beat leaſure for theſe controuerſies alſo: whereupon it is alſo fallen out, that the maters wont to be heard by more generall Commiſſions of Iuſtices in Eyre, are heard all at one time with theſe Aſſiſes: which was not ſo of ould, as appeareth by Bracton, lib. 3. c. 7. nu. 2. Habet etiam Iuſticiarios itinerātes de comitatu in Comitatum, quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad omnia placita, quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad quaedam ſpecialia, ſicut Aſſiſas &c. & ad Gaolas deliberandas, quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad vnicam vel duas, & non plures. And by this meanes the Iuſtices of both benches, being iuſtly to be accounted

the fitteſt of all others, and others their aſſiſtants, as alſo the Sergeants at law may be imployed in theſe affaires, who as graueſt in yeares, ſo are they ripeſt in iudgement, and therefore likeſt to be voide of prociality, for being called to this dignity, they giue ouer practiſe anno 8. R. 2. cap. 3. but this alway to be remembred, that neither Iuſtice of either bench, nor any other, may be Iuſtice of Aſſiſe in his owne country, anno 8. Rich. 2. cap. 2. & anno 33. H. 8. cap. 24. laſtly, note that in theſe daies, though the ſelfe ſame men diſpatch buſines of ſo diuers natures, and all at one time, which were wont to be performed by diuers, and at ſeuerall times, yet they doe it by ſeuerall commiſſions. Cromptons Iuriſdictions. fo. 210. For thoſe who be in one word called Iuſtices of circuit, and twice euery yeare paſſe, by two and two, through all Englād, haue one cō
                  miſſion to take Aſſiſes; another to deliuer Goales, another of oyer and terminer. That Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, and Iuſtices in Eyre did aunciently differ, it appeareth an. 27. Ed. 3. cap. 5. and that Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, & Iuſtices of goale deliuery were diuerſe, it is euident by anno 4. Fd. 3. cap. 3. The oath taken by Iuſtices of aſſiſe, is all one with the oath taken by the Iuſtices of the kings bench. Ould abridgement of ſtatutes. titulo Sacramentum Iuſticiariorum. See Oath.
               
               
                  Iuſtices of oyer and terminer, Iuſticiarii ad audiendum & terminandum) were Iuſtices deputed vpon ſome eſpeciall or extraordinary occaſion, to heare and determine ſome or more cauſes. Fitzherberd in his natura beruium ſaith, that the commiſſion d' oyer and terminer, is directed to certaine perſons vpon any great aſſembly, inſurrection, hainous demeanure, or treſpaſſe committed. And becauſe the occaſion of granting this commiſſion ſhould be maturely wayed, it is prouided by the ſtatute anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 2. that no ſuch commiſſion ought to be graunted, but that they ſhalbe diſpatcheo before the Iuſtices of the one bench or other, or Iuſtices errāts, except for horrible treſpaſſes, & that by the eſpecial fauour of the King. The forme of this cō
                  miſſion, ſee in Fitzh. natura breu. fol. 110.
               
                  Iustices in Eyre (Iusticiarii itinerantes) are ſo termed of the French (Erre. i. iter) which is an old word, as (a grand erre. i. magnis iteneribus) prouerbially ſpoken. the vſe of theſe in auncient time, was to ſend them with commiſſion into divers counties, to heate ſuch cauſes eſpecially, as were termed the

plees of the crowne, and therefore I muſt imagine they were ſo ſent abroad for the eaſe of the ſubiects, who muſt els haue beene hurried to the kings bench, if the cauſe were too high for the countie court. They differed from the Iuſtices of oyer and terminer, becauſe they (as is aboue ſaid) were ſent vpon ſome one, or fewe ſpeciall caſes and to one place: whereas the Iuſtices in Eyre, were ſent through the prouinces and counties of the land, with more Indefinite and generall commiſſion, as appeareth by Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 11. 12. 13. and Britton cap. 2. And againe they ſeeme to differ in this, becauſe the Iuſtices of oyer and terminer (as it is before ſaid) were ſent vncertainly, vpon any vproare or other occaſion in the country: but theſe in Eyre (as M. Gwin ſetteth downe in the preface to his reading, were ſent but euery ſeuen yeare once; with whome Horn in his myrrour of Iuſtices, ſeemeth to agree. lib. 2. cap. queux poient eſtre actours, &c. and lib. 2. c. des peches criminels &c. al ſuyte de Roy, &c. and lib. 3. c. de Iuſtices in Eyre. where he alſo declareth what belonged to their office. Theſe were inſtituted by Henry the 2. as M. Camden in his Britannia witneſſeth pag. 104. And Roger Hoveden, parte poſteri. annalium. fo. 313. b. hath of them theſe wordes: Iuſticiarij itinerantes conſtituti per Henricum ſecundum. i. qui diuiſit regnum ſuumin ſex partes, per quarum ſingulas tres Iuſticiarios itinerantes conſtituit, quorum nomina haec ſunt, &c.
               
               
                  Iustices of Gaol deliuery (Iuſticiarii ad Gaolas deliberandas) are ſuch as are ſent with commiſſion, to heare and determine all cauſes apperteining to ſuch, as for any offence are caſt into the Gaol, part of whoſe authoritie is, to puniſh ſuch, as let to mainpriſe thoſe priſoners, that by lawe be not bayleable by the ſtatute de finibus, cap. 3. Fitzh. nat. br. f. 251. I. Theſe by likelyhoode in auncient time, were ſent to countries vpon this ſeuerall occaſion. But afterward Iuſtices of Aſſiſe were likewiſe authoriſed to this, anno. 4. Ed. 3. cap. 3. Their oath is all one with other of the kings Iuſtices of either bench. Ould Abridgement of ſtatutes. titulo Sacramentum Iuſticiariorum. See Othe.
               
               
                  Iuſtices of labourers, were Iuſtices appointed in thoſe times, to redreſſe the frowardneſſe of labouring men, that would either be idle, or haue vnreaſonable wages. See anno 21. Eduardi 3. cap. primo. anno. 25. eiuſd. cap. 8. & anno 31. eiuſdem cap. 6.
               
                  
                  Iuſtices of Niſi prius, are all one now a daies with Iuſtices of Aſſiſes: for it is a common Adiournment of a cauſe, in the common plees to put it off to ſuch a day, Niſi prius Iuſticiarii venerint ad eas partes, ad capiendas Aſſiſas: and vpon this clauſe of Adiournment, they are called Iuſtices of Niſi prius, as well as Iuſtices of Aſſiſes; by reaſon of the writ or action that they haue to deale in: their commiſſion you may ſee in Cromptons Iuriſdsctious fol. 204. yet M. Crompton maketh this difference betweene them, becauſe Iuſtices of Aſſiſe haue power to giue iudgement in a cauſe, but Iuſtices of Niſi prius. only to take the verdict. But in the nature of both there functions this ſeemeth to be the greateſt difference, becauſe Iuſtices of Niſi prius haue to deale in cauſes perſonall as well as reall, wheras Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, in ſtrict acception, deale only with the poſſeſſory writs called Aſſiſes.
               
               
                  Iuſtices of trial baſtō, alias of trayl baſton, were a kind of Iuſtices appointed by King Edward the firſt vpon occaſion of great diſorder growne in the Realme, during his abſence in the Scottiſhe and French warres, they are called in the ould nat. bre. f. 52. Iuſtices of triall Baſton, but by Holynſhed and Stow in Edw. pri. of Traile baſton, of trailing or drawing the ſtaffe as Holinſhed ſaith. Their office was to make inquiſition through the Realme by the verdict of ſubſtantiall Iuries vpon all officers, as Mayors Shyreeues, Bailifes, eſcheatours & others, touching extortion, briberies and other ſuch greeuances, as intruſions into other mens lands, and Barratours that vſed to take mony for beating of men, and alſo of them whom they did beate; by meanes of which inquiſitions many were puniſhed by death, many by ranſome, and ſo the reſt flying the Realme, the land was quieted, & the king gained greate riches toward the ſupporting of his wars. Inquire farder of the name. Baſton is thougt by ſome to be the beame of a paire of Scoales or waights. and this is in this place metaphorically applied to the iuſte peiſing of recompence for offences committed. My poore opiniō is, that the etymology of this title or addition groweth from the French (treilles) i. cancelli, barres or letiſes of what thing ſoeuer, a grate with croſſe bars, or of the ſinguler (treille) i. pargula, an houſe arbour, a raile or forme, ſuch as vines runne vpon, and (Baſton) a ſtaffe or pole, noting thereby that the Iuſtices emploied in this commiſſion, had authoritie

to proceede without any ſolemne iudgement ſeate in any place either compaſſed in with railes, or made booth or tent-wiſe, ſet vp with ſtaues or poales without more worke, whereſoeuer they could apprehend the malefactors they ſought for. See, lib. Aſſiſarum. fol. 141. 57.
               
                  Iuſtices of peace (Iuſticiarii ad pacem) are they that are appointed by the kinges commiſſion, with others, to attend the peace in the County where they dwell: of whom ſome vpon ſpeciall reſpect are made of the Quorum, becauſe ſome buſines of importance may not be dealt in without the preſence or aſſēt of them, or one of them. Of theſe it is but folly to write more, becauſe they haue ſo many thinges perteining to their office, as cannot in fewe words be comprehended. And againe Iuſtice Fitzherberd ſome time ſithence, as alſo M. Lamberd and M. Crompton of late haue written bookes of it to their great commendatiō, and fruitfull benefit of the whole Realme. See alſo Sir Thomas Smith de repub: Angl: lib: 2. cap. 19. They were called Gardians of the peace, vntill the 36. yeare of King Edward the third, cap. 12. where they be called Iuſtices. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 4. cap. 19 pag. 578. There oathe ſee alſo in Lambard. lib. i. ca. 10.
               
                  Iuſtices of peace, &c. within liberties, Iuſticiarii ad pacem infra libertates, be ſuch in cities and other corporate townes, as thoſe others be of any countie: and their authoritie or power is all one within their ſeueral precincts anno. 27. H. 8. ca. 25.
               
                  Iuſticies, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the diſpatch of iuſtice in ſome eſpeciall cauſe, wherewith of his owne authoritie he cannot deale in his Countie Courte. lib. 12. cap. 18. wherevpon the writ de excommunicato deliberando, is called a Iuſticies in the old nat. bre. fol. 35. Alſo the writ de homine replegiando. eodem: fol. 41. Thirdly the writ de ſecunda ſuperoneratione paſturae. eodem: fol. 73. Kitchin fol. 74. ſaith, that by this writ called Iuſticies, the Shyreeue may hold plee of a greate ſumme, whereas of his ordinary authoritie he cannot hold plees but of ſummes vnder 40. ſhillings. Crompt on fo. 231. agreeth with him. It is called a Iuſticies, becauſe it is a commiſſion to the Shyreeue ad Iuſticiandum aliquem, to 
                     •
                  doe aman right, and requireth noe returne of any certificat of what he hath done. Bracton. lib. 4. tracta. 6. cap. 13. nu. 2. maketh mention of a Iuſticies to the Shyreeue of London, in a

caſe of Dower. See the newe booke of Entries, Iuſticies.
               
               
                  Iuſtification (Iuſtificatio) is an vpholding or ſhewing a good reaſon in courte, why he did ſuch a thing as he is called to anſwere: as to iuſtifie in a cauſe of Repleuin. Broke. titulo Repleuin.
               
            
            
               K E
               
                  KEeper of the great Seale (Cuſtos Magni Sigills) is a L. by his office and called Lord Keeper of the great Seale of England, &c. & is of the Kings priuy Councell, vnder whoſe hands paſſe al charters, Commiſſions, and graunts of the King ſtrengthened by the great or broad Seale. Without the which Seale, all ſuch Inſtruments, by Lawe are of no force. for the King is in interpretation and intendment of Law, a Corporation, and therefore paſſeth nothing firmely, but vnder the ſaid Seale. This Lord Keeper by the ſtatute anno 5. Elizabethae Cap. 18. hath the ſame and the like place, authority, preeminence, Iuriſdiction, execution of Lawes, and all other Cuſtomes, Cōmodities; and Aduantages, as hath the Lord Chaunceler of England for the time being.
               
                  Keeper of the priuy Seale (Cuſtos priuati Sigilli) is a Lord by his office, vnder whoſe hands paſſe all Charters ſigned by the Prince, before they come to the broad or great Seale of England. He is alſo of the Kings priuy Councell. He ſeemeth to be called Clerke of the priuy Seale. anno 12. R 2. Cap. 11. But of late daies, I haue knowne none to beare this office, by reaſon the Prince thinketh good, rather to keepe this Seale in his owne hands, and by priuate truſt to commit it to his principall Secretary, or ſome ſuch one of his Councell, as he thinketh fit for that function.
               
                  Keeper of the Touch. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 14. ſeemeth to be that officer in the kings mint, which at this day is termed the maſter of the aſſay. See Mint.
               
               
                  Keeper of the Foreſt (Cuſtos Foreſtae) is alſo called cheife Warden of the Foreſt. Manwood part. pri. of his Foreſt Lawes, pag. 156. &c. & hath the principall gouernmēt of all things belonging thereunto: as alſo the check of all officers belonging to the Foreſt. And the Lord Cheife Iuſtice in Eyre of the Foreſt, when it pleaſeth him to keepe his Iuſtice Seate, doth 40. daies before, ſend out his generall Summons to him, for the warning of all vnder-officers, to appeare before him at a day aſſigned in the Summons. This See in Manwood Vbi Supra.
               
               
                  King (Rex) is thought by M.

Camden in his Britan. pag. 105. to be contracted of the Saxon word Cyninge, ſignifing him that hath the higheſt power & abſolute rule ouer our whole Land. and thereupon the King is in intendment of Lawe cleared of thoſe defects, that common perſons be ſubiect vnto. For he is alwaies ſuppoſed to be of full age, though he be in yeares neuer ſo young. Cromptons Iuriſdictions fol. 134. Kitchin. fol. i. He is taken as not ſubiect to death, but is a Corporation in himſelfe that liueth euer. Crompton ibidem. Thirdly, he is aboue the Law by his abſolute power. Bracton lib. pri cap. 8. Kitchin fol. 1. and though for the beter and equall courſe in making Lawes he doe admitte the 3. eſtates, that is, Lords Spirituall, Lords temporall, and the Commons vnto Councell: yet this, in diuers learned mens opinions, is not of conſtreinte, but of his owne benignitie, or by reaſon of his promiſe made vpon oath, at the time of his coronation. For otherwiſe were he a ſubiect after a ſort and ſubordinate, which may not bee thought without breach of duty and loyaltie. For then muſt we deny him to be aboue the lawe, and to haue no power of diſpenſing with any poſitiue lawe, or of graunting eſpeciall priuiledges and charters vnto any, which is his onely and cleare right, as Sir Thomas Smith well expreſſeth lib. 2. cap. 3. de Repub. Anglican. and Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 16. num. 3. and Britton, cap. 39. For hee pardoneth life and limme to offendours againſt his crowne and dignitie, except ſuch as he bindeth himſelf by oath not to forgiue. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 35. And Habet omnia iura in manu ſua. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 24. num. prim. And though at his coronation he take an oath not to alter the lawes of the land: Yet this oath notwithſtanding, hee may alter or ſuſpend any particular lawe that ſeemeth hurtfull to the publike eſtate. Blackwood in Apologia Regum, c. 11. See Oath of the king. Thus much in ſhort, becauſe I haue heard ſome to be of opiniō, that the lawes be aboue the king. But the kings oath of old you may ſee in Bracton, lib. 3. cap. 9. nu. 2. for the which looke in Oath of the King. The kings oath in Engliſh, you may ſee in the old abridgement of Statutes, titulo, Sacram. Regis. Fourthly, the kings only teſtimonie of any thing done in his preſence, is of as high nature and credit as any Record. Whence it cōmeth, that in all writs or precepts ſent out for the diſpatch of Iuſtice, he vſeth none other witneſſe but himſelfe, alwaies vſing theſe words vnder it, Teste me ipſo.
                  
Laſtly, he hath in the right of his crowne many prerogatiues aboue any common perſon, be he neuer ſo potent or honourable: whereof you may reade your fill in Stawnf. tractate vpon the Statute thereof made, anno 17. Ed. 2. though that containe not all by a great number. What the kings power is, reade in Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 24. nu. prim. & 2.
               
                  King of Heradls (Rex Heraldorū
                   is an officer at Armes, that hath the preeminence of this Society. See Herald. This officer of the Romans was called Pater Patratus.
               
               
                  Kings Bench (Bancus Regius) is the Court or Iudgment ſeate where the Kinge of England was wont to ſitte in his owne perſon: and therefore was it moueable with the court or kings Houſhould. And called Curia domini Regis, or Aula Regia, as M. Gwine reporteth in the preface to his readings; and that, in that and the Exchequer, which were the only courts of the king, vntill Henry the thirds daies, were handled all maters of Iuſtice, as well Ciuill as Criminall. whereas the court of common plees might not be ſo by the ſtatute: anno 9. H. 3. cap. 11. or rather, by M. Gwins opinion, was preſently vpon the graunt of the great charter ſeuerally erected. This court of the Kings bench was wont in auncient times to be eſpecially exerciſed in all Criminall maters & plees of the crowne, leauing the handling of priuate contracts to the cownty court. Glanuil. lib. 1. cap. 2. 3. 4. & li. 10. cap. 18. Smith de Repub: Anglicana, lib. 2. cap. 11. and hath preſident of it, the Lord Cheife Iuſtice of England, with three or foure Iuſtices aſſiſtaunts, four or fiue as Forteſcu ſaith, cap. 51. and officers thereunto belonging, the clearke of the crowne, a Praenatory or Protonotari, and other ſixe inferior miniſters or Atturnies. Camd: Britan: pag. 112. See Latitat: How long this court was moueable, I finde not in any wrighter: But in Brittons time, who wrot In K. Ed: the 1. his daies, it appeareth it followed the court, as M. Gwin in his ſaid preface wel obſeruethout of him. See Iuſtice of the Kings Bench.
               
               
                  Kings ſiluer, is properly that mony, which is due to the king in the court of common plees in reſpect of a licence there graunted to any man for paſſing a fine. Coke vol. 6. fo. 39. a. & 43. b.
               
               
                  Kintall of woad, iron &c. is a certaine waight of merchandize to the valew of a hundred, or ſomething vnder or ouer, according to the diuers vſes of ſundry nations. This word is mentioned

by Plowden in the caſe of Reniger and Fagoſſa.
               
               
                  Knaue, is vſed for a man ſeruant. a. 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. ca. 3. And by M. Verſtigans iudgemēt, in his Reſtitutiō of decaied intelligence. ca. 10. it is borowed of the dutch (cnapa) cnaue or knaue, which ſignifie all one thing: and that is ſome kinde of officer or ſeruant: as (ſcild-cnapa) was he, that bore the weapon or ſhield of his ſuperior, whom the latines call (armigerum) and the French men (eſcuyer.)
               
               
                  Knight (Miles) is almoſt one with the Saxon (Cnight. i. Adminiſter) and by M. Camdens iudgment, pag. 110. deriued from the ſame. with vs it ſignifieth a gentleman, or one that beareth Armes, that for his vertue and eſpecially Martiall prowes, is by the King, or one hauing the Kings authority, ſingled (as it were) from the ordinary ſort of gentlemen, and raiſed to a higher accompt or ſteppe of dignity. This among all other nations, hath his name from the Horſe: Becauſe they were wont in auncient time, to ſerue in warrs one horsbacke. The Romans called them Equites, the Italians at theſe daies terme them Cauallieri. The French men Cheualliers. The German, Reiters. The Spaniard Caualleros, or Varoncs a Cauallo. It appeareth by the ſtatute anno 1. Ed. 2. cap. 1. that in auncient times, gentlemen hauing a full knights fee, and houlding their land by knights ſeruice, of the king, or other great perſon, might be vrged by diſtreſſe, to procure himſelfe to be made knight, when he came to mans eſtate for the anſwerable ſeruice of his Lorde in the Kings warres. To which point you may alſo reade M. Camden in his Britannia. pag. 111 But theſe cuſtomes be not nowe much vrged: this dignity in theſe dayes being rather of fauour beſtowed by the Prince vpon the worthier ſort of gentlemen, then vrged by conſtraint. The maner of making knights (for the dignitie is not hereditarie) M. Camden in his Britan. pag. 111. ſhortly expreſſeth in theſe words: Noſtris verò temporibus, qui Equeſtrem dignitatem ſuſcipit, flexis genibus educto gladio leuiter in humero percutitur. Princeps his verbis Gallicè affatur: Sus vel ſois Cheualier au nom de Dieu. id eſt, Surge, aut, Sis Eques in nomine Dei. The ſolemnitie of making Knights among the Saxons, M. Stow mentioneth in his Annals. pag. 159. See the priuiledges belonging to a knight in Fernes Glorie of Generoſitie. pag. 116. Of theſe knights there be two ſorts: one ſpirituall, another temporall. Caſſanaeus in gloria mundi. parte 9. Conſiderat. 2. of both thoſe ſorts,

and of many ſubdiuiſions, reade him in that whole part. The temporall or ſecond ſort of knights M. Ferne in his Glorie of generoſitie. pag. 103. maketh threefold here with vs. Knights of the ſword, Knights of the Bath, and Knights of the ſoueraigne Order, that is, of the Garter: of all which you may reade what he ſaith. I muſt remember that mine intent is but to explain the termes eſpecially of our common lawe. Wherefore ſuch as I find mentioned in Statutes, I will define as I can. M: Skene de verb. ſignificat. verbo Milites, ſaith, that in the auncient lawes of Scotland, Freeholders were called Milites. Which may ſeem to haue bene a cuſtome with vs alſo by diuers places in Bracton, who ſaith, that knights muſt be in Iuries, which turne Freeholders doe ſerue.
               
                  Knights of the Garter, (Equites Garterii) are an order of knights, created by Edward the third, after he had obtained many notable victories, (king Iohn of Frannce, and king Iames of Scotland being both his priſoners together, and Henry of Castile the baſtard expulſed out of his Realme, and Don Petro being reſtored vnto it by the Prince of Wales, and Duke of Aquitane, called the blacke Prince) who for furniſhing of this honorable Order, made a choice out of his owne realme, and all Chriſtendome, of the beſt and moſt excellent renowned Knights in vertues and honour, beſtowing this dignitie vpon them, and giuing them a blew Garter, decked with gold, pearle, and precious ſtones, and a buckle of gold to weare daily on the left legge onely, a kirtle, gowne, cloake, chaperon, a coller, & other ſtately and magnificall apparell both of ſtuffe and faſhion, exquiſite and heroicall, to weare at high feaſtes, as to ſo high and princely an order was meete. Of which Order, he and his ſucceſſours, kings of England, were ordained to be the Soueraignes, and the reſt fellowes and brethren to the number of 26. Smith de Republ. Angl. libro primo. cap. 20. I haue ſeene an auncient monument, whereby I am taught that this Honourable companie is a Colledge or a Corporation, hauing a common Seale belonging vnto it, and conſiſting of a Soueraigne Gardian which is the King of England, that alwaies gouernes this order by himſelfe or his Deputie, of 25. Companions called Knights of the Garter, of 14. ſecular Chanons that be Prieſts, or muſt be within one yeare after their admiſſion: 13. Vicars alſo Prieſts, and 26. poore Knights, that

haue no other ſuſtenance or meanes of liuing but the allowance of this houſe, which is giuen them in reſpect of their daily praier to the Honour of God, and (according to the courſe of thoſe times) of Saint George. There be alſo certaine officers belonging to this order, as namely the Prelate of the Garter, which office is inherent to the Biſh: of Wincheſter for the time being, the Chaunceler of the Garter, the Regiſter, who is alwaies Deane of Windeſour. The principall King at Armes called Garter, whoſe chiefe function is to manage and marſhall their Solemnities at their yearely feaſts and Inſtallations. Laſtly, the Vſher of the Garter, which (as I haue heard) belongeth to an Vſher of the Princes chamber, called Blacke rod. There are alſo certaine ordinances or Conſtitutions belonging vnto this Society, with certaine forfeitures, and ſometime penances for the Breakers of them; which conſtitutions concerne either the ſolemnities of making theſe Knights, or their duties after their Creation, or the Priuiledges belōging to ſo high an order, but are too large for the nature of this poore Vocabularie. The ſite of this Colledge, is the Caſtle of Windeſoure, with the Chapel of Saint George, erected by Edward the third, and the Chapter houſe in the ſaid Caſtell. Howbeit the yearly Solemnity or proſeſſion may be, and is, by the Soueraignes direction, performed at the Court, whereſoeuer it lyeth, vpō Saint Georges day. M. Camden ſaith, that this order receiued great ornament from Edward the 4 See Fearns glory of Generoſity. pag. 120. See Garter. Hoſpinian in his booke de origine & progreſſu Monachatus, maketh mention of this honourable order, terming it by ignorance of our tongue ordinem Carteriorum equitum, and Charteriorum equitum. which you may reade. cap. 307. as alſo Bernardus Girardus in his hiſtorie, libr. 15. ca. 185.
               
                  Knights of the Bath (milites balnei, vel de balneo) are an order of Knights made within the Liſts of the Bath, girded with a ſword, in the ceremonie of his Creation. Ferns glorie of generoſity. pag. 105. Theſe are ſpoken of, anno. 8. Ed. 4. cap. 2. But I had an ould monument lent me by a freind, whereby it appeareth, that theſe Knights were ſoe called of a Bath, into the which (after they had bine ſhauen and trimmed by a Barber) they entred, and thence, the night before they were Knighted, being well bathed, were taken againe by two Eſquiers

commanded to attend them, dried with fine linnen cloathes, and ſo apparelled and ledde through many ſolemne Ceremonies. viz. Confeſſing their ſinnes, watching and praying all night in a church or chappell, with many other,) to the order of Knighthood the next day. So that by the ſame reaſon theſe ſeemed to be termed Knights of the Bathe, by which Knights made out of the feild in theſe daies are called knights of the Carpet, becauſe in receiuing their order they commonly kneele vpon a Carpet.
               
               
                  Knights of the order of Saint Iohn of Ieruſalem (milites Sancti Iohannis Heiroſolumitani) were otherwiſe called the Knights of the Rhodes, being an order of Knighthood, that had beginning about the yeare of the Lord. 1120. Honorius then Pope of Rome. Caſſanaeus de gloria mundi, parte. 9. Conſiderarione 4. & M. Fern. in his glorie of Generoſity: pag. 127. they had their primarie foundation and cheife aboad firſt in Hieruſalem, and thē in Rhodes, wheremany of thē liued vnder their Principall called the M. of Rhodes. vntill they were expelled thence by the Turke, anno 1523. ſithence which time their cheife ſeate is at Malta, where they haue done great exploits againſt the Infidels, but eſpecially in the yeare 1595. Theſe, though they had their beginning & eſpecialeſt abode firſt at Ieruſalem and next in Rhodes, yet they encreaſed both in number and Reuenues, liuing after the order of Friers vnderthe Rule of Saint Auguſtine, and were diſperſed into France, Spaine, Alvern, Campany, Englād, and Ireland. Of theſe mention is made in the ſtat: anno. 25. H. 8. ca. 2. & anno 26. eiuſdem, cap. ſecundo. and it appeareth that they in England had one generall prior, that had the gouernment of the whole order within England & Scotland. Reg. orig. fol. 20. b. But toward the ende of Henrie the eights daies, they in England and Ireland being found ouer much to adhere to the B. of Rome againſt the King, were ſuppreſſed, and their Lands and goods referred by Parlament to the Kings diſpoſition. anno. 32. H. 8. cap. 24. The Occaſion and the propagation of this order more eſpecially deſcribed, you may reade in the Treatiſe intituled the Booke of Honour and Armes, lib. 5. cap. 18. written by M. Rich. Ihones.
               
               
                  Knights of the Rhodes, anno. 32. H. 8: ca. 24. See Knights of the order of Saint Iohn.
               
               
                  Knights of the Temple otherwiſe called Templers) Templaplarii
                  
was an order of Knighthood created by Gelaſius the Pope, about the yeare of our Lord. 1117. and ſo called, becauſe they dwelt in a part of the buildings belonging to the Temple. Theſe in the beginning dwelling not far from the Sepulchre of the Lord entertained Criſtian ſtraungers and Pilgrims charitably, and in their armour ledde them through the Holy Land, to view ſuch things, as there were to be ſeene, without feare of Infidels adioyning. This Order continuing and increaſing by the ſpace of 200. yeares, was farre ſpred in Chriſtendome, and namely here in England. But at the laſt, the cheife of them at Hieruſalem, being (as ſome men ſay) found to fall away to the Sazarens from Chriſtianity, and to abound in many vices, the whole Order was ſuppreſſed by Clemens quintus, which was about King Ed. the 1. daies, and their ſubſtance giuen partly to the Knights of the Rhodes, and partly to other Religious. Caſſan: de gloria mnndi, parte 9. Conſid. 5. and See anno prim: Ed. 1. cap. 42. Others wright that in truth their deſtruction grewe from leaning to the Emperour againſt the Pope of Rome, what ſoeuer was pretended. Ioach. Stephanus De iuriſdictione. lib. 4. cap. 10. nu. 18. See Templers.
               
               
                  Knights of the Shire (Milites Comitatus) otherwiſe be called Knights of the Parlament, and be two Knights, or other gentlemen of worth, that are choſen in pleno Comitatu, by the free holders of euery Countie that can diſpend 40. ſhillings per annum, and be Reſient in the ſhire, anno 10. H, 6. cap. 2. & anno 1. H. 5. cap. 1. vpon the Kings writ, to be ſent to the Parlament, and there by their counſell to aſſiſt the common proceedings of the whole Realme. Theſe when euery man that had a Knights fee, were cuſtumarily conſtreined to be a Knight, were of neceſſity to be milites gladio cincti, for ſo runneth the tenour of the writ at this day. Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. pri. But nowe there being but fewe Knights in compariſon of former times, & many men of great liuing in euery county, Cuſtome beareth that Eſquiers may be choſen to this office. anno 23. H. 6. ca. 6. ſo that they be reſient within the countie, anno H. 6. cap. 7. & anno 1. H. 5. cap. prim. For the obſeruations in choice of theſe knights, ſee the ſtatutes anno 7. H. 4. cap. 15. & anno 11. eiuſdem, cap. 1. & anno 6. H. 6. cap. 4. & anno 23. H. 6. cap. 15. and the new booke of Entries. verbo Parlament. nu. 1. Their expences during the Parlament are borne by the

County, anno 35. H. 8. cap. 11.
               
                  Knight Marſhiall (Mareſcallus hoſpitii Regii) is an officer in the kings houſe, hauing iuriſdiction, and cogniſance of any tranſgreſſion within the kings houſe and verge, as alſo of contracts made within the ſame houſe, whereunto one of the houſe is a partie. Regiſter orig. fo. 185. a. b. & fo. 191. b. whereof you may there reade more at large.
               
                  Knights fee, (Feudum militare) is ſo much inheritaunce, as is ſufficient yearely to maintaine a knight with conuenient reuenew which in Henry the. 3. daies was fifteene pounds. Camdeni Britan. pag. 
                  
                     •
                  11. or 680. acres of land, or 800. acres. eodem: But S. Thomas Smith in his Repub. Angl. lib. pri. cap. 18. rateth it at fourtie pound. And I finde in the ſtatute for knights anno pri. Ed. 2. cap pri. that ſuch as had 20. pound in fee or for terme of life per annum, might be compelled to be knights. M. Stowe in his annals, pag. 285. ſaith, that there were found in England at the time of the Conqueror 60211. Knights fees: others ſay 60215. whereof the religious houſes before their ſuppreſſion were poſſeſſed of 28015. Knights fee, is ſometime vſed for the rent, that a knight payeth for his fee to his Lord, of whom he houldeth. And this is an vncertaine ſumme, ſome houlding by fortie ſhillings the ſheild, ſome by twenty ſhillings as appeareth by Bracton. lib. 5. tract: pri. cap. 2.
               
                  Knighten Gylde, was a Gylde in London conſiſting of 19. knights, which king Edgar founded, giuing vnto them a portion of void ground lying without the walls of the city, now called Porteſoken ward. Stow. in his Annals, pag. 151.
            
            
               L
               
                  LAborariis, is a writ that lieth againſt ſuch, as hauing not whereof to liue, doe refuſe to ſerue, or for him that refuſeth to ſerue in ſummer, where he ſerued in winter: orig. Regiſter, fol. 189. b.
               
               
                  Laches, commeth of the French (laſcher. i. laxare, or luſche. i. frigidus, ignavus, flaccidus) it ſignifieth in our common law, negligence: as no laches ſhalbe adiudged in the heire within age, Litleton fol. 136. and old nat. br. fol. 110. where a man ought to make a thing, and makes it not, I of his laches cannot haue an Aſſiſe, but I muſt take mine action vpon the caſe.
               
                  Lagon, See Flotzon.
               
               
                  Laiſed liſtes, anno i. R. 3. cap. 8.
               
                  Land tenent, anno 14. Ed. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ſtat. 1. cap. 3. & anno 23. eiuſdem.

cap. 1. &. 26. eiuſdem, ſtat. 5. cap. 2. See Terre-tenent, & anno 12. R. 2. cap. 4. & anno 4. H. 4. cap. 8. it is ioyned with this word (Poſſeſſor) as Synonymon. v. anno 1. H. 6. cap. 5. See Terretenent.
               
               
                  Lanis de creſcentia Walliae traducendis ab
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cuſtuma, &c. is a writ that lyeth to the cuſtomer of a porte, for the permitting one to paſſe ouer wolles without cuſtome, becauſe he hath paid cuſtome in Wales before, Regiſter, fol. 279.
               
                  Lapſe (Lapſus) is a ſlippe or departure of a right of preſēting to avoide benefice, from the originall patron neglecting to preſent within ſix monethes, vnto the Ordinary. For we ſay that benefice is in lapſe or lapſed, wherevnto he that ought to preſent, hath omitted or ſlipped his oportunitie, anno 13. Eliz. cap. 12. This lapſe groweth as well the Patron being ignorant of the auoydance, as priuie, except onely vpon the reſignation of the former Incumbent, or the depriuation vpon any cauſe comprehended in the ſtatute, anno 13. Eliz. cap. 12. Panor: in cap. quia diuerſitatem. nu. 7. de conceſſ: praebend. Rebuffus de devolut: in praxi beneficiorum: Lancelotus de collation: lib. 1. Inſtitut. canon: §. Tempus autem. In which caſes the Biſhop ought to giue notice to the Patron.
               
                  Larceny (Laricinium) commeth of the French (Larcen. i. furtum, detractio alicui) It is defined by Weſt. parte. 2. Symbol titulo Inditements, to be theft of perſonall goods or chatels, in the owners abſence: and in reſpect of the things ſtollen, it is either great or ſmall. Great Larceny is, wherin the things ſtolne, though ſeuerally, exceede the value of 12. pence, and petit Larceny is when the goods ſtolne exceede not the value of 12. pence, hitherto M. Weſt. But he differeth from Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. c. 32. n. 1. Of this ſee more in Stawnf. pl. cor. l. 1. cap. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.
               
                  Laghſlite, is compounded of (lah. i. lex) and (ſlite. i. ruptum) and ſignifieth mulctam ruptae vel violatae legis. Lamb: explicat. of Saxon words, verbo Mulcta.
               
               
                  Last, is a Saxon word, ſignifiing a burden in generall, as alſo particularly a certaine weight: for as we ſay a laſt of hering, ſo they ſay Ein laſt corns, laſt wines, &c. thence commeth laſtage, which ſee in Leſtage. A laſt of hering conteineth 10. thouſand, an. 31. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 2. a laſt of pitch and tarre, or of aſhes, conteineth 14. barrels. anno. 32. H. 8. cap. 14. a laſt of hides, anno 1. Iac. cap. 33. conteineth 12. dozen of hides or skins.
               
                  Latitat, is the name of a writ whereby all men in perſonall

actions are called originally to the Kings bench. Fitz. nat. br. fo. 78. M. And it hath the name from this, becauſe in reſpect of their beter expedition, a man is ſuppoſed to lurke, and therefore being ſerued with this writ, he muſt put in ſecuritie for his appearance at the day, for latitare, eſt ſe malitiosè occultare animo fraudandi creditores ſuos agere volentes. l. Fulcinius §. Quid ſit latitare. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Quibus ex cauſis in poſſeſſionem eatur: But to vnderſtand the true original of this writ, it is to be knowne, that in auncient time, whileſt the kings bench was moueable, and followed the court of the King, the cuſtome was, when any man was to be ſiewed, to ſend forth a writ to the Shyreeue of the county where the Court lay, for the calling him in: and if the Shyreeue returned, non eſt inventus in baliva nostra, &c. then was there a ſecond writ procured foorth, that had theſe words, (testatum est eum latitare, &c.) and thereby the Shyreeue willed to attach him in any other place where he might be found. Now when the tribunall of the Kings bench came to be ſetled at Weſtminster, the former courſe of writ was kept for a long time, firſt ſending to the Shyreeue of Midleſex to ſummon the party, and if he could not be found there, then next to apprehend him whereſoeuer. But this ſeeming too troubleſome for the ſubiect, it was at laſt deuiſed, to put both theſe writs into one, and ſo originally to attache the party complained of vpon a ſuppoſall or fiction, that he was not within the county of Middleſex, but lurking elſe where, and that therefore he was to be apprehended in any place elſe, where he was preſumed to lye hidden, by a writ directed to the Shyreeue of the county where he is ſuſpected to be: and by this writ a man being brought in, is committed to the Marſhall of that court, in whoſe cuſtodie when he is, then by reaſon he is in the ſame countie where the Kings bench is, he may be ſiewed vpon an action in that court, whereas the original cauſe of apprehending him muſt be a pretence of ſome deceit or contempt committed, which moſt properly of old belonged to the cognizance of that court. I haue bene enformed, that the bringing of theſe actions of treſpas ſo ordinarily to the kings bench, was an inuention of Councelers, that becauſe onely Sergeants may come to the common plees barre, found a meanes to ſet themſelues on worke in that court. The forme of this writ is ſuch: Iacobus Dei

gratia Angliae, Francis, Scotiae, & Hiberniae Rex, fidei defenſor, &c. Vicecomiti Cantabrigiae ſalutem. Cum Vicecomitinoſtro Midleſexiae nuper praeceperimus, quod caperet Thomam T. & Wilielmum W. ſi inuenti fuiſſent in balliua ſua, & eos ſaluo cuſtodiret, ita quòd haberet corpora eorum coram nobis apud Weſtminſter die veneris proximo poſt octavas Sanctae Trinitatis, ad respondendum Roberto R. de placito trangreſſionis; cum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vicecomes noſter Midleſexiae, ad diem illum nobis returnauerit, quod praedicti Thomas T. & Wilielmus W. non ſunt inuenti in balliua ſua, ſuper quo ex part: praedicti Roberti in curia noſtra coram nobis ſufficienter teſtatum eſt, quòd praedicti Thomas & Wilielmus latitant & diſcurrunt in comitatu tuo. Idcirco tibipraecipimus quòd capias eos, ſi invētifuerint in balliua tua, & eos ſalvo cuſtodias, it a quod habeas corpora eorum coram nobis apud Weſtminſter, die. Martis proximo poſt tres ſeptimanas, eodem Trinitatis, ad reſpondendum praefato Roberto deplacito praedicto, & habeas ibi tunc hoc breve. Teſte Iohanne P
                        •
                     pham apud Weſtminſter. Roper.
               
               
                  Launcegay, anno. 7. Rich. ſecundi: cap. 13.
               
                  Law (lex) cometh of the Saxon (lah) the generall ſignificatiō is plaine, only this I thought to note, that the law of this land hath beene variable. For firſt Dunwallo Mulmutius otherwiſe Molincius a Brittaine, that being Duke of Cornwall reduced the whole land formerly ſeuered by ciuile wars, into the ſtate of a Monarchy, made certaine wholſome lawes, which long after were called Mulmutius lawes, and by Gyldas tranſlated out of the Bryttiſh tongue into latine. Stow in his Annals, pag. 16. Of theſe there remaine yet certaine heads, recorded by our hiſtoriographers, as followeth. 1. vt Deorum templa, & ciuitates hominum conſequantur tantam dignitatem, ne quis illò confugiens extrahipoſſit, antequàm ab eo quem laeſerat, veniam impetraverit. 2. vt huiuſmods privilegium immunitatis habeant etiam ipſae viae, quae ducunt ad templa & ad vrbes. 3. Imo & iumenta quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      illa, quae res ruſticae ſubueniunt. 4. Deni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      colonorum aratra ipſa tali praerogativa libertatis perfruantur. 5. Hoc amplius, vt ne quaterra vacaret culturâ, neve populus inopia reifrumentariae premeretur, aut ea minueretur, ſi pecora ſola occuparent agros qui ab hominibus coli dobent. 6. Conſtituit quot aratra quaelibet dioece ſis haberet ac poenam ſtatuit iis, per quos ille numerus aratrorum foret diminutus: 7. Item vetuit, bovem arator
                        •
                     m pro debito pecuniae, aſſignari debitoribus, ſi alia bonae debitoris eſſent. Ita fore, ne compendii

cauſa homines pecuarii agros incultos redderent: ſic etiam fore, ne quid carum rerum, quas natura praebet, hominibus vſquam deeſſe poſſet. Rich. Vitus hiſtoriarum Britanniae. li. 3. nu. 1. And of theſe lawes we finde no obſcure remanets in our lawes now in vſe: See Magna charta. ca. 1: &c
                        •
                     . 14. See Sanctuary. See Peace. Then was there a lawe called Merchenlage, whereby the Mercians were gouerned, being a kingdome in the heart of the land, conteining thoſe countries, that be nowe called Northampton ſhire, Leyceſter ſhire, Rutland ſhire, Lincolne ſhire, Nottingham ſhire, and Derby ſhire. Camd. Britan. pag. 94. whoſe power was great in the Heptarchy of the Saxons, vntill at the laſt they were conquered by the weſt Saxons, and made ſubiect to them. Polydor. in Angl. Hiſt. lib. 5. But whereas the name of theſe lawes ſauoureth of the Saxons time, it is reported by others that Martia a very learned Queene and wife to Quintelinus a Britton king, was the author of them, long before the Saxons ſet foote in England. Rich. Vitus. hiſto. Britan. li. 3. nu. 14. who alſo ſaith that Alphred the Saxon King tranſlated both theſe, and alſo thoſe of Mulmutius into the Engliſh or Saxon tongue. Thirdly, there was the lawe of the weſt Saxons, called weſt Saxenlage, and the lawe of the Danes when they ſet foote into the Realme▪ called Denelage. And of theſe lawes, Edward made one lawe, as ſome write, whereby he ruled his kingdome. But M. Camd. vbi ſupra, ſpeaking nothing of Mulmutius lawes, ſaith out of Geruaſius Tilburienſis, that of the other three William the Conquerour choſe the beſt, and to them adding of the Norman lawes, ſuch as he thought good, he ordeined lawes for our kingdome, which we haue at this preſent, or the moſt of them.
               Lawe hath an eſpeciall ſignification alſo, wherein it is taken for that which is lawfull with vs, and not els where. As tenent by the courteſie of England. anno 13. Ed. 1. cap. 3. and againe, to wage lawe, vadiare legem, and to make lawe, facere legem. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37. is to chalenge a ſpeciall benefite, that the lawe of this Realme affordeth in certaine caſes: whereof the firſt, ſc. vadiar
                        •
                      legem, is to put in ſecuritie, that he will make lawe at a day aſſigned, Glanuile lib. 1. cap. 9. and to make law is to take an oath, that he oweth not the debt chalenged at his hand, and alſo to bring with him ſo many men as the court ſhall aſſigne, to avowe vpon their oath, that in there conſciēces he hath ſworne truly. And this lawe is vſed in

actions of debt, without ſpecialty, as alſo where a man comming to the court, after ſuch time, as his tenements for default be ſeiſed into the Kings hands, will denie himſelfe to haue beene ſummoned, Glanuile lib. 1. cap. 9. & 12. and See Bracton vbi ſupra. nu. 1. v. Kitchin. fol. 164. See the newe expoſition of lawe Termes verbo (Ley) this is borrowed from Normandie, as appeareth by the grand Cuſtumarie, cap. 8y. But Sir Edward Cooke ſaith, it ſpringeth originally from the iudiciall lawe of god, li. 4. of his reports, Slades caſe, fol. 95. b. alleaging the 22. cap. of Exodus, verſu. 7. Whether ſo or not, the like cuſtome is among the Feudiſts: by whome they that come to purge the defendant, are called (Sacramentales.) libro feud. 1. tit. 4. §. 3. & titulo 10. & titulo. 26.
               
                  Lawe of armes (ius militare) is a law that giueth precepts & rules how rightly to proclaime warre, to make and obſerue leagues & truce, to ſet vpon the enemie, to retire, to puniſh offendours in the campe, to appoint ſouldiers their pay, to giue euery one dignitie to his deſert, to diuide ſpoiles in proportion, and ſuch like, for farder knowledge wherof, reade thoſe that write de iure bells.
               
               
                  Lawe day, ſignifieth a leete Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 160. and the county court, anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 2.
               
                  Lawles man, is he qui eſt extra legem, Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 11. nu. 1. See Outlawe.
               
               
                  Lawe of Marque, See Retriſalles. This word is vſed anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 17. and groweth from the German word March. i. limes, a bound or limite. And the reaſon of this appellation is, becauſe they that are driuen to this lawe of repriſall, do take the goods of that people of whome they haue receiued wrong, and cannot get ordinary iuſtice, when they can catch them within their owne territories or precincts.
               
                  Lawe Merchant, is a priuiledge or ſpeciall lawe differing from the common lawe of England, and proper to merchants and ſummary in proceeding, anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 8. 9. 19. & 20. anno 13. Ed. 1. ſtat. tertio.
               
               
                  Lawing of dogs (expeditatio canum) See Expeditate. Maſtifs muſt be lawed euery three yeare. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 163.
               
                  Leaſe (leſſa) commeth of the French (layſſer. i linquere, relinquere, omittere, permittere:) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a dimiſe or letting of lands or tenements or right of common, or of a rent or any hereditament

vnto another, for terme of yeares or of life, for a rent reſerued. And a leaſe is either written, called a leaſe by Indenture, or made by word of mouth, called a leaſe paroll. See the newe Termes of the lawe. The party that letteth this leaſe, is called the leaſſour, and the partie to whom it is let, the leaſſee. And a leaſe hath in it ſixe points: viz. words importing a dimiſe, a leaſſee named, a commencement from a day certaine, a term of yeares, a determination, a reſeruation of a rent. Coke vol. 6. Knights caſe. fol. 55. a.
               
               
                  Leete (leta) is otherwiſe called a lawe day, Smith de Republ. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 18. the word ſeemeth to haue growne from the Saxon (Lethe) which as appeateth by the lawes of king Edward ſet out by M. Lamberd. num. 34. was a court or iuriſdiction aboue the Wapentake or Hundred, comprehending three or foure of them, otherwiſe called Thryhing, and contained the third patt of a Prouince or Shire. Theſe iuriſdictions one and other be now aboliſhed, and ſwallowed vp in the Countie court, except they be held by preſcription. Kitchin. fol. 6. or charter in the nature of a franchiſe, as I haue ſaid in (Hundred.) The libertie of Hundreds is rare, but many Lordes, together with their courts Baron, haue likewiſe Leetes adioyned, and thereby do enquire of ſuch tranſgreſſions, as are ſubiect to the enquirie and correction of this Court: whereof you may read your fill in Kitchin, from the beginning of his booke to the fifth chapter, and Briton. cap. 28. But this court, in whoſe maner ſoeuer it be kept, is accompted the kings court, becauſe the authoritie thereof is originally belonging to the Crowne, and thence deriued to inferiour perſons, Kitchin fol. 6. Iuſtice Dyer ſaith, that this Leete was firſt deriued from the Shyreeues Turn. fol. 64. And it enquireth of all offences vnder high treaſon, committed againſt the Crowne and dignitie of the king; though it cannot puniſh many, but muſt certifie them to the Iuſtices or Aſſiſe, per Statut. anno 1. Ed. 3. cap. vlt. Kitchin fol. 8. but what things bee onely inquirable, and what puniſhable, ſee Kitchu in the charge of a court Leet▪ fol. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. See alſo the Statute anno 18. Ed. 2. The Iuriſdiction of Bayliffes in the Dutchy of Normandie, within the compaſſe of their Prouinces, ſeemeth to be the ſame, or very neare the 
                     •
                  ame, with the power of our

Leete. cap. 4. of the grand Cuſtumarie.
               
                  Legacie (legatum) is a particular thing giuen by laſt will and teſtament. For if a man diſpoſe or transferre his whole right or eſtate vpon another, that is called Haereditas by the Ciuilians, and he to whome it is ſo transferred, is tearmed haeres. Howbeit our common Lawyers call him Heire, to whom all a mans lands and hereditaments doe deſcend by right of bloud. See Heire. See Hereditaments.
               
               
                  Leproſo amouendo, is a writ that lyeth for a Pariſh, to remoue a Leper or Lazar, that thruſteth himſelfe into the company of his neighbours, either in church or other publike meeting, and communeth with them to their annoyance or diſturbance. Regi. orig. fol. 267. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 234.
               
                  Leſtage, aliâs laſtage, (laſtagium) proceedeth from the Saxon word (laſt. i. onus) and is a cuſtome chalenged in Faires & markets for carying of things. Raſtals Expoſition of words: or a cuſtome chalenged in cheapings or Faires. Saxon in the deſcription of England, cap. 11. Laſtage. anno 21. R. 2. cap. 18. ſeemeth to be the Ballance of a ſhippe. Fleta tearmeth it Leſting, ſaying, quòd ſignificat acquietantiā Leſtagii. lib. 1. cap. 47. §. Leſting.
               
               
                  Leters of exchaunge, (literae Cambitoriae, vel litera Cambii) Regiſt. orig. fol. 194. a.
               
               
                  Leters patents (literae patentes) be writings ſealed with the broad Seale of England, whereby a man is authorized to do or enioy any thing that otherwiſe of himſelfe he could not. anno 19. H. 7. cap. 7. And they be ſo tearmed of their forme, becauſe they be open with the Seale hanging, readie to be ſhewed for the confirmation of the authoritie giuen by them. If any will ſay, that leters patents may bee graunted by common perſons, I will not greatly contend. For I find that to be true in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 35. E. Howbeit they bee called rather patents in our cō
                  mon ſpeech, then Leters patents. Leters patents to make Denizens. anno 32. H. 6. cap. 16. yet for difference ſake, the kings leters patents be called leters patents royall. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 10. There is likewiſe a writ patent. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 1. & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Leuari facias, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the leuying of a Summe of money vpon lands and tenements, of him that hath forfeited a recognizance, &c. Regiſt. origin. fol. 298. b. & 300. b.
               
               
                  Leuari facias damna de diſſeiſitoribus, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the leauying of

dammages, wherein the diſſeiſour hath formerly beene condemned to the diſſeiſee. Regiſt. fol. 214. b.
               
               
                  Leuari facias reſiduum debiti, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, for the leuying of a Remanent of a debt vpon lands and tenements, or chatels of the debtor, that hath in part ſatisfied before, Regiſt. orig. fol. 299.
               
                  Leuari facias quando vicecomes returnavit quòd non habuit emptores, is a writ commaunding the Shyreeue to ſell the goods of the debtor, which he hath alreadie taken, & returned that he could not ſell them, and as much more of the debtours goods, as will ſatisfie the whole debt. Regiſt. orig. fol. 300. a.
               
               
                  Leter of Atturney, (litera Atturnatus) is a writing, authorizing an Atturney, that is, a man appointed to do a lawfull act in our ſteedes, Weſt parte prim. ſymbol. lib. 2. ſect. 559. It is called in the ciuile lawe (mandatum, or procuratorium) There ſeemeth to be ſome difference betweene a leter of Atturney, and a warrant of Atturney. For whereas a leter of Atturney is ſufficient, if it be ſealed and deliuered before ſufficient witneſſe: a warrant of Atturney muſt be acknowledged and certified before ſuch perſons, as fines bee acknowledged in the country, or at the leaſt before ſome Iuſtice or Sergeant, Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Recoveries. ſect. 1. F. See the ſtatute, anno 7. R. 2. cap. 14.
               
                  Leters of Marque. See Marque and lawe of Marque. See Repriſals. ſee a. 14. Hen. 6. cap. 7.
               
                  Leters patents of ſummons for debt: anno 9. H. 3. cap. 18.
               
                  Leuy (Leuare) commeth of the French (Leuer. i. alleuare, attoller
                        •
                     ) It is vſed in our common law, for to ſet vp any thing, as to leuy a mill. Kitchin, fol. 180. or to caſt vp, as to leuy a ditch. Old. nat. br. fol. 110. or to gather and exact, as to leuy mony. See Leu
                        •
                     
                     ri facias.
               
               
                  Libell (Libellus) literally ſignifieth a litle booke, but by vſe it is the originall declaration of any action in the ciuill lawe, anno 2. H. 5. cap. 3. & anno 2. Ed. 6. cap. 13. it ſignifieth alſo a criminous report of any man caſt abroad, or otherwiſe vnlawfully publiſhed in writing, but then for difference ſake it is called an in famous libel, famoſus libellus.
               
               
                  Libello habendo. See Copia libelli de liberanda.
               
               
                  Libera Chaſea habenda, is a writ Iudiciall, graunted to a man for a free chace belonging to his maner, after he hath by a Iury prooued it to belong vnto him. Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 36. & 37.
               
                  Liberate, is a warrant iſſuing out of the Chaūcery to the Treaſurer,

Chamberlaines, and Barons of the Exchequer, or clerk of the Hamper, &c. for the payments of any annuall penſion or other ſummes graunted vnder the broad ſeale. v. Brooke. titulo Taile d'Exchequer. nu. 4. orig. Reg. fol. 193. a. b. or ſometime to the ſhyreeue. &c. n. br. f. 132. for the deliuery of any lands or goods taken vpon forfeits of a Recogniſaunce. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 131. & 132. v. Coke. li. 4. Fulwods caſe, ſo. 64. 66. & 67. It is alſo to a Gaoler from the Iuſtices for the deliuery of a priſoner, that hath put in baile for his appearaunce. Lamb. Eirenarch. lib. 3. cap. 2.
               
                  Libertate probanda, is a writ that lyeth for ſuch, as be chalendged for ſlaues, and offer to proue themſelues free, to the Shyreeue, that he take ſecurity of them for the prouing of their freedome before the Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, and prouide, that in the meane time they be quiet from their vexations, that chalenge them for ſlaues. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 77. See Natiuo habendo.
               
               
                  Libertatibus allocandis, is a writ that lyeth for a citizen or Burges of any citie, that contrarily to the liberties of the city or towne whereof he is, is impleaded before the kings Iuſtices, or Iuſtices errants, or Iuſtice of the Foreſt, &c. that refuſeth or deferreth to allow his priuiledge Orig. Regiſt. fol. 262. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 229.
               
                  Libertatibus exigendis in itinere, is a writ, whereby the king willeth the Iuſtices in eyre, to admit of an Atturney for the defence of another mans libertie, &c. before them. Regiſt. origin. fol. 19. b.
               
               
                  Libertas (libertas) is a priuiledge held by graunt or preſcription, whereby men enioy ſome benefite or fauour beyond the ordinarie ſubiect. Liberties royal what they be, ſee in Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 5. Broke hoc titulo. See Franchiſe.
               
               
                  Librata terrae, containeth foure oxegangs, and euery oxegange 13. acres. Skene de verb. ſignif. verbo Bovata terrae. See Farding deale of land.
               
               
                  Licence to go to election, (Licentia eligendi, Regiſt. fol. 294.) See Conge d'eſlire.
               
               
                  Licence to ariſe, (licentia ſurgendi) is a libertie giuen by the Court to a tenent, that is eſſoyned de malo lecti in a reall action. For the lawe is, that in this caſe he may not ariſe out of his bed, or at leaſt goe out of his chamber, vntill he haue bene viewed by Knights thereunto appointed, and ſo vpon view of his ſickneſſe, haue a day aſſigned him to appeare, or elſe lye, vntill he be licenced by the court to ariſe. And the reaſon of this is, as I

take it, becauſe it may appeare, whether he cauſed himſelfe to be eſſoyned deceitfully yea or not: And therefore if the demaundant can prooue, that he be ſeene out of his chamber, walking vp and downe his grounds, or els going abroad vnto any other place, before he be viewed or haue licence of the court, he ſhalbe adiudged to be deceitfully eſſoyned, and to haue made default. Of this ſee Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 7. 10. & 12. and Fleta, li. 6. cap. 10. Horne in his ſecond booke of his mirrour, ca. des Eſſoines, ſaith that the aduerſe party may graunt licentiam ſurgendi to his aduerſary thus eſſoyned: And if he will not, the king vpon iuſt cauſe, may.
               
                  Licentia ſurgendi, is the writ whereby the tenent eſſoyned de malo lecti, obteineth liberty to riſe. See Licence to ariſe. See the Regiſter, fol. 8.
               
                  Licentia tranſfretandi, is a writ or warrant directed to the keepers of the Port at Douer, &c. willing them to let ſome paſſe quietly ouer ſea, that hath formerly obteined the kings licence thereunto, Reg. Orig. fol. 193. b.
               
               
                  Lieftenent (locum tenens) is a French word, ſignifiing as much as (Legatus) it is compounded of (Lieu. i. Locus) and (tenir. i. tenere) It ſignifieth with vs him, that occupieth the kings place, or repreſenteth his perſon, as the Liefetenent of the Kings of Ireland. anno 4. H. 5. cap. 6. ſo is it vſed anno 2. & 3. Ed. 6. cap. 2. whence that officer ſeemeth to take his beginning. But I read alſo in M. Manwoods firſt part of foreſt lawes. pag. 113. that the lord cheife Iuſtice in Eyre of the Foreſt: and the cheife warden alſo, haue their Liefetenents in the foreſt. So that though a Leiftenent be moſt ordinary and moſt properly vſed for the Depute of the king: yet is it ſometime extēded to ther deputes that be but Liefetenents to the King.
               
                  Liefetenent of the Ordinance, anno 39. El. ca. 7.
               
                  Liege, (ligius) is a word borowed from the Feudiſts, and hath two ſeuerall ſignifications in our common lawe: ſometime being vſed for Liege Lord. anno 34. & 35. H. 8. cap. 1. & anno 35. eiuſdem, cap. 3. and ſomtimes for Liege man. anno 10. R. 2. cap. vnico. & anno 11. eiuſdem. cap. prim. Liege Lord is he, that acknowledgeth no ſuperiour. Duarenus in Comment. de Conſuetud. Feudorum, cap. 4. num. 3. Liege man is he, that oweth legeancie to his liege Lord. M. Skene de verb. ſign. verbo Ligeantia, ſaith, that it is deriued from the Italian word, (liga) i. a band, league, or obligation, in whom read more of this mater.
               
                  
                  Ligeancie, is ſuch a duty or fealtie, as no man may owe or beare to more then one Lord. Idem, eodem. num. 4. I find alſo this definition of ligeancie in the grand Cuſtumarie of Normandy, cap. 13. Ligeantia eſt, ex qua Domino tenentur vaſalli ſui contra omnes homines qui mori poſſunt & viuere, proprii corporis praebere conſilii & auxilii iuvamentum, & ei ſe in omnibus innocuos exhibere, nec ei adverſantium partem in aliquo confouere. Dominus etiam eoſdem tenetur regere, protegere & defenſare: eoſque ſecundum iura & conſuetudines, & leges patriae pertractare: this is otherwiſe called l
                        •
                     gietas, Caſſan: de Conſuetud: Burgund: pag. 420. & 421. This word is vſed in the ſtatutes of our realm: as the kings liege people. anno 14. H. 8. c. 2. Of the oath of leageancy, Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludio feudorum, cap. 2. nu. 138. hath theſe words: Praeſtatur hoc Ligeum Homagium in manibus Regis vel imperatoris, genibus flexis, poſitis manibus iunctis in manibus Domini, dicendo: Ego iuro homagiū tibi Dom. vt a modo ſim homo ligeus veſter, contra omnem hominem, qui poteſt viuere: verba ſunt pulchra Andr. de Iſern: in cap. 1. in verbo omnem. Colum: prima. de noua forma fidelita: & hoc ligeum Homagium videmus praeſtari domino Regi tantum: quia cum per id efficiatur homo ſolius illius, cui iuratur, vt dixit Hoſtienſis in cap. ex diligenti. de Symon: alii non poteſt praeſtari. i. quia illius ſolius eſſe ſimiliter non poteſt: Non
                        〈…〉
                     . eſſe poteſt duorum in ſolidum. l. ſi vt certo. §. ſi duobus vehiculum. 
                        〈◊〉
                     : commodati. ſecundùm And: in dicto cap: 1. §. omnem. & Bald: hic in 7. diuiſ & Aluar. in 13. diuiſione.) Non ligeum verò dicitur, quando quis 
                        ••
                     rat fidelitatem Domino, excepta aliqua perſona, viz. domino ſuperiori, vel antiquiore: Hactenus Iacobutius. where you may reade more touching this point: as alſo in Hotomans diſputations de feudis, pag. 816. fol. 820. &c.
               
               
                  Ligeance (Ligeantia) See Liege It ſometime ſignifieth the dominions or territoritie of the Liege Lord: as anno 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. Children borne out of the Ligeance of the King.
               
                  Lierwit eſt mulcta adulteriorum. Fleta li. 1. ca. 47. It is vſed for a libertie whereby a Lord chalengeth the penalty of one that lyeth vnlawfully with his bond woman. See Lotherwit.
               
               
                  Limitation of Aſſiſe (Limitatio aſſiſae) is a certaine time ſet downe by ſtatute, within the which a man muſt alledge himſelfe or his aunceſter to haue bin ſeiſed of lands, ſiewed for by a writ of Aſſiſe. See the ſtatute of Merton, cap. 8. anno 20. H. 3. and Weſt. 1. cap. 38. and an. 32. H. 8. c. 2. & an. 1. M. 1. p. c. 5. See alſo

                  Theloals digeſt of writs lib. 10. cap. 2. So it is vſed in the old. nat. br. fol. 77. in theſe words: the writ de conſuetudinibus & ſeruitiis lyeth, where I or mine Aunceſters after the limitation of Aſſiſe, were not ſeiſed of the Cuſtomes, &c. But before the Limitation of Aſſiſe wee were ſeiſed, &c.
               
                  Lindwood, was a Doctor of both Ciuill and Canon lawes, and Deane of the Arches, he was Embaſſadour for Henry the fiueth into Portingall, anno 1422. as appeareth by the preface to his commentarie vpon the Provincialls.
               
               
                  Litleton, was a lawyer of great accompt, liuing in the daies of Edward the fourth, as appeareth by Stawnf. praerogat: cap. 21. fol. 72. he wrot a booke of great accompt, called Litletons tenoures, which Hotoman in his commentary de verbis feudalibus. verb. Foedum, thus commendeth. Stephanus Paſquerius excellenti vir ingenio, & inter Pariſienſes cauſidicos dicendi facultate praeſtans, libellum mihi Anglicanum Litletonum dedit, quo Feudorum Anglicorum lura exponuntur, ità inconditè, abſurde, & inconcinnè ſcriptum, vt facilè appareat verum eſſe, quod Polidorus Virgilius in Anglica hiſtoria ſcribit, ſtultitiam in eo libro cum malitia & calumniandi ſtudio certare.
               
               
                  Literae ad faciendum attornatum pro ſecta facienda: ſee in the Regiſt: originall, fol. 172. Literae de annua penſione, eodem, 266. & 307. Litera patens ad faciendum generalē atturnatum quia infirmus, eodem, fol. 21. Litera per quam dominus remittit curiam ſuam Regi, eodem. fol. 4. Literae de requeſtu, eodem, fol. 129. Literae canonici ad exercendam iuriſdictionem loco ſuo, fo. 305. Literae patentes ad conferendum beneficta, domino in remotis agente. fol. 305. Literae ad innote ſcēdum recuperationem Regis de eccleſia omnibus quorum intereſt, fol. 305. Literae patentes regis quod Abbas ad totam vitam ſuam poſſit facere Atturnatos generales, f. 21. Literae procuratoriae; fol. 205. 306. Literae Regia deprecatoriae pro annua penſione, fol. 307. All theſe you may ſee in their places, & vnderſtand the meaning of them, as occaſion ſhall require.
               
                  Liverie (Liberatura) is drawne from the French (
                        ••
                     vree i. inſigne, geſtamen, Centuriale diſcrimen, nota centurialis, turmalis) or els from (livrer. i. tradere) and accordingly hath 3. ſignifications. In one it is vſed for a ſuite of cloth or other ſtuffe, that a gentleman giueth in coates, cloakes, hats or gownes, with cogniſaunce or without, to his ſeruants or followers, anno 1. Rich. 2. cap. 7. & anno 20. eiuſdem, cap. 1. & 
                        〈◊〉
                     . & anno 7. H. 4. ca. 14. &

anno 8. Ed. 4. ca. 2. & anno 7. eiuſdem, ca. 14. & anno 13. eiuſdem, ca. 3. & a. 8. H. 6. ca. 4. & anno 8. Ed. 4. ca. 3. & anno 3. H. 7. ca. 1. & 12. & anno 11. eiuſdem, ca. 3. & anno 19. eiuſdem, cap. 14. In the other ſignification, it betokeneth a deliuery of poſſeſſion vnto thoſe tenents, which hould of the king in capite, or in knights ſeruice: for the king by his prerogatiue hath primier ſeyſini (or the firſt poſſeſſion) of all lands and tenements ſo houlden of him. anno 52. H. 3. cap. 16. & an. 17. Ed. 2. cap. 3. that is, when any ſuch tenent dyeth, the king foorthwith entreth, and holdeth it vntill the heire do his homage, and ſo pray his land to be deliuered vnto him. Which act in the king is called Liuerie: and liuerie in this ſignification is either generall or ſpeciall. Stawn. praerog. fol. 12. & cap. 3. Liuerie generall ſeemeth to be that, which is made in general words, and therefore may eaſily be miſſued. Liuerie ſpeciall is that, which containeth in it a pardon of ouerſights committed by the tenent in ſiewing out his liuerie, by which pardon the miſſuing is diſpenſed with. Stawnf. pag. 67 cap. Trauerſ. 20. See the Inſtitutes and grounds of the common lawe. cap. 30. of generall and ſpeciall liueries. Liuerie in the third ſignification is the writte which lyeth for the heire to obtaine the poſſeſſion or ſeiſin of his lands at the kings handes: which ſee in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 155.
               
                  Liuerie of ſeiſin (deliberatio ſeiſinae) is a deliuerie of poſſeſſion of land or tenement, or other things corporeall, (for of things incorporeall no liuerie of ſeiſin may be) vnto one that hath right or a probabilitie of right vnto them. For as Bracton ſaith: Traditio debet eſſe veſtita & non nuda, ſc. quòd traditione praecedat vera cauſa vel putatiua, qua tranſeat Dominicum. lib. 2. cap. 18. num. 3. Weſt parte prim. ſymbol. li. 2. ſect. 196. calleth this a ceremonie in the common lawe, vſed in the conueyance of lands or tenements, &c. where you may ſee the vſuall forme hereof particularly ſet downe, whereunto ioyne the new expoſition of law tearmes.
               
                  Lieutenent. See Lieftenent.
               
               
                  Lieutenent of the tower, ſeemeth to haue bene an officer vnder the Conſtable. anno Henr. 4. cap. 15.
               
                  Locus partitus, ſignifieth a diuiſion made betweene 2. townes or counties, to make triall in whether the land or place in queſtion lieth. Fleta lib. 4. cap. 15. num. 1.
               
                  Locall (localis) ſignifieth in our common lawe, as much as tyed or annexed to a place certaine: Example: the thing is locall

and annexed to the Free-hold. Kitchin fol. 180. and againe in the ſame place: An action of treſpaſſe for battery, &c. is tranſitorie and not locall: that is, not needfull that the place of the batterie ſhould bee ſet downe as materiall in the declaration: or if it be ſet downe, that the defendant ſhould trauerſe the place ſet downe, by ſaying, he did not commit the batterie in the place mentioned in the declaration, and ſo auoide the action. And againe, fol. 230. the place is not locall: that is, not materiall to be ſet down in certaintie. And the gard of the perſon and of the landes differeth in this, becauſe the perſon being tranſitorie, the lord may haue his rauiſhment de garde, before he be ſeiſed of him, but not of the land, becauſe it is locall. Perkins Graunts 30.
               
                  Lobbe, is a great kinde of north ſea fiſh. anno 31. Ed. 3. ſtat. 3. cap. 2.
               
                  Lodemanage, is the hire of a Pilot for conducting of a ſhip from one place to another.
               
                  Loichfiſh, as Lob. Ling. Cod. anno 31. Ed. 3. ſtat. 3. cap. 2.
               
                  Lode works, is one of the works belonging to the Stannaries in Cornwall: for the which reade M. Camdens Britan: in his title of Cornwal. pa. 119. See Streme work.
               
               
                  Lollards (Lollards) were in accompt and reputation of thoſe times, Heretiks that abounded heere in England, in the daies of Edward the third, and Henry the fifth. anno 2. H. 5. cap. 7. whereof Weekleife was the cheife, as Stowe ſaith in his Annalls: pag. 425. who by his report, went barefooted and baſlely clothed, to wit in baſe ruſſet garments downe to the heeles: they preached, and eſpecially againſt Monks and other religious men. Of theſe reade more in him and others that writ of thoſe times. The name Lindwood deriueth a lolio: quia ſicut lolium inficit ſegetes: ſic Lollardi multociens inficiunt fideles ſimplices inter quos conuerſantur. in ca. finali: de Haereticis verbo Lollardiae: But Tritemius in his chronicle, deduceth the name from one Gualter Lolhard a German as the firſt author of that ſect, liuing about the yeare of our redemption. 1315.
               
                  Lord (Dominus) by M. Camdens opinion, is a contract (of Lafford) which is the Daniſh word for Dominus. It is a word of honour with vs, and is vſed diuerſly. Sometime being attributed to a man, that is noble by birth or creation, which ſort are otherwiſe called Lords of the Parlament. Sometime to thoſe that be ſo called by the courteſie of England, as all the ſonnes, of a Duke, or the eldeſt ſonne of an

Earle. Sometime to men honorable by office, as lord chiefe Iuſtice, &c. and ſometime to a meane man that hath fee, and ſo conſequently the homage of tenents within his maner. For by his tenents he is called Lord, and by none other, and in ſome places, for diſtinction ſake, he is called Landlord. It is vſed neuertheleſſe by the Writers of the common lawe, moſt vſually in this ſignification. And ſo is it diuided into lord aboue, and lord meſn: lord meſn, is he that is owner of a maner, and by vertue thereof hath tenents holding of him in fee, and by copy of court rolle, and yet holdeth himſelfe ouer of a ſuperiour Lord: who is called lord aboue, or lord Paramount, old nat. br. fol. 79. Although I thinke none ſimply to be accounted lord Paramount, but the Prince: becauſe all hold either mediately or immediatly of him, and he of none. In this ſignification I likewiſe reade Very lord, and Very tenent. eod. fol. 42. & Broke titulo Heriot. num. 1. where (I thinke) very lord, is he which is immediate Lord to his tenent: and him to be very tenent to that Lord, of whom he immediately holdeth. So that if there be lord aboue, lord meſn, and tenent, the lord aboue is not very lord to the tenent, nor the tenent very tenent to the lord aboue.
               
                  Lord in groſſe. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 3. is he that is lord hauing noe maner, as the king in reſpect of his crown. idem, f. 5. F. See him alſo, fol. 8. A. B. where I finde a caſe wherein a priuate man is lord in groſſe. viz. a man maketh a gift in tayle of all the land hee hath, to hold of him and dyeth: his heire hath but a Seignorie in groſſe.
               
                  Lorimers. anno 1. R. 3. cap. 12. is one of the companies in London, tha makeht bits for bridles of horſes and ſuch like. The name ſeemeth to be taken from the latine (lorum) and is elſe where writen Lorinors.
               
               
                  Lotherwit, aliâs Leyerwit, is a libertie or priueledge to take amends of him that defileth your bondwoman without licence, Raſtall: expoſition of words. It is an amends for lying with abondwoman. Saxon in his deſcription of England. cap. 11. Some thinke it ſhould be rather writen (Legerwit) For (Leger) is the Saxon word for a bedde, or (Logherwit) of the old word (Logher) being of the ſame ſignification. See Bloodwit and Lyerwit.
               
               
                  Luſernes, See Furre.
               
               
                  Luſhoborow, is a baſe coine vſed in the daies of King Ed. the 3. coined beyōd Seas to the likenes of Engliſh money, and

brought in to deceiue the King and his ſubiects. To auoide the which it was made treaſon for any man wittingly to bring in any ſuch. an. 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 4. cap. ſecundo.
               
            
            
               M
               
                  MAcegriefs. aliâs Macegrefs. be ſuch as willingly buie and ſell ſtolen ſleſh, Britton, cap. 29. fo. 71. b. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fo. 193. a.
               
               
                  Magna aſſiſa eligenda, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, to ſummon foure lawful knights before the Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, there vpon their oathes to chuſe 12. knights of the vicenage, &c. to paſſe vpon the great aſſiſe betweene A. plaintife and B. defendant, &c. Regiſter originall, fol. 8. a.
               
               
                  Magna Charta, called in Engliſh the great charter, is a charter conteining a number of lawes ordained the ninth yeare of Henry the third, and confirmed by Edward the firſt. The reaſon why it was tearmed Magna charta, was either for that it conteined the ſumme of all the writen lawes in England, or elſe that there was another Charter called the Charter of the Foreſt, eſtabliſhed with it, which in quantitie was the leſſer of the two. I reade in Holinſhed, that King Iohn to appeaſe his Barons, yelded to lawes or articles of gouernment much like to this great Charter, but wee nowe haue noe auncienter writen lawe, then this, which was thought to be ſo beneficall to the ſublect, and a lawe of ſo great equitie in compariſon of thoſe, which were formerly in vſe, that K. Henry the third was thought but hardly to yeld vnto it, and that to haue the fifteenth peny of all the moueable goods both of the ſpiritualtie and temporaltie throughout his realme. Holinſhed in Henry the third. And though this Charter conſiſt not of aboue 37. chapters or lawes: yet is it of ſuch extent, as all the lawe wee haue, is thought in ſome ſort to depend of it. Polydorus and Holinſhed, vbi ſupra.
               
               
                  Mahim (Mahemium) commeth of the old French (Mehaigne) as M. Skene ſaith, de verbo. ſignif. verbo Machanium, and ſignifieth a corporal hurt, whereby a man looſeth the vſe of any member, that is or might bee any defence vnto him in batel. The Canoniſts call it membrimatilationem, as the eye, the hand, the foote, the ſcalpe of the head, his foretooth, or, as ſome ſay, of any finger of his hand, Glanuile lib. 14. ca. 7. See

                  Bracton at large, lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 24. nu. 3. and Britton cap. 25. and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. pri. ca. 41. and the newe expoſition of law Termes, and the Mirrour of Iuſtices, cap. d'homicid. The grand Cuſtumarie of Normandie, cap. 6. calleth it Mahaignium, and defineth it to be enormem laeſionem. All agree that it is the loſſe of a member, or the vſe thereof. And membrum, as Caſſan: de conſuetu: Burgund. pag. 168. defineth it out of Baldus, eſt pars corporis habens deſtinatam operationem in corpore. where you may reade more of this point. But if you will ſee it largely diſcuſſed, look Vgolinus de irregularitatibus, ca. 4. §. 3. 4. 5. alſo read M. Skene vbi ſupra.
               
               
                  Mainour, aliâs Manour, aliâs Meinoure, ſeemeth to come of the French (Manier. i. manu tractare, attrectare) or els of (Ameuer. i. abducere). It ſignifieth in our common lawe, the thing that a theefe taketh away or ſtealeth: as to be taken with the mainor. pl. cor. fol. 179. is to be taken with the thing ſtolen about him: and againe, fol. 194. It was preſented that a theefe was deliuered to the Vicount together with the Mainor: & thirdly, fol. 186. If a man be indited that he feloniouſly ſtole the goods of another, where, in truth, they bee his owne goods, and the goods bee brought into the court as the manour, and it be demaunded of him, what hee ſaith to the goods, and he diſclaime them: though he be quitted of the felonie, he ſhall looſe the goods, and againe. fol. 149. if the defendant were taken with the manour, and the manour bee caried to the court, they in auncient times would arraine him vpon the manour, without any appeale or inditement. I find this word vſed in the old. nat. br. fol. 110. in this ſort: where a man maketh a thing by mainour, or leuying, or eſtopping, in ſuch caſe he ſhall haue Aſſiſe. where it ſignifieth handie labour, and is but an abbreviation of Mainovrey.
               
               
                  Mainovre, ſee Minouerye.
               
               
                  Mainpriſe (Manucaptio) is compounded of two French words (Main. i. manus) & (prins. i. captus) which is a participle of the verbe) prendre i. capere, excipere, captare) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, the taking or receiuing a man into friendly cuſtody, that otherwiſe, is or might bee committed to the mercie of the priſon, vpon ſecuritie giuen for his forth comming at a day aſſigned: as to let one to mainpriſe. old nat. br. fol. 42. is to commit him to them, that vndertake his apparence at

the time appointed. And they that do thus vndertake for any, are called Mainpernouns, becauſe they do receiue him into their hands. pl. cor. fol. 178. Of this ſort is the word (Mainpernable) which ſignifieth him that hath committed ſuch an offence, as by law he may be thus bayled. For in many caſes a man is not mainpernable: whereof ſee Broke, titulo Mainpriſe, per totum. and Fitz. nat. br. fol. 249. & ſeqq. M. Manwood in the firſt part of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 167. maketh a great difference betweene Bayle and Mainpriſe. For he that is mainpriſed (quoth he) is alwayes ſaid to be at large, and to goe at his owne libertie out of ward, after the day is ſet to mainpriſe, vntill the day of his appearance, by reaſon of the ſaid common ſummons or otherwiſe. But otherwiſe it is, where a man is let to bayle to foure or two men, by the lord Iuſtice in eyre of the Foreſt, vntill a certaine day. For there he is alwayes accounted by the lawe to be in their ward and cuſtody for the time. And they may, if they will, keepe him in ward, or in priſon all that time, or otherwiſe at their will. So that he that is ſo bayled, ſhall not be ſaid by the lawe to be at large, or at his owne libertie. Thus farre M. Manwood. The myrror of Iuſtices maketh a difference alſo betweene pledges and mainpernours, ſaying, that pledges are more generall, & that mainpernours are bodie for bodie. lib. 2. cap. de treſpaſſe venial. and lib. 3. cap. des pledges & mainpernours. When mainpriſes may be granted, and when not, ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 136. &c. vſque 141. and Lamberd. Eiren. lib. 3. cap. 2. pag. 336. 337. 338. 339. 340. See alſo Britton fol. 73. a. cap. Des pledges & mainpernours: the author of the Myrror of Iuſtices ſaith, that pledges bee thoſe, that bayle or redeeme any thing but the body of a man, and that mainpernours be thoſe, that free the body of a man. And that pledges therefore belong properly to reall and mixt actions, and mainpernours to perſonall.
               
                  Maintenance (manutentio vel manutenentia) is a French word, and ſignifieth an vpholding of a cauſe or perſon, metaphorically drawne from the ſuccouring of a young child, that learneth to goe, by ones hand. In our common lawe, it is vſed in the euill part, for him, that ſecondeth a cauſe depending in ſuite betweene others, either by lending of mony, or making friends for either partie, toward his help. anno 32. Henr. 8. cap. 9. And when a mans act in this kinde is by lawe accounted Maintenance,

and when not, ſee Broke, titulo Maintenance: and Kitchin, fol. 202. & ſeqq. and Fitz. nat. br. fol. 172. and Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 38. The writ that lyeth againſt a man for this offence, is likewiſe called Maintenance. Termes of the lawe. verb. Maintenance. Speciall maintenance Kitchin, fol. 204. ſeemeth to bee maintenance moſt properly ſo tearmed. Of this ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 155. b. and the new booke of Entries. verbo, Maintenance. Maintenance, vid. Nouos terminos Iuris.
               
               
                  Make (facere) ſignifieth in the common lawe, to performe or execute: as to make his lawe, is to performe that lawe which he hath formerly bound himſelfe vnto, that is, to cleare himſelfe of an action commenced againſt him by his oath, and the oathes of his neighbours. Old nat. br. fol. 161. Kitchin fol. 192. which lawe ſeemeth to be borowed of the Feudiſts, who call theſe men that come to ſweare for another in this caſe, Sacramentales. Of whom thus ſaith Hotoman in verbis foundal. Sacramentales a ſacramento i. iuramento diccbantur 
                        •
                     i, qui quamuis res, de qua ambigebatur, teſtes non fuiſſent, tamen ex eius, cuius res agebatur, animi ſententia, in eadem quae ille verba iurabant: illius vide licet probitate & innocentia confiſi. Nam tum demum adhibebantur, cùm teſtes nulli extarent. See the reſt. The formall words vſed by him that maketh his lawe, are commonly theſe. Heare O ye Iuſtices, that I doe not owe this ſumme of money demaunded, neither all nor any part thereof, in maner and forme declared, ſo helpe me God, and the contents of this booke. To make ſeruices or cuſtome, is nothing elſe but to performe them. Old. nat. br. fol. 14. To make oath, is to take an oath.
               
                  Maletent, in the Statute called the Confirmation of the liberties of &c. anno 29. Ed. prim. cap. 7. is interpreteted to be a tolle of 40. ſhillings for euery ſacke of wooll. Stow in his Annals calleth it a Maletot. pag. 461 See alſo the Statute (de tallagio non concedendo) an. 34. eiuſ. ſtat. 5.
               
                  Malin. See Marle.
               
               
                  Manbote ſignifieth a pecuniary compenſation for killing of a man. Lambard in his expoſition of Saxon words. verbo Aeſtimatio. Of which reade Roger Houeden alſo, in parte poſter. ſuorum annal. fol. 344. a. b.
               
               
                  Mandamus, is a writ, that lyeth after the yere and day, wheras in the meane time the writ called (diem clauſit extremum) hath not bene ſent out to the Excheatour, for the ſame purpoſe, for the which it ſhould formerly haue bene ſent forth. Fitzh. nat.

br. fol. 253. B. See Diem clauſit extremum. Mandamus is alſo a charge to the ſhyreeue, to take into the kings hands, all the lands and tenements of the kings widowe, that againſt her oath formerly giuen, marieth without the kings conſent. Regiſter. fol. 295. b. See Widow.
               
               
                  Mandatum, is a commaundment iudiciall of the king or his Iuſtices, to haue any thing done for the diſpatch of iuſtice, wherof you ſhall ſee diuerſity in the table of the Regiſter iudiciall. verbo Mandatum.
               
               
                  Maner (Manerium) ſeemeth to come of the French (manoir. i. domicilium, habitatio) M. Skene. de verbo. ſignificatione. verbo Manerium, ſaith it is called Manerium, quaſi Manurium, becauſe it is laboured with handy worke by the Lord himſelfe. It ſignifieth in our common law, a rule or gouernmēt, which a man hath ouer ſuch as hould land within his fee. Touching the originall of theſe maners, it ſeemeth that in the beginning, there was a certaine compaſſe or circunt of ground, graunted by the king vnto ſome man of worth (as a Baron or ſuch like) for him and his heires to dwell vpon, and to exerciſe ſome iuriſdiction more or leſſe within that compaſſe, as he thought good to graunt, performing him ſuch ſeruices, and paying ſuch yearely rent for the ſame, as he by his graunt required: and that afterward this great man parcelled his land to other meaner men, inioyning them againe ſuch ſeruices and rents, as he thought good, and by that meanes, as he became tenent to the king, ſo the inferiours became tenents vnto him. See Perkins Reſeruations 670. and Andrew Horns booke intituled the mirrour of Iuſtices li. 1. ca. du. Roy Alfred. See the definition of a Maner. Fulb. fol. 18. And this courſe of benefiting or rewarding their nobles for good ſeruice, haue our kings borowed from the Emperours of Rome, or the Lombard kings, after they had ſetled themſelues in Italy, as may well appeare by Antonius Contius in methodo feudorum, c. i. de origine, & libris Feudorum. And I finde that according to this our cuſtome, all lands houlden in fee throughout Fraunce, are diuided into Fiefz and arrierfiefz: whereof the former are ſuch as are immediatly graunted by the king, the ſecōd ſuch as the kings feudataries doe againe graunt to others. Gregorii Syntagm. lib. 6. an. 5. nu. 3. But the inconſtancy of mans eſtate, and the mutability of time, hath brought to paſſe, that thoſe great men, or their poſterity, haue alienated theſe Manſions and lands ſo giuen

them by their Prince, and others that had none, haue by ther welth purchaſed many of them: and againe that many for capitall offences haue forfeited them to the king, and that thereby they ſtill remaine in the crowne, or are beſtowed againe vpon others: ſo that at theſe daies many be in the hands of mean men, ſuch as by their ſkill in lawe or phiſicke, by merchaundize, grazing, or ſuch other good husbandry, haue gathered welth, and inabled themſelues to purchaſe them of thoſe, that by diſcent receiued thē from their anceſtors in greater aboundance, then wit to keepe them. But who ſo euer poſſeſſeth theſe maners, the liberty belonging vnto them is reall and prediall; and therefore remaineth ſtill, though the owners be changed. In theſe daies a maner rather ſignifieth the Iuriſdiction and royalty incorporeal, then the land or ſite. For a man may haue a maner in groſſe (as the law termeth it) that is, the right and intereſt of a court Baron, with the perquiſites thereunto belonging: and another or others haue euery foote of the land thereunto belonging. Kitchin. fol. 4. Brooke hoc titulo per totum. Bracton, lab: 4. ca. 31. nu. 2. diuideth manerium, in capitale & non capitale. See Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 5. ca. 28. nu. pri. See Fee: The new expoſitor of law terms ſaith, that Manour is a thing compounded of diuers things, as of a houſe, land earable, paſture, meadow, wood, rent, advouzen, court Baron, and ſuch like. And this ought to be by long continuance of time, to the contrary whereof mans memory cannot diſcerne, &c.
               
                  Manſion (Manſio) as Eracton defineth it, lib. 5. cap. 28. nu. pri. is a dwelling, conſiſting of one or more houſes without any neighbour. And yet he graunteth forthwith, that Manſio Manſioni poſſit eſſe vicinata. I finde it moſt commonly vſed for the lords cheife dwelling houſe within his fee, whether it haue neighbours adioyning or not, otherwiſe called the capitall meſuage. Bracton. li. 2. c. 26. or the cheife maner place. Manſio amongſt the auncient Romans, was a place appointed for the lodging of the Prince or ſouldiers in their iourney, furniſhed with conuenient entertainement by the neighbours adioyning. And in this ſence we reade primam manſionem, for the firſt nights lodging, and ſo in order. It is probable that this word (Manſion) doth in ſome conſtruction ſignifie ſo much land, as Beda calleth familiam in his eccleſiaſticall hiſtory. For Maſter Lambert in his explica. of Saxon words, ver. Hida

terrae, ſaith, that that which he calleth familiam, others ſithence call Manentem vel Manſam. (Manſus and Manſum) I reade of in the Feudiſts, which as Hotoman ſaith, in verbis feudalibus, eſt neque domus, neque area, neque hortus, ſed ager certi modi ac menſurae. And againe, in Commentarus feudorum, lib. p. tit. 4. verſ. de Manſo. Agri deſerti & inculti certa menſura dabantur cultoribus quaſi in emphyteuſin, vt culti & meliorati, feudi iure a vaſallis poſſiderentur. In contractu autem vaſalls nonnunquam incrementum. i. meliorationem omnem ſibi recipiebant, ſiue per culturam, ſiue per inaedificationem ea melioratio fieret, &c. And Caſſanaeus de conſuet. Burg. pag. 1195. defineth it thus: Manſus eſt, quantum qu is cum vno pari boum laborare poſſit. prouing it out of Bartolus, in li. ſi ita. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . de auro & argen. legato: in fine legis. Reade M. Skene de verbo. ſign. verbo Manſus. I reade the latine word (Manſia) in the ſame ſignification, as namely in the charter graunted by King Kanulphus to Ruchin the abbot of Abingdon, which Sir Edward Cooke ſetteth downe in his booke de iure Regis eccleſiaſtico.
               
               
                  Manſlaughter (Homicidium) is the vnlawfull killing of a man, without prepenſed malice: as when two, that formerly meant no harme one to the other, meet togither, and vpon ſome ſodaine occaſion falling out, the one killeth the other. Weſt par. 2. ſymb. titulo Inditements. ſect. 44. It differeth from murder, becauſe it is not done with foregoing malice: & from chauncemedly, becauſe it hath a preſēt intēt to kill. And this is felony, but admitteth clergie for the firſt time. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 9. and Britton ca. 9. It is confounded with murder in the ſtatute, anno 28. Ed. 3. ca. 11.
               
                  Mantyle (Mantile) commeth of the French (Manteau) and ſignifieth with vs a long roabe, anno 24. Hen. 8. cap. 13.
               
                  Manucaptio, is a writ that lyeth for a man, who taken for ſupition of felony, and offering ſufficient Bayle for his appearance, cannot be admitted thereunto by the Shyreeue, or other hauing power to let to mainpriſe. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 249. See Mainpriſe. How diuerſly it is vſed, ſee the Regiſter originall, in the table.
               
                  Manuel (Manualis) is a thing whereof preſent profit may be made. Stawnf. praerogat. fol. 54. And a thing not manuell is that, whereof no preſent profit may be made, but hereafter, when it falleth, ibid.
               
               
                  Manumiſſion (Manumiſſio) is a freeing of a villein or ſlaue out of his bondage. The forme of

this in the time of the Conquerour, M. Lamb. in his 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . fol. 126. ſetteth downe in theſe words: Si quis velit ſeruum ſuum liberum facere, tradat eum vice-comiti, per manum dexteram, in pleno comitatu, & quietum illum clamare debet à iugo ſeruitutis ſuae per manumiſſionem: & oſtendat ei liberas portas, & vias, & tradat illi libera arma, ſcilicet lanceam & gladium: & deinde liber homo efficitur. Some alſo were wont to be manumitted by charter of manumiſſion. vide Brooke, titulo Villenage. fol. 305. The newe expoſitour of lawe Termes maketh two kinds of manumiſſion: one expreſſed, an another implied. Manumiſſiō expreſſed is, when the Lord maketh a deede to his villein to infranchiſe him by this worde (Manumittere) The maner of manumitting in old time was thus: The Lord in preſēce of his neighbours tooke the bondman by the head, ſaying: I will that this man be free, and therewith ſhoued him forward out of his hands. Manumiſſion implied, is, when the Lord maketh an obligation for paiment of mony to him at a certaine day, or ſieweth him, where he might enter without ſuite, or granteth him an annuitie, or leaſeth land vnto him by deede, for yeeres, or for life, and ſuch like.
               
                  Manutenentia, is the writ vſed in caſe of maintenance, Regiſter originall, fol. 182. & 189. See Maintenance.
               
               
                  Marches (Marchia) be the bounds and limits betweene vs and Wales, or betweene vs and Scotland. anno. 24. Henry 8. cap. 9. Camd. pag. 453. & 606. and the marches of Scotlād are deuided into weſt and midle marches anno 4. H. 5. ca. 7. & anno 22. Ed. 4. cap. 8. It ſeemeth to bee borowed from the German (March. i. limes) Camd. Britan. pag. 27. or it may be from the French (Marque. i. ſignum) being the notorious diſtinction of two diuers countries or territories. It is vſed in the ſtatute anno 24. Hen. 8. ca. 12. generally for the precincts of the Kings dominions.
               
                  Marchers, be the noble men dwelling on the Marches of Wales or Scotland: who in times paſt (as M. Camden ſaith, pag. 453.) had their priuate lawes, much like as if they had beene Kings, which now be worne out. Of theſe Marchers you may reade, anno 2. H. 4. cap. 18. & anno 26. Hen. 8. cap. 6. & anno 1. Ed. 6. cap. 10. where they are called Lord Marchers. See anno 27. Hen. 8. cap. 26. howe theſe were extinguiſhed.
               
                  Mareſhall (Mariſcallus) is a French word, ſignifying as much

as Tribunus Celerum, or Tribunus militum with the auncient Romanes, or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   with the Grecians, or 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Tiraquel. de Nobilitate, ca. 8. p. 42. nu. 17. The french word may ſeeme alſo (among many other that they haue, to proceede from the German Marſchalk. i. equitum magiſter. which Hotoman in verbis feudalibus, verbo Marſchalkus, deriueth from the old word (March) ſignifiing a houſe, with whome agreeth Lupanus, de Magiſtratibus Eranciae, lib. pri. ca. Marcſhallus. Others make it of theſe two Saxon words. (Mar. i. equus and ſcalch. i. praefectus) or as M. Verſtegan ſaith, from (Mare) the generall appellation of all horſes, as hors) is now in Engliſhe, and (Scalc) which, in the auncient language of the Netherlanders, he affirmeth to ſignifie a kind of ſeruant, as Scalco, doth at this day among the Italians, being originally a Dutch word. with vs there be diuers officers of this name: but one moſt noble of all the reſt, who is called Lord or Earle Marſhall of England, of whome mention is made in diuers ſtatutes, as anno. 1. H. 4. ca. 7. & 14. & anno. 13. Rich. 2. ca. 2. His office conſiſteth eſpecially in maters of warre and armes, as well with vs as in other countries. whereof you may reade in Lupanus vbi ſupra. and Tilius. li. 2. ca. de Coneſtabili, Mariſcallo. &c. But he that will knowe the office of our Lord Marſhall, had neede beſide the fewe ſtatutes which concerne him, to read his commiſſion, and alſo to haue acces to the Heradls, who out of their antiquities are able to diſcouer much, that by preſcription belongeth vnto this office. The next to this is the Marſhal of the Kings houſe, whoſe eſpeciall authoritie is, according to Britton and M. Gwin in the preface to his reading, in the Kings place to heare and determine all plees of the Crowne, and to puniſh faults committed within the verge, & to heare and determine ſuites betweene thoſe of the kings houſhold, and others within the verge. Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 102. of him you may reade Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 241. B. and anno. 18. Ed. 3. ſtatut. 2. ca. 7. & anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. c. 6. & an. 2. H. 4. c. 23. & a. 15. H. 6. c. 1. Fleta ſaith, that the office of the Marſhall of the kings houſe belongeth to the Earle of Northf. in fee, and that he may appoint (with the Kings conſent) a Knight vnder him to execute the office. which office he alſo deſcribeth to be eſpecially to execute the iudgements & decrees of the Steward, & to haue the keeping of the priſoners. li. 2. cap. 4. and read farder of his office in the 5. chapter

of the ſaid booke, which is to diſpoſe of the Lodging in the Kings houſhold vnder the Chamberlaine, and to cleere the Verge of ſtrumpets, &c. anno 5. Hen. 3. ſtatut. 5. Then be there other inferiour officers of this name: as Marſhall of the Iuſtices in Eyre, anno 3. Ed. 1. ca. 19. Marſhall of the Kings bench, anno 5. Ed. 3. ca. 8. and this is he which hath the cuſtodie of the priſon, called the Kings bench in Southwarke. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 251. I. And theſe inferiour Marſhalls be either ad placitum, or in fee, Kitchin. fol. 143. I finde alſo in Fleta li. 2. ca. 15. mention of a Marſhall of the Kings hall, whoſe office is, when the tables be prepared and clothes laide, to call out both thoſe of the houſhold and ſtraungers, according to their worth, and decently to place them, to reiect vnworthy perſons, to knowe the number of the hall, and to teſtifie it at the next accompt, to ſee dogs kept out, to ſaue the almes from filching, to ſee filence kept, and euery man competently ſerued with meate and drinke, and when the courte remoueth, to appointe euery one of the houſhold his lodging. There is alſo a Marſhall of the eſche quer, anno. 51. H. 3. ſta. 5. to whome the courte committeth the cuſtody of the kings debters during the terme time, to the end they may be farder impriſoned, if they cleere not their debts. He alſo aſſigneth Shyreeues, eſcheators, cuſtomers, and collectors, their auditours before whome they ſhall accompt. He hath all inquiſitions taken before eſcheators virtute officii, deliuered vnto him, to be deliuered by him to the treaſurers Remembrancer.
               
                  Mareſhalſee (Mareſcaltia) is the Court of the Marſhall or (word for word) the ſeate of the Marſhall, of whome ſee Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 102. It is alſo vſed for the priſon in Southwarke, the reaſon whereof may be, becauſe the Marſhall of the kings houſe was wont perhaps to ſit there in iudgment. See the ſtatute anno 9. R. 2. cap. 5. & anno 2. Hen. 4. ca. 23.
               
                  Martiall lawe, is the law that dependeth vpon the voice of the king, or the kings leiuetenent in warres. For how be it, the king for the indifferent and equall temper of lawes to all his ſubiects, doe not in time of peace make any lawes but by the conſent of the three eſtates in Parlament: yet in warres by reaſon of great daungers riſing of ſmall occaſions, he vſeth abſolute power: in ſo much as his word goeth for law. And this is called Martiall law. Smith de repub: Angli: li. 2. c. 3. See Law of armes.
               
               
                  
                  Mariage (Maritagium) ſignifieth not onely the coupling together of man and wife, but alſo the intereſt of beſtowing a ward or a widow in mariage. Magna charta, ca: 6. anno 9. He. 3. and Bracton lib. 2. ca. 3. and alſo it ſignifieth land giuen in mariage, Bracton li. 2. ca. 34. & 39. And in this ſignification the ſame authour ſaith, that Maritagium eſt aut liberum aut ſeruitio obligatum. li. 2. ca. 7. nu. 3. & 4. Liberum maritagium dicitur, vbi donator vult, quòd terra ſic data, quieta ſit & libera ab omni ſeculari ſeruitio, quod ad Dominum feudi poſſit pertinere; et ita quòd ille, cui ſic data fuerit, nullum omninò inde faciat ſeruitium vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad tertium haeredem, & vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad quartum gradum: ita quòd tertius heres ſit incluſivus. See the reſt. See alſo Skene de verbo. ſignificatione, verbo Maritagium, who is worth the reading.
               
                  Maritagio amiſſo per defaltam, is a writ for the tenent in frank mariage, to recouer lands, &c. whereof he is deforced by another. Regiſt. fol. 171.
               
                  Maritagio forisfacto, is a writ. See Forisfactura Maritagii.
               
               
                  Marke, (merca) commeth of the Saxon (Mearc) which ſignifieth a peece of mony worth thirty ſiluer pence. Lamb. explicat. of Saxon words. verbo, Mancuſa: what it now ſignifieth in our coyne euery man knoweth. But in auncient times I find a merke of gold, which was the quantitie of eight ounces. Stowes annals. pag. 32. and againe, pag. 691. 12. merkes of golde Troy weight, the which was 200. pounds of Engliſh mony, after which rate euery merke valued 16. pounds, 13. ſhillings, 4. pence. M. Skene de verbor. ſignific. verbo, Merke. ſaith, that in tractatu de ponderibus & menſuris, a Mercke ſignifieth an ounce weight, or halfe a pound, wherof the dramme is the eighth part, like as the ounce is the eighth part of a marcke: citing Caſſanaeus de conſuet. Burgund. Rub. prim. §. 7. verbo. Solz Turnoys. hiis verbis. Solidus (inquit) in iure capitur pro auro, quorum 72. faciunt libram auri, & duodecim vncia faciunt libram, & octo vnciae mercā.
               
               
                  Market (mercatus) commeth of the French (marche. i. emporium, forum nundinarium) it ſignifieth with vs, the ſame thing, and alſo the liberty or priuiledge whereby a towne is enabled to keepe a market. Old nat. br. fol. 149. So doth Bracton vſe it, lib. 2. cap. 24. num. 6. & lib. 4. cap. 46. where he ſheweth, that one market ought to bee diſtant from another ſex lencas & dimidiam, & tertiam partem dimidiae. The reaſon thereof both he and Fleta giueth in theſe wordes: Quia omnes rationabiles dietae conſtant

ex 20. milliaribus. Diuidatur ergo dieta in tres partes: prima autē matutina detur euntibus verſus mercatum: ſecunda detur ad emendum & vendendum: quae quidem ſufficere debet omnibus, niſi ſint forte mercatores ſtatarii qui merces depoſuerint & expoſuerint venales, quibus neceſſaria erit prolixior mora in mercatu: & tertia pars relinquitur redeuntibus de mercatu ad propria. Et quaequidem omnia neceſſe erit facere de die, non de nocte, propter infidias & incurſum latronum, vt omnia ſint in tuto, &c. lib. 4. cap. 28. §. Item refert.
               
               
                  Marle, is a kind of ſtone or 
                     •
                  halke, which men in diuers countries of this Realme, caſt vpon their land to make it the more fertile. It is ſome where called Malin. anno 17. Edvard. 4. cap. 4.
               
                  Marque, ſeemeth to bee a French word ſignifying notam, vel ſignum, or elſe to come from the German (march. i. limes) it ſignifieth in the aunciēt ſtatutes of our land, as much as repriſals, as anno 4. H. 5. cap. 7. Marques and Repriſals are vſed as ſynonyma. And leters of Marque are found in the ſame ſignification in the ſame chapter. The reaſon may be, becauſe 
                     ••
                  e griefes wherevpon theſe le
                  
                     ••
                  rs are ſought and graunted, are commonly giuen about the 
                     •
                  ounds and limits of euery contrey: or at leaſt the remedie for the ſame is likeſt there to bee had by ſome ſodaine inrode, & happing of ſuch recompence of the iniurie receiued, as may moſt conueniently be lighted vpon. See Repriſals. See Marches.
               
               
                  Marquis (Marchio) by the opinion of Hotom. verbo Marchio, in verbis feudalibus, commeth of the German March. i. limes, ſignifiing originally as much as (Cuſtos limitis) or (Comes & praefectus limitis) of theſe Zaſius thus writeth: de Marchione nihil compertū eſt, niſi quod Gothicum vocabulum putamus. And afterward thus: Huiuſmodi Marchionum (ſiue vt nos appellamus) Margraphiorum origo in limitaneos, praepoſitos, ſiue duces referenda: Margraphis dicti quòd limitibus, quos vulgò marken appellamus, graphii, id eſt praepoſiti fuerunt, &c. For in thoſe teritories, that haue naturally noe bounds of great ſtrength or defence, there is neede of wiſe and ſtout men toward their borders, for the keeping out of neighbour enemies. But here in England though we haue a Lord warden of the marches northward, and a warden of the cinque ports toward the ſouth eaſt, and were wont to haue Lo. Marchers between vs and Wales, that ſerued this turne, yet thoſe which we call Marquiſes, are lords of more dignity, without any ſuch

charge: and are in honour and accompt next vnto Dukes. At this day I know but one in England, and that is the Marquis of Wincheſter, being of that noble familie of the Powlets. See Caſſanaeus de conſuetud. Burg. pag. 15.
               
                  Marrow, was a lawyer of great accompt, that liued in Henry the ſeuenth his daies, whoſe learned readings are extant, but not in print. Lamb. Eiren. li. pri. cap. 1.
               
                  Marterns, ſee Furre.
               
               
                  Maſter of the Rols (Magiſter rotulorum) is an Aſſiſtāt vnto the Lord Chauncelour of England in the high court of Chauncery, and in his abſence heareth cauſes there, and giueth orders. Crompt. Iuriſd. fol. 41. His title in his patent (as I haue heard) is Clericus paruae bagae, cuſtos rotulorum & domus conuerſorum. This domus conuerſorum, is the place where the rols are kept, ſo called becauſe the Iewes in auncient times, as they were any of them brought to chriſtianity, were beſtowed in that houſe ſeparatly from the reſt of their nation. But his office ſeemeth originally to haue ſprong, from the ſafe keeping of the Roules or records of inditements paſſed in the kings courts, and many other things. He is called clerke of the rols, anno 12. R. 2. ca. 2. and in Forteſcue his booke, cap. 24. and no where maſter of the rols, vntil anno 11. Hen. 7. cap. 20. and yet anno 11. einſdem, cap. 25. he is alſo called clerk. In which reſpect, Sir Thomas Smith, li. 2. ca. 10. de Repnb. Angl. well ſaith that he might not vnfitly be called (Custos Archiuorum). He ſeemeth to haue the beſtowing of the offices of the ſixe clerks. anno 14. & 15. Hen. 8. cap. 8.
               
                  Maſter of the mint, anno 2. Hen. 6. cap. 14. he is now called the Warden of the mint, whoſe office, ſee in Mint.
               
               
                  Master of the court of Wards and Liueries, is the cheife and principall officer of the court of wards and liueries, named and aſſigned by the king, to whoſe cuſtodie the ſeale of the court is committed. He at the entring vpon his office, taketh an oath before the Lord Chauncelour of England, well and truly to ſerue the King in his office, to miniſter equal iuſtice to rich & poore, to the beſt of his cunning, witte, and power, diligently to procure all things, which may honeſtly and iuſtly be to the kings aduā
                  tage and profit, and to the augmentation of the rights and prerogatiue of the crowne, truly to vſe the kings ſeale appointed to his office, to end eauour to the vttermoſt of his power, to ſee th
                     〈…〉
                   king iuſtly aunſwered of all ſuc
                     〈…〉
                   profits, rents, reuenewes, a
                     〈…〉
                  
                  iſſues

as ſhall yearely riſe, grow, or be due to the king in his office from time to time, to deliuer with ſpeed ſuch as haue to do before him, not to take or receiue of any perſon any gift or reward in any caſe or mater depending before him, or wherein the king ſhall be party, whereby any preiudice, loſſe, hinderance, or diſheriſon ſhall be or grow to the king, a. 33. H. 8. c. 33. Maſter of the horſe, is he that hath the rule and charge of the kings ſtable, being an office of high accompt, and alwaies beſtowed vpon ſome Noble man both valiant and wiſe. This Officer vnder the Emperours of Rome, was called (comes ſacri ſtabuli.) The Maſter of the horſe is mentioned. anno 39. Eliz. cap. 7. & anno prim. Ed. 6. cap. 5.
               
                  Maſter of the poſts, is an Officer of the Kings court, that hath the appointing, placing, and diſplacing of all ſuch through England, as prouide poſt horſe for the ſpeedie paſſing of the kings meſſages and other buſineſſe, in the through-fayre townes where they dwell: as alſo to ſee that they keepe a certaine number of conuenient horſes of their owne, and when occaſion is, that they prouide others, wherewith to furniſh ſuch, as haue warrant from him to take poſt horſes, either from or to the ſeas, or other borders, or places within the Realme. He likewiſe hath the care to pay them their wages, and make their allowance accordingly, as he ſhall thinke meete. This officer is mentioned, anno 2. Ed. 6. cap. 3.
               
                  Maſter of the armorie, is he that hath the care and ouerſight of his Maieſties armour for his perſon or horſes, or any other prouiſion or ſtore thereof in any ſtanding Armories: with command, and placing or diſplacing of all inferiour Officers thereunto appertaining. Mention is made of him. anno 39. Eliz. cap. 7.
               
                  Maſter of the Iewel houſe, is an Officer in the Kings houſhould, of great credit, beeing allowed bouge of court, that is, diet for himſelfe and the inferiour Officers. viz. Clerks of the Iewell houſe, and a ſpeciall lodging or chamber in court, hauing charge of all plate of gold, of ſiluer double or parcell guilt, vſed or occupied for the Kings or Queenes board, or to any Officer of accompt attendant in court, and of all plate remaining in the Tower of London, of cheynes and looſe Iewels not fixed to any garment. Mention is made of this Officer anno 39. Eliz. cap. 7.
               
                  Maſter of the Kings houſhould,, (magiſter hoſpitii) is in his iuſt title called grand Maſter of the

Kings houſhould, and beareth the ſame office that he did, that was wont to be called Lord Steward of the kings moſt honorable houſhould. anno 32. H. 8. ca. 39. Whereby it appeareth, that the name of this Officer was then chaunged, and Charles Duke of Suffolke, Preſident of the Kings Councell, then enioying that office, was ſo to be called euer after, ſo long as he ſhould poffeſſe that office.
               
                  Maſter of the Ordinance. anno 39. El. cap. 7. is a great Officer, to whoſe care all the Kings Ordinance and Artillerie is committed, being ſome great man of the Realme, and expert in marſhall affaires.
               
                  Maſter of the Chauncery (Magiſter Cancellariae) is an aſſiſtant in Chauncerie to the Lord Chaunceler or Lord Keeper of the broad ſeale in maters of iudgement. Of theſe there be ſome ordinarie, and ſome extraordinarie: of ordinarie there be twelue in number, whereof ſome fit in court euery day thorough each Terme, and haue committed vnto them (at the Lord Chauncelers diſcretion) the interlocutorie report, and ſometimes the finall determination of cauſes there depending.
               
                  Maſter of the Kings muſters, is a martiall officer in all royall armies moſt neceſſarie, as well for the maintaining of the forces complete, well armed and treined, as alſo for preuention of ſuch fraudes, as otherwiſe may exceedingly waſte the Princes treaſure, and extreamly weaken the forces. He hath the ouerſight of all the captaines and bands, and ought to haue at the beginning deliuered vnto him by the Lord Generall, perfect liſts and rolles of all the forces both horſe and foot, Officers, &c. with the rates of their allowances ſigned by the Lord Generall, for his direction and diſcharge, in ſignifying warrants for their full pay. This Officer is mentioned in the ſtatue, anno 2. Ed. 6. cap. 2. and Muſter maſter generall, anno 35. Eliz. cap. 4. who ſo deſireth to reade more of him let him haue recourſe to Maſter Digs his Stratioticos.
               
               
                  Maſter of the Wardrobe (magſter garderobae) is a great and principall officer in Court, hauing his habitation and dwelling houſe belonging to that office, called the Wardrobe neere Puddle-wharfe in London. He hath the charge and cuſtodie of all former Kings and Queenes auncient robes, remaining in the Tower of London, and all hangings of Arras, Tapeſtrie, or the like, for his Maieſties houſes,

with the bedding remaining in ſtanding wardrobes, as Hampton court, Richmond, &c. He hath alſo the charging and deliuering out of all either Veluet or Scarlet allowed for liueries, to any of his Maieſties ſeruants of the priuie chamber, or others. Mention is made of this officer. anno. 39. Eliz. ca. 7.
               
                  Mater in deede, and mater of record, are ſaid to differ. old. nat. br. fol. 19. where mater in deede, ſeemeth to be nothing elſe, but a truth to be prooued, though not by any Record: and mater of Record, is that which may be proued by ſome Record. For example, if a man be ſiewed to an exigent, during the time he was in the kings warres, this is mater in deede, and not mater of record. And therefore (ſaith the booke) he that will alledge this for himſelfe, muſt come, before the Scire facias for execution be awarded againſt him. For after that, nothing will ſerue but mater of Record; that is, ſome errour in the proceſſe appearing vpon the Record. Kitchin fol. 216. maketh alſo a difference betweene mater of Record, and a ſpecialitie, and nude mater; where he faith, that nude mater is not of ſo high nature, as either a mater of Record or a ſpeciality, otherwiſe there called mater in deede; which maketh mee to thinke, that nude mater is a naked allegation of a thing done, to be proued only by witneſſes, and not either by Record, or other ſpeciality in writing vnder ſeale.
               
                  Mauger, is ſhuffied vp of two French words (Mal) and (Gre) id eſt, animo iniquo) it fignifieth with vs as much as in deſpight, or in deſpight of ones teeth. as the wife mauger the huſbande, Litleton fol. 124. that is, whether the huſbund will or not.
               
                  Meane (Medius) ſignifieth the middle betweene two extreames, and that eitherin time or dignitie. Example of the firſt: His action was meane betwixt the diſſeiſin made to him and his recouerie: that is in the interim. Of the ſecond there is Lord Meane and Tenent. See Meſn.
               
               
                  Meaſe (Meſuagium) ſeemeth to come of the French (Maiſon) or rather (Meix) which word I finde in Caſſanaeus de conſuetu. Burgund. pag. 1195. and interpreted by him Manſus: what Manſus is, ſee Manſiō. It ſignifieth a houſe. Kitchin fol. 239. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 2. C. See Meſuage.
               
               
                  Medlefe. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 193. is that which Bracton calleth (medletum) It. 3. tract. 2. ca. 35. It ſeemeth to ſignifie quarels, ſcuffling, or brawling, & to be deriued from the French

                  (meſler). i. miſcere, turbare
               
               
                  Meere (Merus) though an Adiectiue, yet is it vſed for a ſubſtantine, ſignifiing meere tight. Owld nat. br. fol. 2. in theſe words. And knowe yee, that this writte hath but two iſſues: that is to ſay, ioyning the miſe vpon the meere: And that is, to put himſelfe in the great aſſiſe of our Souerainge Lord the King, or to ioyne battell. See Miſe.
               
               
                  Meſurement. See Admeſurement.
               
               
                  Medietas linguae, ſignifieth an enqueſt empaneled vpon any cauſe, wereof the one halfe conſiſteth of Denizens, the other of ſtraungers. It is called in Engliſh the halfe tongue, and is vſed in plees, wherein the one party is a ſtraunger, the other a denizen. See the ſtatute, anno 28. Ed. 3. ca. 13. &. anno, 27. eiuſdem, ſtatu: 2. ca. 8. commonly called the ſtatute of the Staple. & anno. 8. H. 6. ca. 29. &. anno. 2. He. 5. ca. 3. &. anno. 11. He. 7. ca. 21. &. anno. 1. &. 2. Phi. &. Mar. ca. 8. And before the firſt of theſe ſtatutes was made, this was wonte to be obteined of the King by graunt made to any company of ſtraungers, as Lombards, Almaines, &c. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. ca. 7.
               
                  Medio acquietando, is a writ iudiciall, to diſtraine a lord for the acquiting of a meane Lord from a rent, which he formerly acknowledgeth in court not to belong vnto him. Regiſter iudiciall, fol. 29. b.
               
               
                  Melius inquirendo, is a writ that lyeth for a ſecond inquiry, as what lands and tenements a man dyed ſeiſed of, where partiall dealing is ſuſpected vpon the writ, Diem clauſit extremum. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 255.
               
                  Merchenlage, was one of the three ſorts of lawes, out of which the Conquerour framed lawes vnto vs, mingled with thoſe of Normandy. Camd. Britan. pag. 94. who alſo, pag. 103. ſheweth that in the yeare of our lord 1016. this land was diuided into three parts, whereof the weſt Saxons had one, gouerning it by the lawes called Weſt Saxon lawes, and that conteined theſe nine ſhyres, Kent, Southſex, South. rey, Barkeſhire, Hamſhire, Wilſhire. Somerſet, Dorſet and Deuonſhire. the ſecond by the Danes, which was gouerned by the lawes called Denelage, and that conteined theſe fifteene ſhires, Yorke, Darby, Notingham, Leyceſter, Lincolne, Northampton, Bedford, Buckingham, Hertford, Eſſex, Midleſex, Northf. Southf. Cambridge, Huntington. The third was poſſeſſed and gouerned by the Mercians, whoſe lawe was called Merchenlage. which were theſe

eight, Gloceſter, Worceſter, Hereford, Warwicke, Oxenford, Cheſter, Salop, and Stafford. See Lawe.
               
               
                  Mercy (Miſericordia) ſignifieth the arbitrement or diſcretion of the King or Lord, in puniſhing any offence, not directly cenſured by the law. As to be in the grieuous mercie of the king. anno 11. H. 6. cap. 6. is to be in hazard of a great penaltie. See Miſericordia.
               
               
                  Meaſondue, (domus Dei) commeth of the French (maiſon de dien) by which names diuers Hoſpitals are named. You find the word, anno 2. & 3. Philip. & Mar. cap. 23. in fine.
               
               
                  Meſe, See Meaſe.
               
               
                  Meſn (medius) ſeemeth to come from the French (mainſnè. i. minor natu) it ſignifieth in our common lawe, him that is lord of a maner, and thereby hath tenents holding of him, yet holding himſelfe of a ſuperiour Lord. And therefore it ſeemeth not abſurdly to be drawne from the French (mainſnè) becauſe the Lordſhip is created after the higher, whereof he holdeth. Meſn alſo ſignifieth a writ, which lyeth where there is Lord, meſn, and tenent, the tenent holding of the meſn by the ſame ſeruices, whereby the meſn holdeth of the Lord, and the tenent of the meſn is diſtrained by the ſuperiour lord, for that his ſeruice or rent, which is due to the meſn. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 135. See Meſnaltie.
               
               
                  Meſnaltie (medietas) commeth of Meſn, and ſignifieth nothing but the right of the meſn: as, the meſnaltie is extinct. old net. br. fol. 44. if the meſnalty deſcend of the tenent. Kitchin fol. 147. For farder vnderſtanding wherof, take theſe words out of the Cuſtumarie of Norm. Medietate tenentur feuda, quando aliqua perſona intervenit inter Dominum & tenentes. Et hoc modo tenent omnes poſt nati, mediante ante nato.
               
               
                  Meſſenger of the Exchequer, is an Officer there, of which ſorte there be foure in that court, that be Purſuyvants attending the lord Treaſurer, to cary his leters and precepts. See Purſuyvant.
               
               
                  Meſuage (meſuagium) is a dwelling houſe. Weſt part. 2. ſymbol. titulo. Fines. ſect. 26. But by the name of a meſuage may paſſe alſo a Curtilage, a garden, an orchard, a doue houſe, a ſhoppe, a mill, as parcell of an houſe, as he himſelfe confirmeth out of Bracton. lib. 5. cap. 28. ſect. prim. and Plowden fol. 199. 170. 171. and of himſelfe he auoucheth the like of a cotage, a toſt, a chamber, a celler, &c. yet may they be demaunded by their ſingle names. Meſuagium in Scotland, ſignifieth the principall dwelling

place or houſe within a Barony, which in our land is called a maner-houſe. Skene de verb. ſignificat. verbo, Meſuagium, where he citeth Vaientine Leigh, that in his booke of Suruey he affirmeth Meſuagium to be the tenement or land earable, and the dwelling houſe or place, or court hall thereof, to be called the ſite, in Latine called Situs.
               
               
                  Mile (milliare) is a quantitie of a thouſand paces, otherwiſe deſcribed to containe eight furlongs, and euery furlong to conteine forty lugs or poles, and euery lugger or pole to containe 16. foote and a halfe. anno 35. El. cap. 6.
               
                  Mildernix. anno 1. Iacob. cap. 24.
               
                  Mindbruch, is hurting of honour and worſhip. Saxon in his deſcription of Engl. cap. 71.
               
                  Miniuer. See Furre.
               
               
                  Minouery. anno 7. R. 2. cap. 4. ſeemeth to be compounded of two French words (main. i. manus and (ouvrer. i. operari) and to ſignifie ſome treſpaſſe or offence committed by a mans handie worke in the Foreſt, as an engyn to catch Deere. Britton vſeth the verbe (Meinoverer) for to occupie and manure land. cap. 40. and cap. 62. main-ovre, for handyworke. It is not vnlike, that our Engliſh (manure) is abbreuiated of the French.
               
                  Mint, commeth of the Germane word, (meunk. i. pecunia, moneta) and it ſignifieth with vs, the place where the kings coyne is formed, be it gold or ſiluer, which is at this preſent, and long hath bene, the Tower of London, though it appeare by diuers ſtories, and other anticuities, that in auncient times the mint hath bene alſo at C
                        •
                     leis, an. 21. R. 2 cap. 16. & anno 9 Hen. 5. ſtat. 5. cap. 5. The Officers belonging to the mint, haue not bene alwaies alike. At this preſent they ſeeme to be theſe: The Warden, who is the chiefe of the reſt, and is by his office to receiue the ſiluer of the Goldſmiths, and to pay them for it, and to ouerſee all the reſt belonging to this functiō. His fee is an hundred pounds per annum. The maſter-worker, who receiueth the ſiluer from the Warden, cauſeth it to be melted, and deliuereth it to the moniers, and taketh it from them againe, when it is made. His allowance is not any ſet fee, but according to the pound weight. The third, is the Controller, who is to ſee that the mony be made to the iuſt aſſiſe, to ouerſee the officers, and controll them, if the money be not as it ought to be: his fee is 100. merkes per annum. Then is the Maſter of the Aſſaye, who weigheth the ſiluer, and ſeeth

whether it be according to ſtandard: his yerely fee is alſo an hundred merkes. Then is the Auditour to take the accompts, and make them vp Auditor-like. Then is the Surueyor of the melting, who is to ſee the ſiluer caſt out, and not to be altered after it is deliuered to the melter: which is after the Aſſay-maſter hath made triall of it. Then is the Clerke of the Irons, who ſeeth that the Irons be cleane, and fit to worke with. Then the Grauer, who graueth the ſtampes for the monies. Then the Smyters of Irons, who after they be grauen, ſmiteth them vpon the money. Then the Melters, that melt the Bullion, before it come to the coyning. Thē the Blanchers, who do aneale, boyle, and cleanſe the money. The Porter, who keepeth the gate of the mint. The Prouoſt of the mint, who is to prouide for all the monyers, and to ouerſee them. Laſtly, the monyers, who are ſome to ſheere the money, ſome to forge it, ſome to beate it abroade, ſome to roūnd it, ſome to ſtampe or coyn it. Their wages is not by the day or yeare, but vncertaine, according to the waight of the money coyned by them. Other officers that haue benein former time, are ſaid nowe to bee out of vſe.
               
                  Miſauenture, or miſaduenture, commeth neere the French (meſaduenture. i. infortunium.) In our common law, it hath an eſpeciall ſignification for the killing of a man, partly by negligence, and partly by chaunce. As if one thinking no harme, diſſolutely throweth a ſtone, where with he killeth another: or ſhooteth an arrow, &c. For in this caſe he committeth not felony, but onely looſeth his goods, and hath pardon of courſe for his life. Stawn. pl. cor. li. 1. ca. 8. Britton ca. 7. diſtinguiſheth betweene Auenture and miſauenture. Auenture he maketh to be meere chaunce, as if a man being vpon or neere the water, be taken with ſome ſodaine ſicknes, and ſo fall in, and is drowned, or into the fire, and be burned to death. Miſauenture he maketh, where a man commeth to his death by ſome outward violence, as the fall of a tree, or of a gate, the running of a cartwheele, the ſtroke of a horſe, or ſuch like. So that miſauenture in Stawnfords opinione, is conſtrued ſomewhat more largely, then Britton vnderſtandeth it. Weſt parte. 2. Symbol. titulo Inditement, ſect. 48. maketh homicide caſuall, to be meerely caſuall or mixt. Homicide by meere chaunce, he defineth ſect. 49. to be, when a man is ſlaine by meere fortune, againſt the

minde of the killer; as if one hewing, the axe flieth of the haſte, and killeth a man. And this is all one with Brutons miſauenture. Homicide by chaunce mixed he defineth ſect. 50. to be, when the killers ignorance or negligence is ioyned with the chaunce: as if a man loppe trees by an high way ſide, by which many vſually trauell, and caſt downe a bowgh not giuing warning, &c. by which bowgh a man paſſing by is ſlaine.
               
                  Miſcontinuance, Kitchin fol. 231. See Diſcontinuance.
               
               
                  Miſe (miſa) is a French word ſignifing as much as (expenſum) in latine, and the latine word (Miſa) is ſo vſed in Kitchin fol. 144. and in Weſt. parte. 2. Simbol. titulo, Proceedings in chauncery, ſect. 21. F. It is vſed anno 2. & 3. Ed. 6. ca. 36. for a ſomme of mony paid by the Kings tenents in certaine counties in Wales according to their ſeuerall cuſtomes. In the ſtatute 33. H. 8. ca. 13. it is vſed plurally, for certaine cuſtumary gratuities ſent to to the Lord Marchers of Wales, by their tenents, at their firſt comming to their lands. And anno 4. & 5. Phil. & Mar. ca. 11. miſe is vſed in an action of right or property, for the point whereupon the parties proceede to triall, either by Aſſiſe or battaile: as iſſue is in an action perſonall; if the Miſe be vpon battell. Litleton fol. 102. and in the old nat. br. fol. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  . you haue theſe words. Know yea that this writ hath but two iſſues: that is to ſay, ioyning the miſe vpon the meere, and that is, to put himſelfe into the great Aſſiſe of our ſoueraigne Lord the King, or to ioyne battaile, See anno 37. Ed. 3. ca. 16. To ioyne the miſe vpon the meere, is as much to ſay, as to ioyne the miſe vpon the cleare right, and that in more plaine terms is nothing elſe, but to ioyne vpon this point, whether hath the more right, the tenent or demaundant. Litleton. li. 3. ca. 8. foll. 101. b. This word in ſome other place is vſed for a participle, ſignifiing as much as (cast or put vpon) in engliſh, which appeareth by S. Ed. Cokes report in Saffins caſe. vol. 6. fo. 124. a.
               
               
                  Miſericordia, is vſed in the common law, for an arbitrary puniſhment. Bracton li. 4. tracta. 5. ca. 6. in theſe words. Item ſiquis in miſericordiam inciderit pro diſſeiſina, non remanebit miſericordia exigenda, ſi ille qui 
                        •
                     miſerit, quaeſiuerit conuictionem. Kitchin. fol. 78. out of Glanuile ſaith thus, Eſt autem miſericordia, quia quis per iuramentum legalium hominum amerciatus eſt, ne aliquid de ſuo honorabili contenemento amitta
                        •
                     , which ſaying you haue in a maner word forword in Glanvile,

lib. 9. cap. 11. Fitzherbert ſaith, that it is called miſericordia, becauſe it ought to be very moderate, and rather leſſe then the offence, according to the tenure of the great charter. cap. 14. This ſaith Fitz. in his nat. br. in the writ De moderata miſericordia, fol. 75. A. I. Miſericordia is to be quit of Miſericors, that is, to be diſcharged of all maner of amercements, that a man may fall into within the Foreſt. Crompton. Iuriſd. fol. 196. See Amerciament. See Mercy, and Moderata miſericordia.
               
               
                  Miske
                        •
                     ning. i. chaunging of ſpeech in court. Saxon in the deſcription of Engl. cap. 11.
               
                  Miſnomer, is compounded of the French (mes) which in compoſition alwaies ſignifieth as much as (amiſſe) and (nomer. i. nominare.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, the vſing of one name for another, or miſ-tearming. Broke, titulo Miſnomer.
               
               
                  Miſpriſion (Miſpriſio) commeth of the French (Meſpris. i. faſtidiū, contemptus,) it ſignifieth in our common lawe, neglect, or negligence, or ouerſight: As for example, Miſpriſion of treaſon, or of felony, is a neglect or light accompt ſhewed of treaſon or felony commited, by not reuealing it, when we know it to be committed; Stawnf: pl. cor. li. 1. ca. 19. which read at large: or by letting any perſon committed for treaſon or felony, or ſuſpitiō of either, to goe before he be indited. Alſo Miſpriſion of Clerks, anno. 8. He. 6. ca. 15. is a neglect of Clerks in wrighting, or keeping records. Thirdly, anno. 14. Ed. 3. ca. 6. ſtatu. pri. by miſpriſion of Clerks no proceſſe ſhalbe admitted. Miſpriſion of treaſon, is the concealement, or not diſcloſing of knowne treaſon, for the which the offendours are to ſuffer impriſonment during the Kings pleaſure, looſe their goods, and the profits of their lands, during their liues. Crompton in his Iuſtice of peace. cap. Miſpriſion of felony, fol. 40. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditements, ſect. 63. in ſiue. Miſpriſion of felonie, ſeemeth only finable by the Iuſtices, before whome the party is attainted. Crompton. Iuſtice of peace, vbiſupra. The Iuſtices of the common place haue power to aſſeſſe fines and amerciaments vpon perſons offending for miſpriſions, contempts, or negligences, for not doing, or miſdoing any thing, in or concerning fines. Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 133. Iuſtices of Aſſiſe ſhall amend the defaults of Clerks miſpriſing of a ſillable or leter in writing. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 208. But it is to be noted, that other faults may

be accompted miſpriſions of treaſons or felonie, becauſe certaine later ſtatutes doe inflict that puniſhment vpon them, that of old hath beene inflicted vpon miſpriſions. whereof you haue an example. anno 14. El. ca. 3. of ſuch as coine foreine coines not current in this Realme, and of their procurers, aiders, and abetters. And ſee the newe expoſition of lawe Termes. Miſpriſion ſignifieth alſo a miſtaking, anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. pri. ca. 6.
               
                  Miſſes, See Miſe.
               
               
                  Miſuſer, is an abuſe of libertie or benefite: As, he ſhall make fine for his miſuſer. old. nat. br. fol. 149.
               
                  Miſtery (myſterium) commeth of the latine (Myſterium) or rather from the French (Meſtier. i. ars, artificium) an art or occupation.
               
                  Mittendo manuſcriptum pedis finis, is a writ Iudiciall, directed to the Treaſurer and Chamberlaines of the Exchequer, to ſearch and tranſmit the foote of a fine, acknowledged before Iuſtices in Eyre, into the common plees, &c. Regiſter. fol. 14. a. b.
               
               
                  Mittimus, ſignifieth a precept ſent by the King out of his Bench, to thoſe that haue the cuſtodie of fines levied, that they ſend them by a day aſſigned to his Bench, Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Eynes ſect. 138. F. & 154. B. and alſo to the Exchequer for certificate that Iudgment is giuen for the liuerie of lands to ſuch or ſuch a one, out of the Kings hands: whervpō he is diſmiſſed alſo out of the exchequer, a. 5. R. 2. c. 15. of diuers other vſes and applicatiōs of this (Mittimus) ſee the Regiſter originall in the table of the booke.
               
                  Moderata miſericordia, is a writ that lieth for him that is amerſed in court Baron or other, being not of Record, for any tranſgreſſion or offence beyond the qualitie of a fault. It is directed to the Lord of the court, or his Bayliffe, commanding them to take a moderate amerciament of the party: and is founded vpon Magna charta, ca. 14. Quòd nullus liber homo amercietur niſi ſecundùm qualitatem delicti, &c. The reſt touching this writ, ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 75. See Miſericordia.
               
               
                  Modo & forma, are words of art in a proceſſe, and namely in the anſwer of the defendant, wherby he denieth himſelfe to haue done the thing layde to his charge, modo & forma declarata. Kitch. fol. 232. It ſignifieth as much, as that clauſe in the ciuile lawe, Negat allegata, prout allegantur, eſſe vera.
               
               
                  Moitye, commeth of the French (Moitiè) id eſt, coaequa vel

mediapars) and ſignifieth the halfe of any thing, Litleton. fol. 125.
               
                  Monks clothes, anno 20. Hen. 6. cap. 10.
               
                  Moniers (Monetari
                        •
                     ) Regiſter. original. fol. 262. b. & anno 1. Ed. 6. ca. 15. be miniſters of the Mint, which make and coine the Kings mony. It appeareth by ſome antiquity which I haue ſeen that in auncient times our kings of England had mints in moſt of the countries of this Realme. And in the tractate of the Exchequer, writen by Ockham, I finde, that whereas the Shyreeues ordinarily were tyed to pay into the Exchequer the kings ſterling, for ſuch debts as they were to anſwer, they of Northumberland, and Cumberland, were at libertie to pay in any ſort of mony, ſo it were ſiluer. And the reaſon is there giuen, becauſe thoſe two ſhires, monetarios de antiqua inſtitutione non habent.
               
               
                  Monſtrance de droyt, is as much to ſay, as ſhewing of his right. It ſignifieth in our cōmmon lawe, a ſulte in Chancerie to be reſtored to lands or tenements, that indeede be mine in right, though they were by ſome office found to be in poſſeſſiō of another lately dead. See Stawnf. praerog. ca. 21. at large, and Brooke, titulo Petition. of this alſo reade Sir Edward Cookes reports, lib. 4. fol. 54. b. &c. the Wardens of the Sadlers caſe.
               
               
                  Monſtrauerunt, is a writ that lieth for tenents that hold freely by charter in auncient Demeane, being diſtreined for the payment of any tolle or impoſition, contrary to their libertie, which they do or ſhould enioy, which ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 14.
               
                  Morian, is all one in ſignificatiō with the french (Morion. i. caſſis) a head peece: which word the french man boroweth from the Italian (morione) anno. 4. & 5. Phi. &. Ma. ca. 2.
               
                  Morlinge, aliâs Mortling. ſeemeth to be that wolle which is taken from the ſkinne of a dead ſheep, whether dying of the rotte, or being killed. anno. 27. H. 6. ca. 2, This is writen Morki
                        •
                     . anno. 3. Iaco. ca. 8.
               
                  Mort d'aunceſter, See Aſſiſe.
               
               
                  Mortgage (Mortuum vadium, vel Morgagium) is compounded of 2. French words (Mort, id eſt, mors) and (Gage, id eſt, pignus, merces) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a pawne of land or tenement, or anything moueable, laid or bound for mony borowed, peremptorily to be the creditours for euer, if the mony be not paide at the day agreed vpon. And the creditour holding land or tenement vpon this bargaine, is in the meane

time called Tenēt in mortgage. Of this we reade in the grand Cuſtumarie of Normandie, cap. 113. in theſe wordes. Notandum inſuper eſt, quod vadiorum, quoddam viuum, quoddam mortuum nuncupatur. Mortuum autem dicitur vadium, quod ſe de nihilo redimit & acquietat, vt terra tradita in vadium pro centum ſolidis, quam cum obligator retrahere voluerit, acceptam pecuniam reſtituet in ſolidum. Vivum autem dicitur vadium, quod ex ſuis prouentibus acquir atur. Vt terra tradita in vadium pro centum ſolidis vſque ad tres annos, quae, elapſo tertio anno, reddenda eſt obligatori, vel tradita in vadium, quouſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      pecunia recepta de eiuſdem proventibus fuerit perſoluta. Glanvile likewiſe lib. 10. cap. 6. defineth it thus: mortuum vadium dicitur illud, cuius fructus vel reditus interim percepti in nullo ſe acquietant. Soe you ſee by both theſe bookes, that it is called a dead gage, becauſe whatſoeuer profit it yeeldeth, yet it redeemeth not it ſelfe by yelding ſuch profit, except the whole ſomme borowed be likewiſe paid at the day. See M. Skene. de verborum ſignif. eodem. He that layeth this pawne or gage, is called the Mortgager, & he that taketh it, the Mortgagee. Weſt. par. 2. ſymb. titulo Fines: ſect. 145. This if it containe exceſſiue vſurie, is prohibited. anno 37. H. 8. c. 9.
               
                  Mortmaine (Manus mortua) is compounded of two french words (Mort. i. mors) and Main. i. manus) It ſignifieth in the common lawe, an alienation of lands or tenements to any corporation, guilde, or fraternitie, and their ſucceſſours, as Biſhops, parſons, vicars, &c. which may not be done without licence of the king, and the Lord of the maner. The reaſon of the name proceedeth from this, as I conceiue it, becauſe the ſeruices and other profits due for ſuch lands, as eſcheates, &c. comme into a dead hand, or into ſuch a hand as holdeth them, and is not of power to deliuer them, or any thing for them backe againe. Magna charta, cap. 36. & anno 7. Ed. prim. commonly called (the ſtatute of Mortmaine) and anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtatut. 3. cap. 3. & anno 15. Richard. 2. cap. 5. Polydor. Virgill in the 17. booke of his Chronicles, maketh mention of this lawe, and giueth this reaſon of the name. Et legem hanc manum mortuam vocarunt, quòd res ſemel datae collegiis ſacerdotum, non vtique rurſus venderentur, velut mortuae, hoc eſt, vſui aliorum mortalium in perpetuum ademptae eſſent. Lex diligenter ſervatur, ſic vt nihil poſſeſſionum ordini ſacerdotali a quoquam detur, niſi Regio permiſſu. But the former ſtatutes be ſome thing abridged

by anno 39. Elizabeth cap. 5. by which the gift of lands, &c. to Hoſpitals is permitted without obteining of Mortmaine. Hotoman in his commentaries de verbis feudal. verbo Manus mortua, hath theſe words. Manus mortua locutio eſt, quae vſurpatur de ijs, quorum poſſeſſio, vt ita dicam, immortalis eſt: quia nunquam haeredem habere deſinunt. Quâ de causâ res nunquam ad priorem dominum revertitur. Nam manus pro poſſeſſione dicitur, mortua pro immortali. Sic municipium dicitur non mori, l. An vſusfructus 56. D. de vſufr. legat. quoniam hominibus aliis ſuccreſcentibus, idem populi corpus videtur. l. proponebatur. 76. D. de Iudiciis: Haec Hotemanus. & read the reſt. Amortizatio, eſt in manum mortuam tranſlatio Principis iuſſu. Petrus Belluga in speculo principum: fol. 76. Ius amortizationis eſt licentia capiendi ad manum mortuam. Idem, eodem. where you may reade a learned tractate both of the begicning and nature of this doctrine. To the ſame effect you may read Caſſa. de conſuetu. Burg. pag. 348. 387. 1183. 1185. 1201. 1225. 1285. 1218. 1274. M. Skene de verborum ſignif. ſaith that Dimittere terras ad manum mortuam, eſt idem atque dimittere ad multitudinem ſive vniuerſitatem, quae nunquam moritur: id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      per 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , ſeu a contrario ſenſu, becauſe communalties neuer die.
               
                  Mortuary (Mortuarium) is a gift leſt by a man at his death, to his pariſh church, for the recompence of his perſonall tithes and offerings not duly payed in his life time. And if a man haue three or more catell of any kind, the beſt being kept for the lord of the fee, as a Heriot, the ſecond was wont to be giuen to the perſō in right of the church, cap. ſtatutum. De conſuetu. in provincial. Touching this you haue two ſtatutes. one anno 13. Ed. pri. commonly called, Circumſpectè agatis: whereby it appeareth, that Mortuaries are ſuable in the court Chriſtian; the other anno 21. H. 8: cap. 6. whereby is ſet downe an order and rate in mony for mortuaries.
               
                  Mulier, as it is vſed in the common lawe, ſeemeth to be a word corrupted and vſed for (Melior) or rather the French (Melieur). It ſignifieth the lawfull iſſue preferred before an elder brother borne out of matrimony: anno H. 6. cap. 11. Smith de repub. Anglo. lib. 3. cap. 6. But by Glanuile lib. 7: ca. pri. the lawfull iſſue ſeemeth rather (Mulier) then (Melior) becauſe it is begotten (è Muliere) and not (ex Concubmâ). for he calleth ſuch iſſue filios mulierato
                        •
                     , oppoſing them to baſtards. And Britton cap. 70. hath frere mulier. i. the brother begotten of the wiſe,

oppoſit to frere baſtard. This ſeemeth to be vſed in Scotland alſo, for M. Skene de verborum ſignifi. verbo (Mulieratus filius) ſaith that Mulieratus filius, is a lawful ſon begotten of a lawfull wife. Quia mulieris appellatione vxor continetur. l. Mulieris 13. & ibid. gloſſa de verborum ſignificatine.
               
               
                  Mulmutius lawes, See Lawe.
               
               
                  Multure (molitura, vel multura) commeth neare the French, (moulture) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, the tolle that the miller taketh, for grinding of corne.
               
                  Murage, (muragium) is a tolle or tribute to be leuied for the building or repayring of publike edifices or walles. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 227. D. Murage ſeemeth alſo to be a libertie graunted by the King to a towne, for the gathering of money toward walling of the ſame. anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 30.
               
                  Murder (murdrum) is borowed of the French, (meurtrier. i. carnifex, homicida) or (meurtre. i. internecio, homicidium,) The new Expoſitour of the lawe termes draweth it from the Saxon word, (mordren) ſignifying the ſame thing. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a wilfull and felonious killing of any other vpon prepenſed malice. anno 52. H. 3. cap. 25. Weſt. part. 2. ſymbol. titulo, Inditements. ſect. 47. Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 15 num. prim. defineth it to be Homicidium, quod, nullo praeſente, nullo ſciente, nullo audiente, nullo vidente, clam perpetratur. And of the ſame minde is Britton. cap. 6. as alſo Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 30. yet Fleta ſaith alſo, that it was not murder, except it were proued the partie ſlaine were Engliſh, and no ſtraunger. But as Stawnf. ſaith, pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 2. the lawe in this point is altered, by the ſtatute, anno 14. Ed. 3. cap. 4. and murder is now otherwiſe to be defined. When a man vpon prepenſed malice killeth another, whether ſecrotly or openly, it maketh no mater: or be he an Engliſh man, or a forainer liuing vnder the Kings protection. And prepenſed malice is here either expreſſe or implyed: expreſſe, when it may be euidently proued, that there was formerly ſome euill will implyed: when one killeth another ſodainly, hauing nothing to defend himſelfe: as going ouer a ſtyle, or ſuch like. Crompton. Iuſtice of peace, in the chapter of Murder. fol. 19. b. See M. Skene de verbor. ſignif. verbo, Murdrum. This by the Latine Interpretour of the graund Cuſtumarie of Normandy, is called multrum. cap. 68. See Were.
               
               
                  Muſter, commeth of the French

                  (mouſtre. i. ſpecimen, ſpectamen, exemplum,) as, feire mouſtre generale de toute ſon armee, is as much as, luſtrare exercitum. The ſignification is plaine. Muſtred of record. anno 18. H. 6. cap. 19. ſeemeth to be dare nomen, or to bee inrolled in the number of the kings ſouldiours. Maſter of the kings muſters. anno. 2. Ed. 6. cap. 2. See Master.
               
               
                  Muſter maſter general. anno. 35. Eliz. ca. 4. See Maſter of the kings muſters.
               
            
            
               N
               
                  NAam (Namium) ſeemeth to come from the Dutch word (nemmen. i. capio) It ſignifieth in our common law, the taking or apprehending of another mans moueable goods: and is either lawfull or vnlawfull. Lawfull naam, is nothing els but a reaſonable diſtreſſe, proportionable to the valew of the thing diſtreined for. And this naam was aunciently called either vif or mort, quicke or dead, accordingly as it was made of dead or quicke chatels. Lawfull naam is ſo, either by the common law, or by a mans perticular fact: by the common law, as when one taketh another mans beaſts dammage ſeiſant in his grounds: by a mans particular fact, as by reaſon of ſome contract made, that for default of payment of an annuity agreed vpon, it ſhall be lawfull to diſtreine in ſuch or ſuch lands, &c. Horns mirrour of Iuſtices. lib. 2. ca. de vec de naam. where you may read of other circumſtances required in lawfull naam: viz: of what thing, or of what things firſt, in what maner, on what daies, and at what houres it ought to be made; with other points worth the reading, for the vnderſtanding of our law antiquities. See Withernam.
               
               
                  Naſſe. anno. 4. H. 7. ca. 21. ſeemeth to be the proper name of Orford Hauen. Whether it be ſo termed of the boates or water veſſels that lye there or not, let the reader iudge. But (naſſelle) is in French a kinde of ſmall boat.
               
                  Natiuo habendo, is a writ that lyeth to the Shyreeue for a Lord, whoſe vilein claimed as his inheritance, is runne from him, for the apprehending and reſtoring of him to his Lord againe. Regiſter orig. fol. 87. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 77. See Libertate probanda.
               
               
                  Naturalization. See Denizen.
               
               
                  Ne admittas, is a writ that lyeth for the plaintife in a Quare impedit, or him that hath an action of Darrein preſentment depending in the common Bench, and feareth that the Biſhop will admit the clerke of the defendant, during the ſuite betweene

them. And this writ muſt be ſued within ſixe monethes after the avoydance. Becauſe after the ſixe moneths the Biſhop may preſent by lapſe. Regiſter orig. fol. 31. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 37. where ſee the reſt.
               
                  Negatiue pregnant (Negatiua praegnans) is a negatiue implying alſo an affirmatiue. As is a man being impleaded, to haued one a thing vpon ſuch a day, or in ſuch a place, denyeth that he did it modo & forma declarata: which implyeth neuer the leſſe, that in ſome ſort he did it. Or if a man be ſaid to haue alienated land, &c. in fee, he denying that he hath alienated in fee, ſeemeth to confeſſe that he hath alienated in ſome other ſort. Dyer. fol. 17. nu. 95. See Brooke hoc titulo and Kitchin, fol. 232. And ſee the new expoſition of lawe terms. And read alſo in ſome Ciuilians, of Affirmatiua praegnans, and that is, quae habet in ſe incluſiuam negatiuam. Et hoc importare videntur dictiones (Solùm & tantùm, quae implicant negatiuam) Pacianus. De probationibus. lib. 1. ca. 31. nu. 16. fol. 93.
               
                  Neif (natiua) commeth of the French (Naif. i. naturalis, vel nativus) it ſignifieth in our common law, a bond woman, anno. 1 Ed. 6. ca. 3. the reaſon is, becauſe women become bond rather natiuitate, than by any other means.
               
                  Ne in iuſte vexes, is a writ that lyeth for a Tenent, which is diſtrained by his Lord, for other ſeruices than he ought to make, and is a prohibition to the Lord in it ſelfe, commaunding him not to diſtreine. The eſpecial vſe of it is, where the tenent hath formerly preiudiced himſelfe by performing more ſervices, or paying more rent without conſtraint, than he needed. For in this caſe, by reaſon of the Lords ſeiſin, he cannot avoide him in avowry: and therefore he is driuen to this writ as his next remedie, Regiſter orig. fol. 4. Fitzh. nat. br. fol 10.
               
                  Ne vicecomes colore mandat
                        •
                      Regis quenquam amoueat à poſſeſſione eccleſiae minus iuſtè. Regiſter orig. fol. 61.
               
                  Nient compriſe, is an exception taken to a petition as vniuſt, bicauſe, the thing deſired, is not conteined or comprehended in that act or deede, wherevpon the petition is grounded. For example, one deſireth of the court, to be put in poſſeſſion of a houſe formerly among other lands &c. adiudged vnto him. The adverſe party pleadeth, that his petitiō is not to be granted, becauſe thogh he had a iudgement for certaine lands and houſes: yet the houſe into the poſſeſſion wherof he deſireth to be put, is not conteined among thoſe for the which he

had iudgement. See the newe booke of Entries. titulo, Nient compriſe. This ſeemeth to be eſpecially to hinder execution.
               
                  Nifle, anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5.
               
                  Nihil. anno. 5. R. 2. ſtat. pri. cap. 3. is a word ſet vpon a debt illeuiable, by the foreine Appoſer in the Exchequer.
               
                  Nohil dicit, is a fayling to put in anſwer to the plee of the plaintiffe by the day aſſigned, which if a man do commit, iudgement paſſeth againſt him, as ſaying nothing why it ſhould not.
               
                  Niſi prius, is a writ iudiciall, which lyeth in caſe, where the Enqueſt is paneled, and returned before the Iuſtices of the Banke, the one partie or the other making petition, to haue this writ for the caſe of the contrie. It is directed to the Shyreeue, commaunding that hee cauſe the men impaneled to come before the Iuſtices in the ſame countie, for the determination of the cauſe there, except it be ſo difficult, that it need great deliberation. In which caſe it is ſent againe to the Bank, v. anno 14. Ed. 3. cap. 15. The forme of the writ, ſee in old. nat. br. fol. 159. and in the Regiſt. indic. fol. 7. & 28. & 75. See the new booke of Entries, verbo, Niſi prius. And it is called (Niſi prius) of theſe words compriſed in the ſame, whereby the Shyreeue is willed to bring to Weſtminſt. the men impaneled at a certaine day, or before the Iuſtices of the next Aſſiſes: niſi die Lunae apud talem locum prius venerint, &c. whereby it appeareth, that Iuſtices of Aſſiſes, and Iuſtices of (niſi prius) are differing. And Iuſtices of (niſi prius) muſt be one of them, before whom the cauſe is depending in the Bench, with ſome other good man of the Countie aſſociated vnto him. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 240. E. which he taketh from the Statute of Yorke. ann. 12. Ed. 2. See Weſtm. 2. cap. 30. anno 13. Ed. prim. & anno 27. eiuſdem. cap. 4. & anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 17. & anno 4. eiuſdem, cap. 11. & anno 14. eiuſdem cap. 16. & anno 7. Rich. 2. cap. 7. & anno 18. Eliz. cap. 12.
               
                  Nobility (nobilitas) in England compriſeth all dignities aboue a Knight. So that a Baron is the loweſt degree thereof. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. prim. cap. 17. Bartolus in his Tractate De Nobilitate, which he compiled vpon the lawe, Si vt proponis C. de dignitatibus, libro. 12. rehearſeth foure opinions de Nobilitate, but reiecteth them, and himſelfe defineth it thus: Nobilitas eſt qualitas illata per principatum tenentem, qua quis vltra honeſtos plebeios acceptus oſtenditur. But

this definition is too large for vs, except we will accompt Knights and Banerets inter plebem, which in mine opinion were too harſh. For Equites among the Romanes, were in a middle ranke inter Senatores & plebem.
               
               
                  Nocumento. See Nuſance.
               
               
                  Nomination (nominatio) is vſed by the Canoniſts, and common Lawyers, for a power that a man by vertue of a maner or otherwiſe, hath to appoint a Clerke to a patron of a benefice, by him to be preſented to the Ordinarie. New termes of the lawe.
               
                  Non-abilitie, is an exception taken againſt the plaintiffe or demandant vpon ſome cauſe, why he cannot commence any ſuite in lawe, as a Praemunire, Outlawrie, Villenage, Excommunication: or becauſe he is a ſtranger borne. The Ciuilians ſay, that ſuch a man hath not perſonam ſtandi in iudicio. See Broke, hoc titulo. ſee Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 35. A. fol. 65. D. fol. 77. C. The new Expoſitour of lawe termes reckoneth ſixe cauſes of Non-ability: as if he be an outlawe, a ſtranger borne, condemned in a premunire, profeſſed in religion, excommunicate, or a villein. Howbeit the ſecond cauſe holdeth onely in actions reall or mixt, and not in perſonall, except he be a ſtraunger and an enemie.
               
                  Non admittas. See Ne admittas.
               
               
                  Non-age, is all the time of a mans age vnder one and twenty yeares in ſome caſes, or fourteen in ſome, as mariage. See Broke, titulo, Age. See Age.
               
               
                  Non capiendo clericum. See Clerico non capiendo.
               
               
                  Non clayme, Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 144. ſeemeth to be an exception againſt a man that claimeth not within the time limited by lawe, as within the yeare and day, in caſe where a man ought to make continuall claime, or within fiue yeares after a fine leuyed. v. Coke. lib. 4. in prooemio. See Continuall clayme.
               
               
                  Non compos mentis, is of foure ſortes: firſt, he that is an idiot borne: next, he that by accident afterward wholy leeſeth his wits: thirdly, a lunaticke, that hath ſomtime his vnderſtanding, and ſometime not: laſtly, hee which by his own act depriueth himſelfe of his right mind for a time, as a drunkard, Coke lib. 4. fol. 124. b.
               
               
                  Non diſtringendo, is a writ, compriſing vnder it diuers particulars, according to diuers caſes: all which you may ſee in the Table of the Regiſter original, verbo, Non diſtringendo.
               
               
                  Non eſt culpabilis, is the generall

anſwer to an action of treſpaſſe, whereby the defendant doth abſolutely deny the fact imputed vnto him by the plaintiffe, whereas in other eſpeciall anſwers, the defendaunt graunteth the fact to be done, and alledgeth ſome reaſon in his defence, why he lawfully might doe it. And therefore whereas the Rhetoricians, compriſe all the ſubſtance of their diſcourſes, vnder three queſtions, An ſit, quid ſit, quale ſit, this aunſwere falleth vnder the firſt of the three: all other anſwers are vnder one of the other two. And as this is the generall aunſwer in an action of treſpaſſe, that is, an action criminall ciuily proſecuted: ſo is it alſo in all actions criminally followed, either at the ſuite of the king or other, wherein the defendant denieth the crime obiected vnto him. See the new booke of Entries. titulo, Non culpabilis, and Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 62.
               
                  Non eſt factum, is an aunſwer to a declaration, whereby a man denyeth that to be his deed, whereupon he is impleaded. Broke, hoc titulo.
               
               
                  Non implacitando aliquem de libero tenemento fine breui, is a writ to inhibit Bayliffes, &c. from diſtraining any man without the kings writ, touching his free hould. Regiſter, fol. 171. b.
               
               
                  Non intromittendo quando breue praecipe in capite ſubdolè impetratur, Is a writ directed to Iuſtices of the bench or in Eyre, willing them not to giue one hearing, that hath vnder the colour of intitling the king to land, &c. as houlding of him in capite, deceitfully obteined the writ called: praecipe in capite. but to put him to his writ of right, if he thinke good to vſe it. Regiſter orig. fo. 4. b.
               
               
                  Non mercandizando victualia, is a writ directed to the Iuſtic̄es of Aſſiſe, commaunding them to inquire whether the officers of ſuch a towne, doe ſell victuals in groſſe or by retaile, during their office, contrary to the ſtatute, and to puniſh them, if they finde it true. Regiſter, fol. 184.
               
                  Non moleſtando, is a writ that lyeth for him, which is moleſted contrary to the kings protection graunted him. Regiſter fol. 24.
               
                  Non omittas, is a writ lying where the Shyreeue deliuereth a former writ to a Bayliffe of a fraunchis, within the which the party, on whom it is to be ſerued, dwelleth, & the Bayliffe neglecteth to ſerue it: for in this caſe, the Shyreeue returning, that he deliuered it to the Bayliffe, this ſhalbe directed to the Shyreeue, charging him himſelfe to execute the kings commaundement. Old. nat. br. fol. 44. of this the

                  Reg. orig. hath three ſorts. fol. 82. b. & 151. and the Reg. Iudiciall one, fol. 5. & 56.
               
                  Non ponendo in Aſſiſis & Iuratis, is a writ founded vpon the ſtat. Weſtm. 2. ca. 38. and the ſtat: Articuli ſuper chartas. ca. 9. which is graunted vpon diuers cauſes to men, for the freeing them from Aſſiſes and Iuries. See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 165. See the Regiſter, fol. 179. 100. 181. 183.
               
                  Non procedendo ad Aſſiſam Rege inconſulto, is a writ to ſtop the triall of a cauſe appertaining vnto one, that is in the kings ſeruice, &c. vntill the kings pleaſure be farder knowne. Reg. fol. 220. a.
               
               
                  Non reſidentia pro clericis Regis, is a writ directed to the Ordinary, charging him not to moleſt a Clerk imployed in the kings ſeruice, by reaſon of his non reſidence. Regiſter orig. fol. 58. b.
               
               
                  Non-ſuite, is a renuntiation of the ſuite by the plaintife or demaundant, when the mater is ſo farre proceeded in, as the Iury is ready at the barre, to deliuer their verdict. anno 2. H. 4. ca. 7. See the new booke of Entries, verbo Non-ſuite. The ciuilians terme it Litis renunciationem.
               
               
                  Non ſoluendo pecuniam ad quam Clericus mulctatur pro non reſidentia, is a writ prohibiting an Ordinary to take a pecuniary mulct, impoſed vpon a clerk of the kings for non-reſidence. Regiſt. orig. fol. 59.
               
                  Non tenure, is an exception to a coumpt, by ſaying that he houldeth not the land ſpecified in the coumpt, or at the leaſt, ſome parte of it. anno 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 4. ca. 16. Weſt parte. 2. Simbol. titulo. Fines. ſect. 138. maketh mention of non-tenure generall, and non-tenure ſpeciall. See the new booke of Entries, verbo, Non-tenure. where it is ſaid, that eſpeciall non-tenure is an exception, alledging that he was not tenent the day whereon the writ was purchaſed. Non-tenure generall is then by likelyhood, where one denyeth himſelfe euer to haue bene tenent to the land in queſtion.
               
                  Non ſum informatus. See Informatus non ſum.
               
               
                  Non ſane memorie (Non ſane memoriae) is an exception taken to any act declared by the plaintife or demaundant to be done by another, wherupon he groundeth his plaint or demaund. And the contents of this exceptiō be, that the party that did that act (being himſelfe or any other) was not well in his wits, or madde, when he did it. See the new booke of Entries, titulo Non ſane memory, and Dum non fuit compos mentis. See alſo ſupra Non compos mentis.
               
               
                  Non terme (non terminus) is the

time of vacation between Terme and Terme. It was wont to bee called the times or dayes of the kings peace, Lamb. Archaiono. fol 126. and what theſe were in the time of King Edward the Confeſſour, ſee there. This time was called (Iuſticium) or (Feriae) among the Romanes, or (dies nefaſti) Ferias appellari notum eſt tempus illud, quod forenſibus negotus & iure dicendo vacabat. Earum autem aliae ſolennes erant, aliae repentinae. Briſſon. de verb. ſignif. lib. 6. vide Weſenbec: paratit. De Ferits. num. 6.
               
                  Note of a fine, (nota finis) is a briefe of a fine made by the Chirographer, before it be engroſſed. The forme whereof ſee in Weſt. part. 2. ſymbol, titulo. Fines. ſect. 117.
               
                  Novell aſſignement (noua aſſignatio) is an aſſignement of time, or place, or ſuch like, otherwiſe then as before it was aſſigned. In Brocke you may find theſe wordes in effect: titulo, Deputie. num. 12. See novell aſſignement of treſpaſſe in a new place after Barre pleaded. Broke. titulo, Treſpaſſe. 122. and, novel aſſignement in a writ de e
                        •
                     ectione cuſtodiae. titulo, Eiectione cuſtodiae. num. 7. See Aſſignement.
               
               
                  Nude mater. See Mater.
               
               
                  Nunne (Nonna) is the French word (nonnain) or (nonne) ſomething altered, which ſignifieth a holy or conſecrated virgin, or a woman that hath by vowe bound her ſelfe to a ſingle and chaſt life, in ſome place and company of other women, ſeparated from the world, and addicted to an eſpeciall ſeruice of God, by prayer, faſting, and ſuch like holy exerciſes. If we wold know whence this word came into Fraunce, S. Hierome maketh it an Egyptian word, as Hoſpinian recordeth of him, in his booke De origine & progreſſumonachatus. fol. 3.
               
                  Nuper obtit, is a writ that lyeth for a coheire being deforced by her coheire of lands or tenements, whereof the graundfather, father, vncle, or brother to them both, or any other their common aunceſters, dyed ſeiſed of an eſtate in fee ſimple. See the forme of the writ, origin. Regiſt. fol. 226. &c. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 197. If the aunceſtour dyed ſeiſed in fee tayle, then the coheire deforced ſhall haue a Formdon. Idem. ibid.
               
               
                  Nuſance (nocumentum) commeth of the French (nuire. i. nocere.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, not onely a thing done, whereby another man is annoyed in his free lands or tenements, but eſpecially the Aſſiſe or writ lying for the ſame. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 183. And this writ (de Nocumento) or of Nuſance
                  
is either ſimply De nocumento, or de paruo nocumento; and then it is Vicountiel. old. nat. br. f. 108. & 109. & Fitzh. nat. br. vbi ſupra. & fol. 184. Britton calleth it Noſance. whome alſo reade. ca. 61. & 62. M. Manwood parte 2 of his foreſt lawes. ca. 17. maketh three ſorts of Nuſance in the foreſt, the firſt is Nocumentum commune, the ſecond Nocumentum ſpeciale, the third Nocumentum generale. which reade with the reſt of that whole chapter. See the Regiſter originall, fol. 197. & 199.
               
                  Nutmegs (nux myriſtica vel nux muſcata) is a ſpice well knowne to all. It groweth of a tree like a peach tree, and is incloſed in two huskes, whereof the inner huske is that ſpice which we call mace. Of this who will, may reade more in Gerards herball, lib. 3. ca. 145. It is mentioned among ſpices that are to be garbled. anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.
            
            
               O
               
                  OBedientiae, was a rent, as appeareth by Roger Hoveden parte poſter: ſuorum annalium, fol. 430. in theſe words: vt ergo eis, ſc: regularibus, adimatur oportunitas evagandi, prohibe
                        〈…〉
                     , ne reditus, quos obedientias vocant, ad firmam teneant, &c. Obedientia in the canon lawe is vſed for an office or the adminiſtration of an office, ca. cùm ad monaſterium. 6. extra de ſtatu monacho: & cano. regula. And therevpon the word (obedientiales) is vſed in the provinciall conſtitutions for thoſe which haue the execution of any office vnder their ſuperiors. cap. pri. de ſtatu. regula. For thus ſaith Lyndwood in his gloſſe vpon that word: Hii ſunt qui ſub obedientia ſuorum praelatorum ſunt, & habent certa officia adminiſtranda interiùs vel exterius. It may be that ſome of theſe offices called obedienti
                        •
                     
                   conſiſted in the collection of rents or penſions: and that therefore thoſe rents were by a metonymie called obedientiae, quia colligebantur ab obedientialibus.
               
               
                  Oblations (oblationes) are thus defined in the canon lawe. Oblationes dicuntur, quaecun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      a pi
                        •
                     s fidelibuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Chriſtianis offeruntur Deo & eccleſiae, ſiue res ſoli, ſiue mobiles ſint. Nec refert an legentur teſtamento, an aliter donentur, cap. clerici. 13. quaeſt. 2. Reade more of theſe in Duarenus. De ſacr. eccl. miniſter. ac benefi. cap. tertio.
               
               
                  Obligation (Obligatio) and Bill be all one, ſauing that when it is in Engliſh, it is commonly called a Bill, and when it is in Latine, an Obligation. Weſt parte 1. ſymbol. lib. 2. ſect. 146. True it is that a Bill is obligatorie: but we commonly call that an

obligation, which hath a condition annexed. The former author in the ſame place ſaith thus farder. An obligation is a deede, whereby the obligour doth knowledge himſelfe to owe vnto the Obligee, a certaine ſumme of money or other thing. In which, beſides the parties names, are to be conſidered the thing due, and the time, place and maner of payment, or deliuerie. Obligations be either by mater in deede, or of record. An obligation by mater in deede is euery obligation not acknowledged & made in ſome court of record. Hitherto M. Weſt.
               
               
                  Occupauit, is a writ that lieth for him, which is eiected out of his land or tenement in time of warre: as a writ of Novel diſſeiſin lieth for one eiected in time of peace. Ingham §. Bref de novel diſſeiſin.
               
               
                  Octo tales. See Tales: See Brooke tit. Octo tales.
               
               
                  Odio & atia, anno 3. Ed. 1. ca. 11: is a writ ſent to the vnderſhyreeue, to inquire whither a man being committed to priſon vpon ſuſpition of murder, be committed vpon malice or euill will, or vpon iuſt ſuſpition. Regiſter originall, fol. 133. b. See Bracton li. 3. parte 2. ca. 20.
               
                  Office (Officium) doth ſignifie not onely that function, by vertue whereof a man hath ſome imploiment in the affaires of another, as of the King or other common perſon; but alſo an Inquiſition made to the Kings vſe of any thing by vertue of his office who inquireth. And therefore wee oftentimes reade of an office found, which is nothing but ſuch a thing found by Inquiſition made ex officio. In this ſignification it is vſed anno 33. H. 8. cap. 20. and in Stawnfords praerog. fol. 60. & 61. where to trauers an office, is to trauers the inquiſition taken of office. And in Kitchin fol. 177. to returne an office, is to returne that which is found by vertue of the office, ſee alſo the newe booke of Entries, verbo Office pur le Roy. And this is by a metonymie of the effect: And there be two ſorts of offices in this ſignification, iſſuing out the exchequer by commiſſion viz. an office to intitle the King in the thing inquired of, and an office of inſtruction. which reade in Sir Edw. Cokes reports, vol. 6. Pages caſe. fol. 52. a. b. Office in fee, is that which a man hath to himſelfe and his heires, anno 13. Ed. 1. ca. 25. Kitchin fol. 152. See Clerk.
               
               
                  Official (officialis) is a word very diverſly vſed. For by ſundry Ciuilians of other countries, that write in theſe daies, it appeareth to be applyed in many

places, to ſuch as haue the ſway of temporall iuſtice. Aegidius Boſſius in pract. crim. tit. De officialibus corruptis, &c. But by the auncienter ciuile lawe, it ſignifieth him, that is the miniſter or appparitor of a magiſtrate or Iudge. l. 1. §. ſi quis vltro. Π. de quaeſtio. & Co. de filiis officialium, &c. li. 12. In the Canon lawe, it is eſpecially taken for him, to whome any Biſhop doth generally commit the charge of his ſpirituall iuriſdiction. And in this ſence one in euery Dioces is (officialis principalis) whome the ſtatutes and lawes of this Kingdome call chanceler. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 15. The reſt, if there be more, are by the canō law called officiales foranei. gloſ: in clem. 2. de Reſcriptis, but with vs termed Cō
                  miſſaries (Commiſſarii) as in the ſtatute of H. 8. or ſome times (Commiſſarii foranei.) The difference of theſe 2. powers you may reade in Lyndwood, titulo de ſequeſtra poſſeſ. ca. 1. verbo. Officialis. But this word (officiall) in our ſtatutes and common lawe ſignifieth him, whom the Archdeacon ſubſtituteth in the executing of his iuriſdiction. as appeareth by the ſtatute aboue mentioned and many other places.
               
                  Officiariis non faciendis vel amovendis, is a writ directed to the magiſtrates of a corporatiō, willing them not to make ſuch a man an officer, and to put him out of the office he hath, vntill enquirie be made of his maners, according to an inquiſition formerly ordeined. Regiſter originall, fol. 126. b.
               
               
                  Onerando pro rata portionis, is a writ that lieth for a ioint tenent, or tenent in common, that is diſtreined for more rent, then the proportion of his land cōmeth vnto. Reg orig. f. 182. a.
               
               
                  Open Lawe (Lex manifeſta; Lex apparens) is making of Lawe. which by Magna charta ca. 28. Bayliffes may not put men vnto vpon their owne bare aſſertions, except they haue witneſſes to proue their imputation.
               
                  Orchel. anno. 1. R. 3. ca. 8: Orchall anno. 24. H. 8. ca. 2. &. anno. 3. & 4. Ed. 6. ca. 2. ſeemeth to be all one with cork.
               
                  Ordinance of the foreſt (Ordinatio Foreſtae) is a ſtatute made touching foreſt cauſes in the 34. yeare of Edward. 1. See Aſſiſe.
               
               
                  Ordinarie (Ordinarius) though in the ciuil lawe, whence the word is taken, it doth ſignifie any iudge that hath authoritie to take knowledge of cauſes in his owne right, as he is a magiſtrate, and not by deputation: yet in our common lawe, it is moſt commonly, and for ought I remember, alway taken for him,

that hath ordinarie Iuriſdiction in cauſes eccleſiaſticall. See Brooke hoc titulo. Lindwood in cap. exterior. titulo de Conſtitutionibus. verbo Ordinarii, ſaith quòd Ordinarius habet locum principaliter in Epiſcopo, & aliis ſuperioribus, qui ſoli ſunt vniuerſales in ſuis iuriſdictionibus, ſed ſunt ſub eo alii ordinarii, hii viz. quibus competit Iuriſdictio ordinaria de iure, privilegio, vel conſuetudine, &c. v. c.
               
               
                  Ordinatione contra ſeruientes, is a writ that lieth againſt a ſervant for leauing his maſter againſt the ſtatute: Regiſter originall, fol. 189.
               
                  Ordael (Ordalium) is a Saxon word, ſignifiing as much as Iudgement, in ſome mens opinions compounded of two Saxon words (or) a priuatiue, as (α) in greeke, and (dael. i. pars) It ſignifieth as much as expers: but it is artificially vſed for a kind of purgation practized in auncient times: whereby the party purged, was iudged expers criminis, called in the canon lawe purgatio vulgaris, and vtterly condemned. There were of this two ſorts, one by fire, another by water. Of theſe ſee M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words. verbo Ordalium, where he expreſſeth it at large, with ſuch ſuperſtitions as were vſed in it. Of this you may likewiſe read Holinſhed in his deſcription of Britanie fol. 98. and alſo M. Manwood, parte pri. of his foreſt lawes, pag. 15. But of all the reſt, Hotoman eſpecially, diſput. de feud. ca. 41. where of fiue kinde of proofes, which he calleth feudales probationes, he maketh this the fourth, calling it explorationem, & huius furioſae probationis 6. genera fuiſſe animadvertit, per flammam, per aquam, per ferrum candens, per aquam vel gelidam vel feruentem, per ſortes, & per corpus Domini, of all which he alledgeth ſeuerall examples out of hiſtorie, very worthie the reading. See M. Skene alſo de verbor. ſignificatione. verbo (Machamiū) This ſeemeth to haue bene in vſe here with vs in Henry the ſeconds dayes, as appeareth by Glanvile. lib. 14. cap. 1. & 2. Reade alſo of this in M. Verſtegans Reſtitution of decayed intelligence. cap. 3. pag. 63. & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Orfgild, aliâs, Cheapegild, is a reſtitution made by the Hundred or Countie, of any wrong done by one that was in plegio. Lamberd. Archaion. pag. 125. & 126.
               
                  Orgeis, anno, 31. Ed. 3. ſtat. 3. cap. 2. is the greateſt ſort of North ſea-fiſh, now adaies called Organ ling.
               
               
                  Oredelfe, is a liberty whereby a man claimeth the Ore found in his ſoyle. New expoſition of

Termes.
               
                  Ortelli, is a word vſed in the booke termed (pupilla oculi) in the chapter containing the charter of the Foreſt. parte 5. cap. 22. and ſignifieth the clawes of a dogges foote, being taken from the French, orteils des pieds. i. digiti pedum, the toes.
               
                  Oſmonds, anno 32. Henr. 8. cap. 14.
               
                  Oath of the King, (Iuramentum Regis) is that which the King taketh at his Coronation, which in Bracton is ſet downe in theſe words. Debet Rex in coronatione ſua, in nomine Ieſu Chriſti praeſtito ſacramento haec tria promittere populo ſibi ſubdito: Inprimis ſe eſſe praecepturum & pro viribus opem impenſurum vt eccleſiae dei & omni populo Chriſtiano vera pax omni ſuo tempore obſervetur. Secundò, vt rapacitates & omnes iniquitates omnibus gradibus interdicat: 3. vt in omnibus iudieiis aequitatem praecipiat & miſericordiam, vt indulgeat et ſuā miſericordiā clemens & miſericors Deus, & vt per Iuſtitiā ſuam firma gaudeant pace vniuerſi. And in the old abridgement of ſtatutes ſet out in H. 8. daies, I finde it thus deſcribed. This is the oath that the King ſhall ſweare at his coronation: That he ſhall keepe and maintaine the right and the liberties of the holy church, of old time graunted by the righteous Chriſtian Kings of England, and that he ſhall keepe all the lands, honours, and dignities righteous and free of the Crowne of England in all maner whole, without any maner of miniſhment, and the rights of the Crowne hurt, decayed, or loſt, to his power ſhall call againe into the auncient eſtate, and that he ſhall keepe the peace of the holy church and of the clergy, and of the people with good accord: and that he ſhall doe in all his iudgements equitie and right iuſtice with diſcretion and mercie: and that he ſhall graunt to hold the lawes & cuſtomes of the realme, and to his power keepe them, and affirme them, which the folke and people haue made and choſen: and the euill lawes and cuſtomes wholly to put out: and ſtedfaſt and ſtable peace to the people of this realme keepe and cauſe to be kept to his power: and that he ſhall graunt no charter, but where he may doe it by his oath. All this I finde in the foreſaide Booke, titulo. Sacramentum Regis. and Charter of pardon. quinto.
               
               
                  Oth of the Kings Iuſtices is, that they well and truly ſhall ſerue the king, and that they ſhall not aſſent to things, that may turne to his dammage or diſinheritance. Nor that they ſhall take

no fee nor liuerie of none but the king. Nor that they ſhall take gift nor reward of none that hath adoe before them, except it be meate and drinke of ſmal value, as long as the plee is hanging before them, nor after for the cauſe. Nor that they ſhall giue councell to none in mater that may touch the King, vpon paine to be at the kings will, body and goods. And that they ſhall doe right to euery perſon, notwithſtanding the Kings leters, &c. anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtatut. 4. which the old abridgement maketh to be anno 20. eiuſdem ſtatuto per ſe.
               
               
                  Otho, was a Deacon Cardinall of S. Nichens in carcere Tulliam, and Legate for the Pope heere in England, anno 22. H. 3. whoſe conſtitutions we haue at this day: Stowes An. pa. 303. & ſee the firſt conſtitution of the ſaid Legat.
               
                  Othobonus was a Deacon Cardinall of S. Adrian, and the Popes legate heere in England anno 15. H. 3. as appeareth by the award made betweene the ſaid King and his commons, at Kenelworth. his conſtitutions we haue at this day in vſe.
               
                  Ouch, anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13.
               
                  Ouſter le main (Amouere manum) word for word, ſignifieth to take off the hand, though in true French, it ſhould be (Oſter la main) It ſignifieth in the common law, a Iudgement giuen for him that tendeth a trauers, or ſieweth a Monſtrance de droit, or petition. For when it appeareth vpon the mater diſcuſſed, that the King hath noe right nor title to the thing he ſeiſed, then Iudgement ſhalbe giuen in the Chauncery, that the kings hands be amoued, and thereupon Amoueas manum ſhalbe awarded to the Eſcheatour: which is as much, as if the iudgement were giuen, that he ſhould haue againe his land. v. Stawn. praerog. ca. 24. See anno 28. Ed. 1. ſtat. 3. ca. 19. It is alſo taken for the writ graunted vpon this petition. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 256. C. It is written oter le maine, anno 25. Hen. 8. ca. 22.
               
                  Ouſter le mer (vltra mare) commeth of the French (oultre. i. vltra) and (le mer. i. mare) and it is a cauſe of excuſe or Eſſoine, if a man appeare not in Court vpon Summons. See Eſſoin.
               
               
                  Outfangthef, aliâs vtfangthef, is thus defined by Bracton li. 3. tra. 2. ca. 34. vtfangthef dicitur latro extraneus veniens aliunde de terra aliena, & qui captus fuit in terra ipſius, quitales habet libertates, but ſee Britton otherwiſe. fol. 91: b: It is compounded of three Saxon words (out. i. extra) (fang. i. capio vel captus) and (Thef. i. fur) It is vſed in the common law, for a liberty or

priuiledge, whereby a Lord is inhabled to call any man dwelling within his owne fee, and taken for felony in any other place, and to iudge him in his owne court. Raſtals expoſ. of words.
               
                  Owelty of ſeruices, is an equality when the tenent parauaile oweth as much to the meſn, as the meſn doth to the Lord paramont: Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 136 A. B.
               
               
                  Outlawry (vtlagaria) is the loſſe or depriuation of the benefit belonging to a ſubiect: that is, of the Kings protection and the Realme: Bracton: li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 11. num. pri. & nu. 3. Foriſfacit vtlagatus omnia quae pacis ſunt: Quia a tempore quo vtlagatus eſt, caput gerit lupinum, ita quòd ab omnibus interfici poſſit, & impunè: maxime ſi ſe defenderit, vel fugerit, ita quòd difficilis ſit eius captio. &, nu. 4. Si autem non fugerit, nec ſe defenderit cùm captus fuerit: extunc erit in manu domini Regis mors, & vita. & qui taliter captum interfecerit, reſpondebit pro co ſicut pro alio, v. c.
               
               
                  Outeparters anno. 9. H. 5. ca. 8. ſeemeth to be a kind of theeues in Rideſdall, that ride abroad at their beſt advantage, to fetch in ſuch catell or other things, as they could light on without that liberty: ſome are of opinion that thoſe which in the forenamed ſtatute, are termed out-patters, are at this day called outputters, and are ſuch as ſet matches for the robbing of any man or houſe: as by diſcouering which way he rideth or goeth, or where the houſe is weakeſt & fitteſt to be entred. See Intakers.
               
               
                  Owtryders, ſeeme to be none other but bayliffe errants, employed by the Shyreeues or their fermers, to ride to the fardeſt places of their counties or hundreds, with the more ſpeede to ſummon to their county or hundred courts, ſuch as they thought good to worke vpon. anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. ca. 9.
               
                  Oxgang of Land (Bouata terrae) Sixe oxgangs of land, ſeeme to be ſo much as ſixe oxen will plough. Crompton. iuriſd. fol. 220. but an oxegang ſeemeth properly to be ſpoken of ſuch land as lyeth in gainour, old nat. br. fol. 117. M. Skene de verbor. ſignificat. verbo Bovata terrae, ſaith, that an oxen-gate of land ſhould alway conteine 13. acres, and that 4. oxen-gates extendeth to a pound land of old extent. See Librata terrae.
               
               
                  Oyer and Terminer, (audiendo & terminando) in true French (Ovir & terminer) is, in the intendment of our lawe, a commiſſion eſpecially graunted to certaine men, for the hearing and determining of one or more

cauſes. This was wont to be in vſe vpon ſome ſodaine outrage or inſurrection in any place. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 131. & 132. See The Statute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 29 anno, 13. Ed. 1. who might graunt this commiſſion. And ſee Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 100. for the forme and occaſion of the writ, as alſo to whom it is to bee graunted, and whom not. See Broke, titulo, Oyer & determiner.
               
               
                  Oyer de Record, (Audire Recordum) is a petition made in court, that the Iudges, for beter proofes ſake, will be pleaſed to heare or looke vpon any Record.
            
            
               P
               
                  PAcking whites. anno, 1. R. 3. cap. 8.
               
                  Pain fort & dure (poena fortis & dura) is in true French (peine fort & dure.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, an eſpeciall puniſhment for thoſe, that being arraigned of felonie, refuſe to put themſelues vpon the ordinarie triall of God and the cuntrey, and thereby are mute, or as mute in interpretation of law. This (as Stawnf. thinketh, pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 60.) is founded vpon the Statute of Weſtm. prim. cap 12. anno. 3. Ed. prim. His reaſon is, becauſe Bracton, who writ before that Parlament, maketh no mention of it: and Britton writing after that time, toucheth it in his 4. chapter; fol. 11. viz. in words to this effect: If they will not acquite themſelues, let them be put to their penance vntill ſuch time as they do deſire triall: and let the penance bee ſuch: viz. Let them be bare legged, without girdle, and without hatte or cappe, in their coate onely, and lye in priſon vpon the naked earth day and night. And let them eate no bread, but of barley and branne, nor drink any other then water, and that vpon that day when they eate not. And let them be chained. Stawnford in his ſaid 60. chapter of his ſecond booke, expoundeth it more plainely and particularly in this ſort. And note, that this ſtrong and hard paine ſhall be ſuch: ſc. He ſhall be ſent backe to the priſon whence he came, and layed in ſome lowe darke houſe, where he ſhall lye naked vpon the earth without any litter, ruſhes, or other clothing, and without any raiment about him, but onely ſomething to couer his priuie members. And he ſhall lye vpon his backe with his head couered and his feete. And one arme ſhall bee drawne to one quarter of the houſe with a cord, and the other arme to another quarter: and in the ſame maner let it be

done with his legges: and let there be layed vpon his body iron and ſtone, ſo much as he may beare or more: and the next day following, he ſhall haue three morſels of barley bread without drinke: and the ſecond day, he ſhall haue drinke three times: and as much at each time, as he can drinke, of the water next vnto the priſon doore, except it be running water, without any bread. And this ſhall be his diet vntill he dye.
               
                  Palatine. See County Palatine. See Caſſan. de conſuetud. Burg. pag. 14.
               
                  Palingman, anno. 11. Henr. 7. cap. 22.
               
                  Panell (panellum) commeth of the French (panne. i. pellis, or paneau) a peece or pane, as wee call it in Engliſh. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a ſhedule or rolle, containing the names of ſuch Iurours, as the Shyreeue prouideth to paſſe vpon any triall. Regiſter orig. fol. 223. a. Kitthin, fol. 266. See Broke, hoc titulo. And thereupon the empaneling of a Iurie, is nothing but the entring of them into the Shyreeues rolle or booke.
               
                  Pannage (pannagium) is a tolle or contribution. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 227. D. See Pawnage.
               
               
                  Paramounte, aliâs peremounte, commeth of theſe two French words (par. i. per) and (Monter. i. aſcendere) It ſignifieth in our law, the higheſt Lord of the fee: for there may be a Tenent to a Lord, that houldeth ouer of another Lord. And the former of thoſe is called Lord Meſn, the ſecond Lord paramount. And a Lord paramount (as it ſeemeth by Kitchin, fol. 209) conſiſteth only in compariſon: as one man may be great being compared with a leſſer, and litle being compared with a greater: and as Genus, among the Logicians, may be in diuers reſpects both genus, and ſpecies. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 135. M. So that none ſeemeth ſimply to be Lord paramount but only the King, as Genus ſummum is ſimply Genus. For the King is patron paramount to all the benefices in England, Doctor and ſtudent: ca. 36. See Parauaile, Maner. and Fee.
               
               
                  Parauaile, aliâs Perauaile, is compounded of two French words (par. i. per) and (aualler. i. dimittere, demittere) It ſignifieth in our common law, the loweſt tenent, or him that is tenent to one, who houldeth his fee ouer of another, So is it vſed. pl. cor. fol. 197. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 135. M. See Paramounte. See Meſn.
               
               
                  Parcell makers, are two officers in the eſchequer, that make the parcels of the eſcheators accoumpts, wherein they charge

them with euery thing they haue leuyed for the kings vſe, within the time of their office, & deliuer the ſame to one of the auditors of the court, to make an accompt for the eſcheatour thereof.
               
                  Parceners. See Coparceners.
               
               
                  Parcinarie (participatio) commeth of the French (partir. i. diuiduum facere. It ſignifieth in our common law, a houlding or occupying of land by more pro indiviſo, or by ioynt tenents, otherwiſe called Coparceners, of the French (parſonnier. i. partiarius, particeps.) For if they refuſe to diuide their common inheritance and chuſe rather to hold it ioyntly, they are ſaid to hold in parcinarie. Litleton, fol. 56. & 57. This by the Feudiſts and Lombards is termed (adaequatio, vel paragium.) And among the auncient Romanes particulones, ſic enim authore Nonio, a veteribus cohaeredes inter ſe dicebantur, quòd partes invicem facerent. Spigelius.
               
               
                  Pardon (Perdouatio) is a French word, ſignifiing as much as pax, venia, gratia. It is vſed moſt notoriouſly in our common lawe, for the remitting or forgiuing of a felonious or other offence committed againſt the king. This pardon is two-fold: one ex gratia Regis, the other, per cours del ley, by courſe of law. Stawnſ. pl. cor. fol. 47. Pardon ex gratia Regis, is that, which the king, in ſome ſpeciall regard of the perſon or other circumſtance, ſheweth or affoordeth vpon his abſolute prerogatiue or power. Pardon by courſe of lawe, is that, which the lawe in equitie affoordeth, for a light offence, as homicide caſuall, when one killeth a man hauing no ſuch meaning. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo, Inditements. ſect. 46. Of this ſee the new booke of Entries, verbo, Perdon.
               
               
                  Pardoners, anno 22. H. 8. c. 12. were certaine fellowes that caried about the Popes Indulgences, and ſold them to ſuch as would buy them, againſt whom Luther, by Sleydans report, in cenſed the people of Germany in his time, exhorting them, ne merces tam viles tanti emerent.
               
               
                  Parke (parcus) commeth of the French (parquer. i. vallo, vel foſſa circundare.) It ſignifieth with vs, a peece of grounde incloſed and ſtored with wild beaſtes of chaſe. Which a man may haue by preſcription or the kings graunt. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 148. M. Manwood parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 148. defineth it thus: A parke is a place of priuiledge for wilde beaſtes of venerie, and alſo for other wild beaſts, that are beaſts of the Foreſt, and of the chaſe, tam ſylueſtres, quam campeſtres. And all thoſe wild beaſtes are to

haue a firme peace and protectiō there. So that no man may hurt or chaſe them within the park, without licence of the owner of the ſame. Who alſo fol. 149. ſaith thus: A parke is of another nature, then either a chaſe, or a warren is. For a parke muſt bee incloſed, and may not lye ope: for if it doe, that is a good cauſe of ſeiſure of the ſame into the hands of the king, as a thing forfeited: as a free chaſe is, if it be encloſed. And moreouer, the owner cannot haue action againſt ſuch as hunt in his park, if it lye open. See Foreſt. See Chaſe. See Warren. This word Parke, Baldwinus deriueth a paradiſo, eum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      locum eſſe dicit, in quo varia animalia ad vſum voluptatis, aut venationis includuntur & poſſidentur, adempta naturali libertate. Ad tit. de rerum diviſ. in Inſtitutionib.
               
               
                  Parco fracto, is a writ which lyeth againſt him, that violently breaketh a pound, and taketh out beaſts thence, which, for ſome treſpas done vpon another mans ground, are lawfully impounded. Regiſter originall fol. 166. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 100.
               
                  Pariſh (parochia) commeth of the greeke (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. Accolarum conuentus, accolatus, ſacra vicinia) it is vſed in the Cannon law, ſome time for a Biſhoprick. But in our common law, it ſignifieth the particular charge of a ſecular prieſt. For euery church is either Cathedrall, Couentuall, or Parochiall. Cathedrall is that, where there is a Biſhop ſeated, ſo called a Cathedra: Conuentuall conſiſteth of Regular clerks, profeſſing ſome order of religion, or of Deane and chapter, or other colledge of ſpirituall men. Parochiall is that, which is inſtituted for the ſaying of diuine ſeruice, and miniſtring the holy Sacraments to the people dwelling within a certaine compas of ground neare vnto it. Our Realme was firſt diuided into pariſhes by Honorius Archb: of Canterbury, in the yeare of our Lord. 636. Camden Britan. pag. 104. Of theſe pariſh churches I finde there were in England in the daies of H. 8. the number of 45000. Hotoman in his diſputations de feudis. ca. 2. maketh mention of this word (parochia) out of Pomponius Laetus in theſe words. Nam ſic quo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Pomponius Laetus veterem conſuetudinem fuiſſe ſcribit, eam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab Imperat
                        〈…〉
                      Conſtantino repetitam, vt Duc
                        〈…〉
                      praefectis, Tribunis qui pro augend
                        •
                      Imperio conſenuerant, darentur agri, villae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , vt neceſſaria ſuppet
                        〈…〉
                     , quoad viuerent, quas paroehias cabant. And a litle after: ver
                        〈…〉
                      inter feuda & parochias hoc 
                        〈…〉
                      eſt, quod hae plerum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſenibus
                        〈…〉
                      veteranis, pleriſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      emeritae 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     
dabantur, qui cum de Rep. bene meriti eſſent, publico beneficio reliquum vitae ſuſtentabant: aut ſi quod bellum naſceretur, euocati non tam milites, quàm magiſtri militū viderentur. Feuda vero plurimum I
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     enibus robuſtis, & primo flore aetatis, qui militiae munus ſuſtinere poterāt: imo verò & vt poſſēt & vt vellēt, &c.
               
               
                  Parlament (parlamentum) is a French word ſignifiing originally as much as (Collocutio) or (colloquium) but by vſe, it is alſo taken for thoſe high courts of Iuſtice throughout the kingdome of Fraunce, where mens cauſes and differences are publikely determined without farder appeale. Whereof there be ſeuen in number: as Paris, Tolouſe, Greſnoble in Daulphene, Aix in Prouence, Bordeaux, Diion in Bourgogine, and Roan in Normandy. Vincentius Lupanus de Magiſtrat. Franc. lib. 2. cap. Parlamentum. num. 28. whereunto Gerard de Haillon addeth the eighth. viz. Rhenes in Brettagne.
               
               In England we vſe it for the aſſembly of the king and the three eſtates of the Realme, videlicet. the Lords Spirituall, the Lords Temporall, and commons, for the debating of maters touching the common wealth, and eſpecially the making and correcting of lawes. which aſſembly or court is of all other the higheſt, and of greateſt authoritie, as you may reade in Sir Thomas Smith. de Repub. Anglo lib. 2. cap. 1. & 2. Camd. Britan. pag. 112. and Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. pri. & ſeqq. The inſtitution of this court Polydor Virgil, lib. 11. of his Chronicles, referreth after a ſort to Henry the firſt: yet confeſſing that it was vſed before, though verie ſeldome. I find in the former prologue of the Grande Cuſtumarie of Normandie, that the Normans vſed the ſame meanes in making their lawes. And I haue ſeene a monument of Antiquite, ſhewing the maner of houlding this parlament in the time of King Edward the ſonne of King Etheldred, which (as my note ſaith, was deliuered by the diſcreeter ſorte of the Realme vnto William the Conquerour, at his commaundement, & allowed by him. This writing beginneth thus. Rex eſt caput, principium, & finis parlamenti, & ita non habet parem in ſuo gradu. Et ſic ex Rege ſolo primus gradus eſt. Secundus gradus eſt ex Archiepiſcopis, Epiſcopis, Abbatibus, Prioribus per Baroniā tenentibus. Tertius gradus eſt, de procuratoribus cleri. Quartus gradus eſt de Comitibus, Baronibus, & aliis Magnatibus. Quintus gradus eſt de militibus Comitatuum. Sextus gradus eſt de civibus & Burgenſibus: & ita eſt parlamentum

ex ſex gradibus. ſed ſciendum, licet aliquis dictorum quin
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      graduum poſt Regem abſens fuerit, dum tamen omnes praemoniti fuerint per rationabiles ſummonitiones, parlamentum nibilo minus cenſetur eſſe plenum. Touching the great authoritie of this court, I finde in Stowes Annalls, pag. 660. that Henry the ſixth directing his priuie ſeale to Richard Earle of Warwicke, thereby to diſcharge him of the Captainſhip of Cales, the Earle refuſed to obey the priuie ſeale, and continued forth the ſaid office, becauſe he receiued it by Parlament. But one example cannot make good a doctrine. And of theſe two one muſt needes be true, that either the king is aboue the Parlament, that is, the poſitiue lawes of his kingdome, or els that he is not an abſolute king. Ariſtotle lib. 3. Politico. cap. 16. And therefore though it be a mercifull policie, and alſo a politique mercie (not alterable without great perill) to make lawes by the conſent of the whole Realme, becauſe ſo no one part ſhall haue cauſe to complaine of a partialitie: yet ſimply to binde the prince to or by theſe lawes, weare repugnant to the nature and conſtitution of an abſolute monarchy. See Bracton. lib. 5. tract. 3. ca. 3. nu. 3. and Caſſan de conſuet: Burg: pag. 335. and Tiraquel. in his booke De Nobilitate, cap. 20. pag. 68. nu. 26. See the ſtatute anno 31. H. 8. cap. 8. in prooemio. and many excellent men more, that handle this point. That learned Hotoman in his Francogallia, doth vehemently oppugne this ground, as ſome other that write in corners: but he is ſo cleane overborne by the pois of reaſon, that not onely many meaner men for learning triumph ouer him in this caſe, but himſelfe, as I haue credibly hard, vpon the ſight of his fault, cried God and the world mercie for his offence, in writing that erroneous and ſeditious booke. The Emperours of Rome had their ſemeſtria conſilia, & their praetorium or place of councell, builded by Auguſtus in his palace, and therevpon called (palatium) afterward termed (conſiſtorium) where they, as in their principall court, did both determine the greateſt ſort of their cauſes, and alſo made their conſtitutions. And heere had they aſſiſting them many of the wiſeſt of their empire; whome Auguſtus firſt called (conſiliarios,) Alexander Severus afterward (ſcriniorum principes) others after that (palatinos) and then (comites conſiſtorianos)
                  
And theſe men in this reſpect, were indued with great honour, and enioyed many priuiledges. Yet were they but aſſiſtants to the Emperour to aduiſe him, not chalenging any power ouer him, or equal with him. More touching the courſe and order of this Parlament, ſee in Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. pri. & ſeqq. and Vowell, aliâs Hooker, in his booke purpoſely writen of this mater. See King.
               
               
                  Parole (Loquela) is a French word, ſignifying as much as (Dictio, allocutio, ſermo, vox) It is vſed in Kitchin, fol. 193. for a plee in court. It is alſo ſometime ioyned with leaſe, as Leaſe parol, that is Leaſe per parole. a leaſe by word of mouth.
               
                  Parſon (Perſona) commeth of the French (Perſonne). It peculiarly ſigniſieth with vs, the Rector of a church: the reaſon whereof ſeemeth to be, bicauſe he for his time repreſenteth the church, and ſuſteineth the perſon thereof, as well in ſiewing, as being ſiewed in any action touching the ſame. See Fleta. lib. 6. ca. 18. Parſon imperſonee (perſona imperſonata) is he that is in poſſeſſion of a church, whether appropriated or not appropriated. for in the new booke of Entries, verbo Ayde in Annuity, you haue theſe words. Et praedictus A dicit, quod ipſe eſt perſona praedictae eccleſiae de S. imperſonata in eadem ad praeſentationem E. patroniſſae, &c. So I haue reaſon to thinke, that perſona is the patrō or he that hath right to giue the benefice, by reaſon that before the Lateran councell he had right to the tithes, in reſpect of his liberalitie vſed in the erection or endowment of the church, quaſi ſuſtineret perſonam eccleſiae. and he perſona imperſonata to whome the benefice is giuen in the patrons right. For I reade in the Regiſter Iudiciall perſonam imperſonatam, for the Rector of a benefice preſentatiue and not appropriated, fol. 34. b. and ſee Dyer. fol. 40. nu. 72. where he ſaith that a Deane and chapter be perſons imperſonees of a benefice appropriated vnto them. who alſo fol. 221. num. 19. plainly ſheweth that perſona imperſonata is he that is inducted and in poſſeſſion of a benefice. So that perſona ſeemeth to be termed imperſonata, onely in reſpect of the poſſeſſion that he hath of the benefice or Rectorie, be it appropriated or otherwiſe, by the act of another. And yet I haue talked with men of good opinion in the common lawe, that hold onely the proprietarie of

a benefice to be the perſon perſonee. But if that weare true, he ſhould rather be called perſon parſonnier. i. partiarius vel particeps fructuum, becauſe the Vicare hath ſome parte toward his paines in ſeruing the cure. For (parſonnier) in the french tongue. is (partiarius) or (particeps)
               
               
                  Partes finis nihil habuerunt, &c. is an exception taken againſt a fine levied. Cookes reports lib. 3. the caſe of Fines. fol. 88. a. b.
               
               
                  Parters of gold and ſiluer. See Finours.
               
               
                  Partitione facienda, is a writ that lieth for thoſe, which hould lands or tenements Pro Indiuiſo, and would ſeuer to euery one his part, againſt him or them that refuſe to ioyne in partition as Coparceners and Tenents in Gauel kind, ould: nat. br. fol: 142. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 61. Regiſter orig. fol. 76. 316. and Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 80. and the new booke of Entriſe. verbo Partition.
               
               
                  Part let, ſeemeth to be ſome part of a mans attire, as namely ſome looſe collar of a dublet, to be ſet on or taken of by it ſelfe. without the bodies, as mens bands or womens neckirchiefs be, which are in ſome places, or at leaſt haue beene within memory, called partlets. This word is reade in the ſtatute, anno 24. H. 8. ca. 13. and ſeemeth to be a diminutine of the word (part.)
               
               
                  Paruo nocumen to, is a writ. See Nuſance.
               
               
                  Paſſage (Paſſagium) is a French word, ſignifying tranſitum, tranſitionem, meatum. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, the hire that a man payeth for being tranſported ouer ſea, anno 4. Ed. 3. cap. 7. or ouer any riuer. Weſtm. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. pri.
               
               
                  Paſſagio, is a writ to the keepers of ports, to let a man paſſe ouer, that hath licenſe of the king. Regiſter originall. fol. 193. b. 194. a.
               
               
                  Paſſeport, is compounded of two French words (Paſſer. i. perambulare, tranſire) and (port. i. portus) It ſignifieth with vs, a licenſe made by any that hath authoritie, for the ſafe paſſage of any man from one place to another. anno 2. Ed. 6. ca. 2.
               
                  Paſuage, paſuagium. See Pawnage.
               
               
                  Patent (literae patentes) is different from a writ, Cromptons Iuriſd fol. 126. The Coroner is made by writ and not by patent. See Leters patents. See alſo Literae patentes in the table of the Regiſter, where you ſhall finde the forme of diuers patents.
               
                  Patron (Patronus) is vſed in

the Ciule lawe, for him that hath manumitted a ſeruant, and thereby is both iuſtly accompted his great benefactor, and challengeth certaine reverence and dutie of him during his life: ſee the title De iure patranatus: in the Digeſt: with the Feudiſts it is vſed pro authore feudi. Hotom. verbo Patronus, in his commentarie de verbis feudal. In the canon lawe, as alſo in the feuds, and our common lawe, it ſignifieth him that hath the gift of a benefice. And the reaſon is, becauſe the gift of churches and benefices originally belonged vnto ſuch good men, as either builded them, or els indowed them with ſome great part of the reuenew belonging vnto them. De iure patronatus in the Decretals. Such might well be called patrons, as builded the Church, or inriched it: but theſe that now haue the gift of a benefice, are more commonly patronized by the Church, though againſt her will, alway ſelling their preſentations as deerely as they can: and therefore may be called Patroni a patrocinando, as Mons à mouendo. Patronum faciunt dos, aedificatio, fundus, ſaith the old verſe, Of lay patrons one writeth thus. Quod autem a ſupremis pontiſicibus proditum eſt, (ca. cùm dilectus, extra de iure patronatus) laicos ius habere preſaentādi clericos Ordinarois: hoc ſingulari favore ſuſtinetur, vt allectētur laici, invitētur, & inducantur ad conſtructionē eccleſiarū (c. quoniam. eodem) Nec omni ex parte ius patronatus ſpirituale cenſeri debet, ſed temporale potius ſpirituali annexum. (gloſ. in c. piae mentis, 16. qu. 7.) Theſe be Coraſius words in his paraphraſe ad ſacerdotiorum materium, parte pri. cap. 2. and parte. 4. cap. 6. in principio, he thus writeth of the ſame mater. Patroni in iure Pontificio dicuntur qui alicuius eccleſiae extruendae. aut alterius cuiuſcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fundationis eccleſiaſticae authores fuerunt, ideo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      praeſentandi & offerendi clericum ius habent. quem eccleſiae vacanti praeeſſe, & in ea collatis reditibus frui velint. Acquirunt autem hoc ius, qui de Epiſcopi conſenſu vel fundant eccleſiam, hoc eſt, locum in quo templum extruitur, aſſignant, vel eccleſiam aedificant, vel etiam conſtructas eccleſias ante conſecrationem dotant. vt non valde ſit obſcurum, ius patronatus quo de agimus, finire, ius eſſe praeſentandi clericum ad eccleſiam vacantem ex gratia ei conceſſum, qui conſentiente Epiſcopo, vel conſt
                        •
                     uxi
                        •
                     , vel dot avit eccleſiam.
               
               
                  Pannage (Pannagium, aliâs paſnagium) or (pennagium) as it is latined (in pupilla oculi) may be probably thought to come of the French (panez) or (panets) which

is a roote ſomething like a parſnep, but ſomewhat leſſe and ranker in taſte, which hogs in Fraunce feede vpon, though it be eaten by men alſo; and the French may ſeeme to come of the latine (pamcium). i. that which men vſe in the ſteede of bread (Iſodorus) or (panicium) of the French. It ſignifieth in our common law, the mony taken by the Agiſtors for the feede of hogs with the maſt of the kings foreſt: Crompton. Iuriſd. fol. 165. Weſtm. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. pri. with whom M. Manwood parte pri: of his foreſt lawes agreeth in theſe words: Agiſtment is properly the common of herbage of any kinde of ground, or land, or woods, or the money due for the ſame: and pawnage is moſt properly the maſt of the woods, or lands, or hedgerowes, or the money due to the owner of the ſame for it. But this learned man in his ſecond part. cap. 12. where he writeth at large of this, driueth the word from the greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   at the which (I thinke) he ſmiled himſelfe when he ſet it downe. Lindwood defineth it thus: Panagium eſt paſtus pecorum in nemoribus & in ſyluis, vtpote de glandibus & aliis fructibus arborum ſylueſtrium, quarum fructus aliter non ſolent colligi. titulo de decimis. ca. ſancta. verb: Pannagiis. M. Skene de verborum ſignf. calleth it pannagium, and defineth it to be the duty giuen to the king, for the paſturage of ſwine in his foreſt. The French word for the ſame thing is (panage) or (glandee). i. glandatio, vel glandium collectio, & paſtio ſuum ex glandibus. And we ſurely take it from the French, whence they had it, or what etimologie they make of it, let themſelues looke.
               
                  Peace (pax) in the generall ſignification is oppoſite to warre or ſtrife. But particularly it ſignifieth with vs, a quiet and harmleſſe cariage, or behauiovr toward the king and his people. Lamb. eirenarcha. li. 1. ca. 2. pag. 7. And this is one way prouided for all men by oath, as you may read in Frank pledge, but more eſpecially in caſe, where one particular man or ſome few goe in daunger of harme from ſome other. For vpon his oath made thereof before a Iuſtice of peace, he muſt be ſecured by good bond. See Lamb. eirenarcha lib. 2. c. 2. p. 77. See alſo Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 118. b. &c. vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      f. 129. This amōg the Ciuiliās is called cautio de non offendedo. Gail, de pace publ. lib. pri. c. 2. nu. 
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  .
               
                  Peace of God and the church, (pax Dei & eccleſiae) is aunciently vſed for that reſt, which the kings ſubiects had from trouble and ſuite of law, betweene the

termes. See Vacation.
               
               
                  Peace of the King. anno. 6. R. 2. ſtat. pri. ca. 13. is that peace and ſecuritie both for life and goods, which the King promiſeth to all his ſubiects or others taken to his protection. See Suite of the kings peace. This pointe of policie ſeemeth to haue beene borowed by vs from the Feudiſts. for in the ſecond booke of the ſeuds, there is a chapter viz. the 53. chapter intituled thus. De pace tenenda inter ſubditos, & iuramento firmanda, & vindicanda, & de poena iudicibus appoſita, qui cum vindicare & Iuſtitiam facere neglexerint, the contents of which chapter is a Conſtitution of Fredericke the firſt, as Hotoman there proueth, expounding it very learnedly and like himſelfe. Of this kings peace, Roger Houeden ſetteth downe diuers branches, parte poſter. ſuorum annalium. in Henr. 2. fol. 344. a. b. and fol. 430. b. he mentioneth a ſorme of an oth which Hubert Archbiſhop of Canterburie, and chiefe Iuſtice of Englād in R. the firſt his daies, ſent through the whole realme, to be taken by the kings ſubiects. See Deciners. See Suertie of peace. There is alſo the peace of the Church, for which, ſee Sanctuarie. And the peace of the kings high way, which is the immunitie that the kings high way hath, from all annoyance or moleſtation. See Watling ſtreet. The peace of the plowe, whereby the plow and plow catell are ſecured from diſtreſſes. For which, ſee Fitz. nat. br. fol. 90. A. B. So Fayres may be ſaid to haue their peace, becauſe noe man may in them be troubled for any debt elſewhere contracted. See Fayre.
               
               
                  Pedage (pedagium) ſignifieth money giuen for the paſſing by foote or horſe through any countrey. extra de Cenſibus, ca. Innovamus. I reade not this word in any Engliſh writer, but onely the author of the booke called pupilla oculi. parte 9. cap. 7. A. D. I thinke we rather vſe paſſage for it. Pedagia dicuntur quae dantur â tranſeuntibus in locum conſtitutum à principe. Et capiens pedagium debet dare ſaluum conductum, & territorium eius tenere ſecurum. Baldus in vſibus Feudorum. de pa. iura. fir. §. Conventionales. Caſſan. de conſuetud. Burg. pag. 118. hath theſe wordes, Pedagium a pede dictum eſt, quòd à tranſeuntibus ſolvitur, &c.
               
               
                  Peere (pila) ſeemeth properly to be a fortreſſe made againſt the force of the ſea, for the better ſecuritie of ſhips, that lye at harbour in any hauen. So is the peere of Douer deſcribed in M. Camd. Brit. p. 259. in meo.
               
               
                  
                  Peeres (pares) commeth of the French (per. i. par) it ſignifieth in our common lawe, plurally thoſe, that are empaneled in an Enqueſt, vpon any man for the conuicting and clearing him of any offence, for the which he is called in queſtion. And the reaſon thereof is, becauſe the courſe and cuſtome of our nation is, to trie euery man in this caſe by his equals. Weſt prim. cap. 6. anno. 3. Ed. prim. So Kitchin vſeth it. fol. 78. in theſe wordes: Mais ſi le amerciament ſoit affirre per pares. And this word in this ſignification, is not in vſe with vs onely, but with other nations alſo. For pares ſunt conuaſalli, quorum ſententiá vaſallus propter feloniam eſt condemnatus. Barklaius de Regno, lib. 4. cap. 2. Et pares ſunt qui ab eodem domino feudum tenent, lib. prim. Feudor. cap. 26. But this word is moſt notoriouſly vſed for thoſe that be of the Nobilitie of the Realme, and Lords of the Parlament, and ſo is it vſed in Stawnf. pl. of the Crowne, lib. 3. cap. Triall per les Peeres, being the firſt. The reaſon whereof is, becauſe though there be a diſtinction of degrees in our Nobilitie, yet in all publike actions they are equall: as in their voices in Parlament, and in paſſing vpon the triall of any Noble man, &c. This appellation ſeemeth to be borowed from Fraunce, and from thoſe twelue Peeres, that Charles the Great, (or Lewis the younger, in ſome mens opinion) inſtituted in that kingdome, which be next vnto the King, and are of like dignitie among themſelues, touching their power in publike affaires. Of whome you may reade Vincentius Lupanus de magiſtrat. Fraunciae lib, 1. cap. Pares Fraunciae. So that we though we haue borowed the appellation, and applied it with ſome reaſon to all that are Lords of the Parlament, yet haue wee no ſett number of them, becauſe the number of our Nobles, may be more or leſſe, as it pleaſeth the King.
               
                  Pelota, is a word vſed in the booke called (pupilla ocult) parte 5. cap. 22. ſignifying the ball of the foot, of the French (pelote.) i. pila.
               
               
                  Peru fort & dure. See Pain for & dure.
               
               
                  Pelt wooll, is the woll pulled off the skinne or pelt of dead ſheepe, anno 8. H. 6. cap. 22.
               
                  Penon, anno 11. R. 2. cap. prim. is a Standard, Banner, or Enſigne, caried in warre. It is borowed from Fraunce: for pennon in the French language ſignifieth the ſame thing. See Baneret: yea reade this word anno 21. R. 2. cap. 1.
               
                  
                  Penne, See Baye.
               
               
                  Peper, (piper) is a ſpice known in a manner to euery childe, beeing the fruite of a plant, that is betweene a tree and an herbe: of whoſe diuerſities and nature, you may reade Genards herball, lib. 3. cap. 
                  
                     •
                  46. This is ſet among merchandize that are to be garbled. anno, 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Peper lowſe, anno, 32. H. 8 cap. 14.
               
                  Per. cui, & poſt, See Entrie.
               
               
                  Perambulatione facionda, is a writ, that is ſiewed out by two or more Lords of manets, lying neere one another, and conſenting to haue their bounds ſeuerally knowne. It is directed to the Shyreeue, commanding him to make perambulation, and to ſet downe their certaine limits betweene them. Of this reade more at large in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 133. See Rationabilibus diuiſis. See the Regiſt. orig. fol. 157. and the new booke of Entries, verbo, Perambulatione facienda.
               
               
                  Perche (pertica) is a French word, ſignifying a long pole. It is vſed with vs for a Rodde or Pole of 16. foote and a halfe in length. Where of 40 in length and foure in bredth make an acre of ground. Cromptons. Iuriſd. fol. 222. Yet by the cuſtome of the countrie, is may be longer, as he there ſaith: For in the Foreſt of Sheerewood it is 25. foot, fol. 224. M. Skene de verbor. ſignif. verbo, Particata terrae, ſaith, that particata terrae is a Roode of land: where he hath alſo theſe wordes in effect: Three beere cornes without tayles ſet together in length make an inch: of the which cornes one ſhould be taken of the midde ridge, one of the ſide of the ridge, another of the furrow. Twelue inches make a foot of meaſure: three foote and an inch make an elne; ſixe elnes long make one fall. which is the common lineall meaſure, and ſixe elnes long, and ſixe broade, make a ſquare and ſuperficiall fall of meaſured land. And it is to be vnderſtood, that one rod, one raip, one line all fall of meaſure, are all one, for each one of them containeth ſixe elnes in length. Howbeit, a rod is a ſtaffe or pole of wood, a raipe is made of tow or hempe. And ſo much land as falleth vnder the rod or raipe at once, is called a fal of meaſure, or a lineal fall: becauſe it is the meaſure of the line or length onely. Like as the ſuperficiall fall is the meaſure both of length and bredth. Item, tenne fals in length and foure in bredth make a Roode; foure Roodes make an acre, &c. This is the meaſure of Scotland, where of you may reade more in the ſame place.
               
                  
                  Perdonatio vtlagariae, in the Regiſter iudiciall, fol. 28. is the forme of pardon for him, that for not comming to the kings court is outlawed, and afterward of his owne accord yeldeth himſelfe to priſon.
               
                  Peremptorie (peremptorius) commeth of the verb (perimere) to cut of, and ioyned with a ſubſtantiue (as action or exception) ſignifieth a finall and determinate act without hope of renewing. So Fitzh. calleth a peremptory action, nat. br. fol. 35. P. fol. 38. M. fol. 104. O. Q. R. fol. 108. D. G. and non-ſuite peremptorie. idem, eodem, fol. 5. N. F. fol. 11. A. peremptory exception. Bracton li. 4. ca. 20. Smith de rep. Anglorum, li. 2. ca. 13. calleth that a peremptory exception, which can make the ſtate and iſſue in a cauſe.
               
                  Perinde valere, is a diſpenſation graunted to a clerk, that being defectiue in his capacity to a benefice or other eccleſiaſticall function, is de facto admitted vnto it. And it hath the appellation of the words which make the faculty as effectuall to the party diſpenſed with, as if he had bene actually capable of the thing, for which he is diſpenſed with, at the time of his admiſſiō.
               
                  Perkins, was a learned Lawyer, fellow and bencher of the inner Temple, that liued in the daies of Edward the 6. and Queene Mary. He writ a booke vpon diuers points of the common law of very great commendation.
               
                  Permutatione Archidiaconatus & eccleſiae eidem annexae, cum eccleſia & praebenda, is a writ to an Ordinary commaunding him to admit a clerk to a benefice, vpon exchaunge made with another: Regiſter orig. fol. 307. a.
               
               
                  Pernour of profits, commeth of the French verb (prendre. i. accipere) and ſignifieth him that taketh as pernour of profits, anno 1. H. 7. ca. pri. Pernour de profits, and ceſti quevſe is all one, Coke li. i. caſu Chudley. fol. 123. a. See Pernour, anno 21. R. 2. ca. 25.
               
                  Per quae ſeruitia, is a writ iudiciall iſſuying from the note or fine, and lyeth for the cognizee of a maner, ſeignory, cheife rent, or other ſeruices, to compell him that is tenent of the land at the time of the note of the fine leuied, to atturne vnto him. Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 126. To the ſame effect ſpeaketh the old nat. br. fol. 155. See alſo the new booke of Entries. ver
                        ••
                      Per quae ſeruitia.
               
               
                  Perquiſite (perquiſitum) ſignifieth, in Bracton, any thing purchaſed, as perquiſitum facere. 
                        〈◊〉
                      2. cap. 30. nu. 3. & lib. 4. ca. 22. Perquiſites of court, be thoſe profits that grow vnto the Lord of a maner, by vertue of his

Court Baron, ouer and aboue the certaine and yearely profits of his land, as eſcheats, mariages, goods purchaſed by villeines, fines of copie houlds, and ſuch like. New terms of the law.
               
                  Perſon. See Parſon.
               
               
                  Perſonable, ſignifieth as much as inhabled to hould or mainetaine plee in a court. for example: The demaundant was iudged perſonable to maintaine this action. old. nat. br. fol. 142. and in Kitchin fol. 214. The tenent pleaded that the wife was an alien borne in Portingall without the ligeance of the King, and Iudgement was asked whether ſhewould be anſwered. The plaintife ſaith: ſhee was made perſonable by Parlament, that is, as the Ciuilians would ſpeake it, habere perſonam ſtandi in iudicio. Perſonable is alſo as much, as to be of capacitie to take any thing graunted or giuen. Plowden, caſis Colthirſt. fol. 27. b.
               
               
                  Perſonall (Perſonalis) hath in our common lawe, one ſtrange ſignification, being ioyned with the ſubſtantiue, things, goods, or Chatels: as things perſonall, goods perſonall, Chatels perſonall, for thus it ſignifieth any corporeall, and moueable thing belonging to any man, be it quicke, or dead. So is it vſed in Weſt, parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditements, ſect. 58. in theſe words. Theft is an vnlawfull felonious taking away of another mans moueable perſonall goods, and againe, fol. 61. Larceny is a felonious taking away of another mans moueable perſonal goods; & Kitchin f. 139. In theſe words: Where perſonall things ſhalbe giuen to a corporation: as a horſe, a cowe, an oxe, ſheepe, hogs, or other goods, &c. and Stawnford. pl cor. fo. 25. Contrectatio rei aliena, is to be vnderſtood of things perſonall: for in things reall it is not felony, as the cutting of a tree is not felony. The reaſon of this application, ſee in Chatell.
               
               
                  Perſonalty (Perſonalitas) is an abſtract of perſouall. The action is in the perſonalty, old. nat. br. fol. 92. that is to ſay, brought againſt the right perſon, or the perſon againſt whome in lawe, it lieth. I find theſe contrary words. (Perſonalitas & Imperſonalitas) in the author of the booke called vocabularius vtriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iuris: as for example, Perſonalitas ſignificatur per has dictiones: tu, mihi, ego, tibi, cum alto ſignificato quod probabiliter conclulitur & ſi nullo modo concludatur, tunc eſt Imperſonalitas, quia actum vitiat, prout ratio dictat. verbi gratia. Ego ſtipulor: conſtituis te mihi ſoluturum debitum a Titio mihi debitum: Tu reſpondes, Satisfiet. Haec Imperſonalitas non contrahit obligationem.
               
               
                  Perſons ne Praebendaries ne ſeront

charges as quinſimes, &c. is a writ that lyeth for preb endaries or other ſpirituall perſons, being diſtreined by the ſhyreeue, or collectours of fifteenths, for the fiftenth of their goods, or to be contributory to taxes. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 176.
               
                  Peſterable wares, ſeeme to be ſuch wares, as peſter and take vp much roome in a ſhippe, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14.
               
                  Peter pence (Denar
                        〈…〉
                      Sancti Petri) otherwiſe called in the Saxon tongue Roomfooh. i. the ſee of Rome, or due to Rome, and alſo Romeſcot, and Rome penning, was a tribute giuen by Inas King of the weſt Saxons being in pilgrimage at Rome, in the yeare of our Lord. 720. which was a peny for euery houſe. Lamberds explication of Saxon words. verbo Numus. whome ſee alſo fol. 128. in Saint Edwards lawes. nu. 10. where it is thus writen. Omnes qui habent 30. denariatus viuae pecuniae in domo ſua de ſuo proprio, Anglorum lege dabit denariū Sancti Petri, & lege Danorum, dimidiam merkam: Iſte verò denarius debet ſummoniri in ſolennitate. Apoſtolorum Petri & Pauli & colligi ad feſtivitatem, quae dicitur ad vincula: ita vt vltra illum diem non detincatur. Si quiſpiam detinuerit, ad Inſticiam Regis 
                        〈◊〉
                      deferatur, quoniam denarius hic Rogis eleemmoz
                        〈…〉
                      eſt, Iuſticia verò faciat denarium 
                        〈◊〉
                      dere, & foriffacturam. Epiſcopi
                        •
                      & Regis. Quòd ſi quis domos plures had buerit, de illa, vbi reſidens fuerit infeſto Apoſtolorum Petri & Paul
                        •
                      denarium reddat. See alſo King Edgars lawes. fol. 78. cap. 4. which containeth a ſharpe conſtitution touching this 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  ter, Stowe in his Annals, pag. 67. ſaith, that he that had 20. peni worth of goods of one manes catell in his houſe, of his own proper, was to giue a p
                     〈…〉
                   at Lammas yearly. See Romeſ
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
               
               
                  Petit Cape. See Cape.
               
               
                  Petit Larceny (parvum latr
                        〈…〉
                      nium) See Larcenye.
               
               
                  Petit treaſon (parua traditio) in true French is (petit trahizon. 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  proditio minor) treaſon in a leſſer or lower kinde. For whereas treaſon in the higheſt kinde, is an offence done againſt the ſecuritie of the common wealth Weſt parte 2. ſymb. titulo Indi
                        •
                     ements, ſect. 63. petit treaſon is of this nature, though not ſo expreſly as the other. Examples of petit treaſon you ſhall find to be theſe: if a ſeruant kill his maſter, a wife her husband, a ſecular or religious man his prelate, anno 25. Edward 3. cap. 2. Whereof ſee more in Staw
                        •
                     f. pl. cor. lib. 1. cap. 12. See alſo Crom
                        〈…〉
                      Iuſtice of peace. fol. 2. where he addeth diuers other examp
                     〈…〉
                   thoſe of Stawnford. For the puniſhment

of petit treaſon, ſee the ſtatute, anno 22. H. 8. cap. 14. and Crompton vbi ſupra.
               
               
                  Petition (Petitio) hath a general ſignification for all intreaties made by an inferiour to a ſuperiour, and eſpecially to one hauing iuriſdiction: But moſt eſpecially it is vſed for that remedie, which the ſubiect hath to helpe a wrong done, or pretended to be done by the King. For the King hath it by prerogatiue, that he may not be ſiewed vpon a writ. Stawnf. praer. cap. 15. whome alſo read cap. 22. And a petition in this caſe is either generall, or ſpeciall. It is called generall of the generall concluſion ſet downe in the ſame. viz. que le Roy lui face droit & reiſon. that the King doe him right and reaſon: wherevpon followeth a generall indorſement vpon the ſame. ſoit 
                        〈◊〉
                      fait aux partis. let right be done to the partiſe. Petition ſpecial is where the concluſion is ſpeciall for this or that: and the Indorſment to that is likewiſe ſpeciall. See the reſt cap. 21.
               
                  Petra lanae, a ſtone of wooll See Stone.
               
               
                  Philiſer, See Filazer.
               
               
                  Piccage (Piccagium) is money paid in faires for breaking of the ground to ſet vp boothes or ſtandings.
               
                  Picle, ali
                        〈…〉
                      p
                        〈…〉
                     
                   ſeemeth to come from the Italian (piccolo vel picciolo. i. parvus, minutus) and ſignifieth with vs a little ſmall cloſe or incloſure.
               
                  Pienour, commeth of the French (Pionnier. i. foſſor) and ſignifieth ſuch labourers, as are taken vp for the Kings hoſt to caſt trenches, or vndermine forts anno. 2. & 3. Ed. 6. cap. 20.
               
                  Piepowders court (Curia pedis pulverizati) cōmeth of two French words (pie
                        •
                     . i. pes) and pouldreux. i. pulverulentus) It ſignifieth a court held in faires for the redres of all diſorders cōmitted within them: which becauſe it is ſummarie, de plano, & ſine figura iudicii, it hath the name of duſtie ſeete, which we cōmonly get by ſitting neere the ground: of this ſee Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 221. Reade M. Skene. de ver. ſignif. verbo Pedepulveroſus: which word he reporteth to ſignifie a vagabond, eſpecially a merchant, which hath no place of dwelling, where the duſt may be wiped of his feet or ſhooes, & therefore muſt haue iuſtice ſummarily miniſtred vnto him. viz. within three flowings and three ebbings of the ſea. Bract. calleth it Iuſtitiam pepoudrous, li. 5. tract. 1. ca. 6. nn. 6. Of this court reade the ſtatute anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 2.
               
                  Pille of Foddray, in the countie of Lancaſtor, an. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . H. 6. ca. 5.

ſeemeth to be a creeke, and called pille by the ideom of the country for pile: for the which ſee Pile.
               
               
                  Pillorie (Colliſtrigium, Pillorium) commeth of the French (Pilorie) which may ſeeme to ſmell of the greeke, and to proceede from (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) becauſe one ſtanding on the pillory putteth his head through a kind of doore. i. ianua: & 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. video: it ſignifieth all one thing with it, ſauing that the French is vſed for a tumbrell, as well as for that which we call the pillorie, There is a ſtatute made of the pillorie. anno 51. H. 3. wherein you may ſee who were then ſubiect to this puniſhment. This was among the Saxons called Healsfang of (Heals) a necke and (Fang) to take, Lamb. explication of Saxon words. verbo. Mulcta.
               
               
                  Pipe (pipa) ſeemeth to be a rolle in the exchequer, otherwiſe called the great rolle, anno 37. Ed. 3. ca. 4. See Clerke of the pipe. It is alſo a meaſure of wine or oile couteining halfe a tunne, that is ſixe ſcore & ſixe gallons, anno 1. R. 3. cap. 13.
               
                  Piſcarie (piſcaria) commeth of the French (peſchario. i. piſcatio) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, a libertie of fiſhing in an other mans waters.
               
                  Pittle. See Picle.
               
               
                  Placard, anno 2. & 3. Ph. & Mar. cap. 7. is a licence whereby a man is permitted to maintaine vnlawfull games.
               
                  Plaint (Querela) is a French word, ſignifing as much as Queſtus, querimonia. In our common law, it is vſed for the propounding of any action perſonall or reall in writing. So it is vſed in Brooke, titulo. Plaint in Aſſiſe. And the party making this plaint, is called plaintife: Kitchin, fol. 231.
               
                  Plea (placitum) commeth of the French (ploid. i. lis. controverſia). It ſignifieth in our common lawe, that which either partie alleadgeth for himſelfe in court. And this was wont to be done in French from the Conqueſt vntill Edward the 
                     〈◊〉
                   who ordeined them to be done in Engliſh. a. 36. cap. 15. Pleas are diuided into pleas of the Crowne, and common pleas. Pleas of the Crowne in Scotland be 4. roberie, rape, murder, and wilfull fire, Skene de verb. ſign. verb. Placitum. with vs they be all ſuites in the Kings name againſt offences committed againſt his Crowne and dignitie. Stawnf. pl. cor. cap. 1. or againſt his Crowne and peace. Smith. de Repub. Augl. li. 2. cap. 9. And thoſe ſeeme to be treaſons, felonies, miſpriſions of either, and mayhem. For thoſe onely doth that reverend

Iudge mention in that tractat. Common pleas be thoſe that be held betweene common perſons. Yet by the former definitions, theſe muſt compriſe all other, though the king be a partie. Plea may farder be diuided into as many braunches as Action, which ſee. For they ſignifie all one. Then is there a Forein plea, whereby mater is alleadged in any court that muſt be tried in another. As if one ſhould lay Baſtardy to another in a court Baron. Kitchin. fo. 75. The word (placitum) is vſed by the Commentours vpon the Feuds in the ſame ſignification that pleas be with vs. And (placitare) with them is (litigare, & cauſas agere. Hotom. in verb. feudal. verb. Placitare.
               
               
                  Pledge (Plegius) commeth of the French (Pleige. i. fideiuſſor) Pleiger ancun. i. fideiubere pro aliquo. In the ſame ſignification is Plegius vſed by Glanuile. libro decimo, capite quinto, and Plegiatio for the act of ſuretiſhip in the interpreter of the Grand Cuſtumarie of Normandie, capite. 60. Plegii dicuntur perſona
                        •
                      qua ſe obligant ad hoc, ad quod qui eos mittit tenebatur. And in the ſame booke, capit. 89. & 90. Pligutio is vſed as Glanuile before doth vſe it. Salui plegii, be vſed for plegii, pupill. oculi, parte quint. capit. 22. Charta de Foresta. This word plegius is vſed alſo for Frank pledge ſometime, as in the ende of William Conquerours lawes ſet out by Master Lamberd in his Archaiononi. fol. 125. in theſe words. Omnis homo qui voluerit ſe teneri pro libero, ſit in plegio, vt plegius eum habeat ad Iusticiam, ſi quid offenderit, &c. And theſe be called capitall pledges. Kitchin. folio decimo. See Frank pledge.
               
               
                  Plena forisfactura, and plena vita, fee Forfeiture.
               
               
                  Plegiis acquietandis, is a writ that lieth for a ſuretie againſt him, for whome he is ſuretie, if he pay not the money at the day. Fitzh. nat br. fol. 137. Regist. original. 158. a.
               
               
                  Plenartie, is an abſtract of the adiectiue (plenus) and is vſed by our common Lawyers in mater of benefices▪ Wherein plenartie and vacation be meerely contrarie. Stawnford. prarogativ. cap. octau. fol. 32. West. ſecundo, capit. quint. anno 13. Edvard. pri.
               
               
                  Plevin (pleuina) commeth of the French (plenine. i. sponſio)
               
               
                  
See Replevin.
               
               
                  Plite of Lawne, &c. anno. 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. ſeemeth to be a certaine meaſure, as a yard, or elle, &c.
               
                  Plonkets, anno 1. R. 3. cap. 8. is a kind of wollen cloth.
               
                  Pluries, is a writ that goeth out in the third place. For firſt goeth out the originall Capias: which, if it ſpeed not, then goeth out the Sicut aliâs: and if that faile, then the Pluries. See old nat. br. fol. 33. In the writ De excom. capiendo, ſee in what diuerſitie of caſes this is vſed in the Table of the original Regiſt.
               
               
                  Pole. See Perch.
               
               
                  Polein, anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 7. ſeemeth to be a ſharpe or picked toppe ſet in the forepart of the ſhooe or boott. This faſhion was firſt taken vp in Richard the ſeconds dayes, the pickes being made ſo long as they were tyed vp to the knees with ſiluer or golden chaines, and forbidden by Edward the fourth. Stow pag. 4.
               
                  Policie of aſſurance, is a courſe taken by thoſe which do aduenture wares or merchandize by ſea, whereby they, loche to hazard their whole aduenture, do giue vnto ſome other a certaine rate or proportion, as tenne in the hundred, or ſuch like, to ſecure the ſafe arriuall of the ſhip, and ſo much wares at the place; agreed vpon. So that if the ſhip and wares do miſcarie, the aſſrer maketh good to the venturer ſo much as he promiſeth to ſecure, as 20. 30. 100. more or leſſe: and if the ſhip do ſafely ariue, he gaineth that clearely which the venturer compoundeth to pay him. And for the more euen dealing betweene the venturer and the ſecurer in this caſe, there is a certaine Clerk or officer ordained to ſet downe in writing the ſumme of their agreement, that they afterward differ not betweene themſelues vpon the bargaine. This is in courſe Latine elſewhere called aſſecuratio. This terme you haue anno 43. Fliz. cap. 11.
               
                  Pondage. See Poundage.
               
               
                  Pone, is a writ, whereby a cauſe depending in the County court, is remoued to the common Banke. old nat. br. fol. 2. See in what diuerſitie of caſes it is vſed, in the table of the Originall Regiſter.
               
               
                  Pone per vadium, is a writ commaunding the Shyreene to take ſuretie of one for his appearance at a day aſſigned: of this ſee fiue ſorts in the table of the Regiſts Iudic. verbo, Pone per vadium.
               
               
                  Ponondis in Aſſiſis, is a writ founded vpon the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. cap. 38. and vpon the ſtatute Articuli ſuper chartas cap. 9. which ſtatutes do ſhew, what

perſons Vicounts ought to impanell vpon Aſſiſes and Iuries, and what not: as alſo what number he ſhould empanell vpon Iuries and Inqueſts, which ſee in the Regiſter orig. fol. 178. a. and in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 165.
               
                  Ponendo in ballum, is a writ whereby to will a priſoner held in priſon, to be committed to baile in caſes baylable. Regiſter orig. fol. 133. b.
               
               
                  Ponendo ſigillum ad exceptionem, is a writ whereby the king willeth Iuſtices, according to the ſtatute of Weſtm. 2. to put their ſeales to exceptions laid in againſt the plaintiffes declaration by the defendant.
               
                  Pontage (pontagium) is a contribution toward the maintenance or reedifying of bridges Weſtm. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. pri. It may be alſo tolle taken to this purpoſe of thoſe that paſſe ouer bridges, anno 39. Eliz. cap. 24. anno 1. H. 8. cap. 9. and ſee the ſtatute, anno 22. H. 8. cap. 5.
               
                  Pontibus reparandis, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, &c. willing him to charge one or more to repaire a bridge, to whom it belongeth. Regiſt. orig. fol. 153. b.
               
               
                  Portgreue (portgreuius) is compounded of two words (port) & (greue) or (graue) i. praefectus. It ſignifieth with vs the chiefe magiſtrate in certaine coaſt townes, and as M. Camden ſaith in his Britan. pag. 325. the chiefe magiſtrate of London was termed by this name: in ſteed of whom Richard the firſt ordained two Bayliffes: but preſently after him, King Iohn granted them a Maior for their yearely Magiſtrate.
               
                  Porter of the doore of the Parlament houſe, is a neceſſary officer belonging to that high court, & enioyeth the priuiledges accordingly. Cromptons. Iuriſd. fol. 11.
               
                  Porter in the circuit of Iuſtices, is an officer that carieth a verge or white rodde before the Iuſtices in Eyre, ſo called, a portando virgam, anno 13. Ed. 1, cap. 24.
               
                  Porter bearing verge (virgator) before the Iuſtices of either benth, anno 13. Ed. 1. cap. 41. See Vergers.
               
               
                  Portemote, is a word compounded of (port. i. portus) and the Saxon (Gemettan. i. conuenire) or of the French (mot. i. dictio, verbum.) It ſignifieth a Court kept in hauen townes, as Swainmote in the Foreſt. Manwood, parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes, pa. 111. It is ſometime called the Portmoote Court, anno 43. Eliz. cap. 15.
               
                  Portſale, anno 35. H. 8. cap. 7. id eſt, ſale of fiſh preſently vpon returne in the hauen.
               
                  Poſſeſſion (poſſeſſio) is vſed two waies in our common lawe. Firſt for lands and inheritance: as, he is a man of large poſſeſſions. In

which ſignification it is alſo vſed among the Ciuilians ſc: for the thing poſſeſſed, l. poſſeſſionum: Cod. commun. vtriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Iudic. Next, for the actuall enioying of that, which either in truth or pretence is ours. And in this ſignification there is poſſeſſion indeed, and poſſeſſion in lawe: pl. cor. fol. 198. The example there is this: Before or vntill an office to be found, the king hath onely poſſeſſion in law, and not in deed, ſpeaking of the lands eſcheated by the attainder of the owner. See praerog. fol. 54. &. 55. In this ſignification alſo there is an vnitie of poſſeſſiō, which the Ciuilians call Conſolidationem. Take an example out of Kitchin, fol. 134. if the Lord purchaſe the tenancie held by Heriot ſeruice, then the Heriot is extinct by vnity of poſſeſſion: that is, becauſe the ſeigneurie and the tenancie be now in one mans poſſeſſion. Many diuiſions of poſſeſſion you may reade in Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 17. per totum.
               
               
                  Poſt. See Per.
               
               
                  Poſt diem, is a returne of a writ after the day aſſigned for the returne: for the which, the Cuſtos breuium hath foure pence, whereas he hath nothing, if it be returned at the day: or it may be the fee taken for the ſame.
               
                  Poſt fine, is a duty belonging to the king for a fine formerly acknowledged before him in his court which is paid by the cognizee, after the fine is fully paſſed, and all things touching the ſame wholly accompliſhed. The rate thereof is ſo much and halfe ſo much, as was payed to the king for the fine, and is gathered by the Shyreeue of the Countie where the land, &c. lyeth, whereof the fine was leuyed, to be aunſwered by him into the Exchequer.
               
                  Poſt terme, is a returne of a writ, not onely after the day aſſigned for the returne thereof, but after the terme alſo; which may not be receiued by the Cuſtos brevium, but by the conſent of one of the Iudges it may be alſo the fee which the Cuſtos breuium taketh, for the returne thereof, which is twenty pence.
               
                  Poſtea, is a word vſed for a mater tried by Niſi prius, and returned into the court of common pleas for Iudgement, and there afterward recorded. See Plowden, caſu Saunders. fol. 211. a. See an example of this in Sir Edw. Cokes reports. volum. 6. Rowlands caſe. fol. 41. b. 42. a. See Cuſtos breuium.
               
               
                  Poſt diſſeiſin (poſt diſſeiſina) is a writ giuen by the ſtatute of Weſt. 2. cap. 26. and lyeth for him that

hauing recouered lands or tenements by (praecipe quod reddat) vpon default, or reddition, is againe diſſeiſed by the former diffeiſour. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 190. ſee the writ that lyeth for this in the Regiſter originall, fol. 208. a.
               
               
                  Poſteriority, (poſterioritas) is a word of compariſon and relation in tenure, the correlatiue whereof is prioritie. For a man holding lands or tenements of two lords, holdeth of his auncienter Lord by prioritie, and of his later Lord by poſterioritie. Stawn. praerog. fol. 10. & 11. when one tenent holdeth of two Lords, of the one by prioritie, of the other by poſterioritie, &c. old nat. br. fol. 94.
               
                  Pourchas (perquiſitum) commeth of the French (pourchaſſer, i. ſollicitare, ambire:) it ſignifieth the buying of lands or tenements with money or other agreement, and not the obtaining of it by title or diſcent. Coniunctum perquiſitum. Ioynt pourchaſe. Regiſt. originall. fol. 143. b.
               
               
                  Pour faire proclaimer, que nul eniect fimes ou ordures en foſſes euriuers pres cities, &c. is a writ directed to the Maior, Shyreeue or Bayliffe of a citie or towne, cōmanding them to proolaime, that none caſt filth into the ditches or places neare adioyning: and if any be caſt alreadie, to remoue it. This is founded vpon the ſtatut, anno 12. Rich. 2. cap. 13. Fitzherb. nat. br. fol. 176.
               
                  Pourparty (propars, propartis, vel propartia) is contrarie to (pro indiuiſo) For to make pourparty is to diuide, and ſeuer the landes that fall to Parceners, which before partition they hold ioyntly, and pro indiuiſo. old. nat. br. fol. 11.
               
                  Pourpreſture (pourpreſtura, vel perpreſtura, vel parapreſtura) ſeemeth to come from the French (pourpris. i. conſeptum.) It is thus defined by Glanuile, lib. 9. cap. 11. Pourpreſtura eſt propriè, quando aliquid ſuper Dominum Regem iniuſtè occupatur. Vt in Dominicis Regis, vel in viis publicis abſtructis, vel in aquis publicis tranſuerſis à recto curſu: vel quando aliquis in ciuitate ſuper Regiam plateam aliquid adificando occupauerit: & generaliter, quoties aliquid fit ad nocumentum Regii tenementi, vel Regiae viae, vel ciuitatis. Crompton. in his Iuriſd. fol. 152. defineth it thus: Pourpreſture is properly when a man taketh vnto himſelf or incrocheth any thing that he ought not, whether it be in any Iuriſdiction, land or fraunchis: and generally, when any thing is done to the Nuſance of the kings tenents. Et idem, eodem, fol. 203. ſaith to the ſame effect, but

more at large. See Kitchin, fol. 10. and Manwood, parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 169. & parte 2. cap. 10. per totum. See Skene de verbor. ſignif. verb. Purpreſture. Where he maketh three ſorts of this offence: one againſt the King, the ſecond againſt the Lord of the fee: the third, againſt a neighbour by a neighbour lying neare him.
               
                  Pour ſeiſir terres la femme que tient en Dower, &c. is a writ whereby the King ſeiſeth vpon the land, which the wife of his Tenent, that held in capite, diſceaſed, hath for her Dowrie, if ſhee marry without his leaue: and is grounded vpon the ſtatute of the Kings prerogatiue. cap. 3. ſee Fitzh. fol. 174.
               
                  Pourſuyuant, commeth of the French (pourſuiure. i. agere, agitare, perſequi) It ſignifieth the Meſſenger of the king attending vpon him in warres, or at the counſell table, the Starre Chamber, Exchequer, or commiſſion court, to be ſent vpon any occaſion, or meſſage, as for the apprehenſion of a party accuſed, or ſuſpected of any offence committed. Thoſe that be vſed in marſhall cauſes, be called Pourſw
                        〈…〉
                     ts at armes, anno 24. Hen. 8. cap. 13. whereof there be foure in number of eſpecial names, which ſee in Herald. And M. Stowe ſpeaking of Richard the third his end. pag. 784. hath theſe words: For his bodie was naked to the skinne, notſo much as one cloute about him, and was truſſed behinde a Purſuyuant at armes, like a hogge, or a calfe, &c. The reſt are vſed vpon other meſſages in time of peace, and eſpecially in maters touching iuriſdiction. See Herald.
               
               
                  Pourueyour, (prouiſon) commeth of the French (pour
                        〈…〉
                     . i. prouidere proſpicere.) It ſignifieth an Officer of the King, Queene, or other great perſonage, that prouideth corne and other victuall, for the houſe of him whoſe Officer he is. See magna charta. cap. 22. & 3. Ed. prim. cap. 7. & cap. 31. & anno 28. eiuſdem. Articuli ſuper chartas. 2. and many other ſtatutes gathered by Raſtal vnder this title.
               
                  Powldauis. anno 1. Iacob. ca.. 
                  
                     •
                  4.
               
                  Power of the countie, (poſſe c
                        〈…〉
                     
                     tatus) by M. Lamberds opinion in his Eirenar. lib. 3. cap. 1. fol. 309. containeth the ayde and attendance of all Knights, gentlemen, yeomen, labourers, ſeruants, apprentiſes, and villaines: and likewiſe of Wardes, and of other young men aboue the age of fifteene yeeres, within the countie, becauſe all of that age are bound to haue harneſſe, by the ſtatute of Wincheſter. But women, eccleſiaſticall perſons,

and ſuch as be decrepit, or do labour of any continuall infirmitie, ſhall not be compelled to attend. For the ſtatute 2. H. 5. cap. 8. (which alſo worketh vpon the ſame ground) ſaith, that perſons ſufficient to trauell, ſhall be aſſiſtant in this ſeruice.
               
                  Pounde (parcus) ſeemeth to ſignifie generally any incloſure of ſtrength to keepe in beaſts: but eſpecially, with vs, is ſignifieth a place of ſtrength to reſtraine catell being diſtrained or put in for any treſpas done by them, vntill they be repleuied or redeemed. And in this ſignification it is called a pound ouert, or open pound being builded vpon the waſt of ſome Lord within his fee, and is called the Lords pownd. For he provideth it to his vſe, and the vſe of his tenents. See Kitchin. fol. 144. It is diuided into pound open, and pound cloſe: pound open or ouert, is not onely the Lordes pownd, but a backſide, court, yarde, paſture, or elſe what ſoeuer, whether the owner of any beaſts impounded may come to giue them meate and drinke without offence, for their being there, or his comming thither: pound cloſe is then the contrary viz. ſuch a one as the owner cannot come vnto, to the purpoſe aforeſaide without offence, as ſome cloſe houſe, or ſuch like place.
               
                  Powndage, is a Subſidie granted to the King of all maner of merchandies of euery merchant denizen and alien, caried out of this realme, or brought into the ſame by way of Merchandize, to the valew of twelue pence in eeuery pound, anno 12. Ed. 6. cap. 13. anno 31. Eliz. cap. 5. anno 1. Iacobi, cap. 33.
               
                  Pray age. See Age prier.
               
               
                  Pray in ayd. See Ayd.
               
               
                  Prebend (praebenda) is the portion, which euery member, or Canon of a Cathedrall church receiueth in the right of his place, for his maintenance. And though vſe haue wrought the latine word into the nature of a Subſtantiue: yet I thinke it originally to be an Adiectiue, or participle, and to haue bene ioyned with (pars or portio) as (Canonica portio) which is in a maner all one in ſignification. How be it (Canonica portio) is properly vſed for that ſhare which euery Canon or Prebendary receiueth yearely out of the common ſtocke of the Church: and praebenda is a ſeuerall benefice riſing from ſome temporall land, or church appropriated, toward the maintenance of a Clerke, or member of a Collegiat Church; and is commonly ſurnamed of the place, whence, the profit groweth. And Prebends

be either ſimple, or with dignity. Simple Prebends be thoſe, that haue no more but the reuenew toward their maintenance: Prebends with dignity are ſuch, as haue ſome Iuriſdiction annexed vnto them according to the diuers orders in euery ſeuerall church. Of this ſee more in the title. De praebendis, & dignitat: in the Decretalls. Alciat ſaith that (praebenda) in the plurall number and neuter gender was aunciently vſed: as now (praebenda) in the ſinguler number and feminine gender is vſed. parerg. ca. 43.
               
                  Praebendary (praebendarius) is he that hath a prebend: See Praebend.
               
               
                  Praecept (praeceptum) is diuerſly taken in the cōmon law: ſometime for a commaundement in wrighting ſent out by a Iuſtice of peace, or other for the bringing of a perſon one or more, or records before him: of this you haue examples of diuers in the table of the Reg. Iudiciall: And this vſe ſeemeth to be borowed from the cuſtomes of Lombardy, where praeceptum ſignifieth ſcripturam, vel inſtrumentum. Hot. in verbis feudal. & libro. 3. Commentariorum in libros fendorum, in praefatione. Sometime it is taken for the prouocation, whereby one man inciteth an other to commit a felony, as theft, or murder. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 105. Bracton calleth it (praeceptum) or (mandatum) lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 19. whence a man may obſerue three diuerſities of offending in murder: Praeceptum, fortia, conſilium: praeceptum, being the inſtigation vſed before hand, fortia, the aſſiſtance in the fact, as help to binde the party murdered, or robbed: conſilium, aduiſe either before or in the deede. The Ciuilians vſe (mandatum) in this caſe, as appeareth by Angelus in tracta: de maleficus. verſ. Sempronium Mandatorem.
               
               
                  Praeceptories, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 24. were benefices in a kinde, & termed preceptories, becauſe they were poſſeſſed by the more eminent ſort of the Templers, whome the cheife maſter by his authoritie created and called (praeceptores Templi) Ioach. Stepha. de Iuriſdict. li. 4. cap. 10. num. 27. See Comaundry.
               
               
                  Praecipe quod reddat, is a writ of great diuerſitie touching both the forme and vſe, for beter declaration whereof ſee Ingreſſu, and Entrie. This forme is extended as well to a writ of right, as to other writs of entry, or poſſeſſion. old. nat. br. fol. 13. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 5. And it is called ſometime a writ of Right cloſe, as a praecipe in capite, when it iſſueth out of the court of common plees for a tenent holding of the King in cheife, as

of his Crowne, and not of the King, as of any honour, caſtell or maner. Regiſter orig. fol. 4. b. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 5. F. Sometime a writ of Right patent: as when it iſſueth out of any Lords court, for any of his tenents deforced, againſt the deforcer, and muſt be determined there. Of this reade more at large in Fitzh. nat. br. in the very firſt chapter or writ of all his booke.
               
                  Praemunire, is taken either for a writ, or for the offence wherevpon the writ is graunted. The one may well enough be vnderſtoode by the other. It is therefore to be noted, that the church of Rome vnder pretence of her ſupremacie and the dignitie of Saint Peters chaire, grew to ſuch an incroching, that there could not be a benefice (were it Biſhoprick, Abbathy, or other) of any worth here in England, the beſtowing whereof could eſcape the Pope by one meanes or other. In ſo much, as for the moſt part, he graunted out Mandats of eccleſiaſticall liuings, before they were voide to certaine perſōs by his buls, pretēding therein a great care to ſee the Church prouided of a Succeſſorbefore it needed. Whence it grew that theſe kinde of Buls were called (Gratiae expectativae) or (Prouiſiones) whereof you may reade a learned diſcourſe in Duarenus that worthie Ciuilian in his tractat: De beneficiis lib. 3. c. 1. and in his treatiſe De immunitate eccleſiae Gallicanae. Theſe prouiſions, wereſo rife with vs, that at the laſt, King Edward the third, that heroicall Prince, not diſgeſting ſo intolerable an oppreſſion, made a ſtatute in the 25. yeare of his reigne, ſtatuto 5. cap. 22. and another, ſtatuto 6. eiuſdem anni. cap. pri. and a third anno 27. againſt thoſe that drew the Kings people out of the Realme, to anſwer of things belonging to the kings court; and another anno 28. ſtatu. 2. 6. 1. 2. 3. & 4. to the like effect whereby he greatly reſtained this libertie of the Pope. Yet ſuch was the wantonneſſe that grew out of his power, & the num patiēce of princes in thoſe daies, that hee ſtill advē
                  tured the continuance of theſe prouiſions: in ſo much as King Richard the ſecond made likewiſe a ſtatute againſt them in the 12. yeare of his reigne, cap. 15. and the 13. yeare ſtatut. 2. ca. 2. making mention of the ſaid firſt ſtatute of Edward the third, ratifiing the ſame, and appointing the puniſhment of thoſe, that offēded againſt it, to be perpetuall baniſhment, forfeiture of their lands, tenements, goods, and catels, as by the ſame doth more at large appeare. And againe in the 16.

yeare of his reigne, cap. 5. to meete more fully with all the ſhifts inuented to defraude theſe former ſtatutes, he expreſſeth the offence more particularly, and ſetteth the ſame puniſhment to it, that hee ordeined in the laſt former ſtatute. for there toward the ende he hath theſe words: If any purchaſe or purſiew, or do to be purchaſed, or purſiewed in the court of Rome, or els where, any ſuch tranſlations, proceſſes, and ſentences of excommunication, Buls, Inſtruments, or any other things, &c. After him K. H. the fourth in like maner greeued at this importuny by other abuſes not ſully mette with in the former ſtatutes, in the ſecond yeare of his reigne, cap. 3. & 4. addeth certaine new caſes, and laieth vpon the offendours in them the ſame cenſure, whereunto for ſhortnes ſake I referre you: admoniſhing likewiſe to adde the ſtatute, anno. 9. eiuſdem. cap. pri. & anno 7. cap. 9. & 8. & anno 9. eiuſdem. cap. 8. & anno 3. H. 5. cap. 4. Out of which ſtatutes haue our profeſſors of the common lawe, wrought many daungers to the Iuriſdiction eccleſiaſticall, thretning the puniſhment conteined in the ſtatute anno. 27. Ed. 3. &. 38. eiuſdem, almoſt to euery thing that the court Chriſtian dealeth in, pretending all things delt with in thoſe courts to be the diſheriſon of the Crowne. from the which, and none other fountaine, all eccleſiaſticall Iuriſdiction is now deriued: wheras in truth Sir Tho. Smith ſaith very rightly, and charitablely, that the vniting of the ſupremacie eccleſiaſticall, and temporall in the king, vtterly voideth the vſe of all thoſe ſtatuts. Nam ceſſante ratione, ceſſat lex. And whatſoeuer is now wrought or threatened againſt the Iuriſdiction eceleſiaſticall, by colour of the ſame, is but in emulation of one court to another: and by conſequent a derogation to that authoritie, from which all Iuriſdiction is now deriued, and the maintenance whereof was by thoſe Princes eſpecially purpoſed. But of this reade Sir Thomas Smith, lib. 3. de Rep. Angl. cap. 9.
               Some later ſtatutes doe caſt this puniſhment vpon other offenders: as namely the ſtatute, anno 1. El. cap. primo, vpon him that denieth the Kings ſupremacie the ſecond time, &c. and the ſtatue anno 13. El. ca. 2. vpon him that affirmeth the authoritie of the Pope: or that refuſeth to take the oathe of ſupremacie. and the ſtatute, anno 13. El. cap. 1. fuch as be ſeditious talkers of the inheritance of the Crowne, or affirme the Queenes Maieſtie

to be an heritique. And the word is applied moſt commonly to the puniſhment firſt ordeined by the ſtatutes before mentioned, for ſuch as tranſgreſſed them; but in later times impoſed vpon other offences. for that, where it is ſaide that any man for an offence committed ſhall incurre a premunire, it is meant, that he ſhall incurre the ſame puniſhment, which is inflicted againſt thoſe that trangreſſe the ſtatute made, anno 16. R. 2. ca. 5. which is commonly called the ſtatute of premunire, which kinde of reference is not vnuſuall in our ſtatutes. Cor example, I ſhew onely the ſtatute, anno 5. El. ca. 5. where it is inacted that if any man preach or teach by wrighting, that the cōmon Counſell of the Realme doe by that ſtatute forbid fleſh to be eaten, as of neceſſitie for the ſauing of mans ſoule, that he ſhall for ſuch preaching, &c. be puniſhed as they be, which be ſpredders of falſe newes: hauing reference thereby to thoſe ſtatutes, which conteine the puniſhment of ſuch offenders.
               Now touching the Etymologie of this word (Praemunire) ſome thinke it proceedeth from the ſtrength giuen to the Crown by the former ſtatutes, againſt the vſurpation of forein and vnnaturall power: which opinion may receiue ſome ground from the ſtatute, anno 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 6. cap. pri. But other thinke it to grow from the verb (Praemonere) being barbarouſly turned into (Praemunire) which corruption is taken from the rude Interpreters of the Ciuile, and Canon lawes, who indeede doe vſe the effect (Praemunire) many times for the efficient cauſe (Praemonere) according to our prouerb: He that is well warned, is halfe armed. And of this I gather reaſon from the forme of the writ, which is thus conceiued in the old. nat. br. fol. 143. Praemunire facias praefatum praepoſitum & I. R. procuratorem, &c. quod tune ſint coram nobis, &c. for theſe words can be referred to none, but parties charged with the offence.
               
                  Praepoſitus villae, is vſed ſometime for the Conſtable of a town, or petit Conſtable. Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 205. how be it the ſame author, fol. 194. ſeemeth to apply it otherwiſe. for there quatuor homines praepoſiti, be thoſe 4. men, that for euery towne muſt appeare before the Iuſtices of the Foreſt in their Circuit. It is vſed ſometime for a Reeve. See Reeve.
               
               
                  Praerogatiue of the King (praeregatiua regis) is that eſpeciall

power, preeminence, or priuiledge that the King hath in any kinde, ouer and aboue other perſons, and aboue the ordinarie courſe of the common lawe, in the right of his crowne. And this word (Praerogatiua) is vſed by the Ciuilians in the ſame ſenſe. l. Reſcriptum. 6. §. 4. Π. de hono. & muner. But that priviledge that the Roman Emperour had aboue common perſons, they for the moſt part compriſed (ſub iurefiſci. Π. de iure fiſct, per totum tit. & Co. li. 10. tit. 1. Among the Feudiſts this is termed (ius regalium, ius regaliorum vel a nonnullis ius regaliarum) But as the Feudiſts, ſub iure regalium, ſoe our lawyers (ſub praerogatiua regis) doe compriſe alſo, all that abſolute heighth of power that the Ciuilians call (maieſtatem, vel poteſtatem, vel ius imperii,) ſubiect only to god: which (regalia) the Feudiſts diuide into two ſorts, maiora ſc. &. minora regalia. for to vſe their owne words, Quaedam regalia, dignitatem, praerogatiuam, & imperii praeemmentiam ſpectant: quaedam verò ad vtilitatem, & commodum pecuniarium immediatè attinent: & haec proprièfiſcalia ſunt, & ad ius fiſci pertinent. Peregri: de iure fiſci, li. pri. cap. 1. nu. 9. See alſo Arnoldus Clapmarius. de arcanis Imperii. lib. pri. cap. 11. & ſeqq. who ſeemeth to make difference betwene maieſtatem, & ius regaliorū. Others alſo make thoſe (maiora regalia) that appertaine to the dignitie of the prince, and thoſe minora, which inrich his cofers. Regnerus Sixtinus, de iure rega. cap. 2. By this it appeareth, that the ſtatute of the Kings prerogatue made, an. 17. Ed. 2. conteineth not the ſumme of the Kings whole prerogatiue, but onely ſo much thereof, as concernes the profit of his cofers growing by vertue of his regall power and crowne. for it is more then manifeſt, that his prerogatiue reacheth much farder: yea euen in the maters of his profit, which that ſtatute eſpecially conſiſteth of. For example, it is the kings prerogatiue to graunt protection vnto his debtours againſt other creditours, vntill himſelfe be ſatisfied. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 28. B. to diſtreine for the whole rent vpon one tenent, that hath not the whole land. Idem. fol. 235. A. to require the aunceſters debt of the heire, though not eſpecially bound. Brit. cap. 28. fo. 65. b. to ſeiſe vpon money paid by his deptour into a court, for the ſatisfaction of an executor. Plowden, fol. 322. a. to permit his deptours to ſiew for their debts by a (Quo minus) in the exchequer. Perkins. Grawnts. 5. to be firſt paid by one that oweth money both to

him and others. Dyer. fol. 67. nu. 20. to take the lands of accountants into his hands for his own ſatisfaction. Plowd. caſu Almes. fol. 321. & 322. to take his action of accoumpt againſt executors, eodem, fol. 320. not to be tied to the demaund of his rent. Coke. li. 4. fo. 73. a. Now for thoſe regalities which are of the higher nature (all being within the compas of his prerogatiue, and iuſtly to be compriſed vnder that title) there is not one that belonged to the moſt abſolute prince in the world, which doth not alſo belong to our king, except the cuſtome of the nations ſo differ (as indeede they doe) that one thing be in the one accompted a regalitie, that in another is none. Onely by the cuſtome of this kingdome, he maketh no lawes without the conſent of the 3. eſtates though he may quaſh any lawe concluded of by them. And whether his power of making lawes be reſtreined (de neceſſitate) or of a godly and commendable policy, not to be altered without great perill, I leaue to the iudgement of wiſermen. But I hold it incontrowlable, that the king of England is an abſolute king. And all learned politicians doe range the power of making lawes, inter inſignia ſummae & abſolutae potestatis. Maiora autem regalia ſunt haec: clauſula plenitudinis poteſtatis, & ex ea aliquid ſtatuere, leges condere, ac eas omnibus & ſingulis dare, bellum indicere, belli indicenci licentiam alii dare, pronunciare ita vt a ſententia appellari non poſſit, committere ſive delegare alicui cauſam cum clauſula appellatione remota, cognoſcere de crimine laeſae maieſtatis, legitimare per reſcriptum eos qui extra legitimum matrimonium nati ſunt, ad famam, honores, & natales in integrum reſtituere, veniam aetatis dare, creare Duces, Marchiones, Comites, regnum in feudum concedere. Huc referri poteſt ius erigendi ſcholam, quae hodie Vniuerſitas vel Academia appellatur, etiā ius creādi doctores, gradu licentiae aliquem inſigniendi, creandi magiſtratus, tabelliones, ſiue notarios, ius dandi inſignia nobilitatis, ſiue nobiles creandi, ius cudendae monetae, noua vectigalia inſtituendi, vel inſtituta vectigalia augendi; Sixtinus vbi ſupra. So that thoſe other which are mentioned in libris feudorum, and the interpreters of them, are (at the leaſt for the moſt part) iuſtly called regalia minora, as armandiae, viae publicae, flumina nauigantia, portus, ripalia, vectigalia, monetae, mulctarum poenarum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      compendia, bona vacantia, bona quae indignis auferuntur, bona eorum qui inceſtum matrimonium contrahunt, bona damnatorum, & proſcriptorum, angariae & parangariae, extraordinariae

ad expeditionem imperatoris collationes, poteſtas creandorum magiſtratuum ad iuſticiam exequendam, argentarie, palatia in ciuitatibus conſtituta, piſcationum reditus, ſalinarum reditus, bona committentium crimen laeſae maieſtatis, theſaurus inuentus. By ſetting downe theſe regalities of both ſorts, as they are accoumpted in the Empire, and other forein kingdomes, they may be the more eaſily compared with our kings prerogatiues, and ſo the differences noted betweene vs and them. And whereas ſome things are before reckoned both (inter regalia maiora, & minora) the reader muſt vnderſtand that this may be in diuers reſpects. For example, the power of raiſing a tribute, or of coyning money is inter maiora: but the profit that groweth to the Prince by the one or other, is (inter minora) Now may there alſo be noted out of books a great number of prerogatiues belonging to the king of this land, which doe not bring profit to his cofers immediately, and therefore may be accoumpted inter regalia maiora, or at the leaſt, in a middle or mixt nature, or inter maiora & minora, becauſe by a conſequent they tend to the increaſe of the kings exchequer. Of theſe ſuch as I haue obſerued in reading, I will ſet downe as they come to my hands, without farder curioſity in diuiding. It is the kings prerogatiue that he may not be ſiewed vpon an ordinary writ as tenent to lands, but by petition. Plowd. caſu Walſingham fo. 553. to haue a ceceſſary conſent in the appropriation of all benefices. Idem, caſu Grendon. fol. 499. to waiue and to demurre, and to pleade to the iſſue, or to waiue the iſſue, and to demurre vpon the plee of the aduers part, yet not to chaunge the iſſue another terme after he and the aduers part be once at iſſue. Idem, caſu Willion. fol. 23. 6. a. & caſu Mines fol. 322. a. to be receiued in a ſuite before iſſue ioyned vpon an (ayde prier) Idem, caſu Dutchry of Lancaſter, fol. 221. b. to be neuer in nonage, eodem, fol. 218. b. that a man indicted may not wage battell with him. Idem caſu nimes fol. 335. b. that no man vpon any right may enter vpon him being in poſſeſſion, but muſt be put to ſuite. Dyer fol. 139. nu. 33. to ſeiſe the lands of his tenents that alienate without licence. Plowd. caſu. Mines. fol. 322. a. that no ſubiect may wage his law againſt him. Broke. choſein action. 9. Coke. lib. 4. fol. 93. to preſent in the right of the youngeſt coparcener being his worde before the elder. Plowd: caſu. Mines. fol. 332. b. & fol. 333. a. that a benefice by inſtitution is

not full againſt him. Coke. Digbies caſe, fol. 79. a. not to finde pledges for the perſecuting of any action. For he cannot be amerced. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 31. F. & fo. 47. C. to ſiew in what court he will. Fitzh. nat. br. f. 7. B. & 32. E. to ſiew the writ Ne admittas after ſixe monethes. Regiſt. orig. fol. 31. a. that a mans villein hauing remained in his auncient demeſn by the ſpace of a yeare, may not be recouered by the writ (de natiuo habendo) Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 79. A. to graunt an office with the (babendum poſt mortem alterius) Dyer. fo. 295. nu. 1. to ſhorten the ordinary time of ſummons (being 15. daies) in writ of right. Brit. ca. 121. to giue what honour or place he liſteth to his ſubiects. anno 31. H. 8. ca. 10. to be owner of a foreſt. See Foreſt. to haue free warren. See Warren. Not to be owted of his free hould. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 59. b. & 16. a. to araigne a man being both a Traitor, and a Felon, rather vpon the treaſon, than vpon the felony, becauſe he may haue the whole eſcheats. Idem. eodem. fol. 99. a. to warrant the day of appearance to his ſubiect being in his ſeruice, and ſummoned to appeare at a day certaine. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 17. a. Diuers of theſe and many others did belong (fiſco imperatorum) which you may finde in the Digeſt: De iure fiſci. & Co. lib. 10. tit. 1. Beſides theſe alſo many moe may be obſerued to belong vnto our King out of lawes, which I leaue to their collection that are of longer reading, and more painefull induſtry.
               
                  Prerogatiue of the Archbiſhop of Canterbury, or Yorke, (prarogatiua Archiepiſcopi Cantuarienſis, ſeu Eboracenſis) is an eſpeciall preeminence, that theſe Sees haue in certaine caſes aboue ordinary Biſhops within their Prouinces. And that of the Archbiſhop of Canterburie, principally conſiſteth of theſe points.
               Firſt, in the confirmation of all elections made of Biſhops by the Deane and Chapter of all Cathedrall Churches, as alſo the conſecration of them.
               Next, in a power of viſiting his whole Prouince, of aſſembling Synods, of ſupplying the defects and negligences of inferiour Biſhops, of receiuing appeales from their courtes, of aſſigning coadiutours to thoſe Biſhops, that grow weake and inſufficient to diſcharge their function, of appointing Vicars generall to thoſe that haue either none, or an inſufficient man employed in that office: and of diſpenſing in all eccleſiaſticall caſes, wherein the lawes beare diſpenſation: of taking oath of euery Biſhop, at his confirmation, to performe

canonicall obedience vnto the See of Canterburie. But thes ſeem to belong vnto him by an ordinarie archiepiſcopall authority.
               Certaine other things there be, that appertaine vnto him more then ordinarily to other Archbiſhops: as the originall calling of any perſon in any cauſe belonging to ſpirituall iuriſdiction, out of any part of his prouince, though not appealed. But this point is now limited by the Statute made, anno 23. Henr. 8. ca. 9.
               The receyuing of an appeale from the loweſt Iudge eccleſiaſticall within his prouince immediatly. The appointing of a keeper or guardian of the ſpiritualties during the vacancie of any biſhopricke. By which means all epiſcopall rites of the Dioces for that time do belong vnto him: as Viſitation, Inſtitution to Benefices, and ſuch like.
               The viſitation of euery Dioceſſe within his prouince, when & in what order it pleaſeth him. As alſo of all other priuiledged Churches. The probate of Teſtaments and graunting of adminiſtrations, in caſe where the party deceaſed hath goods of any conſiderable valew out of the dioceſſe wherein he dyeth. And that valew is ordinarily fiue pounds, except it be otherwiſe by compoſition betweene the ſaid Archbiſhop, and ſome other Biſhop: as in the Dioceſſe of London it is tenne pounds.
               The probate of euery Biſhops Teſtament, or the adminiſtration of his goods dying inteſtate, though not hauing any goods, chatels, or debts without the compaſſe of his owne iuriſdiction. The beſtowing of any one dignitie or prebend in any Cathedrall church vpon the creation of a new Biſhop, that himſelfe thinketh good to make choice of.
               There may be more particulars of this prerogatiue, that I know not: but theſe may be ſufficient to expreſſe the thing that I deſire to declare. Who ſo deſireth to reade theſe more at large, and other priuiledges of this Church in temporall maters, may reſort to the booke intituled: De antiquitate Britannicae Eccleſia, & nominatim de priuilegiis Eccleſia Cantuarienſis hiſtoria: and eſpecially to the 8. chapter of the ſaid booke. pa. 25.
               
                  Prerogatiue Court, (curia prerogatiuae Archiepiſcopi Cantuarienſis) is the Court wherein all Wils be proued, and all adminiſtrations taken, that belong to the Archbiſhop by his prerogatiue, which ſee in Prerogatiue. And if any contention do grow betweene two or more touching any ſuch will or adminiſtration, the cauſe is properly debated &

determined in this Court. The Iudge of this Court is called Iudex Curiae praerogatiuae Cantuarienſis. The Archbiſhop of Yorke hath alſo the like power and court, which is tearmed his Exchequer, but farre inferiour to this in countenance and profite.
               
                  Preſcription (praeſcriptio) is a courſe or vſe of any thing for a time beyond the memory of man, as the expoſition of the law terms doth define it. Kitchin fol. 104. ſaith thus: Preſcription is, when for continuance of time, whereof there groweth no memory, a perticuler perſon hath perticuler right againſt another perticuler perſon. And cuſtome is, where by continuance of time beyond memorie, diuers perſons haue gotten a right: with whome agreeth Sir Edward Cooke, lib. 4. fol. 32. a. And vſage is by continuance of time the efficient cauſe of them both, and the life of both preſcription and cuſtome. Thus ſaith Kitchin. But as in the Ciuill lawe, ſo I think likewiſe in the common, Preſcription may be in a ſhorter time. As for example, where the Satute anno, 1. H. 8. cap. 9. ſaith, that all actions popular muſt be ſiewed within three yeares after the offence committed, and the Statute anno, 7. eiuſdem. cap. 3. That foure yeares being paſt after the offence committed in one caſe, and one yeare in another, no ſuite can be commenced, and the Statute 31. Eliz. cap. 5. ſaith, (by way of correcting the two former ſtatutes) that all actions, &c. brought vpon any Statute, the penaltie whereof belongeth to the King, ſhall be brought within two yeares after the offence committed, or elſe be voide. And the Satute, anno 39. Eliz. cap. prim. & ſecund. ſaith, that actions brought after two yeare by any common perſon, or after three yeares by the king alone for decay of husbandry or tillage, ſhall bee of noe force. Whoſoeuer offendeth againſt any ſuch Statute, and doth eſcape vncalled for two yeares, or three yeares, in one caſe of the two later of theſe three Statutes, may iuſtly be ſaid to haue preſcribed an immunitie againſt that action. The like may be ſaid of the Statute made anno 23. Eliz. cap. prime. which ſaith, that all offences compriſed in the Statute made in the 13. yeere of Eliz. cap. 2. are inquirable before both Iuſtices of peace and of Aſſiſe, within one yeare and a day, after the offence committed. Alſo the title that a man obtaineth by the paſſing of fiue yeares after a fine acknowledged of any lands or tenements, may

iuſtly be ſaid to be obtained by preſcription. And whereas the Statute, anno 8. R. 2. cap. 4. ſaith, that a Iudge or Clerke convicted for falſe entring of plees, &c. may be fined within two yeares; the two yeares being ended, he preſcribeth againſt the puniſhment of the ſaide Statute; and whereas the Statute anno 11. H. 7. ſaith, that he which will complaine of maintenance, or embracery, whereby periurie is committed by a Iurie, muſt doe it within ſixe dayes, thoſe ſixe daies ended, the parties preſcribe: and whereas the ſtatute anno prim. Ed. 6. ſaith, that a man being not indicted within 3 monethes of any offences there mentioned touching Seruice and Sacraments, he ſhalbe cleare from thence forward: the three monethes being ended, he preſcribeth: And the ſame may be ſaid of the ſtatute anno 5. Ed. 6. cap. 5. which ſaith that a man ſhall not be indited of any offence there mentioned touching the decay of tillage, after. 3. yeares. And whereas it is ordeined by the ſtatute anno 8. H. 6. cap. 9. that thoſe which keepe poſſeſſion of lands by force after. 3. yeares poſſeſſion held by themſelues & their aunceſtours, ſhall not be ſubiect to the arbitrement of Diſſeiſours there ſet down, I hould this a preſcription likewiſe againſt thoſe cenſures. v. anno 23. H. 6. ca. 15. Laſtly a ſeruant preſcribeth liberty after a yeare. Bracton. li. 1. ca. 10. nu. 3. and the right that is gotten in any Stray to a Lord of a maner, no man claiming it within the yeare and day after proclamation made, is an vſucapion, or preſcription. See Action perpetuall, and temporall. And ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 173. b. vbi habebis feſtum. But ſee one rule for all in Lamb. Eirenarch. li. 4. ca. 5. pa. 469. Of this preſcription, and the learning touching the ſame, you may reade a ſolemne report in S. Ed. Cookes, and Luttrels caſe. vol. 4. fo. 84. b. & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Preſentation (Praeſentatio) is vſed properly for the act of a patron offering his Clerke to the Biſhop, to be inſtituted in a benefice of his gift: the forme whereof ſee in the Regiſter originall fol. 302. a.
               
               
                  Preſentment, is a meere denuntiation of the Iurours themſelues, or ſome other offices, as Iuſtice, Conſtable, ſearcher, ſurueiours &c. (without any information) of an offence inquirable in the court wherevnto it is preſented. See Lamberd Eirenarcha, lib. 4. ca. 5. pa. 467.
               
                  Preſident (Praeſes) is vſed in the Common law for the kings

Liuetenent in any Prouince or function: as Preſident of Wales, of Yorke, of Barwick. Preſident of the Kings Councell. anno. 22. H. 8. cap. 8. & anno 24. H. 8. cap. 3. & 14.
               
                  Preignotarie (Protonotarius) is a word that ſeemeth to be made either of two French words (Prime) or Primier. i. primus) and (Notaire. i. Notarius, tabellio, or of two Latine words (prae) & notarius) quaſi primus aut principalis notarius. The office is likewiſe borowed from the later Romanes, who made his name of halfe Greeke, and halfe Latine, viz 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. primus, principalis) and (Notarius). It is vſed in our common lawe for the cheife clerks of the Kings courts, whereof 3. be of the common pleas, and one of the Kings bench. For the pregnotarie of the commmon plees, anno 5. H. 4. cap. 14. is termed the cheife clerke of that court. He of the Kings Bench recordeth all actions civile ſiewed in that court, as the Clerke of the Crowne office doth all criminall cauſes. Thoſe of the common plees doe enter and inrolle all maner of declarations, pleadings, Aſſiſes, and Iudgements: and all actions, the ſame terme that the apparence is made. Alſo they make out all iudiciall writs, as the venire facias after iſſues ioyned, and Habeas corpus, for the bringing in of the Iurie, after it is returned vpon the venire facias. They alſo make forthe writs of executions, and ofſeiſin, writs of ſuperſedeas, for appearance to exigents, as well as the exigents, and writs of priuiledges, for remouing of cauſes from other inferiour courts of Record, in caſe where the partie hath cauſe of priuiledge: Alſo writs of procedendo, of ſcire facias in all caſes, and writs to inquire of dammages: and all proces vpon prohibitions, and vpon writs of audita querela, and falſe Iudgement. Finally they inrolle all recogniſances acknowledged in that court, and all common Recoueries: and may make exemplifications of any Record the ſame terme, before the rols be deliuered from them.
               
                  Prender, commeth of the French (prendre. i. accipere, acceptare, capere, prehēdere) it ſignifieth in our common lawe ſometime a power, or right to take a thing before it be offered: as ſuch things as lie in Prender, or ſuch as lie in render. Weſt. parte 2. titula Fines. ſect. 126. where you haue theſe words: If the lord graunt the ſeruices of his tenent by fine, or otherwiſe, the Lord before atturnment, ſhall haue ſuch things as lie in prender: as the ward of the body of the heire

and of the land: eſcheats, &c. but not ſuch things as lie in prender, as rents, and releifes, heriots and other ſeruices. For he canot avowe for them before the atturnment.
               
                  Prender de Baron, ſignifieth literally in barbarous French to take a husband: but it is vſed in our common lawe, as an exception to diſable a woman from perſiewing an appeale of murder againſt the killer of her former husband, Stawnf. pl. cor. li. 3. cap. 59. The reaſon whereof whether it be, becauſe by her ſecōd mariage, ſhe may iuſtly be thought to haue giuen vp the intereſt ſhee had in her former husband, or for that ſhee is now couert againe, or for both, I leaue to conſideration.
               
                  Prender del profits, ſignifieth verbatim to take the profits. It ſignifieth ſubſtantiuely the taking of the profits. See Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 185. See Pernour of profits.
               
               
                  Preſt, is vſed for ſome dutie in money to be paide by the Shyreeue vpon his accoumpt in the exchequer, anno 2. & 3. Ed. 6. cap. 4.
               
                  Prest mony, is ſo called of the French word (Prest. i. explicatus, promptus, expeditus) for that it bindeth thoſe, that haue receiued it, to be ready at all times appointed.
               
                  Primage, is a dutie due to the mariners and ſaylers for the loading of any ſhippe at the ſetting forth from any hauen, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14.
               
                  Primier ſeiſin (Prima ſeiſina) ad verbum ſignifieth the firſt poſſeſſion. It is vſed in the common lawe, for a braunch of the kings prerogatiue, whereby he hath the firſt poſſeſſion of all lands, and tenements through the Realme, holding of him in cheife, whereof his tenent died ſeiſed in his demeſn as of fee; and ſo conſequently the rents, and profits of them, vntill the heire, if he be of age, doe his homage, if he be vnder yeares, vntill he come to yeares. See Stawnf. prarog. cap. 3. and Bracton lib. 4. tract. 3. cap. pri.
               
               
                  Primo beneficio. See Beneficio.
               
               
                  Prince (Princeps) is a french word, and taken with vs diuerſly, ſometime for the king himſelfe, but more properly for the kings eldeſt ſonne, who is prince of Wales, as the eldeſt ſonne to the French king is called Dolphine, both being princes by their natiuitie. M. Fearn in the glory of generoſitie. pag. 138. For Edward the firſt to appeaſe the tumultuous ſpirits of the Welch men, who being the auncient Indigenae
                  
of this land, could not in long time beare the yoke of vs, whome they call ſtrangers, ſent his wife being with childe into Wales. where at Carnaruan ſhee was deliuered of a ſonne, therevpon called Edward of Carnarvan and afterward asked the Welch men, ſeing they thought much to be gouerned by ſtraungers, if they would be quietly ruled by one of their owne nation; who anſwering him, yea: then (quoth he) I will appoint you one of your owne country men, that cannot ſpeake one word of Engliſh, and againſt whoſe life you can take no iuſt exception: and ſo named vnto them his ſonne borne in Carnarvan not long before. from which time it hath continued, that the kings eldeſt ſonne (who was before called: Lord Prince, Stawnf. praerog: cap. 22. fol. 75.) hath beene called prince of Wales: Stowes Annals, pag. 303. See anno 27. H. 8. cap. 26. & anno 28. eiuſdem, cap. 3.
               
                  Principality of Cheſter. anno 21. Rich. 2. cap. 9. See Cownty palatine. and Cromptons diuers iuriſdictions, fol 137.
               
                  Prior perpetuall, or datife and removeable. anno 9. R. 2. cap. 4. and anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 1. paulo ante finem. Lord prior of Saint Iohns of Ieruſalem, anno 26. H. 8. cap. 2.
               
                  Priors aliens (Priores alieni) were certaine religious men borne in Fraunce, and gouerners of religious houſes erected for out-landiſh men here in England: which were by Henry the fifth thought, no good members for this land, after ſuch conqueſt obtained by him in Fraunce, and therfore ſuppreſſed. Whoſe liuings afterwards by Henry the 6. were giuen to other Monaſteries and houſes of learning. Stowes Annals. pag. 582. See anno 1. H. 5. cap. 7. but eſpecially to the erecting of thoſe two moſt famous Colledges called the Kings Colledges of Cambridge and Eton.
               
               
                  Prioritie, (prioritas) ſignifieth in our common lawe, an antiquitie of tenure in compariſon of another not ſo auncient. As to hold by Prioritie, is to hold of a Lord more aunciently then of another. old. nat. br. fol. 94. So to hold in poſterioritie, is vſed by Stawnf. praerog. cap. 2. fo. 11. And Crompton in his Iuriſdiction. fol. 117. vſeth this word in the ſame ſignification. The Lord of the prioritie ſhal haue the cuſtodie of the bodie, &c. fol. 120. If the tenent hold by prioritie of one, and by poſterioritie of another, &c. To which effect, ſee alſo Fitz. nat. br. fol. 142. F. Bartolus in his Tractate, De inſigniis & armis, vſeth theſe very wordes, prioritas, and poſterioritas,
                  
concerning two that beare one coate armor.
               
                  Priſage, ſeemeth to be that cuſtome or ſhare, that belongeth to the King out of ſuch merchandize, as are taken at ſea, by way of lawfull prize, anno 31 Eliz. cap. 5.
               
               
                  Priſage of Wines, anno I. H. 8. cap. 5. is a word almoſt out of vſe, now called Butlerage, it is a cuſtome wherby the prince chalengeth out of euery barke loaden with wine, containing leſſe then forty tunne, two tunne of wine at his price.
               
                  Priſe (priſa) commeth of the French (prendre. i. capere) it ſignifieth in our Statutes, the things taken by pourveyours, of the Kings ſubiects. As anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 7. & anno 28. eiuſdem. ſtat. 3. cap. 2. It ſignifieth alſo a cuſtome due to the King, anno 25. eiuſdem cap. 5. Regiſt. origin. fol. 117. b.
               
               
                  Priſoner (priſo) commeth of the French (priſonnier) and ſignifieth a man reſtrained of his libertie vpon any action ciuill or criminall, or vpon commaundement. And a man may be priſoner vpon matter of Record, or mater of fact: priſonervpon mater of Record is he, which being preſent in court, is by the court committed to priſon, only vpon an arreſt, be it of the Shyrecue, Cenſtable, or other. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. prim. cap. 32. fol. 34. & 35.
               
               
                  Prinie, commeth of the French (priuè. i. familiaris) and ſignificth in our common lawe, him that is partaker, or hath an intereſt in any action, or thing: as, priuies of bloud, old nat. br. fol. 117. be thoſe that be linked in conſanguinitie. Eucry heire in tayle is priuy to recouer the land intayled. eodem fol. 137. No priuitie was betweene me and the tenent. Litleton, fol. 106. If I deliuer goods to a man to be caried to ſuch a place, and he, after he hath brought them thither, doth ſteale them, it is felenie: becauſe the priuitie of deliuerie is determined, as ſoone as they are brought thither. Stawn. pl. cor. lib. prim. cap. 15. fol. 25. Merchants priuie be oppoſite to merchant ſtraungers. anno 2. Ed. tertii. cap. 9. & cap. 14. & ann. eiuſdem, ſtat. 2. cap. 3. The newe Expoſitour of lawe termes maketh diuers ſorts of priuics: as priuies in eſtate, priuies in deed, priuics in lawe, priuies in right, and priuies in bloud. And ſee the examples he giueth of euery of them. See Perkins Conditions. 831. 832. 833. and Sir Edward Cooke lib. 3. Walkers caſe. fol. 23. a. & lib. 4. fol. 123. b. & 124. a. where he maketh foure kindes of priuies, viz. priuies in bloud, as the heire to his fathes, &c.

priuies in repreſentation, as executours or adminiſtratours to the deceaſed: priuies in eſtate, as he in the reuerſion, and he in the remainder, when land is giuē to one for life, and to another in ſee: the rcaſon is giuen by the Expoſitour of lawe termes, for that their eſtates are created both at one time. The fourth ſort of priuies are priuies in tenure: as the Lord by eſcheate: that is, when the land eſcheateth to the Lord for want of heires, &c.
               
                  Priuie ſeale (priuatum ſigillum) is a ſcale that the King vſeth ſome time for a warrant, whereby things paſſed the priuy ſignet and brought to it, are ſent farder to be confirmed by the great ſeale of England: ſometime for the ſtrength or credit of other things written vpon occaſions more tranſitory and of leſſe continuance, then thoſe be that paſſe the great ſeale.
               
                  Priuiledge (priuilegium) is defined by Cicero in his oration pro domo ſua, to be lex priuata homini 
                           ••
                        ogata. Frerotus in paratitlis ad titulum decretalium de priuilegiis, thus defineth it: priuilegium eſt ius ſingulare, hoc eſt priuata lex quae vni homini, vel loco, vel Collegio, & ſimilibus aliis concedit ur: cap. priuilegia, diſtinct: 3. priua enim veteres dixere que nos ſingula dicimus. Inſit Agellius lib. 10. ca. 20. Ideo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      priuilegia modò beneficia, modò perſonales conſtitutiones dicuntur, &c. It is vſed ſo likewiſe in our common law, and ſometime for the place, that hath any ſpeciall immunity. Kitchin fol. 118. in the words: where depters make ſained gifts and feofements of their land, and goods to their freinds, and others, and betake themſelues to priuiledges, &c. Priuiledge is either perſonall, or reall: a perſonall priuiledge is that, which is graunted to any perſon, either againſt, or beſide the courſe of the common law: as for example, a perſon called to be one of the Parlament, may not be arrcſted either himſelfe, or any of his attendance, during the time of the Parlament. A priuiledge reall is that, which is graunted to a place, as to the Vniuerſities, that none of either may be called to Weſtm. hall, vpon any contract made within their owne precincts. And one toward the court of Chauncery, cannot originally be called to any court but to the Chauncery, certaine caſes excepted. If he be, he will remoue it by a writ of Priuiledge grounded vpon the ſtatute anno 18. Ed. 3. See the new booke of Entries. verbo Priuilege.
               
               
                  Probat of teſtaments (probatio teſtamentorum) is the producting, and inſinuating of dead mens wils before the eccleſiaſticall Iudge, Ordinary of the place,

where the party dyeth. And the ordinary in this caſe is knowne by the quantity of the goods, that the party deceaſed hath out of the Dioces, where he departed. For if all his goods be in the ſame Dioces, then the Biſhop of the Dioces, or the Archdeacon (according as their compoſition, or preſcription is) hath the probate of the Teſtament: if the goods be diſperſed in diuers Dioces, ſo that there be any ſumme of note (as fiue pounds ordinarily) out of the Dioces where the party let his life: then is the Archbiſhop of Canterbury the ordinary in this caſe by his prerogatiue. For whereas in ould time, the will was to be proued in cuery Dioces, wherein the party diceaſed had any goods: it was thought conuenient both to the ſubiect, and to the Archiepiſcopall See, to make one proofe for all before him, who was and is of all the generall Ordinary of his prouince. But there may be aunciently ſome compoſition betweene the Archebiſhop and an inferiour ordinary, whereby the ſumme that maketh the prerogatiue, is abouc fiue pound. See praerogatiue of the Archbiſhop. This probate is made in two ſorts either in common forme or perteſtes. The proofe in common forme, is onely by the oath of the exceutour, or party exhibiting the will, who ſweareth vpon his credulity, that the will by him exhibited, is the laſt will, and teſtament of the party deceiſed. The proofe per teſtes is, when ouer and beſide his oath, he alſo produceth witneſſes or maketh other proofe, to confirme the ſame, and that in the preſence of ſuch as may pretend any intereſt in the goods of the deceaſed, or at the leaſt in their abſence, after they haue beene lawfully ſummoned to ſee ſuch a will proued, if they thinke good. And the later courſe is taken moſt commonly, where there is feare of ſtrife, and contention betweene the kindred and freinds of the party deceaſed about his goods. For a will proued only in common forme, may be called into queſtion any time within 30. yeares after by common opinion, before it worke preſcription.
               
                  Procedendo, is a writ whereby a plee, or cauſe formerly called from a baſe court to the Chaūcerie, Kings bench, or commō plees, by a writ of priuiledge or certiorare, is releaſed, and ſent downe againe to the ſame court, to be proceded in there, after it appeareth that the defendant hath no cauſe of priniledge; or that the mater compriſed in the bille, be not well proned. Brooke hoctitulo. and Termes

of lawe: Cooke vol. 6. fol. 63. a. See anno. 21. R. 2. cap. 11. in fine, leters of procedendo graunted by the keeper of the priuie ſcale. See in what diuerſitie it is vſed in the table of the originall Regiſter, and alſo of the Iudiciall.
               
                  Proces (Proceſſus) is the maner of proceeding in euery cauſe, be it perſonall, or reall, ciuile, or criminall, even from the originall writ to the end. Britton fol. 138. a. where in there is great diuerſitie, as you may ſee in the table of Fitzh. br. verbo Proces, and Brookes Abridgement, hoc titulo. And whereas the wtitings of our common lawyers ſometime call that the proces, by which a man is called into the court and no more: the reaſon thereof may be giuen, becauſe it is the beginning, or the principall part thereof, by which the reſt of the buſines is directed, according to that ſaying of Ariſtotle. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Diucrs kinds of proces vpon Inditements before Iuſtices of peace: See in Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 133. b. 134. 135. But for orders ſake, I referre you rather to M. Lamberd in his tractat of ptoceſſes adioyned to his Eirenarcha, who acording to his ſubiect in hand, diuideth criminall proces, either into proces touching cauſes of treaſon, or ſelonie, and proces touching inferiour offēces. the former is vſually a capias, capias aliâs, & exigi facias. The ſecond is either vpon enditement, or preſentment, or information: that vpon enditement or preſentment, is all one, and is either generall, and that is a venire facias', vpon which if the partie be returned ſufficient, then is ſent out a Diſtringas infinite vntill he come: if he be returned with a Nibil habet, then ifſueth out a Capias, Capias aliâs, Capias pluries, and laſtly an Exigifacias. The ſpeciall proces is that, which is eſpecially appointed for the offēce by ſtatute. for the which he referreth his reader to the 8. Chapter of his 4. booke being very different.
               
                  Proceſſium continuando, is a writ for the continuance of a proces after the death of the cheife Iuſtice, in the writ of oyer and terminer. Regiſter originall. fol. 128. a.
               
               
                  Prochein Amy (Proximus amicus, vel propinquior) is, word for word, a neere freind. It is vſed in our common lawe, for him that is next of kinde to a childe in his nonage, and is in that reſpect allowed by lawe, to deale for him in the managing of his affaires: as to be his Gardian, if he hold of any in ſocage, and in the redreſſe of any wrong done vnto him, be it by his Gardian, if he be ward and hold in Chiualrie,

or any others. Statut. Weſt. pri. cap. 48. 3. Ed. pri. and Weſtm. 2. cap. 15. anno 13. Ed. pri.
               
               
                  Profe, aliâs Prove, is vſed for an Enqueſt. anno 28. Ed. 3. cap. 13.
               
                  Proclamation (Proclamatio) ſignifieth a notice publikely giuen of any thing, whereof the King thinketh good to advertiſe his ſubiects. So it is vſed, anno 7. Rich. 2. ca. 6. Proclamation of rebellion is a publike notice giuen by the officer, that a man not appearing vpon a Sub poena, nor an attachment in the Starre Chamber or Chauncerie, ſhalbe reputed a rebell, except he render himſelfe by a day aſſigned. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 92. See Commiſſion of rebellion.
               
               
                  Proclamation of a fine, is a notice openly, and ſolemnly giuen at all the Aſſiſes, that ſhall be holden in the Countie within one yeare after the ingroſſing of the fine, and not at the foure generall quarter ſeſſions. And theſe proclamations be made vpon tranſcripts of the fine, ſent by the Iuſtices of the Common plees, to the Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, and the Iuſtices of peace. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 132. where alſo you may ſee the forme of the proclamarion. Proclamare eſt palā, & valde clamare, vſed by Tullie, Liuie, and the Civilians. Π. Quibus ad liberta proclamare non licet. And Proclamator ſignifieth him qui litem intendit, vel cauſam agit. Cicero de oratore. lib. pri. Non enim cauſidicum neſcio quem, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      proclamatorem, aut rabulam hoc ſermone conquirimus, &c. I reade in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 85. C. that the kings proclamation is ſufficient to ſtay a ſubiect from going out of the Realme. See the force of proclamations. anno. 31. H. 8. cap. 8. ſee alſo Proclamations in diuers caſes. Newe booke of Enteries. verbo Proclamation.
               
               
                  Procters of the clergie (procuratores cleri) are thoſe which are choſen and appointed to appeare for cathedrall, or other Collegiat churches, as alſo for the common clergie of euery Dioces, at the Parlament, whoſe choice is in this ſort. Firſt, the king directeth his writ to the Archebiſhop of each province for the ſummoning of all Biſhops, Deanes, Archdeacons, cathedrall and collegiat churches, and generally of all the clergie of his prouince, after their beſt diſcretion and iudgement, aſſigning them the time and place in the ſaid writ. Then the Archebiſhops proceede in their accuſtomed courſe. One example may ſerue to ſhew both. The Archebiſhop of Canterbury vpō his, writ receiued, directerh his leters to the Biſhop of London as

his Deane provincial. 1. §. ſtatuimui. de poenis & verb. tanquam in gloſ. firſt citing himſelfe petemptorily and then willing him to cite in like maner all the Biſhops, Deanes, Archedeacons, cathedrall and collegiate churches, and generally all the Clergie of his Prouince to the place, and againſt the day prefixed in the writ. But directeth withal that one Proctor ſent for euery Cathedrall or Collegiat Church, and two for the bodie of the inferiour Clergie of each Dioceſſe, may ſuffice. And by vertue of theſe leters authentically ſealed, the ſaid Biſhop of London directeth his like leters ſeuerally to the Biſhop of euery Dioceſſe of the Prouince, citing them in like ſort▪ and commaunding them not onely to appeare, but alſo to admoniſh the ſaid Deanes, and Archdeacons, perſonally to appeare, and the Cathedral
                     〈…〉
                   and collegiat Churches, as alſo the common Clergie of the Dioceſſe, to ſend their Proctors to the place, and at the day appointed: and alſo willeth them to certifie the Archbiſhop the names of all and euery ſo moniſhed by them, in a ſhedule annexed to their leters certificatorie. The Biſhops proceed accordingly, and the Cathedrall and collegiate churches as alſo the Clergie make choice of their Proctors: which done, and certified to the Biſhop, he returneth all anſwerably to his charge at the day. Theſe proctors of the Clergie, howſoeuer the caſe of late dayes is altered, had place and ſuffrage in the lower houſe of Parlament, as well as the knights, citizens, Barons of the Cinque ports, and Burgeſſes. For ſo it plainely appeareth by the Statute, anno 21. R. 2. cap. 2. & cap. 12. And ſithence they were remooued, the Church hath daily growne weaker and weaker: I pray God that in ſhort time ſhe famiſh not, but that her liberties be better maintained.
               
                  Procurator, is vſed for him that gathereth the fruites of a benefice for another man. anno 3. R. 2. ſtat. 1. cap. 2. And procuracy is vſed for the ſpecialtie, whereby he is authorized. Ibid. They are at this day in the Weſt parts called Proctors.
               
               
                  Profer (profrum vel proferum) is the time appointed for the accompts of Shyreeues, and other officers in the Exchequer, which is twice in the yeare, anno 51. H. 3. ſtatut. quint. And it may be gathered alſo out of the Regiſter, fol. 139. in the writ De Atturnato Vicecomitis pro profro faciendo. I reade alſo of profers, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 21. in theſe words:

Trinitie terme ſhall beginne the Monday next after Trinity Sunday, whenſoeuer it ſhall happen to fall, for the keeping of the eſſoins, profers, returnes, and other ceremonies heretofore vſed and kept. In which place (profer) ſeemeth to ſignifie the offer, or indeauour to proceede in action by any man, whom it concerneth ſo to doe. See Briton. cap. 27. fol. 50. b. & 55. a. & fol. 80. b. and Eleta lib. 1. cap. 38. §. Vtlagati & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Profer the halfe merke. See Halfe merke.
               
               
                  Profeſſion (profeſſio) is in the common lawe, vſed particularly fot the entring into any religious Order of Friars, &c. New booke of▪ Entries, verbo Profeſſion.
               
               
                  Profits apprender. See Prender.
               
               
                  Prohibition, (prohibitio) is a writ framed for the forbidding of any court, either ſpirituall or ſecular, to proceed in any cauſe there depending, vpon ſuggeſtion, that the cognition thereof belongeth not to the ſaid court. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 39. G. but is moſt vſually taken, eſpecially in theſe dayes, for that writ, which lyeth for one that is impleeded in the Court Chriſtian, for a cauſe belonging to the temporall iuriſdiction, or the cogniſance of the Kings court, whereby as well the partie and his Councell, as the Iudge himſelfe, and the Regiſter, are forbidden to proceed any farder in that cauſe: for that it appertaineth to the diſinheriting of the Crowne of ſuch right as belongeth vnto it. In how many caſes this lyeth, ſee▪ 
                  Broke, hoc titulo, and Fitz. na. br. fol. 39. & ſeqq. This writ, and the praemunire, might in theſe daies well be ſpared: For they were helpes to the kings inheritance and Crowne, when the two ſwords were in two diuers hands. Whereas now both the Iuriſdictions being ſetled in the King, there is ſmall reaſon of either, except it be to weatie the ſubiect by many quircks and delayes, from obtaining his right▪ of this prohibition, you may reade Bracton alſo, lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. who ſaith, that it lyeth not after ſentence giuen in any cauſe, howſoeuer the caſe is altered: and againe, the ſtatute made, anno 50. Ed. 3. which ordaineth, that aboue one prohibition ſhould not lye in one cauſe. See the diuerſitie of prohibitions in the table of the original Regiſt. See the new booke of Entries, verbo, Prohibition, and Fitz. nat. br. fol. 39.
               
                  Prohibitio de vaſtodirecta parti, is a writ Iudiciall directed to the tenent, and prohibiting him from making waſte vpon the

land in controuerſie, during the ſuite. Regiſter Iudiciall. fol. 21. It is ſometime made to the Shyreeue, the example whereof you haue there next following.
               
                  Pro Indiuiſo, is a poſſeſſion, and occupation of lands, or tenements belonging vnto two or more perſons, whereof none knoweth his ſeuerall portion, as Coparceners before partition. Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 2. cap. pri. nu. 7.
               
                  Prolocutour of the conuocation houſe (prolocutor domus conuocationis) is an officer choſen by perſons eccleſiaſticall publiquely aſſembled by the kings writ at euery parlament. And as there be two houſes of conuocation, ſo be there two prolocutours, one of the higher houſe, the other of the lower houſe, who preſently vpon the firſt aſſembly is by the motion of the Biſhops, choſen by the lower houſe, and preſented to the Biſhops for their prolocutour, that is, the man by whom they meane to deliuer their reſolutions to the higher houſe, and to haue their owne houſe eſpecially ordered and gouerned. His office is to cauſe the clerk to call the names of ſuch as are of that houſe when he ſeeth cauſe, to cauſe all things propounded to be read by him, to gather the ſuffrages, and ſuch like.
               
                  Promoters (promotores) be thoſe, which in popular and penall actions doe deferre the names, or complaine of offenders, hauing part of the profit for their reward. Theſe were called among the Romaines Quadruplatores, or Delatores. They belong eſpecially to the Exchequer and the kings bench. Smith de Repub: Anglo. li. 2. cap. 14.
               
                  Pro partibus liberandis, is a writ for the partition of lands betweene coheires. Regiſter originall, fol. 316.
               
                  Prophecies (prophetia) be in our common law, taken for wiſerdly foretellings of maters to come, in certaine hidden and enigmaticall ſpeeches. Whereby it falleth out many times, that great troubles are ſtirred in our common wealth, and great attempts made by thoſe, to whom the ſpeach framed, either by the deſcription of his cogniſance, armes, or ſome other quality, promiſeth good ſucceſſe anno. 3. Ed. 6. cap. 15. & anno 7. eiuſdem. cap. 11. & anno 5. Eliza. ca. 15. But theſe for diſtinctions fake are called falſe, or phantaſticall prophecies.
               
                  Property (proprietas) ſignifieth the higheſt right that a man hath or can haue to any thing, which is no way depending vpon any other m
                     •
                  ns courteſie. And this none in our kingdome can be

ſaid to haue in any lands, or tenements, but onely the King in the right of his Crowne. Becauſe all the lands through the realme, are in the nature of fee, and doe hould either mediately or immediately of the Crowne. See Fee. This word neuertheleſſe is in our common law, vſed for that right in lands and tenements, that common perſons haue, becauſe it importeth as much as (vtile dominium) though not (directum).
               
               
                  Proprietate probanda, is a writ. See the originall Regiſt. fol. 83. a. & 85. b. It lyeth for him, that will proue a propertie before the Shyreeue. Brookes Propertie, 1. For where a propertie is alledged, a replegiare lyeth not. Idem ibidem.
               
               
                  Proprietarie (proprietarius) is he that hath a propertie in any thing but it is moſt notoriouſly vſed for him, that hath the fruites of a benefice, to himſelfe and his heires or ſucceſſours, as in time paſt Abbots and Priors had to them and their ſucceſſours. See Appropriation.
               
               
                  Prorata portionis. See Onerando pro rata portionis.
               
               
                  Protection (protectio) hath a generall and a ſpeciall ſignification. In the generall it is vſed for that benefite and ſafetie, that euery ſubiect, or Denizen, or alien ſpecially ſecured, hath by the Kings lawes And thus it is vſed, anno 25. Ed. tertii. capite. 32. Protection in the ſpeciall ſignification is vſed for an exemption, or an immunitie giuen by the King to a perſon againſt ſuites in lawe, or other vexations vpon reaſonable cauſes him thereunto moouing, which I take to be a braunch of his prerogatiue. And of this protection, Fitzh. maketh two ſortes in his nat. br. fol. 28. The firſt forme or ſort he calleth a protectiō, cum clauſula volumus, wherof he mentioneth foure particulars. A protection, quia profecturus, for him that is to paſſe ouer ſea in the kings ſeruice: A protection, quia moratur, for him that is abroad in the Kings ſeruice vpon the ſea, or in the marches, anno 7. H. 7. cap. 2. A protection for the Kings debter, that he be not ſiewed or attached vntill the King be payed his debt. See anno 15. Ed. 3. This ſome Ciuilians call moratoriam: which ſee In ſingularibus Marantae, verb. Princeps. pag. 79. col. 2. And a protection in the kings ſeruice beyond the ſeas, or on the marches of Scotland: whereof you may reade ſomething, anno 1. R. 2. cap. 8. See the Regiſt. orig. fol. 23. and Britton, cap. 123. The ſecond forme of protection is tearmed cum clauſula, Nolu
                        〈…〉
                     
                   which is graunted moſt commonly

to a ſpirituall company for their immunitic from taking of their catell by the Kings miniſters. But it may be graunted alſo to one man ſpirituall or temporall. Of theſe things reade the ſame authour: and the formes of theſe writs. See alſo in the Regiſter originall. fol. 22. & 23. And ſee the new Expoſitour of lawe termes, to what action the kings protection doth not extend. See alſo the new booke of Entries, verbo Protection.
               
               
                  Protonotarie, (protonotarius.) See Preignetarie.
               
               
                  Proteſtation, (proteſtatio) is (as Iuſtice Walſh defineth it) a defence or ſafegard to the partie, which maketh it from being cō
                  cluded by the act he is about to doe, that iſſue cannot be ioyned vpon it, Plowden. fol. 276. b. whereof ſee the Regiſter original. fol. 306. b. And ſee Protest.
               
               
                  Proteſt, (proteſtari) hath two diuers applications: one is by way of cautell, to call witneſſe (as it were) or openly to affirm, that he doth either not at all, or but after a ſort yeeld his conſent to any act, as vnto a proceeding of a Iudge in a court, wherein his iuriſdiction is doubtfull, or to anſwer vpon his oath farder then he by lawe is bounde. See Plowden. caſu Gresbroke. fol. 276. b. and the Regiſter orig. fol. 306. b. Another is by way of complaint to proteſt a mans bill: For example, if I giue mony to a Merchant in Fraunce, taking his bill of exchange to be repayed in England, by one to whome he aſſigneth me, if at my comming I find not my ſelfe ſatisfied to my contentment, but either delayed or denyed: then I goe into the Burſe, or ſome open concurſe of Merchants, and proteſt that I am deceiued by him. And thereupon if he haue any goods remaining in any mans hands within the Realme, the lawe of Merchants is, that I be paid out of them.
               
                  Prouuer (Probator) See Approuuer. anno 5. H. 4. ca. 2. See Approuours.
               
               
                  Prouince (Prouincia) was vſed among the Romans for a Country without the compaſſe of Italie, gained to their ſubiection by the ſword. wherevpon the part of Fraunce next the Alpes was ſoe called of them, when it was in their dominion, and of that carieth the ſame name at this preſent: But with vs a province is moſt vſually taken for the circuit of an Archebiſhops Iuriſdiction, as the Province of Canterbury, and the province of Yorke. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 23. & anno 33. eiuſdem,

cap. 31. yet it is vſed diuers times in our ſtatutes for ſeuerall parts of the Realme.
               
                  Provinciall (Prouincialis) is a cheife gouernour of an order of Friers, anno quar. Henr. quar. cap. 17.
               
                  Protoforestarius, was he whom the auncient kings of this Realme made chiefe of Winſour foreſt, to heare all cauſes of death, or mayhem, or of ſlaughter, or of the Kings deare within the Foreſt. Camd. Britan. pag. 213. See Iustice of the Forest.
               
               
                  Prove. See Profe.
               
               
                  Prouiſion (Proviſio) is vſed with vs, as it is vſed in the Canon lawe, for the providing of a Biſhop, or any other perſon of an eccleſiaſticall liuing, by the Pope, before the Incumbent be dead. It is alſo called gratia expectatiua, or Mandatum de providendo. The great abuſe whereof in the Pope through all Chriſtendome heretofore, you may read, not only in Duarenus de ſacris eccleſiae miniſtoriis, & beneficiis. lib. 3. cap. 2. but alſo for England particularly, in diuers ſtatuts of the Realme. viz. anno. 25. Ed. 3. cap. 22 ſttat. 4. & ſtatu. 5. commonly called the ſtatute de prouiſcribus. &. anno. 27. eiuſdem. cap. i. & anno 38. eiuſdem. ſtat. 2. cap. 1. & 2. 3. 4. & anno 38. eiuſdem, & anno 2. Rich. 2. cap. 7. & anno 3. eiuſdem cap. 3. & anno. 7. eiuſdem. cap. 12. & anno 12. eiuſdem, cap. 15. & anno 13. eiuſdem, ſtat. 2. cap. 2. & 3. & anno 16. eiuſdem cap. 5. & anno 2. H. 4. cap. 3. & 4. & anno 5. eiuſdem, cap. pri. & anno 7. eiuſdem, cap. 6. & 8. & anno 9. eiuſdem, cap. 8. & anno 3. H. 5. cap. 4. See Praemunire.
               
               
                  Proviſour (Proviſor) is he that ſieweth to the court of Rome for a prouiſion. old. nat. br. fol. 143. See Proviſion.
               
               
                  Proviſo, is a condition inſerted into any deede, vpon the obſeruance wherof the validitie of the deede conſiſteth, which forme of condition ſeemeth to be borrowed from Fraunce. for (Pourve u Gallicum ſemper conditionem inducit. Tiraquel. tomo. 3. pag. 216. Our common lawyers ſay that it ſometime ſignifieth but a couenant, whereof you haue a large diſdiſpute in the 2. booke of Sir Ed. Cokes reports in the Lord Cromwels caſe. It hath alſo another ſignification in maters Iudiciall: as if the plaintife or demaundant deſiſt in proſecuting an action, by bringing it to a triall, the defendant or tenent may take out the venire facias to the Shyreeue: which hath in it theſe words, Prouiſo quòd, &c. to this ende, that if the plaintife

take out any writ to that purpoſe, the ſhyreeue ſhall ſummon but one Iurie vpon them both. See old natura breuium in the writ Niſi prius. fol. 159.
               
                  Purchas. See pourchas.
               
               
                  Purfles of a womans growne. anno 33. H. 8. cap. 5.
               
                  Purgation (Purgatio) is a cleering of a mans ſelfe from a crime, whereof he is probably and publiquely ſuſpected, and thereof denounced to a Iudge. Of this there was great vſe in England touching maters of felonie imputed to Clerks in former time, as appeareth by Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 48. See Clergie. It is ſtill obſerued for mater pertaining to the eccleſiaſticall court, as ſuſpicion, or common fame of Incontinencie, or ſuch like. Purgatio is either canonicall (canonica) or vulgar (vulgaris) Canonicall is that which is preſcribed by the Canon lawe: the forme whereof is vſuall in the ſpirituall courte, the man ſuſpected taking his oath that he is cleere, of the fault obiected, and bringing ſo many of his honeſt neighbours, being not aboue twelue, as the court ſhall aſſigne him, to ſweare vpon their conſciences and credulitie that he ſweareth truly, or hath taken a true oath. Vulgar purgation was by fire, or water, or by combat, vſed by Infidels, and Chriſtians alſo, vntill by the Canon lawe it was aboliſhed, tit. 15. de purgatione Can. & vulga. in Decretalibus. Combat, though it be leſſe in vſe then it was, yet is it, and may be ſtill practiſed by the lawes of the Realme, in caſes doubtfull, if the defendant chuſe rather the Combat then other triall. See Ordel. See Combat.
               
               
                  Purlue, is all that ground neere any Foreſt, which being made Foreſt by Henry the ſecond, Richard the firſt, or King Iohn, were by perambulations graunted by Henry the third, ſeuered againe from the ſame. Manwood. parte 2. of his Foreſt lawes. cap. 20. And he calleth this ground either Pourallee. i. perambulationem, or purlieu. and purluy, which he ſaith be but abuſiuely taken for pourallee. vbi ſupra. nu. 3. But with the licence of that induſtrious and learned gentleman, I am bold to ſay, that this word may be no leſſe fitly made of two French words (pur. i. purus) and (lieu. i. locus) and my reaſon is, becauſe that ſuch grounds as were by thoſe kings ſubiected to the lawes, and ordinances of the Foreſt, are now cleered and freed from the ſame: for as the Ciuilians cal that purum locum, qui ſepulchrorum religioni non eſt obſtrictus. §. 9. de rerum diviſ. in inſtitut.
                  
ſo, no doubt, in imitation of that very point, our aunceſtours called this purlieu, id eſt, purum locum, becauſe it was exempted from that ſeruitude or thrauldom, that was formerly laid vpon it. So (ager purus eſt, qui ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſacor, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſanctus, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      religioſus, ſed ab omnibus huiuſmodi nominibus vacare videtur. l. 2. §. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . de religio. & ſumptibus funerum.) And therefore M. Cromptons Purraile is not much amiſſe fol. 153. of his Iuriſd. becauſe we may alſo deriue it from the French words (pur) and (Allee) that is as much to ſay, as a cleere, or a free walke or paſſage. And where it is ſometime called Pouralee, that may and doth come from (pur) and (Allee) i. Itio, profectio, ambulatio) becauſe he that walketh or courſeth within that compaſſe, is cleere enough from the lawes, or penalties incurred by them, which hunt within the precincts of the Foreſt. See the ſtat. anno 33. Ed. pri. ſtat. 5.
               
                  Pourlie man, is he that hath groūd within the Purlieu, and being able to diſpend 40. ſhillings by the yeare of free hould, is vpon theſe two points licenſed to hunt in his owne purlieu. Manwood. parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 151. & 177. but what obſeruations he muſt vſe in his hunting, ſee him pag. 180 181. 186. See him likewiſe parte 2. cap. 20. nu. 5. 8. 9. &c. See Purlieu.
               
               
                  Purpreſture. See Pourpresture.
               
               
                  Purſey, anno 43. Elizabeth. cap. 10.
               
                  Purſwivant. See Pourſuivant.
               
               
                  Purveyours. See Pourveyours.
               
               
                  Pyker, alias Pycar, a kind of ſhippe. anno 31. Ed. 3. Stat. 2. cap. 2.
            
            
               Q
               
                  QVadrageſima, is the firſt ſonday in lent, ſo called (as I take it) becauſe it is the fourtith day before Eaſter. The ſonday before that is Quinquageſima, the ſecond before Sexageſima, the 3. ſeptuageſima.
               
               
                  Quae plura, is a writ, that lieth where an Inquiſition hath beene made by the Eſcheatour in any countie, of ſuch lands or tenements, as any man died ſeiſed of, and all that was in his poſſeſſion be not thought to be found by the office. The forme whereof ſee in the Regiſter originall, fol. 293. and in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 255. It differeth from the writ called melius inquirendo, as Fitz. there ſaith, becauſe this is granted, where the Eſcheatour formerly proceeded by vertue of his office: and the other, where he found the firſt office by vertue

of the writ called, Diem clauſit exeremum. See the newe booke of Entries. verbo. Quae plura.
               
               
                  Quaerens non invenit plegium. is a returne made by the Shyreue vpon a writ directed vnto him with this condition inſerted. Si A fecerit B. ſecurum de loquela ſuae proſequenda, &c. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 38. O.
               
               
                  Quae ſeruicia, is a writ. See Per quae ſervitia.
               
               
                  Quale ius, is a writ Iudiciall, that lieth where a man of religion hath iudgement to recouer land, before execution be made of the Iudgement. for this writ muſt betweene Iudgement and execution, goe forth to the Eſcheatour, to inquire whether the religious parſon hath right to recouer, or the Iudgement is obteined by colluſion betweene the Demaundant and the Tenent, to the intent the true Lord be not defrauded. See Weſtm. 2. cap. 32. Cum virireligioſi, &c. the forme of this writ you may haue in the Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 8. 16. 17. & 46. and in the old. nat. br. fol. 161. See the newe boke of Entries. verbo. Qualeius.
               
               
                  Quare eiecit infra terminum, is a writ, that lieth for a leaſſee, in caſe where he is caſt out of his ferme before his terme be expyred, againſt the feoffee of the leaſſour, that eiecteth him. And it differeth from the Eiectione Firmae, becauſe this lyeth: where the leaſſour after the leaſe made, infeoffeth another, which eiecteth the leaſſee. And the Eiectione firma lieth againſt any other Straunger, that eiecteth him. The effect of both is all one: and that is to recouer the reſidue of the terme. See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 197. See the Regiſter originall, fol. 227. and the newe booke of Entries. verbo. Quare eiecit infra terminum.
               
               
                  Quare impedit, is a writ, that lyeth for him, who hath pourchaſed a maner with an Advouſen thereunto belonging, againſt him that diſturbeth him in the right of his Advowſen, by preſenting a Clerk thereunto, when the Church is voide. And it differeth from the writ called (Aſſiſa vltimae praeſentationis) becauſe that lieth, where a man or his Aunceſtours formerly preſented, and this for him, that is the pourchaſour him ſelfe. See the Expoſitour of the termes of law, and owld nat. br. fol. 27. Bracton. lib. 4. tracta. 2. cap. 6. Britton cap. 92. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 32. and the Regiſter originall. fol. 30. where it is ſaid that a Quare impedit is of a higher nature, then Aſſiſa vltimae praeſentationis; becauſe it ſuppoſeth both a poſſeſſion and a right. See at large

the newe booke of Entriſe. verbo. Quare impedit.
               
               
                  Quare incumbrauit, is a writ, that lyeth agaiuſt the Biſhop, which within ſixe monethes after the vacation of a benefice, conferreth it vpon his Clerke, whileſt two others be contending in law for the right of preſenting. Expoſition of the terms of law, old. nat. br. fol. 30. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 48. Regiſter originall. fol. 32.
               
                  Quare intruſit matrimonio non ſatiſfacto, is a writ that lyeth for the Lord againſt his tenent being his ward, that after couenable mariage offered him, marieth another, and entreth neuer the leſſe vpon his land, without agreement firſt made with his Lord and Gardian. Terms of the law.
               
               
                  Quare non permittit, is a writ that lyeth for one that hath right to preſent for a turne againſt the proprietary. Fleta. lib. 5. cap. 16.
               
                  Quarentine (quarentina) is a benefit allowed by the lawe of England, to the widow of a landed man deceaſed, whereby ſhee may challenge to continue in his capitall meſſuage, or cheife manſion houſe, by the ſpace of 40. daies after his deceaſe. Of this ſee Bracton lib. 2. cap. 40. And if the heire, or any other attempt to eiect her, ſhee may haue the writ De Quarentina habenda. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 161. ſee anno 9. H. 3. cap. 7. & anno 20. cap. pri. and Britton. cap. 103. M. Skene de verborum ſignificatione. verbo Quarentina viduarum, deriueth this word from the French Quareſme. Who alſo haue this cuſtome called lo quareſme des vefues granted to widows after the deceaſe of their husbands: as he proueth out of Papon in his Arreſts libro 15. titulo des dots. cap. 7. & lib. 10. tit. Subſtitutiones cap. 30. Of this read Fleta alſo lib. 5. cap. 23.
               
                  Quarentena habenda, is a writ, that lyeth for a widow to inioy her Quarentine. Regiſter originall. fol. 175.
               
                  Quare non admiſit, is a writ, that lyeth againſt the Biſhop refuſing to admit his Clerk, that hath recouered in a plee of Aduowſen. The furder vſe whereof ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 47. & Regiſter originall: fol. 32. See the new booke of Entries. verbo quare non admiſit.
               
               
                  Quare obſtruxit, is a writ, that lyeth for him who hauing a ſeruitude to paſſe through his neighbours ground, cannot inioy his right, for that the owner hath ſo ſtrengthened it. Fleta: li. 4. cap. 26. §. Item ſi minus.
               
               
                  Quarter Seſſions, is a court held by the Iuſtices of peace in euery Countie, once euery quarter. The iuriſdiction whereof

how farre it extendeth, is to be learned out of M. Lamberds Eirenarcha. Sir Thomas Smith de Republ. Anglor. lib. 2. ca. 19. But to theſe you muſt adde the late ſtatutes of the Realme, for their power daily increaſeth. Originally it ſeemeth to haue bene erected onely for maters touching the peace. But in theſe daies it extendeth much farder. That theſe Seſſions ſhold be held quarterly, was firſt of all ordeined (ſo farre as I can learne) by the ſtatute anno 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. pri. cap. 8. of theſe read Lamberds Eirenarcha the fourth booke throughout, where he ſetteth them out, both learnedly, and at large.
               
                  Quaſhe (quaſſare) commeth of the French (quaſſer. i. quaſſare, conquaſſare) it ſignifieth in our common law to ouerthrowe, Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 2. cap. 3. nu. 4.
               
                  Quekbord, anno 17. Ed. 4. ca. 2.
               
                  Que est meſme, ſignifieth verbatim. Which is the ſelfe ſame thing. It is vſed in our common law as a word of art in an action of treſpas, or of like nature, for a direct iuſtification of the very act complained of by the plaintffe as a wrong. for example, in an action of the caſe, the plaintiffe ſaith that the Lord threatned his Tenents at will in ſuch ſort, as he draue them to giue vp their tenures. The Lord for his defence pleadeth, that he ſaid vnto them, that if they would not depart, he would ſiew them as the law would. This being the ſame thretning that he vſed, or, to ſpeake artificially, que eſt le meſme the defence is good. Of this ſee Kitchin in the chapter. Que eſt le meſme. fol. 236. where you may haue many like examples.
               
                  Que eſtate, word for word, ſignifieth, Quem ſtatum: It ſignifieth in our common law, a plee whereby a man intitling another to lands, &c ſaith that the ſame eſtate that he had, himſelfe hath from him: for example, in a Quare impedit the Plaintife alleadgeth that ſuch foure perſons were ſeiſed of lands, whereunto the Advowſen in queſtion was appendant in fee, and did preſent to the Church, and afterward the Church was voide, Que eſtat del, &c. that is which eſtate of the foure perſons, he faith alſo, that he hath nowe during the vacation, by vertue whereof he preſently, &c. Brooke titulo Que eſtate. fol. 175. & 176. But it is harder to knowe when this Que eſtate is to be pleaded, then to vnderſtand what it is, as by him may appeare. See the new booke of Entries. verbo. Que eſtate.
               
               
                  Queene (Regina) is either ſhee that houldeth the Crowne of this

Realme by right of blood, or els ſhee that is maried to the King. In the former ſignification ſhee is in all conſtruction the ſame that the King is, and hath the ſame power in all reſpects. In the other ſignification ſhee is inferiour, and a perſon exempt from the King. For ſhee may ſiew and be ſiewed in her owne name. Yet that ſhee hath, is the Kings, and looke what ſhee looſeth, ſo much departeth from the King. Stawnf: praerog: cap. 2. fol. 10. in fine. See Kitchin fol. 1. b. See Cooke lib. 4. Copy-hould caſes, fo. 23. b. Auguſta was the like among Romaines, how be it not euiſdem iuris in all things.
               
                  Queenes ſiluer. See Kings ſiluer.
               
               
                  Quem reditum reddat, is a writ Iudiciall, that lyeth for him to whom a rent ſeck, or rent charge is graunted by fine leuied in the Kings Court, againſt the Tenent of the land, that refuſeth to atturne vnto him, thereby to cauſe him to atturne. See old: nat. br: fol. 156. and Weſt. parte 2. Simbol: titulo Fines. ſect: 125. See the new booke of Entries. Verbo Quem reditum reddit.
               
               
                  Querela friſcae fortiae, is a writ. See Freſh force.
               
               
                  Querela coram Rege & conſilio diſcutienda, & terminanda, is a writ, whereby one is called to iuſtifie a complaint of a treſpaſſe made to the king and himſelfe before the King & his counſell. Regiſter originall, fol. 124. b.
               
               
                  Queſtus est nobis, &c. is the ſorme of a writ of Nuſance, which by the ſtatute anno 13. Ed. pri. cap. 24. lieth againſt him, to whome the houſe or other thing that breedeth the Nuſance, is alienated, wheras before that ſtatute, this actiō lay onely againſt him, that firſt leuied the thing, to the hurt of his neighbour. See the Statute.
               
               
                  Quia improvide, ſeemeth to be a ſuperſedeas graunted in the behalfe of a clerke of the Chawncerie ſiewed againſt the priuiledge of that court, in the common plees, & perſiewed to the exigēd. See Dyer. f. 33. n. 18.
               
                  Quid iuris clamat, is a writ Iudiciall iſſuing out of the Record of the Fine, which remaineth with the Cuſtos breuium of the common place, before it be ingroſſed (for afterward it cannot be had) and it lieth for the Grauntee of a Reverſion, or Remainder, when the particular tenent will not atturne. Weſt. parte. 2. ſymbol. titulo. Fines. ſect. 118. whome ſee farder. See the Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 36. 57. And the newe booke of Entries. verbis Quid iuris clamat.
               
               
                  Quinquageſima Sunday, is alway the next Sabbath before Shrouetide, ſo called, becauſe it is the fiueteth day before

Eaſter. The reaſons of this appellation who ſo deſireth to know, hee may finde diuers ſuch as they bee, in Durandi Rationaeli diuinorum, capit. De Quinquageſima. Sexageſima Sunday is the next Sabbath before Quinquageſima, ſo called in the opinion of the ſaid authour, becauſe the number of ſixtie conſiſteth of ſixe times tenne: ſixe hauing reference to the ſixe workes of mercie, and tenne to the tenne commandements. Septuageſima is the next before Sexageſima, and isinſtituted and ſo called, as Durand likewiſe ſaith, for three things: and (to vſe his owne words,) Primò, propter redemptionem Sabbathi, vel ſecundum alios, quintae feria, in quae ſancti Patres ſtatuerunt ieiunari. Secundò, propter repraeſentationem, quoniam repraeſentat ſeptuaginta annos captiuitatis Babilonicae. Tertio, propter ſignificationem, quoniam per hoc tempus ſignificatur deniatio, exilium, & tribulatio totius humani generis ab Adam vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad finem mundi: quod quidem exilium ſub revolutione ſeptem dierum peragitur, & ſub ſeptem millibus annorum includitur. But of theſe three dayes, you may reade him at large, that haue a mind to learne of him. I onely take occaſion to note, what time of the yeare they be, becauſe I find them ſpoken of in our ancient lawe writers, as Britton ca. 53. and ſuch like.
               
                  Quite claime (quiete clamantia, vel quieta clamantia) is a releaſe or acquiting of a man for any action, that he hath, or might haue againſt him. Bracton lib. 5. tract. 5. cap. 9. num. 9. & lib. 4. tractat. 6. cap. 13. num. prim.
               
               
                  Quittance (quietantia,) ſee Acquitance.
               
               
                  Quid pro quo, is an artificiall ſpeech in the common lawe, ſignifying ſo much as the Greeke 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , among the Ciuilians, which is a mutuall preteſtation or performance of both parties to a contract: as a horſe and tenne pound betweene the buyer and the ſeller. Kitchin, fol. 184.
               
                  Quinſieme (Decima quintae) is a French word, ſignifying a fifteenth. It is vſed in our common lawe, for a taxe laid vpon the ſubiects, by the Prince. an. 7. H. 7. cap. 5. ſo tearmed, becauſe it is rated after the fifteenth part of mens landes or goods. See Fifteenth and Taxe. The Fifteenth (as Crompton ſaith in his Iuriſdict. fol. 21.) is leuied more commonly in theſe dayes by the yards of land: and yet in ſome places by goods alſo: and note alſo, that he there ſaith, that it is well knowne by the Exchequer rolle, what euery

towne through England is to pay for a Fifteenth. Sometime this this word Quinſieme is vſed for the fifteenth 
                     •
                  ay after any feaſt, as Quinſieme of S. Iohn Baptiſt. anno 13. Ed. prim. cap. 3. & anno decimo octano. eiuſd. capit. prim.
               
               
                  Quòd ei deforciat, is a writ that lyeth for the tenent in tayle, tenent in dower, or tenent for terme of life, hauing loſt by default, againſt him that recouered, or againſt his heire. Expoſition of termes. See Broke hoc tit. See the Regiſt. original. fol. 171. and the new booke of Entries. verbo Quod ei defortiat.
               
               
                  Quod permittat, is a writ, that lyeth for him that is diſſeiſed of his commune of paſture, againſt the heire of the diſſeiſour being deade. Termes of lawe. Britton ca. 8. ſaith that this writ lyeth for him, whoſe aunceſtour died ſeiſed of commune of paſture, or other like thing annexed to his inheritance, againſt the Deforceour. See Broke hoc titulo. See the Regiſter origin. fol. 155, and the new booke of Entries. verbo, Quod permittat.
               
               
                  Quod Clerici non eligantur in officio Ballivi, &c. is a writ, that lyeth for a Clerke, which by reaſon of ſome land he hath, is made, or in doubt to be made either Bayliffe, Bedell, or Reeue, or ſome ſuch like officer. See Clerico infra ſacros, &c. See the Regiſter orig. fol. 187. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 175.
               
                  Quòd Clerici beneficiatide Cancellaria, &c. is a writ to exempt a Clerk of the Chauncerie from contribution toward the Procters of the Clergie in Parlament. Regiſter originall: fol. 261. a.
               
               
                  Quòd perſonae, nec Praebendarii, &c. is a writ, that lieth for ſpirituall perſons, that are diſtrained in their ſpirituall poſſeſſions for the payment of the fifteenth with the reſt of the pariſh. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 176.
               
                  Quòd non permittat. See Conſuetudinibus, & ſeruiciis.
               
               
                  Quo iure, is a writ, that lyeth for him that hath land, wherein another chalengeth commun of paſture time out of mind. And it is to compell him to ſhewe by what title he challengeth this commune of paſture. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 128. Of this ſee Briton more at large, cap. 59. ſee the Regiſter origin. fol. 156. and the newe booke of Entries. verbo Quo iure.
               
               
                  Quo minus, is a writ, that lyeth for him, which hath a graunt of houſebote, and heybote, in another mans woods, againſt the graunter making ſuch waſte, as the grauntee

cannot enioy his graunt. old nat. br. fol. 148. Termes of lawe: ſee Brooke, hoc titulo. See Kitchin fol. 178. b. This writ alſo lyeth for the Kings fermer in the Exchequer, againſt him to whom he ſelleth any thing by way of bargaine touching his ferme. Perkins Graunts. 5. For he ſuppoſeth, that by the breach of the vendee he is diſabled to pay the king his rent.
               
                  Quo warranto, is a writ that lyeth againſt him, which vſurpeth any Frawnchis or libertie againſt the king, as to haue wayfe, ſtray, faire, market, court Baron, or ſuch like, without good title. old. nat. br. fol. 149. or elſe againſt him that intrudeth himſelfe as heire into land. Bracton, lib. 4. tractat. 1. cap. 2. num. 3. See Brook hoc titulo. You may reade of this alſo. anno 18. Ed. prim. Stat. 2. & 3. & anno 30 eiuſdem. And the new booke of Entries. Quo warranto.
               
            
            
               R
               
                  RAcke vintage, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14. is a ſecond vintage o
                     •
                   voyage for wines by our Merchants into Fraunce, &c. For rackt wines, that is, wines clenſed and ſo purged, that it may be and is drawne from the leeſe. From this voyage▪ our Merchants commonly returne about the end of December, or beginning of Ianuarie.
               
                  Radknights. See Rodeknights.
               
               
                  Ran, is a Saxon word, ſignifying ſo open a ſpoiling of a man, that it cannot be denied. Lamb. Archan. fol. 125. defineth it thus: Ran dicitur aperta rapina, quae negari non poteſt.
               
               
                  Ranſime, (redemptio) commeth of the French (rançon) or (rençon) i. (redemptio.) It ſignifieth properly with vs, the ſumme paid for the redeeming of a Captiue: and ſometime a great ſumm of money to be paid for the pardoning of ſome heinous crime. anno pri. H. 4. cap. 7. Note that when one is to make fine, and Ranſome, the Ranſome ſhalbe treble to the Fine. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 142. a. and Lamb. Eirenarch: lib. 4. ca. 16. pa. 556. Horne in his mirrour of Iuſtices, maketh this difference betweene amerciament, and ranſome, becauſe ranſome is the redemption of a corporall puniſhment, due by law to any offence, lib. 3. cap. de amerciament taxable.
               
               
                  Rape (rapus vel rapa) is a part of a county, ſignifiing as much as a Hundred. As Southſex is diuided into ſixe parts, which by a peculiar name are called rapes: viz: the Rape of Chicheſter, of Arundell, of Brember, of Lewis, of Peuerſey, of Haſtings. Camden:

Britan. pag. 225. whom alſo ſee pag. 229. Theſe parts are in other places called Tithings, Lathes, or Wapentakes. Smith de Repub. Anglo. lib. 2. ca. 16.
               
                  Rape (raptus) is a felony committed by a man in the violent deflowring of a woman, be ſhee ould, or young: Britton: cap. 1. whereof Weſt. parte. 2. Simbol. titulo Inditements, ſecto: 54. hath theſe words: Copulation violent, is termed, a rape, or rauiſhment of the bodie of a woman againſt her will: which is carnall knowledge had of a woman, who neuer conſented thereunto before the fact, nor after. (And this in Scotland ought to be complained of the ſame day, or night that the crime is committed. Skene de verborum ſignifica. verbo Raptus. his reaſon. quia lapſu diei hoc crimen preſcribitur) This offence is with vs Felony in the principall, and his ayders. anno 11. H. 4. cap. 13. anno pri. Ed. 4. cap. pri: Weſtm. 2. cap. 13. (But Fleta ſaith that the complaint muſt be made within fourty daies, or els the woman may not be heard. lib. 3. cap. 5. §. Praeterea. And carnall knowledge of a woman vnder tenne yeares ould is felony. anno. 8. Elizab. cap 6. Thus far M. Weſt: of the diuerſity of Rapes, ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 43. b. & 44. See Rauiſhment. The ciuile lawe vſeth (raptus) in the ſame ſignification. And (rapere virginem vel mulierem, eſt ei vim inferre & violere. Co. li. 9. de raptu virgines.
               
               
                  Raptu haeredis, is a writ lying for the taking away of an heire houlding in Soccage, and of this there be 2. ſorts, one when the heire is maried, the other when he is not; of both theſe ſee the Regiſter originall. fol. 163. b.
               
               
                  Raſtall, was a Lawyer of reuerend accoumpt, that liued in Queene Maries daies, and was a Iuſtice of the common plees. He gathered the ſtatutes of the land into an Abridgement, which carieth his name at this day. He is alſo the author of the new booke of Entries.
               
               
                  Ratification (ratificatio) is vſed for the confirmation of a Clerk, in a pre bend, &c. formerly giuen him by the Biſhop, &c. where the right of patronage is doubted to be in the King. Of this ſee the Regiſter originall: fol. 304.
               
                  Rationabili parte bonorum, is a writ that lyeth for the wife againſt the Executours of her husband, denying her the third part of her husbands goods after debts and funerall charges defrayed. Fitzh. nat br. fol. 222. Who there citeth the 18. chap. of magna charta, and Glanuile, to proue, that according to the common law of England, the

goods of the deceaſed, his debts firſt paid, ſhould be diuided into three parts, whereof his wife to haue one, his children the ſecond, and the Executours the third. Fitzherbert ſaith alſo, that this writ lyeth as well for the children, as for the wife. And the ſame appeareth by the Regiſter originall fol: 142. b. I haue heard ſome learned men ſay, that it hath no vſe, but where the cuſtome of the country ſerueth for it. See the new booke of Entries, verbo: Rationabili parte: et Rationabili parte bonorum.
               
               
                  Rationabilibus diuiſis, is a writ, which lyeth in caſe, where two Lords in diuers townes haue their ſeigneuries ioyning together, for him, that findeth his waſte, by litle and litle, to haue bene encroched vpon within memory of man, againſt the other that hath encroched, thereby to rectifie the bounds of their ſeigneuries. In which reſpect Fitzherbert calleth it, in his owne nature, a writ of right. The old natura breuium ſaith alſo, that this is a Iuſticies, and may be remoued by a pone out of the county to the common Bank: See farder the forme and vſe of this writ in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 128. and in the Regiſter, fol. 157. b. and the new booke of Entries. verbo. Rationabilibus diuiſis. The ciuilians call this Iudicium finium regundorum.
               
               
                  Rauiſhment, raptus commeth of the French (rauiſſement. i. direptio, ereptio, raptio, raptus, raptura) and ſignifieth in our law, an vnlawfull taking away either of a woman, or of an heire in ward. Sometime it is vſed alſo in one ſignification with rape, viz. the violent deflowring of a woman, See Rape. And thereupon is the writ called Rauiſhment de gard, otherwiſe called de haerede abducto, lying for the Lord, whoſe tenent by reaſon of his tenure in Knights ſeruice being his ward, is taken and conueied from him. See Fitzh. natu. br. in the writ De recto de cuſtodia. fol. 140. F. See alſo the old. nat br. fol. 92. 93. & 94. See the new booke of Entries. verbo. Rape, & Rauiſhment de gard.
               
               
                  Rawe, anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.
               
                  Rawnge, commeth of the French (Ranger. i. aſtituere, ordinare) or elſe the Subſtantiue (Rang. i. ordo, ſeries) It is vſed in our common lawe, both as a verbe (as to Raunge) and alſo as a ſubſtantiue (as to make Rawnge) charta de Foreſta, cap. 6. The word is appropriated to the Foreſt, ſignifiing the office of the Rawnger. The Rawnger is a ſworne officer of the Foreſt (of which ſort there ſeeme to be twelue) charta de Foreſta. cap. 7. whoſe authoritie is partly declared in his oath, ſet downe

by M. Manwood parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 50. in theſe words: You ſhall truly execute the office of a Rawnger in the Purlieuſe of B. vpon the borders of the kings Foreſt of W. you ſhall rechaſe, and with your hound driue backe again the wild beaſts of the Foreſt, as often as they ſhall raunge out of the ſame Foreſt into your Purlieuſe. You ſhall truly preſent all vnlawfull hunting, and hunters of wild beaſts of venerie, as well within the purlieuſe, as within the Foreſt. And theſe and all other offences you ſhall preſent at the Kings next court of Attachements, or Swainmote, which ſhall firſt happen, ſo helpe you God. But the ſame author ſetteth downe his office more particularly in his ſecond part c. 20. n. 15. 16. & 17. The ſumm wherof is this. A Raunger is an officer of the Foreſt, or to the Foreſt, but not within the foreſt, hauing no charge of vert, but only of veniſon that commeth out of the foreſt into his charge, or part of the pourallee, to ſale conduct them back againe. And therfore in thoſe foreſts that haue no pouralleeſes, there be no Rawngers, but Foriſters ſerue the turne. This Raunger is made and appointed by the King his leters patents vnder the great ſeale, and for his beter incouragement in his dutie, he hath a yearely fee of 20. pound or 30. pound paid out of the Exchequer, and certaine fee Deere both redde and falow. His office conſiſteth cheifely in theſe three points ad perambulandum quotidie per terras deafforeſtatas, ad videndum, audiendum & inquirendum, tam de malefactis, quàm de malefactoribus in Balliua ſua: ad refugandum feras Foreſtae tam veneris quàm chaſeae de terris deafforeſtatis, in terras afforeſtatas: and, ad praeſentandū omnes tranſgreſſiones Foreſtae in terris deafforestatis factas, ad proximas curias illius Foreſtae tentas.
               
               
                  Rawnſom. See Ranſom.
               
               
                  Ray, ſeemeth to be a word attributed to cloth neuer coloured or died. v. anno 11. H. 4. cap. 6.
               
                  Realtie. See Royaltie.
               
               
                  Reaſonable ayde (Rationabile auxilium) is a duty that the Lord of the fee claimeth holding by Knights ſeruice or in ſoccage to marie his daughter, or to make his ſonne Knight. Weſtm. 1. cap. 39. See Ayde. See Brooke titulo Reaſonable aide.
               
               
                  Reattachement (Reattachiamentum) is a ſecond attachement of him, that was formerly attached, and diſmiſſed the court without day, as by the not cōming of the Iuſtices, or ſome ſuch like caſualtie. Brooke tit. Reattachment; where he maketh a

Reattachment generall and a Reattachment ſpeciall. Reattachment general ſeemeth to be, where a man is reattached for his appearance vpon all writs of Aſſiſe lying againſt him. Brooke eodem, nu. 14. Then ſpeciall muſt be for one, or more certaine, Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 35. See the newe booke of Entriſe. verbo Reattachment.
               
               
                  Rebellion (Rebellio) is a French word ſignifiing the taking vp of armes againſt the King or preſent eſtate. This French commeth from the Latine (Rebellio) which ſignifieth a ſecond reſiſtance of ſuch as being formerly ouercome in battaile by the Romanes, yeelded themſelues to their ſubiection. The French men and we vſe it generally for the traiterous taking vp of armes againſt the eſtate, be it by naturall ſubiects, or by others formerly ſubdued. Reade more of this. lib. 3. feudorum cap. 61. and Hotoman vpon the ſame chapter. See the writ of Rebellion. Rebell is ſometime attributed to him that wilfully breaketh a lawe. anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 6. & anno 31. eiuſdem, ſtat. 3. c. 2. ſometime to a villein diſobeying his Lord, a. 1. R. 2. c. 6.
               
                  Rebellious Aſſembly, is a gathering together of 12. perſons or more, intending or going about, practiſing, or putting in vre vnlawfully of their owne authoritie to chaunge any lawes, or ſtatutes of this Realme, or to deſtroy the incloſure of any park, or ground incloſed, or bankes of any fiſheponds, pale, or conduict, to the intent the ſame ſhall remaine voide, or to the intent vnlawfully to haue common, or way in any of the ſaid grounds, or to deſtroy the Deere in any Park, or any warrē of conies, or deuehouſes, or fiſh in any pondes, or any houſe, barnes, mils, or bayes, or to burne ſtacks of corne, or to abate rents, or prices of victuals, an. pri. Mar. c. 12. & an. 1. Eliza. cap. 17. See Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditem
                        〈…〉
                     s. Sectio 65. And Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. f. 41. b.
               
               
                  Rebutter, commeth of the French (Bouter. i. pellere, impellere, propellere, intrudere) and ſignifieth in our common lawe the ſame thing. For example, a man giueth land to him and the iſſue of his body, to antoher in fee with warranty. And the Donnee leaſeth out this land to a third for yeares. The heire of the Donour impleadeth the tenent, alleadging that the land was intailed to him. The Donee commeth in, and by vertue of the warrantie made by the Donour, repelleth the heire, becauſe though the land were intailed to him: ye
                     •
                   he is heire to the warranty likewiſe;

and this is called a Rebutter. See Brooke. titulo Barre: nu. 13. And againe if I graunt to my tenent to hould ſine impetitione vaſti, and afterward I implede him for waſte made, he may debarre me of this action, by ſhewing my graunt, and this is likewiſe a Rebutter. Idem, eodem, nu. 25. See the newe booke of Entries, verbo Rebutter.
               
               
                  Renant, anno 32. H. 8. ca. 2.
               
                  Recaption (Recaptio) ſignifieth a ſecond diſtreſſe of one formerly diſtreined for the ſelfe ſame cauſe, and alſo during the plee grounded vpon the former diſtreſſe. It likewiſe ſignifieth a writ lying for the party thus deſtreined, the forme, and farder vſe whereof, you may ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 71. and the Regiſter orig. fol. 86. and the Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 69. and the new booke of Entries. verbo. Recaption.
               
               
                  Receyver (Receptor, or Receptator) generally and indefinitely vſed, is as with the Ciuilians, ſo alſo with vs, vſed commonly in the euill part for ſuch as receiue ſtollen goods from theeues, and conceale them. l. 1. Π. de receptatoribus, but annexed to other words, as the receiuer of rents, &c. it ſignifieth many times an officer of great accoumpte, belonging to the king or other great perſonage. Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 18. There is alſo an officer called the Reiceiuer of Fynes, who receiueth the mony of all ſuch, as compound with the King in the office of the finances for the buying of any lands, or tenements houlden in Capite. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 106. Receiuer of all offices accounptable. anno. 1. Ed. 4. ca. 1.
               
                  Receiuer generall of the Duchy of Lancaſter, is an officer belonging to the Duchy court, that gathereth in all the reuenewes and fines of the lands of the ſaid Duchy, and of all forfeitures and aſſeſments, or what elſe is thence to be receiued.
               
                  Receiuer generall of the court of Wards and liueries, is an officer belonging to that court, that is to receiue all rents, revenewes and fines of the lands belonging to his maieſties wards, as alſo the fines for licences to the Kings widowes to mary, of ouſter le main ſued out, and for idiots and lunatikes land, and finally all other profits whatſoeuer in mony ariſing to his maieſtie out of or by reaſon of the court of wards and lyveries.
               
                  Receiuer generall of the Muſter rolles. anno. 35. El. ca. 4.
               
                  Receiuer generall of the Duchie of Lancaſter of the wards, and liveries, anno 39. Elizab. cap. 7.
               
                  Receyt. See Reſceit.
               
               
                  
                  Recluſe (Recluſus) is he, that by reaſon of his order in religion, may not ſtirre out of his houſe or cloyſter. Litleton fol. 92.
               
                  Recogniſance (Recognitio) commeth of the French (Recognoiſance. i. agnitio, recognitio) and in our common lawe is thus defined. A Recogniſance is a bond of record, teſtifing the recognizour to owe vnto the recognizee a certaine ſumme of money, and is knowledged in ſome court of record, or before ſome Iudge or other officer of ſuch court, hauing authoritie to take the ſame: as the Maſters of the Chancerie, the Iudges of either Bench, Barons of the Exchequer, Iuſtices of peace, &c. And thoſe that be meere recogniſances are not ſealed, but inrolled. And execution by force thereof is of all the recogniſours goods, and chatels, except his draught beaſts, and implements of husbandrie, and of the moitie of his lands, Weſt. parte prim. ſymb. lib. 2. titulo Recogniſances. ſect. 149. And of theſe you may ſee there great diuerſitie of preſidents.
               Note farder, that a Recognizance, though in the ſpeciall ſignification, it do but acknowledge a certaine debt, and is executed vpon all the goods, and halfe the lands of the recogniſour: yet by extention it is drawne alſo to the Bonds, commonly called Statute Merchant, and Statute of the Staple: as appeareth by the Regiſter original. fol. 146. 151. & 252. and by Weſt. vbi ſupra, and others. See Statute Merchant, and Statute Staple.
               
               Recogniſance hath yet another ſignification, as appeareth by theſe wordes in the ſtatute, Weſt. 1. c. 36. anno 3. Ed. 1. It is prouided alſo and agreed, that if any man be attainted of diſſeiſin done in the time of our King that now is, with roberie of any maner of goods, or moueables, by recogniſance of Aſſiſe of nouel diſſeiſin, the iudgement ſhall, &c. In which place it is vſed for the verdict of the twelue men empaneled vpon an Aſſiſe, which twelue are alſo called recognitours of the Aſſiſe, Litleton fol. 72. So alſo Bracton calleth them lib. 5. tractat. 2. cap. 9. num. 2. in theſe words: In eſſonio verò reddendo exigentur omnes illi, quos cauſa tetigerit: ſicut particeps, Warantus, & alii vt. ſupra. Recognitores in Aſſiſis, Iuratores in Iuratis, Inquiſitores in Inquiſitionibus, &c. And againe, lib. 3. tract. prim. cap. 11. num. 16. See the Statute anno 20. Ed. prim. ſtat. 4. See the newe book of Entries, ver. Recogniſance.
               
               
                  
                  Recognitione adnullanda per vim & duritiem facta, is a writ to the Iuſtices of the common Bench, for the ſending of a record, touching a recogniſance, which the recogniſour ſuggeſteth to be acknowledged by force and hard dealing, that if it ſo appeare, it may be diſanulled. Regiſter original. fol. 183. a. b.
               
               
                  Recognitours (recognitores) is a word vſed for the Iurie empaneled vpon an aſſiſe. The reaſon why they be ſo called, may be, becauſe they acknowledge a diſſeiſin by their verdict. See Bracton lib. 5. tract. 2. cap. 9. nu. 2. & lib. 3. tract. prim. cap. 11. num. 16.
               
                  Record, (recordum) commeth of the Latine (recordari.) The word is both French and Engliſh, and in both tongs ſignifieth an authenticall or vncontroulable teſtimonie in writing. Britton cap. 27. and Lamb. Eirenarch. lib. 1. cap. 13. In the Grand Cuſtumarie of Normandie, there are ſeuerall Chapters of diuers records, expreſſing whoſe preſence in each of the Courts, is ſufficient to make that which is enacted to be a record. viz. the 102. chapter, where you haue wordes to this effect. The record of the Kings Court, is a record of things done before the King. All things done before the King, ſo he haue one other witneſſe. This record may he and other make: if he himſelfe will not make it, it may be made by three others. And his perſon may not bee impeached (or excepted againſt) either in this or any other thing. The next chapter. viz. the 103. ſheweth how many perſons ſuffiſe to make a record in the Exchequer. The next how many in an aſſiſe, &c.
               I find not that wee in our Courts (eſpecially the Kings Courts) ſtand much vpon the number of recorders or witneſſes for the ſtrength of the teſtimonie which the record worketh: but that we take it ſufficient which is regiſtred in each Court. Glanvile lib. 8. cap. 8. Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37. num. 4. Britton in the Proeme of his booke, ſaith, that the Iuſtices of the Kings Bench haue a record, the Coroner, Vicount, Iuſtices of the Exchequer, Iuſtices of Goale deliuerie, the Steward of England, Iuſtices of Ireland, Iuſtices of Cheſter, Iuſtices aſſigned by the Kings leters patents, in thoſe cauſes they haue commiſſion to take knowledge of. All which (as I take it) muſt be vnderſtood with that caueat of Brooke, titulo (Record) num. 20 & 22. that an act committed to writing in any of the Kings

Courts, during the terme wherein it is written, is alterable, and no record: but that terme once ended, and the ſaid act duly enrolled, it is a record, and of that credit, that admitteth no alteration, or proofe to the contrarie. Yet ſee Sir Edward Cookes Reports lib. 4. Rawlins caſe. fol. 52. b. ann. 12. Ed. 2. cap. 4. It is ſaid, that two Iuſtices of either Bench haue power to record Non ſuites, & Defaults in the countrey. It appeareth by Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 2. c. 1. & 11. that quatuor milites babent recordum, being ſent to view a partie eſſoined de malo lecti, and lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 4. nu. 2. that Seruiens Hundredi habet recordum in teſtimonio proborum honinum. And in the Statute of Carleil, made anno 15. Ed. 2. it is ſaid, that one Iuſtice of either Bench with an Abbot, or a Prior, or a Knight, or a man of good ſame and credence, hath a record in the view of one that is ſaid by reaſon of ſickneſſe, to be vnable to appeare perſonally for the paſſing of a fine. And anno 13. H. 4. cap. 7. & anno 2. H. 5. cap. 3. that two Iuſtices of peace, with the Shyreeue, or Vnderſhyreeue haue power to record, what they find done by any in a ryot, or route, &c.
               That which is before mentioned out of Britton touching the Shyreeue, ſeemeth to be limited by Fitzh: nat. br. fol: 81. D. Who alloweth him a Record in ſuch maters onely, as he is commaunded to execute by the Kings writ, in reſpect of his office. And thence it commeth that Kitchin fol. 177. ſaith, that the Eſcheatour, and Shyreeue be not Iuſtices of record, but officers of record. In which words he ſignifieth, that their teſtimony is authenticall onely in ſome certaine things that are expreſly inioyned them by vertue of their. Commiſſion, as miniſters to the King in his higher Courts, whereas Iuſtices of record haue in generality a record for all things within their cogniſance done before them as Iudges, though not expreſly or particularly commaunded. Fitzherbert in his Nat: br. fo. 82. in principio, ſomething explaneth this point, writing to this effect: Euery act that the Shyreeue doth by vertue of his commiſſion, ought to be taken as mater of record, no leſſe then the Iuſtices of peace. His reaſons be two: the former, he cauſe his patent is of record: the other, becauſe he is a conſeruatour of the peace. And then he addeth, that the plees held before him in his County be not of record. Yet is the county called a Court of record. Weſtm. 2. ca. 3. anno 13. Ed. 1. But it ſeemeth by Britton. cap. 27. that it is onely in theſe

cauſes, whereof the Shyreeue houldeth plee by eſpeciall writ; and not thoſe that he houldeth of courſe or cuſtome. And in that caſe alſo it may be gathered out of the ſame authour, that he hath a record, but with the teſtimony of thoſe annexed, that be ſuiters to the Court. Which ſeemeth to agree with Bractons words aboue ſpecified. Seruiens Hundredi habet recordum in teſtimonio proborum hominum. And to this purpoſe read Glanuile. lib. 8. cap. 8. 9. & 10. One Iuſtice vpon view of forcible detinew of land, may record the ſame by ſtatute. anno 15. R. 2. cap. 2. the Maior, and Conſtables of the Staple, haue power to record recogniſances of debt taken before them. anno 10. H. 6. ca. 1.
               
                  Brooke, titulo (Record) ſeemeth to ſay, that no court eccleſiaſticall is of record: how truly, it is to be inquired. For Biſhops certifiing baſtardy, bigamy, excommunication, the vacancy or plenarty of a Church, a mariage, a diuorce, a ſpirituall intruſion, or whether a man be profeſſed in any religion, with other ſuch like, are credited without farder enquiry or controlment. See Brooke, titulo Baſtardy. See Fleta. lib: 6. ca. 39. 40. 41. 42. Lamb. cirenarcha: lib: pri. cap. 13. Glanuile. li. 7. ca. 14. & 15. the Regiſter originall: fol. 5. b. Bracton. lib. 5. tracta. 5. ca. 20. nu. 5. Britton ca. 92. 94. 106. 107. & 109. Doct. and Stud. li. 2. ca. 5. but eſpecially Coſius apologie, parte pri. ca. 2. And a teſtament ſhewed vnder the ſeale of the Ordinary is not trauerſable. 36. H. 6. 31. Perkins Teſtament. 491. Fulb. paral. fol. 61. b. But it may be that this opinion groweth from a difference betweene that law, whereby the court Chriſtian is moſt ordered, and the common law of this land. For by the ciuile or canon law no inſtrument, or record is held ſo firme, but that it may be checked by witneſſes able to depoſe it to be vntrue. Co. plu
                        •
                      valere quod agitur quàm quod ſimulate concipitur. ca. cùm Iohannes. 10. extra: de fide inſtrumentorum. Whereas in our common law againſt a record of the Kings Court, after the terme wherein it is made, no witnes can preuaile. Britton. ca. 109. Coke lib. 4. Hindes caſe. fol. 71. lib. aſſiſarum fol. 227. nota. 21. This reconciliation may be iuſtified by Brooke himſelfe. titulo, Teſtaments. num. 4. 8. & 14. and by Glanuile, lib. 8. cap. 8.
               The King may make a court of record by his graunt. Glanuil. li. 8. ca. 8. Britton cap. 121. as for example, Queene Elizabeth of worthy memory by her Charter dated. 26. Aprilis. anno 3. regni ſui made the Conſiſtory Court of

the Vniuerſity of Cambridge a Court of record.
               There are reckoned among our common lawyers three ſorts of records: viz: A record iudiciall, as attainder, &c. A record miniſteriall vpon oath, as an office found. A record made by conueyance by conſent, as a fine, deede enrolled, or ſuch like. Coke. li. 4. Andrew Ognels caſe. fo. 54. b.
               
               
                  Recordare facias, or recordari facias, is a writ directed to the Shyreeue, to remoue a cauſe depending in an inferiour court, to the Kings bench, or common plees, as out of a court of auncient Demeſn, Hundred, or Countie, Fitz. nat. br. fol. 71. B. out of the countie Court. idem, fo. 46. B. or other courts of record. idem fol. 71. C. & 119. K. Howbeit, if you will learne more exactly, where, and in what caſes this writ lyeth, reade Brooke in his Abridgm. titulo, Recordare & pone. It ſeemeth to be called a recordare, becauſe the forme is ſuch, that it commaundeth the Shyreeue to whom it is directed, to make a record of the proceeding by himſelfe, and others, and then to ſend vp the cauſe. See the Regiſter, verbo, Recordare, in the Table of the originall Writs. See Certiorart. See Accedas ad Curiam.
               
               
                  Recorder (recordator) commeth of the French (recordeur. i. talis perſona quae in Ducis Curia â iudicio faciendo non debet amoueri.) Grand Cuſtumarie of Norm. cap. 107. & 121. Whereby it appeareth, that thoſe which were neceſſarie Iudges in the Duke of Normandies Courts, were called Recorders: and who they were, is ſhewed in the ninth chapter of the ſaid booke. And that they, or the greater part of them, had power to make a record, it is euident in the chapter 107. Here in England a Recorder is he, whome the Maior or other Magiſtrate of any citie, or towne corporate, hauing Iuriſdiction, or a Court of record within their precincts by the Kings graunt, doth aſſociate vnto him for his beter direction in maters of Iuſtice and proceedings, according vnto lawe. And he is for the moſt part a man well ſeene in the common lawe.
               
                  Recordo & proceſſis mittendis, is a writ to call a Record, together with the whole proceeding in the cauſe, out of one court into the Kings Court. Which ſee in the Table of the Regiſter orig. how diuerſly it is vſed.
               
                  Recordo vtlagariae mittendo, is a writ Iudiciall, which ſee in the Regiſter iudicial. fol. 32.
               
                  Recouerie (Recuperatio) cōmeth of the French) Recouvrer. i. Recuperare. It ſignifieth in our commō
                  
lawe, an obteining of any thing by Iudgement, or triall of lawe, as evictio doth among the Ciuilians. But you muſt vnderſtand, that there is a true recouerie and a feigned. A true Recouerie is an actuall, or reall recouerie of any thing, or the value thereof by Iudgement: as if a man ſiewed for any land, or other thing moueable or immoueable, and haue a verdict, and Iudgement for him. A feigned recouerie is (as the Ciuilians call it) quaedam fictio iuris. a certaine forme, or courſe ſet downe by lawe, to be obſerued for the beter aſſuring of lands or tenements vnto vs. And for the beter vnderſtanding of this, reade Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Recoveries. ſect. pri. who ſaith, that the end, and effect of a Recouerie, is to diſcontinue and deſtroy eſtates Tayles, Remainders, and Reuerſions, and to barre the former owners thereof. And in this formality there be required 3. parties, viz. the Demaundant, the Tenent, and the Vowchee. The Demaundant is he that bringeth the writ of Entrie, and may be termed the Recouerer: The Tenent is he, againſt whom the writ is brought, and may be termed the Recoveree. The Vowchee is he, whom the tenēt vowcheth, or calleth to wartantie for the land in demaund. Weſt. vbi ſupra. In whom you may reade more touching this mater.
               But for example to explane this point, a man that is deſirous to cut of an eſtate tayle in lands or tenements, to the end, to ſell, giue, or bequeath it, as him ſelf ſeeth good, vſeth his frend to bring a writ vpon him for this land. He appearing to the writ ſaith for him ſelfe, that the land in queſtion came to him or his aunceſters from ſuch a man or his aunceſter, who in the conueiance thereof, bound him ſelfe and his heires to make good the title vnto him or them to whome it was conueied. And ſo he is allowed by the court to call in this third man to ſay what he can for the iuſtifiing of his right to this land, before he ſo conveied it. The third man commeth not: wherevpon the land is recouered by him that brought the writ: and the tenent of the land is left for his remedie to the third man that was called and came not in to defend the tenent. And by this meanes the entayle which was made by the tenent, or his aunceſter, is cut of by iudgement herevpon giuen: for that he is pretended to haue no power to entaile that land, wherevnto he had no iuſt title, as now it appeareth: becauſe it

is evicted, or recouered from him.
               This kinde of recouery is by good opinion, but a ſnare to deceiue the people. Doctor & Stud. ca. 32. dial. pri. fol. 56. a. This feigned Recouery is alſo called a common Recouery: And the reaſon of that Epitheton is, becauſe it is a beaten and common path to that end, for which it is ordeined, viz. to cut of the eſtates aboue ſpecified. See the new booke of Entries verbo. Recouery.
               
               I ſaide before, that a true recouery is as well of the value, as of the thing: for the beter vnderſtanding whereof, know, that (In valew) ſignifieth as much as (Illud quod interest) with the Ciuilians. For example, if a man buy land of an other with warranty, which land a third perſon afterward by ſuite of lawe recouereth againſt me, I haue my remedie againſt him that ſould it me, to recouer in value, that is, to recouer ſo much in mony as the land is worth, or ſo much other land by way of exchaunge. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 134. K. To recouer a warranty. old. nat. br. fol. 146. is to proue by iudgement that a man was his warrant againſt all men for ſuch a thing.
               
                  Recto, is a writ, called in Engliſh, a writ of Right, which is of ſo high a nature, that whereas other writs in reall actions, be onely to recouer the poſſeſſion of the land, or tenements in queſtion, which haue beene loſt by our aunceſter, or our ſelues, this aimeth to recouer both the ſeiſin, which ſome of our Aunceſters, or wee had, and alſo the propertie of the thing, whereof our Aunceſter died not ſeiſed, as of fee: and whereby are pleaded, and tried both the rights togither, viz. as well of poſſeſſion, as property. Inſomuch as if a man once looſe his cauſe vpon this writ, either by Iudgement, by Aſſiſe, or batell, he is without all remedie, and ſhall be excluded (per exceptionem Rei iudicatae) Bracton lib. 5. tract. 1. cap. 1. & ſeqq. where you may reade your fille of this writ.
               It is diuided into two species: Rectumpatens, a writ of right patent, and Rectum clauſum, a writ of right cloſe. This the Ciuilians call Iudicium petitorium. The writ of right patent is ſo called, becauſe it is ſent open, and is in nature the higheſt writ of all other, lying alwaies for him that hath fee ſimple in the lands, or tenements ſiewed for, and not for any other. And when it lieth for him that chalengeth fee ſimple, or in what caſes, See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. pri. C. whome ſee alſo. fol. 6. of a

ſpeciall writ of right in London, otherwiſe called a writ of right according to the Cuſtome of London. This writ is alſo called Breue magnum de Recto. Regiſter originall. fol. 9, A. B. and Fleta li. 5. cap. 32. §. 1.
               A writ of right cloſe, is a writ directed to a Lord of auncient Demeſn, and lieth for thoſe, which hould their lands and tenements by charter in fee ſimple or in fee taile, or for terme of life, or in dower, if they be eiected out of ſuch lands, &c. or diſſeiſed. In this caſe a man or his heire may ſiew out this writ of Right cloſe directed to the L. of the Auncient Demeſn, commanding him to doe him right, &c. in his court. This is alſo called a ſmall writ of right. Breve parvum, Regiſter originall. fol. 9. a. b. and Britton, cap. 120. in fine. Of this ſee Fitzh. likewiſe at large. nat. br. fol. 11. & ſeqq.
               
               Yet note that the writ of right patent ſeemeth farder to be extended in vſe, then the originall inuention ſerued: for a writ of Right of Dower, which lieth for the tenent in Dower, and onely for terme of life, is patent, as appeareth by Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 7. E. The like may be ſaid of diuers others that doe hereafter followe. Of theſe ſee alſo the table of the originall Regiſter. verbo Recto. This writ is properly tried in the Lords court betweene kindſmen, that claime by one title from their Aunceſter. But how it may be thence remoued, and brought either to the Countie, or to the kings court, ſee Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 3. 4. & 5. Glanvile ſeemeth to make euery writ, whereby a man ſieweth for any thing due vnto him, a writ of right. lib. 10. ca. 1 lib. 11. cap. 1. lib. 12. cap. 1.
               
                  Recto de dote, is a writ of Right of Dower, which lieth for a woman, that hath receiued part of her Dower, and purpoſeth to demaund the Remanent in the ſame towne, againſt the heire, or his Gardian, if he be ward. Of this ſee more in the old nat. br. fol. 5. and Fitzh. fol. 7. E. and the Regiſter originall, fol. 3. and the newe booke of Entries, verbo Droyt.
               
               
                  Recto de dote vnde nihil habet, is a writ of right, which lieth in caſe, where the husband hauing diuers lands or tenements, hath aſſured no dower to his wife, and ſhe thereby is driuen to ſiew for her thirds againſt the heire or his Gardian, old. nat. by. folio 6. Regiſter originall, fol. 170.
               
                  Recto de rationabili parte, is a writ that lieth alway, beweene priuies of bloud, as brothers in Gauel-kind, or ſiſters, or other Coparceners, as Nephewes or

Neeces, and for land in Fee ſimple. For example, if a man leaſe his land for tearme of life, and afterward dyeth, leauing iſſue, two daughters, and after that the tenent for terme of life likewiſe dyeth: the one ſiſter entring vpon all the land, and ſo deforcing the other; the ſiſter ſo deforced, ſhall haue this writ to recouer her part. Fitz. nat. br. fo. 9. Regiſter origin. fol. 3.
               
                  Recto quando Dominus remiſit, is a writ of right, which lyeth in caſe, where lands or tenements that be in the Seigneurie of any Lord, are in demaund by a writ of right. For if the Lord hold no Court, or otherwiſe at the prayer of the Demandant, or Tenent, ſhall ſend to the Court of the King his writ, to put the cauſe thither for that time (ſauing to him another time the right of his Seigneurie) then this writ iſſueth out for the other partie, and hath this name from the words therein compriſed, being the true occaſion thereof. This writ is cloſe, and muſt be returned before the Iuſtices of the common Bancke. old. nat. br. fol. 16. Regiſt. orig. fol. 4.
               
                  Recto de Advocatia Eccleſiae, is a writ of right, lying where a man hath right of Advouzen, and the Parſon of the Church dying, a ſtraunger preſenteth his Clerke to the Church, & he not hauing moued his action of Quare impedit nor darrein preſentment within ſixe monethes, but ſuffered the ſtraunger to vſurpe vpon him. And this writ he only may haue, that claimeth the Aduowzen, to himſelfe and to his heires in fee. And as it lyeth for the whole aduowzen: ſo it lyeth alſo for the halfe, the third, the fourth part. old. nat. br. fol. 24. Regiſter originall. fol. 29.
               
                  Recto de cuſtodia terrae & haeredis, is a writ that lyeth for him, whoſe Tenent houlding of him in Chiualry, dyeth in his nonage, againſt a ſtraunger, that entreth vpon the land, and taketh the body of the heire. The forme, and farder vſe whereof ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 139. and the regiſter originall: fol. 161.
               
                  Recto ſur diſclaimer, is a writ that lyeth, where the Lord in the kings court, ſc: in the common plees, doth avow vpon his tenent, and the Tenent diſclaimeth to hould of him, vpon the diſclaimer he ſhall haue this writ: and if the Lord auerre, and proue, that the land is houlden of him, he ſhall recouer the land for euer. old. nat. br. fo. 150. which is grounded vpon the ſtatute, Weſtm. 2. ca. 2. anno 13. Ed. pri. which ſtatute beginneth. Quia Domini feudorum, &c.
               
               
                  Rector, is both Latine, and Engliſh, ſignifiing a Gouernour. In

the common law rector eccleſia parochialis, is he that hath the charge, or cure of a pariſh Church: qui tantum ius in eccleſia parochiali habet, quantum praelatus in eccleſia collegiata. ca. vlt: De locat; & Conduct: in gloſ: verbo Expelli potuiſſent. In our common law, I heare that it is lately ouer ruled, that rector eccleſiae parochialis is he, that hath a perſonage, where there is a vicarage, endowed: and he that hath a perſonage without a vicarage, is called perſona. But this diſtinction ſeemeth to be new and ſubtile praeter rationem. I am ſure Bracton vſeth it otherwiſe, lib: 4. tracta: 5. ca. pri. in theſe words. Et ſciendum quod rectoribus eccleſiarum parochialium competit Aſſiſa qui inſtituti ſunt per Epiſcopos, & Ordinarios vt perſonae. Where it is plaine, that rector and perſona be confounded. Marke alſo theſe words there following: Item dici poſſunt rectores Canonici de eccleſus praebendatis. Item dici poſſunt rectores, vel quaſi, Abbates, Priores & alii, qui habent eccleſias ad proprios vſus.
               
               
                  Rectus in curia, is he that ſtandeth at the barre, and hath no man to obiect any offence againſt him. Smith de repub: Angl: li. 2. c. 3. ſee a. 6. R. 2. ſta. 1. c. 12.
               
                  Reddendum, is vſed many times ſubſtantiuely for the clauſe in a leaſe, &c. Whereby the rent is reſerued to the leaſour. Coke lib. 2. Lord Cromwels caſe. fol. 72. b.
               
               
                  Rediſſeiſin (rediſſeiſina) is a diſſeiſin made by him, that once before was found, and adiudged to haue diſſeiſed the ſame man of his lands, or tenements. For the which there lyeth a ſpeciall writ, called a writ of rediſſeiſin. old: nat. br. fol. 106. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 188. See the new booke of Entries. verb. Rediſſeiſin.
               
               
                  Rediſſeiſina, is a writ lying for a rediſſeiſin. Reg. orig. fo. 206. 207.
               
                  Reddicion, is a iudiciall confeſſion, and acknowledgement that the land or thing in demaūd belongeth to the demaundant, or at the leaſt, not to himſelfe. a. 34. & 35. H. 8. ca. 24. Perkins Dower. 379. 380.
               
                  Redubbours, be thoſe that buy cloth, which they know to be ſtollen, and turne it into ſome other forme or faſhion. Britton. cap. 29. Cromptobs Vicount, fol. 193. a.
               
               
                  Reentry, cōmeth of the French (r
                        ••
                     trer). i. rurſus intrare, and ſignifieth in our common law, the reſuming, or taking againe of poſſeſſion, which we had 
                     •••
                  ſt forgone. For example, if I make a leaſe, of land, or tenement, I doe thereby forgoe the poſſeſſion, and if I doe condition with the Leaſſee, that for non payment of the rent at the day it ſhalbe lawfull for me to reenter, this

is as much as if I conditioned to take againe the lands &c. into mine owne hands, and to recouer the poſſeſſion by mine owne fact without the aſſiſtance of Iudge or proces.
               
                  Reere countie. See Rier Cowntye.
               
               
                  Re extent, is a a ſecond extent made vpon lands, or tenements, vpon complaint made, that the former extent was partially performed. Brooke, titulo. Extent. fol. 313.
               
                  Regard (regardum) is borowed of the French (Regard) or Regardure. i. aſpectus, conſpectus, reſpectus.) and though it haue a generall ſignification of any care or diligence: yet it hath alſo a ſpeciall acceptance, and therein is vſed onely in maters of the Foreſt: and there two waies: one for the office of the Regarder, the other for the compaſſe of ground belonging tothe Regarders office or charge. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 175. 199. Touching the former, thus ſaith M. Manwod, parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 198. The Eire, generall ſeſſions of the Foreſt, or Iuſtices ſeat, is to be houlden, and kepte euery third yeare: and of neceſſity before that any ſuch ſeſſions or Iuſtices ſeate can be houlden, the Regarders of the Foreſt muſt make their Regard. And this making of the Regard muſt be done by the kings writ. And the Regard is, (as he afterward there ſaith) to goe through the whole Foreſt, and euery Bayliwicke of the ſame, to ſee and enquire of the treſpaſſes of the Foreſt: which he compriſeth in theſe 4. viz. ad videndendum. ad inquirendum, ad imbreviandum, ad certificandum. Of euery of which braunches you may reade there his expoſition.
               Touching the ſecond ſignification, the compas of the Regarders charge is the whole Foreſt, that is, all that ground, which is parcell of the Foreſt. For there may be woods within the limits of the Foreſt, that be no parcell thereof, and thoſe be without the Regard, as the ſame author plainely declareth, parte pri. pag. 194. and againe parte 2. cap. 7. nu. 4. where he ſheweth the difference between theſe words: (Infra Regardum) or (Rewardum) & Infra Foreſtam.
               
               
                  Regarder (Regardator) commeth of the French (Regardeur). i. ſpectator) & ſignifieth an officer of the Foreſt. Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 153. where it is thus defined. A Regarder is an officer of the Foreſt, appointed to ſurvew all other officers. He ſaith there alſo, that this officer was ordeined in the beginning of

King Henry the ſeconds daies. M. Manwood in his firſt part of Foreſt lawes. pag. 188. thus defineth him. A Regarder is an officer of the Kings Foreſt, that is ſworne to make the Regard of the Foreſt, as the ſame hath been vſed to be made in auncient time. And alſo to view and inquire of all offences of the Foreſt, as well of vert as of veniſon, and of all concealements of any offences or defaults of the Foreſters, and of all other officers of the Kings Foreſt, concerning the execution of their offices. He ſaith there alſo, that a Regarder may be made either by the Kings leters patents, or by any one of the Kings Iuſtices of the Foreſt, at his diſcretion in the generall Eyre, or at ſuch time, as the Regard is to be made, by vertue of the Kings writ, directed to the Shyreeue of the Countie for that purpoſe. The forme of which writ he there ſetteth downe.
               After that pag. 192. he ſetteth downe his oath in theſe words. You ſhall truly ſerue our ſouereigne Lord the King in the office of a Regarder in the Foreſt of Waltham. You ſhall make the Regard of the ſame in ſuch maner, as the ſame hath beene accuſtomed to be made. You ſhall raunge through the whole foreſt, and through euery Bailiwicke of the ſame, as the Foreſters there ſhall lead you to view the ſaid foreſt. And if the foreſters will not, or doe not know how to lead you, to make the regard or raunge of the Foreſt, or that they will conceale from you any thing that is forfeited to the King, you your ſelues ſhall not let for any thing: but you ſhall ſee the ſame forfeiture, and cauſe the ſame to be inrolled in your rolle. You ſhall inquire of all waſtes, pourpre. ſtures, and Aſſerts of the Foreſt, and alſo of concealements of any offence, or treſpaſſe in the Foreſt. & all theſe things you ſhall to the vttermoſt of your power doe, ſo helpe you God. Then you may reade farder the particulars of his office. eadem, pag. 195. And pag. 207. he ſaith that their preſentments muſt be vpon their view, and ſo recorded, and that the Regarders of themſelues haue power to heare and determine the fine, or amerciament for expeditating of dogs. See Regard.
               
               
                  Regio aſſenſu, is a writ whereby the King giueth his Royall aſſent to the election of a Biſhop or Abbot. Regiſter origin. fol. 294. b.
               
               
                  Regiſtrie) Regiſtrum) commeth of the French (Regiſtre. i. liber, librarium, codex ratiocinarius, ephemeris, commentarius) it ſignifieth

with vs the office, or books, or rolls, wherin are recorded the proceedings of the Chauncerie, or any ſpirituall courte. The writer, and keeper whereof is called the Regiſter, in latine, Regiſtarius. Regiſter is alſo the name of a booke, wherein are expreſſed all the formes of writs vſed at the common lawe, called the Regiſter of the Chauncerie. anno 13. Ed. prim. cap. 24. Some ſay it is tearmed Regiſtrum quaſi Regeſtum. Prataeus.
               
               
                  Regrator (regratator) commeth of the French (regratter i. deſquamare.) Regratter quelque vielle robe & la faire neufue) is to ſcoure or furbuſh an old garment and to make it new againe. Alſo (regratteur) ſignifieth as much as (Mango) in Latine: which kind of men ſold children, and to ſel them the beter, mentiends coloris artem optime callebant. Martialis & Plinius. This word in our cō
                  mon lawe, did aunciently ſignifie ſuch as bought by the great, and ſold by retayle. anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. prim. ca. 3. but now it ſignifieth him, that buyeth and ſelleth any wares, or victuals in the ſame market, or faire, or within 5. miles thereof. anno 5. Ed. 6. cap. 14. anno 5. Eliz. cap. 12. anno 13. Eliz. cap. 25. See Foreſtallers and Engroſſers.
               
               
                  Rehabere facias ſeiſinam quando Vice comes liberavit ſeifinam de maiore parte, quam deberet, is a writ Iudiciall. Regist. Iudicial, fol. 13. 51. There is another writ of this name and nature. eodem fol. 54.
               
                  Reioynder (reiunctio) ſignifieth in our common lawe, as much as Duplicatio with the Ciuilians, that is, an exception to a replication. For the firſt anſwer of the Defendant to the Plaintiffes bill, is called an exception: the plaintiffes aunſwer to that, is called a Replication: and the Defendants to that, Duplication in the ciuill lawe, and a Reioynder with vs; eſpecially in Chauncerie. Weſt. parte 2. ſymb. titulo Chauncerie. ſect. 56. where he citeth theſe words out of Spigelius. Eſt autem reiunctio ſeu duplicatio, vel allegatio, quae datur reo ad infirmandum replicationē actoris, & confirmandum except ionem Rei.
               
               
                  Relation (relatio) idem quod fictioiuris, to make a nullitie of a thing from the beginning, (for a certaine intent) which had eſſence, Cooke lib. 3. Butler & Baker. fol. 28. b. which in playner termes may be thus expounded. Relation is a fiction of the lawe, whereby ſomething is (for a ſpeciall purpoſe) imagined neuer to haue bene, which in

truth was. Reade the reſt.
               
                  Releaſe (relaxatio) commeth of the French Relaſche. i. ceſſatio, relaxatio, lax amentum) and in our common lawe is thus defined: A Releaſe is an Inſtrument whereby eſtates, rights, titles, entries, actions, and other things be ſome time extinguiſhed, ſome time tranſſerred, ſometime abridged, and ſometime enlarged. Weſt. parte prim. ſymbol. lib. 2 ſect. 509. And there is a Releaſe in fact, and a releaſe in lawe. Perkins Graunts 71. A releaſe in fact ſeemeth to be that, which the very words expreſſely declare. A Releaſe in lawe is that, which doth acquite by way of conſequent, or intendment of lawe. An example whereof you haue in Perkins vbi ſupra. Of theſe, how they be auaileable, & how not, ſee Litleton at large. li. 3. cap. 8. fol. 94. of diuers ſortes of theſe Releaſe ſee the newe booke of Entries. verbo Releaſe.
               
               
                  Reliefe (relevium) commeth of the French (relever. i. relevare) and fignifieth in our common lawe, a certaine ſumme of money, that the tenent holding by knights ſeruice, grand ſergeantie, or other tenure, for the which homage or regall ſeruice is due, or by ſoccage, for the which no homage is due, and being at full age at the death of his aunceſtour, doth pay vnto his Lord at his entrance. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 36. giueth a reaſon why it is called a Reliefe. viz. quia haereditas, quae tacens fuit per anteceſſoris deceſſum, relevatur in manus heredum, & propter factam relevationem, facienda erit ab herede quaedam praeſtatio, quae dicitur Relevium. Of this you may read Britton. cap. 69. in a maner to the ſame effect. Of this alſo ſpeaketh the Grand Cuſtumary of Normandie, cap. 34. to this effect: It is to be knowne, that the Lord of the fee ought to haue reliefe of the lands, which be held of him by homage, when thoſe die, of whom he had homage. And that this is not onely proper to vs in Eng. or Normandie, appeareth by Hotoman in his Commentaries, de verbis feud. verbo Relevium, who there defineth it thus: Relevium est honorarium, quodnovus vaſallus patrono introitus cauſa largitur, quaſi morte vaſalli alterius, vel alto quo caſu feudum ceciderit: quod iam à novo ſublevetur: and farder ſpeaketh of it, that which is worth the reading, and containeth great knowledge of antiquitie. See the like definition in Maranta ſingularibus. verbo Relevium. For the quantitie of this reliefe, ſee the Great charter, cap. 2. in theſe words: If any of our Earles or Barons, or any other

our tenents, which hold of vs in chiefe by knights ſeruice, dye, and at the time of his death his heire is of full age, and oweth to vs reliefe, he ſhall haue inheritance by the old Reliefe: that is to ſay, the heire, or heires of an Earle for one whole Earldome one hundred pound: the heire or heires of a Baron for one whole Baronie, one hundred merkes: the heire or heires of a Knight, for one whole Knights fee, one hundred ſhillings at the moſt. And he that hath leſſe, ſhall giue leſſe, according to the old cuſtome of the fees. Reade alſo. Glanvile lib. 9. cap. 4. fol. 68. who ſaith, that in his dayes the Reliefe of a Baronie was not certaine. The heire in francke ſoccage, when he commeth to his full age, after the death of his aunceſter, ſhall double the rent that he was wont to pay to the Lord, and that ſhall be in place of reliefe. old nat. br. fol. 94. Somewhat more hereof you may reade in anno 28. Ed. prim. ſtatut. prim. and Kitchin fol. 145. ca. Reliefe. and Glanvile, lib. 7. cap. 9. The Feudiſts alſo write of this at large. Among others Vincentius de Franchis deſciſ. 121. ſaith, that Relevii ſolutioest quaedam extrinſeca praeſtatio à conſuetudine introducta, quae non ineſt feudo, quodque ſoluitur proconſirmatione, ſeu renouatione inveſtiturae & poſſeſſionis. See Heriot. This Leo the Emperour Novella 13. calleth 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . By the auncienter ciuile lawe it is termed (introitus) l. penult. §. Alumno. Π de legatis. Skene de verb. ſignif. ſaith, that Reliefe is a French word from the Latine relevare, which is to releeue or take vp that which is falen. For it is giuen by the tenent, or vaſſall being of perfect age, after the expiring of the wardeſhip to his Lord, of whome he holds his land by Knights ſeruice, that is, by ward and reliefe; and by payment thereof he relieues, and (as it were) raiſeth vp againe his lands, after they were fallen downe into his ſuperiours hands by reaſon of wardſhip, &c.
               
                  Remainder (remanentia) ſignifieth in our common law, a power or hope to inioy lands, tenements, or rents after the eſtate of another expired. For example, a man may let land to one for terme of his life, and the Remainder to another for terme of his life. Litleton cap. Atturnment: fol: 113. And this Remainder may be either for a certaine terme, or in fee ſimple, or fee taile, as might be proued by many places in the law writers. But in ſteed of the reſt, take Brooke, titulo Done & Remainder, fol: 245. Glanuile. lib. 7. ca. pri: in fine hath theſe words:

                  Not andum quod nec Epiſcopus, nec Abbas, quiaeorum Baroniae ſunt de eleemozina Domini Regis, & anteceſſorum eius, non poſſunt de Dominicis ſuis aliquam partem dare ad remanentiam ſine aſſenſu & confirmatione Demini Regis. Where it appeareth that Dare ad remanentiam is to giue away for euer. To the ſame effect doth he vſe it cap. 9. eiuſdem libri in theſe words, ſpeaking of the Lords of mancrs during the minority of their wards. Nihil tamen de haereditate, de iure alienare poſſunt ad remanentiam. In the like ſort doth Bracton vſe it. lib. 2. cap. 23. in fine: and alſo lib. 4. tracta. 2. cap. 4. nu. 4. See the new booke of Entries. verbo Remainder.
               
               
                  Remembrancers of the Exchequer (Rememoratores) be three officers, or clerks, one called the Kings Remembrancer. anno 35. El. cap. 5. The other the Lord Treaſurers Remembrancer, vpon whoſe charge it ſeemeth to lye, that they put all Iuſtices of that court, as the Lord Treaſurer and the reſt, in remembrance of ſuch things, as are to be called on, and delt in for the Princes behoofe. The third is called the Remembrancer of the firſt fruites. Of theſe you may read ſomething. anno 5. Rich. 2. ſtat. pri: cap. 14. & 15. to the effect aboue ſpecified. Theſe anno 37. Ed. 3. cap. 4. be called clerks of the Remembrance. It ſeemeth that the name of this officer is borowed from the Ciuilians, who haue their (Memoriales) qui ſunt notarii Cancellariae in regno ſubiects officio Queſtoris. Lucas de penna. C. lib. 10. tit. 12. nu: 7. The kings Remembrancer entreth in his office all recognicances taken before the Barons for any the Kings debts, for apparences, or for obſeruing of orders. He taketh al bonds for any of the kings debts, or for apparance, or for obſeruing of orders, and maketh proces vpon them for the breach of them. He writeth proces againſt the collectors of cuſtomes, ſubſidies and fiueteenthes, for their accompts. All informations vpon penall ſtatutes are entred in his office. And all maters vp on Engliſh bils in the Exchequer chamber are remaining in his office. He maketh the bils of compoſitions vpon penall lawes: taketh the ſtalments of debts: maketh a record of a certificate deliuered vnto him by the clerk of the Starre-chamber of the fines there ſet, and ſendeth them to the pipe. He hath deliuered vnto his office all maner of indentures, fines, and other euidences whatſoeuer, that concerne the aſſuring of any lands to the Crowne. He yearely in craſtino animarum readeth in open court the ſtatute for the

elections of Shyreeues, and giueth thoſe that chuſe them their oath: he readeth in open court the oath of all the officers of the court, when they are admitted.
               The treaſurers remembrancer maketh proces againſt all Shyreeues, eſcheators, receiuers, and bayliffs for their accoumpts. He maketh proces of (fieri facias) and extent for any debts due to the King, either in the pipe, or with the auditors. He maketh proces for all ſuch reuenew as is due to the King by reaſon of his tenures. He maketh a record, whereby it appeareth whether Shyreeues and other accountants pay their profers dew at Eaſter and Michelmas. He maketh another record, whereby it appeareth, whether Shyreeues and other accountants keepe their daies of prefixion. All extreats of fines, iſſues, and amerciaments ſet in any courts of Weſtminſter, or at the aſſiſes, or ſeſſions, are certified into his office, and are by him deliuered to the clerk of extreats to write proces vpon them. He hath alſo brought into his office all the accoumpts of cuſtomers, controllers, and other accoumptants to make thereof an entry of record.
               The Remembrancer of the firſt fruites, taketh all compoſitions for firſt fruites and tenthes: and maketh proces againſt ſuch as pay not the ſame.
               
                  Remittere, commeth of the French (remettre. i. reſtituere, reponere) and ſignifieth in our common law, a reſtitution of one that hath two titles to lands or tenements, and is ſeiſed of them by his later title, vnto his title that is more auncient, in caſe where the later is defectiue. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 149. F. Dyer fol. 68. nu. 22. This in what caſe it may be graunted to any man, ſee in Brooke, titulo Remitter: and the terms of law. The Doctor and Student of this mater hath theſe words: if land diſcend to him that hath right to that land before, heſhalbe remitted to his beter title, if he will. capite nono. fol. 19. b. See the new booke of Entries: verbo Remitter.
               
               
                  Render, commeth of the French (Rendre. i. reddere, retribuere, reſtituere) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, the ſelfe ſame thing. For example, this word is vſed in leuying of a fine. For a fine is either ſingle, by which nothing is graunted, or rendred backe againe by the Cognizee, to the Cognizoumor double, which conteineth a graunt, or render backe againe of ſome rent, common,

or other thing, out of the land it ſelfe to the Cognizor, &c. West. parte. 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 21. & 30. F. Alſo there be certaine things in a maner that lie in prender, that is, which may be taken by the Lord, or his officer, when they chaunce, without any offer made by the tenent, as the ward of the body of the heire, and of the land, eſcheats, &c. and certaine that lie in Render, that is, muſt be deliuered or anſwered by the Tenent, as rents, reliefes, heriots, and other ſeruices. Idem, eodem ſect. 126. C. Alſo ſome ſervice confiſteth in ſeiſāce, ſome in Render. Perkins Reſeruations. 696.
               
               
                  Rent (Reditus) commeth of the French (Rent. i. vectigal, penſitatio annua) and ſignifieth with vs, a ſumme of mony or other conſideration iſſuing yearly out of land or tenements. Plouden, caſu Browning. fol. 132. b. & fol. 138. a. 141. b. There be three ſorts of rents obſerued by our common Lawyers: that is, Rent ſeruice, Rent charge, and Rent ſeck. Rent ſeruice is, where a man houldeth his land of his Lord by fealty, and certaine rent, or by fealty, ſeruice, and certaine rent. Litleton lib. 2. ca. 12. fol. 44. or that which a man, making a leaſe to another for terme of yeares, reſerueth yearely to be paid him for the ſame. Termes of lawe. verbo Rents. who giueth this reaſon thereof, becauſe it is in his libertie, whether he will diſtraine, or bring an action of debt. A Rent charge is that, which a man making ouer an eſtate of his land, or tenements to another, by deede indented either in in fee, or fee tayle, or leaſe for terme of life, reſerueth to himſelfe by the ſaid indenture a ſumme of money yearely to be paide vnto him with clauſe of diſtreſſe, or to him and his heires. See Litleton, vbi ſupra. A Rent ſeck, otherwiſe a drie rent, is that, which a man making ouer an eſtate of his land or tenement, by deede indented, reſerueth yeerely to be paid him without clauſe of diſtreſſe mentioned in the Indenture. Litleton vbi. ſupra. and termes of the lawe. verbo Rents. ſee the newe expoſitour of lawe Termes: See Plowden, caſu Browning. fol. 132. b. See the differences betweene a rent, and an annuitie. Doctor and Student. cap. 3. O
                        •
                     dialo. primo.
               
               
                  Reparatione facienda, is a writ, which lieth in diuers caſes, whereof one is, where three be tenents in common, or ioynt tenents, or pro Indiviſo, of a mille, or houſe which is fallen into decay, and the one being willing to repaire it, the other two

will not. In this caſe, the party willing ſhall haue this writ againſt the other two. Fitzh. nat. br. f. 127. where read at large the form & many vſes of this writ. as alſo in the Regi. orig. fol. 153. b.
               
               
                  Repeale, commeth of the French (Rappel. i. Revocatio) and ſignifieth in our common lawe euen the ſame; as the Repeale of a ſtatute, Raſtall titulo Repeale. Brooke vſeth Repellance in this ſignification, titulo Repellance.
               
               
                  Repleader (Replacitare) is to plead againe, that which was once pleaded before. Raſtall, titulo Repleader. See the newe booke of Entries, verbo Repleder.
               
               
                  Replegiare. See Replevie. See Second deliuerance.
               
               
                  Replevie (Pleuina) is the bringing of the writ called Replegiarifacias, by him that hath his catel or other goods diſtreined by another for any cauſe, and putting in ſuerty to the Shyreue, that upon the deliuery of the thing diſtreined, he will perſiew the action againſt him that diſtreined. Termes of lawe. See Replegiare. It is vſed alſo for the bayling of a man. pl. cor. fol. 72. 73. 74. & Weſt pri. cap. 11. & cap. 15. anno 3. Ed. 1.
               
                  Replegiare de averus, is a writ brought by one, whoſe catell be diſtreined or put in pound vpon any cauſe by another, vpon ſurety giuen to the Shyreeue to perſiew the action in lawe. anno 7. H. 8. cap. 4. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 68. See the Regiſter originall, of diuers ſorts of this writ called Replegiare. in the table, verbo eodem. See alſo the Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 58. & 70. ſee alſo the newe boke of Entries. verbo Replevin. See Dyer. fol. 173. nu. 14.
               
                  Repleviſh (Replegiaro) is to let one to mainpriſe vpon ſuretie. anno 3. Ed. 1. cap. 11.
               
                  Replication (replicatio) is an exception of the ſecond degree made by the plantife vpon the firſt anſwer of the Defendant, Weſt. parte 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ſymbol. titulo Chauncerie. ſect. 55. & Weſtm. 2. anno. 13. Ed. pri. cap. 36. This is borowed from the Ciuilians, De replicationibus, lib. 4. Inſtitutio. titulo. 14.
               
                  Report (Reportus) is in our common lawe a relation, or repetition of a caſe debated, or argued. which is ſometime made to the court, vpon reference from the court to the Reporter, ſomtime to the world voluntarily, as Ploydens reports, & ſuch like.
               
                  Repoſition of the Foreſt, was an act whereby certaine foreſt grounds being made purlieu vpon view, were by a ſecond view laide to the Foreſt againe. Manwood, parte pri. pag. 178.
               
                  Repriſels (Repriſalia) are all one in the common and Ciuill law. Repreſalia est potestas pignorandi contra quemlibet de terya debitoris

data creditori pro iniuriis & damnis acceptis. Vocabularius vtriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iuris. This among the auncient Romans was called (Clarigatio) of the verb (Clarigo. i. res clarè repeto) It is called in the ſtatute anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 17. lawe of Marque, of the German word March. i. terminus, limes. And the reaſon may be, becauſe one deſtitute of Iuſtice in another territory, redreſſeth himſelfe by the goods belonging to men of that territorie, taken within his owne bounds.
               
                  Requeſts (Supplicum libelli, Curia Requiſitionum) is a Court of of the ſame nature with the Chauncerie, redreſſing by equitie the wrongs that poore men doe ſuffer at their hand, whoſe might they are not able to withſtand either in lawe or otherwiſe. It tooke beginning as ſome men thinke, by commiſſion from King Henry the 8. before which time the Maſters of Requeſts had no warrant of ordinary Iuriſdiction, but travailed betweene the Prince and petioners, by direction from the mouth of the King. Guins preface to his readings, But ſee Court of Requeſts.
               
               
                  Reſceyt (Receptio) ſeemeth to be an admiſſion of a third perſon to pleade his right in a cauſe formerly commenced, betweene other two. See the newe booke of Entries. verbo Reſceit. v. Aide prier. The Ciuilians call this admiſſionem tertii pro ſuo intereſſe. Of this you haue one example in the Termes of lawe, viz. if Tenent for terme of life, or tenent for terme of yeares bring an action: he in the reuerſion commeth in, and prayeth to be receiued to defend the land, and to plead with the Demandant. Many more you may haue in Brooke, titulo, Reſceite. fol. 205. See Perkins Dower. 448. 
                     •
                  eceit is alſo applied to an admittance of plee, though the controuerſie be but betweene two onely. Brooke eſtoppell. in many places.
               
                  Reſceyt of homage, is a relatiue to doing homage, for as the Tenent, who oweth homage, doth it at his admiſſion to the land: ſo the Lord receiueth it. Kitchin fol. 148. See Homage.
               
               
                  Reſcous (Reſcuſſus) commeth of the French (Reſcourre ſe Reſcourre du danger. i. aſſerere ſe ab iniuria) It ſignifieth in our common law a reſiſtance againſt a lawfull authoritie: as for example, if a Baylife, or other officer vpon a writ doe arreſt a man, and another (one or more) by violence doe take him away, or procure his eſcape: this act is called, a Reſcus Caſſanaeus in his booke de conſuetud. Burg. hath

the ſame word coupled with (reſiſtentia) fol. 294. whereby it appeareth, that other nations do vſe this word in the ſame ſignification that we doe, or the very like. It is alſo vſed for a writ, which lyeth for this act called in our lawyers latine (Breue de reſcuſſu) whereof you may ſee both the forme and vſe in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 101. and the regiſter originall: fol: 125. See the new booke of Entries. verbo reſcous. This reſcous in ſome caſes is treaſon, and in ſome felony. Crompton. Iuſtice fol: 54. b.
               
               
                  Reſeiſer (reſeiſire) is a taking againe of lands into the Kings hands, whereof a generall liuery, or ouſter le main was formerly miſſued by any perſon or perſons, and not according to forme and order of law. Of this ſee Stawnf. praeroga: 26. where it is handled at large. See reſumption.
               
               
                  Reſiance (reſiantia) ſeemeth to come of the French (raſſeoir, ſee Raſſeoir. i. reſidere) and ſignifieth a mans aboad or continuance in a place. Old nat: br. fo. 85. whence alſo commeth the participle (reſiant) that is continually dwelling, or abiding in a place. Kitchin, fol. 33. It is all one in truth with Reſidence, but that cuſtome of ſpeach tyeth that onely to perſons eccleſiaſticall.
               
                  Reſeruation, ſignifieth that rent or ſeruice which the graunter in any graunt tyeth the grauntee to performe vnto him, or them, or the Lord Paramonte. Perkins reſeruations: per totum.
               
               
                  Reſidence (reſidentia) commeth of the Latine (reſidere) and is peculiarly vſed both in the Canon and Common lawe, for the continuance or abode of a Parſon or Vicar vpon his benefice. The default whereof (except the partie be qualified, and diſpenced with) is the loſſe of tenne pounds for euery moneth, anno 28. Henr. 8. cap. 13.
               
                  Reſignation (reſignatio) is vſed particularly for the giuing vp of a Benefice into the hands of the Ordinarie, otherwiſe called of the Canoniſts (renunciatio.) And though it ſignifie all one in nature with the word (Surrender) yet it is by vſe more reſtreined to the yeelding vp of a ſpirituall liuing, into the hands of the Ordinarie, and Surrender to the giuing vp of temporall lands into the handes of the Lord. And a reſignation may now be made into the hands of the King, as well as of the Dioceſan, becauſe he hath ſupremam authoritatem Eccleſiaſticam, as the Pope had in time paſt. Plowden. caſu Grendon. fol. 498. a.
               
               
                  Reſort, is a word vſed properly in a writ of ayle, or couſenage,

as diſcent is in a writ of right. Ingham.
               
               
                  Reſpectu computi Vice-comitis habendo, is a writ for the reſpiting of a Shyreeues accompt vpon iuſt occaſion, directed to the Treaſurer and Barons of the Exchequer. Regiſter fol. 139 & 279.
               
                  Reſpight of homage, (reſpectus homagii) is the forbearing of homage, which ought firſt of all to be performed by the tenent, that holdeth by homage. Which reſpight may be occaſioned vpon diuers good reaſons: but it hath the moſt frequent vſe in ſuch as hold by Knights ſeruice in capite: who becauſe the Prince cannot be at leaſure to take their homage, do pay into the Exchequer, at certaine times in the yeare, ſome ſmall ſumme of money to be reſpighted, vntill the Prince may be at leaſure to take it in perſon.
               
                  Responſions (responſiones) ſeeme to be a word vſed properly and eſpecially by the knights of S. Iohn of Ieruſaiem, for certaine accompts made vnto them by ſuch as occupied their landes or ſtockes. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 24.
               
                  Reſponſalis, is he that commeth for another at the day aſſigned for his appearance in Court, Bracton. Fleta ſeemeth to make a difference betweene atturn atum, eſſoniatorem & reſponſalem, lib. 6. cap. 11. §. Officium: as if eſſoniator came onely to alledge the cauſe of the parties abſence, be he the demandant or tenent, and reſponſalis came for the tenent not onely to excuſe his abſence, but alſo to ſignifie what triall he meant to vndergoe, viz. the combat or the countrie. lib. 6. cap. 11. §. Si autem. A man in auncient time could not appoint an Atturney for him, without warrant from the king. Fleta, eodem cap. 13. in fine. See Atturney. This word is vſed in the Canon lawe, Et ſignificat procuratorem vel eum qui abſentem excuſat. cap. Cùm olim propter. extra. de reſcript.
               
               
                  Reſtitution (reſtitutio) is a yeelding vp againe of any thing vnlawfully taken from another. It is vſed in the common law, moſt notoriouſly for the ſetting him in poſſeſſion of lands or tenements, that hath bene vnlawfully diſſeiſed of them, which when it is to be done, and when not, ſee Cromptons Iustice of peace. fol. 144. b. &c. vſque 149.
               
                  Reſtitutione extracti ab Eccleſia, is a writ to reſtore a man to the Church, which he had recouered for his ſanctuarie being ſuſpected of felonie. Regiſter ori. fol. 69. a.
               
               
                  Reſtitutione temporalium, is a writ that lyeth in caſe, where a

man being elected, and confirmed Biſhop of any Dioceſſe, and hath the Princes royall aſſent thereunto, for the recouery of the temporalities, or Baronie of the ſaid Biſhopricke with the appurtenances. And it is directed from the King to the Eſcheatour of the Countie, the forme whereof you haue in the Regiſt. origin. fol. 294. and in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 169. Where you may read alſo, that it lyeth for thoſe Abbots and Priors newly elected and confirmed, that were of the kings foundation.
               
                  Reſummons (reſummonitio) is compounded twice, that is, of re, ſub, and Moneo: and ſignifieth a ſecond ſummons and calling of a man to anſwer an action, where the firſt ſummons is defeated by any occaſion, as the death of the partie, or ſuch like. Brook tit. See Reſummons. fol. 214. See of theſe foure ſorts, according to the foure diuers caſes in the Table of the Regiſter Iudiciall. fol. 1. See alſo the new booke of Entries, verbo. Reattachement, & Reſummons.
               
               
                  Reſumption (reſumptio) is particularly vſed for the taking again into the Kings hands, ſuch land or tenements, as before vpon falſe ſuggeſtion, or other error, he had deliuered to the heire, or graunted by leters patents to any man. Brooke, titulo Repellance, & Reſumption. fol. 298. Thus it is applyed, anno 31. H. 6. cap. 7. See Reſeiſer.
               
               
                  Retainer, commeth of the French (retenir. i. detinere, retinere) It ſignifieth in the cōmon law, a ſeruant not meniall nor familiar, that is not continually dwelling in the houſe of his Lord or Maſter, but onely vſing, or bearing his name, or liuery. This liuery was wont to conſiſt of hats (otherwiſe hoods) badges, and other ſuits of one garment by the yeare. anno pri: R. 2. cap. 7. Theſe were taken by great Lords, many times vpon purpoſe of maintenance, and quarels, and therefore they haue beene iuſtly, for the better freedome of law, forbidden by many ſtatutes: as namely by anno pri: R. 2. cap. 7. vpon paine of impriſonment, and greeuous forfeiture to the King: and againe anno 16 eiuſd. cap. 4. & anno 20. eiuſedem, cap. 1. & 2. and anno pri. H. 4. cap. 7. by the which the Lords offending herein ſhould make ranſome at the Kings will, and any Knight or Eſquire hereof duly attainted, ſhould looſe his ſaid Liuery, and forfeit his ſee for euer; and any yeoman wearing the Liuery of the King, or other Lord, ſhould be impriſoned, and make raunſome at the Kings will, onely ſome fewe excepted in the ſaid ſtatute: which ſtatute

is farder confirmed, and explaned anno 2. H. 4. cap. 21. & an. 7. eiuſd. cap. 14. & anno 13. eiuſd. cap. 3. & anno 8. H. 6. ca. 4. And yet this offence was ſo deeply rooted, that Edward the fourth was driuen to confirme the former ſtatutes, and farder to extend the meaning of them, as appeareth by the ſtatute made anno 8. Ed. 4. cap. 2. adding an eſpeciall paine of fiue pounds to euery man that giueth ſuch Liuery, and as much to euery one ſo retained, either by writing, oath, or promiſe, for euery moneth. Yet is not this fault ſo well looked vnto, but that there is need of more pregnant lawes for the redreſſe thereof, or at the leaſt beter execution of thoſe, that be already made. Theſe be by the Feudiſts called (affidati.) Sic enim dicuntur, qui in alicuius fidem & tutelam recepti ſunt. Neapol. conſtitu. li. 3. titulo 7. And as our retainers are here forbidden: ſo are thoſe (affidati) in other countries.
               
                  Retraxit, is an exception againſt one that formerly commenced an action, and withdrew it, or was non-ſuit before triall. Brooke. titulo. Departure in deſpight, & Retraxit. fol. 216. See alſo the new booke of Entries: verbo Deperter & verbo retrar it.
               
               
                  Returne (returna) commeth of the French (retour. i. reditio, reuerſio, recurſus) and in our common law, hath two particular applycations, as namely the return of a writ by Shyreeues, and Bayliffs, which is nothing but a certificate made to the Court, whereunto the writ directeth him, of that which he hath done, touching the ſeruing of the ſame writ. And this among the Ciuilians is called Certificatorium. Of returnes in this ſignification, ſpeake the ſtatutes of Weſtm. 2. cap. 39. anno 13. Ed. prim. and Tractatus contra Vice-comites & Clericos, with diuers other, collected by Raſtal, titulo Returne of Shyreeues. So is the returne of an office, Stawnf. prarog. fol. 70. a certificate into the court, of that which is done by vertue of his office: See the Statutes of dayes in banke. anno 51. H. 3. & anno 32. H. 8. cap. 21. And in this ſignification Hilary terme is ſaid to haue 4. returnes. viz. Octabis Hilarii, Quindena Hilarii, craſtino Purificationis, Octabis Purificationis: and Eaſter terme to haue 5. returnes, viz. Quindena paſchae, Tres paſchae, menſe paſchae, Quinque paſche, & craſtino Aſcenſionis. And Trinity terme 4. returnes. i. Craſtino Trinitatis, Octabis Trinitatis, Quindena Trinitatis, Tres Trinitatis. And Michaelmas Terme 8. returnes. ſc. Octabis Michaelis, Quindena Michaelis, Tres Michaelis, Menſe Michaelis, Craſtino

animarum, Craſtino Martini, Octabis Martini, Quindena Martini.
               
               The other application of this word is in caſe of Repleuy. For if a man diſtraine catell for rent, &c. And afterward iuſtifie or avowe his act, that it be found lawfull, the catell before deliuered vnto him that was diſtrained vpon ſecurity giuen to follow the action, ſhall now be returned to him, that diſtrained them. Brooke, titulo Returne d'auers & hommes. fol. 218. you ſhall finde this word often vſed in Fitzh. nat: br. as appeareth in the word Returne in his table: but in all thoſe places it hath the one or the other of theſe two ſignifications.
               
                  Returno habendo, is a writ, which lyeth for him that hath auowed a diſtreſſe made of catell, and proued his diſtreſſe to be lawfully taken for the returne of the catell diſtrained vnto him, which before were expleuied by the party diſtrained, vpon ſuerty giuen to perſiew the action. Terms of law, verbo Repleuin.
               
               
                  Returnum aueriorum, is a writ Iudiciall, graunted to one impleaded for taking the cattell of another, & vniuſt deteining of them contra vadium & plegios, and appearing vpon ſummons is diſmiſſed without day, by reaſo
                     •
                   that the plaintife maketh default, and it lyeth for the returne of the cattell vnto the Defendant, whereby he was ſummoned, or which were taken for the ſecurity of his apparence vpon the ſummons. Regiſter Iudiciall. fol. 4. a.
               
               
                  Returnum irreplegiabile, is a writ iudiciall ſent out of the common plees to the Shyreeue, for the finall reſtitution or returne of catell to the owner, vniuſtly taken by another as dammage ſeiſant, and ſo found by the Iury before Iuſtices of Aſſiſe in the County. For which ſee the Regiſter Iudiciall fo. 27. a. b.
               
               
                  Reue, aliâs Greue (Praefectus) is made of Gerefa the Saxon word for a gouerner. Lamb: explica: of Saxon words, verb. Profectus, and that by reiecting the firſt ſillable, which (he ſaith) among the Saxons is vſuall. It ſignifieth in our common law, the Bayliffe of a Fraunchis or maner, and eſpecially in the Weſt parts. Of this you may ſee Kitchin. fol. 43. See Greue. See Shyreeue. See alſo of this word M. Verſtigan in his reſtitution of decayed intelligence. cap: 10. ſpeaking much to the ſame effect.
               
                  Reuels, ſeemeth to be deriued from the French word (Reueiller. i. excitari, vel expergefieri) It ſignifieth with vs ſports of daunſing, masking, comedies, tragedies, and ſuch like vſed in

the Kings houſe, the houſes of court or of other great perſonages. The reaſon whereof is, becauſe they are moſt vſed by night, when otherwiſe men commonly ſleepe, and be at reſt. In the Kings houſe there is an officer called the Maſter of theſe Reuils, who hath the ordering, and diſpoſitions of theſe paſtimes in the court.
               
                  Reuenewe, is a French word, ſignifiing as much as Reditio, Reuerſio, Reditus. It ſignifieth properly the yearely rent that groweth to euery man from his lands and poſſeſſions.
               
                  Reuerſion (Reverſio) ſignifieth in the comon lawe, a poſſibility reſerued to a mans ſelfe and his heires, to haue againe lands or tenements made ouer conditionally vnto others, vpon the defect or fayling of ſuch condition. The difference betweene a Remainder, and a Reverſion is, that a Remainder is generall, and may be to any man but to him that graunteth, or conueieth the land, &c. for terme of life onely or otherwiſe: a Reuerſion is to himſelfe from whome the conveiance of the land, &c. proceeded, and commonly perpetuall, as to his heires alſo, Litleton, fol. 112. in fine. See Cooke lib. 2. Sir. Hugh Cholmleis caſe, fol. 51. a. And yet a Reuerſion is ſometime confounded with a remainder. Cooke li. 2. Tookers caſe, fol. 67. b. Plowden, caſu Hille. fol. 170. b. what this word Reuerſion in a deede doth carie. See Litleton lib. 2. ca. 12.
               
                  Revocation (Revocatio) is the calling backe of a thing granted. Of theſe you haue diuers in the Regiſter originall, as Reuovocationem brevis de audiendo & terminando. fol. 124. Revocationem praeſentationis. fol. 304 & 305. Revocationem protectionis, fol. 23. Revocationem ſpecialium Iuſticiariorum quia, &c. fol. 205.
               
                  Reviving, is a word metaphorically applied to rents and actions and ſignifieth a renewing of them, after they be extinguiſhed: no leſſe then if a man, or other liuing creature ſhould be dead, and reſtored to life. See diuers examples in Brooke titulo. Revivings of rents, actions, &c. fol 223.
               
                  Rewardum. See Regard.
               
               
                  Reweye. anno. 43. Elizab. cap. 10.
               
                  Rie, is a Saxon word ſignifiing as much as Regnum, in Latine. Camd. Britan. pag. 346.
               
                  Riens paſſe perle fait, is a forme of an exception taken in ſome caſes to an action. See Brooke titulo Eſtaunger al fait or Record.
               
               
                  Riens dans le gard, was a chalenge to a Iurie, or Enqueſt within

                  London. for that foure ſufficient men of liuelyhood to the yearely value of fortie ſhillings aboue all charges, within the ſame City, and dwelling and hauing within the ſame ward, weare not impanelled therein. But it is abrogated by the ſtatute. anno 7. H. 7. cap. 4.
               
                  Rier countie (Retrocomitatus) ſeemeth to come of the French (Arriere. i. poſterior) and in the ſtatute. anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 5 is oppoſite to the open countie And by compariſon of that ſtatute with Weſtm. 2. cap. 38. it appeareth to be ſome publique place, which the Shyreeue appointeth for the receipt of the kings money after the ende of his Countie. Fleta ſaith that it is dies crastinus. poſt comitatum. lib. 2. cap. 67. §. Quia Iusticiarii.
               
               
                  Right Rectum. See Recto.
               
               
                  Ridings, be the names of the parts or diuiſions of Yorke ſhire, being three in number. viz. Weſt riding, Eaſt riding, and North riding. Camd. Britan. pag. 530. This word is mentioned in the ſtatute, anno 22. H. 8. cap. 5. & 23. H. 8. cap. 18. and M. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditements ſaith, that in Inditements within that Countie, it is requiſite that the towne, and the Riding be expreſſed. ſect. 70. Q.
               
               
                  Right in the Court. anno 6. R. 2. ſtat. 1. cap. 12. See Rectus in Curia.
               
               
                  Ringhead, anno 43. Elizab. cap. 10.
               
                  Riot (Riottum) commeth of the French (Rioter. 
                        〈…〉
                     rixari.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, the forcible doing of an vnlawfull act, by three or more perſons aſſembled togither for that purpoſe. Weſtm. parte. 2. ſymbol. titulo, Inditements. ſect. 65. P. The differences and agreements betweene a Riot, a Rout, and vnlawfull aſſembly. See in M. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 5. &c. See the ſtatute. 1. M. 1. cap. 12. & Kitchin. fol. 19. who giueth theſe examples of Riots: the breach of incloſures, or banks or conduicts, parks, pownds, houſes, barnes, the burning of ſtacks of corne. M. Lamberd vbi ſupra. vſeth theſe examples: to beate a man, to enter vpon a poſſeſſion forcibly, See Route. and vnlawfull aſſembly. See alſo Cromptons Iuſtice of peace diuers caſes of Riots, &c. fol. 53. See Trihings.
               
               
                  Ripiers (Riparii) be thoſe that vſe to bring fiſh from the ſea coaſt to the inner parts of the land. Camd. Britan. pag. 234. It is a word made of the latine (Ripa).
               
               
                  Riſe (oriza) is a kinde of corne growing in Spaine, Aſia, and India, with the which both good foodes and medicines be

made. whereof if you deſire farder knowledge, reade Gerards herball. lib. 1. cap. 52. This is mentioned among merchandize to be garbled in the ſtatute. anno 1. Iaco. cap. 19.
               
                  Roag (Rogus) ſeemeth to come of the French (Rogue. i. arrogans) It ſignifieth with vs an idle ſturdie beggar, that wandring from place to place without paſport, after he hath beene by Iuſtices beſtowed vpon ſome certaine place of aboade, or offered to be beſtowed, is condemned to be ſo called. who for the firſt offence, is called a Roag of the firſt degree, and puniſhed by whipping, and boring through the griſſell of the right eare with a hot yron an inch in compas: & for the ſecōd offence, is called a Roag of the ſecond degree, and put to death as a felon, if he be aboue 18. yeares ould. See the ſtatute, anno 14. Elizab. cap. 5. & 18. eiuſdem, cap. 3. & anno 36. cap. 17. If you will know who be Rogues, and to be puniſhed as Rogues by lawe, Reade Lamberds Eirenarcha. lib. 4. cap. 4. See Rout.
               
               
                  Robberie (Robaria) commeth of the French (Robbe. 1. vestis) and in our common lawe, a felonious taking away of another mans goods from his perſon or preſence, againſt his will, putting him in feare, and of purpoſe to ſteale the ſame goods. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditments, ſect. 60. This is ſometime called violent theft. Idem, eodem. which is felonie for two pence. Kitchin fol. 26. and 22. lib. Aſſiſ. 39. Robaria is a word vſed alſo in other nations, as appeareth by the annotations vpon Mathaeus de Afflictis, deſciſ. 82. nu. 6. pag. 122. See Skene verbo Reif. libro de verbo ſignificat. See Cromp. Iustice of peace. f. 30. b.
               
               
                  Roberdſmen, anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 14. & anno 7. R. 2. cap. 5. M. Lamb. interpreteth them to be mighty theeues. Eironarch. lib. 2. cap. 6. pag. 190.
               
                  Rodknights, aliâs Radknights, are certaine ſeruitours, which hould their lands by ſeruing their Lord on horſeback. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 36. nu. 6. faith of them, debent equitare cum Domino ſuo de manerio in manerium. vel cum Domini vxore. Fleta. lib. 3. cap. 14. §. Continetur.
               
               
                  Rodde (Pertica) is otherwiſe called a pearche, and is a meaſure of 16. foote and an halfe long, and in Stafford Shire 20. foote, to meaſure land with. See 
                     
                        •
                     earch.
               
               
                  Rofe tyle, aliât Creaſt tyle, is that tyle which is made to lay vpon the rudge of the houſe. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 4.
               
                  Rogation weeke (dies rogationum) is a time well knowne to

all, being otherwiſe called Gang weeke. The reaſon why it is ſo termed, is becauſe of the eſpeciall deuotion of prayer and faſting, then inioyned by the Church to all men, for a preparatiue to the ioyfull remembrance of Chriſts glorious aſcenſion, and the deſcenſion of the holy Ghoſt, in the forme of cloven tongues ſhortly after. And in that reſpect the ſolemnization of carnall matrimony is forbidden from the firſt day of the ſaid weeke, vntill Trinitie Sunday. See Aduent.
               
               
                  Roode of land (Roda terrae) is a certaine quantitie of land being the fourth part of an acre. ann. 5. Eliz. ca. 5. See Perch.
               
               
                  Roll, aliâs Roule (Rotulum) commeth of the French (Rouler. i. volvere, pervolvere, rotare) whence alſo is the French (Role ou Roule. i. volumen, catalogus, Codex) It ſignifieth with vs a ſhedule of paper, or parchment turned, or wound vp with the hand to the faſhion of a pipe. So is it vſed in Stawnf. plees of the Crowne, fol. 11. The chequer rolle of the kings houſe, out of the ſtatute anno 3. H. 7. cap. 13. which ſignifieth nothing but the catalogue, wherein the names of the Kings houſhould ſeruants are ſet downe. And anno 5. Rich. 2. cap. 14. ſtat. pri: there is mention made of the great Rolle of the Exchequer which ſeemeth otherwiſe to be called the pipe. The Roules is alſo a place deſtinated by Ed. 3. to the the keeping of the Rols, or Records of the Chauncery ſituat betweene the two Temples in London. Camd: Britan: pag. 321. the Maſter whereof is the ſecond man in Chauncery, and in the abſence of the Lord Chaunceler, or Keeper, ſitteth as Iudge, being commonly called the Maſter of the Rols. See Maſter of the Rols.
               
               
                  Romeſcot, is compounded of Rome, and Scot, as you would ſay, the tribute due to Rome: it is called by Mathaeus Weſtmonaſterienſis, Conſuetudo Apoſtolica, à qua, neque Rex, neque Archiepiſcopus, vel Epiſcopus, Abbas, vel Prior, aut quilibet in regno immunis erat: and was firſt graunted by Offa a Saxon King. Camd. Britan. pag. 306. See Peter pence: and Roger Houeden parte poster. ſuorum annalium. fol. 344. a. in Henrico ſecundo.
               
               
                  Roundlet, is a certaine meaſure of wine, oyle, &c. containing 18. gallons and a halfe, anno 1. R. 3. cap. 13.
               
                  Route (Routa) is a French word ſignifying a companie, or flocke: as (vne grande route de gents, on de cerfs. i. grex hominum, longa ceruorum ſeries.) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, an aſſembly

of three perſōs or more, going on about forcibly to cō
                  mit an vnlawfull act, but yet doe it not, Westm. parte 2. ſym. titulo Indictments. ſect. 65. o. M. Lamberd thus ſaith of it: A Route is the ſame, which the Germans yet call Rot, meaning a band or great companie of men gathered together, and going about to execute, or executing indeed, any ryot or vnlawfull act: and (ſaith more) it is ſaid properly of the multitude that aſſembleth themſelues in ſuch diſorderly ſort, for their common quarels. As if the inhabitants of a towneſhip doe aſſemble to pull downe a hedge, or pale, to haue their common, where they ought to haue none, or to beate a man, that hath done them ſome publike offence or diſpleaſure. But the ſtatute of 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. prim. cap. vnico. which giueth proceſſe of outlawrie againſt ſuch as bring routes into the preſence of the Iuſtices, or in affray of the people, and the Statute of 2. Rich. 2. cap. 6. that ſpeaketh of riding in great routes to make entrie into lands, and to beate others, and to take their wiues, &c. doe ſeeme to vnderſtand it more largely. And it is a route, whether they put their purpoſe in execution or no: if ſo be, that they do goe, ride, or moue forward after their meeting. Broke, titulo Riot. 4. & 5. So (as it ſeemeth) a route ſhould be a ſpeciall kind of vnlawfull aſſembly: and a riot the diſorderly fact committed generally by any vnlawfull aſſembly. Howſoeuer it be, two things are common both to Riot, Route, and vnlawfull aſſembly: the one, that three perſons at the leaſt bee gathered together: for ſo it is commonly taken at this day, as I haue learned: the other, that they being together, do breed diſturbance of the peace, either by ſignification of ſpeech, ſhew of armour, turbulent geſture, or actuall and expreſſe violence: ſo that either the peaceable ſort of men be vnquieted, and feared by the fact, or the lighter ſort, and buſie bodies emboldened by the example. Thus farre M. Lamberd in his Eirenarcha. lib. 2. cap. 5. &c. Where you may reade more worth the noting, though too long to be copied out. See Riot, and Vnlawfull aſſembly. Kitchin giueth the ſame definition of a Route, fol. 20.
               
                  Rowing of clothes anno 27. H. 8. cap. 13.
               
                  Royall aſſent (regius aſſenſus) is that approbation which the King giueth to a thing formerly done by others: as to the electiō of a Biſhop by Deane and

Chapter. Which giuen, then he ſendeth an eſpeciall writ to ſome perſon for the taking of his fealtie. The forme of which writ you may ſee in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 170. C. And alſo to a bill paſſed by both the Houſes of Parlament. Cromptons Iuriſ. fol. 8. which aſſent being once giuen, the bill is indorſed with theſe wordes: Le Roy veult, i. it pleaſeth the King. If he refuſe to agree vnto it, then thus: Le roy aduiſera. 1. the King will yet thinke of it. See Parlament.
               
               
                  Royalties (regalia vel regalitates) be the rights of the King. Iura Regis. Hotoman in verbis feudal: verbo. Regum Feudiſtae. And ſo are they vnderſtoode of vs likewiſe, who otherwiſe call them the Kings prerogatiue. See Prerogatiue. And ſome of theſe be ſuch as the King may graunt vnto common perſous, ſome ſo high, as may not be ſeparated from his owne Crowne priuatiuè as the Ciuilians terme it, though cumulatiuè he may. See Bracton lib. 2. cap. 5. Theſe be in ſome ſort expreſſed in the firſt of Samuell. cap. 8. but theſe generalities bee ſpecified more at large by thoſe Lawyers that write of this point. Among whom I eſpecially commend Mathaeum de Afflictis vpon the title of the Feuds. Quae ſint regalia. being the 33. title of the third booke, as ſome diuide them, but according to others the 56. of the ſecond booke: where be named in the text 25. ſpecialties of Royalties. See alſo Hotomans Commentaries in lib. 2. Feudor. cap. 56.
               
                  Rouge croſſe. See Herald.
               
               
                  Rudge waſhed Kerſey. i. made of fleece wooll waſhed onely on the ſheepes backe. anno 35. Eliz. cap. 10.
            
            
               S
               
                  SAbles. See Furre.
               
               
                  Sac (ſacha vel Sacca) is a Royalty or priuiledge touching plee, and correction of treſpaſſes of men within a maner. Raſtal, titulo expoſ: of words: where he addeth this reaſon: becauſe (ſaith he) Sac in engliſh is (Encheſon) in French: as to ſay, for ſick, ſack, pour quel encheſon. i. for what hurt. That which our common lawyers call (encheſon) the true French man termeth (Achoiſe. i. occaſionem) as (Achoiſe fort grande, occaſio ampla) or els may encheſon come of (Encheoir. i. incidere) which we in engliſh call an accident, or incident. But all this is farre enough from (ſac) and from the interpretation thereof, as it is a liberty or priuiledge. Bracton hath the word, as Stawnford not eth out of him, pl. cor: li. pri: cap: 23. but neither of them both doe particularly interpret it. Bractons words be theſe lib. 3.

                  tract. 2. cap. 8. vel ſi ſit aliquis qui de conceſſione Domini Regis talem habeat libertatem (ſicut ſock & ſack, Tolnetum, Team, Infang thefe, & Hutfanghhefe) qui inuētus fuerit ſeiſitus de alique latrocmio, ſicut Hondhabende & Backberend, tales habent regalē poteſtatē: & vnde qui tales libertates habēt, habebūt priſonam ſuam de talibus, quia poſſunt tales in Curia ſua iudicare. Of the which mater he ſpeaketh alſo in lib. 2. cap. 24. nu. 2. & 3. and againe lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 35. But in none of theſe places he giueth any interpretation of the word. Saxon in his deſcription of England defineth Sack to be a forfeiture, as doth Raſtall vbi ſupra. fol, 132. M. Camden in his Britan: pag. 415. ſpeaking of Lincoln. hath theſe words: Eduardo Confeſſore regnante, erant (ex cenſuali libro loquor) 1070. manſiones hoſpitalae, & duodecim Lageman habentes ſocam & ſacam. To all theſe adde Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. where he writeth thus. Sunt & aliaeres quaſi ſacrae, quae perſonam Regis reſpiciunt, & aliquando tranſferri non poſſunt, niſi Iuſticiariis Domini Rogis, ficut viſus Franciplegii, placita de vetito nannio, emendatio tranſgreſſionis Aſſiſarum, Iudicium latronum, ſicut de illis qui habent ſock & ſack, & huiuſmodi omnia, quae pertinent ad pacem, & per conſequens ad Coronam. I am informed, that the word (ſack) in the Saxon tongue doth properly ſignifie ſo much as (cauſa) with the Latines: whence wee in Engliſh haue the word (ſake) as (for whoſe ſake.) M. Skene de verbor. ſignif. verbo, Sacke, writeth thus. In ſome old books it is called placitum & emenda de tranſgreſſione hominum in Curia noſtra. In the lawes of king Edward ſet foorth by M. Lamberd, fol. 132. it is written, (Sacha) Sacha autē eſt, ſi quilibet aliquē nomin atim de aliquo calumniatus fuerit, & ille negauerit, foris factura probationis vel negationis, (ſi euenerit) ſua erit. Which may be called the amercement payed by him, who denieth that thing, which is proued againſt him to be true, or affirmeth that thing, the contrarie whereof is true. Thus farre M. Skene. Fleta of this hath theſe words: Sake ſignificat acquietantiam de ſecta ad Comitatum, & Hundredum. lib. pri. cap. 47. §. Sake. But by all thoſe I find not any reaſon of the word, that is, why this liberty ſhould be ſo called, and therefore I muſt leaue it to beter Antiquaries or Linguiſts. ſee Rog. H. part. poſter. ſuorum annaliū. f. 345.
               
                  Saccus cum brochia, ſeemeth to be a ſeruice of finding a ſacke and a broch to the King by vertue of a tenure, for the vſe of his armie. Bract. li. 2. c. 16. n. 6.
               
                  Sacke of wooll, (ſaccus laenae) is

a quantitie of wooll, that containeth 26. ſtone, and a ſtone, fourteene pounds, anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. cap. 21. See Sarplar.
               
               
                  Sacramento recipiendo, quòd vidua Regis ſe non maritabit ſine licentia Regis, is a writ or commiſſion to one for the taking of an oath of the Kings widowe, that ſhe ſhall not marie without the Kings licence. Regiſter original, fol. 298. a.
               
               
                  Safe conduict. See Saulf conduict.
               
               
                  Salus, is a coine of gold ſtamped by king Henry the ſixth in Fraunce, which onely come, with another of Blanes of eight pence a peice, was current in thoſe places of Fraunce, where King Henry was obeyed. Stowes Annals, pag. 586.
               
                  Safe pledge (Salvus plegius) is a ſuretie giuen for a mans apparence againſt a day aſſigned, Bracton lib. 4. cap. 2. nu. 2. where it is alſo called certus plegius.
               
               
                  Sailing ware. anno prim. R. 3. cap. 8.
               
                  Sak. See Sac.
               
               
                  Sakebere, in Britton cap. 15. & 29. ſeemeth to be he that is robbed, or by theft depriued of his goods: with whome Bracton alſo agreeth, lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. 32. nu. 2. iu theſe words: Furtum vero manifeſtum eſt, vbi latro deprehenſus ſit feiſitus de aliquo latrocini o. ſc. Hondhabende, & Backberend, & inſecutus fuerit per aliquem, cuius res illa fuerit. qui dicitur Sacaburthe, &c. or Sathaber, as Stawnford calleth it, pl. cor. lib. pri. cap. 21. The interpretation of this word I find not. Onely M. Skene de verb. interpretatione. verbo. (Sacreborgh) thinketh it ſhould rather be written. Sickerborgh, of (Sicker. i. Securus) and (Borgh. i. plegius) ſignifiing a ſure cautioner or ſuretie which one findeth to another for theft, or ſlaughter: whereof he offereth to accuſe him iudicially. For in this caſe it behoueth the perſiewer to oblige, or binde himſelfe into the hands of the officer, or before a Iudge competent with Sicker borgh, or ſure caution, that he will perſiew in forme of lawe. And by this meanes it may be, that the accuſer was wont with vs to be called Sakbere of a circumſtance, becauſe in this caſe he was ſurely bound to perſiew. Sycker is alſo an old engliſh word, ſignifiing as much as ſure, ſecure, or certaine, and ſee Borowe.
               
               
                  Salet, is a headpeece. anno 4. & 5. Phil & Mar. it ſeemeth to come from the French (Salut. i. Salus).
               
               
                  Salmon ſewſe, ſeemeth to be the young fry of Salmon, quaſi ſalmon iſſue. anno 13. R. 3. ſtat. pri. cap. 19.
               
                  
                  Salva Gardia, is a ſecuritie giuen by the King to a ſtraunger, fearing the violence of ſome of his ſubiects, for ſeeking his right by courſe of lawe: the forme whereof ſee in the Regiſter originall. fol. 26. a. b.
               
               
                  Sanctuarie (Sanctuarium) is a place priviledged by the prince, for the ſafegard of mens liues, that are offenders, being founded vpon the lawe of mercie, and vpon the great reuerence, honour, and deuotion, which the Prince beareth to the place, whereunto he graunteth ſuch a priuiledge. Of this you may read a ſufficient treatis in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 38. This ſeemeth to haue taken beginning from the Cities of refuge, which Moyſes appointed them to flie vnto for ſafegard of their liues, that had by caſualty ſlaine a man. Exodus, cap. 21. In baſtardly imitation whereof, firſt the Athenians, then Romulus erected ſuch a place of immunity, which they, & he after them called Ayſlum. Polidor: Virg: de inuentione rerum, lib. 3. cap. 12. The Emperours of Rome made the places of their owne ſtatues or Images, a place of refuge, as appeareth. Cod. lib. 1. titulo 15. De iis qui ad ſtatuas confugiunt: as alſo the Churches: eodem, titulo 12. De iis qui ad eccleſias confugiunt, &c. But among all other nations, our auncient Kings of England ſeeme to haue attributed moſt to theſe Sanctuaries, permitting them to ſhelter ſuch, as had committed both felonies, and treaſons, ſo that within fourty daies they acknowledged their fault, and ſo ſubmitted themſelues to baniſhment: during which time, if any man expelled them, if he were laye, he was excommunicated, if a Clerk, he was made irregular. But after fourty daies noe man might releeue them. Stawnf. vbi ſupra. See of this the new booke of Entries: verb Sanctuary: and Fleta: lib. 1. cap. 29. And how by degrees they haue beene taken away, you may read partly in him, and partly in the ſtatutes. a. 26. H. 8. ca. 13. & anno 28. eiuſdem, ca. 7. & anno 32. eiuſd. ca. 12. & anno 33. eiuſdem, cap. 15. & anno pri: Ed. 6. cap. 12. & ann. 2. eiuſdem, cap. 2. & cap. 33. & anno 5. eiuſdem, cap. 10. See Abiuration.
               
               
                  Salarie (ſalarium) is a recompence or conſideration made to any man for his paines or induſtry beſtowed vpon another mans buſines. So called, as Pliny ſaith, qui tam neceſſarium quam ſal homini. The word you haue anno. 23. Ed. 3. ca pri.
               
               
                  Salmon pipe, anno 25. H. 8. cap. 7. is an engine to catch Salmons and ſuch like fiſh.
               
                  
                  Sandall, anno 2. Rich. 2. cap. 1. is a merchandize brought into England. And it ſeemeth to be a kinde of wood brought out of India. For (Sandal) in French ſo ſignifieth, and in latine it is called Santalum.
               
               
                  Sarcling time, or time of ſarcling. Seemeth to be all one with hey ſeele. Or the time when the country man weedeth his corne. And it proceedeth from the latine ſarculare, to rake or weed. Or from the French (Sarcler) which hath all one ſignification.
               
                  Sarpler (Sarplera lanae) is a quantitie of woll. This in Scotland is called Serplathe, and conteineth foureſcore ſtone, for the Lords in the counſell in anno 1527. decreed foure ſerpliathes of packed wolle to containe 16. ſcore ſtone of woll, by the trafique of Merchants now vſed. The Merchants vſe to fraught for their goods to Flaū
                     ders, by the Sack, to Fraunce, Spaine, and England, by the Tunne, and to Dansken and the Eaſter ſeas, by the Serpliāthe. Skene de verbo. ſignificatione, verbo. Serpliathe. with vs in England a loade of wolle (as I haue beene informed) conſiſteth of 80. todde, each todde conſiſting of two ſtone, and each ſtone of 14. pound. And that a Sack of wolle is in common accoumpt equall with a load: and a Sarpler (otherwiſe called a pocket) is halfe a Sack. Further that a packe of wolle is a horſe loade, which conſiſteth of 17. ſtone. two pounds. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 12. ſaith that all our Engliſh meaſures are compounded of the peny ſterling, which weigheth 32. wheate cornes of the middle ſort. and that 2. of thoſe pence make an ounce, and 12. ounces a pound in weight, or 20. ſhillings in number, and that 8. pound of wheat maketh a ialon or a galon as we now call it, and eight galons a buſhell, and 8. buſhels a common quarter. Alſo that 15. ounces of the quantitie aforeſaid doe make a merchants pounde. And that 12. ſuch pound and a halfe, make a ſtone, and that 14. ſtone make a waigh, and that two waighes or 28. ſtone, make a ſack of wolle, which ought to waigh a quarter of wheate, and that 12. ſacks make a laſt. So that a waigh, and a ſarpler ſeemeth to be all one, but that the ſarpler is the caſe, and the weigh reſpecteth the quantitie of the wolle it ſelfe: And that a loade and a ſacke is all one.
               
                  Saunkfin, is a pharſe vſed by Britton. cap. 119. for the determination, or finall end, of the lineall race, or diſcent of a kindred.

It ſeemeth to come from the French (Sang. i. ſanguis) and Fine. i. finitus.)
               
               
                  Sauer de default, is word for word, to excuſe a default. This is properly, when a man hauing made default in court, commeth afterward and alleadgeth good cauſe, why he did it, as impriſonment at the ſame time, or ſuch like. Newe booke of Entries. verbo. Sauer de default.
               
               
                  Saulfe conduict (Salvus conductus) is a ſecurity giuen by the Prince, vnder the broad ſeale to a ſtraunger, for his quiet comming in and paſſing out of the Realme, touching which you may ſee the ſtatuts. anno 15. H. 6. cap. 3. & anno 18. eiuſdem. ca. 18. & anno 28. H. 8. cap. pri. The forme of this ſee in the Regiſter originall, fol. 25.
               
                  Stawnford, was a man very learned in the common lawes of the land, wherein he wrote 2. bookes one termed the plees of the Crowne, the other the Princes prerogatiue. He floriſhed in the daies of Ed. the ſixth, and of Queene Mary, being in Queene Maries daies a Iudge, and knighted.
               
                  Scandalum Magnatum, is the eſpeciall name of a wrong done to any high perſonage of the land, as Prelates, Dukes, Earles, Barons, and other Nobles: and alſo of the Chanceler, treaſurer, clerk of the priuy ſeale, ſteward of the kings houſe, Iuſtice, of the one bench or of the other, & other great officers of the realm, by falſe news: or horrible & falſe meſſages, whereby debates and diſcords betwixt them and the commons, or any ſcandall to their perſons might ariſe. anno 2. R. 2. cap. 5.
               
                  Scauage, otherwiſe called Shewage is a kind of tolle, or cuſtome exacted by Maiors, Shyreeue, and Baylifs of Cities and Borough townes, of Merchants for wares ſhewed to be ſoulde within their precincts, which is forbidden by the ſtatute. anno 19. H. 7. cap. 8. It commeth of the Saxon word (Sceawe) to behold or view, or to ſhewe. whence is the word (Sceaw-ſtowe) a theater or ſhew place, a beholding place. M. Verſtegan in his reſtitution of decayed intelligences. litera S.
               
               
                  Scire facias, is a writ Iudiciall, moſt commonly to call a man to ſhew cauſe vnto the Court, whence it is ſent, why execution of a Iudgement paſſed, ſhould not be made. This writ is not graunted before a yeare and a day be paſſed after the Iudgement giuen, ould nat. br. fol. 151. Scire facias vpon a fine, lieth after a yeare and a day from the fine levied. Otherwiſe it is all one with the writ hababere

facias ſeiſinam. Weſt. part. 2. ſimb. titulo fines, ſect. 137. See an. 25. Edwardi 3. Sta. 5. cap. 2. v. anno 39. Eliz. cap. 7. The Regiſter originall and Iudiciall alſo in the table ſheweth many other diuerſities of this writ, which reade. See alſo the newe booke of Entries. verb. Scire facias.
               
               
                  Scyra. Camd. Britan. pag. 103. & 544. See Shyre.
               
               
                  Scot, ſeemeth to come of the French (eſeot. i. ſymbolum) Raſtall ſaith it is a certaine cuſtome, or common tallage made to the vſe of the Shyreeue, or his Baylifes. Saxon in his deſcription of England. cap. 11. ſaith thus: Scot a gadering to worke of Bailes: what he meaneth God knoweth I thinke the place is corruptly printed. Scot (ſaith M. Camden out of Mathewe of Weſtm:) illud dicitur, quod ex diuerſisrebus in vnum aceruum aggregatur. In the lawes of William the Conquerour, ſet forth by M. Lamberd: fol. 125. you haue theſe words, Et omnis Francigena, qui tempore Edwardi propinqui noſtri fuit in Anglia, particeps conſuetudinum Anglorum, quod dicunt ane hlote, & aue ſcote perſol
                     
                        •
                     antur ſecundum legem Anglorum.
               
               
                  Scot and Lot. anno 33. H. 8. ca. 19. ſignifieth a cuſtumary contribution laid vpon all ſubiects after their hability. Roger Houeden writeth it Aulote & Auſcote, in principio Henrici ſecundi.
               
               
                  Scotall (Scotalla) is a word vſed in the Charter of the Foreſt. ca. 7. in theſe words, as Pupilla oculi hath them, parte 5. cap. 22. Nullus Foreſtarius vel Bedellus, faciat Scotallas, vel garbas colligat, vel aliquam collectam faciat. &c. M. Manwood parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 216. thus defineth it. A Scotall is where any officer of the Foreſt doth keepe an alehouſe within the Foreſt, by colour of his office, cauſing men to come to his houſe, and there to ſpend their mony, for ſeare of hauing diſpleaſure. It ſeemeth to be compounded of Scot and Ale.
               
               
                  Scutagio habendo, is a writ that lieth for the King or other Lord againſt the Tenent, that houldeth by knights ſeruice, (wherein homage, fealtie, and eſcuage be conteined) being to make a viage to warre againſt the Scots, or French men. For in thoſe caſes, this writ iſſueth out to all ſuch tenents to ſerue by themſelues, or a ſufficient man in their place, or elſe to pay, &c. See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 83. It is vſed in the Regiſter originall, for him to recouer eſcuage of others, that hath either by ſeruice or fine performed his owne to the King. fo. 88. a.
               
               
                  Sealer (Sigillator) is an officer in Chauncerie, whoſe dutie is to

ſeale the writs and inſtruments there made.
               
                  Seane fiſh, anno 1. Iacob. ſeſ. 1. cap. 25. Sea ne fiſh, ibidem, ſeemeth to be that fiſh which is taken with a very great and long net called a ſeane.
               
                  Second deliuerance (Secunda deliberatione) is a writ that lyeth for him who after a returne of catel repleuied adiudged to him that diſtreined them, by reaſon of a default in the party that replevied, for the repleuying of the ſame catell againe, vpon ſecuritie put in for the redeliuerie of them, if in caſe the diſtreſſe be iuſtified. New booke of Entries. verbo, Replevin in ſecond deliuerance. fol. 522. col. 2. v. Dyer fol. 41. n. 4. 5.
               
                  Secta ad Curiam, is a writ that lyeth againſt him, who refuſeth to performe his ſuite either to the Countie, or Court Baron. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 158.
               
                  Secta facienda per illum qui habet eniciam partem, is a writ to compell the heire that hath the elders part of the cobeires, to performe ſeruice for all the coparceners, Regiſt. origin. f. 177. a.
               
               
                  Secta molendini, is a writ lying againſt him, that hath vſed to grind at the mille of B. and after goeth to another mille with his corne. Regiſter origin. fol. 153. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 122. But it ſeemeth by him, that this writ lyeth eſpecially for the Lord againſt his franke Tenents, who hold of him by making ſuite to his mill, eodem. See the new book of Entries. verbo Secta ad molendinum. By likelihood this ſeruice is alſo in Fraūce. For Balduinui ad titulum de ſervitutibus pradiorum, in Inſtitut. hath theſe words: Bannalis mola nova & barbarae ſeruitutis ſpecies eſt, qua hodie paſſim ruſtici coguntur vna mola, quam bannalem vocamus, vnoque furno vti ad quaeſtum Domini, qui fortaſſe praeeſt iuriſdictioni eius pagi.
               
               
                  Sectam proferre, eſt teſtimonium leg alium hominum qui contractui inter eos habito interfuerint praeſentes producere. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 63. §. Nullus. And ſecta is vſed for a witnes. Idem, lib. 4. cap. 16. §. final. Habes tamen ſectam vnam vel plures, &c.
               
               
                  Secta ad Iuſticiam faciendam, is a ſeruice due for 
                     •
                  a mans ſee to be performed, 
                     •
                  eing by his ſee bound thereunto. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 16. num. 6.
               
                  Secta vnica tanium facienda pro pluribus haereditatibus, is a writ that lyeth for that heyre that is diſtreined by the Lord to more ſuites then one, in reſpect of the land of diuers heires deſcended vnto him. Regiſter orig. fol. 177. a.
               
               
                  Sectis non faciendis, is a writ, that lyeth for one in wardſhip

to be deliuered of all ſuites of Court during his wardſhip, Regiſter origin. fol. 173. b. See other vſe of 
                     ••
                  is writ, eodem, fol. 174. touching women that for their dower ought not to performe ſuite of Court.
               
                  Seounda ſuperoneratione paſtura, is a writ that lyeth, where meaſurement of paſture hath bene made, and he that firſt ſurcharged the common, doth againe ſurcharge it, the meaſurement notwithſtanding. Regiſter origin. fol. 157. oldnat. br. fol. 73.
               
                  Secundarie, (ſecundarius) is the name of an Officer next vnto the chiefe Officer: as the Secundarie of the fine Office: the Secundarie of the Counter: which is (as I take it) next to the Shyreeue in London in ech of the two Counters. Secundarie of the office of the priuie ſeale. anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 1. Secundaries of the Pipe two: Secundarie to the Remembrancers, two, which be Officers in the Exchequer. Camden. pag. 113.
               
                  Securitatem inueniendi, quòd ſe non diuertat ad partes exteras fine licentia Regis, is a writ that lyeth for the King againſt any of his ſubiects, to ſtay them from going out of his kingdome. The ground whereof is this, that euery man is bound to ſerue and defend the Commonwealth, as the King ſhall thinke meet. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 85.
               
                  Securitate pacis, is a writ that lyeth for one, who is threatened death or daunger, againſt him that threateneth, taken out of the Chauncerie to the Shyreeue: whereof the forme and farder vſe you may ſee in the Register origin. fol. 88. b. and Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 79.
               
                  Se defendendo, is a plee for him that is charged with the death of another, ſaying that he was driuen vnto that which he did, in his owne defence, the other ſo aſſaulting him, that if he had not done as he did, he muſt haue beene in perill of his owne life. Which daunger ought to be ſo great, as that it appeare incuitable. As Stawnford ſaith in his plees of the Crowne. li. 1. ca. 7. And if he doe iuſtifie it to be done in his owne defence, yet is he driuen to procure his pardon of courſe from the Lord Chanceler, and forfeiteth his goods to the King. As the ſaid authour ſaith in the ſame place.
               
                  Seignior (Dominus) is borowed of the French (ſeigneur) It ſignifieth in the generall ſignification, as much as Lord: but particularly it is vſed for the Lord of the ſee, or of a maner, euen as (Dominus) or (ſenior) among the Feudiſts, is he, who graunteth a a fee or benefite out of his land

to another. And the reaſon is, (as Hotoman ſaith) becauſe hauing graunted the vſe and profite of the land to another: yet the propertie. i. (Dominium) he ſtill reteineth in himſelfe. See Hotoman in verbis feudal. verbo Dominus, & Senior. Seignior in groſſe, ſeemeth to be he that is Lord, but of no maner, and therefore can keepe no court. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 3. b. See Seignorie.
               
               
                  Seignourage. anno 9. H. 5. ſtat. 2. cap. 1. ſeemeth to be a regalitie or prerogatiue of the king, whereby he challengeth allowance of gold and ſiluer brought in the maſſe to his Exchange, for coyne.
               
                  Seignorie (Dominium) is borowed of the French (ſeigneury. i. ditio, dominatus, imperium, principatus, potentatus.) It ſignifieth peculiarly with vs, a Maner, or Lordſhip. Seignorie de ſoke mans. Kitchin fol. 80. Seignorie in groſſe, ſeemeth to be the title of him that is not Lord by meanes of any maner, but immediatly in his owne perſon: as Tenure in capite, whereby one holdeth of the King, as of his Crowne, is ſeignorie in groſſe: becauſe it is held of the king for the time being, and not of the King, as of any honour, maner, &c. Kitchin, fol. 206. See Seignior.
               
               
                  Seiſin (ſeiſina) is borowed of the French (ſeiſine. i. poſſeſſio,) and ſo it ſignifieth in our common lawe: and to ſeiſe, is to take poſſeſſion. Primier ſeiſin (prima ſeiſina) is the firſt poſſeſſion. See Primier ſeiſin, of the French word (ſeiſir) is made a Latine (ſeiſire,) vſed by the Canoniſts. cap. Clericis. § Nos igitur non ſemel de immunitate Eccleſiae, num. 6. as alſo the Ciuilians. Guido. Pap. ſingula. 865. Seiſire eſt etiam poſſeſſionem tradere. Tiraquellus in Tractatu. Le mort ſaiſit le vif. pag. 53. num. 3. Seiſin with our common Lawyers, is two fold: ſeiſin in fact, and ſeiſin in lawe. Perkins Dower. 369. 370. Seiſin in fact is, when a corporall poſſeſſion is taken: ſeiſin in lawe, is when ſomething is done, which the lawe accompteth a ſeiſin, as an Inrolment. Seiſin in lawe, is as much as a right to lands and tenements, though the owner be by wrong diſſeiſed of them. Perkins Tenent per le courteſie. 457. 478. And it ſeemeth by Ingham, that he who hath had an houres poſſeſſion quietly taken, hath ſeiſin de droit, & de claime, whereof no man may diſſciſe him by his owne force or ſubtiltie, but muſt bee driuen to his action. §. Bref denovel diſſeiſin. Sir Edward Cooke lib. 4. calleth it ſeiſin in lawe, or ſeiſin actuall. fol. 9. a. The Ciuilians call the one ciuilem poſſeſſionem, the other naturalem.
               
               
                  
                  Seiſiua habenda quia Rex habuit annum, diem, & vaſtum, is a writ that lyeth for the deliuery of ſeiſin to the Lord, of his land, or tenements, that formerly was conuicted of felony, after the King in the right of his prerogatiue hath had the yeare, day, and waſt. Rog. orig. fol. 165. a.
               
               
                  Selion (ſelio) is borowed of the French (ſellon. i. terra elata inter duos ſulcos) in Latine (Porca) in engliſh a Ridge, or land. It ſignifieth euen ſo with vs alſo: and is of no certaine quantity, but ſome time conteineth an acre, ſometime halfe an acre, ſometime more, and ſometime leſſe. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol: titulo. Recouery: ſect: 3. Therefore Crompton in his Iuriſdictions: fol: 221. ſaith, that a ſelion of land cannot be in demaund, becauſe it is a thing vncertaine.
               
                  Seneſhall (ſeneſcallus) is a French word, but borowed from Germany, being (as Tilius ſaith) compounded of Schal. i. ſervus, aut officialis, and (Geſnid. 1. familia) we engliſh it a Steward. As the high Seneſhall, or Steward of England: pl. cor: fol. 152. High Seneſhall or Steward, and South ſeneſhall, or vnderſteward. Kitchin fol. 83: is vnderſtood for a ſteward, or vnderſteward of Courts. Seneſhal de l'hoſtel de Roy, Steward of the Kings houſhold. Cromptons Iuriſdictions. fol. 102.
               
                  Seneſcallo & Mareſhallo quod non teneant placita de libero tenemento, &c. is a writ directed to the Steward or Marſhall of England, inhibiting them to take cogniſance of any action in their court, that concerneth either Freehold, dept, or couenant. Regiſter orig. fol. 185. a. 191. b.
               
               
                  Senie, aliâs, Sene, (ſena) is a leafe of a medicinable herbe, that bringeth foorth ſtalkes of a cubite high, purging phlegmaticke, cholericke, and alſo melancholicke humors, without great violence. The farder vſe whereof you may reade in Gerrards Herbal. lib. 3. cap. 8. This is mentioned among other drugs and ſpices to be garbled. anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Septuageſima is a ſunday certaine, and alwayes the third ſabbath before Shroueſunday, from the which vntill the Octaues after Eaſter, the ſolemnizing of mariage is by the Canon lawes forbidden. The reaſon whereof is giuen, for that all this time vntill Eaſter, is a time of mourning for the fall of Adam, and for the miſerie of man thereof inſuing. And Eaſter with the Octaues thereof is a time of Chriſts glorification, and ſo of ours alſo in him, for his, and by him our conqueſt ouer death and ſinne.

And that therefore all carnall affection ought, during that ſpace, to be wholy mortified in vs See Quinquageſima, ſee Aduent, ſee Rogation weeke.
               
               
                  Sequatur ſub ſuo periculo, is a writ, that lyeth, where a ſummons ad warrantizandum is awarded, and the Shyreeue returneth, that he hath nothing, whereby he may be ſummoned. For then goeth out an (Aliâs) and (Pluries) And if he come not at the (Pluries) then ſhall go out this writ. old nat. br. fol. 163.
               
                  Sequeſtration (ſequeſtratio) is a ſeparating of a thing in controuerſie from the poſſeſſion of both thoſe that contend for it. And it is double: voluntarie, or neceſſarie Voluntarie, is that which is vſed by the conſent of each partie. Neceſſarie is that, which the Iudge of his authoritie doth, whether the parties will or not. It is vſed alſo for the act of the ordinarie diſpoſing of office, the goods and chatels of one deceaſed, whoſe eſtate no man will meddle with. Dyer. fol. 232. num. 5. & fol. 256. num. 8. & fol. 160. nu. 42. & fol. 271. num. 26. As alſo in the gathering of the fruites of a Benefice voide, to the vſe of the next incumbēt. anno 28. H. 8. cap. 11. Forteſcue cap. 50. and in diuers other caſes.
               
                  Sequeſtro habendo, is a writ iudiciall for the diſſoluing of a ſequeſtration made by the Biſhop, at the Kings commaundement, of the fruites of a benefice, thereby to compell the Parſon to appeare at the ſuite of another: for the Parſon vpon his apparence may haue this writ, for the releaſe of the ſequeſtration. egiſt. Iudicial. fol. 36. a.
               
               
                  Sergeant (ſeruiens) commeth of the French (ſergeant. i. ſatelles, accenſus) a man of the Guard, a kind of ſouldier, ſo called, becauſe he was ſaepè aecitus ad res neceſſarias in exercitu peragendas. Calepin. M. Skene de ver. ſign. verb. Seriant, hath theſe words: Sergeant commeth from Sergent: quae eſt vox compoſita de (Serrer) quod eſt, includere, & gent, quod pro gente, populo vel plebe vſurpatur. Itaque Seriandus dicitur, qui iuſſu magiſtratus, quemlibet de populo reum crimin is in carcerem coniicit, ſeu includit. This word Sergeant is diuerſly vſed in our law, and applyed to ſundrie offices and callings. Firſt, a Sergeant at lawe, (or of the coyfe) is the higheſt degree taken in that profeſſion, as a Doctor is in the ciuill lawe. And to theſe, as men beſt learned, and beſt experienced of all others, is there one court ſeuered, to plead in by themſelues: (and that is the Court of common-plees) where the common

lawe of England is moſt ſtrictly obſerued. Theſe are made by the Kings mandat, or writ, directed vnto them, commaunding them vpon a great penaltie, to take vpon them that degree by a day certaine therein aſſigned. Dyer fol. 72. num. 1. ſee Counte. And of theſe one is the Kings Sergeant, being commonly choſen by the King out of the reſt, in reſpect of his great learning, to pleade for him in all his cauſes: as namely, in cauſes of treaſon. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. prim. And of theſe there may be more if it ſo pleaſe the King. This is called in other Kingdomes, Aduocatus Regius. Caſſan. de conſuet. Burgund. pag. 850. With what ſolemnitie theſe Sergeants be created, reade Forteſcue, cap. 50. This word Sergeant ſeemeth to be vſed in Brition for an Officer belonging to the Countie: who, in his firſt chapter ſpeaking of Appeales made before the Corones, hath theſe words in effect: And then let the Coroner cauſe his appeale to be entred, and the names of his ſureties. And afterward let commaundement be giuen to the Sergeant of the countrie, where the felonie was committed, that he haue the bodie of the perſons appealed at the next Countie. And it is probable, that this officer was all one with him, whom Bracton in his fifth booke cap. 4. num. 2. calleth Seruientem Hundredi. of whome he hath theſe words: Poſt probationem defaltae, faciet ſeruiens Hundreds incontinenti ſummonitionem, vel affidet partibus diem, ſi praeſentes ſint, ad proximum Comitatum, &c. This is like to be the ſame Officer, which in auncient time was called the Bayliffe of the Hundred, who (as is declared in Baylife) had the like authoritie in his Hundred, that the ſhyreeue had in the Countie, though inferiour to him, and to be controlled by him, as appeareth by diuers auncient preſidents ſet downe by Kitchin in his tractat of Returns in Court Hundred, Court Baron, &c. I read alſo in Bracton lib. 3. tractat: 2. ca. 28. Of the Kings Sergeant, who is like to be alſo an officer in the County, in theſe words: ſpeaking of a woman raniſhed, and what ſhee ought to doe for the perſuite of the Rauiſher & ſic ire debet ad praepoſitum Hundredi, & ad ſeruientem Domini Regis, & ad coronatores, & ad vice-comitē, & ad primū comitatū faciat appellū ſuum. And againe eod. li: c: 32. in theſe words: & ſi ſine ſecta cognouerit ſe inde eſſe latronem coram vicecomite, vel coronatore, vel ſeruiente Domini Regis, &c. And againe lib. 5. tractat: 3. cap. 4. nu. 8. in theſe words. Quid ſi ſeruiens Domini Rogis dederit partibus diem

ad Comitatum, &c. And by Fleta it ſeemeth, that this terme was generall to the Shyreeue, Coroner, and Bayliffes of Counties, who in his ſixth booke. cap: 3. §. 1. hath theſe worde: Cum quis igitur ſenſerit dominum ſuum vel curiam ſuam ſibi de recto defeciſſe, tunc oſtenſo hoc vicecomiti, ſtatim praecipiat balliuo Hundredi, vel itineranti, vel alteri ſeruienti Regis, quòd aſſumptis ſibi liberis, & legalibus hominibus de vicineto illo, ad curiam illius domini, ſi quem habuerit accedat, &c. And to helpe this probability, I finde that the ſteward of a maner is termed ſeruiens manerii. Coke Vol: 4. Copyhould caſes. fo. 21. a. Then is there a Sergeant at armes (ſeruiens ad arma) whoſe office is to attend the perſon of the King, anno 7. H. 7. ca. 3. to arreſt traitours, or men of worth or reckoning, that doe, or are like to contemne meſſengers of ordinary condition for other cauſes, and to attend the Lord high Steward of England ſitting in Iudgement vpon any Traytour, and ſuch like: pl: cor. lib. 3. cap. pri: Of theſe by the ſtatute anno 13. R. 2. cap. 6. there may not be aboue thirtie in the Realme. This ſort is called del eſpee. In the cuſtumary of Nor. ca. 5. which read. There be alſo ſome two of theſe Sergeants of the Parlament, one for the vpper, another for the lower houſe, whoſe office ſeemeth to ſerue for the keeping of the doores, and the execution of ſuch commaundements, eſpecially touching the apprehenſion of any offender, as either houſe ſhall thinke good to inioyne them. See Cromptons Iuriſdictions, fol. nono. See alſo Vowels, aliâs Hookers booke of the order of the Parl. There is one of theſe that belongeth to the Chauncery, who is alſo called a Sergeant of the Mace, as the reſt may be, becauſe they cary Maces by there office. He of the Chauncery attendeth the Lord Chaunceler, or Keeper in that court, for the meanes to call all men into that court, is either by this officer or by ſub poena. Weſt. pa. 2. ſym. tit. Chauncery Sect. 17. Then be there ſergeants that be the chiefe officers in their ſeuerall functions within the kings houſhould, which be chiefe in their places, of which ſort you may read many named in the ſtatute anno 33. H. 8. ca. 12. There is alſo a more baſe kinde of ſergeant of the Mace, whereof there is a troupe in the City of London, and other townes corporate, that ſerue the Maior or other head officer, both for meſniall attendance, and mater of Iuſtice. Kitchin fol. 143. And theſe are called Seruientes ad clauā. New book of Entries. ver. ſcire

facias: in Mainperners. f. 538. c. 3.
               
                  Sergeantie) Seriantia) commeth of the French (Sergeant. i. ſatelles) & fignifieth in our cō
                  mō law, a ſeruice due to the King frō his tenēt holding by ſuch ſeruice. For this ſeruice cannot be due to any L. from his Tenēt, but to the King onely. And this is either grand, or petit, as you ſhall find at large ſet downe in Chivalrie. Of this alſo you may read Bra l. 2. c. 16. &c. 37. n. 5. 4. & Brit.. c. 66. n. 1. & 2. See Seruice. M. Skene de ver. ſignifi. calleth this Sergeanterie, defining and diuiding it as we doe in England.
               
                  Servientibus, are certaine writs touching ſeruants, and their Maſters violating the ſtatutes made againſt their abuſes. which ſee in the Regiſt. orig. fol. 189. & 190. & 191.
               
                  Service (ſeruitium) though it haue a generall ſignification of dutie toward them vnto whome we owe the performance of any corporall labour, or function: yet more eſpecially in our common lawe, it is vſed for that ſeruice, which the tenent by reaſon of his ſee, oweth vnto his Lord. And ſo doth it ſignifie among the Feudiſts alſo For Hotoman thus defineth it. Seruitium eſt munus obſequii clientelaris. verbo Servitium. De verbis feudal. or rather declareth it ſo to be defined. lib. feud. 2. titulo 51. §. 8. It is ſometime called ſeruage, as anno. i. R. 2. cap. 6. This ſeruice is either militarie, and noble, commonly called Knights ſeruice: or clowniſhe & baſe, commonly called ſocage. of both which reade Chiualry, as alſo ſocage. and Bracton lib. 2. cap. 16. Seruice is divided by Britton into perſonall, and reall. cap. 66. where he maketh wards, mariags, homage, Releifs, and ſuch like, to be reall ſeruices: perſonall, I imagine, may thoſe be called, that are to be performed by the perſon of the Tenent, as to follow his Lord into warre, &c. The Ciuilians diuide munera in this ſort, either in perſonalia, or patrimonalia. Then Bracton vbi ſupra num. 7. diſtributeth ſeruitium in intrinſecum, & extrin ſecum aliás forinſecum. & medium. Seruitium intrinſecū
                   is that, which is due to the capitall Lord of the maner, Forinſecum is that which is due to the King, and not to the capitall Lord, but when he goeth in his owne perſon to ſerue: or when he hath ſatisfied the king for all ſeruices whatſoeuer. And againe in the ſame place he ſaith, it is called Forniſecum, quia fit, & capitur foris, ſive extra ſeruitium, quod fit Domino capitali. ſee Forein ſeruice. Of this reade him vbi ſupra, more at large. and Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 14. §. Continetur.

Seruitia quae nec intrinſeca nec forinſeca ſunt, Bract. handleth in the ſame chap. n. 8. ſaying thus: ſunt etiam quaedam conſuetudines, quae nec dicuntur intrinſecae, nec forinſecae: ſed ſunt quaedam ſeruitia concomitantia, ſicut ſeruitia regalia, & militaria, & etiam homagia: & ideo in chartis non ſunt exprimenda. Quia ſi homagium praeceſſerit, & regale ſeruitium, ſequitur exinde quòd ad capitalem Dominum pertinebit Releuium, & cuſtodia, & maritagium: ſiue ſeruitium ſit militare, vel ſeriantia propter exercitum, &c. Here then Reliefe, Ward, and Mariage, be thoſe ſeruices, which he calleth, nec intrinſeca, nec forinſeca, ſed concomitantia. Seruice is alſo divided into frank ſeruice, and baſe, or villenous ſeruice: the one Bracton, calleth (liberum ſeruitium) the other (ſeruitium villanum) or (villenagium) lib. 2. cap. 8. nu. pri. This villenagium is Socage in baſe tenure, as to dung the Lords ground, to ſerue him ſo many daies in harueſt, to plaſh his hedges, &c. or els copy hould. All other ſeruices ſeeme to be frank. Seruice conſiſteth ſome in ſeiſance, ſome in render. Perkins Reſeruations. 696. Seruice ſeemeth alſo to be diuided into continuall, otherwiſe annuall, and caſuall, or accidentall. An example of the former is the ſeiſin of rent, and of the other, ſeiſin of reliefe. Sir Ed. Cookes reports. lib. 4. Bevils caſe. fol. 9. a. See Copy hould: See Socage. ſee Ayde.
               
               
                  Seruice ſecular. anno 1. Ed. 4 ca. 1. which may be contrary to ſpirituall, viz. the ſeruice diuine commaunded to ſpirituall men by their founders.
               
                  Servitours of bils, ſeeme to be ſuch ſeruāts or meſſengers of the mariſhall belonging to the kings bench, as were ſent abroad with bils, or writs to ſummon men to that court, being now more ordinarily called Tip. stafs.
               
               
                  Servitiis acquietandis, is a writ Iudiciall, that lieth for one diſtreined for ſeruices by Iohn, which oweth and performeth to Robert, for the acquitall of ſuch ſeruices. Regiſter Iudicial, fol. 27. a. & 36. b.
               
               
                  Seſſions (Seſſiones) ſignifieth in our common lawe a ſitting of Iuſtices in court vpon their commiſſion: as the ſeſſions of oyer, and terminer. pl. cor. fol. 67. Quarter ſeſſions, otherwiſe called generall ſeſſions. anno 5. Elizab. cap. 4. or open ſeſſions. ibidem. Oppoſite wherevnto are eſpeciall, otherwiſe called priuie ſeſſions, which are procured vpon ſome ſpeciall occaſion, for the more ſpeedie expedition of Iuſtice in ſome cauſe. Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 110. what

things be inquirable in generall ſeſſions ſee Cromptons Iuſtice of peace, fol. 109. Petit ſeſſions, or ſtatute ſeſſions, are kept by the high Conſtable of euery Hundred, for the placing of ſeruants, anno 5. Eli. cap. quart. in fine.
               
               
                  Seſſour. anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 6. ſeemeth to ſignifie ſo much as aſſeſſing or rating of wages at this day,
               
                  Set clothes, anno. 27. Henric. 8. cap. 13.
               
                  Setwell, Valeriana, is a medicinal herb, the nature and diuers kinds whereof you haue in Gerards herball, lib. 2. cap. 424. The roote of this is mentioned among drugs to be garbled, anno. 1. Ia. cap. 19.
               
                  Seuerance, is the ſingling of two or more, that ioyne in one writ, or are ioyned in one writ. For example, if two ioyne in a writ de libertate probanda, and the one afterward be non-ſuite, here ſeuerance is permitted; ſo that, notwithſtanding the non-ſuite of the one, the other may ſeuerally proceede. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 78. I. K. Of this ſee Brooke, titulo ſeverance, & ſummons. fol. 238. For it is harder to knowe in what caſes ſeuerāce is permitted, then what it is. There is alſo ſeuerāce of the tenents in an Aſſiſe, when as one or two, or more diſſeiſours appeareth vpon the writ, and not the other. New booke of Entries, fo. 81. col. 4. & ſeuerance in attaints. eod. fol. 95. col. 2. And ſeuerance in debt. verbo. debt. fol. 220. col. 1. ſee the ſaide booke, verbo Seuerance.
               
               
                  Severall taile (tallium ſeparatum) is that whereby land is giuen and entayled ſeuerally to two. For example, land is giuen to two men, and their wiues, and to the heires of their bodies begotten: the Donees haue ioynt eſtate for their two liues, and yet they haue ſeuerall inheritance: becauſe the iſſue of the one ſhall haue his moyety, and the iſſue of the other, the other moyetie, Kitchin ibidem.
               
               
                  Severall tenancie (tenura ſeparalis) is a plee, or exception taken to a writ, that is laide againſt two as ioynt, which are ſeuerall, Brooke titulo, Severall tenancie, fol. 237.
               
                  Sewantly wouen, an. 35. El. c. 10.
               
                  Sewar, hath two ſignifications with vs, one applied to him that iſſueth or commeth in before the meate of the King, or other great perſonage, and placeth it vpon the table: the other to ſuch paſſages, or gutters as carie water into the ſea, or riuer, in lawyers Latine called Sewera, an. 6. H. 6. c. 5. which is alſo vſed in common ſpeach for commiſſioners authoriſed vnder the broad ſeale to ſee draines, and

ditches well kept, and maintained in the mariſh and fenne countries, for the better conueyance of the water into the ſea, and the preſeruing of the graſſe for feede of catell. ſtat. anno 6. H. 6. cap. 5. It is probable to bring this word from the French (iſſir) or (iſſue) as if we ſhould call them (Iſſuers) becauſe they giue iſſue or paſſage to the water, &c. And the latine word (ſuera) ſometime vſed in theſe commiſſions for theſe draines, is a competent reaſon of this coniecture: ſee Eitzh. nat. br. in oyer and terminer. Yet I finde in an old French booke conteining the officers of the King of Englands court as it was aunciently gouerned, that he whom in court we now call Sewer, was called (Aſſeour) which may ſeeme to come from the French (Aſſeour) wherein his office in ſetting downe the meat vpon the table is well expreſſed. And Sewer as it ſignifieth an officer, is by Fleta latined Aſſeſſor: li. 2. ca. 15. All which argueth that the deſcent of this word is from the French (Aſſeoir) as ſignifiing a diſpoſing or placing of any thing, or (as we ſay in Engliſh) an aſſeſſing of any perſon toward the performance of a dutie.
               
                  Sexageſima. See Septuageſima.
               
               
                  Shanckes See Furre.
               
               
                  Shares. See Flotzon.
               
               
                  Shewing, is to be quit of attachment in any court, and before whom ſoeuer in plaints ſhewed and not avowed. Newe expoſition of law termes. verbo, Shewing. See Scauage.
               
               
                  Shipper. anno 1. Iac. ſeſ. 1. ca. 33. is a Dutch word, ſignifying the Maſter of the ſhip.
               
                  Shire, (Comitatus, Shira) is a Saxon word, ſignifying Satrapian, of the verbe (ſcyran. 1. partiri.) Lamb. in his explication of Saxon words. verbo Centuria. The word is in vſe ſo rife, that euery child vnderſtandeth it. Who firſt thus diuided this land into ſhires, appeareth by M. Camdens Britan. pa. 102. in theſe words. Nee dum tamen florente Heptarchia, Anglia ita in Comitatus diuiſa, (ſic enim vulgò vocant) ſed poſtea, cum ſolus Aluredus rerum potiretur. Vt enim Germani maiores nostri, teſte Tacito, iura per pagos vicoſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      reddebant, & centeni ex plebe comites ad rem adminiſtrandam adiungebantur: ſic ille (vt Ingulfi Croulandenſis verbi. vtar) primus Angliam in Comitatus diuiſit, quod indigenae rapinas committerent exemplo & colore Danorum. Comitatus porrò in Centurias. i. Hundreds, & Decimas. i. Tythings, diſtribus fecit: praecepit
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vt omnis indigena in aliqua eſſet Centuria, & Decima. Praefectos etiam preuinciarum,

qui antea Vicedomini vocabantur, in duo officia diuiſit, viz Iudices, nunc Iusticiarios: & Vice-comites, qui adhuc idem nomen retinent. See the reſt.
               
                  Shyreeue (Vicecomes) is compounded of theſe saxon words (Scyre. 
                        〈◊〉
                      ſatrapia) and (Reue i. praefectus) and accordingly he is the cheife officer vnder the King of his Shyre, or County. See Ferme in Lacies nobility: pag. 12. M. Camden: pag. 104. Thus deſcribeth his office: Singulis verò annis, nobilis aliquis ex incolis praeficitur, quem vicecomitem, quaſi vicarium comitis, & noſtrâ linguá Shief. i. comitatus praepoſitum vocamus: qui etiam comitatus, vel prouinciae Quaeſtor rectè dici poteſt Eius enim eſt publicas pecunias prouincia ſuae conquirere, mulctas irrogatas, vel pignoribus ablatis colligere, & aerario inferre, Indicibus praeſto adeſſe, & eorum mandata exequi, duodecim viros cogere, qui in cauſis de facto cognoſcunt, & ad Iudices referunt (Iudices enim apud nos, iuris ſolùm, non facti ſunt Iudices) condemnatos ad ſupplicium ducere, & in minoribus litibus cognoſcere. In matoribus autemius 
                        〈◊〉
                      Iuſticiarii, quos itiner antes ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ſas vos ant, qui quotannis bos. Comitatus bis adeunt, vt de cauſis cognoſcant, & de incarceratis fententiam ferant. Henricus ſecundus hos it inerantes instituit, vel poteùs reſtituit. Ille (vt inquit Mathaeus Pariſienſis) conſilio filii ſui & Epiſcoporum conſtituit Iuſticiar os per ſex paries regni; in qualibet parte tres, qui iurare nt quod cuilibet ius ſuum conſeruarent illaeſum. Of the antiquitie and authoritie of this officer, reade Sir Edward Cookes Reports. lib. 4. Mittons caſe. The maner of appointing theſe Shyreeues in Henry the ſixt his dayes, ſee in Forteſcue. cap. 24. fol. 53. b. The name Vicecomes commeth from the Normans, as Shyreeue commeth from the Saxons. For in the fifth Chapter of the Grand Cuſtumarie, you haue (viconte) which the Latine Interpreter turneth (vicecomitem) whoſe office you ſhall find in that Chapter to be very like vnto ours. The forme of the Shyreeues oath ſee in the Regiſter origin. fol. 301. b. Of this reade M. Skene de verbor. ſignif. verbo Shyreeue: where he largely deſcribeth the office of the Shyreeue in Scotland, in a diſcourſe woorth the reading.
               
                  Shyreeue weke of Wincheſter and of Eſſex. anno 21. R. 2. cap. 10. & 11.
               
                  Shire Clerke, ſeemeth to bee the Vnder ſhyreeue. anno 11. H. 7. cap. 15. It is vſed ſometime for a Clerk in the County court, deputie to the Vnderſhyreeue. See Sir Edward Cookes 4. booke of Reports in Mittons caſe.
               
               
                  Shire moote, ſee Turne.
               
               
                  
                  Shorling, and Morling ſeeme to be words to diſtinguiſh fels of ſheepe: as if ſhorling ſhould ſignifie the fels after the fleeces be ſhorne off the ſheepes backe, and morling the fels fleane off after they be killed or dye alone. anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. prim. & anno 4. eiuſdem, cap. 3. & anno 12. eiuſ. cap. 5. & anno 14. eiuſdem, cap. 3.
               
                  Shot commeth of the Saxon word, ſceate, ſignifying pecuntam aut vectigal. Lamberds explicatiō of ſaxon words, verbo Primitiae.
               
               
                  Shrof metall.
               
               
                  Sicut aliâs, is a writ ſent out in the ſecond place, whereas the firſt ſped not. Coke libro quart. folio 55. b. It is ſo called of theſe words expreſſed in it. For example. Iacobus dei gratia, &c. vicecomiti Kan: ſalutem: Praeciptmus tibi (ſicut aliâs praecepimus) quod non omittas propter aliquam libertatem in Balliua tua, quin eam ingrediaris, & capias. A. B. de C. in comitatu tuo Labourer, &c. as in the firſt capias. Lamb: in his tractat of proceſſes in the end of his Eiranarcha.
               
               
                  Sidemen aliâs Queſt men, be thoſe that are yearely choſen according to the cuſtome of euery pariſh, to aſſiſt the church wardens in the inquiry and preſenting ſuch offenders to the Ordinary, as are puniſhable in the Court Criſtian.
               
                  Significauit, is the writ de excommunicato capiendo, which iſſueth out of the Chauncery vpon a certificate giuen by an Ordinary of a man that ſtandeth obſtinately excommunicate by the ſpace of fourty daies, for the laying him vp in priſon without bayle, or mainpriſe, vntill he ſubmit himſelfe to the authority of the church. And it is ſo called, becauſe of the word (ſignificauit) mentioned in the writ (De excōmunicato capiendo) which haue relation to the certificate, ſent into the Chauncery by the Eccleſiaſticall Iudge. There is alſo another writ in the Regiſter orig. of this name, fo: 7. a. directed to the Iuſtices of the bench, willing them to ſtay any ſuite depending betweene ſuch and ſuch, by reaſon of any excommunication alledged againſt the plaintiffer becauſe the ſentence of the Ordinarie that did excommunicate him, is appealed from, and the appeale yet hangeth vnderided. Which ſee: and ſee Fitz. nut. br. De excommunicato capiendo. fol. 62. N. but eſpecially 66. A. where you may find writs of this name in other caſes.
               
                  Sine aſſeuſu capituli, is a writ that lyeth in caſe where a Deane, Biſhop, Prebendarie, Abbot, Prior or Maſter of Hoſpitall, alieneth

the land held in the right of his houſe, without the conſent of the Chapter, Couent, or Fraternitie. For in this caſe his ſucceſſor ſhall haue this writ. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 195.
               
                  Si non omnes, is a writ of aſſociation, whereby if all in cō
                  miſſion cannot meete at the day aſſigned, it is permitted, that two or more of them may finiſh the buſineſſe. See Aſſociation. And Fitz. nat. br. fol. 185. & 111. C. and Regiſter origin. fol. 202. 206. & 124.
               
                  Si recognoſcant, is a writ that lyeth for a Creditour againſt his depter for money numbred, that hath before the ſhyreeue in the Countie court, acknowledged himſelfe to owe vnto his creditor ſuch a ſumme receiued of him in numeratis pecunits. The forme of the writ is this: Rex Vicecomiti ſalutem. Praec. tibi quod ſi A. recognoſcat ſe debere R. 40. ſolid. fine vlteriori dilatione, tunc ipſum diſtringas ad praedictum debitum eidem R. ſine dilatione reddendum. Teſte, &c. Old nat. br. fol. 68.
               
                  Skawe. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1.
               
                  Skyvinage. anno 27. H. 6. cap. 2. a proper name, ſignifying the precincts of Caleis.
               
               
                  Sluſe (excluſa) is a frame to keepe, or let water out of a grounde.
               
                  Soc (Soca) is a word ſignifiing a power, or libertie of Iuriſdiction, as appeareth by theſe words out of Bracton, Sunt quidam Barones, & alii libertatem habentes, ſc: ſoc, & ſac, Tol & Thean, Infangthefe, & Vtfangthefe, & iſti poſſunt iudicare in Curia ſua, eum qui inuentus fuerit iufra libertatem ſuam ſeiſitus de aliquo latrocinio manifeſto. & li. 3. tractat. 2. cap. 8. In the lawes of King Edward ſet out by M. Lamberd, fol. 132. you haue theſe words: Socha eſt quod ſi aliquis quarit aliquid in terra ſua, etiam furtum, ſua eſt Iuſticia, ſi inuentum fuerit, an non. Saxon in the deſcription of Britany, cap. 11. ſaith, that Sock is a ſuite of Court and that thereof commeth Soken. But the ſignification of the word (as I haue bene credibly informed) is as much as Inquiſitio which we in moderne Engliſh, terme (ſeeking) Of this (Sok) Skene de verborum ſignifie. ſpeaketh to this effect. Sok is an ould word vſed in Charters and feofments, which in ſundry old bookes conteining the municipiall law of this Realme, is called Secta de hominibus ſuis in curia, ſecundum conſuetudinem Regni. So after my opinion he that is infeoffed with Sck. (which now we call Soit (but we in England Suite) hath power to hould courts within his owne Baronie, in which, homines ſui
                  
ſhould giue Soyt. Thus farre M. Skene. Of this Fleta hath theſe words. In huiuſmodi verò maneriis (ſpeaking of the Kings maners) erant olim liberi homines liberè tenentes, quorum quidam cum per potentiores è tenementis ſuis eiecti fuerant, & eadem postmodum in villenagium tenenda reſumpſerūt: & quia huiuſmodi tenentes cultores Regis eſſe dinoſcuntur, eis proviſa fuit quies ne ſectas facerent ad comitatus vel hundredōs, vel ad aliquas inquiſitiones, aſſiſas vel iuratas, niſi in manerio tantùm, dum tamen pro terra, quorum congregationem tunc ſocam appellarunt. & hinc eſt quòd Socmanni hodie dicuntur eſſe. A ſoco enim deriuantur, quorum tonementa ſunt villenagium domini privilegiatum, & ideo dicuntur glebae aſcriptitii, eo quòd ab huiuſmodi glebis amoueri non deberent, quam diu ſoluerent debitas penſiones: nec compelli poterunt ad buiuſmodi tenementa tenenda, contra ſuas voluntates, eo quòd corpora ſua ſunt libera. Nec obſtabit longa ſeruitutis poſſeſſio ad libertatē extinguendam, quamuis ad merchetum ſanguinis ſui compulſus fuerit quis pro tenemento reddendo. Nulla enim ſervitus ratione praeſcriptionis temporis poteſt liberum ſanguinē in ſeruitute reducere, non magis quam liberum tenementum poteſt ſervum in libertatem, &c. By whoſe words it appeareth, that Soca is nothing elſe, but the meeting or aſſembly of theſe kinde of tenents in any place within the maner or libertie: wherefore he that hath ſoc may ſeeme to haue ſuch a maner, ſuch tenents, and ſuch a libertie belonging to his maner and tenents, as is here deſcribed. Here you ſee diuerſities of opinions touching this word, one ſaying that it is a power or libertie to ſeeke after theeues & ſtollen goods within a maner or fee, and to doe iuſtice vpon ſuch inquiſition. others that it is a libertie onely to haue ſuiters to his court. other (as Fleta, that it conteineth both the former ſignifications, and furder that it is taken for the company of tenents which liue within ſuch a liberty; and are exempled from thoſe common ſeruices of the Prince and country wherunto ſubiects are ordinarily tied. This kinde of liberty is in diuers places at this day in England, and commonly knowne by the name of ſoke or ſoken. See Soke and Sockmans.
               
               
                  Soccage (ſoccagium) commeth of the French (Soc. i. vomer, a plowſhare or coulter). It ſignifieth in our common lawe a tenure of lands by or for certaine inferiour, or husbandly ſeruices to be performed to the Lord of the fee. See Inſtituts of

common lawe. 31. As I haue ſhewed in (Chivalrie), all ſeruices due for land, is either knights ſeruice, or ſocage. So then, whatſoeuer is not knights ſeruice, is ſoceage: Bracton in his 2. booke cap. 35. num. primo. deſcribeth it thus. Dici poterit ſoccagium à Socco, & inde tenentes qui tenent in Sockagio, Sockmanni dici poterunt, eo quòd deputati ſunt, vt videtur, tantummodo ad cultur am, & quorum cuſtodia, & maritagia ad propinquiores parentes iure ſan guinis pertinebit. Et ſi aliquando inde de facto capiatur homagium, quòd pluries contingit, non tamen habebit propter hoc Dominus capitalis cuſtodiam, & maritagium. Quia non ſemper ſequitur homagium, licet aliquando ſequatur. M. Skene de verborum ſignificatione. verb. Sockmanria, ſaith, that Sockage is a kinde of holding of lands, when a man is infeoffed freely without any ſeruice, ward, reliefe, or mariage, and paieth to his Lord ſuch dutie, as is called petit ſergeantie, or when one holdeth land in the name of burgage, or in libera elemozina, or otherwiſe in blenche ferme, ſiue nomine albae firmae, & opponitur militi, qui tenet per ſeruitium militare. Out of the place aboue named in Bracton, you may finde a diuiſion of Soccage, wherby it is termed either Soccagium liberum, or villanum. frank or free Soccage, and baſe, otherwiſe called villenage. The former is there thus defined. Soccagium liberum eſt, vbi fit ſeruitium in denariis Dominis capitalibus, & nihil inde omnino datur ad ſcutum & ſeruitium Regis. Where I gather that to be free ſoccage which paieth a certaine ſumme of money to the chiefe Lord in regard of ſome tillage, or ſuch like, and not of any Sergeantie, or eſchuage. And to this effect he writeth alſo, lib. 2. cap. 16. nu. 9. &c. vnde ſi tantum in denariis & ſine ſcut agio vel ſeriantiis, vel ſi ad duo teneatur ſub diſiunctione, ſc: ad certam rem dandam pro omni ſeruitio, vel aliquam ſummam in denariis, id tenementum poteſt dici Soccagium: ſi autem ſuperaddas Scutagium, aut ſervitium regale, licet ad vnum obulum vel ſeriantiam, illud poterit dici feudum militare. This free Soccage, is alſo called common Socage, anno 37. H. 8. cap. 20. Soccage in baſe tenure, or villanum Soccagium, is diuided againe in villanum Soccagium, & purum villenagium: Villanum Soccagium eſt illud, de quo fit certum ſeruitium, idque ratione ſui tenemēti, non perſonae ſuae. Purum villenagium eſt illud, in quo praeſtatur ſeruitium incertum, & indeterminatum, vbi ſciri non poterit veſpere, quale seruitium fieri debet mane. viz. vbi quis facere tenetur

quicquid ei praeceptum fuerit. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 8. num. 3. The old. nat. br. fol. 94. maketh three parts of this diuiſion. viz. Soccage of free tenure, Soccage of auncient tenure, and ſoccage of baſe tenure. ſoccage of free tenure is (as the booke ſaith) where a man holdeth by free ſeruice of 12. pence by yeare, for all maner of ſeruices, or by other ſeruices yearely. Soccage of auncient tenure is of land of auncient Demeſn, where no writ originall ſhall be ſiewed, but the writ of Right, that is called ſecundum consuetudinem manerii. Soccage of baſe tenure is of thoſe that hould in Soccage, and may haue none other writ, but the Monstraverunt: and ſuch Sockmen hould not by certaine Seruice. And for that are they not free Sockmen. Then againe Soccage is diuided into ſoccage in cheife, and common ſoccage. Soccage in cheife or in capite, is that which holdeth of the King, as of his Crowne. Praerog. fol. 41. Common Soccage is that, which holdeth of any other capitall Lord, or of the King by reaſon of ſome honour or maner. Ibidem. Burgage is alſo a kinde of Soccage, See Burgage.
               
               
                  Sockmans (Sockmanni) are ſuch tenents as hould their lands, and tenements by Soccage tenure. And accordingly as you haue 3. kinds of Soccage, ſoe be there 3. ſorts of ſockmans. as ſockmans of frank tenure. Kitchin, fol. 81. ſockmans of anncient Demeſn. ould nat. br. fol. 11. and Sockmans of baſe tenure. Kitchin vbi ſupra. But the tenents in auncient Demeſn, ſeeme moſt properly to be called Sockmans, Fitzh. na. br. f. 14. B. Brit. c. 66. n. 2.
               
                  Soke, anno 32. H. 8. cap. 15. & cap. 29. Of this Fleta ſaith thus Soke ſignificat libertatem curiae tenentium. quam ſocam appellamus. lib. 1. cap. 47. §. Soke. See Roger Houeden, parte poſter. ſuorum annalium. fol. 345. b. and See Soc.
               
               
                  Soken (Soca) ſee Soc. and Hamſoken. Soken is latined Soca Regiſter originall, fol. 1. a.
               
               
                  Sokereue ſeemeth to be the Lords rent. gatherer in the Soke, or Soken, Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 55. in principio.
               
               
                  Sole tenent (Solus tenens) is he or ſhee which holdeth onely in his or her owne right without any other ioyned. For example, if a man and his wife hould land for their liues, the remainder to their ſon: here the man dying, the Lord ſhall not haue Heriot, becauſe he dieth not ſole tenent. Kitchin, fol. 134.
               
                  Solicitour (Solicitator) commeth of the French (Soliciteur) It ſignifieth in our commō law, a man imploied to folow ſuites depending

 in law, for the beter remembrance and more caſe of Atturnies, who commonly are ſo full of clients and buſines, that they cannot ſo often attend the ſeriants and counſellers as the caſe may require.
               
                  Solet & Debet. See Debet & ſolet.
               
               
                  Solidata terrae. ſee Farding deale of land
               
               
                  Sollace, anno 43. Elizabeth. cap. 10.
               
                  Sommons, aliâs ſummons (ſummonitio) commeth of the French (ſemondre. i. vocare) It ſignifieth in our common law, as much as (vocatio in ius) or (citatio) among the Ciuilians. And thence is our word (ſomner) which in French is (ſemonneur. i. vocator, monitor) The Cuſtumary of Normandie for our (ſommons hath (ſemonſe) ca. 61. ſummons of the Exchequer anno 3. Ed. pri: ca. 19. & anno 10. eiuſdem, cap. 9. How ſummons is diuided, and what circumſtances it hath to be obſerued. See Fleta, lib. 6. cap. 6. 7.
               
                  Solutione feodi militis Parlamenti, and ſolutione feodi Burgen. Parlamenti, be writs whereby Knights of the Parlament may recouer their allowance, if it be denyed, anno 35. H. 8. ca. 11.
               
                  Sontage. Stow. pag. 284. is a taſke of fourty ſhillings laid vpon euery Knights fee.
               
                  Sorting Kerſeies. 3. Iacobi: ca: 16.
               
                  Sothale, is a kinde of intertainment made by Bayliffes to thoſe of their Hundreds for their gaine. Which ſometime is called Filctale. Of this Bracton lib. 3. tracta: 2. cap. pri. hath theſe words: De Balliuis, quifaciunt ceruiſias ſuas. quas quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vocant (ſothale) quando
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      (Filctale) vt pecunias extorque ant ab eis qui ſequntur Hundreda ſua, & Baliuas ſitas, &c. I thinke this ſhould rather be written Scotale. See Scotale.
               
               
                  Southvicont (Subvicecomes) is the vnder Shyreeue. Cromptone Iuriſdict: fol: 5.
               
                  Sowne, is a verb neuter, properly belonging to the Exchequer, as a word of their art, ſignifiing ſo much, as to be leuiable, or poſſible to be gathered or collected. For example, eſtreats that ſowne not, are ſuch as the Shyreeue by his induſtry cannot get, and eſtreats that ſowne, are ſuch as he can gather, anno 4. H. 5. ca. 2.
               
                  Speaker of the Parlament, is an officer in that high Court, that is as it were the common mouth of the reſt: and as that honourable aſſembly conſiſteth of two houſes, one called the higher or vpper houſe, conſiſting of the King, the nobility, and Kings councell, eſpecially appointed for the ſame, the other termed the lower or commonhouſe,

containing the Knights of the Shires, the citizens, barons of the cinque ports, and the burgeſes of borough townes: ſo be there alſo two ſpeakers, one termed the Lord ſpeaker of the higher houſe, who is moſt commonly the Lord Chaunceler of England, or Lord Keeper of the great ſeale: the other is called the ſpeaker of the lower houſe. And the duties of theſe two you haue perticularly deſcribed in M. Vowels, aliâs Hookers booke, intituled The order and vſage of keeping the Parlament.
               
                  Speciall mater in euidence. See Generall iſſue. And Brooke. titulo Generall iſſue, and ſpeciall euidence.
               
               
                  Spiritualties of a Biſhop (ſpiritualia Epiſcopi) be thoſe profits which he receiueth, as he is a Biſhop, and not as he is a Baron of the Parlament. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 132. The particulars of theſe may be the duties of his Viſitation, his benefite growing from ordering and inſtituting Prieſts, preſtation money, that ſubſidium charitatiuum, which vppon reaſonable cauſe he may require of his Clergie. Iohannes Gregorius de Beneficiis. cap. 6. num. 9. and the Benefite of his Iuriſdiction. Ioachimus Stephanus de Iuriſd. lib. 4. cap. 14. num. 14. for theſe reckoneth exactionem Cathedratici, quartam Decimarum, & mortuariorum, & oblationum penſitationem, ſubſidium charitatiuum, celebrationem ſynodi, collationem viatici vel commeatus, cùm Epiſcopus Romam proficiſcitur, ius hoſpitii, Litaniam & Proceſſionem.
               
               
                  Spikenard (ſpica nardi, vel nardus) is a medicinall herbe, whereof you may for your farder inſtruction reade Gerards Herball. lib. 2. cap. 425. The fruite or eare of this (for it bringeth forth an eare like Lauender) is a drugge garbleable, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Spoliation (ſpoliatio) is a writ, that lyeth for an incumbent, againſt another incumbent, in caſe where the right of patronage commeth not in debate. As if a Parſon bee made a Biſhop, and hath diſpenſation to keepe his Rectorie, and afterward the patron preſent another to the Church, which is inſtituted and inducted: The Biſhop ſhall haue againſt this incumbent a writ of spoliation in Court Chriſtian. Fitz. nat. br. fol. 36. ſee Beneuolence.
               
               
                  Squalley. anno 43. Elizab. cap. 10.
               
                  Squyers. See Eſquires.
               
               
                  Stableſtand, is one of the foure Euidences, or preſumptians whereby a man is convinced to intend the ſtealing of the Kings Deere in the Foreſt.

                  Manwood. parte 2 of his Foreſt lawes. cap. 18. num. 9. the other three be theſe Dogdrawe, Backbeare, Bloudie-hand. And this ſtableſtand, is when a man is found at his ſtanding in the Foreſt, with a Croſſe bowe bent, ready to ſhoote at any Deere, or with a long bowe, or elſe ſtanding cloſe by a tree with Greyhounds in a leaſe, ready to ſlippe, Idem, eodem.
               
               
                  Stalkers, a kind of net anno 13 R. 2. ſtat. 1. cap. 20. & anno 17. eiuſdem, cap. 9.
               
                  Stallage (ſtallagium) commeth of the French (Eſtaller. i. merces exponere, expedire, explicare.) It ſignifieth in our common law, money payed for pitching of ſtalles in Faire or Market. See Scavage. This in Scotland is called ſtallange. Skene de verbor. ſignif. verbo Stallangiatores. And among the Romaines it was termed (Siliquaticum) à ſiliqua, primo & minimo omnium pondere apud illam nationem.
               
               
                  Stannaries (ſtannaria) commeth of the Latine (ſtannum.) i. tynne, ſignifying the Mines and workes touching the getting, and purifying of this mettall in Cornewall, and other places. Of this read Camden. Britan. pa. 119. The liberties of the ſtannarie men graunted by Ed. 1. before they were abridged by the ſtatute, anno 50. Ed. 3. ſee in Plowden. caſu Mines. fol. 327. a. b.
               
               
                  Staple (Stapulum) ſignifieth this or that towne, or citie, whether the Merchants of England by common order, or commandement, did carie their wolles, wol-fels, cloathes, lead, and tinne, and ſuch like commodities of our land for the vtterance of them by the great. The word may probably be interpreted two wayes: one taking it from (ſtaple) which in the Saxon or old Engliſh language, ſignifieth the ſtay or hold of any thing. Lamb. in his duties of Conſtables. num. 4. becauſe the place is certaine, and ſetled: and againe, from the French (eſtape. i. forum vinarium) becauſe to thoſe places, whether our Engliſh Merchants brought their commodities, the French would alſo meete them with theirs, which moſt of all conſiſteth in wines: but I thinke this latter the truer becauſe I finde in the Mirrour of the world written in French theſe words. A Calais. 
                        〈◊〉
                      auoit Eſtape de le laine, &c. Which is as much to ſay, as the ſtaple for wols, &c. You may read of many places appointed for this ſtaple in the ſtatutes of the land, according as the Prince by his Councell thought good to alter them, from the ſecond yeare of Ed: 3. cap. 9. to the fifth of Edw:
                  
the ſixth. cap: 7. what officers the ſtaples had belonging to them you may ſee anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 21.
               
                  Starre chamber (Camera ſtellata) is a Chamber at Weſtminſter ſo called (as Sir Tho. Smith coniectureth lib. 2. cap. 4.) either becauſe it is full of windowes, or becauſe at the firſt all the roofe thereof was decked with Images of guilded ſtarres. And the later reaſon I take to be the trewer, becauſe anno 25. H. 8. ca. 1. It is written the Sterred Chamber. In this Chamber euery weeke twice during the terme, and the very next day after terme, is there a Court held by the Lord Chaunceler or Keeper, and other honourable perſonages of the Realme. This Court ſeemeth to haue taken beginning from the ſtatute anno 3. H: 7. ca. pri. Whereby it is ordained, that the Lord Chaunceler and Treaſurer of England for the time being, and the Keeper of the Kings priuy ſeale, or two of them, calling to them a Biſhop, and a temporall Lord of the Kings moſt honourable Councell, and the two cheife Iuſtices of the Kings Bench, and common place, for the time being, or other two Iuſtices in their abſence, ſhould haue power to call before them, and puniſh ſuch miſdoers, as there be mentioned. The faults that they puniſh, be Routes, Riots, Forgeries, Maintenances, Embraceries, Periurics, and ſuch other Miſdemeanures as are not ſufficiently prouided for by the common law. It appeareth both by Sir. Tho: Smith lib. 2. de Rep: Anglo: cap. 4. and by experience alſo, that at this day, the whole number of the Princes moſt honourable priuy Councell, and ſuch other Barons ſpirituall, or temporall as be called thither by the Prince, haue place in this Court with thoſe aboue named. Of this Court thus ſpeaketh M. Gwin in the preface to his readings: It appeareth in our bookes of the termes of K. Edward 4. And of the report of caſes hapning vnder the vſurpation of Richard the third that ſometime the King and his Councell, and ſometime the Lord Chaunceler, and other great perſonages, did vſe to ſit iudicially in the place then and yet called the Starre Chamber. But for as much as be like that aſſembly was not ordinary, therefore the next Kings, Henry the ſeuenth, and his ſome. H. 8. tooke order by two ſeuerall lawes. viz. 3. H. 7. ca. pri. & 21. H. 8. ca. 2. That the Chaunceler aſſiſted with others there named, ſhould haue power to heare complaints againſt Retainours, Embraceours, miſdemenures

of officers, and ſuch other offences, which through the power and countenance of ſuch as do commit them, do lift vp the head aboue other faults: and for the which inferiour Iudges are not ſo meete to giue correction. And becauſe that place was before dedicated to the like ſeruice, it hath bene euer ſince alſo accordingly vſed. Touching the officers belonging to this Court, ſee Camden. pag. 112. & 113.
               
                  Statute, (ſtatutum) hath diuers ſignifications in our common lawe. Firſt, it ſignifieth a Decree or act of Parlament, made by the Prince and three eſtates, which is the bodie of the whole Realme. And though it borow the name from that kind of Decree, which thoſe cities, that were vnder the Romaine Empire, made for the particular gouernment of themſelues, ouer and aboue the vniuerſall or common lawe of the Empire: yet in nature it commeth neareſt to that which the Romaines called (legem) for that, as that was made by the whole people noble and ignoble: ſo this is ordeined by thoſe, that repreſent the whole number, both of prince, and ſubiects, one and other, through the whole kingdome. The difference neuertheleſſe was this, that Lex was offered to the conſideration of the people by the Magiſtrate of the Senate, or Conſull: but the bils or ſuggeſtions whence our ſtatutes ſpring, are offered by any of either houſe, and ſo either paſſed or reiected. In this ſignification a ſtatute is either generall or ſpeciall. Coke lib. 4. Hollands caſe, fol. 76. a.
               
               
                  Statute, in another ſignification is a ſhort ſpeach taken for a bond; as ſtatute Marchant, or ſtatute ſtaple. anno 5. H. 4. cap. 12. The reaſon of which name is, becauſe theſe bonds are made according to the forme of ſtatuts expreſſely, and particularly prouided for the ſame; which direct both before what perſons, and in what maner they ought to be made. Weſt. parte pri. ſymbol. li. 2. ſect. 151. where he defineth a ſtatute Merchant thus. A ſtatute Merchant is a bond acknowledged before one of the Clerks of the ſtatutes Merchant, and Maior or chiefe Warden of the citie of London, or two Merchants of the ſaid citie for that purpoſe aſſigned, or before the Maior, cheife Warden, or Maſter of other Cities or good townes, or other ſufficient men for that purpoſe appointed, ſealed with the ſeale of the Depter, and of the King, which is of two peeces, the

greater is keept by the ſaide Maior, cheife Warden, &c. and the leſſer peece thereof by the ſaide Clerks. The form of which bond, you may ſee in Fleta. lib. 2. c. 64. §. 2. to be ſuch; Noverint vniuerſi me. N. de tali comitatu teneri. N. in 10. marcis ſoluendis eidem ad festum Pent. anno regni Regis, &c. & niſi fecero, concedo quod currant ſuper me & haeredes meos diſtrictio, & poena proviſa in ſtatuto domini Regis edito apud Weſtm. Datum London, tali die, an. ſupra dicta. The fee for the ſame ſeale, is for ſtatutes knowledged in Faires. for euery pound an halfepeuy, and out of faires a farding. The execution vpon ſtatute Merchant, is firſt to take the bodie of the Deptor, if he be lay, and can be found: if otherwiſe, then vpon his lands, and goods: The bound is founded vpon the ſtatute, anno 13. Ed. pri. ſtatut. 4. Of this alſo as of the ſtatute Staple, ſee the newe booke of Entries. verbo. Statut Merchant. and reade in Fleta vbi ſupra, more touching this mater worth the reading.
               
                  Satute ſtaple (to vſe the very words of M. Weſt.) is either properly ſo called, or improperly, A ſtatute ſtaple properly ſo called is a bond of Record knowledged before the Maior of the Staple, in the preſence of one of the two conſtables of the ſame ſtaple, for which ſeale the fee is of euery pound, if the ſumme exceed not a 100. poūd, an halfepeny, & if it exceed and 100. poūd, of euery pound a farding. And by vertue of ſuch ſtatute Staple, the Creditor may forthwith haue execution of the body, lands & goods of the Depter. and this is founded vpon the ſtatute anno 27. Ed. 3. cap. 9. A Statute Staple improper, is a bond of Record, founded vpon the ſtatute anno 23. H. 8. cap 6. of the nature of a proper ſtatute ſtaple, as touching the force, and execution thereof, and knowledged before one of the chiefe Iuſtices, and in their abſence before the Maior of the ſtaple, and Recorder of London. The formes of all theſe bonds, or ſtatutes, ſee in Weſt. parte pri. ſimbol. li. 2. ſect. 152. 153. 154. 155. Statutes is alſo vſed in our vulgar talke, for the petit ſeſſions, which are yearely kept for the diſpoſing of ſeruants in ſeruice, by the ſtatute, anno 5. Eliz. cap. 4. ſee Recogniſance.
               
               
                  Statute ſeſſions, otherwiſe called petit ſeſſions, are a meeting in euery hundred of all the ſhires in England, where of cuſtome they haue beene vſed, vnto the which the conſtables doe repaire, and others both houſholders and ſeruants, for the

debating of differences between maſters and their ſeruants, the rating of ſeruants wages, and the beſtowing of ſuch people in ſeruice, as being fit to ſerue, either refuſe to ſeeke, or cannot get Maſters, anno 5. Eliz. cap. 4.
               
                  Statuto ſtapulae, is a writ that lieth to take his body to priſon, and to ſeiſe vpon his lands and goods, that hath forfeited a bond, called ſtatut ſtaple. Regiſter orig. fol. 15
                        •
                     . a.
               
               
                  Statutum de laboriis, is a writ Iudiciall for the apprehending of ſuch laborers, as refuſe to worke according to the ſtatut. Regiſter Iudicial l. fol. 27. b.
               
               
                  Statuto Mercatorio, is a writ for the impriſoning of him, that hath forfeited a bond called the ſtatut Merchant, vntill the dept be ſatiſfied. Regiſter orig. fol. 146. b. and of theſe there is one againſt lay perſons, vbi ſupra. and another againſt Eccleſiaſticall. 148.
               
                  Staviſaker, ſtaphis agria, vel herba pedicularis, is a medicinable herb, the kinde and vertues whereof, you haue ſet forth in Gerards herball, lib. 1. cap. 130. The ſeede of this is mentioned among drugs to be garbled, anno prim. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  Stennerie, is vſed for the ſame that Stannaries be, in the ſtatute anno 4. H. 8. cap. 8. ſee Stannaries.
               
               
                  Sterling (Sterlingum) is a proper epitheton for money current within the Realme. The name groweth from this, that there was a certain pure coyne, ſtamped firſt of all by the Eaſterlings here in England. Stowes Annalls. pag. 312. The which I rather beleeue, becauſe in certaine old monuments of our Engliſh, and broken French, I finde it written Eſterling. ſo Ro. Hoveden writeth it. parte poſter. annalium. fol. 377. b. M. Skene de verborum ſignif. verbo. Sterlingus, ſaith thus: ſterling is a kinde of weight conteining 32. cornes, or graines of wheat. And in the Canon law mention is made of fiue ſhillings ſterling, and of a merke ſtarling. cap. 3. de arbitris. &. c. conſtituit. 12. de procurator: And the ſterling peny is ſoe called, becauſe it waighes ſo many graines, as I haue ſundry times proued by experience. And by the law of England the peny which is called the ſterling round and without clipping wayeth 32. graines of wheat without tailes, whereof 20. make an ounce, and 12. onnces a pound, and eight pound maketh a gallon of wine, and eight gallons make a buſhell of London, which is the eight part: of a quarter. Hitherto M. Skene. Buchanan. lib. 6. ſaith, that the common people thinke it ſo

termed, of ſterling a towne in Scotland. Our Lyndwood ſaith that it is called ſterling of the bird which we call a ſterling which as he noteth, was ingrauen in one quarter of the coine ſo termed. cap. Item quia. de teſtamentis. verbo. Centum ſolidos. in gloſ.
               
               
                  Stewes, are thoſe places, which were permitted in England to women of profeſſed incontinencie, for the profer of their bodies to all commers: It is deriued from the French (Eſtuves. i. thermae, vaporarium, Balneum) becauſe wantons are wont to prepare themſelues, to theſe venerous acts, by bathing themſelues. And that this is not, newe, Homer ſheweth in the 8. booke of his Odiſſ. where he reckoneth hot bathes among the effeminate ſort of pleaſures, Of theſe ſtewes ſee the ſtatute anno 11. Henric. 6. cap. pri.
               
               
                  Steward. See Seneſchall and Stuward, Steward of the Kings houſe anno 25. Ed. 3. ſtatute. 5. ca. 21.
               
                  Stillyard (Guilda Theutonicorum anno 22. H. 8. ca. 8. & anno 32. eiuſdem ca. 14.) is a place in London, where the fraternity of the Eaſterling Merchants, otherwiſe the Merchants of Hawnſe and Almaine. anno pri: Ed. 6. cap. 13. Are wont to haue their aboade. ſee Geld. It is ſo called of a broad place, or courte, wherein ſteele was much ſould. vpon the which that houſe is now founded. Nathan Chitraens. See Hawnſe.
               
               
                  Stone of woll. (Petra lanae) ſee weights. See Sarpler. It ought to weigh fourteene pounds, yet in ſome places by cuſtome it is more. See Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. fol. 83. b.
               
               
                  Straife alias Stray. See Eſtrae.
               
               
                  Straites anno 18. H. 6. ca. 16.
               
                  Streme workes, is a kinde of worke in the Stannaries: for (ſaith M. Camden titulo Cornwall pag. 119.) Horum Stannariorum ſiue metallicorum operum duo ſunt genera: Alterum Lode-works, alterum ſtreme-works vocant. Hoc in locis inferioribus eſt cùm Foſſis agendis ſtanni venas ſectantur & fluuiorum alueos ſubinde deflectunt: illud in locis aeditioribus, cùm in montibus puteos, quos Shafts vocant in magnam altitudinem defodiunt, & cuniculos agunt. Theſe you may read mentioned anno 27. H. 8. ca. 23.
               
                  Stirks.
               
               
                  Strip. See Eſtreapement.
               
               
                  Stuard, alias ſteward (ſeneſcallus) ſeemeth to be compounded of Steede and ward, and is a word of many applications: yet alway ſignifieth an officer of cheife accoumpte within the place of his ſway. The greateſt of theſe is the Lord high Steward of England, whoſe power (if thoſe antiquities

be true which I haue read) is next to the kings, and of that heighth, that it might in ſome ſort match the Ephori amongſt the Lacedemonians. The cuſtome of our commonwealth hath vppon great conſideration and policie brought it to paſſe, that this high Officer is not appointed for any long time, but onely for the diſpatch of ſome eſpeciall buſineſſe, at the arraignment of ſome Noble man in the caſe of treaſon, or ſuch like: which once ended, his commiſſion expireth. Of the high Steward of Englands Court, you may reade Cromptons Iuriſdiction. fol. 82.
               I haue reade in an auncient manuſcript of what credit, I know not, that this officer was of ſo great power in auncient times, that if any one had ſought iuſtice in the Kings court and not found it, he might vpon complaint thereof made vnto him, take thoſe petitions, and reſeruing them to the next Parlament, cauſe them there to bee propounded, and not onely ſo, but alſo in the preſence of the King openly to rebuke the Chaunceler, or any other Iudge, or officer whom he found defectiue in yeelding iuſtice. And if in caſe the Iudge, or officer ſo reprehended, did alledge, that his defect grew from the difficultie of the caſe, inſomuch as he durſt not aduenture vpon it: then the caſe being ſhewed, and ſo found, the Lord ſteward together with the Conſtable of England there in the preſence of the King and Parlament, might elect 25. perſons, or more, or fewer, according to their diſcretion, and the caſe or caſes in queſtion, ſome Earles, ſome Barons, ſome Knights, ſome Citizens and Burgeſſes, which vpon deliberation ſhould ſet downe, what they thought iuſt and equal: and their decree being read and allowed by Parlament, did ſtand as a law for euer: fardermore, if the Chaunceler or other Iudge or officer, could not well approue, that the delay of iuſtice complained of, grew from iuſt difficultie, by reaſon that the caſe in queſtion was formerly determined by lawe or ſtatute: then might the ſteward on the Kings behalfe, admoniſh him of his negligence, and will him to be more carefull and ſtudious. Or if there appeared malice, or corruption, then the King and Parlament was wont to remoue him and aſſigne another of better hope to the place. Laſtly, if the king had about him any ſuch euill Counceller, as aduiſed him to things vniuſt, or vnanſwerable to his Maieſtie, as tending either to the diſherifon of the

Crowne, publike hurt, or deſtruction of the ſubiect. The office of the Steward was, taking to him the Conſtable, and other great men, with ſome of the Commons, and giuing notice to the King of their intention, to ſend to that Counſeler, and will him to deſiſt from miſleading the king, yea, if need ſo required, to charge him to ſtay no longer about him, but to depart from the Court, which if he neglected to performe, then they might ſend to the King, and will him to remoue him: and if the king refuſed, then they might take him as a publike enemie to the King and Realme, ſeiſe on his goods and poſſeſſions, and commit his body to ſafe cuſtody, vntill the next Parlament, there to be Iudged by the whole kingdome: examples are brought of Godwin Earle of Kent in the time of King Edward next before the Conquerour, of Hubert Burgh Earle of the ſame County, in the reigne of Henry the third, and of Peter Gaueſton, in Edward the ſeconds daies. But experience (as I ſaid) hath found this officer more daungerous then profitable, and therefore hath time taught, though not wholly to ſuppreſſe him, yet to limite him to particular occaſion, and to reſtraine his power. Then is there the Steward of the Kings moſt honourable houſhould, anno 24. H. 8. cap. 13. whoſe name is changed to the name of great Maſter. anno 32. eiuſdem, cap. 39 But this ſtatute was repealed by anno prim. Mar. 2. Parlam. cap. 4 and the office of the Lord Steward of the Kings houſhold reuiued: where you may at large reade diuers things touching his office. As alſo in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 241. B. Of this Officers auncient power, reade Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 3. There is alſo a Steward of the Marſhalſea. pl. cor. fol. 52. & anno 33. H. 8. cap. 12. To be ſhort, this word is of ſo great diuerſitie, that there is not a corporation of any accompt, or houſe of any honour, almoſt through the realme, but it hath an officer toward it of this name. A ſteward of a maner, or of a houſhold, what he is or ought to be, Fleta fully deſcribeth. lib. 2. cap. 71. & 72.
               
                  Straunger, commeth of the French (eſtranger. i. alienare.) It ſignifieth in our Language generally a man borne out of the land or vnknowne: but in the lawe, it hath an eſpeciall ſignification for him that is not priuie or a party to an act: as a Straunger to a iudgement: oldna. br. fol. 128. is he to whome a iudgement doth not belong. And in this ſignification it is directly contrarie to (partie) or

                  (priuie.) See Priuie.
               
               
                  Submarſhall, (ſubmareſcallus) is an officer in the Marſhal ſea, that is, deputie to the chiefe Marſhall of the Kings houſe, commonly called the Knight Marſhall, and hath the cuſtody of the priſoners there. Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 104. He is otherwiſe called Vnder-marſhall.
               
               
                  Subpoena, is a writ that lyeth to call a man into the Chauncerie, vpon ſuch caſe onely, as the common lawe faileth in, and hath not prouided for: ſo as the partie who in equitie hath wrong, can haue none ordinary remedie, by the rules and courſe of the common lawe, Weſt. part. 2. ſymbol. titulo Proceedings in Chauncerie. ſect. 18. where you may reade many examples of ſuch caſes, as ſub poena lyeth in. There is alſo a ſub poena ad testificandum, which lyeth for the calling in of witneſſes to teſtifie in a cauſe, as well in Chauncerie, as in orher courts. And the name of both theſe proceede from words in the writ, which charge the partie called to appeare at the day and place aſſigned, ſub poena centum librarum, &c. I find mention of a common ſub poena in Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 33. which ſignifieth nothing elſe but ſuch a ſub poena, as euery common perſon is called by into the Chauncerie: whereas any Lord of Parlament is called by the Lord Chauncelers leters: giuing him notice of the ſuit intended againſt him, and requiring him to appeare. Crompton. eodem.
               
               
                  Subſidie, (ſubſidium) commeth of the French (ſubſide) ſignifying a taxe or tribute aſſeſſed by Parlament, and graunted by the commons to be leuied of euery ſubiect, according to the value of his lands or goods after the rate of 4. ſhillings in the pound for land, and 2. ſhillings 8. pence for goods, as it is moſt commonly vſed at this day. Some hold opinion, that this ſubſidie is graunted by the ſubiect to the Prince, in recompence or conſideration, that whereas the Prince of his abſolute power, might make lawes of himſelfe, he doth of fauour admit the conſent of his ſubiects therein, that all things in their owne confeſſion may be done with the greater indifferencie. The maner of aſſeſſing euery mans lands or goods, is this: firſt, there iſſueth a Commiſſion out of the Chauncerie to ſome men of honour or worſhip in euery Countie, by vertue thereof to call vnto them, the head Conſtables or Bayliffes of euery Hundred, and by them the Conſtable and three or foure of the ſubſtantialleſt

houſholders in euery towne within their hundred at a day certaine: which men ſo called, or ſo many of them, as the Commiſſioners thinke good to vſe, do rate the inhabitants of their owne towne, in ſuch reaſonable maner, as they find meete, yet by the diſcretion of the ſaid Commiſſioners. And then euery man after his value ſet downe, muſt at his time pay to the Collectour appointed, after the rate aforeſaid. Yet in auncient time, theſe ſubſidies ſeeme to haue beene graunted both for other cauſes, as in reſpect of the Kings great trauell, and expences in warres: or his great fauours toward his ſubiects: as alſo in other maner then now they be: as euery ninth Lambe, euery ninth fleece, and euery ninth ſheafe. anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. prins. cap. 20. And of theſe you may ſee great, varietie in Raſtals Abridgement. tit. Taxes, Tenths, Fifteenths, Subſidies, &c. whence you may gather that there is no certaine rate, but euen as the two houſes ſhall thinke good to conclude. Subſidie is in the ſtatute of the land, fometime confounded with cuſtome. anno 11. H. 4. cap. 7. See Beneuolence.
               
               
                  Suretie of peace, (ſecuritas pacis) is an acknowledging of a bond to the Prince, taken by a competent Iudge of Record, for the keeping of the peace. Lamberds Eirenarcha, li. 2. cap. 2. pag. 77. This peace may a Iuſtice of peace commaund, either as a Miniſter, when he is willed ſo to doe by a higher authoritie, or as a Iudge, when he doth it of his owne power deriued from his commiſſion. Of both theſe ſee Lamberd. Eirenarcha. lib. 2. ca. 2. pag. 77. ſee Peace, ſee Supplicauit.
               
               
                  Suffragan (Suffraganeus) is a titular Biſhop ordeined, and aſſiſted to aide the Biſhop of the Dioces in his ſpirituall function. c. Suffraganeus. Extra de electione. For the Etimology, Suffraganes dicuntur, quia eorum ſuffragiis cauſae eccleſiaſticae iudicantur. Ioach. Stephanus de Iuriſd. li. 4. ca. 16. nu. 14. It was inacted anno 26. H. 8. ca. 14. that it ſhould be lawfull to every Dioceſan at his pleaſure to elect two ſufficient men within his Dioces, and to preſent them to the King, that he might giue the one of them ſuch title, ſtile, name, and dignity of ſeaſe in the ſaide ſtatut ſpecified, as he ſhould think conuenient.
               
                  Suyte (Secta) commeth of the French (Suite. i. affectatio, conſecutio, ſequela, comitatus) It ſignifieth in our common law, a following of another, but in diuers ſenſes, the firſt is a ſuite

in lawe, and is diuided into ſuite reall, and perſonall. Kitchin, fol. 74. which is all one with action reall and perſonal. Then is there ſuite of Court, or ſuite ſeruice; that is an attendance which a tenent oweth at the court of his Lord. Fitzh. nat. br. in Indice. verbo Suite. ſuyte ſeruice and ſuyte reall, anno 7. H. 7. cap. 2. The newe expoſitour of lawe Termes, maketh mention of foure ſorts of ſuites in this ſignification. Suite couenant, ſuite cuſtom, ſuite reall, and ſuite ſeruice. Suite couenant, he defineth to be, when your aunceſter hath couenanted with mine aunceſter, to ſiew to the court of mine aunceſters. Suite cuſtome, when I and mine aunceſters haue beene ſeiſed of your owne, and your aunceſters ſuite, time out of minde, &c. Suite reall, when men come to the Shyreeues Turne, or Leete, to which court all men are cōpelled to come, to knowe the lawes, ſo that they may not be ignorant of things declared there, how they ought to be gouerned. And it is called reall, becauſe of their allegance. And this appeareth by common exeperience, when one is ſworne: his oath is that he ſhall be a loyall and faithfull man to the King. And this ſuite is not for the land that he holdeth within the Countie but by reaſon of his perſon and his aboade there, and ought to be done twice a yeare: for default whereof he ſhallbe amerced and not diſtreined. I thinke this ſhould be called rather regall or royall, becauſe it is performed to the King for (royall). The French word in the vſuall pronuntiation commeth neere to reall, the leter (o) being almoſt ſuppreſſed. ſee Leete. Suyte ſeruice, is to ſiew to the Shyreeues Turn or Leete, or to the Lords court from three weekes to three weekes by the whole yeare. And for default thereof a man ſhall be diſtreined, and not amercied. And this ſuite ſeruice is by reaſon of the tenure of a mans land. Then doth ſuite ſignifie the following of one in chace, as freſh ſuite. Weſt. 1. c. 46. a. 3. Ed. 1. Laſtly, it ſignifieth a petition made to the prince, or great perſonage.
               
                  Suyte of the Kings peace (ſecta pacis Regis) anno 6. R. 2. ſtat. 2. ca. pri. & anno 21. eiuſdem, cap. 15. & anno 5. H. 4. cap. 15. is the perſiewing of a man for breach of the K. peace, by treaſons, inſurrectiōs, rebelliōs, or treſpaſſes.
               
                  Summoneas, is a writ Iudiciall of great diuerſitie, according to the diuers caſes wherein it is vſed, which ſee in the table of the Regiſter Iudiciall.
               
                  
                  Summoner (ſummonitor) ſignifieth one vſed to call or cite a man to any court. Theſe by the common lawe, ought to be boni, that is by Fleta his Iudgement, liberi homines, & ideo boni, quia terras tenentes, quod ſint coram talibus Iusticiariis ad ce 
                        •
                     tos diem, & locum ſecundum mandatum Iuſticiariorum vicecomiti directum, parati inde facere recognitionemilib. 4. cap. 5. §. Etcum.
               
               
                  Summons (Summonitio) ſee Sommons, Common Summons. Marlb. cap. 18. anno. 52. Henric. 3. is l.
               
               
                  Summons in terra petita Kitch. fol. 286. is that ſummons which is made vpon the land, which the party at whoſe ſuite the ſummons is ſent forth, ſeeketh to haue, Summons ad Warrantizandum. Dyer fol. 69. nn. 35.
               
                  Sumage (Sumagium) ſeemeth to be tolle for cariage on horſeback, Crompton Iuriſd. fol. 191. Forwhere the Charter of the Foreſt, cap. 14. hath theſe words: for a horſe that beareth loades euery halfe yeare, a halfe penny: the booke called Pupilla ocult, vſeth theſe wordes: pro vno equo portante ſummagium, per dimidium annum obolum. It is otherwiſe called a Seame. And a Seame in the Weſterne parts is a horſe loade.
               
                  Superoneratione paſturae, is a writ Iudiciall that lyeth againſt him who is impleaded in the County for the overburdening of a common with his catell, in caſe where he is formerly impleaded for it in the countie, and the cauſe is remooued into the Kings court at Weſtm.
               
               
                  Superſedeas, is a writ which lieth in diuers, and ſundry cafes, as appeareth by the table of the Regiſter originall, and the Iudiciall alſo, and by Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 236. and many other places noted in the Index of his booke verbo. Superſedeas. But it ſignifieth in them all a command, or requeſt to ſtay or forbeare the doing of that, which in apparence of law were to be done, were it not for the cauſe, wherevpon the writ is graunted. For example: a man regularly is to haue ſurety of peace againſt him, of whome he will ſweare that he is afraide, and the Iuſtice required herevnto cannot denie him. Yet if the party be formerly bound to the peace, either in Chauncerie, or elſe where: this writ lyeth to ſtay the Iuſtice from doing that, which otherwiſe he might not denie.
               
                  Superſtatutum, Ed. 3. vers ſervants and labourers, is a writ that lyeth againſt him, who keepeth my ſeruant departed out of my ſeruice againſt lawe. Fitzh. nat. fo. 167.
               
                  
                  Super ſtatuto de York quo nul ſera viteller, &c. is a writ lying againſt him, that occupieth vitteling either in groſſe or by retaile in a Citie, or Borough towne, during the time he is Maior, &c. Fitzh. natur. bre. fol. 172.
               
                  Super ſtatuto, anno pri. Ed. 3. cap. 12 & 13. is a writ that lyeth againſt the Kings Tenent holding in cheife, which alienateth the kings land witout the Kings licenſe. Fitzh: nat. br. fol. 175.
               
                  Super ſtatuto facto pour ſeneſhall & Marſhall de Roy, &c. is a writ lying againſt the Steward, or Marſhall for holding plee in his court of freehould, ot for treſpaſſe, or contracts not made within the Kings houſhold. Fitzherbert nat. breu. fol. 241.
               
                  Super ſtatuto de Articulis Cleri, cap. 6: is a writ againſt the Shyteeue, or other officer, that diſtreineth in the Kings high way, or in the glebe land aunciently giuen to Rectories. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 173.
               
                  Super praerogatiuae Regis, cap. 3. is a writ lying againſt the kings widow for marying without his licence. Fitzherbert. nat. br. fol, 174.
               
                  Supplicauit, is a writ iſſuing out the Chauncerie for taking the ſurety of peace againſt a man. It is directed to the Iuſtices of peace of the county, and the Shyreeue: and is grounded vpon the ſtatute, anno pri. Ed. 3. cap. 16. which ordeineth that certaine perſons in chauncerie ſhallbe aſſigned to take care of the peace, See Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 80. This writ was of old called Breve de minis, as M. Lamberd in his Emenarcha. noteth out of the Regiſter originall, fol. 88.
               
                  Sur cui in vita, is a writ that lyeth fot the heire of that woman, whoſe husband hauing alienated her land in fee, ſhee bringeth not the writ Cui in vita for the recouery of her owne land for in this caſe her heire may take this writ againſt the tenent after her deceaſe. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 193. B.
               
                  Surgeon, commeth of the French (Chirurgien. i. Chirurgus, vulnerarius) ſignifiing him that dealeth in the mechanicall parte of phiſicke, and the outward cures performed with the hand. The French word is compounded of two greeke words (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. manus) and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . i. opus) And therefore are they not alowed to miniſter inward medicine. See the ſtatut. 32. H. 8. ca. 4. and M. Powltons new abridgement titule Surgeons.
               
               
                  Surcharger of the foreſt, is he that doeth common with more beaſts in the foreſt, then he

hath right to common withall. Manwood, parte 2. of his foreſt lawes. cap. 14. nu. 7.
               
                  Surpluſage (ſurpluſagium) commeth of the French (ſurplus. i. corollarium, additamentum) It ſignifieth in the common law, a ſuperfluity or addition more then needeth, which ſometime is a cauſe that a writ abateth. Brooke, titulo. Nugation & Superfluity, fol. 100. Plowden caſu Dine, contra Maningham, fol. 63. b. It is ſometime alſo applied to mater of accoumpt, and ſignifieth a greater disburſement, then the charge of the accoumptant amounteth vnto.
               
                  Surreioynder, is thus defined by Weſt. parte 2. ſymb. titulo. Supplications. ſect. 57. A Surreioynder, is a ſecond defence of the plaintifes actiō, oppoſite to the Defendants Reioynder. And therefore (as he ſaith) Hotoman call eth it Triplicationem, quaeeſt ſecunda actoris defenſio, contra Rei duplicationem oppoſita. Not Hotoman onely calleth this triplicationem: but the Emperour himſelfe. De Replicationibus, libro. 4. Inſtitut: titulo. 14.
               
                  Surrender (ſur ſum redditio) is an Inſtrument teſtifiing with apt words, that the particular tenent of lands, or tenements for life or yeares, doth ſufficiently conſent and agree, that he which hath the next or immediate Remainder, or Reuetſion thereof ſhall alſo haue the particular eſtate of the ſame in poſſeſſion: and that he yeeldeth, and giueth vp the ſame vnto him. For euery ſurrender ought forthwith to giue a poſſeſſion of the things ſurrendred. Weſt: parte pri: lib. 2. ſectio. 503. where you may ſee diuers preſidents. But there may be a ſurrender without writing. And therefore there is ſaid to be a ſurrender in deede, and a ſurrender in law. A ſurrender in deede, is that which is really and ſenſibly performed. Surrender in law is in intendment of law by way of conſequent, and not acutall. Perkins Surrender. 606. & ſeqq. as if a man haue a leaſe of a ſerm, & during the terme he accept of a new leaſe, this act is in law a ſurrender of the former. Coke. vol. 6. fo. 11. b.
               
               
                  Surſiſe (ſuperſiſae) anno 32. H. 8. ca. 48. ſeemeth to be an eſpeciall name vſed in the Caſtle of Douer, for ſuch penalties, and forfeitures, as are laid vpon thoſe that pay not their duties or rent for Caſtle ward at their daies. a. 32. H. 8. ca. 48. Bract. hathit in a generall ſignification lib. 5. tract. 3. ca. 1. nu. 8. and Fleta lib. 6. ca. 3. in prin.
               
               
                  Surueiour (ſuperuiſor) is compounded of two French words (ſur. 1. ſuper) and veoir. 1. ce
                        •
                     ert intueri, deſpioere, proſpicere, videre) It ſignifieth in qur common law,

one that hath the ouerſeeing or care of ſome great perſonages lands, or works. As the Surueiour generall of the Kings maners. Cromptons Iuriſd. fo. 106. And in this ſignification it is taken anno 33. H. 8. cap. 39. where there is a court of Surueiours erected. And the Surueiour of the Wards and Liueries Weſt parte 2. ſimbologr: titulo Chauncery, ſect: 136. which officer is erected anno 33. H. 8. ca. 22. who is the ſecond officer by his place in the court of wards and Liueries, aſſigned and appointed by the king. His office ſeemeth eſpecially to conſiſt in the true examination of the lands belonging to the Kings wards, that the King be not deceiued. At the entrance into his office, he taketh an oath miniſtred vnto him by the Maiſter of that Court, which ſee an. 33. H. 8. cap. 39.
               
                  Surueiour of the Kings exchange, anno 9. H. 5. ſtat. 2. ca. 4. was an officer, whoſe name ſeemeth in theſe daies to be changed into ſome other. For I cannot learne that there is any ſuch now.
               
                  Suruiuour, is compounded of two French words (Sur. 1. ſuper) and viure. 1. aetatem agere, viuere) whence alſo commeth the compound (Suruiure. i. ſupereſſe) It ſignifieth in our common law, the longer liuer of two ioynt tenents. See Brooke, titulo Ioynt tenents, fol. 33. or of any two ioyned in the right of any thing.
               
                  Suſpenſion (Suſpenſio) is vſed for a temporall ſtop of a mans right, and differeth from extinguiſhment in this, that a Right of Eſtate ſuſpended reuiueth againe, but extinguiſhed it dyeth for euer. Brooke, titulo Extinguiſhment and Suſpenſion. fol. 314. Suſpenſion is alſo vſed in our common lawe, ſometimes as it is vſed in the Canon lawe, pro minori excommunicatione. As anno 24. H. 8. cap. 12. See Excommunication.
               
               
                  Suspirall, ſeemeth to be a ſpring of water paſſing vnder the ground, toward a conduit or ceſterne. anno 35. H. 8. ca. 10. and to be deriued from the Latine (ſuſpirare) or the French (ſouſpirer) i. ducere ſuſpiria. And indeed the word it ſelf is French for (ſouſpiral) in that tongue, ſignifieth (spiramentum cauernae) the mouth of a caue or den: or the tunnell of a chimney.
               
                  Swainmot, alias Swanimote, (Swainmotum) ſignifieth a Court touching maters of the Foreſt kept by the Charter of the Foreſt, thrice in the yeare: anno 3 Henr. octau cap. 18. it is called a Swannie-mote: what things be inquirable in the fame, you may reade in Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 180. who ſaith that this court of Swainemote is as incident

to a Foreſt, as the court of Piepowder is to a faire, with whome agreeth M. Manwood parte pri. of his Forest lawes, pag. 144. The word ſeemeth to be compounded of (Swain) and (mot) or (Gemot). For ſwaine, as M. Manwood ſaith vbi ſupra, pag. 111) in the Saxons tongue ſignifieth a Bockland man, which at this day is taken for a Charterer, or freeholder: and (Gemot) as M. Lamberd ſaith in his explication of Saxon words, verbo Conventus, is Conventus, wherevpon it is to be noted, as he ſaith in the ſame place, that the Swainemote is a court of free-holders within the Foreſt. Of the which you may reade him at large, pag. 110. &c. vſque 122.
            
            
               T
               
                  TAbling of fines, is the making of a table for euery countie, where his Maieſties writ runneth, conteining the contents of euery fine, that ſhall paſſe in any one terme, as the name of the Countie, townes, and places, wherein the lands or tenements mentioned in any fine, do lye, the name of the plaintiffe and Deforceant, and of euery maner named in the fine. This is to be done properly by the Chirographer of fines of the common plees: who the firſt day of the next terme after the engreſſing of any ſuch fine, ſhall fixe euery of the ſaid tables in ſome open place of the court of Common plees: and ſo euery day of the ſaid terme during the ſitting of the ſaid court. And the ſaid Chirographer ſhall de
                  
                     •
                  iuer to the Shyreeue of euery Countie, his Vnderſhyreeue or Deputie, faire writen in parchment, a perfect content of the table ſo to be made for that ſhire, in the terme that ſhall be next before the Aſſiſes to be holden in the ſame countie, or elſe in the meane time betweene the terme, and the ſaid aſſiſes, to be ſet vp the firſt day, and euery day of the next aſſiſes, in ſome open place, of the Court, where the Iuſtices of Aſſiſes then ſhall ſit, to continue there ſo long, as they ſhall ſit in the ſaid court. If either the Chirographer, or Shyreeue faile herein, he forfeiteth fiue pounds. And the Chirographers fee for euery ſuch table is foure pence. anno 23. Elizab. cap. 3. This ſaith, Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo. Fines, ſect. 130.
               
                  Taile (Tallium) commeth of the French (taile. i. Sectura) or the verb (tailler. i. ſcindere) ſignifiing in our common law two ſeuerall things, both grounded vpon one reaſon. Plowden, caſu Willi
                        •
                     n,

fol. 251. a. b. Firſt it is vſed for the fee, which is oppoſite to fee ſimple: by reaſon that it is ſo (as it were) minced, or pared, that it is not in his free power to be diſpoſed of him which owneth it: but is by the firſt giuer cut, or diuided from all other, and tyed to the iſſue of the Donee, Cooke lib. 4. in prooemio. And this limitation, or taile, is either generall, or ſpeciall. Taile generall is that, whereby lands, or tenements are limited to a man, and to the heires of his body begotten. And the reaſon of this terme is, becauſe how many ſoeuer women, the tenent houlding by this title, ſhall take to his wiues, one after another in lawfull matrimony; his iſſue by them all, haue a poſſibility to inherit, one after the other. Taile ſpeciall is that, whereby lands, or tenements be limited vnto a man and his wife, and the heires of their two bodies begotten: becauſe if the man bury his wife before iſſue, and take another: the iſſue by this ſecond wife cannot inherit the land, &c. Alſo if land ſhould be giuen to a man and his wife, and to their ſonne and heire Iohn, for euer: this is taile eſpeciall. See more of this in ſee, and Litleton lib. pri: ca. 2. and the new booke of Entries. verbo Taile. Taile in the other ſignification, is that which we vulgarly call a Tallie. For it is vne taille de bois a clouen peece of wood to nick vp an accoumpt vpon, for in the ſtatute anno 10. Ed. pri. cap. 11. and anno 27. eiuſdem, ſtat. pri. ca. 2. it is termed a Taile, and anno 38. Ed 3. cap. 5. And ſo in Brooke his Abridgement, titulo. Taile d'Exchequer fol. 247. See Tayles.
               
               
                  Tailes (talliae) are in theſe daies called Talleyes, well knowne what they be. Of theſe reade in our ſtatutes two ſorts, to haue bene vſuall in the Exchequer for a long continuance. The one is tearmed tayles of debt, anno 1. R. 2. cap. 5. which are a kind of acquittance for dept paide in to the king. For example, the Vniverſitie of Cambridge payeth yearely ten pounds, for ſuch things as are by their Charter graunted them in fee ferme, fiue pounds at the Annunciation and fiue at Michaelmas. He that payeth the firſt fiue pounds, receiueth for his diſcharge a taile or taley, and he that payeth the other fiue, receiueth the like. With both which, or notes of them, he repayreth to the Clerke of the Pipes office, and there in ſteede of them receiueth an acquittance in parchment for his whole diſcharge. Then be there alſo mentioned tayles of reward, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 11. & anno 33. & 34. eiuſdem. ca. 16. and anno 2. & 3. Ed. 6. ca.
                  
4. And theſe ſeeme to be tailes, or talyes of allowances, or recompence made to Shyreeues for ſuch maters, as to their charge they haue performed in their office, or for ſuch monies as they by courſe haue caſt vpon them in their accompts, but could not leauie thē where they were due. And theſe, as it ſeemeth by the ſaid ſtatute, anno 27. H. 8. cap. 11. were of old graunted in the Exchequer vnto them, vpon warrant made to the Treaſurer and Chamberlaines there, by the Clerkes of the ſignet vpon bill aſſigned by the King. But ſithence the ſtatute anno 2. & 3. Ed. 6. cap. 4. what the courſe in this caſe is, I am not ſo well informed. Only I heare, that for ſome counties theſe tayles be ſtill in vſe, and that the warrant commeth now from the Auditour of the receipts, vnto thoſe that make theſe taleys. And that the Shyreeue with them proceedeth to thoſe who take his finall accompt, and there hath his allowance accordingly.
               
                  Taylage (tallagium) aliâs, Tallage, commeth of the French (taille) which originally ſignifieth a peece cut out of the whole: and metaphorically is vſed for a ſhare of a mans ſubſtance payed by way of tribute. It ſignifieth with vs a tolle, or taxe, as anno pri. Ed. 2. cap. vnico. And Stowes Annals. pag. 445. Thence commeth Tailagiers in Chawcer for taxe, or tolle gatherers.
               
                  Taint (Attinctus) commeth of the French (teinct. i. infectus, tinctus) and ſignifieth either ſubſtantiuely a conviction, or adiectiuely a perſon convicted of felonie or treaſon, &c. See Attaint.
               
               
                  Tales, is a latine word of knowne ſignification: It is vſed in our common lawe, for a ſupply of men empaneled vpon a iury or enqueſt, and not appearing, or at their apparence, chalenged by the partie, or either partie, if there be two, as not indifferent. for in this caſe, the Iudge vpon petition graunteth a ſupply to be made by the Shyreeue of ſome men there preſent, equall in reputation to thoſe that were impaneled. And herevpon the very act of ſupplying is called a Tales de Circumſtantibus. This ſupply may be one or more, and of as many as ſhall either make defaulte, or els be chalenged by each party. Stawf. pl. cor. lib. 3. ca. 5. How be it, he that hath had one Tales, either vpon default or challenge: though he may haue another,

yet he may not haue the later to conteine ſo many as the former, for the firſt Tales muſt be vnder the principall panell, except in a cauſe of Appeale, and ſo euery Tales leſſe then other, vntill the number be made vp of men preſent in courte, and ſuch as are without exception to the partie, or parties. Of this ſee Stawnford more at large vbi ſupra. where you may finde ſome exceptions to this generall rule. Theſe commonly called (Tales) may in ſome ſort, and in deede are called (Meliores) viz. when the whole Iurie is chalenged, as appeareth by Brooke, titulo. Octo tales & auter tales, fol. 105. In whome you may likewiſe reade many caſes touching this mater.
               
                  Tales, is the proper name of a booke in the Kings bench office. Coke lib. 4. fol. 93. b.
               
               
                  Tallage. See Taylage.
               
               
                  Talſhide. See Talwood.
               
               
                  Talwood, v. anno 34. & 35. Henric. octau. capit. 3. & anno 7. Ed. 6. ca. 7. & 43. El. cap. 14. Talſhide. ibidem. It is a long kinde of ſhide riuen out of the tree, which ſhortened is made into billets.
               
                  Tartaron, anno 12. Ed. 4. cap. 3. & anno 4. H. 8. cap. 6.
               
                  Taſels. anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. 1. is a kinde of hard burre vſed by clothiers and cloth workers in the dreſſing of cloth.
               
                  Task, aliâs Tare, by M. Camden following the authoritie of Doctor Powell (whome he greatly commendeth for his diligence in the ſearch of antiquities) is a Britiſhe word ſignifiing tribute. Camden. Britan. pag. 304. And it ſeemeth, it is ſuch a kinde of tribute, as being certainly rated vpon euery towne, was wont to be yearely paide. See Gild, and the places there cited out of M. Camden. Now is it not paide, but by conſent giuen in Parlament, as the Subſidie is. And it differeth from Subſidie in this, that it is alway certaine, accordingly as it is ſet downe in the Chequer booke, and levied in generall of euery towne, and not particularly of euerie man. Laſtly, it is a fifteenth of that ſubſtance, that euery town was firſt rated at, by the number of hides of land in the ſame. Wherevpon it is alſo called a fifteenth v. anno 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. 1. cap. 20. for whereas M. Crompton in his Iuriſdictions, ſaith that it is leuied ſomtime by goods, as well as by lands, as alſo appeareth by the ſtatute, anno 9. H. 4. ca. 7. I take his meaning there to be, that though the task in the

whole were at the firſt by the Prince proportioned by the land: Yet the townes men among themſelues to make vp that ſumme, are at theſe daies ſometime valued by goods. See Fiftenth. It ſeemeth that in auncient times, this task was impoſed by the king at his pleaſure, but Edward the firſt, anno 25. of his raigne, bound himſelfe, and his ſucceſſours from that time forward; not to leuie it but by the conſent of the Realme. anno 25. Ed. pri. cap. 5. The word Task may be thought to proceede from the French (Taux, aliâs Taxe. i. aeſtimatio, pretium) for we call it alſo Taxe: but ouer curiouſly to contend in theſe derivatiōs, may ſeeme friuolous, cōſidering that many words are common to diuers peoples.
               
                  Telonium, or Breue eſſendi quietum de Telonio, is a writ lying for the Citizens of any Citie, or Bourgeſſes of any towne that haue a Charter, or preſcription to free them from Tolle, againſt the officers of any town, or market conſtraining them to pay Tolle of their Merchandiſe, contrary to their ſaid graunt or preſcription. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 226. Hotoman lib. 2. commentariorum in feuda, cap. 56. verſ. Vectigalia, hath theſe words: Telonis autem dicuntur, public anorum ſtationes in quibus vectigalia recipiunt: ſed apud iſtius generis ſcriptores, Telonium dicitur vectigal, quod pro pontium aut riparum munitione penditur: & plerum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      á principibus ſolius exactionis cauſa, imperatur.
               
               
                  Team, aliás Theam, is an ould Saxon word, ſignifiing a Royalty granted by the Kings charter, to a Lord of a maner. Bracton li. 3. tracta. 2. ca. 8. of this Saint Edwards lawes, nu. 25. ſay thus. Quod ſi quiſquam aliquid interciet (id eſt, penes alium defendat) ſuper aliquem, & intercitatus, non poterit warantum ſuum habere, erit foriſfactura ſua, & Iuſticia ſimiliter de calumniatore, ſi defecerit. M. Skene de verborum ſignificatione, verbo Theme. ſaith, that it is a power to haue ſeruants and ſlaues, which are called natiui, bondi, villani; and all Baronies inſoffed with Theme, haue the ſame power. For vnto them all their bondmen, their children, goods and cattels, properly appertaine: ſo that they may diſpoſe of them, at their pleaſure. And in ſome ould authentike bookes it is writen. Theme eſt poteſtas habends natinos, it a quòd generationes villanorum veſtrorum, cum eorum catallis, vbicun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      inueniantur, ad vos pertineant, Theme commeth from Than. i. ſervus, and therefore ſome time ſignifieth the bondmen, and ſlaues, according to an ould ſtatute and law. De curia de Theme.

Quod ſi quis teneat curiam de Theme, & illa querela in illa curia mouetur, ad quam Theme vocatur: non debet illa curia elongari, ſed ibidem determinari, & omnes Theme ibi compareant. Which is vnderſtoode of the queſtion of liberty, when it is in doubt, whether any perſon be a bondman or free man. Which kinde of proces ſhould not be delayed but ſummarily diſcided. And the new expoſitour of law terms. ſpeaketh to the like effect, verbo Them. I read it alſo in an ould paper writen by an exchequer man thus tranſlated: Theam. i. propago villanorum.
               
               
                  Teller, is an officer in the Eſchequer, of which ſort their be foure in number. And their office is, to receiue all monies due to the King, and to giue to the clerk of the Pel a bill to charge him therewith. They alſo pay to all perſons, any money paiable vnto them by the King, by warrant from the auditour of the receipt. They alſo make weekely and yearely bookes both of their receipts & payments, which they deliuer to the L. Treaſurer.
               
                  Templers (Templarii) See Knights of the Temple. Theſe whil leſt they floriſhed here in England, which ſeemeth to be all that time betweene Henry the ſeconds daies, vntill they were ſuppreſſed, had in euery nation a particular gouernour, whom Brac. calleth Magiſtrū militiae Tē
                     pli: l. 1. c. 10. Of theſe read M. Cam. in his Br. p. 320. See Hoſpitalers.
               
               
                  Temporalties of Biſhops (Temporalia Epiſcoporum) be ſuch reuenewes, lands, and tenements, as Biſhops haue had laid to their Sees by the Kings and other great perſonages of this land from time to time, as they are Barons, and Lords of the Parlament. See Spiritualties of Biſhops.
               
               
                  Tend, ſeemeth to ſignifie, as much as to indeuour, or offer, or ſhew forth, to tend the eſtate of the party of the Demaundant, old n. br. f. 123. b. to tend to trauers. Stawnf: prarog. fol. 96. to tend an auertment. Britton, cap. 76.
               
                  Tender, ſeemeth to come of the French (Tendre. i. tener, delicatus) and being vſed adiectiuely, ſignifieth in engliſh ſpeech, as much as it doth in French. But in our common law, it is vſed as a verb: and betokeneth as much, as carefully to offer, or circumſpectly to indeuour the performance of any thing belonging vnto vs: as to tender rent, is to offer it at the time and place where and when it ought to be paid. To tender his law of non Summons. Kitch. fo. 197. is to offer himſelfe ready to make his law, whereby to prooue that he was not ſummoned. See law. See make.
               
               
                  Tenementis legatis, is a writ

that lyeth to London, or other corporation, where the cuſtome is, that men may demiſe tenements by their laſt will, as well as their goods and catels, to whome they liſt, for the hearing of any controuerſie touching this mater, and for the rectifying of the wrong. Regiſt. orig. fol. 244. b.
               
               
                  Tenant, aliâs, tenent, (tenens) commeth either of the Latine (tenere) or of the French (tenir) and ſignifieth in our common lawe, him that poſſeſſeth lands, or tenements by any kind of right, be it in fee, for life, or for yeares. This word is vſed with great diuerſitie of Epithits in the lawe, ſometime ſignifying or importing the efficient cauſe of poſſeſſion, as tenent in Dower: which is ſhee, that poſſeſſeth land, &c. by vertue of her Dower. Kitchin, fol. 160. Tenent per ſtatute Merchant. Idem, fol. 172. that is, he that holdeth land by vertue of a ſtatute forfeited vnto him. Tenent in franck mariage. Kitchin, fol. 158. viz. he that holdeth land or tenement by reaſon of a gift thereof made vnto him vpon mariage, betweene him and his wife. Tenent by the courteſie. Idem, fol. 159 i. he that holdeth for his life by reaſon of a child begotten by him of his wife being an inheritrix, and borne aliue. Tenent per elegit. Idem, fol. 172. i. he that holdeth by vertue of the writ termed Elegit. Tenent in mortgage. idem, fol. 38. is he that holdeth by vertue of a mortgage or vpon condition, that if the leſſour pay ſo much money at ſuch a day, that he may enter, and if not, that the leaſſee ſhall haue a fee ſimple, fee tayle, or free hould. Sometime theſe Epithites import the maner of admittance: as tenent by the verge in auncient demeſn. Idem. fol. 81. is he that is admitted by the rod in a court of auncient demeſne. Sometime the euidence, that he hath to ſhew for his eſtate: as Tenent by copy of court rolle, which is one admitted Tenent of any lands, &c. within a maner, that time out of the memorie of man, by the vſe and cuſtome of the ſaid maner, haue bene demiſable, and demiſed to ſuch as will take the ſame in ſee, fee-tayle, for life, yeares, or at will, according to the cuſtome of the ſaid maner. Weſt parte prim. ſym. lib. 2. ſe. 646. whom reade more at large. Againe, Tenent by charter, is he that holdeth by feofment in writing or other deede. Kitchin; fol. 57. Sometime theſe Epithites ſignifie that dutie which the tenent is to performe by reaſon of his tenure. As Tenent by Knights ſeruice, Tenent in ſocage, Tenent in burgage, Tenent

in frank fee, Tenent in villenage. Sometime they import the eſtate of the tenent, or his continuance in the land, as Tenent in fee ſimple. Kitchin, fol. 150. Tenent in fee taile, Idem fol. 153. Tenent for life, and tenent for yeares: Idem, fol. 163. Tenent at the will of the Lord according to the cuſtome of the maner. Idem fol. 132. & 165. Tenent at will by the common law. Idem, eodem. Tenent vpon ſufferance. Idem, fol. 165. Tenent of ſtate of inheritance. Stawnf: praerog. fol. 6. Sometime they containe a relation toward the Lord of whom he houldeth, as Tenent in cheife. i. he that houldeth of the King in the right of his crowne. Fitz. nat: br. fol. 5. F. Tenent of the King, as of the perſon of the King. Idem, eodem. or as of ſome honour. eodem: Very tenent. i. he that houldeth immediately of his Lord. Kitchin fol. 99. For if there be Lord Meſn. and Tenent, the Tenent is very Tenent to the meſn, but not to the Lord aboue. Tenent parauaile, pl. cor: fo. 197. & Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 136. D. is the loweſt tenent, and fardeſt diſtant from the Lord Paramont. It ſeemeth to be tenent per auaile. See Diers commentaries fol. 25. nu. 156. Noe tenent in right to the Lord, but Tenent as for the avowrie to be made, Litleton, fol. 96. Sometime they haue a relation betweene Tenents, and Tenents in ſeuerall kindes, as ioynt tenents. i. they that haue equall right in lands and tenements, and all by vertue of one title. Litleton, li. 3. ca. 3. Tenents in common, be they that haue equall right, but hold by diuers titles, as one or more by gift or deſcent, and others by purchaſe. Idem, eod. cap. 4. Particular tenent. Stawnf. praerog. fol. 13. that is, he which holdeth onely for his terme, as tenent in dower, tenent by the courteſie, or otherwiſe for life, Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo. Fines. ſect. 13. G. See anno 32. H. 8. ca. 31. and Cooke in Sir William Pellams caſe. lib. 5. fol. 15. a. they be termours for yeares or life. See Plowden caſu Colthirſt. fol. 23. b. Sole tenent, Kitchin 134. i. he that hath none other ioyned with him. If a man and his wife hold for both their liues, and the man dyeth, he dieth not ſole tenent, Idem eodem. Seuerall tenent, is oppoſite to ioynt tenents or tenents in common. See Seuerall tenencie. Tenent al praecipe, is he, againſt whom the writ (Fraecipe) is to be brought. Cookes Reports. lib. 3. the caſe of fines. fol. 88. a. Tenent in demeſn, anno 13. Ed. 1. cap. 9. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 37. is he that holdeth the demeanes of a maner for a rent without ſeruice. Tenent in

feruice, an. 20. Ed. 1. ſtat. pri. is he that holdeth by ſeruice v. Britton. cap. 79. in principie, & ca. 96. Car fealte, &c. vel quaere whether he may be termed tenent in demeſne, that holdeth ſome of the Demeanes howſoeuer, and he tenent in ſeruice, which is a freehoulder to a maner houlding by ſeruice, for the free houlds of a manner are not accounted of the demeſne, but onely that which the Lord keepeth in his owne hand or letteth out by copie, according to the cuſtome of the maner. Tenent by execution an. 32. Henr. 8. cap. 5. is he that holdeth land by vertue of an exeution vpon any ſtatute, recogniſance, &c.
               
                  Tendeheved (decanus, vel caput decem familiarum) of this ſee Roger Hoveden, parte poſter. ſuorum annalium. fol. 346. a. See Frank pledge.
               
               
                  Tenement (Tenementum) is diuerſly vſed in the common lawe, Moſt properly it ſignifieth a houſe or home ſtall: but in a larger ſignification it is taken for either houſe or land that a man holdeth of another. And ioyned with the adiectiue (Frank) in our lawyers French, it conteineth generally lands or houſes, yea or offices, wherein we haue eſtate for terme of life, or in fee. And in this ſignification, Kitchin, fol. 41. maketh frank tenement, and baſe eſtate oppoſite the one to the other. In the ſame ſort doth Britton vſe it, through his whole 27. chapter, as alſo Bracton doeth the latine (liberum tenentum) lib. pri. cap. 5. & 6. and many other places.
               
                  Tenentibus in aſſiſa non onerandis, &c. is a writ that lieth for him to whome a diſſeiſour hath alienated the land whereof he diſſeiſed another, that he be not moleſted for the dammages awarded, if the Diſſeiſour haue wherewith to ſatisfie them him ſelfe. Regiſter. orig. fol. 214. b.
               
               
                  Tenths (Decimae) is that yearely portion or tribute, which all liuings eccleſiaſticall doe yeeld to the king. For though the Biſhop of Rome doe originally pretend right vnto this revenewe, by example of the high preiſt among the Iewes, who had tenths from the Levites, Numb. cap. 8. Hieronimus in Ezechielem. yet Iread in our Chronicles that theſe were often graunted to the King by the Pope, vpon diuers occaſions, ſometime for one yeare, ſometime for more, vntill by the ſtatute, anno 26. Hen. 8. cap. 3. they were annexed perpetually to the Crown. See Diſms. It ſignifieth alſo a taske leuied of the temporalty. Holinſhed. H. 2. f. 111.
               
               
                  
                  Tenore indictamenti mittendo, is a writ whereby the Record of an indictment, and the proces thereupon, is called out of another court into the chauncerie. Regiſter orig. fol. 169. a.
               
               
                  Tenure (Tenura) commeth of the Norman (Teneure) as appeareth by the Grand Cuſtumarie: cap. 28. where it is defined to this effect: Tenure is the maner, whereby tenements are houlden of their Lords. What may make a tenure and what not, ſee Perkins Reſeruations, 70. And in that chapter ſhall you finde the moſt of thoſe tenures recited, that be now vſually in England. In Scotland I finde that there be foure maner of tenures, which they call halding of land; the firſt is pura eleemozina, which is proper to ſpirituall men, paying nothing for it, but deuot a animarum ſuffragia: the ſecond they call Few, or few ferme, which houldeth of the King, Church, Barons, or others, paying a certaine duty called Feudi firma. The third is a hould in (Blench) as they terme it, by payment of a peny, roſe, paire of guilt ſpurs, or ſome ſuch like thing, if it be asked, in name of Blench, id eſt nomine albae firmae. The fourth is by ſeruice of ward, and relieue, where the heire being minor, is in the gard or cuſtody of his Lord, togither with his lands, &c. And land houlden in this fourth maner, is called there feudum de Hauberk, or Haubert. or feudum militare, or feudum Hauberticum, or feudum loricatum: becauſe it is giuen vpon condition, that the vaſſall poſſeſſor therof, ſhall come to the hoſt with a lack, or Haubert which is a coate of maile. M. Skene de verb: ſignifica: verbo. Haubert. Tenure in groſſe, is the Tenure in Capite. For the Crowne is called a Seignory in groſſe, becauſe it conſiſteth as a corporation of and by it ſelfe, not tyed to any honour, or maner. See Cromptons Iuriſd: fol: 206. See the new booke of Entries, verbo Tenure.
               
               
                  Term (Terminus) ſignifieth with vs commonly, the bounds and limitation of time: as a leaſe for terme of life or terme of yeares. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 6. nu. 4. But moſt notoriouſly it is vſed for that time, wherein the Tribunals, or places of Iudgement are open to all that liſt to complaime of wrong, or to ſeeke their right by courſe of law, or action. The reſt of the yeare is called vacation. Of theſe terms there be foure in euery yeare: during the which, maters of Iuſtice (for the moſt part) are diſpatched. and this Sir Tho. Smith lib. 3. de Rep. Ang: cap. 2. reckoneth as miraculous: that in leſſe time then the third part of the yeare, three Tribunals,

all in one city, ſhould certifie the wrongs of ſo large and populous a nation, as England is. Of theſe terms one is called Hilary terme which beginneth the 23. of Iannuary, or if that be Sunday, the next day following, and eudeth the 21. of February. Another is called Eaſter terme, which beginneth 18. daies after Eaſter and endeth the munday next after Aſcenſion day. The third is Trinity terme, beginning the Friday next after Trinity Sū
                  day, and ending the Wedenſday fortnight after. The fourth is Mich aelmas terme, beginning the 9 of October, or if that be Sunday, the next day after, and ending the 28. of Nouember.
               
                  Termor (Tenens extermino) is he that 
                     •
                  houldeth for terme of yeares or life. Kitchin fol. 151. Litleton fol. 100.
               
                  Terra extendenda is a writ directed to the Eſcheatour, &c. willing him to inquire and find the true yearely value of any land, &c. by the oath of twelue men, and to certifie the extent into the Chauncerie, &c. Regiſt. orig. fol. 293. b.
               
               
                  Terris, bonis & catallis rehabendis poſt purgationem, is a writ that lyeth for a Clerke to recouer his lands, goods, or chatels formerly ſeiſed on, after he hath cleared himſelfe of that felonie, vpon ſuſpition whereof he was formerly conuicted, and deliuered to his Ordinarie to be purged. Regiſt. orig. fol. 68. b.
               
               
                  Terris liberandis, is a writ, that lyeth for a man conuicted by attaint, to bring the Record and proceſſe, before the King, and to take a fiue for his impriſonment, and to deliuer him his lands and tenements againe, and to releaſe him of the Strip and Waſte. Regiſt. orig. fol. 232. a. It is alſo a writ for deliuery of lands to the heire after homage, and reliefe performed. eodem fol. 293. b. or vpon ſecuritie taken, that he ſhall performe them. eodem, fol. 313. b.
               
               
                  Terris & catallis ventis vltra debitum levatum, is a writ Iudiciall, for the reſtoring of lands or goods to a deptour that is diſtrained aboue the quantitie of the dept. Regiſter Iudiciall. fol. 38. b.
               
               
                  Terretenent, (terratenens) is he which hath the naturall, and actuall poſſeſſion of the land, which we otherwiſe call the occupation. anno. 39. Eliz cap. 7. For example, a Lord of a maner hath a freeholder, who letteth out his freeland to another to be occupied: this occupier is called the Terretenent. Weſt. parte 2. ſymb. titulo. Fines. ſect. 137. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 194. Britton. cap. 29. Perkins feofments. 231. And Petrus Bellugain ſpeculo Principum.

Rub. 46. verſiculo, Reſtat videre num. 9. vſeth this word Terratenentes in the ſame ſignification. See Land tenents. Yet I haue heard ſome learned in the lawe ſay, that the Tertenent, is the teuent in free, or copyhold, according to the cuſtome of the maner, and oppoſite to tenent for terme of yeres. Quaere.
               
               
                  Ters, is a certaine meaſure of liquide things, as wine, oyle, &c. conteining the ſixth part of a Tunne. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 14. or the third part of a pipe.
               
                  Teſtament, (teſtamentum.) See Will.
               
               
                  Teſtatum, is a writ that ſeemeth eſpecially to lye againſt great perſonages of the realm, whoſe bodies may not be medled with in actions of dept. And therefore if the Shyreeue return, (nihil habet in balliva mea) in a caſe of execution, another writ ſhall be ſent out into any other Countie, where ſuch perſonage is thought to haue whence to ſatisfie, which is termed a Testatum; becauſe the Shyreeue hath formerly teſtified, that he found nothing in his Bayliweeke to ſerue the turne. See Kitchin in his Returnes of writs. fol. 287. b.
               
               
                  Teſte, is a word commonly vſed for the laſt part of any writ: ſo called, becauſe the very concluſion of euery writ wherein the date is contained, beginneth with theſe words, (teſte 
                        •
                     eipſo, &c.) If it be an originall writ, or if iudiciall, teſte Thom. Flemming, or Edovar do Cooke, according to the Court whence it commeth. Where I may note by the way, that in Glanvile lib. pri. cap. 6. & 13. & lib. 2. cap. 4. I find the forme of an originall writ in the laſt clauſe to be (teſte Ranulpho de Glanvilla apud Clarindon, &c. And diuers times in the Regiſter orig. Teſte cuſtode Anglu: as namely, in the title Prohibition. fol. 42. a. and Conſultation, fol. 54. b.
               
               
                  Thanus, is a made Latin word of the Saxon (thegn) which commeth of (thenian. i. alicui miniſtrare.) It ſignifieth ſometime a Noble man, ſomtime a free man, ſometime a Magiſtrate, ſomtime an Officer, or miniſter. Lamb. in in his Explication of Saxon words. verbo: Thanus. See the place. See vavaſour. M. Skene de verbor. ſignif. ſaith, it is the name of a dignitie, and appeares to be equall with the ſonne of an Earle. And Thanus was a free holder holding his lands of the King. And a man not taken with the fang (that is, with the maner, as we ſay,) accuſed of theft, no ſufficient proofe being brought againſt him, muſt purge himſelfe by the oath of 27. men, or of three Thanes. Thanagtum

Regis, ſignifieth a certaine part of the Kings lands, or propertie, whereof the rule and gouernement appertaineth to him, who therefore is called Thanus. For Domania Regis, and Thanagia, idem ſignificant. It is a Dutch word: For (teiner) ſignifieth a ſeruant, and teiner to ſerue. And thane is likewiſe a ſeruant, and vnder-thane, an inferiour thane or ſubiect. Thus farre M. Skene.
               
               
                  Thack tile. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 4. otherwiſe called plaine tyle, is that tile which is made to be layed vpon the ſide, and not vpon the rudge of a tyled houſe. anno 17. Ed. 4. cap. 4.
               
                  Theam. See Team.
               
               
                  Theft (furtum) is an vnlawfull felonious taking away of another mans moueable, and perſonall goods againſt the owners will, with an intent to ſteale them. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditements. ſect. 58. where alſo he ſaith, that theft is from the perſon or in preſence of the owner, or in his abſence. Theft from the perſon or in preſence of the owner, is of two ſorts: the one putting the owner in feare, the other not. Idem, eodem, ſect. 59. The former is properly called Robberie. ibid. ſect. 60. The new expounder of lawe termes, verbo Larconie, diuideth theft into theft ſo ſimply called, and petit or litle theft. Whereof the one is of goods aboue the value of twelue pence, and is felonie, the other vnder that value, and is no felonie. But ſee Felonie.
               
               
                  Theftbote, is made of (theft) and (boote) i. compenſatio, and ſignifieth properly the receiuing of goods from a theefe, to the end to fauour, and maintaine him. The puniſhment whereof is raunſome and impriſonment, and not loſſe of life and member. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. prim. cap. 43. and the myrror of Iuſtices. lib. 2. cap. des peches criminels al ſute le Roye. And yet he there maketh mention of a Record alledged, which teſtified a iudgement of life and member given in this caſe.
               
                  Thegue. See Thanus, and Thingus.
               
               
                  Them. See Team. It ſignifieth acquietantiam amerciamentorum ſequelae propriorum ſervorum. Fleta lib. prim. cap. 47. §. Theme.
               
               
                  Thelonium. See Tholle, and Tholonium, and Tolle.
               
               
                  Theolonio rationabili habendo pro Dominis habentibus Dominica Regis ad firmam, is a writ, that lyeth for him, that hath of the Kings demeſne in fee ferme, to recouer reaſonable tolle of the Kings tenents there, if that his demeſn haue bene accuſtomed to be tolled. Regiſter origin.

fol. 87. b.
               
               
                  Thingus. Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 197. ſeemeth to be vſed for the Saxon Thegne. See Thanus. His words are theſe, ſpeaking of a Charter or Graunt made by a Lord of a Foreſt. Scietis me conceſſiſſe omnibus militibus, & omnibus thingis, & omnibus liberè tenentibus, qui manent in Foreſtamea do Honore de Lancaster, quòd poſſunt, &c. Fleta writeth it Tlem, & ſaith, quod ſignificat liberum.
               
               
                  Then, ſignificat ſervum. Fleta li. prim. cap. 47. See Thanus, and Thingus.
               
               
                  Thridborow, is vſed for a conſtable. anno 28. H. 8. cap. 10. which alſo is noted by M. Lamberd in his Tractate intituled: The dutie of Conſtables, pag. 6. which ſeemeth to be corruptly vſed for the Saxon (freoborh. i. ingenuus fide iuſſor,) or (freborheſhe ofod. i. vas primarius) Idem. in his explication of Saxon words. verbo. Centuria.
               
               
                  Thrid with hawan man (trium noctium hoſpes) who if he did any harme, his hoſt, by the lawes of Saint Edward, and of the Conquerour, was anſwerable for the harme. Rogerus Hoveden parte poſter ſuorum annal. fol. 345.
               
                  Thokei of fiſh, anno 22. Ed 4. cap. 2.
               
                  Tholl (Thollonium) est libertas emendi, & vendendi in terra ſua. Archainom. Lamb. fol. 132. See Toll.
               
               
                  Thraue of corne, anno 2. H. 6. ca. 2. conſiſteth of two ſhookes: and euery ſhoke conteineth 6. ſheaues. It ſeemeth to be a word proper to the north parts.
               
                  Thrimſa, commeth of (Threo) that is three, and ſignifieth a peece of money of three ſhillings. Lamb. expla. of Saxons words. verbo Thrimſa.
               
               
                  Tilſen of ſaten, anno 1. H. 8. ca. 14.
               
                  Tince
                        •
                     , commeth of the French (Eſtincelle. i. ſcintilla) or the verb (Eſtinceller. i. ſcintillare) It ſignifieth with vs a ſtuffe or cloath made partly of ſilke and partly of gold or ſiluer, ſo called becauſe it gliſtereth or ſparkleth like ſtarres.
               
                  Tiſſu, is a French word ſignifiing as much as (wouen) Cloth of Tiſſue, with vs cloth of ſilke and ſiluer, or of ſilke, and gould wouen togither.
               
                  Tithe (Decimae) ſeemeth to be an abbreuiat of (tything) being the Saxon (Teothung) a litle altered, which ſignifieth Decuriam, Lamb. explica. of Saxon words. verbo. Decuria. It ſignifieth in our common lawe, the tenth part of all fruites prediall, or perſonall, which be due to God, and ſo conſequently to his Miniſter, toward the recompence of his paines taken in inſtructing his charge, how to

liue after Gods commandements, and his continuall interceſſion that he doth or ought to make vnto God for their both ſpirituall and temporal bleſſings Leuit. cap. 27. verſu. 30. I ſay the tenth part, though Couarruvias with other learned Canoniſts and Scholemen, hold the rate of tithes, not to be neceſſarily the tenth part of the fruites by the morall lawe of God. Yet the beter and more theologicall opinion is, that they are all deceiued, and that from their errour hath ſprong much wrong to almighty God, and greate miſchief to his church: & that by the law of God and nature no contrary cuſtome ought to laſt any longer, then the parſon and pariſhioner ſhall both thinke well of it. Wherefore thoſe cuſtomes of paying a halfepeny for a lambe, or a pennie for a calfe by ſuch as haue vnder ſeuen in one yeare, how long ſo euer it hath indured, is but very vnreaſonable in theſe daies, when both lamb and calues are growne foure times deerer, and more then they were when this price was firſt accepted. And therefore no man diſchargeth well his conſcience in this point that paieth not duly the tenth of euery Lamb, euery calfe, and euery otherthing titheable. For by this courſe the miniſter fareth well or euill in a proportion with his pariſhioner, as it pleaſeth God to giue increaſe, whereas by any other order the one or the other ſhall finde want of indifferencie, as the prices of things ſhall riſe or fall.
               
                  Tithing (Tithingum) is the Saxon word Teothung for the which ſee (Tithe) It ſignifieth (as M. Lamb. ſaith in his dutie of Conſtables) the number or company of ten men with their families caſt, or knit together in a ſocietie, all of them being bound to the King for the peaceable and good behauiour of each of their ſocietie. Of theſe companies was there one cheife or principall perſon, who of his office was called (Toothung man) at this day in the Weſt parts (Tithingman) But now he is nothing but a Conſtable. For that old diſcipline of Tithings is left long ſithence. It ſignifieth alſo a court, anno 23. Ed. 3. cap. 4. & anno 9. H. 3. cap. 35. See Chiefe Pledge and Frank pledge, and Decennier. Tithing is vſed for a Court. Magna charta, cap. 25. and Merton, cap. 10.
               
                  Todde of wooll, is a quantitie conteining 28. pound in weight, or two Stone.
               
                  Toſt (Toſtum) is a place, wherein a meſuage hath ſtoode

                  Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines ſect. 26.
               
                  Toile, commeth of the French (Toile. i. tela) and ſignifieth with vs a net of cord to compaſſe or take Deere.
               
                  To lange and to bred. See Bred.
               
               
                  Tolle (Tollere) as it is a verbe ſignifieth to defeate or take away, anno 8. H. 6. cap. 9.
               
                  Toll, aliás Tholl (Tolnetum, aliás Theolonium) is a Saxon word, and hath in our common lawe two ſignifications: firſt it is vſed for a libertie to buy and ſell within the precincts of a maner. Lamb. Archainom. fol. 132. which ſeemeth to import ſo much as a faire or market. The words be theſe: Thol (quod nos dicimus Tholoniū) est ſcilicet quod habeat libertatem vendendi & emendi in terra ſua. In the ſecond ſignification it is vſed for a tribute or cuſtome paid for paſſage, &c. as in Bracton. Si cui concedatur talis libertas quòd quietus ſit de Theolonio & conſuetudinibus dandis per totum Regnum Angliae in terra & mari, & quod Theolonium & conſuetudines capiat infra libertatem ſuam de ementibus & vendentibus, &c, lib. 2. cap. 24. num. 3. But euen there in the end of the ſecond number he hath this word, Toll (as it ſeemeth) in the former ſignification alſo, which by theſe words aboue written folowing a little after, he interpreteth to be a libertie as well to take as to be free from Tolle. The made Latine word (Theolonium) Caſſanaus in conſuetud. Burgund. pag. 118, deriueth a Tollendo) but I rather thinke it commeth from the greeke (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) or (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ). i. vectigalium redemptio, vel etiam vectigalium exactio) Fleta hath theſe words of it: Tol ſignificat acquietantiam Theolonii vbi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in Regno, lib. pri. cap. 47. M. Skene de verb. ſignifi. verbo Toll, ſaith it is a cuſtome, and that it commeth from the Greeke word of the ſame ſignification (
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) and that he who is infeoffed with Toll, is cuſtome free, and payeth no cuſtome: which is manifeſt by ſundry ould bookes, wherein it is writen: Toll, hoc eſt quod vos & homines veſtri de toto homagio veſtro ſint quieti de omnibus mercantus, & de Tolneto, de omnibus rebus emptis & venditis. Thus farre he. Kitchin fol. 104. maketh mention of Tolle through, and Toll Trauers, his words be to this effect. Cuſtom or preſcription to haue Toll through in the high way, is not good: for it is againſt the common right. But to haue preſcription of Tolle Trauers, is good. In which place the difference betweene the one, and the other the newe expoſitour of lawe terms faith to be, that tolletrauers is that mony, which

is taken for paſſing ouer a priuate mans ground. But this author ſeemeth to differ from Kitchin touching the lawfulnes of tolle through, ſaying that by reaſon of a bridge prouided at the coſt and charge of the towne, for the eaſe of trauellers, he thinketh it reſonable, that tolle through be exacted toward the maintenance thereof: which writer alſo maketh mention of tolle turn: and that he defineth to be tolle paide for beaſtes driuen to be ſold, though they be not ſold indeede. Where, I think, he muſt meane a tolle paide in the returne homeward from the faire or market, whether they were driuen to be ſold. Plowden, caſu Willion, fo. 236. agreeth in this definition of tolle trauers. And this the Feudiſts call parangariam, defining it to be ſumptus & labores ferendi referendiue alicui
                        •
                     s cauſa a principe impoſiti, cùm non per viam, ſed aliò verſùm iter ſuſcipitur. l. 2. Co. de Epiſc. & cleri. a graeco (
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     ). i. tranſitus per viam tranſverſam. Gothofred. ad. l. 4. §. 1. Π. de vetera. I finde in Andrew Horns mirrour of Iustices, lib. 1. cap. des articles, &c. that by the auncient lawe of this land, the buyers of corne or catell in faires or markets, ought to pay tolle to the Lord of the market, in teſtimony of their contract there lawfully made in open market: for that priuie contracts were held vnlawfull.
               
                  Toloneum or Breve de eſſends quietum de Toloneo, is a writ that lyeth in caſe, where the Citizens of any Citie, or Burgeſſes of any towne, be quit from tolle by the graunt of the kings predeceſſours, or preſcription: which you haue at large in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 226. See Telonium.
               
               
                  Tolt (Tolta) is a writ whereby a cauſe depending in a court Baron, is remoued into the county court. Old. nat. br. fol. 2. The reaſon of the appellation ſeemeth 
                     •
                  o come from the verb (Tollo) v: Cooke, lib. 3. in praefatione ad lectorem.
               
               
                  Tonne. See Tunne.
               
               
                  Tonnage, is a cuſtome or impoſt due for merchādiſe brought or caried in tonns and ſuch like veſſels, from or to other nations after a certain rate in euery tonne anno 12. Ed. 4. ca. 3. anno 6. H. 8. ca. 14. & anno pri. Ed. 6. cap. 13. anno pri. Iacobi, cap. 33. I haue heard it alſo called a duty due to the Mariners for vnloading their ſhip arriued in any hauen after the rate of euery tonne.
               
                  Torny. See Turney.
               
               
                  Totted anno 42. Ed. 3. cap. 9. & anno 1. Ed. 6. ca. 15. is a word vſed of a dept, which the forein Appoſer or other officer in the Exchequer noteth for a good

dept to the King by writing this word (Tot) vnto it.
               
                  Tourn. See Turn.
               
               
                  Tout temps priſt & vncore eſt: that is to ſay in Engliſh, Alway ready and is at this preſent: this is a kinde of plee in way of excuſe or defence vnto him that is ſiewed for withhoulding any dept, or duty belonging to the plaintiffe. See of this Brooke his Abridgement, fol. 258.
               
                  Traile baſton. See Iuſtices of triall baſton.
               
               
                  Traitor (traditor, proditor) See Treaſon.
               
               
                  Tranſgreſſione, is 
                     •
                  writ, called commonly a writ or action of treſpas. Of this Fitzherbert in his Naturabre: hath two ſorts: one Vicountiel, ſo called, becauſe it is directed to the Shyreeue, and is not returnable but to be determined in the countie: The forme whereof differeth from the other, becauſe it hath not theſe words: Quare vi & amis, &c. and this ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 85. G. The other is termed a writ of treſpaſſe vpon the caſe, which is to be ſiewed in the common Bank, or the Kings Bench, in which are alwaies vſed theſe words vi & armis, &c. And of this you haue Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 92. E. See Treſpas. See the diuers uſe of this writ in the Regiſter originall, in the table.
               
                  Tranſcript, anno 34. & 35. H. 8. cap. 14. is the copy of any originall writen againe or exemplified.
               
                  Tranſcripto Recognitionis factae coram Iuſticiariis itiner antibus, &c. is a writ for the certifiing of a Recogniſance, taken before Iuſtices in Eire, into the Chauncery, Regiſter orig fol. 152. b.
               
               
                  Tranſcripto pedis finis levati mittendo in Cancellariam, is a writ for the certifiing of the foote of a fine leuied before Iuſtices in Eyre, &c. into the Chauncerie, eodem. fol. 169. & Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 14.
               
                  Travers, cōmeth of the French (Traverſer. i. transfigere) It ſignifieth in our common lawe ſometime to denie, ſometime to ouerthrow, or vndoe a thing done. Touching the former ſignification take theſe words in Weſts ſymbol. parte 2. titulo Chauncery, ſect. 54. An anſwer (ſaith he, ſpeaking of an anſwer 
                     〈◊〉
                   a bille in Chauncerie) is that, which the Defendant pleadeth or ſaith in barre to avoide the plantiffes bille, or action, either by confeſſion and avoiding, or by denying and traverſing the materiall parts thereof. And againe, ſectio. 55. A replication is the plaintifles ſpeech or anſwer to the Defendants anſwer, which muſt affirme and perſiew his bille, and confeſſe

and auoide, deny or traverſe the Defendants anſwer. And the formall words of this trauers are in Lawyers French (ſans ceo) in Latine (abſque hoc) in Engliſh (without that.) See Kitchin fol. 227. titulo Affirmatiue & Negatiue. In the ſecond ſignification I find it in Stawnfords praerog. cap. 20. through the whole chapter, ſpeaking of trauerſing an office: which is nothing elſe, but to proue, that an inquiſition made of goods or lands by the Eſchetour, is defectiue and vntruly made. So trauerſing of an Inditement, is to take iſſue vpon the chiefe mater thereof: which is none other to ſay, then to make contradiction, or to deny the point of the Enditement. As in preſentment againſt A. for a high way ouerflowne with water for default of ſcowring a ditch, which he and they, whoſe eſtate he hath in certain land there, haue vſed to ſcower and cleanſe. A. may trauerſe either the mater, viz. that there is no high way there, or that the ditch is ſufficiently ſcowred: or otherwiſe he may trauers the cauſe, viz. that he hath not the land, &c. or that he and they whoſe eſtate, &c. haue not vſed to ſcoure the ditch. Lamb. Eirenarcha. lib. 4. cap. 13. pag. 521 522. Of Trauers ſee a whole chapter in Kitchin, fol. 240. See the new booke of Entries. verbo, Trauers.
               
               
                  Treaſon (traditio, vel proditio) commeth of the French, trahiſon, i. proditio) and ſignifieth an offence committed againſt the amplitude and maieſtie of the commonwealth. Weſt parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditements. ſect. 63. by whom it is there diuided into High treaſon, which other call altam proditionem, and petit treaſon. High treaſon he defineth to be an offence done againſt the ſecuritie of the common wealth, or of the Kings moſt excellent Maieſtie: whether it be by imagination, word, or deed: as to compaſſe or imagine treaſon, or the death of the Prince, or the Queene his wife, or his ſonne and heyre apparent, or to deflowre the Kings wife, or his eldeſt daughter vnmaried, or his eldeſt ſonnes wife: or leuie war againſt the King in his Realme, or to adhere to his enemies, ayding them, or to counterfeit the Kings great Seale, priuie Seale, or money, or wittingly to bring falſe money into this Realme counterfeited like vnto the money of England, and vtter the ſame: or to kill the Kings Chaunceler, Treaſurer, Iuſtice of the one bench, or of the other, Iuſtices in Eyre, Iuſtices of Aſſiſe, Iuſtices of oyer and terminer, being in his place, & doing

of his office. anno 25. Ed. prim. ca. 2. or forging of the Kings ſeale manuell, or priuy ſignet, priuy ſeale, or forrein coine current within the Realme anno 2. Mar. cap. 6. or diminiſhing or impairing of money current, an. 5. Elizab. ca. 11. & anno 14. El. ca. 3. & 18. Elizab. ca. pri. and many other actions which you may read there and in other places particularly expreſſed. And in caſe of this treaſon a man forfeiteth his lands, and goods to the King onely. And it is alſo called treaſon Paramount. anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. The forme of Iudgement giuen vpon a man conuicted of high treaſon is this. The Kings Sergeant after the verdict deliuered, craueth Iudgement againſt the priſoner in the behalfe of the King. Then the Lord Steward (if the traitour haue bene noble) or other Iudge (if he be vnder a peere) ſaith thus: N. Earle of P. For ſo much as thou before this time haſt bene of theſe treaſons indited, and this day arraigned for thee ſame, and put thy ſelfe vpon God and thy peeres, and the Lords thy peeres haue foūd thee guilty, my Iudgement is that thou ſhalt from hence be conueied vnto the Tower of London, whence thou cameſt, and from thence drawne through the middeſt of London to Tiburne, and there hanged: and liuing thou ſhalt be cut downe, thy bowels to be cut out and burnt before thy face, thy head cut off, and thy body to be diuided in foure quarters, and diſpoſed at the Kings Maieſties pleaſure: and God haue mercy vpon thee.
               Petit treaſon is rather deſcribed by examples, then any where logically defined: as when a ſeruant killeth his maſter, or a wife her husband, or when a ſecular or religious man killeth his prelate, to whom he oweth faith and obedience. And in how many other caſes petit treaſon is committed. See Cromptons Iuſtice of peace. And this maner of treaſon giueth forfeiture of Eſcheats to euery Lord within his owne fee anno 25. Ed. 3. cap. 2. Of treaſon ſee Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. nu. pri. & 2. Treaſon compriſeth both high and petit treaſon anno 25. Ed. 3. ſtat. 3. cap. 4.
               
                  Treaſure troue (The ſaurus inuentus) is as much as in true French (Treſor trouuè). i. treaſure found: and ſignifieth in our common law, as it doth in the Ciuile law, ideſt, veterem depoſitionem pecuniae, cuius non extat memoria, vt iam dominum non habeat. l. 31 §. prim. Π. de acquir. rerum Dom. Neere vnto which definition commeth Bracton. lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 3. num. 4. And this treaſure

found, though the ciuill lawe do giue it to the finder, according to the lawe of nature; yet the lawe of England, giueth it to the King by his prerogatiue, as appeareth by Bracton vbi ſupra. And therefore as he alſo ſaith in the ſixth chapter, it is the Coroners office to enquire therof by the countrie to the Kings vſe. And Stawn. pl. cor. lib. pr. cap. 42. ſaith, that in auncient times, it was doubtfull, whether the concealing of treaſure found were felonie, yea or not: and that Bracton calleth it grauem praeſumptionem, & quaſi crimen furti. But the puniſhment of it at theſe dayes, as he proueth out of Fitzh. Abridgment. pag. 187. is impriſonment, and fine, and not life and member. And if the owner may any way be knowne, then doth it not belong to the kings prerogatiue. Of this you may reade Britton alſo; cap. 17. who ſaith, that it is euery ſubiects part, as ſoone as he hath found any treaſure in the earth, to make it knowne to the Coroner of the countrie, or to the Bayliffes, &c. See Kitchin alſo, fol. 40.
               
                  Treaſurer, theſaurarius, commeth of the French (treſorier) i. quaeſtor, praefectus fiſci) and ſignifieth an Officer, to whom the treaſure of another, or others, is committed to be kept, and truly diſpoſed of. The chiefeſt of theſe with vs, is the Treaſurer of England, who is a Lord by his office, and one of the greateſt men of the land: vnder whoſe charge and gouernment is all the Princes wealth contained in the Exchequer, as alſo the checke of all Officers any way employed in the collecting of the Impoſts, tributes, or other reuenewes belonging to the Crowne. Smith de Repub. Anglor. lib. 2. cap. 14. more belonging to his office, ſee ann. 20 Ed. 3. cap. 6. & anno 31. H. 6. cap. 5. & anno 4. Ed. 4. cap. pri. & anno 17. eiuſdom. cap. 5. & anno prim. R. 2. cap. 8. & anno 21. H. 8. cap. 20. & anno prim. Ed. 6. cap. 13. Ockams Lucubrations affirme, that the Lord chiefe Iuſtice had this authoritie in times paſt: and of him hath theſe words: Iſte excellens Seſſor omnibus, quae in inferrore vel ſuperiore ſcacchio ſunt, proſpicit. Ad nutum ipſius quaelibet officia ſubiecta diſponuntur: ſic tamen vt ad Domini Regis vtilitatem iuſte perueniant: Hic tamen inter caetera videtur excellens, quod poteſt his ſub teſtimonio ſuo breve Domini Regis facere fieri, vt de theſauro quaelibet ſumma liberetur, vel vt computetur quod ſibi ex Domini Regis mandato praenouerit computandum, vel ſi maluerit, breve ſuum ſub aliorum teſtimonio faciet de his rebus.
                  
This high Officer hath by vertue of his office at this day, the nomination of the Eſcheatours yeerely throughout England, and giueth the places of all cuſtomers, controllers, and ſearchers in all the ports of the Realme. He ſitteth in the chequer chamber, and with the reſt of the court, ordereth things to the Kings beſt benefite. He with the Barons may by ſtatute ſtall depts of three hundred pounds and vnder. And by commiſſion from his maieſtie, he with others ioyned with him, letteth leaſes for liues or yeares, of the lands that came to the Crowne by the diſſolution of Abbeys. He by his office giueth warrant to certaine men to haue their wine without impoſt. He taketh declaration of all the money payed into the Receipt of the Exchequer, and of all Receiuers accompts.
               Then is there a Treaſurer of the kings houſhold, who is alſo of the priuie Councell, and in the abſence of the Steward of the Kings houſhold, hath power with the Controller and the Steward of the Marſhalſea, without commiſſion to heare and determine treaſons, miſpriſions of treaſons, murder, homicide, and bloudſhed, committed within the Kings pallace. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 5. In the ſtatute anno 28. Rich. 2. cap. 18. & anno 11. H. 7. cap. 16. mention is made of the Treaſurer of Calis. In Weſtm. 2. cap. 8. of the Treaſurer of the Exchequer. & anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 18. & ann. 35. Eliz. cap. 4. Of the Treaſurer of the Nauie, or Treaſurer of the warres or garriſons of the Nauie. anno 39. El. cap. 7. Treaſurer of the Kings chamber. anno 26. H. 8. cap. 3. & anno 33 eiuſdem cap. 39. Treaſurer of the warres. anno 7. H. 7. cap. prim. anno 3. H. 8. cap. 5. Treaſurer of the Chauncerie. West. parte 2. ſymbol. titulo Fines. ſect. 152. Treaſurer of the Kings Wardrobe. anno 15. Ed. 3. ſtat. prim. cap. 3. & anno 25. eiuſdem, ſtat. 5. cap. 21. whoſe office you haue well ſet foorth in Fleta, lib. 2. cap. 14. Treaſurer of the Countie for poore ſouldiers. anno 35. Eliz. cap. 4. And moſt corporations through the kingdome, haue an officer of this name, that receiueth their rents, and disburſeth their common expences.
               
                  Treate commeth of the French (traire. i. emulgere) and ſignifieth in the common lawe, as much as taken out, or withdrawne. As a Iurour was chalenged, for that hee might not diſpend 40. pounds, and for that cauſe he was treate by the Statute. old na. br. fol. 159. that is, remoued or diſcharged.

                  Breade of treate, anno 51. H. 3. Statute of breade, &c. what it ſignifieth, I cannot learne.
               
                  Treſpas (Tranſgreſſio) is a French word ſignifiing as much as Mors, obitus, exceſſiss. The reaſon whereof I take to be, becauſe in interpretation it is a paſſage from one place or eſtate to another: for in Britton, cap. 29. I find treſpaſſants for paſſengers. In our common law and language, it is vſed for any tranſgreſſion of the lawe, vnder treaſon, felonie, or miſpriſion of treaſon, or of felonie, as may be gathered out of Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 38. where he ſaith, that for a Lord of the Parlament to depart from the Parlament without the kings licence, is neither treaſon nor felonie, but treſpaſſe. And againe, fol. 31. ſaying, that where it was wont before the ſtatute made anno prim. Ed. 2. called Statutum de frangentibus priſonam, that the breach of priſon was felonie, if it were the Kings priſon: it is ſithence but treſpaſſe, except the priſoner were committed for felonie. But it is moſt commonly vſed for that wrong or dammage, which is done by a priuate man to the King, as in his Foreſt, pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 18. or to another priuate man. And in this ſignification it is of two ſortes: treſpaſſe generall, otherwiſe termed, treſpaſſe vi & armis: and treſpaſſe eſpeciall, otherwiſe called treſpaſſe vpon the caſe. And this ſeemeth to be without force. Termes of the Lawe. Action vpon the caſe, as appeareth by Kitchin, fol. 176. The former I take to be called generall, becauſe it riſeth from that generall ground in lawe, that whatſoeuer is done by any priuate mans humour vi & armis, is an offence. The later I call eſpeciall, becauſe Kitchin calleth the other generall: and another reaſon may be this, becauſe it ſpringeth from a particular caſe or fact, not conteined vnder any other generall head. And the action lying for this treſpaſſe, is otherwiſe called an action vpon the caſe, as may be gathered out of diuers places vnder the title Treſpaſſe, in Brookes his Abridgement. How to diſtinguiſh the forme of theſe writs or actions, See Fitz. nat. br. fol. 86. I. & 87. H. I. In an action of treſpaſſe, this is perpetuall, that the plaintiffe ſieweth for dammages, or the valew of the hurt cone vnto him by the Defendant. It ſeemeth an hard thing to diſtinguiſh theſe two kinds of treſpaſſes ſo, as to be able to ſay when it is a treſpaſſe vi & armis, and when vpon the caſe: as may well appeare to him that ſhall peruſe this title in Brooke. But this is to be left to the experiēce

of graue and skilfull pleaders. I find moreouer in Kitchin, fol. 188 that there is a treſpaſſe locall, and treſpaſſe tranſitorie: treſpaſſe locall is that, which is ſo annexed to a place certaine, as if the Defendant ioyne iſſue vpon the place, and trauers the place, onely by ſaying, Abſque hoc, that he did the treſpaſſe in the place mentioned in the declaration, and averre it, it is enough to defeate the action. Treſpaſſe tranſitorie is that, which cannot be defeated by the defendants trauers of the place, ſaying: without that I cō
                  mitted the treſpaſſe in the place declared: becauſe the place is not materiall. Examples of both you haue ſet downe by Kitchin, in the place aboue named, to this effect: trauers by (Abſque hoc) of treſpaſſe in batterie, or goods brought in, is tranſitorie, and not locall: as it is of trees cut, or herbes.
               And therefore in treſpaſſe tranſitorie the place ſhall not make iſſue, neither is it trauerſable: no more then is a treſpaſſe vpon a caſe of an Aſſumption. Bracton in his fourth booke, cap. 34. num. 6. diuideth tranſgreſſionē in maiorem & minorem: which place reade. See alſo great diuerſitie of treſpaſſes in the new booke of Entries. verbo Treſpaſſe.
               
               
                  Triall (triatio) is vſed in our common lawe, for the examination of all cauſes ciuill or criminall, according to the lawes of our Realme. Of this word Stawn. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. 26. writeth to this effect. There was a ſtatute made prim. & ſecund. Philip. & Mar. cap. 10. to this purpoſe. And be it furder enacted by the authoritie aforeſaid, that all trials hereafter to be had, awarded or made for any treaſon, ſhal be had and vſed according to the due order and courſe of the common lawes of this Realme, and not otherwiſe, &c. By this word (triall) ſaith Stawnf. in that place, ſome vnderſtand as well the inqueſt that indicteth a man as the enqueſt vpon the arraignment, that attainteth or acquiteth him. For theſe two make but one entire triall, that euery man is to haue, when he is impeached of treaſon. But others haue anſwered to this, that triall in common ſpeech, is the triall that a man is to haue, after he is indicted, and not before. For in lawe the inditement is nought, but the accuſation againſt him, which he is to make anſwer vnto and that being tried, it either attainteth, or acquiteth him. So that the triall is the iſſue, which is tried vpon the Inditement, & not the Inditement it ſelfe. For that is no part of the thing which trieth, but the thing which

is tried, and the offence. And ſo is this word Triall vnderſtood in the ſtatute, anno 33. H. 8. cap. 23. where it ſaith thus. muſt be indighted within the ſhires or places, where they committed their offences, and alſo tried by the Inhabitants, or feeeholders. So he putteth a differen ce betwene Inditement and Triall, as he doth alſo afterward in theſe words: There to be indited and tried of their offences, &c. Thus far: Stawnf. Sir. Tho. Smith de Rep. Anglo. li 2. ca 5. ſaieth, that by order and vſage of England, there are three trialls, that is. 3. waies and maners, whereby abſolute, and definite Iudgement is giuen: by Parlament, which is the higheſt, and moſt abſolute. by battell and great Aſſiſe: which he ſeuerally deſcribeth in 3. chapters folowing, though not ſo fully as the thing requireth. But of the great Aſſiſe, he ſpeaketh at large in the 23. chapter of the ſame booke. And of theſe trials ſee more in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 2. cap. pri. 2. & 3. whereof he deuideth the great Aſſiſe into two ſorts: one proper to Baro
                     •
                   of the Parlament, which is by 20. or 18. of their Peeres: the other common to others of lower condition, which is by 12. men, that be neighbours to the place where the offence was committed, And of thoſe you may read him at large in the ſaide chapters there following. See Twelue men. See the new booke of Entriſe. verbo. Triall.
               
               
                  Trihing (Trihinga, vel Trithinga) ſeemeth by a place in Edward the confeſſours lawes, ſet out by M. Lamberd, nu. 34. to be the third part of a ſhire or prouince, otherwiſe called (Leth) which we now call (Leete). The ſame lawe doth M. Camden alſo mention, pag. 102. & 103. This court is ahoue a court Baron, and inferiour to the Shire, or countie. This word is alſo vſed in the ſentence of excommunication vpon the great Charter and charter of the Foreſt. denounced in the daies of Edward the firſt, as it is latined in the booke called pupilla oculi. parte 5. cap. 22. A. I. in theſe words: Viſus autem de franco plegio ſic fiat, ſc: quòd pax noſtra teneatur, & quod Trihing a integra ſit, ſicut eſſe conſueuit, &c. Of this Fleta lib. 2. cap. 61. §. final. writeth thus; Sciendum eſt quod al
                        ••
                      poteſtates erant ſuper Wapentakia, quae Tritinga dicebantur, eo quòd erat tertia pars prouinciae, qni verò ſuper eas dominabantur, trithingreves vocabantur, quibus deferebantur cauſa quae non in Wapentakiis poterant definiri in Schiram Sic
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      quòd vocatur

Hundredum, iam per variationem locorum & idiomatis, Wapentakie appellatur, & tria vel quatuor velplura Hundreda ſolebant trithinga vocari: & quod in trithingis non poterant diffiniri in ſhiram. i. in comitatum deferebatur terminandū. Modernis autem temporibus pro vno & eodē habentur apud homines Hundreda Wapentakia & trithinga Learne whether thoſe diuiſions in Yorke-ſhire called ridings, be not quaſitrithings. Of this Roger Houeden parte poſt. ſuorum annal. fo. 346. b. hath the ſame words in effect.
               
                  Treſwell of double ſoled ſhooes, anno 2. & 3. Ed. 6. cap. 9. which as I haue heard ſhould rather be written creſwel, ſignifieth the broad edge or verge of the ſhoe ſole round about.
               
                  Trinitie honſe, is a certaine houſe at Deptford which belongeth to a companie or corporation of ſea-faring men that haue power by the Kings Charter to take knowledge of thoſe that deſtroy ſea markes, and to redreſſe their doings, as alſo to correct the faults of ſaylers, &c. and to take care of diuers other things belonging to nauigation and the ſeas. v. anno 8. Elizab. ca. 13. & anno 35. eiuſdem, ca. 6.
               
                  Trink, is a kind of net to fiſh withall. anno 2. H. 6. cap. 15.
               
                  Triours, be ſuch as be choſen by the court to examine whether a challenge made to the panell, or any of the panell, be iuſt yea, or not. Brooke titulo. Chalenge. f. 122. & ould na. br f. 158.
               
                  Tritis, aliás Triſtis, is an immunitie from that attendance, in the foreſt, whereby euery man dwelling in the foreſt, is tyed to be readie, houlding of a Greyhound, when the Lord of the Foreſt is diſpoſed to chace within his Foreſt, at ſuch place as he ſhall be appointed, or els to be amerced for dis default. Manwood parte pri. of his forest lawes. pag. 86. and Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 192. & 197.
               
                  Tronage (Tronagium) is a kind of tolle, Weſtm. 2. cap. 25. anno 13. Ed. 1. taken (as it ſeemeth) for weying. For I find in Fleta li. 2. cap. 12. §. Item vlnas that trona is a beame to weigh with. See Weight.
               
               
                  Trover, commeth of the French (Trouver. i. Invenire) It ſignifieth in our common lawe, an action which a man hath againſt one that hauing found any of his goods, refuſeth to deliuer them vpō demaund. See the new bookof Entries ver. Trover.
               
               
                  Troy weight (Pondus Troiae) See Weight.
               
               
                  Tumbrell (Tumbrellum) is an engine of puniſhment, which ought to be in euery libertie that hath view of frank pledge,

for the coertion of skowldes and vnquiet women, Kitchin. fo. 13. a. Newe booke of Entries. Franchiſe 2. & Quo warranto. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . See Cucking ſtoole.
               
               
                  Tunne, is a meaſure of oile or wine conteining twelue ſcore and twelue gallons, anno 
                        〈◊〉
                     . R. 3. cap. 12. that is 4. hogſheads.
               
                  Tunnage. See Tonnage.
               
               
                  Turbarie (Turbaria) is an intereſt to digge turves vpon a common. Kitchin, fol. 94. old. not. br. fol. 70. It commeth of the rude Latine word (Turba) which is vſed for a turfe. Lynd, in provin. de de
                        •
                     imis cap. finali
                        •
                     
                  
               
               
                  Turmerick (Turmerica) is a certaine roote of an herb growing in Arabia, as I haue bene informed, very wholſome for diuers diſeaſes in horſes, and ſometime vſed for man alſo in the caſe of ieandes. It is reckoned among the garbleable drugs anno 1. Iaco. ca. 19.
               
                  Turne (Turnum) is the Shyreeues court kept euery yeare twice: once after Faſter, and againe after Micheelmas. Magna charta cap. 35. and that within one moneth after each feaſt, anno 3. Ed. 3. c. 15. from this court are exempted onely, Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Abbots, Priors, Earles, Barons, all religious men, and women, and all ſuch as haue Hundreds of their owne to be kept. And theſe are not bound to appeare there except their apparence be eſpecially required vpon ſome extraordinary cauſe, anno 25. H. 3. cap. 10. and Britton, cap. 29. It ſeemeth to be called the Shyreeues Turn of the French word (Tour. i. ambitus. circuitus, viciſſitudo) and is of Britton called Tour, cap. 61. ſub fine capitis, as if we would ſay (The Shyreeue his courſe) for (as Britton noteth in the ſaid 29. chapter) that which before the Shyreeue, is called the Shyreeues Turne, is called in the court of Fraunchiſes and Hundreds, the view of Frank-pledge: wherein inquirie is eſpecially made of ſuch as be not in any dozin. with whome Fleta agreeth: And by Fleta it appeareth that this Turn was the Shyreeues courſe to keepe his courtin euery Hundred. lib. 2. cap. 52. in princip. So that as the inferiour courts had their times to take knowledge of thoſe, and other cauſes belonging to their cogniſance: So the Shyreeue had his courſe or turne to doe the like at theſe two ſeuerall ſeaſons. That if there were any defects in them, it might be redreſſed in theſe, and Gods peace and the Kings ſo much the more carefully obſerued. This, as Lamberd ſaith, was of old called

alſo the Shyreeues moote, lib. 4. cap. 4. In this court (as Britton ſaith vbiſupra ) the Shyreeue cauſeth tobe found out 12. of the moſt ſage, loyall and ſufficient men of all the Hundred (for he kept his turne twice every yeare in each Hundred. Magna charta, cap. 35. & Britton vbi ſupra) whome he charged vpon their oathes, to preſent the truth touching the articles miniſtred vnto them, and ſet downe by Britton in the ſame chapter. This done he put all other to their oathes, according to their dozins and villages; truly to preſent vnto the former twelue all things concerning ſuch articles, as by them they ſhould be asked of. But fithence the Hundred courts are all called to the county by the ſtatute anno. 14. Ed. 3. cap. 3. Statut. pri. theſe Turnes be likewiſe kept in one cheife place of euery ſhire; and not ſeuerally in euery Hundred, as before they were. Of this you may reade more in Britton or in Cromptons Iuriſdiction fol. 230. and in the Mirrour of Iustices, lib. pri. cap. de Turnes.
               
               
                  Turney (Torneamentum) commeth of the French (Tournoy. i. Decurſorium) It ſignifieth a martiall exerciſe of Knights or Souldiers fighting one with another in diſport, and is thus defined. ca
                        •
                      felicit Extra de Torneamentis Torneamenta dicuntur Nundinae vel feriae, in quibus milites ex condicto convenire, & ad oftentationem virium ſuarum, & audaciae, temerè congredi ſolent. This word is vſed in the ſtatute, anno. 24. Henric. octau. capit. 13. and as I haue heard, it ſignifieth with vs in England thoſe combats, that are made with arming ſwords on horſebacke. And I thinke the reaſon of the name to proceede from the French (Tourner. i. vertere) becauſe it conſiſteth much in agilitie both of horſe and man.
               
                  Turno vececomitum, is a writ, that lyeth for thoſe that are called to the Shyreeues turne out of their owne Hundred. Regiſter orig. fol. 174.
               
                  Tuain nithes geſt. (hoſpes duarum noctium) Roger Houeden, parte poſter ſuorum annalium, fol. 345. b. who if he did harme to any, his hoſte was not aunſwerable for it, but himſelfe. See Thrid nithes hawan man.
               
               
                  Twelue men (Duodecim homines legales) is a number of twelue perſons, or vp wards to the number of 24. by whoſe diſcretion all tryals paſſe both in ciuill and criminall cauſes, through all courts of the common law in this Realme. Firſt for ciuile cauſes, when proofe is made of the

mater in queſtion, as the parties and their councell thinke good, on both ſides, the point of the fact, that they are to giue their verdict of, is deliuered likewiſe vnto them, which we call the iſſue: and then are they put in minde of their oath formerly taken, to doe right betweene party and party, and ſo ſent out of the court ſeuerally by themſelues to conſider vpon the evidence of both ſides, vntill they be agreed; which done they returne to the court againe, and deliuer their verdict by the mouth of the foreman. And according to this verdict, Iudgement afterward paſſeth, either condemnatorie for the plantife, or abſolutory for the Defendant. Theſe 12. be called 12. milites. Glanuilo, lib. 2. cap. 14. & 15. and ſo be they in Bracton diuers times: but that word is altered.
               In cauſes criminall there be two ſorts of Enqueſts, one called the graund Enqueſt, and the other the Enqueſt of life and death. The graund Enqueſt is ſo called, either becauſe it conſiſteth commonly of a greater number then 12. as of 24. 18. or 16. at the leaſt, or els becauſe all cauſes criminall or penall firſt paſſe through them: whereas the other Enqueſt is eſpecially appointed for one or few maters touching life and death, committed to their conſiderations. Thoſe of the grand Enqueſt are alſo called by Bracton 12. milites lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap. pri. nu. 2. becauſe they were wont to be Knights, as it ſee. meth, and not inferiours, except ſo many knights could not be found. Idem eodem. num. 1. in fine. And their function is to receiue all preſentments made vnto them of any offence, and accordingly to giue their generall opinion of the preſentment by writing either theſe words (Balla vera) vpon the bille of preſentment, which is an Inditement of the party preſented: or els this word (Ignoramus) which is an abſoluing of him. Now as criminall cauſes be of two ſortes, either capitall touching life and member, or finable: ſo is there a double courſe of theſe Inditements. For in cauſes onely finable, the party indited muſt either trauers the Inditement by denying it and ſo it is referred to a petit Iury, whereby he is either conuicted or diſcharged of the crime, or els he confeſſing it, the court ſetteth his fine vpon his head wirhout more worke. But in maters of life and death, the party indited is commaunded to hold vp his hād, & āſwer (guilty) or (not guilty) if (guilty) he ſtandeth conuicted by his owne confeſſion:

if (not guilty) he is farder referred to the Enqueſt of life and death: which conſider vpon the proofe brought againſt the priſoner, and accordingly bring in their verdict, (Guilty) or (not Guilty) So is he iudged to dye, or deliuered by the court. Of this read more in Iuditement. Aſſiſe, Iury, See the ſtatute anno 35. H. 8. cap. 6. & 37. ciuſdem cap, 22. & anno 2. Ed. 6 cap. 32. & an. 5. El. ca. 25.
            
            
               V
               
                  VAcation (vacatio) hath an eſpeciall ſignification in this kingdome, being vſed for all that time reſpectiuely which paſſeth betweene terme and terme at London. And when ſuch times begunne and ended in our annceſters daies, ſee Roger Hovedens annals parte poſteriori fo. 343. a. where you ſhall find that this intermiſſion was called (pax Dei & eccleſiae.)
               
               
                  Vaccarie, aliâs vacharie (vaccaria, aliâs vacheria) ſemeth to be a houſe to keepe kine in, Fleta lib. 2. cap. 41. §. Item inquiratur 12. and Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 194. in theſe words: without warrant no ſubiect may haue within the Foreſt a vacarie. But in the ſtatute anno 37. H. 8. cap. 16. I finde vacharie to be, as it were a ſpeciall proper name of a certaine quantitie and compaſſe of ground within the foreſt of Aſhedowne.
               
               
                  Valewe (valentia, valor) The word is in it ſelfe plaine enough: But I cannot omitte one place in M. Weſt. parte. 2. ſymbol. titulo Inditements, ſect. 70. V. W. touching the difference betweene value and price. Theſe be his words, And the value of thoſe things, in which offences are committed, is vſually compriſed in Inditements, which ſeemeth neceſſary in theſt, to make a difference from perit larceny: and in treſpas, to aggrauate the faulte, and increaſe the fine. But no price of rhings ferae naturae, may be expreſſed, as of deere, of hares &c. if they be not in Parks and warrens, which is a liberty anno 8. Ed. 4. fol. 5. nor of charters of land. And where the number of the things taken are to be expreſſed in the Inditement, as of yong Doucs in a Doue houſe, yong haukes in a wood, there muſt be ſaide (pretii) or (ad valentiam) but of diuers deade things (ad valentiam) and not (pretii) of coine not current, it ſhalbe (pretii) but of co
                     •
                  ne current, it ſhall neither be ſaide (pret
                        •
                     ) nor (ad valentiam) for the price and value thereof is certaine. But of counterfeit coine, ſhall bee ſaid (ad valentiam) and in couterfeiting of coine ſhall not be ſaid (decem libras in denariis

Dominae Reginae) nor (in pecunia Dominae Reginae) but (ad inſtar pecuniae Dominae Reginae).
               
               
                  Valour of mariage (Valore maritagii) is a writ that lyeth for the Lord, hauing profered covenable mariage to the Infant, without diſparidgement, againſt the Infant, comming to his yeares, if he refuſe to take the Lords offer. And it is to recouer the value of the mariage, Regiſt. orig. fol. 164. old. nat. br. fol. 90.
               
                  Variance, commeth of the French (varier. i. alter are) it ſignifieth in the common lawe, an alteration, or change of condition after a thing done. For example, the communality of a towne make a compoſition with an Abbot. Afterward this towne by a graunt from the king obteineth Bayliffes. This is a variance, and in this caſe, if the Abbotcōmence any ſuite for breach of the compoſition, he muſt varie from the words of the communalty ſet downe in the Compoſition, and begin againſt the Bayliffes and the Communalties. Brooke tit. Variance. fol. 292. It is alſo vſed for an alteration of ſome thing formerly laide in a plee, which is eaſilier knowne what it is, then when it may be vſed as it appeareth by Brooke through the whole title aforeſaide: See variance in the newe booke of Entries.
               
               
                  Vaſſall, (vaſſallus) ſignifieth him, that holdeth land in ſee of his Lord, Hot. verbo Feudal: we call him more vſually a tenent in fee: whereof ſome owe fidelitie and ſeruice, and are called vaſſalli iurati: ſome that owe neither, and are called vaſſalli iniurati. But of this later ſort, I thinke that in England we haue not any. Of theſe thus writeth Hotoman in his diſputations vpon the Feuds, cap. 3. Propriè is vaſſa dicitur, qui ab Imperatore regale feudum accepit, vaſſallus autem 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  diminutivo nomine qui ab illo feudale beneficium adeptus est: quaſi qui in vaſſi fide & clientela eſt &c. M. Skene de verbor. ſignif. verb. Ligentia, ſaith, that vaſſallus is diuided into homologum, & non homologum. Homologus is he that ſweareth ſeruice with exception of a higher Lord: and non homologus, is he that ſweareth with out exception, all one with Ligeus. And the ſame author verb. Vaſſallus, ſaith, that it is vaſſallus, quaſibaſſallus, id eſt, inferior ſoctus. From the French (bas. i. humilis, dimiſſus) and the Dutch word (geſel. i. ſocius:) his reaſon is, becauſe the vaſſall is inferior to his maſter, and muſt ſerue and reuerence him: and yet he is in maner his companion, becauſe each of them is obliged

one to the other. He ſaith farder out of Cuiacius, lib. prim. de Feud. that leades, leodes, fideles, homines noſtri, feudatarii, miniſteriales, beneficiarii, beneficiati, vaſſalli, ſignifie almoſt all one thing. And a litle after he ſaith thus: In the lawes of the Feuds, vaſſallus is called fidelis, quia fidelitatem iurat. Amongſt vaſſals the firſt place of dignitie is giuen to them, that are Duces, Marchion
                        •
                     s, Comites, and are called Cap
                        •
                     tanti Regni. The ſecond is granted to Barons and others of like eſtate, and are called Valvaſores Maiores. The third to them who are called Gentlemen or Nobles holding of Barons, which alſo may haue vnder them vaſſals that be Gentlemen. And ſuch vaſſals holding in chiefe of Barons, are called Valv aſo
                     
                        •
                     ts minores. And they which hold of Gentlemen, are called vaſſalli, valvaſſini, ſeu minimi valvaſores. But in this Realm (he ſpeaketh of Scotland) they that hold of Barons, are called Milites, and they that hold of them, are called ſubvaſſores. Thus fa
                     •
                  e M. Skene.
               
               
                  Vaſto, is a writ that lyeth for the heire againſt the tenent for terme of life or of yeares, for making waſte, or for him in the Reuerſion or Remainder. Fitzh. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . br. fol. 55. Regiſt. orig. fol. 72. & 76. and Regiſt. Iudic. fol. 17. 21. 23. & 69. v. anno 6. Ed. pricap. 5.
               
                  Vavaſour (vavaſor, aliâs, valvaſor) is one that in dignitie is next vnto Baron. Camden Britan. pag. 109. Bracton lib. prim. cap. 8 ſaith thus of this kind of men. Sunt & alii potentes ſub Rege, qui dicuntur Barones, hoc eſt, robur belli: ſunt & alii qui dicuntur Vavaſores, viri magnae dignitatis. Vavaſor enim, nihil meliùs dici poterit, quàm vas ſortitum ad valetudinem. Iacobutius de Franchis in praeludio Feudorum. tit. prim. num. 4. &c. calleth them valvaſores, and giueth this reaſon of it: Quia aſſident valva i. portae Domini in feſtis, in quibus conſueueruat homines curtizare & eis reuerentiam exhibere, propter Beneficium eis collatum, ſicut libertus patrono: M. Camden. in his Britan. pag. 108. hath theſe words of them. Primus etiam Normannorum temporibus, & Thani proximi à Comitibus in dignitate cenſebantur. Et valvaſores maiores (ſi illis qui de feudis ſcribunt credimus) iidem fuerunt Barones.
               
               
                  Venditioni exponas, is a writ Iudiciall, directed to the Vnderſhyreeue, commaunding him to ſell goods that he hath formerly by commaundement taken into his hands, for the ſatisfying of a iudgement giuen in the kings Court. Regiſter Iudicial. fol. 33. b.
               
               
                  
                  Venire facias, is a writ Iudicall, and goeth out of the Record, lying where two parties plead and come to iſſue. ſc: vpon the ſaying of the country. For then the party plaintiffe, or Defendant ſhall haue this writ directed to the Shyreeue, that he cauſe to come twelue lawfull men of the ſame country, to ſay the truth vpon the ſayd iſſue taken. And if the Enqueſt come not at the day of this writ returned, then ſhall goe a habeas corpora, and after a diſtreſſe vntill they come. old. nat. br. fol. 157. See how diuerſly this writ is vſed in the table of the Regiſter Iudiciall. There is alſo a writ of this name, that is originall, as appeareth in the Regiſter orig. fol. 200. b. which M. Lamberd in his proceſſes annexed to his Eirenarcha ſaith to be the common proces vpon any preſentment not being felony, nor eſpecially appointed for the fault preſented by ſtatute. Whereof he ſetteth downe an example in the ſame place. See alſo the new booke of Entries. verbo Enqueſt fol. 253. columna. 1. 2. & 3.
               
                  Venire facias tot matronas. See Ventre inſpiciendo. See Lamb. Eirenarcha, li. 4. ca. 14. pa. 532.
               
                  Venew (vicinetum) is taken for a neighbour or neare place. As for example twelue of the Aſſiſe ought to be of the ſame Venew where the Demaund is made. old. nat. br. fol. 115. and in the ſtatute anno 4. H. 4. ca. 26. & anno 25. H. 8. ca. 6. I finde theſe words: And alſo ſhall returne in euery ſuch panell vpon the (venire facias) ſixe ſufficient Hundreders at the leaſt, if there be ſo many within the Hundred, where the Venew lyeth.
               
                  Ventre inſpiciendo, is a writ for the ſearch of a woman that faith ſhee is with childe, and thereby withhouldeth land from him that is the next heire at the common law. Regiſter originall fol. 227. a.
               
               
                  Verdour (viridarius) commeth of the French (verdior. i. Saltuarius, vel cuſtos nemoris) he is (as M. Manwood parte pri: of his foreſt lawes pag. 332. defineth him) a Iudiciall officer of the Kings foreſt, choſen by the King, in the full county of the ſame ſhire, within the foreſt, where he doth dwell, and is ſworne to maintaine, and keepe the Aſſiſes of the foreſt, and alſo to view, receiue, and inrolle, the Attachments and preſentments of all maner of treſpaſſes of the foreſt of vert, and veniſon. And the ſame authour vpon the firſt artitle of Canutus charter, in the beginning of the ſame part, ſaith, that theſe in the Saxons times were called (Pagened) being foure in number, and they

chiefe men of the foreſt as then they were. Their fee was in Canutus time, each of them euery yeare of the Kings allowance, two horſes, one of them with a ſaddle, another of them without a ſaddle, one ſword, fiue Iauelins, one ſpeare, one ſhield, and ten pounds in money. Theſe foure (as appeareth by the ſaid charter, nu. 11.) had regalem poteſtatem, and might proceede to a threefold iudgement: And if any man offered them, or any of them violence, if he were a free man, he ſhould looſe his freedome, and all that he had: if a villein, he ſhould looſe his right hand. All the officers of the foreſt were to be corrected and puniſhed by them. ibidem, nu. 10. The verdour is made by the Kings writ. Cromptons Iuriſd: fol: 165. the forme of which writ you haue in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 164. which is directed to the Shyreeue for the choice of him in a full County, by the aſſent of the ſaid County. Yet if a verdour bee ſodainely ſicke or dead at the time of the Iuſtice ſeate, a new may be choſen without a writ. Manwood parie prim. pag. 72. the office is (as Crompton ſaith) loco allegato) properly to looke to the vert, and to ſee that it be wel maintained. Alſo when any forfeiture is taken in the Foreſt before the Foriſters, or other miniſters: the price thereof ſhall be deliuered to the verdour, who is to anſwer for it before the Iuſtices in Eyre. And if he die, his heire is chargeable therewith. Crompton ibidem. The forme of his oath at his admittance you may ſee in Manwoods firſt part of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 51. who there calleth him verderour, aliâs, verdictor. You ſhall truly ſerue our Soueraigne Lord the King in the office of a verderor of the Foreſt W. you ſhall to the vttermoſt of your power, and knowledge, do for the profit of the King, ſo farre as it doth apperteine vnto you to do. You ſhall preſerue and maintaine the auncient rights and franchiſes of his Crowne: you ſhall not conceale from his Maieſtie any rights or priuiledges, nor any offence either in vert or veniſon, or any other thing. You ſhall not withdraw, nor abridge any defaults, but ſhal endeuour your ſelfe to manifeſt and redreſſe the ſame, and if you cannot doe that of your ſelfe, you ſhall giue knowledge thereof vnto the King, or vnto his Iuſtice of the Foreſt. You ſhall deale indifferently with all the Kings liege people: you ſhall execute the lawes of the Foreſt, and do equall right and iuſtice, as well vnto the poore, as vnto the rich

in that appertaineth vnto your office: you ſhall not oppreſſe any perſon by colour thereof, for any reward, fauour or malice. All theſe things you ſhall to the vttermoſt of your power obſerue and keepe. Their office is farder expreſſed, eodem pag. 93. which is to ſit in the court of attachment, to ſee the attachments of the Foreſt, to receiue the ſame of the Foreſters and Woodwards, that do preſent them, and then to enter theſe Attachments into their rolles.
               
                  Verdict, (veredictum) is the anſwer of a Iurie or Enqueſt made vpon any cauſe ciuill or criminall, committed by the court to their conſideration or triall. And this verdict is two-fold: either generall or eſpeciall. Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 9. A general verdict is that, which is giuen or brought into the Court, in like generall termes to the generall iſſue: as in an action of diſſeiſin the Deſendant pleadeth, No wrong, no diſſeiſin. Then the iſſue is this in generall, whether the fact in queſtion be a wrong or not. And this committed to the Iurie, they vpon conſideration of their euidence, come in and ſay, either for the plaintiffe, that it is a wrong, and diſſeiſin: or for the Defendant, that it is no wrong, no diſſeiſin. And againe, the priſoner at the barre pleading, Not guiltie: the Enqueſt in like generall termes bring in their verdict, either for the King, Cuilty, or for the priſoner, Not guilty. A ſpeciall verdict is that, whereby they ſay at large, that ſuch a thing, and ſuch, they find to be done by the Defendant, or Tenent, ſo declaring the courſe of the fact, as in their opinions it is proued: and for the qualitie of the fact, they pray the diſcretion of the Court. And this ſpeciall verdict, if it containe any ample declaration of the cauſe, from the beginning to the end, is alſo called a verdict at large. Whereof reade diuers examples in Stawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 9. and one or two in Litleton. fol. 78. & 79. See the new booke of Entries, verb. Verdict.
               
               
                  Verge (virgata) may ſeeme to come from the French (verger i. viridarium, hortus.) It is vſed here in England for the compaſſe about the Kings court, that boundeth the iuriſdiction of the Lord Steward of the Kings houſhold, and of the the Coroner of the Kings houſe, and that ſeemeth to haue bene 12. miles compaſſe. anno 13. R. 2. Stat. prim. cap. 3. & Fitz. nat. br. fol. 241. B. and Britton. fol. 68 b. 69. a. and Fleta lib. 2. cap. 2. and Sir Edward Cookes Reports. li. 4. fol. 47. a. For this ſee the Statute

                  anno 33. H. 8. cap. 12. toward the end. But Fleta ſaith, that this compaſſe about the Court is called virgata, a virga, quam Mariſhallus portat vt ſignū ſuae poteſtatis. lib. 2. cap. 4. §. prim. Verge hath alſo another ſignification, and is vſed for a ſticke, or rodde, whereby one is admitted tenent, and holding it in his hand ſweareth fealtie vnto the Lord of a maner: who for that cauſe is called Tenent by the verge. old nat. br. fol. 17.
               
                  Vergers, (virgatores) be ſuch as cary white wands before the Iuſtices of either banke, &c. Fleta lib. 2. cap. 38. otherwiſe called Porters of the verge.
               
                  Very Lord, and very Tenent (verus Dominus, & verus Tenens) are they that be immediate Lord & Tenent one to the other; Brooke. titulo, Hariot. fol. 23. In the old nat. br. and in the writ (Replegiare de averits. fol. 42. I find theſe words: And know ye that in taking of leaſes, ſix things are neceſſarie: that is to ſay, very Lord and very tenent, Seruice behind, the day of the taking, ſeiſin of the ſeruices, and within his Fee. And know ye, that a man is not very tenent, vntill he haue atturned to the Lord by ſome ſeruices. So that by Brooke, the very Lord, and the very Tenent, muſt be immediate, and by this booke there muſt be an acknowledgement. See an. 19. H. 7. cap. 15. See Tenent.
               
               
                  Vert, (viride) is made of the French (verd. i. viridis) and ſignifieth with vs in the lawes of the Foreſt, euery thing that doth growe, and beare greene leafe, within the Foreſt, that may couer and hide a Deere. Manwood in the ſecond part of his Foreſt lawes, fol. 6. a. and fol. 33. b. (with whom alſo Crompton agreeth, fol. 170. of his Iuriſd.) And vert (as the ſame author ſaith, eodem, fol. 34.) is diuided into Ouer vert, and Neather vert. Ouer vert, is that, which the Lawyers call (Hault bois) and Neather vert, is that which they cal (South bois.) And of this you may reade him in his ſecond part of Foreſt lawes. cap. 6. per totum. Where you ſhall find, that he diuideth vert into generall, and ſpeciall: Generall is, as it is aboue defined: vert ſpeciall, is euery tree and buſh within the Foreſt to feed the Deere withall: as Peare trees, Crabtrees, Hauthornes, Blackbuſh, and ſuch like. And the reaſon of this name is, becauſe the offence of deſtroying of ſuch vert, is more highly puniſhed, then of any other, according to the quantity thereof. eod ca. 6. nu. 2. fol. 35. a.
               
               
                  Verviſe, otherwiſe called Plonkets. anno. 1. R. 3. cap. 8. a kind of clothe.
               
                  
                  Veſſes. anno 1. R. 3. cap. 8. & anno 14. & 15. H. 8. cap. 11. otherwiſe called, Set clothes.
               
                  Vesture (veſtitura) is a French word ſignifying a garment: but in the vſe of our common lawe, turned metaphorically to betoken a poſſeſſion, or an admittance to a poſſeſſion. So it is taken, Weſtm. 2. c. 25. anno 13. Ed. prim. And in this ſignification is it borowed from the Feudiſts, with whom (Inveſtitura) ſignifieth a deliuerie of poſſeſſion by a ſpeare, or ſtaffe, and veſtitura, poſſeſſion it ſelfe. Hotoman. in verbis feudal. verbo Inveſtitura.
               
               
                  Vesture of an acre of land. an. 4. Ed. prim. ſtat. prim. is the profit of it. & anno 13. Edvard. 1. cap. 25.
               
                  Vice-treaſurer of the Exchequer 1. Iacob. 26. See Vnder-treaſurer of England. See Treaſurer of the Exchequer.
               
               
                  View of frank pledge, (viſus Franci plegii) is the office which the Shyrecue in his Countie court, or the Bayliffe in his Hundred, performeth in looking to the Kings peace, and ſeeing that euery free man be in ſome pledge. This is called of Bracton li. 2. ca. 5. nu. 7. in fine, Res quaſi ſacra, quia ſolam perſonam Regis reſpicit, & quòd introductus ſit pro pace & communi vtilitate. codem, ca. 16. nu. 8. in fine. See frank pledge, and Leete, and Decennier. See the new booke of Entries. verb: view of frank pledge.
               
               
                  Veiours (viſores) commeth of the French (Veoyr. i. cernere, intueri, deſpicere, proſpicere, videre) and ſignifieth in our common lawe thoſe, that are ſent by the court to take view of any place in queſtion, for the beter deſciſion of the right: old. nat. br. fol. 112. So doth Bracton, vſe it, lib. 5. tract. 3. cap. 8. per totum. It ſignifieth alſo thoſe, that are ſent to view ſuch as eſſoine themſelues de malo lecti, whether they be in truth ſo ſicke, as they cannot appeare, or whether they counterfeit. Bracton lib. 5. tracta. 2. cap. 10. & cap. 14. per totum. Laſtly it is vſed for thoſe that are ſent or appointed to view an offence, as a man murdered, or a Virgin rauiſhed. See View.
               
               
                  Vicario deliberando occaſione cuinſdam Recognitionis, &c. is a writ that lyeth for a ſpirituall perſon impriſoned vpon forfeiture of a Recogniſance, without the Kings writ. Reg. orig. fol. 147. See ſtatuto mercatorio contra perſonam eccleſiaſticam.
               
               
                  Vicis & venellis mundandis, is a writ that lyeth for a Maior and Bayliffes of a towne, &c. For the cleane keeping of their ſtreets. Regiſter orig. fol. 267. b.
               
               
                  View (viſus) commeth of the

French (veue. i. viſus, aſpectus, conſpectus, prospectus) and ſignifieth with vs, the act of viewers. For (as the author of the Termes of lawe ſaith) when any action reall is brought, and the Tenent knoweth not well what land it is, that the Demandant asketh, then he may pray the view: that is to ſay, that he may ſee the land, which is claimed: of this Britton ſpeaketh, cap. 45. This point of proceeding we haue receiued from the Normans, as it appeareth by the Grand cuſtumarie. cap. 66. where you ſhall reade to this effect. It is to be knowne that there bee diuers ſorts of viewes: one of a fee, another of a man in ſicknes, another of an offence, as of a man ſlaine, or of a Virgin deflowred: all which he deſcribeth in that place, and againe, cap. 80. & 96. which are worth the reading: this view at this day is vſed in an Aſſiſe of rent ſeruice, rent charge, or rent ſeck. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 178. D. and in a writ de Curiā claudenda. Idem, fol. 128. B. In a writ of Nuſance. Idem, fol. 183. L. N. O. In a writ Quoiure. Idem. fol. 128. L. In the writ de rationalibus diuiſis. Idem. fol. 129. D. And in the writ de ſecta ad moliendinum. Idēf. 123. B. See the new booke of Entries: verbo: View. and ſee Fleta how this view is made. lib. 4. ca. 6. See Veiours.
               
               
                  Vicechamberlaine, called vnderchamberlaine anno 13. R. 2. ſtat. 2. cap. 1. is a great officer in court next vnder the Lord Chamberlaine, and in his abſence, hath the command and controlmēt of all officers ſuperior & inferior whatſoeuer, appertaining to that part of his maieſties houſhold, which is called the chamber, wherein is included as well the bedde chamber, as the priuy chamber, the preſence and the great Chamber, and all other roomes, as galeries, &c. thereto belonging, with the Councell chamber, priuic cloſet, &c. And in the Lord Chamberlaines abſence he keepeth his table in the great chamber, commanding and overſeeing the attendance of all, to whome it appertaineth to be ready and waiting on his maieſtie going to the chapell, or to ſpeake with ambaſſadours, or els walking or riding forth.
               
                  Vicount, aliâs Viſcount (vicecomes) commeth of the French (vicompte. i. Procomes) and ſignifieth with vs as much as Shyreeue. Betweene which two words I finde no other difference, but that the one commeth from our Conquerours the Normans, and the other from our Aunceſters the Saxons, wherefore ſee

more of this in Shyreeue. Vicount alſo ſignifieth a degree of nobility next vnto an Earle, which (as M. Cam. Brita. p. 107. ſaith) is an old name of office, but a newe one of dignitie, neuer heard of amongſt vs, vntill Henry the ſixth his daies. But this degree of honour is more auncient farre in other countries. Caſſan in gloria mundi, parte 5. conſid. 55. whome you may reade.
               
                  Vicountie, is an adiectiue made of vicountiè, and ſignifieth as much, as belōging to the vicount; as writs vicountiel are ſuch writs as are triable in the countie or Shyreeues court. old. nat. br. fol. 109. Of this kinde you may ſee diuers writs of Nuſance ſet downe by Fitzh. in his nat. br. fol. 184. b. There be alſo certaine fermes called Vicountiels, which the Shyreeue for his time payeth a certaine rent for to the King, and maketh what profit he can of them. See the ſtatutes, anno 33. & 34. H. 8. ca. 16. & anno 2. & 3. Ed. 6. ca. 4. and anno 4. H. quint. capite ſecund.
               
               
                  Vilaica removenda, is a writ that lyeth for the remooving of forcible poſſeſſion of a benefice kept by lay men. And this writ is graunted ſome time vpon the Certificate of the Biſhop into the Chauncerie, that there is ſuch a force in his Dioces: ſome time vpon a ſurmiſe made there of by the Incumbent himſelfe, without the certificat of the Biſhop, and hath a ſeuerall forme for either caſe. Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 54. Regiſter orig. fol. 59. & 60.
               
                  Villanis Regis ſubtractis reducendis, is a writ that heth for the bringing back of the kings bondmen, that haue beene caried away by others out of his maners, wherevnto they belonged, Regiſter origin. fol. 87. b.
               
               
                  Villein (villanus) commeth of the French (vilain. i. illiberalis, impurus, vilis, turpis) and ſignifieth in our common lawe a bondman, or as much as Servus among the Ciuilians. Of theſe there be two ſorts in England, as Sir Tho. Smith ſaith in his repub. Anglo. li. 3. cap. 8. one termed a Villein in groſſe, which is immediately bound to the perſons of his Lord and his heires, the other a villein regardant to a maner, whome the Ciuilians terme (Glebae aſcriptitium) being bound to their Lord, as members belonging and annexed to ſuch a maner, whereof the Lord is owner. This diuiſion is affirmed by diuers places of our common lawe writers: as in the old. nat. br. fol. 8. You haue theſe words. Know ye that a woman ſhall

be indowed with a villein in groſſe, &c. and againe. fol. 39. If a man doe menace or threaten any villeins, which are regardant to a maner, &c. Bracton hath another diuiſion of villeins, which is all one with the Ciuilians. For in his firſt booke, cap. 6. nu. 4. he ſaith thus: Serui autem naſcuntur aut fiunt, and then thus goeth forward: Naſcuntur ex nativo & natiua alicuius copulatis vel ſolutis, ſive ſub poteſtate Domini conſtituti ſint, ſive extra poteſtatem. Item naſcitur ſeruus, qui ex natiua ſoluta generatur, quamvis ex patre libero: quia ſequitur conditionem matris quaſi vulgò conceptus, &c. And after diuers things deliuered of this ſort, he ſaith againe thus: Fiunt etiam ſervi liberi homines captivitate de iure Gentium: &c. Fit etiam ſervus liber homo pro confeſſionē in Curia Regis factam: vt cum liber homo ſit in Curia Regis, & ſe cognoſcat ad villanum. Item liber homo fit ſervus, ſi cum ſemel manumiſſus fuerit, ob ingratitudinem in ſeruitutem reuocetur. Item fit liber homo ſeruus, cùm ab initio clericus vel monachus factus fuerit, poſtea ad ſecularem vitam redierit. Quia talis reſtitus debet Domino ſuo. v. Tiraquellum de Nobilitate. cap. 2. pag. 14. num. 54. In very many provinces of Fraunce there be certaine men called (homines manus mortuae, qui tanta iuris ſimilitudine adſcriptiis colonis coniuncti, & prope iidem videntur. Non autem ſerui ſunt omnino, ſed in territorio domini ſunt, tanquam alligati, non habentes demigrandi poteſtatem. Ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſerui corporis & proſecutionis vulgò dicuntur, quòd ſi fugerint, potest eos profequi dominus & capere. Tributum antem iſti & nonnullas commoditates domino praeſtant: in quibus haec maxima, quod ipſis vita functis ſine ſobole, ſuccedit dominus vel ex toto vel ex parte. Connanus. li. 2. cap. 10. num. 3. whoſe words I thought not vnfit for this place, becauſe they expreſſe the nature of our villenage ſomthing aptly.
               
                  Villein fleeces: anno 31. Ed. 3. cap. 8. are fleeces of wolle that are ſhorne from ſcabbed ſheepe
               
                  Vidimus, anno 15. H. 6. ca. 3.
               
                  Villenage (Villenagium) commeth of (villein) and ſignifieth a ſeruile kinde of tenure belonging to lands or tenements; that is, a tenure of lands or tenements, by ſuch a ſeruice, as villeins are fitteſt to performe. For euery one that houldeth in villenage, is not a villein, or a bond man. Villenagium vel ſeruitium nihil detrabit libertatis, habit a tamen diſtinctione, vtrum tales ſint villani, & tenuerint in villano ſoccagio de dominico Domini Regis. Bracton, lib. pri. ca. 6. nu. pri. Britton in his 66. chapter ſpeaketh to this

effect: Villenage is a tenure of the demeſns of a Lord deliuered to a Tenent at the Lords will, by villenous ſeruices, to improoue it to the Lords vſe, and deliuered by the rodde, and not by any title of writing, or ſucceſſion of inheritance, &c. And a litle after he hath words to this effect: In the maners of our auncient Demeſns, there be pure villeins both by blood and tenure: the which may be caſt out of their tenement, and depriued of their chatels, at the pleaſure of the Lord. By which two places I gather, though villein tenure doe not alway make the Tenent a villein: yet that there is a two fold tenure called villenage: one wherin both the perſō & the tenure is bound, and in all reſpects at the diſpoſition of the Lord: and another, which in reſpect of the tenure is after a ſort ſeruile, though the perſon be not bond. This is well proued by Bracton, li. 2. ca. 8. nu. 3. in theſe words. Item tenementum non mutat ſtatum liberi, non magis quam ſerut: Poterit enim liber homo tenere purum villenagium, faciendo quicquid ad villanum pertinebit, & nihilo-minus liber erit, cum hoc faciat ratione villenagii, & non perſonae ſuae: & ideo poterit, quando volucrit, villenagium deſerere, & liber diſcedere, niſi illaque atus ſit per vxorem natiuam ad hoc faciendum. ad quam ingreſſus fuit in villenagium, & quae praeſtare poterit impedimentum, &c. So that a man may hould in pure villenage, and yet be a free man in reſpect of his perſon. But what is pure villenage? Bracton aunſwereth in the words there next following: Purum villenagium eſt, à quo praeſtatur ſeruitium incertum & indeterminatum, vbi ſcirinon poterit veſpere, quale ſeruitium fieri debet mane. viz: vbi quis facere tenetur quicquid ei praeceptum fuerit. The other ſort of villenage which is not pure, is there called of Bracton (villanum ſoccagium) which differeth from the other in this, becauſe it is onely tyed to the performrnce of certaine ſeruices agreed vpon betweene the Lord and the Tenent. Whereof ſee Bracton alſo in the ſame place: by whom you may perceiue, that a man may hould (per villanum ſoccagium) and yet haue (liberum tenementum if he haue it to himſelfe and his heires. This villanous ſoccage is to cary the Lords dung into his feilds, to plow his ground at certaine daies, ſow and reape his corne, plaſh his hedges, &c. See Soccage.
               
               
                  Villenous iudgement (Villanum iudicium) is that which caſteth the reproch of villeny and ſhame vpon him againſt whom it is giuen, as a Conſpiratour; &c.

                  Stawnf: pl: cor. lib. 3. 12. f. 175. This M. Lamb. in his Eirenarcha, lib. 1. ca. 13. pag. 63. calleth villenous puniſhment, and ſaith that it may well be called infamous, becauſe the iudgement in ſuch a caſe ſhalbe like the auncient iudgement in Attaint (as it is ſaid anno 4. H. 5. Fitzh. Iudgement 220.) and is (in 27. lib. Aſſiſ: pl. 59.) ſet downe to be, that their oathes ſhall not be of any credit afterward, nor lawfull for them in perſon to aproch the Kings Courts: and that their lands and goods be ſeiſed into the Kings hands, their trees rooted vp, and their bodies impriſoned, &c. And at this day the puniſhmēt apointed for periury, (hauing ſomwhat more in it, then corporall or pecuniary paine) ſtretching to the diſcrediting of the teſtimony of the offender from euer after, may be partaker of this name. Thus farre M. Lamberd.
               
               
                  Virgata terrae. Regiſter orig. fol. 167. a. See yard land.
               
               
                  Viridario eligendo, is a writ that lyeth for the choice of a verdour in the foreſt. Regiſter orig. fol. 177.
               
                  Viſitation of maners (Viſitatio morum) was wont to be the name of the Regarders office in auncient time. Manwood, parte pri. of his foreſt lawes, pag. 195. See Regarder.
               
               
                  Viſne (Vicinetum) ſignifieth a neihgbour place, or a place neere at hand anno 16. R. 2. ca. 6.
               
                  Vtſu Franciplegū, is a writ to exempt him from comming to the view of Frankpledge, that is not within the Hundred reſident. For men are bound vnto this view by reaſon of their habitation, and not of lands held where they dwell not, Regiſter orig. fol. 175.
               
                  Vitteller (victualarius) commeth of the French, victuailes. i. commeatus) and ſignifieth with vs, him that ſelleth victuals. For theſe there is a writ in Fitz. nat. br. fol. 172. if they exerciſe their trade, bearing a magiſtracie in any towne corporate.
               
                  Vmple. anno 3. Edvard. 4. cap. 5.
               
                  Vncore priſt, is a plee for the Defendant, being ſiewed for a debt due at a day paſt, to ſaue the forfeiture of his bond; ſaying, that he tendered the dept at the time, and place, and that there was none to receiue it, and that he is now alſo readie to pay the ſame. 7. Ed. 6. 83. Dyer. See Vnqueſt priſt.
               
               
                  Vncuth, is a Saxon word ſignifying as much as (incognitus) It is vſed in the auncient Saxon lawes, for him that commeth to an Inne gueſt wiſe, and lyeth there for two nights at the moſt. In which caſe

his hoſt was not bound to anſwer for any offence, that he committed, whereof he was guiltleſſe himſelfe. But if he laid there the third night, then he was called (gueſt, hoſpes) and thē muſt the hoſt anſwer for him, as for one of his owne familie. And if he taried any longer, then was he called Agen hine, that is to ſay, familiaris. Whom, if he offend againſt the Kings peace, his hoſte was to ſee foorthcomming: or if he could not bring him out within a moneth and a day, he muſt ſatisfie for his offence. Lamberd. Archaiono. fol. 133. num. 7. Of this Bracton. lib. 3. cap. 10. num. 2. writeth thus: Item ſecundum antiquam conſuetudinem dici paterit de familia alicuius, qui hoſpitatus fuerit cum alio per tres noctes: quia primâ nocte poterit dici Vncuth, ſecunda verò Guſt, tertiâ nocte Hoghenhine, &c. This law was made for the better preſeruation of the Kings peace, and to ſhew in what pledge euery man was to be accompted, that trauelled by the way. See Tuainnithes: geſt.
               
               
                  Vnde nihil habet, is a writ. See Dote vnde nihil habet.
               
               
                  Vnder-chamberlaine of the Exchequer, is an Officer there, that cleaueth the taileys written by the Clerke of the Taileys, and readeth the ſame, that the Clerke of the Pel and the controllers thereof may ſee their entrie be true. He alſo maketh ſearches for all Roords in the Treaſurie. There be two Officers there of this name.
               
                  Vndereſcheateur. Subeſcheatour. anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 4. See Eſcheatour.
               
               
                  Vnderſhyreeue, (Subvicecomes) See Shyreeue.
               
               
                  Vnderſitter is an Inmate. See Inmate.
               
               
                  Vndertakers, be ſuch as are employed by Pourueyours of the King as their deputies. anno 2. & 3. Phil. & Mar. cap. 6. and ſuch as vndertake any great worke, as drying of Fennes, &c. anno 43. Eliz. cap. 11.
               
                  Vnder-treaſurer of England, (vicctheſaurarius Angliae) anno 39. El. cap. 7. & anno 43. eiuſdem. Subſidie of the Clergie. This Officer (as ſome Exchequer men thinke) was firſt created in the time of king H. the ſeuenth, to cheſt vp the Kings Treaſure at the end of euery Terme, and to note the content of money in each cheſt, and to ſee it caried to the Kings Treaſurie in the Tower, for the eaſe of the Lord Treaſurer, as being a thing too meane for him to be troubled with, and yet meete to be performed by a man of great ſecrecie and truſt. He in the vacancie of the Lord Treaſurers

office, doth all things in the receipt, that the Lord Treaſurer doth. He nominateth the two Prayſers of all goods ſeiſed as not cuſtomed, and ordereth, whether the partie ſhall haue them at the price or not. He appointeth the Steward, Cooke, and Butler for the prouiſion of the Starre-chamber. But this Officer in other mens iudgment, is farre more auncient then Henry the ſeuenths dayes, yet named Treaſurer of the Exchequer in the Statutes vntill Queene Elizabeths time, where he is tearmed Vnder-treaſurer of England. Neuertheleſſe, anno 35 Eliz. he is alſo written Treaſurer of the Exchequer. Read the Statutes, anno 18. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 17. & 27. eiuſdem. Stat. 2. cap. 18. 1. Rich. 2. cap. 5. 4. Hen. 4. cap. 18. 8. H. 6. cap. 17. 27. H. 8. cap. 11. with diuers other places, that ſeeme to approue this to be true.
               
                  Vnion (vnio) is a combining or conſolidation of two Churches in one, which is done by the conſent of the Biſhop, the Patron, and the Incumbent. And this is properly called an Vnion. Howbeit, that there be two other ſortes: as when one Church is made ſubiect to the other, and when one man is made Prelate of both, and when a conuentual is made Cathedrall, as you may reade in the Gloſſe of the chapter, Licet. De locato & conducto, in Lyndwoods Prouincials. §. Et quia. verſu Appropriationis. Touching Vnion in the firſt ſignification there was a ſtatute, an. 37. H. 8. cap. 21. that it ſhould be lawfull in two Churches, wherof the value of the one is not aboue ſixe pounds in the Kings bookes of the firſt fruites, and not aboue one mile diſtant from the other. Vnion in this ſignification is perſonall, that is, for the life of the Incumbent: or reall, that is, perpetuall, whoſoeuer be Incumbent.
               
                  Vnitie of poſſeſſion, is called conſolidatio vſus fructus, & proprietatis in the Ciuill lawe, ſignifying a ioynt poſſeſſion of two rights by ſeuerall titles. For example, I take a leaſe of land from one vpon a certaine rent: afterward I buy the Fee-ſimple. This is an vnitie of poſſeſſion, wherby the leaſe is extinguiſhed: by reaſon that I, which had before the occupation only for my rent, am become Lord of the ſame, and am to pay my rent to none, but my ſelfe. Alſo an Abbot being ſeated within a certaine pariſh, afterward obtaineth an appropriation of the tythes belonging to that Church, for the vſe of his houſe. Here is an vnity of poſſeſſion, by reaſon that the tythes, which before were to be

paid to the Incumbēt, are now to be paid to none but himſelfe, by vertue of the appropriation.
               
                  Vniverſitie, (Vniuerſitas) is by the Ciuill lawe any bodie politicke, or corporation: but in our language it is (at the leaſt moſt ordinarily) taken for thoſe two bodies, that are the Nouriſhes of learning, and the liberall Sciences, Cambridge and Oxford: endowed with great fauours, and priuiledges, for their beter maintenance, as appeareth not onely by an. 2. & 3. Ph. & Mar. c. 15. a. 13. El. c. 21. & a. 18. eiuſ. c. 6. but much more by their ſeuerall charters, graunted vnto them by diuers godly and magnanimous Kings of this land.
               
                  Vnlawfull aſſembly, (Illicita congregatio, illicita aſſemblata) is the meeting of three or more perſons together, with force to commit ſome vnlawfull act, and abiding ſtil, not indeuouring the execution thereof, as to aſſault or beate any perſon, to enter into his houſe or land, &c. West. parte 2. ſymb. titulo, Inditements, ſect. 65. M. Lam. in his Eirenarcha. cap. 19. ſaith thus: An vnlawfull aſſembly is the companie of three perſons or more, gathered together, to do ſuch an vnlawfull act, although they do it not indeed. So ſaith Kitchin in effect, fol. 20.
               
                  Vnques priſt, is (word for word) alwaies readie. And it ſignifieth a Plee, whereby a man profeſſeth himſelfe alway ready to do or performe that, which the Demaundant requireth, therby to auoide charges. For example: a woman ſieweth the tenent for her Dower: and he cōming in at the firſt day, offereth to auerre, that he was alway ready and ſtill is, to performe it. In this caſe except the Demaundant will auerre the contrarie, he ſhall recouer no dammages. When this Plee will ſerue to auoide Charges, and when not, ſee Kit. fol. 243. See Vncore priſt.
               
               
                  Voydance (vacatio) is a want of an Incumbent vpon a benefice: and this voydance is double: either in law, as when a man hath more benefices incōpetible: or indeed, as when the Incumbēt is dead, or actually depriued. Brooke, titulo Quareimpedit. n. 51.
               
                  Voucher (Aduocatio) is a calling in of one into the Court at the petition of a party that hopeth to be helped thereby. New booke of Entries. verbo. voucher. voucher de garantie Brit. ca. 75. in latine (Aduocatio ad war antizandum) is a petition in court made by the Defendant to haue him called, of whom he or his Aunceſter bought the land or tenement in queſtion, and receiued warranty for the ſecure inioying thereof againſt all men.

                  Britton of this writeth a long chapter. vbi ſupra, intituling it Garant voucher. But Bracton writeth a large tractate of it, lib. 5. tracta. 4. per totum. Litleton alſo handleth it not minſingly, in the laſt chapter of all his Tenures. Of this you may read Fitzh. alſo in his nat. br. fol. 134. De warantia chartae. All this law ſeemeth to haue bene brought into England out of Normandy. For in the Grand Cuſtumary you haue likewiſe a chapter intituled (vouchement de garant, cap. 50. id eſt, vocamentum Garanti) where it is ſet downe, what time ought to be giuen, for the appearance of the warrant called in this caſe, how many warrants may be vouched, one calling in another, and diuers other points touching this doctrine. All which, and many more, you may read in Bracton vbi ſupra. A common voucher, a double voucher. Coke lib. 2. Sir Hughe. Cholmleis caſe, fol. 50. b. This is very aunſwerable to the contract in the Ciuill lawe, whereby the buyer bindeth the ſeller, ſometime in the ſimple value of the thing bought, ſometime in the double, to warrant his ſecure enioying of the thing bought. But this difference I find betweene the Ciuill lawe and ours, that whereas the Ciuill lawe bindeth euery man to warrant the ſecuritie of that which hee ſelleth, ours doth not ſo, except it be eſpecially couenanted. The party that voucheth in this caſe, is called the Tenent, the partie vouched is tearmed the Vouchee. The writ whereby he is called, is termed Summoneas ad warrantizandum. And if the Shyreeue return vpō that writ, that the party hath nothing, whereby he may be ſummoned: then goeth out another writ. viz. Sequntur ſub ſuo periculo. See Termes of the lawe. verbo Voucher. And Lamb. in his Explication of Saxon wordes, verbo Advocare. See Warrantie. I reade in the new booke of Entries, of a forain voucher, which hath place properly in ſome Franchiſe, Countie Palatine, or other where one voucheth to warrantie one not dwelling within the Franchiſe. fol. 615. columna. 1. whereupon becauſe the foreyner neede not be tryed in that Court, the record and cauſe is remooued to the common plees, &c. See of this Fitz. nat. br. fol. 6. E.
               
                  Vſer de action, is the perſiewing or bringing of an action, which in what place and countie it ought to be, See Brooke, titulo Lieu & Countie. fol. 64.
               
                  Vſe (vſus) is in the originall ſignification, plaine enough: but it hath a proper application in our common lawe, and that is

the profit or benefit of lands or tenements. And out of M. Weſts firſt parte of his ſimbol: lib. pri ſect. 48. 49. 50. 51. and 52. I gather ſhortly thus much for this purpoſe. Euery deede in writing hath to be conſidered the ſubſtance, and the adiuncts. Touching the ſubſtance, a deede doth conſiſt of two principall parts, namely the premiſſes and the conſequents. The premiſſes is the former parte thereof, and is commonly ſaide to be all that, which preceedeth the (Habendum) or limitation of the eſtate, which be the perſons contracting, and the things contracted. The conſequent is that which foloweth the premiſſes, & that is the (Habendum) In which are two limitations: the one of the eſtate, or propertie, that the party paſſiue ſhall receiue by the deede, the other of the vſe: which is to expreſſe in the ſaid (Habendum) to or for what vſe, and benefite he ſhall haue the ſame eſtate. And of the limitation of thoſe vſes, you may read many preſidents ſet downe by the ſame author in his ſecond booke of his ſaide firſt part, ſectio. 308. and ſo forth to 327. Theſe vſes were inuented vpon the ſtatute called, West. 3. or Quia emptores terrarum, before the which ſtatute no vſes were knowne. Perkins. Deviſes. 528. And becauſe mens wits, had in time deviſed many deceits, by the ſetling of the poſſeſſion in one man and the vſe in another, there was a ſtatute made, anno, 27. H. 8. ca. 1. wherby it was inacted, that the vſe and poſſeſſſion of lands and poſſeſſions ſhould alway ſtand vnited. New expoſitour of lawe termes, verbo. Vſe. v. Coke lib. 1. Chudleiſe caſe. fol. 121. & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Vſher (Ostiarius) commeth of the French (Huiſſier. i. Accenſus, apparitor, Ianitor) It ſignifieth with vs firſt an officer in the Eſchequer: of which ſort there be foure ordinarie vſhers that attend the cheife officers and Barons of the court at Weſtminſter, and Iuries, Shyreeues and all other accoumptants at the pleaſure of the court. Therbe alſo Vſhers in the Kings houſe, as of the priuy chāber, &c.
               
                  Vtas (Octavae) is the eight day following any terme or feaſt: as the vtas of Sainct Michaell, the vtas of Sainct Hilary, the vtas of Sainct Martine, of Sainct Iohn Baptiſt, of the Trinitie &c. as you may reade. anno 51. H. 3. ſtat. concerning generall daies in the Benche. And any day betweene the feaſt and the eighth day, is ſaide to be within the vtas. The vſe of this is in the returne of writs, as appeareth by the ſame

ſtatute.
               
                  Vtfangthef, is an auncient Royaltie graunted to a Lord of a maner, by the King which giueth him the puniſhment of a theefe dwelling out of his liberty, and hauing committed theft without the ſame, if he be taken within his fee. Bracton. lib. 2. cap. 24. who in his third booke, tract. 2, ca. 35. ſeemeth rather to interpret the word, then to expreſſe the effect, and ſaith thus. Vtfangthef dicitur extraneus latro, veniens aliunde de terra aliena, & qui captus fuit in terra inſius, qui tales habet libertates. It ſeemeth to be compounded of theſe three words. Vt, fang, thef. which in our moderne Engliſh be, oute, take or taken, Theefe. Of this Fleta hath theſe words. vtfangenthef dicitur latro extraneus veniens a liunde de terra aliena, & qui captus fuerie in terra ipſius qui tales habet libertates. Sed non ſequitur quod poſſit ille hominem ſuum proprium extra libertatem ſuam captum reducere vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      in libertatem, & ibi eum iudicare: reducere tamen poterit indicatum, & iudicium in proprio patibulo exequiratione libertatis: commodum tamen non video. Debet enim quilibet iuri ſubiacere, vbi deliquit: proprios tamen latrones & alienos iudicare poſſunt, dum tamen infra libertatem fuerint capti, &c.
               
               
                  Vtlaghe, ſignificat bannitum extra legem. Fleta. li. 1. cap. 47. See Vtlawrie.
               
               
                  Vtlagato capiendo quando vtlagatur in vno comitatu, & poſtea fugit in alium, is a writ, the nature whereof is ſufficiently expreſſed in the words ſet downe for the name thereof. See the Regiſter originall, fo. 133.
               
                  Vtlawrie (vtlagaria, aliâs vtlagatio) is a puniſhment for ſuch as being called into lawe, and lawfully ſought, doe comtēptuouſly refuſe to appeare. And as Bracton ſaith li. 3. tract. 2. ca. 11. He that is ſiewed muſt be ſought, and called at 5. counties, a moneth being betweene euery countie, to anſwer to the lawe. And if he come not within that time, pro exlege tenebitur cum principi non obediat, nec legi: & ex tunc vtlagabitur: that is, as the author of the termes of lawe ſaith, he ſhalbe pronounced by the coroner, to be out of the Kings protection, and depriued of the benefit of the lawe. The effect of this is diuers (as the ſame Author ſaith). for if he be outlawed in an action perſonall, (he meaneth) at the ſuite of another in a ciuile cauſe: he ſhall forfeit all his goods and cattells to the King: if vpon felonie then he ſhall forfeit all his lands and tenements, that he hath in fee ſimple, or for terme of his life, and his goods

and cattles. Bracton: vbi ſupra, nu. 5. ſaith, that ſuch as be out-lawed vpon felonie, ex tunc gerunt caput lupinum, ita quod ſine iudiciali inquiſitiene ritè pereant, & ſecum ſuum iudicium portent & meritò ſine lege pereunt, qui ſecundum legem viuere recuſarunt. Et haec ita, ſi cum capiendi fuerint, fugiant, vel ſe defendant ſi autem vivi capti fuerint, vel ſe reddiderint, vita illorum & mors erit in manu Domini Regis. See Horns mirrour of Iuſtices, lib. 3. cap. des fautes puniſhables. Bracton ſaith in the place aboue ſpecified (with whome alſo Fleta agreeth, lib. 1. cap. 27.) that a Minor or a woman cannot be outlawed. But take his owne words: Minor verò, & qui infra aetatem. 12. annorum fuerit, vtlagarinon poteſt, nec extra legem poni, quia ante talem aetatem non eſt ſub lege aliqua, nec in Decenna, non magis quàm foemina, quae vtlagari non poteſt, quia ipſa non eſt ſub lege. i. Inlaugh Anglicè, ſc: in frāco plegio, ſive decenna: ſicut maſculus, 12. annorum, & vlteriùs. Et ideo non poteſt vtlagari. Waiviari tamen bene poteſt, & pro derelicta haberi, cum pro felonia aliqua fugam fecerit ſiue ceperit. Eſt enim waiuium, quod nullus aduocat, nec princeps eum advocabit, nec tuebitur, cum fuerit rite Waiviata: ſicut fit de maſculo, qui ſecundum legem terrae ritè fuerit vtlagatus, &c. To the ſame effect writeth Fitz h. in his na. br. fo. 161. viz; And becauſe women be not ſworne in leetes to the King, as men be of the age of 12 yeares or vpward: it is ſaid, when a woman is outlawed, that ſhee is waiued, but not out-lawed. for ſhee was neuer vnder the law, nor ſworne vnto it. More of this you may reade in Bracton, lib. 3. tracta. 2. cap 12. &. 13. and then in the 14. how an outlaw is inlawed againe, and reſtored to the Kings peace and protection. See alſo Fleta, lib. 1. cap. 28. per totum.
               
               
                  Virum. See Aſſiſe.
               
               
                  Viter Bariſters, be ſuch as for their longe ſtudy and great induſtry beſtowed vpon the knowledge of the common lawe, be called out of their contemplation to practiſe, and in the face of the world to take vpon them the protection and defence of clients. Theſe are in other countries called, (Licentiati in iure). How be it in modeſtie they ſtill continue themſelues hearers for diuers yeares, like the ſcholers of Pythagoras, that for the firſt fiue yeres neuer aduentured to reaſon or diſcourſe openly vpon any point of their maſters Doctrine, which their ſilence (a cohibendo ſermone) was termed 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as Suidas and Zenedorus doe report.
               
                  
                  Vtlepe ſignificat eſcapium latronum. Fleta lib. 1. ca. 47.
            
            
               W
               
                  VVAge (vadiare) proceedeth of the French (Gager. i. dare pignus, pignore certare) and ſignifieth in our common lawe the giuing of ſecuritie for the performing of any thing: as to wage lawe, & to wage deliuerance which ſee before in Gage. None wageth lawe againſt the King. Brooke tit. Choſe in action, num. 9. The ſubſtantiue of this verb is (Wager) in the latine (vadium) which ſome Feudiſts call (wadium) as teſtifieth Hotoman in his Commentaries de verbis feudalibus. verbo Wadium. See Lawe.
               
               
                  Wainage (Wainagium, aliâs Wannagium) ſignifieth as much as peculium ſervorum of the Saxon word wouen. i. habitare, & woeuing. i. habitatio. See. Gainage.
               
               
                  Waiue (waiuiare) Regiſter orig. fol. 277. a) is to forſake (habere pro derelicto) as the Ciuilians terme it. Waiviare feudum ſuum. Bracton lib. 2. cap. 7. that is to forſake. Many of the Kings liege people to be outlawed, and many waiued by erroneous proces. anno 7. H. 4. ca. 13. See Vtlawrie. To waiue the company of theeues. Stawnf. pl. cor. fol. 26. To waiue his beneſit. Idem fol. 46. to waiue the aduantage. Idem praerog. fol. 17. Perſons attainted or waiued. Weſt. parte 2. ſimbol. titulo Fines, ſect: 13. D. This word waiued waiuiata properly belongeth to a woman that being ſiewed in law contemptuouſly refuſeth to appeare, as outlawed doth to a man. Regiſterorig. fo. 132. b. & 277. a. The reaſon whereof ſee in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 161. A. See Weif.
               
               
                  Wales (Wallia) is a part of England, on the weſt ſide inhabited by the ofſpring of the auncient Britons chaſed thither by the Saxons, being called hether by them to aſſiſt them againſt the might of the Picts. The reaſon of the appellation commeth from the Saxon (wealh. 1. exterus, vel peregrinus) for ſo the Saxons both called them and held them, though now to the great quiet of this kingdome they be incorporated vnto vs See M. Lamb: explication of Saxon words. verbo. Wallus.
               
               
                  Walkers, ſeeme to be thoſe that are otherwiſe called Foreſters. Crompton in his Iuriſdictions, fol. 154. hath theſe words in effect. There be Foreſters aſſigned by the King, which be walkers within a certeine ſpace aſſigned them to looke vnto.
               
                  Waiuiaria mulieris, is as much as vtlagatio viri. Regiſter originall fol. 132. b. See Waiue.
               
               
                  
                  Wapentake (Wapentakium) is all one with that, which we call a Hundred, as appeareth by Bracton, lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. pri. nu. pri. in fine. Conuocentur (ſaith he) poſtmodum ſeruientes & Baliui Hundredorum, & per ordinem irrotulentur Hundredarii, ſiue wapentakia, & nomina ſeruientium, quorum quilibet affidabit, quod de quolibet Hundredo eliget quatuor milites, qui ſtatim veniant coram Iuſticiariis ad faciendum preceptum Domini Regis, & qui ſtatim iurabunt, quòd eligent duodecim milites, vel liberos & legales homines, ſi milites non inueniantur, &c. M. Lamberd in his explication of Saxon words, verbo Centuria, is of the ſame minde: and farder ſaith, that this word is eſpecially vſed at this day in the countries be north the riuer Trent. And in the lawes of King Edward ſet forth by him nu. 33. it is moſt plaine in theſe words. Et quod Angli vocant Hundredum, ſupradicti comitatus vocant wapentakium. But there he nameth ſome ſhires of this ſide Trent, as Warwick ſhire, Leiceſter ſhire, and Northhampton-ſhire. In the words there folowing, there is a reaſon giuen of this appellation in theſe words. Et non ſine cauſa: Cum quis enim accipiebat praefecturam wapentakii, die ſtatuto in loco, vbi conſueuerant congregari, omnes maiores contra eum conueniebant, & deſcendente de equo ſuo, omnes aſſurgebant ei. Ipſe verò, erecta lancea ſua, ab omnibus ſecundum morem foedus accipiebat. Omnes enim quotquot vtniſſent, cum lanceis ſuis ipſius haſtam tangebant, & ita confirmabant per contractum armorum, pace palam conceſſa. Anglicè enim arma vocantur (waepun) & taccare confirmare: quaſi armorum confirmatio. Vel vt magis expreſsè ſecundum linguam anglicanam dicamus, waepentak armorum tactus eſt (waepun) enim arma ſonant (tac) tactus eſt. Quamobrèm poterit cognoſci, quòd hac de cauſa, totus ille conuentus dicitur (wapentae) eò quòd per tactum armorum ſuorum ad inuicem confoederati ſunt. Thus farre the booke goeth word for word. With whom Fleta agreeth, ſauing that Fleta ſaith, that this word is vſed in all counties be north Watlinſtreete, li. 2. ca. 61. §. vniuerſimode. Take Sir Tho: Smithes opinion alſo: whoſe words in his ſecond booke de Rep: Anglo: ca: 16. be theſe: Wapentak. I ſuppoſe, came of the Danes, or peraduenture of the Saxons. For that ſo many townes came by there order then into one place, where was taken a mouſter of there armour and weapons: in which place, from them that could not finde ſufficient pledges for their good abearing, their weapons were taken away. The ſtatute anno. 3. Henrici 5. ca. 2. & anno 9. H. 6.

                  cap. 10. & anno 15. H. 6. ca. 7. T. maketh mention of Stainctife Wapentake, and Frendles Wapentake, in Crauen in the County of Yorke. See Roger Houeden, parte poſter: ſuorum annalium, fo. 346. b.
               
               
                  Wards and Liueries (wardi & liberaturae) is a Court firſt erected in King Henry the eighth his time, and afterward augmented by him with the office of Liueries, and therefore called by him (as now it is) the Court of wards and Liueries. The chiefe of this Court is called the maſter of the Court, &c. To whom are ioyned the Surueiour, Atturny, and Receiuer of the ſaid Court, as his Aſſiſtants: then as Miniſters the Regiſter, two inferiour Atturnies or Clerks, and a Meſſenger.
               
                  Ward (Cuſtodia) is the German word, as (Garde) is the French. Both theſe be vſed among our common lawyers: the one by thoſe that write in French, the other by thoſe that write in Engliſh. Wherefore for your farder vnderſtanding, See Gard and Gardein. Yet is Gard ſometime vſed in the Engliſhbookes alſo: as yeomen of the Gard. And alſo the keeper of one in his minority, is not called a warder but a Gardein or Gardian. Ward hath diuers applications, as a Ward in London, latined (warda) which is a portion of the City committed to the eſpeciall charge of ſome one of the 24. Aldermen of the city, in ſuch ſort as euery one knoweth his certaine ward aſſigned vnto him, and hath dwelling within the ſame compas ſome one graue Citizen for the good gouernment thereof: who is in that reſpect a Deputie to the ſaid Alderman, and commonly called the Aldermans Deputie. Of theſe there be 25. within the citie, and one without, beſide other liberties and the ſuburbes. Stowes Suruey of London. Alſo a Foreſt is diuided into wards: Manwood, parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 97. Laſtly, a priſon is otherwiſe called a Ward. And the heire of the Kings tenent, houlding by knights ſeruice, or in capite, or of any common perſon by Knights ſeruice, is called Ward, during his nonage. See anno 32. H. 8. cap. 46.
               
                  Warden (Gardianus) ſignifieth al one thing with the French (Gardien.) And therefore of this ſee more in Gardien. But it is the more vſuall word of all that writ in Engliſh, for him that hath the keeping or charge of any perſon or thing by office: as Wardens of Felowſhips in London. anno 14. H. 8. cap. 2. Warden courts, anno 31. H. 6. ca. 3. Warden of the Marches, anno 4 H. 7. cap. 8. Wardens and Communaltie
                  
of the lanes contributorie to Rocheſter bridge. anno 18. Eliz. cap. 7. Wardens of peace. anno 2. Ed. 3. cap. 3. Statute Northampton. Warden of the Weſt Marches. Camd. Brit. pag. 606. Warden of the Foreſt. Manwood, parte prim. pag. 111. & 112. Warden of the Aulnage. anno 18. H. 6. cap. 16. Chiefe Warden of the Foreſt. Manwood parte prim. pag. 42. & 43. Warden of the Kings wardrobe. anno 51 H. 3. ſtatut. quinto. Wardens of the tables of the Kings Exchaunge, anno 9. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. cap. 7. & anno 9. H. 5. ſtat. 2. c. 4. Warden of the rolles of the Chauncerie. anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 1. & cap. 5. Warden or Clerke of the hamper of the Chauncerie. ibid. Warden of the kings writs, and Records of his common bench, ibid. Warden of the Kings armour in the tower. anno 1. Ed. 4. cap. 1.
               
                  Wardnote; is a court kept in euery ward in London. anno 32. H. 8. cap. 17. ordinarily called among them, the Wardmote Court.
               
                  Ward peny, is money to be contributed toward watch and ward.
               
                  Warantie, (warantia) commeth of the French (garantie) or (garant) i. vindex litis:) which is a word of great antiquitie with the French men, being brought firſt thither by the Francogalli. And thence do they make a Latiniſh verbe, viz. (guarentare) vel, vt eſt in aliis libris, guarentiſare. i. cauſam alterius ſuſcipere, ſe defenſorem profiteri. The Feudiſts alſo vſe this word (guarentus) quo ſignificatur is, qui Latinis author dicitur, & euictionem praeſtat. lib. 2. Feud. titulo 34. §. 2. The Ciuilians haue a ſtipulation (habere licere) whereby is ſignified a power of perpetuall & quiet poſſeſſion to be giuen: l. 11. § final. Π. de action empt. & vend. But this reacheth not ſo farre as our warrantie. For the ſeller hereby is bound but to a kind of diligence and care to maintaine the buyer in his poſſeſſion. For if he be euicted, the buyer is not tyed to recōpence. Doctores in l. ſtipulatio ista, Habere licere. Π. de verb. obliga. Warrantie ſignifieth in our common lawe, a promiſe made in a deed by one man vnto another for himſelfe and his heires, to ſecure him and his heires againſt all men, for the enioying of any thing agreed of betweene them. And he that maketh this warrantie, is called Warrantus by Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 10. & 37. The Romaines called him Auctorem, as Hotoman teſtifieth in his Commentarie vpon Tullies oration pro Aulo Caecinna. verbo, Ceſennius author fundi, whom you

may reade more at large. And that which we terme vocationem warranti, the Ciuilians call authoris laudationem vel nominationem. Eimer pract. cap. 48. This warranty paſſeth from the ſeller to the buyer, from the feoffer to the feoffee, from him that releaſeth, to him that is releaſed of an action reall, and ſuch like. And for the forme it paſſeth in a clauſe toward the end of a deed in theſe wordes: Et ego verò praefatus I. & haeredes mei praedictas decem acras terrae cum pertinentiis ſuis praefato H. haeredibus, & aſſignatis ſuis contra omnes gentes warrantizabimus in perpetnum per praeſentes. Weſt. parte prim. ſymbol. lib. 2. titulo Feofments. ſect. 281. & 288. So a releaſe may be with a clauſe of warrantie. Idem, eodem. titulo Releaſes. ſect. 510.
               There is alſo a warrant of Atturney, whereby a man appointeth another to do ſome thing in his name, and warranteth his action, Weſt. eod. ſect. 181. And theſe warrāts of Atturney ſeeme to differ from leters of Atturney, becauſe that, whereas leters paſſe ordinarily vnder the hand and ſeale of him, that maketh an Atturney by them, before any credible witneſſes: warrants of Atturney be acknowledged before ſuch perſons, by ſuch means and in ſuch maner, as Fines. Weſt. parte 2. ſymbol. titule Recoueries. ſect. prim. F. See Atturney.
               
               But theſe waranties in paſſing land from one to another, be of greateſt conſequent, & of more intricate vnderſtanding. And therefore of theſe, diuers haue written at large: as Glanvile lib. 3. per totum. Bracton lib. 5. tract. 4. per totum. Britton. cap. 105. Litleton in the laſt chapter of his tenures: the forme and effect whereof Bracton in his ſecond booke cap. 16. num. 10. declareth thus: Et ego & haeredes mei warrantizabimus tali & haeredibus ſuis tantùm, vel tali & haeredibus & aſſignatis, & haeredibus aſſignatcrum, vel aſſignatis aſſignatorum, & eorum haeredibus, & acquietabimus, & defendemus eis totam terram illam cum pertinentiis (ſecundum quod praedictum eſt) contra omnes gentes in perpetuum, per praedictum ſeruitium. Per hoc autem quòd dicit (Ego & haeredes mei) obligat ſe & haeredes ſuos ad warrantiam, propinquos, & remotos, praeſentes & futuros ei ſuccedentes in infinitum Per hoc autem quòd dicit (warrantizabimus) ſuſcipit in ſe obligationem ad defendendum ſuum Tenementum in poſſeſſione res datae, & aſſignatos ſuos & eorum haeredes, & omnes alios, ſecundum quod ſupradictum eſt, ſi fortè tenementum datum petatur ab antiquo in Dominico. Per hoc autem quòd dicit (acquiet abimus) obligat ſe & haeredes ſuos ad

acquietandum, ſi quis plus petierit ſeruitis, vel aliud ſeruitium, quam in charta donationis continetur: per hoc autem quòd dicit (Defendemus) obligat ſe & haeredes ſuos ad Defendendum, ſi quis velit ſeruitutem ponere rei datae contra formam ſuae donationis, &c. But the new expounder of law terms ſaith, that this warranty beginneth two waies: one by deede of law: as if one and his aunceſters, haue held land of another and his aunceſters, time out of minde byhomage (which is called Homage aunceſtrell) for in this caſe, the homage cōtinually performed by the tenent is ſufficient to bind the Lord to warrant his eſtate. The other is by deede of the party, which by deede or fine tyeth himſelfe to warrant the land or tenement to the tenent. And Sir Ed: Cooke in the fourth booke of his reports, mentioneth the ſame diſtinction. Nokes caſe, fo. 81. a. calling the one a warranty in law, the other an expreſſe warranty. Ciuilians would call theſe ſpecies, tacitam & expreſſam.
               
               
                  Warranty (as the ſaid author of the terms of law ſaith, is in two maners: warranty lineall, and warranty collaterall. But (Litleton ſaith vbi ſupra) it is threefold: warranty lineall, warranty collaterall, and warranty that beginneth by diſſeiſin. Warranty by diſſeiſin what it is, is partly declared in Sir Ed. Cookes reports, li. 3. Fermors caſe, fol. 78. a. Whether of them deuideth more aptly, let the learned iudge. For my part, I thinke that lineall and collaterall be no eſſentiall diſſerences of warranty, as it is originally conſidered in the firſt warranter. For he bindeth himſelfe and his heires in generall. And ſuch be bound, be they lineall or collaterall vnto him. Therefore this diuiſion riſeth rather from the euent of the originall warranty: videlicet, becauſe it ſo falleth out, that the tenent, to whom the warranty was made, or his heires, when he or they be called into queſtion for the land warranted formerly by the firſt feoffour, is driuen by the meanes of the firſt warranters death, to cal or vouch him to waranty that is his heire, and now preſently liuing, be he deſcending or collaterall, as it falleth out. For example. A. infeoffeth B. in twenty acres land, with clauſe of warranty againſt all men. So long as A. himſelfe liueth, he is liable to this couenant, and none els: after his diſceaſe his heire is ſubiect vnto it, be he his ſonne, brother, vncle, or what els. And whether of theſe, or neither of theſe it will be, none knoweth vntill he be dead. Wherefore I conclude that this diſtinction of lineall or

collaterall hath no vſe originally in this contract. For (as the author of the terms of law ſaith) the burden of this warranty, after the death of the firſt warranter, falleth vpon him, vpon whom the land ſhould haue deſcended, if the warranty had not bene made. And that is the next of blood to the warranter, be he in the defcending or collaterall line. And therefore I reſolue that this diſtinction groweth from an euent, after the death of him that couenanteth to warrant. But to make this plaine, I finde warranty to be vſed equiuocally: ſignifiing in one ſort, the contract, or couenant of warranty firſt made, as appeareth by Bracton in the place formerly noted: and in another ſort the very effect and performance of this contract, either by the warranter or his heires, when he or they be by the tenent thereunto vouched, or called: As alſo I ſhew out of Bracton, lib. 5. tract. 4. ca. pri. nu. 2. in theſe words. Imprimis videndum eſt quid ſit warrantizatio. Et ſciendum quod warrantizare, nihil aliud eſt, quàm defendere & acquietare tenentem, qui warrantum vocabit in ſeiſina ſua, &c. With whom agreeth Fleta ſaying that warrantiz are nihil aliud eſt, quam poſſidentem defendere, li. 5. ca. 15. §. 1. & lib. 6. ca. 23. quod lege per totum. And the former diuiſion of lineall and collaterall warranty, rather belongeth to warranty in this ſecond ſignification then the former.
               And that this way it is imperfect or at the leaſt obſcure, I thinke it not hard to declare. Firſt to ſhew this I note out of Bracton, who may be called to warrantie. And he lib. 5. tractat. 4. cap. pri. num. 5. ſaith thus: Videndum eſt quis vocari poſſit ad warrantum, & ſciendum, quod tam maſculus quam foemina, tam minor quàm maior (dum tamen ſi minor vocetur, remane at placitum de warantia in ſuſpenſo vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad aetatem, niſi cauſa fuerit ita fauorabilis, quòd aetas expectari non debeat; ſicut ex cauſa Dotis) Item non ſolum vocandus est ad warantum ille qui dedit, vel venddit: verùm etiam vocandi ſunt eorum haeredes deſcendentes in infinitum propter verba in Chartis contenta, (Ego & haeredes mei warantizabimus tali & haeredibus ſuis, &c.) Et in quo caſu tenentur haeredes warantizare, ſive ſint propinqui, ſive remoti, remotiores, vel remotiſſimi. Et quod de haeredibus dicitur, idem dici poterit de aſſignatis, & de illis, qui ſunt loco illorum haeredū, ſicut ſunt capitales Domini qui tenentibus ſuis quaſi ſuccedunt, vel propter aliquem defectum, vel propter aliquod delictum, ſicut de eſchaetis Dominorum: By which words we perceiue

that the burden of this warrantie is not tyed to heires only, be they in the deſcending or collaterall line, but that vnder this word (Haeredes) are compriſed all ſuch, as the firſt warranters lands afterward come vnto either by diſcent, or otherwiſe ex cauſa lucratiua So that if a man haue 20 children, yet if he will, and may giue his land to a ſtraūger, leauing his childrē no land: that ſtraunger in this caſe is his aſſigne, & is conteined vnder this word, heire. So if he commit felonie after ſuch warrantie covenanted, and forfeit his lands to his Lord by eſcheate: the Lord is quaſi haeres in this caſe, and lyable to the warrantie formerly paſſed. And in theſe two later caſes, warranty in the ſecōd ſignification ſeemeth to be neither lineall, nor collaterall: at the leaſt as Litleton, and the other author haue defined, or by examples expreſſed them.
               But yet let vs define theſe two ſpecies, as they be. wherefore lineall warranty is that, which he is called vnto by the tenent, vpon whome the land warranted had deſcended, if the warranty had not beene couenanted. For example; A ſelleth to B. 20. acres land with clauſe of warranty, and afterward dieth leauing iſſue. C. ſoone after B. is impleaded for this land by D. and voucheth. C. This is called a lineall warranty: becauſe but for it the land had deſcended from A. to C.
               
                  Warranty collaterall, is that wherevnto he is called by the tenent vpon the couenant of him, from whome the land could not deſcend to the party called. For example; B. the ſonne pourchaſeth tenements in fee, whereof A. his father diſſeiſeth him, and ſelleth them to C. with a clauſe of warranty. A being deade, C. is impleaded for the tenements, and calleth B. to warranty. This warranty wherevnto B. is caled, is collaterall: by cauſe the tenements, if the warrnty had not beene couenanted by A. could not haue deſcended from him to his father A. for they were his owne by Pourchaſe. Many other exāples there be of this in Litleton. And this very caſe he maketh his example of warranty by diſſeiſin, as alſo of warranty collaterall. which plainly argueth, that warranty by diſſeiſin, and warranty collaterall, are not diſtinct members of warranty, but may be confounded: though one warranty may cary both names in diuers reſpects. For there is ſome warranty collaterall that beginneth not by diſſeiſin. For

example. A. tenent in taile, alienateth to B. in fee, and dieth leauing iſſue. C. Afterward. D. brother to A. and vncle to C. releaſeth to B. with warranty, and dying leaueth. C. his heire being next of blood vnto him. This warranty is collaterall, becauſe it deſcendeth vpon. C. from his vncle. D. and yet it beginneth not by deſſeiſin of his ſaid vncle.
               
                  Warranty, hath a double effect: one to debarre him vpō whome it diſcendeth from the firſt warranter as his next of blood, from claiming the land warranted: and another to make it good to the tenent, if by him he be vouched thereunto, or els to giue him as much other land by exchange. But as the former of theſe effects taketh place with all heires, except thoſe to whome the land warranted was intailed, and that reape no equiualent benefit by the firſt warranter. anno 6. Ed. pri, ca. 3. ſoe the latter preiudiceth none that receiueth not ſufficient land from the firſt warranter to make it good. Bracton, lib. 5. tractat. 4. ca. 8. nu. pri. & cap. 13. nu. 2. In the cuſtumaric of Norm. ca. 5. you haue vouchement degarant, which the Interpreter tranſlateth, Vocamentum Garanti. a voucher or calling of the wartanter into the court to make good his ſale or gift.
               
                  Warantiadiei, is a writ lying in caſe, where a man hauing a day aſſigned perſonally to appeare in court to any action wherein he is ſiewed, is in the meane time by commaundement imployed in the Kings ſeruice, ſo that he cannot come at the day aſſigned. This writ is directed to the Iuſtices to this end, that they neither take nor: record him in defaulte for that day. Regiſter originall, fol. 18. Of this you may read more in Fitzh. nat. br. fol. 17. and ſee Glanuile, lib. pri. ca. 8.
               
                  Warantia. chartae., is a writ that lieth properly for him who is infeoffed in land or tenements with clauſe of warranty, and is impleaded in an Aſſiſe or writ of Entrie, wherein he cannot vouche or call to warranty: for in this caſe his remedy is, to take out this writ againſt the ſeoffour or his heire. Regiſter orig. fol. 157. Fitzh. nat. br: fol. 134 Of this you may likewiſe reade Fleta, lib. 6. ca. 35. and Weſt parte 2. ſimb. titulo Fines. ſect. 156.
               
                  Warrantia cuſtodia, is a writ Iudiciall, that lyeth for him that is challenged to be ward vnto another, in reſpect of land ſaid to be houlden in Knights ſeruice, which when it was bought

by the aunceſters of the ward, was warranted to be free from ſuch thraldome. And it lieth againſt the warranter and his heires, Regiſter Iudiciall, fol. 36.
               
                  Warrant of Atturney. See Leter of Atturney, and Waranty.
               
               
                  Wardwite ſignificat quietantiam miſericordia in caſu quo non invenerit quis hominem ad wardam faciendam in caſtra, vel alibi. Flet a lib. 1. cap. 47.
               
                  Warren (Warrenna, aliâs varrenna) commeth of the French (Garrenne. 1. vivarium, vel locus in quo vel aves, vel piſces, vel ferae continentur, quae ad victum di
                        •
                     ntaxat pertinent) Calapine out of Aulus Gellius. lib. 2. Noct. Attica: cap. 20. A warren (as we vſe it) is a preſcription or graunte from the king to a man of hauing feſants, partridges, connies, and hares, within certaine of his lands, Cromptons Iuriſdict. fol. 148. where he ſaith, that none can haue warren, but onely the King, no more then Foreſt or chaſe. Becauſe it is a ſpeciall priuiledge belonging to the King alone. And a little after he hath words to this effect. The king may graunt warren to me in mine owne lands, for feſants and partridges onely. And by this graunt no man may there chaſe them without my licence. And ſo of Hares, but not of Connies. For their property is to deſtroy the 
                     〈◊〉
                   of the 
                     〈◊〉
                  , as to eate corne, and pille the barke of apple trees. M. Manwood in his firſt part of Foreſt lawes, ſaith thus of it: A warren is a fraunchiſe or priuiledged place of pleaſure, onely for thoſe beaſts and foules that are beaſts and foules of warren, tantùm campestres & non ſylueſtres. viz. For ſuch beaſts and foules as are altogether belonging to the feilds, and not vnto the woods: and for none other beaſts or foules. There are but two beaſts of warren, that is to ſay Hares and Connies: and there are alſo but two foules of warren, viz. Feſants and partridges. And none other wild beaſts or birds haue any firme peace, priuiledge, or protection, within the warren. If any perſon be found to be an offender in any ſuch free warren, he is to be puniſhed for the ſame by the courſe of the common law, and by the ſtatute. auno 21. Ed. 3. called the ſtatute de male factoribus in parcis & chaceis &c. For the moſt parte there are not officers in a warren, but the maſter of the game, or the keeper. A free warren is ſome time in cloſed, and alſo the ſame ſome time doth lie open. for there is no neceſſity of incloſing the ſame, as there is of a park, for if a park be ſuffered to lie open, it ought to be ſeiſed into the kings

                  
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Manwood.
               
               
                  Warſcot, is the contribution, that was wont to be made towards armour in the Saxons time. In Canutus his charter of the Foreſt ſet out by M. Manwood in the firſt part of his Foreſt lawes, num. 9. you haue theſe wordes: Sint omnes tam primarii quàm mediocres, & minuti, immunes, liberi & quietiab omnibus prouincialibus ſummonitionibus, & popularibus placitis, quae Hundred laghe Angli dicunt, & ab omnibus armorum oncribus, quod Warſcot Angli dicunt, & forinſecis querelis.
               
               
                  VVarwit, aliâs, VVardwit, is to be quite of giuing money for keeping of watches. New expoſition of lawe termes.
               
                  VVaſte (vastum) commeth of the French (gaſter. i. populari. It ſignifieth diuerſly in our common lawe, firſt, a ſpoile made, either in houſes, woods, gardens, orchards, &c. by the tenent for terme of life, or for terme of anothers life, or of yeares, to the preiudice of the heire, or of him in the Reuerſion or Remainder. Kitchin fol. 168. &c. vſque 172. vpon this committed the writ of waſte is brought for the recouerie of the things, whereupon the waſte is made. See Vaſto. VVaſte may be alſo made of tenents or bondmen belonging or 
                     〈◊〉
                   to the maner. Regiſt. orig. fol. 72. a. & 73. a. See the new booke of Entries. verbo VVaſte. A waſte of the Foreſt (as M. Manwood ſaith, parte prim. of his Foreſt lawes, pag. 172.) is moſt properly where any man doth cut downe his owne woods within the Foreſt, without licence of the king, or of the Lord chiefe Iuſtice in Eyre of the Foreſt. But it is alſo, where a man doth plow vp his owne medow or paſture, and conuerterh it vnto tillage. And of this you may reade him at large, in his ſecond part, cap. 8. num. 4. & 5. VVaſte in the ſecond ſignification is taken for thoſe parts of the Lords Demeſns, that be not in any one mans occupation, but lye common for bounds or paſſages of the Lord and tenent from one place to another, and ſomtimes for all the Kings ſubiects. VVhich ſeemeth to be called waſte, becauſe the Lord cannot make ſuch profit of it, as he doth of other of his land, by reaſon of that vſe which others haue of it in paſſing to and fro. Vpon this none may build or feed, or cut downe trees, without the Lords licence. VVaſte hath a third ſignification, as yeare, day, and waſte. Annus, dies, & vaſtum: which is a puniſhment or forfeiture belonging

to petittreaſon, or felonle: whereof you may reade Seawnf. pl. cor. lib. 3. cap. 30. And ſee Yeare, Day, and VVaſte.
               
               
                  VVaſters. anno 5. Ed. 3. cap. 14 See Roberds men. See Draw latches.
               
               
                  VVaſtell breade; anno 51. H. 3. ſtatute of bread, and ſtatute of pilorie.
               
               
                  VVater bayliffes, ſeeme to bee officers in port townes for the ſearching of ſhippes, anno 28. H. 6. cap. 5.
               
                  Watling ſtreet, is one of the 4. waies, which the Romaines are ſaid to haue made here in England, and called them Conſulares, Praetorias, Militares, Publicas. M. Camden in his Britannia, perſwadeth himſelfe that there were more of this ſort than 4. This ſtreete is otherwiſe called Werlam ſtreat, (as the ſame author ſaith, and howſoeuer the Romains might make it and the reſt, the names be from the Saxons. And Roger Houeden ſaith, it is ſo called, becauſe the ſonnes of Wethle made it, leading from the Eaſt ſea to the Weſt. Annal. part. prior. fol. 248. a. This ſtreet leadeth from Douer to London, and ſo to S. Albons, and there onward directly toward the North-weſt through the land, as from Donſtable to Weſtcheſter: anno 39. El. cap. 2. the ſecond ſtreet is called Ikenild ſtreet, beginning ab Icenis, who were the people inhabiting Northfolke, Southfolke, and Cambridge ſhire, as M. Camden declareth, pag. 345. The third is called Toſſe: the reaſon of the name he giueth, becauſe he thinketh it was ditched of each ſide. The fourth is called Ermin ſtreet, Germanico vocabulo, à Mercurio, quem ſub nomine Irmunſull. i. Mercurii columna, Germani maiores noſtri coluerunt. Of theſe reade more in the ſaid author, pag. 43. & 44. In the deſcription of England going vnder Saxons name, cap. 7. I reade that Belinus a Briton king made theſe 4. wayes: whereof the firſt and greateſt he calleth Foſſe, ſtretching out of the South into the North, and beginning from the corner of Cornwel, and paſſing ſoorth by Deuonſhire, Somerſetſhire, and ſo along by Tetburie vpon Toteſwould beſides Couentree vnto Leceſter, and thence, by the wide plaines to Newarke and to Lincolne where it endeth. The ſecond he nameth Watling ſtreet, comming out of the South-eaſt toward the Foſſe, beginning at Dover, and paſſing through the middle of Kent ouer Thames beſide London nere Weſtminſter, and thence to S. Albons, by Donſtable, Stratford, Towceter, Weden, Lilborn, Atheriſton, Gilberts hill, now called Wreaken, by Seuerne,

Workeceſter, Stratton, and ſo foorth by the middle of Wales, vnto Cardican and the Iriſh ſeas. The third he calleth Erminageſtreet, ſtretching out of the Weſt North-weſt into the Eaſt South-eaſt, from S. Dauids in the weſt Wales vnto Southhampton. The fourth he called Rikenild ſtreet, ſtretching foorth by Worceſter, by Wicombe, Brinningham, Litchfield, Derby, Cheſterfield, and by Yorke foorth into Tynmouth. But he that liſteth to reade at large of theſe wayes, let him haue recourſe to the firſt volume of Helinſheds Chronicle, and the deſcription of England there, the 19. chapter. Where this antiquitie is farre otherwiſe declared, then by the former writer. Henry of Huntington likewiſe in the firſt booke of his hiſtorie, not farre after the beginning mentioneth theſe 4. ſtreetes, terming them calles Regia ſublimatos authoritate, ne aliquis in eis inimicum invadere auderet, &c.
               
               
                  Waterbayliffes. anno 28. H. 6. cap. 5. is an officer belonging to the citie of London, which hath the ſuperuiſon and ſearch of fiſh, that is brought to that citie, as alſo the gathering of the tolle riſing from that water. He is reckoned an Eſquier by his office, as the Sword-bearer, the Huntſman, and the chiefe Sergeant is. He alſo attendeth vpon the Lord Maior for the time being, and hath the principall care of marſhalling the gueſts at his table.
               
                  Way. See Chimin.
               
               
                  Weife (wauium) whence it hath his originall, I cannot certainely ſay. But I finde the nineteenth chapter of the Grand Cuſtumary of Normandy to be intitled (De choſes gaiues) and latined by the interpreter (De rebus vaiuis) which are there thus defined vaiua ſunt res, vel alia, qua nullius proprietati attributa, ſixe poſſeſſionis reclamatione ſunt inuenta, quae vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad diem & annum ſeruanda ſunt. Et de iis modo, quo dictum eſt de veriſcis, that is (weeks) eaſua eſſe probantibus eſt reſtitutio facienda, &c. This weife or things weiued haue the very ſame ſignification in our common law, and be nought but things forſaken. The Ciuilians call it (Derelictum) or (Quod eſt pro derelicto) Bracton in the twelue chapter of his firſt booke nu. 10. reckoneth them inter res quae ſunt nullius ea quae pro waiuio habentur: ſicut de aueriis, vbi non apparet Dominus, where he alſo ſaith, quòdo lim fuerunt inuentoris de iure naturali, & iam efficiuntur principis de iure Gentium. That this is a Regality, and belonging to the King, except it be challenged by the owner within a yeare and a day, it appeareth by Britton in his

uenthteene chapter. Now the Kings in their times haue graunted this and ſuch like prerogatiues vnto diuers ſubiects with their fees. who there likewiſe ſaith, that weifes, things loſt, and eſtrayes, muſt by the Lord of the fraunchiſe where they are found, be cauſed to be cried and publiſhed in markets and churches nere about, or els that the yeare and day doth not runne to the preiudice of him that hath loſt them. See Waiue. M. Skene de verborum ſignifi. verb. waife, ſaith, that waife eſt pecus, vel animal aberrans, which wanders and wauerrs without a knowne maſter, and being found by any man within his owne bounds, muſt be by him proclaimed vpon diuers, and ſundry market daies, at the pariſh church, and within the ſhyreeuedome. Otherwiſe the deteiner may be accuſed of theft. And it is lawfull for the owner to challenge the beaſt within a yeare and day. Whereby it appeareth, that in Scotland that is called a weife which we heere call a ſtray or eſtray.
               
                  Weald of Kent, is the wooddie part of the Countrie. Camden Britannia, pag. 247. M. Verſtegan in his reſtitution of decayed intelligence ſaith, that Wald, Weald, and Would differing in vowell, ſignifie one thing, to wit a Foreſt. See the reſt luera. W.
               
                  Wedding (Nuptiae) commeth of the German (wed). i. pignus. and wedde in Scotland ſignifieth ſo much at this day. Skene de verborum ſignifi. verbo Vadium.
               
               
                  Weigh (waga) is a certaine waight of cheeſe or wooll, conteining 256. pounds of avoyr de poyce. See Clove.
               
               
                  Weights (Pondera) what they be, it is wellknowne. There be 2. ſorts of them in vſe with vs. The one called Troy weight, which conteineth 12. ounces in the pound, and no more: by the which, pearl, pretious ſtones, electuaries, & medicinal things, gould, ſiluer, and bread be waied: The other is called Auer de pois, which conteineth 16. ounces in the pound. By this all other things are waied, that paſſe betweene man and man by weight, ſauing onely thoſe aboue named. why the one ſhould be called Troy weight, I haue not learned. though I reade it termed libram & vnciam Troianam: as if it came from Troy. But Georg. Agricola in his learned tractate de ponderibus & menſuris pa. 339. termeth the pound of 12. ownces libram medicam, and the other of 16. ownces libram ciuilem. ſaying thus of them both: Medica & ciuilis libra, numero non

grauitate vnciarum differunt. The ſecond ſeemeth ſoe to be termed by reaſon of the more full weight. for (Avoir de pois) in French, isas much to ſay, as to haue full weight. But by theſe words (Avoir de pois) are ſome time ſignified ſuch marchandies as are bought and ſould by this kinde of weights. the firſt ſtatute of Yorke anno 9. Ed. 3. in prooem. & anno 27. Ed. 3. ſtat. 2. ca. 10. & ann. 24 H. 8. ca. 13. Of weights in Scotland. See Skene de verb: ſignif. verbo Serplathe. All our weights and meaſures haue their firſt compoſition from the peny ſterling which ought to weigh 32. wheat corns of a middle ſort, twenty of which pence make an ownce and twelue ſuch ownces a pound or twenty ſhillings, but 15. ownces make the Merchants pound. Fleta, li. 2. ca. 12. It is not vnlike that this merchants pound, though an ounce leſſe, ſhould be all one in ſignification with the pound of auoir de pois: and the other pound, called by Flata trone weight, plainely appeareth to be all one with that which we now call trole weight. And I finde not Troie weight mentioned by any other that euer I read vpon this ſubiect, but onely our owne contry men. See Tronage.
               
               
                  Weights of Awncell, anno. 14. Ed. 3. ſtat. pri. c. 12. See Auncell weight.
               
               
                  Were, aliâs werre ſignifieth as much as (Aeſtimatio capitis, aut pretiū hominis. M. Lam. exp. of Saxō
                   words, verbo: Aeſtimatio. That is to ſay, ſo much as one paid for killing of a man. Whereby he gathereth that ſlaughters, and ſuch other great offences, were more rarely committed in auncient times, then now: when as for the multitude of offenders, death is moſt iuſtly inflicted for thoſe crimes, that then were redreſſed by pecuniary mulcts. Of this ſee Roger Houeden, parte poſter. ſuoruns annalium, in Henrico 2. fo. 344.
               
                  Weregelt thef. ſignificat latronem quire dimi poteſt. wera enim anglicè idem eſt in Saxonis lingua, vel pretium vitae hominis appraetiatum. Fleta lib. 1. ca. 47.
               
                  Weſt Saxon lage, aliâs Weſt ſexenlage. See Lawe.
               
               
                  Wharfe (wharfa) is a broad plaine place neare to a Creeke or hithe of the water, to lay wares vpon, that be brought to or from the water to be tranſported to any other place. New booke of Entries, fol. 3. col. 3.
               
                  Wharfinger, is the keeper of a wharfe, anno 7. Ed. 6. ca. 7.
               
                  White hart ſiluer (Candidi Cerui argentum) is a tribute or mulct paid into the Eſchequer out of the Foreſt of white hart: which (as M. Camden reporteth in his

                  Britan. pag. 150.) hath continued from Henry the thirds time, and was impoſed by him vpon Thomas De-la-linde, for killing of a moſt beautifull hart, which himſelfe before had purpoſely ſpared in hunting.
               
                  Widow (vidua) ſeemeth to come of the French (vide. i. inanitus, exinanitus) or the verb (vuider. i. inaniare) quaſi priuata at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      orba marito. Macrobius lib. pri. ſaturn. ca. 15. draweth it from the Hetruſcan verb (Iduare. i. diuidere. Vnde vidua quaſi valde idua. i. valde diuiſa: aut vidua. i. a viro diuiſa. The ſignification with vs is apparent. But there is one kinde of widow, called the widow of the King, or the Kings widow (vidua Regis) that requireth expoſition. And ſhee is that widow, which after her husbands death being the Kings tenent in capite, is driuen to recouer her Dower by a writ De dote aſſignanda. Of whom you may read Stawnf: praerog. cap. 4. The words of the ſtatute of the prarog: made anno 17. Ed. 2. be theſe. Item aſſignabit viduis poſt mortem virorum ſuorum, qui de co tenuerunt in capite, dotem ſuam, quae eas contingit, &c: licet haeredes fuerint plenae aetatis, ſividuae voluerint. Et viduae illae ante aſſignationens dotis ſuae praedictae, fiue haeredes plenae aetatis fuerint, ſiue infra aetatem, iurabunt, quòd ſe non maritabunt ſine licentia Regis. Tunc Rex capiet in manum ſuam nomine diſtrictionis omnes terras, & tenementa, quae de eo tenentur in dotem, donec ſatiſfecerint ad voluptatem ſuam: ita quòd ipſa mulier nihil capiet de exitibus, &c. quia per huiuſmodi diſtrictiones huiuſmodi mulieres, ſeu viri corum ſinem facient Regiad voluptatem ſuam. Et illae voluntas tempore Regis Henrici patris Regis Edwardi aeſtimari conſueuit ad valentiam praedictae dotis per vnum annum adplus niſi vlteriorem gratiam habuerint. Mulieres, quae de Rege tenent in capite aliquam haereditatem, iurabunt ſimiliter, cuiuſcun
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      fuerint aetatis, quòd ſe non maritabunt ſine licentia Regis. Et ſifecerint, 
                        •
                     errae & tenementa ipſarum eodent modo ca
                        〈…〉
                     
                     tur in manum De
                        •
                     ini Regis, 
                        〈…〉
                     
                     uſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſatiſfecerint ad voluntatem Regis. Of this ſee likewiſe the great charter cap. 7. whereby it appeareth that other common Lords haue the ſame power ouer their widowes, touching their conſent, in their mariage, that the King hath. Of this you may read more in the writ De dote aſſignanda. Fitzh. nat. br. fo. 263. C. See alſo the ſtatute anno 32. H. 8. cap. 46.
               
                  Windeleſor. a Herald. See Herald.
               
               
                  Withernam (vetitum Namium) Maſter Lamberd thinketh to be compounded of (wither. i. altera, ſiue ſecundae) & (Nam. i.

                  pignoris captio) marueiling much why it ſhould ſo farre be depraued in the interpretation, as to be tranſlated (vetitum Namium.) Reade him in the explication of Saxon wordes, verbo, Pignorari. The concord of the thing ſignified with the meaning of the Latine words, maketh ſome to thinke, that it is compounded of (wehren. i. veto,) and (nyman,) or nemmen. i. capio.) For withernam in our common lawe is the taking, or driuing a diſtreſſe to a hould, or out of the countie, ſo that the Shyreeue cannot vpon the repleuin make deliuerance therof to the partie diſtreined: In which caſe, the writ of Withernam, or de vetito Namio is directed to the Shyreeue, for the taking of as many of his beaſts that did thus vnlawfully diſtrein, or as much goods of his, into his keeping, till that he hath made deliuerance of the firſt diſtreſſe. Alſo if the beaſtes be in a fortlet or caſtell, the Shyreeue may take with him the power of the countie, and beat downe the caſtell, as it appeareth by the Statute. Weſtm. pri. cap. 20. Britton. cap. 27. But M. Lamberds interpretation ſeemeth more conſonant to the writ, the forme whereof is thus in part, (Fitz. nat. br. fol. 73.) Tibi praecipimus quòd averia praedicti B. in Balliva tua capias in withernam, &c. and the Regiſter orig. fol. 82. & 83. & 79. a. & 80. a. and in the Regiſter Iudic. fol. 29 a. & 30. a. Whereby it appeareth, that the Shyreeue by theſe words is willed to take in compenſation of the former taking, ſo many cattell, &c. But yet this may qualifie M. Lamberds maruelling, becauſe they that tranſlated this word into ſuch Latine, ſeeme to haue bene deceiued by the propinquitie of the word, (wehren) both to the word (withernam) and alſo to the meaning. This error (if it be an error) hath a probable likelihood of deſcent from the Normans, as appeareth by the grand Cuſtumarie. cap. 4. where you haue wordes to this effect: Deficientes (ſc. Baliuos) facere iuſticiari, & ca, de quibus iudicium vel recordatio habet fieri in curia: debet (ſc. Iuſticiarius) retrahere vel recitare. Treugam dari debet facere, quod eſt aſſecuratio pacis obſervandae. Nampta iniuſte capta per ius facere liberari, &c. Here you may ſee (nampta) referred to the firſt taking or diſtreſſe, which is vnlawfull. Sir Thomas Smith in his Repub. Anglor. agreeth with M. Lamberd in theſe words: This (withernam) he (meaning Litleton, with whom Bracton alſo agreeth. lib. 2. cap. 5. & lib. 3. tract. 2.

                  cap. 36.) interpreteth vetitum Namium, in what language I know not. Whereas in truth it is in plaine Dutch, and in our old Saxon language (wither nempt. i. alterum accipere, alterum rapere,) a word that ſignifieth all one with that barbarous Latine word, (Repraeſalia) when one taking of me a diſtreſſe, which in Latine is called (pignus) or any other thing, and carying it away out of the Iuriſdiction, where I dwell, I take by order of him that hath iuriſdiction, another of him againe, or of ſome other of that Iuriſdiction: and do bring it into the iuriſdiction, wherein I dwell: that by equall wrong I may come to haue equall right, &c. Namatio animalium in Scotland is vſed for the pounding of cattell, Skene de verbor. ſignif. verbo, Averia: whom alſo reade, verbo, Namare. Withernam in Bracton lib. 3. tract. 2. cap. 37. and alſo in Weſtm. 2. ca. 2. ſeemeth to ſignifie an vnlawfull diſtreſſe, made by him that hath no right to diſtreine. an. 13. Ed. prim. cap. 2. See the newe booke of Entries. verbo Withernam.
               
               
                  Woad, (glastum) is an herbe brought from the parts of Tolouſe in France, & from Spayno, much vſed and very neceſſary in the dying of wollen cloth. an 7. H. 8. cap. 2. we call it woad of the Italian word (guado) or the Germane word (weidt.)
               
               
                  Woodgeld, ſeemeth to be the gathering or cutting of wood within the Foreſt, or money payed for the ſame, to the vſe of the Foreſters. And the immunitie from this by the Kings graunt, is by Crompton called Woodgeld. fol. 197.
               
                  Woodmen, ſeeme to be thoſe in the Foreſt, that haue their charge eſpecially to looke to the Kings woods. Manwood parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes pag. 193. and Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 146.
               
                  Woodmote court, is the Attachment of the Foreſt. Manwood parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes. pag. 95. See Attachment.
               
               
                  Woodward (Woodwardus) is an officer of the Foreſt, whoſe function you may partly gather by his oath ſet downe in Cromptons Iuriſd. fol. 201. which M. Manwood hath alſo in his firſt part of his Foreſt lawes pag. 50. to the ſame effect, but ſomething more at large. viz. You ſhall truly execute the office of a woodward of B. woods within the Foreſt of W. ſo long as you ſhalbe woodward there: you ſhall not conceale any offence either in Vert or in Veniſon, that ſhalbe committed or done within your charge: but you ſhall truly preſent the ſame, without any fauour, affection or reward. And

if you doe ſee or know any malefactors, or doe finde any Deere killed or hurt, you ſhall forthwith doe the verderour vnderſtand thereof. And you ſhall preſent the ſame at the next court of the Foreſt: be it Swainmote, or court of Attachments, ſo help you God. Woodwards may not walke with bow and ſhafts, but with Foreſt bills. Manwood parte pri. of his Foreſt lawes pag. 189. and more of him pag. 97.
               
                  Wooldriuer, anno 2. & 3. Ph. & Ma. ca. 13. be thoſe that buy wool abroad in the country of the ſheep maſters, & carry it by horſe backe to the clothyers or to market townes to ſell it againe.
               
                  Woolferthfod (Caput lupinum) is the condition of thoſe, which were outlawed in the Saxons time, for not yelding themſelues to Iuſtice. For if they could be taken aliue, they muſt haue bene brought to the King: and if they in feare of apprehenſion did defend themſelues they might be ſlaine, and their heads brought to the King. For they carried a woolues head, that is to ſay: their head was noe more to be accoumpted of, then a woolues head, being a beaſt ſo hurtfull vnto man. See the lawes of K. Edw: ſet out by M. Lamberd fol. 127. b. nu. 7. The very like whereof Bracton alſo ſaith lib. 3. tract. 2. ca. 11. See vtlarie. Roger Houeden writeth it (Wulueſheued. parte poſter, ſuorum annalium fol. 343. b.) whom read of this mater becauſe you ſhall there ſee what it was in thoſe daies to violate the peace of the church.
               
                  Woolſtaple, anno 51. H. 3. ſtat. 5. See Staple.
               
               
                  Wooll winders, be ſuch as winde vp euery fleece of wooll that is to be packed and ſould by weight, into a kinde of bundle after it is clenſed in ſuch maner as it ought to be by ſtatute. And to auoide ſuch deceit as the owners were wont to vſe by thruſting locks of refuſe wooll and ſuch other droſſe to gaine weight they are ſworne to performe that office truly betweene the owner and the merchant. See the ſtatute, anno 8. H. 6. cap. 22. & anno 23. H. 8. ca. 17. & anno 18. Eliza. ca. 25.
               
                  Would. See Weald.
               
               
                  Wranglands, ſeeme to be miſgrowne trees that will neuer prooue timber. Kitchin fol. 169. b.
               
               
                  Wormſeede (ſemen ſantonicum) is medicinal ſeede browght forth of that plant which in Latine is called (Sementina) in Engliſh, holy wormwood, whereof you may read in Gerards Herball li. 2. ca. 435. This is a drugge to be garbled, anno 1. Iacob. cap. 19.
               
                  
                  Wreck (wreccum vel wrectum maris) is the loſſe of a ſhippe and the goods therein conteined by tempeſt, or other miſchaunce at the ſea. The Ciuilians call it (Naufragium) This wreck being made, the goods that were in the ſhippe, being brought to land by the waues, belong to the king by his prerogatiue. And therevpon in many bookes of our common lawe the very goods, ſo brought to land are called wreck. And wreck is defined to be thoſe goods which are ſo brought to land. Sir Ed. Coke vol. 6. relatio, f. 106. a. & the ſtatute anno 17. Ed. 2. ca. 11. in theſe words. Item Rex habebit wreccum maris, per totum Regnum, ballenas, & ſturgiones captas in mari vel alibi infra Regnum, exceptis quibuſdam locis privilegiatis per Regem. Whereby it appeareth that the King hath them, or ſuch as haue by graunt this libertie or priuiledge of him. And that this ſtatute doth but affirme the auncient lawe of the land, it appeareth by Bracton, lib. 2. cap. 5. num. 7. hiis verbis: Suntetiam alia res quae pertinent ad coronā propter privilegium Regis, & it a communem non recipiunt libertatem, quin dari poſſint, & ad alium transferi. Quia ſi transferantur, tranſlatio nulli erit damnoſa, niſi ipſi Regi fiue principi. Et ſi huiuſmods res alicui conceſſae fuerint, ſicut wreccum maris, &c. The reaſon of this he toucheth ſhortly in his firſt booke. cap. 12. num. 10. where he reckoneth theſe goods (iure naturali) to be (in bonis nullius) quia non apparet Dominus eorum, ſed iure Gentium fieri principis: And ſee him alſo, lib. 2. cap. 24. num. 1. & 2. It is worth the asking to know: what is a wreck, and what not in this ſtricter ſignification. And the author of the termes of lawe ſaith, that if any perſon of the ſhippe come to land, it is not a wreck, or the wreck is not ſuch, that the king ought to haue the goods. with whome agreeth S. Ed. Coke vol. 6. f. 107. a. No, if either Dogge or Catte eſcape aliue to the land: the goods are the owners ſtill, ſo he come within a yeare, and day to claime them. And for this the ſtatute is plaine Weſtm. pri. ca. 4. anno 3. Edw. pri. which doctrine Fitzh. in his nat. br. fol. 112. 
                     〈◊〉
                   extendeth thus farre, that if any of the goods be caſt vpon the drie land by any in the ſhippe, it is no wreck ſubiect to the prerogatiue, for by this ſome of the ſhippe are preſumed to come to land, and ſtill to haue a cuſtodie of the goods. Cooke vbi ſupra. This in the

Grand Cuſtumarie of Normandie. cap. 17. is called (varech) and latined (veriſeum) where it appeareth that the like lawe to ours was in Normandie almoſt in all points. But ſome ſorts of their pretious Merchandiſe doe by their lawe appertaine to the Duke by his prerogatiue, though a iuſt challenge of the goods be made within the yeare and day. The Emperours of Rome made no advantage of this pitifull event, as appeareth: titulo De Naufragiis 11. Cod. And it appeareth that Richard the firſt had ſome remorſe of poore ſea mens miſeries in this caſe. For he quietum clamavit wreck ſuis ſubditis. Rog. Hoveden parte poster. ſuorum annal. fol. 386. Of this M. Skene de verb. ſignif. ſpeaketh to this effect: wreck ſignifieth a power, liberty, and prerogatiue appertaining to the King, or to any perſon, to whome the ſame is graunted by him by feofment, or any other diſpoſition, to take vp and gaine ſuch goods as are ſhip broken, or fall to him by eſcheate of the ſea.
               
                  Writ, (breue) is that with our common lawyers (in Sir Tho. Smiths iudgement lib. 2. de Repub. Anglorum. cap. 9.) which the Civilians call (Actionem, ſiue formulam) But I am rather of his iudgement, that hath added the marginall note vnto him, ſaying that (Actio) is the parties whole ſuite: and that (Breue) is the kings precept, whereby any thing is comaunded to be done touching the ſuite or action: as the defendant or tenent to be ſummoned, a diſtreſſe to be taken, a diſſeiſin to be redreſſed, &c. And theſe writs are diuerſly diuided, in diuers reſpects. Some in reſpect of their order, or maner of graunting, are termed originall, and ſome Iudiciall. Originall writs be thoſe, that are ſent out for the ſummoning of the Defendant in a perſonall, or Tenent in a reall action, or other like purpoſe, before the ſuite beginneth, or to begin the ſuite thereby Thoſe be iudiciall, that be ſent out by order of the court, where the cauſe dependeth, vpon occaſion growing after ſuite begunne. old. nat. br. fol. 51. And Iudiciall is thus by one ſigne knowne from the Originall, becauſe the Teste beareth the name of the chiefe Iuſtice of that Court whence it commeth, where the Orig. beareth in the Teſte the name of the Prince. Then according to the nature of the action, they be perſonall or reall: and reall be either touching the poſſeſſion, called writs of Entrie, or the property, called writs of right.

                  Fitzh. nat. br. ſparſim per totum. Some writs be at the ſuite of a party, ſome of office. old. nat. br. fol. 147. Some ordinary, ſome of priuiledge. A writ of priuiledge is that which a priuiledged perſon bringeth to the court, for his exemption, by reaſon of ſome priuiledge. See Pro cedendo. See the new booke of Entriſe. verbo. priviledge. See Briefe.
               
               
                  Writ of rebellion. See Commiſſion of rebellion.
               
               
                  Writer of the talies (Scriptor talliarum) is an officer in the Exchequer being clerk to the auditour of the receipt, who writeth vpon the talies the whole letters of the tellers billes.
            
            
               Y
               
                  YArd land (Virgataterrae) is a quantitie of land called by this name of the Saxon (Gyrdlander (but not ſo certaine a quantity, as that it is all one in all places. For in ſome country it conteineth 20. acres: in ſome 24. in ſome 30. as M. Lamb. ſaith in his explication of Saxon words: verbo virgata terrae. This yard land Bracton calleth (virgatam terrae. lib. 2. cap. 20. & 27.) but he expreſſeth no certainty what it conteineth.
               
                  Yere and day (annus & dies) is a time thought in conſtruction of our common lawe fit in many caſes to determine a right in one, and to worke an vſucapion or preſcription in another. As in a caſe of an eſtray, if the owner (proclamations being made) chalenge it not within that time, it is forfeit. So is the yeare and day giuen in caſe of appeale, in caſe of deſcent after entry or claime; of no claime vpon a fine or writ of right at the common lawe: ſo of a villein remaining in auncient demeane, of the death of a man ſore bruiſed or wounded: of protections; eſſoines in reſpect of the Kings ſervice: of a wreck, and divers other caſes Coke. vol. 6. fol. 107. b. And that touching the death of a man ſeemeth an imitation of the civile lawe. Nam ſi mortifere fuerit vulneratus, & poſtea poſt lon. gum intervallum mortuus ſit, inde annum numerabimus ſecundum 
                        •
                     ulianum. l. ait lex. Π. ad legē Aquil.
               
               
                  Yeare, day, and waste, (annus dies, & vastum) is a part of the Kings prerogatiue, whereby he challengeth the profits of their lands and tenements for a yere, and a day, that are attainted of petit treaſon or felonie, whoſoeuer be Lord of the maner, whereunto the lands or tenements do belong, and not onely ſo, but in the end waſteth the tenement, deſtroyeth the houſes, rooteth vp the woods, gardens,

paſtures, and ploweth vp medowes, except the Lord of the fee agree with him for the redemption of ſuch waſte, afterward reſtoring it to the Lord of the fee. Whereof you may reade at large in Stawnf. praerog. cap. 16. fol. 44. & ſeqq.
               
               
                  Yoman, ſeemeth to be one word made by contraction of two Daniſh words (yong men) which I gather out of Canutus Charter of the Foreſt ſet out by M. Manwood parte prim. fol. prim. num. 2. in theſe words: Sunt ſub quolibet horum quatuor ex mediocribus hominibus, quos Angli (Legeſpend) nuncupant, Dani verò (yong men) vocant, locati, qui curam & onus tum viridis tum veneris ſuſcipiant. Theſe M. Camden in his Britan. pag. 105. placeth next in order to Gentlemen, calling them (Ingenuos) whoſe opinion the ſtatute affirmeth, anno 16. R. 2. cap. 4. whereunto adde the ſtatute anno 20. eiuſdem Regis cap. 2. Sir Thomas Smith in his Repub. Anglor. lib. prim. cap. 23. calleth him a Yoman, whom our lawes call legalem hominem: which (as he ſaith) is in Engliſh a Free man borne, that may diſpend of his owne free land, in yerely reuenew, to the ſumme of forty ſhillings ſterling. Of theſe he writeth a good large diſcourſe, touching their eſtate and vſe in this common wealth. The former etymologie of the name he liketh not, making queſtion whether it come of the Dutch (yonker) yea or not, which in the Low countries ſignifieth a meane Gentleman, or a gay fellow. But he that hath added the marginall notes to that booke, ſeemeth to draw it from the Saxon (Geman) which ſignifieth a maried man. M. Verſteg an in his reſtitution of decayed intelligence, cap. 10. writeth, that (Gemen) among the auncient Teutonicks, and (Gemein) among the moderne, ſignifieth as much, as Common, and that the firſt leter G. is in this word, as in many others, turned into Y. and ſo written Yemen, and that therfore Yemen, or Yeomen ſignifieth ſo much as Commoner. Yoman ſignifieth an Officer in the Kings houſe, which is in the middle place betweene the Serge ant and the Groome: as Yoman of the Chaundrie, and Yoman of the Scullerie. anno 33. H. 8. cap. 12. Yoman of the Crowne. anno 3. Ed. 4. cap. 5. & anno 22. eiuſ. cap. 1. & anno 4. H. 7. cap. 7. This word (Yongmen) is vſed for Yomen in the ſtatute. anno 33. H. 8. cap. 10.
               
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   