
      
         
            
            
            THE
TRIALL OF
Witch-craft,
SHEWING
THE TRVE AND
RIGHT METHODE
of the Discouery:
WITH
A Confutation of erroneous wayes.
            
            
               By IOHN COTTA, Doctor in Physicke.
            LONDON,
Printed by GEORGE PVRSLOWE for SAMVEL
RAND, and are to be solde at his shop neere
Holburne-bridge. 1616.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONORAble,
Sir Edward Coke Knight, Lord Chiefe Iustice of
England, and one of his Maiesties most honourable priuie
Councell, and to the rest of the honourable and
worthie IVDGES.
            
               RIght honourable Lords, where according vnto the
direction of good lawes, gracious Soueraignes nobly
rule, and loyall Subiects freely obey, there the
Common-weale, which is the common good of
both, produceth the most royall, happy and stable
Monarchy. If euer any Kingdome hath been fortunate, to giue a
true mirror and example of this happinesse, this famous Iland hath
been therein incomparable, wherein so many puissant Monarchs,
successiuely swaying this Emperiall Diademe, according vnto the
ancient Lawes and Customes of this Nation, haue so many hundreths
of yeares gouerned this mighty people in peace and honour
at home, and victoriously led them in triumphant warre abroad,
as by the glorious trumpe of forreine and domestike fame
and Historie is not obscure. The splendor of this truth, the iniurious
aspersion of insufficiencie in our English laws, cannot without
shame or blushing guilt behold. Notwithstanding, since in some
few things to be wanting, was neuer as yet wanting in the most
exquisite lawes, policy and state that euer hath been, and since the
Lawe of God it selfe (though perfect in it selfe) through humane
imperfection in the true perfection was neuer yet seene, giue mee

leaue through all lawes and Countries in one particular to wonder
at their generall defect. What Lawe or Nation in the detection
of Witches, and Witch-craft, hath as yet euer appeared
competent, or from iust exception exempt? How vncertaine are
among all people differing iudgements? Some iudge no Witches
at all, others more then too many, others too few by many,
in so opposite extremes, so extremely opposite: I doe not presume
to prescribe how a lawe may become more absolute or perfect,
I onely labour and enquire to learne. Among many generall
directions by different Authors, diuersly published, concerning
the perfecting of particular lawes, (as farre as perfection is
possible vnto humane frailety) Demosthenes in his second Oration
against Aristogiton, in my thought doth seeme to equall (if not exceede)
the most exquisite. Three things sayth he (as may bee
plainely out of the forenamed place collected) doe concurre vnto
the vpright constitution of euery complete lawe, whereby it
may be held sacred and inuiolate. The first is, that it be 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that
is, that it bee the ordinance and gift of God.
Secondly, that it bee 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the sage and
iudicious decree and counsell of the most wise and prudent. The
third is, that it bee 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the vniuersall consent
of the whole state, City or countrey. Certainely, the true
cause of the forementioned generall lamenesse, and confusion of
Lawes in the proposed case of With-craft consisteth herein. First,
for that men haue not as yet sufficiently searched the holy Scriptures
to finde out that 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, what is the ordinance
of God therein. Secondly, for that men haue not seriously consulted
with that wisedome and prudence, which by the light of
nature and reason Almightie God hath left discouerable and allowed
to be iustly and truly deemed, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that
is, the sage counsell, determination and decree of the most iudicious,
prudent and wise men.
            
               
When these two are met and are agreed; namely, the ordinance
of God, and the vpright & sincere counsell of the most holy, prudent
and wise men, purposely studied, and without superstition exercised
therein: then wil the happy harmony of all mens hearts become
easily tunable thereto, which is, 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               , that is, the
common consent of Prince, People, and Countrey. Vnto this faire
worke and building of God: let it not seeme presumption, that I
offer this my moytie of desire, and good will. I know that in this
subiect, many ages of learned Authors, haue endlesly varied, many
famous Writers haue been branded with infamous errors, many
excellent wits haue runne themselues almost out of their wits,
and those who haue best deserued, their trembling pens haue niggardly
dropped, and timorously pointed out any fully, or firmely
auouched certainty. It is notwithstanding no breach of rule of modesty,
but by bounden duty, vnto the accomplishment and honour
of truth, to adde whatsoeuer in my vtmost endeauour may be conducible.
Neither would my many conflicts, with difficulties in this
kinde, hold me excused, if so oft spurred, or rather galled, by so
frequent exercice, practice and conuersation, with persons in so diuers
extraordinary manners afflicted, and supposed be witched, it
should awake no answerable dispatch or display therein. Let it
then seeme no wonder, that a man (though lesse then the least among
men) who hath not onely as studiously as others laboured
the same particular, and as diligently therein obserued, but hath
farre more happily been fortuned then others, with frequent matter,
and occurrents worthy obseruation, and hath also beene more
plentifully gratified with opportunitie, to inrich his vnderstanding
with variety and worth of obiects, instructing his reason, and confirming
his experience: Let it seeme no wonder (I say) that a
meane wit, thus beyond others furnished thereto, may aduenture
amiddest so many doubts and ambiguities, wherewith so many
worthies haue been formerly intangled and perplexed, to auouch

and proue certainty, and demonstration. In this subiect of Witch-craft,
by better meanes aduantaged, if beyond former times or
Writers, I haue haply proposed a more direct and certaine module
and methode of iudging therein, I doe not thereby arrogate
vnto my selfe, but attribute vnto the meanes, nor derogate from
others, whom if the like contingence of the same helpes, had as
freely and friendly affronted, and the like facilitie had opened as
ready accesse, I acknowledge in the guilty sense of my owne exiguitie
(whether in the outward beauty of words, or inward substance
of vnderstanding) it had been easie for any man to exceed
with so good meanes this so euil meanenesse of my performance.
Since then (Right Honourable Lords) the subiect it selfe, & a pertinent
and peculiar vse therein, doe point vnto your Honours the
propertie of this Dedication, vnto whose tribunall the lawes of
God and men appeale against that foule abominable sinne, let it
not bee censured pride or presumption, humbly to present vnto
your Lordship that consideration and resolution which beyond
my merit or desert, Occurrents haue freely administred vnto long-distracted
meditation. If there may appeare therein ought aduancing
truth, or seruiceable vnto the common-weale, vouchsafe for
those good respects, it may be gracious in your eyes, acceptable
and worthy your noble fauours and protection, against the iniuries
of aduerse obdurate custome, ignorance, enuy, and the vulgar
indignation of common receiued and deceiued opinion. In the
meane season, my deuoted heart shal deuoutly pray vnto Almightie
God for your Lordships long life, the multiplication of many
happy dayes, redoubled honour in your seruice of God, your King
and Countrey, and after this life, that life which euer lasteth.
            
               Your Lordships, in the most humble desire, and tender
of his deuotions seruice and obseruance.
IOHN COTTA.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               INgenious Reader, in this subiect of Witch-craft
which I here present vnto thee, thou art not ignorant,
what obscuritie, difficultie, difference,
contrarietie and contradiction hath among Authors
and learned men in all ages arisen. From
the effusion of generall ignorance, or superstitious blindnesse
herein, willing to withdraw the vulgar illusion; I haue indeuoured
demonstratiuely to declare what portion of certainety in
such vncertainties, God and Nature hath destined & allowed.
It is not any worth either arrogated vnto my self, or derogated
from others, but my studious desire and vehement affection in
this particular, together with some speciall experience & paines
vpon diuers occurrents, & occasions extraordinarily hapning,
that hath drawne me forth to offer my opinion as the widdowes
mite, more haply in good will, and harty affection, then in true
valew or deserued esteeme. If it may only giue occasion vnto a
more exquisite pensell, it is the heigth of my intention, and a
complete recompence of my indeuour. For this cause, and for
common easie reading and apprehension, I haue purposely auoided,
and discontinued the smooth thrid of a continued laboured
stile, and haue for the most part preferred and inserted a
plaine texture, of a more vulgar and carelesse phrase and word.
The enuious haply may cauill, that a Physicion out of his owne
supposed precincts, should rush into sacred lists, or enter vpon so
high points of Diuinitie, as by an vnauoidable intercurrence, do

necessarily insert themselues in this proposed subiect. Diuinitie
it selfe doth herein answere them. In the theory of Theologie, it
is the duety and praise of euery man, to bee without curiositie
fruitfully exercised.
            For as touching matter of Diuinitie, as it falleth out, or is incident
in the discourse of this small Treatise, I onely propound
such reasons and considerations therein, as in common are allowable
and commendable in euery Christian man, and therein
I doe neither vsurpingly controule others, nor controulingly conclude
my selfe, but willingly submit vnto the graue censure and
dictature of the learned and reuerend Diuine. If therefore
(good Reader) I haue here published or communicated vnto
thee ought thankes-worthy, as it is by me freely intended vnto
thee; so let it not from me be vnfriendly extended by thee. If I
haue in ought erred, let it be thy praise and goodnes to make thy
vse thereof without abuse. If thou hast formerly thought amisse,
and doest here reade that is more right, bee not ashamed to acknowledge
thy better knowledge. If thou list not to know, then
know, that truth shall iudge thee, and iustifie her selef without
thee.
            
               Thy well-willing friend,
IOHN COTTA.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE TRIALL OF
WITCH-CRAFT:
            Shewing, the true and right Method
of the Discouerie.
            
               CHAP. I.
               Of naturall knowledge, and how it is solely acquired, either by Sense,
or Reason, or by artificiall and prudent coniectation.
               
                  AS there is one onely Infinite,
which hath created all things
finite: so is there one onely finite,
most neerly like vnto that
Infinite, which is wisedome
and knowledge in men and
Angels. The knowledge which
is giuen to Angels, is onely
knowne to God and Angels.
The knowledge which is giuen
to man, is knowne by man,
limited, measured and confined. It is therefore by the most
wise Philosophers and fathers, of former times, and the Sages
of later times and ages agreed, by a generall consent and harmony

of the same truth, that all things which are allotted
man to know or vnderstand, are by two waies of instruments
soly to be atchieued or hoped. TheScalig. de Subtil. Exercit. 307. sect. 22 first of these is the inward
vnderstanding: the second is the outward sense. The vnderstanding
hath knowledge diuers wayes. First immediately,
by an inbred Idea, and vnderstanding of certaine general notions
common vnto all men, and in them and with them
born. This, though intellectuall, may be in some sort assimulated
vnto that naturall instinct in bruit creatures; by which,
when they come first into the world, yet immediatly by the
direction of Nature, they refuse, and flie from that which is
euill and harmefull, and seek and know that which is needfull
vnto their life and preseruation. Secondly, the vnderstanding
hath knowledge by ratiocination, by the discourse and
vse of reason. By this ratiocination, we do in many things
gaine aOmnis syllogismus, vel regularis, & recta ratio cinatio est vel demonstratiua, vel dialectica, Aristot. lib. Analyt. certainty of knowledge; in othersome a probability
and likelihood onely of certainty, yet oft-times in a very
great neerenesseDialecticꝰ syllogismꝰ, vel ratiocinatio, ex propositionibꝰ Dialecticis, vel probabilibus, licet non certa vt demonsiratiuus syllogismus, tamen vera indicia constituit, ideo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      est verarum opinionum sons, Aristot. ibid. and affinity with certainty. Knowledge
likewise commeth by the outward senses, which do certainly
and vndoubtedly informe the vnderstanding concerning
their seuerall proper obiects, where the faculty is found, and
the instruments of sense, and the outward meanes of conueyance
are rightly disposed.
               Among these fiue senses, the sight and hearing, the eye and
eare, are the most excellent and chiefe wayes of multiplication
and increase of naturall knowledge. Besides these wayes
of knowledge; namely, the inward and the outward sense,
there neuer was, nor euer can be enumeration of any other.
For this cause the Philosophers haue diuided all things that
are incident vnto mankinde, to know or vnderstand; either
vnto such things as immediatlyHinc Syllogismi perfecti & imperfecti ratio ex Aristot. in their very first thought
or mention do proue themselues, and at the first cōsideration
or sight are euident vnto all men; or such as are directly inferred
and necessarily proued by other propositions, or such
as by prudent gesse onely and likely coniecture giue a faire
probability of truth and certainty. Such things as immediatly

proue themselues, and are vndoubted, in their first view,
are subiect either to the sense onely, or vnto the vnderstanding
onely. Such things as are only proper to the sense, and
thereto immediatly and properly subiect, are things seene,
heard, touched, tasted, smelt, as colours, figures, lineaments,
sounds, musike, hardnesse, softnesse, drinesse, moisture, roughnesse,
smoothnesse, sowre, sweete, diuersity of odours and
the like: in which, without the vse of the fiue senses, men
cannot be sensible or know any thing in this inferiour world
vnder the heauens. Such things as are subiect vnto the vnderstanding
onely, and not vnto the sense, and immediatly
proue themselues, are generall notions and receptions, inseparably
fixed in the vnderstanding of all men. Of this kind
are these positions in Philosophie. All things that are made,
haue their matter,Materiam, Formam, Priuationem. out of which they were made, haue their
speciall formes and difference, by which they are apart that
they are: and lastly to that being, which they are, are risen
from that which they were not. Likewise, these positions
in Logicke: Euery proposition is true or false, affirmatiue or
negatiue, and extendeth generally vnto all vnder the same
kinde, or to some particulars, or to a singular, or is indefinite.
Likewise, in Arithmaticke these: One is no number, one cannot
bee diuided, or is indiuisible; foure is more then two.
Likewise, in Physicke these: Euery man is sicke or healthful,
or a neuter: Contraries are cured by contraries, as heat by
cooling, cold by heating, moysture by drying, drynesse by
moysting. As in these named Sciences, so in all other; there
are the like generall notions, immediatly at the first viewe
proouing themselues vnto the vnderstanding, and euery man
in common sense and reason, immediatly consenteth vnto
their truth; and he that denieth it, or seeketh proofe thereof,
is esteemed iustly madde, or voyd of reason.
               There are other things also subiect vnto the vnderstanding
only, which do not immediatly vpon the first view or
consideration (as the former) proue themselues, but are proued
by others more cleere and euident then themselues; as

this proposition. The motion of the heauens is not infinite.
This is not manifest vnto euery man at first view, but requireth
another more manifest then it selfe, to make it manifest
then it selfe, to make it manifest, thus: That which hath a
certaine limitted course, circumuolution and motion, cannot
be infinite; but Astronomie for many thousands of yeares
hath discouered the courses, periods, reuolutions, and set perambulations
of the heauens, and therfore the motions of the
heauens cannot be infinite. It may here easily be obserued,
how the first position being vnable to proue it selfe, but
another more manifest doth giue it light, and doth deduce it
vnto that, which doth so immediately proue it selfe vnto
common sense and reason, and obseruation of all ages and
times, that no idiot can be ignorant, or will deny it.
               Thus hath been manifested, how some things are immediately
vnderstood in the very first consideration and view:
some are proued by themselues, some not proued by themselues,
but made euident by others. As many things are in
the former kindes and seuerall manners manifested, and euidently
proued vnto Reason, Sense, or vnderstanding: so are
there many things neither by themselues nor by other euident,
neither to the vnderstanding and reason, nor to the
outward sense at the first apparent, but remaine ambiguous
and doubtfull. In these things certainety of knowledge by
manifest proofe failing, there remaineth no other refuge, but
prudent and artificiall coniecture, narrowly looking and
searching thorow probabilities, vnto the neerest possibilitie
of truth and certainty.
               From hence doe arise excellent vses and benefits vnto vnderstanding,
though not so farre forth ofttimes gained, as
is defired vnto all priuate ends, yet so farre forth, as maketh
wise and vnderstanding men, excell and shine before others.
Hence it commeth to passe that in doubtfull cases, counsels
and attempts, one man is seene and knowne to ouershine an
other, as much as the glorious Sunne doth his ecclipsed sister,
the Moone. Hence haue issued so many noble and heroike

Vertues; Sagacitie, exquisitnes of iudgement, Prudence,
Art, in the administration of high affaires. For, although
in probabilities are no euident certainties, yet doe
they so farre forth oft-times aduantage and aduance vnto
the knowledge of certainety, that it is almost equall vnto
certainty, and doth perswade and settle discreete resolution
and disposition in all affaires. In this consisteth the height,
the top, the summe of Art, and the perfection of all humane
knowledge, aboue or beyond which, no man could euer soare
or leuill. By this light onely the former mentioned meanes
failing, is oft times gained much excellence of natural knowledge
to man, beyond and without which the eye and sight
of knowledge in man is sealed vp, his vnderstanding darkned,
and cannot know many hidden things. And thus to him
that rightly doth meditate and consider, it is vndoubtedly
cleere and certaine, how the Creator and infinite Prince of
all principles hath founded the beginning & end, the power
and posse of all knowledge, vpon one of the former waies of
inuestigation, beside which there is no naturall knowledge
to be expected.Quod non est secundum, naturam non continetur a Scientia, Arist, Anal. poster. Philosophie as yet neuer found other* waies
vnto that infinite number of all Arts and Sciences, so admirably
flourishing thorow so many ages of the world. For
this cause the most excellent & prime Philosopher, Aristotle,
reiecteth whatsoeuer cānot be found by Sense, or proued by
reason, as spurious. Likewise Ptolomie hath bounded the true
Art of Astronomie within fatum Physicum, within a necessitie
in Nature, and to distinguish it from superstition (wherwith
curiositie vsually defileth or intangleth it) doth limit it
intra conuenientem natura modum, that is, within proportion
and measure answerable to Reason and Nature. For this
cause also, all true Philosophers haue determined the two
onely instruments of all true Arts, to bee Reason and Experience,
which Galen doth call the two legges wherevpon the
Art of Physike doth consist. And therefore in the second
chapter of his Finitiones medicae, he saith, Optimus is est Medieus,
qui omnia in Medicina recta agit ratione, that is, hee who

doth all things in his subiect of Physike, according to right
rule of reason, is the most excellent Physicion.
               From hence also all true Artists haue defined Art to bee,
Habitus cum ratione factiuus, that is, a settled habilitie, and
promptnesse of action, and operation according to reason.
Vpon this ground others haue built other true rules and obseruations,
concerning true and lawfull Arts. Therefore (saith
Galen) ars non est exijs quorum neutiquam est potestas, Isagog▪
cap. 5. that is, Art is not of such things as cannot be accomplished.
Which is worthy noting, to distinguish prestigious
and supposed Arts from true Art. To this others likewise
haue added another obseruation, that is, that Art is imployed
about such things as are in reason profitable and not vaine.
So saith Scaliger, exercit. 37. Sect. 31. Ars non est de rebus inutilibus.
It is yet further obserued vpon the same ground, that
true Art doth not confound or cloud it selfe in mists, but reduceth
vnto order, light and reason, things dissipate, confused,
and out of order and reason (as Cicero affirmeth) Ars res
diuulsas dissolutasque conglutinat, & ratione quadam constringit.
Vpon the same grounds diuers renowmed common weales
haue expelled all false and forged Arts: as, Necromancy,
Aeromancy, Geomancy, with other sortiligious Diuinations.
Vpon the same reasons, diuers Emperors, Kings, Kingdomes
and Lawes, haue exploded, censured, and condemned all
such as vnder pretext of the wholesome Arts of Astronomy,
Mathematikes, and the like, haue runne into foolish curiosities,
impostures, and deceitfull practices. Iustinian the Roman
Law-giuer and Emperour, his lawes are extant to this
purpose. Likewise Tiberius his Decrees for the expulsion of
counterfeit Mathematicians and Magicians. And Vlpian in
his booke de Mathematicis & Maleficis, testifieth the publication
of their goods, and their inhibition by the Emperors
from communion with other Citizens so much as in fire or
water. And as Reason, good Lawes, Kingdomes, Nations,
and Common-weales haue distinguished ingenuous, liberal,
true and profitable Arts and Sciences builded vpon reason,

truth and vnderstanding; from base ignoble, vnprofitable,
needlesse, curious and erronious Arts: so hath the holy
Scripture both iustified, sanctified and commended the one,
and condemned, and nominated with rebuke and shame
th'other. The first is euident, Exod. 3. verse 1. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
where Almightie God doth testifie concerning the knowledge
and skill of Workmanship in gold, siluer, and stone,
that he gaue it by his Spirit vnto Bezaleel and Aholiab, who
were workmen according to knowledge and vnderstanding
in that lawfull Art, profitable vnto the building of Gods
house. The second is manifest, Acts 19. ver. 19. where it is in
their due commendations recorded, that those who before
vsed and practised vaine & curious Arts, when they were by
the preaching of the Apostles truely conuerted, in token of
their vndissembled repentance, they absolutely renounced
and disclaimed their vaine learning, and openly burnt their
bookes, though valued at an high rate and rich price.
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               That no Knowledge can come vnto man in any Art or Science,
but by Sense or Reason, or likely and artificiall coniecture, is
proued by the Science and Knowledge of Physike in stead of all
other Arts and Sciences.
               NOw for the better impression of that which hath bin
before said: that is, that nothing is or can be detected,
or is liable vnto mans knowledge, which commeth
not vnto him by the help of Reason, the inward or the
outward Sense, Demonstration, Ratiocination, or iudicious
and prudent Coniectation in reasonable likelihood: let vs
examine any one particular, ingenuous, liberall or lawfull
Art or Science, in steade of many, and therein view, how by
the former mentioned keyes, dores & entrances solely, are opened
the waies vnto their contemplations, study, and perfect

apprehension. And if one Art or Science may be sufficient
herein, I think it most fit to choose my owne, because as
to my selfe most prompt; so vnto any other not vnprofitable.
All diseases that happen vnto the body of man are
either outward or inward, and therefore either seene by the
eye, and deprehended by the outward Sense, or conceiued
only by Reason and the inward Vnderstanding. Inward
diseases, and subiect onely vnto reason and vnderstanding
doe sometimes appeare clearely and certainly to reason and
vnderstanding; sometimes they do not appeare certaine, or
by certaine notes or signes, but by likely markes onely,
which are the grounds of artificiall coniecture.
               And as some diseases are apparent to outward sense, some
euident to inward reason, some by artificiall coniecture only
in learned, exact search and perquisition pursued vnto their
discouery: so also are many diseases hidden from all these
wayes of inuestigation, and therefore remaine as remembrances
of mans manifold ignorance in this life, and of the
secret reseruation of Gods decree and prohibition. As then
in those diseases which are apparent vnto fight, it is blindnesse
in a Physicion to make question, in these which are euident
to reason, to make doubt, is reasonlesse fatuity, in those
which may be attained by artificiall coniectation, search or
perquisition, either to be slacke, is sloth, or to be vnable, is insufficiency:
so in those diseases, which neither outward sense,
nor inward reason, nor art, nor artificial coniecture can possibly
discouer: to hope or seeke beyond Sense and Reason,
and reasonable likelihood, is reasonlesse and senselesse striuing,
and impatience of those bounds which God hath set
to limit the curiosity of man. For better proofe and illustration,
it will not bee impertinent to nominate some particular
diseases in all these kinds. First for outward diseases, and
such as are euident to outward sense, they are infinite. Who
that is the least practised in Physicke, doth not assuredly
know, when, with his eyes he doth behold an inflammation,
a Shirrus, a Gangrene, Cancer, Callus, Fistula, Vlcer,

Leprosie, Psora, Struma, Petechia, Variola, Iaundes, Gout,
Tabescence, Extenuation, and the like. Secondly, for inward
diseases euident to reason; he that is least learned, doth
know, that all diseases which may be defined, must necessarily
be euident to reason; as also, that it is not difficult to define
innumerable diseases to him that is able toGenus morbi proximum, cum parte affecta coniunctū cōstituit morbi speciem. conioine
with the part affected, the true immediate kinde of the affection.
The stomake ceasing her proper function of concoction,
or depriued of appetite, doth it not thereby manifestly
proue vnto reason some inward ill affection therein?
If with that ill affection be ioined a manifest inward heat about
the region of the stomake, accompanied with an Ague,
drinesse, thirst and other accidents, and consequences of
heate, is not as plainly detected the kinde of the affection
to be hot?
               Thus both the part affected, which is the stomake apparently
(because there the former accidents are found originally
moouing and first seated,) and also the ill affection
(which by the manifest burning heate doth proue her kind)
being both conioined, doe truly define the disease to be an
inflammation of the stomake. The like may be sayd of the
inflammations of all other inward parts of Plurisies, Phrensies,
inflammation of the Liuer, Splene, Wombe, Reines,
Guts and other parts, the certaine testimonies of excessiue
heate giuing demonstration of an inflammation, and the
paine (or at least, some defect) or defection in the proper offices
of the parts manifesting the parts themselues. As concerning
inward inflammations of diuers parts, so likewise
of inward Vlcers, and other maladies may be instanced. The
disease of the bladder is oft certainly knowne, by paine in
the part, or by cessation of his proper functions, or defection
therein, and the kinde of disease therein by the excretions
oft-times proceeding from it. And thus an Vlcer is oft discouered
in the bladder, by paine, with purulent and sanguinolent
miction. Diseases likewise of the head are certainly
discouered and detected vnto reason, by defects growing;

sometimes in the vnderstanding, sometimes in the memory,
sometimes in the imagination, sometimes in all those together,
and sometimes in the generall motion of the whole
body. Diseases of the heart likewise appeare by the euil and
faulty motions of the pulse, by soundings and defections in
liuelihood of the spirits and vitall faculty. Diseases of the
Wombe or Mother likewise, doe oft demonstrate themselues
by depriued or depraued motions. It were tedious
to make a particular enumeration of all diseases of this kind,
which are in the same manner euident and apparent vnto
reason.
               Now let vs briefly also consider some diseases, which are
neither euident to Reason, nor manifest to Sense; but are
gained, detected, and hunted out of their deepe and hidden
couerts, by the quicke and exquisite sent of probable and
artificiall coniecture; the necessity or vse whereof, either
in an ambiguous complication of doubtfull diseases, or in
the extrication of any intricate single affection or malady,
there is no man in Physicke exercised, who doth not dayly
finde. Many examples of diseases of this kinde would cause
the small body of this little worke voluminously to swell:
we will therefore onely propose one.
               Let vs suppose a sicke man, doubtfully and diuersly with
these accidents afflicted: namely, a continuall feuer, a cough,
spitting of bloud, shortnesse of winde, head-ache, deliration,
want of sleepe, drinesse, thirst, paines in diuers parts, sides,
ribbes, backeand belly. What disease or diseases here are,
can neither be manifest to sense, distracted in this confusion,
multitude and concurrence of accidents; nor yet be euident
to reason at the first view, because it requireth so different
consideration, and deuided contemplation of so many seuerals
apart. Here then it remaineth, that learned, iudicious,
prudent, and discreete artificiall coniecture proceed exactly
to distinguish and analise, as followeth. All the forenamed
paines, distempers and accidents may indifferently arise,
either from the Longs inflamed, or the Liuer, or the

Midriffe, or the Pleura; because any one of these by it selfe
doth vsually bring forth all, or most part of them. Heere
then prudent, artificiall, and exquisite perpension doth exactly
valew and esteeme all the different manners, quantities,
qualities, positions and situations of pains; likewise accidents,
motions, times, manners of motion, caracters, orders,
and all other both substantiall and circumstantiall considerations.
               And first, as touching the feuer, head-ache, thirst, idlenesse
of braine (because they are common to many other diseases
besids these, & require no curious, but a more carelesse
and common respect) prudent & circumspect coniectation
doth leaue their needlesse confusion of more vsefull and
needfull perpension, and doth more narrowly search about
those accidents, which are more inseparable, proper and peculiar
vnto the diseases named, and by exact disquisition in
their indifferencies, doth notwithstanding sift out their hidden
and secretly couched differencies, by which, in exact
view they are found and distinguished sufficiently differing.
The inseparable accidents which doe peculiarly, or for the
most part accompany the diseases before named, that is, the
inflammation of the Longs, the Liuer, the Midriffe and the
Pleura, are cough, shortnesse of winde, spitting of bloud,
paines about the ribbes, sides, belly, which in all these named
diseases, more or lesse are present, either primarily, or by
consent of one part with another. These, though seldome
absent from most of the foure former diseases, and therefore
not easily distinguished, when they proceed from th'one or
th'other; yet rightly weighed, and accurately considered in
their seuerall manners, measures, and right positions in euery
one, when a part and single, they doe likewise in their
confused mixture one with another, yeeld distinct and seuerall
difference to him, that in a iudicious and discerning
thought, doth beare their iust distinctions apart. For illustration,
spitting of bloud is vsually a companion to all, or
most of the foure named diseases; but in one in lesse quantity,

in another more; in one after one manner, in another after
another; in one by vomiting, in another by expectoration,
and in another by coughing; in one with much expuition,
in another with little; in one with danger of strangulation
and suffocation, in another without; in one with thicknesse,
blacknesse, and small quantity of bloud, in another
with thinnesse, brightnesse of colour, and more quantity;
and in one of these also with lesse, and in another with
more difficulty and labour. Shortnesse of winde, or difficulty
of breathing, is a common companion to all the named
diseases; but in one with frequent expuition, in another
without, and where, with expuition, in one with more
facility, in another with difficulty, in one with one manner
of distension of the instruments of respiration, in another
with another, in one kinde of difficulty of respiration more
frequent, in another lesse, in one more grieuous, in another
tolerable.
               The like may be sayd of coughing, and pains. Coughing
in one of the forenamed diseases is with much, in another
with little, and in another with no expuition at all; in one
continuall, in another with intermission; in one with intension,
in another with remission; in one loud, in another stil,
and where, with expectoration, in one of one colour and
quantity, in another of another; and in another of none at
all; in one easie, gentle, free and without paine, in another
grieuous and painfull; yea suffocatory, and neere to strangle.
Paine likewise is a common companion to al the mentioned
diseases; but distinguished in th' one and the other,
by the manner, nature, and situation of the seuerall parts,
which apart in euery one it possesseth, and also by the different
oddes, fashions, and kindes of paine; some being sharp,
some dull, some quicke, some slowe, some with dissension,
some with punction, some with heauinesse and sensible
weight, some more grieuous to the Patient lying, some to
him sitting or standing, some more calme in one position of
the body, and some in another.
               
                  
And thus prudent and skilfull coniecture, by due and diligent
perpension, comparing together oddes, and exactly referring
vnto true discerning the seuerall properties and differences
of accidents, their manners, proportions, and other
due circumstances, doth in the end reduce euery accident to
his right disease, and euery disease to his right cause; whereby
the prudent and iudicious Physicion doth cleerely vnderstand,
directly and timely to apply proper and pertinent remedies.
And thus in doubtfull cases, which are neither euident
to Reason, nor manifest to Sense in the Art and exercise
of Physike, it is manifest how solert and accurate coniectaon,
through the clouds and mists of ambiguities, doth in the
end so cleerely send forth and giue so faire a light, that doubt
it selfe doth become out of doubt, and is little inferiour vnto
certaine and plaine demonstration. As a short summe of all
that hath been said, whatsoeuer hath beene declared of diseases,
the same may bee propounded concerning their issues
very briefely.
               The issues of all diseases are either informed from Sense,
or euident by reason, or scrutable by artificiall coniecture.
Examples of the first kinde are manifest, when with our eyes
we behold the motion and Sense externall and other outward
functions of the body, either abolished, or in an high
degree depriued of their power and naturall vse.
               This certaine testimonie of our sight doth certainely informe
the vnderstanding, concerning the dangerous issue.
               Examples of the second kinde are manifest likewise, when
we finde either the causes of diseases vnremoueably fixed, or
the disease it selfe rooted in the substance of any of the principall
parts, or accidents in malignitie, vehemence, and fury
irresistable. In these cases a doubtful and hard issue is euident
to Reason by iust consequent.
               Examples of the latter kinde are also apparent, when in
diseases, good and euill signes are so doubtfully mixed, that
some promise Life, others as much threaten Death: some in
number discourage, other some in worth as much as incourage.

We do oft see and know in the middest of this mist and
darknes, where there appeareth not to a common sense so
much as the least shew of any indication of certaine issue; yet
through the exquisitenesse of prudent and artificiall perpension,
and due exact distinction in the fore-mentioned seeming
inscrutable oddes; the learned Physicion euen in the
first scarce sensible budding of indication, and in the first
most imperfect and scarce-being; being thereof doth oft
discouer that true, euent which vsually and for the most part
is seene and obserued to come to passe.
               If any man not rightly apprehending reason, make a doubt
or question of any such possible exquisitnes, let him consider
and behold it by an easie example. In an inequalitie of one
and the same Vermiculant pulse, where the beginning of
the same distension is quicker, the next continuation or middle
part is flower, and the beginning of the end thereof, ending
almost before it begin: it must needs be very difficult,
nay, almost impossible vnto the first view of Sense or Reason,
or to a common iudgement or learning, to diuide really,
and distinguish this one short small motion into two or
three distinct times and parts of motion, the space so very
short, the faculty of mouing so low and weake, and the mouing
it selfe almost altogether in an insensible exiguitie, and
an indiuisible degree of lownesse.
               We see oft-times a common vulgar cannot in his reason
conceiue it, much lesse by his sense at all perceiue it. Neither
is it found easie to euery man though learned therein, yea,
or educate thereto, either perfectly to apprehend the general
Idea of such a motion, or at all in the first proofes and tryals
of his sense or hand to deprehend any particular. Notwithstanding,
the Physicion that exquisitely discerneth and
iudgeth, doth both in reason see, that euery single smallest
motion, hath his diuers distinct diuision of parts, and also by
his discerning, wary, iudicious and exercised touch, doth apertly
detect and discouer it: And thus hath been proued by
seuerall instances taken in the Art of Physike, in steade of all

other Arts and Sciences, for auoiding tediousnesse and confusion,
that all knowledge, all Art, all Science whatsoeuer
giuen vnto man, hath no other entrance, meanes, or wayes
thereto, but thorow Sense or Reason, or prudent and artificiall
coniecture, sagacitie and exquisitenesse of iudging and
discerning thereby.
               And that it may the better appeare, that beyond these
waies and lights, the Physicion cannot sinde any knowledge
or discouery of Diseases: let vs view some particular examples
of some Diseases for this cause vndiscouerable, and not
to be detected: and therewith consider the impossibilitie of
discouerie to consist solely herein; namely, for that they are
remoued from any capacitie of Sense or Reason, and from
the reach of all artificiall search, scrutiny and accurate insight
deriued from both, which is the highest straine of humane
Vnderstanding. In the generall it cannot be denied (except
of such whose vnderstandings are extremely blinde) that it
is impossible, that those diseases should or can bee at all so
much as suspected (and therefore much lesse knowne) which
yeeld no shew, no signe, no indication of themselues. There
needeth hereof no other, nor better proofe, then the enumeration
of some particular diseases of this kinde.
               Are not diuers secret and hidden Apostemations, & other
inward collections of vicious matter in the body, dayly Seminaries
of vnexpected and wondred shapes of corruption
and putrifaction, which lying long hidden in the body, and
by an insensible growth taking deepe roote, in the end sodainely
breake forth beyond all possible expectation, or
thought of the most excellent, exquisie and subtill circumspection
and disquisition? For a briefe confirmation hereof,
Hollerius doth mention a man, the cause of whose disease
while he liued, being vnknowne to Physicions, and Art, after
his decease his guts were found gangrened and perished,
and therein things viewed like vnto Water-snakes, and his
Liuer full of schirrose knots.
               There happened vnto my selfe this yeere last past, a Patient,

a very worthy Gentleman, who being extremely vexed
with the Strangury, Disurie, and Ischurie together with pissing
of blood in great abundance, and the stone, who by the
vse and accommodation of remedies, found much ease, mitigation
of paines, and qualification of the extremitie of all the
former accidents. Notwithstanding, for that there were
certaine indications of an Vlcer in the body or capacitie of
the Bladder, his recouerie was not expected, but after his
decease, in the dissection of his body, his Bladder was found
rotten, broken and black, without any manifest matter therin
as cause thereof, or so much as one stone, although hee
had formerly and immediately before auoided many stones
at seuerall times. This I produce, being fresh in memory, as
an instance of impossibilitie of knowledge vnto a Physicion
in many and frequent cases. For how could the fracture or colour
of his Bladder, while the Patient was liuing, by any exquisitenesse
of Art or vnderstanding, be knowne in any possibilitie,
meanes, or power of man, although all the other accidents
aboue mentioned, were vndoubtedly, by certaine indications
and signes discouered? I might here deliuer many
other like Examples out of mine owne knowledge; I will
onely call to remembrance one more.
               I was of late yeares Physicion vnto a right Noble Lady;
the cause of whose apparent dangerous estate, diuers learned
and famous Physicions conioyned with my selfe, could neuer
discouer. In the dissection of her body after her decease, her
heart was found inclosed with a shining rotten gelly, and
the very substance of the heart of the same colour.
               In the same Lady, an intolerable paine about the bottome
of her stomack, by fits depriued her of all ease by day, and of
rest by night, and could neuer be either knowne in the cause,
or remoued in the accident by any meane or remedy: but after
death, in the dissection of her body before mentioned, a
black round gelly as bigge as a Tenice ball, did manifest it
selfe in that place, where, in her life, the intolerable paine was
seated and fixed.
               
                  
Of this euill discoloration of her heart, of the matter and
euill colour of that matter wherewith her heart was inuironed;
as also of that collected gelly in her stomake, what
possible knowledge (thinke you) or exquisite vnderstanding,
or art of man could euer in her life time giue any notice
or information? Like vnto this is that which Hollerius
in the 21. of his rare obseruations doth mention. In a
sicke man perplexed in a strange manner from an vnknowne
cause in his life, after his death his liuer and epiploon did appeare
corrupted and putrified, his stomake toward the bottome
bruised and full of blacke iuice or humour. Christophorus
Sillineus, opening the body of a childe after death, reporteth,
that he saw in the small veines, running thorow the
substance of the liuer, many small scrauling wormes then liuing.
Beniuenius doth make mention of a woman tormented
grieuously by a needle in her stomake, which was impossible
by any art or exquisitnesse of vnderstanding to be conceiued
or suspected, if nature it selfe working it out thorow
the body and substance of the stomake, vnto the outward
view and sense, had not so discouered it. I will not here
mention the generation of worms, stones, and the like in the
guts, gall, heart, longs and other parts, of which no art, or
excellence of knowledge can possibly take notice, vntil they
haue proued themselues vnto the sight. Many diseases of
these kindes being fearefull and terrible accidents, and afflictions
vnto the body, yet for the most part are neuer detected;
because they haue not onely no proper true certaine
likely, but no possible meanes or way of indication or notice
at all, in any reason or vnderstanding of humane Art or
Science; without which the most exquisite and Scientifical
Clarkes are altogether disabled, and must necessarily be ignorant.
Thus hath been at large manifested, that nothing
can bee vnto the Physician in his Art and Science knowne,
which either by outward sense or inward is not apparent, or
by likely and artificiall coniecture from both, is not detected
or discerned. The like might be vrged concerning the

trials of lawe and iustice, and inquisitions of offences and
errors against the law, which are the diseases of a Commonweale,
as the former of the body of man. Many offences against
the law are apparent vnto the outward sense, as sight
or hearing: and therefore being witnessed by hearers or beholders,
are without doubt or difficulty immediately dispatched,
sentensed, and adiudged. Many also are euident
to reason, which therefore are held and reputed inuincibly
and infallibly to to conuince.
               Many offences also there are, neither manifest to sense, nor
euident to reason, against which onely likelihood and presumptions
doe arise in iudgement; whereby notwithstanding,
through narrow search and sifting, strict examination,
circumspect and curious view of euery circumstance, together
with euery materiall moment and oddes thorowly,
and vnto the depth and bottome by subtil disquisition fadomed,
the learned, prudent, and discerning Iudge doth oft
detect and bring vnto light many hidden, intestine, and secret
mischiefes, which vnsensibly and vnobseruedly
would otherwise oppresse and subuert the Common-weale.
When by none of these wayes of extrication the truth can
possibly be gained, the wise and vpright Iudge vnto necessity
in want of due warrant vnto iust proceeding, doth with
patience and sobriety submit. For this cause (as may bee
seene vpon records) many cases iustly necessarily and vnauoidably
stand perpetually inscrutable vndecided and neuer
determined, as certaine proofes and euidences of the limitation
and annihilation of mans knowledge in many things
of this life: Almighty God oft-times decreeing to hide some
truth from the sight of man, and detaining it in his owne secret
will and pleasure.
            
            
               
               CHAP. III.
               Whether Witch-craft haue any other wayes or meanes of inuestigation,
then these before mentioned, and what is the true inuestigation.
               IT hath been at large before declared, how God and Nature
haue limited and confined all knowledge of man,
within certaine waies and bounds, out of which, and beyond
which it cannot passe; as also for that cause, that
no iustifiable Art or true Science whatsoeuer, doth or can
exceede those restraints. There haue been also diuers examples
produced of the necessity of mans ignorance, in the impossibility
of much knowledge, and discouery of things hidden
and inhibited by the iust and vnsearchable decrees of
God and Nature. It remaineth now to enquire concerning
one particular subiect of Witch-craft, whether in the cōmon
way of all other detections of truths, it ought likewise consist;
orwhether by it selfe it haue other priuiledges beyond
all other trials. If reason be the sole eye and light of naturall
vnderstanding which God hath giuen vnto reasonable man
(as is before proued.) If without it can be no naturall knowledge,
no Art, no Science no discouery. If lawe among all
people and nations be so iust in all things, as to do or allow
nothing against true reason (in which consisteth right.) If
God himselfe, and all flourishing Common-weales haue tyed
men and lawes, and the decision by them of all doubts,
questions and controuersies, either vnto right proofe, euidence
and allegation, according vnto reason, or at least, faire
likelihood, presumption, and probabilitie; and beyond these
there neuer was, is, or can be any iust iudgement or triall:
How is it possible that man can attaine any knowledge of
Witch-craft, if not by those meanes, by which only his nature
is capable of whatsoeuer is allotted to be known thereto?

If this be infallibly true, man must either by the former
common wayes of knowledge and detection, know likewise
and detect Witch-craft, or els bee altogether ignorant
thereof; whereof the contrary by daily experience is manifest.
It may bee and is obiected, that it is a hard and difficult
matter to detect Witch-craft, by the former and ordinary
courses, as is oft seene and found apparent. So is it likewise
equally difficult, and as hard by the same meanes ofttimes,
for many a iust man to proue and cleere his opposed
innocency, and for many an iniuriously wronged wretch to
proue his right, to defend his goods, yea, life it selfe from
violence; notwithstanding, this is no allowance vnto another
way, no reason or iustification of any vnwarranted way,
or way out of the way of Reason, Iustice, and Lawe, be his
burden neuer so importable, or his iniury exceeding crueltie.
               For, if God had allowed vnto men alwaies smooth, assured,
certaine and infallible wayes vnto the satisfaction of their
wants, and the accomplishment of their intentions & desires
without failing; what would become of Religion, Vertue,
and Wisedome? Then should euery man be alike wise, and
men would be so confident in their own strength and power,
and so proud, that they would forget God, and neuer
thinke of the Almighty. If the meanes and waies vnto all
knowledge, and the information of our desires and affections,
did meet with no impediment, no opposition, no contradiction,
no casualty to intercept, and all things should
prosperously succeed vnto our means and endeuors, there
would neuer be any vse of Patience, Temperance, or dependance
vpon the diuine prouidence; and consequently, little
acknowledgement, and lesse worship and adoration of our
Creator, who according to his wisedome, good will and
pleasure, doth otherwise gouerne, guide, order and dispose
all things. For if vnto our supposed needfull ends, vses and
necessary desires were certaine and vncontrouled waies, nothing
impossible, nothing denyed; then were our lust a

lawe, and manin no power but in his owne, in no awe, in no
lawe, in no rule.
               Therefore Almightie God in his great and vnspeakeable
Wisedome hath subiected vaine man, and made his pride
subiect to infinite creatures, limits, restraints, coertions,
thereby to teach him true wisdome, piety, trust, dependance,
worship, and adoration of his all-restraining & all-limiting
vnlimited power. Man therefore must thereby learne to be
contented so to know, as therewith to learne to know himselfe;
that is, with his large portion, his lot, his manifold
indowments, his excellencie of Sense, Reason, Vnderstanding,
Prudence, Art, not to forget or spurne at their interdictions,
prohibitions, and inioyned lists, beyond which
to desire to know, is curiositie, is folly: Sapientia vera,
               
               
                  Nolle nimis sapere, saith the Poet. It is true Wisedome, not
to be too wise: that is, not to know, nor desire to know
more then is allowed or needfull: needful, not in our desires,
but Gods Decree.
               Here then let me intreat reasonable men, not too much (as
is vsuall) to swell with indignation, or to be puffed with impatience,
where God doth not apertly reueale and plainely
(as they desire and thinke needfull) the subtill engines, and
mysticall craft of the Diuell in the Machinations of Witches
and Sorcerers, but soberly, modestly, and discreetly, so
faire forth be contented to pursue the try all and iust way of
their Discouery, as with sense, with reason, with Religion is
iust and righteous, knowing that whatsoeuer is beyond
these lists; is reasonlesse, senselesse, and impious.
               For since God and Nature (as is before said) hath limited
the scrutinie of all true Arts and Sciences, all naturall
knowledge for discouerie of controuersies and resolutions
vnto the lights of Reason & Sense, and artificiall coniecture,
prudence, art, sagacitie, and subtiltie of vnderstanding deriued
from thence, vnto what other barre or seate of Iustice
can Witch-craft appeale or be brought?
               It may be obiected; the Art of Witch-craft, being supernaturall,

and the practice thereof sustained by an extraordinary
power; that therefore the meanes and waies of discouerie
must be likewise more then ordinary and supernaturall.
               Hereto is truely answered, that since the nature & power
of Spirits is vnknowne vnto man (as things supernaturall)
and can be, and is no otherwise knowne, but by examining
the workes issuing from thence, and comparing them aright with that which is naturall (because man in his Reason
and vnderstanding cannot discerne that which is truely
trascending his Nature, otherwise, then obseruing how far
it exceedeth that which is according to Nature:) therefore
(I say) the workes of the Diuell, or Witches, though sustained
and produced by a supernaturall power, yet can haue no
other way for their detection by man, but that which is ordinary
vnto man, and natural and possible vnto man; for that
which is aboue or beyond his power or Nature, is not his
owne.
               From hence must necessarily be concluded, that there is
no other ordinary way vnto man (who knoweth or can
know nothing but that is naturall) vnto the discouerie
of that is supernaturall, but that way which is likewise
naturall.
               Although therefore the subiect of Witch-craft require a
greater measure of knowledge to discerne that which is
therein really, and truely supernaturall, from that which
in nature oft-times hath a very great likenesse, and a deceiueable
similitude therewith: yet is the way vnto that
knowledge, the common high way which conducteth vnto
all other knowledge whatsoeuer. Let men then be perswaded
and contented (since God hath alotted, and allowed
vnto the nature and power of man no other way) in this only
warranted true way to seeke the discouery, to finde the
footing, path, and steppings of Witchcraft, as of all other
things, which by the Decree of God are reuealed vnto man,
and subiect vnto the knowledge of man.
               It may be here demanded, whether Almightie God doth

not extraordinarily, and miraculously at some time discouer
this so abominable sin of Witch-craft, aswell as by ordinarie
meanes leaue it vnto discouerie? This doubt shall more
fitly in more due place be hereafter at large discoursed.
               It hath now beene here manifested, that there is or can
be no other ordinarie tryall of Witch-craft, then that which
is common vnto all other detections of truth: and also that
all detections subiect vnto the discouerie of man (as hath
beene before cleared) are drawne and deriued either from
Sense or Reason, or likely probabilitie raised from both.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               Of the workes of Witches and Diuels.
               BEfore wee proceed further to treate concerning matter
of Witch-craft, according to the former waies of
discouerie and inuestigation: it will be needfull to distinguish
who is the true Author, cause, & immediate workman
of the supernaturall workes, which by Sorcery and
Witch-craft are compassed or brought to passe.
               All created substances indowed with powers and vertue
from God their Creator, are either bodily, or corporall substances,
or Spirituall, or mixt and betweene both.
               Bodily and corporall substances are the heauens, the celestiall
bodies of the Starres, of the Sunne, of the Moone, the
bodies of the elements, and all elementarie substances from
them deriued and composed.
               Spirituall substances are either Angels, or Diuels, or soules
of men after death, separated from their bodies.
               Mixed substances, partly Spirituall, partly bodily, are
mankinde compounded of a naturall body, and an vnderstanding
soule.
               Hence it commeth to passe, that man by his vnderstanding
Spirit, doth together with Angels, Spirits, and Diuels,
participate and vnderstand many things; as the Scripture reuealed;

the History and Creation of the whole world; many
truths of God; the grounds of Reason; the principles of
Nature; many generall rules and obseruations, and infinite
particular obiects of many things past, present, and to come.
But for that this vnderstanding Soule is depressed, and
imprisoned in this life by the body, by the passions, diseases,
and manifold incumbrances thereof, and cannot extend or
inlarge it selfe further vnto any portion of knowledge, then
thorow the narrow windowes, closures, parts and organs of
the body: therefore must necessarily the knowledge of man
be much inferiour vnto that measure of knowledge, which
Spirits, being of a more subtill essence, and free from the
burden and incumbrance of an earthly tabernacle or prison,
doe in a more large extent inioy.
               As is said of the difference of knowledge in Spirits. beyond
the power and nature of man: so may be said from the
same reason of the difference of the workes of Spirits, farre
inlarging and extending their vertue and power, beyond the
power and force of men.
               The workes of men, are confined within the power and
nature of these sublunarie bodies, vnto which they are annexed,
and tyed.
               The works of Spirits are limited to no corporall substance
or body, but spaciously compasse the whole and vniuersall
body of the sublunary or inferiour world (as the Diuell dorh
witnesse of himselfe, Iob 1. verse 7.) and are not tyed vnto any
particular place, but rule generally therein, and in all places
by the permission of God, as is euident, Ephe. 2. ver. 2. where
the Diuell is called the Prince that ruleth in the ayre, euen
the Spirit that now worketh in the children of disobedience:
and likewise, Ephes. 6. verse 12. where he is called the Prince
of darknesse of this world.
               From these vndoubted grounds, it is necessarily inferred,
that both all knowledge exceeding the knowledge of man,
must needes issue from the knowledge of Spirits, and also
that all works exceeding and transcendent, aboue the power

and nature of corporall substances, must necessarily be the
force of Spirts. It may now be demaunded, how the works
of good Spirits shall be knowne and distinguished from the
works of euill Spirits and diuels, since both their workes
proceede from the same nature, substance, and spirituall essence
common vnto them both. This shall appeare by the
consideration of the orders and sorts of good Spirits, expressed
in holy Scripture, and their properties, beside which, all
other are necessarily euill, and therefore diuels; like vnto
whom likewise, by iust consequent must be their workes,
the one reciprocallyAngeli boni non possunt peccare, confirmati per gratiam. Angeli mali, permalitiam obstinati non possuut bene veile. Magist. Sent. dist. 7. lib. 3. discouering the other. All good Spirits
are either Angels and Messengers of God, specially sent
with his holy embassage, to special holy men, for special holy
ends; as was the Seraphin sent vnto Isaia, the 6. Chapter
verse 6. and as were the Angels vnto the Shepheards, when
our Sauiour was borne, or as where the Angels which
were sent vnto the Patriarkes of olde, or els tuteler Angels,
ordinarily commanded to guide, protect, and defend
the Elect and chosen children of God, as is manifest both by
the testimony of our Sauiour, Matth. 18. vers. 10. See that
you despise not (sayth our blessed Sauiour) one of these little
ones: For I say vnto you, that in heauen there Angels alway
behold the face of my Father, which is in heauen. And by
that Text also, Heb. 1. vers. 14. Are they not all ministring
Spirits (sayth the Apostle, speaking of Angels) sent forth to
minister for their sakes, who shall be heires of saluation? Beside
these orders of good and holy Spirits, neither hath the
holy Scripture, neither hath the light of reason, or nature,
or obseruation knowne or discouered any other.
               All the workes likewise and employments of these good
Spirits, are all and euer obserued to be like themselues, holy,
good, freely seruing and ministring vnto the expresse will,
knowne and vndoubted pleasure of Almighty God, as is
certainly confirmed, Psal. 103. verse 20. Praise ye the Lord
(sayth the Psalmist) ye his Angels that excell in power, that
doe his commandements in obeying the voyce of his word.

All workes therefore or effects issuing from Spirits, that cannot
bee proued and manifested to be first commanded byBoni Angeli difficile cō
                     parent, nee nisi summi Dei iussa capessunt Fern: l. de Abd. Rer. Caus. lib. 1. ca.
God; secondly, tending solely to the execution of his will;
and thirdly, are not contained in one of the foure first mentioned
offices and administrations of Spirits, they are all certainly
and assuredly to be suspected as works of diuels and
euill spirits, whom God doth permit (as sayth S. Augustine
in his 3. Booke, de Trinitate) to bring to passe such workes
of theirs, partly to deceiue those wicked, which God in
iudgement hath giuen ouer to be deceiued of diuels; partly,
to quicken and stirre vp the godly and holy man, and to
trie and prooue him thereby, as hee did his faithfull seruant
Iob.
               
               Now for a more distinct cleerenesse and light vnto the
proofe of these suspected workes of diuels, it is very profitable,
necessary and pertinent, that wee consider their kinds
which are two. The first kind is of such supernatural works,
as are done by the diuell solely and simply to his owne ends
or vse, without any reference or respect to any contract or
couenant with man. The second kinde is of such transcendent
workes, as are done with a respect or reference vnto
some contract or couenant with man. In the first, the diuell
is solely an Agent for himselfe, without the consent or
knowledge of man. In the second, the supernaturall and
transcendent works are truely, essentially, and immediately
from the diuels also (because out of the reach or power
of any command of man simply) yet therein man hath a property
and interest by couenant and contract, and deriuation
thereof from the diuell, which is truely and solely Sorcerie,
and Witch-craft: for since supernaturall workes are onely
proper to a Spirit, and aboue the nature and power of man,
they cannot truely and properly bee esteemed his; and
therefore it is not the supernaturall worke it selfe, but mans
contract and combination therein with the diuell, his consent
and allowance thereof, that doth make it his, and him a

Witch, a Sorcerer, which is a contracter with the diuel. Now
let vs proceed to consider how these supernaturall workes in
the former seuerall kindes are or may be detected, some by
Reason, some by Sense.
            
            
               CHAP. V.
               The workes of the Diuell by himselfe, solely wrought without the
association of man.
               IT is not destitute of easie proofe, that there are many supernatural
workes of the diuell manifest to sense, wherein
man doth not participate in knowledge, contract or
consent with him. Did not the Diuell in the body of a Serpent
miraculouslyInstrumentum Diaboli Serpens. Tremelius Iunius. The Serpent did verily speake. It was a true Serpent not a shadow. The Diuell spake in the Serpent as the Angel in the Asse. reason, dispute, speake and conferre with
Eua, Gen. 3? Was not his speech and voice vndoubtedly, manifestly,
perceptibly, and truly heard, and sounding in her
eares? There then was no man as, yet borne that could
combine with the diuell in this supernaturall worke, or that
could then be found a Witch. Dr Willet. Likewise, was not the diuels
carriage of the body of our Sauiour, and setting it vpon a
pinacle of the Temple manifest to the eye? Was not the fire
which the diuellIob. l. ver. 16. brought downe from heauen in so miraculous
manner, and in so extraordinary power to deuoure
so many thousands of Iobs sheepe, truly visible? The Messenger
escaping to bring the tydings doth witnesse it. Was
not the power of the diuell seene at such time, as in the Gospell
hee carryed whole herds of swine headlong into the
Sea? Was not the Diuell seene to rend and teare the bodies
of men by him possessed, in an extraordinarie and supernaturall
manner and sort, Marke the first, Luke 4. Math.
17. Marke the ninth? Was not the very voyce of a Spirit
heard and distinguished, when the diuell in so fearefull and
marueilous manner cryed out in the possessed, Math. 8.
Mark. 5. Luke 8? Did not the people behold the miraculous

force of the diuell casting the possessed into the middest of
them, Luke 4. verse 33, 34, 35? Did not the people heare
and behold a foule Spirit crying aloud, and in an admirable
power and manner, comming out of the possessed, Marke 1.
24, 25, 26, 27? All these were workes supernaturall of the
diuel, and manifest to outward sense; yet no mention, no
suspicion, no reason of mention, or suspicion of a Witch or
Sorcerer: wherin therfore the diuel alone was sole Agent. But
it may be obiected, that these examples out of the holy Scriptures
are recorded as things specially seene, or noted in some
speciall ages and times, which after times and other ages do
not, or cannot affoord.
               The contrary is manifest by the faithfull histories and true
reports of Ethnicke writers, who liuing in distant ages, doe
not differ in the true consent & harmony of the same report,
concerning the same things, as they haue succeeded in their
seuerall ages. It is not incredible, but certain vnto any common
Reader, what diuers authors of approued faith and credit,
in seuerall ages haue written: how the diuell not onely
out of the bodies and seuerall parts,Oracula edita sunt per pudenda puellae. Mornae. us de verit. Rel cap. 23. Ex Diodoro. a part of the bodies of
men haue vttered words, and spoken with the voice of men,
euen as in the Gospell hee did out of the possessed; but also
out of trees, caues of earth, images and statues. The first is euident
by the generall report from one succeeding age vnto
another, concerning the Pythons Pythonici 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  Ventriloqui,
and the like. The second was neuer hid many hundreth
of yeares, for many ages long before the birth of our
blessed Sauiour, as is apparent by the famous Oracle of Delphos,
the Oake of Dodona, the statue of Memnon. Petrus
Gregorius, Tholosanus, in his Syntagmaiuris, reciteth this history
concerning certaine statues at Alexandria, that they
did fall vnto the ground sodainly, and with an audible voice
declared the death of Mauricius the Emperour, euen at the
same moment and point of time when he was then slaine at
Rome.
               As the Diuell doth shew himselfe by voices and sounds in

trees, caues, statues, and the like: so doth he in diuers other
outward shapes and formes of other creatures.
               Thus he appeared vnto Eua, and spake vnto her in the
shape of a Serpent aforesaid. Of his appearance in diuers other
formes likewise are many testimonies.
               It is reported by Iohn de Serres the French Chronicler, that
the late renowmed King of France, Henry the 4. being in his
hunting sports, a Diuell or Spirit presented vnto the Kings
eares & his whole company, a great cry of hounds, and winding
of hornes. The King commanded Count Soissons to goe
see who it was, wondering who durst interrupt his game.
The Earle still issuing forward toward the noise, still heard
it, but seemed nothing neerer vnto it, though desiring to
come neerest vnto it. At length a bigge blacke man presented
himselfe in the thickest of the bushes, and speaking vnto
the Earle some few words, sodainely vanished.
               There could be no deceit in so many eares and witnesses,
nor can the obiection of a meere imagination stand vncontrouled
of the iust reproofe of want of wit and good maners,
in doubt or deniall of so faire and so well aduised due testimonies.
               Master Fox, in the life of Martin Luther, doth relate the
apparition and conference of the Diuell with a young man;
who vpon contracts agreed betweene the Diuell and himselfe,
deliuered vnto the Diuel his bond for conditioned performances.
               
                  Speede in his Chronicle, and relation of the passage of many
affaires, within the time of Henry the 4. doth make mention
of the apparition of the Diuell in the habite of a Minorite
Fryer at Danbury Church in Essex, with such thundring,
lightning, tempests, & fire-bals, that the vault of the Church
brake, and halfe the Chancell was carried away.
               I will not further recite infinite Histories and Reports,
which may seeme to depend vpon the obscure or doubted
credit of superstitious factions, or partiall Authors, but of
such onely as by the common consent of times, and generall

voice of all Writers, exact credit and esteeme.
               In this kinde what a multitude of Examples doth the
whole current and streame of all Writers of all ages afford?
Who almost that readeth any ancient classical Author, can auoide
the common mention of fained gods,*Vide Platonem in Epinomide de viribus & potestatibus Heroum, quos Latini Lemures dixerunt. De Genus item diis & daemonibus promiscue in coelo, terra, & singulis mundi regionibus distributis vide in Politico. and goddesses
of the field, of the woods, of the mountaines, of houses, of
desarts, of riuers, of springs, and the like, offering themselues
vnto men and people, sometimes in one shape, sometimes
in another; requiring worship, ceremonies and rites;
some in one manner, some in another; doing strange and admired
workes oft-times, sometimes pleasantly encountring
people, sometimes menacing?
               Herevpon grew the multitude and varietie of names giuen
vnto them, according to the seuerall maners, shapes, gestures,
and places which they vsed; as*Vide Platonem 4. de legibus. Quosibi Plato promiscue Daemones appellat, Latini his nominibus, & quibusdam officiis distinxerint. 
                  Fauni, Satyri, Nymphae,
Empusa, Lemures. All Christians, who know God, his
word, and truth, and thereby beleeue one onely true God,
must needs assure themselues that all these were, euill Spirits,
and Diuels. That such were, all times, ages, histories, and records
of times with one vniuersall consent confirme. That
they were manifestly seene, knowne, and familiarly by
the outward senses discerned and distinguished, cannot bee
denied, by the seuerall descriptions of their maners, shapes
and gestures.
               And thus briefely auoiding the tediousnesse of the multitude
of vncertaine particular examples giuen by priuate men,
I haue by vndoubted and vncontrouled references vnto ages
and successions of continued histories from one vnto another
manifested, how among the heathen, the Diuell hath apparently
offered himselfe vnto the outward sense, without the
association of a Witch or Sorcerer; Which was likewise before
proued by instances out of the holy Scripture. In all these
the Diuell hath affected to*Diabolus Deiaemulus quo se fallaci similitudine insinuet in animos simplicium. counterfeit the apparitions of
the blessed Angels of God vnto his holy seruants,Caluin. lib. 1. Instit. cap. 8. Sect. 2. thereby
to make himselfe like or equal vnto God in ignorant and vnbeleeuing
hearts.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               Workes done by the Diuell, with respect vnto Couenant with
Man.
               IT now followeth to giue examples of such supernaturall
workes as are offered by the Diuell, wherein man hath an
interest and propertie by contract with the Diuel; as also
to shew that these workes are manifest in like manner vnto
the outward sense. Vnto this proofe, out of holy Scripture,
behold the Witch of Endor; did not Saul contract with her,
and she promise vnto Saul to bring vp Samuel vnto him? Did
not Saul see the vision raised by her, or at least speake thereto,
and receiue answere there-from, 1. Sam. 28. 8? were not
then his eyes and eares (those two outward senses) certaine
witnesses of her Sorcerie? Behold also the Sorcerers of Egypt.
Did not Pharaoh see & view with his eyes those great
and mighty Sorceries, water turned into blood, rods into
Serpents, Frogges caused to issue out vpon the face of the
earth?
               And as the holy Scripture doth afford vs these examples:
so are the histories of all ages, people, and countries, fraught
with the like as manifest to sense as these, and as apparently
detecting and pointing out the Sorcerer and Sorcery.
               
                  Liuy reporteth, in those ancient dayes of Rome, that the
Romane Claudia, a vestall Virgin, did shew her selfe in act, able
alone with ease and facilitie to draw a mightie ship by a smal
line or girdle, which was in the weight and greatnesse vnmoueable,
against the force and power of many strong men,
assisted by the strength of cattell accustomed to draw mightie
and heauy burdens? That this was an act supernaturall,
and aboue, and beyond any naturall vertue or force in her
Nature, is madnesse to doubt. That in this supernaturall act
also, she had a propertie by her allowance and liking thereof,

expressed by her voluntarie action of vndertaking & drawing;
who can make doubt? The act was supernaturall and
aboue her power and nature: her good will, allowance, and
voluntary putting the act in practice, did proue her consent
and contract, with that power and nature superiour vnto her
owne, which is vndoubtedly Sorcery and Witch-craft.
               
                  Tuccia also a vestall Virgin is reported by mumbling of a
certaine prayer, to keepe water within a siue, or a riddle, as
witnesseth not onely Pliny, but euen Tertullian.
               
               
                  De diuina, ge, neribus. pag. 118. 
                  Camerarius maketh mention of a man, who armed onely
with certaine charmes, would vndertake to receiue vpon his
body, without harme, bullets or shot out of the fiery cannon.
               He maketh also mention of another, who would vndertake
to lay his hand vpon the mouth of the like instrument,
euen when the fire was alreadie giuen, and thereby cause the
flame appearing in the mouth therof, together with the shot
there, to stay.
               It is credibly written of Pythagoras, that hee was at once
by seuerall parties seen, in the very same point of time, both
in the Citie of Thurium, and the towne of Metapontum.
               
               
                  Apollonius like wise was translated, as it were, in the twinkling
of an eye, or in the space of a word speaking from Smyrna,
vnto Ephesus, as some histories report. That the power
by which these things were done, was more then humane,
no Reason can doubt. That also the voluntary accession of
these mens disposing, or apting thēselues vnto these works,
doth proue their consent, and by consent, societie with a Spirit,
who can doubt?
               But here by the way, is iust occasion offered vnto a question;
namely, whether a Spirit or Diuell can cause or bring
to passe, that the same true body at once may be really in two
distant places, as it seemeth by this history of Pythagoras.
               
               The answer hereto must needs in reason be negatiue; because
it is impossible in nature, and in the ordinary vnchangeable
course of all things by God created, that one indiuiduall
& continued substance, or entire thing should be wholly

deuided from it selfe, and yet be it selfe, or possibly be twice,
or be in two places, and yet bee but one and the selfe same
thing.
               Wee must therefore rather here thinke that the diuell is a
Iuggler, presenting the liuely shape & pourtraiture of Pythagoras
in one place, and thereto haply by his supernaturall
power, adding a counterfait liuelihood of speech and gesture,
while the true substance is certainely and truely seene
in another place. That these like practises are vsuall with
the diuell, is apparent in many other kinds beside. Did hee
not vndertake, Math. 4. verse 8. vnto wisedome it selfe our
blessed Sauiour, to shew vnto him all the Kingdomes of the
earth, a thing so farre out of his reach and compasse, but only
by a lying and iuggling vision? If this he doth vnto the
Sonne of God, how shall the silly sonnes of sinfull men escape?
It is written by some Authors, that the diuel hath perswaded
some foolish Sorcerers and Witches, that hee hath
changed their bodies and substances, into Catts, Asses,
Birds, and other creatures, which really and indeed without
illusion (if it be not presumption to reason with the Diuell)
is impossible vnto him to doe. For there can bee no reall or
true transmutation of one substance or nature into another,
but either by creation or generation. The one is the sole
immediate hand of God, communicable to no creature (because
there cannot be two Creators) the other is naturall,
the finger-work and power of God in nature, and proper to
the nature of liuing animate creatures, not to Angels or
Spirits.
               Againe, creation is the worke of an infinite power, and
therefore of God alone, because there can be but one Infinite,
whose nature containing all things, and contained of
nothing, can admit no equall, no second, no other. The Diuell
then cannot create. That likewise he cannot cause these
transmutations by generation, is as plaine and euident, because
a true and reall generation hath many precedentGeneratio non est nisi in tempore id
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      apparata materia per antecessionem mutationis, quam Graeci 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      recentiores Ciceroniā maluerunt cō
                     mutationem. Scal. de subt. exercit. 6. sect. alterations,
and by little and little in space of time groweth vnto

the perfection of that kinde, vnto which it doth tend or is
begotten; but these seeming transmutations by the Diuell
of the substances of Men into Cattes, and the like, are swift
and sodaine, in a moment, and without preparation: and
therefore are no true, but seeming and iuggling transmutations.
               Here may be againe obiected, that the Diuell is able to
worke aboue the power of Nature; and therfore beside and
aboue the naturall course of generation, hee is able to make
these reall transmutations. It is answered, though the diuel
indeed, as a Spirit, may do, and doth many things aboue and
beyond the course of some particular natures: yet doth hee
not, nor is able to rule or commaund ouer generall Nature,
or infringe or alter her inviolable decrees in the perpetuall
and neuer-interrupted order of all generations; neither is he
generally Master of vniuersall Nature, but Nature Master
and Commaunder of him. For Nature is nothing els but the
ordinaryNatura est ordinaria Dei potestas. Scalig. power of God in al things created, among which
the Diuell being a creature, is contained, and therefore subiect
to that vniuersall power.
               For this cause, although aboue the power of our particular
nature, the Diuell as a Spirit doth many things, which in respect
of our nature are supernaturall, yet in respect of the
power of Nature in vniuersall, they are but naturall vnto
himselfe and other Spirits, who also are a kinde of creature
contained within the generall nature of things created: Opposite
therefore, contrary, against or aboue the generall
power of Nature, hee can do nothing. Therefore, to conclude
this point, hee cannot be able to commaund or compasse
any generation aboue the power of Nature, whose
power is more vniuersall and greater then his. We wil then
hence conclude, that aboue and beyond the vniuersall Nature
and course of all generation, hee cannot make a true
transmutation of the substance of any one creature into another.
               It was before proued, that it is impossible for him to do it

by creation. It is here manifest, that he cannot do it by any
course of true generation. There can be no reall transmutation
of one substance into another, without either a creation
or generation. Wee will therefore conclude with the
saying of Saint Augustine de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 18. cap. 18.
Nec sane Daemones naturas creant, sed specie tenus, quae à Deo
creata sunt, commutant, vt videantur esse quae non sunt: that is,
diuels cannot create any nature or substance, but in iuggling
shew or seeming onely, whereby with false shadowes and
outward induced shapes couering those things which are
created of God, by these commutations they cause them to
seeme that which they are not indeed.
               Concerning other manifest iugglings and illusions of the
Diuell, diuers authors haue giuen diuers examples, but that
which aboue all the rest doth most palpably detect him herein,
is a history related by Ioannes Baptista Porta in his second
booke de Magia naturali. He there witnesseth, that vpon the
Diuels suggestion, a Witch beleeued firmely, and perswaded
her selfe, that all the night shee had rid in the ayre, ouer
diuers great Mountaines, and met inconuenticles of other
Sorceresses; when the same night the mentioned Authour
himselfe, with others, had watched and seene her all that imagined
time of her transuectiō in the ayre, to be within her
chamber profoundly sleeping; yea, had smitten her, made
her flesh blue with strokes, and could not awake her, nor
perswade her afterward, when shee was awaked that they
had so vsed her, or at all had either seene or beheld her. Thus
preualent was the iuggling power of the Diuell.
               
                  S. Austine de Ciuitate Dei, lib. 18. doth deliuer an History
concerning the father of one Praestantius, who lying in a deep
traunce so profoundly that no meanes could awake him, did
dreame (as when hee awaked he did report) that hee was
transformed into an Asse, and carryed bagges or burdens of
corne into a campe of Souldiers. At the same time, in the
same manner, such a like Asse as hee in dreame imagined
himselfe did bring such burdens into the same campe.
               
                  
From these examples may bee iustly drawne a plaine demonstration
of the Diuels palpable iuggling and illusion,
which also may serue for confirmation, together with the
reasons before annexed vnto my former answer, concerning
the Diuels seeming, or deceitfull presentation of the reall
body of Pythagoras in two distant places at once, in the same
point of time. And from all these conioined and conferred,
may be truely inferred and collected, that the Diuell as hee
doth many supernaturall workes really, so he doth many other
by illusion and beguiling the imagination.
               These his iugglings notwithstanding are things also supernaturall,
and tricks onely possible to Spirits and impossible
to man. For it is impossible to man to frame so liuely a seeming
presence of man in one place, that it shall not bee discerned
otherwise then the very same true presence and real
substance which is really in another place, as also to fasten
such dreames as were before mentioned, vpon men, and according
to those dreames to cause the things dreamed, by
the witnesse and testimony of other beholders, to bee
brought to passe in so liuely likenesse and similitude, as cannot
bee discerned and discouered otherwise then the very
same that they were in dreame likewise beleeued.
               From hence it doth also follow very necessarily, that
what man soeuer shall vndertake these supernaturall iuglings,
which are only possible in the power of Spirits, and of
the Diuell alone, is therby as truly conuinced to be a Witch
or Sorcerer, as hee that vndertaketh any of the former reall
supernaturall works, or any other of the like kinde, because
they are both and all alike proper onely to the diuell, and
wherein man can haue no property, or power, but by and
through him. Let vs now then againe returne vnto the
Diuels reall supernaturall performances and workes, vnto
Sorcerers, from whence by the way of answere vnto the former
doubt, concerning Pythagoras his supposed realty of
being at once in two places, wee haue hitherto onely digressed.
               
                  
It is written as a thing vsuall vnto many famous Magicians,
Sorcerers and Witches, vnto the view and sight of some
admitted spectators, to raise resemblances of the dead, which
seemeth a thing vndoubted by the Witch of Endor, raising
Samuel the Prophet vnto Saul the King before mentioned.
               In this kinde those famous and renowned Witches, Medea
and Circe in old and ancient times are reported to excell.
Hence among the Heathen had Necromancie the reason
of the name and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   which is diuination by calling
vp, or raising the dead.
               Later times haue not been behinde former times in the record
of the like: but to adde reason to inforce the truth of report
herein; I will answer an obiection which may be made.
Whether in these apparitions there be only illusion and imagination;
or some thing truely and really visible vnto the
outward sense.
               As touching the reall raising of the dead, it is impossible
vnto the limited power of the Diuell, either in the substance
of body or soule, to reduce or bring the dead back into this
world, or life, or sense againe; because in death, by the vnchangeable,
and vnalterable decree of God in his holy Writ,
the body returneth into dust from whence it came, and the
Soule to God who gaue it.
               Notwithstanding, since the outward shape and figure, and
proportion of any substance, and not the substance it selfe,
or creature, is the true and naturall obiect of the eye, according
to the Philosopher, who truely saith, Res non videntur,
sedrerum species; that is, the substances or things themselues
are not offered, nor come vnto the sight, but onely their
shape, and outward figure, as also for that common sense
and experience doe teach vs, that it is a thing absurd, and impossible,
that all those bodies & substances, which in infinite
number wee dayly see, and behold really and materially in
their corporall substances, and dimensions, should be contained
in the small body of the eye: for these causes (I say) it
is possible according to reason, that the Diuell in these supposed

apparitions of the bodies and substances of dead men,
may present true, reall, and naturall obiects, certaine and assured
vnto the eye and sight, if he can onely present thereto
the outward liuely pourtraitures, and shapes of the substances
or bodies, though the bodies themselues be away. That
the Diuel can doe this, is no doubt. For if man by Art can vsually
diuide the outward shapes, and figures of creatures
and substances, from the substances & creatures themselues
(as is apparent by the looking glasse) and the cunning Painter
can in another borrowed substance, separated from their
true, right and proper substance, represent perfectly the true
and liuely shape of men, and other creatures, euen when they
are not onely absent, and remoued in farre distant places,
but when oft-times they haue many yeares beene swallowed
of the graue; why should it be thought impossible vnto
the Diuell (who certainely is more then exquisite Apelles
excellent) to offer and present vnto the eye likewise any
true shape whatsoeuer?
               If he can offer the true shape (as is not to be doubted) he
doth offer a true and perfect obiect; and therefore that
which is truely and certainely manifest to sense, although
speech and the motion thereof, without another visible bodie
to sustaine it (being impossible vnto shapes and pourtraitures
drawne by men) be things supernaturall, and truely
spirituall, which doe therefore make it a worke proper vnto
the Diuell.
               And thus it is apparent, that the supposed apparitions
which the Diuell doth offer of dead men, may bee esteemed
and reckoned among such supernaturall workes of Diuels
and Sorcerers, as manifestly are brought to outward sense.
               Now let vs returne to view some other kindes of the same
workes of the same Authors.
               It is reported by some Writers of worthy credit, that the
bodies of Sorcerers and Witches haue beene really carried,
and locally remoued from one place into another by the
Diuell.
               
                  
And of later times (as Bartholomaeus de Spina doth witnesse)
the inquisit
                     •••
                   haue condemned vnto perpetual prison, and
there detained Witches, who by their owne confession, and
others proofe, haue by the Diuell been transported into so
farre distant places, in few houres, that afterward it hath bin
a trauell of many dayes, by their owne naturall power to returne
againe from whence they were manifestly by the diuell
carried.
               It is a thing likewise written and vulgarly receiued, that
Witches are oft-times seene bodily to haunt places, fields,
houses, graues, and sepulchers, in an vniuersall and miraculous
manner and wondred fashion. These things, and infinite
more, whether true or no, cannot be knowne, but to him
that doth himselfe behold, and can from his owne sight auouch
them really true, and not imaginarie. To performe
some manner of asportation, and locall translation of the bodies
of Witches and Sorcerers, it seemeth in reason a thing
whereunto the Diuell is not vnable.
               First, for that it appeareth within the power of a Spirit, by
the history of the Prophet Habacue, whom the Angel carried
by the hayre of the head, out of Iudea into Babylon. The naturall
faculties and properties of a Spirit, giuen in their creation,
and by their essentiall formes vnited vnto them, the
Diuell doth participate with all other Spirits whatsoeuer,
though in his fall from heauen, he lost their true happinesse
and perfect fruition in the face and fauour of GOD his
Creator.
               Secondly, for that there are vndoubted examples in holy
Scripture of the diuels power in the locall translation, not
onely of bodies inanimate: as fire, windes, tempests,
houses (as is apparent on the history of Iob) and of animate
bodies also, or bodies of brute creatures (as is euident in the
herds of swine which he carried headlong into the Sea) but
likewise of the bodies of men, as is cleere in the Gospel,
where it is said, that the Diuell did cast the bodies of the possessed
into the middest of the people. If the Diuel could cast,

or carrie their bodies the distance there expressed (whatsoeuer
or how little so euer it was) it doth manifestly proue
his power, in the locall motion of mens bodies, although the
full extent of his power therein bee not necessarily thence
collected.
               Concerning the taking the body of our Sauiour, and setting
it vpon a pinacle of the Temple, I will not vrge, but doe
conclude vpon my former reasons sufficiently and necessarily,
that the Diuell, where God himselfe doth not countermaund,
or prohibite him, hath power to dispose and transport
our naturall bodies. I will not cite a multitude of Authors
herein, and from them borrow needlesse examples.
As some may bee true, so I doe not beleeue all, and very
few I wish trusted, where the proofe doth not manifestly
exceede all exception.
               I conclude, that it is possible, that sometimes the supernaturall
power of the Diuell in this kinde, as in other before
mentioned, may appeare vnto outward sense manifest, and
the Witch or Sorcerer be found a voluntarie wihth him. And
as is said of this kinde, so may be said of many more besides
those before mentioned.
               Concerning the manifest supernaturall workes done by
Charmers,Charmers. who is ignorant? To omit the histories of Medea
& Circe those old famous Hags, who were seene by charmes
immediately to cause graine to wither vpon the ground; the
current of waters to stand still; the streame to runne backe
against the course, tempests, raine, thunder, windes to rise
and fall at their word and command, for an assured testimonie
of the true and reall harmes, which Charmers manifestly
vnto outward view and sense did vnto the ancient world,
is as yet extant so many hundreths of yeares, the Law of the
twelue Romane Tables, wherein was a Decree and Statute
made to preuent and restraine the manifest wrongs and iniuries
of Charmers. Alienas Segetes ne incantato, saith the Law,
Alienas Segetes in-cantando ne pellexeris, that is, Let no man
charme his neighbours graine. Let no man by charmes and

Incantations carry away or transport anothers graine. There
are many other true reports and records of other wonderfull
works and supernaturall feates, all alike offered vnto the
outward sence: Their enumeration or citation is not further
needfull. It is sufficient whatsoeuer or how many soeuer
they be, that they are workes supernaturall, that they are
manifest to sense, that they are of the Diuell, and that the
Witch or Sorcerer doth manifest his guilt therein, by voluntary
presenting himselfe therein, by manifest vndertaking
any part or office in the performance or by promising, and
according to promise causing to come to passe. The reason
is infallible. He that doth vndertake voluntarily, doth present
himselfe and doth promise, and according to promise,
cause to be performed that which is in anothers power, and
impossible vnto himselfe, doth thereby necessarily and vnanswerably
prooue himselfe to haue an interest, a power, a
contract with that other, which for any man to haue with
the Diuell, is society with Diuels, which is Witch-craft and
Sorcerie. And thus hath been declared, how the supernaturall
workes of the Diuell and Sorcerers may bee manifest to
the outward sense, and the true testimony thereof.
               An obiection here may be made, that many of the former
workes may seeme manifest to the sense, which indeed and
truth are deceits of the imagination and illusion; and therefore
there can be no such certainty vnto the outward sense.
It is trulyThings imagined and fancied, easily discerned from those things which are reall & true obiects of the sense. answered, He that wanteth so much true iudgement,
as to distinguish when he doth see a certain true obiect
offered vnto his sight from without, and when he is incountred
only with a resemblance thereof from within his fancie
and imagination, is diseased in body or mind, or both, and
therfore is no competent Iudge or witnesse in these or any other
weighty affaires. For he that is in health of body, and
in the outward organes & instruments of sense, and sound in
his reason, iudgment, & vnderstanding, though somtime the
fogge and mist of deceiued sense, or fancy, ouershadow the
brightnes of true & vndeceiued reason for a short time in him

yet it cannot so perpetually eclipse it, but it will recouer
his light and true splendor againe, and truth wil shine more
excellently in the end out of that darkenesse. This is very
liuely seene in the example of S. Peter, Acts 12. verse 10. 12.
who at first did thinke he had onely seene the Angell which
God sent vnto him to deliuer him out of bonds, in a dreame
or vision: but when afterward he was come to himselfe, and
his true sense and reason, hee then perfectly discerned and
knew that he was really deliuered out of prison by an Angel
of God.
               If men could not certainely discerne betweene that
which they do really see, and that they falsely imagine in visions,
dreames and fancie, then were the life of man most miserable,
there could be no certainty of truth, no excelling in
knowledge or vnderstanding. All men should be a like vnable
to distinguish, whether we liue in dreames only, or in
wakefull deed. But the certain knowledge which God hath
giuen vnto mankind in so infinite kindes and measures, doth
proue the eminence of reason and vnderstanding aboue the
intanglements and depression of sense and fancie.
               There remaineth as yet another doubt, which is, how
those things which before were mentioned to be spirituall
& supernaturall can be subiect in reason vnto outward sense
or be knowne thereby, howsoeuer by the former examples,
it doth so seeme. It is true that a Spirit and a Spirituall work
simply in it selfe in the owne nature and substance, cannot
be seene by any bodily eyes, or be deprehended by any outward
sense.
               Notwithstanding, as they doe mixe themselues with bodilySpiritus incorpori & à sacrificibus nostris remoti operibus conspicui. Pernel lib. 1. de Ab. Rer. caus. cap. 11.
substances, which are subiect to sense, by accident Spirits,
and spirituall operations, are eertainely tryed and discouered
euen vnto sense. For how is it possible that a Spirit
should mixe it selfe in corporall things, but the discrepant
nature thereof, and mighty difference, must produce and beget
some great apparent alteration, which alteration being
beyond the wonted nature of the one, doth proue another

superiour nature in the other? For illustration hereof, let vs
borrow an instance from one of the forenamed manifest Sorceries.
Water is turned into bloud by a Spirituall power.
They eye doth manifestly see the water, and as apparently after
see the bloud, and is a true and vndeceiued witnesse of
both. Reason and common sense doe know the transmutation
to proceed from an inuisible power, which appearing in
visible bodies, is by them apart seene, and doth detect an
inuisible Author, because an immediate effect manifested
to sense, doth necessarily in nature proue the immediate
cause, though hidden and vnknowne to sense. That inuisible
and spirituall things may, by those things which are visible
and bodily, be conceiued and discerned, the holy Scripture
doth witnesse in these words of S. Paul, Rom. 1. verse 20.
The inuisible things of God (sayth he) are seene by the visible
things, or by his workes in the creation of the world,
which are visible.
               It may be here demaunded, since it is the propertie of the
Diuel, in his seeming miraculous contriuements and actions
(though a limited and finite obiect creature of God) yet to
indeuour to countereit & imitate the most high and mightiest
workes of wonder of the infinite Creator, thereby to
magnifie, deifie, and equall himselfe vnto God in vnbeleeuing
and seduced hearts: Since, I say, this is his property,
how shall the fraile vnderstanding and capacity of man distinguish
the maruailes of the diuell, so liuely resembled
thereto, from the true miracles, and truly miraculous works
of God, that thereby with more facility, and lesse confusion,
industrious mindes may discouer the proper works and acts
of the Diuel, and his associates, Enchaunters, Witches, and
Sorcerers? First, the true miracles of God being transcendent
aboue all cteated power, and the immediate effects only
of a creating vertue, Almighty God for his sole good will
and pleasure doth vsually and euer dispense by the hands
and through the administration of holy men, Prophets and
Apostles manifestly called of God. Secondly, the end and

scope of Gods myracles, directly and mainely ayme and are
bent at the glory of God, and the benefit of his people, not
vnto any priuate end, any particular vaine end, tending to satisfaction
of priuate lusts and curiositie.
               For this cause the holy Apostles vsed the gift of myracles
not vnto any other ends, then vnto the confirmation of that
holy Gospel, which they preached and published from God,
neither did they therein ascribe ought vnto their own praise
or glory, but solely vnto the praise and glory of God, and the
good of his Church.
               That this was their true end, and ought to be the scope and
end of all that receiue the power of myracles from GOD,
S. Paul doth witnesse and teach, 1. Cor. chap. 12. vers. 4, 5, 6, 7.
Now there are (saith hee) diuersities of gifts, but the same
Spirit: and there are diuersities of administrations, but the
same Lord: and there are diuersities of operations, but God
is the same which worketh all in all. But the manifestation of
the Spirit is giuen to euery man to profit withall.
               It is from hence manifest, that if any myracles proceed from
God as Author, they are dispensed by men, sanctified by
God, and who can and are able to proue & iustifie their warrant
from God: as also that these men of God do solely professe
and bend them vnto the glory of God, and the weale of
his Church. This then is the square and infallible rule by
which all myracles doe stand ot fall, and are approued either
to be of God, or conuinced to be of Diuels.
               Let vs then conclude this point, with that excellent & diuine
saying of Theophilact, vpon the 9. chap. of S. Luke. Praedicatio
miraculis & miracula praedicatione sanciuntur. Multi enim
saepe miracula ediderunt per Daemones, sed eorum doctrina non erat
sana, quamobrem eorum miracula non extiterunta Deo. That is,
the word of God doth establish & confirme the truth of myracles,
and myracles ratifie and confirme the authoritie and
truth of the word. For many haue done myracles by the power
of the diuel, but their doctrine was corrupt & not found;
and therefore their myracles were not of God. Wheresoeuer

therefore myracles or supernaturall works shall dare to shew
their heads, not contained within those limits or compasse,
that is neither proued immediately from God himselfe, nor
mediately by him reuealed in his writ & word of truth, they
are iustly to be suspected to issue from the enemies of God;
the Diuell, and euill Spirits, and therefore their Authors
ought to be accomptant therin vnto Iustice, and all religious
ministers and seruants of God and Iustice, in the most strict
and seuere extent of Lawe. And thus much concerning the
manifestation of the supernaturall workes of Witches and
Sorcerers, vnto or through the outward Sense.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               The workes of the Diuell or Witches manifest to Reason, or consequence
of Reason.
               ALl doubts being cleared, it hath vndoubtedly appeared
how supernaturall and spirituall workes are apparent
to sense. It now followeth to declare, how
likewise they are euident to Reason, or necessary to consequence
of Reason.
               Those things are said to be proper obiects of Reason and
vnderstanding: which, being remote frō the immediate view
or notice of the outward senses, are grounded vpon vniuersall
and intellectuall knowne positions, propositions, and
certaine & vndoubted general notions, by necessary collections,
or raciocinations. That we may build the foundation of
this our Reason or Raciocination vpon the infallible truth of
Gods holy Word which shall neuer be shaken: let vs for the
detection of Witches and Sorcerers, by reason, and consequence
of reason, syllogise directly and immediately from
God himselfe.
               Thus saith Almightie God, Isaiah chap. 8. verse 19. And
when they shall say vnto you, Enquire of those that haue a
Spirit of Diuination, and at the South-sayers, which murmure

and whisper, should not a people enquire of their
God? Vnder this interrogatiue (should not a people inquire
of their God?) is vnderstood this affirmatiue; A people
should enquire of no other Spirit, but of their God alone.
               From this holy text and writ, reason doth assume and collect
necessarily, and truely.
               First, that many things are hidden from the knowledge of
man, which are reuealed vnto the science and knowledge of
Spirits. Otherwise neither would man aske or enquire of
Spirits (as hath been vsuall in all ages) neither should God
haue occasion here to forbid the enquiring at Spirits. That
the ignorance also of man in things knowne to Spirits, is the
true, First and originall motiue or reason for enquiring at
Spirits, is very plaine by the words of King Saul, 1. Sam.
chap. 28. verse 15. God is departed from me (saith he) vnto
the vision of Samuel, raised by the Diuell, and answereth me
no more, neither by Prophets, neither by dreames: therfore
haue I called thee, that thou maist tell mee what I should
doe.
               Here is a manifest graunt of knowledge in Spirits aboue
men. Secondly, reason doth hence collect, that all Spirits
that doe suffer themselues to be enquired at, are euill Spirits,
and therefore Diuels; because Almightie God hath here expressely
forbidden the enquiring at any other Spirit beside
himselfe: and therefore good and holy Spirits will not, nor
Angeli boni non possunt peccare, Pet. Lomb. d. 7. li. 2 This doth condemne that white Magick or Theourgia, which is supposed or pretended conference with good Spirits.can not disobey the commandement of God, nor countenance
or assist men in so doing. Thirdly, reason doth necessarily
hence conclude, that such men as are enquired at for reuelations
of things hidden from the skill and possibilitie of
knowledge in man, are Sorcerers, Witches, and Southsayers.
               The consequence and inference of this reason is iust; for
that to promise those things, or to vndertake those things
which are out of their owne knowledge, and solely and properly
in the knowledge of Spirits and Diuels, doth manifestly
proue in the performance, their interest, societie, and

contract with Spirits and Diuels, which is Sorcery and
Witch-craft.
               It may bee here obiected, that there are some men who
affect to be resorted vnto, and to bee enquired at in things
supposed hidden from the knowledge of man, and to be reputed
able vnto such Reuelations, though haply they practise
to deceiue, vnder the colour or pretence, of such abilitie.
               It is iustly hereto answered, that this their presumption
ought to be seuerely enquired into, whether it doe taste of
ought that is diabolicall, of the Diuell, or supernaturall: and
if nothing so doe, yet in this grand cause of God himselfe,
the religious iealousie of the prudent Magistrate ought to
punish their presumption, which dare affect to vndertake the
name or note of a sinne, so odious and abominable vnto Almightie
God. Let vs for better impression, againe repeate
and iterate those things which were collected out of the propounded
text.
               First, that there is knowledge in Spirits of things hidden,
and separated from the knowledge of man.
               Secondly, that such Spirits as are enquired at, and doe reueale
such knowledge vnto man, are Diuels.
               Thirdly, that men which doe practise to be enquired at
for such supposed Reuelations, ought not onely to be iustly
suspected, and inquired into, but that if they be found therewithall,
to know and reueale those things, which are indeed
and really aboue and beyond the knowledge of man, and
are properly and onely in the power of Spirits; that then this
doth infallibly proue their interest, power, and societie with
Diuels, which is certaine and assured Sorcery and Witch-craft.
               And thus hath reason drawne a demonstration out of the
booke of God, of a certaine Witch, and manifest Sorcerer.
Let vs now exercise our selues in the consideration, examination,
and tryall of some particulars herein.
               Who hath not heard of the name and mention of that famous

and renowmed British Wisard Merlin, and of his high
and great esteeme among Princes for his prophesies? Vnto
his fore-sight and predictions, from many fore-going ages,
the successes and euents of diuers Princes affaires, in their seuerall
raignes, haue been vsually by diuers times and histories
referred.
               For this cause Master Camden, in the description of Caermarden-shire,
doth terme him the Tages of the Britans.
               
               
                  Speede in his tractate of the ancient Inhabitants of great
Britane; as also of the life of Aurelius, Ambrosius, and of the
raigne of King Iohn, and of Henry the fourth, doth out of
Malmesbury, and others, recite diuers accidents & euents,
in seuerall succeeding ages, vnto his oraculous and miraculous
illuminations, ascribed to haue beene foreseene, foretold,
and knowne.
               If there be truth in those Oracles, and ancient fore-seeing
Reuelations, they doe necessarily inferre the assistance of a
power, farre superiour vnto all the power of man. Therefore
whosoeuer doth finde them true, must conclude their Author
a Witch or Sorcerer. Neither hath the generall reception,
or opinion of Authors, been here-from different, who
haue published him the sonne of an Incubus, or the sonne of
a Witch, begotten by the Diuell. As it is said of this ancient
time-noted, and age-viewed Sorcerer; so may be testified of
many other.
               What shall wee iudge of that infamous woman, among
the French, called Ioane of Arc, by others Ioane Pucell de Dieu?
Iohn de Serres, the French historian, doth report, that shee had
many miraculous Reuelations, whereof the King (then
Charles the seuenth) and all his armie and men of warre, were
open wondring witnesses, and in those reuelations for the
most part, there was found no lesse wondrous truth, then true
wonder.
               By her sole incouragement, and stout assurance of successe,
built vpon miraculous reuelations, the French prosperously
incountred the victorious English in France, at seuerall

times, and against all humane reason, recouered their in reason-vnrecouerable,
and most desperate standing, euen neere
vnto the pit of vtter downefall, with more then vnspeakeable
amazement and terrour, vnto the sodainely confounded
English.
               Notwithstanding, at length shee was taken prisoner by
the English, executed and burnt for her Witch-craft. What
shall wee say or iudge of other the like Authors, and broachers
of supernaturall reuelations and predictions in other
times? The fore-mentioned Historian reporteth, that a Wisard
foretold Duke Biron of his death, and that he should
dye by the backe blow of a Burguignon, who afterward proued
his Executioner, being that Countrey man.
               
                  Melancton ont of Carion doth recite the mention of a woman,
of the order of the Druides among the Tungri, who
foretold Dioclesian that hee should be Emperour of Rome,
when he had first killed a Boare, which prooued afterward
one Aper, then an Vsurper, which in the Latine tongue signifieth
a Boare.
               
                  Suetonius writeth of a Diuinour, who loug before was able
to make knowne the death, and the manner of the death,
and murder of Iulius Caesar.
               
               
                  Philippe de Commines, in his 8. Book, Chap. 19. doth make
mention of one Frier Hierome, and of his many admirable reuelations
& predictions, concerning the affaires of the king
of France, which as from the Friers owne mouth, he himselfe
did oft heare, so with his owne eyes he did witnesse and behold
their issue true. It was disputed whether in these transcendent
reuelations the Frier were a man of God or no, and
it is doubtfully there concluded.
               In these like reuelations and prophecies reason cannot deny,
but must acknowledge the manifest impression and
stampe, of more then humane Science or demonstration. If
we desire or affect more specially to viewe what our owne
Histories at home afford: who can deny him a Wisard, or
Witch, who as Mr. Speede and others testifie, in the reigne of

                  Richard the Vsurper foretold, that vpon the same stone
where hee dashed his spurre, riding toward Bosworth fielde,
he should dash his head in his returne: which proued accordingly
true, when being slaine in battell, he was carryed naked
out of the field, and his head hanging low by the horse
side behinde his bearer did smite vpon the same stone in repassage,
where before in passage he had strooken his heele
and spurre.
               What can be deemed lesse of the Author of that prophecie
in Edward the fourth; that is, thatSpeede. 
                  G. should murder king
Edwards heires, which G. vnderstood of the Duke of Glocester,
was too true.
               How can he likewise escape the iust supition of the same
foule crime, from whom originally or first was deriued that
prophecie or prediction in Henry the fift, concerning his
sonne, as yet then vnborne, videlicet, that what Henry of
Monmouth should winne (which was Henry the fift) Henry
of Windsor should lose (which was Henry the sixt and his
sonne) as it after came truly to passe?
               But here may bee obiected, that since it is sayd by God
himselfe, that no man ought to aske of any other Spirit, but
of God alone, things hidden and vnreuealed to men, Isa. 8.
verse 19. before alleaged; and since for that cause it is not to
be doubted, that many things may be reuealed by God vnto
men, for this cause and reason (I say) it may be deemed & obiected,
that some of the former reuelations and prophecies
may be free from the imputation of Witch-craft, & Sorcery.
               It is vnanswerably answered to this obiection: First, that
all the reuelations and prophecies which are of God, are euer
published by holy Prophets and men of God, immediately
called by God himselfe vnto these their holy functions and
places. Secondly, those holy vessels, holy Saints and seruants
of God, which are the publishers of Gods reuelations
or prophecies, doe euer auouch and openly professe God
himselfe to bee Authour thereof, from whom they onely
clayme, and openly proclaime their immediate and expresse

warrant and commission, as appeareth by all the prefixions
of their prophecies: Thus sayth the Lord, The word of the
Lord, The burden of the Lord, The reuelation of Iesus
Christ, and the like. Thirdly, the reuelations and prophecies
which are thus deriued and sent from God, carry in themselues
some manifest stampe of their authority and power
from God, in some fruites or effects correspondent and answerable
to the nature, wil and pleasure of God, and are directly
and originally bent and intended vnto the glory of
God, and the publike wele & good of his Church & people.
               By these notes and infallible markes of Gods holy prophecies
and reuelations, may be euidently discerned a cleere
difference and distinction thereof from diuelish predictions,
and Sorcerous prognostications, which therefore cannot
shrowde or hide themselues vnder colour or pretense therof,
being duely and rightly expended.
               It may be yet further obiected, that some learned and truly
religous seruants of God (though no publike Ministers
of Propheticall functions or callings) haue had sometimes
their special reuelatiōs of some particular things, in which it
were not only manifestly iniurious, but plainly & extremely
ridiculous to accompt them Witches. It is true, and cannot
be denyed that Almighty God sometimes, by dreams, sometimes
by secret prodigies doth admonish some his priuate
seruants, good and holy men, of some things to come, for
their own priuate & retired reformation, information or better
preparatiō; but that any prophecies or reuelations can be
of God, that are obscurely whispred or cast abroad by any vn
warranted or profane Authors, without any manifest warrant,
cōmission, or authority from God, in the vpright iudgement
of all men that truly worship & feare the true God, the
the God of hostes, is much irreligion and profane credulity
to auouch or affirme. Nay, it is altogether contrary and contradictory,
& therefore impossible to God his miraculous reuelations,
visions & ptophecies, ordinarily, or commonly to
serue or wait vpon the ordinary ends or vses of priuate men,

since all true miracles and miraculous reuelations are euer in
their proper nature and true end, solely attendant vpon God
his immediate commaund and word, vnto his extraordinary
workes. To make it therefore ordinary, or a thing common
or of customary practice, to foretell or giue prediction of
things to come, must necessarily proceede from the Diuell,
since the gift of true prophesie, and the Spirit of true reuelation
is not subiected to the common or vsuall intentions of
men; neither can profit or commodity or sale be made thereof
by men at their pleasure, as is not vnwonted with all the
disciples of Simon Magus, Sorcerers and Witches, in their
markets and fayres made of their prophecies and reuelations.
               If then these whispered reuelations cannot be of God,
then are they necessarily of the Diuell. If they proceed from
the Diuell, then by an ineuitable conclusion, those men are
his instruments or organs, by whom or through whom they
originally flowe, or are deriued vnto men and published.
It may be yet further obiected, that in men possessed by the
Diuell, as were those men in the Gospell, whose bodies the
Diuell did really rend and teare (in whom he did roare and
crie out) whom he cast into the middest of the people. It may
be (I say) obiected, that in those possessed and the like, there
may bee reuealed many things hidden from men, without
the imputation or iust opinion of Witch-craft or Sorcerie in
them.
               That this may bee, is manifest in the Gospell, where the
Diuel in the possessed vttered words of knowledge then hidden
from men, but by extraordinary reuelation, when he acknowledge
our Sauiour to be IESVS the Sonne of the liuing
God. This could not in any possibility of mans reason
bee knowne vnto the possessed, because it was then but in
part reuealed vnto the Disciples themselues, who were as yet
but learners themselues and Scholers of that diuinitie; neither
had the naturall man, or the world as yet so much as tasted
or sauoured any notice thereof.
               
                  
The like may be obiected concerning those that are obsessed.
I call them obsessed, in whose bodies outwardly appearing
no extraordinarie signes or tokens of the Diuels corporall
presidence, orMaster Perkins in his discourse of Witch-craft Cha. 3. pag. 122. doth diuide likewise Witches vnto such within whom the Diuel is not inwardly, but from without doth inspire them and within whom hee is, as was the Pythonisse at Phillippi Act. 16. 16. residence in them (as was in the possessed
manifest) yet are their mindes, vnderstanding, wils, and reasome
palpably obserued to bee besieged, captiued and inchanted,
by an extraordinary and more then naturall, or rather
an infernall inuasion of the Diuels illusions, for the magnifying
and aduancing whereof, the Diuell doth oft-times
mix and temper them with some rare and wonderfull reuelations,
by or through the obsessed deliuered.
               From these obiections both concerning the possessed, and
also the obsessed, doth issue a necessary sequel, that prophecies
and reuelations are not alwaies inseparable testimonies
of a Witch.
               It is truely hereto answered, that soly and simply reuelations
are not sufficient euidences, or conuictions of a Witch,
or Sorcerer, but with difference and distinction.
               Supernaturall reuelations vnrequiredly transfused and
transferred by the Diuel, doe not proue the persons in whom
they are found, to bee their owne free or desirous Agents in
consent therein, but rather properly and truely the Diuels
Patients, and therefore it cannot bee their guilt, but his intrusion,
vsurpation, and insidiation: but supernaturall reuelations,
in which any man shall knowingly, and deliberately
consult with, or inquire at a knowne Spirit, and inioyning
the free libertie of his will, not depraued or corrupted by illusions
or diseases, shall with consent or allowance thereof
entertaine, commerce conference or assistance of Spirits vnto
that purpose; such reuelations (I say) wheresoeuer truely and
duely detected, doe demonstratiuely and infallibly point ou
a Witch or Sorcerer.
               Although therefore the possessed, or obsessed, are iustly acquite
in their reuelations and prophecies, because transmitted
or sent vnrequired, and vnknowingly vnto them, yet
cannot the Witch or Sorcerer bee any thing at all aduantaged,

or cleared in his reuelations, which are euer detected to
be both by him affected (as is proued by his mercinarie sale
therof) and also fore-thought and premeditate, as is euident
by his promised and couenanted vndertaking thereof, according
to conditions or agreement.
               All obiections therefore, doubts and impediments remoued,
let vs build a neuer-deceiuing, and inuiolate conclusion
concerning Witches, vpon this neuer-failing nor shaken
foundation: that is, all supernaturall reuelations or prophecies
whatsoeuer, that issue not either immediately, and manifestly
from God himselfe (the proofe and touchstone whereof
hath been before touched, and briefely declared) or from
the Diuell in the ignorant possessed or obsessed, or are not
counterfeit and imposturous (which is likewise else-where in
the due place considered) all other reuelations (I say) whatsoeuer,
not excepted nor included in one of these, are vndoubtedly
issuing from Witches and Sorcerers, and are
certaine and demonstratiue proofes and euidences of Witchcraft
and Sorcery, in whom they are originally first detected.
And thus how Reason doth cull and draw forth a
Witch or Sorcerer, hath euidently beene cleared and declared.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               Of diuers kindes and manners, wherein Soreerers and Witches
receiue knowledge from Spirits.
               AS Almightie God hath out of the Text before mentioned,
Isaiah 8. in generall made euident, who is infallibly
a Witch or Sorcerer: so hath he in other places
of Scripture manifested some of their seuerall kindes, according
to the different shapes and formes, in which they do
enquire at Spirits for their knowledge and reuelations.
               This is apparent out of the 18. chap. of Deuteronomie, verse
                  
10. Let none be found amongst you that vseth Witchcraft.
What Witch-craft is, was before out of the Prophet Isaiah
declared.
               Now in this place doth follow the enumeration of some of
the special or particular shapes in which they shrowde themselues.
Let none bee found among you (saith the Prophet)
that vseth witch-craft: and immediatly after doth adde those
particular formes in which they enquire: A regarder of
times: a marker of the flying of fowles: a Charmer: a Soothsayer,
or that asketh counsell of the dead. As therefore before
we proued, that the infallible true note of a Witch in
generall, and in common vnto all Witches, and Sorcerers, of
what kinde so euer, is to bee enquired at in things hidden
from men (as is likewise by those words of Saul apparent,
Sam. 1. chap. 28. verse. 7. Seeke mee a woman that hath a familiar
Spirit, that I may goe to her and aske of her:) so here
in this text are reckoned vp some of their seuerall shapes, by
which in true & sound reason, and the due consequent thereof,
we may consider and collect many other, though not here
numbred, or mentioned.
               For since the common and inseparable signe or marke of
Witches is certainely made knowne to bee, the practice of
reuealing vnto men that enquire those things which are hidden
from men, and onely reuealed by Spirits: it followeth
by necessarie consequent, that not onely those which are
here specially nominated, in that shape of marking of the flying
of fowles, or of charming, or of raising the dead, but all
other whatsoeuer, in what other shape so euer that is, hath
or can be deuised, that shall bee found to practise or vndertake
to be enquired at, and to giue answere and reuelation
of things separated from the knowledge of man, and which
God hath hidden from men, and therfore hath forbidden by
Spirits to be made knowne to men; all such (I say) in what
shape so euer, as well in these kindes here named, are, according
to the generall note of a Witch, to be iudged Witches
and Sorcerers.
               
                  
For as the holy Scripture hath nominated and pointed out
vnto vs some few kindes, as a light onely vnto all the rest: so
may common experience by these bring others vnto our
view, and all ages haue vpon the records of time and history,
left vnto succeeding posteritie, many memorable and famous
Witches, not onely in these shapes and formes shrowded,
which are here mention, but in many other.
               Besides those kindes therefore, which here the holy Scripture
hath nominated, let vs take a short view of some other,
which are in other shapes found (since all are in their cōmon
kinde and nature the same.) It is no strange thing, that in
the shape,Astrologers. and vnder the pretense of Astrologie, some men
haue hidden sorcerous practice, and performing vnder the colour
thereof such things as were onely in the power of Spirits,
haue thereby cleerely manifested, that they deriued and
borrowed them of Spirits. Saxo Grammaticus, in his historie
de rebus Danicis, doth make mention of a sort of Wisards,
who would vndertake for gaine, to foretell the certaine state
and constitution of weather to come so assuredly, that they
would vsually sell vnto Marchants prosperous and fortunate
windes, when by aduerse and opposite gales they were deteyned
from their intended voyage.
               This kinde of Sorcerer may very rightly be referred vnto
that which in the 18. Deut. vers. 10. is noted by a regarder
of times, which perhaps may also not vnaptly be vnderstood
a Magicall Astrologer. His performance aboue the nature and
power of his Art, of that which is onely in the power of a
Spirit, doth both detect the Diuel to be chiefe Author of the
works, and the other to be also guilty to the worke.
               That the professors of Astrologie haue in former ages vnto
Astrologie ioyned this diuelish skill and custome; as also other
kindes of Diabolicall Diuinations, plainely doth appeare.
               First, by the word of God, Daniel 2. verse 2. wherewith
the Astrologers, the Caldeans, Magicians, Sorcerers and Enchanters
are conioyned.
               
                  
Secondly, it doth appeare by the Lawes, which by the
Romane Emperours were prouided against them iointly together,
with Caldeans, Magicians, and Southsayers. The
words of one ancient Law are, Nemo Aruspicem consulat, aut
Mathematicum, nemo Ariolum, Caldeum, Magum; that is,
let it bee enacted or ordered that no man aske counsell of a
Southsayer, a Mathematician, an Astrologer, a Caldean, a
Magician.
               
                  Dion in the 27. booke of History; doth make mention
of Astrologers, who by diuelish skill practised and vsed to
send the Diuell to presentThis kinde of Diuel is called, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . dreames vnto men in their sleep;
for which cause Tiberius the Emperor reuenged himselfe vpon
such Astrologers, though otherwise himselfe a great
friend and louer of Astrologie. Sir Christopher Heydon in his
defence of iudiciall Astrologie, doth out of Osiander recite
this distinction of Astrologie:Page 27 
                  Astrologia pura quae nihil habet
de Magia, that is, Astrology that is not mixed, nor intermeddleth
with Magicke. Wherby is necessarily concluded,
that Astrology may be, and sometimes is impure and defiled
with Magicke and Sorcerie. In other places of the same
worke, he maketh a difference betweene AstrologersPage 29 simply,
and such as with Astrologie ioined Magicke. And out of
Brentius he reciteth these words, Non negat Hierimias eam partem
Astrologiae, quae sequitur manifest as naturae rationes; that is,
the Prophet Ieremy doth not deny or condemne that part of
Astrology, which is guided by manifest reason or cause in
nature. Hereby then is vnauoidably concluded, that the Prophet
of God cōdemneth that part of Astrology, which exceedeth
causes & reason in nature, & that necessarily must needs
be Sorcery and Magicke. As it is not obscure, that some men
vnder the colour of Astrology haue practised Magicke and
Sorcery; so is it no lesse euident, that many others, vnder the
pretense of aduising and counselling in Physicke of curation
or prognostication of diseases, haue likewise exercised the
same diuelish practice.
               That this hath beene no new vpstart custome, the multitude

of diseases, which ancient times doe register to haue
been cured by enchaunted Spels, and words, and Magicke
skill, doth plentifully witnesse. The most ancient father of
all Physicke and Physicions, the in comparable worthy founder
of Method and Art,Hipp. libro de Sacro mor. bo de Magis. 
                  Hippocrates,
                  Dioscor. lib. 2. cap. 102. 
                  Dioscorides,
                  Theophrast de hist. Plant. Trallianus. lib. 9. cap. 4. 
                  Theophrastus,
with other succeeding Ancients, do generally all acknowledge
the force and power of Magicall curation. Galen
in his younger time gaue no credit thereto, but in the more
agedGalenus lib. de Medica Hemeri tractatione. experience of right obseruatiō he doth acknowledge
it. I will not stuffe this small Treatise with the particular citation
of euery Author. Later Physicians also of the best and
most choyse note, doe herein, with former ages consent and
concurre, and experience doth confirme all truth in both.
               Whosoeuer is acquainted with books and reading, shal euery
where meet a world of the wonders of cures, by words,
by lookes, by signes, by figures, by characters, and ceremonious
rites. As what the practice of former ages hath beene
is manifest; so what our age and later time doth herein afford,
is almost no where in this kingdome obscure. The neerest
vnto that impudence, which here in this our time doth
produce and set forth, is that history of a Germane Witch, reported
in the Malleus Maleficarum.
               
               There was (as the Author of that worke sayth) sometime
a Sorceresse in Germany, who vsually cured not only all that
were bewitched, but all kinde of diseased people, so farre beyond
all power or course of Art and Nature, and with such
facility, that all vse of the Art of Physicke, or of Physicions
was altogether (for a time) neglected and forsaken; while
people from all Countries, both neere and remote, in such
numbers and frequence resorted vnto her, that the Gouernour
of that Countrey imposing vpon euery man one penny
that resorted vnto her, thereby raised himselfe a mighty treasure.
               What others among the most ancient Authors, that are
not Physicians do publish, concerning the power of incantations
in the curing of diseases is needlesse to write. Hee that

hath read any few lines of old Homer, or of diuers other aged
Poets, shall finde plentifull record hereof. Herodotus is not silent
herein. But to omit all their needlesse testimonies, Physicians
of these last times, of the most eminent note & worth
(whose pennes are yet scarce drie) doe witnesse the truth
hereof from their owne knowledge, sight and experience.
Aboue the rest, Fernelius de Abditis rerum causis is worthy any
mans paines or view.
               Let vs now lastly see what may bee collected out of the
booke of God, concerning the power of the Diuell in curing
diseases, from whom all these inferiour Agents, Witches
and Sorcerers do deriue their power and skill. If it bee
in his power, where God doth permit, to induce diseases, it
must needes be in his power to cease or calme diseases; because
both causing and curing consist in the vertue and force
of the same meanes. He therefore that knoweth how and
by what cause the disease is induced, doth necessarily vnderstand,
that by the remouall of that cause it is cured, and according
to that rule can equally, as well by the remouall of
that cause, cure, as by the induction of the cause bring sickenesse.
For this reason it is a maxime in Physicke infallible,
that hee is the most excellent Physician, who knoweth best
the causes of diseases, and who vpon the knowledge of their
true causes doth found the right method of their curation.
               That the Diuell doth both know the causes of diseases,
and also how by them to procure and produce diseases, is manifest
by the history of Iob, vpon whom hee brought that
grieuous generall botch and byle ouer all his body, Iob. chap.
2. verse 7. That he did this by the force of causes in nature,
must needes be euident: first, because hee is a creature, and
subiect and limited by nature vnto and within her lists; and
therefore is not able absolutely and simply without causes
and meanes in nature, to produce any effects in nature, although
our ignorance of his power and knowledge (because
it so farre excelleth our power or nature) doth call all his
workes iustly supernaturall. Secondly, for that byles and

botches are knowne naturall diseases; and therefore had naturall
causes, although haply vnknowne to any man, and beyond
the nature of knowledge or skill in man.
               These reasons of the Diuels impossibility, to worke those
effects without nature, are thus yet more briefly and cleerely
made infallible. OfCreatio est constitutio substantiae ex nihilo, Scalig. de Subt. Exerclt. vj. Sect. 13. nothing simply to produce any thing
vnto a true being and existence, is the sole and proper worke
of an infinite Creator, and impossible vnto any creature,
Therefore the Diuell being a creature, could not bring those
diseases vpon Iob, but by created meanes preexisting in created
nature, in which he is contained and limited. And thus
much concerning that kinde of Witch and Sorcerer, which
is enquired at concerning the curing and issue of diseases,
which we will conclude with this note, that all learned men
of the best experience haue obserued; that in those cures by
Witches and Sorcerers, the Diuell hath neuer perfectly healed,
but for a time; or els where he hath seemed most perfectly
to cure, it hath been for a reseruation of the body by him
cured, vnto a greater and further mischiefe in time to succeede.
Besides, this kind of Witch, by meanes vnknown to
man, or by a supernaturall vertue in knowne means aboue &
beyond their nature, vndertaking to cure the sick, or to foretell
the euent and issues of diseases, there is also another kind
which doth vndertake to bee enquired at for extraordinary
reuelation of such diseased persons, as are bewitched or possessed
by the Diuell. This kinde is not obscure, at this day
swarming in this kindom,Wisemen and Wisewomen. wherof no man can be ignorant,
who lusteth to obserue the vncontrouled liberty & license of
open & ordinary resort in all places vnto wise-men, & wisewomen,
so vulgarly termed for their reputed knowledge cō
                  cerning
such diseased persons as are supposed to be bewitched.
               But it may be obiected, that many of these two last mentioned
forts are rather deceiuers, and Impostors onely, who
by an opinion of this power, and not by any reall power
herein, do deceiue, seduce, and beguile the people. This cannot

in some be denied: notwithstanding least impious imposture
be still tolerated to bee a couert to hide the manifest
diuellish practice of Witches, vnder pretense thereof (wherby
it shall euer continue in this shape neglected or vnspied)
I will both briefely giue satisfaction how the one may be distinguished
from the other, and also declare how men ceasing
to enquire at Diuels and Witches, or Impostors, may
learne to enquire of their God alone, and by the light of nature
and reason (which he hath giuen vnto them) in his feare,
with his allowance and approbation, more truely and certainely
informe themselues.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Of Wisards and Impostors, how they differ from Witches.
               HOw Witch-craft in diuers kindes may, according to
euidence of reason, be detected, hath beene before
made manifest. How imposture may be discouered
(since there is so good vse and necessitie of the distinction
thereof, for the more perfect separating and setting apart of
Witch-craft by it selfe) wee will likewise briefely make manifest.
               
                  Qui oculos fallent, alia pro aliis subditia ostentantes, ij praestigiatores ab antiquis dicti sunt. Scaliger. Impostura ab eo dicta, quod adulterinas merces, pro veris supponit, Vlpian, Impostores dicuntur versuti & fallaces homines, qui merces adulte rinas proveris supponunt, Accursius. The Impostor is he who pretendeth truth, but intendeth
falshood. For this cause sometimes vnder an holy pretense,
he maketh God theEphes. 4. 14 Author of his vnholy prestigiation, and
slandereth God vnto his face. Sometimes to be reputed an
Colos. 2. 23Angell of light, he maketh himselfe a license to counterfet
the Diuell. He proposeth it his trade to seduce, and liueth by
lying. Sometimes in shew and pollicitation hee is a Witch,
but in the performance of the greater sinne hee is lesse iust,
and in the personate resemblance solely a Iuggler. For as the
Witch performeth that which in true, and infallible reason is
transcendent and aboue nature; so the Impostor performeth
that which in false and fallible reason and opinion, onely seemeth
parallel.
               
                  
Hence as Witches doe strange and supernaturall workes,
and truely vnto reason worthy of wonder; so the Impostor
doth things voide of accomptable reason, in shadow, shew,
and seeming onely supernaturall, wondred and admired.
And hence it commeth to passe, that with vndiscerning
mindes, they are sometimes mistaken and confoundedSee Reginald Scot in his discouerie of Witchcraft, where in regard of the seeming likenesse of Impostures and Witchcraft, erroneously he confoundeth them as one and the selfesame sinne. one
for another.
               From hence it is also necessarily concluded, that as Witch craft
is discouered by a supernaturall worke aboue reason,
whereto the Witches consent is accessary; so an Impostor is
detected by a worke voide of accomptable reason, but in a
deceiuing false Visar or shew, wherewith the purpose and
intention of the Deceiuer or Impostor doth concurre. As
therefore the suspected Witch is tyed to answere vnto any
iust doubt, which may bee directly vrged against his or her
manifest voluntary action, that is proued supernaturall: so
is a truely doubted Impostor bound to giue satisfaction, for
such his ambiguous actions, as doe in likely reason appeare
fraudulent, vaine, prestigious, iuggling, couzening, or deceiuing.
And thus shall each appeare in his owne true shape
apart. Of diuers kindes of Witch-craft, I haue here produced
examples.
               I may here likewise very pertinently, for further illustration,
propose some examples of Imposture in generall, that the
odiousnesse of this foule sinne may appeare more foule, and
the ougly face thereof may be more fully discouered.
               Among multitude of examples, I will recite onely some
few, whereof some consist in lewd and guilefull contriuement
of action, other in the bewitching power of false prophecies,
reuelations, predictions, and prognostications.
               Concerning the first, who can be ignorant of the impious
and infamous Impostures of Mahomet, who by guileful counterfeit
miracles, and pretended angelicall illuminated works,
first magnified and set vp that heathenishPolidorus Virgil. li. 7. cap. vlt. 
                  Empire, and Religion
of the blasphemous Turkes?
               
               The History of Sebastian, the pretended Portugall King,

as it is set forth by Iohn de Serres, according to Master Grimstones
translation thereof (if he were a true Impostor indeed,
and were not iniuriously traduced, and blurred with vndeserued
reproch) is an incomparable example, aboue and beyond
many other. I will referre my Reader to the Author
himselfe.
               If wee desire more neere or domesticall examples herein,
behold, in the raigne of Henry the seuenth,Speede. a boy of meane
parentage, through imposturous machinations opposed, set
vp and crowned King in Ireland, against that famous and renowned
Prince Henry the seuenth, putting him in great danger
of his life and crowne of England.
               In the late raigne of Queene Mary, there arose an Impostor,
stiling himselfe Edward the sixth. The danger of the progresse
of that Impostor (if it had preuailed) who knoweth
not? The manifest wrongs, iniuries, and impeachments also
from counterfeit prophecies, reuelations, and predictions,
issuing not onely vnto priuate men and families, but vnto
kingdomes, Empires, and common-weales, are infinite.
               
                  Iulian, an Emperour of Rome, though otherwise a mighty
and learned Prince, and valiant souldier, by a prophecie of an
Impostresse or seeming Pythonisse, promising his conquest,
and triumph ouer the kingdome of Persia, was thither hastened
vnto his deserued death, and the vengeance of God vpon
his infamous Apostasie.
               
               It is reported by Iohn de Serres, the French Chronicler, that
the power and force of some pretended reuelations, and visions
of a yong Shepheard, in the raigne of Charles the seuenth
King of France, was so preualent, that it perswaded
Pothon that great & famous French Captaine, with the Martiall
of France, to arme and incounter the then victorious
English in the bowels of that kingdome; by which vnaduised
attempt, the French were supprised and taken by the
English.
               It is recorded by the same Author, that one Martha Brosier,
counterfeiting the fits and passions of such as were possessed,

in short time became so powerfull in illusion, that she
ministred much matter of wonder and amazement, not onely
vnto priuate men, but vnto the Kings Counsell, to Preachers
in pulpits, yea vnto the whole Parliament, vntill the
counterfet Diuell induring some punishment and restraint,
forsooke his pretended possession.
               If we require examples in our own country, behold, in the
raigne of Edward the fourth, his brother George
                  Speede. Duke of
Clarence, was hastened vnto his vntimely death, euen by the
allowance of his brother King, vpon the feare of a vaine and
flying prophecie, that G. of King Edwards heyres should bee
the murtherer.
               In the time of Henry the eight, the holy Maide of Kent by
her seeming miraculous reuelations, deceiuing not onely the
common sort, but euen-diuers learned and some men of the
best ranke, and prime note, stirred vp in the King great iealousie,
and feare of his Crowne and safety, as by the records
of her attaindour doth appeare, wherein doth stand proued
and sentenced her treason-some imposture of most dangerous
consequent, if it had obtained equall issue.
               In the same kings raigne, the bewitching esteeme, credit,
and hope of force and vertue in counterfeit predictions, and
pretended reuelations, whet the ambitious heart of Edward
                  Speede.
                  Lord Stafford, Duke of Buckingham, first into high Treason,
and to reach at the Crowne, and after from thence thrust him
headlong or headlesse into his graue.
               In the raigne of Edward the sixt, there was a prophecie
diuulged from the mouth of some pretended Wisard; by
which the coniuration of Kett, & those Norfolke Rebels, was
hartned and encouraged to proceede in their rebellion and
outrage, vnto the great danger & damage of the kingdome,
and in the end vnto their owne destruction. That blind pretended
prophecie, in the insidiation of vaine and credulous
mindes, was somewhat like vnto that ambiguous Oracle in
Virgils Aeneids.
               
               
                  
                     
Aio, te Aeacida Romanos vincere posse:
                  I say, the sonne of Aeacus the Romane power shall quell.
               
               This Oracle may on either side indifferently, either actiuely
or passiuely be vnderstood. Like vnto it was that prestigious
prophecie, which the rebellious Norfolcians with
their Kett trusted:
               
                  
                     Hob, Dic, and Hic with clubbes and clouted shoone,
                  Shall fill vp Dussin-dale with slaughtered bodies soone.
               
               The Rebels vnderstanding this blinde reuelation, or prediction,
concerning the victory wherein they themselues
should bee Agents and not Patients, (as afterward their
owne ruine did truly interpret it) and dreaming the filling
vp of the Dussin-dale to be intended of other mens dead bodies,
and not their owne, were thereby incited with furious
courage, vnto the hazard of the kingdome and their natiue
Countrey, vntill their owne mangled and slaughtered carcases
became butchered spectacles, and bloudy monuments
of such illusion and imposture.
               How many other feareful & horrid treasons haue bin built
and grounded vpon other the like prodigious impostures? To
recite the damages & wrongs done vnto priuate men by imposture
in manifold kinds, were infinite. What should wee
mention Prior
                  Speede. 
                  Bolton of St. Bartholmewes in London, who in
the raigne of Henry the eight, vpon the impression of an vniuersall
worlds floud, grounded vpon pretended miraculous
predictions, ridiculously buildeth himselfe an house or
neast on the top of Harrow hil, to saue himselfe from drowning?
               What mighty terrors did the wicked imposturous predictions
of strange euents in the admirable yeare 88. strike
into the cōmon people or vulgars of England? from whence,
what different distractions in many priuate men did bring
forth, to relate, were iust matter of profound laughter. What
translations of dwellings, peregrinations into other Countries,

exchange of inheritances for monies, and other ridieulous
extrauagant molitions did the approach of that yeare
diuersly prepare? I will not waste paper in any morePhilippe de Commines, booke 4 chap. 10. taakth our English. Natiō for the multitude and vanity of flying Prophecies in this kinde. particular
recitals: Our later age and time hath not been barren
of many wicked and harmeful fruits of imposturous prophecies,
neither haue they altogether escaped the eye of Iustice,
nor the blurre of infamy written in their names and chronicled
memory. And although many impostures (because practised
vpon priuate and more obscure personages) are lesse
knowne and published, then such as are committed against
Princes and States, and therefore are more remarkable in the
eyes of al men, yet are they both equally in their natures pernicious:
It were not now impertinent from the declaration
of the mischiefes of imposture in generall, to descend vnto
some such in particular, as are practised vnder the lying pretense
and false colour of a transcendent and Magicke vertue.
In examples of this kind, Reignald Scott doth ouer-abound in
his discouery. It is not vnknowne vnto my owne proofe,
how vsuall it is with many, by the reputation of a Witch only,
imposturously to promise and vndertake the miraculous
curations, and prognostications of diseases and their issues;
wherein, for breuity sake, and to auoide confusion, and the
crambe or iteration of the same things, I wil referre the Reader
to a former Manuell by my selfe published, where, although,
by reason of my absence beyond and beside the Errata,
many errors both in some words and sense doe still remaine;
yea there are many things in this kinde worthy notice.
Reade page 71. the Treatise of Wisards; likewise, in
the second marginal note of the pag. 58. an history of a Chirurgeon,
famous in curing such as were bewitched: Likewise,
page 109. 110. 111. an History of imposture, vnder
the colour and pretense of the inspection and iudging of Vrines:
and likewise, page 60. and from thence vnto the end
of that whole Chapter.
               There is a very rare, but true, description of a Gentlewoman,
about sixe yeares past, cured of diuers kinds of convulsions,

and other apoplecktike, epileptike, cataleptike, and
paralytike fits, and other kinds of accidents of affinitie therwith.
After she was almost cured of those diseases, but the
cure not fully accomplished, it was by a reputed Wisard
whispered, and thereupon beleeued, that the Gentlewoman
was meerely bewitched, supposed Witches were accused,
and after executed. The Gentlewoman hath been free
from all those accidents there mentioned, the space of sixe
yeares now past.
               In this last past seuenth yeare, since the writing of that
history, some of the former fits arePlurimae autem passiones puerulis iudicantur in septem mensibus, nonnullae annum 7. Hipp. Aphor. 28. lib. 3. Morbi Diuiini ad septenarij rationen: habēt Crisim, non septenarij quoad menles modo, sed quoad annos. Galen. in dictu Aphorism. critically again returned:
the same Wisard or Deceiuer resorted vnto and enquired at,
doth now againe auouch her to be bewitched; vpon opinion
whereof and trust in his illusion, the timely vse and benefit of
due counsell hath beene much omitted and neglected. Her
diseases which formerly, far exceeded these which now are,
in number, frequence and vehemence, were in shorter space
cured, and so continued the space of sixe yeares together.
These fewe which now doe returne, due counsell and time
neglected, though being in number fewer, lesse intricate, and
farre lesse violent, haue notwithstanding a farre larger space
of time continued.
               If that Counseller or vndertaker to counsell, be a Wisard
in name and reputation only (as I doe gesse and deeme
him) then is this History an incomparable example and instance
of the wickednesse, impietie and cruelty of imposture
and Impostours. If he be found a Witch, then is it an vnanswerable
euidence and instance of the Diuels iuggling, lying,
illusion and deceiuing, wherof we made mention and proofe
before in the question or doubt concerning Pythagor as realty
in two places. For, in true reason and iudicious discerning,
it is as cleere as the brightest day, that no accident befalling
the Gentlewoman mentioned, can be other then naturall,
or farther supernaturall, then either the Diuels credit
with a Witch, or an Impostors credit with deceiued and seduced
men is able to inchaunt perswasion vnto vain affiance

in them. I referre the Reader to the consideration of the history
at large, with that which here is added: I will only exhort
all men not to be in those doubtfull cases, too violent,
nor rash in asking or beleeuing vnworthy or worthlesse
counsell, but to aske it of such as are truly and godly learned
and prudent, and not of Impostours or Seducers, considering
that the consequences of rashnesse, mistaking error and
ignorance, are no lesse then the life or death of the sicke, a
putting out of the eyes and light of reason, which God and
Nature hath giuen man to walke withall in the darke pilgrimage
of this life; a depriuation of due remedies which God
hath allowed (while beguiled with vaine and foolish opinion,
with wilfull blindnesse, they worthily esteeme not, nor
will expect his grace and fauour therein.
               Assuredly, he that doth giue vp himselfe to become a prey
to folly and illusion, and led by deceiuers headlong into confused,
vniustifiable, vnwarranted and inhibited explorations
and trials, doth forsake the guidance and vse of right reason,
and in stead thereof, is intemperately distracted with impatience
of expectation of due respect and esteeme of Gods
ordinance and allowance in his ordinary meanes, may iustly
feare that God hath decreed and determined, not onely to
dispoyle him of that common blessing which he hath promised
to all that duely seek, and rightly vse his allowed means;
but also that hee leaueth him vnto the cursed path and way
of perpetuall blindnesse and hardnesse of heart therin, except
his speciall and extraordinary diuine grace in time reduce his
dangerous steps. For certainely he vnto whose blinded eies
God doth offer so great mercy and fauour, as is plainely euident
in all his ordained ordinary meanes, vnto euery good
that befalleth man in this life, and with thankfulnesse cannot
or will not behold it, when it is layd at his vnthankfull
feete, is in a desperate way of a lethargicall disposition, or
senselesse memory and obliuion, both of his reason, and of
himselfe, & of Gods mercifull goodnes towards him. And
thus the vglinesse of imposture both by the description therof,

and also by example doth appeare, wherein may bee first
seene, how they that trust thereto, doe forsake God, themselues
and their owne common sense and reason, and giue
themselues to bee swallowed vp of lying and illusion. Secondly
in the whole course of imposture it selfe, is seene the
continuall practice of mercilesse impiety, the vsuall wrong
of the afflicted, the belying of truth, the deceiuing the miserable,
the depriuation of the sicke, of the vse of due remedies
and meanes which God hath made & blessed vnto men,
that with praise vnto his name, patience & due dependance
vpon his prouidence therein, can be contented to seeke and
expect the likely and hopefull issue thereof, in vsuall course of
nature. Lastly, may be collected, and obserued, the vse and
necessitie of distinction betweene Imposture and Witchcraft;
namely, that the odious & abominable sinne of witchcraft
be not suffered to continue, vnregarded or neglected,
vnder the colour of vaine Imposture, and that the Diuell be
not suffered to liue amongst vs, too commonly, & too openly,
in the coate and habite of a foolish Impostor, or Iuggler.
For certainely nothing doth more hood-winke the throughdiscouery
of Sorcerers, then remissenesse and omission of inquisition,
and castigation of Impostors, out of whose leauen
(no doubt) but diligent animaduersion, might oft-times
boult out many a subtill and concealed Witch.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               How men may by reason and nature be satisfied, concerning such
as are indeede and truely bewitched.
               IT followeth now, according to promise, briefely to point
vnto direction, how men leauing to enquire at Witches
& Sorcerers, & Impostors, concerning the sick, supposed
to be bewitched, may enquire and be better satisfied by the
light of Reason, which God hath giuen vnto them. Reason

doth detect the sicke to be afflicted by the immediate supernaturall
power of the Diuell, two wayes: The first way is by
such things as are subiect and manifest vnto the learned Physicion
onely: the second is, by such things as are subiect and
manifest vnto a vulgar view.
               Those things which are manifest vnto the Physicion alone,
are of two sorts. The first is, when in the likenesse and similitude
of a disease, the secret working of a supernatural power
doth hide it selfe, hauing no cause or possibilitie of being
in that kinde or nature. The second is, when naturall remedies
or meanes according vnto Art and due discretion applyed,
doe extraordinarily or miraculously either lose their
manifest ineuitable nature, vse, and operation, or else produce
effects and consequences, against or aboue their nature.
The impossibilitie of either of these in vsuall or ordinarie
course of nature, doth certainely proue an infallibilitie of
a superiour nature, which assuredly therefore must needs be
either Diuine or Diabolicall.
               This conclusion concerning the infallibilitie of a supernaturall
mouer, from the like assumption, the learned and
worthy preseruer of reuerent antiquitie, Master Camden, in
his description of Cheshire, hath truely inferred vpon the miraculous
prelusions, and presages, euer and perpetually forerunning
the death of the heyres of the house or family of the
Briertons. These & such like things (saith he) are done either
by the holy tuteler Angels of men, or els by Diuels, who by
Gods permission mightily shew their power in this inferiour
world.
               Whensoeuer therefore the Physicion shall truely discouer
a manifest transcending power, manner, or motion in any
supposed disease, there is an vndoubted conclusion of the
Author. Where likewise remedies finde concomitances, or
consequences contrary to their nature, or such as neuer were,
nor euer can be contingent in course of nature: this assumption
truely granted, doth inuincibly inferre a transcendent
force and vertue, therein neuer to be denied.
               
                  
Thus how diseases, and the wonderfull accidents which
oft happen in diseases, may bee by the Physicion detected,
according vnto the rule of reason, whether induced by the
Diuell or no, is briefely pointed at.
               How the guilt of any man therein with the Diuell (which
doth onely conuince a Witch) may and ought appeare, hath
been before declared, and shall likewise hereafter be further
made cleare.
               It will not now be immateriall or vnprofitable, for confirmation,
illustration, and better proofe of those two wayes,
which are distinguished to be onely subiect, and manifest vnto
the Physicion, in the detection of the secret workes of Diuels
and Witches in diseases, to produce one or two examples
of both.
               Concerning the first, Fernelius in his 2. booke De Abd:
Rer. causis, cha. 16. deliuereth a history of a yong man of a noble
family, who was by a violent conuulsion in an extraordinary
manner long time tormented. Diuers learned Physicions
remained long time doubting and vnsatisfied, both in
the cause of this disease, as also of the seate or place where
the cause, with any sufficient reason, might be iudged setled.
               Behold very pregnant inducements of the finger of the Diuell,
mouing in the disease. One was the incredible velocitie
of motion in the diseased, impossible vnto the force of man:
the other was, for that in all the fits and conuulsions, though
very strong and vehement, his sense and vnderstanding remained
in the diseased, perfect and nothing obscured, or interrupted,
which in conuulsions according vnto natural causes
was neuer seene, and is impossible.
               The force of these reasons to euince the presidence of the
Diuell, in the manner and motion of the fore-named disease,
the Diuell himselfe did shortly after iustifie, declaring and
professing himselfe the Author thereof in plainely expressed
words.
               In the fore-named booke and chapter, there is another report
or relation of a man sodainely surprised, with an extraordinarie

ordinarie fashion, or shape of madnesse or phrensie, wherein
he vttered and reuealed things hidden, and of profound science
and reuelation, not onely aboue the pitch and power of
naturall capacitie, and the forgerie of fained extasie, but really
in true and vpright iudgement, and vnpartiall discerning
beyond all question and exception supernaturall. The
sequel after made it good. These examples are sufficient vnto
men that are wise, and with whom reason hath authoritie. I
doe not affect vnaduised multiplication herein, suspecting
many histories, and reports of diuers Authors.
               The possibilitie of those which are here produced, beside
the vnstained credit of the Author, is apertly confirmed by
the holy Scripture, where, in the Lunatike the Diuell manifested
himselfe by actions, onely proper and appropriate vnto
the power of a Spirit: such was his casting the Lunatike
into the fire, and into the water, his violent rending and tearing
him, which were things impossible vnto the power and
nature of the Lunatike himselfe, or of his disease alone.
               The man possessed among the Gadarens, Math. 8. Mark. 5.
Luk. 8. likewise doth establish the same, who was knowne,
and seene euidently, not to be simply or solely diseased, by
those vndoubted workes, and that finger of the Diuel, when
he easily brake in peeces those iron chaines wherewith the
Lunatike was bound: so that no force thereof whatsoeuer
could hold or binde him; as also when he vttered and spake
that more then humane vnderstanding and reuelation of Iesus
Christ to be the Sonne of God: a knowledge as yet vncommunicated
vnto mankinde, and vnto reason impossible.
               Concerning the second way of detection, subiect vnto the
Physicion alone, namely, when naturall remedies aptly applyed,
are attended with supernaturall consequences, contrary
to their nature, or aboue the same, out of the former
Author, and fore-named place: there is an example also without
farther straggling of vnquestioned estimation. A certaine
man there mentioned, vehemently burning and thirsting,
and by intolerable heate compelled to seeke any mitigation,

or extinction of his heate and thirst, in want of
drinke or other fitting liquor, happened to finde an Apple,
in the moisture and naturall iuice whereof, hoping the vsuall
short refreshing of the tongue, he, after the first tasting
thereof, immediately found (not onely that which was contrarie
to the nature of an Apple, greater burning and thirst
then before) but had instantly his mouth and iawes so fast
closed and sealed vp thereby, that he hardly escaped strangling.
               The reasonable doubt of the latitation of the Diuel, in this
faire, harmelesse, and vsuall remedie of the tongues thirst
and drinesse, was afterward made more euident and manifest
by the sodaine and swift obsession of his minde, with frightful
visions, wherof as in the disposition, temper, substance or
qualitie of his braine or body, there was no ground or cause,
so in the Apple it selfe, was no other pernicious mixture, but
that the Diuel, as with Iudas Sop, though wholesome and
sauing in it selfe, so in this medicinall fruit, entred and possessed,
where God permitted. The like may be said of other both
outward & inward remedies, which by a Magick power are
and may be oft interrupted, turned and bent vnto a vse contrarie
to their nature.
               For this cause Hyppocrates himselfe in his booke de sacro
morbo, & de natura muliebri, doth acknowledge many accidents,
as also diseases and remedies themselues to be diuine,
as hauing their cause and being aboue the course of nature.
When therefore fitting vnto any cause, matter, or humour in
the body, according to true Art and Reason discouered, apt
and fit remedies, are aptly & fitly by the iudicious Physicion
applyed, notwithstanding, contrary to the nature and custome
of such remedies, they haue extraordinary, vnusuall,
and iustly wondred effects, is there not iust matter of doubt,
concerning an vnusuall, and an extraordinarie cause answerable
thereto? The deepe and mysticall contingents in this
kinde, and their hidden reason and cause, the vnlearned man,
or hee that is not exercised in difficult discoueries, cannot

discerne, nor can the intricate and perplexed implications
therein, of doubts and ambiguities possibly, become intelligible
in euery ordinary apprehension; yet by the former easie
and familiar example, euery man may gesse and coniecture
at the most abstruse. The subtilty of the Diuell doth
easily deceiue a vulgar thought, and in the cloudes and mists
of doubts and difficulties beguileth vsually the dimme sight
and disquisition.
               The learned Physicion, notwithstanding possessing true
iudgement and learning; who doth and can warily obserue,
and distinguish first the wonders of nature vnknowne vnto
euery mediocrity of knowing: secondly, the true wonders
aboue nature in due collation with nature to bee knowne,
doth not easily or rashly with vulgars, erre or runne mad in
the confusion of vaine and idle scruples. The wonders of nature,
are such naturall diseases as are seene in their wondred
and admired shapes or mixture, to haue a great likenesse or
deceiuing identity with such maladies, as are inflicted by the
Diuell. The wonders aboue nature, are such diseases, as are
truly and vndoubtedly knowne and proued to haue no consistence,
or power of consistence, or cause in sublunary nature.
               Of the first I will heere cite no particular examples, because
I haue both formerly in a former Manuall, deliuered
briefly some of their generallPage. 58 59 60 descriptions, denyed by no
man that in ancient time was, or at this time is a iudicious
and learned Physician, as also diuers of theirPage. 61 62 63 64 particular Histories
in the persons of some sicke men knowne vnto my
selfe.
               Of the second it is heere needlesse to propound any
more particulars then those aboue mentioned, which I esteeme
for the generall illustration sufficient. In true and
right decision & distinction of the one from the other, multiplicity
of consideration and circumspection ought diligently
attend the intricate maze and labyrinth of error, and illusion
in their deceiueable likenesses, whereby the Diuell, for

his owne aduantage, and the perdition of seduced and beguiled
men, doth sometimes cunningly hide his owne workes,
and the diuelish practices of Witches and Sorcerers, from
their due detection and punishment; sometimes to insnare
the guiltlesse and innocent, doth iugglingly seem to do those
things which Nature doth iustly challenge, not as his, but
as her owne, in iust ballance weighed. It is most certaine,
that the Diuell cannot possibly mixe himselfe, or his power,
with any inferior nature, substance or body, but the alteration,
by the coniunction of so far discrepant natures, in the vnchangeable
decree of the vniuersall nature of all things, necessarily
and vnauoidably produced, must needs witnes and
manifestly detect it in the great and mighty oddes. This is
very euident and apparent in all the supernaturall workes
of the Diuell, before mentioned in the generall discourse of
this small Treatise or worke, whether such as were declared
manifest to sense, or such as were euident to reason;
whether such as were affected by the Diuell himselfe, with
the consent or contract of a Sorcerer or Witch, or such as
were without their knowledge, society, or contract performed
by himselfe. All those supernaturall workes of both
these kindes were therefore knowne to be supernaturall, because
they were aboue and beyond any cause in sublunarie
nature. The like the learned Physician may certainely conclude,
concerning diseases inflicted or moued by the Diuell.
For it is impossible that the finger or power of the Diuell
should bee in any malady, but such a cause must needes produce
some effect like it selfe, where true and iudicious discerning
is able to finde the infallible, certaine, and vndeceiued
stampe of difference. Thus farre hath been briefly declared,
how the Physician properly and by himselfe doth alone enter
into the due consideration & examination of diseases (where
is iust occasion of question) whether naturally or supernaturally
inferred. How vnfit it is here to admit euery idiot for
a Physician or Counsellor (as is too common both in these
and all other affaires of health) let wise men iudge.
               
                  
Certainely from hence it commeth to passe, that most
men for euer liue in perpetuall confusion of their thoughts in
these cases, and as a iust iudgement of God against their carelesse
search and neglect of learned and warranted true counsel,
all certainty & truth herein doth still fly farre from them.
For as in these ambiguities is requisite and necessary, a learned,
iudicious, and prudent Physician; so is it as necessary
that hee finde those that neede herein aduice, truly and constantly
obedient vnto good reason, temperate and discreete,
not mutable vpon euery vaine and idle proiect to start away,
and to bee transported from reasonable, iust, and discreete
proceeding, vnto vncertaine, vaine, and Empiricall tryals,
since wisedome, knowledge and truth are neuer truly found,
but onely of those, that with diligence, patience, and perseuerance
search and seeke them out. It remaineth now to
come vnto the second way of detection of the bewitched
sicke, which was before said to consist in such things as were
subiect and manifest vnto a vulgar viewe, as the first vnto
the learned Physician alone. As of the first, some few examples
haue been propounded, so of the later let vs also viewe
other some.
               In the time of their puroxismes or fits, some diseased persons
haue beene seene to vomit crooked iron, coales, brimstone,
nailes, needles, pinnes, lumps of lead, waxe, hayre,
strawe, and the like, in such quantity, figure, fashion and proportion,
as could neuer possibly passe downe, or arise vp thorow
the naturall narrownesse of the throat, or be contained
in the vnproportionable small capacity, naturall susceptibility
and position of the stomake. These things at any time
happening, are palpable and not obscure to any eye without
difficulty, offering themselues to plaine and open viewe.
               These like accidents Beniuenius, Wierus, Codronchius and
others also, euen in our time and countrey, haue published
to haue been seen by themselues. Some other sicke persons
haue, in the time of the exacerbations of their fits, spoken
languages knowingly and vnderstandingly, which in former

time they did neuer know, nor could afterward know againe:
as Fernelius a learned Physicion, and beyond exception
worthy credit, doth witnesse concerning a Sicke man
knowne to himselfe.
               Some Sicke men also haue reuealed and declared words,
gestures, actions done in farre distant places, euen in the very
time and moment of their acting, doing, and vttering, as
I haue knowne my selfe in some, and as is testified likewise
to haue beene heard, knowne, and seene by diuers witnesses
worthy credit in ourSee a Treatise of the Witches of Warbozys. countrey, in diuers bewitched Sick
people.
               As these examples are manifest to any beholder, which
shall at any time happen to view them: so are the examples of
the first and second kinde euident to the reason and iudgement
of the learned and iudicious Physicion, and all doe
therfore certainely detect and proue a supernaturall Author,
cause, or vertue, because they are manifest supernaturall
effects.
               Thus haue wee pointed out briefely, the detection of the
bewitched Sicke, both by learned Reason proper vnto the iudicious
Physicion, and also by common sense and reason in
all men.
               If men more at large please to exercise themselues in
due consideration and proofe heereof, they shall finde more
certaine and sound satisfaction and fruit, with the blessing
and allowance of God, then can issue out of the mouthes of
Sorcerers & Witches, which God hath cursed, and disallowed,
and in whose hearts and mouthes, the Diuell is oft a lying
Spirit.
               It hath been briefely, and yet sufficiently herein proued,
that Almightie God hath giuen vnto Reason light, whereby
reasonable, temperate and sober mindes, through circumspect
care and diligence, may see and behold whatsoeuer
is truely possible, or iust for man to know, with the fauour
and allowance of Gods grace, in the detection and discouerie
of the bewitched Sicke. Whosoeuer therefore shall contemne,

or neglect this light, and shall aske counsell of Diuels
and Witches, the open and proclaimed enemies of God,
doe certainely relinquish their faith, and trust in God their
Creatour, and their patience and dependance vpon his prouidence.
               And although it may sometimes fall out, that prosperous
issue doth seeme to follow the counsell of the Diuell,
yet doth it behooue men to be wary, and not presume,
lest it proue onely a sweet baite, that by a sensible good, the
Diuell may draw their bewitched desirous vaine mindes vnto
an insensible damnable hurt. For certainely, hee who will
rather be beholding vnto the Diuell, for his life or health,
then chuse to die in the gracious and mercifull hand of
God his Creator, can neuer expect to participate any portion
of saluation in him.
               Thus much concerning the reasonable discouerie of the
bewitched Sicke, wherein leauing to enquire at Witches,
Sorcerers, or Impostors, vpright men, that loue or feare God,
or imbrace Religion or common reason, may and ought confine
and satisfie their iust desires.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               The production of the workes of Witches and Sorcerers, vnto the
publique seate and censure of Iustice.
               WE haue hitherto considered, how the workes of
Diuels and Witches may bee both manifest to
Sense, and euident to Reason. They haue in their
diuers kindes and different performances and manners distinctly
beene instanced. Besides those kindes which haue
been mentioned, there may be innumerable more, among
which are those who vndertake and are enquired at, to reueale
treasures hid, goods lost or conueighed away, the
workes and guilt of other Witches, good fortunes, and euill

fortunes in diuers affaires, desseignes and attempts; as also
those who vndertake by inchantment, to leade captiue the
wils and mindes of men, vnto extraordinarie and vnreasonable
desires or lusts, hatred or loue vnto, or against this or
that person, or this or that particular thing, aboue or beyond
the naturall power of resistance, and the force and vsuall guidance
of naturall reason, in the ordinarie course of mans will
and nature: but they are all included in the same generall
kinde, and common proofe of their diuellish impietie, deriued
from the word of God before alledged vnanswerably,
and the true consequence of Reason from thence.
               The difference that is in their diuers kindes, doth onely arise
from their seuerall subiects, manners, ceremonies, and
rites, according to their seuerall differing contracts with the
Diuell: some vsing in their workes, reuelations or oraculous
answeres, of the demand of resorting people in one manner,
fashion, ceremonie, gesture, and rite; some in another, and
some in none at all, certaine, or vnchangeable.
               Concerning these ceremonies, with their seuerall contracts,
and the manners thereof, I will not write, partly, because
in this place not much materiall; partly, because they
are difficult to detect, except by the Witches owne free confession,
which happeneth very rare and seldome; partly, because
they tend more to the satisfaction of curiositie then of
vse, and therefore are not without some danger published. It
hath now been manifested by the word and mouth of God,
vnto the reason of man, how a Witch or Sorcerer may euidently
appeare vnto right Reason; namely by his voluntary
vndertaking to be enquired at, for knowledge and reuelation
of such things as are hidden by God from all knowledge
of men, and are solely and properly in the knowledge of
Spirits.
               The reuelation being found supernaturall, doth discouer
the supernaturall Agent or Author the Diuell, whose proper
act whatsoeuer man doth vndertake in part, or in whole,
must necessarily buy or borrow from him, and thereby bee

conuinced vndoubtedly of contract with him.
               We haue produced diuers sorts of noted Practisers likewise
of this inhibited contract, both in the holy Scripture
expressely nominated, and also by their ordinarie common
custome herein obserued in seuerall kindes.
               Concerning them all, we will conclude as a corallary vnto
all that went before, with the testimonie and confirmation
of Lucius Apuleius, that famous, expert, & learned Magician,
in his booke de Aureo Asino, from his long proofe and acquaintance
with the Diuel: Daemones (saith he) praesident Augurijs,
Aruspicijs, oraculis, Magorum miraculis, that is, the Diuels
are chiefe presidents, haue chiefe power or authoritie
are chiefe Maisters, Guides, or Rulers ouer Diuination, or reuelation
by the signes taken in flying of fowles, of diuination
by inspection of the entralls of beasts, of Oracles, and
of all the miracles or miraculous workes of Magicians. They
that will not beleeue the holy Scripture, nor the testimony
of so many men and ages, that the Diuell is the sole Author
of vaine miraculous reuelations, diuinations and workes, let
them credit the Magician his owne mouth.
               As we haue hitherto viewed, how Witch-craft and Witches
may be, first, by sense manifestly detected: secondly, by
reason euidently conuicted: so let vs now consider, how they
may be both produced vnto the barre of Iustice, and bee arraigned
and condemned of manifest high treason against
Almighty God, and of combination with his open & professed
enemy the Diuell.
               Concerning the first, since it chiefely consisteth in that
which is manifest vnto the outward sense, if the witnesses of
the manifest magicall and supernaturall act, bee substantiall
sufficient, able to iudge, free from exception of malice, partialitie,
distraction, folly, and if by conference and counsell
with learned men, religiously and industriously exercised,
in iudging in those affaires, there bee iustly deemed no
deception of sense, mistaking of reason or imagination, I see
no true cause, why it should deserue an Ignoramus, or not be

reputed a true Bill, worthy to bee inquired, as a case fit and
mature for the same due triail, which Iustice, lawe, and equitie
haue ordained in common vnto al other rightfull hearings,
and proceedings by witnesse and testimonie, although
it is likely to proue a rare plea or cause, because in reason not
too frequently to be found, and farre lesse in it selfe common
or vsuall, then is vulgarly reputed. It might notwithstanding,
haply be more oft detected, if more diligently according
to reason inquired.
               The second kinde of Witch by euidence of reason discouered,
is farre more frequent then the first, as appeareth by
the varietie and multitude of names, which it hath branded
vpon it, and the diuersitie of kindes and fashions which it
hath put on. It is likewise more easily detected and proued.
               A supernaturall worke or reuelation being first made truely
manifest (lest preposterously we haply call a surmised, or
falsely suspected offender into question, before any offence
be apparent or knowne; which is an vniust iniury, and worthy
of rebuke and shame with God and iust men) a supernaturall
worke or reuelation (I say) being manifest, any mans
guilty contract therein is proued, by his vndertaking to be
enquired at therein.
               That vndertaking likewise is easily knowne and discouered
by those that haue inquired. The foundation of this way
of inuestigation of this Witch or Sorcerer, is the Word of
God it selfe before recited, and iust and true reason built
therevpon, cannot fall or be shaken.
               Thus hauing brought these prisoners to the Barre, I there
arrest any farther progresse, and leaue them to Iustice, to the
decree & sentence of the reuerend, graue, and learned Iudge,
and so proceede to the third promised way of inuestigation,
and inquisition of Witches and Sorcerers, according to likely
presumption, probable and artificiall coniecture.
               But before we arriue vpon that point, it is necessarie that
first a materiall obiection be satisfied. That is, in the forementioned
Iudgement of supernaturall workes of Sorcery

manifest to sense, how can any true testimony or witnesse be
required or expected, since doubt is made, whether really or
truely, or delusorily and in seeming onely, many or most
things of that kinde, are seene or heard? Hereto is answered:
As a true substance is seene not of it selfe simply, but in and
by the outward true figure, shape, proportion, colours and
dimension inherent therein, and inseparable there-from; so
the true likenesse, resemblance and pourtraiture of that substance,
when separated from that substance, is as truely and
as really seene. Therefore, experience doth shewe vs, that
the same eye which saw the shape, proportion, and figure,
together with the true substance, doth as perfectly both see
and know it, when it is separated from the substance by the
Art of the Painter.
               As in the true miracles of God, wrought by the hand of
his seruant Moses, the true and vndoubted substance of a truly
created Serpent, was seene when it was changed from a
rodde, by the outward proper and inherent shape: so as truly
was an outward pourtraiture and likenesse of Serpents seene,
in the false miracle of the seeming transmutation of
the Sorcerers rods. For how could religion or reason condemne
those miracles of the Diuell for illusions, if the liuely
resemblance of miracles appearing manifestly vnto the eye,
had not thereby made them knowne? For an example, or illustration,
how is a iuggling deceit knowne but by the eye?
The sight is sayd to be deceiued therein. Therefore it doth
see that which doth deceiue. Reason likewise comparing
that which was seene, with that which is not seene; that is,
the counterfait with the true substance, doth proue the
counterfait the present obiect of the sight. The same eyes
therefore that sawe, in the true miracles of Moses, the substance
of a Serpent by the true inseparable inherent shape,
sawe likewise the true image and picture of a Serpent, in the
false and seeming miracles of the Enchaunters of Egypt. The
testimony of the presentation of both vnto the eye, is as true
as truth it selfe; because the word of truth hath sayd it. That

the Diuell is as powerfull as the most excellent Painter, to
represent any the most true and liuely likenesse of any creature,
is in reason cleare, and hath beene also before proued.
               Therefore a true testimony may be truly giuen, and iustly
accepted or taken of a liuely shape, figure, likenesse, or proportion,
really presented (by the Art of the Diuell) vnto the
eye. All the doubt then remaining, is, to put a true difference
between that which our imaginatiō doth represent vnto vs,
from within the brain, and that which we see without by the
outward sense. This difference wil best appeare by an example.
Fernelius in his first book, cap. 11. de Abd. rer. caus. doth
make mention of a man, who by the force of charms, would
coniure into a looking glasse certaine shapes or visions,
which there would either by writing, or by liuely presentations
so perfectly expresse and satisfie, whatsoeuer he did demaund
or commaund vnto them, that easily and readily it
might be distinguished, and knowne by standers by. This
Fernelius doth report that he sawe himselfe. What shall wee
say herein? Was this Diuelish practice a thing doubtfull?
Was it not manifest to many eyes, diuersity of beholders, and
the iudicious view of a learned and discerning sight? It
therefore could not be a meere imagination, but was a true
outward obiect. Those things which are meerly in imagination
(with those men whō diseases depriue not of their sense
or reason) are by right reason and true sense, after a short
time of their preualence, easily detected to be imaginary; but
those things which are truly, really, and certainely seene, remaine
the same for euer after in their due reception of sense;
with vndoubted and vnchanged allowance of reason.
               Hence it is, that a man in a sleep or dream, thogh for a short
space, he doth oft-times verily, really, and very feelingly (as
it were) thinke himselfe in many actions and employments;
yet when he awaketh from sleep, his sense and reason do tell
him hee was but in a dreame. Many sicke persons likewise
vsually, though waking, dreame of things falsely imagined,
but the disease being gone, and their sense and reason therefrom

from recouered, they then know and laugh at the fallacies of
their imaginations. By these short instances it is apparent,
that it is not a thing impossible, but vsuall and familiar vnto
all kinde of men that want not their common wits, to distinguish
betweene those things which are only in imagination,
and those which are reall and indeede.
               From hence we may then truly conclude, that against the
acts of Sorcery and Witch-craft manifest to sense, the due testimonies
of vnderstanding, discreete, and iust men, ought to
bee no lesse equiualent then against any other open acts, or
crime whatsoeuer, whereof the Witch of Endor may serue to
shut vp and conclude all doubt for euer herein, for an vnanswerable
instance and proofe. She acknowledgeth her guilt
and crime might be made manifest vnto Saul in these words,
1. Sam. 28. 9. Wherefore seekest thou to take me in a snare,
to cause me to dye? Saul likewise himselfe doth grant vnto
her, the sufficiency of his testimony to cause her to dye, vers.
9. in these words, As the Lord liueth, no harme shall come
vnto thee, for this thing: meaning, by his testimony of her
fact, no harme should come vnto her. But here may be obiected,
that it was not his testimony of her fact of raising the vision
of Saul, which the Witch did feare, but his testimony of
her confession of her selfe to be a Witch, by promising to vndertake
it. The contrary is manifest by the Text, verse 21.
See, thy hand-mayd hath obeyed thy voyce, and I haue put
my soule in thy hand, and haue obeyed the word whch thou
saydst vnto me. And thus is the doubt concerning the sufficiency
of testimonies and witnesse in case of Witch-craft satisfied.
It now remaineth as was promised and intended, that
we next view that light vnto the discouery of Witch-craft,
which artificiall coniecture, probable reason and likely presumption
do afford, since what sense and reason haue made
manifest is already declared.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               That Witches and Witch-craft may bee discouered by probable
reason and presumption.
               AS from things euident to sense, and manifest to reason,
there issueth a certainety of vndoubted knowledge:
so in things that carry onely probabilitie, diligence
doth beget and produce verity andOpinio vera est habitus circa conclusiones ex Dialecticis pronunciatis, Arist in lib. Analyt. truth of opinion. Hence it commeth to passe, that he who truely knoweth,
and knowingly can distinguish and discerne the validitie,
nature, difference, and right vse of probabilities, doth most
seldome in his opinions mistake or erre.
               Hence also it commeth to passe, that according to seuerall
measures, and degrees of diligence, study, practice, and exercise
of iudging in probabilities, men doe diuersly differ, some
excelling other in the merited stiles and attributes of subtiltie,
Policy, Sagacity, Exquisitenes. It is true, that in probabilitie,
is no perpetuallCe
                        •
                     tum est, quod nunquam aliter fiat, probable, quod plerunque ita fiat, Cicero. certainty: notwithstanding he that
warily and wisely weigheth it, cannot in the vncertainty
thereof but finde more certainty, then in blinde and vnlikely
casualtie; then in rash attempts and prosecutions, voide of
counsell, or likely reason.
               For although sometimes those things which seeme most
likely and probable, doe happen to proue false, yet doth nature
and reason teach and inioyne vs rather to giue credit
thereto; & experience doth manifest that the cause of deception
therein, for the most part, doth consist in the weaknesse
of mans iudging thereof aright. For in iudging of probabilities,
are great odds, some things onely seeme probable to
such as areProbabilia sunt, quae probantur aut omnibus, aut lurimis, aut certe lapentibus, & ijs si non plurimis, 
                        〈◊〉
                      maxime probatis, quorum est ipestara Sapientia, Aristor. wise, learned, expert, subtill: some vnto the
most exquisite Iudges alone: some to euery vulgar; some to
the choise and best sort of Vulgars, and not vnto all; and in
these differences, doth necessarily breed much error and mistaking.

Notwithstanding, the vertue and force of probabilitie
it selfe, simply doth not deceiue, or vsually faile, but as it
is diuersly and differently conceiued by men, that oft proueth
false, which seemed likely. Vatem hune perhibemus optimum,
saith Cicero, qui bene conijciet, that is, wee auouch and
affirme that man to be the best Prophet, or prognosticator of
issues to come or happen, who hath the power and skill of
right and true coniecture, which euer consisteth in the exquisite
perpension of probable inducements.
               What is among men more admired, or more worthy to
be admired, then this art, this skill, this power? Who doth
not know what vse, also what benefit doth arise thereby,
both vnto the true warrant and allowance of action, and also
vnto the maintenance, and iustification of right opinion,
in counsels and deliberation? As in all other faculties and sciences,
the excellencie and necessitie thereof doth brightly
shine: so most apertly vnto common obseruation, it doth
proue and manifest it selfe in the two seuerall professions of
the Logician and the Oratour.
               
               The Logician in his discrepations and questions, concerning
doubts and ambiguities, by the diligence of subtill dispute,
from the light of probabilitie, rectifieth the vnstable
fluctuation of vnconstant opinion, and produceth through
mature disquisition, and raciocination, what is most safe,
most consonant with truth, to hold affirme, or bee perswaded.
               The Oratour in his coniecturall state or questions, in his
pleas of doubtfull and controuersed facts, or rights, wherein
oft-times probabilitie and likelihood seeme to stand equall
and vnpartiall vnto both parts: notwithstanding by mature,
acute, and seasonable pressing, and vrging that which is
most like, most reasonable, and consonant with right, with
law and equitie, in the end doth bring into light, and discouer,
what is most equall, vpright, and worthy to be credited,
or respected. What euictions of truth and right, what
conuictions of guilt and errour doe dayly issue from hence,

common experience doth proue and demonstrate.
               Thus much briefely prefixed in generall, concerning the
necessitie, light and truth of probabilities; it now remaineth
to consider the vse and power thereof likewise, in our particular
proposed subiect of Witch-craft, which common sense
doth not onely iustifie (as in all other subiects) but the word
of vndoubted truth.
               Almightie God, in case of Idolatrie, doth not onely publish
and proclaime his detection of that great sinne it selfe,
but therewith doth include whatsoeuer hath any probabilitie
of respect, or reference thereto; whether in affection and
inclination, or in ceremonie or superstitious shew. This is euident,
Deut. 18. ver. 9. where he first forbiddeth his people so
much as to imitate, or doe after the maners of the Gentiles;
and afterward particularizeth their making their sonnes and
daughters to passe thorow the fire. Likewise Leu. 19. ver. 27,
28. where he forbiddeth as much as the cutting of his peoples
heads, or the corners of their heads round, or marring
the tufts of their beards, or marking or cutting of their flesh,
as was the manner of Infidels and Gentiles, in their mourning
and lamenting of the dead. Likewise Deut. 16. verse
21. where hee forbiddeth so much as the planting of any
groues of trees neere his Altar, because it was the custome,
inuention, manner, and resemblance of Idolaters.
               As in case of Idolatry, so in case of Witch-craft, which is
likewise a kinde of Idolatry, because the worship of Diuels,
Almighty God in those places of holy Writ, where
hee publisheth and proclaimeth his high displeasure against
Witches and Sorcerers, with that abominable sinne it selfe,
doth also condemne as abominable, First, in general all kind
of shew, of affection, liking, inclination, or respect thereof,
Secondly, any customes, fashions, rites, ceremonies, superstitions,
or gestures from thence deriued, or belonging
thereto.
               The first is manifest, Leuit. 19. verse 31. There the Prophet,
from their God Iehouah, doth charge his people, that they do

not so much as turne toward, or decline toward Sorcerers or
South-sayers, vouchsafe to aske any question, or to respect
them: and Leuit. 20. verse 6. hee giueth iudgement and sentence
of death, against that soule that doth but turne or look
toward them.
               The second is likewise manifest, Isaiah 8. verse 19. where
Almightie God noteth the superstitious peepings, whisperings,
and mutterings of Sorcerers, and according to those
gestures, doth with reproch terme them whisperers, mutterers
and peepers: and Deut. 18. verse 10 11. hee rehearseth
their mumblings, & charmings, and their superstitious marking
the flying of fowles; and Leuit. 19. verse 26. hee noteth
their vaine and ceremonious obseruing of times.
               If then Almightie God be so strict, that hee will not endure
or tolerate so much as a friendly looking toward Sorcerers:
the least respect giuen vnto them, or so much as a demaund
of a question at their hands, any inclination toward
them, any their ceremonies, rites or superstitions, yea, so smal
a matter as their very outward gestures; how can religious
zeale, or the duty of man toward God his Creator, esteeme
any of these, or the like, or the least of them, lesse then sufficient
matter of probable doubt, presumption, religious iealousie,
and suspicion against such men, as doe, or dare presume
to imitate, to practice or vse them?
               As the holy Scripture hath pointed out some few gestures,
maners, and rites of Sorcerers, for an example and light vnto
all other of the same kinde: so hath the dayly obseruations
of succeding times added infinite more, which haue, doe,
and still may encrease, multiply, and be added, and newly inuented,
and put on new different shapes and fashions, according
to the fancie of the contractors therein (which are the
Diuel, and man possessed by him, in whose powers and will,
according to the nature, qualitie & conditions of their contract,
dependeth and consisteth the variation, or innouation
of ceremonious rites.
               For this cause, among Authors and records both of elder

and later times, we reade of such diuersities and numbers of
superstitious litations, dedications, performances, and diabolicall
solemnities. As therefore wee haue manifested such
superstitious rites, ceremonies and gestures of Sorcerers, as
the holy Scripture hath noted and deciphered; so let vs propound
some other by after-times, and other Authors obserued.
               Some haue vsed in their intention or execution of their
Diabolicall workes, or in the way of prelusion one kinde of
See Master Perkins discouery of Witchcraft, chap. 2. pag. 48.ceremonious homage, and some another. Some do neuer
attempt nor enterprise a Diabolicall execution, but with
mumblings, whisperings, and secret sounds, and words heard
grumbling in their mouthes: as Theophrastus in his 9. booke
of herbes and plants doth witnesse, concerning certaine Magicians
in gathering Helleborus, and Mandragora: and as is
likewise vndoubtedly discouered, by the great attributes
that are by many famous Writers ascribed vnto the Caball
of the Iewes, and vnto letters, caracters, words, sillables and
sentences superstitiously pronounced.
               
                  Galen writeth, that a certaine Sorcerer by vttering and
muttering but one word, immediately killed, or cause to
dye a Serpent or Scorpion. Beniuenius in his booke de Abd.
morb. caus. affirmeth, that some kinde of people haue beene
obserued to do hurt and to surprise others, by vsing only certaine
sacred and holy words. It is apparant likewise, that others
haue accomplished their diuelish ends, by apparitions,
shapes, or figures, raised or coniured into glasses; as Fernelius,
an eye-witnesse, in his booke de Abdit. rer. caus. doth publish.
Some receiue power and vertue from the Diuell vnto
their Diabolical preparations, by certaine inchaunted herbs,
or medicines which they mixe and gather, sometimes with
brasse hooks, sometimes by Moone-shine in the night, sometimes
with their feete bare and naked, and their bodies clothed
with white surplices, as Pliny reporteth. Some are reported,
to obtaine of the Diuell their desired ends or works,
by deliuering vnto the Diuel bonds or couenants, written

with their owne hands. This Serres the French Chronicler
doth report, confessed by certaine Witches, in the raigne of
Henry the 4. And Mr. Fox, in the life of Martin Luther, doth
make mention of a young man, who deliuered a bond vnto
the Diuell, vpon certaine conditions, which bond was written
with the young mans owne bloud, and vpon his repentance,
and the earnest zealous prayer of the people vnto God
in his behalfe, was redeliuered, and cast into the Church in
the view and sight of the whole assembly there and then being.
Some deriue an effectual vertue vnto their decreed Diuelish
works, by hanging caracters or papers about the neck,
as Pliny reporteth. Some practise to bring their Diuelish ends
vnto issue, by coniured images and pictures of waxe, golde,
earth, or other matter, as Thomas Aquinas in his booke, de occultis
Naturae witnesseth.
               
                  Holingshed, page 534. doth chronicle the execution of certaine
Traitours, for conspiring the King of Englands death
by Sorcerous and Magicall pictures of waxe. The same author,
page 1271. doth report, that in the twentith yeare of
Queene ELIZABETH, a figure-flinger (as hee termeth
him) being suspected as a Coniurer or Witch, sodainely dying,
there was found about him (besides bookes of coniuration,
& other Sorcerous papers or Caracters) the picture of a
man wrought out of Tynne. Some late Writers haue obserued,
that diuers Witches by such pictures, haue caused the
persons thereby represented secretly to languish and consume,
as was lately proued against some late famous Witches
of Yorke-shire and Lancaster, by the testimonies beyond exception
of witnesses, not only present, but Presidents in their
tryall and arraignment. Some execute their hellish intentions
by infernall compositions, drawne out of the bowels of
dead and murthered Infants; as Ioannes Baptist Porta in his
booke de Magia naturali, doth from his owne knowledge
affirme, and thereto the Malleus Maleficarum with others
doe assent.
               Some practise also Sorcery by tying knots, as Saint Ierome
                  
testifieth in vita Hilarij, concerning a Priest of Aesculapius
at Memphis. Some practise Witch-craft by touching with
the hand or finger only, as Biniuenius sayth. Some in their
Sorcerous acts or coniurations, vse partchment made of the
skinne of Infants, or children borne before their time: as
Serres reporteth from the confession of Witches, in the time
and raigne of Henry the fourth detected. Some for the promoting
of their Diuelish deuices, vse the ministery of liuing
creatures, or of Diuels and Spirits in theirPerkins discourse of Witchcraft, chap. 2. pag 48 likenesse, as histories
report, and Theocratus in his Pharmacentria, seemeth to
credit, inducing there a Sorceresse, who by the power of her
bird, did drawe and force her Louer to come vnto her.
               This seemeth not impossible vnto a Witch, by the multitude
of liuing shapes, which the Diuell in former ages hath
vsually assumed, termed Faunes, Satyres, Nymphes, and the
like, familiarly conuersing with men. Some bring their cursed
Sorcery vnto their wished end, by sacrificing vnto the
Diuell some liuing creatures, as Serres likewise witnesseth,
from the confession of Witches in Henry the fourth of France
deprehended; among whom, one confessed to haue offered
vnto his Diuell or Spirit a Beetle.
               This seeemeth not improbable, by the Diabolicall litations
and bloudy sacrifices, not onely of other creatures, but
euen of men, wherewith in ancient time the heathen pleased
their gods, which were no other then Diuels. And rather
then the Diuell will altogether want worship, hee is sometimes
contented to accept the parings of nailes; as Serres frō
the confession of certain French Witches doth report. Some
Authors write, that some sorts of Sorcerers are obserued to
fasten vpō men their Magicall mischieuous effects, & works,
by conueying or deliuering vnto the persons, whom they
meane to assault, meates, or drinkes, or other such like; as
is euident by the generally knowne power of the Magicke
cups of the inchaunted Filtra or loue draughts: and as seemeth
iustified by S. Augustine, in his 18. booke de Ciuitaete
Dei, making mention of a woman who bewitched others, by

deliuering onely a piece of cheese. Some of our late Countrimen
haue obserued, some Witches to mischiefe or surprise
such as they intend maliciously to destroy, by obtaining
some part or parcell of their garments, or any excrements belonging
vnto them, as their hayre or the like.
               It is not to be doubted that the Diuell, that old Proteus, is
able to change and metamorphise his rites, ceremonies, and
superstitions, into what new shapes or formes are best sutable
to his pleasure and his fellow-contractors most commodious
vses, and purposes. Concerning all the former mentioned,
although it bee exceeding difficult; nay, an impossible
thing for any man to auouch euery of them true in his
owne knowledge or experience; yet for that some kindes of
them wee may assuredly know and beleeue from God himselfe,
who hath in his sacred word nominated both apparitions
of the Diuel, as also, incantations, charms, spels & familiarity
with Spirits; as also for that reason doth demonstrate,
that there may be many more kinds, besides those named of
the same likenesse, nature abused, and diuelish vse; and for
that vnto othersome, the credit, worth and merit of those
Writers by whom they haue been obserued and published,
doth giue weight & estimation, it may be approued as an infallible
conclusion, that wheresoeuer any of them or the like,
being diligently enquired after, are either really found, or in
apparence or shew resembling, that there (with the concurrence
of circumstances, and approued precedence of a manifest
worke of Sorcery consenting) that there, I say, it ought
to be sufficient & vncontroled matter, or occasion of iust suspicion
& presumption against the particular, in whom they
are by iust witnesses free from exception, detected and palpably
known, practised & exercised. As we haue now briefly
recited and called to mind some sorts of such ceremonies,
rites, superstitions, manners, instruments and gestures as are
annexed vnto that kinde of Sorcerie or Witch-craft which
consisteth in action: So let vs also recite some other sorts of
ceremonies, rites, and superstitions, which belong vnto that

kinde of Sorcery which is conuersant in diuinations, reuelations
of things hidden, predictions, and prophecies. Diuinations
according to nature or art, as Cicero distinguisheth in his
first booke de Diuinatione, we doe not intend or purpose, but
that diuinatiō which the same Author in the same place doth
refer into a power aboue man, which hee there termeth the
power of the gods, between whom and diuination, the Stoicks
make this reciprocation, Si sit Diuinatio, Dij sunt, si Dij sint, est
Diuinatio; that is, if there be right diuination or prediction
of things to come not contained in Art or Nature, certainly
that diuination is of the Gods, as reciprocally where there are
Gods, there is diuination. Here wee see playnely, not onely
the antiquity, but the direct originall of diuinations, and that
they do manifestly deriue themselues from Idol gods, from
Infidels, from Idolaters.
               This is further euident likewise, by the generall current
and report of all histories, euen from the first beginning and
foundation of Rome by Romulus, as through all ancient
writings and writers, the frequent mention of Augury, Aruspicy,
Extispicy, and the like, doth plentifully witnesse. The
holy Scripture also and Word of God doth testifie the same,
Deut. 18. verse 9, 10, 11. where diuination by the flying of
fowles, by the obseruation of times, and the like, are reckoned
among the abominations of the Nations, or Gentiles.
               The originall then of Diuinations issuing from Diuels (because
from false gods, the gods of the heathen and Idolaters)
let vs for the better noting of the abomination it selfe, obserue
and point out some of their ceremonies, manners, and
superstitions also.
               Some in old time vsed to diuine, as by the flying of fowles,
so by viewing of lightning, by monsters, by lots, by inspection
of the starres, by dreames, per monstra, & portenta, fulgura,
sortes, Insomnia, per Astra, as Cicero testifieth at large in
his bookes de Diuinatione. Some did vse to draw their Diuinations
out of tubs, or vessels of water, whereinto were
cast certaine thin plates of siluer and gold, and other precious

our Iewels, by which the Diuels (which Infidels ignorantly
called their gods) were allured to answere vnto demands,
doubts, and questions, as is by Psellus described, and was vsual
among the Assyrian coniectors. Some deriued their Diuinations
from looking-glasses, wherein the Diuell satisfied
vnto demands and questious, by figures and shapes
there appearing.
               This kinde of Diuination was called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   wherevnto
came very neere and was like 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Some
fetch their Diuinations by lots, taken from points, letters,
caracters, figures, words, syllables, sentences, which kinde
of diuination is distinguished by the name of

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   If wee should number vp euery particular kinde of shape,
wherein Diuination doth shrowde it selfe, it would proue a
long and tedious voyage, not onely through fire, water, ayre,
earth, and other farre distant and diuided parts of the wide
and spacious world, but through siues, riddles, the guts and
bowels of the dead, and many other secret haunts & holes,
wherein as the inuincible Labyrinths of intricate illusions,
the diuell doth shadow and hide his subtill insidiation of
silly deceiued man.
               Hee that desireth more curiously to reade other particulars
herein, I referre him vnto S. Augustine, de natura Daemonum,
and to Camerarius, de Diuinationum generibus. It is sufficient
that the truth and possibilitie of these kindes of Diuinations
and the like, with their ceremonies, rites, customes, and
superstitions; as also their detested originall, end, vse, and
abomination, is esteemed diuellish by the Word of God, and
his most sacred voice, wherein vnder those kindes of Diuination,
by the flying of fowles, obseruation of times, Deut. 18.
verse 10, 11. and vaine gazing and beholding the starres,
Isaiah 47. 19. he displayeth and iudgeth the nature and qualitie
of all other the like, couered by what styles or names so
euer. The enumeration of any more sorts, might increase in
number, and aduance curiosity, but can adde nothing in substance
or materiall vse.
               
                  
We haue summarily (wherein our information is sufficient
competence) produced some few sorts of ceremonies,
rites, and superstitious gestures in both kindes, that is, both
such as belong to that kinde of Sorcery, which consisteth in
act, and working, as also that which is exercised in Diuination,
prediction, and reuelation.
               The generall rule and reason is the same, and extendeth
it selfe equally against both.
               Let vs then in the conclusion thus conioyne them both together.
What man is he among men so blind, who beholding
in any man the former ceremonies, rites, prelusions, or gestures,
being suspicious notes, markes, cognizances and
badges of Sorcerers and Witches, in either kinde, and doth
not thinke that he may with good reason doubt the ordinarie
correspondence of fruits, and workes answerable thereto?
Vnto the former presumption, if circumstances of time,
place, instruments and meanes, fitting such diuelish Acts opportunitie,
and the like doe adde their force, doth not iust
occasion of doubt increase? For illustration and example,
let vs suppose a person of a curiousMast. Perkins in his discourse of Witchcraft, chap. 1. pag. l1. and inquisitiue disposition
in things hidden or inhibited, a man voide of the feare
and knowledge of God, a searcher after Sorcerers, and their
diuelish Arts, educate among them, by kindred, affinity, or
neighbour-hood, with them hauing generall opportunitie
vnto inchoation into that Diabolicall mysterie, a man likely
and prone to become a receptacle of Diuels, expressed by
his long obserued, or knowne flying from or hating all occasions
or places, where the name, mention, worship, or
adoration of Almighty God is in any kinde vsed; a man out
of whose cursed lips hath at any time beene heard, thePerkins chap. 2. pag. 48. discourse of Witch craft. renouncing
of God, or voluntary profession of loue & friendship
vnto the Diuell (all which with horror sometimes my
owne eares did heare, in aShe was easie and ready to professe, that she renounced God and all his workes, but being required to say that shee renounced the Diuell and all his workes, she did refuse it with this addition of the reason, (videlicet) for that the Diuell had neuer done her any hurt. woman at an open assise, being
there indited vpon suspicion of Witch-craft.)
               Let vs yet further consider in the same man, an extraordinary
alienation of himselfe, from all societie and company

with men (for that familiar conuersation with Diuels, begetteth
an hatred and detestation, both of the remembrance
of God or sight of men) likewise a frequentation or solemne
haunting of desartSerres, from the confession of Witches detected and censured in the raigne of Henry 4. of France. places, forsaken and vnaccustomed of
men, the habitations of Zijm and Iijm, graues and sepulchres.
This seemeth, Math. 8. Luke 8. Marke 5. in the possessed
true.
               The possessed and the Witch, are both the habitacles of
Diuels; with this onely difference, that the Witch doth willingly
entertaine him.
               His custome of haunting tombes and sepulchers, in the
one doth make it probable, and credible in the other. Likewise
a solitary solacing himselfe, or accustoming abroad oft,
and vsually alone, and vnaccompanied at times and houres
vnusuall and vncouth to men, as the most darke seasons of
the night, fitting the darke workes, and the workemen of
the Prince of Darknes.
               Let vs yet more particularly obserue this man branded
with the former note, seeming or professing to practice
workes aboue the power and possibiliitie of man, to threaten
or promise to performe, beyond the custome of men, whether
in generall, or toward any particular. In a diuellish intended
action bent against any particular, likewise wee may
diligently examine any manifest speciall prouocation, first
giuen: secondly, an apparent apprehension thereof expressed
by words, gestures, or deeds: thirdly, intention, or expectation,
succeeding the prouocation, starting out oft times, or
intimated by any rash, vnaduised, or sodaine proiect, of headdie
and vnbridled passion: fourthly, the opportunitie sutable
vnto such an intended desseigne, as time and place competent
for accesse, speech, sight, or receiuing from, or giuing
vnto the particular, against whom such diuellish thoughts
are set, any thing, wherein any inchanted power or vertue is
vsually hid and conueighed.
               After a Sorcerous deede is thus certainely obserued to
proceede, we may then further with vigilant circumspection

view, whether ought may be detected, iustly arguing his
reioycing pride, or boasting therin, that standeth iustly suspected,
or ought that may proue or expresse his doubt, or feare
of discouery, his guilty lookes, cunning euasions, shifting,
lying, or contradictory answeres, and apologies vnto particulars
vrged.
               These circumstances and the like, though each alone and
single, may seeme of no moment or weight, yet concurring
together, or aptly conferred, they oft produce a worth from
whence doth issue full and complete satisfaction. Veri similiae
singula suo pondere mouent, coaceruata multùm proficiunt (saith
Cicero) that is, euery single circumstance hath his weight and
vse, but consenting and concurring together, they do much
aduantage. Since then what vertue or power soeuer, circumstances
and presumptions, doe vsually and generally vnfold
in all other subiects or matters whatsoeuer, the same equally
and as largely, reason doth here display and offer in this of
Witch-craft: why should not the like practice thereof herein
also be vrged and found, as likely and succesfull? I do not
commend or allow the vsuall rash, foolish and fantasticall
abuse of circumstances, nor their wresting and forgoing, nor
the coniuration or raising vp of their likenesse, and shadows,
without any substance or truth (as is too common and vulgar)
out of meere fancy or defect of true iudgement, without
the due manifestation of a certaine crime first in this kinde
assured.
               But where all the former circumstances doe truly and really
occurre, or most of them, or the most materiall amongst
them with an apparant vncōtroled precedent euidence of an
vndoubted art of Sorcery, and are not indirectly wrested or
guilefully extorted, but directly proued, and fairly produced
and vrged; what man inioying his common sense or reason,
can be ignorant, what a large scope and faire fielde they do
yeeld to sent, to trace and chace the most hidden and secret
guilt of Witches whatsoeuer, out of their vtmost shifting
most close couerts and subtill concealements?
               
                  
I doe not affirme circumstances and presumptions, simply
in themselues sufficient to proue or condemne a Witch: but
what reasonable man will or can doubt or deny, where first a
manifest worke of Sorcery is with true iudgement discerned,
and knowne certainly perpetrate: that the former circumstances
and presumptions pointing vnto a particular, doe
giue sufficient warrant, reason, and matter of calling that
particular into question, and of inioyning & vrging him vnto
his purgation and iustification from those euill apparances,
whereby through the differencies, iarres, contrarieties,
and contradictions of the false faces and vizards of seeming
truth (because identity and vnity is properly and solely found
with truth it selfe inuiolable and the same) guiltinesse is oft
vnable to finde a couert to hide it selfe, but rubbed or galled
vnto the quicke, doth breake out and issue forth in his
owne perfect and vndeceiuing likenesse. It may be obiected,
that it doth commonly fall out, and is so oft seene, that the
hearts of Witches are by the Diuell so possessed, so hardned
and sealed vp against all touch, either of any conscience, or
the least sparke of the affections of men left in them, that
there is no possibility, or hope of any preualence, by the
pressing of any presumptions or circumstances, which
they for the most part will answere with wilfull and peruerse
silence.
               This is and may be sometimes true, yet is no sufficient reason,
why due proofe and tryall should not alwayes diligently
be made herein, since first experience it selfe doth witnesse
a manifest benefit thereby: secondly, the like reasonable
course and practice is knowne both vsuall, fruitfull, and effectuall
in all other disquisitions, and inquisitions whatsoeuer:
and thirdly, the Diuell himselfe, the Witches and Sorcerers
great and graund Master, though of farre fewer words then
Witches▪ as seldome speaking at all▪ and abounding with
farre more subtiltie and cunning; yet is he not able by all his
art or cunning, alwayes to hide his owne workes, but by presumptions
and circumstances, wise and vnderstanding hearts

doe oft discerne and discouer them, as is by dayly experience
seene and testified, and is confirmed by the proofe
which all holy and godly men haue euer had thereof. And
to this purpose, and for this cause the holy Scripture doth require
Gods chosen children, to sist and trie the Spirits, whether
they be of God or no, that is, whether they bee of his
holy Spirit, or of the euill spirit which is the Diuell.
               Although therefore God for his owne secret decree, or
purpose, do permit the Diuell sometimes to hide and shadow
the guilt of his associates, Witches and Sorcerers, from the
sight or deprehension of man, and thereby, sometimes,
frustrate mans iust endeuour and duty of their discouery; yet
doth hee not totally or altogether herein subiect, or captiuate,
or abridge mans power or possibility of preualence, euen
against all the power and force of Diuels, as oft-times
our dullest senses cannot choose but witnesse.
               Could the Diuell, or their owne craft whatsoeuer, deliuer
the Sorcerers from destruction out of the hands of Saul,
who iustly destroyed them al out of the land of Israel, 1. Sam.
18. verse 9. or out of the hands of Ioshua, who according to
lawe, tooke away or abolished all that had familiar Spirits,
and Southsayers, 2. Kings chap. 23. verse 24? The extirpation
of these Southsayers, by those Princes, was commended
of God, and by his Lawe commanded, Leuit. 20. 27. The
same Lawe of God commaundeth, that no man be iudged
or put to death, but by the mouth of two witnesses, from
whence it is necessarily collected, that the workes of Sorcery
are not alwayes hidden, but oft-times so open, that they
may be manifestly noted; otherwise, how could they be testified,
which vnto their condemnation the Lawe doth euer
presuppose and necessarily commaund?
               Neither is this Lawe of God any thing discrepant from
the common equity of all lawes, or from reason it selfe: first,
for that many workes of Sorcery do immediately in their
first view, manifest themselues to the sense, as is euident, by
the miraculous workes of the Enchaunters of Egypt, practised

in the sight of Pharaoh King of Egypt. Secondly, for that
many workes are apparent manifestly to Reason, in which,
though the sense cannot immediately discerne, or take notice
of their quality and authour; yet by necessary inference
and euidence of reason, they are certainly and demonstratiuely
proued to issue from the power & force of Spirits and
Diuels, as hath beene formerly declared, concerning both
works and also diuinations, prophecies, and reuelations hidden
frō all curiosity and possibility of man. Thirdly, for that
circumstances and presumptions doe with good and likely
reason call into question, and iustly charge with suspicion (as
hath been instanced concerning the performers & practisers
of ceremonious rites, superstitious gestures, actions & manners
vsual vnto Witches & Sorcerers. Since then, as is before
proued, Almighty God doth inioine a necessity of testimonies,
vnto all condemnations & iudgements of death whatsoeuer,
and testimony doth alwaies necessarily include a manifestatiō
of whatsoeuer is testified, either to sense, or reason,
or both; it followeth as a necessary conclusion vnto all that
hath bin sayd: that from things either manifest to sense, or
euident to reason, issueth wholly and solely, not only the reasonable
and likely way of detection of Witches, but the very
true way by God himselfe, in all true reason intended and
commanded. And from this way it is, both by multitudes of
examples, by experience and reason manifest, that neither
Witches, nor the Diuel himselfe is altogether able to hide or
defend their guilt. Diligence therefore herein duely and
carefully exercising it selfe certainely, shall not, nor can
proue the Lawe of God vaine, nor the owne indeuour frustrate
or voyde, although haply difficulties and impediments
may sometimes interrupt, as in all other cases and affaires
is vsuall.
               Thus hath been made manifest how Witch-craft is discouerable
by sense, and euident by reason; likewise, that it is
no more inscrutable or hidden from detection in the inquisition
thereof, by signes of presumption, probable and likely

coniecture or suspicion, then all other intricate or hidden
subiects, or obiects of the vnderstanding what soeuer. For,
although presumptions are alone not sufficient proofe, yet
doe they yeeld matter and occasion of diligent and iudicious
inquisition, which is the reasonable way and due method of
vpright proceeding, and the common, hopefull and warranted
path vnto all detections, in all other cases of doubt
and difficulty whatsoeuer; wherein I see no cause or reason,
why iudicious, wary & wise practice and proofe, weighing &
pressing circumstances into the bone & marrow, should not
equally, in case of Witch-craft, as in al other cases of iudgement
& inquisitions (though not euer because that exceedes
the nature of presumption) equally, I say, and as oft should
not confound the guilty, and chase and winde out as faire an
issue.
               Certainely, if men would more industriously exercise their
sharper wits, exquisite sense, and awaked iudgements, according
vnto the former reasonable, religious, and iudicious
wayes, exempt from the burden and incumbrance of blinde
superstitions; traditionarie and imaginarie inuentions and
customes, no doubt, but experience would yeeld and bring
forth in short time, a much more rich increase of satisfaction,
and more happy detection in iudiciall proceedings.
               It is true, that in the case of Witch-craft many things are
very difficult, hidden and infolded in mists and clouds, ouershadowing
our reason and best vnderstanding.
               Notwithstanding, why should men be more impatient or
deiected, that in matter of Witch-craft, many things are oft
hidden from our knowledge, and discouery, when the same
darknesse, obscuritie, difficultie and doubtfulnes, is a thing
ordinary in many other subiects beside, as necessary vnto vs,
and concerning which, it may be no lesse truely said, that in
this life of mortalitie, much more is that which is vnknowne,
then that which is knowne and reuealed vnto vs.
               Hence is that ancient saying of the Philosopher: Hoc tantum
scio, quòd nihil scio, that is, so few are those things, which

are demonstratiuely, truely, and certainely knowne, that
they are nothing in comparison of the infinite number and
multitude of such things, as are either onely probable, or obscure
or inscrutable.
               For to deny that God hath giuen vnto man a great measure
of knowledge in many things, were not onely grosse
darknesse and blindnesse, but great ingratitude, yea impiety.
Neuerthelesse, it were also as great fatuity not to see or acknowledge,
that God hath mixed this knowledge with
much intricate difficultie and ambiguitie, which notwithstanding
he doth in his wisedome more or lesse reueale, distribute
and dispense, in seuerall measures, vnto seuerall men,
according to their seuerall cares, studies, indefatigable
paines, and more industrious indeauour, in seeking and inquiring
it: in defect whereof more commonly then either in
Gods decreed restraint, or natures abnuence, mens desires
and labours are so often annihilate.
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               The confutation of diuers erroneous wayes, vnto the discouerie of
Witches, vulgarly receiued and approued.
               AS true religion doth truely teach the true worship of
God in that true manner which he requireth, & commandeth:
so superstition in an vnapt measure or
manner, doth offer vp & sacrifice her vaine & foolish zeale or
feare. Vnto her therefore and her sacrifice, thus doth Almightie
God reply; Who required this at your hands? I hate
and abhor your Sabboths and your new Moones, Isaiah 12.
13. The heathen Oratour could say, Religio continetur cultu pio
Deorum. True religion consisteth in the holy and true worship
of God. Vnto the aduancing of the worship of the true
God, the extirpation of Witches and Witch-craft (because
it is the most abominable kinde of Idolatry) is a speciall seruice,

and acceptable duty vnto God, expressely commanded
by himselfe, Deut. 17. 3, 4, 5.
               In the performance therefore of this worship, as it is solely
and truely religious, to seeke their extermination by those
meanes, and in that manner, which Almightie God doth approue
and allow: so with misgouerned zeale or feare, in the
ignorance, or neglect of the right manner or way, inconsiderately
to follow vnwarranted pathes thereto, is plaine Superstition.
               
                  Iulius Scaliger, in his third booke of Poetrie, thus describeth
very liuely the nature of Superstition. Superstitio satisfacit
ad notandum eum habitum, quo metuimus, aut Deum sine ratione,
aut ei opera attribuimus quae opera ne cogitauit quidem vnquam
ille, that is, this word Superstition doth serue to set
forth such an habite or disposition of minde, wherein wee
worship or so feare God, as is voide of cause or reason, or
vnto our owne hurt or damage, we attribute vnto God, as of
God those workes or things, which Almightie God himselfe
neuer thought or intended. The word which the Greekes
vse for Superstition, is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , inconsulta & absurda diuinae
potentiae formido, that is in absurd, and ill-aduised feare or worship
of God, which certainely is there, where he neither requireth
it, nor is true cause or reason either of such worship,
or in such sort or manner.
               In this special part therefore of the worship and feare of
God, namely, in the discouery of Witch-craft and Sorcery,
as wee haue before laboured to finde out those wayes which
are lawfull, iustifiable, and allowed: so let vs now briefely
display the folly and vanity of erroneous and blinde pathes,
pointing deceitfully thereto; that wee seeke not superstitiously
to serue God, in our inioyned and commanded duties
of the discoueries of Witches, with our owne vanities
or follies, rash inuentions, or deuices, but in reasonable, iust,
discreete and religious proceeding, which is onely and solely
acceptable with God.
               In former ages and times, haue been published by diuers

writers, many ridiculous traditions, herein so vaine, and so
farre vnworthy any serious confutation, that they scarce deserue
so much as bare mention.
               Of this sort are the imagined profligations of the fits of
the bewitched, by beholding the face of a Priest, by being
touched by hallowed oyntments, or liniments, by the vertue
of exorcisation, of incense, of odours, of certaine mumbled
sacred or mysticall words.
               I will therefore omit these, as by time it selfe worne exolete
found worthlesse, and almost of later writers left namelesse,
and will onely oppose and examine such later experiments,
as doe in our time and countrey most preuaile in
esteeme.
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               The casting of Witches into the water, Scratching, Beating,
Pinching, and drawing of blood of Witches.
               IT is vulgarly credited, that the casting of supposed Witches
bound into the water, and the water refusing or not
suffering them to sinke within her bosome or bowels, is
an infallible detection that such are Witches.
               If this experiment be true, then must it necessarily so be,
either as a thing ordinary, or as a thing extraordinary: because
nothing can happen or fall out, that is not limited within
this circuit or compasse.
               That which is ordinary, is naturall, as likewise that which
is naturall, is ordinarie. Aristotle in the second of his Ethicks,
saith of that which is naturall, quod aliter non assurscit, that is,
ordinarily it is not otherwise, then euer the same. Frō whence
it doth follow by good consequent, that whatsoeuer is ordinary,
must be naturall, because it keepeth the same course and
order, which is the property of nature.
               For this cause Scaliger in his booke de subtilitate saith, Natura

est ordinaria Dei potestas, that is, nature is the ordinarie
power of God, in the ordinarie course and gouernment of
all things.
               If then this experiment in the tryall of Witches, bee as a
thing ordinary (as it is vulgarly esteemed) it must bee found
likewise naturall. If it cannot be found naturall, it cannot be
ordinarie. That it is not, nor cannot be naturall, is manifest.
First, for that the ordinarie nature of things senselesse and
voide of reason, doth not distinguish one person from another,
vertue from vice, a good man from an euill man. This
our Sauiour himselfe doth confirme, Math. 5. verse 45. God
maketh his sunne to arise on the euill, and the good, and
sendeth raine on the iust and vniust.
               Nay, we may further obserue in the booke of God, and also
reade in the booke of nature and common experience, that
the common benefit of nature, is not onely vouchsafed vnto
all wicked men indifferently, but euen vnto Diuels themselues,
who doe not onely participate in nature the common
essence, faculties and powers, proper vnto the substance and
nature of all other Spirits; but also doe exercise these powers
and spirituall forces vsually vpon other inferiour natures,
subiect vnto their supernaturall nature, reach and efficacie,
as is oft seene in their workes euen vpon the bodies & goods
of the blessed Saints and sonnes of God.
               Hereby then is euident, that nature cannot take notice, or
distinguish a wicked man, no not a Diuell, and therefore
much lesse a Witch.
               But here may be obiected, that diuers hearbs & other simples,
produce many strange and wondred effects, by an hidden
secret, and occult quality and property in nature, though
there appeare no manifest qualitie oft-times in them, by
which in reason or probabilitie they should or can bee effectuall
thereto. This Physicions do dayly witnesse and proue
true.
               Why then may there not bee likewise yeelded the
like hidden power, or antipatheticall vertue in the nature of

the element of water, and thereby a Witch bee detected; as
well without knowne cause or reason thereof in nature; notwithstanding
naturally the euils or diseases both of body
and minde, are both detected, and cured by elementary substances
or compositions, in which there is no manifest known
proportion therewith?
               It is truely answered, that although in this supposed experiment
of the disposition of the element of water towards
Witches, casualtie may haply sometimes seeme to iustifie it
true; yet is not this sufficient to euince it a thing naturall.
Those things which are naturall, necessarily and euer produce
their effect, except some manifest or extraordinary interception
or impediment hinder.
               Thus fire doth necessarily, ordinarily, and alwayes burne
and consume any combustible matter or fuell being added
thereto, except either some manifest or extraordinary hindrance
oppose it. The like may be sayde of all other elements
for their natural effects in their proper obiects. Natural medicines
likewise, if rightly accommodated with prudence, art
and discretion vnto the right disease, doe neuer faile their vsuall
productions or effects.
               This, Almighty God in his holy writ doth confirme, and
long and aged experience of many hundreths of yeares hath
successiuely witnessed, wherin the ancient records of all learned
Writers, haue euer testified innumerable medicinal herbs
and drugges, certainly and truly to bee euer the same. Present
times do likewise see and witnesse it, and no man doth
or can doubt it in the right proofe. Concerning any such nature
or custome in the element of water, in the refragation of
Witches, who was as yet euer able to write and fully resolue,
or proue it ordinary, necessary, certaine, euer or for
the most part, not fayling as is in course of nature most infallible
and neuer doubted? What former ages haue successiuely
vouchsafed the mention of truth or certainty therein?
Hath Almighty God, at all, so much as approued any opinion
or thought thereof? Is it not rather to be iustly doubted,

that it may bee esteemed among the abominations of the
Gentiles, which God in his people doth detest, Deut. 18.
verse 9? Doe all men in our time, or good and iust men auouch
their owne proofe in the tryall thereof? Or contrariwise,
do not many wise, religious, learned and equall minds
with reason reiect and contemne it? Dooth Law as yet
establish it, or reason proue it? How can it then be proposed
as equiualent with those reasonable meanes or wayes, of iust
proceedings or tryals, which God, his diuine Lawe, his law
of nature, iudgement, reason, experience, and the lawes of
men haue euer witnessed, perpetually and onely assured certaine
and infallible?
               It wanteth the vniuersall testimony of former ages and
Writers; in this our age it is held in iealosie with the most
iudicious, sage, and wise: It hath no reasonable proofe, no
iustifiable tryal hath dared to auouch it vpon publike record,
no lawe hath as yet, thought it worthy of admittance; and
the Lawe of God is not proued to proue or approue it. If it
had beene a thing naturall, ordinary, of necessary, or of certaine
operation or power, and therein so euidently remarkeable,
it is impossible it should haue escaped authenticall approbation,
or the same notable testimonies, which all other
tryed truths haue euer obtained. From the former premises
therefore we conclude, that it cannot be a thing naturall, necessary
or ordinary. If it bee not ordinary, then is it not alwayes
the same; if not alwayes the same, then is it sometimes
fayling; if sometimes fayling, then is it not infallible;
if not infallible, then in no true iudgement or iustice to bee
trusted or credited. It now remayneth to enquire, whether
being proued false as ordinary, it may not be proued true as
extraordinary (for to esteeme or grant it▪ both is an impossibility
in nature, and an absurdity in reason.) Let vs grant, it
may be iudged and deemed extraordinary; the next doubt
then remaining is, whether being extraordinary or miraculous,
it be of God or of the Diuell.
               The reason why some men suppose it should be of God,

is, for that the water is an element which is vsed in Baptisme,
and therefore by the myraculous & extraordinary power of
God, doth reiect and refuse those who haue renounced their
vowe and promise thereby, made vnto God, of which sort
are Witches.
               If this reason be sound and good, why should not Bread
and Wine, being elements in that Sacrament of the Eucharist,
be likewise noted and obserued to turne backe, or flye away
from the throates, mouthes, and teeth of Witches? and
why, (if for the former reason, the water being an element in
the Sacrament of couenant, made with God, in the first initiation
into the faith, doe for that cause refuse to receiue
Witches into her bosome, and thereby giue an infallible
proofe of a Witch?) Why, I say, should not by the same
reason Bread and Wine, being elements in the Sacrament of
confirmation and growth of faith, refuse and fly from those
much more, whose faith and promise made vnto God in riper
and more vnderstanding yeares, is by them renounced?
And why for that cause, should not Bread and Wine become
as infallible markes and testimonies vnto the detection of
Witches? If the reason be good in the first, it must necessarily
be the same in the second; and if it fayle in the second, it
cannot be good or sound in the first. Neither doth it or can
it stand with any good reason at all, that because so small
part of the element of water, is set apart vnto that religious
seruice in the Sacrament; therefore, the whole element of
water, or all other waters must thereby obtaine any generall
common propertie aboue the kinde or nature. Neither is it
as yet agreed, or concluded generally among the most learned,
and reuerend Diuines, whether that small part of water
which in particular is set apart, or vsed in the Sacrament,
doth thereby receiue any manifest alteration at all in substance,
essence, nature, or quality. If then that part of
the element of water it selfe, which is hallowed into that
holy vse, be not manifested, or apparantly proued to be therby
indowed with any vertue, much lesse can it communicate

any vertue vnto other waters, which did not participate therwith
in the same religious seruice. Except then there may
be proued by this religious vse of water, some more endowment
of sense or religion therein, then is in other elements,
why should it more fly from a Witch then the fire, then the
ayre, then the earth? The fire doth warme them, the ayre
flyeth not from them, but giueth them breathing; the earth
refuseth not to beare them, to feede them, to bury them.
Why then should the water alone runne away or flye from
them? It may bee answered, that it is a miracle, whereof
therefore there neither can nor ought reason in nature to be
demaunded or giuen. If it be a miracle, it is either a true miracle,
which onely and solely doth exceede the power of any
Non est creator, nisi qui principaliter format: nec quisquam hoc potest, nisivnus Creator Deus, Aug. 3. de Trin.created nature, or is a seeming miracle by the power of the
Diuell, working effects in respect of mans reason, nature, and
power supernaturall and impossible; notwithstanding confined
and limited within the generall rule, reason and power
of vniuersall nature, which heAugustinus 3. de Trin. Alia potest si non prohibetur, Daemon: Alia non potest, etsi permittatur, quem
                        ••
                     modum homo potest, ambulare si non prohibeatur, volare non potest, etsi permittarur, cannot exceed or transcend,
being a finite creature, and no infinite Creator.
               Miracles of the first kinde, are raising from the dead the
sonne of the widdow of Sarepta, by Elias 3. of the kings, 17.
the diuiding the water of Iorden with Elias cloake, 4. of the
Kings 2. the curing of the sicke by S. Pauls handkercher, Act.
5. 19. the raising Lazarus by our blessed Sauiour and the
like.
               Miracles of the second kinde, are all the workes of the
Enchanters of Aegypt, Exod. 7. which were onely diuellish
sleights, cunningPetr. Lomb. Sent. lib. 2. Dist. 7. imitations, counterfets, and Diabolicall
resemblances and shadowes of the true myracles, wrought
by Almightie God, in the hand of his seruant Moses.
               
               If this myracle, or this miraculous detection of Witches
by water, be of this later kinde, it is of the Diuell, and is not
to be esteemed or named, where the Name of God is feared
or called vpon.
               For although the cunning fraude of the Diuell, aboue and
beyond all capacitie of the weake sense and vnderstanding

of man, doe so liuely oft-times cast before our eyes, the outward
shape and similitude of the myracles of God, that man
is not able easily to distinguish them, or at first sight to put a
true difference: yet must men studiously, and circumspectly
bee aduised herein, lest rashly they confound, or equall the
vile and abiect illusions of that damned creature the Diuell
(though neuer so wonderfull in our eyes) vnto the infinite
power of the Almighty Creator, in his true and truely created
myracles, which is an high dishonour vnto our God, and
accursed impiety.
               For this cause, the holy Scripture hath admonished and
warned the weakenesse of humane vnderstanding, not to be
transported by signes and wonders, nor to trust or giue credit
to euery myracle: and our Sauiour himselfe, Math. 24.
verse 24. doth furnish his Disciples with carefull warning
herein. And S. Iohn, in his Reuelation fore-telleth, that in the
later dayes and times, the Diuell and the great Whore of Babylon,
shall with great signes, wonders, and myracles, seduce
and deceiue the last ages, and people of the world.
               For this cause, saith Saint Augustine, tract. 13. vpon the
Gospell of Saint Iohn, Miraculis decipi non debemus, that is▪ he that doth myracles, is nothing, if they bee not done in vnity and truth.
               Since then myracles are of no validity, except certainely
and truely knowne to be of God; and since also it is not easie
for euery Spirit to discerne therein; let vs duely examine and
sift this our supposed and proposed myracle in the tryall and
detection of Witches. Petrus Gregorius Tholosanus in his Syniagma
iuris lib. 2. cap. 12. in a tractate concerning the relicks
and Monuments of Saints, together with myracles, doth
giue very honest, sound, and substantiall direction.
               First, that all credited myracles be found and allowed by
religious lawes and authoritie.
               Secondly, that the persons by whom they are first reuealed
or knowne, or by whom they are auouched, be testes idonei,
omni
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      exceptione maiores, that is, that they be worthy witnesses

of vndoubted and vnstained credit and worth, free
from all iust exception, of holy life, and vnstained conuersation.
Without these cautions (saith he) no myracles ought to
be esteemed, or receiued as of truth.
               How farre our vulgar tryall of Witches, by the supposed
miraculous indication and detection of them by the water, is
different from this care or respect, this equitie, religion, or
humanitie, common practice doth openly declare, when
without allowance of any law, or respect of common ciuilitie,
euery priuate, rash, and turbulent person, vpon his owne
surmise of a Witch, dare barbarously vndertake by vnciuill
force, and lawlesse violence, to cast poore people bound into
the water, & there deteine them, for their owne vaine and
foolish lusts, without sense, or care of the shameful wrong, or
iniury, which may befall oft-times innocents thereby.
               Though this kinde of tryall of a Witch, might haply proue
in it selfe worthy to be allowed, yet is it not in euery priuate
person iustifiable, or tolerable, or without warrant of authoritie
in any sort excusable. The manner therefore of this vulgar
tryall, must needs with iust and honest mindes, vncontrouersedly,
and vndoubtedly, be rusticall, barbarous, and
rude▪ Now to returne againe into the truth of the myracle it
selfe in this tryall.
               First, let vs enquire with Petrus Gregorius, what religious
lawes or authoritie haue admitted it as true.
               Secondly, what religious, reuerend, iudicious, graue, or
holy Spectators, or eye-witnesses doe auouch it. Let vs yet
farther proceede with the same Author, in the fore-named
Syntagma, lib. 34. cap. 21. and by some other rules, farther
examine this myracle, if it bee well and duely auouched and
credited, concerning the being thereof, whether that being
be not a being of the Diuel, and of his myracles. Conatus omnis
Daemonum (saith that Author) vnum habet generalem scopum,
operibus Dei se obijcere, ei debitum honorem subfurari, pios hominum
animos sibi lucri facere, & a vero Deo retrahere. That is,
the works of the Diuell haue one generall scope; namely, to

oppose themselues against the workes of God, to rob God
of his honour, to draw the hearts of men from God, and to
gaine them vnto himselfe. Let vs now consider the fore-named
miracle by these rules.
               Concerning the approbation thereof by any religious
lawes or authority, I haue neuer read my selfe, nor haue heard
by other, of any authentike suffrage from classicall Author,
and with good reason, I may conceiue and iudge a nullitie
therein.
               Concerning any religious, learned, and iudicious Spectators
and auouchers of this myracle, whose faith and credit
may be wholly free from all iust exception, it hath euer been
a difficult and hard taske to furnish any true sufficiencie or
competencie in this kinde, though multitudes of swarmes of
deceiued Vulgars, continually and violently obtrude their
phantasticall sominations. Since then as yet there doth no
manifest law stand vp to patronage this myracle, and the
learned, religious, and holy man able to discerne and iudge,
and free from exception, is not at all, or hardly to be produced
or found to auouch or countenance it true; it may bee
with good reason suspected, and that reason may iustly disswade
all sodaine, rash, or hastie credit or trust thereof. Now
let vs examine, if it were vndoubtedly to be a assumed as true,
whether being true, it be not as truly of the Diuel. And first
let vs consider, whether it doe not oppose the workes of
God, which was the first direction of Gregorius. It is herein
truly conuicted, because the nouelty and supposed miraculous
force and might thereof, doth first vsually and easily intise
vnsetled braines, rashly to forsake the wayes of iudgement
and iudicious legall proceeding, which is the ordinance
and worke of God: secondly, doth imbolden staggering
and vnresolued minds presumptuously without warrant
to expect, to aske or seeke a signe or miracle, which ordinarily
or vnnecessarily required, our blessed Sauior apertly
condemneth, Math. 16. An adulterous & vnbeleeuing generation
doth seeke a signe or miracle. And as herein it directly

opposeth against the decree and work of God; so likewise
by giuing occasion and way, that supposed miracles may become
vulgarly common and ordinary, whereby the true miracles
and miraculous workes of God also may grow with
vndiscerning men of lesse esteeme, vile and of no accompt.
Nam miracula Dei assiduitate viluerunt (sayth S. Augustine)
the miracles and miraculous works of God, being oft seene,
become of smal or no reputation. The second tryall of a false
miracle, was the robbing of God of his due honour and
praise, which in this proposed miracle is partly proued, by
making the extraordinary worke or vse of miracles ordinary,
and thereby derogating from the power, worth and nature
of Gods true miracles (as is before sayd) partly▪ by vnthankfull
vnder-valewing, omitting or relinquishing the ordinary
meanes of tryals and detections of doubtfull truths, which
God hath made and giuen in his good grace; and therefore
their contempt and neglect is a manifest robbing of God of
his due prayse and glory therein. The third tryall of the Diuels
property in miracles, was the seducing of mens hearts
from God vnto himselfe, which in our supposed miracle may
be necessarily concluded. For if the miracle it selfe bee vpon
good grounds before alleaged; rightfully deemed to bee of
the Diuell, it must necessarily follow, that whatsoeuer esteeme
or reputation is giuen thereto, is a secret sacrifice of
ignorance or superstition vnto the Diuell, and an hidden and
couert seduction from God. And thus hath been proued, or
at least, with good reason alleaged: First, that the tryall of
Witches by water, is not naturall or according to any reason
in nature. Secondly, if it be extraordinary and a miracle, that
it is in greater likelihood and probability a miracle of the
Diuell to insnare, then any manifest miracle of God to glorifie
his name, which is the true end of right miracles. Concerning
the other imagined trials of Witches, as by beating,
scratching, drawing bloud from supposed or suspected Witches,
whereby it is sayd that the fits or diseases of the bewitched
doe cease miraculously; as also concerning the burning

of bewitched cattell, whereby it is sayd, that the Witch
is miraculously compelled to present her selfe.
               These, and the like, I thinke it vaine and needlesse, particularly
or singly to confute, because it doth directly appeare,
by their examinatiō, according to the former rules produced,
against the naturalizing of the detection of Witches▪ by casting
them into the water, that first they are excluded out of
the number of things naturall: secondly, that being reputed
as miracles, they will also bee rather iustly iudged miracles
of the Diuel, then of God, by the former reasons which haue
stripped the supposed miraculous detection of witches by the
water, of any hopefull opinion that they can be of God.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               The exploration of Witches, by supernaturall reuelations in the bewitched,
by signes and secret markes, declared by the betwitched
to be in the body of the suspected Witch, by the touch of the Witch
curing the touched bewitched.
               THere remain as yet other miraculous explorations of
a Witch, carrying in their first view a far more wondred
representation then any or al the former explorations.
One is, when persons bewitched, shall in the time
of their strange fits or traunces nominate or accuse a Witch,
and for a true testimony against him, or her, thus nominated,
shall reueale secret markes in his or her body, neuer before
seene or knowne by any creature; nay, the very words or
works, which the supposed, or thus nominated Witch shall
be acting or speaking in farre distant places, euen in the very
moment and point of time, while they are in acting or
speaking; all which I haue sometimes my selfe heard and seen
proued true. This is reputed a certain conuiction of a Witch.
Another miraculous tryall of a VVitch and like vnto this,
wonderfull is, when a supposed VVitch required by the bewitched,

doth touch him or her (though when vnknowne or
vnperceiued by the bewitched themselues,) yet according to
the prediction of that issue by the bewitched, he or shee immediately
are deliuered from the present fit or agonie, that
then was vpon him or her, which I haue also my selfe seene.
For the better discouery of truth in these so wondred difficulties,
let vs first recall to minde these few obseruations in
our former Treatise determined and proued. First, that the
Diuel doth many miraculous and supernatural things meerely
simply and alone of himselfe, for his owne ends, and without
the instigation or association of a Witch. This was made
manifest by his conference, disputation and speech with
Eua after a miraculous manner, out of the body of the Serpent,
when as yet neither Witch, nor Witch-craft were come
into the world. Secondly, that the Diuell is able to obtrude
or impose his supernaturall or miraculous workes vpon men,
against their knowledge, liking, will, or affection, and being
vnrequired. This is cleere by his transuection of the body of
our blessed Sauiour, as also by his violent casting of the bodies
of the possessed, amongst the people mentioned in the
Gospell. Thirdly, let vs not here forget specially, that hee is
able to transmit and send vnto, or into men vnrequired, and
without their desire or assēt, secret powers, force, knowledge,
illuminations, and supernaturall reuelations. This was proued
by the possessed in the Gospel, who from a secret and hidden
reuelation and power, aboue and beyond themselues, were
able to vtter that high mystery, as yet hidden from the world,
that Iesus was the Sonne of the liuing God. This could not
be knowne vnto them, by their owne reason or nature, being
aboue and beyond all reason or nature, and by grace only
then begun to be reuealed vnto the blessed Disciples themselues.
To thinke that the possessed could haue that knowledge
equally with the Disciples by the same grace, were impious
derogation from their Apostolicall priuiledge and prerogatiue
therein, vnto whom did properly belong the first
fruits thereof alone.
               
                  
This supernaturall reuelation therefore was transfused into
the possessed by the Diuell, who could not be ignorant of
the Lyon of Iuda, the mighty destroyer of his spirituall kingdome,
long before the disciples were borne, or capable of
knowledge. And thus hauing recalled these obseruations,
from them doe issue these necessarie inferences. First, that all
supernaturall acts or workes in men, are not to bee imputed
vnto those men. Secondly, that for this cause those supernaturall
workes, are onely to be imputed vnto men which the
Diuell, according vnto contract or Couenant which those
men do practise and produce.
               And for this cause, in the inquisition of Witch-craft, when
we haue truely first detected an act, done by a spirituall and
supernaturall force (because it is in all lawes iniurious, to accuse
of any act, before it be certainely knowne the act hath
been committed) then, and not before, wee ought indeuour
directly and necessarily to proue the contract, consent, and
affection of the person suspected, vnto, or in that supernaturall
act, that being no lesse essentiall, to detect and discouer
the true and vndoubted Witch, then the supernaturall act,
being certainely apparent, doth vndoubtedly proue the Diuell,
and his power therein.
               This equall regard, in case of Witch-craft, ought to bee
carefully ballanced, without which vaine and vnstable men
shall euer at their lust and pleasure, vpon affections and passions,
be priuiledged with impunity, to lay vniust imputations,
and vse wrongfull violence and oppression, beyond all equitie,
or reason.
               When therefore men that are prudent, iudicious, and able
to discerne, do first aduisedly vpon good ground and reason,
adiudge a supernaturall act euidently done, or at least worthy
to be suspected: secondly, shall by iust and reasonable
proofe, or at least liuely and faire presumption, detect the
contract, affection, or consent of any man in that act, then
and not before, is the accusation, inquisition, and inditement
of Witch-craft, against any man equall and iust.
               
                  
For since a supernaturall worke can bee truely and simply
no act of a naturall man, and is the immediate hand & power
of a Diuell (as is formerly proued) it is the mans consent, contract
and couenant alone, in the act with the Diuell, that being
detected and discouered, doth infallibly and essentially
proue him a Witch, and not the act it selfe.
               These obseruations, and considerations, first necessarily
prefixed, let vs now proceed vnto the two former propounded
experiments of the miraculous detection of Witches.
               It is necessarily true, that it can solely proceed from a supernaturall
power, that the bewitched are inabled in their
traunces, to fore-tell the sequel of the supposed Witches
touch: likewise, that the nominated Witch, shall accordingly
by her touch immediately free and dispossesse the Sicke or
the bewitched of their agonies.
               It is as necessarily true also, that it can solely proceede
from a supernaturall power, that the bewitched are able
in their traunces to nominate the most secret and hidden
markes in the bodies of the suspected Witch, her present
speechHerein the Diuel affecteth to imitate the power of God in his holy Prophet, who was able by his diuine reuelation to make knowne what the King spake in his Priuy Chamber. and actions in farre distant places, and the like,
but whether these miraculous Reuelations, with their answerable
euents, ought to bee esteemed iust conuictions
of the persons thus by a supernaturall finger, pointed out
and noted; as also whether they proceede of GOD or
of the Diuell, is very materiall, to examine and consider.
               If they proceede from God,2. Kings verse 12 chap. 6. He herein also counterfetteth the Diuinitie of our Sauiour, seeing Nathaniel, when he was vnder the Figge-tree. Iohn. 1▪ 48. their end, their extraordinary
necessitie and vse, bent solely vnto the immediate speciall
glory, or extraordinary glorification of God therein, will euidently
declare.
               What more extraordinary glorification of God can bee
pretended in the needfulnesse of a miraculous detection of
Witch-caft, then of any other sinne committed, as immediately
against God, and with as high an hand? Witch-craft is
indeed one kinde of horrid renunciation, and forsaking of
God, but there are many more kinds much more hellish then

this secret and concealed defection: as the open cursings,
wilfull blasphemings, and spitefull railings vpon God, euen
vnto his face, professed hatred and contempt of God.
               Among many Offendors in these kindes, after their owne
long prouoking continuance therein, and Almighty God his
vnspeakeable long suffering and patience: some few sometimes
haue been made hideous spectacles and examples vnto
the rest, of the infinite power and iustice of God, his vnsufferable
displeasure, indignation and direfull reuenging
wrath. In this number was, for some time, Nobuchodonosor,
and Pharaoh King of Aegypt, and in later times Iulian the Apostata,
and others the like. Many other as high Blasphemers,
and despisers of God, notwithstanding haue been permitted
to escape any such miraculous punishments, or fearefull
notorious exposings vnto the worlds view.
               
                  Rabshakeh, railing on the liuing God, in the open view and
hearing of the men of Israel, and Olofernes denying the God
of heauen, were not miraculously, or by any immediate hand
of God smitten, but were suffered to grow on, vntill their
haruest of confusion was ripe. That high degree of blasphemie
against the Sonne of the liuing God, hanging vpon the
Crosse for the sinnes of mankinde, committed by the cruell
& hard-hearted Iewes, in scorning, scoffing, and spitefull derision
both of God in heauen, Math. 27. verse 43. and also of
the eternall Sauiour of the world, descended from heauen,
was not by God then extraordinarily reuenged (as the incomparable
greatnesse of the sinne might seeme to require)
but was in Almightie God his iust iudgement, suffered, vntill
in the due time, their owne execrations, and cursings of
themselues, and their posterity, thereby to hasten and purchase
the effusion of that holy innocent bloud, did fall vpon
them so heauily, that their whole Nation, People, and kingdome,
became extirpate, vile, and vagabond for euer vpon
the face of the earth. It is recorded in the Reuelation, chap. 13.
verse 5, 6, 7. concerning the Beast, that he opened his mouth
vnto blasphemy against God, his Tabernacle, and the Saints;

that he spake great mighty blasphemies, yet power was giuen
vnto him to continue, and preuaile therein many yeares,
and a large space of time.
               By these few examples it is euident, that neither the height,
the nature, the quantitie, nor the qualitie of the most abominable,
or prouoking sinne, most odious vnto God and men,
doth vsually, or alwaies draw downe from heauen vpon it
selfe a miraculous immediate hand of Gods wrath. We may
easily instance the like, concerning the sinne of Witch-craft,
which is our particular subiect.
               Although by the hand of his holy seruant Saint Paul, Almighty
God did miraculously smite the Sorcerer Elymas, and
as writers report, Simon Magus, by the hand of St. Peter, multitudes
of societies of other Sorcerers, South-sayers among
the Caldeans, escaped not onely the hands of Nabuchodonosor,
in his wrath; but as it seemeth in the prophecie of Daniel,
they liued many yeares in high esteeme, fame, and renowne,
both in their owne Nation, and also in forreine Countreys,
yea through the world. There is no doubt, that Aegypt likewise
did abound with swarmes of Sorcerers, as the holy
Scripture, and all times and writers report. Among the people
of God also, the Israelites, it is manifest that diuers Sorcerers
and Witches did shrowd themselues, and liued with impunity,
as appeareth by the Witch of Endor, which king Sauls
seueritie, in their generall extirpation thorow the whole
kingdom, had notwithstanding passed by, and left vnespied,
as also by that speciall note and commendations, from Gods
owne mouth and word of Ioshua, that is, that hee had taken
away from amiddest his people, all the Enchanters & Sorcerers:
by which it is likely and cannot be denied, that through
the lenitie or carelesnesse of former Princes, they formerly
had long securely there breathed. That God doth not vse by
myracles to detect all, or most Enchanters, Magicians, or
Witches, is farther made vndoubted; because it should follow
then and thence necessarily, that he hath both in the first
ages of the world, ordained lawes, and ordinary legall courses

of proceeding against them in vaine; as also for that hee
doth, in the holy records of his sacred word, make knowne
his Decree, that they shalbe permitted to liue and continue
vpon the face of the earth among other, and as other vnrepentant
sinners, vntill his second comming, and the last day
of eternall doome, Reuelat. chap. 22. vers. 15. without shalbe
Enchanters. If his Iustice and seuere iudgement should by
his miraculous power make so narrow search amongst them,
as ordinarily to root them out, it were impossible any one of
them should escape his all-seeing reuengefull hand, to suruiue
vnto his generall decreed day of sentence, and dreadfull
doome, of all kinde of sinnes and sinners, which both in
iustice vnto some, and mercy vnto other some, his infinite
goodnes and wisedome hath decreed, shall not be frustrate.
Although therefore Almighty God doth sometimes stretch
forth his mighty hand miraculously to smite, or bring into
light some horrid sinnes and sinners, his extraordinarie
power therein sometimes onely extended, at his owne good
will & pleasure, doth not iustifie the presumptuuos expectation
of the dispensation thereof in any particular. God who is
the God of order, and not of confusion, doth not ordinarily
dispense his extraordinary workes, nor vsually confound indifferently,
so different natures in their end and vse, and his
own decree. Nature it selfe doth also teach an impossibilitie
that which is extraordinary, to becom or be expected ordinrie.
In that way which is ordinarie, the industruous, the diligent,
the prouident man therefore doth with carefull perseuerance
vprightly walke. The slothfull, onely the intemperate,
the improuident man, either by folly or ignorance loseth,
or by idle sloth forgetteth, or omitteth, his ordinarie
way or opportunitie, and ridiculously hopeth or trusteth vnto
to the redemption thereof, by extraordinarie contingents or
euents.
               Thus it hath appeared, that in regard of any more speciall
or extraordinarie glorification of God, in the detection of
Witches, rather then of other as great and as abominable

sinners, there is no needfull or necessary vse of myracles.
               The second consideration was, whether they are not rather
of the Diuell, then of God; as also, how they may bee
any iust conuictions of the supposed or suspected guilty.
               Wee will first herein examine the touch of the supposed
Witch, immediatly commanding the cessation of the supposed
fits of the bewitched. That this is a false or Diabolicall
myracle and not of God, may be iustly doubted.
               First, because the holy and blessed power of working myracles
(among which, the healing the Sicke or the possessed
was not the least) was neuer of God dispensed, to haunt or
follow the touch of wicked men, or Sorcerers or Witches.
               Secondly, for that the true myracles of God (which were
euer dispensed, either for the common good of his Church, or
the declaration of his glorious truth, or for the extraordinarie
punishment and destruction of euill men) did neuer obscurely,
or indirectly, proue themselues or their ends, but in
their manifestation were inabled to ouer-shine cleerely, all
the fogges and mists of doubt or question.
               The contrary hereunto in this our suspected myracle is manifest,
wherein is ridiculously imagined, that the blessed gift
and vertue of healing the sicke, descended from God aboue,
may be reputed in the hands of a Witch: a signe or testimonie
of his or her guilt and impiety, which euer hath been, and
is in it selfe a speciall grace and fauour of God, and was euer
vsed rather as a confirmation of the truth of Gods Ministers
and seruants. Let vs now cōsider how this miraculous touch
and the efficacie thereof, may bee any iust conuiction of a
witch. No man can doubt that the vertue wherewith this
touch was indued, was supernaturall. If it bee supernaturall,
how can man, vnto whom nothing simply is possible, that is
not naturall, be iustly reputed any poore Agent therein? If he
cannot bee esteemed in himselfe any possible or true Agent,
then it remaineth, that he can onely be interessed therein, as
an accessary in consent; as a Solicitor or Seruent vnto a superiour
power. If that superiour power (as is before proued in
the falsehood of his myracle) be the Diuel, the least reasonable

doubt remaining whether the Diuel alone, or with the
consent or contract of the suspected person hath produced
that wonderfull effect: with what Religion or reason can any
man rather encline to credit the Diuels information in the
mouth of the bewitched (who is the common accuser of
God to men, and of men to God) then in requisite pittie,
pietie and humane respect vnto his owne kinde to render the
weakenes of fraile man, against the subtilty of the deceitfull
Diuel. Shall man with man find lesse fauour, then the Diuell
with man against man? That the Deuill is able by the
permission of God, to annex or hang this myracle vpon this
or that particular, is manifest, by the possessed in the Gospel;
vpon whom and their naturall actions and motions, he cast
supernaturall consequences or concomitances. Was not
their speech attended with supernaturall reuelation, their
hands with supernaturall force, to rend and teare in pieces
iron chaines and bonds? If the Diuell be able to transfuse,
or cast these miraculous concomitances or consequences alone,
and without allowance of any man or person where
God doth permit; how is it in any equity or reason iust, that
these impositions of the Diuell should be imputed vnto any
man? God forbid, that the Diuels signes & wonders, nay his
truths should become any legall allegations or euidences in
lawe. We may therefore conclude it vniust, that the forenamed
miraculous effect by the Diuell wrought & imputed by
the bewitched, should be esteemed a signe or infallible mark
against any man, as therfore conuinced a Witch, for that the
Diuel and the betwitched haue so deciphered him. These like
miraculous stratagems may be exercised vpon any man, or
vnto any mans actions may be deceitfully or fraudulently by
the Diuell conioined or apted. This therefore doth not infer
any mans guilt therein. It ought be a mans owne proper
contract therein with the Diuel, necessarily and directly proued,
that shall iustly condemne him. This contract may bee
and is plainly detected, by sifting and considering, that mans
voluntarily assisting or promoting, promising, or vndertaking
such supernatural works, with answerable performance

thereof▪ as hath been said, concerning the miraculous consequence
of the touch of a suspected Witch; so may be determined
concerning the supernaturall reuelations of secret
markes or signes in her body, according vnto the prediction
of the bewitched, as also of the discouery of the present actions,
gestures, and speeches of supposed witches in farre distant
places. Diuers examples I my selfe haue seene in these
kinds: I must necessarily acknowledge a more then naturall
power therein, because farre beyond the nature, reason or
power of man. But there is notwithstanding sufficient matter
of doubt, whether such reuelations, secret signes, and
marks, though found in the named persons or parts true, as
also the right pourtraitures and shapes of the supposed or accused
Witches, though neuer of the bewitched before seene,
and yet by the bewitched truly described; there is, I say, notwithstanding,
sufficient matter of doubt, whether they are
not very insufficient to charge or accuse any particular thus
pointed out or marked. The Lawe and expresse commandement
of God doth allow of no reuelation from any other
Spirit, but from himself, Isa. 8. 19. Whether these reuelations
are immediately of God, if their due examination by the rule
of his Word do not clearely determine,ESTIN AMARTIA ANOMIA. rash or hasty perturbation
or passion ought not presume it.Quicquid non congruit cum lege, peccatum est. The laws of men
also admit no supernatural illuminations or reuelations, as any
grounds of iust tryals or decisions of right or truth. It
followeth therefore necessarily, that they are voyde, and
ought to be of no force or credit in vpright iudgement with
iust and righteous men. It may bee obiected, that truth is
found in these reuelations, and truth ought bee of regard. It
may hereto againe bee replied, that although truth in it selfe
be great, and ought and will preuaile; yet in the abuse, euill
vse, or corrupted, or depraued end thereof, it ought not deceiue
nor is of force. The Diuell, as all other cunning lyers
and deceiuers and imitators of that his art, vsually mixe
truths with lyes, that those truths giuing credit vnto lyes,
men may beleeue both and so bee deceiued. It was euer the
onely safe way of lying to face & guard it with some plausible

truths. In the former reuelations therefore, representations
& true descriptions in the bewitched, of persons of secret
markes and signes, of speeches, gestures, and the like although
the Diuel be foūd true, or speaking truth, yet may he
notwithstanding haply be therein also a lyer, while truly describing
their persons, shapes, marks, manners and gestures,
speeches & the like, he falsely and lyingly addeth thereby a
seeming or deceiuing necessity of their guilt, as if therein or
thereby necessarily inferred. Wee may boldly yet further affirm,
that if it were possible for the Diuel to speak the truth,
truly, wholly, vnpartially; so as it might appeare plaine, euident,
manifest, yet ought wee not from him beleeue it or receiue
it. This is in our blessed Sauior made vndoubted, who
in the Gospel oft rebuked him euen speaking truth, as also in
S. Paul rebuking the Pythonisse, truly affirming, & acknowledging
him the seruant & Minister of God. If the diuel then
speaking truth, may not be allowed or credited; how shal reuelations,
miracles or oracles proceeding frō him, be they neuer
so true, or approued with any shew of true Religion or
reason, become any iust probations or allegations in lawe, equity
or iustice? It may bee obiected, that many times men
haue bin by dreams & visions admonished of secret and concealed
hideous murders, & other euil facts cōmitted priuily,
whereby the Malefactors and their guilt haue bin admirably
produced vnto due punishment. This truth is euen by Heathen
Authors witnessed, & in our time the like hath hapned,
and is testified by witnesses, whose faith & credit is free from
al exception. Although this be true & cannot be denied, som
reasons notwithstanding do perswade that it is more safe to
incline, to suspect that these like visions or dreams are rather
of the Diuell, then rashly to determine or decree that they
are immediately of God. First, for that though haply they
might be sometimes so granted, yet ought we not too swiftly
or sodainly so beleeue, for that by the liuely counterfait of
the true visions, dreams and reuelations of God, the Diuell
hath euer vsually practised to be taken and esteemed as God:
the allowance whereof by men is high blasphemy against

God, and ignorant and occult adoration of Diuels.
Secondly, for that no visions, dreames, or reuelations, ought
to be esteemed of God, originally or immediately, which do
respect or answere curiositie of knowledge or desire, as most
of the forementioned kindes vsually are wont. Thirdly, for
that the visions of God, as they are euer bent into an extraordinary
diuine end, and an vniuersal good, so are they euer dispensed
by the ministery of men, who haue manifest commission,
or warrant from God, either mediate, or immediate.
The mediate is proued by the manifestation of the meanes:
the immediate, by the euident reflexion of a manifest diuinity,
in the power and authority thereof. For as it is said of the
word of God, Heb. 4. verse 12. so must it necessarily be concluded
of all the true myracles, visions, or reuelations of God,
that they are liuely, and mighty in operation.
               This is seene in the miracles wrought by Moses, which the
Sorcerers themselues could not deny to be the finger of God,
Gen. 8. verse 19. This is likewise seene in Simon Magus, who
could not but acknowledge the miraculous power of the holy
Ghost, by the laying on of the Apostles hands, so far forth
that in the consideration of his owne guilt, & of a conuincing
power or deitie therein, he desired them to pray for him.
               The same is also witnessed in the seruants of the high Priests
who being sent with wicked malice, and cursed preiudice to
intrap and betray our Sauiour, were by the miraculous power
of his word and works compelled to proclaime and confesse;
No man euer spake like this man. All these notes or markes,
of the true visions, dreames, or reuelations of God, are euer
generally, or for the most part wanting in the forementioned
kindes, which being neuer free from some suspitious note of
godly iealousie, therfore ought not but with much doubt and
difficultie be at any time admitted. It may bee as yet further
obiected. How can it otherwise bee deemed, then that God
himselfe is the Author of the former reuelations, since they
tend vnto his glory in the detecting and punishing of so hideous
sinnes? It is hereto answered, that Almighty God is
able to vse and command euill instruments vnto good ends.

He hath ordained the Diuell himselfe to be the common accuser
of all sinnes and sinners. It is therefore no inconuenience
nor repugnant vnto religion or reason, to affirme, that
the Diuel himselfe, in the fore-mentioned visions or dreames,
by the commandement or permission of God, is the producer
of the fore-mentioned murders, euil facts, vnto light & iudgement.
God for his owne glory permitteth the Diuel by these
his wonderfull reuelations, to detect the named sinnes and
sinners. The Diuell also for his owne end, and desire of their
destruction, doth execute the Decree of God for their iust
punishment,
               But here may be obiected againe, that the Diuell in his reuelations
(as is before mentioned) is not to bee beleeued or
credited, although he spake truth. How then may men be allowed,
to admit or make vse of these his visions or dreames
in this kinde.
               It is hereto replyed, Almightie God himselfe doth both
permit and here the Diuell when hee accuseth, as is manifest
by holy Scriptures. Therefore among men, and by men also,
his accusations may be heard and considered. Notwithstanding,
since hee is oft a false Accuser, and the enemy of God
and truth, he may not be credited in himselfe, no nor truth it
selfe simply as in his mouth. Vpon his accusation therefore,
if truth and certainty doe declare it selfe, the force and vertue
thereof, and not the accusation doth conduct vpright
men and mindes, vnto proceeding and iudgement; it is not
the Diuels accusation, but the truth it selfe, vnto which haply
that accusation did point inquisition, that by it selfe made
manifest, is therefore credited.
               And thus with breuity hath the vanity both of all superstitions,
and also of all miraculous wayes of the detection of
Witches and Witch-craft, been in some few of their particulars
generally vnmasked. There are, and may be many more
besides these, which in these, and with these will likewise perish
and vanish, being by the same rule and reason compelled
vnto the golden tryall of sincere religion and affection.
               The sole, true and warranted way, wherein vprightly men

may walke herein before God and men, hath beene in this
Treatise formerly disquired and discoursed. Therein (intelligent
Reader) thou maist obserue two sorts of manifest Witches:
The one is offered vnto the outward sense, in his apparent
and palpable Sorcerous workes: The other is made euident
by plaine demonstration out of the sacred word of truth.
It hath euer preuailed with vulgar custome (because most sensible
of the most grosse harmes more open to sense) to cast
chiefely, or for the most part, the eye and common iealousie
vpon the first kinde. The other kinde (because vsually lest noted
of sense, and therefore esteemed least harmefull to men)
is both in the iust protraction or production thereof vnto the
barre of Iustice much more rare and seldome, & also in common
and vulgar obseruation is little or not at all considered.
               Hence it proceedeth, that most men do doubtfully resolue
thereof; Yea, some men admire a worth therein, others esteeme
it of reasonable and commendable vse, vnto the satisfaction
of their curiosities, in things secret and hidden from
the knowledge of man.
               But since Almighty God hath more specially (as is in the
former Treatise proued) both giuen most certaine and plaine
indication, and information of this kinde, by the expressed
fruits thereof, and the necessary inference of familiarity and
consultation with other Spirits then himsefe, Isaiah 8. verse
19. and hath also so oft in so diuers places iterated the great
abomination, and his high detestation thereof, it is not onely
the sauing duety of all priuate men to take more diligent and
warie notice thereof, thereby to eschew and flye from it, according
vnto Gods expresse charge and command; but it is
the charge of Princes & Magistrates also, to fulfill therby the
commanded execution of Gods holy wrath and vengeance
vpon it; for which pleasing seruice and sacrifice vnto him, Almighty
God hath vpon the euerlasting records of his holy
word fixed for euer the so memorable praise, & cōmendation
of those famous Princes, who haue dedicated themselues vnto
his will therein. As it hath been declared by what meanes
Witches and Sorcerers, in two kindes seuerally may be manifestly

charged, challenged, and proued as certaine and vndoubted
Offendors: so also how farre presumption, probabilities,
or matter of iust suspition in both may blamelesly
guide, and conduct vpright and equall inquisition, hath
been briefely instanced. From all which it is euident: first,
that God in nature hath not shut vp in this subiect, the common
entrance and doore of iudging, trying or deciding as equally▪
as in other cases: secondly, that beside and beyond
that way, which God hath left open vnto sensible and reasonable
progresse, herein it must necessarily bee preposterous
presumption to breake out, or ouer-reach, as also in steade of
that plaine approued and authentike walke for the tryalls of
truth; the iudgement & condemnation of others, and the establishment
of mens owne thoughts, and mindes, to seeke
irreligious footing, in the Labyrinth of amazing wonderments,
and reasonlesse traditions and experiments. To walke
in these wayes, is no better then to runne away from God, in
whom to trust, though with some restraint, and coertion of
our longing vaine desires, and satisfactions, is truly far more
happy then out of the conduct of his allowance, therein to
inioy the fullest measure or ouerflow of all the most obsequious
influencies of humane blisse. If true religion and pietie
could settle this consideration, the common folly of misgouerned,
petulant, inordinate, and intemperate expatiations in
this kinde, would not only in priuate men more vsually blush
and be ashamed, but a more euen, straight, and vninterrupted
way, being prepared therby vnto iustice, would vsually bring
forth a much more happy issue, then now is ordinary. Thus
farre the loue of truth, which I haue euer carefully sought and
studied, hath offered violence vnto my priuate thoughts and
meditations, exposing thē vnto the hazard of publike view.
               As my labour is not lost vnto my selfe, and my owne more
confirmed satisfaction thereby▪ so if there be therin any good
vnto the common good, I know, good men will not for the
thorne, refuse the fruit, for defect of elegance instile, or obscurity
of worth in the Author, quarrell with the matter it selfe.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Errata.
            PAge 4. Line 4. leaue out. then it selfe to make it manifest, Page 4. line 10. leaue
out but, Page 6. line 4. reade cum ratione. Ibid line 8. reade Isagog Page 12.
line 14. reade distension. Ibid line 31. reade distension, Page 14. line 8. leaue
out this point; Page 16. line 3. leaue out who. Page 17. line 12. reade Schillincus,
Ibid. line 25. reade bring fearefull. Page 19. line 11. reade our particular. Page 22.
line 5. reade as all things. Page 34. line 14. leaue out this point? Page 39. line 2.
reade Inquisitours. Ibid. line 10. reade in an vnusuall. Ibid. line 29 reade in the page
42. in the Marginall note, reade sensibus. Page 43. line 19. reade abiect. Page 47. in
the Marginall note, reade them and within. Page 58. line 13. reade a truth. Page 62.
line 20. reade haue before. Page 64. line 14. reade some men. Page 66. line 29. reade
53. Page 67. Marginall note, reade in 7 annis. Page 73. line 10. reade tongues thirst.
Page 75. line 18. reade effected. Page 76. line 3. reade these cases. Page 85. line 7.
reade nature. Page 87. line 29. reade abominable, first. Page 92. line 8. reade 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
Page 95. line 1. reade wherein for our. Page 97. line 28. reade act page
102. line 3. reade no. Ibid. line 3 reade yet. Page 103. line 18. reade 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
Page 109. Marginall note, reade quemadmodum. Page 116. line 11 reade doth. Ibid.
line 27. reade and to vse. Page 119. line 14. reade and societies. Page 120. line 25.
reade in that which. Page 121. line 32. reade propre. Ibid. line 35. reade Tenaunt.
Page 123. line 1. reade thereof. As Page 126. line 29. reade superstitious.
            
         
      
   