
      
         
            
            FATHER COTTON A IESVITE, THE KINGS CONFESSOVR, His two and thirtie Demands, to the MINISTERS of France, with the Anſweres added at the end of euerie DEMAND. Alſo threeſcore and foure Demands propoſed to Father COTTON, by way of Counter-change. By PETER MOVLIN, Miniſter of the word of God in the Church of Paris.
            
            Printed according to the French Copie, printed in PARIS.
            
            Alſo a new late Chalenge, by a learned Diuine, to all Papiſts, in 24. other Popiſh ARTICLES.
            
               
                  MATTH. 22. VERS. 23. & 29.
               
               The Saduces came to Ieſus, and asked him, &c. But Ieſus anſwered and ſaid vnto them; yee erre, not knowing the Scriptures.
            
            
               LONDON: Printed for Iohn Barnes, and are to be ſould at his ſhop, ouer againſt S. Sepulchers Church, without New-gate. 1614.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, MY VERIE GOOD LORD, SIR THOMAS EDMVNDS, Knight, Embaſſadour for his Maieſtie, Reſident with the French KING.
            
               IT was the ſaying of wiſe Salomon, long ſince: that there is no end of making Bookes, and much reading is a wearineſſe of the fleſh, Eccleſ. 12.12. which was neuer more verified, then in theſe dayes of vanitie, when vnlearned as well as learned, will be writing, whereby the Preſſe is euen oppreſſed with multiplicitie of ſuch Treatiſes, (as being ballanced by the weights of Gods Sanctuarie) will be found more light then vanitie it ſelfe. but for ſuch Treatiſes as this, which afford direction to the Church & Spouſe of God,

trauailing to heauenly Ieruſalem, through the Wilderneſſe of this world, nothing more neceſſary; being fit to reſolue her of doubts in matters of Controuerſie, when ſhe ſtandeth in biuio, doubtfull which way to take this her iourney, and therefore meeting with this skilfull Guide, in that Nation where your Honor hath long had very Honourable imployment from the State of this Land, where this Stranger is now ariued: I haue attired him in our Engliſh habite, and doe preſent him vnto your Honour, whoſe fauourable protection hee ſeemeth ſilently to craue, and ſolemnly promiſeth his beſt directions to Gods Church, by this and ſuch like Treatiſes, which hee hath in his Natiue Country divulged, ſo deuoting my beſt endeuours in this kinde, to my Country, and humbly deſiring to ſhelter my ſelfe vnder your Honourable fauour: I humbly reſt at your Honours commaund.
            
               I. B.
            
         
         
            
            
               PETER MOVLIN his Aduertiſement to the READER.
            
               OVR Lord Ieſus being tempted by the Scribes and Phariſees with captious queſtions, ſatisfied them by the holy Scriptures. We in the like cauſe and kinde, are queſtioned, and incombred. But wee eaſilie come out, and free our ſelues by the ſame meanes. For, we cut off with the ſword of the Word theſe knots of intricate Queſtions, wreathed of purpoſe to entangle mens mindes. A farre off, they ſeeme Gardian knots, but at hand no better then Spiders webs, not able to endure the leaſt winde or breath of Truth. They catch nothing but Flies, but light and giddy ſpirits, carryed away with euery firſt blaſt of wordly hopes. Maſter Cotton, a man full of queſtions, hath propoſed them in diuers faſhions to ſundry ſorts of ſpirits. We haue had our part: For hee hauing often-times ſhewed his dexteritie in his ſubtilly-conceiued, and finely-filed queſtions, they to whom he hath propoſed them, haue brought them vnto me, and deſired my anſwere vnto them. I haue alwaies ſatisfied them: but he ſuppreſſing my Anſweres, hath ſtill gone on to make new Queſtions, pleaſing himſelfe onely in the Office of an Inquiſitor.
            
               There is good ſufficiencie required in making good and fit Demands, but more in giuing them apt Anſweres. To moue difficulties, without adding any Anſweres or Solutions, is like the Sunne in March, which drawes humours, but diſſolues them not. It may be becauſe hee is pearched in ſo high a place (as to be the Kings Confeſſor) he thinks he may ſecurely ſpit on euery Paſſenger without any returne of ſuch a wrong. Or happily he takes delight to cut out worke for idle joke. But it is eaſier to tye then vntie a knot. Or it may be that the ſtreame and torrent of his worldly or ciuill affayres do draw his minde ſome other wayes, and that the interpoſition of the earth doth ecclipſe the cleareneſſe and brightneſſe of his ſpirit. Theſe are the cauſes of his ſilence as farre as I am able to deuine: He then following his queſtioning courſe to put impediment to Miniſters in their better imployments hath lately put into the hands of ſome Honourable Perſonages,Mounſieur de la Forſe. 32. Queſtions, vnanſwerable as he accounts them. I haue readily and ſpeedily anſwered them; and to returne him double pay, I haue ſent him 64. other Demands, to ſee whether he hath as good dexteritie and facilitie in anſwering as he hath edge and itch in asking and queſtioning. He ſhall much deceiue me, if he make any anſwere. He ſhould alſo be the firſt, that hath vndertaken to doe it. At the leaſt, this profit I ſhall receiue by it, that if he anſwere not my Demands, I ſhall be for euer hereafter freed from anſwering his: and he ſhall no longer vaunt (as hee hath often done) that we haue nothing to anſwere him.
            The Anſweres to the 22. and 29. Demands are corrected, and much enlarged.
            
               Farewell.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            TVVO AND THIRTIE DEMANDS, PROPOVNDED BY Father COTTON.
            1 
                  FIRST, let thoſe of the pretended Religion ſhew vs where it is written that there are but two Sacraments, to wit, Baptiſme and the Supper, and in what place in the Scripture they be called Sacraments.
            2 That Children may be ſaued by the ſole faith of their Parents, without being baptiſed: and that therefore Baptiſme is not of abſolute neceſsitie.
            3 That Baptiſme muſt not be adminiſtred without a Sermon.
            4 That it is not lawfull to make the ſigne of the Croſſe.
            5 That we may not hallow water, and being hallowed, that we ought not to vſe it.
            6 That the Bread of the Supper is onely the figure of the body of Ieſus Chriſt.
            7 That the Church may erre.
            8 That we muſt not receiue Traditions.
            9 That the Saints in glory cannot heare our prayers.
            10 That Prieſts and religious perſons may breake their vow of Obedience, Chaſtitie, and Pouertie, which they haue made vnto God.
            11 That the eſtate of Marriage is more acceptable to God, then ſingle life.
            12 That the Bookes of the Machabees, of Wiſdome,
               
of Eccleſiaſticus, of Tobias, of Baruch, are Apocriphall.
            13 That Ieſus Chriſt deſcended not into hell for the ſoules of the Fathers that attended his comming, or rather that before the Aſcention of Ieſus Chriſt, the ſoules of the Saints were receiued into heauen, not into Limbus, or into any other third place.
            14 That wee ought not to confeſſe our ſinnes but to God onely.
            15 That Faith onely doth Iuſtifie.
            16 That the puniſhment of ſinne is taken away, together with the fault.
            17 That God created not all men of like condition; but that hee created ſome to ſaluation, and others to eternall damnation.
            18 That euery man in particular hath not his particular Angell to his guardian.
            19 That it is not lawfull to ſalute this Angell, or others, eyther in generall or in particular.
            20 That God permitteth not ſinne, but willeth it, as Caluin writeth in his Inſtitutions, Lib. 1 cap. 17. §. 8. and cap. 18. §. 1. & 2.
            
            21 That in the Church we ought not to vſe lights, or Eccleſiaſticall Ornaments diſtinguiſhed from ſecular.
            22 That the Biſhop is inferiour to the Prieſt, and the Deacon ſuperiour to the Prieſt; that is to ſay, that the Watchman or Superintendent ouer the Church, is no more then an Elder in the Church, and that the Miniſter is more then the Elder.
            23 That the Scripture is eaſie to be vnderſtood, and that the intelligence thereof is graunted vnto all: theſe be Caluins words in his Inſtitut. lib. 3. cap. 21. §. 5.
            
            24 That all ſinnes are mortall.
            25 That a man with the grace of God cannot merit any thing.
            
               26 That it is not poſsible to keepe all Gods commandements, no not with his grace.
            27 That God will not recompence good workes, which is as much as to ſay there be no merits.
            28 That there is no diſtinction of beatitude among the bleſſed, and that they are all equall in glory.
            29 That we ought not to vſe that impoſition of hands which the Apoſtles vſed vpon the Samaritanes and, Epheſians, Act. 8. v. 14. & cap. 19. v. 5. and that the ſaid confirmation was not one of the Articles of the Apoſtles Catechiſme mentioned in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes, chap. 6. verſ. 2.
            
            30 That the precept of the annoynting of the ſick with oyle, contayned in S. Iames, cap. 5. v. 14. is not to be put in practiſe in the Church, although the Apoſtles vſed it, Mar. 6. v. 12.
            
            31 That Prayer for the dead was not in vſe, no not in the time of the Machabees.
            
            32 That S. Peter was not chiefe of the Apoſtles, notwithſtanding S. Mathew cap. 10. v. 2. doth ſay; The names of the twelue Apoſtles are theſe: The firſt, Simon, ſurnamed Peter.
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               WHoſoeuer requireth of any man an account of his faith, muſt firſt demand an account of that he doth beleeue, and not of that which he doth not beleeue. If a man ſhould require a Ieſuite to proue vnto him, that there be many Gods, either that Ieſus Chriſt neuer ſuffered death, he would ſay that ſuch demands were iniurious and that they did wrongfully goe about to make him a defender of impieties & abſurdities: and yet ſuch is their demeanour towards vs; for of theſe 32. demands onely one quarter doth in truth repreſent our Beliefe, the other 24. are ſlanderous: how then ſhall they make true report to their people of that which we beleeue, ſith euen vnto our ſelues they would adde to our beliefe?

and haue vndertaken to make vs to beleeue that which we beleeue not. Theſe Queſtions therefore we might reiect, deſiring them firſt to proue vnto vs that we doe beleeue theſe points, before they binde vs to defend them. But that we make not two labours of it, let vs heare what they demand.
            
            
               
                  I. DEMAND. LEt thoſe of the pretended Religion ſhew vs where it is written that there are but two Sacraments, that is, Baptiſme and the Lords Supper, and in what place of the Scripture they be called Sacraments.
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  IN the Goſpell we find the inſtitution of Baptiſme, and of the holy Supper. And reading ouer the whole Teſtament, we doe not finde that Ieſus Chriſt inſtituted any other Sacrament. If there be any other, it belongeth to our Aduerſaries to ſhew it vnto vs, for we are not to proue that there is no mention of any other; for to proue this vnto them, we muſt read vnto them all the new Teſtament. As for the word Sacrament, we are not tied vnto it, neither doe we by that word vnderſtand any other thing then the ſame is which by Ieſus Chriſt called a Commemoration or Remembrance. Luk. 22.19 & by S. Paul, a Seale or Signe, Rom. 4.11. We ſay not that all the words that may be vſed, but all that the doctine neceſſary to ſaluation is contayned in the holy Scripture. And we doe willingly apply and frame our ſelues to the vſuall words, alwaies prouided that the doctrine doe ſtill remaine pure and vndefiled.
            
            
               
                  II. DEMAND. That Children may be ſaued by the faith of the Parents onely, without Baptiſme, and therefore that Baptiſme is not of abſolute neceſsitie.
               
                  ANSVVERE.
               HEere begin the ſlanders, The Author of theſe queſtions hath not fully conceiued what we hold in the points. God ſaith to Abraham that he will be his God and the God of his ſeed, Gen. 17. And S. Paul. 1 Cor. 7. ſpeaking of Children borne of faithfull Fathers and Mothers, ſaith, that they be holy. By the ſtrength of this Couenant it commeth to paſſe that the Children of the faithfull ſo ſoone as they be borne doe belong to God. As for this abſolute neceſſitie of Baptiſme, we acknowledge that it is abſolutely neceſſary to celebrate Baptiſme in the Church, ſith God that ſo commanded: as alſo according to the ſaying of Ieſus Chriſt, Iohn 3. That, whoſoeuer is not borne of water and the ſpirit cannot enter into the Kingdome of God: we beleeue that whoſoeuer voluntarily doth depriue himſelfe of Baptiſme and contemneth it, cannot be ſaued. For it is the contempt, not the want or depriuation of Baptiſme that bringeth condemnation. But to ſay that God cannot, or will not ſaue a childe without Baptiſme, or to beleeue that a childe being carried towards Baptiſme and dying by the way, is excluded from eternall ſaluation. 1. It is a cruell and raſh ſentence. 2. It is a tying of the grace of God to the water. 3. It is the committing of the ſaluation of a childe into the power of a man, or of a Midwife: for if they liſt to baptiſe the dying childe it ſhall paſſe into Paradiſe; if not, it ſhall not come there. 4. It is an accuſing of God, that he did prouide but badly for the ſaluation of Children borne vnder the old Teſtament, in that they might not be circumciſed before the eight day. 4. Euen our aduerſaries themſelues doe hold that many are ſaued without Baptiſme of water, as ſundry Martyrs that were neuer baptiſed. They are much to blame therefore ſo to vrge this paſſage or Text of the third of Iohn, wherein themſelues doe ſay

there is no ſpeech but of the Baptiſme of water.Concil. Trid. Seſſ. 7. c. 11.
                   6. This Baptiſme likewiſe of bloud is contrary to their Canons, which hold that the Sacrament is none, if he that baptiſeth hath not an intent to baptiſe: for dare they auow that the executioners conferred Baptiſme, or that euer they had any entent to baptiſe? 7. How many people alſo died there by Martyrdome without effuſion of bloud? 8. Alſo ſith Baptiſme is irreiterable (that is, not to be twiſe adminiſtred to one and the ſame perſon) what reaſon haue they, that Martyrdome of a perſon baptiſed ſhould not be a Sacrament, but the Martyrdome of a perſon not baptiſed ſhould be a Sacrament? 9. Doe not our aduerſaries make themſelues, mention of a Baptiſme of the Spirit, which they call Baptiſmum flaminis, which ſupplieth the default of the Baptiſme of water? and what elſe doe we ſay? 10. But if we craue formall examples out of the holy Scriptures, euery man knoweth that to the Iſraelites Circumciſion was the ſame which at this day Baptiſme is to vs, and that the neceſſitie was alike: and yet infinite people were ſaued vnder the old Teſtament without Circumciſion, as all the faithfull women, and ſuch as truly repented among the Niniuites. 11. But what a preſumption was it in them to build for children dying without Baptiſme, a ſeuerall Chamber vnder the earth, which they tearme the Childrens Limbe; whereof we finde not any mention eyther throughout the Scriptures, or in all the antiquity of the Church? 12. This do they place vnder the earth, yet tell they vs not where it ſhall be when the earth ſhall not be: nor whether theſe infants ſhall vndergoe the iudgement in the latter day, and what ſentence the Iudge ſhall giue: neyther doe they ſhew vs the reaſon wherefore the bodies of theſe children are throwne headlong into a bottomleſſe pit, which is in the Hoſpitall called Hoſtel Dieu, at Paris, as vnworthy of Buriall.
            
            
               
               
                  III. DEMAND. That we ought not to baptiſe but when there is a Sermon.
               ANSVVERE.
               THis doe not we beleeue. A Sermon is ſeemely, but not of abſolute neceſſity. None of vs doth beleeue that Baptiſme adminiſtred without a Sermon is no Baptiſme; or that it ought to be reiterated. True it is that we ſay, that the Scales without writings are vnprofitable, ſo the Sacraments without the Word are vnfruitfull. But, by the Word, we vnderſtand the promiſes of the Goſpell, and the forme of Baptiſme, inſtituted by Ieſus Chriſt, and not a Sermon, as this Inquiſitor weeneth.
            
            
               
                  IIII. DEMAND. That it is not lawfull to make the ſigne of the croſſe.
               ANSVVERE.
               SO doe not we ſay: yea, we could willingly be content to be inioyned to make a million of ſignes of the Croſſe, ſo it might tend no further then to reduce our Aduerſaries into the right way. Indeed we doe ſay, that the making of the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon the Hoſte,
                     Innocent. 3. lib. 2. de Miſt. Miſſae cap. 58. Efficit ſuper ea Crueis ſignaculum vt per crucis virtutem omnes conatus Diabolica malignitatis effugiat, ne contra Sacerdotem vel Sacrificium aliquo modo praeualeat. to expell the force of the wicked Spirits [as Pope Innocent ſaith] is as much as to ſeeke to ſuccour Ieſus Chriſt without neceſſitie. Alſo that the making of the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon a mans mouth when he yawneth, is not the way to ſtop the Diuels paſſage, who entereth into mans heart, not by the mouth, but by the eyes & eares, that is to ſay, by the obiects and ſpeeches whereby God is offended. It were therefore more requiſite at the hearing of a filthy word, or of a Ieſuites Sermon, to make the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon the eare. We alſo ſay, that when that thing which in the Primitiue Church was a

marke of Chriſtian profeſſion, grew to be an action of Superſtition, it was expedient to take it away for the abuſe ſake: the ſame not being in its owne nature neceſſarie, neither practiſed by Ieſus Chriſt, neither by his Apoſtles or Diſciples. Eſpecially, the making of the ſigne of the Croſſe vpon the Singing bread, as they call it, or vpon the conſecrated Hoaſt is in all antiquitie without example: for the Liturgies of S. Iames, and of Chryſoſtome are manifeſtly falſe, and forged of late, as making mention of perſons that liued not of a long time after, and to all antiquitie were vtterly vnknowne.
            
            
               
                  V. DEMAND. That wee may not hallow or conſecrate water, and being hallowed, that we ought not to vſe it.
               ANSVVERE.
               VVEE ſay not ſo: onely wee ſay that wee doe indeede finde that the Heathen did vſe holy or luſtrall water; but that wee finde not that euer the Apoſtles vſed any. And becauſe we are not ſo light of beliefe, we demand of our aduerſaries whether the word of God doth teach them that water conſecrated by either words or ſignes, be of any force againſt the Diuels: for the Goſpell ſheweth vs the meanes whereby the Apoſtles caſt them out; namely, by Faith, by Prayer, and by Faſting, Mat. 17.21. but neuer by holy water.
            
            
               
                  VI. DEMAND. That the bread of the Supper is onely the figure of the body of Ieſus Chriſt.
               ANSVVERE.
               THis is likewiſe a ſlander. Wee doe indeede beleeue that the bread of the Supper is the figure of the body of Chriſt: by this figure meaning no other then

the ſame which Ieſus Chriſt called Commemoration. But that it is onely a figure we ſay not,Rom. 4. conſidering that Saint Paul calleth the Sacrament of Circumciſion, not onely a ſigne, but alſo a ſeale: thereby teaching vs that the Sacraments doe not onely ſignifie, but alſo doe ſeale Gods promiſes. We doe alſo beleeue the ſaying of Saint Paul, 1. Cor. 10.Rom. 4. That the bread which wee breake is the Communion of the body of Chriſt: For the Sacraments are not onely ſignificatiue of the grace of God, but alſo exhibitiue, and doe not onely repreſent them, but alſo doe preſent them vnto vs.
            
            
               
                  VII. DEMAND. That the Church may erre.
               ANSVVERE.
               THis is likewiſe ſlaunderous: for, I beleeue, that by Church hee meaneth the ſame that is ſpoken of in the Creede: alſo, that hee meaneth that wee ſhould ſay that ſhe may erre in the deciſion of doubts, or matters of Religion, wherein hee would make vs belieue that we doe not. For we hold that the Church cannot erre in the deciſion of doubts, becauſe it was neuer aſſembled to decide them, neyther did euer make any deciſion at all. For, this Church, being the Communion of Saints, and the aſſembly of all the elect that are, were, or ſhall be vpon the earth, as the Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, cap. 12. verſ. 23. doth define it, that it is the aſſembly and Church of the firſt borne that are written in heauen, it appeareth that this body of the Elect was neuer aſſembled for the deciding of any matter. It therefore neuer erred in ſuch deciſions.
            
            
               
                  VIII. DEMAND. That we are not to receiue Traditions.
               
                  ANSVVERE.
               THis is euen ſuch another, and diſguiſeth our beliefe. We doe not reiect all manner of Traditions, but onely ſuch as are repugnant to the holy Scriptures, or that men do forgoe at their pleaſures without neceſſity, by them to impoſe ſuch a yoake vpon conſciences, as God neuer impoſed.
            
            
               
                  IX. DEMAND. That the Saints in glory cannot heare our Prayers.
               ASVVERRE.
               BY Prayers we meane not the ſound of words, but the conception of his heart that prayeth. 1 This the Saints doe not know: for the holy Scripture ſaith, that God onely knoweth the hearts of men, 1 Reg. 8. v. 99 and 2. Chron. 6. v. 30. And this is one propertie of God, whereby the holy Scripture honoureth God, viz. by knowing the hearts, Acts. 1. v. 24.2. Moreouer there needeth a diuine power to know the thoughts of an hundred thouſand perſons different in places, that poure out their prayers at one time. 3. That if in ſeeing God, they did ſee all things, (as they would perſwade vs) they ſhould alſo ſee things to come, and conſequently ſhould know the day of iudgement, which neuertheleſſe Ieſus Chriſt ſaith, the very Angels are ignorant it of, and that none knoweth it, Mar. 13. v. 32.4. If any man tell vs that God can giue them this vertue or power, we anſwer that here the queſtion is not what God can doe, but what God will doe. And require our Aduerſaries to make proofe of his will herein. 5. We alſo know that God will not haue the Saints to be Gods, or equall with God, as they ſhould be if they had an infinite knowledge: and if in ſeeing God they ſhould know all that God

knoweth. 6. Furthermore the thing which doth moſt eſpecially diſtinguiſh the Creator from the moſt excellent Creatures, is this, that God both knoweth and worketh infinite things in one and the ſame moment, but the continuance and actions of Creatures are ſucceſſiue, and the one is done after the other. Therfore the Saints neyther know, nor can conceiue infinite things in one inſtant. 7. This demand doth alſo make a falſe report of our Beliefe. For, we doe not ſay that the Saints eyther can or cannot heare our prayers, but onely that they doe not heare them.
            
            
               
                  X. DEMAND. That Prieſts and Monkes may breake the vowes of Obedience, Pouertie and Chaſtitie that they haue made to God.
               ANSVVERE.
               THE Inquiſitor would perſwade vs that wee beleeue this, albeit wee beleeue the contrarie: for wee doe hold that Prieſts ought to obſerue the vowe that they haue made to obey God; and wee complaine, that they hauing vowed obedience to God, doe obey the Pope more then God. Wee alſo hold that Prieſts ought to keepe Chaſtitie: but if a Prieſt, burning with incontinencie, haue made a vow that hee will neuer marry, ſuch a vow as being repugnant to the vow of Chaſtitie, and to the vow of obeying God, ought not to be kept. The commandement of God is laid downe in 1 Cor. 7. verſ. 9. If they cannot containe, let them marrie, for it is better to marry, then to burne. Whoſoeuer maketh a vow to obey God, he maketh a vow to keepe this commaundement, yea, had hee made no vow, yet is hee bound to keepe it. As for the vow of pouertie, we vnderſtand not how this word is meant: for the words haue at this day altered their ſignification: conſidering

that we finde none ſo well fed, or liuing ſo much at eaſe, or gathering more pence vnder the pretence of Pardons, then thoſe that make profeſſion of pouertie. The pouertie of the Ieſuits is more abundant then the riches of others: Pouertie, which in time paſſed was an affliction, is now a profeſſion. In like manner Ignorance, which in others was a Vice, is in the ignorant Friers a vertue: vvherefore theſe our Maſters muſt haue a new Calepine.
               
            
            
               
                  XI. DEMAND. That the ſtate of Marriage is more pleaſing to God, then ſingle life.
               ANSVVERE.
               THis is one of the greateſt ſlanders: For contrariwiſe, wee doe acknowledge, that a chaſte and continent ſingle life hath aduantages aboue marriage. Onely wee ſay, that the chaſte marriage is more acceptable to God, then incontinent and whoriſh ſingle life: wee referre men to Rome, and to the Cloyſters both of men and women,
                     Rom. 3. Bellarmin, lib 2 De Amiſſ. Gratia, cap. 18. §. dicet. Non peccat Magiſtratus ſi meretricibus certam locum vrbis incolendum attribuat, quamnis certo ſciat eo loco ipſas non bene vſuras. Poteſt enim permittere minus malum vt maiora impediantur. there to behold the fruits of Romiſh ſingle life: for we, who obſerue the rule of Gods word; namely, That we muſt not doe euill, that good may come of it. cannot in any wiſe approue the cauſe of Cardinall Bellarmine, who being not able to deny, that at Rome the moſt holy Father ſuffereth publike Stewes, for excuſe, ſaith, That it is lawfull for the Magiſtrate to permit a leſſe euill, to hinder a greater: and doth ſhew, that God may iuſtly ſuffer ſinne in the world by the example of the Magiſtrates, who doe graunt harlots a certaine part or quarter of the Citie to dwell in. Was it poſſible to finde a more honeſt compariſon, for to repreſent vnto vs the Iuſtice of God, then the example of Magiſtrates, eſtabliſhing the Stewes?
            
            
               
               
                  XII. DEMAND. That the Bookes of the Macchabees, of Eccleſiaſticus, of Wiſedome, of Toby, and of Baruch are Apocriphall.
               ANSVVERE.
               AFter tenne ſlanderous demaunds, hee hath bethought himſelfe to propound one that is not ſo: For indeede ſuch is our beleefe, grounded firſt vpon this principle of S. Paul, Rom. 3. That God is true: whereof it doth follow, that the Scripture diuinely inſpired ought to be free from vntruth: but in theſe Bookes we finde many vntruths, vvhich our Aduerſaries could neuer yet excuſe, and whereof there be ſundry Bookes written expreſſely: 2. Againe, theſe Bookes are not contayned in the originall of the old Teſtament, which is the Hebrew Bible. 3. Alſo, Ieſus Chriſt and the Apoſtles, vvho vpon all occaſions doe alleadge the paſſages of the olde Teſtament, did neuer name any of theſe Bookes, or out of them cite any one paſſage. 4. Particularly the Author of the Macchabees in his ſecond Chapter, verſ. 19. doth tell vs, that his intent was to abridge into one volume the fiue Bookes of Iaſon: how then can the abridgement of a prophane Booke be a Canonicall Booke? 5. And this, that himſelfe toward the end doth doubt whether hee hath ſpoken vvell, and as it appertaineth to the Hiſtorie: alſo ſoone after hee excuſeth the baſeneſſe of his ſtile: all vvhich, is farre from the dignitie of the ſpirit of God, vvho giueth eloquence enough to thoſe vvhom hee inſpireth, and reaping no profit by being beleeued of men, neuer excuſeth himſelfe vnto men.
            
            
               
                  XIII. DEMAND. That Ieſus Chriſt deſcended not into hell, to deliuer the

ſoules of the Fathers that attended his comming: or at the leaſt, that before the aſcention of Ieſus Chriſt, the ſoules of the Saints were receiued into heauen, not into any Limbus, or any other third place.
               ANSVVERE.
               VVE finde this euidently in the Scriptures: for wee finde that the Thiefe dyed fortie three dayes before the aſcenſion of Ieſus Chriſt; alſo, that vpon the day of his death, Ieſus Chriſt ſaide vnto him, This day thou ſhalt be with me in Paradiſe:
                     Bellarmine in his fourth Booke of Chriſt, Cap. 11. Alſo the Catechiſme of the laſt Councell of Trent, in the Article of the deſcention into Hell. Pag. 63. For we are not ſo ſubtill, as by this word Paradiſe to vnderſtand hell, or Limbus, as our aduerſaries doe: principally conſidering, that S. Paul, 2 Cor. 12. hauing ſaid in the ſecond verſe, that he was rauiſhed into the third Heauen, doth ſoone after call this third heauen Paradiſe. 2. Heerevnto how Moſes and Elias talked with Ieſus Chriſt vpon the Mountaine, Mat. 17.3. They were not therefore in ſome den vnder the ground. 3. Alſo, if the death of Ieſus Chriſt were of power ſufficient to deliuer the Fathers of the old Teſtament out of hell, why not out of Limbus, which is ſaide to be a more eaſie priſon? 4. If Ieſus Chriſt his riſing, drew theſe ſoules out of Limbus, yet brought them not into heauen before his aſcenſion, what became of them all the fortie daies betweene? 5. Finally, this ſo bold a fiction and hidden denne of ſoules, which is now ſaide to be vnprofitable, cannot we admit, becauſe wee finde no proofe thereof in the vvord of God.
            
            
               
                  XIIII. DEMAND. That we muſt not confeſſe our ſinnes to any other, but to God onely,
               ANSVVERE.
               HEre begin the ſlanders againe. We ſay not ſo. But that wee muſt confeſſe our faults one to another,

that is, reciprocally, as ſaith S. Iames.
                  Iames 5.16. Whereof it followeth, (forſooth) that if a woman proſtituting her ſelfe to her Curate, confeſſeth her ſinne vnto him, her Curate ought reciprocally to confeſſe his ſin to her, and ſo to obey the commandement of S. Iames; who in this place ſpeaketh not of the peoples confeſſing in the eare of the Prieſt, but of that confeſſion that euery man ought to make to his neighbour, after he hath offended him. And this is euident by that which he hath added. Confeſſe (ſaith he) your offences one to another, and pray ye one for another. For as we are not to pray for the Prieſts onely, but for euery one that ſtandeth in neede, ſo muſt we not confeſſe our ſelues to the Prieſts onely: but to euery one of the people whom we haue offended. Thus is the commandement of S. Iames equall as well for Prayer as for Confeſſion.
            
            
               
                  XV. DEMAND. That faith onely iuſtifieth.
               ANSVVERE.
               THis demand is fraudulent and doubtfull, or ambiguous. Firſt, he ought to haue expounded, whether he meaneth of iuſtification before God, or before men: for we doe not denie, but that in the ſight of men we are iuſtified by workes: but before God, hauing but two meanes to be iuſtified, eyther by our owne righteouſneſſe [which is Iuſtification by the workes of the Law] or by the righteouſnes of another (namely by the righteouſneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, which is by faith) we finde in the Apoſtle S. Paul. Epheſ. 2. verſ. 8. and 9. That we are ſaued by grace, through faith, not by workes: And Galat. 2. verſ. 9. That we are iuſtified by faith in Ieſus Chriſt, and not by the workes of the Law. Now that by the works of the 1 Law, he alſo vnderſtandeth the works

of the morrall Law, the whole courſe of the Epiſtle doth ſhew? for in the next Chapter he ſaith, Curſed is he that continueth not in the words of this Law: which is a paſſage alledged out of the end of the 27. Chapter of Deuteromie, wherein we haue no mention but of the tranſgreſſions againſt the Morrall Law. And in the fift Chapter he ſaith, that the whole Law is fulfilled in this onely word. Thou ſhalt loue thy neighbour as thy ſelfe. Some Ieſuites doe ſay, that faith iuſtifieth, becauſe it is the beginning of our regeneration: as if I ſhould ſay, that a mans knowledge conſiſteth in knowing an A. and a B. becauſe he beginneth by them. But S. Paul. Phil. 3.9. and in many other places, oppoſing the righteouſneſſe by the Law to the righteouſneſſe by faith, cutteth off this ſhift: for as the righteouſneſſe by the Law is the ſame which conſiſteth wholly in the obedience to the Law, euen ſo the righteouſneſſe by faith is the ſame which conſiſteth wholly in faith: otherwiſe there were no oppoſition. And in the fourth to the Romanes, he maintaineth, that Abraham and Dauid were not iuſtified by workes: yet he ſpeaketh of them, not as when they began, or before they began to be regenerate: but when they were well forward in godlineſſe: namely, when Abraham offered his Sonne: and when Dauid writ the 32. Pſalme: In which Pſalme Dauid (ſaith S. Paul) declareth, that mans beatitude conſiſteth in this, that God imputeth vnto him righteouſneſſe without workes. Faith therefore cannot be without workes, yet doth it iuſtifie alone, and without workes: as our eyes are not without our eares, yet doe they onely ſee, and that without any helpe of the eares.
            
            
               
                  XVI. DEMAND. That when the fault of ſinne is taken away, the puniſhment alſo is taken away.
               
                  ANSVVERE.
               THis is likewiſe ſlanderous: for we doe not ſay, that when God hath pardoned the fault, all puniſhment is neceſſarily taken away, but onely that puniſhment which is ſatisfactorie to Gods iuſtice. For there be puniſhments which ſerue to amend man, yet not to pay God: to correct our vniuſtice, yet not to ſatisfie Gods iuſtice: and theſe are Exerciſes and Trials, not Payments, which cannot be made after the fault is forgiuen: and this do we proue: 1. Becauſe God is no mocker, neither doth he contradict himſelfe. But it is a mockery to forgiue a man his ſin, and not the puniſhment of his ſinne: to tell him, I forgiue thee thy debt, not the payment of thy debt: our ſins are debts, as it is ſaid in the Lords Prayer, the payment whereof is puniſhment. 2. Againe, becauſe Ieſus Chriſt paid not otherwiſe for our fault, but by bearing the paine, he therefore payed for the paine, and there was but one payment for both: It is therefore the forging of a new Goſpell, to imagine that he paid more for the one then for the other: for if he hath fully paid for the fault, then alſo for the paine. And if he hath fully paid for our paine, the ſame was for our acquittall, and to diſcharge vs. 3. Likewiſe becauſe God is iuſt, it were iniuſtice to puniſh a man with ſatisfactory paine, that hath no fault, & ſo conſequently is not faulty. The fault therefore being taken away, the paine is alſo taken away.
            
            
               
                  XVII. DEMAND. That God created not all men to a like eſtate, but that he created ſome to be ſaued, & ſome to be perpetually damned.
               ANSVVERE.
               THeſe words thus rawly propounded, may be miſtaken, and otherwiſe vnderſtood then we do beleeue.

In this ſenſe they be true, That God hath predeſtinate ſome to ſaluation in his ſonne: and others he hath preordained to damnation for their ſinnes, which he fore-ſaw: for God damneth none but for their ſinnes, neither doth he delight in the deſtruction of his creature: as alſo he hath not choſen ſome rather then other ſome in regard they are better; but to the end to make them better: neither doth he fore-ſee any other goodneſſe in that creature, then the ſame which he will infuſe into him. For he is the ſpring of all the goodneſſe that is in the creature. The Apoſtle S. Paul. is expreſly of our minds in the ninth of his Epiſtle to the Romanes, and in the firſt to the Epheſians, verſ, 4. as alſo the Ieſuites do confeſſe the ſame hauing of late herein ranked themſelues with vs,Non elegit Deus homines quia vidit ſe eligendum ab eis, ipſo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      boni operis fructum allaturos, & in bono perſeueraturos, ſed elegit vt faciat bene operantes & in bono perſeuerantes. as being forced by the truth. For whereas the common opinion of others is, That God elected to ſaluation theſe whom he fore-ſaw ſhould be good men, and that ſhould doe good workes, ſo to merit ſaluation, Bellarmine on the other ſide diſputeth tooth & naile againſt it in the tenth Chapter of the ſecond Booke of Grace and Free-will, ſaying, God choſe not men becauſe they ſhould bring forth the fruits of good workes, and perſeuere in good workes: but he choſe them to make them doers of good works, and perſeuerers in goodneſſe: & toward the end of the 12. Chap. he ſaith thus. If God predeſtinated men, becauſe he foreſaw that they ſhould make good vſe of free-will, why did he not predeſtinate the Tyrians and Sidonians, of whom Ieſus Chriſt ſpake, Matth. 11. and of whom the truth doth teſtifie, that they could well haue vſed their free-will, and yet ſaith he, Out of all queſtion they were neuer predeſtinate, but with the other veſſels of diſhonour, left in the corrupted lumpe. Wherein he followeth Thomas and S. Auguſtine, who were ſo inſtructed by the word of God.
            
            
               
               
                  XVIII. DEMAND. That euery one in his owne particular hath not his Angell-Guardian.
               ANSVVERE.
               YEt one ſlander more. For we affirme not any thing heerein. True it is, that as concerning the faithfull, wee ſay with Dauid, Pſal. 34. The Angell of the Lord taryeth round about them that feare him: And with the Apoſtle, Heb. 1. The Angels are miniſtring Spirits, ſent for their ſakes that ſhall be heyres of ſaluation. And Ieſus Chriſt, Matth. 18. ſaith, that the Angels of little children doe behold the face of the heauenly Father. But that euery one (that is to ſay, both the good and the bad) as the Queſtionarie ſaith, hath an Angell-Guardian, wee finde not in the Scripture. Conſidering withall, that wee ſee ſome Ieſuites aske counſell of the Diuels concerning things to come, and concerning Queſtions of Diuinitie, which ſurely they would neuer doe, if they had any one good Angell Guardian, for they would rather aske counſell of him.
            
            
               
                  XIX. DEMAND. That it is not lawfull to ſalute or to inuocate or craue ayde of this Angel, or any other eyther in generall or in particular.
               ANSVVERE.
               TO ſalute an Angell or a Saint is a mocking of them: to inuocate a Saint or an Angell is an offence to God. The reaſons are euident. To ſalute one, is to ſay, God keepe you, or Good-Morrow: alſo, to ſalute, is to deſire ones health, which is a kinde of prayer that wee make for him. But our Aduerſaries doe acknowledge it to be a wrong to a Saint to pray

for him. And it is a groſſe abuſe, euen at this day, to ſay to the Virgin Mary, Aue Maria, that is to ſay, God keepe thee Mary: this is no inuocating or calling vpon, but a praying for her. As for inuocating an Angell or Saint, it is repugnant to the rules and examples of Gods word. 1. Saint Paul ſaith, that wee cannot inuocate any, but him in whom we beleeue: How ſhall they (ſaith hee) inuocate him on whom they haue not beleeued? Rom. 10. But we are taught both by the Scripture, and by our Beliefe, to ſay, I beleeue in God the Father, and in Ieſus Chriſt, and in the holy Ghoſt: but in no wiſe, I beleeue in any Creature. 2. It is alſo requiſite, that hee, whom a man doth inuocate, ſhould know his heart that doth inuocate him, and be aſſured whether hee be an Hypocrite.2 Chron. 6.30. But Gods word doth teſtifie, that God onely knoweth the hearts of men. 3. Neither can we haue any better Aduocate then Ieſus Chriſt, who (ſaith Saint Paul, 1 Tim. 2.) is our onely Mediator. 4. Sith alſo it is God himſelfe that inſpireth our hearts to pray, and ſtirreth vp in vs thoſe groning ſighes that S. Paul, Rom. 8.25. ſpeaketh of, what neede we any interceſſors to commend vnto God that prayer which God himſelfe hath inſpired into vs? or to cauſe the voyce of the Spirit of God to be acceptable vnto God? 5. Neyther do we finde any example or commandement to inuocate Creatures, throughout all the holy Scripture: but one expreſſe example wee haue of an Angell reiecting the adoration of S. Iohn, who did not adore this Angell, as thinking him to be God: for in the Reuelat. cap. 21. v. 9. he ſaith directly, that it was one of the ſeauen Angels that had the ſeauen Vials, who ſoone after forbad S. Iohn, when he would haue worſhipped him, cap. 21. v. 9. 6. To be briefe, our Aduerſaries are in this cauſe ſo perplexed that they begin openly to teach that inuocation of Saints is not neceſſarie, and that wee may be

ſaued without it, notwithſtanding, Pope Innocent the third affirmeth the contrarie in his third Booke of the Myſteries of the Maſſe, cap. 9.Quorum meritis precibuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      rogamus. 
                  Neceſſarium nobis eſt in via Sanctorum ſuffragium, &c. And that the Maſſe is not content with their interceſſions onely, but alſo craueth of God ſaluation through their merits, euen ſo farre forth that Bellarmine ſaith,
                     Lib. 1. Indulgen. cap. 4. in the end of the Chapter. that they be in ſome ſort our Redeemers. And indeede it is holden, that they pay for vs, ſith the Pope doth conuert their ſupererogatory ſatisfactions into payments for other men. All this is taken out of the vnwritten word.
            
            
               
                  XX. DEMAND. That God permitteth not ſinne, but willeth it, as Caluin ſaith in his Inſtitutions, lib. 1. cap. 17. §. 8. & cap. 18. §. 1. &. 2.
               
               ANSVVERE.
               VVEE heare that our Aduerſaries haue printed Caluins Inſtitutions, wherein they haue altered whatſoeuer they liſt: if it be ſo, it muſt needes be that the author of theſe queſtions hath thereout taken all that he imputeth vnto Caluin. For ſo farre is Caluin in the eight Section of the ſeauenteenth Chapter of his firſt Booke, from ſaying that God willeth ſinne, that euen throughout all that Section there is not one word of ſinne; neyther doth hee there ſpeake of the euill of the fault, but of the euill of the puniſhment, and afflictions. As concerning the firſt and ſecond Sect. of the 18. Chapter, the Author taketh this word (to will) in a contrarie ſence. For it doth not import that God is the author of ſinne, but it onely excludeth the naked and idle permiſſion: Becauſe the wicked, doing euill, (as Iudas and the Iewes, when they betrayed and crucified Ieſus Chriſt) doe it voluntarily and of their owne motion:

and yet neuertheleſſe for all this doe no more but what the counſell of God had before determined ſhould be done, as ſaith S. Peter, Acts 4.8. Thus you ſee in one Demand two ſlanders, here followes the third: that is, that this Demand preſuppoſeth that wee are grounded vpon Caluin, or bound to defend him, whom neuertheleſſe wee knew to be a man and ſubiect to errour, who alſo doth ſtill referre vs to the Scriptures, to the end wee ſhould not build vpon him. The ſlaunders of our Aduerſaries doe more binde vs to reade him then his owne authoritie. But our Aduerſaries doe not rancke the Popes in this degree: for, they hold that the Popes cannot erre in Faith, and therefore they are bound to defend all their ſayings: as the ſaying of Pope Clement, 1. who in Cauſa 12. Can. Dilectiſsimis, approueth the opinion of Plato, who ſaith that Goods and Wiues ought to be common: and calleth him the wiſeſt of all the Greekes. Alſo, the opinion of Iohn the 24. who taught, that the ſoules of men doe dye with the ſoules of beaſts: and for the ſame was condemned in the Councell of Conſtance, Seſſ. 11. Alſo the Canon Chriſtiano, in the 34. Diſtinction, which ſaith, that A Chriſtian ought to haue but one Wife, and for want of a Wife a Concubine. Alſo the Canon Hac ratione, &c. Apoſtoli praeceperant ſecundas adire nuptias propter incontinentiam hominum. Nam ſecundam quidem accipere, ſecundum praeceptum Apoſtoli licitum eſt, ſecundum autem rationem veritatis verè fornicatio eſt, &c. 
                  Hacratione, cauſ. 31. qu. 1. which ſaith that the Apoſtle S. Paul ſpake againſt both truth and reaſon. In this Demand there is yet a fourth tricke of bad meaning. Hee requireth a proofe of that which Caluin ſaith in ſuch and ſuch places, and yet in the ſame places he might haue found the proofes added by Caluin himſelfe: would hee wiſh vs to copie him out the Chapters? or can he better reade our writing then the Impreſſion of the Inſtitution? Let him then ſeeke the places if he liſt: and if they content him not, let him refute them.
            
            
               
               
                  XXI. DEMAND. That we muſt vſe no Lights in the Church, neither any Eccleſiaſticall Ornaments, diſtinguiſhed from the ſeculers.
               ANSVVERE.
               VVHo euer ſaid ſo? Doe not wee our ſelues light vp Candles in our Churches, when we cannot well ſee? Haue not the Paſtors habits conuenient for the Action or ſeruice, in the Churches, where they may goe on foot to
                     For the places oft-times appointed to the Proteſtants for exerciſe of their religion are ſome miles diſtant from their habitation.
                     Cir. Offic. 3. Omnibus viris ſtatuae & ad eas Thus & Cerei. Ouid. Ep. Medeae. Ardet vt ad magnos pinaea taeda deos.
                     
                     
                        Cereos non clara luce accendimus, vt tu fruſtra calumniaris ſed vt tenebras noctis hoc ſolatio temperemus.
                     
                   ſerue God without riding on horſeback? But to aske whether we may light vp Candles at high-noone, is a queſtion out of the compaſſe of Diuinitie, and may be decided by common ſenſe. For, it is as much as to aske whether we muſt walke through the towne with Lanthorne at high-noone, or whether we ſhall need a combe to a bald head. We know that the Gentiles vſed Tapers in broad day-light, and lighted them about the Images of their Gods and great Perſonages: but we are not their Diſciples, And vpon this quarrell doth S. Hierome confute the ſlander of Nigilantius who complained that we light vp Candles in the broad day-light. We light not vp (ſaith S. Hierome) any Tapers in broad day-light, as thou vainely doſt ſlander vs: but onely by this remedie to qualifie the darkeneſſe of the night.
               
            
            
               
                  XXII. DEMAND. That a Biſhop is inferiour to a Prieſt, and that a Deacon is aboue a Prieſt; that is to ſay, that the Superintendent is no more then an Elder in the Church, and that the Miniſter is aboue the Elder.
               ANSVVERE.
               A Slander. We ſay not that the Biſhop is inferiour to the Prieſt: but onely that in the new Teſtament

the ſame perſons are called Prieſts and Biſhops. 1. Saint Paul to the Phil. 1. v. 1. ſalutes the Biſhops and Deacons of Philippi, omitting the Prieſts, and naming many Biſhops in a heathen towne, where the Church was ſmall, it is euident that he tearmeth the Prieſts, Biſhops. 2. In the 20. of the Acts. verſ. 17. the ſame Apoſtle aſſembleth the Prieſts and Elders of the Church of Epheſus: but in the 28. verſe he tearmeth the ſelfe-ſame perſons Biſhops. 3. Likewiſe, in the Epiſtle to Titus, cap. 2. ver. 5. he ſaith, I haue left thee in Creete, that thou mighteſt eſtabliſh 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Prieſts or elders from towne to town; namely, if there be any that is vnreproueable, the Husband of one Wife onely, hauing faithfull Children, not accuſed of diſſoluteneſſe: For, a Biſhop muſt be vnreproueable, &c. Who perceiueth not, that here he nameth him a Biſhop whom a little before he called a Prieſt?
               Now the reaſon why Presbyters or Prieſts are called Biſhops or ouer-ſeers, is, becauſe the power of Prieſtly Order. 1. Of diſpenſing the Word and the Sacraments (wherein that ouer-ſight of theirs eſſentially conſiſts) is equally in Presbyters or Prieſts, and in thoſe whom now by an excellency wee call Biſhops or Ouer-ſeers: I meane Ouer-ſeers not onely for their power of diſpenſing the Word and Sacraments, but alſo for their power of Iuriſdiction and gouernment in their owne Churches.
               For, the Apoſtles ordayning many coaſſiſtant Preſbyters or Prieſts, for the edification of the newly conuerted Cities,
                     
                        V. Hier. ad Euag.
                     Cyprian. lib. 1. Epiſt. 3.
                     Hier. aduerſus Lucifer.
                   with their neighbouring places (which they called Churches) for the auoyding of Schiſme and confuſion, and preſeruation of vnitie, peace and order eſtabliſhed a Fatherly preheminence or prioritie (not a Princely as Bellarmine contends) of one Presbyter aboue the reſt, not in the power of order, wherein I ſaid they were all equall: but in the execution or exerciſe

of diuers particulars that belong to that power; as Dedicating of Churches, Confirming of the Baptiſed, but eſpecially ordination of Miniſters, which things onely in caſe of neceſſitie (that is, in defect of Orthodoxe Biſhops) were and might be performed by Preſbyters, as appeares they were by Saint Ambroſe, on the fourth to the Epheſians. Whereas otherwiſe in the preſence of Orthodoxe Biſhops, the Presbyters were not to meddle with theſe things which were reſerued onely to the Biſhops. Without whoſe leaue (ſay Ignatius and Tertullian) they may neyther preach, baptiſe,Ignat. ad Magneſia. Epiſt. 3. Tert. de Baptiſmo.
                   miniſter Sacraments, or doe any miniſteriall acts. And as one Presbyter euer from the time of the Apoſtles, had this eminent and Biſhoply power aboue the reſt, in the execution or exerciſe of miniſteriall acts, leaſt,
                     Aduerſus Luciferianos. (as Ierome ſpeakes) there ſhould be as many Schiſmes as there are Prieſts: ſo for the auoyding of like Schiſme and Confuſion, Biſhops haue euer had a preeminent power of Iuriſdiction and gouernment in their owne Churches, by Eccleſiaſticall cenſures.
               As for the word Deacon, the Scriptures apply it to euery Eccleſiaſticall Function, yea, euen to Ieſus Chriſt, vvho was often called 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, Deacon, or Miniſter. The Apoſtle to the Hebrewes, cap. 8. v. 2. tearmeth him, The Miniſter of the Santuary. And Rom. 15. v. 8. The Miniſter of Circumciſion. And in the ſame Chapter, S.
                     t Paul calleth himſelfe The Miniſter of Ieſus Chriſt, Likewiſe to the Colloſsians foure times. Thus doth he exhort Timothy to be a good Miniſter of Ieſus Chriſt, 1 Tim. 4.6. yet in the Subſcription of the ſecond Epiſtle he is called a Biſhop. Thus you ſee that in the phraſe of Scriptures, the ſame perſons are called ſometimes Prieſts or Presbyters, ſometimes Biſhops or Ouerſeers, ſometimes Deacons or Miniſters.
               Though wee will not denie, that the vvord Deacon
                  
in a more reſtrained acception, was vſually applied to him that adminiſtred the goods or mony of the poore, and the Church-Treaſure, euen in the Apoſtles time, to eaſe them of that care. But when the Treaſurie of the Church increaſing, was committed to certaine Stewards, and the poore otherwiſe prouided for, they were more ſpecially vſed for the aſſiſting of the Biſhop and Presbyters in things pertayning to Gods Seruice and worſhip.Tert. lib. de Baptiſmo. Cyp. l. 3. ep. 17. Greg. Epiſt. lib. 4. cap. 88. Cyp. ſerm. 6. de Lapſis.
                   Wherupon Tertullian witneſſeth, that in ſome caſes they might baptiſe: Saint Cyprian, that they might reconcile penitents: Saint Gregory, that they might preach: and againe Saint Cyprian, that they aſſiſted the Biſhop and Presbyters in miniſtring the Sacrament of the Lords body and bloud, and miniſtred the Cup. Out of the ſocietie and companie of Deacons in each Church, there was one anciently choſen, ſaith Saint Hierome,
                  
                     Ad Ruſticum Nouachum. who was not onely to performe the things pertayning to the Deacons Office, but alſo to preſcribe vnto others what they ſhould doe: and ſuch were called Arch-deacons.Concil. Carth. 4. Can. 37.39.
                   Theſe in proceſſe of time (notwithſtanding all Canons to the contrary, and the violent oppoſition of Saint Hierome and other worthies of thoſe times) were lifted vp,
                     Ad Euagrium. not onely aboue Presbyters, but Arch-presbiters alſo, for theſe reaſons.
               
                  
                     Ad Euagrium.1 Becauſe the number of Presbyters (as Hierome notes) made them leſſe eſteemed, and the fewneſſe of Deacons made them the more honoured.
               2 Becauſe they were buſied in the Church-Treaſure, and in money matters, which are vſually more regarded imployments.
               3 Becauſe being Miniſters vnto the Biſhop, they were vſed by him for the viewing of ſuch parts of his Dioceſſe, as he could not conueniently come vnto himſelfe; the diſpatch of things for him; and in the end, for reformation of the leſſer and ſmaller faults, which vpon

ſuch view they ſhould finde. Whereupon at laſt, they obtayned a kinde of Iuriſdiction, and power of correction by preſcription and cuſtome. But this maketh nothing againſt the Arch-deacons in the Church of England, who vnder that name exerciſe Iuriſdiction. For, by the Canons of our Church they are Presbiters, choſen to aſſiſt the Biſhop in his gouernment, and not meere Deacons, as ſometimes they were.
            
            
               
                  XXIII. DEMAND. That the Scripture is eaſie to be vnderſtood, and that the vnderſtanding thereof is granted to all. They be the words of Caluin in the 3. of his Inſtitutions, Cap. 21. §. 5.
               
               ANSVVERE.
               IN this paſſage of Caluin, wee finde not one word of this matter: neyther doth any man deny, but that in the holy Scripture there be darke places. Onely wee ſay, that all that is in the Scripture is not obſcure, and that, that which is apparant, is ſufficient to ſaluation. The tenne Commandements, and the Articles of faith, contained in the Creed, are there plainely layd downe and expounded. The Fathers in the olde Teſtament knew not ſo much, and yet were ſaued: beſides, that there are infinite more matters cleare in the Scriptures: If therefore Caluin in any place haue ſo ſayd, he meaneth that in the holy Scripture euery man may vnderſtand enough for his ſaluation. But hee neuer termed the Scripture Theramenes buskin, A Sword for all hands: a Forreſt of Forragers: hee neuer ſaid that it maketh a man an Atheiſt, and that hee that beleeueth becauſe he hath read the Scripture, is no Chriſtian, as ſaith 
                     Charron in his 3. truth, cap. 4. Thou beleeueſt that thou readeſt, then art thou not a Chriſtian, read the 3. and 4. Chapter. 
                  Charron. Neither did he call it, as 
                     Bellarmin. lib. de verba Dei non ſcripto. cap. 12. §. Dico ſecundo Scripturam, & ſi non eſt facta precipue vt ſit Regula fidei eſſe tamen Regulam fidei, non totalem ſed partialem. 
                  Bellarmine doth, a piece of a Rule; neyther doth hee ſay: That the holy Scripture (ſaying of it ſelfe that it is Diuine) cannot

herein be certainely beleeued, if we haue no other teſtimonie: for (ſaith he) Mahumets Alcaron ſaith as much of Mahomet, in whom we doe not beleeue, lib. 4. De verbo Dei non ſcripto, cap. 4. §. Quarto neceſſe.
               
            
            
               
                  XXIIII. DEMAND. That all ſinnes are mortall.
               ANSVVERE.
               VVEE doe not ſimply ſay ſo: But our Aduerſaries making two ſorts of ſinne, ſome mortall, and ſome veniall, that is to ſay, pardonable: 1. Wee ſay, that to the faithfull repenting him of his ſinnes, all ſinnes are veniall and pardonable: alſo that the ſame ſinnes which our aduerſaries doe hold to be mortall, as Murther and Whoredome, doe grow pardonable in the faithfull that doe amend, as appeareth by the example of Dauid. But as for the wicked and impenitent, in them all ſinnes are mortall: that is to ſay, in that they abide in them to death, and that God puniſheth them all by death euerlaſting. 2. We alſo ſay, that it is raſhneſſe in our Aduerſaries to define that there be but ſeauen mortall ſinnes, and that all other ſinnes are not ſo: for it belongeth to the Iudge, not to the Offender, to iudge what puniſhment euery ſinne doth deſerue: but we are all guiltie, and haue neede of remiſſion in the ſight of God. 3. But among their mortall ſinnes, why haue they not put Herefie, Atheiſme, Superſtition, Slandering, &c. Be theſe ſmall ſinnes, and pardonable in the iudgement of his Holineſſe? 4. To call a mans brother Foole, or to ſpeake euill of him, are they mortall ſinnes in the iudgement of the Church of Rome? No, ſay they: yet doth Ieſus Chriſt in the fift of Matthew, ſay, That whoſoeuer doth call his brother Foole, is in danger of hell fire: And S. Paul, 1 Cor. 6. verſ. 10. ſaith,

                  That ſlanderers ſhall not enter into the Kingdome of heauen.
               
            
            
               
                  XXV. DEMAND. That with the grace of God we can merit nothing.
               ANSVVERE.
               THis Demand anſwereth it ſelfe: For whatſoeuer is of Grace, is not of merit, ſaith S. Paul, Rom. 11. verſ. 6. If it be of grace, it is no more of workes, or elſe were grace no more grace. To merit by grace, agreeth as well as to be frozen with heat: or to be wet with drougth. 1. For how may we merit by grace, conſidering that it is grace that keepeth our good workes from being meritorious? that is to ſay, that they proceede from the grace of God. 2. Againe: Saluation is a gift, Rom. 6. verſ. 23. Epheſ. 2. verſ. 8. and 9. Then is it not obtained by merits. 3. And Saluation is an Inheritance belonging to the faithfull, for as much as they be the children of God, as ſaith Saint Paul, Rom. 8. The ſpirit of God beareth witneſſe with our ſpirit, that we are the children of God: and if we be children, ſaith he, then are we heyres:
                     Here vpon let vs heare Bellarmines Confeſsion, lib. 2 de Gratia, cap. 14. Deus conſtituit in predeſtinatione regnum dare certis hominibus quos abſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vlla operum praeuiſione dilexit: tamen ſimul conſtituit vt quo ad executionem via perueniendi ad Regnum eſſent bona opera. But no man by merits purchaſeth that inheritance which belongeth vnto him as a Sonne. Moreouer, Ieſus Chriſt ſaith, Luke 17.10. When we haue done all that wee are commanded, yet are we vnprofitable ſeruants: but what can be the merit of an vnprofitable ſeruant? Admit alſo that our good workes were as perfect, as they be mixed with infirmitie, and that wee were more righteous then the Angels: vvhat goodneſſe vvere there in all this, vvhich alſo were not the gift of God? and what merit can there be in offering to God that which is alreadie his, and from him? Wee confeſſe that GOD rewardeth good workes: but there be rewards that are not deſerued. The Father will giue his Sonne a new coat, becauſe he made an A. or a B. yet not in regard

of his Sonnes merit, but of his owne promiſe, or for that he is his Sonne. But by the way we are to note, that this inquirer doth diſguiſe our opinion, and altereth the Controuerſie: for our difference is not, whether it be poſſible to merit with the grace of God; but whether the holy Scripture doth teach vs that we muſt merit, or purchaſe ſaluation by our merits.
            
            
               
                  XXVI. DEMAND. That it is vnpoſsible to keepe Gods Commandements, euen with his grace.
               ANSVVERE.
               THis muſt be asked of them that beleeue it. Wee doubt not but God can giue ſome man grace to keepe his Commandements.
            
            
               
                  XXVII. DEMAND. That God will giue no recompence to good workes, which is all one, as to ſay, that there be no meritorious workes.
               ANSVVERE.
               A Slander. Wee hould that God doth recompence good workes: but that heereof it doth not enſue that good workes are meritorious, and betweene theſe two there is a great deale of difference. This haue wee ſhewed in the anſwere to the 25. demand.
            
            
               
                  XXVIII. DEMAND. That there is no diſtinction of beatitude betweene the bleſſed, and that they are all equall in glory.
               ANSVVERE.
               THe Inquiſitor is much deceiued, if hee thinke vs to be of that beliefe. In theſe curious things we ſuffer

euery man to thinke what he liſt. It is the propertie of the Popes and Church of Rome, not onely to place in the ranke of Saints whom they pleaſe, after the Imitation of the Pagan Apotheoſis, or Deifying of the Roman Senate, but alſo to aſcribe to euery one his office: to one the charge of horſes: to another the charge ouer women with childe, to another ouer France, to another ouer Spayne, &c. and ouer them all to appoint the Queene of heauen, with extreame iniurie to the holy and bleſſed Virgin, who taketh no pleaſure in that honour wherein God is diſhonoured, whoſe Coeleſtiall Royaltie is incommunicable with the creature. Alſo that men ſhould attribute titles & dignities celeſtiall vnto Saints, without any teſtimonie of Gods word, is a matter no leſſe ridiculous and raſh, then if the Ants or Piſmires ſhould hold a counſell to conſerue the offices of the Crowne of France, and the charge of the priuie Councell to ſuch men as they liſt.
            
            
               
                  XXIX. DEMAND. That we muſt not vſe the like Impoſition of hands, as the Apoſtles vſed ouer thoſe of Samaria and of Epheſus. Act. 8. verſ. 14. and cap. 19. verſ. 5. And that the ſaid Confirmation was not one of the Articles of the Apoſtles Catechiſme, mentioned in the Epiſtle to the Hebrewes. cap 6. verſ. 2.
               
               ANSVVERE.
               HEre is a double ſlander, and an impoſture. For 1. where you ſay, we denie you may vſe the like Impoſition of hands, as did the Apoſtles; we denie not but you may if you can beſtow the like miraculous gifts as did the Apoſtles vpon the Samaritanes, by laying on of your hands. Secondly, you imply that wee denie all Impoſition of hands: whereas we will grant you the like forme (though not altogether the like effect)

of impoſition of hands, as was vſed by the Apoſtles. For as after Philip had catechiſed the Samaritanes, and taught them the chiefe points of Chriſtian Doctrine the Apoſtles came and prayed for them, and laid their hands on them: So after children or youth in their owne perſons, haue made publike and particular profeſſion of the ſumme of their faith, or Chriſtian Catechiſme (which others in their name did ſummarily profeſſe for them, at their Baptiſme) we denie not but Prayer may be made for them, that ſtrength & increaſe of the Grace of the holy Ghoſt may be giuen them, to liue and die in that Chriſtian faith, and newneſſe of life, whereof they haue made profeſſion. And that to thoſe prayers may well be added that ancient and Apoſtolike ceremonie of Impoſition of hands, betokening our reſtrained deſires to the parties whom we preſent to God by our prayers.
               But herein is a notable Impoſture: that you would perſwade vs, that the Confirmation or Impoſition of hands,
                     Bell. lib de Confirmatione cap. 8 & 13.
                     See the Rhemiſts on Act. 8 Sect. 6.
                   vſed by your Popiſh Biſhops, is like that of the Apoſtles. Did they conſecrate Oyle mixed with Balme? did they croſſe it, breath vpon it, ſalute it, Aue ſanctum Chyſma. Haile, holy Chryſme? Did they annoynt the Samaritanes with ſuch Oyle? Make croſſes in their fore-heads, giue them kiſſes, and claps in their eares, binde their fore-heads with Fillets, and enioyne them not to waſh their faces or heads for ſeauen daies, as the Popiſh Biſhops doe, in their Confirmation? which being more like a May-game (as they vſe it) then a Sacrament (as they make it,
                     Nichol. Papa. Diſt. 4. de Conſecrat. Can. A quodam Indao. though Chriſt did not inſtitute it) yet doth the Church of Rome hold it, in greater eſtimation then Baptiſme. The adminiſtration whereof they permit to Prieſts, to Women, yea, euen to the Iewes and Heathen: alwayes reſeruing to the Biſhops only the power of Confirmation.Can. de his. Pope Melchiades in the ſecond

diſtinction of conſecration, comparing Baptiſme with Confirmation, ſaith that the Sacrament or Confirmation ought to be held in greater honour. And Bellarmine in his Booke of Confirmation, and eleauenth Chapter, ſaith it is great power to ſtrengthen the ſoule againſt the Diuell.
               It would make a man laugh to heare this Inquiſitour enquire whether in the Apoſtles Catechiſme there was euer an Article of Confirmation. For it were his part to proue that there was one, not ours to proue there was none. It is his part that affirmeth, to proue. The rather for that, we dare not aſſuredly auow, that the Apoſtles had any ordinarie forme of Catechiſme. And the ſixt Chapter to the Hebrewes, in the iudgement of our learned Diuines,Caluin, Beza, Piſcator. doth proue Confirmation to haue beene vſed by the Apoſtles, or by their approbation, yet doth it not proue Confirmation was an Article of their Catechiſme.
            
            
               
                  XXX. DEMAND. That the precept of annoynting the ſicke with Oyle, laid downe in the 5. of Iames. verſ. 14. ought not to be put in practiſe in the Church, albeit it was vſed by the Apoſtles. Mark. 6. ver. 13.
               
               ANSVVERE.
               THe Inquiſitour alledging S. Mark. 6. verſ. 13. anſwereth himſelfe, for S. Marke ſaith, They caſt out many Diuels, and annoynted many that were ſicke with Oyle, and healed them. The Apoſtles and Diſciples were therefore commanded to annoynt the ſicke, to heale them: If any one hath this miraculous gift of healing, we doe very well like that he ſhould annoynt the ſicke: But at theſe dayes they annoynt thoſe whoſe diſeaſes are deſperate, and the miracles are all reduced

to one onely kinde, which is the coniuring of Diuels: Thus of a Medicine it is made a Sacrament: and a miraculous Vnction which healed the bodies, is now growne to be an Vnction vnprofitable both to the bodie, and to the ſoule. After the loſſe of the vertue, they labour to preſerue the Ceremony, and yet ſo altered, and diuerſly changed by an artificiall kinde of trouble that it will aske at the leaſt a good halfe houres worke to conferre extreame Vnction.
            
            
               
                  XXXI. DEMAND. That Prayer for the dead was not in vſe, euen in the time of the Machabees.
               
               ANSVVERE.
               VVHether it were then vſed or not vſed, it importeth not much: For we liue not now by the example of the Machabees, but by the rule of the Goſpell, we therefore affirme nothing vpon the point. For the Author of the Booke of the Machabees, hauing reported many things contrary to the truth of the Storie, might well doe the like in the 12. Chapter of the ſecond booke thereof. The principall matter is, that he there ſpeaketh of Prayer for the dead, which nothing pertayneth to the controuerſie of theſe dayes: for the Author ſaith, that Iudas in that prayer remembred the reſurrection, and that otherwiſe it had beene a folly to pray for the dead. Where ſhall we finde that Maſſe-Prieſt, who if you demand of him wherfore he recommendeth the deceaſed in his memento, will anſwere, that it is to the end he may riſe againe in glory, or that he regardeth the reſurrection?
            
            
               XXXII. DEMAND. That S. Peter was not the firſt of the Apoſtles, albeit

S. Matth. cap. 10. v. 2. ſaith, The names of the twelue Apoſtles are theſe: The firſt, Simon, called Peter, &c.
               
               ANSVVERE.
               THis likewiſe is calumnious as well as the former, and almoſt all the reſt. Wee deny not but Saint Peter was the firſt among the Apoſtles; for it is of no importance. He might be the firſt in age, in eloquence, in vertues, or miracles, or in knowledge. All this is poſſible, without hauing power or iuriſdiction ouer the reſt of the Apoſtles, which is that kinde of Primacie for the which they plead ſo hard in theſe dayes.
               1 For had the Apoſtles knowne that Ieſus Chriſt had giuen the ſuperioritie and command ouer the reſt vnto Saint Peter, they would neuer after haue contended among themſelues about Primacie, and that euen the day before the death of IESVS CHRIST, Luke 22.24.
               2 And S. Iohn, cap. 1. and S. Paul, Gal. 2. would neuer haue named Saint Peter after Saint Andrew and Saint Iames.
               
               3 Neyther would the Apoſtles haue vnder-taken to haue ſent S. Peter to Samaria, Acts 8.15.
               4 Neyther would S. Paul haue ſaid of himſelfe that in nothing hee was inferiour to the moſt excellent Apoſtles, 2 Cor. 11. & 12. vvhere hee ſaith, IN NOTHING, he taketh away all exception.
               5 Beſides that, ſay that S. Peter had ſuperioritie of Iuriſdiction ouer the other Apoſtles, doth it therefore enſue that the ſame ought to be perpetuall in the Church? allſo, that if one man haue commaund ouer a few, that therefore one man muſt gouerne all the Church throughout the world?
               6 Doth it alſo follow that the Biſhop or Rome ſhould be his Succeſſor in this Primacie? But, ſay theſe

Doctors, Saint Peter dyed at Rome. Admit it were ſo: but Ieſus Chriſt dyed at Hieruſalem, ſhall the death of Saint Peter at Rome be of greater force to deriue the Primacie to the Biſhop of Rome, then the death of Ieſus Chriſt in Hieruſalem, to deriue the Primacie to the Biſhop of Hieruſalem?
               7 Againe, admit the Pope were Saint Peters Succeſſor; doth it follow that hee muſt ſucceede him in his Apoſtleſhip: for others will ſay that he is not his Succeſſor but in qualitie of Biſhop of Rome: and thereof there is farre greater appearance: for, likewiſe the Biſhop of Hieruſalem was Succeſſor to Saint Iames; and the Biſhop of Epheſus ſucceeded Saint Iohn and Saint Paul, in that theſe Apoſtles were Biſhops of Hieruſalem and Epheſus; yet were they not their Succeſſors in the function of Apoſtles.
               8 Finally, were the Pope Saint Peters Succeſſor in qualitie of an Apoſtle, and of the head of the Church; had he not long ſince loſt this Succeſſion by reuerſing the doctrine of Saint Peter, and liuing in the eſtate of a temporall Monarch, not of a ſpirituall Paſtor? If then he be Succeſſour to Saint Peter, it is in like manner as ſickneſſe ſucceedeth health, and as an vſurper ſucceedeth in place of him whom he hath expelled. To what purpoſe are the keyes, which ſerue onely but to ſhut vp heauen? or Simons Barke, which hath no other vſe then to trafficke withall? or his Net, which at this day is imployed onely in fiſhing for Dukedomes, and to entangle Common-wealths?
            
         
         
            
            THREE SCORE and foure Demands, propounded to the Ieſuites of the COVRT.
            1. WHether the Doctrine of the Goſpell be ſufficient to ſaluation: alſo whether the Goſpell be wholy contayned in the new Teſtament: or if there be but a part thereof, where we may finde the reſt.
            2 When the The Prohibition is to be ſeene in the Index of Bookes prohibited by the Councell of Trent, printed at Cologne by Goſuin Cholin, by authoritie from Pius the 4 and Clement the 8. Prohibition, in theſe dayes made to the Lay-people, that they ſhall not reade the holy Scripture without eſpeciall permiſſion, did firſt beginne.
            3 Whether in the holy Scripture there be eyther example or commandement to pray vnto Saints: wee aske not whether they pray for the faithfull that are vpon earth, but whether the faithfull that are vpon earth ought to pray vnto them, and where God commandeth it.
            4 Sith wee ſhould offend the King, if at his hands wee ſhould craue any gift through the merits of ſome other ſubiect of his: how dare they in the Romiſh

Church ſpeake vnto God in ſuch manner as they dare not ſpeake to man for feare of offending him, in crauing at Gods hand ſaluation through the merits of Saints, Quorum meritis precibuſ
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   regamus. as the Prieſt doth in his Maſſe.
            5 What aſſurance haue wee that the bleſſed Virgin Mary was in body rapt vp into Heauen, and there crowned Queene of Heauen? For ſith ſhee is ſo protrayted in all your Churches, and the people ſo taught, there ought to be ſome very aſſured teſtimonie of the ſame.
            6 Whether the Saints in Paradiſe haue their diſtinct charges. One ouer France, as S. Deniſe: another ouer Spaine, as S. Iames: another ouer Women with childe, as S. Margaret: another ouer Hunters, as S. Euſtace, &c. Who gaue them thoſe offices: alſo when this opinion firſt beganne.
            
               
                  
                     Innoc. 3. lib. 3. de miſt. Miſſae, cap. 9.
                  
                  Neceſſarium nobis eſt in via Sanctorum ſuffragium.
               7 Whether praying vnto Saints be neceſſary to ſaluation: alſo, whether by praying vnto GOD onely through Ieſus Chriſt, we cannot be ſaued.
            8 Whether God hath commanded to pray in ſuch a tongue, as euen he that prayeth doth not vnderſtand: and when this cuſtome beganne.
            9 Whether throughout the holy Scripture we haue eyther commaundement or example to haue in Temples the Image of God, or of the Trinitie, repreſented in ſtone or in painting. Alſo whereas God in the 4. of Deuteronomy, verſ. 15. & 16. prohibiteth the repreſenting of him in any grauen ſimilitude or Image, be it of male or female: whether hee hath ſince changed this ordinance: or if hee haue not changed it, wherefore doth the Romiſh Church diſpence therewith.
            10 Whether in the holy Scripture there be eyther Commandement or example, that we ought to kneele before the Images of Saints, to kiſſe, cloathe, light, or ſence them, &c.
            
               11 Whether we ought to adore the Croſſe with like adoration as God; as Thomas in his 3. Part. queſt. 25. and Cardinall Caietane vpon the ſame place, and many other Doctors of the Romiſh Church doe teach. Alſo, when the Prieſt ſpeaking to the Wood, ſaith, Aue lignum triumphale, I ſalute thee triumphant Wood, whether this Wood vnderſtandeth what he ſaith: if they anſwere that they doe it in the honour of Ieſus Chriſt, yet ought the Wood whereto they ſpeake in the honour of Ieſus Chriſt, to vnderſtand what is ſaid vnto it; conſidering alſo, that to ſpeake to the Wood of the of the Kings Chayre in honour of the King, is rather a mockage then an honour to the King: and indeede where did God euer command it?
            12 Whether Ieſus Chriſt hath not paid enough to exempt ſoules out of the fire of Purgatorie: and if he hath paid enough, why ſhould any man pay againe that which is alreadie fully paid? Why ſhould they againe ſatisfie Gods iuſtice for that wherein it is alreadie ſatsfied? what a preſumption is it, to teach that Ieſus Chriſt hath not ſatisfied for the paine due to ſinnes committed after Baptiſme, and ſo to impare the vertue of the death of our Sauiour? and in a matter of greateſt importance to forgoe a new Article of faith, without any teſtimonie of the holy Scripture?
            13 Sith alſo, that Ieſus Chriſt is yet an Interceſſor and Mediator for thoſe ſoules which they ſay are yet in Purgatorie, why doe they not immediately come forth at his Interceſſion, but doe ſtill abide there, ſome hundreds or thouſands of yeeres, as appeareth by the Pardons for fiue or ſixe hundred thouſand yeeres granted by the Pope.
            14 Againe, inaſmuch as other Orders of Fryers are at this time of ſmall eſteeme in regard of the Ieſuites, how comes it to paſſe, that in priuiledges of the Ieſuites

are inferiour to the Carmelites,The Carmelites haue publiſhed certaine Theſes containing this priuiledge: and Caheir in his Booke entituled The furnace of the Reuerberate, maintayneth this priuiledge. Alſo, the Carmelite Doctors haue to the end of the Booke ſet and ſubſigned their approbation. and to the Fraternitie of Minorites or Franciſcans? For, the Popes haue granted to the Carmelites this priuiledge, That they ſhall remaine no longer in Purgatory but vntill the next Saturday after their deceaſe. And the Fraternitie of the Franciſcans haue alſo this priuiledge that they may fetch a ſoule out of Purgatory Pope Sextus the 5. in the yeere 1586. the 7. of May granted to the Fraternitie of the Cordelies this Priuiledge inſerted into the Booke of Indulgences, conferred to that Fraternitie, printed at Paris by Iohn le Bouc. vpon Mount S. Hillary, at the ſigne of Diligence, in the yeere 1597. by ſaying fiue Paters; and as many Auees vpon the Saturday before Palme-Sunday: how, I ſay commeth it to paſſe that the Ieſuites haue no ſuch priuiledge?
            15 In as much as the Church of Rome doth hold that Purgatorie ſhall continue no longer but vntill the day of Iudgement, whereof it followeth that none of the faithfull that ſhall then liue, ſhall goe into Purgatory: we demand how it commeth, that Gods Iuſtice requireth of them no ſatisfaction by Purgatory, and yet it is now ſaid that they goe into Purgatorie to ſatisfie Gods Iuſtice? Is it not an heauie misfortune that a man dying at this day, and going into Purgatorie, there to be tormented certaine hundreds of yeeres, was not borne in that latter age? for then albeit he had merited tenne times more puniſhment, yet ſhould he haue beene exempt from the fire of Purgatory.
            16 Againe, in as much as in the Romane Church they hold that Infants dying ſoone after Baptiſme doe goe ſtraight into Paradiſe, what is the reaſon that Prieſts doe take money to pray and to ſay Maſſes for them; and what benefit doe theſe Infants reape by the the ſame?
            17 Againe, let them tell vs whether in the holy Scripture there be any Commandement that wee ſhall eate no fleſh vpon Fridayes or Saturdayes, conſidering that euen the ordinarie day wherein Ieſus Chriſt eate the Paſſeouer, was the Friday, and that Saint Paul willeth vs, 1 Cor. 10. that if wee be inuited to the houſes

of Infidels, wee ſhould eate of all that is ſet before vs without enquiring for conſcience ſake.
            18 Let them alſo ſhew vs where God forbiddeth Biſhops or Prieſts to marry: alſo whether when Saint Paul writ to Timothie, ſaying,1 Tim. 3 v. 2. 
               Let the Biſhop be vnreproueable, the Husband of one onely Wife, the law of ſingle life were already eſtabliſhed.
            19 VVhere Ieſus Chriſt commanded to ſacrifice a propitiatorie Sacrifice for the quicke and for the dead. And becauſe their Prieſts vocation is, that they are eſtabliſhed to ſacrifice Ieſus Chriſt, where is their paſſe or warrant? or where did God eſtabliſh them Sacrificers? conſidering that Ieſus Chriſt gaue not this qualitie to his Diſciples, and that the new Teſtament doth not in any place tearme the Paſtors of the Church Sacrificers?
            20 Whether Ieſus Chriſt or his Apoſtles did euer miniſter the Supper without Communicants: alſo who inſtituted the firſt priuate Maſſes: likewiſe, the Maſſes for Corne, for Heards, for finding things loſt, &c.
            21 How it commeth to paſſe that the Maſſes for Obits and anniuerſaries are not founded but for thoſe that haue giuen to the Church: and that the foure Orders of begging Fryers are not preſent at the deaths or Funerals of the needie or poore Artificers.
            22 Let them tell vs whether the Prieſt in his Maſſe breaketh the ſame things that Ieſus Chriſt brake in his Supper: for the Euangeliſts doe teſtifie that our Lord made his breaking before the words, which they tearme Conſecrating, whereof it followeth that he brake but bread, but the Prieſt at this day breaketh, after the conſecration, and which is worſe, ſaith that in breaking he doth ſacrifice: which is as much as euidently to ſay that Ieſus Chriſt ſacrificed bread becauſe hee brake it before conſecration.
            
               
               Can. Poenitentialis 39 in calce Decreti. Quando mus comedit vel corredit corpus Chriſti &c. 2. de conſecrat Si quis. Vide ibidem Gloſſam. Tum Cautelas Miſſae & Thomam. 3. queſt. 8 Art. 3.23 Alſo becauſe euery reproch that befell to Ieſus Chriſt during his infirmitie, befell him for our Saluation: wee demand what this reproch wherein the Doctors, Canons, and Cauteles of the Romiſh Church doe ſay, that the bodie of the Lord is ſometimes deuoured by Mice and Rats, and ſometime by Wormes, euen now that he is in his glory, doth helpe our ſaluation?
            24 Wherefore, ſith the Apoſtles adored not that which Ieſus Chriſt gaue them in the Euchariſt: alſo, that whereas Ieſus ſpake not of ſacrifice, neyther made any eleuation of the Hoaſt, hauing communicated to all that were preſent, and ſpoken in a language that all vnderſtood: the Prieſt at this day doth euery thing contrarie.
            25 Alſo, in as much as the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, when he celebrated the Euchariſt was frayle, paſſible, and mortall: but that this bodie which the Apoſtles receiued of him, was impaſſible, and could ſuffer nothing, according to the doctrine of our Aduerſaries, let them tell vs whether this opinion be receiueable, which giueth to Ieſus Chriſt at one time two bodies of contrary nature, or at the leaſt one bodie contrarie to it ſelfe.
            26 Sith alſo, that ſoone after that the Apoſtles had receiued the Sacrament into their ſtomackes, Ieſus Chriſt ſweate drops of bloud, was apprehended, buffeted, &c. wee demand whether this bodie of Ieſus Chriſt, which was in the Apoſtles ſtomackes ſweat any droppes of bloud, eyther was by the Souldiers apprehended and buffeted: for, if he ſweat, was apprehended and buffeted vnder the formes, and in the ſtomackes of the Apoſtles, hee was alreadie paſſible vnder them; yea, and wee muſt alſo place vnder the ſame formes, the Souldiers that buffeted him: but if vnder

thoſe formes hee ſweat not, neyther was apprehended nor buffeted, then was there at the ſelfe ſame time one Ieſus Chriſt ſuffering, and one Ieſus Chriſt not ſuffering: and conſequently which was not our Sauiour. For it was by his ſufferings that he was our Sauiour.
            27 How doth this ſaying of the Church of Rome agree:
                  Pope Innocent. 3. lib. 4. de Miſter. Miſſae. cap. 11. Eſt enim hic color & ſapor: quantitas & qualitas, cum nihil altervtro ſit coloratum & ſapidum, quantum aut quale.
                  
                  Stella. Faſcicuius. Tempor. Na
                        ••
                     ler, Genebrard. 4. Auenturus, lib. 7. Pag. 598 Platinam Clem. 5.
                That betweene the Prieſts hands there is roundneſſe, and nothing round: colour, and not coloured: quantity, and nothing that hath quantitie? And indeede if the Conſecrated Hoſt be round, and this Hoſt be the body of Ieſus Chriſt, it followeth in good Sylogiſme, that ſome body of Ieſus Chriſt is round. But if the Concluſion be falſe, ſo muſt alſo one of the propoſitions be. Wee therefore demand which of the two it is.
            28 Alſo when Victor the third was poyſoned in a Challice: and Henry the ſeauenth, Emperour, in an Hoſt, we demand what it was that was poyſoned: Saying that it was Bread and Wine, you deny the Tranſubſtantiation: Saying, it was the body of Ieſus Chriſt that was poyſoned, you doe prophane it: Saying, that it was the accidents, the colour and meaſures that were impoyſoned, it were not onely to mocke at it, but alſo to make the accidents Subiects of the ſubſtance: And all this miracle is onely to kill a Pope and a good Emperour.
            29 Sith alſo the Church of Rome doth hold, that the body of the Lord is fully whole in euery part of the conſecrate Hoſt: doth ſhe not by conſequent ſay,This is repreſented at Paris in the fore-front of the Church of Billettes.
                that the point of the holy Pen-knife that pricked the Hoſt, where-out ſprang drops of bloud, pricked Ieſus Chriſt in all parts of his body? For, that Ieſus Chriſt glorified can yet receiue wounds, is but a ſmall matter in regard of beleeuing that a Pen-knife could at one onely blow hit in 10. thouſand places of one ſelfe-body.
            
               30 Wee alſo demand, ſith the Church of Rome doth hold that it is no conſecration, vnleſſe the Prieſt haue an intent to conſecrate, how the people that is there to adore the Hoſt, may know whether the Prieſt had an intent to conſecrate, or to doe as the Church of Rome doth, for feare of Idolatrie in adoring the Bread that is not conſecrated?
            
               Quod libetica, queſtio ſuppoſito ſecundo Concilium Conſtantienſe excuſat ſimplices adorantes hoſtiam non conſecratā ſi ſic adorent. Ad
                     •••
                  te ſi tu es 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               31 Alſo whether the aduice of Pope Adrian, ſupported by the Councell of Conſtance, ought heerein to be followed, which willeth not that they ſhould adore the Hoſt ſimply, but conditionally, in ſaying to himſelfe: I doe adore thee, if thou be Chriſt, for that is to adore at all aduentures.
            32 Againe, if Ieſus Chriſt after the Euchariſt had reſerued ſome Hoſts (for hee might, and it is not credible, but that if a loafe broken into ſo many pieces, there yet remayned ſome crummes) vvee demand therefore whether theſe reſerued Hoſts were alſo crucified the next day: or elſe whether Ieſus Chriſt at one and the ſame time were ſuffering vpon the Croſſe, and not ſuffering vnder the formes: on the Croſſe in one place, and without the Croſſe in another: dead in the Sepulchre, and aliue in the Pixe: for if hee had beene crucified in the Pixe, they muſt alſo haue layde in the ſame Pixe, the Croſſe, the Souldiers, the Speare, and the Crowne, &c. Now if this Croſſe be not vnder the Hoſt, and yet Ieſus Chriſt is there crucified, it followeth that he ſhall be there crucified without a Croſſe, and ſmitten without a ſtroke.
            33 Whether in the ſixt Chapter of Iohn, in theſe words, If you drinke not my bloud, you ſhall haue no life, the Euchariſt be ſpoken of. For if it be not there ſpoken of, how commeth it that the Doctors of the Romiſh Church doe alleadge this Chapter and this verſe for their realtie and corporall eating? but if it be there

ſpoken of, why doe they depriue the people of life by taking away the Cup? It is to no purpoſe heere to alleadge the concomitance, for he that taketh the bloud in the Hoſt drinketh not: now Ieſus Chriſt ſaith expreſly, that if wee drinke not his bloud, wee ſhall not haue life.
            34 Againe, in as much as it is manifeſt impietie to oppoſe our ſelues againſt Gods ordinance, vvee demaund how the Councell of Conſtance can excuſe it ſelfe: which in the 13. Seſſion confeſſeth,Quod licet Chriſtus poſt coenam inſtituerit & ſuis diſcipulis adminiſtrauerit ſub vtra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſpecie panis & vini hoc venerabile Sacramentum, tamen hoc non obſtante &c. that Ieſus Chriſt inſtituted and adminiſtred the Sacrament vnder both kindes: and that in the Primitue Church the faithfull receiued both kindes: and yet neuertheleſſe complayneth, that in ſome parts of the world ſome did raſhly preſume that the Chriſtian people ought to receiue the Sacrament vnder both kindes. That is to ſay, that it is raſhneſſe to deſire to imitate Ieſus Chriſt. And it ſaith, that Ca
                     ••
                   in nonnullis mundi partibus quidam temerarie praeſumant populum Chriſtianum debere Sacramentum Euchariſtiae ſub vtra
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ſpecie ſuſcipere, conſuetudo rationabiliter introducta habenda eſt pro lege pertinanter aſſerentes, oppoſitum tanquam heretici arcendi ſunt & grauiter puniendi, Inuocato etiam auxilio brachij ſecularis. the cuſtome to deliuer it vnder but one kinde, being by reaſon brought in, ought to be holden for a Law: It alſo declareth all ſuch as ſhall contradict it to be Heretickes, and grieuouſly puniſhable, but by the Secular power. Doe they not heere confeſſe, that the Goſpell and the Primitiue Church, are oppoſite to the Church of Rome at this day? and preſume to be wiſer then Ieſus Chriſt, and ranke him among Heretickes and men puniſhable?
            35 Whether the Popes pretended power to giue and to take away Kingdomes, and to diſpence vvith Subiects for their Oath of Alleageance, be by Diuine right, or whether it be but an humane order or pollicie onely.
            36 Wee alſo demand, whether the Pardons that the Pope giueth vpon condition to commit ſome notable wickedneſſe, be auaileable: as when in the yeeres 1588. and 1589. he granted ſeauen yeeres of Pardon

to all that would ioyne with the holy Vnion, and band themſelues againſt their Prince, yet hee a Catholicke Romane.
            37 Wherefore the people are ſo forward in going to the Iubile at Rome, to purchaſe the great Pardons, conſidering that at all times they may obtayne full pardon, and ſixe or ſeauen hundred thouſand yeeres of Indulgences to ſpare.
            38 If a man, needing but tenne thouſand yeeres of Pardon, purchaſeth an hundred thouſand, what ſhall become of the foureſcore and tenne thouſand that remaine? for this cauſe there are at 
                  This is to be ſeene in the Booke of Romane Indulgences, printed at Rome, Anno. 1570. by Giulio Ac
                     ••
                  lto nelia Chie 
                     •
                   di Pietro in Vaticano la prima Dominica della quinquageſima vie Indulgentia plenaria & ottodieci milla anni & tante quarentene. Rome ſome Churches, where a man may in one day purchaſe full pardon for all ſinne, and eighteene or twentie thouſand yeeres of Pardons ouer-plus: what ſhall become of this ſurpluſſage and ouer-plus of Indulgences, beſides the full remiſſion? Doth the Pope pardon the payne of future ſinnes, and giue Indulgences of prouiſion?
            39 Aboue all the reſt, ſith the Pope vaunteth himſelfe to haue in the Treaſurie of the Church all the ſufferings and ſuper-aboundant labours of the Saints, Monkes and Martyrs which hee conuerteth into payment, for the puniſhment due to others, diſtributing them by his Indulgences; wee demand: 1. Who laid vp theſe ſufferings of the Saints in the Popes Treaſurie? 2. When began this diſtribution? 3. How ſhall wee be aſſured that God will receiue them in payment for vs? 4. And wherefore receiue other payments, conſidering that the death of Chriſt Ieſus is a payment ſufficient? 5. Doth Ieſus Chriſt giue to any man power to pay a debt alreadie fully acquitted? 6. Hath the Pope alſo in the Treaſurie of the Church, the paines and labours of Noah, of Abraham, of Iacob, &c. 7. And vpon what conſideration did not the high Prieſts vnder the Law diſtribute them to the faithfull

in their dayes? or why neither Ieſus Chriſt, nor his Apoſtles, neyther their Diſciples in all the firſt ages after Ieſus Chriſt neuer diſtributed any Indulgences to the dead? 9. Neyther celebrated any Iubile. 10. Neyther eſtabliſhed any priuiledged Altars, where-vpon whoſoeuer can procure the ſaying of certayne Maſſes, ſhall fetch one ſoule which ſo euer he will out of Purgatorie. 11. Neyther granted Bulls to free any ſoules out of purgatorie? 12. Neyther tyed Remiſſion of ſinnes to a certaine place, where the Pardons are laid vp. 13. Neyther gaue out hallowed graines, or Agnus Dei, ſeruing for the remiſſion of ſinnes. Is all this now done, becauſe the Popes are more full of Inuentions then the Apoſtles? or that God is now more liberall then heretofore?
            40 Whether the Pope hath power to giue to ſome a higher degree of glory in heauen then to other ſome? If he haue this power wee demand where, or when God gaue it him? If he haue it not, why doth he attribute it to himſelfe,In retributione iuſtorum ſalutis aeternae pollicemur augmentum. as Innocent the third in his Bull Ad liberandam, which is in the end of the Counſell of Lateran, where he pomiſeth an augmentation or encreaſe of glory to thoſe that will goe to the holy warre: but to ſuch as will not goe in perſon, but ſend a man at their owne charge, he giueth them no more but Remiſſion of all their ſinnes. As likewiſe the laſt Councell of Lateran, in the ninth and tenth Seſſions, attributeth to Leo the tenth, that he hath all power in heauen and in earth: as alſo doth the Booke of ſacred Ceremonies, lib. 1. Sect. 7. cap. 6.
            41 Whether the Pope and Church of Rome can at this day make any Articles of faith:Certum eſt non eſſe in manu Eccleſiae aut Papa ſtatuere articulos fidei. If they can, where is the authoritie that God hath giuen them? If they cannot, wherefore did Leo the tenth in the Bull Exurge Domine, ioyned to the laſt Councell of Lateran,
               
inſert this among the Hereſies of Luther, That he ſaid, that the Pope and Church of Rome can make no Articles of faith?
            
            
               Seſſ 4 & 6.
               42 Whether the ſecond Councell of Nice ſpake well in ſaying, that Images were equiualent with the Goſpell, and that we muſt worſhip them. Alſo that we may paint Angels, becauſe they be corporall: that a Temple without Images is nought worth: and that of all Hereſies it is the greateſt to be an enemie to Images.
            43 Whether the ſixe and ſeauen Councels, condemning Pope Honorius of Hereſie, and the Councell of Conſtance condemning Pope Iohn, the 23. for denying heauen and Hel, and teaching that the ſoules are mortall; did beleeue that the Pope cannot erre in faith: It skilleth not whether theſe Councels were well or ill enformed: onely wee demaund whether they did beleeue that the Pope cannot erre in faith, as they teach at this day.
            44 1. When the Pope began to weare three Crownes. 2.
                  
                     Diſt. 6. Can. Satis eſt. In the Gloſſe of the Clementin. Cum inter Dominus Deus noſter, &c.
                  
                  1. Booke of ſacred Ceremonies. Sect. 7 c. 6 Councell of Lateran Seſſ. 1. & 3. & 9. & 10.
                  As lately againſt the Venitian Common-wealth.
                To preach no more. 3. To be called God vpon earth, and the Diuine Maieſtie. 4. And King and Prince of all the earth. 5. To diſpence with oathes and vowes made vnto God. 6. To permit marriages within the degrees prohibited by the word of God, as of the firſt with the ſecond degree. 7. Not to drinke the Wine out of the Challice, but to ſucke it out with a Reed. 8. To be adored. 9. To put whom hee liſt into the ranke of Saints, appointing them their feaſts, &c.
            45 Whether the Popes Excommunications, caſt out againſt a whole eſtate for pecuniary matters, and ciuill pretenſions, are of any force: and whether they that die in ſuch eſtate, during their Excommunication, be for euer damned. Alſo what is the meaning of thoſe words ſpoken to Saint Peter, kill and eate:
               
and whether the ſame be alſo ſpoken to the Pope.
            46 For how much were the voyces of the Cardinals bought in the election of a new Pope, in the firſt age after Ieſus Chriſt? Alſo whether a Prince that hath ſpent three or foure hundred thouſand Crownes to procure a fauourable Pope, may preſume that all this corruption and theſe mercenary ſuffrages, were guided by the Spirit of God: or whether a Pope thus purchaſed cannot erre in faith?
            47 To what a rate are the taxes of abſolutions and diſpenſations of the Chancerie and Penitentiarie of Rome now raiſed. For we haue the Taxe printed at Paris, by authority of the Court, in the yeere 1520. when all this Marchandiſe was farre better cheape:Abſolutio pro eo qui matrem, ſororem, &c iut commatrem carnaliter cognouit, groſ 5. Sed hic tantum pro qualificatis & huiuſmodi gratiae non conceduntur pauperibus. for hee that had laine with his Mother, or with his Goſſip, paid for his Letters of Abſolution fiue groſſes. He that had ſlaine his Father or Mother ſeauen groſſes: and he that had falſified the Apoſtolical Letters eighteene groſſes. And a Prieſt that had cut off his owne priuities ſeauenteene groſſes: But now they pay all in Duccats of the Chamber. And the diſpenſations for the neereſt degrees in marriage are not granted but to people of calling, and ſuch as are of abilitie: as the ſame Taxe doth ſet it downe, fol. 23.
            48 Whether is it greater offence in a Prieſt to be married, or to commit whoredome ſecretly, and which of the two ſhould we moſt miſlike?
            49 Vpon what ſinnes doth the Prieſt impoſe greateſt penance, vpon the blaſpheamer of God, or vpon him that miſcalleth the Pope? vpon the Adulterer or vpon him that eateth fleſh vpon Good-Friday? And what is the reaſon that euery Biſhop may abſolue ſinnes committed againſt the Law of God: but treſpaſſes committed againſt the Papall Sea, as hindering ſuch as goe to Rome for Pardons; or intruſion

into a benefice, are matters paſt the Biſhops reach, and reſerued to his Holineſſe. Hath the Popes authoritie now gotten the vpper hand of the Law of God?
            
               
                  
                     Sac. Cerem. lib. 1. Sect. 2. cap. 3. Dicitur ad Marmoream ſedem quae Stercorata appellatur.
                  
                     And ſoone after, Sunt duae ſedes P
                        •
                     rphyretice perforatae & ibi ſedet Pontife
                        •
                     .
               50 VVhereof grew the Cuſtome, practiſed euen to this time, vpon the day of the Popes Coronation, to make him ſit on a hollow Chayre [called the Chayre of Eaſement] and vvhen ceaſed the cuſtome of handling his Holineſſe priuities vpon that day?
            51 Whether the Pope did well in eſtabliſhing the publicke Stewes at Rome, whereinto the Prelates repayre openly and with all liberty?
            52 Where remayned the ſoules of the Fathers of the old Teſtament from Chriſts Reſurrection vntill his Aſcenſion?
            53 And ſith the Church of Rome placeth the Infants Limbe vnder the earth, where ſhall it be when the earth ſhall haue no more being?
            54 VVhether wee muſt keepe faith giuen to Heretikes?
            
               Sect. de oratione p. 483.
               55 Whether it be well done to ſay, Our Father which art in Heauen, before the Image of a Saint, as now adayes they doe: and the Catechiſme of the Tridentine Councell, doth allow it.
            56 Againe, in that there were diuers Popes at one time, and that the ſtrongeſt bare it away: how can they proue that the ſtrongeſt was the moſt lawfull? for if he were not ſo, then their ſucceſſion muſt haue beene often interrupted: and thoſe that followed were the Succeſſors of vſurping Popes, being choſen by Cardinals, created by the Pope that went before, vvho being no lawfull Pope, had no iuſt authoritie to create Cardinals.
            57 Sith Ieſus Chriſt ſpeaking of the time that ſhall

goe before the Iudgements ſaith that then there ſhall be no Faith vpon earth: we demand whether then the Church of Rome ſhall be pure in the Faith, and ſhall not erre in any point, but ſhall yeeld a viſible luſtre.
            57 Againe, ſith the Pope may, whether by Iuriſdiction (as ſome doe hold) or in manner of ſuffrage, fetch ſoules out of Purgatorie, why doth he not fetch them all out? wherefore doth hee permit Infants to linger many hundred yeeres in a burning fire, though hee be able to pull them out?
            58 Whether it be to be found in the Word of God that the Biſhop may abſolue ſome certaine ſinnes which the Prieſt cannot abſolue: and whether there be any ſinnes which the Pope onely may abſolue, and are tearmed Caſes reſerued: alſo when this cuſtome began.
            59 Wee alſo demaund, vpon what authoritie the Church of Rome is founded: and how we may be aſſured that there is one Church in the world, and that the Church of Rome is this true Church. For the proofe hereof, the Doctors of the Romiſh Church cannot produce any teſtimonie out of the holy Scripture. For, in as much as they ſay that it is the Church that giueth authoritie to the Scripture, it appeareth, that this Church cannot be founded vpon the Scripture, and that the Scripture cannot conferre any authoritie vnto it. The foundation and ſupport of a houſe cannot be founded vpon the houſe.
            60 Whether it ſtandeth with the Holineſſe of him that tearmeth himſelfe the Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt, to ſuffer the Iewes at Rome, which beleeue that Ieſus Chriſt was a ſeducer and deceiuer, and there to permit them the free exerciſe of their Religion; and yet to condemne to the fire thoſe that ſay there is no other Mediator but Ieſus Chriſt, neyther any other propitiatorie Sacrifice but his death.
            
               61 Alſo, ſith in the Church of Rome there are many reliques euidently falſe and ridiculous: As at Saint Iohn Lateran in Rome, the fore-skinne of Ieſus Chriſt. At Court-Chiuernie neere Bloys, the breath of Ioſeph. At Burgos in Spaine, the hayre and nayles of a wodden Crucifixe, &c. Wee demand what marke they can giue vs, whereby to diſcerne the true from the falſe, and what mooued theſe our Maſters thus to abuſe the poore people.
            62 Whether wee may beleeue the Monkes which make their vaunts to doe more then God commaundeth: conſidering that God will be ſerued with all our heart and all our ſtrength: is there any man that can do more then that which he doth with all his ſtrength?
            63 Againe, in as much as the Pope permitteth no man to preach, without his vocation from him, eyther mediately or immediately: Wee would gladly know, whether for the reprouing of the Popes abuſes, it be requiſite to be authorized by the Pope himſelfe: alſo whether we may hope that euer the Pope will giue any man charge to reproue him.
            64 How doth this opinion of the Church of Rome, that Infidels and Heathen doe worke meritorie deeds, which they tearme merits of Congruitie, agree with this of Saint Paul, Rom. 24. v. 23. That all that is not of faith is ſinne: Be there, in the iudgement of the Church of Rome, meritory ſinnes? Can people, deſtitute of the Spirit of God, doe any good worke, conſidering that the Apoſtle Saint Paul witneſſeth, that our ſelues cannot ſo much as thinke a good thought: and that it is God that worketh within vs both the will and the deede at his good pleaſure, 2 Cor. 3. Phil. 2.13.
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            A NEW CHALLENGE to all Papiſts, in foure and twentie Popiſh Articles, by a learned Diuine now liuing, and ready to iuſtifie the ſame, if any Papiſt ſhall accept the Condition.
            
            1 IF any Papiſt can ſhew mee any approued Father or Councell before Saint Auguſtines dayes, which teſtifieth, that the Bookes of Tobith, Iudith, Wiſdome, Eccleſiaſticus; the firſt and ſecond of Maccabees are Canonicall Scripture, I yeeld to Poperie: If on the contrarie he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him an approued Father or Councell, before S. Auguſtines dayes, which teſtifieth that they are not Canonicall.
            2 If any Papiſh can ſhew mee any approued Father or Councell within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which teſtifieth, that any Latine tranſlation is to be preferred before, or equalled with the Hebrew and the Greeke, I yeeld to Poperie: if on the contrarie he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him any approued Father or Councell, within that time, which teacheth, that the Hebrew and the Greeke are to be preferred before whatſoeuer Latine tranſlation.
            3 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father, or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, vvhich taught; that it was vnlawfull to tranſlate the Bible into

the knowne languages of the common people, I yeeld to Poperie: if on the contrarie hee will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him by approued Fathers or Councels, that in the beſt ages of the Church it was thought profitable and commendable to haue the Scripture ſo tranſlated.
            4 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which held it vnlawfull for the people of God to reade the Scriptures in their Mother tongue, I yeeld to Poperie: If on the contrarie he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels, that in the beſt ages of the Church they might lawfully haue read them.
            5 If any Papiſt can ſhew mee any approued Father or Councell, within 600. yeeres after Chriſt, vvhich teacheth; that common prayers ought to be made in a language vnknowne to the common people, I yeeld to Popery: if on the contrary, he will become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him by approued Fathers or councels, that common prayer ſhould be made in a knowne language.
            6 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, (except Saint Auguſtine onely) which teacheth; that there are but three commandements in the former Table, ſeauen in the latter, I yeeld to Poperie: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him by Fathers or Councels, that there are foure Commaundements in the former Table, and ſixe in the latter.
            7 If any Papiſt can ſhew mee any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, that it was lawfull to picture God the Father, I yeeld to Popery: if on the contrary hee will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him approued Fathers or Councels which thought it vnlawfull to picture him.
            
               8 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which taught that Latria might be giuen to Images, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him an approued Father or Councell, within that time, which taught that Latria ſhould not be giuen to Images.
            9 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which ſpeaking of Sacraments, named ſeauen onely, and neyther moe or fewer, I yeeld to Popery: if on the contrarie, he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him an approued Father or Councell, within that time, who names no moe but two, to wit, Baptiſme and the Lords Supper.
            10 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, vvhich teacheth that women may baptiſe, I yeeld to Poperie, if on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him an approued Father or Councell, which abſolutely forbad women to baptiſe.
            11 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father, or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which teacheth; that it is vnlawfull for any, ſaue the Miniſter or Prieſt, who conſecrates, to drinke of the Sacramentall Cup, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him an approued Father or Councell, within that time, which held it ſacriledge not to drinke of the Cup, hauing eaten before of the Bread.
            12 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father, or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which forbad Communicants to receiue with their hands the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant,

if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels, that within that time, it was vſually deliuered into their hands.
            13 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 600. yeeres after Chriſt, which called the Sacrament, their Lord and their God, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him an approued Father or Councell, which ſpeaking hereof, cals it panem Domini, not panem Dominum, the bread of the Lord, not, Bread, his Lord.
            14 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 600. yeeres after Chriſt, which held it lawfull for a Chriſtian at Communion time to ſtand by, and looke on, though he partaked not thereof, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels, within that time, that ſlanders by were required to depart, or elſe, to draw neare and communicate.
            15 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which taught, that a man may dine of a faſting day, I yeeld to popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers Councels, that the conſtant practiſe of the Church was, to faſt till night.
            16 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, vvhich taught, that a Miniſter, or Prieſt (as they call him) ſinnes more grieuouſly if he marry, then if he play the fornicator abroad, or if he keep a whore at home, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of an approued Father, or Councell within that time, that it was held much worſe

for a Miniſter or Prieſt, to play the whoremaſter, then to marry.
            17 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, vvhich was of opinion, that a man who had vowed chaſtitie, was not guiltie of breaking his vow by whoring, but onely by marrying, I yeeld to popery. If on the contrarie he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of an approued Father or Councell, that by whoring, Votaries were guiltie of breaking their vow of chaſtitie, as well as if they marryed.
            18 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeers after Chriſt, which taught that a notorious offender might be abſolued from his fault before ſome penance was inioyned and performed by him, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels, within that time, that before abſolution they alwaies inioyned ſome penance, and ordinarily ſaw it performed.
            19 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which held it vnſeemely for men and women to ſing Pſalmes together in their publike aſſemblies, I yeeld to popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him an approued Father or Councell, vvithin that compaſſe of time, which approued of ſuch ſinging.
            20 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 100. yerees after Chriſt, vvhich 
                  •
               aught, that men might vow to goe on pilgrimage, eſpecially to Ieruſalem, vvithout their Wiues conſent, and goe according to their vow, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary, he vvill promiſe to become Proteſtant if I can ſhevv him, that ſuch vowes are flat contrarie to the Scripture.
            
               21 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 500. yeeres after Chriſt, which writeth, that the Pope by his command called all, or any of the firſt foure generall Councels, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promiſe to turne Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels, within that time, that the Emperours called all thoſe foure, by vertue of their authoritie.
            22 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 500. yeeres after Chriſt, which writes, that the Biſhop of Rome was preſident in all thoſe foure generall Councels, eyther in his owne perſon, or by his deputies, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels within that time, that other Biſhops ſate as preſidents, in ſome of thoſe foure, and in other generall Councels following, and that in their owne right.
            23 If any Papiſt can ſhew me out of any approued Father or Councell, within 600. yeeres after Chriſt, that the Pope was not ſubiect vnto the Emperour, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels, within that time, that the Pope was ſubiect vnto the Emperour, and that the Chriſtians acknowledged none but God himſelfe to be aboue the Emperour.
            24 If any Papiſt can ſhew me any approued Father or Councell, within 1000. yeeres after Chriſt, which appropriated the name Pope to the Biſhop of Rome onely, I yeeld to Popery: If on the contrary, he will promiſe to become Proteſtant, if I can ſhew him out of approued Fathers or Councels, that all Biſhops generally, and ſome Elders in ancient time, were called Popes.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   