
      
         
            
            
            THE
BISHOP
OF
GALLOVVAY
HIS
DIKAIOLOGIE:
Contayning a iust Defence of his
former APOLOGIE.
            Against the iniust Imputations of
Mr. DAVID HVME.
            O what a griefe; that hauing to doe with Enemies, wee are
forced to fight with Friends!
            
               LONDON:
Printed by Thomas Snodham for Iohn Budge, and are to be sould
at the great South-dore of Paules, and at
Brittaines-Bursse. 1614.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE CHRISTIAN
READER.
            
               AS I was on my iourney from
LONDON homeward, in
the Moneth of May last, I
was ouertaken not farre from
Darnetoune, by our Country-man,
Mr. Dauid Hume,
Goodman of Gods-croft.
After we had saluted one another,
we fell incontinent to a conference of Church-gouernment:
hee excused himselfe, that his leasure
serued him not at that time to stay in our companie,
his vrgent affaires forcing him to post before, but hee
promised to send mee his doubts in writing, and I
promised him (if it pleased the Lord) an answere. The
point I tooke in hand to proue, was, that no substanciall
point of Discipline was changed in our Church.
For, Ecclesiasticke Synods vsed before, are retained
still, the censures of Admonition, Suspension, Excommunication;
yea, the Admission and Deposition of

Pastors, or what euer else pertaynes to the matter of
Discipline; these are not remoued but rectified and
roborated: in that the power to moderate and exercise
these censures, is not left free to euery one, but
restored againe to the Bishop, to be vsed with aduise
of his Brethren: thus keepe wee still the same Discipline,
but more orderly vsed.
            
               
                  〈◊〉
                dined at Darneroune, and parted in louing
manner, with all brotherly kindnes: we ouertooke him
againe at Dunbar, where not finding his former humanitie,
I maruelled what it could be, or from whom
it c
                  •
               me, that so small a change of the soile; should
make so great a change of the affection; for in the one
hee was most kinde, where with reason he might haue
beene more strange; and in the other most strange,
where of dutie hee both might and should haue beene
more kindly. Since that time I fore-gathered not with
him, and I expected nothing, but kindnesse from him,
and that the question should haue beene quietly and
peaceably disputed by writing among our selues, till
now that he hath begunne the publike warre. He had
sent me some missiue Letters written by him to some
others, crauing resolution of his doubts concerning
Church gouernment. And as I was dispatching an Answere
to him, I was forced to plead for my Conscience
by APOLOGIE against a lying Libeller, which here
Mr. Dauid against all dutie and reason hath publickely
impugned. First, because I stood 
                  •
               ound by promise
to giue an answere to himselfe, and reason would hee
should haue expected it: yea doubtlesse he had gotten

it long ere now, in more quiet and louing manner, if
he had not interrupted me. Secondly, I had written
nothing against Mr. Dauid, I touched him not in my
Apologie, and no other way gaue I him any cause to
write against mee. Thirdly, hee being a priuate man,
it cannot be but a great Presumption to condemne by
publike writing a Church-gouernment established by
Law and that without knowledge (if himselfe be true)
for he professeth to seeke instruction concerning it,
yea, without eyther calling or lawfull commission.
Fourthly, before euer he sent this Refutation of this
Apologie to me, or had discharged with me, he published
sundry Copies of it to be seene and read of others,
which in our Prouerbe we call Treason vnder trusting.
Fiftly, his whole Admonitorie Treatise is full
of Inuectiues in personam, without regard of modestie,
yea, of that feare of God which becommeth a
Christian, bringing nothing, or else very little ad
propositum.
            
            Thus hath Mr. Dauid kept no faire warre with
mee, but hath very farre ouer-seene himselfe, and
wronged mee, which that the indifferent may know,
I haue here published his Admonition in his owne
words and mine answeres. I haue omitted no materiall
thing in it; onely words of needlesse repetition wherein
hee abounds. If hee had contented himselfe to iustifie
the Libeller, in tramping my Name, my Conscience,
my Ministrie vnder his feete, it had beene a proofe of
my patience great enough. But where without reason
or truth, he will beare downe a common cause, and

increase offences in the hearts of simple people, I cannot
of conscience suffer it vnanswered: specially, seeing
vnder pretence of impugning mee, hee directly
impugneth it. If my heart in this had reproued mee
of my wayes, I might haue lurked in secret, and past
ouer the Libeller, and him also with silence; but an
honest conscience feareth not the light, but rather reioyceth
in it. Onely I craue of the modest minded
Christian, that if my speeches in the Answere at any
time be sharper then becommeth, it be imputed to
humane infirmitie, whereunto the loue of the cause,
and knowledge of mine owne innocencie hath carryed
mee, not want of loue toward him or others. It is no
pleasure to mee to offend any man: if any such haue
escaped mee, I will not excuse my selfe in that which
the wise, godly, and indifferent Reader shall thinke
may iustly be reprehended.
            
               Thine in the Lord,
W. B. of Galleway.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE
BISHOP OF
GALLOWAY
HIS APOLOGIE.
            
               THere are two things requisite in a man, that would
doe good in a publike calling, the one is a good
Conscience, the other a good Name; the first
commends him to God, and obtaines a blessing
to his labours; the next commends him to men,
and procures him the greater credit to effectuate
the good which hee hath intended, for the
which (said Philo) Sicut bonum ac honestum esse,
               Philo de migratione Abraham
                     •
                  .
               ita & videri a
                     •
                   haberi pr
                     •
                  dest. As it is a good
thing to be good and honest, so is it also good
that we should be esteemed good, Nonitaque est 
                     ••
                  gligenda fama restum ad custodian
tu
                     ••
                   ad dignitatem vitae vtilissim
                     •
                  : A good name therefore is not to be
neglected, considering it is a singular helpe both for the custodie and dignitie
of our life: for this cause hath it alway beene one of Sathans customable
policies, who stands at the right hand of Ieh
                     •
                  shuah, to resist him in well doing,Zach. 3.
to staine the Name where he cannot corrupt the Conscience, that by disgra
               
                  •
               ing
the instruments, he may destroy, at least diminish the good which faine
they would doe: Hoc est Diaboli 
                     〈…〉
                   seruos Dei mendacio laceret,
               Cyprian ad Anton. 
               & falsis

                     〈…〉
                   qui conscientiae su
                     •
                   luce clarescunt falsis ru
                  
                     •
                  oribus
sordidentur: This is the worke of the Diuell, to strike the seruants of
God with the scourge of a lying tongue, to abase their honest name in the
hearts of others, by wrongfull conceptions, and by false reports to defile
them, who are honest in regard of their owne consciences.
            2 It is a difficult thing to liue in a publike calling, and not to be calumniated.
So long as our Sauiour liued a priuate life, we reade not that he was

either tempted by Satan, or traduced by men, but from the time that by Baptisme
he was consecrate to doe the great worke of the promised Messiah, then
Satan set vpon him, and the mouthes of all his cursed instruments were
opened to blaspheme him. Now we know that the seruant is not aboue the
master:H
                     ••••
                  n Prolog. 2. 
                     〈◊〉
                   Iob. 
               Si aut 
                     〈…〉
                   aut palmarom folia complicarem, vt ins
                     •
                  
                  dore
vultus mei panem comederem, & ventris opus sollicita mente pertrectarem 
                     •••
                  
                  lus
morderet, 
                     〈◊〉
                   reprehenderet, nunc autem iuxta sententiam Saluatoris volo operari
cibum qui non perit, & geminus mihi error infigitur: If were set (said Hierome)
to weaue a basket of twigs, with the bull-rush, or to twist the leaues of
I'alme-trees, or by any such base occupation, I had no more adoe, but to care
for my belly, that I might eate my bread in the sweat of my brow, I might
doe it all my dayes, and no man bite mee or reproue me for it, but now because,
according to the saying of our Sauiour, I labour in a spirituall calling,
to nourish my selfe and others with that bread of life which perishes not, a
double error is enforced vpon me, Virum egregium sequitur proximorum inuidia,
Enuie alway followes vertue: where it can hurt no otherway, it impugnes by
calumnie:Nazian. this is, as Nazianzen calls it, Malum grauissimum, generosam enim

                     〈◊〉
                   um virorum constautiam labefactere nititur: A most heauie euill, for by it
Sathan seekes to weaken the constancie of good men, and so much the greater
euill is it,Ambros. 
               Quia non solum falsa componit, sed etiam quae pi
                     •
                  gesta sunt decolorat,
Because, faies Ambrose, it not onely forges false things, but falsifies true things,
deforming and defacing that with her vncouth colours, which is done sincerely,
and out of a good affi
                  •
               ction.
            3 With the like of these weapons hath Sathan fought against mee in his
peeuish instruments, euer since the Lord called mee to be a Preacher, and no
maruaile, Shall a man trample on a Serpent, and not looke to be stinged?
I haue professed my selfe, by the grace of my Lord, a disquieter of Sathans
Kingdome, I thinke it not strange if hee doe what hee can to disquiet mee,
disquiet hee may, dishearten hee shall not. Shall I be mooued at his lying
Libellers?Tertul. No: Absit à seruo Christi tale inquinamentum, vt patientia maioribus
praeparata, in minimis excid at: Farre be that spot from the seruants of
Christ, that their patience prepared for greater, should faile in so small tentations,
Qu
                     •
                   cito iniuria mouetur,
               Amb. Off. lib. 1. to. 5. 
               facit se dignum videri contumelia, Hee that is
hastily moued with a contumely, makes it to seeme that hee is worthie of it.
What then, shall I vtterly neglect his false accusations? No, least by them
any credit I haue to doe good vnto others be stollen from mee. I will neither
suffer an Absolom nor an Achitophel, A Friend nor a Foe, to steale away
from mee the hearts of any of Gods people, if I may stay it. To such therefore
as feare God I speake,August. ad Frat. in Erem. as Augustine did to his brethren, Mihi sufficit conscientia
mea, vobis necessaria est fama mea, To mee my conscience is sufficient,
but for you my good name is necessarie. Of such as are mine Enemies either
of weakenesse or wickednesse, I demaund as Iacob did of Laban. Now when
yee haue searched all my stuffe, what haue yee found? bring it forth, that
we may see it.
            
               
4 O, forsooth, yee were once otherwayes minded concerning Church-gouernement.
In some things, I confesse, I was, in others not. Paritie in
Church-gouernment I euer thought the Mother of confusion, neither can, I
see that God hath beene the Author of it in any of his workes, yea by the diuersitie
of his gifts he declares that hee allowes not equalitie in gouernment,
where here, if any strife be about comparison of gifts, I haue no more to say,
but that hee who in humilitie of minde cannot submit himselfe to obay any
other, was neuer meete to bee a Ruler of others, how great so euer has
gifts be.
            
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               .
            And that Preachers should haue place in Parliament, to giue light out of
the holy Oracle, to the Prince and States of the Kingdome, I euer thought
it both reasonable and necessarie, and did by my publike voice approue it in
that generall assembly holden at Dundie, wherein this matter was first motioned.
And in these publike Lectures which once in the moneth wee had
in our Presbyteriall exercise, for clearing the Controuersies of this time: I
did in my course openly declare, how in Church-gouernment a happy meane
were to be wished betweene Anarchie and Monarchie, two fearefull euils
in the Church, the one proceeding from paritie, wrought confusion, as
might be seene in the pitifull state of the Churches of Flanders: the other
breeding tyrannie and all sort of oppression: a lamentable proofe whereof
we might see in the Churches of Italy, and other parts vnder the dominion
of that Romish Vsurper: thus is there not so great a cause to charge me with
a change, as is alleaged.
            5 But in that wherein before I misliked Episcopall gouernment, fearing
least tyrannie▪ libertie, and other euils should follow it, if now, perceiuing
a Christian King most carefull out of his rare pietie and wisedome, to
see it vsed vnto the right end, I haue changed my minde, as many others,
both worthie Fathers, and brethren in our Church haue done, to whom the
world cannot denie an honest testimonie: what imputation should this be
vnto me,Ambros in Psal. 119. 
               Cum mentem in melius mutare non leuit as sit sed virtus, sith for a man
to change his minde to the better, it is no leuitie nor inconstancie, (as the
lying Libeller termes it) but vertue? Episcopall gouernment was embraced
of this Church ere I was borne, and with it wee enioyed the Gospell
for many yeares, and some that were worthie and faithfull men in this
same Ministrie of Perth, wherein I haue now laboured by the grace of God
almost this twentie yeares, did discharge (in effect) the same office of a
Bishop in the bounds of Galloway, yea by imposition of their owne hands
did ordaine Bishops of other Dioces. If there were then a reason, why the
Episcopall gouernment once embraced, being fallen in decay, the Presbyteriall
should be established, is it not now possible (thinke ye) to get a reason
why both of them should be reunited, the one of them being ordained

to honour and strengthen the other, and being reduced to that order and
vse, for which anciently it did serue in the Primitiue Church. Especially
seeing it is done by the fatherly fore-cast and prouident care, (not without
warrant of Gods word, example of the Primitiue Church, nor aduice of the
present Church) of such a King as God hath giuen vs, a Professor, a Confessor,
a Semi-martyt, a Protector, a Preacher, a Propagator of the Gospell
with vs, whose power, for any thing I can yet learne, is greater in the externall
gouernment of the Church, then we haue well considered of.
            6 O but, say you, by this change, the people are made vncertaine of their
Religion? This cannot be but the bolt of some enemie, or the birth of the
braine of some friend ouer-farre miscaried with opinion. If it hath done euill
to any, it is an argument, their light is weake: for why? doth diuersiue of
externall gouernment import a difference in Religion? Are there not many
famous Churches in Europe, flourishing this day vnder the Episcopall gouernment?
haue not many Bishops themselues beene honoured with the honour
of Martyrdome, and sealed the truth of the Gospell with their blood,
since the reformation of Religion: Latmer, Ridley, Cranmer, and many moe
in our neighbour Church may stand for examples. I will beseech all such
weake Christians to take none offence,Aug. Confess. Art. 7. where it is not giuen. Ad v
                     •
                  itate
                     •
                  
fidei sufficit vt 
                     •
                  adem sit doctrina Euangelij & Sacramentorum administratio: It
is sufficient for the vnitie of faith, that the Doctrine of the Gospell and Sacraments
be one and the same: in other externall things, there may be diuersitie,
yea often times the diuersitie of times, and states of people will require
a diuersitie of externall things, for the furtherance of the worke of edification.
            7 The Apostles did all teach one, and the selfe-same Doctrine, but did
not all gouerne their Churches in one and the selfe-same manner: for Iames
and Peter among the Iewes tolerated Circumcision, which Paul among the
Gentiles would not doe; yea, the Disciples of S. Peter and S. Iohn, testifie
how these blessed Apostles kept the Feast of the Pass
                  •
               ouer on diuers dayes,
as both Eusebius and Socrates doe write: yet was this diuersitie no impediment
to the propagation of the Gospell by them both. It is euer to be considered,
what the worke of edification requires. For that kinde of externall
gouernment which some Churches of Christ hath, and others hath not:
shall there be entertained a Schisme in our Church? and an vnnecessarie and
vnkindly contention, betweene a Christian people, and their most Christian
King. Since to speake in most modest termes, to giue contentment to such
as are not contentious, there is no question of Faith in the Church of Scotland
(Christian people might be ignorant of this disputation about Discipline,
& come to heauen neuerthelesse, if so it might please some of their Pastors)
neither is there a question betweene good & euill, but betweene good
and better; betweene two, whereof either of them haue had their course to
be, when the other was not; euen in this same Church, I doubt not, the iudicious
Reader will consider this, & Wisedome shall be iustified of her children.
            
               
8 But here I know it is obiected by men, euen of moderate mindes, if
such gouernment were better vsed, and these who haue receiued it, did more
good with it, then it would soone purchase credit to it selfe, and be the better
liked. These men I see haue nothing against the thing it selfe, but against
the vse of it, by which kinde of argument now commonly it is impugned.
To these it were sufficient to answere, that Artisicum errata, artibus attribu
                  
                     •••
                  
mon sunt, the errors of Artisans are not to be ascribed to the Arts themselues,
or to such as more wilfully reason in this manner, to answere, as Nazi
                     ••
                  zen
did the Eunomians,Nazian. 
               Cum in se 
                     •
                  ihil pr
                     ••••
                  ij habeant, in nostra illud

                     〈…〉
                  
                Where in themselues they haue no strength, they seeke
it in our imbecillitie: Et de malorum in 
                     〈◊〉
                   sciutilla flammam ex
                     ••
                  tant & ad

                     〈…〉
                   affland
                     •
                   tollunt, vt longè 
                     〈◊〉
                   Babilo
                     ••••
                   superet: Of a
little sparke of euill in vs, they kindle a great fire, by blowing vpon it with
their secret surmisings, and publike reproches, till they make the flame, which
they haue raised out of a sparke, to mount vp higher then the furnace of Babel:
thus is it the manner of men to blame readily where they loue not.
            9 But to goe further with them, as with all reason I require, that the
faults of persons be not imputed to their Offices; so with my heart doe I
wish in all that are imployed with Ecclesiasticall authoritie, so moderate a
behauiour, that no offence should be giuen to the weake, nor cause of contradiction
to the contrary minded: but that as Iosephs preferment, tending
to the good of all his brethren, forced them, who enuied it at the first, to
thanke God for it at the last: euen so, credit may be conquest to vs in the
hearts of them that feare God, by feruent and faithfull aduancement of the
Gospell of Christ Iesus. We should neuer forget that warning which Ierome
gaue to a certaine Bishop; Rusticus Narbonensis, vide ne minor inueni ar is in Chris
                     ••
                  
                  
                     〈…〉
                   in hoe seculo: Take heede that thou be not found lesse in
Christ, then thou art named in this world; thou art called a Bishop, so liue,
that Christ that great Archbishop may approue thee for one.
            10 But yet by some carnall and contentious spirits, who liue as if they
were Demi-gods, and in their tongues God had set his tribunall, or had
made them Iudges of the consciences of their brethren, it is obiected, published,
and carried from hand to hand, in a Libell, as full of lies as lines,
that
                  •
                corrupt respects of gaine & glory hath moued me to embrace it: a fearefull
crimination, if I were as guiltie of it, as they are bold to affirme it. I
know it is a horrible sinne to abuse an holy calling to filthie luere: the Apostle
said, that godl
                     •
                  nesse is great gaine, that is to say, that great gaine is godlinesse;
Questum 
                     〈◊〉
                   pi
                     •
                  tatem. It is a peruerse order:Beza. 
               Terrena coelestibus

                     •
                  ercari, to buy earthly things with heauenly, where the spirituall Ministri
                  •
               
teacheth vs to exchange earthly things for heauenly, such impietie as this
will be punished with a worse leprosie, then that of Gehazi. And no losse
abhominable is it, to abuse it to vaine-glory and affectation of honour: it is
a grosser idolattie then that of the Israelites, who of the gold and siluer
which they reserued from the Lord,Hosea, 2. 8. made a Baal to themselues.
            
               
11 To such I will answere, as Augustine did to Petilian, I am a man appertaining
to the floore of Christ, if I be good,August. I am there as corne, if I be
euill, I am there as chaffe, Sed non est huius areae ventilabrum lingua Petitiani,
But your Petulant tongue, like the tongue of Petilian, is not the fanne of
this floore. If any man thinke hee knowes me better then I doe my selfe, let
him giue iudgement as he pleaseth, and others beleeue him as they list: if they
will credit me of my selfe, my witnesse is in heauen, and my conscience within
me beareth me record, that I was not moued with gaine or glorie, and I
trust to declare it by Gods grace.Amb. Off. But what? Bene sibi conscius non debet falsis
moueri, nec putare plus esse Ponderis in alieno co
                     ••
                  itio, quam in suo testimonis: Hee
that hath in himselfe a good conscience, should not be moued with false conceptions
in others, nor esteeme that there is greater waight in other mens
traducing, then in his owne testimonie.
            12 Now here I know it is expected, that as I haue declined the causes
falsly imputed to me, so I should declare the true causes that moued me, which
now shortly are these.
            13 First, I perceiued a Christian King, by all meanes possible, seeking
the aduancement of the Gospell, for the which it is griefe enough that his
Maiestie sustaineth the greatest hatred and contradiction of the aduersaries,
but more then enough, his Highnesse should want the comfort of his subiects,
professors also: which when I considered, I thought it a matter of conscience
to refuse to serue and follow his Maiestie in so good a course.
            14 Secondly, I saw the weake hearts of many well affected Christians,
through misconception, offended at the very name of a Bishop, not able out
of light and knowledge to giue any reason of their misliking, notwithstanding,
though it be so highly honoured by the Apostle, and commended by
the famous lights of the Primitiue Church, who not onely accepted the
name, but exercised the office thereof, to the great good of the Church: and
that this offence might be remoued, at least so farre as my credit may carrie
me, I haue embraced it.
            15 Thirdly, I perceiued a perillous Schisme, and vnnecessarie diuision in
our Church, for this matter of gouernment, to the great aduantage of the
common Aduersarie, which gap I resolued, for my owne part, not to enlarge
by contention, but so farre as my weaknesse may to close it vp, at least to
make it the lesse.
            16 Fourthly, I considered, that the same reason, that of old forced the
Fathers of the Primitiue Church, in the iudgement of Ierome, to induce this
gouernment in the Church, that is, in Remedium Schismatis, did more then manifestly
require that it should be restored vnto vs: but of this the lesse I
speake for duties sake, the more I leaue to be considered of them, who know
the truth hereof.
            17 Fiftly, the question among vs when I searched as narrowly as I
could, is about Ierusalems wall, whether it should be circular or quadrangular,
round or foure-squared: so the Citie be well, is this a matter for which we

should make contention, it being better for the good of the Church, that any
one of them should be, then that thus they should striue together, to the
great hinderance of the Gospell.
            18 Sixtly, and I doe verily thinke that the most famous and reformed
Churches in Europe, who want this gouernment, would be glad to accept it,
vpon this condition, that with it they might enioy the puritie of the Gospel,
which they haue with vs, together with that libertie, fauour and protection
of a Christian reformed King, which we haue, and they want.
            19 For these reasons, as I was determined before, in the priuate calling
of a Preacher, to reuerence and obey others my brethren, clad with the office
of Bishops, the proofe whereof I gaue in these Prouinciall assemblies, moderated
by Bishops, whereat I was bound to be present, so haue I at length
embraced it in my owne person, being called there-vnto by the most Christian
King, and Church of this Kingdome, without any motion, affection,
or petition of mine owne (if there be so much charitie in my aduersaries as
to beleeue me) I could with greater contentment and willingnesse of minde,
haue giuen obedience in all dutifull submission to any of my brethren, nor to
haue had any more publike charge in the Church (if the matter had beene in
my choice.) And this doe I witnesse out of the very truth and simplicitie
of mine heart.
            20 If Shimei still will raile, and charge mee with a corrupt affection, let
him be doing till his owne iniquitie reproue him, I am sure no well aduised
Christian will fight with any such armour, for the weapons of our warfare
are not carnall, but spirituall. As for others, who like barking Dogges and
Birds of the night, chatter to themselues in secret confused sounds, which
can bide no triall, back-biting those whom they dare not looke in the face,
for such as these, why shall a man turne out of the way? It is a sufficient punishment
to such as this way with their will would hurt mee, that against
their will they shall helpe me,Aug. cont. liter. Petil. lib. 3. c. 7. 
               Qui volens detrahit same mee, nolens additmer
                  
                     ••••
                  
meae, For he that with his will empaites my name, against his will, shall encrease
my reward.
            21 But if such busie idle-bodies will come and labour with mee in the
worke of God, I hope to teach them to bestow their time more profitably,
not to disquiet, as they do, their vnsetled braines with such vanities, as vanish
so soone as they are conceiued, and brought forth, leauing nothing behinde
them but a guiltinesse to themselues, for mine owne part I haue determined
not to be contentious, for that is not the custome of the Church of Christ,
but haue resolued to spend my time and talent I haue saued to the vantage of
my Master, and good of my Brethren, after my weake measure, Aur
                     •
                  us vtluteas
minuat sic malleus vrnas.
            
            22 As for others my Brethren, whom I loue in the Lord, and will alwaies
reuerence for the graces of God in them, I wish from my heart that
precept of the Apostle were fulfilled in vs.1 Cor. 1. That wee did all speake one
thing, and there were no dissension among vs, but that we were knit together

in one minde, and one iudgement, for since the first beginning of this question,
I euer thought it a lamentable thing, that they whose hearts are ioyned
in one resolution to die for Christ, if so the Lord should call them vnto
it, cannot liue together in the vnitie of one minde. But this hath in all ages
beene Sathans policie, where hee cannot disturbe the peace of the Church
with externall euasion, he creepes in like a subtile Serpent, to disquiet it with
internall perturbation, & that oft-times vpon vnnecessarie or small occasions:
where-vpon hath proceeded this great rupture in Ierusalems wall heere among
vs, which as it is seene of vs all, and more then enough talked of by
many, so would to God, our hearts did pitie it, and all of vs endeuoured by
humbled hearts toward our God, by meekenesse of minde, euery one of vs
toward another, to repaire and close it vp againe. And seeing such in the
condition of our humane infirmitie, that our knowledge in this life is but in
part, and so our iudgements in all things cannot be vniforme, let vs take heed
to the next, that difference of iudgements worke not distraction of affections,
remembring that the wisedome which is from aboue, is peaceable, and
that the zeale of God fights not with the weapons of flesh, such as hatred,
debate,Iam. 1. emulations, wrath, contentions. I
                     •
                   we liue in the Spirit, let vs also walke
in the Spirit, expressing the fruits of it in our liues, which are, loue, ioy, peace,
long suffering, meekenesse, goodnesse, wherewith the Lord more and more
endue vs all for Christs sake, AMEN.
            
               Yours in the Lord,
WILLIAM COOPER,
B. of Galloway.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A DEFENCE OF
THE BISHOP OF
Galloway his Apologie,
against the Paralogie
of Mr. D. H.
            
               PSAL. 7. 10.
               My defence is in God, who preserueth the vpright
in heart.
            
            
               I Receiued from Master Dauid 
Hume, a Gentleman of sundrie
good qualities (if they
were seasoned with greater
sobernesse, pietie, and loue)
An admonitorie letter; (as hee
calls it) intending thereby to
make mine Apologie Anapologeticke;
but indeede, as it will shew it selfe, An Accusatorie
libell, dentata Charta, 
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
written in defence of those falshoods, which the former
shamelesse, and namelesse Libeller had forged against
mee, and which now I am forced againe to improue,
that all honest men may see mine Apologie

Euapolegeticke, my defence easily defended, and vvith
reason.
            
                Before I entred to reade it, I bowed my knees to
the Lord my God, earnestly praying, that if it contained
any message from the Lord, he would encline my
heart to follow it, and not suffer the vnruly passions,
and perturbations of corrupt nature in me, to suffocate
any light comming from his Maiestie toward me. But
hauing read it, I found it to be but inanis, & inanimis
oratio, a vaine declamation, void of spirit, life, truth and
loue; stored with such carnall boastings, contemptible
reproaches, raylings, false lyings, and iterate criminations,
as ministred vnto me manifest proofes, that the
Spirit which hath stirred him vp to this vnchristian
and contentious dealing, proceedes from the father of
lies, who hath so far miscaried him out of the compasse
of Christian modestie,Aug de. verb. Dom as to shew himselfe Non correctorm,
sed traditorem, non correptorem, sed corrosorem,
Not a corrector,Ber. epist. 78. but a betrayer, not a reprouer, but a
biting deuourer: for which I went againe the second
time, and vpon the knees of mine heart, spread it out
before God, as good Ezekiah did the rayling of Rabsache.
            
            
                And heere I found contentment enough for my
selfe, and willingly would haue rested in the secret of
mine owne heart, possessing (as our Sauiour counselleth)
my soule in patience, which the admonent out of his impatience,
wrongfully, and vainely had besieged without,
remembring that of Nazianzene,
               Nazian. lib. cyg. Carm. 
               In irae praelio risus
optima est armatura, in a battell 
                  •
               f warth, foughten with
words,Chrysoft in Ioan. cap. 7. laughter is best armour, Quid enim, an non diues,
si pauper appellatur, ridet, quia fal
                     •
                  um id nouit? For
why, will not a rich man if he be called poore, laugh
in himselfe, because he knowes it is false, which is said
of him? Howsoeuer mine opponent please himselfe, in

saying what he will, it is notorious to me, he hath said
what he should not, to him it is truth (as hee sayes) by
appearance, to me it is certainly knowne to be an vntruth.
            In this testimonie as I haue said, I would willingly 
haue rested, if the admonent in signe of battel, arietem in
nos immisisset, yea by displayed banner had made known
vnto others, that he intended battell against me, before
he had giuen vp, or made any signification vnto mee,
and there-after when his admonition came to me, hee
warnes me by his letter sent with it, that I should not
receiue it, as priuate, but publicke, because (forsooth) a
publicke matter must be publickly handled, with many
other pert probations to triall, giuing out great brags,
that he hath sought many, but can finde none to encounter
with him, Et calum territat armis, nec minus gloriatur,
quam si argiuum abstul
                     •
                  sset clypeum. Beside, that his
particular imputations are so shamelesse, as to charge
me plainely for a Teacher of false Doctrine, and a man
of corrupt conscience. And I know this Treatise of
his is caried from hand to hand among those of his
owne humor, like an Idoll, in a procession of triumph,
admired, yea adored, as if it were some new Apollinis
oraculum. That dutie also which I own to my brethren,
and all honest, peaceable, and well affected
Christians, bindes mee to giue them iust satisfaction
for remouing such offences as this aduersarie hath laid
before them.Cler. Rom. Cyp. epist. 31. 
               Quamuis enim animus bene sibi conscius Deo
solo contentus esse soleat, nec alterius, aut laudes petere, aut
accusationes pertimescere geminata tamen laude sunt condigni,
qui cum consci
                     •
                  ntiam sciant se soli Deo debere iudici
actus tamen suos desiderant, ab ipsis etiam fratribus comprobari.
For albeit, an honest conscience contents it selfe
with God, and neither seekes the praise, nor feares the
accusation of another, yet are they worthie of double

praise, who knowing that God is the onely Iudge of
their conscience, desires neuer the lesse, their actions
may be approued of their brethren. In all these respects
I hope it shall be none offence to modest men,
that I haue broken my determinate silence, and resolued
once for all to answere, I will not say a Foole, yet
certainely an inconsiderate man,Pro. 26. 5. 
               least he seeme to be wise
in his owne conceit.
            
            
                Mr. Dauid his whole Treatise consists of raylings,
and reasonings: the fore-front, or vantgard of his
battell hee commits to raylings, and these disordered
and confused, altogether: wherein I must excuse him,
it being hard to keepe such wilde Warriours in rule,
as here he hath hired against me. I haue gone through
them with order, and reduced them to foure ranckes:
raylings, first against my Name. 2. against my Conscience.
3. against my Ministerie. 4. against my Brethren
cloathed with the office of Bishops. In the end,
he commeth more modestly to enquire of the cause,
and there by Gods grace, hee shall finde me, as modest
as he seekes me, readie with words of sobernesse and
truth, to resolue him, if hee be readie with like affection
to receiue it. But as to his behauiour in the beginning:
I vvould truly haue dealt vvith him in the
Spirit of meekenesse,
               1 Cor. 4. I loue it best, but hee hath forced
mee to come with a rodde; yea, it is good for him
and others, I should so doe: Since I am a Pastor, and
hee a Sheepe of the Flocke: since hee hath shewed
mee the sore, and protests in vvord hee is content
I should cure it: Since I see his corruption so grosse,
and that the canker thereof is like to eate him vp, I
cannot of dutie but apply the greatest, the sharpest
salt I can get to rectifie it. Excuse mee Master Dauid,
though it should bite you, better so, that you may be
mended, then otherwise, that this cankred corruption

should consume you, which it will not faile to doe, if
it be not in time preuented.
            For, beleeue, mee, you haue come forth, not like a 
new Dauid, but an olde Diogenes: Canis & tuba conuitiorum,
Not with the gentle oyle of admonition, nor
with the sharper wine of compunction, both which are
necessarie in correcting offences by rebukes, and vsed
by the sweet Samaritane in curing the wounds of his
owne,Ber. 
               Vngendo sanat Christus Iehouae, non vrendo, But
you are a Phisitian of another qualitie, you haue propined
a Cup full of the gall of your bitternesse, it is returned
backe to your selfe,Psal. 37. 14. and you must drinke it,
You haue drawne your sword to slay such as be of vpright
conuersation, and it is entred into your owne bowels: You
vvould kindle a hellish fire in an heauenly fellowshippe,
and pester the Paradise of GOD vvith the
pest and poyson of Satan. You bring in vvorkes
of the flesh, hatred, emulation, wrath, contention, sedition,
enuie, lying, rayling, heresie: (for you are the
first Father of this calumnie, that in our Church
are Teachers of false Doctrine) to defend, as you
thinke a Spirituall cause. This is intollerable in the
Church, this is to shame the Church (so farre as you
may.)
            It were but a iust recompence of your presumption,
to pay you home with your owne money. Neither
is it alway reproueable (said Nazian.) Radentem vicissim
radere; I know he commends Hero the Martyr, that he
came out against the Cynicks of his time, Canis aduersus
veros canes: but where the iniurie concernes my selfe, I
will not so requi
                  •
               e you. You haue iudged my conscience
to be corrupt, & done what you could to defame
me, I will not doe the like to you. I am bound by the
Apostles precept,Rom. 12. 17. 
               recompence to no man euill for euill. And
againe, Be not ouercome of euill, but ouercome euill with

goodnesse. Ver. 21. I remember mine owne lesson in the
Alphabet for Sions Schollers, it is dangerous to fight
against Satan with his owne armour, to giue rebuke
for rebuke,Turtul. and pay home one calumnie with another:
for I know there is no difference inter prouocantem et
prouocatum,
               Nazian. Eustochio. epist. 55. 
               nisi quod ille prior in maleficio depraehenditur. I
esteeme it neither wisedome then manhood, Cum virtute
vincere liceat vitio superari, aut etiam superare, quod
multo sceleratius est: When a man may ouercome by
vertue, to suffer himselfe be ouercome by vice in another,
or which is much worse, to striue by it to ouercome
others.
            But where your reproaches are not priuate, nor
personall onely, but publicke, concerning the whole
Church, I cannot of dutie but speake of them as they
are vnder, such names and stiles as they deserue: for
the cause is common, and the Ministrie of a publicke
Office-bearer in the Church, is for the benefit of others,
where it is good, and honest, the defaming of it,
is not without the preiudice of many, that should receiue
good by it. In this you haue degressed so inordinately
out of the compasse of Christian dutie, that I
am forced to come to you with a fire from God, to
burne vp, extinguish and vndoe your vncouth fire, and
with an holy anger, as the hammer of God, to beate
downe the horne of your pride. That same holy Spirit,
which at one time descended in the likenesse of a
Doue, at another discended in the similitude of Fire.
Meekenesse alway is not to be vsed: there is a time
when it becommeth Moses, the meekest man of the
earth, to be angrie. I dare not say I can rule anger, as
he did, but shall doe what I may to restraine it. I know
then onely is anger good, when it is a seruant to reason,Basil. Ser. de ira.
and a Souldier fighting for the truth, Tunc neruus
quidam animae est indignatio, fortitudinem ad res bene gerendas

praebens. And here if any shame of this conflict
arise vnto you, it is not by my deede, you haue drawne
it vpon your selfe. As the dirt which the Sea foames
and casts vp in her flowing, returnes backe againe
without difficultie into her owne bosome in the ebbing:
so is it, beleeue me, with you; you haue here but
foamed out your owne shame, your reproaches and
calumnies, which you haue here heaped vp, and dawbed
together with vntempered morter, so soone as they
are touched, fall backe vpon your selfe, and it is not
my rebuke, but your owne, returning vnto you.
            You haue drawne me from mine accustomed course 
of studie, vnto a field of Contention, which I like not.
It had beene greater pleasure to mee, and profit to others,
I had spent this time vpon some other subiect,
meeter for edification of the soules of men, and doubtlesse
or now I had done so, if you had not interrupted
me: but since you haue kindled a fire in the Church,
and your selfe falne into it, and like to draw others
with you into it also, I will not be so vndutifull as
to leaue any thing vndone, that I may doe to quench
it. And if in pulling you out of this fire, I handle you
more roughly then otherwise I would, and my speeches
be sharper then you like wel of to heare; yet I hope
to speake nothing against your selfe, but against your
sinne, not to seeke a fault in you by searching your
conscience, but to rebuke it, where you by word plainly
manifest it: and in this if not you, yet at least the Christian
Reader will excusemee, your danger is so desperate,
the danger wherein simple ones are drawne by
you, yea the perill imminent to the whole Church so
euident, by this trumpet of Sedition you haue blowne
into it,2 Sam 2
                     •
                  . like another Bichraean Sheba, that I am forced
to doe as I haue done.
            Yet by Gods grace two things I shall keepe, Patience
               
               
and Loue, the one in my selfe,Aug. Marcel. Epist. 5. 
               Cauendum enim est ne vindictae
cupiditate amittatur ipsa patientia, quae pluris est habenda,
quam omne quod potest inimicus etiam inuito auferre.
The other toward you, I haue, and I will loue you,
whether you will or not, neither shall your raging in
this Feauer, alienate mine affection from you. But indeed,
I looked for better fruits from you, and expected
you should haue beene answerable to your stile, Theagrius.
The husbandrie of God should abound in fruits
of the Spirit, which are loue, peace, gentlenesse, goodnesse,
meekenesse: but how farre you haue digressed
from these, I hope you will see better, when you come
to your selfe againe?Psal. 55. 12. 
               Surely if mine enemie had defamed
me, I could haue borne it, or if mine aduersarie had exalted
himselfe against mee, I would haue hid my selfe from him:
but it was thou, O man, euen my familiar, and my companion,
who delighted to consult together, and goe to the house of
God as companions: What can the most professed enemie
of the Gospell doe more then you haue done.
You haue rewarded me euill for good, and so haue brought
your selfe vnder the danger of that fearefull sentence:Psal. 35. 12.
               He that rewardeth euill for good, euill shall neuer depart from
his house: I wish your eyes may be opened to see it, and
God may giue you grace in time to repent of it. But
now to come to the matter.
            
                The spight of your furie runnes first against my
name, and that with such violence, as declares a great
force of inordinate affection in you to ouer-runne it,
if you could. For so you begin.
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               RIght loued brother, while I am in expectation of the answere
you promised to my Letters, I receiued by euenture

your Apologie written in defence of your fame, as you
giue it out in your Preface, and proues you should so doe by
diuers authorities of diuers Doctours, yet as good will thinke
Fame should be despised, or procured, and retained by good
actions, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  HVmano capiti ceruicem pictor equinam, &c.
                  
               
               Mr. Dauid begins at right loued brother; but that
this agrees no better with the progresse of his Paralogie,
then a mans head set vpon a beasts body, will be
manifest in the own place.Reuel. 9. The Locusts that came out
of the bottomlesse pit, had a face like a mans face, but
their teeth were as the teeth of Lyons, and their tailes
like vnto the Scorpion, it becomes not a professed Christian
to be like one of them. Doe you not here come
to mee, as Ioab did to Amasa, hee tooke him by the
beard with the right hand, to kisse him, and said, Art
thou in health my brother?
                  Pro. 26. 23. and smote him with the left
hand. As siluer drosse ouer-laied vpon a pot-shard, so are
burning lips, and a false heart: if a louing heart had moued
your lips in louing manner, to call me Right loued
brother, you would haue spared to spew out such raylings
as after followes, but you haue bewrayed your
selfe: Salomon heere hath found you out, to be but a
guilt Pot-shard, pretending by one word Christian brotherhood,
when all the rest of your words and deedes,
proues the contrarie, as concerning me.
               What euenture caried mine Apologie to you, I care 
not, I published it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , speaking truly
on my conscience to men, as conscience spake vnto
me, onely to remoue such offence as weake Christians
might conceiue, through the calumnies of a lying

Libeller, I did it with such moderation of words, as I
cannot thinke it offended any man, if I were in the
wrong to any, it was to my Brethren, who stand for
Episcopall gouernment, in that I set it lower, to procure
peace, then I should haue done; yet it offends Mr.
Dauid, though it no way concerne him, he will be a busic-bodie,
and meddle with other mens matters, where-vnto
he hath neither calling nor commission.
               
                   What your Doctours are, who mislike that a good
name should be defended, yea that it should be despifed,
I know not: you say it, but you cite them not, as
good you call them, as Philo, Tertullian, Ierome, Ambrose,
Nazianzene, Augustine: These men are small in
Mr. Dauids conceit, here in the very entry giuing vs a
taste of that humour, wherein you continue and encrease
in the rest, liberall enough in your (as good) a
word frequently vsed of them who are scant of matter,
& yet faine would be contending: but this chaire is
too high for you, to be the Palemon of Doctours past,
and present; can you tell their value, can you match
them rightly? you still vsurpe it, but will be found to
take too much vpon you.
               A name, sayes your Doctors, should be despised, or
else say you obtained, and retained by good actions,
not by Apologies. The first is true, no man denies it,
a good name should be procured by good deedes, but
why seclude you the second? Are not Apologies lawfull,
yea needfull, to conserue a good name, begotten
of good actions, when an euill tongue would destroy
it? For why? will good actions stop the mouthes of
backbiters? Will innocencie it selfe fence a man against
the strife of tongues? No, it kept not Iesus the iust
from the scourge of the tongue. Was not Samuel an
vnrebukeable man among men, yet forced to vse Apologie:
                  1 Sam. 12. 3.
                  Behold, here am I, beare record of me before the Lord,

whose Oxe haue I taken? or whose Asse haue I taken? or
whom haue I done wrong to? or whom haue I hurt? or at
whose hand haue I receiued any bribe to blinde mine eyes
therewith? Mr. Dauid, many a time in your admonitorie,
you charge me for a corrupt louer of gaine: but I
adhere to Samuels protestation before the Lord against
you, and against all creatures. I could tell at how manie
hands I haue refused gaine, euen for a shew of vngodlinesse,
but that creature was not, is not, that can
conuict me of receiuing it. And was not Saint Paul, a
faithfull seruant of God, a painefull man in the worke
of the Ministrie, yet compelled to plead his cause by
Apologies before men. What shall I say, the Christians
of the primitiue Church were men of a godly life, yet
so sore oppressed with calumnies that Iustin, Tertullian,
& other Fathers of the Church were forced to defend
them by Apologies? A worthy, constant, and couragious
man of God was Athanasius: was he not without
cause accused as a Murtherer and Sorcerer, that he had
slain Arsenius, & cut off his right arme, to vse it in witchcraft,
and so forced to purge himselfe by Apologie?
               And is not this it, which I tolde you so clearely in 
mine Apologie, but that you can see nothing, which
pleaseth not your humour? I tell you it now therefore
ouer againe: It is Satans policie to staine the Name,
where hee cannot corrupt the Conscience; and to disgrace
the person, by contempt of men, where he cannot
dishonour them, by trapping them in his owne
snare. Sore hath mine aduersarie thrust at mee, from
my young yeeres, by change of tentations hath hee
sought to winnow mee, if you had read my little Dialogue,
it could haue told you I haue beene trained vp
with the wrastlings of GOD. Many wayes hath the
Enemie sought to snare me, that he might shame me,
and in shaming me, might shame the glorious Ministrie

committed to me, though least, and vnworthiest of all
his seruants: But my Lord prayed for mee, and his
grace preserued me, that Satan got no vantage against
mee, to the disaduantage of the Gospell: but now hee
hath changed his battell,☞ and heere is the point; what
Satan could neuer obtaine of mee by inward tentation, hee
would make the world beleeue by outward calumnie, that he
had obtained it, and that he had made me a man of a corrupt
conscience, and of an vnhonest heart toward God and man.
Before he fought against mee with inward tentations,
and I resisted him by instant prayer; now he impugnes
me by outward calumnies, he hath not, I thanke God,
corrupted my conscience, but he would make men beleeue
that he had done it: and here it offends Mr. Dauid,
I should resist the enemie, and defend my selfe by
Apologies: Since he hath changed the manner of his
on-set, why may not I change the manner of my Defence?
for in all this I take him for my principall
partie.
               
                   Thus stands the question betweene Satan and mee,
and I am sorie for you that you come in to second
him, and serue him for an instrument to carie his lies
vpon the chariots of your tongue and penne, to the
eares and hearts of others, for to speake according to
truth: this is the place vvherein you stand at this
time, you haue taken you to be Satans second in this
combat against me, at least he hath abused you to follow
him ignorantly into it: But since there must be a
winde and a firie Chariot to carie Elijah into heauen.
Since there must be an Angell of Satan to buffet Paul,
and keepe him from pride: Since there must be a fire
to purge the sonnes of Leui, I meane of affliction, which
vnto the godly is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Purgatorie fire
of Pisida, since gold cannot be fined but by Lead, which
consumes and finishes it selfe in the fining of it: let it

come by any instrument, by you, or any other the
Lord pleaseth to stirre vp, so it bring forward his worke
in me, I care not.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               MOreouer, I am sure ye know it is with the oppugning of
the Discipline of Scotland, the defence of the office of
Bishops: This is more then any mans fame, the fame of the
whole Church of Scotland these many yeeres, the fame of
the best reformed Church in Europe. It is yet more, a matter
touching the Church in lawfulnesse or vnlawfulnesse, in
obedience or disobedience to their God, to their Prince, as
you would make men beleeue. Also of the estate of the
Church in profit, flourishing, or not flourishing, and many such
things of great importance, of what weight should fame be
here? And againe, If fame be ioyned with the truth, and
that which is right in the sight of God, let that truth and
that right haue the sway in our hearts, let it appeare in our
profession. In our pretences, in our actions, let vs auow it before
the Sunne and Moone, not because of our fame, but because
of it selfe, we shall haue no losse thereby, our fame shall
be cleared, by clearing of it. If our fame be ioyned▪ with errour,
or what is wrong in the eyes of that diuine Maiestie,
so that it cannot be borne out, but by bearing out of errour,
let vs not seeke to maintaine our fame by maintaining that errour;
let vs stoope to him, and renounce that foolish fame, and
count it our honour so to confesse our shame.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  HE that is first in his owne cause (saith Saloman) is 
iust,
                  Pro. 18. 17. 
                  then commeth his neighbour, and makes enquirie

of him. You haue heaped vp heere a multitude of
words, huing a faire shew, not vnlike the words of the
friends of Iob, good enough in themselues, but wrongfully
applied, as will be seene by mine answere. Farre
be it from mee Mr. Dauid, to seeke honour with the
dishonour of my good God: I will still vse the words
of those fortie Martyrs mentioned of Basile, Nolo honorem
vnde nascetur ignominia,
                  Basil. Ser. in 4. Mar. 1. Neither will I maintaine my
Name by impairing his Truth: Nay, nay, God forbid I
should so doe, but it is for his truth, and for the honour
of his name that I contend to maintaine my
poore name. Since the Lord hath counted mee faithfull,
and put me in his seruice; since he hath called me
to be a witnesse of his truth, and since he hath blessed
my Ministrie to doe good by it; will you not suffer
me to defend the honestie of it against a lying Libeller
that hath sought to dishonour it? But I know where
you are, Satan would haue me a witnesse of no value,
nor credit, because through grace I stand vnder the
banner of Christ against him, and so would you, because
I am against you in this question of Church-gouernement:
you seeke so farre as you may to disgrace
the man, that his testimonie may be the lesse regarded.
Here is your policie, but it will not be for you. I
thanke God, among men I haue more to stand with
me, witnesses of the honestie and effcacie of my weake
Ministrie, then you are able to bring against mee: neither
am I in doubt, but the same also who for the present
are with you, if it pleased God I were knowne to
them, as I am to others, who haue felt the comfort of
my Ministrie, would stand vp to iustifie mee against
you. But to leaue men, and come before the Lord,
Mr. Dauid, I dare not speake presumptuously, since
our Lord in the weakenesse of one, haue pointed out
the infirmitie of all, yet in some measure I may say, I

haue name, and life, and all that I haue to giue vnto
the Lord for the glory of his name, and fealing vp of
his truth, if his Maiestie require it, I trust hee will giue
grace to performe it. Neither care I what shame befall
me, so it may serue to hold vp the honour of my God.
If this inward testimonie of mine owne heart sustained
mee not, it had beene impossible for me to haue
borne the manifold contempts of flesh I haue suffered,
and this of yours among the rest, but to goe from
my selfe.
               The discipline of the Church of Scotland, is not 
oppugned by Bishops, as you would make the simpler
sort beleeue; but rather it is stablished, and confirmed
by them. Neither will you euer be able to proue, that
the discipline of our Church at any time disalloweth
the office of Bishops, but onely fights against the corruptions
thereof, as the monuments of our Church,
search them when you will, shall make manifest vnto
you. And if you be able to make it good, that it is a
hurt to a family, to haue a kindely Father ruling ouer
it, then may you also proue that it is a harme to the
Church, to haue an honest Bishop president in it?
This is for the honour and name of the Church of
Scotland, which now I maintaine according to truth,
and set it downe in this assertion.
               The Church of Scotland,☞ with the puritie of Doctrine,
not stained with any blot of Heresie, hath also kept a sound,
and constant forme of gouernement, without alteration of any
point of Discipline in substance, mending onely some circumstances,
as time required, to make them serue for the greater
edification of the Church.
               This is the point I promised to cleare vnto you, I 
hope to make it plaine or I end, and should haue cleared
before now, if your Katagoric Pamphlet had not distracted
mee. This Mr. Dauid is the state of the controuersie:

This is a truth, which neither you, nor your
Trident Fathers, nor your Sorbon Doctors, none with
you, none by West you, none by East you, none about
you will euer be able to impugne. And if you, or they
haue any compassion of this Church, if you be her
Sonne, a Christian, borne againe in her bosome, if you
haue sucked out of her breasts the milke of consolation,
then I am sure you will feare to impugne it:
Since as I said it is a truth, it is the honour of your
Mother, who in all times hath kept one constant tenour
of Doctrine and Discipline, since it procures peace
in her bowels, since it stops the aduersaries mouth, and
remoues offences from the weaker ones.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               
                  I Am sure you know that this defence of your name, is with
the touch of many mens fame, euen all those who are of a
contrarie minde in matter of Discipline: but you thinke you
care not for that, it is lawfull for you to defend your owne,
though with the interest of theirs. And againe you say:
That such as shall be liberall to speake against you, appearingly
you call them carnall contentious Spirits, Demi-gods, as
if God had set his tribunall in their tongue, or made them
Iudges of mens Consciences, Libellers of lies, Shemeis, Raylers,
Busie-bodies, Night-birds, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   DOe you not here speake as one of the children of
men set on fire,
                  Psal. 57. 
                  whose teeth are speares and arrowes, and
their tongue a sharpe sword? Are you not heere blowing
at the coale, to kindle if you can a fire among brethren.

To strengthen your feeble cause▪ you cry for a partie▪
and goes about, not with the godly policie of S. Paul,
to deuide Pharisies and Sadduces, but with the godlesse
impietie of the Serpent, to sowe the seede of dissention
among brethren. That euill-one doth it in the night,
when men are sleeping, and you are not afraid to doe
it in the day,Psal. 58. and all men looking vpon you. Is it true
which you haue said, speake you iustly, and haue you iudged
vprightly? Will you throw these words of mine against
my brethren? are you become so brazen-fac'd? haue you
shaken off all shame, and taken libertie to say what you
like, yea euen against your owne light? for you dare
not say plainely to it, but appearingly, say you, I call them
so. Are not my words plaine? said I not in mine Apologie,
I am sure no well aduised Christian will fight with such
armour? if I thinke no Christian will doe it, farre lesse
will any brother of the Ministrie doe it. Are they who
are contrarie minded in Church-gouernment, otherwise
stiled by mee, then Reuerend Fathers, or Brethren?
God knowes they are so in my heart, as I haue termed
them in speech. Yet you say I haue iniured them in
their name.
               My speech was then against a lying Libeller, and 
some other professours, whereof some are preposterously
zealous, others prophanely presumptious, to
giue out rash iudgement of all men. I knew not then
that you had beene one of that sort, but since my
words haue beene to you like the breath of the Hart,
to draw such a Serpent as you out of your denne, and
make you know your selfe in your owne colours, I cannot
but tell you plainely, that you are one of them, to
whom all these Epithets rehearsed by you are competent,
a few onely excepted, Carnally contentious a rayling
busie-bodie, a Dem
                        •
                     god; vsurping Gods tribunall, you
haue here declared your self but of others I cleare you,

that you are not a night-bird, a chatterer in secret; a biter
behinde backes: For the height of your pride, and stoutnesse
of your conceit carries you so farre, that you
thinke it too little for the greatnesse of your reputation
to be a Pestilence walking in darknesse.
                  Psal. 91. 6. Nay, for the
honour of your name, you must be daemonum meridianum,
a plague that destroyes at noone, and an arrowe
that flies by day, to slay the innocent. This is wickednesse
more then enough; and yet, Vt sit supra modum
peccans peccatum, you will adde drunkennesse to thirst,
and not content to slay one, you will (as I said) be a
fire-brand in the Church to burne all, kindling, continuing,
encreasing fierie contention among brethren.
               
                   It became you rather of Christian dutie (if you
knew it) to bring words of modestie, truth, and loue,
like water to quench the fire that is, then by words of
strife and contention, to kindle it where it is not, et sic
oleum camino addere. Thinke you Mr. Dauid to goe betweene
vs and our brethren; beleeue mee, they neede
not your patrocinie at our hands, nor we yours, or any
mans at theirs, euen the Lord knowes how wee haue
tendred their names, they are our brethren, wee dare
goe neerer them then you, to liue with them, to die
with them: where discrepance of iudgement is about
things externall, God knowes it is with our mutuall
griefe: where consonance is, as blessed be the Lord it
is in all points of Faith, it is with our mutuall ioy. And
since the beginning of this Controuersie, I did euer
thinke it a lamentable thing, to see such as agree in
vnitie of faith, disagree in a matter of Discipline, and
that those who could happily haue concorded on a
scaffold, to scale the truth of God, professed by them
both; if so the Lord had called them vnto it, should
thus vnnecessarily discord for a question of externall

Church-gouernement, in it selfe not absolutely requisite
to Saluation.
               But this (as I said in mine Apologie) is the pittifull 
condition of humane infirmitie. If I cannot mend it,
I shall at least mourne for it, and will daily pray to my
God, that he would set peace in Ierusalems borders, and vnite
the hearts of his seruants into one. Neither will I despaire
of it, but will pray the Lord to stirre vp in this
Church such a man as Athanasius was, and blesse the
worke of this Vnion in his hands. A powerfull instrument
of the Lord was hee to conserue puritie of Doctrine
by his singular constancie, with peace among
Preachers by his godly wisedome: for this was he renowned,
as Columen Ecclesiae in his time. Many times
was hee banished by deceit, and often-times forced to
flie, to eschew the furie of his enemie: but none of all
his sufferings purchased him such commendation as
this, that when hee came home, and found a Schisme
among the Fathers of the Church, for a greater cause
then any that is among vs (praised be God) yet he happily
composed it,Nazian▪ de laude Athan. 
                  Vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim parte leniter & humane
accersita verborum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      sententia diligenter, & accurrate perpensa
postaquam Concordes reperit, nec quantum ad doctrinam
quicquam inter se dissidentes, ita negotium transegit, vt
nominum vsum ipsis concedens, rebus ipsos constringeret▪
                  
For calling both the parties with meekenesse and loue
vnto him, and iudiciously pondering either of their
opinions, he perceiued that concerning Doctrine there
was no difference, the diuersitie was about words, the
matter vvhich either of them beleeued, one and the
same, hee did therefore so compose this discord, that
leauing vnto them free the vse of the words & names,
hee bound them both with necessitie of the matter it
selfe. I wish againe that such an Athanasius were among
vs, for I can see nothing but strife about words and

persons (there being otherwise agreement both in the
matter of Doctrine and Discipline.) The same power
of gouernement that now is in our Church, was alway
in it, now vnder the name of a Bishop, before vnder a
name equiualent to it. And when both the names were
silent; yet the power of them both euer exercised by
some: When the name was not, the matter remained,
the power I meane in substance: But now contention
is growne to such heat, that an Office toll
                     •
                  rably lawfull,
needfull in it selfe, is thought vntollerable vnder
such a name, and for such persons as are with it, or against
it. A lamentable matter, for the which I sigh
within my selfe, and doe yet the third time cry for an
Athanas
                        •
                     us.
               
               
                   But till the Lord send this, I make knowne vnto
you, that you haue no cause to wrest my vvords against
my Brethren of the Ministrie, what euer their
iudgement or opinion be concerning Church-gouernement,
I would be loath to speake of them, as you
haue alleadged: and therefore because I see the heat
of contention in you is yet encreasing; remember
that when I speake of men of your humour, your sort,
your band, your fellowship, I meane of such as the
Libeller, and you haue declared your selues to be. Men
that sets by loue, for a liking of their opinion, that
spares not to forsake the bounds of modestie, yea, and
Christianitie, debating their priuate iudgement with
contention, rayling, lying, backe-biting: this is Satans
armour, and is not meere to be vsed in defence of the
cause of God: but now this first part of your Paralogie
containing raylings against my name, you conclude
this way.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               LOe, Brother, what I thinke right concerning your
name.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               THis is the second, and yet the last time that you 
vse any word of meekenesse and loue, they stand
alone in this your 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and thinkes shame of
the rest,Pro. 26. 28. 
                  As hee that faigneth himselfe madde casts firebrands,
arrowes, and mortall things, so dealeth the deceitfull
man with his friend, & saith, am not I in sport? Mr. Dauid
in a furie, without rithme or reason, strikes all that are
about him, friend or foe, as you will heare, and then
will mend all with a word, I am but in sport, and am
your brother. Salomon sayth, that this is to play the deceiuer.
               
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               YOur fame is in a hard case,Sect. 2. very hard to be cleared from
some blemish, &c.
               Thus stands it with your fame,Sect. 4. which I cannot see, how it
shall be remedied. And againe: Chiefely that Idoll Fame,
which you trauaile so to maintaine: beleeue me there is no remedie,
downe it must, and best by your selfe, your owne hand
may pull it downe more easily, others must more rudely. Thinke
not; your Apologies will doe the turne, Palmodies must
doe it.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   GOod Mr. Dauid, be not so sodaine▪ be appeased
but a little, and I will pay you to the vttermost
farthing; if I doe not, then pull all downe at your pleasure.
A righteous man (saith Salomon) hath compassion
ouer his beast, but the mercies of the wicked are crueltie.
Mr. Dauid, why wil you be so cruell as at one stroke to
slay both my selfe and my name, yea to burie my name,
ere I be dead my selfe▪ and that without anie pittie or
compassion? If you had anie loue, you would haue
mourned at least a little ouer it, because once it did
good, once it smelled well. Though there be not a
Tribe cut off from Israel (and euen they were sorie for
it,Iudg. 21. 6. which had done it) yet is there a man in your conceit
cut off from Israel, and you insult in the doing of
it, yea, and haue triumphed with your complices during
this interim of a none answere, neither can you
keepe it close, but in your pride proclaime it, that you
haue slaine a man.1 Sam. 30. 16. Yet it is but the Amalekites daunce:
your pray will quickly be taken from you; what you
thought you had done, you will finde it vndone. It
but fareth with you, as Philo saith it did with Cain:
Then Cain arose against his brother Abel, and slew him,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,Phil. whom slew he? not Abel, no: hee
slew himselfe. It seemes, saith he, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , an
incredible Paradoxe, yet is it true 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
Abel
is taken away in the foolish minde of Cain, but he liues
in God a blessed life; and my name which in your conceit
is past remedie, I suppose with you it is perished
cleane in Preston, and you haue buried it there,
neuer to rise againe: yet I am a man that beleeues the

resurrection of the dead, euen of them who are dead,
& buried in Preston also.Athan. cont. gent. But Mr. Dauid, know you not
that the Sunne shines clearely in some parts, euen when
it is obscured in others? I am sure you cannot be ignorant
of this, that when the Sunne is obscured by clouds
or smoake in Preston, yet other parts of the Kingdome
sees it clearely enough, and there also where it is obscured
for a time, it will shine againe. Who sent a winde,
and draue the Locusts of Egipt into the red Sea? Who
scattered the smoake that came from the bottomlesse
pit, to darken the Sunne? Is it not the Lord who soweth
light for the righteous? hee brings to light things that are
hid in darknesse. I will still walke in the innocencie and
simplicitie of mine heart, and not spare to speake to
men, what I haue beene taught of God, nothing moued
either with your calumnies, or other mens contempt.2 Sam. 6. 22. Mich. 7. 9.
                  And of these men that haue despised me, shall I be
had in honour: when God shall plead my cause, execute iudgement
for me, and bring me forth into the light.
               
               But now as Satan in the tempting of Iob, proceeded 
from a small tentation to a greater: so Mr. Dauid not
content to trample my name vnder foote at his pleasure,
makes corruption also vpon my conscience. Hee
iustifies the former Libeller in plaine termes, and will
needes haue mee guiltie of a corrupt loue vnto gaine
and glorie, for these are his words.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               MEn searching what should haue moued you to change
your minde,Sect. 3. lights onely on these two, Gaine, and Glorie,
as the onely appearant: for what could you euen say your
selfe, if you saw diuers Hammers hammering a vessell, and
it endured them all, and broke not, till the golden Hammer

come, and so soone as it hits, the vessell leapes asunder at the
first stroke: what would you thinke but that the golden Hammer
had broken it? &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  
                  AS athorne in the hand of a drunkard, so is a Parable in
the mouth of a foole (saith Salomon) for a drunkard
taking a thorne in his hand to strike others,Pro. 26. 9. hurteth
himselfe with it, and a foole pierces himselfe with the
Parable wherewith he thinkes to pricke another. Mr.
Dauid, this false supposition of yours is answered by
another, which is true: what if the vessell was broken,
or euer the golden Hammer touched it? if they vvho
could best see, being neerest vnto it, saw that it was so:
if the change was made, or euer the Bishopricke came,
is he not a lyer that will say the golden Hammer did it?
What euer you had said of the cause it selfe, or of my
name might haue beene somewhat excusable, these are
things externall; but how take you this boldnesse to
iudge another mans conscience?Iob. 28. 15. 3. 
                  Who art thou that
iudgest another mans seruant? hee standeth, or falleth to his
Master. My cause you thinke you know perfectly to
be euill, my name it pleases you to terme a vaine Idoll,
which you will haue pulled downe, though the smoke
of your pride darken your minde, so that you know
none of them as they are: but as for my conscience, I
am sure you know it not at all. The iudgement of conscience
belongs to him who iudges the highest things,
Who searches the r
                        •
                     ines and the heart, it is the Lord that
makes the weight of the winde, and weighes the waters by
measure, hee trieth the perfection of all things? How then
vsurpe you the Lords roome, to iudge things that are
secret? Will you sit downe on his tribunall? or otherwise.

                  Cum iudicare nescias cur vis calumniari?
                  Ambros. Why will
you calumniate, where you cannot iudge? why speake
you euill of that, which you know not.
               Now euen the God of truth, who hath the eies of 
fire to pierce into the soules of men, knoweth that you
haue giuen out false iudgement against me:Aug. de Ciuit. Dei. lib. 10. ca. 4. 
                  Deus font
est omnis beatitudinis meae, ipse finis omnis appetitionis meae,
As the Lord is the fountaine of my felicitie, so is he the
end of my desires:Psal. 37. 
                  Whom haue I in the heauen but thee?
and I haue desired none in the earth with thee: my flesh failes,
mine heart also, but God is the strength of mine heart, and
my portion for euer.
                  Nazian. 
                  Quem stercoribus animum adijciam,
Shall I set mine heart vpon dung? Was euer it so Lord
since I knew thee? This false accuser would foule the
face of my soule with it; looke vpon it O Lord, and
consider it.
               Perceiue you not how like you are to the Diuell in 
this accusation, what a false imputation was it which
he laid to the charge of Iob, the man of God: Doth Iob
serue God for nothing? Hee accuses him not of any corrupt
action, he could not, he accuses him of a corrupt
affection, that he was but a hireling, and a mercenarie
worshipper of God, one that serued God, not for loue
of God, but for loue of gaine which he got from God:
this is the voice of the accuser, hee is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and
how is this, that you will be like him; will you also be
a false accuser of your Brethren, imputing crimes to
them, which you, nor no flesh can know, farre lesse
qualifie? May it not content you to examine their actions?
how presume you to enter into their affections?
See you not how Satanicall this is to leaue the action,
and to iudge the affection? Perswade your selfe,
Mr. Dauid, the sinne in the world that hath had least
credit or commandement of mine heart, is Couetousnesse,
and loue of gaine;
                  Psal. 119. it had neuer force to encline mine

heart after it, I thanke the Lord: and yet you would
blot mee with it, you haue done me great wrong: the
Lord lay it not to your charge.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               ANd to what effect serues such and so many words?
One onely argument had beene better then them all, but
you bring neuer a one, onely for all arguments you appeale to
the testimonie of your conscience, which as it is the best comfort
inwardly, so the worst probation outwardly, for may not
any man purge himselfe of ambition and couetousnesse, and
whatsoeuer can be seene outward? Men thinke all makes
against you.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   BVt I pray you, Is not the crime which the Libeller
first, and you next impute to mee an inward
crime, and how can it be cleared, but by an inward
purgation? If the accusation were of an outward fact,
it behoued to be answered and auoided by outward
proofes and arguments, though euen in these oft-times
the Oath must decide the controuersie for lacke of other
probation: but here it is an internall guilt of a corrupt
affection, wherewith you charge me, and where
can I goe to improue it, but ad domesticum tribunal, to
the internall testimonie of anvncorrupt conscience?
Any equitable man may see how your preiudice blinds
you to denie a principall, when S. Paul retired to this
defence,Rom 9. 1. 
                  I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, my conscience
bearing me witnes in the holy Ghost. Might not his aduersaries
haue answered him, as you doe me, The testimonie

of conscience is the worst probation outwardly? yet he vses it.
My Apologie stands Apologetique for any thing you
haue said; and I meruaile not you doe what you may
to make mine Apologie no Apologie: Since you are so
pert to doe what you should not, to make my conscience
no conscience. It is more high then that you can
reach vnto it, more secret then that you can see it: Tu
vides in facie, Deus in corde, Man lookes into the countenance,
but God beholds the heart.
               And if wee shall compare man with man, it is certaine 
in this knowledge, you can no way compare
with me:Ber. ad Og
                        •
                     r. Epist. 87. 
                  Certum est quod eo ipso mihi notior sim, quam tibi,
quo propinquior ideo
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      magis credo mihi de me videnti
me, quam tibi o
                        •
                     inanti de me, quod non vides in me. Sure it
is, I know my selfe better then you can know me, I am
neerer mine owne hart then you, and am priuie to my
conscience, which you cannot be, and therefore haue
reason to beleeue my selfe of that which I know, and
see in my selfe, rather then you who are but an Opinator,
not a Spectator of mine heart, and thinke you see
that in me, which I know you see not. But since you
are of this humour, voide of loue, which beleeueth all
things, that you will not credit a Brothers declaration
of his conscience, I must in this leaue you to your
owne conceit, vvhich I credit verie well, to be such as
here you haue declared it, that is, both lawlesse, louelesse,
and truthlesse, as will better appeare in that which
followes, wherein to strengthen your calumnie, that
the loue of gaine and glorie moued mee to accept a
Bishopricke, you vvould make vs beleeue that most
part of honest men are as deepe in this contumely as
you are: for these are your words.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONNET.
               ANd howbeit, some will indeede be sober, and not so
bold to affirme any thing precisely, setting themselues,
as you plaine that Libeller doth, iudge of you, or any other
mans conscience, yet you may be sure the most modest, knowing
of no change come till the Bishopricke come, thinking
that, the most, yea the onely likely cause of the change, can but
suspend their iudgement, and what they encline, encline to
that, as most apparant. Againe, whatsoeuer can be seene
outward, men thinke all makes against you; then a little after,
Who can say that will say any thing at all, but that it is the
golden Hammer hath done the turne?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   MAster Dauid, beleeue me, you are now like a man
out of his owne element, confused, and perturbed
in your thoughts, if they be according to your
words. It were best you should hold you at your olde
tune of cauilling talke. There you speake like your
selfe, and it flowes best with you: now you would
come to speake words of modestie, and they will not
mouth for you; for what language is this, I pray, though
sober men be not bold to affirme it, yet the most modest will
encline to it? Perceiue you not how you reele, and roue,
and knowes not what you say? Doth not one of your
words dash and destroy another? They suspend their
iudgement (say you) and yet they encline to this as
most apparent. Sober men will not affirme it (say you)
yet the most modest will: and why forsooth? Because
(saith Mr. Dauid) It is most appearant. I pray you, doe

sober and modest men encline their iudgement to and
fro by appearance: and since as you say, Most modest
men suspends their iudgement, why are you not one
of those most modest men? why praecipate you, and
giues out rash iudgement? O but s
                     •
                  y you, you knew
no change till the Bishopricke came: What of that?
you knew it not, nor your complices, therefore it was
not. It was knowne clearelie enough to such as vvere
familiar with mee, it was knowne openlie in the Synods
of Fyffe, yea vnto manie that desired not to know it: it
vvas made knowne euerie day in the Presbyterie of
Perth, from the time that once the Episcopall gouernement
was receiued againe by order of the Church, by
act of generall assemblie, with approbation of his Maiestie,
I resolued to conforme my selfe, and from that
time declared it in communing, reasoning, disputing:
honouring Bishops priuatelie, publicklie, all that I
could, and willinglie would haue liued content all my
daies, to haue giuen honour to anie Brother of the
Ministrie, aduanced to that office, rather then receiued
it. This is the verie truth, though it was not published
in Preston, nor knowne to Mr. Dauid.
               
               And where you say, that Gaine and Glorie are the 
onelie apparant causes, and most modest men enclines
to them as most apparant, and that whatsoeuer can be
seene of men outwardlie, makes all against me. Now
God be thanked it is but apparantlie, and it is but the
thought, and sight of men, and that of your men, it is
but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , mans day, mans iudgement,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , and of such
men whose iudgement I set little by: my reason is, because
by their owne confession, it is but iudgement by
appearance. Will Christian Religion teach you to
iudge by appearance? Is not this the praise of our
Lord, who as he is a Prince of Saluation, so stands hee

also for a Paterne of righteousnesse vnto vs, Hee shall
bring out iudgement in truth: why bring you out iudgement
in vntruth? he iudges not by the hearing of the eare:
why doe you giue iudgement vpon report? hee iudges
not by appearance, and you spare not to condemne the
conscience of your brother, hauing no reason for you,
but appearance. Is not this too weake a probation for
so strong a calumnie? Who may not see, malice hath
moued you, no light hath led you: you haue bewrayed
by your speech the weakenesse of your cause, the
wickednesse of your heart, which God forgiue you.
Now you conclude this point.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               VVHo can say, that will say any thing at all, but it is
the golden Hammer hath done the turne?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  
                  HOw long will you vexe my soule, and torment me with
words?
                  Iob. 19. 2. 
                  you haue now tenne times reproached me, and
are not ashamed: you are impudent towards mee. Haue you
forgotten what you said euen now? Were not these
your words: Sober men will not say it, modest men enclines
to it but by appearance? Yet now you will make vs beleeue,
that such as will say any thing, can say no otherwise,
but as you say. Mr. Dauid, Mendacem oport
                        •
                     it esse
memorem. Frequently you bragge of this, that all men,
whom you know, thinke as you thinke, and so with the
terrible shew of your associates, like an Armie of the
stuffed skinnes of Indian Elephants, you would afray
vs. I am sure when your great multitude, mustred vnder

generall titles, comes to be viewed, they will be found,
as I haue said. For doubtlesse, godlie, modest, & learned
men, howsoeuer they be minded concerning the
cause it selfe, will no way approue your carnall debating
of it, nor yet allow that which you haue said:
they will be loath, I warrant you, to come vnder your
standard, neither will they thinke their cause strengthened,
but dishonoured by your Patrocinie. Thus
will you be found but like Chaucers Cooke, busie where
you neede not, taking paines, for which no side will
giue you thanks. And these being remoued from you,
who with their iudgement in Church-gouernement,
retaine inward sobrietie and brotherlie loue vvith
meekenesse; the remanent that will stand vp with you,
to maintaine your carnall, and contentio
                     •
                  s raylings,
will trie as I haue said. Your great Vniuersalitie will
be reduced to a small fellowship of strait-shod Gentlemen,
and to speake as it is, A Diocie of Donatists, of
whom you may read what hath beene the iudgement
of the godlie, Horum spiritus homicida & mendax: Who
thinke there is no Church, no Religion, no Conscience
but with the men of their opinion: and if any
man be otherwise minded, then forsooth hee is not a
Brother, you must keepe no companie with him, you
must not salute him, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , nor
walke in the streete or way with them. Fie vpon this
pride, what should such wickednesse doe in Sion? away
with it to Shinar, meeter for Barbarians of Moroco, then
for Christians of the beloued Ile. In Africk it dwelt
of olde, I would wish (if I might lawfullie) it were there
againe, and this Church were quit of it.
               Now in the third roome, Mr. Dauid in most furious
manner, inuades my Ministrie, not vnlike that
fourth, fearefull, and terrible beast which Daniel saw
in the vision, with iron teeth, deuouring, breaking in

pieces, stamping vnder feet all 
                     ••
                  at is before him. Now
he speweth out the superfluitie of his malitiousnesse,
and vvith most false and horrible calumnies he chargeth
me.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               ERrour must be confessed. 2. Erroneous Doctrine, yea
false Doctrine. 3. Rash affirming of vncertainties. 4. Inconsideratenesse,
temeritie, headinesse. 5. Inconstancie. 6. Papisticall
implicite faith. 7. Falsefying of Gods message, speaking
that whereof he had no warrant from him. 8. Prophaning
the chaire of veritie. 9. Carelesnesse and sloath in your
calling, that in a great, high, and speciall question of it, being
so long a Past
                     •
                  r, you neuer searched to know the truth of that
point.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  
                  O Lord, false witnesses are risen vp against mee, they
charge me with things which I know not.Psal. 35. 11. O righteous
God,Psal. 7. 9. who trieth the hearts and the reines, and hast proued
and visited mine heart in the night,Psal. 17. 3. plead thou my cause, and
let the lying lips be made dumbe, which cruelly, spightfully,
and proudly speake against the righteous.
               The answere which our Sauiour gaue his Disciples,
when they willed him to bring fire from heauen vpon
the Samaritanes, is not vnproper here for Mr. Dauid:
for hee hath here multiplied against me so many grieuous
imputations, as (if they were true) might iustly
make me worthie both of fierie wrath from God, and
of all indignation from man. But M. Dauid, you know

not of what spirit these railings haue proceeded. Saint
Iames saith,Iames 3. 17. that the wisedome which is from aboue is pure,
peaceable, gentle, easie to be entreated (no oath of conscience
can entreate Mr. Dauid.) It is full of mercie, he is so
full of malice that hee runnes ouer: for who will say
but that the house is full of smoake when it commeth
out at the dore and window? It is without iudging: he is
bold to iudge the most secret things. It is without H
                        •
                     pocrisie:
hee at one time kisseth and killeth, with Ioab. The
same man whom at one word hee cals A beloued Brother,
at the next word hee cals An abhominable man, a
false Teacher, &c. His mouth is full of bitter enuie and
strife, his tongue set on fire of Hell would set on fire
the course of Nature; yea, the whole Church if hee
could; this wisedome descends not from aboue, but is earthly,
sensuall and diuellish, saith S. Iames. Loe where you are
Mr. Dauid, see by what Decree you are condemned in
this doing; not mine but the Apostles. Is not this the
monstrous birth of your Viperous minde? Looke
backe to it againe, and see if it be well faced or not?
Thinke you not shame of it? or otherwise will nothing
content you, except yee be the Basiliske, king of Serpents,
and crowned as chiefe of railers?
               But let vs examine more narrowly, and see what 
truth is in him.Psal. 19. 12 You will first haue mee to confesse an
error: why not? I daily doe it, who knoweth the errours
of his life? Errare possum, Haereticus esse nol
                        •
                     . Wee are
men and may fall into errour, from Heresie Grace will
keepe vs, and mine heart abhorres it. But are you Mr.
Dauid and your fellowes free from errour?Aug. 
                  Homo, iuste
sanct
                        •
                     le, tune sine macula?
                  
                     N
                           •
                        z. orat. 39. in sancta luminaria▪
                   Holie one, tell mee, are you
without blemish? Dic mihi noue Pharisae & nomine duntaxat
pure: Is it so? I hope you will thinke shame to be
a new Pharisie,Ambros. pure in name onely. Audes tu mundum
te dicere, qui etsi operibus mundus esses hoc solo verbo immundus

                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 page duplicate〉
                     
                     
fieres? Dare the Catharan, Nouatian, Donatist,
say he is cleane? albeit in regard of his workes he were
cleane, yet this same proud word would make him vncleane.
But I thinke Mr. Dauid will confesse error also;
why then casts he the first stone at mee? O forsooth
Mr. Dauid is a common Christian, and I am a Preacher;
But may not a good and faithfull Preacher commit
an errour? To cite a testimonie of Scripture not out
of the right place is an errour: to draw a sense out of
the words, not consonant to the course of the Text,
suppose agreeable to the Analogie of Faith, is an
errour: to say that Timothie placed in Ephesus was an
extraordinarie Euangelist, seeing it is plaine hee was
setled there as an ordinarie Bishop, may be an errour
but no Heresie: to say that Papall Hierarchie came out
of Episcopall authoritie, is an errour, for it is not the
proper cause of the other; but who will call it Haeresie
or falsifying of Gods message? And many other waies
(not needfull to be repeated) may Preachers commit
errour, which yet are not Heresies. God forbid they so
were.
               
                   O but it is an higher Commission, which this Legate
from the Legion, hath brought against mee. Hee is
to accuse mee of many points of Treason against the
most high God, for so hee reckens them out: You haue
taught erronious doctrine false doctrine, and deceiued others.
Auoid Sathan, thou art shamelesse in lying. You haue
falsified Gods Message. Goe behinde mee Sathan, you
are diuellish in railing. You haue prophaned the chaire
of veritie. The Lord rebuke thee Sathan. Mr. Dauid,
this is not you; I will neuer thinke the good man of
Gods-Croft hath said this: no, it is but subtle Satan,
abusing the sillie Serpent.Aug. 
                  Vas es, alius te vtitur; organum
es, alius te tangit. The Apostle leades vs to this
consideration,Ephes. 6. 
                  We wrastle not with 
                        •
                     lesh and bloud, but with

Principalities, Powers, and spirituall Wickednesses. In this
you are but Satans Serjeant: Is est qui omnia peccata nostra
rimatur diligentia inuidi
                        •
                     ; It is hee that searcheth all
our sinnes with the watchfull eye of Enuie. I am onely
sorie that you are thus abused by him, and haue learned
Ex vno multa facere, so cunningly to calumniate,
and to imploy your engin to make a mountaine of a
mote if you could finde it; yet you would seeme modest,
and professe you are loath to touch; but can you
be more malicious, and if yee can I defie you. For I
must tell you, many a time hath Satan troubled mee
with his grieuous accusations, so much more fearefull
then yours, in that they were internall: I haue appealed
and drawne him before the highest Tribunall,
and there sundrie absoluitorie Decrees hath my God
giuen mee against his false imputations, by many glorious
victories hath the God of peace trampled Sathan vnder
my feete.
                  Rom. 16. And now you come in, as it were vpon a
new factorie from him, to charge me againe with the
same criminations, and pursue mee before the Iudicatorie
of men. Sillie man, why haue yee done this? Seeing
I haue endured the roaring of a Lyon, thinke you
that I will be commoned for the biting of a Flea?
               Euen Satan himselfe, as false as he is, knowes, and 
if hee could speake any truth hee might tell you that
you are here miscarried from the truth: I am no prophaner
of the Chaire of Veritie: I haue gone to the
Pulpit in much feare and trembling; I neuer went to it
vnsanctified by Prayer, and the best part of that houre
of preparation, haue I spent lying vpon the ground
on my face, with teares and cries begging the Lords
mercifull assistance. And after greatest humiliation, I
haue found his most comfortable presence. I am forced
to vtter that which I thought neuer flesh should
haue knowne, for answering this shamelesse Accuser,

who chargeth mee as a prophaner of the Chayre of
Veritie.
               
               
                   And as for false Doctrine, you are the first aduersarie
(among Professors) that euer charged any in our
Church with it. Is any Article of Faith denyed▪ because
the gouernment which you would haue is denyed?
Are they all false Teachers who stand for defence of
Presbyteries against Episcopall Gouernment: or will
you haue them false Teachers who stand for the maintenance
of Episcopall gouernment? Doth the one of
them so esteeme of the other? You will be

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a Doctor of the Law, but vnderstand not what
you speake, nor what you affirme. Can you call it false
doctrine which impugnes not any article of Faith?
Know you not that Preachers are the lawfull Iudges of
true and false Doctrine? Spiritus Prophetarum subijcitur
Prophetis; You are no Prophet nor Preacher, God called
you not to that honour, yet your pride causeth you
to stretch your selfe beyond your line, and to giue out against
a Preacher a decree of false Doctrine.
               You would haue it a matter of Faith, least it should
seeme that yee striue for nothing; but it will not be for
you: Is not this the confession of the reformed
Churches,
                     Aug. confess. Art. 7. 
                  Ad vnitatem fideisufficit, si consentiatur de doctrina
Euangelij, & administratione Sacramentorum; It is
sufficient for the vnitie of Faith, that wee agree in the
doctrine of the Euangell, and ministration of the
Sacraments. Dare yee say that in these among vs there
is any disagreement? will you 
                     •
                  eclude them all from
the vnitie of Faith, who are not partakers of this Discipline?
What then will you say to Beza; Exijs quaem Ecclesia
Christi requiruntur vt partibus suis omnibus constet,
                  
                     Beza do presb. & ex
                        •
                     om.
                  solam doctrinam videri nobis absolute & si
                        •
                     e omni exceptione
necessariam; Of those things which are required to make
vp a compleate Church, perfect in all her parts, it

seemes to mee that the word onely absolutely, and
without all exception is necessarie. Heare you this
Mr. Dauid, no word here of Discipline, nor externall
Church-gouernement as absolutely necessarie to make
vp a Church, yet you will haue it a matter of faith: and
againe,
                     Beza de gradibus ministrorum. 
                  Ordo est diuinitus praescriptus, ordinis ratio arbitraria
& pro circumstantijs temporum & locorum mutari potest,
quia positi
                        •
                     i est iuris: Order is prescribed by God,
the manner or forme of order is arbitrarie, and may be
changed according to the circumstances of times and
places, because it is of humane constitution.
               Praised be the Lord againe, there is no question of 
faith, no disagreement in anie article of our Creede, all
the Doctors of the reformed Churches in Europe agree
in the vnitie of one and the selfe-same Doctrine
of saluation; some discrepance indeede in the matter
of Discipline, some of them standing for Episcopall
gouernement, and others impugning it: but will the
one of them for this, account the other false Teachers?
And in our owne Church, many that haue different
iudgements concerning Church-gouernement, doe
liue in mutuall loue as brethren, the one not esteeming
the other Heretiques, till you come to make it so,
if you could: but God forbid, rather all of them ioyntly
haue cause to account you a diuider of brethren; a seditious
fire-brand in the Church, and a disturber of
Christian peace, if it lay in your power.
               In your other criminations you are still like your 
selfe, you will be as one of those Dogges and Swine,
that turnes backe to rend them, who hath cast vnto
you the pearles of the Kingdome of God, with horrible
imputations of implicite faith, inconstancie, rashnesse,
temeritie, negligence, and sloath in my calling. Mr. Dauid
humum, haec sapiunt, non Theagrium, imo nec 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      quidem,
sed 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , Argiua enim haec insectatio: you were

wiser to forbeare this language of Ashdod, and speake
in Canaans tongue, and out of the new generation. But
since you haue cast your selfe loose, to speake what
you should not, Sine iugo, statera, aut mensura, Without
a yoake,Amb offi▪ lib. 1. ca. 2. a ballance, or a measure, which three Ambrose
requires in the speech of a moderate man, you
must euen heare againe that which you would not, that
these criminations though they be not of such weight,
yet are they of no lesse falshood then the former.
               
                   And first, among all the points of Ditta, which you
haue here giuen in against mee, I meruaile most what
you meane to charge me with a Papists implicite faith.
Would you perswade them that I am become a Proselite
of theirs, tell me, thinke you so your selfe, or would
you haue others to thinke it? At that same time when
mine Apologie was published, there came forth also a
Treatise of mine against Papists, in defence of the antiquitie
of the Church of Scotland, prouing that we
receiued not Christian Religion from the Church of
Rome, might not that serue to cleare me, if you were
not malitious to speake against cleare light, of all Papisticke
implicite faith? What should haue moued you
to this calumnie, I know not, except that in my young
yeares, as other modest men of the Ministrie did, I imployed
my studie to Doctrine, and as for Discipline, I
embraced that which I found for the time, not making
anie enquirie of it. But M. Dauid, this will not proue
mee guiltie of a Papists implicite faith, but rather conuince
you of an Apists explicite euill will, who had
rather giuevantage to an enemie, or the Idoll of your
conceit be not honoured in all points, suppose to the
disgrace of a friend.
               
                   But the string you harpe most vpon, is my inconstancie,
euerie where throughout this Pamphlet you
obiect a change to mee, and as you call it an absurd

change: and heere you haue collected manie things
together of my speeches, Sermons, subscriptions, most
part of them false, as will be shewed when wee come
to them: but I pray you to what purpose bring you
probations, of that whereof in mine Apologie I haue
made a plaine confession, because say you, I haue not
beene cleare in that point to declare from what, and
vnto what I had changed: but Mr. Dauid, I supposed
I had spoken more clearelie then you desired me; and
if yet you wil haue it more plainelie explained to you,
here it is. In my younger yeares I misliked Episcopall
gouernement, not hauing studied the question of
Church-gouernement. Now after better consideration
of it, I approue it, as best for the Church, and hauing
the best warrants of all other gouernement. You
haue cried for a Palinodie, aduise how this will please
you, for I haue none other to giue you.
               This is it which Mr. Dauid will haue inconstancie,
but if you can improue the iudgement which I haue
embraced, then I must say my change is euill, yea worse
then inconstancie: but if you cannot (for you plainely
decline that point, and I am sure you are not at anie
time able to doe it) then you should remember what I
told you in mine Apologie,Amb. 
                  Quod mentem in melius mutare
non leuitas sit, sed virtus: But let vs consider of this
change,Basil. Asc
                        ••
                     . 
                  Vniformis est Christianorum vita vnicum habens
scopum gloriam Dei: Since mine heart is the same, and
the marke whereat I aime, to wit, the glorie of God,
and good of his Church, remaines the same: if I haue
changed the meanes, and made choise of that which
is more effectuall for my proposed end; what blame
is this? May not a wise man change his course, and
continue his purpose? may he not alter the meanes for
the better furtherance of his intention? If you can
blame a Marriner for changing his saile, to take vantage

of the winde, or call him for that, inconstant,
he being still constant in his purpose, and course toward
his intended harborie,Philo. lib. de Ioseph. then may you blame mee
also: this is the truth, vvherein mine owne heart allowes
me, condemne you it as you please.
               
                   But you blame me that I should be ignorant of any
point of my calling, and not learned all at the first,
and cannot abide to heare that I haue learned that now
which I knew not before. M. Dauid, it is the glorie
of Angels,
                  
                     Nazian 
                     
                        •
                     rat. 2. de Th
                        •
                     olog. that they are 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , propter gratiam,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vnchangeable through the grace that is
giuen them, being otherwise of their owne nature

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , mutable of will. With their first creation
they receiued full vnderstanding of all truth,
which their Creator thought needefull to communicate
to them, and in it by grace they abide without
change, not subiect to any errour: but is it so vvith
man vpon earth? attaine wee at the first to perfection
of knowledge? must we not learne, and come to it by
degrees? I pray you whose words are these, when I was
a childe, I spake as a childe, I thought as a childe. Now I
haue put childish things from me? Is it with euerie one as
it was with the Baptist: he was Renatus prius quam natus,
                  Gregor. moral.
                  
Regenerate ere he was borne; he had not yet come
into the world by the first birth, & he is made partaker
of the second? Were wee all with Ieremie sanctified in
the wombe? Get we all, with Salomon, knowledge of
right and wrong in our younger yeeres? he was wonderfull
wise before hee was twelue yeeres olde. Is it
with all Preachers as with the Apostles, who within
fiftie dayes after that they were sent out by Christ, his
Ambassadours to the world, they receiued the Spirit
to leade them in all truth? Thanks be to God when he
entred vs into his holy Ministrie, he gaue vs such measure
of his Spirit, as did teach vs all substantiall points

of faith, needfull to saluation, and gaue vs gifts profitable
in their measure, for edification of the Church.
But Mr. Dauid, it was spoken to one, and it stands for
all: Attende lectioni, intentus esto tibi ipsi & doctrinae.
Take heede vnto learning. Timothie had learned the
holy Scriptures from his youth, yet the Apostle will
haue him to learne still, for so saith he to him,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that it may be manifest to
all men how thou profitest: and shall it then be a blame
to mee to professe I haue learned that which I knew
not? Correct your selfe M. Dauid, what you call inconstancie,
will be found 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , not 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , not
inconstancie, but encrease of knowledge.
               O, but this Inquisitour will not take this for an answere,
he will needes haue me guiltie of negligence and
sloath in my calling, That in so great, so high, so speciall a
question as it, yet neuer searched to know the truth of that
matter, till now of late. Mr. Dauid, my calling is to be a
Preacher: my commission is the whole word of God,
whereof I acknowledge with Augustine, Tantam esse
profunditatem, &c. The depth to be so great, that the
quickest Engine, though hee should liue Methusalems
yeeres, and doe no other thing but read it continually,
yet vvere not able to plum it, nor to learne all the
great, and high, and speciall questions concerning it.
There are many points in holy Scripture, which most
excellent Preachers know not, and will you for that
conuince them, either for false Teachers, or carelesse
Students. Know you not that Iacob at the first vvas
called Israel, the one 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the
other 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  :
                     Philo de Temulentia. the one a name of learning and profiting,
the other of perfection and preuailing? Now
is the time of our wrastling, a time wherein we should
learne and grow in knowledge, Encreasing with the encreasings
of GOD, stepping forward euery day a new

step, and so walking till we appeare before the face of
our God in Sion. The time is at hand, when wee shall
come to the measure of perfect men in Christ: No
darknesse, no error shall then be left in our mindes, but
we shall then know euen as we are knowne.
               
                   But it being a principall point of your calling, and
you so long a Pastor, saith the admonent, it cannot
be but a great sloath, that you haue neuer searched to
know the truth of that matter. Truly Mr. Dauid, I doe
verily thinke, that a man may proue both a faithfull
and fruitfull Minister in the Church all his daies, and
neither busie himselfe, nor his people with any question
of externall Church-gouernement that is amongst
vs. I thanke God, being now a man neere-by of fourtie
and sixe yeeres, I haue liued in the Church twenty
and foure yeeres a Pastor, without rebuke of any till
the Libeller, and you yoaked against me, and beleeue
me, if this matter of Church-gouernement had not
beene wakened to mine hand, and the compassion I
carie to this Church, wherein I was borne a Christian,
and honoured to be a Pastor, whose bowels are vnnaturally
rent by vnnecessarie contention of some of her
vnkindely children: If these reasons, I say, had not
moued mee, I thought all my daies few enough to
spend in the matter of Doctrine, as being of greatest
importance for edification of the Church, and wherein
I haue found greatest comfort to mine owne heart,
remembring that vvarning of Hippocrates,
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Vita breuis ars longa, And in this,
though I haue not come with such speede as I would,
yet that I haue neither beene sloathfull nor carelesse, I
haue some workes for my witnesses, which how weake
so euer they be in themselues, or little worth in your
eyes, yet are they the encrease of my talent, wherein I
haue found comfort to mine owne heart, and others

of the Saints of God in all parts of the Ile, haue found
comfort also.Seneca. 
                  Ab homine exigitur, vt prosit hominibus, si
fieri potest multis, siminus, paucis, si minus, proximis, si minus,
sibi.
               
               And where you tell me, I could not but know this 
same matter to haue beene agitate before in the persons of
Bishops, Adamsone, and Montgomrie: This is like all the
rest of your bold and rash assertions, for they vvere
both dead ere euer I was called to be a Preacher, and
what you would haue mee to learne at them, I can
hardly coniecture: for if the equitie of their cause was
obscured, either by the iniquitie of their actions (which
I know not) or the violent course of that time, what
is this to the matter now in hand. The one of them I
neuer saw that I know, the other I heard when I was
verie young at Schoole in St. Andrewes, and now must
tell you, that if you were either so learned, or such a louer
of learning as you pretend, you would haue spared
to rake the ashes of the one, for the honour of his
learning. There vvere sundrie other Bishops in this
Church beside them, who liued and died honest men,
and vnrebukeable; but you passe by them, still like the
venomous Flie that lights vpon the sore part, as if the
faults of one or two were sufficient to discredit all the
rest of the fellowship. And I cannot meruaile how still
you obiect the example of two, as vndoubted proofes
in your consistorie, to improue the honestie of all the
rest. Since in mine Apologie, I remitted you to three
renowned Bishops in our neighbour Church, Latimer,
Ridley, Cranmer, lately, euen in our Fathers daies honoured
vvith the honour of martyrdome, that you
who cannot endure to see any honour vpon a Bishops
head, may lay downe your combe of contempt, and
thinke more honourably of them. This cannot be
but an euill affection in you, that you haue an eye to

see the euill of the one, and not an eye to see the goodnesse
of the other: Nay, you will not suffer it to be
thought, that such grace, or godlinesse, or conscience
can be in a B
                     •
                  shop, as to make him a worthie Martyr
of Christ; but rather, which I told you before, as the
ignorant Gentiles were seduced of olde, to esteeme it a
iust cause of persecution of a man, if he had once been
named a Christian: so are the simple people abused
by you, and such as you, to disdaine a Preacher, were
he neuer so honest otherwise, if once he be named a
Bishop. A
                     •
                  d because your horne cannot reach vnto all,
you thinke to trie your manhood in the killing of o
                     •
                  e,
and when you haue loadned me with your contumelies,
then you lay on this, as one ouer-laid vpon it:
That I am an abhominable man, for if so be not, you haue
done me wrong to conceiue so abhominably of me, as
you haue confessed you doe.
               
                   What shall I say? Anger is cruell, wrath is raging, but
who can stand before enuie?
                  Pro. 27. 4. But Mr. Dauid, you are not
the first Egyptian, who hath esteemed an Israelite an
abhomination, nor the first Pharisie that hath abhorred
a Publican. Are you the great Chamberlaine of
the house of God? Are all the vessels of honour in it
committed to your custodie? Are 
                     •
                  ou keeper of the
Booke of life, wherein the names of the he
                     •
                  es of grace
are registred? Haue you the balance of the Sanctuarie?
or is the fan put into your hand to seperate Chaffe and
Corne: Speake no more presumptuously, and let not such
arrogancie come out of your mouth, leas
                     •
                  it proue true vpon
you which Augustine hath to Parmenian,
                  
                     Aug 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . Epist. Parm. 
                        •
                     ib. 1. ca. 4 
                  Quon
                        •
                     am
patientiam miseri isti perd
                        •
                     derunt, & festinant se ante tempus
velut a palea separare, leuissimam paleam vento de area
ablatam seipsos demonstrar
                        •
                     nt, Because you haue lost patience,
and make hast before the time to separate the
Chaffe and Corne, counting at your pleasure some

men abhominable, and some men approued; you haue
declared your selfe to be but chaffe, and most light
chaffe, carryed out of the compasse of charitie, by the
winde of your owne pride.
               Trie your selfe M•. Dauid, and see what spirit doth 
leade you. It hath beene Satans pollicie in all ages, to
vent out his wares of hatred, enuie, and strife vnder
colour of Religion, and to cause weake Christians to
breake the band of brother-hood and loue, for small
causes, or rather conceits. What pittie was it to see such
a Schisme in the Church of Constantinople, for the
space of thirtie yeeres betweene some that allowed the
banishment of Iohn Chrisos
                        •
                     ome, and others who allowed
it not, that the one would not communicate with
the other? And againe to see such a pride in some Catharans
of Ierusalems Church, as to separate themselues
from the fellowship of other Christians, as vnworthie
of their companie; and all through a vaine
conceit of their owne puritie and sanctitie beyond
others? wherein they proceeded so farre that they
would not keepe companie with Gregorie Nyssen, a
worthie Bishop and excellent teacher, the Brother of
Basill the great, who hauing come vpon the expenses
of the Emperour Theodose, for reformation of some
Churches in Arabia, and afterwards visiting by this
occasion Ierusalem, hee found a miserable Schisme in
it, and because the Schismatickes sought to strengthen
their faction by drawing Ambrosia and Basilissa, women
reputed notable for pietie among the people, vnto
their opinion, he preuented it by his Letter to them,
disswading them from fostering any diuision in the
Church: his reasons I wish were pondered by you; I
bring but one of them, Vnum odium sanxit cum Serpente
vitae nostrae Legislator, at 
                        •
                     athari isti foedus cum Serpente
faciunt, odium mutuum in seip
                        •
                     os conuer
                        •
                     unt: There is but

one hatred which the Law-giuer of our life hath allowed;
namely, that Christians should hate the Serpent,
but these Catharans make a couenant with the
Serpent, while they turne their hatred against Christians.
               
                   Perceiue out of this how farre oftentimes good
men vnder a shew of godlinesse, are carryed out of the
compasse of Christian dutie. Learne you by other
mens example to become wise: doubtlesse they were
godly, learned and professors of the truth, yet you see
to what extremitie the high conceit of their owne puritie
and holinesse, did carrie them. I wish we had none
like them in our bowels: but though I would not
point at you, your owne words bewray that you are
sicke of this same disease, in that you dare call your brother
abominable, who worshippeth the Trinitie with
you, professeth and beleeueth all the Articles of Faith
which you professe. This, in the iudgement of Nyssen,
will proue you to stand with the Serpent against
Christ, not with Christ against the Serpent. Turne
you, turne you Mr. Dauid, turne the penne, and edge
of your sword, turne the hatre
                     •
                   of your abhorring
heart against the Diuell,Pisid. not against any that stand for
Christ: Angues vorando, sana fit Ciconia; suffer not, foster
not, nourish not such Serpents in your bosome, worrie
them, deuoure, destroy them with the Stroke, so may
you happilie recouer of this euill. But now you proceede.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               AND if you will needes delight in learning,Sect. 4. wee may by
your learning learne to speake learnedly, and shall not
despise to take any good lesson from you, concerning learned

writing, eyther of Grammer, Rhethoricke or Logicke, or
any point of Philologie. Shortly I lay open my stuffe, and permits
it to your cen
                     •
                  uring, and I shall consider, and correct at
your admonition.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               COnsider I pray you whether it be your shame or 
no; that your deedes should be so far contrarie to
your words. Here you say yee will not despise to take a
good lesson, and after this you pray mee to communicate
to you any light that I haue: but if it be (as you
say) that you would be a Disciple, how presume you to
condemne your Master before you heare him? Let your
skill in Grammer, Rhethoricke, Logicke, be as great as
you suppose it, and then I thinke no man shall match
you; yet you know these are but hand-maides to Theologie.
Though Hagar be with childe,Nazian. Cyg. Carm.
                   let her not despise
her Dame; shee is but a seruant, and will neuer get
that honour as to bring out an heire of the promise.
God hath learned me that which all the Grammer and
Rhetoricke of East-Lowthan could not haue learned
mee, hath not learned you, nor many others that brag
with you, though euen there in my young yeeres I was
trained vp also, and profited in those studies no way
inferiour to any that were with mee. But seeing (as I
said) you offer your selfe to be a Disciple, how are you
so bolde as to controll your Master, not in a point
whereof you haue skill, but in a matter of preaching
whereof you are but an ignorant? Your hypocrisie is
euill couered, and your proud humour vnder humilities
shadow is palpable. This verball submission of
your selfe to learne, it is but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
is but a false shew of an humble man that would

seeme in glorious, being indeede vaine-glorious. It proueth
true in you which was said by the Auncient, falsa
humilitas, veram inducit superbiam; false humilitie drawes
on true pride. Now you speake out of counterfeit humilitie,
no maruell you forget your selfe, and shortlie
returne to speake out of vncounterfeit pride.
               
                   But this point concerning my Ministerie, I close
with this Admonition. It had beene better for you to
haue followed the example of Aquila and Priscilla:
they could not preach themselues, yet because they assisted
S. Paul with their countenance and comfort, they
receiue this praise in the heauenly Oracle, that they
were the Apostles Fellow-helpers. Or else as it is written
of Flauianus an honourable man,Histor. Tripart. lib. 8. 
                  Non concionabatur
inter ecclesiasticos, sed hoc agentibus multa Consilio
                        •
                     um conferebat
subsidi
                        •
                     , illi tendebant arcus, iste vero quasi ex quibusdam
Pharetris suae mentis congruas offerebat Sagittas:
But if still yee will be like Alexander the Copper-smith,
of whom S. Paul complained that hee resisted his Ministerie
sore; see to it, and fore-see what will be the end
of it. I am farre deceiued if you haue done, or be able
to doe while you liue, so great good, as that Ministerie
hath done, which so earnestly you seeke to disgrace if
it lay in your power. Now Mr. Dauid proceedes to
the improbation of mine Apologie, and intermixeth
throughout it, Railings against my Brethren, which I
placed in the fourth roome, and now occurres to be
considered of vs. Thus hee beginnes.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               FIrst then, concerning this stuffe, you demand what is found
in it; but you demand before euer the search be made:
Iacob of whom you speake, did not so; hee was silent till all

was searched, and saw that nothing was found; then onely,
and not till then, he demanded the question: hee was wise, he
knew there might be something which hee saw not, or if h
                     •
                  e
were sure enough of that, yet he thought it ouer-soone to brag
of it, till the searcher had seene also that there was nothing.
Then he triumphs, but after victorie, which is the iust time
of triumphing.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               A Word spoken in his place is like Apples of Gold, and Pictures 
of Siluer, saith Salomon:
                  Prou 25. 11. such are not Mr. Dauid,
your words here, they come out, somewhat painted-like,
but not in their place, nor yet for this purpose.
Looke to them I pray you and see: did I purge
before I was accused? Was not inquirie made of mee
before I did answere? Did not the Libeller then, whom
you haue iustified now, search my stuffe? And was it
not lawfull for mee to tell him (without your rebuke)
that hee had done mee wrong in charging mee with a
fault which hee had not found in mee. See you not
how your prettie words are nothing to the purpose?
But, say you, the first Inquisitour searched not well enough,
and what he left vndone, you are come to doe,
and you doubt nothing to finde Idols, and truly if any
be, I thinke indeede you may best doe it. The Libeller
with his sixe Lines, being but young and inexpert,
beat mee with rods, but you come in with your sixe
Sheetes of Paper
                     •
                   as an olde Souldier, experimented
with inuectiues, to scourge me with Scorpions; and as
if you were another Iambres, you thinke to turne your
Libellers Rod into a Serpent; yet you will proue but
a deceiued deceiuer; your Serpent is dead, hath but a

shew, and your accusation liuelesse, fectlesse, and nothing
worth.
               
                   But knowing in this your owne weaknesse, you boast
much that many moe stricter inquisitors are comming
vpon mee; and with this, as Alexanders Armie was
afraid at the hissing and noise of a S
                     •
                  rpent, ere euer they
saw it, you would terrifie mee. It is easie to doe it I
grant, yet is not, nor shall not my feare be without
hope, when they come: if their inquisition be about
Episcopall gouernment, they will finde it no stollen
nor hidden Idoll: It will not fall to bee couered
by Rahell, Iacob will maintaine it, as his owne iust and
lawfull possession. And they shall see a Bishop, a
graue Ecclesiastique Senator, standing in the chiefe
and most publike place of Iacobs Tent, compassed with
a guard inuincible of auncient and recent Fathers, readie
to maintaine him, with his eies looking vp to God,
and the hand of God vpholding him in his Word.
Deceiue not your selfe, to thinke that in this question
you haue to doe with an Idoll. And if it be the person
they meane to come and search, come their way,
hee whom Satan hath sought to winnow feareth not
to be searched or sifted by flesh: Thou hast wrastled
with God, and thou shalt preuaile with man. Now you proceede.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               BVt if Rahels theft had beene found, what would hee
haue said, trow yee, hee might ha
                     •
                  e excused himselfe
iustly, but triumphed at leasure. Alas, how blinde are we
oftentimes, not 
                     •
                  eeing the faults eyther of vs, or of our selues?
how poore are our triumphs, how slender our victories, if the
cause of our triumph be solidly searched? It was not her
                     •
                   the

innocency of Iacobs house that gaue him matter of triumph,
but Labans ill searching, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               MAster Dauid, let your skill in Grammer, or Rethoricke,
be as it will; I can tell you, you are an
euill Tholog, and wot not how to handle a Text of
Scripture; when you thinke you are wisest, you euanish
most in your owne cogitations. If Rahels theft had
beene found (say you) he might haue triumphed at leasure.
And why? Is it any reason that Rahels fault should
haue beene imputed to Iacob? Laban accused Iacob that
hee had stollen his Idols: the question is not here of
the honestie of Iacobs house, but of Iacobs selfe, hee is
the partie accused; the accusation was false, Iacob was
free of it; and albeit Laban had found out Rahels theft,
hee had found out but his owne shame: but it stands
with no reason that the fault of Labans Daughter
should be sufficient to improue the honestie of Iacobs
heart, or yet to impaire his triumph. No, though it
had beene found, Iacob with a verie good reason might
glory in his owne innocencie, and told Laban neuerthelesse,
that his accusation was false.
               To cleare the matter, and set it downe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
Let Mr. Dauid be Laban (seeing hee will be so,)
let my heart be Iacob, let my corruption be Rahell, let
the Idols be Gaine and Glory: If corruption in mee
hath had any secret respect to these Idols, beleeue mee,
my heart is not priuie vnto it. I know there is no man
in whom the seede of all sinne is not. If I come to be
examined before God, I will protest with Dauid, Lord
enter not into iudgement with mee, for in thy sight shall no
flesh be iustified.
                  Iob. 9. 20. 
                  I know not mine owne soule, many euils are

in it which are hid from mee; for God is greater then the
conscience, and knoweth many things of vs which our
owne conscience knoweth not. But so farre forth as a
man can know himselfe, in this whereof I am accused,
I may answere you boldlie, My lips haue spoken no wickednesse,
and my tongue hath vttered no deceit. It was not
the loue of Gaine or Glorie that hath wrought this
change of my minde. In this you haue wrongfully,
and now after mine Apologie and oath of Conscience,
wickedly, accused mee.Iob. 27. 4. 
                  God forbid I should iustifie you vntill
I die, I will neuer take mine innocencie from my selfe, I
will keepe my righteousnesse, and will not forsake it: mine
heart shall not reproue mee of my dayes. This is Mr. Dauid,
the right application of this example. But now you
proceede.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               NOW to looke backe but euen a little vpon this that wee
haue alreadie said, what is this wee see standing at the
very entrie? Is it not Fame? and is not that a great Idoll, as
euer was in the World, the cause of huge Idolatrie; and yet
haue you reared it vp here openly, in a publike place.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   SVrely, if you were not like an Idoll of the Nations
that hath eyes and sees not, I am sure you would
not speake as you doe. You complained in the preceding
Section, Alas we are blinde: and truely you are
much blinder then I supposed you had beene: and
now you say you see an Idoll, and what an Idoll? Fame.
Mr. Dauid, it is but your dimme sight which causeth

you to take one thing for another: you are like that
blinde man, of whom wee reade in the Gospell, when
hee saw men hee thought hee had seene trees, for his
eyes were not yet well opened. Stay a little, iudge not
out of your darke sight: Pray IESVS to touch your
eyes againe, and you shall see more clearely: what you
thought to haue beene an Idoll, and called so, it is not
so indeede; it is a more excellent, yea, a most necessarie
thing: for a good name is as a precious Oyntment, it is
to be chosen aboue all riches. Salomon said so, hee saw as
well as you; and S. Paul will haue a Bishop well reported
of, euen of them which are without: but if a
good name had beene an Idoll, hee would not haue
so necessarilie required it. Now you returne againe to
your former blasphemous railings, refuted by mee, repeated
now by you: for so well is Mr. Dauid pleased
vvith the tune of this Song, that hee must sing it ouer
oftner then once.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               ANd that inconstancie with how blushfull things is it
shielded? how too like to Rahels Idols in her blushfull
confession? seeing for the eschewing thereof, 1. Errour must
be confessed; 2. Erronious Doctrine; 3. Rash affirming of vncertainties;
4. Headinesse; 5. Papisticke implicite faith;
6. Falsifying of Gods Message; 7. Prophaning the Chayre
of Veritie; 8. Carelesnesse of Calling.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  AND a mighty strong winde rent the Mountaines and 
brake the Rockes, but the Lord was not in the winde:
                  1 Kings 19. 9
                  
                  and after the winde came an earth-quake, but God was not
in the earth-quake: and after the earth-quake came fire, but
God was not in the fire. Mr. Dauid now againe gathers
his breath, bends vp his bowels, to bring out a mightie
blast of winde out of the Desart and Wildernesse of a
a barren heart against me, not vnlike the winde wherewith
Satan ouer-threw Iobs house and children, at one
blow: so would this Reuiler ouer-turne my Name,
Ministrie, Conscience, and all, with this one stroke
and violent charge. Many furious, fierie, and mightie
boistering words of winde hath hee blasted out vpon
mee, but God is not in them. I will abide with Elijah
till the Lord come in a soft and peaceable voyce, he speaketh
peace to the hearts of his Saints: The Lord will
looke on mine affliction, and doe me good for his cursing this
day. The refutation of them see Sect. 35. 36. 37. 38.
39. &c.
               
                   Certainely it is euill more then enough to see men
degenerate into beasts through the want of reason, but
it is much worse to see a man become a Diuell, by abusing
his reason so maliciously, that they Qui Angeli &
sily Dei esse debeant, ne hoc quidem vt homines esse videantur
sibi reseruarunt, who should be Angels and Sonnes of
God reserue not so much modestie to themselues; as
whereby they may seeme to be men, or to put difference
betweene them and beasts; yea rather worse then
beasts: euery beast hath some one euill qualitie of the
owne, but you will finde a man so beastly, that in him
they are all collected in one;Chris. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Mat. hom▪ 22. 
                  Irascitur vt Serpens, pungit
vt Scorpio, insidiatur vt Vulpes, imo quasi Diabolus atrocia
suscipit bella in fratrem: And this hating, abhorring, deuouring
one of another, argueth it not (saith the Apostle)
a carnall man? yea truely. Non humanae mansuetudinis,
sed immanitatis est belluarum; it is beastly barbaritie
and not that mansuetude which becommeth men.

The Lord who is 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  Pisid.
manure by his grace the heart of Theagrius, and all
our hearts, that these thornes and bryers may be rooted
out of them, and like a ground blessed of the Lord,
they may bring forth the spirituall fruit of Meeknesse,
Truth, and Loue. Now you proceede to improue my
Reasons, and ere euer you doe it, you take a Decree to
your selfe to call them ridiculous and fectlesse: but
what is it which may not be labefacted by words?
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THE first is to comfort the King, for that you insinuate
that his Maiestie may haue the comfort of his Subiects.
Alas, what say you? take you on a Bishopricke to comfort
the King? who will beleeue you, and that it is not rather to
comfort your selfe?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               YOV dispute with words not comely,Iob 15. 1. and with talke that 
is not profitable: Shall a wise man speake words of the
winde? how vnlike your words are vnto mine the iudicious
Reader will consider by reading mine Apologie.
My reason I doubt not will be thought weightie
of all honest hearts: this it is. Seeing we haue a Christian
King sustaining contradiction of the Aduersarie for the
Gospels sake, it is no reason his Highnesse should be grieued
with the contradiction of his people also, specially for a matter
not so materiall as you would make it; for a point of Discipline,
not of Faith, wherein his Maiestie doubtlesse hath the
best end of the cause also. Is there no pittie nor compassion to
such a Father of the Church and Common-wealth? Shall his

Maiestie be loadned with burdens at all hands, grieued with
enemies, and grieued with Subiects also? This is my reason,
it moued mee then, it moueth me yet, and made
mee to resolue that I would not be contradictorie to
his Maiestie in any cause for the which I dare not giue
my life; and I trust such a cause shall neuer fall into
the heart nor hand of the Lords annointed. This was
my resolution long ere any motion of a Bishopricke
was made to mee. God knoweth it, men know it, thinke
you and yours what yee like to the contrarie. Now,
this reason you answere this way; Who beleeues you that
you tooke on a Bishopricke to comfort the King, and not rather
to comfort your selfe? Is not this thinke you a iust
confutation? yet wee must take this for a sufficient
proofe that Mr. Dauid saith the contrarie? who may
not see that in stead of reasoning you raile; you shame
your selfe, you answere not mee.
               
               It is very well knowne I sought not a Bishopricke,
I thinke in this I shall haue no accuser to charge mee
with Ambitus, and after that his Maiestie vnrequired,
vnknowne, or vnlooked for of mee, had out of his
Maiesties owne free pleasure presented mee vnto it,
there interceeded more then eighteene weekes before
that I accepted it: I would not haue done so, but griped
more greedily at it, if I had so farre regarded my
selfe as you alledge. Mr. Dauid, I ought you no quittance,
neither make I any vnto you, but of the very
truth of mine heart, I declare to such as feare God,
that if the respects of dutie I owe to his Maiestie and
this Church had not beene stronger in mee, then any
respect I had to my selfe, I should neuer haue accepted
it. This is the truth, calumniate as you will. You goe
yet on.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               BVT here you all commonly insult, and runne out vpon it,
and haue euer the King, the Kings Maiestie in your
mouth, whom we all reuerence.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               ANd doth this offend you Mr. Dauid? is it not good 
reason we should haue his Maiestie in our mouths,
yea, and in our hearts also, as a singular blessing of
God bestowed vpon vs, for whom wee cannot be
thankefull enough to our God; whose fatherly loue
and care, and entire affection toward his people, wee
are neuer able to recompence: no remembrance, no
care, no seruice, no obedience here can be sufficient. And
then, that you may seeme to say something, you pray.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               TOuching his Maiestie, whom the GOD of Heauen
blesse in his owne person and posteritie to the worlds end,
and send him better comforters then any of you Bishops be.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               A Man that boasts of false liberalitie is like vnto Clouds 
without raine.
                  Prou. 25. 14. What your affection to his Maiestie
is, we are not to examine, his Maiestie can best discerne
it of any man; but as for your prayer we say Amen to it.

Euen the God of heauen send his Maiestie better comforters;
for his Highnesse is worthy of better then the
best of vs are indeede. Yet this is some good, that there
is no want of good will in vs, we wish from our hearts
we were better then we are, more able to glorifie God,
t edifie his Church, to serue his Maiestie then we are.
And albeit we cannot doe the good which we would,
yet his Maiestie shall not want the good which wee
may; and of his Princely equitie we doubt not but his
Highnesse will accept good will in part of payment.
And as for you Mr. Dauid, if your affection to his Maiestie
be so sincere as you pretend,2 Sam. 19. then let me demand
of you in these words which Zadok and Abiathar got
in commission to aske the Elders of Israel, Why are yee
behinde to bring the King againe to his owne house? or in
plainer termes and meeter for our purpose, Why render
you not his Maiestie all the comfort and contentment
you may? Or, if the light of your minde in this
question permit you not, seeing it is but your priuate
iudgement, and your selfe but a priuate man, why take
yee vp a publike banner against his Maiestie? why
shew yee your selfe an open contradictor and a partie
speciall, seeing this is not your calling, and you haue
no commission for it. It would fit you better to be
more sparing of your words, and more liberall in your
deedes, to proue your affection to your Soueraigne,
which now by your needlesse medling, you haue called
more in doubt then it was before. And now to declare
what you meane by better comforters, you fall
out into a commendation of our brethren contrarie
minded in Church-gouernment.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               GOe you beyond them who stand for our Discipline, eyther
in affection, or in action, or in praying, or in praysing,
by word, by writ, by tongue, by pen, to honour him to the
world within his owne countrie, without to forraine Nations?
you know you haue not done it, not can any Bishop of Scotland
doe it beyond them.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  PRoud, hautie, and scornefull is his name that worketh 
wrath in his arrogancie.
                  Prou. 21▪ 24. What neede you to take this
paines out of your pride, to worke wrath among Brethren:
it will not be for you Mr. Dauid, you shall long
commend them before you offend vs. If so be the
change of Court could content you, I wish it were,
good comforters, good counsellors may they be to
his Maiestie; you will finde no Bishop of Scotland to
hinder it, but by all meanes willing to procure it: but
more impertinent are your comparisons which follow.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               VVIll you enter into comparison with them in any
thing? or can you preferre your selues? Come let's
see, and let vs try it but a little. What can you say? you loue
him, so doe they: you pray for him, so doe they, &c.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  
                  AS the coale or wood maketh fire,
                  Prou▪ 26. 21. 
                  so is a contentious
man apt to kindle strife.
                  Prou. 6, 19. 
                  A false witnesse that speaketh
lies, and him that raiseth vp contentions among brethren
doth the soule of the Lord abhorre. What needes I pray
you such words, or how are they for the purpose of
our argument? Doe any of vs disesteeme of their gifts?
in my iudgement you had commended them better
and forborne comparisons. You derogate from them
when you compare them with others inferiour to
them in good. Is there no way to aduance them but
to set them on the backes of their brethren? Is not this
higher pride then to ride on a beast at Parliament? I
doubt not, it is against their will, but you haue mounted
them so in the conceit of your vaine minde. Why
doe you not consider that there is in the Church diuersitie
of gifts but the same spirit? The Lord is a wise dispenser
of his gifts, who hath not giuen all vnto any
one. If there be one endued with a gift which another
wants, looke againe when yee will, and you shall see
hee wants some gift that another hath. Dauid an excellent
Prophet, yet hee needed a Nathan to waken
him. Paul a worthy Apostle yet Agabus told him what
hee knew not. This diuersitie of gifts makes the sweeter
harmonie in the Church, and you would wickedly
abuse it, to foster a cursed iealousie: for still you
insist.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               YOu will not denie, I hope, they all auow him their Prince,
loued by the good, hated by the enemie, and persecuted;
yea, they will goe beyond you in all that you haue yet said, as
who affectedly confesse, and professe him, their onely hope on
earth, their onely delight, and contentment, their onely second
meane, and effectuall instrument for aduancement of the
Gospell, their greatest care, their onely hope on whom they set
their eyes vnder God, whom they daily pray for on the knees
of their heart, sighes, and sobs for him to their God, whom
they honour, whom they affect, whom they serue, and will
serue, with their goods, with their meanes, with their lands,
with their blood, with their liues, and so forth. What deerenesse
the tongue of man can speake, or the Pen describe, or the
heart conceiue, if words may make it, they know the figures
of Rhetoricke as well as you, and if deedes may make it, goes
farre beyond you in all gratious action.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               HIther to Master Dauid haue the streames of your 
sweet eloquence and Rhetoricke so much bragged
of, caried you into a meruailous delight of your
selfe, scarse knowing where away: but you must be
told by the way, that your former accustomed Rhetorick,
which is Ars male conuitiandi, and in very deed as
the Prouerbe hath it, Canina facundia, flowes most freely
with you: for there you know a declaiming Conuitiator
without stamme
                     •
                  ing; but your Encom
                     •
                  astick
stile goes somewhat more hardly with you; as not so
agreeable to your Cynick humour: for you haue here

gathered many fectlesse flowers of What's and whom's,
vnmeete for a royall Maiestie, sundrie silly figures
without substance of truth: Doubled Affectings, but
simple effects, shadowes without bodies: but when all
is done, though they were euen as good as they seeme,
to what end I pray you serue they? Would you perswade
vs of the good affection of our Brethren toward
his Highnesse person and posteritie? Wee doubt
not their heart is more honest in that, then that you are
mee
                     •
                  e to expresse it. God forbid, it were otherwise in
any Preacher of the Euangell, or haue you so spoken,
because you would perswade his Maiestie of it. Remember
Mr. Dauid, the King of Britaine is a prudent
Prince, his Maiestie can best tell, who grieues him, who
comforts: who affects his Highnesse, and who not.
This matter must depend vpon his Highnesse owne
testimonie, your idle discourse will not decide it: and
you may be sure, a man of your humour, will neuer
be found good for VNION; nay, not of a brother
with a brother, farre lesse of a subiect with a King.
               
                   What you meane by your prouocation to words, I
know not: if words, say you, may make it, they know
the figures of Rhetoricke as well as you: what they
know, that is not the question, what the power of your
words is, we haue proued in a part. You touch a farre
off some speeches of mine in my Dedicatorie Epistles,
before that Treatise on the eight Chapter to the Romanes,
and the Conference betweene a Catholicke Christian,
and a Catholicke Romane: but if this be all the rancour
your heart can thinke, your tongue speake, and
your Pen write, you may boast at leasure, for you will
finde that said before you, where-vnto as yet you haue
not attained. Of deedes we speake in the owne place.
But truly if you were as wise as olde, you would leaue
this bragging of words to children: and since you will

not, remember what I said of you, He that boasts of false
liberalitie, is a cloud without raine; let it stand you for an
answere, Validior vox operis, quam oris, The voice of
the worke is stronger then the voice of the word: yea,
dicta factis deficientibus erubescunt: Words where deeds
are not to second them, do but blush and thinke shame
of themselues.
               But howsoeuer your former speeches be childish,
and impertinent to our purpose; yet are they tolerable
in respect of these which followes: for now againe, like
a Salamander that cannot long liue out of the fire,
you returne to your accustomed railing, and will haue,
if your word may doe it, all Bishops and their allowers,
mercenarie hirelings, not worthie to be ranked in the
fellowship of honest and sincere men: For these are
your words.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THey loue him for himselfe without gaine, you for your
selfe with gaine, they taking nothing from him, whereby
to diminish his reuenewes, or impouerish his Crowne: You taking
daily from him, to the great impa
                     •
                  ing of it: you pray,
but prayes for your selfe, and maintenance of your estate, they
pray, and prayes for him onely: no maintenance of their estate,
or any particular, saue that which is generall to all the
Church and Countrey. Iudge then who likes, who may be
mercenarie, who cannot be mercenarie, but must be knowne
sincere, who loueth best, who is ablest, and best minded to
comfort.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   VVHat neede you Mr. Dauid call for another
Iudge: Is there any in the land, that will be
found more pert, and presumptuous in giuing out rash
iudgement of things secret, which falles not vnder the
iudicatorie of man, then your selfe? Is it possible that
any will come after you, who is able to goe before you
in this impietie? Is this good Diuinitie, or rather is it
not Satans Sophistrie? Iob had great riches giuen him
of God, which many poore ones beside him had not,
therefore hee was a mercenarie. The Good-man of
Gods Croft hath a Lammer mure, Melene, and many
beside him that loueth God more then he, hath not so
good, therefore the Good-man of Gods-Croft is not a
sincere man, hee loueth not God for himselfe, hee is a
mercenarie, or at least may be a mercenarie, which
they cannot be, who haue not receiued so much from
God. Are you not ashamed of this stuffe? And where
you say the Kings reuenewes are diminished, and his
Crowne impouerished, bewray you not your poore
enuie? Couetousnesse, saith St. Paul, is the roote of all euill:
Anger and wrath are cruell, saith Salomon, but who can
stand before enuie? The most couetous man, though he
will not giue of his owne, yet can be content that another
giue beside him. But Mr. Dauid, his eye is euill,
because the King is good, like another Constantine, giuing
more, then some perhaps are worthie to receiue,
yet no more then a Prince of his qualities is worthie to
giue: and still you complaine that the Crowne is impouerished;
a care, I warrant you, that troubles you
sore: Certainely, it were a pitie you were not his Highnesse
Treasurer; no doubt you vvould encrease his

reuenue: but through this maske of spatious words,
may not men perceiue you? this is but Sepiae Atramentum,
hides you not, but layeth you open, that all men
may see you. If your Crowne had not returned from
Court so clipped as it did, but some streames of his
royall liberalitie flowed ouer it, to water it, and make
it encrease, then should not the Crowne be impouerished.
But what Crowne I told you not.
               And now that it may be manifest, how vnrighteous 
Mr. Dauid is in this imputation: wee will looke backe a
little to the state of our Church of olde, how oft did
our Fathers seeke maintenance of Superintendents and
Ministers? how oft craued they that the Patrimonie
of the Church, which sacrilegious men had taken away,
might be restored againe. They sought it, and
could not obtaine it. Now a Christian King freely offers
it, and Mr. Dauid contradicts it: leauing other probations,
I will onely present to you a view of Mr. Knoxe
his last Letter that he wrote to our generall assembly.
               
                  
                     The mightie Spirit of Comfort, Wisedome and
Concord in God, remaine with you.
                     DEere brethren, if ability of body would haue suffered,
I should not haue troubled you with this my
rude enditement. I haue not forgot, what was laid to
my charge by famous Libels the last assembly, which
I pray you patiently to heare, and iudge of me, as you
will answere to God, for vnto you in that head, I submit
my selfe, being assured, that I neither offended
God, nor good men in that which hitherto hath been
laid to my charge. And now Brethren, because the
daily decay of naturall strength, threatneth vnto mee
certaine, and sodaine departure from the miserie of this
life. Of loue and conscience I exhort you, in the feare
of God I charge and commaund you, that you take

heede vnto your selues, and to the Flocke ouer the
which God hath placed you Pastors. To discourse of
your owne behauiour, I may not; but to commaund
you to be faithfull to the Flocke, I dare not cease. Vnfaithfull
and Traytors to the Flocke shall you be before
the Lord Iesus, if that with your consent, directly
or indirectly, you suffer vnworthie men to be thrust
into the Ministrie of the Church, vnder whatsoeuer
pretense it be. Remember the Iudge, before vvhom
you must make account, and resist that tyrannie as you
would auoid hells fire. This battell I graunt will be
hard, but the second part will be harder; that is, that
with the like vprightnesse and strength in God, you
gaine-stand the mercilesse deuourers of the Patrimonie
of the Church. If men will spoile, let them doe it
to their owne perill and condemnation, but communicate
you not with their sinnes, of whatsoeuer estate
they be, neither by consent, nor yet by silence, but by
publicke protestation make this knowne vnto the
world, that you are innocent of such robberie: which
will ere it be long prouoke Gods vengeance vpon the
committers thereof, whereof you will seeke redresse
from God and man. God giue you wisedome and courage
in so iust a cause, and mee a happie end. 
                     
                        S. Andrewes.Aug. 3. 1571.
                        
                        Your Brother in Christ Iesus,
IOHN KNOXE.
                        
                     
                  
               
               OVr first Fathers knew, that robbery of Church-liuing
was a Iulian persecution, & fore-saw it would
bring on a decay of Religion, if it were not preuented:
but now Mr. Dauid grudges, that honour, credit, or
maintenance should be giuen to the Church by a
Christian King.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               NEuer a one of you that are Bishops, can be said, to haue
done any good, or gracious action.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               A Sore calumnie, a grieuous imputation doubtlesse 
if it were true: none of you hath done any good.
All their persons, all their actions (none excepted) condemned
by you in one sentence. It is written of Nero,
that Monster of Nature, that he wished all the people
of Rome had but one necke, that hee might at one
stroke cut off all their heads. There is little more fauour,
I see, to be expected at M. Dauids hands, if hee
might as easily dispatch Bishops by the sword, as hee
hath done here at one word: such is his zeale, you may
be sure they should trouble Israel no longer. Thinke
it not strange, that I say this, none of my words are aboue
the wickednesse of your deedes: you haue slaine
vs all in our name, you haue taken conscience and honestie
away, and without these, life is worse then death.
But, I pray you, tell vs what angers you? whereat are
you offended? Is it at the Office or the persons of Bishops?
your owne speech will lead vs ere it be long. You
grudge at the persons, it will be found so; yet you pretend
it is at the Office: you would perswade the people,
that Bishoprie is a noysome weede, a barren tree,
that neuer bare good fruit, and neuer will: but that it
hath done good in the Church, will easily be shewed:
Many famous Bishops haue beene fruitfull trees in the
Lords Vineyard, and admit that now they are not so

fruitfull as they should be, or had done no good,
wherein you will be disproued also, yet it agrees with
no reason, that the calling it selfe should be discredited
for the infirmitie of persons that beare it: you might
rather doe as they did in Lacedaemon, when an eloquent
man, but an euill man, had giuen ou
                     •
                   a good decree
in a doubtfull matter, the decree, most equitable
in it selfe, was misliked by many, for the iniquitie
of him that gaue it; such is the humour of people, that
they looke rather to the person then to the cause: to
remedie this euill, they caused the same decree to be
pronounced by a good man, so was neither sentence
taken from the mouth of an euill man, nor a good decree
iniustly reiected.
               
                   It is not the office of a Bishop, I hope you vvill
condemne, when you are well aduised: It will be found
a good thing, and well warranted; this offends you,
that it is come in at such a time, and in such a manner,
and in the persons of such and such men: where if
Bishopricks were in the hands of good men, all were
well enough: this is the matter, for as strange as you
make it, and your selfe hereafter doth not denie it, for
these are your words;☞ 
                  If God hath astricted ruling to gifts,
and to greatest gifts, for you will not say it is to smallest, then
ought these greatest gifts to rule, and where they rule not, be
it in Bishops or whatsoeuer, there is confusion and plaine contrarietie
to the ordinance of God, which should not be suffered
in the Church, neither is it pride to the greater gifts, if
they claime the higher place, but iustice in claiming their
owne place. Mr. Dauid, you haue once tolde out the
truth plainely, and honestly, and truly, I wish it were
euen as you say, suppose I see not by what rule this triall
of greatest gifts, shall be made to content all, you
will finde some that haue gifts for the Schooles, vnmeete
for the Pulpit: and by the contrarie, some

againe, godly and zealous, but not learned: others,
learned, but without that experience and wisedome
which may make them meete for gouernment: and it
will not be so easie to place euery gift in the owne
roome as you suppose; yet for my part I could agree
with Nazianzen, to be cast ouer boord as Ionas was,
depriued of all preferment in the Church, if this might
stay the storme of strife, which as may be seene by
your words, contention for the greatest gifts hath raised
in it. Though in this also I rather thinke you speake
out of your owne conceit, not out of sound iudgement,
as wherein others will allow you.
               But howeuer it be, till a better reformation come,
let mee tell you, you haue here also spoken what you
should not. Neuer one of you haue done any good, say you.
What if I should say you are in the wrong to some of
them, requiring fruit ere euer the tree be fastned: to
others very malicious, that cannot see fruit euen where
it abounds, hauing still an eye to see euill, not to see
good? Mr. Dauid, tell mee; who planted the Churches
of Annandail, and other countries in the South border?
who made the Gospell to be preached there where it
was not heard in our daies, nor in the daies of our Fathers?
was it any Presbyterie? I doubt not they would
but could not: you will finde it was the diligence and
fidelitie of a Bishop. I may say further that in sundrie
parts of the high Land, the name of Christ is brought
in reuerence, by the care of Bishops, where it was not
knowne before, in such bounds as haue not beene visited
by any Superintendent, Bishop, Commissioner,
nor Presbiterie before this. I could tell you of a meane
Bishop, who hath made a constant prouision of three
thousand Markes by yeere to his Ministers, more then
their former stipends: and this care of the continuance
of the Gospell after vs, you cannot denie to be a good

action. Besides that, many professed enemies haue rendred
themselues professed friends, by the care and diligence
of such as vnder God, and his Maiestie, haue
speciall charge in the Church. None of the rest want
their owne witnesses, some more, some lesse, wherein
I could be particular, but before we, with the Pharises,
would proclaime by Trumpet our good deedes, wee
will rather keepe silence, contented to let this blast
of yours blow by vs also: yet the winde encreaseth and
blustereth out these mightie blasts which follow.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT:
               AND is any man so impudent as to say that his Maiesties
good course against Papists is deerer to you then to
them, better fauoured by you? or are you more earnest in it?
Doe any of you? dare any of you doe more for it, or for his
Maiestie in it? Alas how poore a power is that of Bishops
in that case, but that it is vnderpropped by them.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   SEeing by your owne confession Bishops are vnderpropped
by Preachers: why come you to vndermine
them whom Preachers vnderprop, vnlesse you
be minded to fight against them both? It is true, Bishops
are the stronger, in that they haue worthie Preachers
assistors vnto them in the combat against the
enemie; and they in like manner finde themselues more
strengthened by authoritie of Bishops, and it is best
when they goe ioyntly together to doe the worke of
God: why then complaine you hereafter of an vniting

or revniting to be made betweene them, and rage at a
mixture, as you call it your selfe, betweene Bishops and
their brethren of the Ministrie? and here and euery
where throughout this Eristic Libell of yours, doe what
you can to stirre vp the one against the other, and set
them by the eares together: for what language is this
of yours? Doe you? dare you? Know you what spirit leadeth
you to speake so? if you know not, looke to your
selfe in this glasse: And there came out a man whose height
was sixe cubits and an hand bredth, and hee had an helmet
of brasse on his head, and a Brigandine vpon him which
weighed fiue thousand Shekels of brasse, and hee had bootes
of brasse, and a shield of brasse, and a speare like a weauers
beame, and hee stood and cryed; Doe you? dare you? Is any
of you able to fight against me? And so also railed Rabsache;
Are you able to ride the horses of my Master? Thus
did these Infidels in their pride despise the people of
God, and vilifie them sore. And with no lesse carnall
confidence doth this great Giant come out against vs,
as if with his threatning voyce of Doe, dare yee, hee
would afray vs all. But Rabsache, stay your railing:
glorious Goliah get you backe againe to your Tent,
lay downe your Speare and waightie Brigandine: put
off your carnall armour of vaine, windie, and bragging
words, and vnder pretence of loue to some of Israels
armie, reproach not the rest. Through grace we both
doe and dare doe to the glorie of our God, when you,
if you continue in this Phar
                     •
                  saicall boasting, will proue
but a phantasticall phraser. Take you therefore in
time to a more wise and sober minde, or doubtlesse
some stone out of the Riuer of God will beate out your
braines.
               And this for your intended confutation of my first
reason, in effect no other but a digression from it, I
absolued it in sixe lines, and you haue heaped vp a

multitude of words, Commendations, Comparisons,
impertinent to the purpose, and no way touching my
reason: but you goe on in your owne conceit as followeth.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               HAd you said, you had laid downe a Bishopricke for his
Maiesties comfort and obedience, you had said something,
but to take it on for that end, is a pretended excuse,
which no man will approue; for who will not take it on that
thinkes it lawfull?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   MAster Dauid, if for obedience of a Christian King
you thinke it good a man should lay downe a
Bishopricke, why thinke you it euill that for his obedience
he should accept it. Beleeue me, if the Church
shall thinke it expedient, and his Maiestie shall declare
it to be his pleasure, and in this require a proofe of mine
obedience, I shall doe the one more speedily, more
willingly, then euer I did the other, not for any vnlawfulnesse
or misliking of it, but for the loue I haue to a
more quiet life my selfe. And thinke you Mr. Dauid,
that no man hath, or doth accept a Bishopricke, being
rather willing to want it? So you speake out of your
carnall minde of things which yee know not, measuring
other men with your spanne, but I am sure the
minde of an honest Bishop or Pastor is a more high
and diuine thing then that you G. are able to iudge it.
How many worthy men of the Primitiue Church, notwithstanding
that they thought the office lawfull, yet

haue fled it, and denyed it, till they haue beene forced
by the Church to accept it: yea, some haue dismembred
themselues that they might eschew it. I know
their preposterous zeale is not commendable, yet good
enough to improue you, that euery one who alloweth
a Bishoprie is not euer willing to accept it. But you
thinke these men are not now adaies; and seeing it is
so, that such as like it will make no scruple to accept
it, you might soone doe worse then fall to and studie
the lawfulnesse of Episcopall Gouernement your selfe.
Beleeue mee, if you lay aside your preiudicate minde,
you will easily learne it, and then without difficultie
I see you will accept it your selfe (if you may get it.)
Poesie prospers not with you, I meane, it renders you
not wished contentment; though you haue skill in it,
yet you know there is one before you that hath the
praise of Prince of Poets: but if once you could be content
to be a Bishop, who doth know what good you
might doe to your selfe and the whole Church? There
is no impediment, but that you are not a Pastor; yet
the consideration of your learning, wherein you excell
many Pastors, might purchase to you some speciall
priuiledge, and be a motiue to others to draw you out
in publike like another Ambrose, who for his singular
learning and pietie was taken from the Barre, and placed
in the Pulpit, and of a ciuill Iudge incontinent ordained
to be a Bishop: onely you must be remembred
that the motiue which moued the people to elect Ambrose,
was an Orison of concord, which he, being then
Gouernour of Liguria, had made to pacifie a tumult
that was raised in Medeolanum about their Bishop;
and you, if you would come to the like honour, must
not, as you haue done, blow the bellowes of Sedition:
the subiect of your eloquent Oration must be concord,
no more discord. And truely for all your con
                     •
                  ending,

this is the worst I wish you, neither doe I despaire
that you may change your minde, if not to be a Bishop,
yet at least a Bishops fauourer. But whether this be or
not, boast mee no more with a dismission of my Bishopricke,
Quem nulla cupidit as traxit ad ambiendum, is ab
eo soli
                        •
                      non formidat deturbart; He will neuer be afraid to
be cast downe from his dignitie, who by no ambition
of his owne was aduanced vnto it. Now you proceede
to improue my second Reason, but with no better successe
then you had in the former.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THE second is like vnto this, to remoue (say yee) the
offence the people haue conceiued against the honourable
name of a Bishop. If this be worth the answering euen in your
owne eyes, I trow I shall answere it.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   MY reason is more weightie then that you are able
to answere it; and therefore you shift it, and put
it by you with impertinent words. My reason the Reader
may see in my Apologie: and now this I adde
vnto it, that the people are abused through your wrong
information and others of your humour, to thinke no
otherwise of a Bishop then of an Heretike, and that he
who once becomes a Bishop is no more to be accounted
a Brother. Among the auncient Fathers, Martyrs,
and Confessors of the Church primitiue, a Bishop was
honoured as Ornamentum Ecclesie.
                  
                     Elias in Naz. de compositu d
                        •
                     ffer▪ ration
                        •
                     . And now you will
haue our Church so farre degenerate from them, that
what they thought honourable, you will haue it abhominable,

and so a stumbling blocke is laid before simple
people, and they are made to contemne that
which they should honour. Is not this an euill? or rather
manifold euils crauing remedie, that an innocent
man vnder a misliked name be not condemned, that
people be not abused to persecute that which they
know not, and if they knew, would certainely honour
it, and that the Church be not defrauded of an office,
receiued in all ages, of all Orthodoxe Churches, good
and profitable for conseruation of the Gospell, with
peace and order. Now let vs see vvhat you answere
to this.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               ALas, are we so carefull of names? and if we should, haue
we not a better way? Explicate it onely, and let it be
vsed rightly, let them be called Bishops, that the Scripture so
calls: Euery Pastor a Bishop, so shall all men honour the name,
who now offends at this abuse of it, and thinke you to honour
this abuse of it?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               MAster Dauid, why talke you so idlely? when I 
speake of the name, doe I disioyne it from the
matter signified by the name: Doe I not in my speech
expresly knit the name of a Bishop, and his office together.
But you will haue all Pastors called Bishops,
and then the name will be honoured of all. Mr. Dauid,
we know that in a generall sense, all Pastors comes vnder
the name of Bishops, Prophets, &c. Which for all
that derogates nothing to the distinction of their places,

and offices, and powers in gouernement. This is
a common argument, vsed against Episcopall authoritie,
but in truth of no strength: for why? Doth Communion
of names take away proprieties of things? The
blessed Spirits in heauen are called Angels, the faithfull
Bishops of the Church in earth, called Angels also.
Will you inferre of this an equalitie among them?
All Christians are called Kings and Priests to their
God, will it therefore follow that there is not a peculiar
kingly and priestly Office, proper to some, not
common to all?
               
                   And thinke you that the name of a Bishop, when it
is giuen vnto one Pastor, (it being his calling to ouersee
the rest) and not vnto all, is abused? know you not
that the name of a Bishop and Superintendent, are one
in the pith of signification, the one being but a Latine
word, expressing the equiualent of it in Greeke? and
as their names are one, so their powers also are one;
as you will finde hereafter declared by act of generall
assembly. Was the name then abused, when some Pastors
were called Superintendents, and all Pastors not
so called? I hope you will not affirme it, you will be
loath to condemne your Fathers so lightly, how euer
beyond dutie you be liberall in setting light by vs that
are your brethren.
               
                   But to goe vp higher with you, was the name of a
Bishop abused by the auntient Fathers of the Church
primitiue, when they gaue both the name, and the honour
of Bishops to some Pastors, which they gaue not
to all? Was it abused by Policarp, Martyr, and Bishop of
Smyrna, by Ignatius Martyr, and Bishop of Antiochia,
by Ph
                        •
                     tin
                        •
                     s, Irenaeus Bishops of Lions, by Ambrose
Bishop of Millane, by Chryfostame Bishop of Constantinople:
by Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, by Cyprian,
Martyr, and Bishop of Carthage, by Augustine
                  
Bishop of Hippon, with innumerable more whom I
cannot rehearse, were they all abusers that receiued
this name? and was the whole Church abus
                     •
                  rs of that
name, when they gaue it vnto some Pastors, and not
vnto all, calling them Bishops, that is, Superintendents,
and ouer-seers, not onely of their Flockes, but of their
Brethren of the Ministrie within the bounds of their
Diocesse: Will you pull out the eyes of all these men?
Did they see nothing? Or will you make them all abusers
of that holy name? Aduise better good man, and
be not so sodaine, as with one dash of your priuate
Penne, to condemne all the worthie lights of the antient
Churches.
               And where you would draw vs vp to be iudged by 
holy Scripture: with a verie good will we agree vnto
it, more readie then you are to require it: That is the
Fort of Sion, it defends both the Citie and the vvalls:
but how vainely you bragge of this, your selfe vvill
make manifest to your owne shame, when we come to
the question it selfe: you will be found to denie it
then, and euen presently you denie it, forsaking to
reason the matter, and turning you to your wonted
inuectiues in personam.
               
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               ANd thinke you to honour this abuse of it, and for that
cause takes it on your selfe? Strange you should thinke s
                     •
                  ,
and is it not arrogancie so to thinke? you mixe a word like
modestie, (as farre as your credite might carie you, you would
remoue the offence) but might you not know, that would be
no way off, not halfe an inch doubtlesse, your credit might
not serue you to honour it, it might well impaire your credite,
&c.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   YOu shew your selfe an arrogant man, imputing that
vnto mee, which I neuer said, neuer thought: that
is, say you, to honour the abuse of the name, and office
of a Bishop. I honour the Office; the abuse I neuer
loued, and farre lesse now. My credit is little
worth in your eies to remoue the offence, not halfe
an inch, as you say: but if it be so, what needes all this
stirre that you haue made? what needes such lamentation?
Alas, alas, such bitter inuection, such complaint
of the great triumph made be my example? you
are an vnmeete man to dwell in the borders, if you
waken the Countrey, and all your friends for halfe
an inch. But Mr. Dauid, be as troublesome as you like,
you shall know for a certaine, that I care nothing to be
disesteemed of you, it contents me to know that I haue
remoued that offence out of the hearts of sundrie that
feares God, not in a part, but vtterly: which Mr. Dauid,
if you be not crabbed, is more then any one of your
inches, though you were as great euen in stature of
bodie, as you are in statelinesse of minde, and then I
am sure you should proue like one of the sonnes of
Anak, or that Giant, the sonne of Haraphath, whose
fingers were by sixes, foure and twentie in number. Yet
when he reuiled Israel, Ionathan, Dauids brother did slay
him.
               
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THe third is neuer a whit better, but worse if worse can
be. To eschew Schisme and close it vp: Eschew Schisme?

In a Schisme by going to the wrong side, was the like euer
heard? Or if you meane that all should doe so, goe to the
Schismaticke side, and then there should be no Schisme, it
may be true by that meane: there should be no Schisme, but
it should be farre worse, all should be in an errour, yet better
a Schisme in the Church be, then the whole Church erring.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               MY third reason vvas, that I perceiued in our 
Church an vnnecessarie diuision for the matter
of Church-gouernement, to the great aduantage of the
common enemie: which gap I resolued for my part,
not to enlarge by contention, but to close vp so farre,
as my weakenesse may. This offends Mr. Dauid, and
he professes plainely, he had rather Minister should be
against Minister, Pulpit against Pulpit; Preachers
against the King, King against Preachers: then hee lay
downe his conceit of gouernement, or suffer others to
doe it.
               And to couer his nakednesse, hee hath shapen a
large cloake for it, but it is of Figge-tree leaues, Better
a Schisme be in the Church, then that the whole Church be
in an errour: but why abuse you the people? Is there
any man, or any Church on earth without errour: and
are there not sundrie errours not so pernitious to the
Church as Schisme? Speake plainely to the people, if
any false Doctrine be in the Church, warne them that
they may beware of it, but where vnder the name of
errour in generall, you would make the people beleeue,
that they were seduced in the faith. Mr. Dauid,
you are but a Master-deceiuer, and since you professe
you will defend a Schisme, and perturbe the peace of

the Church, you are worthie of a Schismatickes punishment,
that is to be cut off from the Church.
               
                   For doubtlesse, you haue shewed your selfe heere a
most malitious Sycophant; see what must follow vpon
your words: you shut vp all the Churches of Europe,
standing for Episcopall gouernement into an
errour, and so makes a great gap in the Armie of Israel,
which God hath gathered together by the trumpet
of his Gospell, against Babel. In like manner, you
spet in the face of your Mother, affirming, that our
Church was in an errour twentie yeeres, all the dayes
of Iohn Knoxe, for all that time it had no gouernement,
but Episcopall: all that time, there was not such
a thing as a Presbyterie in the Church of Scotland:
and if any truth be in you, all that time was our Church
in errour? Beside this, you are blasphemous against
the Church present, and would make simple people
beleeue, that an errour is enforced vpon them, by the
King, by Preachers, by the generall assembly, wherein
you doe most wickedly, and falsly gaine-stand the
truth, since no such thing is done, but onely a gouernement
restored, which the Primitiue Church had,
which Orthodoxe Churches of all times haue had,
which our owne Church in her purest state had: here
is the point: here is all the errour, and for out-holding
of this, you professe a Schisme and diuision betweene
a King, and Church, betweene Pastors and Pastors.
               Mr. Dauid, is not Ierusalem besieged without by
Romanes? Are not here both King and people in like
perill? And the King impugned by the aduersarie beyond
the rest, for the supereminence of his place? Is
there any Israelite vvithin: either Pastor or people,
whose blood is not sought by the enemie? Is it time
then it should be deuided within the selfe? Shall Shimeon,
Iochanan, and Ele
                        •
                     zer, draw the Citie into factions?

Who will not faile to striue for superioritie among
themselues, if Romanes relent to trouble them?
Haue wee not a Christian King going before vs, to
fight the Lords battell, hazarding all that hee hath
for the welfare of Ierusalem? hath hee not aduanced
himselfe before the Armie, and with his owne hands
wounded the aduersaries head? Are not the seruants
of the Lord with his Maiestie, to crie alarum in the name
of the Lord, and blow the trumpet? Haue they not with
them the holy Oracle of the word of GOD? is any
point of that truth impaired by them? Stand they not
in defence of it against the Armie of Antichrist? This
Mr. Dauid is the side where-vnto I haue taken mee, I
wish I had knowne it sooner, that I might haue ioyned
vnto it, and to this side are you bound by all reason
to render your selfe: which if you will doe, and
moue others by your example to doe the like: in so
doing, you might declare your affection, your dutie,
your seruice, your deerest estimation of his Maiestie,
whereof you vaunted so greatly before in word: you
might now make it knowne by your deedes. But now
my fourth reason you gaine-say in this manner.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THe fourth: to enduce Bishops ad remedium Schismatis,
that is to say, the Authors of Schisme for the remedie
of Schisme: if this be not mockerie, I know not what is
mockerie; for are not Bishops the onely Authors of Schisme
in our Church? Were they not the first occasion, formers,
mouers, forgers, ftirrers vp, and yet entertainers of it? It was
not till they came, put them away, and it is gone; loe, the
right remedie of our Schisme, &c. M
                     •
                  tter not therefore
these suspitious words, which you professe to speake lesse of
for duties sake.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  
                  SHall men hold their peace at thy lies? and when thou
mockest others,
                  Iob. 11. 3. 
                  shall none make thee ashamed? It was
Ieromes iudgement, that Episcopall gouernement vvas
brought into the Church, inremedium Schismatis, and I
said, the like rupture now required the like remedie.
This argument you vnloose not with your tongue, but
your teeth, biting at that (after the manner of beasts)
which offends you, not answering it with reason. What
is mockerie, say you, if this be not mockerie? Is it
mockerie to say, that a Bishop was brought in inremedium
Schismatis? since it is Ieromes saying, charge him as
a mocker, and not me, and after your owne manner,
trample all men vnder your feete, be they auncients or
recents that agrees not with your humour: this vvas
Ieromes Iudgement, but when wee come to the point,
Episcopall gouernement, will be found elder then Ieromes
dayes, and maintained by greater authoritie,
where-vnto also that I doe him no wrong, I thinke
his owne words shall leade vs. But say you, there was
no Schisme, till Bishops came, they haue made it, not
remedied it: This double calumnie is answered very
well, by affirmation of the contrarie, and where you
vrge mee not to vtter such suspitious words, as to say,
the lesse I speake for duties sake, the more I leaue to be
considered of them, who know the truth heereof.
Mr. Dauid, you may prouoke as you please, and tempt
as you will; but you shall neuer preuaile to make mee
vncouer nakednesse which should rather be concealed
and couered. And if of weakenesse I were moued
so to doe, yet as Calanus the Indian Philosopher said
to Alexander, what praise were it to you to force me

to doe that which I like not? Where Bishops are reuerenced,
there is a comely vnitie, pleasant to see, such as
should be in the Familie of God, mutuall loue among
brethren, and of them all loue and reuerence to their
Bishop as vnto their Father. This haue I seene, and
haue reioyced in it. What needlesse diuision hath beene
before is knowne also, but shall not be knowne for me
to them who know it not. Now you proceede to the
improbation of my first Reason by sixe Interrogatories.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               NOw of the fift, what shall I say? when you haue searched
all, the question is about Ierusalems wall, whether it
should be round or foure-squared, euill searched certainely,
who searcheth well will finde more: to-wit, the first question
is, whether the wals that are built already should be
pulled downe and built in another fashion? Secondly, which
are strong, built with stone and lime at the least, I might
say with brasse and Iron bands already, if they should be pulled
downe and built with sand and grummell?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               BOth these questions are resolued with one answere.
Let the auncient wals of our Church-gouernment
stand; where they decaied, let them be repaired, not
with sand and grummell of promiscuall regiment, these
are weake defences for a besieged Citie, but with Episcopall
Authoritie, which is able to procure greatest
reuerence to Ecclesiastique Censures, which otherwise
by the impietie of this age, men would draw into contempt,

and make them but like the Spiders Web, hauing
some strength to hedge in the weaker, but easily
broken through by the stronger. And this the Aduersarie
findes in experience, that the wall which they
haue besieged so long is stronger now then euer it was;
where-through, many of their chiefe Captaines are
moued to forsake their Campe, and enter themselues
into the Citie. And if our good Ezechia had not thus
carefully repaired the wall, doubtlesse you had felt the
weakenes of it long ere now, the charge being so great
that was giuen by the enemie, and I may well say, that
all those who are not bewitched with some sinister
conceit, finde peace procured to the Citie in her owne
bowels, and greater strength against the common enemie,
so that others also of the meaner sort, who oft before
contemned our greatest censure of Excommunication
in all parts of the Kingdome, are faine now to
render themselues obedient to Discipline: this is a
knowne truth, howsoeuer Mr. Dauid would obscure
it.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               BVT if the question be light, and of so small importance
as you would make it seeme by that fashion of speaking, as
a difference onely betweene round and square; why is so much
trouble, so much strife, such trauell, such charges, 
                     ••
                  ugre
the indwellers, with such compulsion of the worke men? better
let it stand as it stands, then trouble all the Countrey, or
hurt a simple Labourer, if there were no more, &c.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  INdeede because you are the people, onely Wisedome must 
remaine with you.
                  Iob 12. 2. If the good man of Gods-Croft
counsell had been craued, and his consent obtained,
all should haue gone well. But Mr. Dauid, for all your
malecontentment it is better then you apprehend it:
your errour proceeds from the wrong vptaking of the
question: if you had to do with your companion, or the
Controuersie were onely among the workemen themselues,
then to speake as you haue done, were somewhat
tolerable, suppose-not absolutely best. But here Mr. Dauid,
you haue to doe with your Master, with your Soueraigne
Lord, with whom it becomes you not to stand
vpon as good. And here the question is, feeing the great
Maister of the worke vnder God with aduise of many
skilfull and worthy workemen, will haue the wals repaired,
and of circular made quadrangular, knowing
this to be best for the safetie of the Citie, and that vpon
his owne expences, not troubling the whole countrey,
vnlesse you and your Diocie be the whole, not maugre
the indwellers, but with consent and approbation of
the most wise and auncient inhabitants in it. Whether
is it meeter that the rest of the Worke-men here should
follow him, or otherwise resist him, and tell him to
his face, they will not doe it for him, and not content
onely to with-draw their owne seruice in this worke,
and obedience from him, will not suffer, (if they may
stay it) any of their fellow-workemen to serue him in
that worke; or if any will, doe murmure and grudge
against them, speake euill of them, and esteeme them
for enemies, and so make a fearefull diuision in the Citie
for a needlesse cause?
               
                  
                   But to leaue the Parable, and to speake plainely, seeing
a Christian King requires the wall to be repaired,
and that vpon reason; yea, forced thereunto of necessitie;
is it not better that Pastors and people in this
should obey their King, then otherwise by refusing and
resisting, should procure, and continue a needlesse debaite
betweene a Prince of such knowledge and pietie,
and his people; betweene a King and his Church, and
betweene faithfull, zealous, godly, and learned Pastors
among themselues? And now Mr. Dauid thinke shame
that you professe to haue so great respect to a simple
Labourer, but no respect to a singular King, no
more then if hee had not to doe with the worke at all:
rather then a simple Labourer be hurt say you, let
the building stand: rather then a singular King be offended
say I, let the wall be renued. Where pride is,
where fectlesse and needlesse contention is, whether
with you or vs, I leaue it to the consideration of the
Christian and iudicious Reader. What regard the
auncient Fathers of our Church had to his Maiestie
in his minoritie; how loath any way to make his Highnesse
regent, and the Lords of Counsell their partie,
by giuing them any cause of offence, the monuments
of our Church can witnesse. But now the pleasure or
displeasure of a Christian King in his old age is nothing
regarded: yea, it is maintained for an Axiome, that
Christ his Kingdome is dishonoured, when helpe is
sought from the arme of a Christian King. I thanke
God what euer my minde was in Church-gouernment,
I knew not, I loued not, such foolish pride. Then I
thought out of simplicitie, that euery mans minde had
beene like mine owne: seeing I see it is otherwise, and far
otherwise, they must excuse me to mislike in them, that
which I neuer loued in my selfe, that is, a proud conceit
of singular sinceritie, a disdaine of others, a delight

in needlesse contention, and a misregard of a Christian
King, of whom we haue neuer esteemed as we should,
and as time will force other ages to acknowledge. Your
third interrogatorie now followeth.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT:
               VVHether the wals should be retained in that estate
wherein they are built, and as they are, after the
direction of him who is both Lord and chiefe builder, a cunning
master of the worke: or if wee should cast them downe
and build them againe, after the pleasure of the Prentises and
conceit of the Labourers?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               MAster Dauid is so forward in his owne purpose,
that he forgetteth his speech, or else his tongue
runnes before, and tarries not on his minde. A labourers
office is the basest of any who are imployed in
a building, Mr. Dauid came neuer to this honour, as
to bee a Labourer in Gods house; yet hee dishonours
it so farre, that where in the former Section hee
said hee will rather haue the Master of the worke, albeit
hee were a King, offended, then a Labourer
be offended; now hee saith the Master of the worke
his word should bee a Law; and a Laboures conceit
should not be regarded. Doe you not here proclaime
your inconfiderate folly? But now to your Interrogatorie,
take this for an answere; Your question is
out of question, to vse your owne words, in this you
are your owne Antigonist, you shall haue none of vs

your contradictor: turne your question into an Assertion,
wee assent to it. Let the Tabernacle be built after
the patterne which God shewed Moses in the
Mount; let the forme of Church-gouernment be learned
from Christ and his Apostles; let the auncient Fathers
of the primitiue Church be followed where they
are followers of Christ, and such as will doe otherwise,
let them be accounted Nouices, Prentises, ignorant
Builders, whose conceit may not, should not be a
warrant in so great a workemanship. Your fourth Question
followeth.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               IF we should pull downe the wals quite with our owne hands,
and dismantle the towne wholy.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   THis is as needlesse a question as the former, and
nothing else but an idle conception of your owne
braine; yea, worse then Idlenesse, an exceeding great
malice, that because the Citie is not gouerned after your
humour, you will encourage the enemie to besiege it,
and signifie to them by your warning Peece that the
towne is dismantled, and hath no wals to hold them
out. Is not this to encourage them boldly to set on?
But though such vnnaturall Mutiners as you, would
betray it, bewraying the weakenesse of it to the aduersarie,
your euill hart may foome out your owne shame,
and procure your selfe the iust reward of such vile treason,
but the Lord for his names sake will protect the
Citie, build vp the wals thereof, and loue it still. And

now if any truth Mr. Dauid remaine in you, concerning
this matter, tell mee, doth this Citie want any
wall that euer it had, or rather are not the Towers and
strengths of the wall fortified, that the Samaritanes,
Tobie, Sanballat, and their complices grudge and murmure
to see Ophell Mariamne, Phaselus built vp againe?
To be plaine with you, wants there any Ecclesiastique
Session? want wee Synods Prouinciall or Nationall?
Is any censure of Admonition, Suspention or Excommunication
taken away? they are rectified, roborated,
but not remoued: how then say you the towne is dismantled?
Your fift Interrogatorie followeth.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               YEa, in effect, if wee should receiue in the Plague that
hath proued so, that hath beene cast out, and cut off for
corruption.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               SPeake more sparingly, if you meane not to proue a 
pestilent man in the Church. You call Episcopall
gouernment a pestilence, so you say, but you proue it not.
Much take you in this Treatise vpon your tongue, as
if it were a sufficient warrand for all your Assertion;
The goodman said it: for if you come to probation, how
hath it, as you say, proued a Pestilence? the common
argument you thinke is knowne well enough, that the
Episcopall degree was a step to Antichrist, then must
you graunt it was in the Church before Antichrist; yea
truely, long before Papall tyrannie was hatched,
which is the worldly and wicked Hierarchie our Church

hath abiured, Episcopall gouernement was in the
Church; and you haue no more reason to condemne
Episcopall superioritie, although (as you alledge) Papall
primacie had come of it, then you haue to condemne
Veritie because Heresie came of it, per accidens.
If man had neuer beene ordained, sinne by man had
not come into the world; if the word of truth had not
beene preached, the people of heresie had not followed;
if there were not a bodie, there should not be a
shadow; if there had neuer beene a Bishop, there should
neuer haue beene a Pope, as you say. What then? because
sinne is euill, is the man made by God not good?
because Heresie is abhominable, is not Veritie approuable?
because the shadow is a vaine thing is the bodie
so? because the Pope is a Plague in the Church, is
the Bishop so also? If this be a proofe of your best
Logicke, what will the rest be?
               
                   But say you, it hath beene cast out of the Church, and
cut off for corruption. I know you meane out of our
Church, and that by act of Assembly. It might serue
you for an answere, that the first Ecclesiastique gouernment
which our Church euer allowed by act of
generall assembly, was Episcopall gouernment, as shall
be cleared by Gods grace. The last Ecclesiastique gouernment
approued by act of our generall Assemblie,
is Episcopall gouernment also: neyther shall you finde
in the meane time betweene these two, any Act of Assembly
disallowing the office of Bishops, but onely
the corruptions thereof: and being forced for remouing
the corruption to suspend the office for a time,
they neuer simply reiected it, but by plaine act left a
power of reuocation thereof to their Successors, to
bring it in againe when they should see the good of
the Church required it. The probation of this followeth
hereafter.
               
                  
This is it, which according to your minde, you call 
                  a cutting off for corruption; but our Fathers were neuer so
inconsiderate as you haue affirmed. Mr. Dauid it is no
good Chirurgie to cut off the hand for corruption,
where the corruption may be cured, and the hand
preserued; it may be vnable for the present, and yet able
afterward to doe good. Cut not away an Office from
the Church for corruption thereof, but cut away the
corruption, and conserue the Office, that it may doe
good againe: So hath our Fathers done, like wise Phisitians,
but you in your furie will cut all away, and
make the simple beleeue that our Church had done it.
So vndutifull are you, that you spare not, without all
respect of reuerence, to rip vp againe the bowels of
your Mother, that you may lay open her nakednesse
to the opprobrie of the aduersarie, and where you can
finde none, you faine lyes. Your last Interrogatorie is
to the same purpose.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               SHould wee receiue the plaine aspiring Tyrant and enemie,
knowne and proued so, in the middest of the Citie,
place him in the Citadell, giue him the Keyes in custodie,
giue him all credit to open and shut the Ports, let in and
thrust out at his pleasure, giue him a command of the watch,
the Centinels; to command, controll, that they mute not,
stirre not; doe what hee list, yea, euen binde vp all the Dogs,
and mussell their mouthes, that they bite not, barke not, but
at his pleasure. No light matter, &c.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  
                  SHall there be none end of the words of winde? What
haue wee here? the same tale tolde ouer in new
words: hee still cals Episcopall authoritie a Tyrannie,
an Enemie, knowns, proued so; but hee proues nothing.
The Bishop of Rome became a tyrant, shall the fault
of one be a sufficient reason to impute tyrannie to all?
Did all the remanent famous Churches and Orthodoxe
Bishops in Christendome reiect the paternall
gubernation of Bishops, because the Bishop of Rome
had turned his into tyrannie? Mr. Dauid would haue
it, but be not so inconsiderate as to hold your Father
at the doore for feare of a tyrant.
               
                   The rest of your words are more specious then substantious:
there needes no more to improue you, but
to turne them backe vpon your selfe. Is it not meeter
that some one man hauing Commission from the
Gouernour and Counsellors of the Citie, should haue
the Keyes of the Ports, then that euery one in th
                     •
                   Citie
should haue libertie to open and shut, let out and in at
their pleasure? Is it not meeter that some haue power
to checke the Watch and command them, then that
they should haue libertie to slumber and sleepe at their
pleasure, not fearing the controulement of any? Is
it not meeter that Dogges (that is, vndiscreet and contentious
men) should be kept vnder commandement,
then that they shall haue libertie to barke and bite
at their pleasure, euery one that commeth in their
way? What shall a man, euen of common wit, say,
but that your words faire in shew, fectlesse in purpose,
make against your selfe, when they are well considered?
               
                  
In the end of this section, you haue another question 
proposed, the answere whereof, wil giue you light
for resolution of the maine controuersie wee haue in
hand, and till then, I leaue it. And now you proceede
to improbation of my sixt reason, which was this, That
other reformed Churches in Europe, wanting Episcopall
gouernement, would be glad to accept it vpon
condition, that with it they might enioy the puritie of
Gospell, which they haue with vs, together with that
libertie, fauour, and protection of a Christian King
professing the Gospell truly, which we haue, and they
want. This you impugne after this manner.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT:
               I Verily thinke this is but a bad reason, why a man should
change his minde, in so great a matter, and for my part I
easily thinke, that assertion is as easily denied, as auowed; and
I haue more for me to denie it, then you haue, to auow it, as I
beleeue, their owne profession and declaration of their mindes
against Bishops: But what doe you meane by that word (Condition)
haue we that puritie, libertie, and Christian King by
Condition? I hope we haue them simply and purely without
condition, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               MY reason is better, then you consider: If we had 
liued among the Christians of the Church primitiue,
sore persecuted three hundreth yeeres for Religion
by Emperours who should haue protected them:
or if we had liued in the Church of Fraunce, our necks
daily vnder the sword of the enemie, and then it had

pleased God to turne the heart of the Emperour, and
King, not onely to protect vs, but to professe the Gospell
with vs; we would haue been loath to haue discorded
with them for such a matter. You ponder not
this benefit, but waxe insolent, and thinke it nothing
to entertaine a diuision betweene a Church, and a
Christian King, for a matter, without which, true faith
in Christ, in all the articles thereof may be retained. In
my iudgement, the Church of France, or antient Churches
sore bitten with affliction, would neuer haue discorded
vvith their Christian Rulers in such a cause.
You alleadge you haue a declaration of their minde in
the contrarie: but you must remember priuate letters
are not sufficient to proue the minde of a Church.
               
                   You are offended at this word vpon condition, & you
demand, Haue we puritie, libertie, and a Christian King, on
condition: What needes you peruert my words? I am
sure it can be no ignorance, onely malice caries you
to this cauilling, know you not that his Maiestie will
not be drawne into your opinion of Church-gouernement?
you speake as if the King were of your minde;
or at least would make the simple beleeue so, or that I
had ouer-seene my selfe so farre, as to say, that wee had
a King by condition. You know his Maiestie will not
be drawne that way for you: it were more agreeable
to reason, you should quit your conceit, and goe after
your Soueraigne Lord: but if still you will stand in
contradictorie termes, yet blow vs not all so blinde, as
to make vs beleeue, that his Maiestie is on your side of
this argument. And as to my words, are they not plaine,
that vpon condition they had a Christian King, professing
the Gospell with them, they would be loath to
discord with him for this matter of externall gouernement,
though indeede M. Dauid, you plainely declare
a contrarie disposition in you: that ere your opinion

of Church-gouernement stand not out, you had rather
stand at debate vvith a Christian King all your
dayes. This is the point, but after your fashion, you
flie it. Then you conclude.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THus are these causes no causes, the sixe not making one
sufficient: The former which you call falsly-imputed
causes, remaine vnconuict of falshood, vnrefuted for these, and
euill declined: what will follow therefore, and what must, on
the pretending of them, I leaue to be considered, not listing to
diue any further. And in the end of your answere to my
second reason to this same purpose (say you) Beleeue me
in this, I cannot beleeue, that euer you were that childe, to take
on a Bishoprick for these causes, if you had not another cause,
I thinke it should haue laid long in the dunghill, before you had
put out your finger to take it vp, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  FAlse ballance are an abhomination to the Lord, but a perfect 
weight pleases him;
                  Pro. 11. 1. 
                  he that condemneth the iust, and
absolues the guiltie, are both alike abhomination to the Lord.
M. Dauid now takes a decree to himselfe, but vpon such
false premises, as makes it a decree of no strength nor
value: Hee iustifies againe the lying Libeller, and imputes
to me Gaine and Glorie, hee renewes the former-confuted
calumnies to shew himselfe, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
ac Hyperivertigine laborare: Hee willeth me to beleeue
him, that he beleeues not that such causes moued me.
He craues to be beleeued, and will not beleeue an other.
But M. Dauid, I will not stand with you, I beleeue

you that you can hardly beleeue any good of me,
your faith may well be strong, but your charitie is
colde: your loue little, if you had any: since it beleeues
all things you would beleeue me in one thing.
You tell mee ouer againe, that all men whom you
know, thinke as you thinke, I told you also, I know
you are all men: but as honest, godly, and conscientious,
as you or they either, beleeue mee, and know I
haue spoken the words of truth.
               
                   Any thing you haue in this Libell to contradict the
cause, you will finde it by Gods grace answered with
reason: where you fall to inuectiues against the person,
and against all reason vsurpe the iudicatorie of
my soule, conscience, and affection, I will still appeale
to that supreame, and onely Iudge of conscience, protesting
in his presence, you haue lied against my soule,
enforcing vpon it a foule crime of corrupt loue, of
Gaine and Glorie, whereof when I haue examined my
selfe more then tenne times, I finde mine heart free, so
farre as in regard of humane infirmitie a heart may be,
and the true causes mouing mee, are declared in my
former Apologie. But to conclude this point vvith
you, by your fruits you haue declared what you are,
No man gathers Grapes of thornes, nor Figges of thistles,
your words void of loue, your raylings full of spight,
your iudging without warrant, your pert affirming
without truth, witnesses cleare enough, though you
were the best of your band, you are but a Brier: no
Figge-tree, no Vine-tree in the Lords Vineyard, if in
these you continue. And you know that Briers and
pricking Thistles are the curse of the earth. God make
you better.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               ALway this same weakenesse of reason, to say no further,
bewrayes the selfe euery where through the whole body
of this Apologie, and among the rest most euidently in that
point, that you take libertie to make your selfe your owne Antagonist,
for we know none other.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               IN the remanent Sections of this Inuectiue, we haue
lesse order (I finde none) but more falshood manifest:
for now Mr. Dauid casts himselfe loose, reeling
vp and downe at his pleasure, beating the ayre; fighting
against his owne shadow, or else carping at my
words, and misconstruing them to his owne minde.
He complaines, I make my selfe mine owne Antagonist,
albeit the contrarie be euident: my first aduersarie was
a lying Libeller, I gaue my defences according to his
accusations; and now Mr. Dauid comes in to make all
good that he hath said, and hee will be my partie no
way prouoked there-vnto by mee, nor vrged by any
necessitie, except that Erostratus some way must be renowned.
He will be a busie-bodie,Pro. 23. 3. 
                  Fedem in alieno choro
ponere, medling with other mens matters, Not vnlike
one that takes a Dogge by the eare, so is he that meddles with
strife that belongs not to him: but I hope his owne wickednesse
shall reproue him.
               Hee entreates me not to reiect his admonitorie, but 
to read it; to pleasure him, I haue wearied my selfe, intermitting
my better studies now these fortie dayes for
reading, and refuting of it, this seauen yeares I spent

not so much time with so little vantage to my selfe (except
that it may doe good vnto others.) I haue beene
seeking fruit in horto Tantali, for in all his admonitorie
I cannot finde a line to make a man either more godly,
or more learned. And this part of it, where-vnto now
wee enter, containes no other but fierie in
                     •
                  ectiues in
personam: needlesse repetitions, idle discourses, (for
matter many of them false) all of them fectlesse, for
order nothing else but a confused Chaos, and in a word
a building of small stickes, standing vpon rotten posts:
In the examination whereof, since he prouokes me to
it, I will not insist as in the former: onely in the by-going,
will strike the post, and let the building fall.
               
                   Hee first complaines, that I haue not clearely enough
declared the change of my minde concerning
Church-gouernement, what motiues, what reasons,
wherefore, and where-vnto I haue changed: And about
this, it would wearie any man to read how he repeates
and multiplies words, Sect. 14. 15. 17. 20. An
answere to them all, see out of this Treatise. In your
16. Section, you lay downe a ground, as graunted by
mee, vvhich I neuer gaue you, that I thought our
Church-gouernement. 1. Anarchie. 2. Confusion. 3. Not
allowed by God. 4. Disallowed by God. And heere you
haue heaped vp a heape of words vpon a dreame, and
false conception of your owne braine: you haue begotten
it, and you would father it vpon me, the ground
being false, that cannot stand which you haue built vpon
it. I know there was order in our Church, but such
as needed helpe to hold out carnall diuision; the mother
of confusion, the beginnings whereof in many
parts were more then euident, but then say you.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               VVHere was the dutie of a Preacher, your courage,
your boldnesse? why cried you not an Alarum against
such an enemie?
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               TRuly Mr. Dauid, there were so many false Alarums
                  
cried in our Church, for disturbance of the
peace thereof, by men of your humour, abusing the
simplicitie of some Pastors, that it was needlesse to me
to crie any more, yea of purpose I fled it, and thanke
God I euer delighted to handle my Text for edification
of the hearers in the matter of saluation, and had
no pleasure in digressions, or other discourses, yea not
in an open rebuke of the sinnes of them who were not
present to heare me. Neither is it any reason that euerie
vveakenesse seene in the State, or in the Church
should be proclaimed in Pulpit incontinent: you cannot
be ignorant, that many things are rather to be
tollerated,Cyp. Epist. 26. then mended with vntimely remedies. Ne
dum volumus importune ruimis subuenire, alias maiores multo
videamur parare. Mr. Dauid, we haue had more then
enough of this stuffe among vs: Men that will suffer
no Bishops, and yet in Presbyteries will either gouerne
all, or else nothing goes right: yea some, as if they
were Episcopi Episcoporum, sit in their land-ward Pulpits,
as in chaires of censure, giuing out iudgement, of
King, State, Church, Countrey, and all ranks of men,
condemning them in the hearts of their hearers, with
iniust and vntimely rebukes, that neuer come to the

knowledge of them, vnto whom they are directed,
this is a proud vsurpation, couer it with the cloake of
zeale who will, which for my part I neuer approued:
yet this is one of the Alarums Mr. Dauid cries for.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               TO take vp things then in grossest and simplest manner:Sect. 18.
you misliked Episcopall gouernement, say you, because you
feared tyrannie, libertie, and other euils should follow on it,
what is this to say, that you misliked it not for it selfe, but for
the consequences of it.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   SInce it is notoriously knowne, and I haue plainely
confessed, that I misliked Episcopall gouernement:
what needes all this enquirie of the causes of my misliking.
Sure it is, I misliked it vpon misconception.
Now I know it, but I knew it not then, and is it any
reason that I should for this be restrained from embracing
a clearer light, when God offers? so that you take
here but needlesse paines, and yet you will be doing,
and to proue that I misliked Episcopall gouernement,
for the vnlawfulnesse of the Office it selfe, which you
will neuer be able to make good, you bring foure arguments:
The first, from a priuate speech of mine,
spoken to a friend at the Parliament in Perth, which
this way you repeat.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               VVHether you behaued your selfe so or not, let it be
weighed by this little suruey of your speech first
priuate, then publike: in priuate I will cite but one, said to
haue beene in Perth at their first riding there. Let vs goe
(said you to your friend) and see these proud Prelates ride,
which friend of yours afterward as is reported, at your first
riding in Parliament, being come to Edenburgh; and demanded
of you wherefore hee was come, in detestation of you answered
you with your owne words, hee was come to see the
proud prelates ride. I know others report this somewhat otherwise,
and that it was a Bishop that repeated your words in
Edenburgh to that same your friend concerning you, to giue
you a meeting, for that you said of him in Perth.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               NOW Mr. Dauid comes in to giue the Reader a 
proofe of his skill in 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , for lacke of Canonicall
probations, he turnes him to Apocrypha and
makes vp a tale here so ridiculous by his owne narration,
as may make men maruell what hath made a reputed
wise man so foolish, hee saith, I spake it to a friend
in Perth, and a Bishop heard it; was I so inconsiderate as
to speake that in my priuate house (that time I was
not out of it) that a Bishop might heare in the streetes?
Why name you not the friend? vnder generals you
may say what you list: yet you distrust your selfe, for
you say, the tale which you bring here was said to haue
beene in Perth (said to haue beene) what certaintie is here?
is this ground good enough? say your selfe, and indeede

in the next word you shame your selfe, It is, say
you, otherwise reported: yet you make them both all one
in effect, that is, in truth, both of them false and fectlesse.
Is this solid reasoning thinke you?
               Spectatum admissi risum teneatis amici.
               
                  Without wood the fire is quenched, and without a tale-bearer
strife ceaseth.
                  Prou. 26. 20. Haue you no matter wherewith to fill vp
your paper, but a tale of hee said and she said? and you
cannot tell who said it. You will be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a Iudge,
to iudge mee, and is ignorant of the Law, for it stands
in all ages a Law to a Iudge 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that he
should not iudge by hearing, and yet hee will receiue
against me 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a vaine report. Thou painted
wall,
                  Acts 23. 3. 
                  thou sittest to iudge mee according to the Law, and
smitest mee against the Law? yet wee must vnderstand
that Mr. Dauid is a learned man (who will denie this
that knowes him?) and how euer this subiect seeme
small, yet his skill is the greater to make such a long
and learned Commentarie vpon so little a matter, and
seeing hee hath taken this paines vpon it, wee must all
thinke it worthy of the reading, or else wee doe him
great wrong, for so hee saith himselfe.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THe words (of the fable) are short, and seeme to import
little, but let vs consider them, they may giue vs light
perhaps (and perhaps no) sufficient to this matter concerning
all these chiefe points, whether it was feare of euill to
come, or euils present, you spake of, whether vncertaine feare
or certaine sight, &c,
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               HItherto haue wee heard Mr. Dauid his 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
now followes his 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   of it, a cunning and
most eloquent Orison vpon a fabulous narration.
How euer the matter seeme little, Mr. Dauid warnes
you hee can make it much, Nouit tenuiter diducere, and
can out of it draw many prettie Quiddities and Illatiues,
vpon whethers and what ifs, and can shew himselfe a
Rhethorician vpon Niff naffes. Mr. Dauid is no grosse
spinster, giue him the grossest stuffe you may get, hee
can twine it small, so skilled 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   that of little
hee can make much; yea, and could if neede required
secare cuminum: not vnmeete to be Steward to some
Italian Lord that would haue many dishes vpon small
allowance, but that it were a losse to take such a good
engine from the Schooles, wherein if he continue the
world will see that Scotus subtilis is reuiued in him againe.
But howeuer it be, I pittie you that you should
not haue some better subiect to trye your wits vpon;
for you shall beleeue me, who euer reported this tale
vnto you, in speaking of it was but a lyar, the thing it
selfe is a false fiction: you haue not done Christianly
to receiue it into your care, but much more vndutifully
to publish it in writing, and spend so many words
vainely vpon it: for you haue made vp here a Commentarie
of sixe score and sixteene lines vpon a false
narration. Now you intermixe a discourse against the
riding of Bishops at Parliament, no lesse foolish then
the former, for so you reason out of the Fable.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               THat they were proud is argued by the effect (riding)
now riding is not a fault in the person, nor for the person
in it selfe, all the Lords rode, and you call them not proud
for that, it became them, it is of their place and due, then it
was the fault of the office you marked thereby, for wee must
take heede that the word (ride) is not taken nakedly, for a
simple action of riding, that had beene no fault, and as little
wonder; for so they had done when they were simple Ministers,
but imports all circumstances, riding in Parliament, riding
in pompe of horse, of harnessing, of apparrell, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   NOW truely Mr. Dauid of a South-land Gentleman
you are the worst rider that euer I heard
of, for you ride your selfe cleane out of the Saddle,
and casts your selfe to be dirided of all men. I told you
already your narratiue whereupon you build this is
false; and albeit it were true, fectlesse to be vsed in such
a purpose, except you would shew your selfe ridiculous:
for why is riding, and riding in pompe and fine
apparrell, an effect of pride? tell mee Good man, is it
so with your selfe? are you alwayes proud when you
are mounted vpon your Courser, and your courting
garments vpon you? or if it be not so with your selfe,
why will you not thinke of another as you finde it in
your selfe? May there not be an humble heart vnder
an honourable garment? Read you euer of Eligius,
Nouiomagensis Episcopus,
                  Cent. 7. lib. 2. 
                        •
                     ea. 20. it is recorded of him, Cum vestibus
holosericis externe amictus esset, intra vestimenta ad

nudam cutem cilicio indutus erat: when hee was clothed
with Silke without, hee had Sacke-cloath within nearest
his bodie: and yet out of an outward garment
you will gather pride; and as your owne words
beare, such a pride as is not referred to the countenance
but to the heart. But in all this Mr. Dauid, you haue
said nothing to proue Bishops proud Prelates, and
proud not in countenance onely, but in heart also; but
haue still proclaimed your selfe a proud pratler, pu
                     •
                  t vp
with highest pride that can be, in that you will not
rest in the countenance, which is Mans part, but you
will iudge the heart, which is reserued to God. And
now Mr. Dauid if you were there that day walking on
foote in the streete, and other two with you, whom I
might name, there are many deceiued but three were
more pride going on foote with you there, then was
riding on horse-backe with all the thirteene, though
they had beene there.
               Your second argument, is from a publicke speech 
of mine, vttered in a Sermon at the Parliament of Perth,
there say yee, I taught that the very stile of Bishops was to
be abhorred, with many other imputations of yours,
which admit they were as true as you would haue
them, yet are they but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a figgie Sword,
a weake weapon, that neyther helpes you, nor hurts
mee. Doubtlesse if your cause were as strong as you
suppose, you would bring stronger arguments to defend
it, then to leaue the purpose, and fall vpon the
person, but your allegation is false; I had, as I declared,
mine owne misconceptions of that estate, but neuer
thought, farre lesse taught, that the stile and name of
Bishops was to be abhorred. And albeit you thinke I
taught much in that Sermon against Bishops, yet I remember
more iudicious hearers then you, who were
familiar with mee, maruelled I had spoken so little;

the iust copie of the Sermon is yet extant, and when I
looke vnto it, I maruell at it, and reuerence the Lords
prouidence, who then directed mee to a conclusion,
wherein yet I remaine, for so were my words. That we
may espie the cause of this diuision, let vs see what part of the
wall hath gagged from the foundation whereupon the building
stands, and from that policie wee haue receiued from our
Fathers, let that be drawne in to the rest againe, then shall
arise an happy vnion which shall assure vs of the continuance
and encrease of Gods worke in the middest of vs. These are
the words whereunto the Lord led me, and I yet stand
to them. And againe, to this same purpose serues the
words of my exhortation, directed to such as stood for
Episcopall gouernment, that if they had nay new light
which they had not before, they would communicate it to
their brethren, that wee also might follow them, &c. This
makes the matter cleare, that I was not so farre miscarryed
as to condemne eyther the name or office of
Bishops, as you alledge, but offered my selfe readie and
willing to follow better light if they would bring it, or
God otherwise should send it. And these words as being
mine owne, you vse to my selfe in the end of this
Treatise, desiring that if I haue any new light I should
communicate it to you, which here I haue freely and
truely done, wishing it may moue your heart, as it moued
mine. Your third Reason followeth.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               
                  I Might adde the admonition giuen in by you subscribed to
this same Parliament, where that office is called a slander to
the Gospell, a defection, &c.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               YOur third argument is taken from an admonition 
as you call it, but a supplication, as I take it, subscribed
by mee: for answere to this, I will very plainely
and truely declare the matter as it is, that men may
see there is no pith in your allegation to proue that
which you intend. That there was a supplication giuen
in I heare, who penned it, or what was in it I know
not, where they assembled whether in the Church, or
in a priuate house I enquire not, present at that meeting
sure it is I was not. It was brought to mee by a familiar
brother, to mine owne house; I cannot remember
whether before Sermon, or when I had new
come from it: but well I wot at such a time wherein
I had no leasure to reade it, like as I neuer read it: they
tolde mee it contained nothing but a supplication for
continuance of Church-gouernment, that then was.
And as I haue said, at that time I could willingly haue
contented; yea, contended for it as I might, that our
gouernment might continue, fearing euer least the intended
course had beene to abolish it; but from the time
I perceiued that the course was not to disanull any
substantiall point of Discipline which we had, but onely
to roberate it, by restoring againe Episcopall power,
whereby I perceiued the Church not weakened but
strengthened, not preiudiced but confirmed in all her
lawfull libertie, I reproued my selfe of my former folly,
and not onely consented vnto it, but the more I looked
into it, the more I loued it, reioycing at the preferment
of Preachers for this end, and in honouring
of them esteemed my selfe honoured. And if the subscribed
Supplication hath that in it which you affirme,

that the office of a Bishop is slanderous in the Church,
which I can hardly thinke that any learned or well
adu
                     •
                  sed Preacher will affirme, then I make it knowne
vnto you it neyther had nor hath any approbation of
mine. This being the simple truth I doubt not but the
indifferent Reader will thinke any ouer-sight, that hath
escaped mee, very easily excused. Your fourth Argument
now followeth.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               MIght I not adde also the Assemblies of Dundie 1580.
at which it is likely you were, as being within your
twenty yeeres that you haue beene a Pastor, where (the office
of a Bishop) is called folly, corruption, mans inuention, vnlawfull,
&c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   IT is shame to see you alledge such notorious falsehoods,
I was not at that Assembly; yea, I was no Minister
then at all, being but twelue yeeres old, I was
newly taken from the Grammer Schoole in Dunbar,
and entred into the Colledge in S. Andrewes. With
many such false lies as these fighteth your Fellowship
against mee, which yet are currant for truth in your
Colledge of Do
                     •
                  atists, whose Spirit I iustly called alying
Spirit: for noto
                     •
                  ious 
                     •
                  alshoods are carried among
you in secret, from tongue to tongue, and receiued in
your meetings for vndoubted truths. This I could
qualifie by s
                     •
                  tting downe a particular catalogue of your

                     •
                  alumnies, but I will not at this time. I haue onely to

                     •
                  raue of suc
                     •
                   as feare God, that howsoeuer many spare

not to carie Satan in their tongue by false reports: that
they also lodge him not in their eare by hearing, and
receiuing a false accusation: for this is required of
them, who shall dwell in the tabernacle of God, and rest in
his holy mountaine, that they receiue not a false report against
their neighbour; and therefore rests assured that they
vvill reserue an eare to heare mee, before they condemne
me.
               These are the foure pillars of your great building,
so rotten in themselues, that they fall as soone as they
are touched with the finger: and what then becommeth
of your long discourses, inferred vpon them? Are
they not Bullatae nugae. bellering bablings, watrie bels,
easily dissipate by the smallest winde, or rather euanishes
of their owne accord?
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               HOw is your change then? and what causes are of it?
This had neede to haue beene cleerely shewed, decl
                     •
                  red,
and proued, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               IN this Section you returne againe improbitate muscae,
                  
to the point from which euen now you haue beene
repelled, and you are not ashamed to be tedious to
your Reader, Ea
                        ••
                     em semper canen
                        ••
                      Cantilenam: Still
demanding how is your change: It were more time
you should bethinke you how to change your talke, or
if still you will multiply words in vaine, I contend no
more in that which I haue answered alreadie: There be
foure things (saith Salomon) which cannot be satisfied, the

graue, the barren wombe, the earth, and the fire. Whether
you be the fourth of these for your fierie humour, or a
fifth to be ioyned to them for a hunger you haue, and
I cannot satisfie, I rest resolued to take no more paines
vpon you for this part of our question. Two things
onely you haue here which must be answered. In the
first you would proue, that I haue much more cause
to feare the euils may follow Episcopall gouernement
now then I had before: and your reason is.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               CAn any humane carefulnesse suffice vnto that care? it is
true, Princes haue long eares, but other mens eares, they
haue many eies as Argus, yet are they the eies of others: and
these others may be brought a sleepe by some cunning Mercurius:
Can his Maiestie in such distance see the whole proceedings
of Prelates, the whole and naked truth of things by
such informers? by themselues, or their agents? doth he now
know the deepenesse of misteries? euen the scurfe of many actions?
shall he hereafter? The pride that may be? that tyrannie,
libertie, as it happens to grow, their neglects, sloathes,
bribes, partialities, how much lesse fore-see how they shall be
eschewed? &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   MAster Dauid, you should haue aduised with your
warrant, before you had reuiled your Rulers,
you haue opened your mouth, and giuen out false accusations:
Are you able to qualifie them?Psal. 52. 4. 
                  but thou louest
all words that may destroy, O deceitfull tongue, if you were
                  
put to probation vnder paine of suffering punishment
due to these sinnes, it would goe hard with you. Neither
can it be well, when euery man takes libertie to
accuse such as are in authoritie, either in Commonwealth
or Church, and is not able to make it good,
that yet they goe away not the lesse without controlement:
what you s
                     •
                  eake concerning feare, I confesse (if
that may please you) I am neuer without feare. Euen
the most pure Doctrine, the most perfect Discipline,
who can secure himselfe that none euill shall follow
it: Since in Paradise in the state of innocencie, a Serpent
followed Adam and Euah, and corrupted them,
We are vpon earth, like Passengers on the Sea, were
the winde and weather neuer so faire, yet are they not
without feare, till they come to their harbourie, because
they know there may be a change: and shall wee
get vpon earth a state exempetd from feare? or is it possible
to set downe that forme of gouernement in the
Church, of the which wee may be sure, without all
feare, none euill shall follow it? Is none euill to be feared,
to follow Presbyteriall gouernement? what you
haue enquired of the one, let me aske of you the other:
can all the faults, offences, sloaths of Presbyteries, in
not assembling to the weekely exercise, with diuisions,
disobediences, be knowne to his Maiestie? it is more
apparant, the faults of one, are sooner knowne, sooner
dilated, sooner corrected, then the ouer-sights of manie:
neither is it likely, that Bishops shall escape with
their smallest offences, so long as you and such as you,
are their captors and inspectors, dogging them at the
heeles, treading after them in all their foot-steps, glad
when you may heare or see any weakenesse in them,
that you lay hold vpon greedily, making much of little,
that you may disgrace them. Is not this to imitate
Satans nature? is it not contrarie to the conditions of

elect Angels? they reioyce at the conuersion of a
sinner, you with Satan reioyce at their fall: it doth
you more good then your meate or drinke, to heare
any blame you may impute to a Bishop. God forgiue
you.
               
                   But to returne, sure it is, no carefull, no conscionable
man can liue in any state without feare: for why?
Satan seekes most carefully and cunningly to corrupt
Offices most excellent, and most profitable for the
Church, and the greater good be in them so long as
they abide good, the greater euill comes of them when
they begin to change: Euen as the finest wine turnes
into the sharpest vinegar. How then shal a man be without
feare? but I nothing doubt it is in his Maiestie his
chiefe cares to establish it, and that by fensing it against
all euils, specially tyrannie, libertie, briberie, partialitie,
sloath, which you haue obiected, and where desperately
you insinuate that the Office of a Bishop will
neuer doe good. A Wolfe, say you, will be a Wolfe, and all
the world had sworne it; and will worrie too when the Shepheards
backe is turned: you but speake of your owne, either
ignorance, or euill set affection, considering how
many famous Bishops, without the reuerence of a Christian
King, liued as Fathers to the Church, faithfull
Preachers of the Gospel, and died constant Martyrs for
the testimonie of Iesus; but Mr. Dauid will haue all
these rauening Wolfes. The other cause why my feare
should be greater followes.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               THe Office of Bishops then pretended no preheminence,
now it doth▪ then it was subiect to Presbyteries, now it
is freed from them: then it was bound with caueats, now it is

let loose. Then euery Preacher might speake against it, now
none reproues, then were all alike friend and good fellow with
their Pastors, now his Lordship, &c.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               MAster Dauid, wee know better what was wont to 
be in our Church then you, there was neuer all
alike as you say in it, our gouernement was alway
Aristocratick, for albeit by constitution for that time
paritie was allowed, yet was it not practised; there was
euer some leaders, rulers honoured and reuerenced by
other Pastors, and good reason so should bee: what
else see you now, if the persons liked you, the purpose
is the same? Since the beginning of our Church, Bishops,
Superintendents, vvere neuer subiect to the
iudgement of their brethren, in the matter of their office;
nay, not to their Synods, but were reserued to be
iudged onely by the generall assembly; but you affirme
the contrarie pertly enough, looking for no controlement.
Bishops are not let loose, suppose they be not left
to your teddering.
               But this offends you, that they are called Lords: let
me enquire at you, Is honour giuen to any in the
Church, but for the honour of all? if they could looke
to it with loue and humilitie, euery one might say,
Honoris vestri participes et nos sumus? Will any member
of the bodie grudge to see another honoured; or rather
in the honour of one, doe they not all reioyce, and
esteeme themselues to be honoured? Mr. Dauid, there
is a pride which loueth honour and preferment: Our
Lord condemnes it, there is another pride that disdaines
to giue it, and I may well say, it is the worst
pride of the two, I will not thinke that either Elijah or

                  Samuel were vaine-glorious, when the one was stiled
by Obadiah, and the other by Anna, My Lord: Surely
it is a weake and vaine minde, that is puft vp with so
small a winde, and yet I am sure both Anna and Obadiah
in giuing them this honour, did but their dutie. But I
thinke M. Dauid in this will not be contentious; for in
the backe of his Letter directed to Bishops, he writes,
To his verie good Lord: And then in the subscription
within, Your L. or wisedomes: What he meanes by this,
I know not: he will giue his owne reason; hee saith, it
is a nouation and corruption to call one Pastor a Bishop
more then the rest, yet hee doth it, and here hee
practises in secret, that which he impugnes in publick,
and so dec
                     •
                  iues his complices, giuing honour himselfe
to Bishops, which he saith, should not be giuen them:
they haue cause to feare, least sometime hee forsake
them. Now you proceede.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               YOu make a faire shew by bragges to corroborate all by
the word of God, and example of the Church Primitiue,
iolly words, sooner said then proued, strings much harped on
by diuers, but to little vse, and wherein the more men diue,
the more they cleare the contrarie; it may be easily seene
through all the subtilties, clouds, and colours that they cast
on it, who haue busied themselues in that matter, euen your
Sarauia, euen whosoeuer, whom the more men reades, the
lesse effect they see in him: they, I say, who haue not their
eies blinded with some other thing, such as blindes not the eies
of the wise.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               VVHether it be a faire shew or a solid substance 
wee will trye when it comes to the point:
You will not haue it heard that the Primitiue Church
had Bishops: you may aswell denie that the Sunne
shined vnto them: you call this a Subterfuge, and a large
field whereunto we runne to eschew the chocke of the question;
which say you is this, Whether these Bishops that now are,
and as they are now, be lawfull in the Church of Scotland:
or if the oath hinder? But prouoke at leasure, ere we part
you will finde vs (by Gods grace) at the chocke of
the Question, and your selfe chocked with it for all
your boast; but I must first goe through this hedge of
Bryers and Brambles which you haue laid in my way.
               You set light by our Sarauia as you call him, but you 
deceiue your selfe if you thinke our strength is in Sarauia:
for mine owne part, I neuer read him so much
as I haue done you, and of that which I haue read, I
see Sarauia will stand for himselfe for all you are able
to say; your little Dagger will not reach to him, and it
were shame for you now, though you might, to strike
at a dead man, as I heare hee is: it were greater manhood
to encounter with Downame, you dissemble that
you know him, but if you doe and mislike him, hee is
readie to fight with you in that cause, till your Logicke
panne be cleane dryed vp or the cause renounced.
               One thing you haue, that no man can see any thing 
in Sarauia, but Sophistrie and falshood, except those
whose eyes are blinded with some other thing, such as
blindes the eyes of the wise: you would seeme here to
be modest, yet of purpose as mordent as you may be,
whom you would insimulate of briberie. Aduise with

your selfe, if you be seeking any such here, as the Byword
is, You are in the wrong Close. I told you before,
you were acquainted with the Muses, onely the Dorit
Muse hath beene strange vnto you: you were capable
enough of her instruction, but shee tooke no paines
vpon you: it is meetest you should meane you to Melpomene,
her mourning moodes might procure you pittie,
but out of your pride and male contentment to blot
such as you are bound to honor, and secretly to insinuate
that they were 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , such as gaue iudgement
for gifts, is intollerable presumption. I protest
before God, I know none such in the Church, I would
not say it for all the world. If any such be, of all men
they are the most miserable: if they be not, Mr. Dauid
declareth what manner of man hee is, and woe will be
to him that would bring such a shame vpon Israell
without a cause, if hee repent not. As for mee I thanke
God, I was neuer stained with couetousnesse nor filthy
lucre,Psal. 26. 9. I defie all flesh. Lord, gather not thou my soule with
the sinners, nor my life with bloudie men, in whose hand is
wickednesse, and their right hand is full of bribes: but I will
walke in mine innocencie, redeeme me and be mercifull to me,
my foote stands in vprightnesse, therefore will I praise thee O
Lord, in the Congregation. Now you goe on.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               TOuching our Church and Bishops being in it before you
were borne,Sect. 22. if so be, so is Popple among Wheate before
it be shorne, of great auncientnesse, Co
                     •
                  uall springing vp
with it, and in the ground perhaps before it. And incontinent.
You will finde it difficult enough to proue that Bishops
were receuied in our Church wittingly, willingly, by choyse,
and free consent. &c.
            
            
               
               THE ANSVVERE.
               IF I proue it not without difficultie, and make it plaine 
to the iudicious indifferent Reader, let mee be blamed.
Your refuge, that Bishops were in our Church
as Popple among Wheate, will not relieue you: for
you will finde them planted in this soyle, watred, nourished,
and defended by the best Fathers of our Church.
In your scorning of vniting or revniting Bishops and
Presbyters; Weedes as yee call it, with wine, speaking
oft-times so barbarously for want of better, you doe
but shew your selfe most worthy to be scorned, as ignorant
of all Antiquitie, which could very well informe
you that a Bishop without a Presbyterie, is an
head without a bodie; and a Presbyterie without a Bishop,
a body without an head. Where, by a Presbyterie
I vnderstand that which Ignatius cals

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the Consistorie of a Bishop, subordinate to
him, afterward called his Chapter, because they were
instar Capituli Episcopo, which serue for assistance of
him in waightie matters, as also to take care that the
possessions of the Bishopricke should not haue beene
dilapidated. Then is it well when they both goe together,
euery one in their owne place to doe the worke
of God. But no maruell Mr. Dauid denies that Bishops
were in the Primitiue church, or that our owne church
once allowed them; for hee is bold to denie that any
Father, or Brother of our present Church, approueth
the Office of Bishops, but esteemes it as followeth.
            
            
               
               THE ADMONENT.
               1 THe Office of a Bishop is vnlawfull in it selfe; 2. More
vnlawfull in this Church of Scotland; 3. Vnprofitable
in it importing tyrannie, and is it selfe tyrannie; 4. Doth and
shall import more libertie and loosenesse of life in it selfe, and
in the Countrey, with Papistry, senslessenes, Atheisme: some
that thought wel of it in the beginning, thinke worse of it now.
Consider the experience in boldning Papists in so vnlookt for
manner, so many witnesses in our chiefe Towne since Bishops
got gouernment, as was not nor durst not be in all Scotland
when Presbyteries had gouernment. Now Corruption flowes
and ouer-flowes the whole Country, and defaceth the face of
a most beautifull Church.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   MAster Dauid continues yet in his humour, & adhuc
in Aegiptum euagatur,
                  Nazianz. orat. ad Eu
                        •
                     om. 
                  & patitur se in Assyriam
pertrahi, framing himselfe to the manners and fashions
of Egypt and Assur, hee raileth against Israell, forgetting
all pietie, and modestie, and truth that becommeth
the holy people, whereof hee professeth himselfe to be
one. Hee denyes that any eyther Father or Brother of
the Ministrie in Scotland allowes the office of Bishops,
except it be Bishops themselues: this is a notorious vntruth,
hee still affirmes it is vnlawfull and vnprofitable,
but vpon what reason wee will see when we come
to the Question. If yee had spoken this out of knowledge
that the Episcopall Office in it selfe, is vnlawfull
and tyrannicall, you would haue giuen some reason
for it, but when you come to the point, you shew your

selfe a coward, turnes your shield on your shoulder,
and farely flyes the combat. You would seeme a great
Captaine, and make your fellowes beleeue that you
were matchlesse, but strike not one stroke to defend
their cause, or hurt the contrarie; but if crying may
win the field, then should be beare away the victorie,
for still hee cries it is vnlawfull, tyrannicall, and what
not? the reason is, Mr. Dauid saith so, and any silly wife
could say as much to a cause as you doe here: for you
bring but words, and so could shee, suppose hardly so
many as you.
               In your other speeches you shew your selfe so full 
of malice, that before you want doung to cast on the
face of your Brethren, whom you seeke to disgrace, you
had rather rake it out of the bellie of your Mother: for
what say you? Is not the whole Church ouerflowed with
Papistrie? God forbid, but rather the deluge of waters
which was before is begunne to fall. See you not the
tops of many mountaines discouered? and by all appearance,
if the Lord by the care of a prudent Prince,
had not prouided this remedie of Episcopall authoritie,
it might well haue fallen out, as you say, that the
spawne of Papistry would haue ouer-flowed all. Otherwise
tell mee what would you haue done to preuent
it? Excommunicate them? so might you quickely
haue equalled the sicke wi
                     ••
                   the whole, or 
                     〈◊〉
                   haue
infected the whole with the sicke▪ What else could you
doe, vnlesse it had beene to draw the matter to the
needlesse hazard of a battell, as seemes by you words,
They durst not, say you: what is it to keepe a man that
hee dare not? The Ecclesiastique sword you know was
contemned; the 
                     〈◊〉
                   sword, that is the last remedie;
praised be God wee haue a better: all your Physicke
is violent. Cut off▪ cut off▪
                   but a prudent Prince in
more moderate manner can effectuate peace, giue

authoritie to truth, and falshood fals to the ground.
               
                   And where you say that the face of a most beautifull
Church is defaced, meaning the Church of the
first towne in the Kingdome: how vnrighteous, vndutifull
and inconsiderate are you? Is it your pleasure
to spit in the face of your Mother? delight you to vncouer
her shame, if you could finde it? and where you
cannot, is it your sport to blacke her face with the soote
of your calumnie, and then call enemies to looke vpon
it? What say you, Mr. Dauid to the Church of Edenburgh?
Is it not still a Mother Church? Is not the way
of God truely taught in it? Hath it not learned and famous
Preachers of whom you are vnworthie? Is there
any defection in it from any point of truth? How then
defaced? By Masses (say you) said in it. Were they publicke?
You dare not affirme it. Were they stollen in secret?
You cannot denie it, and yet discouered by the
vigilant care of their Bishop and Pastors. Thankes to
God, such abhomination dare not be auouched there.
Is this a defacing of that Church? No: it is a detracting
of yours, no defacing of them; yea, rather it is their
great commendation, that in so populous a Citie
scarce twelue are found miscarried by seducers, and
those also of no credit nor countenance; who, vvhen
they are tryed and examined, professe they had done
it of simple ignorance, and that they abhor the Masse
so much the more, because they haue seene it, offering
themselues most willing to declare their publicke Repentance,
to remoue all offences giuen by them, out of
the hearts of others: and among them seeing there
was not one Burgesse of Edenburgh deprehended in
this fault, why blame you the town
                     •
                   for it?
               Tell mee, I pray you, was the Church of Ephesus
defaced, because some false Apostles did creepe into it?
find you not the contrarie? that the Bishop of Ephesus,

called there the Angell, is commended, for that he had
examined them, and found them to be lyars. If the
Church of Edenburgh had fallen away (which GOD
auert) as the Church of Thyatyra did, and suffered Iezabell
a false Prophetesse to teach and deceiue the Seruants
of God; there then you might say it were a defaced
Church, I suppose (which I hope in God shall neuer
fall out) that Sathan had a Throne there, as he had
in Pergamus, yet seeing there is a Church that will not
denie the faith, no though Antipas should be slaine,
how say you the face of the Church is defaced? But the
contrarie is manifest, Satan may creepe in there like a
thiefe (thanks be to God) he hath no throne there: what
villanie can hee worke, which they punish not? Can
you say any of their Magistrates, Councellors, Ministers,
Elders, Deacons, or any honourable man of the
body of their Citie, is stained with that Heresie? How
then is the face of their Church defaced? And truely,
though that many such were among them (as you haue
said) which yet is not, it were no maruell to mee, when
I remember the Apostles saying; There must be Heresies,
that such as are approued may be tryed? Where there is
no winde to carrie chaffe away, how shall the Corne
be discerned? where there is no Heresie how shall they
be knowne who are confirmed in veritie, rooted and
grounded so in Christ, stablished and built vpon the
rocke, that no winde of contrarie doctrine can carrie
them away? Traduce as you will, this is the truth, for
many reasons is that Church worthy to be commended;
but in my iudgement, this is the greatest commendation
that euer it got, that subtle Heretiques with
the seed of false doctrine, creeping in into her bosome,
to seeke an aduantage, can finde either none at all or
verie little. Yet your other Assertions are more impudent:
it contents you not most wrongfully to haue

defaced a chiefe Church in the Kingdome, now you
proceede to doe the like vnto all other Pastors and
Professors in our Church.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               
                  I Know many doe countenance Bishops, because they haue to
doe with them, and giue them obedience as a man would
giue his goods to arobber (let not the comparison seeme odious,
for in this they are alike) that hee take not his life also;
because hee is not able to resist him. I know, some feare their
menaces of Deposition, Suspending, Silencing, putting them
from their flockes, takes it for a iust feare, and so a compulsion,
so themselues to be excused: but that from their hearts
like of that Office, I know none, such as you speake of.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                  
                  THE words of the righteous are stedfast, and what is it,
that you can iustly reproue in them?
                  Iob 6. 25. I haue spoken it,
I speake it ouer againe, and I know it, that many worthie
Fathers and Brethren of our Church, are of that
same minde concerning Church-gouernment, that I
haue here declared. As for those whom you say you
know to be otherwise minded, looke what a miserable
Patron you are vnto them (if any such be, for in this
you haue lost credit) you make them all temporizers,
dissemblers, sillie timerous bodies that countenance
Bishops not from their hearts, but for feare and for
compulsion. Mr. Dauid, I suffer you with the greater
patience miscalling me at your pleasure, since I see your
tongue spares none; nay, not those whose hearts you
grant your selfe are with you: you spare not to call

them dissemblers, &c. Since so it is that you take libertie
to speake of all men as you please; neither sparing those
who are in heart with you, nor yet those that in heart
are against you in your opinion, what remaines, but
that it be publickely proclaimed, The Good man of Gods
Croft his tongue is no slander.
               
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               AND that which you pretend of the aduise of this present
Church, comes vnder the same count, nothing voluntary
nor by 
                     •
                  hoyse, but forced by such feares, iust or apprehended
for iust, neyther by the Church customably assembled,
but by a number propped out, for the most part by Bishops, to
that effect.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               THat Mr. Dauid may be knowne for a compleate 
Conuitiator, as he hath hitherto spared no estate
vntouched; for hee hath set out the King hauing eies
and eares not his owne, that may deceiue him, as
though wee had so inconsiderate a Prince as to iudge
by the eyes and eares of other men. Bishops hee hath
painted out for Tyrants, Bribers, Libertines, Vsurpers.
Pastors reuerencing Bishops hee hath made false, dissemblers,
sillie bodies. The whole Church hee hath
giuen out to flow and ouer-flow with Heresie. The
principall Church in the Kingdome he hath described
to be a defaced Church: so now, as if those were too
little in his last furie, debacchatur in supremam Ecclesiae
Synodum, binding vp all his former railings in one bundle.
The Assemblie was conuocated by his Maiesties

will and authoritie, a part of his Christian and Kingly
power; the Bishops of the Church present in it. Pastors
hauing commission to vote from their Presbiteries,
many Noble men honestly affected to religion, vnspotted,
yea, vnsuspected in it; many Commissioners
from the most famous Churches and Townes of the
Kingdome. All these assembled together, Mr. Dauid
not with powder, but with his penne, blowes vp into
the ayre as a corrupt assembly, compelled, budded,
bribed, not rightly assembled, and wherein nothing
was rightly done: yet was there some aged Fathers
who subscribed plainly to the Episcopall gouernment,
now after better aduisement; of whom it is knowne
that before, they suffered imprisoning for impugning
of it: whereof I doe but warne him by the way.
               
                   In the remanent of your Sections, after your owne
disordered manner, to tell you as the truth is, like 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
you compasse about mine Apologie
without order, making a proffer to many places in it,
not lighting nor resting vpon any, to speake it in Scots,
you flie bumming a throat after the manner of a drone
Bee, making a great sound and noise, but little labour,
no honie, no solid reason, no truth, no learning vttered
here, onely iterate Inuectiues, not worthie to be insisted
in, except I would Actum agere. Your misconstruction
of Iosephs preferment for the good of his Brethren,
as if I had so spoken of my selfe, confirmes me
in that which I perceiued before, that you are but a
vaine discourser, pleasing your selfe in Argutijs, silly,
fectlesse, and impertinent conceptions and speeches.
And therefore being loath to wearie the Reader and
my selfe both any longer with your Batt
                        •
                     log-Tautol
                        •
                     
                     gies,
I presently commit them to the South winde to be
carried away from your Peele-house at Preston, with
the rema
                     •
                  ent smoke of your pannes, to the water of

                  Forth, and so bid farewell to Mr. Dauid in his furie,
and now turne mee to speake with him in his more
sober minde.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               VVHat is there then to be done here will you say? euen
this certainely as you said sometime your selfe, If
you haue gotten new light which you had not before, communicate
it to others your Brethren, that they also may follow
you in their hearts, and know they yeeld to you in a good conscience,
&c. Let bitternesse be remoued, let the cause with
calmnesse and meeknesse be considered.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               NOw at length M. Dauid, the euill blood begins to 
fall from your heart, God be thanked, and you
are come to some coolnes, suppose not kindly enough,
yet of your former Feauer wherein you raged, yet it
puts vs in hope, you may recouer of this disease betime,
what you haue here said, I receiue 
                     
                        •
                     buijs vlnis, any
light I haue I will willingly communicate, bitternesse

                     •
                   agree be remoued; Perit enim iudicium, vbires transit
in affectum: I wish therefore perturbate and preiudicat
affection may be laid by:1 Tim. 17. It is onely these two 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
and 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that fights against Episcopall gouernement.
To be short, I embrace all your conclusion,
and euery condition of it, except onely where you
will me, not to disguise my speech by sought out sentences▪
and o
                        •
                     tentation of reading, to iuggle the iudgement of the simple,
I must warne you, that whether your word stand
for a i
                        •
                     gulator, or a deceiuing Iugler, your deede comes

too soone▪ against your protestation, euen now you
craued bitternesse may be remoued, and you cannot
leaue it, but to vse your owne Prouerbe, A Wolfe will be
a Wolfe. Naturam expellas furcalicet vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      recurret; And
as to my manner of writing, I cannot change it: I want
not my owne reasons, neither haue you any cause to
complaine of it. Now we goe to the question.
            
            
               THE ADMONENT.
               
                  I Goe from all that long disputation. 1. Whether Bishops be
lawfull. 2. Whether they were, and how they were in the
Primitiue Church, which you claime to. 3. How they were
in our owne Church at the beginning, or leaues it to a fitter
time, and alledgeth how euer these things were, they are not
lawfull now to vs; 1. In respect of our oath, since our oath; 2. in
respect of our Discipline more profitable for vs.
            
            
               THE ANSVVERE.
               
                   NOw Mr. Dauid hauing of a long time trauelled with
wickednesse, and conceiued mischiefe, at length bringeth
forth a lye.
                  Psal. 7. 14. When all is reckoned and counted the matter
comes to iust nothing: Et magno conatu murem tandem
peperisse videtur. Who could haue looked but that
Mr. Dauid who so largely and liberally hath condemned
Bishops in word, would haue brought at least one
argument against them? hee doth it not, but rather
destroyes all that hee hath said before. You cannot
eschew this; you haue multiplyed words, and by most
sharp Inuectiues haue condemned Episcopall gouernment:
you haue called it tyrannie, and vnlawfull in it
selfe; and now you remit the lawfulnesse or vnlawfulnesse

of it to be disputed. Truely good man you haue
wronged the partie, and abused the Reader: for, according
to reason, you should haue disproued Episcopall
gouernment before you had condemned it; but after
that you haue condemned it, is it not your shame
to remit it to further reasoning? In the one you haue
shewed superfluitie of malice, mouing you to speake
euill of it▪ in the other penurie of knowledge, that you
haue no reason to iustifie you in the condemning of it.
Thus haue you shewed your selfe, in initio confident em, in
facto timidum; one that feareth to fight, but is bold to
bragge. You will not simplie giue ouer the combat,
but declines it farely for this time, and puts it off to a
better time: but in my minde a better time could you
neuer haue had then this, seeing you haue gathered
your friends, and haue mustered you Armie, and ordered
it out of your ripest wits in sixe sheetes of paper
before you; what a shame is it, that in so feeble manner
you should turne your backe, and leaue all that you
haue sent and said before? You haue braued a Bishop in
presence of your friends, now hee stands before you,
and you dare not looke him in the face, nor strike one
stroke at him in this quarrell, that the office of a Bishop
is vnlawfull in it selfe.
               But to pursue you euen to the vttermost point,
wherevnto you haue fled; in this also you shew your
selfe weake, yea, ridiculous: for now you haue drawne
all your speech to this Assertion, and I pray the iudicious
Reader to consider it, Howsoeuer Episcopall Gouernment
in it selfe be lawfull or vnlawfall to other Churches,
or sometime lawfull in our owne Church, yet it is not lawfull
now. A Paradoxe indeede: I thinke Mr. Dauid speakes
not simplie, but grants it by concession. But taking it
as hee giues it, let vs heare it ouer againe, Though Episcopall
gouernement in it selfe were lawfull, lawfull to other

Churches, lawfull once to our owne Church, yet now it is not
lawfull. To proue this, Mr. Dauid brings two Reasons,
which had neede to be very strong, it being a strange
Position they haue to defend: but the Reader shall by
Gods grace see it made plaine, that there is no more
truth, worth, nor value in his two Reasons, then in the
rest of his Assertions. And since the whole weight of
the Controuersie stands vpon these two Reasons, I set
them downe truely to you, as Mr. Dauid hath set them
downe to mee.
               
                  The first REASON.
                  We may not receiue Bishops, because the oath in conceiued
word is against Hierarchie.
               
               
                  The second REASON.
                  In respect of our receiued Discipline more profitable for our
Church.
               
               
                  The Confutation of these reasons.
                  
                      BEfore I come to a iust examination of these Reasons,
I will onely present a view of their weaknesse
to the Reader, in these words. In the Confession of faith,
sworne and subscribed by the Preachers and Professors
of this Land, they haue abiured the Popes wicked and
worldly Hierarchie. Mr. Dauid leauing out the differences
of Papall, wicked, worldly, makes mention onely of Hierarchie:
which, in it selfe, signifies an authoritie or imperatiue
power in things sacred: Who will abiure this?
but to declare their meaning, they added these three
differences, Papall, worldly, wicked: but Mr. Dauid to
declare how hee distrusts his owne cause, deceiueth
the simple, by putting in into his Reason the Word
Hierarchie onely. By this, any indifferent Reader may
see that Mr. Dauid deales not truely, nor faithfully, nor
like a man defending a good cause, but fore-seeing that

these words would destroy his Assertion, of purpose he
leaues them out.
                  His second Reason is without reason, and against
the very rules of reasoning. This is Petitio principij, he
begs the question, and takes it for a principle, which is
the Controuersie it selfe, as shall appeare in our improbation.
I will not be presumptuous to dispute that
which is concluded alreadie, and past in a Law. Onely
to cleare the proceedings of our Church from the
wrongfull imputations of malecontents, I giue an Answere
to all their Obiections in these Positions following.
                  
                     1
                     Episcopall gouernment in it selfe is lawfull, and of 
all other hath best warrants in the Word. Mr. Dauid
hath declined this question, yet will I giue to him and
others such light in it as God hath giuen mee.
                  
                  
                     2
                     No Church since the dayes of Christ vnto our Fathers 
dayes, was without Episcopall Gouernment, and
Mr. Dauid cannot shew one instance to the contrarie:
for, howsoeuer in some reformed Churches Superintendents
were placed, the name being onely changed,
the matter remained.
                  
                  
                     3
                     The Church of Scotland in her purest estate, enioyed 
the Gospell with Episcopall gouernment for the
space of twentie yeeres, as may be proued out of the
Monuments of our Church, for there you will finde
by Acts of generall Assemblie,An. 1561. 
                        Ministers ordained to be
subiect to Superintendents.
                        An. 1561. 
                        A Law craued from the Lords
of secret Counsell, for punishment of such as disobeyed Superintendents.
Power to hold Assemblies twice in the yeere,
giuen to Superintendents.
                        An. 1562. 
                        Power to transport Ministers
giuen to Superintendents.
                        An. 1562. 
                        Power of diuorcements taken from

Ministers and giuen to Superintendents.
                        An. 1573. 
                        Power to admit

                              •
                           inisters, and depose them, giuen to Superintendents. No
religious Bookes to be printed but by ad
                              •
                           ise of Superintendents.
                        An. 1563.
This was the order of our Church all the dayes
of Iohn Knox, &c.
                     
                     
                         Here you obiect, first, that the offices of Bishops and
Superintendents are not one: and why? I am sure you
know in power of signification they are one; in power
of Iurisdiction they are declared to be one by Act of
generall Assemblie, Anno 1573. what power a Superintendent
had by the law of our Church, that same power
a Bishop had by the same Law: And those Countries
which had Bishops of the reformed Religion, president
ouer them were neuer committed to the care of
Superintendents: but the Bishops exercised all points
of Iurisdiction partaining to them, vvithout any contradiction
made to them by our Assemblies.
                     To 
                           •
                        ay yet further, there was appointed by the generall
Assemblie, some Commissioners, to be assembled
with other Commissioners appointed by the Regent,
and Lords of Councell, to entreat of Ecclesiastique Iurisdiction,
& establish it. Commissioners for the church,
beside sundrie Superintendents, were Mr. Iohn Knox,
M. Iohn Craig, M. Iohn Row, M. Dauid Lindsay, with
others that were in the yeere 1564. The same Commission
renued againe by the Church, Anno 1567. and
againe, 1568. a Supplication from the As
                           •
                        emblie to
the Regent, M. Iohn Willok, Superintendent of the West, being
then Moderator, was directed, desiring that such as
were appointed by the Lords of his Highnesse Councell,
and by the Church, might meet, for setling church-Iurisdiction.
After this, in euery assemblie the same
sute is renued, till at length, An. 1571. the gouer
                           •
                        ment
of Bishops is ratified by act of assem
                           •
                        lie. Thus M. Dauid,
you see Bishops willingly rec
                           •
                        iued into our Church.
                     
                        
Your other Obiection is, Superintendents had their 
Office from the Church: did their Office by aduise of
their Brethren, and were countable to the Church
for it. Tell me I pray you, what else see you in Bishops?
Their Office and power is from the Church, their temporall
preferment, their rent and maintenance, is conferred
by the King; yea, good reason it is that his Maiestie
haue the nomination of a Bishop, out of lytes of
honest men giuen in by the Church: What nouation is
here? You will finde the nomination of Superintendents
referred to his Highnes Counsell in his Maiesties
minoritie, becaus
                           •
                         they gaue them their maintenance,
see Act of Assemblie, An. 1562. Againe, Superintendents
did by aduise; good reason: see the Law prescribed
to Bishops of olde, An. 1573. that no Bishop admit
any Minister, without adu
                           •
                        se of three well qualified
Ministers of the bounds. The same stands now,
and can you say that any Bishop in our Church stands
against this, except onely that where the Law bindes
them to vse the aduise of three, they vse the aduise of
sixe, or tenne, or thirteene if they may get them? What
can you say against this Mr. Dauid? See you not here
a constant forme of gouernment in our Church? See
you any other Bishops now then were in the dayes of
Iohn Knox? Here say you, Superintendents were
changeable? but you should haue cleared your selfe,
not deceiued the simple people vnder ambiguitie of
words. Tell the truth, were any of them changed in
their time, or was there any cause might haue taken
from them the office of a Superintendent, but such as
might haue also depriued of the Office of Preaching
and all other offices in the Church? In which case Superintendents,
Bishops, and Pastors, both might and
should lawfully be deposed; but God be praised such
examples feil not out in our Church.
                     
                        
Oh but Superintendents were subiect to their Brethren.
Here also you lu
                           •
                        ke vnder the shadow of doubtfull
speeches. Will you say that Superintendents were
subiect to the censure of Ministers, ouer whom they
had the inspection? The contrarie is true, our Fathers
foresaw the perill of that, and exempted them from it;
reseruing them to be iudged by the generall Assemblie,
as I haue cleared before: and doubtlesse there could
be no order where such as should correct the faults of
others, are put vnder the censure of thos
                           •
                         that should
be corrected by them.
                     You still reply, there is now (say you) no generall
Assemblie to censure them: but you may know that the
same Law which restoreth the Iurisdiction of Bishops,
ratifieth also generall Assemblies, howbeit in a reformed
State, the power to call it belongs to the Christian
Magistrate, and seeing it is the Parliament of the
Church, the great Ecclesiastique Councell of the
Church, the calling of it, except vpon very vrgent occasions,
proueth often more hurtfull then helpfull, but
where great and weightie causes require it, you may be
sure the Prince will not refuse it.
                     But your great grudge is here, that Bishops are not
vnder the power of Ministers to be cast out of their
places by pluralitie of voices You dreame of an assemblie
that would finde the authoritie vnlawfull, and depose
them all: but you are deceiued; our Ministrie are
not so affected, they see the necessitie and vtilitie of
this calling: they who disliked it at the first, are now
brought by reason and experience to allow it, and
where you will finde one discontented with it, I warrant
you twe
                           •
                        tie who are pleased with it, and thanke
Go
                           •
                         for it.
                     Speake no more then of the exemption of Bishops
from censure, there is a Christian King, there is a Councell

of Bishops, till necessitie require a Nationall Assembly,
and it is not denyed to any in the Church or
Kingdome to complaine, accuse, delate, Bishop or
Archbishop, that hee may be brought to his answere,
and tryed; yea some that haue complained, haue beene
answered with Iustice, to their satisfaction.
                     In a word, let it be told you in name of all the Bishops
of our Church, our Calling is of God, allowed
by the generall Assemblie, ratified by our most Christian
King and States of the Kingdome. Our care is to
discharge it in the best sort wee can, when wee haue
done all that is possible for vs, there are many of you
ready so farre as you may to vndoe it, out of an euill
humor, more narrowly looking to negligences then to
obserue paines and good diligence: wee are men, and
may fall as others, but our faults should not be abused
to condemne our function, more then the faults of
Ministers condemne their Ministrie. We claime no liberty,
but are readie by Gods grace, to answere all our
Superiours, and be censured by them as the meanest
in the Church. And we carrie this humble minde, that
if you, or any other, in loue and good affection, will
signifie to vs wherein wee offend, wee will either satisfie
you by reason, or willingly amend it: yet so that
wee will maintaine the honour of our charge and calling,
and not leaue it free for euery man to raile against
lawfull authorities, whereof I pray you consider in
time, and be more sparing to spread such inuectiue Libels:
for, it will be thought a contempt of them whom
you are bound to honour, and if you suffer punishment
for it, you will not suffer as a Martyr, but as a malefactor,
which I wish may no befall you.
                  
                  
                     4
                     So long as this Episcopall gouernement stood in 
vigour, there was nothing but comely order in our

Church, Fathers honoured as Fathers, Ministers agreeing
in pleasant Vnitie, without any Schi
                           •
                        me among
them, singular peace betweene the King his Maiestie
and the Church, t
                           •
                        ey going together like Moses and
Aaron, to doe the worke of God, without grudging,
anger, or diuision, then the Gospell flourished, and
no professed Papist was in the land, but with decay
of the one ensewed a lamentable change of the other,
which cannot be mentioned without griefe, and I wish
for euer may be buried in silence. Alway at this doore
of vnhappie diuision, Papistrie creeped in againe into
our Church; it was sowen then, it tooke roote then,
it buddeth now; and by a false kinde of reasoning,
A non causa pro causa, it is imputed to Bishops now, but
as with the decrease of Episcopall gouernment it entred:
so I hope in God with the credit, and author
                           •
                        tie
thereof, it shall goe to the doore againe, Onely the
Lord cloath his seruants with his righteousnesse and saluation,
let his Vrim and Thummim be with his holy ones. The
Lord set our hearts rightly to seeke his glorie, then
shall his helping hand be with vs. There is no fault
in the cause, God graunt it be not found in our persons.
                  
                  
                     5
                     
                         Episcopall gouernement beganne first to be withstood,
An. 1575. This is the first time that Commissioners
for eschewing of alleadged ambition, are appointed
to be changed yeerely. The same time authoritie of
Bishops is called in question: some with it, some against
it, the matter is referred to the aduisement of three
for euerie opinion, whose names are inserted in the
act: they resolue on these conclusions. It is not thought
expedient, the question be answered at this time, but if any
Bishop be chosen, who hath not such qualities as Gods word
requires, let him be tried by the generall assembly, and so deposed.

2. That the name of a Bishop is common to all Preachers,
whose chiefe function is to preach the Word, minister
the Sacraments, and execute Discipline. Yet of this number
some may be chosen to ouer-see and visite other bounds beside
his owne Flocke, with power to ordaine and depose Ministers,
with aduise of the brethren of the bounds. Perceiue
here how loath wise men in our Church were to quit
all grip of Episcopall gouernement.
                  
                  
                     6
                     And againe, the Office it selfe comming in contempt
for the euill qualities of them that had it, whereof
some were professed enemies of Religion: it was
laid by and suspended, An. 1580. But not simply abrogate,
as will appeare by this three-fold consideration:
First not the Office, but corruption of the Office in
Bishops is impugned, so beareth act, An. 1578. For as
much as there is great corruption in the estate of Bishops, as
they are presently made in this Realme, where-vnto the
Church would prouide remedie in time comming, therefore
further admission of Bishops is discharged till the next assembly.
An argument by the way to Mr. Dauid, that they
were before in the Church, and had their ordinarie admission
of the Church. Then in the next assembly
holden that same yeere. Iune 11. Sect. 3. It is concluded,
that the former act shall be extended for all time to come,
aye, and while the corruption of the estate of Bishops be remoued,
and that all Bishops alreadie elected be enquired
particularly to submit themselues to the generall assembly
concerning the reformation of the corruption of that estate of
Bishops. Nothing here you see against the Office, but
against the corruptions.
                     Secondly, alb
                           •
                        it anno 1580. Episcopall gouernement 
was disallowed; yet that it was not done with full
consent or approbation of the Fathers of our Church,
will appeare by that act of reuocation: which if a man

will consider, hee shall finde procured by the wisedome
and fore-sight of some wise and honest men of
the Ministrie, who contenting to submit themselues
to the present gouernement, and loath to trouble the
Church for that matter with Schismes, and diuisions,
(which you and yours cannot doe) did notwithstanding
leaue an open doore to their posteritie, to bring
in againe Episcopall gouernement, when they should
see it expedient for the Church. See the act. An. 1583.
Sess
                              •
                           . Concerning th
                              •
                            question moued to the assembly, if the
generall Church haue power to prouoke, whatsoeuer things
done by them, or any particular member of the same, to the
hurt and preiudice of the Church, or not. The brethren after
reasoning and disputing, at length voted affirmatiue in the
question, that the Church had power to doe the same: No
exception here of any act, made either for Bishops, or
against them.
                     
                         Thirdly, the abdication of Episcopall gouernement
which was made; was made without consent,
yea contrarie the will of them by whom it was concluded
in the Church, for Episcopall gouernement
being practised in our Church from the beginning,
was established by act of assembly, An. 1571. Whereat
vvere present Commissioners from the Regents
grace, and Lords of secret Counsell, in his Highnesse
name, being also required specially, and to this same
purpose by the Church: there it was agreed to stand
during the Kings minoritie; and therefore when first
his Maiestie perceiued an intended nouation in
Church-gouernement: his Highnesse discharged it,
and protested against it by his letter registred in the
Bookes of generall assembly, An. 1579. 
                              •
                           ul. 7. What
can you finde out of all this, why Episcopall authoritie
should not be restored againe? or rather see you not
many reasons that should moue vs to receiue it?
                  
                  
                     
                     7
                     As for your alleadged oath, whereby you make the 
simpler sort beleeue, that our Church hath abiured
Episcopall gouernement: the strength of your cause
is in it, but it shall be knowne to be as weake as the
rest of your defences.
                     For first of all, an Oath should be defended by the 
lawfulnesse of the thing that is sworne, and it is no
good ground in Diuinitie, to defend the thing that is
sworne by pretence of the sacred authoritie of an Oath.
This order you keepe not.
                     Secondly, since the most part of Preachers in our 
Church, gaue no Oath for Discipline at all, for mine
owne part it was neuer required of mee, and I know
there 
                           〈◊〉
                         many others in the same estate: What reason
is it, that the Oath of some, albeit they had made it (as
you say) which will not be found, should binde others
that made it not.
                     Thirdly, when it was appointed by act of Parliament,
                        An. 1572. Ianuar. 26. that the confession of faith
which therein at length is exprest, should be sworne
and subscribed by all Church-men, the gouernement
which then was in our Church was Episcopall, for
the Oath and subscription is ordained to be made in
presence of the Archbishop, Superintendent, or Commissioner
of the Diocie, as the words of the Act plainly
imports, so that this Oath makes no renunciation of
Episcopall authoritie, but rather ratefies and approues
it.
                     Fourthly, concerning the latter Negatiue confession,
whereof it is most likely you meane, what will you
finde there against Episcopall gouernement? Nothing
at all: it is a good confession, many Pastors, professours
of our Church haue sworne it, subscribed it.
Othere, say you, an Oath is conceiued against Hierarchie.
                        
Mr. Dauid, speake as the truth is. (Now Rahel
takes the Idols, and hides them in Cammels litter) Now
Rachel blushes for shame. Now Mr. Dauid steales away
the chiefe words of the confession, and hides them
for feare they should tell the truth, and shame him:
will you say M. Dauid? Hath our Church renounced
Hierarchie simply, all sacred authoritie, all order, all

                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        , all 
                           〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                        ? say it not for shame, there
are the words: looke what we haue renounced, these
are the verie words of the Oath, We detest and refuse, the
vsurped authoritie of that Romane Antichrist, his worldly
Monarchie, and wicked Hierarchie: Therefore saith Master
Dauid, we detest all Hierarchie: Why mutilate you
the words? and why falsifie you the words which you
bring by a corrupt sense of your owne? which I will
proue was not the Subscribers minde. Will you condemne
Episcopall gouernement vnder the name of Papall,
vsurped, worldly, wicked Hierarchie? Is it ignorance
hath moued you? who would thinke you were so ignorant?
or if you know better, what malice is this to
beare downe a good thing vnder an euill name? Were
not Bishops in the Church before a Pope vvas in
Rome, at least before Antichrist was hatched in it?
Haue any sort of men in the Church done more, suffered
more, to destroy Antichrists Kingdome then Bishops?
yet you will haue all Bishops Antichristian.
                     
                         Let vs first see the iudgement of the Fathers of our
owne Church plat contrarie to M. Dauids, it may be
he will reuerence them, and thinke shame of his owne
folly: when M. Iohn Knox got license from our generall
assembly to goe into England, they wrote a Letter
with him of this tenour: The Superintendents, and Commissioners
of the Church of Scotland, to their brethren the
Bishops and Pastors in England, that haue renounced the
Romish Antichrist, and doe professe the Lord Iesus with

them in sinceritie, the perpetuall encrease of the holy Spirit.
See it registred in our assembly Bookes, An. 1566.
M. Dauid, did our Fathers esteeme Episcopall gouernment
Antichristian Hierarchie? Do they not plainely disioyne
them, writing to Bishops that had renounced the
Romish Antichrist? O, but it will be said, Our Church
was then in her infancie; it may be you make them
all Infants: all the worthie, learned, and vnspotted
Superintendents of our Church, Iohn Willok Superintendent
of the West, Iohn Winram of Fyfe, Iohn Spotswood
of Lowthian, Iohn Erskin of Din Superintendent
of Angus, Iohn Row Superintendent of Galloway:
make Infants also of M. Knox, M. Craig, M. Lyndsay,
M. Hay, with many more I cannot name, present at the
writing of that Letter: all these may well be Infants,
where a man of your experience comes out: but beleeue
me, wee haue not seene many such olde men in
our Church since.
                     Now as this sense, which you make of the word Hierarchie,
                        
is against the minde of our first Fathers; so is
it against the minde of the swearers and subscribers:
and are you not a foule abuser to inforce vpon them
a sense whereof they thought neuer? This is cleere as
the light. For why, did not his Maiestie sweare and
subscribe that confession of Faith? This was his royall
and most Christian oath, offered to God in defence of
his truth. Did not his Highnesse there, and at many
other times, professe openly a renunciation of that
wicked Hierarchie? Will you inferre vpon this, that his
Maiestie therefore abiured Episcopall gouernement?
I dare appeale to your owne knowledge, hath not his
Maiestie kept one constant iudgement concerning
Church-gouernement euer from his young yeeres?
doth not the inhibition of nouation in Church-gouernement
cleere this? doth not the publike printed

Declaration of his Highnesse intention proue it? doth
not all his Highnesse speeches, and actions, before the
subscription, since the subscription, declare his Highnesse
approbation of Episcopal gouernement? and yet
you would make it to be beleeued of the people, that
his Highnesse renounced Episcopall gouernement,
when his Maiestie renounced Hierarchie, vsurped, Papall,
wicked: this, or else a worse, must be the drift of
your language. Truly you may thanke God you haue
to doe with a clement and gratious king. And that
this same which is his Highnesse mind of that Article,
is also the minde of most part of the ancient teachers,
and other brethren, learned, godly, vnspotted, who
haue well deserued of the Church present, by fidelitie
in their ministrie, will bee cleared also: I will not goe
about in any inordinate manner to seeke subscriptions
to this purpose, but when it shall be required by order
in the Church, you will finde a cloud of witnesses
standing against you, to improue this calumnie of
yours: yea, many times in my younger yeeres haue I
heard famous and auncient Fathers of our Church,
who haue seene the first beginnings thereof, affirme,
that our Church could not consist vnlesse Episcopall
gouernement were restored againe: this they spake
when there was no appearance of it, and when Episcopall
gouernement was in greatest disdaine, and at that
time being vnacquainted with Church discipline, I
thought strange to heare it.
                     
                         And here againe, Mr. Dauid, I am in doubt with
my selfe, what to thinke of you, seeing I know no other
oath you meane of, and you haue touched none
other in your Treat
                           •
                        se admonitorie: what hath carried
you to t
                           •
                        is absurd affirmation, that the oath conceyued
against Papall, vsurped▪ wicked, wordly Monarchie,
and Hierarchie, is against Episcopall authoritie? shall

I thinke ignorance hath done it? You are giuen out,
and bragged of for a learned man, and a Writer. Or
shall I thinke malice hath done it? you are counted for
a Christian, and so I thinke you be: what euer hath
moued you, sure I am, it hath miscarryed you: for let
mee tell you, when Zorimus Bishop of Rome, sent ouer
his Legates to the councell of Africke, wherein were
assembled two hundred & seauenteene Bishops, among
whom it is thought Augustine was one, to proue that
it was lawfull to appeale vnto him from all Bishops in
the world, alleadging this power was giuen by the
Councell of Nice: after long deliberation and inquisition
of the most auncient Copies of the Councell of
Nice, his fraudulent vsurpation was discouered, and he
warmed by these Fathers neuer to attempt any such
thing in time to come. Many reasons they gaue him (as
indeede they had all reason for it) specially this, that
the grace of the holy Ghost, had not with-drawne it
selfe from all other Prouinces to rest in one alone,
to discerne there the right of all causes: wherefore they
willed him to abstaine from such ambition, Ne fum
                              •
                           
                           sum
saeculi typhum inducere in Ecclesiam Dei videatur. Here
Mr. Dauid, you see a solemne reiection of the wicked
Hierarchie of the Bishop of Rome: Did these Fathers
by so doing reiect Episcopall authoritie exercised by
themselues allowed, accepted, embraced, and reuerenced
in their Churches. Thus haue I made cleare that
you haue fained a sense of that article contrarie to his
Maiesties minde, contrarie to the minde of the first Fathers
of our Church, contrary to the minde of the present
Fathers of our Church, and contrary to the mind
of the ancient Fathers of the Church primitiue in the
foure hundreth yeere.
                     And if I should draw you vp higher, are you able to 
denie that Episcopall gouernment was in the Church

before that Romish Hierarchie was hatched out of the
the shell? What hath the one of them to do
                           •
                         with the
other? Hath the Romish Church beene more impugned
by any then Orthodoxe Bishops? Or hath any
sort of men beene more persecuted by the Romish Hierarchie,
then reformed Bishops? Why are you so vnrighteous
as to oppresse the one vnder the name of the
other? Were all the Bishops who suffered Martyrdome
in the first three hundred yeeres, guiltie of that Hierarchie
which you haue condemned? And if I should
draw you yet vp higher, I see as much light in the word
of God, as giues warrant to me of the lawfulnesse of
Episcopall Gouernment, and I doubt not will serue to
content reasonable men when they shall heare it. You
prouoked me to this point; but you turne your backe
and flie from it, and I haue not any leasure to pursue a
flying man, hauing better studies I would more gladly
ouer-take: yet something will I subioyne for discharge
at least of my dutie.
                  
                  
                     8
                     
                         These things therefore so standing, the Question
will be thus: Seeing Episcopall gouernment in it selfe
is lawfull, seeing all Christian Churches haue had it,
seeing our owne Church had it ratified by acts of generall
Assemblie, for many yeeres, with an happie successe
of the Euangell; seeing it was laid by against the
will of a Christian King in his minoritie, against the
will of his Highnesse Regent, and Lords of Councell,
well affected to Religion, and that not simplie, but with
a power of reuocation: queritur, whether if or not, a
Christian King in his maioritie, requiring a restitution
of it, the present Church hath done well to receiue it
in againe; especially, seeing it is done without destruction
of that policie so long aduised, and added at
length by the Fathers of the middle age of our

Church, for strengthening of our Discipline.
                     To contract then all the matter which you haue 
spread out with a multitude of idle words, into a short
summe;☜ 
                        There is no new Discipline brought into the Church,
but the auncient restored to th
                              •
                            former strength, no point of
later policie abolished, but established, and an happy vnion
made euery way betweene them who should agree in one, to
do the worke of God. This is my iudgement, and I esteeme
by it the name of the Church of Scotland honoured, a
Christian King in his most reasonable desire satisfied,
the peace of the Church happily procured, the mouths
of aduersaries stopped, offence from weake and simple
ones remoued, and much more good easily effected, if
contentious and vaine spirits would not hinder it.
                     Thus is the very state of the question cleared vnto 
you, so that you haue no cause to cry out as you doe,
Who should teach vs but Bishops? and if they will not, our
bloud be vpon their heads. You seeme to be very earnest
here, but all men may see it is but your Orpit or Ironic
conceit: so like as M. Dauid will be taught of Bishops,
a sort of profane men without either learning or grace,
in your account. But you neede not make the halfe of
this stirre; you might be ignorant of Church-gouernement,
and your bloud in no danger for all that: but if
indeede you stand in feare least you loose your soule,
follow our counsell, and we shall lay our life for yours,
Repent of your sinnes, Beleeue in Iesus the Sauiour of
the world, Amend your life, Decke the hid man of your
heart with a meeke and qui
                              •
                           t spirit, which before God is a
thing much set by; Put on loue and meeknesse, leaue off
strife and contention, be content with your owne calling,
meddle not with things without your compasse,
whereunto albeit you might reach, yet are they not so
profitable as to repay your paines, nor yet absolutely
necessarie for your saluation: doe this, and it shall be

well with you; if not, your bloud shall be vpon your
owne head, and none of the Bishops of Scotland shall
be guiltie of it.
                     
                         The rest of your discourses of paritie and imparitie
in Church-gouernement, are answered by that which
I haue said; neither doe you here your selfe insist in
them, but remit mee by particular quotations to your
Epistles, foureteene in number, written to seuerall men,
contayning eight sheetes of paper, bound vp in forme
of a Booke, and sent to mee to peruse them. But you
must remember it is an vnreasonable request to require
a Bishop, employed in daily teaching, and other necessarie
charges in the Church, to reade ouer all your
missiue Letters, yet haue I looked to them as I had leasure,
and answered them as cause requires in this my
Defence. As for your Epistles, if your conceit be such
of them, as if they contained humane and diuine learning,
like that which Augustine hath vttered in his two
and twentie Bookes de Ciuitate Dei: or if for Eloquence
you esteeme them like the workes of some new Cicero;
or else for vndoubted Rules of Church-gouernement
that are in them, you meane to make them vp as the
bodie of some new Canon Law, whereunto in reasoning
you will remit men as vnto Rules and Decrees; or
at least, will haue other men take paines to make glosses
and Notes vpon them: then I pray you Mr. Dauid,
seeke some Aldus Manutius, or Ludouicus Viues, or some
new Gratianus, you will get of these right good on that
side of the water: but Mr. Dauid, for me, I thinke them
not worthie of that paynes, neyther haue I any time to
spare vpon them; the paines I haue taken are for your
satisfaction if reason may doe it; to pleasure you I haue
lost much good time, which I intended to bestow another
way. At the midst of September I receiued your
Admonitorie, as your Letter will shew, though many

saw it before you sent it to mee. In the end of October
I absolued this answere to it; what time hath ouerpast
since, hath beene spent in writing it ouer and ouer againe
for the Presse, for you will haue it publicke, and
it is best so, for others and me also, to ease me of much
paines of priuate writing, wherein I cannot giue euery
man contentment. If my paines profit not you, I haue
great losse, beside my instant labour, being forced, all
this time to intermit mine ordinarie exercise of teaching
at Euening Prayer: wherein I know you haue
done more euill to this people, then I thinke you haue
done good to any Congregation in the Land: but if
eyther my paines or their losse (for this time) may serue
to gaine you, the one I will thinke pleasure, the other
I thinke they will esteeme vantage; if not, yet I hope it
shall doe good vnto others.
                     And now in the end, albeit M. Dauid doe shunne the
Question it selfe, yet seeing hee desireth I should communicate
to him such light as I haue, I will not refuse
to doe it, partly for his satisfaction, and partly also for
satisfaction of others, who are not contentious of purpose
about this question.
                     There are some godly and learned men in the
Church, who maintaine Episcopall gouernment to be
iuris diuini, of diuine authoritie: there are others, worthy
Light of the Church also, who albeit they thinke
it not to be iuris diuini, but humani or Ecclesiastici, and
sees not that it is a diuine ordinance, but humane, or
Ecclesiastique, yet they reuerence it as a good, and a
lawfull, and a profitable policie for the Church.
                     If Mr. Dauid will not adioyne himselfe to the first, I
wish at least, hee would betake himselfe to the modest
iudgement of the second; and consider what a grieuous
sinne it is to nourish a Schisme in the Church, for such
a matter, and how far the famous Lights of our time

mislike them who spare not to diuide the Church, for
their opinion in the contrary.
                     The Arguments vsed by the first sort, the Reader
will finde at length in the learned Treatises of D. Whytgift,
Bilson, Douname: The reasons mouing mee to incline
to Episcopall gouernment, and by which I found
greatest light and contentment to mine owne minde,
occurred to mee in the handling of the Epistles to Timothie,
I haue shortly subioyned them, and submit them
to the censure of the Church.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            A view of Church-gouernment, best warranted
by the Word, proponed in these
few POSITIONS.
            
               1
               
                  AS other Bookes of holy Scripture, are
written chiefely for the institution of
a Christian, to teach him what he must
beleeue and doe, that he may be saued,
so the Epistles to Timothy and Titus are
especially written for the institution
of Ecclesiastique Office-bearers, teaching them how
to behaue themselues in the gouernement of Gods
house. 1 Tim. 3. 15. So that as the Tabernacle was
build according to the patterne shewed to Moses in the
Mount: so the right plat-forme of Discipline must be
learned from the patterne prescribed by God in his
Word, and most clearely in these Epistles.
            
            
               2
               And as no man can be so farre miscarryed as to
thinke that the Epistles directed to the Romanes, Corinthians,
&c. containing rules of Faith and Manners, belonged
to them onely, but to all Christians till the
worlds end: So is there no reason why a man should
thinke that the Epistles written to them, containing
rules of Discipline and Church-gouernment were for
them onely, but for their successors also.
            
            
               3
               So that the power giuen to Timothie and Titus was
not personall, to endure onely during their dayes,

or to dye in the Church when they by death were taken
from the Church, but it is perpetuall to continue
in the Church to the worlds end: for why? the precepts
are giuen for gouernment of Gods house, and
wee know his house is not for one age, but for all ages
till the worlds end. And againe, Timothie is commanded
to keepe this rule to the second appearance of
Christ, 1 Tim. 6. 14. which by himselfe is impossible
to doe, but in his successors.
            
            
               4
               Now, this power giuen to Timothie and his successors
is the power of a Bishop, not onely in respect of
preaching: for, in this generall sense all Pastors are Bishops,
hauing the ouer-sight of their flockes: but also
in regard of their speciall gouernment and power ouer
other Pastors committed to their inspection; in which
sense the name of a Bishop is proper to some Preachers
of the word, not common vnto all, as is euident out
of the points of power, by diuine authoritie giuen
them.
            
            
               5
               As first, a power to commaund Pastors that they
teach no otherwise then according to the rule of the
word, 1 Tim. 1. 3. Secondly, a power to depose and
stop the mouthes of them who teach otherwise, 2 Tim.
2. 16. Tit. 1. 11. Thirdly, a power to lay hands vpon
Pastors, to ordaine and admit them to their Callings,
1 Tim. 5. 23. Lastly, a power to iudge Pastors, and to
receiue or repell accusatious giuen in against them,
1 Tim. 5. 19. So that his power is not onely ouer his
flocke, but ouer other preaching Pastors also, according
to this rule.
            
            
               6
               This power afore-said wee finde by diuine authoritie
established in the person of one: let any man contrary

minded, shew as cleere a warrant, to proue that
this power is taken from one, and giuen vnto many.
            
            
               7
               And as here we haue this power giuen to one, for
gouernement of Gods house in the precept, so is this
same power established in the person of one, by the
practise of the Son of God, for in his seauen Epistles
to the Churches of Asia, he writes vnto one, as bearing
the burden of all, both Pastors and people in
those Cities. And Beza confesseth, that when S. Iohn
directed his Epistle to the Angell of the Church, vnder
that name he directed it 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
to the President of the Brethren. There wee haue a
Pastor President, both of Pastors and people.
            
            
               8
               And here, because the custome of some is, to create
enuy to Episcopall gouernement, by stirring vp other
Pastors to grudge & mislike it, as being preiudiciall to
their libertie. Let them know, that no tyranny with contempt,
yea, or neglect of other Pastors is here allowed:
Neither yet are other Pastors debarred from the participation
of this same power, when by authoritie and
order of the Church they shall be called vnto it.
            
            
               9
               Neither are here condemned other Churches, who
through necessitie of time, cannot haue Episcopall
gouernement; for howsoeuer it be the best, yet God
forbid wee should thinke, but that without it there
may be a true Church, whole and sound, in all substantiall
points of Faith.
            
            
               10
               These grounds being so cleare, it is euident out of
them that to haue one in the Church, clothed with
the power aforesaid, to exercise it for the benefit of the
rest, is an Apostolike ordinance.
            
            
               
               11
               The common obiection against this, is, that Timothie
was not a Bishop, but an Euangelist, because the
Apostle exhorts him to doe the worke of an Euangelist,
2 Tim. 4. 5. but it is knowne, that the name Euangelist
is common to al that are employed in the propagation
of the Gospel: whether it be by them penned, as
the foure Euangelists, who were by the Spirit to write
the History of the Gospel: or else by preaching it
from place to place, as extraordinary Euangelists did;
or preaching it in a certaine place, as ordinary Euangelists
then did, and yet doe.
            
            
               12
               In the iudgement of Caluin, it is vncertaine whether
S. Paul call Timothie an ordinarie or extraordinary Euangelist;
he thinks that he was aboue vulgar Pastors,
yet so, that he was a Pastor.
            
            
               13
               And truly, whatsoeuer Timothie was before he trauelled
through sundry Countries, to water Churches
planted by the Apostles; yet now, by reasons furnished
out of the Text, it appeares; That Timothie is setled at
Ephesus, a resident ordinary Office-bearer, and not an
extraordinary: I passe by many, and touch but one.
            
            
               14
               The Apostle warnes Timothie, that he neglect not
the gift giuen him by imposition of the hands of the
Presbyterie: eyther this place renders no warrant
for a Presbyterie (as ye take it) or else it must proue
that Timothie was an ordinary, and not an extraordinarie
Office-bearer in the Church of Ephesus.
            
            
               15
               For, by a Presbyteric here, you must vnderstand either
the Office it selfe, of a Preacher, whereunto Caluin enclines,
or else the Office-bearers, as most part of ancients

and recents thinkes. And then, whether you
take a Presbyterie (in your sence) for a fellowship of
equall Pastors, or for a Colledge of Bishops, as consent
of Doctors takes it, the Argument is still against you.
            
            
               16
               For, seeing you affirme, that a Presbyterie is an ordinary
Indicatorie, or call it as you please; and Presbyters
are ordinary Office-bearers in the Church: how
can it bee that an ordinary office in the Church, can
giue calling or admission to an extraordinary?Amb. in 1. Epist. ad Tim. cap. 3. 
                  Neque
enim fas erat vt inferior ordinaret maiorem, nemo tribuit,
quod non accepit. But it shall be best, rather then you
take away a Presbyterie from the Church, you should
confesse that Timothie was an ordinary Office-bearer
in the Church, and stands here for a Paterne to such
as succeeds him in this ministration to the worlds end,
and who must haue such power as he had?
            
            
               17
               But it is needlesse for our purpose to dispute this
question, whether Timothie was an extraordinary Euangelist,
or an ordinary Bishop; whatsoeuer himselfe
was, the question here is; whether this instruction giuen
him for gouernement of Gods house, be extraordinary,
temporarie, and to endure but a 
                     •
                  ime; or, are
they continuall, and should this rule of gouernement
be kept in the Church till Christs comming againe?
            
            
               18
               And if it should be (as I thinke no man will denie
it) that this rule should continue, then it cannot be
eschewed that it is most conformable to the Apostolike
ordinance, that there should be in the Church a
Bishop or Pastor, hauing power of admission, deposition,
iudging, and censuring of Pastors: for the conseruation
of true doctrine, vnitie, order, and loue in the
Church.
            
            
               
               19
               Besides this, it is not to be neglected that in the Postscript
of the second Epistle, Timothie is called the
first Bishop elected of the Church of Ephesus, and
Titus, in the end of that Epistle, The first Bishop of the
Church of the 
                        •
                     retians.
               
            
            
               20
               Against this it is obiected, that the Post-script is no
Scripture, and why? because some ancient Copies haue
it not. A dangerous assertion: I meddle not with it.
The contents of Chapters, and marginall Notes, are
no Scripture, but inscriptions of Prophecies and Epistles,
such Post-scripts also, as haue beene found in
most autentique Copies, from which wee haue the
Epistles themselues, let men beware to reiect them for
any fauour they carrie to their owne priuate opinion.
            
            
               21
               The Post-script in the Geneua Bible, beares, that
Timothy and Titus were Bishops; the Bible of the Spanish
learned translator hath it, Arrius Monta
                        ••
                     s the
Latine hath it, the Greeke hath it, which is the language
wherein the newe Testament was written;
the Scots and English Bibles haue it, and howsoeuer
men now make bolde eyther to deny or infirme it, we
must thinke it is of greater authoritie to proue that
Timothy and Titus were Bishops, then eyther Mr. Dauid,
or Mr. Iohn, or Mr. Robert, or Mr. William, their assertion
in the contrary.
            
            
               22
               Specially, seeing so many both ancient, and recent
Fathers of the Church, are of this same iudgement,
that Timothie was Bishop of Ephesus, Titus Bishop
of Creta, it were long to rehearse all their testimonies,
any man that pleaseth, will finde them cited by
D. Whitgift, Bilson, and Douname, in their learned Treatises,

written in defence of Episcopall gouernement.
If there be any prettie man contrarie minded, that hath
learning, and leasure to write, I doe but here poynt
out vnto him where he may finde a partie: what needs
new prouocations till these be answered who haue
written already?
               Now vnto these arguments, gathered out of holy
Scripture, let vs but ioyne this one argument, furnished
vnto vs by the Fathers, and seruing for this purpose.
               
                  Constat id esse ab Apostolis traditum quod apud ecolesias
Apostolorum fuerit Sacrosanctum: without doubt that
must haue beene deliuered vnto vs by the Apostles,
which in Apostolike Churches is holily obserued. Tertul.
aduers. Marcion. lib. 4.
               
                  Quod vniuersa tenet ecclesia, nec Concilijs institutum,
sed semper retentum fuit, non nisi apostolica authoritate traditum
rectissime creditur. That which is receiued of the
whole vniuersall Church, not instituted, nor ordained
by any Councell, but reteined, as being before Counsels,
is rightly beleeued to haue beene deliuered vnto
vs by Apostolike authoritie. August. de Bap. cont. Donast.
lib. 4. cap. 24.
               This being the proposition, warranted by Tertullian
and Augustine, containing a truth, which I thinke no
reasonable man will denie; the Assumption will be
this. But Episcopall gouernement is such: Embraced
of the Catholike Church, not instituted first by any
Councel: for it was before the first O
                     •
                  cumenick Councell
of Nice, retained by all Councels; not reiected,
nor impugned by any: and this assumption is verefied
by consent and testimonie of the Church in all ages,
which the learned Fathers of our time, Zanchius and
Beza, plainely confesse: the words of Zanchius here
follow.
               
                  
Fides autem mea nititur cum primis & simpliciter verbo
Dei, deinde nonnihil etiam communi totius veteris Ecclesiae
consensu, si ille cum sacris literis non pugnet. Credo enim,
quae a pijs patribus in nom
                     •••
                   Domin
                     •
                   congregatis communi
omnium consensu, citra vllam sacrarum literarum contradictionem,
definita & recepta fuerunt, ea etiam quanqu
                     •
                  m hand
eiusdem cum sacris literis authoritatis, a Spiritu Sancto esse.
Hin
                     •
                   fit, vt quae sunt etusmodi ego ea improbare▪ nec vel
                     •
                  m, nec
aude
                     •
                  m bona conscientia. Quid autem certius ex Historijs▪ ex
Con
                     •
                  lijs, & ex omnium patrum scriptis, quam illos ministrorū
ordines (de quibus dixim
                     •
                  s) communi totius republicae Christianae
consensu in Ecclesia constitutos, receptos
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fuisse? Quis
autem ego sum, qui quod tota Ecclesia approb
                     •
                  uit, improb
                     •
                  m?
               My faith leanes first of all and simply vpon the
word of God, thereafter also it something depends vpon
the common consent of the whole ancient Church,
where it is not repugnant to the holy Scripture. For
I beleeue those things which by godly Fathers, assembled
in the name of the Lord, haue beene concluded,
decreed, and receiued, not contradictorie vnto holy
Scripture, and that those same things also, albeit they
be not of equall authoritie with the holy Scripture,
haue proceeded from the holy Spirit: whereof it comes
to passe, that I neither will, nor dare in a good conscience,
contradict them. For, what is more certaine
out of Histories, Councels, and the writings of all Fathers,
then that these orders of the Ministrie, whereof
we haue spoken, were by common consent of all Christendome
concluded, and receiued into the Church?
And who am I, that I should d
                     •
                  sallow that which the
whole Church hath allowed? Zanch. in his confession.
               To this same purpose serues the testimonie of Beza,
who hauing declared the reasons that moued the auncient
Church, to elect one of the Presb
                     •
                  terie, who in
place and dignitie should be aboue the rest, and to

whom the name of a Bishop, in speciall manner, should
be giuen by the remanent, hee subioynes as followes.
Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      enim quicquam est, quod in hac Prostasia,
                  Beza de grad. minist. cap. 23. sect. 29. & sect. 11. 
                  reprehendi
potest aut debet: for there is nothing in this presidencie
or supereminence of one Pastor aboue the rest, which
either can, or ought to be reproued. And the reason he
giues for it,Beza ibid. cap. 23. sect. 11. is worthy marking, Quum praesertim, vetustus
hic mos, primum Presbyterum deligendi in Alexandrina
celeberrima Ecclesiaiam inde a Marco Euangelista esset obseruatus.
Especially (saith hee) seeing this ancient custome
to choose out the first of the Presbyters to gouerne
the rest, hath beene obserued in the famous
Church of Alexandria, euer since the dayes of S. Marke
the Euangelist. Now it may be collected, that S. Marke
died in the eight yeere of the Emperour Nero, the holy
Apostles Peter, Paul, and Iohn being yet aliue: whereof
it followes, that this policie hath had the Apostles,
eyther authors, or approuers of it, and so will fall to
be of diuine authoritie.
               Now then, the proposition being manifest in it selfe,
and by the testimony of Tertullian and Ambrose confirmed.
The assumption also cleare, and confessed by the
testimonie of Zanchius and Beza, that one Pastor was
in place and dignity aboue the rest, called by the name
of a Bishop, in a speciall sense proper to him, not common
to the rest; the conclusion followes sure, that
this policie may and should be receiued, as descended
from authoritie.
               But now we come to speake of them; who, albeit
they thinke not that Episcopall gouernement is diuine,
yet they reuerence it as a necessary and profitable
policie for the Church.
            
         
         
            
            That Episcopall gouernement is a good
and profitable policie for the Church, in the
iudgement of most learned, and modest
Doctors in our time.
            
               AND as concerning these worthy Diuines
of our time, who thinkes not Episcopall
gouernement to be of diuine
authoritie, yet they reuerence it as a
godly and most necessary policie, and
all of them condemnes you that nourishes
a Schisme for it; I cannot now attaine to them as
I would, being absent from my Bookes, but you shall
haue some notable testimonies to this purpose.
            Zanchius, hauing set downe Ieroms iudgement concerning
it, sub
                     •
                  oynes as here followes. Non damnat
Hieronimus consuetudinem hanc, vtpote vtilem & ferme
necessariam vt fit ordo in Ecclesia. Adde quod non prohibetur
verbo Dei, si igitur liberum est Ecclesiae possunt ex tot
                  •
               
Presbyterorum Collegio, Presbyterum vnum eligere, qui peculiarem
Ecclesiae curam 
                  •
               uscipiat, & in Con
                  •
               istorio 
                  •
               it se
                  •
               
Consul in Senatu politico: at que vt ab alijs decernatur 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ,
vocars potest Episcopus, vel Superintendens, vel
Inspector, vel alio quo
                  ••
               s nomine Episcopus. Certe Ecclesiae
vnitas scindi non debet propter huius cemodi titulorum aut
nominum differentias. Zanchius epist. ad Philip. cap. 1.
            
               Ierome condemnes not this confuetude (of the power
and preferment of a Bishop before a Pastor; as being
profitable, and almost necessary for conseruation
of order in the Church: Besides that it is not forbidden
in the word of God. Seeing therefore it is free,
the Churches may chuse out one of the Colledge of

Presbyters, to haue the peculiar care of the Church,
and who may be in the Consistorie of Presbyters, as a
Consull in the politique Senate, and to the end he may
be distinguished from others he may in more excellent
manner then the rest, be called Bishop, Superintendent
or Inspector, or by any other such name. Certainely
the vnitie of the Church should not be rent for any
such titles or differences of names.
            See you not here, that in the iudgement of this worthy
Doctor, Episcopall gouernment is not forbidden
in the Word, and so is not against any point of Faith,
as you affirme? See you not that the name of a Bishop
is not abused, when it is giuen to one, and not vnto the
rest? And thirdly, doth hee not condemne you that

                  •
               end the vnitie of our Church for such a matter?
            
               Iunius in like manner: O 
                     〈◊〉
                   haec vt iuris humani, at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   (si ita placet) ecclesiastici concedimus fuisse i
                     •
                  m olim
abs
                     •
                  ru
                     •
                  ta, nec d
                     •
                  mnamus ea simpliciter si non abusus access
                     ••
                  it.
Wee confesse that all these haue beene of a long
time obserued in the Church, as being of humane authoritie,
or if you please, Ecclesiastique: neyther condemne
wee them simplie, if they be not abused, Iunius
in B
                     •
                  llar. Controuers. 5. lib. 1. ca. 24. But no such moderation
is in you, you are not content to fight against
the abuse of the Office, you will haue the Office it selfe
abolished, but without any reason.
            
               To this same purpose is the testimonie of He
                  ••
               mingius:
Tametsi tempore Apostoli nondum receptus fuit pro
               
                  •••
               endi
ritus, qualis nunc in vsu est, sciendum tamen est,
pi
                  •
               s Ecclesiarum & Scholarum gubernatores, bono & vtili
con
                  •
               ili
                  •
                instituisse promotionum gradus, tum vt arrogantes

                  〈◊〉
                vsurp
                  •
               rent sibi hunc honoris titulum si
                  •
               e Ecclesie iudi
               
                  •••
               ,
tum v
                  •
                idonei ex testimonio publico agnoscerentur, ac
                  ••
               
precio haberentur. Ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                hoc est contra Hierarchie Ecclesiasti
                  ••
               
diguitatem, quae nobis a S. Sancto commendatur▪ Nam

cum S. Sanctus or din
                  •
               m & detorem commendat Ecclesi
                  •
               ,
ius ipsi relinquit or dinandi ritus, qui ad ordinem & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                facere videantur. Qu
                  •
               ere non est quod moremur superborum
Spirituum voces contemnentium hos ecclesiasticos
gradus, meminerin
                  •
                eos non contemptus aliorum aut arrogantis
supereminentiae symbola esse, sed potius publica testimonia
officij quod Ecclesiae debent, & ad quod tanquam publico Sacramento
obstringuntur. Albeit (saith hee) in the time of
the Apostles, this custome of promotion now vsed in
the Church, was not then receiued, yet we must know
that godly gouernours of Churches and Schooles by
good and profitable counsell haue ordained degrees of
promotion, partly that arrogant men should not
vsurpe this title of honour without approbation of the
Church; partly also, that they who by publicke testimonie
of the Church are thought meete for it, may be
knowne and had in reuerence. Neyther is this against
the dignitie of Ecclesiastique Hierarchie, commended
to vs by the holy Ghost; for in that hee requireth order
and decencie in his Church: the power to ordaine
Rites pertaining to the Church, hee leaueth to the
Church. Wherefore we must not stand vpon the voices
of some proud spirits, contemning Ecclesiasticall
degrees: for, those degrees are not giuen them eyther
for contempt of others, or to nourish any arrogant
supereminence in themselues, but onely to be publicke
testimonies of that dutie wherein they stand bound
and obliged to the Church.
            
            
               Sed obijciunt, Ecclesia Christi nesciat pompam, habeat fidei
& sanctimoniae probationem, preces, & manuum impositione
                     •
                  :
respondeo, minime indignum esse Christianis, pijs ac eruditis
viris, testimonia doctrinae & honestatis conferre, vt sci
                     •
                  t Ecclesia
quibus possit tuto gubernationem & curam doctrin
                     •
                  
commendare. Nec obstat, quod huiusmodi promotiones longo
tempore in abusu fuerint, mod
                     •
                   sordibus abstersis res Ecclesiae

                  
                     •
                  tiles retineamus. But they obiect: there should be no
pompe in the Church of Christ, but Faith and holines,
prayer and imposition of hands. I answere, that it is not
vnseemely for Christians to giue vnto godly and learned
men publike testimonies of doctrine and honesty,
that the Church may know to whom the care of Doctrine
and Gouernement of the Church may safely be
committed. Neyther should it be any impediment that
these degrees of promotion haue of a long time beene
abused, prouiding the abuse be remoued, and that
which is good and profitable for the Church be retained.
            Rursus dicunt Dominum prohibuisse appellari Rabbi &
Magistros super terram. Respondeo, idem Dominus dicit non
appellandum esse Patrem super terram, &c. Quare, non de
appellatione, sed de alia re interdictum est intelligendum; dei
                  •
               de

                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                lo
                  •
               i satis conumcit, quis sit huius loci sensus;
addit enim, Qui maximus est vestrum, erit minister: non
vult sua interdictione sublatam appellationem Patris, Magis
                  ••
               i,
aut Doctoris, sed arrogantem fiduciam. Hemming▪ in
Epist. ad Ephes. cap. 4.
            Againe, it is obiected that Christ hath forbidden that
any should be called Lords or Masters vpon earth. I
answere that the same Lord hath also forbidden that
any should be called Father vpon earth: Wherefore
the interdiction is not to be vnderstood of the appellation
of any by such names, but of some other thing.
Againe, the circumstance of the place proues plainely
what is the meaning thereof: for, hee addes; He that is
greatest among you, let him be the seruant of the rest: he will
not therefore take away the stile of Master, Father, or
Doctor, but onely the arrogant conceit of any greatnesse
in themselues for it.
            And in another place to this same purpose saith Zanchius:
Cum prius omnes verbi Ministri, tum Pastores tum
               
Episcopi, tum Presbyteri, ex aequo app
                  •
               llarentur, equalis etiam
essent authoritatis, quod postea vnus caperit, alijs omnibus
praefici collegis, quanquam non vt Dominus, sed tanquam rector
in Academia, reliquis collegis, & huic imprimis, cura
totius Ecclesiae commissa fuerit, eo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                & 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                quandam
is solus Episcopi, & Pastoris nomine appellari consueuerit,
reliquis Symmistis nomine Presbyterorum contentis, it a vt in
vnaqua
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               , ciuit ate vnus tantum caeperit esse Episcopus & multi
Presbyteri, hoc minime improbari posse iudicamus.
            Whereas before all Preachers of the word were called
equally, Pastors, Bishops, Presbyters, and were also
of equall authoritie, that thereafter one was set ouer
the rest, albeit not as a Lord, but as a Gouernour of
an Academie, and that to him was committed the
charge of the whole Church, who for that, in a more
excellent and singular manner was called Bishop, the
rest of the Preachers contenting themselues with the
name of Presbyters; so that in euery Citie, there vvas
but one Bishop and many Presbyters or Ministers. This
is a policie which in my iudgement cannot be disallowed.
            Hac saue ratione quae etiam de Archiepiscopis, imo & de
quatuor Patriarchis ante Concilium Nic
                  •
               num creatis, constituta
fuerunt, excusari, defendi
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                posse sentimus. Zanch. de
Ecclesiae militantis gubernatione, cap. 11.
            And by this same reason also, that which is said of
Archbishops; yea, and of the foure Patriarkes created
before the Counsell of Nice, wee thinke may be not
onely excused, but easily defended. And least (as commonly
is obiected) men should thinke that this distinction
of degrees tends to establish also the Superioritie
of one aboue the whole Church: Marke what this same
Father hath in the Chapter following.
            
               Ceterum quod vnus tantum caput omnibus per vniuersum
terrarum orbem, Ecclesijs praefeci, ius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   & plenitudinem

vt vocant potestatis in omnes habere debeat, illud non solum
non possumus probare, sed contra non possumus non execrari.
But that one as head should be set ouer all the Churches
in the world, hauing right and plenitude of power
ouer all others, that is an iniquitie: which not onely
we cannot approue, but also cannot but curse.
            Whereof it is euident, that if the iudgement of Zanchius
be any thing worth, it must be eyther a grosse ignorance,
or great malice, that stirreth vp many to cry
out against Episcopall gouernment, as if it were Antichristian.
It is to be wished that wee had many such
wise, humble, learned, and sober minded men among
vs: for the cause of our trouble is the ignorance of
some, the pride of others, (a very few excepted,) and
these are the Parents of needlesse contention.
            
               And yet more cleare is that other part of Zanchius
his testimonie cited by vs before, which now followes,
Quis autem ego sum, qui quod tota Ecclesia approbauit, improbem?
Sed ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                omnes nostri temporis viri docti improbare
ausi sunt, quippe qui norunt, & licuisse haec Ecclesiae, & ex
pietate, at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ad optimos fines pro Electorum aedificatione ea
omnia fuisse perfecta & ordinata fuit praeterea mihi habenda
ratio earum etiam Ecclesiarum, quae licet Euangelium
complexae sunt, suos tamen & re, & nomine habent Episcopos.
Quid quod in Ecclesijs quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                Protestantium non desunt reipsa
Episcopi, & Archiepiscopi quos (mutatis bonis Graecis nominibus
in male latina) vocant Superintendentes, & generales
Superintendentes? Sed vbi ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                vetera illa bona Graeca
ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                haec noua male Latina, verba obtinent, ibi tamen solent
esse aliquot primarij penes quos fere tota est authoritas. De
nominibus ergo fuerint Controuersie, verum de rebus conuenit,
quid de nominibus altercamur?
            Who am I that I should disallow that which the
whole Church hath allowed; yea, neyther dare all the
Doctors of this time disallow it, knowing that this

policie is lawfull in the Church, and that for good
ends; namely, the edification of the Elect, it was receiued
and ordained. It behoued mee also to haue respect
vnto those Churches which haue imbraced the
Gospell with Bishops both in name and office. Yea, also
in the Churches of Protestants, there wants not in
effect Bishops and Archbishops, whom (by changing
good Greeke names into euill Latine names) they call
Superintendents, and generall Superintendents. And
euen there where neyther the good auncient Greeke
names (of Bishop and Archbishop) nor the euill Latine
names (of Superintendents) haue place, yet is there
some principall men who haue the authoritie and
chiefe credit of Church-gouernment. So that the Controuersie
is onely about names, but where men agree
in the matter, why should there be an vnnecessarie
strife about words?
            
               And vnto this same purpose saith Beza: Ne
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                tamen
huius tyrannidis omnes Archiepiscopos seu Episcopos 
                  •
               odie
vocatos accusamus: quae enim fuerit h
                  ••
               c arrogantia? imo
cunctos sic hodie appellatos modo sanctorum illorum Episcorum
exemplum imitentur, & tam misere deformatam domum
Dei ad amissim ex verbi diuini regula pro viribus instaurent,
vt Ecclesiae Christian
                  •
                fidos Pastores cur non agnoscamus?
obseruemus? & omni reuerentia prosequamur? nedum
vt quod falsissime & impudentissime nobis obijciunt,

                  •
               uiquam vspiam Ecclesiae sequendum nostrum peculiare exemplum
praescribamus, imperiti ssimorum illorum similes, qui
nihil nisi quod ipsiagunt rectum putant, Ber. de grad. Minist.
cap. 21. Sect. 2.
            Wee accuse not all Archbishops and Bishops, so
called this day, of this tyrannie: for what arrogancie
were this? yea, those who are so called, prouiding
they follow the example of former holy Bishops, to reforme
the deformed house of God, according to the

rule of Gods word, why shall wee not acknowledge
and reuerence them as faithfull Pastors of the Christian
Church: so farre are wee from that which most
falsly, and without shame, is obiected against vs, to
make our particular example a rule which other
Churches are bound to follow, which is the fashion of
wilfull ignorant men, who thinke nothing well done,
but that which they doe themselues.
            And againe, albeit (saith hee) of old the gouernement
of Presbyters was by course, Attamen prostasias hic
modus paulatim postea visus est ita mutandus, vt vnus Presbyterio
pr
                     •
                  estos esset & permaneret, cap. 23. sect. 25. yet this
forme of presidence was in such sort changed, that
one was set ouer the rest, as constant and perpetuall
Gouernour.
            
               Ita factum est, vt Episcopi nomen ad hunc prestota proprie
significandum, & quidem suorum Compresbyterorum
respectu sit translat
                     •
                  m, cap. 23. Sect. 9. And so it came
to passe that the name of a Bishop was translated properly
to signifie this president of the Presbyterie, not
onely in respect of superioritie ouer the people, but
ouer his Compresbyters also.
            Postremum hunc ordinem, vel modum ordinis humanum,
non simpliciter tamen, sed comparate nulla cum Patrum &
tot Ecclesiarum iniuria appellauero, Sect. 10. And this last
order, or manner of order without any offence of the
Fathers, or of so many Churches, I call humane, yet
not simply, but in comparison.
            
            
               Absit autem, vt hunc ordinem etsi Apostolica & mere
diuina dispositione non constitutum, tamen vt temere aut superbe
in
                     •
                  ectum reprehendam. Sect. 13. Farre be it from
mee rashly or proudly to reproue this order, albeit it be
not established by Apostolicke, or meerely diuine disposition.
            Cuius etiam magnum fuisse vsum, quandiu boni & sancti

Episcopi Ecclesijs praefuerunt quis inficiari possit? fruantur
igitur illo qui volunt & poterunt, Sect. 13.
            And it cannot be denyed that this policie was very
profitable vnto the Church, so long as good and holy
Bishops were Presidents ouer it. Let them therefore enioy
it who so will, and may haue it.
            This is the iudgement of these modest and reuerent
Doctors of thereformed Churches, who albeit they see
not clearely that the Episcopall function is diuine, yet
they reuerence it as a necessarie and lawfull policie,
which may make most iustly the malecontents of our
time ashamed, who haue nothing in their mouthes but
that the office of a Bishop is Antichristian, that the
name is abused when it is giuen to one Pastor and not
to all the rest; wherein if they will not be reformed by
vs, I wish at least, that laying all preiudice aside, they
may follow in their iudging and speaking, this moderation
of these learned and godly Fathers of our
Church.
         
         
            
            A short answere, to the Tripartite Antipologie
of some namelesse Authors.
            
               AS a little sparkle of fire kindleth
a great flame, and one waue in
the waters causeth many; or
as the barking of one dogge in
a Village wakeneth the rest to
barke also (excuse mee to vse
this comparison, for in this, as
Mr. Dauid his word is, the case
is alike) so Mr. Dauid by his example
hath prouoked others, his complices, to imitate
him in his manner of doing. For since my comming
to Edenbrough, for directing▪ away my Dikaiologie
to the Presse, there was deliuered to mee three
sundry Treatises inuectiue, coincident for the most
part, with Mr. Dauid his Parologie; and where they
differ from him, a particular answere is here returned
vnto them.
            The Authors of them I know not, their names are
suppressed: the first and the third goe together, and
seemes to be some Preachers of Fyffe; they reckon out
some sundry indwellers of Fyffe, to proue a certain alleagance
concerning the late Bishop of S. Andrewes.
their intelligence also with Perth, bordering with that
Prouince, from which reports of my Sermons are so
easily carried vnto them, insinuates also the same; but
for their persons, be what they will, the matter is all
one. Great brags were made be Mr. Dauid, of many

answeres, and many Inquisitors that were to search
mine Apologie: before they came, some great thing
was expected, but no such thing is found: doubtlesse
they haue manifested the weakenesse of their cause,
that so many labouring about one thing haue not
brought among them all, so much as one argument to
defend it.
            
               An Answere to the first.
               THE first 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , saith he, is vnacquainted with
mee, onely hath heard mee teach oftentimes, and
beene as sundry others were, comforted thereby, for
which hee thankes God: for, truely the glorie of that
good which God worketh by the ministrie of his weak
Seruants belongs vnto himselfe; for, wee are not able
of our selues so much as to thinke a good thought. And
to the end that such as haue gotten good by my Ministrie,
may be further confirmed, I thought it my dutie,
after I had considered the matter of Church-gouernement,
rightly to informe them, that there is no
cause why our Church should thus be diuided for it:
And I may, and now doe with a good warrant of the
word and mine owne conscience say to it, I should not,
I will not, I dare not, be an author nor maintainer of
diuision in our Church for it. If any will, let them doe
it vpon their owne perill, wherein I will be loath to
communicate with them.
               In your third Sect. you mislike the boldnes of others
that vsurpe the Iudicatorie of other mens consciences,
I wish the like moderation had beene vsed of the rest
of your Complices. This onely you say, that albeit
God be onely 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the searcher of the heart,
yet men may iudge of other men by their fruits:

whereunto I willingly agree; for, it is the rule of our
Sauiour, By their fruits you shall know them. If a man condemne
the life of another, let him disproue it by his
euill deedes; or if hee will impugne the opinion, let him
doe it by strength of reason: but to vsurpe the Iudicatorie
of an other mans conscience, is it not intollerable
presumption? yet commonly practised by your Complices?Naz 
                        
                           •
                        rat. 7.
for whom it were good they remembred Nazianzen
his warning, Multa versanda sunt animo priusquam
ali
                        •
                     m iraepiet atis condemnes.
               
               
                  Sect. 8. You graunt that from the beginning of reformation
till the yeere 1575. Our Church contented
themselues with Bishops and Superintendents, why
then is it counted so odious a thing that Bishops should
be in it now?
               You affirme also that I can bring no warrant for
Episcopall gouernment, neyther from Gods word, nor
practise of the primitiue Church for the first three hundred
yeeres. The Answere you will finde in my Reply
to the last Opponent.
               
                  Sect. 11. You alledge, that they who assembled at
Glasgow, came vpon priuate missiues from his Maiestie,
and vpon promises of gaine. Mr. Dauid obiected that
before, and I answered it in my Dikaiologie; onely you
adde, that I know it to be so: but if you hope to make
your Assertion good, you shall doe well to vse some
other probations, for in truth I know not any such
thing.
               
                  Sect. 16. The argument I vsed, mistaken by you,
concerning the Apostles dispensation of Circumcision,
shall be cleared in mine answere to the last Opponent,
who also impugnes it.
               
                  Sect. 17. 18. You would proue that you are not the
Authors of Schisme, but Bishops: why? because they
haue departed from the gouernment, whereunto you

stand (say you) but this middes will not draw on that
conclusion. For wee stand to the gouernment of our
first Fathers, (confessed by your selfe) from the which
who so shall be found to haue departed, let the blame
be theirs.
               
                  Sect. 19. Your alledging of the growth of Papistrie
now, that was not before, is as I told you a Sophisme,
A non causa pro causa, Kingdomes and Churches haue
their owne periods of times, whereinto sinnes long
contracted before, doe bring iudgement vpon them,
which honest and godly men cannot hold off. By this
same reason Daniell and Ezekiell might be blamed for
Babels Captiuitie, which the sinnes of former ages had
procured. It were but folly for you or vs eyther to
charge one another with the causes of this wrath.
There are none of vs free, by our sinnes wee haue deserued
iudgement; God giue vs grace ioyntly to preuent
it by vnfained repentance in all holines and loue.
               
                  Sect. 28. You charge mee for comparing my brethren
of the Ministrie to Shimeies, if I had so done, I
were worthie to be blamed, but in truth you haue mistaken
mee, God forbid. My words are plaine against
the Libeller, and such as hee, who if in their calling
they were laborious, as I did hope to giue them example
if they were acquainted with mee, they should finde
no time for such idle toyes, and I maruell how men can
so farre misconstrue my words; for I affirmed plainely
that I was perswaded no well aduised Christian would
fight with such armour as lying Libels, and if no common
Christian will doe it, farre lesse euer thought I
that a Christian Preacher would doe it.
               And where you say they are very idle if they be not
more laborious then I, my answere is, let the Worke
beare witnesse. And so fare you well in the Lord.
               
                  Edenburgh. Nouemb. 24. 1613.
                  
               
            
            
               
               An Answere to the second.
               THE second (to wit 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ) commeth in like a
swaggerer, breathing out many brawling speeches
without either truth or modestie, 
                     •
                  he shoots his fectlesse
bolt, and hideth himselfe, which is the fashion of
a feeble coward: hee conceales his name, but by his
speech may be discerned to be some Lucius Blastus, a
furibund, but a figuline fellow, loadned with railings,
lyings, fabulous fictions, wherewith he ouer-burdens
himselfe. I leaue him where I found him, vexing himselfe
with his owne anger, tumbling, and weltring in
the puddle of his tumultua
                     •
                   thoughts, whereof hee
cannot rid himselfe, bragging most vainely, but
bringing nothing that may be counted worthie of an
answere, saue onely that for lacke of any other thing,
wherewith to charge me. Hee carps at my Commentarie
vpon the eight to the Romanes, and passing by
(as the manner of enuious men is) all the good that
is in it, hee findes fault with the Grammaticall construction
of the seauenth verse. A great matter, indeede
I thanke the Lord; these labours of mine published
in twelue or thirteene seuerall Treatises, hath
done good to the Church: and howsoeuer they be
disesteemed by you and some of your humour, yet
that they are in account with men of greater pietie
and learning then you is euident, in that now the third
time that Commentarie vpon the eight to the Romanes,
hath beene imprinted; others of them fiue
times imprinted. You come short of this honour your
selfe, and grieues at it, you cannot walke with mee in
the same way, to put your talent vnto profit, neither
yet can suffer another to doe it beside you, vnlesse you

lye snarling, and barking at his heeles, and thereby declare
your selfe to be but a base bodie. I must tell you,
as the truth is, for many of you blinded, with a vaine
conceit of your selues, spils vnspoken to, whose manner
is, that either they vvould doe, but cannot; or
else can doe, but for idlenesse will not, or may not:
yet doing no good themselues, they will censure the
doings of all others, neither can any thing be done,
were it neuer so good, that shall escape the stroke of
their tongue. But now to the word you quarrell, I
know very well that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is sometime a Substantiue,
and you cannot denie it is also an Adiectiue▪ 
                  Beza in
his notes, findes fault most iustly with the Latine
translation, rendring the words in this manner, Carnem
inimicam esse Deo. First, because if the word had
beene vsed heere as an Adiectiue, the Apostle would
haue said 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , to make it agree with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . Secondly,
because it doth not so significantly expresse
the Apostles meaning: it being more to say the sense
of the flesh is inimitie with God, then to say, it is an enemie
to God. Now if I looking especially to the best
sense, haue vsed 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as an Adiectiue substantiuated
in the plurall, the more effectually to expresse the corruption
of our nature, according to that of Moses,
All the i
                        •
                     aginations of the thoughts of mans heart,
are onely euill continually. And so hath rendered the
words, Sensus carnis Inimicitiae aduersus Deum. And out
of it, haue drawne a true and profitable obseruation,
what haue you heere to carpe it? As to these words
subioyned (otherwise it could not agree with the Substantiue

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  : it is of truth, it is drawne out of the
first vncorrected Copie, and continues in the second
Edition expresly against my direction. But when you
shall haue taken as great paines to encrease your talent
for edification of the Church, and shall offer your labours

to the publicke censure of others. I can assure
you, modest and reasonable men will excuse you for
the like construction, prouided they finde good in
the remanent of your labours.
               And truly I haue great cause to thanke the Lord
my God, that so many eyes and tongues, and Pennes
being stretched out to marke my wayes: my words,
my secret writings; my publicke writings yet among
them all they can finde nothing either in my life, or
in my labours wherewith to charge me: if they could,
the world should haue heard it ere now: yea, since
some of them haue beene so impious, as to iudge of
Gods affection toward me by the death of some of my
children, which I know hath beene tratled into the
eares of some within Edenburgh. What would these who
so narrowly seekes a blame against mee, haue done if
they could haue found it? Againe, I thanke the Lord
who hath so watched ouer me, as not to suffer mee to
fall vnder the rebuke of man. I feare not, I care not the
censure of flesh, and I trust in his grace, that still hee
will preserue me pure and blamelesse to his heauenly
Kingdome for his names sake.
               But to returne vnto you, you haue here no other
thing worthie of an answere: not answered alreadie;
It is scarse a sheete of paper you haue sent me, and you
post through it with such speede, that any man may
perceiue the heat of your humour hath spurred you
to clatter out of the Cabinet of your cheeke any thing
came readiest into it: neuer going in into your selfe,
as becomes a modest man to aduise with your minde.
My counsell to you, is, that when such a fitte of furie
takes you againe, you giue commaund before
to your seruants to holde Paper, Penne, and Inke
out of your vvay, least you shame your selfe yet more,
and so good Master 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , vvishing to you

greater modestie of minde and speech, I bid you farewell.
               
                  Edenburgh Nouemb, 25. 1613.
                  
               
            
            
               An Answere to the third.
               THE third begins his Logomachick declamation,
with a great exclamation: O tempora! O mores!
wherein is more noise of words, then dint of reasons:
Who (saith hee) would haue said within these twelue
yeeres, that I would haue beene of this minde? But
indeede it is no strange thing to see any Christian, farre
lesse a Christian Preacher, in twelue yeeres; yea in
one yeere, attaine to knowledge which he had not before:
What else is our life heere, but a daily changing
from darknesse to light, from sinne to sanctification,
from Satan to the liuing God, from euill to good, from
good to better?2 Cor. 3. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  Wee behold as in a mirrour the glorie of
God with open face, and are changed from glorie to glorie,
into the same image by the Spirit of the Lord; what change
I haue made, is neither so so dainly, nor so lightly done,
as you suppose. I haue considered the matter at length,
and findes for the one part arguments from the authoritie
of persons, which did long restraine mee, as also
from a late custome of our Church, which when I
searched the register of our generall assemblies, I found
easily taken away by a more auncient custome of our
Church: On the other part, arguments from the truth
it selfe, which I dare not conceale for respect of persons;
neither is it any reason that I should be bound
with the cordes of former ignorance, and holden
backe from giuing place to a better light, when God
reueales it; yet this is the maine argument you bring

against me, which I thinke you would not repeat so
often, if you had any stronger to bring for you.
               In this same Page, you charge mee with two speeches,
which are vntruths, they are not mine, I neuer
had any such words, and it is a shame for you, who in
the end of your Treatise subscribes your selfe Philalethe
                        •
                     ,
that you should proue Pseustes in the very beginning.
But if these vaine reports, wherewith you fill
the hearts of such as leane their eares vnto you, were
taken from you, you would be found bare and barren
of matter, whereby you might maintaine them in a liking
of your opinion.
               Your calumnies, Fol. 2. that Episcopall dignitie
drawes neere to Babel, and Egypt; that the calling is
euill in it selfe, and corrupts the Cariers thereof: that
the shew of worldly glorie hath turned me out of the
path
                     •
                  way of Christ, that a man nose-wise (like you)
might smell in my speeches the sauour of a vaine-glorious,
and selfe-pleasing humour, that mine heart cleaueth
to the world, that it appeares to be auaritious
and ambitious, are but words of winde, neither able
to moue the mountaine of Episcopall dignitie (as you
call it) nor yet one whit to commoue me at all: but so
much the more confirmes me, that I see you fight with
lies and vntruths.
               You denie that Superintendents and Bishops are
one, Fol. 6. And why? Because Superintendents rode
not at Parliament. A strong argument (forsooth) as
if this pertained to the substance of their Office: but it
is good enough, you wot where.
               Your▪ anger at Episcopall garments, and their riding
at Parliament with Foot-cloathes, would be the
lesse, if your care to redresse vanitie of apparrell in
your selfe, and your complices were greater. As for
Bishops their apparrell and riding, where-vpon you

gnaw so much, if the honour of their place in that supreame
Court of this Kingdome, wherein now they
haue by his Highnesse fauour that benefit to sit, craued
so long by our Fathers, and not obtained till now,
if this I say moued them no more, then any respect of
honour to themselues, I doubt not they could willingly
content, to be without it. And if I should answere
you in this as I could, well I know I might iustly
make you asharned.
               Bishops you graunt, Fol. 6. were once set vp in our
Church, with consent of our Church: so your first
brother confessed before you; what aileth you then at
a Bishop now? why make you such a stirre for receiuing
that, which our best and oldest Fathers embraced
before vs. Why call you hereafter Episcopall gouernment,
The Romish Hierarchie? Fol. 10. Did Mr. Kn
                        •
                     x
and our Fathers set vp Romish Hierarchie? this must
follow, if you be a true man. God forgiue you, and
lay it not to your charge, that rends the Vnitie of our
Church for that which you are forced to graunt our
Fathers had before vs: you blame them who haue
departed from you: but considers not they haue ioyned
themselues to the Fathers of our Church older
then you, the blame is not theirs, but shall be yours, if
you also follow them not: for my owne part it repents
me, I knew not the truth of this matter sooner, but as
now by searching the monuments of our Church and
former Churches I know it. If I had knowne it, no
man should haue beene confirmed by my example in
the contrarie. There may be personall faults in Bishops
present, they are but men: but I am sure the insolent
pride euident in many of you, that will follow
none, but be followed of others; together with your
hote contentions and needlesse strife, whereby you
rend the bowels of this Church without compassion,

bending your tongues in publicke and priuate against
your brethren: is a sinne more abhominable in Gods
sight, then any wherewith you are able to charge
them? Let alone therefore this conceit, and standing
vpon your reputation. Thinke it no shame to submit
your selfe to Episcopall gouernement; to receiue it in
the Church, which the plaine euidence of truth forces
your selfe to confesse, that it was set vp in our Church
by the oldest and best Fathers that euer our Church
had. But if still you will be contentious, and foster a
diuision, if you will depriue this poore Church of the
good wee might haue vnder so Christian a King, so
long as wee haue his Highnesse for the establishing of
the Gospell: if you haue no respect to encrease his
Highnesse ioy be our Vnion, nor to vnite the present
estate of our Church with her first estate for the
honour thereof? If you haue no care to stoppe the
mouth of the common aduersarie, and will diuide Ierusalem
within, when it is besieged without, stand in
feare, least God require this at your hands. You denie
that the Episcopall and Presbyteriall gouernement
were euer vnited. You may as well denie, that the
Sunne shined in the Primitiue Church. Your fellow
Writer wishes he had the benefit of Printing, I wish the
same; you care not what you write in priuate, but if
you were to publish them by Print, I hope it should be
some awband to you, to restraine you from your accustomed
rash affirmations of such Paradoxes, vntruthes,
fables: or otherwise it would turne to your
greater shame. But now if you will credit Ignatius, from
Peter the third Bishop of Antiochia: through all his
Epistles, hee euer distinguishes a Bishop and a Presbyterie,
and yet makes them sweetly concurre to doe the
worke of God: let it be, you doubt of some of his Epistles,
but I hope you will not reiect them all: hauing

exhorted the Traellians to obey their Bishop and Presbyters,Ignat. ad Tra
                           •
                        llia
                           ••
                        . Epist. 2.
he defines them both 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . What
is a Bishop, but hee that hath power and rule in the
Church, so farre as a man can haue it, and is according
to his power a follower of Christ 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . What is a Presbyterie? but a sacred consistorie
of Counsellours and Assessors to the Bishop.
See you not heere a Bishop and Presbyters distinguished:
see you them not vnited, the one hauing power
to rule, the others dutie being to counsell and assist.
And this testimonie of their Vnion fifteene hundreth
yeeres old. Many other cleare testimonies out of all
the Epistles of Ignatius Bishop of Antiochia, Martyr
at Rome, might be gathered to this same purpose, but
that it were too long to rehearse them.
               Take with this another of Nazianzen.
                  
                     Nazian. 
                     
                        •
                     rat. 7. de Composita disser
                        ••••
                      rati
                        •
                     ne. 
                  Nos omnes
vinum corpus in Christ
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     , ac singuli tam Christs s
                        •
                     mu
                        •
                     
membra, quam alter alterius, nimirum imperat & praesidet
hoc, illud du
                        ••
                     tur, necidem efficunt vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , siquidem imperare,
ac subie
                        •
                     tum esse imper
                        ••
                      non sunt idem, & fiunt tamen
vtra
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , vnum per vnum spiritum conglutinata in vnum
Christum. Wee are all one bodie in Christ, and euerie
one of vs the members of another, as also the members
of Christ: one is president and commaunds; another
is gouerned: both these effectuates not one thing, for
to commaund, and to be subiect to commaundement,
are not one, and yet these two becomes one being
conglutinate and conioyned by one Spirit into one
Christ: That Nazianzen meanes here of the distinction
of Ministers, whereof the Superiour hath power,
to rule; the Inferiour his place to obay, yet both happily
vnited in Christ, to doe the worke of God: See
Elias Commentarie vpon this place.
               Looke againe the fourth Councell of Carthage,

holden about twelue hundred yeere since. Presbyter ordinatur
Episcopo 
                        •
                     um benedicente & manum imponente capiti
eius,
                  Concil. Carth. 4. cap. 3. 
                  & qui adsunt presbyters manus suas iuxta manus
Episcopi teneant: A Presbyter is ordained, the Bishop
laying hands vpon him, and blessing him, and let the
Presbyters which are present, haue their hands beside
the hands of the Bishop. There they are distinguished
yet vnited.
               Omnes Episcopus Presbyter est,
                     Ambr. in 1. Tim. 3. 
                  sed non omnis Presbyter
Episcopus, hic enim Episcopus est, qui inter Presbyteros primus
est. Euery Bishop is a Presbyter said Ambrose, but
euery Presbyter is not a Bishop: for hee is a Bishop,
who is first among the Presbyters: there they are distinguished
and vnited.
               
                  Ioyne to these Cyprians complaint;
                  
                     Cypr. Epist. 10. Aliqui de Presbyteris
nec Euangely, nec loci sui memores nec futurum Domini
iudicium, nec sibi praepositum Episcopum cogitantes, quod

                     〈◊〉
                   sub antecessoribus nostris factum est, cum contumelia
& contemptu praepositi totum sibi vendicant, &c. Si
vltri in s
                     ••
                  dem perseuerauerint vtar ea admonitione, qua me
Dominus vti iubet vt interim prohibeantur offerre.
               In his sixt Epistle hee professeth he was determined
to doe nothing without counsell of his Compresbyters;
but because some Presbyters had receiued some
that had fallen, to the peace of the Church, inconsulto
Episcopo, without knowledge of the Bishop; neyther
fearing the future iudgement of God, nor the present
Bishop set ouer them, which hee saith was neuer done
by any Presbyter vnder any of his Ancestors, not without
contumelie and contempt of their Bishop, he warneth
them if they continue in it, hee will vse that censure
against them which the Lord commaunded him,
and suspend them from their Ministrie. How vnwise
you were to alledge the authoritie of Cyprian for you,Fol. 13. & 15.
this one place, among many, may witnesse: for he not

onely affirmes that the power of a Bishop ouer Presbyters
is more auncient then his time, but that it is warranted
also by diuine authoritie.
               I could to this same purpose bring many others, if
at this time I might attaine to my owne minutes, collected
for helpe of my memorie. But let these suffice
for the present. If they content you not, then I send
you to the fourth Booke of Douname, wherein hee
proueth Episcopall Function to be of Apostolicall institution,
because it was generally receiued in the first
three hundred yeeres after the Apostles. If you be
purposed to dispute this question, you will finde him
there with very formall and forcible reasonings defending
Episcopall gouernement: if you will not, as I
thinke you will not meddle with him, because hee is
too strong for you, then you shall doe best to let alone
your whisperings in the eares of simple people, and
your triuiall arguments which seeme good enough to
them that know no better, but in very deede are like
the Cuties of bone wherewith Children shoote in the
streetes, that may well make a little fize with powder,
but are not able to carrie any Bullet, and it will be long
before you hurt a Bishop with such.
               You carp at my Argument fol. 9. that I bring to
proue the externall D
                     •
                  scipline to be arbitarie and
changeable, as may best serue for edification, because
the Apostles, in a greater matter, dispensed with Circumcision
for edification, some of them retayning it,
some not admitting it, as they saw best for the state of
their people. You neede not tell mee that Circumcision
was a Sacrament, and no point of Church-gouernment,
I know that very vvell: but must tell you
againe, that as quicke as you thinke your selfe, you
mistake the argument; for, it is from the more to the
lesse: If the Apostles vsed a diuersitie in a greater thing,

for the good of the Church, and did not all keepe one
rule concerning the Sacrament of Circumcision;
why shall it be thought euill now to see diuersitie in
the Church about a lesse thing? some Churches vsing
externall gouernment one way, others another way, as
the state of the time and people requires. Besides that,
I beleeued your Doctorship had beene so acquainted,
at least with the recent Writers of this age, that you
would haue soone perceiued the Author of the words
alledged by mee to be Musculus on 1 Tim. 1. and his
probation of it, is not from auncient Augustine, as
you take it, but from the latter Augustana Confessio; put
on your Spectacles and reade it againe. Thus while as
like a blinde man you would strike at mee, you strike a
more worthy man then euer you were, and a vvhole
reformed Church also. Yet for all this, your vvords
are oracles good enough (I warrant you) in your owne
Conuenticles, and with them the simplicitie of many
Christians is abused, whose eyes I pray the Lord open,
that as they know the truth of the Gospell, so they may
know the truth of this question also, and leaue off to
rend this Church by so vnlawfull a diuision.
               That you affirme no Schisme was in our Church
till Bishops came. I must tell you this is but your calumnie,
and the contrarie is notoriously knowne: to
mee it is cleare as the light; with a mourning heart many
a time haue I looked vnto one, I could make it
cleare to the world, but I will not for all your prouocation.
I say no more, but if you be ignorant of this,
you are a great stranger in S. Andrewes.
               
               Your Discourses fol. 10. 11. 12. 13. are answered alreadie.
In the 14 you condemne the calling of the Bishops
of this Church, they neyther haue it from the
people, nor the Church, nor the generall Assemblie.
Surely, you are a pert affirmer of any thing you please,

for you will not finde any Bishop of Scotland, whom
the generall Assemblie hath not first nominated and
giuen vp in lytes to that effect, or else by such as haue
authoritie in the Church to doe it.
               In your fol. 15. you vsurpe the iudgement of my conscience,
and therein vtters the pride of your spirit, but
impaires not mine honest inward testimonie in the
contrarie. I affected no Bishoprie, no creature can conuince
me of Ambitus, directly nor indirectly: but you
must be like your selfe, affirme falshoods confidently,
that your simple ones may beleeue you: neuerthelesse
know that God will bring you to iudgement, and you
shall be countable, if for your idle words, much more
for your false lying words, spoken and published for
the corrupting of others.
               My words against the lying Libeller you wickedly
and most wrongfully wrest against my brethren, God
forgiue you; I haue answered it alreadie.
               And where in your last leafe you runne out vpon
your comparisons, that those who haue laboured more
faithfully and fruitfully in the worke of GOD then I
haue done, could teach mee how to behaue my selfe
in the house of God, though now (say you) I seeme
to my selfe a great Doctor in Israell. All this is but
needlesse talke: I refuse not to be taught of any in the
Church, I haue learned some good from any that
euer I heard, and haue taken paines to keepe it: but
what I seeme to be in mine owne eies is hard for you to
know. When in the secret of my heart I deale vvith
my God, I know my roome, that I am the chiefe of
sinners, and least of Saints; and in truth I so esteeme
my selfe: but where you will come in, and out of your
pride, runne ouer mee, and treade my gift vnder
your feete, I will not suffer you. It is not mine owne,
and I got it not from you I will speake in defence of it,

and not let you disgrace it. I haue by the grace of God,
laboured as faithfully, diligently, and I trust also fruitfully,
as you, or any with you that haue stretched the
penne against mee. Hee that made mee a Doctor in
Israell, hath taught mee that which I neuer learned
from man, and wherewith you, if you were well tryed
would be found vnacquainted.
               Some of your sort, I wot not if it be your selfe, haue
beene carping at my works in a publicke Sermon to
the people. S. Luke (saith hee) when hee wrote the
Historie of the Acts, dedicates it simplie to Theophilus,
but some Writers of our time must in their Dedicatorie
Epistles premit honourable Stiles: Is not this thinke
you, good Diuinitie? But the reputation of this Doctor
maketh any thing good enough that hee liketh
to speake. But if hee read the Booke through, before
hee beganne to expound it, hee might haue marked
that S. Paul speaking to Festus, giues him an honourable
Stile,Acts 26. 25. 
                  O Noble Festus! What will hee say vvhen
hee comes to that place? If it had beene eyther Heresie,
or flatterie, or vnlawfull, in it selfe, to giue Stiles
of honour to honourable men, S. Paul would not haue
vsed it. And hee who did obserue this lesson on Saint
Lukes speech to Theophilus, did but abuse his hearers,
and wrong the absent whose workes hee would faine
disgrace, for a misliking of himselfe.
               As for fideli
                     ••
                  e in the Ministerie, the onely Iudge
thereof is the Lord: and who hath laboured more or
lesse fruitfully in his worke, will be knowne in that
day wherein euery mans fruit shall be manifested: your
presumpeuous preuenting of it will make no man vp
nor downe: hee is not higher, because you doe commend
him, nor the lower, because you disesteeme of
him. My labours published for edification of others,
are not the lesse regarded, that they want some Fifaean

Sonnets prefixed to them, meeter for Actors of Comedies
then Doctors of Diuinitie.
               In your Conclusion, seeing you will haue no peace
except it agree with your humour, which I am not
able to giue, and is as little reason you should receiue,
I leaue you till God mend you, and worke a more
sober and peaceable minde in you: and so farewell.
               
                  Edenburgh, Nouemb. 28. 1613.
                  
               
            
         
         
            The CONCLVSION.
            AND now to conclude all; if Mr. Dauid, or any
of his Complices will still be contentious, let them
know I will no more interrupt the course of my studie
and better exercises for such matters, except it be
by commaundement of my Superiours: if any moe
had come so long as my penne was about this purpose,
they should not haue wanted an Answere, but
now seeing I know none others, I close vp this Combat,
Non licet ad huiusmodi ineptias vacare:
               Cypr. Epis
                     •
                  . 6. surmise, say,
report, backbite, lybell as you will; bu
                  •
                seeke some
other partie. I haue bent the course of my studie to
more profitable labours. I wish my paines may worke
in you what I would, but because wee finde by daily
experience the truth of that once spoken by Macarius,
               
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               : I turne
mee with Nazianzen, to the Lord, who is onely able
to tame the nature of man: Beatissime Christe mortalium
lumen, velim super mare nostrum ambules, & i
                     •
                  ctari desinet;
Sweet Iesus, the light of mankinde, let it please
thee to come and walke vpon the Sea of our perturbed

affections and it shall become calme. Veni Domine
Iesu & aufer scandala de Regno tuo: Come Lord Iesus
take offences out of thy Kingdome, out of our
hearts. Who but thou should raigne in them? let not
Pride possesse vs, let not Arrogancie rule ouer vs, let
not filthie Couetousnesse command vs: Put these to
the doore O Lord; come thou and possesse thine owne;
none but thou O Lord, can claime a title to vs: Vtinam
praeter Christum nihil in nobis viueret! Oh that nothing
beside Christ Iesus were liuing in vs! Lord Iesus
who left thy peace to thy Church, keepe it
among vs, that wee may be one in
thee, with all holinesse,
truth, and loue,
Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   