
      
         
            
            
            THE LADDER OF HELL.
OR
THE PROTESTANTS LIBERTINE
DOCTRINE, BEING
THE BROAD WAY WHICH
leadeth the followers of it to
their eternall ruine and
deſtruction in
Hell.
            
            Set foorth in Proſe and Verſe.
            
            ISAI. 5. 20.
            Woe vnto you who call euill good, and good
euill; putting darkneſſe light, and light
darkneſſe.
            Permiſſu Superiorum.
         
         
            
            
            CRANMER
COVBRIDGE, MINISTER OF
THE WORD IN CVMBERLAND,
to the zealous Proteſtants his Brethren,
concerning the Printing, Title, and vſe
of this admirable Ladder, worthily called
The Ladder of Hell.
            
               COnſidering that this Ladder
was firſt framed and entituled
The Ladder of Hell, by a
Papiſt, to the great diſgrace
(as hee conceined) of our
Proteſtant Religion; I imagine
that ſome of you (dearely beloued Brethren)
will wiſh that it had been quite ſuppreſſed,
and neuer ſeene light: yet, (in regard
it containeth nothing but a collection
of certaine ſentences ſet downe in the publike
bookes of twelue principall Pillars of
our Church) I thought it not amiſſe to ſet it
forth, juſt as I found it, vnder your protection;
knowing well, that euery zealous Proteſtant
can with the dexteritie of his reformed
ſpirit turne all, though neuer ſo plainly
ſeeming ill, to at leaſt a ſeeming good ſenſe:
as for example, wheras the Papiſt called this

collection of ſentences, The Ladder of Hell
becauſe in his judgement the beleefe and,
practiſe of it leadeth a ſoule directly to hell.
Yet one of our new learning (conſidering
that Ladders are made rather to helpe men
vpward then downeward) wil ſay it may be
called The Ladder of Hell, becauſe the beleefe
and practiſe of it will lift ſoules out of
hell. And with reaſon may this be ſaid, ſuppoſing
one ground of our new doctrine be
true,Caluin. in c. 30. Iſa. Hermonia ad cap. 3. Mat. v. 12. I. Inſtit. c. 25. n. 12. to wit, that Hell is (no ſuch locall place
in which are fire and other torments, as is
ſaid by the ancient Fathers, and the Scriptures
themſelues, to be prepared for the Diuels
and other damned creatures, but) only
a certaine terror and horror of an afflicted
conſcience, the which may in ſome meaſure
be felt euen in this world, and is ordinarily
felt after ſin commited euen by Proteſtants,
vntill by beleeuing firmely, and practiſing
freely the points of doctrine contained in
this Ladder, they come by degrees to contemne
all things, to wit, all Lawes of God
and man: and all ſcruple of minde and remorſe
of conſcience, and all feare of Death,
Iudgement, and Hell, which eſtate of mind,
it is like diuers zealous Proteſtants haue alreadie
attained vnto, eſteeming themſelues
hereby to be not onely freed from hell, but

to haue attained a kind of heauen in earth:
Marry the doubt is, whether this their heauē
wil laſt alwayes, as true heauen ought to
doe, or whether this haſtie freeing thēſelues
frō the hell of care, feare, remorſe & ſorrow
in this life, will not plung them into a moſt
bitter feeling of remorſe in the houre of
death, and into intollerable torments of the
eternall Hell in the next life. The which
doubt being in the judgement of ſome, only
a Papiſticall ſcruple, I will leaue to bee
diſcuſſed at better leaſure: It ſhall ſuffice my
preſent purpoſe onely to declare the manifold
vſes, which for the preſent time may be
made of this excellent Ladder, both by
Papiſts and Proteſtants.
            Firſt, I finde that the Papiſts meane to
make this ſhort Ladder ſerue for an anſwer
of many long diſcourſes made by Proteſtant
Miniſters in bookes or Sermons, in which
they obiect the ill liues of ſome Papiſts; the
which obiections the Papiſts doe retort
more ſtrongly againſt vs Proteſtants, who
cannot deny, but that ſince the light of the
new Goſpell was by Luther brought into
the world,Luther in Poſtilla ſupra Euangel. dom. 1. aduentus. men are (as Luther himſelfe
coufeſſed) more reuengeful, more conetous,
more vnmercifull, more vnmodeſt and vnruly,
and much worſe then they were in Papiſtry;

the reaſon whereof (ſay the Papiſts)
is for that the very doctrine it ſelfe of the
new Goſpellers, doth not onely not afford
ſuch effectuall reſtraints and remedies againſt
ſinne, as is in the ancient Catholike
Religion, but alſo hath (as appeareth by the
ſteps of this Ladder) diuers expreſſe principles,
which doe plainly open the gappe to
all licentious libertie of lewde life, far more
then can bee imagined to bee done by any
principles of the Papiſts doctrine. Whereupon
the Papiſts conclude that the Proteſtant
Religion, whoſe doctrine is ſo vnholy,
cannot be a holy Religion inſpired by the
holy Ghoſt, but ſuggeſted (asLuth. de abroganda miſſa priuata, editione prima. 
               Luther the
firſt Author confeſſeth ſome part of it (to
wit, the deniall of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe)
to haue beene ſuggeſted to him) by Satan
himſelfe, the enemy of all true Religion and
holineſſe.
            The zealous Proteſtant not much regarding
this, or whatſoeuer other arguments
made by Papiſts, find out other vſes of this
Ladder: as for example. Firſt, it teacheth
euery one of them to exerciſe heroicall acts
of theirI call it new foūd, becauſe I finde not in Scripture or in the ancient Fathers that a man is made iuſt by confidently beleeuing that hee is Iuſt, but rather by humbly acknowledging ones ſelfe to be a ſinner, as appeareth in the Parable of the Phariſee and the Publican. Luke 18. new-found Iuſtifying Faith, by

which they beleeue that they are juſt, holy,
and of the number of the predeſtinate, not
onely by hauing a good hope, (as the poore
Papiſts haue) when they ſee or feele ſome of
thoſe things in themſelues, which by the
holy Scriptures they learne to be ſignes of
true Iuſtice (to wit, repentance of ſins paſt,
carefulneſſe to auoid ſinne in time to come,
diligence in doing good workes; &c.) but
alſo by infallible and abſolute beleefe, as of
a chiefe article of their Chriſtian faith, euen
at ſuch times as they neither ſee, nor feele
any ſuch ſignes, yea euē whē they euidently
ſee in themſelues contrary ſignes, & namely,
euen when they actually do thoſe works
of the fleſh,Gal▪ 5. of which Saint. Paul pronounceth,
That they who doe ſuch things, ſhall
not obtaine the Kingdome of God. Zealous
Proteſtants, I ſay, maugre this threat of
S. Paul, are taught by this Ladder to beleeue
boldly that they are Saints, and cannot miſſe
ſaluation, notwithſtanding they
commit neuer ſo many moſt horrible ſins.
            Secondly, this Ladder teacheth them to
caſt away all feare of God, not onely in reſpect
of his Iuſtice, in inflicting preſent or
future paines for ſinne (which is called ſeruile
feare) but alſo of ſeparation from God,
which feare cannot ſtand with our new Iuſtifying
Faith, in regard we muſt hold it abſolutely

impoſſible that we can bee ſeparated
from God, and conſequently wee muſt
caſt away this fear, although neuer ſo much
commended in Scripture.
            Thirdly, By this admirable Ladder, zealous
Proteſtants may be deliuered from all
inward remorſe of conſcience, & may come
to that higheſt perfection of our new Goſpell,
which conſiſteth in a neglect of al conſcience,
the which cannot be attained on a
ſudden, but muſt be gained (as Luther himſelfe
gained it) by entering into a terrible
conflict, and fighting againſt ones owne
conſcience; the difficulty of which combate
ariſeth out of three heads.
            The firſt is the letter of the written word,
which ſeemeth euery where to croſſe thi
                  •
               
liberty of conſcience, and to forbid the doing
of any thing againſt conſcience. But our
new ſpirituall man, who judgeth all things,
will oppoſe againſt this killing letter of
Scripture, which reſtraineth our freedome,
the quickening ſpirit of this Ladder, which
alloweth liberty of neglecting conſcience.
            The ſecond is an old Tradition of the Papiſts
in fauour of conſcience, which hath by
long cuſtome taken a deepe roote in vs. But
the zealous Proteſtant, who accounteth
Papiſtry a great blindneſſe, will eaſily defie
this among other Papiſticall traditions.
            
               
The third is an inueterate opinion and
feeling of conſcience engrauen in the very
nature and fleſh of mans heart. But we new
ſpirited men do know old nature to be corrupted,
and that the fleſh profiteth nothing.
            Thus my deare Brethrē, you may ſee what
vſes may be made of this admirable Ladder.
            It remaineth that in a word I alſo declare,
why I make choice to dedicate it vnto you,
and to put it in print vnder your protection.
            The reaſon is, becauſe the authors out of
whom theſe ſentences were collected, were
all zealous Proteſtants. Secondly, becauſe
none now adaies will (as I ſuppoſe) ſtedfaſtl
                  •
               
beleeue & endeuor to practiſe according

                  〈◊〉
                theſe points, but only zealous Prote
               
                  ••
               a
                  •
               s.
Thirdly, beauſe none but ſuch zealous
Proteſtāts, who frame their liues according
to this Ladder, can well vnderſtand how it
is poſſible that this Ladder can be good, or
how it ſhould deliuer one out of Hell, and
cōſequently, why it ſhould be ſtiled in that
ſenſe, in which I ſtile it, The Ladder of Hell.
            
            It may be the Papiſt, which firſt framed
this Ladder, wil play vpon vs with his text,
Woe vnto you that call euil good, and good euill,
Iſa. 5. 20. But wee care not for his text, for
we can cry as lowd, and ſay as faſt, Wo vnto
him, and although the world will, witneſſe
that he hath better reaſon to vſe this text againſt

vs, then we againſt him: yet it ſufficeth
that ourWhich whether it bee white or blacke, Zuinglius himſelfe could not tell. new Spirit doth beare witnes
to our nullity of cōſcience that we ſay true.
            If the Papiſt take aduātage at my intitling
my ſelf Miniſt. of the Word in Comberland,
ſaying that we Miniſters comber the Land
with theſe libertine doctrines. I can reply &
tell him, that it is he & his Seminaries, who
comber our conſciences with their contrary
doctrines, & with putting ſcruples into our
heads, by adding to this Ladder certain ſentences,
threatning hell and damnation to
ſinners: for although we profeſſe by our juſtifying
Faith, that we are ſure to be ſaued,
and that we neede not feare to be damned:
yet I confeſſe, when I ſeriouſly examine my
guilty conſcience, and by ſearching, find the
holy Scriptures themſelues to pronounce
plainly eternall damnation to all ill liuers. I
cannot chooſe but be bodily afraid leſt the
Papiſt ſay true, when he telleth vs that the
Libertine doctrine taught by our new Goſpellers,
& ſet downe in this Ladder, wil moſt
certainly lead the followers of it to their eternall
ruine and deſtruction in hell; from
which I beſeech the Lord to deliuer vs all.
Amen
            
            
               Your deuoted ſeruant in the Lord,
CRANMER COVBRIDGE.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE
PROTESTANTS LADDER
of libertie in Proſe.
            
               
                  Eaſie it is
Hell not to miſſe.
               
            
            
               1 GOD is the Author and enforcing cauſe
of all finne.Caluin.
               
               2 The ten Commandements are impoſsible
to be kept.Caluin.
               
               3 The ten Commandements belong not to Chriſtains.Luther.
               
               4 Chriſt hath fulfilled the Law for vs.Willet.
               
               5 We need take no paines for eternall life:Hofman.
               
               6 Dauid committing murder and adulterie, did
not loſe the holy Ghoſt.Fulke.
               
               7 Whoſoeuer beleeues, God workes for him.Hofman.
               
               8 Sinnes are not hurtfull to him that beleeues.Whittaker.
               
               9 We haue no freewill at all, for it is titulus finere.
                  Luther.
               
               10 Good works are not neceſſary to ſaluation.Illiricus.
               
               11 Good workes are hurtfull to ſaluation.A
                        •••
                     derſ.
               
               12 To teach good workes, is the doctrine of diuels.Luther.
               
               1
                     •
                   Let vs take heed of ſinnes, yea let vs take heed
of good workes.Luther.
               
               14 All our beſt workes are mortall ſins, and meere
iniquitie.Caluin.
               
               15 We need not greeue or doe any ſatisfaction for
our ſinnes.Luther.
               
               16 A thouſand fornications and murders a day,Luther.
cannot withdraw vs from Chriſt.
               17 If thy wife will not come, let thy maid come.Luther.
               
               
                  
18 A woman is as neceſſary as meat and drinke.Luther.
               
               19 We may haue as many wiues as we liſt together.Luther.
               
               20 To faſt and chaſtiſe our bodies,Luther. is ſanctitie for
hogges and dogges.
               21 Purgatory is a deluſion of the diuell.Luther.
               
               22 The diuels are but in hell.Luther.
               
               23 There is no ſinne but infidelitie,Tindall. no iuſtice but
Faith.
               24 No ſins are imputed to the faithfull.Caluin.
               
               25 Sinnes of the faithfull paſt and future,Wotton. are pardoned
as ſoone as committed.
               26 The more wicked thou art,Luther. the more neere to
receiue grace.
               27 Wee haue as much right to heauen,Zuinglius. as Chriſt
himſelfe.
               28 And wee are all Saints,Luther. and as holy as the Apoſtles
were.
               29 Wee are certaine of our ſaluation.Caluin.
               
               30 We cannot fall from ours,Zuinglius. vnleſſe Chriſt fall
from his.
            
            
               A larger paſſage no man treads
               Then that which to perdition leads.
            
         
         
            
            THE
PROTESTANTS LADDER
of libertie, in Verſe.
            
               
                  The gates are 
                        •
                     ide
                  And open bide.
               
            
            GOD is of all our ſinnes the enforcing cauſe,
            It is impoſsible to keepe his lawes,
            The Tables two no rules for Chriſtians bee,
            Chriſt hath fulfill'd the Law, and left vs free.
            We need no paines take for eternall life,
            
               Dauid Vrias kill'd, defilde his wife,
            Yet did not thereby loſe the holy Ghoſt.
            God for beleeuers worke, they (truely) boaſt▪
            
            To the beleeuer, no ſinnes hurtfull are:
            We haue no freewill, tis a title bare:
            There's no neceſsitie of our good workes,
            In them much hinderance to ſaluation lurkes.
            The teaching of good workes is diuels lore;
            Shunne ſin, but for good works eſchew them more▪
            
            All our beſt workes are ſinnes and errors ſoule;
            For ſinne neer ſatisfie, nor grieue thy ſoule,
            A thouſand fornications on a day;
            As oft to kill, pulls not from Chriſt away.
            If thy wife will not, let thy mayde ſupply,
            As meate and drinke, a woman's neceſſary▪
            
            Wiues thou mayeſt take at once al that thou pleaſe▪
            
            To tame the fleſh by faſts, or want of eaſe,
            Is ſanctitie for hogges and dogges to vſe,
            With Purgatorie the Fiend doth fooles abuſe.
            Nor are thoſe damn'd rebellious ſprites in hell,
            
               
No ſinne, but want of Faith, no doing well,
            But to beleeue. No ſinnes the faithfull blot
            Committed, ſtraight they are pardon'd and forgot.
            The moſt defil'd, the readieſt is for grace;
            As Chriſt, ſo wee, haue right to ſee Gods face.
            The Apoſtles equalls we are all, and Saints,
            Our certaintie of ſaluation neuer faints,
            What euer ſoyleth ours, Chriſts glory taints▪
            
            
               
                  They ſpend their dayes in faring well,
                  And in a tri
                        •
                     e deſcend to hell.
               
            
         
         
            
            THE BOOKES OF PROTEſtants
from whence the ſteppes of the▪
Ladder are gathered.
            
               1

                     
                        Caluin. lib. 1. Iuſtitut. cap. 18. ſect. 3. 4.
                     
                        Caſtalio is witnes, l. de Praed. con. Caluin.
                     
                        Ecker. in faſcic. contr. quaeſt. 2. cap. 7.
                     
                        Paraeus apud Beca in 1. par. c. 16. p. 182.
                     Litt. Bern. dat. Anno. 1555.
                  
               
               2 Caluin. lib. 2. Inſtit. cap. 7. ſect. 5.
               3

                     
                        Luther. Serm. de Moiſ. & in coloq 
                           ••
                        nſ.
Germ. fol. 152. 153.
                     
                        Melane. in Loc. Com. edit. 2. pag. 76.
                     
                        Eberus Salmath fecicles cruciger 
colloq. Altemb. Anno 1568.
                  
               
               4 Willet in Sinop. Papiſ. pag. 564.
               5 Hoffman. de Poenit.
               6 Fulke in the Tower diſput.
               7 Hoffman. de Poenit.
               8 Whitaker de Eccleſia. pag. 301.
               9 Luther Art. 36.
               10 Illiricus in Pref. ad Rom.
               11 Amſdorfius quod bona opera ſint pernicioſa
ad ſalut.
               12 Luther de Ʋotis Monaſt.
               13 Luther in Piſcatura Petri.
               14 Caluin lib. 3. cap. 12. ſect. 4.
               15 Caluin lib. 3. cap. 4. ſect. 38.
               16 Luther Tom. 1. epiſt. fol. 334.
               
                  
17 Luther Ser. de Matrimon.
               18 Luther Ibidem.
               
               19 Luther Ibidem.
               
               20 Luther Tom. 5. Ger. fol. 324.
               21 Luther Epiſt. ad Wald. de Eucha.
               22 Luther ad cap. 9. Ionae.
               23 Luther in 5. par. poſt. German. fol. 140.
and Tindall alledged by Fox, Actes
pag. 1137.
               24 Caluin lib. 3. Inſtit. cap. 4. ſect. 28.
               25 Wotton in his Anſw. to the Popiſh Art.
pag. 41.
               26 Luther Ser. de Piſc. Petri.
               27 Zwinglius Tom. 1. fol. 288.
               28 Luther Ser. de Cruce.
               29 Diſput. Ratisb. pag. 463.
               30 Swinglius Tom. 1 fol. 268.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   