
      
         
            
            
            
            
            Preſent Remedies againſt the plague.
            Shewing ſundrye preſeruatiues for the ſame, by wholſome Fumes, drinkes, vomits and other inward Receits; as alſo the perfect cure (by Implaiſture) of any that are therewith inſected.
            
               Now neceſſary to be obſerued of euery Houſholder, to auoide the infection, lately begun in ſome places of this Cittie.
            
            Written by a learned Phyſition, for the health of his Countrey.
            
            Printed for Thomas Pauyer, and are to be ſold at his ſhop at the entrance into the Exchange.
1603
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            FOR as much as the force and infection of the ordinary diſeas called the Plague or Peſtilence, hath heretofore beene too well knowne and felt in ſundrie places of this Realme: and conſidering that it hath of late begun to increaſe in many chiefe Citties and populous places; I thought it good to publiſh to you in time, ſundry preſeruatiues againſt the ſaid diſeaſe, the better to defende thoſe that are in health, from the infection of the diſeaſed: And alſo to cure thoſe that are any way infected, grieued, or troubled with the ſame. And to this I was imboldened, the rather for that it was written by a very learned and approoued Phiſition of our time, who deſireth more the health of his Country, than by diſcouering his name ſeeme vaine glorious to the world. Accept the ſame I pray you in good part, and thanke God for the Phiſitions paines, who hath his deſire if it may doe but that which he wiſheth: namely expel ſickenes, and increaſe health to this Land. Which God for his mercie ſake, proſper and preſerue from all plagues and dangers for euermore, Amen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Theſe things ought duely to be looked vnto. (Viz.)
            
               RIght neceſſary and conuenient it were, that you kéep your houſes, ſtreets, yardes, backeſides, ſinks, and kennels, ſwéet and cleane from all ſtanding puddles, dunghils, and corrupt mayſtures which ingender ſtincking ſauours that may be noyſome, or bréede infection: nor ſuffer no dogs to come running into your houſes, neither kéep any (except it be backeward, in ſome place of open ayre, for they are verie dangerous, & not ſufferable in time of ſickeneſſe, by reaſon they runne from place to place, and from one houſe to another, féeding vpon the vncleaneſt thinges that are caſt forth into the ſtreetes, and are a moſt apt cattell to take infection of any ſickenes, & then to bring it into the houſe.
            
               For ayring your Roomes.
               Ayre your ſeueral taimes with Charcōle fiers, made in ſtone pans or Chaſingdiſhes, and not in Chimneys: ſet your pans in the middle of the Roomes: ayre euery roome once a wéeke (at the leaſt) and put into your fire a little quantity of Frankinſence, Iuniper, dryed Roſemary, or of Bay-leaues.
            
            
               A Fume of great experience.
               Take Roſemary, and put it into ſtrong Vineger, ſteepe it in a Baſon or bowle heat foure or fiue Fl
                     •
                  ntſtones red hot and caſt them into the Vineger and ſo let the Fume aſcend into the middle of euery roome.
            
            
               
               Another.
               Ayre your apparrell in the ſame ſort, and with the ſame fume: & beare in your hands ſome handkercher, Spunge, or Cloth, wetted in the iuyce of Wormwood, Hearbegrace, and red Roſe-vineger, mixt together.
            
            
               To ſmell to.
               The roote of Enula Campna ſtéeped in vineger & lapped in a handkercher, is a ſpeciall thing to ſmel vnto, if you come where the ſickenes is.
            
            
               Another.
               Hearbgrace, and wormewood ſtéeped in vineger, in ſome powter péece cloſe ſlopt, is to be vſed in like ſort.
            
            
               To taſt or chewe in the mouth.
               The roote of Angelica, Setwall, Gencian, Valerian, or Sinamond, is aſpeciall preſeruatiue againſt the plague, being chewed in the mouth.
            
            
               To eate.
               Eate Sorrell ſteeped in vineger, in the morning faſting, with a litle bread and butter, Sorrell ſauce is alſo very holſome againſt the ſame.
            
            
               Another.
               Take the kernell of a walnut, mince it with thrée or foure leaues of Hearbgrace, and a corne or two of Salt: then put it into a Figge, warme it and eate it faſting: faſt thrée houres after, and take it twice a wéek.

                  A ſpeciall thing to eate, found very comfortable.
               
               Take ſtrong red Roſe-Vineger, ſprinkle it vpon a toſt of white bread, ſpreade Butter thereon, and then caſt ye powder of Cinamond vpon it, & eate it faſting: or eate bread and butter with Hearbgrace.
            
            
               Another.
               Giue to the diſeaſed for their ordinary foode, ſome broth made with a neck of Mutton: boyled with a good quantity of Burridge, Sorrell, and Bugloſſe.
            
            
               To comfort the ſtomacke.
               Aleberries are very comfortable, made with Cloues, Mace, Nutmegs, Saunders, Ginney grains, and ſuch like.
            
            
               To drinke.
               Take Rue, Wormewood, and Scabias, ſtéepe it in Ale a whole night, & drinke it faſting euery morning.
            
            
               Another.
               Take the water of Carduns Benedictus, or Angelica, and mixe it with Methridatum,
            
            
               Another.
               The roote of Enula Campana, beaten to powder, is a ſpeciall remedy againſt the plague, being drunke faſting.
            
            
               Another.
               Drinke the powder of Turmentill, in Sorrell or Scabias water.
            
            
               Another.
               If any féele themſeules already infected, take Angelica-water mixt with Methridatum, drinke it off, then goe to bed and ſweat thereon.
            
            
               Another to drinke.
               Take a ſpooneful of Bayberries, and huſke them before

they be dry, heat them to powder, and drinke it in good ſtale Ale or Béere, or in white wine: then ſweat vpon it, and forbeare to ſleepe.
            
            
               to procure Sweat.
               Take Poſſet-Ale ſodden with Sorrell, and Burridge, mixt with Triacle of Diateſſeron and get you to your naked bed.
            
            
               A ſpeciall preſeruatiue againſt the Plague.
               Take of the roote of great Valerian, a quarter of an ounce: of Sorrell a handfull: an ounce of the roote of Butter-bur: boyle them in running water, frō a quart to a pint, two ſpoonefulls of Vineger to it, and let the patient drinke it ſo hot as hee may, and then ſweat vpon it.
            
            
               An other ſpeciall Preſeruatiue.
               Take an Egge, make a hole in the top of it, take out the white and the yolke, and fill the ſhell onelye with Saffron, roſt the ſhel and Saffron togither, in embers of Charcoales, vntil the ſhell waxe yeallow: then beat ſhell and altogether in a marter, with halfe a ſpooneful of Muſtard-ſéed: Now ſo ſoone as any ſuſpition is had of infection, diſſolue the weight of a French crown in ten ſpoonefuls of poſſet-Ale, drinke it luke warme, and ſweat vpon it in your naked bed.
            
            
               An other Preſeruatiue to be diſtilled.
               Take halfe a hundred gréene Walnuts beeing new taken off as they hang gréene on the trée, and a pound of the inner Barke of an Aſh-trée: then take Petimortell, Houſleeke, Scabias, & Veruin, of each a handfull Saffron halfe an ounce, and mince al theſe ſmal together: then put a pottle of the ſtrongeſt Vineger on thē boile them ouer a ſoft fire in a cloſe pot, and after diſtill

them in a limbecke: keep the diſtilled water, and giue the Patient two ounces to drinke therof, foure times in four & twenty-houres, when he is in his naked bed, & let him be prouoked to ſweat, and he ſhall finde great eaſe thereby.
            
            
               If the Patient be bound in the body.
               Take a ſuppoſitor made with a little boiled Hunny, & a litle powder of Salt: let this be put vp at the fundament with a litle butter vntill it moue him to ye ſtoole.
            
            
               Drinke for ordinary Dyet.
               So néere as you can let the patients ordinary drinke be good finall ale of eight daies olde.
            
            
               For Vomitting.
               Vomitting is better then bleeding in this caſe and therefore prouoke to vomit ſo neere as you can.
            
            
               To prouoke Vomit.
               Take thrée leaues of Caſtrabecca, ſtampe it, and drinke it in Renniſh wine, ale, or poſſet ale.
            
            
               Another.
               A litle quantity of 
                     〈◊〉
                   Helibor, grated and drunke in the like fort procureth vomit.
            
            
               A ſpeciall Vomit.
               Take two ounces of Oyle of Walunts, a ſpoonefull of the iuyce of Celandine, and halfe a ſpoonefull of the iuyce of Reddiſh rootes: Let not the party ſleep for two houres after, and in ſo dooing it is better then any purging.
            
            
               For purging.
               If the party be full of groſſe humors, let him blood, immediately vpon the right arme, on the Liuer vein or on the median veyn, in the ſame arm: ſo as no ſore appeare the firſt day.
            
            
               
               A very wholſome purge.
               Put into the pap of an apple, a ſixepennie weight of Aloes, and ſo take it: or the pils of Rufus.
            
            
               A wholſome water to be diſtilled.
               Steep ſorrell in vineger, foure and twentie houres, then take it out and drie it with a linen doth, then ſtill it in a Limbecke, drinke foure ſpoonfuls with a little ſugar, then walke vpon it till you ſweat if you may: if not, keep your bed and ſweat vpon it. Vſe this before ſupper on anie euening.
               If the patient happen to be troubled with any ſwellings, Botches, Carbuncles, or Gods tokens: let him ſweat moderatelie now and then.
            
            
               Outward medicines to ripen the ſore.
               Take the roote of a white Lillie, roaſt it in a good handfull of ſorrell, ſtampe it and applie it thereto very hot, let it lie four and twentie houres, and it wil break the ſore,
            
            
               Another.
               Take of old ſwineſ-greaſe ſalted, two ounces, with the yolke of an egge, and two handfulles of Scabias, ſtampe them togither, and laie it warme to the ſore.
            
            
               Another.
               Take a ſmall quantitie of leauen, a handful of mallowes, a little quantitie of Scabias, cut a white Onion into pieces, with halfe a dozen heads of garlicke, boile theſe together in running water, make a poullus of it and then lay it hot to the ſore.
            
            
               Another.
               The like may be made of two handfuls of Valerian, three rootes of Danwort, and a handfull of ſmalledge, ſeeth them in ſhéepes ſuet and Roſe water, with a few

crums of bread, and apply it hot to the ſore.
            
            
               Another.
               Take a hot Loafe, new taken forth of the Ouen, apply it to the ſore, and it will doubtleſſe breake the ſame but afterward bury the ſame loafe déep inough in the ground, for feare of any infection: for if either dog or amy other thing do féede thereon it, will infect a great many.
            
            
               Other Obſeruations.
               Let the ſicke and infected perſons bee ſeperated and kept from the whole, vntill the ſore be healed: but generally let them be kept within the ſpace of a month.
            
            
               For a Fume.
               Take a new burnt Bricke, & heate it red hote, then put it into a Baſon of Vineger, and let the fume therof aſcend into your houſes.
            
            
               For Ayring Apparrell.
               Let the apparrel of the diſeaſed perſons, be wel and often waſhed, be it linnen or wollen: or let it be ayred in the Sunne, or ouer pans of fire, or ouer a Chaſingdiſh of Coales, & fume the ſame with Frankenſence Iuniper, or dryed Roſe-mary.
            
            
               A perfect good Plaiſter for the Cure of the ſore after it is broken.
               Take vnwróght Waxe, white Turpentine, the yolke of an Egge, a little freſh butter, & a quantity of Engliſh honny, boile all theſe together to a ſalue, and apply it to the ſore, béeing thin ſpread vpon a cloth, in manner of an ordinarie Playſter.
            
            
               
               Additions.
               To preſerue from the Infection of the Plague.
               Take Garlicke péele it and mince it ſmall, put it into new milke and eate it faſting.
            
            
               To take the infection from a houſe infected.
               Take large Oynions, péele them, and lay thrée or foure of them vpon the ground, let them lie ten daies, & thoſe pieled Oynions will gather all the infection into them that is one of thoſe Roomes: but burie theſe Oynions afterward déepe in the ground.
            
            
               Another.
               Take new milke and ſet it in a Baſon in the middle of the infected Roomes, and the milke will draw the infectious vapour into it, letting it ſtand two daies in the ſaide Roome,
            
            
               Againſt the new burning Feuer.
               If the Patient be in a great heat as moſt commonly they wil, take of faire running water a prety quantity put it on a Chaſingdiſh of Coles, then put thereinto a good quantity of Saunders beaten to powder: and let it boyle halfe an houre betwene two diſhes: that done put a couple of ſoft linnen clothes into the diſh, wet the clothes well in water and Saunders, and apply the ſame ſo hote as you can ſuffer it to your bely.
            
            
               
               To drinke for the whot Feuer.
               Take two handfull of Sorrell, and a handfull of Violet leaues with a bunch of ſowre Graps, beat them together ſtalkes and all: then ſtraine it into Butter-milke, then make a poſſet of the ſame Butter-milke, and let the Patient drinke thereof ſo much as he will.
            
            
               To procureſleepe to the ſicke Perſons that are diſeaſed either with the Plague or the hote Feuer.
               Take of a womans Breaſt-milke a good quantiti, put therunto of the like quantity of Aqua-vite, ſtir them well together, and moyſten therewith the Temples of the Patient and his Noſthrils, lay it on with ſome feather, or ſome fine thin ragge.
               Butter-milke in this contagious time is generally holſome to be eaten, and is a good Preſeruatiue againſt either the Plague or the peſtilent Feuer.
            
            Finis.
         
      
   