
      
         
            
            
            The copy of certain
lettres sent to the Quene, and also to
doctour Martin and doctour Storye,
by the most Reuerende father in
God, Thomas Cranmer Archebishop
of Cantorburye from prison in
Oxeforde: who (after long and most
greuous strayt emprisoning and cruell
handlyng) most constauntly
and willingly suffred Martirdome
ther, for the true
testimonie of Christ,
in Marche▪
1556.
            Psal 119.
            I spake of thy testimonies (O Lorde)
euen before Kinges, and was
not confounded.
         
         
            
            To the reader.
            THe Lorde of lyght lyghten thyne eyes, to se
the thyng that is right, & geue the an hearte
to obeye the same, Amen. Thou mayest (good
reader) besydes the open tyrannye, as in a glasse,
playnly see in these lettres, that the popishe kingdome
is the kingdome of faces (that is, the myghtye
Antichrist that Daniel wryteth of) yf thou consydre
only, what face of iustice (in most open iniustice)
it maketh towarde the most mylde Moses,
Thomas Crāmer that most worthy Archebishop
of Cantorbury. He cyteth him to appeare to make
answere at Rome, geuing hym .lxxx. dayes respite,
for his appearaunce there. Is this any thing but
a face of iustice? as thoughe the court of Rome
wolde condemne no man, before he answered for
him selfe, as bothe lawe and equitie require? But
the very same instaunt tyme, Antichristes holynesse
(contrary to that visoured iustice) sent his commissiō
vnto that periured beastly Brockes B. of Gloucestre,
to degrade and depriue him of his dignitie.
Which thing he did, not only before the .lxxx. dayes
were ended, but before ther were .iiij. of thē spent.
Furthermore wher as the sayd most reuerende father
was fast deteyned in most greuous and strayt
prison, so as he coulde not appeare (which thing
was notorious both in Englande, and also in the
Romishe court) and therfore had a lawfull and
most iuste excuse of his absence, by al lawes, euen
popishe and other: yet at Rome in the ende of the
sayd .lxxx. dayes, was that mylde good mā decreed
Cont
                  •
               max: that is, sturdely, frowardly, and wilfully
absent. And in payne of the same his absence, cō
               demned:
and in fyne most cruelly and mercyleslye
martyred (alas for pytie) euen by the ministerie of
them, for whose soules sauegarde, he put him selfe
to that hasarde, and gaue his lyfe. Consydre therfore
(I praye thee) howe the shauen hipocrites
with their complices haue rolled the Quenes maiestie
in wilfull murther by their wynking wyles.

For what is it but wilfull murther to cause a man
to be cyted, and yet to detayne him still in fast prison,
knowing his absence to be his condemnaciō.
Considre also what manifest periurie and tyrannye
they haue wrapped not the Quene alone, but
with her the hole realme of Englande in. For
which the indignacion of God is so prouoked,
that he can not longer forbeare to
plage, as he hathe begonne alreadye
                  •
               
and wyl (no doubt) procede
onles spedy repentaūce
folowe. The
Lorde vttre
their falseh
                  •
               d
and
treason.
AMEN▪
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               Tharchebish▪ of Cantorburies
letters to the Quenes highnesse.
               IT maye please your maiestie to
perdone my presūpciō, yt I dare
be so bolde to wryt to your highnesse.
But very necessitie cōstrayneth
me, that your maiestie may
knowe my mynde rather by myne
owne writing, than by other mennes
reportes. So it is yt vpon Saturdaye
being the .7. daye of this moneth, I
was cited to appeare at Rome, ye .lxxx.
daye after, ther to make answer to
suche maters, as should be obiected against
me, vpon the behalfe of the
king and your most excellent maiestie:
which maters the Thursday folowing
were obiected against me by
Doctour Martin, and D. Storie your
maiesties proctours, before the bishop
of Gloucestre, sittyng in iudgement
by Commissiō from Rome. But alas,
it can not but greue the heart of any
natural subiecte, to be accused of the
king and Quene of his owne realme:
& specially before an outward iudge,
or by autoritie comming frō any person

out of this Realme. Wher the kīg
and Quene, as they were subiectes
within their owne realme, shall complayne,
and requyre iustice at a straū
                  gers
handes against their owne subiecte,
being allready condemned to
deathe by their owne lawes. As
though the king & Quene coulde not
doo or haue iustice wtin their owne
realmes, against their owne subiectes,
but they must seke it at a straungers
handes in a straunge lande. The
like wherof (I thinke) was neuer
sene. I wolde haue wished to haue
had some meaner aduersaries: and I
thinke, that deathe shall not greue me
muche more, than to haue my most
dradde and most gracious souerayne
Lorde and lady (to whom vnder God
I doo owe all obedience) to be myne
accusers in iudgement,The furst cause why tharchebish. wolde not make answer to the popes comissary, is to auoide periury within their
owne realme, before any straunger
& outwarde power. But for asmuche
as in the tyme of the prince of most famous
memorie king Henry the .8. your
graces father, I was sworne neuer
to consent, that the bishop of Rome
should haue or exercise any autorite or
iurisdiciō in this realme of Englāde.
Therfore least I should alowe his autoritie

contrary to myne othe, I refused
to make answer to the B. of Gloucestre
sittyng here in iudgement by ye
popes autoritie, least I should renne
in to periurie.
               An other cause why I refused the
Popes autoritie is this:The .2. cause is that the popes Lawes are contrary to the crowne & lawes of Englande. that his autororitie
(as he claymeth it) repugneth
to the crowne imperiall of this
realme, and to the lawes of the same,
which euery true subiecte is boū
                  den
to defende. Furst so that the pope
sayeth, that all maner of power aswel
temporal as spirituall, is geuen furst
to him of God. And yt ye tēporal al power
he geueth vnto emperours & kinges,
to vse it vnder him:The crowne & temporal power is takē immediatly frō God But so as it be alwayes
at his cōmaundemēt & becke.
               But contrary to this clayme, the
emperial crowne and iurisdicion temporal
of this realme is taken immediatly
from God, to be vsed vnder him
only, and is subiecte vnto non, but to
God alone.The othe of the king and iustices and the duety of Subiectes.
               
               Moreouer themperiall lawes and
customes of thys realme the king in
his Coronacion, and all Iustices whā
they receaue their offices, be sworne,
and all the hole realme is bounden to
defende and mayntene. But contrary

hereunto the Pope by his autoritie
maketh voyde and commaundeth to
blotte out of our bokes, all lawes and
customes being repugnaunt to his
lawes: And declareth accursed all
rulers & gouernours, all the makers,
wrytours, and executours of suche lawes
or customes: as it appeareth by
many of the popes lawes, wherof one
or two I shal rehearse. In ye decrees,
Distinct. 10. is written thus: Constitutiones
contra Canones & decreta praesulum Romanorū
vel bonos mores nullius sunt momenti. That is.
The constituciones or statutes enacted
against the canones and decrees of the
bishoppes of Rome or their good customes,
are of non effecte. Also.
               Extra de sententia excommunicationis,
Nouerit: Excommunicamus omnes haereticos
vtrius
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sexus, quocun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nomine censeantur,
& fautores & receptatores & defensores
eorum: nec non & qui de caetero
seruari fecerint statuta aedita & consuetudines
contra ecclesiae libertatem, nisi ea de
capitularibus suis intra duos menses post
huiusmodi publicationem sententiae fecerint
am
                     •
                  ueri. Item excommunicamus statutarios,
& scriptores statutorū ipsorū, necnon

potestates, consules, rectores, & conciliarios
locorum, vbi de caetero huiusmodi
statuta & cōsuetudines aeditae fuerint vel
seruatae: necnon & illos qui secundum ea
praesumpserint iudicare, vel in publicam
formam scribere iudicata.
               That is to saye: We excōmunicat
all heretikes of bothe sexes, what name
so euer they be called by: and their fauourers
and receptours, & defendours:
and also them that shall hereafter cause
to be obserued statutes and customes
made against the libertie of the church,
except they cause the same to be put out
of theyr bokes or recordes within two
monethes after the publicacion of this
sentence. Also we excommunicate the
statute makers and wrytours of those
statutes, and all the potestates, cōsules,
gouernours & counsaillours of places,
wher suche statutes and customes shall
be made or kept: & also those that shall
presume to geue iudgement according
to them, or to wryte in to publike forme
the maters so iudged.Other the popes lawes be vnlauful, or els all England is accursed.
               
               Now by these lawes, if the bishop
of Romes autoritie which he claymeth
by God, be lawfull: all your graces

lawes and customes of your realme,
being contrary to the popes lawes, be
naught. And aswell your maiestie as
your iudges, Iustices and all other
executours of the same, stande accursed
among heritikes, which God forbidde.
And yet this curse can neuer
be auoided (if ye pope haue suche power
as he claymeth) vntil suche tymes,Note wherin the popes lawes and the lawes of Englande do varye.
as the lawes and customes of this
realme (being contrary to his lawes)
be taken awaye and blotted out of the
lawe bokes. And although ther be many
lawes of this realme contrary to
the lawes of Rome, yet I named but
a fewe: as to conuicte a clearke before
any temporall iudge of this realme,
for debte, felonye, murther, or for any
other tryme: which clearkes by the
popes lawes, be so exempte from the
kinges lawes, yt they can be no wher
sued, but before their ordinarie. Also
the pope by his lawes maye geue all
Bishoprikes and benefices spirituall,
which by the lawes of this realme, cā be
geuen but only by the king and other
patrons of the same, except they
fall in to the lapse.
               By the popes lawes Ius patronat
                        •••
                     
                  
shalbe sued only before the ecclesiasticall

iudge. But by the lawes of this
realme, it shalbe sued before the temporal
iudges. And to be shorte, ye lawes
of this realme doo agree with the popes
lawes, like fyre and water. And
yet the kinges of this realme haue prouided
for their lawes, by the Praemunire:
so that if any man haue let the execucion
of the lawes of this realme, by any
autoritie from the sea of Rome, he
falleth in to the Praemunire. But to mete
with this, the popes haue prouided for
their lawes by cursing. For who so euer
letteth the popes lawes to haue
full course within this realme, by the
popes power standeth accursed. So yt
the Popes power treadeth al ye lawes
& customes of this realme vnder his
fete: cursing al that execute them, vntil
suche tyme as they geue place vnto
his lawes. But it maye be sayed, that
notwithstāding all the popes decrees,
yet we doo execute still the lawes and
customes of this realme. Naye not al
quietly without interruption of the
pope. And wher we do execute them,
yet we doo it vniustely (if the Popes
power be of force) and for ye same we
stande excōmunicate, and shall do, vntill
we leaue thexecucion of our owne

lawes and customes.
               Thus we be wel reconciled to Rome,Marke this wel.
allowing suche autoritie, wherby
the realme standeth accursed before
God, yf the Pope haue any suche autoritie.
               These thinges (as I suppose) were
not fully opened in the parliament
house, whan the Popes autoritie was
receaued agayne within this realme.
For yf they had, I do not beleue, that
either the Kyng or Quenes Maiestie
or the nobles of this realme, or the cō
                  mons
of the same wolde euer haue cō
                  sented
to receaue agayne suche a forain
autoritie, so iniurious, hurtful, &
preiudiciall aswell to the crowne, as
to the lawes and customes, and state
of this realme: as wherby they muste
nedes acknowlege them selues to be
accursed.The duety of the cleargye neclected in the parliament. But none could opē this mater
wel, but ye cleargie, & that suche of
them as had redde the Popes lawes,
wherby the Pope hath made himself,
as it were a God. These seke to mayntene
the pope, whom they desyred to
haue their chief head, to thintent they
myght haue as it were a kingdome &
lawes within them selues, distincte
from the lawes of the crowne, & wher

with the crowne may not medle. And
so being exēpt frō ye lawes of the realme,
myght lyue in this realme, lyke
lordes & kynges, wtout damage or fear
of any mā, so yt they please their highe
and supreme head at Rome. For this
consideracion (I wene) some yt knewe
the truthe, helde their peace at the parliament:
wher as yf they hade done
their dueties to the crowne and hole
realme, they should haue opened their
mouthes, declared the truthe, and shewed
the periles and daungers, that
myght ensue to the crowne and realme.
And yf I should agree to allowe
suche autoritie within this realme,
wherby I must nedes confesse, that
your most gracious hyghnes and also
your realme should euer continue
accursed, vntyll you shall ceasse from
thexecucion of your owne lawes and
customes of your realme: I coulde
not thynke my selfe true, eyther to
your hyghnesse, or to this my natural
countrey, knowing ye I do knowe.
Ignoraunce (I knowe) may excuse other
men:Note. but he that knoweth howe
preiudicial and iniurious the power &
autoritie (which he chalengeth euery

where) is to the crowne, lawes and customes
of this realme, and yet wyl allowe
the same: I can not see in any
wyse, how he can kepe his due allegeaūce,The .3. cause why he could not allowe the Pope. The popes religion is against Christes religion
fidelitie, and truth to the crowne
and state of this realme.
               An other cause I alleged, why I
could not allowe the autoritie of the
pope, which is this. That by his autoritie
he subuerteth not only the lawes
of this realme, but also ye lawes of god
So that who soeuer be vnder his autoritie,
he suffreth them not to be vnder
Christes religiō purely, as Christ
did commaūde. And for one example
I brought furthe: that wher as by
Goddes lawes, all christian people be
boūden diligētly to learne his worde,
that they maye knowe, howe to beleue
& lyue accordingly. And for that
purpose be ordayned holy dayes, whā
they ought (leauyng aparte all other
businesse) to geue them selues holly to
knowe & serue God.why latin seruice ought not to be restored in Englande. Therfore Goddes
will & cōmaūdement is, that whā
the people be gathered together, ye ministers
shoulde vse suche language, as
the people may vnderstāde, & take profite
therby, or elles holde their peace.
For as an harpe or lute, yf it geue no

certain sounde, that me maye knowe,
what is striken, who can daunce after
it, for all the sounde is in vayne?
so is it vayne and profiteth nothing
(sayeth almightie God, by the mouth
of S. Paule) if the priest speake to the
people in a language which they
knowe not. For elles he maye profite
him selfe, but profiteth not ye people,
sayeth S. Paule.
               But herein I was answered thus:
that S. Paule spake only of preachīg,
that the preacher should speake in a
tongue which the people did knowe:
or elles his preaching auaileth nothing.
This I wolde haue spoken, &
could not be suffred. But if the preaching
auaileth nothing, being spoken
in a language, which the people vnderstande
not: how should any other
seruice auaile them, being spoken in
the same language? And yet S. Paule
ment not only of preaching, it appeareth
playnly by his owne wordes.
For he speaking by name expressely
of prayeng, singing, lauding, and
thanking of God, and of all other
thinges which the priestes saye in
the churches, wherunto the people
saye Amen: which they vsed not in

preachīg, but in other diuine seruice:
that whether the priestes rehearse the
wonderfull workes of God, or the
great benefites of God vnto mankynde
aboue all other creatures: or
geue thankes vnto God, or make opē
profession of their faithe, or humble
confession of their synnes, wt earnest
request of mercie and forgeuenesse:
or make sute or request vnto God, for
any thing: that than all the people vnderstanding
what the priestes saye,
might geue theyr myndes and voices
with them, and saye, Amen. That is
to saye, allowe what the priestes saye,
that the rehearsal of Goddes vniuersal
workes and benefites, the geuing
of thankes, the profession of faithe, the
confessiō of synnes, and the requestes
and peticions of the priestes and the
people might ascende vp into the
eares of God altogether, and be as
a swete sauour, odour, & incense in his
nose, & thus was it vsed many hūdred
yeares after Christes ascension. But
thaforesaid thinges can not be done,
whā the priestes speake to yt people in
a language not knowen. And so they
(or their clearke in their name) saye
Amen▪ but they cā not tel whervnto:

Wher as S. Paule sayeth, how can ye
people saye Amen to thy well sayeng,
whan they vnderstande not what
thow sayest. And thus was S. Paule
vnderstanden of al interpretours bothe
Grekes and latines, olde & newe,
schole autors and others, that I haue
redde, vntil about xxx. yeares past. At
which tyme one Eckius with other of
his sorte, begāne to deuise a newe exposicion,
vnderstanding S. Paule of
preaching only. But whan a good
nomber of the best learned men reputed
within this realme, som fauourīg
the olde, som the newe learning, as
they terme it (wher in dede that which
they cal the olde, is the newe: and that
which they call the newe, is in dede ye
olde) but whan a great nomber of
suche learned men of bothe sortes
were gathered together at mynsor,
                  The papistes can saye yea and naye to one thīg with one breathe. for
the reformacion of the seruice of the
church: It was agreed by bothe wtout
controuersie (not one saieng cōtrary)
that the seruice of the churche ought
to be in the mother tongue: and that
S. Paule in the xiiij. chap. to the Corinthianes
was so to be vnderstanden. And
so is S. Paule to be vnderstanden in
the ciuile lawe more than a thousaūt

yeares paste: where Iustinianus (a most
godly Emperour) in a synode writeth
on this maner. Iubemus vt omnes episcopi
pariter & presbiteri non tacito modo,
sed clara voce quae a fideli populo exaudiantur,
Sacram oblationem & praeces in
sacro baptismate adhibitas celebrent, quo
maiori exinde deuotione in depromendis
Domini Dei laudibus audientium animi
efferantur. Ita enim & Diuus Paulus docet
in epistola ad Corinth. Si solūmodo benedicat
spiritus, quomodo is qui priuati
locum tenet, dicet ad gratiarum actionem
tuam, Amen? Quandoquidem quid dicas
nō videt. Tu quidem pulchrè gratias agis,
alter 
                        ••
                     tem non aedificatur.
               
               ☞ That is to saye: We cōmaunde, that
all Bishoppes and priestes celebrate the
holy oblacion and prayers vsed in holy
Baptisme, not after a still close maner,
but with a cleare loude voice, that they
maye be playnly hearde of the faythfull
people, so as the hearers myndes maye
be lyfted vp therby with the greater deuocion,
in vttring the prayses of the
Lorde God. For so Paule teacheth also
in the epistle to the Corinthians. Yf the
spirite do only blesse (or saye well) howe

shal he that occupieth the place of a priuate
person, saye Amen to thy thankes
geuing? For he perceaueth not what
thou sayest. Thou doest geue thankes
well, but the other is not edified.
               And not only the ciuile lawe and al
other writours a thousaunt and fyue
hundred yeares continually together
haue expounded S. Paule not of preaching
onely, but of other seruice sayde
in the churche, but also reason geueth
the same, that yf men be commaūded
to heare any thing, it must be spoken
in a language which the hearers vnderstande,The pope commaundeth bothe against God and natural reason.
or elles as S. Paule sayeth,
what auayleth it to heare? So that the
Pope geuing a contrary cōmaundement,
that the people commyng to the
churche shal hear they wote not what,
& shall answer they knowe not where
vnto, taketh vpon him to cōmaunde
not only against reason,The Sacrament ought to be receaued in bothe kyndes of all christianes. but also directly
against God.
               And agayn I said, wher as our saueour
Christ ordayned the sacrament
of his most precious bodye and blood
to be receaued of all christian people
vnder the formes bothe of bread and
wyne, & said of the cuppe, Drynke ye al
of this: the pope geueth a cleane contrary

cōmaundemēt, that no lay men
shal drynke of the cuppe of their saluacion:
as though the cuppe of saluacion
by the blood of Christ, perteined not to
laye men. And wher as Theophilus Alexandrinus
(whose workes S. Ierome did
translate about .xi. hundred yeares
past) sayeth, that yf Christ had ben crucified
for the deuilles, his cuppe should
not be denyed them. Yet the Pope denyeth
the cup of Christ to christiā people,
for whō Christ was crucified. So
that if I should obey the pope in these
thinges, I must nedes disobey my saueour
Christ.Marke wel. But I was answered
herunto as cōmōly the papistes do answer,
yt vnder ye forme of bread is hole
Christes fleshe & blood: so that whosoeuer
receaueth ye forme of bread, receaueth
aswel Christes blood as his flesh.
Let it be so. Yet in the forme of breade
only, Christes blood is not dronken,
but eaten: nor is receaued in the cuppe
in the forme of wyne, as Christ commaūded:
but eaten wt the fleshe vnder
the forme of bread. And moreouer the
bread is not ye sacrament of his blood,
but of his fleshe onely: nor the cuppe
is not the sacrament of his fleshe, but
of his blood onely.
               
                  
And so the pope kepeth from all laye
persones the sacramēt of their redēpcion
by Christes blood, whiche Christ
commaundeth to be geuen vnto thē.
               And furthermore Christ ordayned
the sacrament in two kyndes, the one
seperated from the other, to be a representacion
of his deathe, wher his
blood was separated from his fleshe,
which is not represēted in one kynde
alone. So that the laye people receaue
not the hole sacrament, wherby Christes
deathe is represented, as he commaunded.
               Moreouer as the pope taketh vpō
him to geue the temporall sworde, or
royall and Imperiall power to kynges
and princes, so dothe he likewise
take vpon hym to depose them from
their Imperiall states, yf they be
disobedient to him: and commaundeth
the subiectes to disobeye their
princes, assoiling the subiectes aswell
of their obedience, as of their laufull
othes made vnto their true kynges &
princes directly contrary to Goddes
commaundement, who cōmaundeth
all subiectes to obey their kinges, or
their rulers vnder them. One Iohan
Patriarke of Constātinopole in the tyme

of saint Gregorie claymed superioritie
aboue all other bishoppes. To
whom Saint Gregorie writeth, that
therin he did iniurie to his three brethren,
which were equal with hym: yt
is to saye, the Bishop of Rome, the bishop
of Alexandria, and of Antiochia:
which three were patriarchal seas, as
well as Constantinopole, and were
brethren one to an other. But (sayeth
saynt Gregorie) Yf any one shall exalte
him self aboue all the rest, to be the vniuersal
bishop, the same passeth in pride.
But now the Bis. of Rome exalteth
him self, not only aboue al bishoppes,
but also aboue all kinges and Emperours,
and aboue all the hole worlde:
taking vpon him to geue and take awaye,
to set vp and put downe, as he
shall thinke good.The deuil and the pope are like. And as the Deuil
hauing no such autoritie, yet toke vpō
him to geue vnto Christ all the kingdomes
of ye world, if he wold fal down
& worship him: in like maner the pope
taketh vpon hym to geue empires &
kingdomes (being non of his) to suche
as will fall downe and worship him,
and kysse his fete. And moreouer his
lawers and glosers so flattre him, that
they feyne he maye commaunde emperours

and kinges to holde his styrrop,
whan he lighteth vpō his horse,
and to be his fotemen. And that if any
emperour or king geue hym any thīg,
they geue him nothing, but that is his
owne. And that he maye dispense against
Goddes worde, against bothe
the olde and newe testament, against
saynt Paules epistles, and against the
Gospel. And furthermore whatsoeuer
he dothe, although he drawe innumerable
people by heapes with him selfe
in to hell: Yet maye no mortal man reproue
him: bicause he being iudge of
all men, maye be iudged of no man.
And thus he sytteth in the temple of
God,The pope is Antichrist, that is, Christes enemye. as he were a God, and nameth
him self Goddes vicare: And yet he dispenseth
against God. If this be not to
playe Antichristes parte, I can not tel
what is Antichrist: which is no more
to saye, but Christes enemy & aduersary:
who shall syt in the temple of god
aduaunceing hym self aboue all other:
yet by hipocrisie and feyned religion
shall subuerte the true religiō of
Christ. And vnder pretense and colour
of christian religion shall worke
against Christ,wherfore the pope is 
                        •
                     ichrist. and therfore hathe the
name of Antichrist. Now if any man
lifte him selfe higher than the Pope

hathe done, who lifteth hym selfe aboue
all the world: or can be more aduersarye
to Christ, 
                     •
                  an to dispense against
Goddes lawes, & wher Christ
hathe geuē any commaundement, to
commaunde directly the contrary: yt
mā must nedes be takē for Antichrist.
But vntill the tyme that suche a persō
may be foūde, mē maye easily coniecture,
wher to fynde Antichrist.
               Wherfore seing the pope thus (to
ouerthrowe bothe Goddes lawes &
mannes lawes) taketh vpon hym, to
make emperours and kynges to be
vassailes and subiectes vnto hym, &
specially the crowne of this realme,
with the lawes and customes of the
same: I see no meane, how I maye cō
                  sente
to admyt this vsurped power
within this realme,Note this conclusion cotrary to myne
othe, myne obediēce to Goddes lawe,
myne allegeaunce & duetie to your
maiestie, & my loue & affection to this
realme. This that I haue spoken against
the power and autoritie of the
pope,The causes why the Archebishop spake & wrote thus I haue not spoken (I take God
to record and iudge) for any malice I
owe to ye popes persō, whom I knowe
not, but I shal praye to God to geue
him grace, that he maye seke aboue

all thinges to ꝓmote Goddes honour
and glorie, and not to folowe ye trade
of his p̄decessours in these later daies.
Nor I haue not spoken it for feare of
punishemēt & to auoide ye same, thinkīg
it rather an occasiō to aggrauate
thā to diminish my trouble: but I haue
spokē it for my most boūdē duety to
yt crowne, liberties, lawes & customes
of this realme of Englād, but most specially
to discharge my cōsciēce in vttering
ye truthe to goddes glorie, casting
awaye al feare, by ye comfort which I
haue in Christ, who sayeth: Feare not
them that kill the body, and can not kill
the soule: but feare him that can cast bothe
body & soule in to hell fyre. He that
for feare to lose this life, will forsake
the truthe, shall lose the euerlasting
life. And he that for the truthes sake
will spende his life, shal fynde euerlasting
life. And Christ ꝓmyseth to stāde
fast with thē before his father, which
will stande faste wt him here. Which
cōfort is so great, yt whosoeuer hathe
his eies fixed vpon Christ, can not
greatly passe on this life, knowing
that he maye be sure to haue Christ
stande by him, in the presence of his
father in heauen.
               
                  
And as touching ye Sacrament,The sacrament. I
sayed: Forasmuche as the hole mater
standeth in ye vnderstanding of these
wordes of Christ, This is my body,
This is my blood: I sayed, that Christ
in these wordes made demonstracion
of ye bread & wyne, and spake figuratiuely,
calling bread his bodye, & wyne
his blood: bicause he ordayned them
to be sacramētes of his body & blood.
And wher ye papistes say in those two
pointes cōtrary vnto me, yt Christ called
not bread his body, but a substaūce
vncertayn, nor spake figuratiuely:
Herein I sayed, I wolde be iudged by
the olde churche. And which doctrine
could be proued the elder, that I wold
stāde vnto. And forasmuche as I haue
alleged in my boke many olde autors
bothe Grekes & latines, which about
a thousaunt yeares after Christ continually
taught as I doo: if they could
bring furthe but one olde autor, that
sayeth in these two poyntes, as they
saye: I offred vj. or vij. yeares agoo, &
doo offre yet still, yt I will geue place
vnto them. But whan I bring furthe
any autor that sayeth in most playne
termes as I doo, yet sayeth the other
partie, that the autors ment not so: as
who shoulde saye, that ye autors spake

one thing, and ment cleane contrary.
And vpon the other parte, whan they
can not fynde any one autor, that sayeth
in wordes, as they saye, yet saye
they, that the autors mēt as they saye.
Now whether I or they speake more
to the purpose herein, I referre me to
the iudgemet of al indifferēt hearers.
Yea the olde churche of Rome aboue
a thousaunt yeares together, neither
beleued nor vsed the Sacrament, as ye
church of Rome hathe done of late yeares.
For in the beginning ye churche of
Rome taught a pure and a sounde doctrine
of the sacrament. But after that
the churche of Rome fell in to a newe
doctrine of transubstanciacion: wt the
doctrine they chaunged the vse of the
sacrament, contrary to that Christ
commaunded, and the olde churche
of Rome vsed aboue a thousaunt
yeares. And yet to deface the olde,
they saye that the newe is the olde:
wherin for my parte, I am content
to the tryall of stande.The papistes make Christ two bodies. But their doctrine
is so fonde and vncomfortable,
that I maruail, that any man wold
allowe it, if he knewe what it is. But
what so euer they beare the people in
hande, that which they wryte in their

bokes hathe nother truthe nor cōfort.
For by their doctrine, of one body of
Christ is made two bodies: one natural,
hauing distaunce of membres wt forme
and proporcion of a mans perfite
body, and this body is in heauen.
               But the body of Christ in the sacramēt,
by their owne doctrine, must nedes
be a monstrous body, hauing neither
distaūce of membres, nor forme,
facion, or proporcion of a mannes naturall
body. And suche a body is in the
sacrament, teache they: and goth in to
the mouthe with the forme of bread,
and entreth no farther thā the forme
of bread gothe: nor tarieth no longer
than the forme of bread is by natural
heat in digesting. So that whan the
forme of bread is digested, that body
of Christ is gone.Marke.
               
               And forasmuche as euil men be
as long in digesting as good men, the
body of Christ (by their doctrine) entreth
as farre, and tarieth as long in
wicked men, as in godly men. And
what cōfort can be herein to any christian
men, to receaue Christes vnshapen
body, & it to entre no farther than
the stomacke, and to departe by & by,
as sone as the bread is consumed?
               
                  
It semeth to me a more sounde & cō
                  fortable
doctrine,The sounde true doctrine of the Sacrament. that Christ hath but
one body, & that hathe forme & faciō of
a mannes true body: which body spiritually
entreth into the hole mā, bodye
& soule. And though the sacrament be
consumed, yet hole Christ remayneth,
& fedeth the receauer vnto eternal life,
if he cōtinue in godlynesse: & neuer departeth,
vntill ye receauer forsake him.
And as for the wicked, they haue not
Christ within them at al, who can not
be where Belial is. And this is my
fayth, and (as me semeth) a sounde doctrine,
according to goddes worde, &
sufficient for a christian to beleue in
that mater.That can they neuer doo. And if it can be shewed vnto
me, that the Popes autoritie is not
preiudicial to the thinges before mē
                  tioned:
or that my doctrine in ye sacrament
is erroneous (which I thinke
can not be shewed) than I was neuer
nor wilbe so peruerse, to stande wilfully
in myne owne opinion, but I shall
(with all humilitie) submitte my selfe
vnto the Pope,The bishop of Gloucestres periury. not only to kisse his
fete, but an other parte also.
               An other cause why I refused to take
the b. of Gloucestre for my iudge, was
the respecte of his owne person being

more than ones periured. Furst for
that he being diuerse tymes sworne,
neuer to consent that the B. of Rome
should haue any iurisdiciō within this
realme, but to take the king, & his successours
for supreme heades of this
realme, as by goddes lawes they be.
Contrary to that lawfull othe the said
B. sate than in iudgemēt by autoritie
from Rome, wherin he was periured,
and not worthy to syt as a iudge.
               The seconde periurie was, that he
toke his bishoprike bothe of ye Quenes
Maiestie & of ye Pope, making to eche
of them a solemne othe. Which othes
be so contrarie, that the one must nedes
be periured. And furthermore in
swearing to the pope,The B. of Gloucestre a traitor and an enemye to the realme. to maintene his
lawes, decrees, cōstitutiōs, ordinaūces
reseruaciōs, & prouisions he declareth
him selfe an enemy to the Imperial
crowne, & to the lawes & state of this
realme: wherby he declared him selfe
not worthy to syt as a iudge win this
realme. And for these cōsideraciōs
I refused to take him for my iudge.
            
            
               This was written in an other lettre
to the Quene.
               I Learned by D. Martin, that at the
daye of your Maiesties coronacion,

you toke an othe of obedience to the
pope of Rome. And yt same tyme you
toke an other othe to this realme, to
mayntene ye lawes, liberties, and customes
of ye same. And if your Maiestie
did make an othe to ye pope. I thinke
it was accordīg to ye other othes, which
he vseth to ministre to princes: which
is to be obedient to him, to defende
his person, to mayntene his autoritie,
honour, lawes, landes, & priuileges.
And if it be so (which I knowe not,
but by reporte) thā I beseche your maiestie,
to loke vpon your othe made to
the crowne & realme: & to expende and
weighe the two othes together, to see
how they do agre, & as your graces cō
                  science
shal geue you. For I am surely
persuaded, that willingly your Maiestie
will not offēde, nor doo against
your conscience for nothing.
               But I feare me,worthy othes wherby periury must nedes be cōmitted. that ther be contradictiones
in your othes, and that
those which should haue informed
your grace throughly, did not their
dueties therin. And if your Maiestie
pondre ye two othes diligently, I thīke
you shal perceaue, you were deceaued:
& than your hignesse maye vse ye mater,
as God shall put in your hearte.

Furthermore I am kept here frō cō
                  panie
of learned men, from bokes, frō
coūsail, from penne & inke, sauing at
this time to writ vnto your Maiestie:
which all were necessary for a man
being in my case. Wherfore I beseche
your maiestie, yt I maye haue suche of
these, as maye stande wt your Maiesties
pleasure.No, ye shalbe despeched nerer home. And as for myne appearaunce
at Rome, if your Maiestie wil
geue me leaue, I will appeare ther.
And I trust, that God shall put in my
mouthe, to defende his truthe ther, as
well as here. But I referre it holly to
your maiesties pleasure.
            
            
               To Doctour Martin, and Doctour
Storye.
               I Haue me commended vnto you.
And as I promysed, I haue sent
my lettres vnto the Quenes Maiestie
vnsigned: Praieng you to
signe thē & deliuer them wt al spede.
I might haue sent them by the

                     •
                  aryer soner, but not surer. But hearing
M. Balif saye, that he wolde
goo to yt court on Frydaye, I thought
him a meter messagier, to sende my
lettres by. For better is later and surer,
thā soner & neuer to be deliuered.

yet one thing I haue written to the
Quenes Ma. inclosed & sealed: which
I require you may be so deliuered, wt
out delay, & not be opened, vntill it be
deliuerd vnto her graces owne hādes.
I haue writtē al yt I remēbre I sayd,
except yt which I spake against ye B. of
Glou. owne person: which I thought
not mete to wryte. And in some places
I haue writtē more thā I said: which
I wolde haue answered to ye B. if you
wold haue suffred me. You promised
I should see mine answer to ye .xvi. articles,
yt I might correcte, amēde and
chaunge them, wher I thought good:
which your ꝓmyse you kept not. And
myne answer was not made vpon
myne othe,Martyn and Story promise breakers. nor repeted nor made in
Iudicio but extra iudiciū, as I ꝓtested: nor
to ye B. of Glou. as iudge, but to you ye
kynges & Quenes proctours. I trust
you deale syncerely with me without
fraude or crafte: & vse me as you wold
wishe to be vsed in like case your selues
Remember yt 
                  Qua mensura mensi fueritis,
eadam remetietur vobis. That is, what
measure you meate, ye same shalbe measured
to you agayne. Thus fare you
well. And God sende you his spirite
to induce you in to all truthe.
               
            
         
      
   