
      
         
            
            THE AMOROSE Songes, Sonets, and Elegies: Of M. ALEXANDER CRAIGE, Scoto-Britane.
            Imprinted at London by William White. 1606.
         
         
            
            
               Prima velim teneris intendat amoribus aetas,
               Et canat ad Cytharam noſtra camena ſuam.
            
            
               Molle meum Leuibus cor eſt penetrabile telis,
               Et ſemper cauſa eſt cur ego ſemper amo.
            
            
               Vitantur venti, pluuiae, vitantur, et eſtus,
               Non vitatur amor, mecum tumuletur oportet.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST GODLY, VERTVOVS, BEAVTIFVLL, and accompliſhed PRINCESSE, meritoriouſly dignified with all the Titles Religion, Vertue, Honor, Beautie can receiue, challenge, afforde, or deſerue; ANNA, by diuine prouidence, of Great Britane, France, and Ireland, Queene▪ ALEXANDER CRAIGE wiſheth all health, wealth, and royall felicitie.
            
               GReat Tamburlan cloaked his fantaſticall crueltie hee exerciſed on Lazars and Leprous men, with a fooliſhe kind of humanity, putting all he could find or heare of, to death,

(as he ſaid) to rid them from ſo painefull & miſerable a life: Though my Poyems (incomparably bountifull, incomparablie beautifull, and ſo peereleſſe Princeſſe) be painefull to me, and vnpleaſant to the delicat Lector; ſhall I with Tamburlan deſtroy them? or like a cruell Althea, conſume with fire the fatall Tree, kill mine owne Meleager, and ſo inhumanlie cut off mine owne birth? I gaue life to my Lines, and ſhall I now become their burreau? O liue my deformed Child, ſome other hand ſhall commit thee to Phaeton or Deucalions mercie, then mine: Though Anaxagoras reſolued to die; yet for Pericles his Maiſters ſake he tooke courage,

& liues. Your royall God-mother poore Rymes hath ſaued your life: yet am I not like Hercules, who th
                  ••
               w Ionius in the Sea, that by the violence of wind & waue the carkas might be caried to foraine ſhoares, for propagation of his fame. I hunt not for fame; nor print I thoſe Papers for prayſes, but to pleaſure your Princely eyes with varietie of my vaine inuentions▪ 
               Megabyſus going to viſit Apelles in his worke-houſe, ſtoode ſtill a long tim
                  •
                without ſpeaking one word, and then began to cenſure of Apelles works; of whom he receiued this rude & nipping checke So long as thou held thy peace, thou ſee
                  •
               medſt a wiſe man; but now thou haſ
                  •
               
               
ſpoke, and the wotſt Boy of my 
                  •
               oppe thinkes thee a foole. I am 
                  •
               old (diuine Ladie) to borrow thy bleſſed name, to beautifie my blotted Booke; and haue ſe
                  ••
                thoſe Poems, like Apelles Pictures through the world: nor doe I care (ſince it is your Princely pleaſure to protect them) the fooliſh iudgement of Megabyſus. Syrannes the Perſian Prince anſwered thoſe (who ſeemed to woonder why his negotiations ſucceeded ſo il, whē his diſcourſes were ſo wiſe) that he was onely maiſter of his Diſcourſes, but Fortune miſtris to the ſucces of his affaires. My Sonnets & Songes are (gracious Princeſſe) for the moſt part, full of complaints, ſorrow, and lamentations:

The reaſon is, I was maiſter of my Verſes; but Fortune Miſtris of my Rewards. When Thetis courted Iupiter, and when the Lecedemonians ſende Legates to the Athenians, they put them not in minde of the good they had done them, but of the benefites they had receiued of them. Your Maieſties munificens, and frequent benefites beſtowed vpon mee, haue headlong impelled mee to propine this worthleſſe worke to your Royall view. Happie beyonde the meaſure of my merit ſhall I bee, if I can purchaſe this portion of your Princely approbation, as to accept and entertaine theſe triuiall toyes (where your Grace ſhall ſmell Flowes to refreſh,

Hearbes to cure, and Weedes to be auoyded) in the loweſt degree of leaſt fauour. But howſoeuer, wiſhing your Highnes as many happie yeares, as there be wordes in my Verſes, and Verſes in my worthles Volume: I am
            
               Your Maieſties moſt obſequious Orator, Alexander Craige, Scoto-Britan.
            
         
         
            
            Epiſtle generall to Idea, Cynthia, Lithocardia, Kala, Erantina, Lais, Pandora, Penelopae.
            
               
                  ZEuxis painted a Childe bearing Vine clusters in his hand ſo perfectly, that the Fowles of the ayre were deceiued, & deſcended thereto in vaine: But angrie at his worke, he cry'd out, I haue painted the Cluſters more liuely then the Child, and the burthen better then the bearer; for had the Child ſeemed as vine as the Vine Grapes, the Fowles had bin affraied at his face. I haue in theſe amorous Sonets and Songes matchles Idea, virtuous Cynthia, graue Lithocardia, ſweete Kala, louely Erantina, laſciuious Lais, modeſt Pandora, liberall Penelopae, painted my Loue; but haue (allaſſe) taken more paines on the Paſsions, then the Poyems; and more

worke on my woes, then the Verſes. But had my Lines been as liuely as either they ſhould, or I wiſh they had been. No Momus affraide at the beautie of my Verſes, had preſum'd (to my diſgrace) to gather the Grapes of my Errors. Nor had I needed (which neceſsarily I muſt doe) to employ the Patrocinie of your protections. Were I an other Hercules, I could not cut off all the hiſsing heads of Hydra: & were I as perfect a Painter as Apelles, ſome ſawſie Souter ſhall cenſure aboue the Sho
                  •
               . But with Agatharchus (who did all in haſte) I humbly craue at all your handes (which with all reuerence, and analogike ſeruice I kiſſe) and looke you will excuſe
            
               Your louing, but rude Zeuxis.
               
               
                  A. C. Banfa-Britan.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            
               
                  SMyrnean Maeonides vſed in his delicate Poems diuers Dialects, as Ionic, Aeolic, Attic, and Doric: So haue I (O courteous Reader) in this; and but alaſse in this, imitate that renowned Helleniſt Homer, in vſing the Scotiſh and Engliſh Dialectes: the one as innated, I can not forget; the other as a ſtranger, I can not vpon the ſodaine acquire. The ſubtile Merchant placed Aeſop in the middle betwixt Cantor and Grammaticus, that by the interpoſition of that deformed fabulator, the other two might appeare the fayrer. So haue I in middest of my modeſt Affections, committed to the Preſſe my vnchaſt Loue to Lais, that contraries by conttraries, and Ʋertue by Vice, more cleerely may ſhine. To each (courteous Reader) that will both of this & that mixtture of Ditties and Dialects, courteouſly cenſure, I am but end to the fatall end,
            
               A moſt louing Friend, in all p
                     •
                  ſsible imployment. Craige.
               
            
         
         
            
            To IDEA.
            
               MAny times from the Table of my Chamber (matchleſſe Idea) haue my deareſt Friends, both by them ſelues, and my Seruant (whom I ſometimes employed to write for mee) ſtole the inuentions of my wanton vaine, thoſe amorous Ditties, ſuch as they beſt liked: and for which hauing, thereby ſerued the humour of my paſſion, I cared no more; wherein their gaine and my loſſe were all one. But now, by printing my then ſcattered, and now lately collected Scrowles (the moſt and beſt part whereof, I can not finde) I haue thought good to eaſe my ſelfe, and ſatisfie (but with the firſt, your Ladiſhip) my friendes. The noble Romans were from all antiquitie, accuſtomed to leaue thoſe Kinges whom they had vanquiſhed, in the poſſeſsions of their kingdomes, that Kings

by them made ſlaues, might be inſtruments to vprayſe the tropheis of their glorie. Thou knoweſt (Diuine Idea) I am thine by conqueſt; and yet thou alloweſt mee the ſeeming fruition of my libertie, while in deed I muſt pay the eternall tribute of vnfaigned Loue: For as Carn
                     •
                  ades the Cyrenean Philoſopher ſaid of Chryſippus; And Chryſippus were not, I could not bee▪ my beeing is by thy munificence. Take this in good part: and ſtill I reſt,
            
               
                  Idea's euer obleged and vnmanumisſible ſlaue, Ad Ideam.
               
            
            
               
                  O bona non tractanda homini bona digna rapina,
               
               
                  Caelic
                        •
                     lum, ſuperis o bona digna locis.
               
            
         
         
            
            To CYNTHIA.
            
               OFfend not, faire Dame; Though the Lines of my Picture change and varie. The World runnes on Wheeles, all things therein mooue without intermiſsion: the ſolide Earth, the rockes of Caucaſus, and the Pyramids of Memphis; both with publike, and their owne motion. Conſtancie it ſelfe, is nothing but a languiſhing and a wauering daunce. I am a Pamphilus, and can not ſettle my obiect. And ſince my Loue runnes ſtaggering with a naturall drunkennes, I pray thee (vertuous Cynthia) with patience peruſe thoſe Poyems: And (as Ariſtippus ſayd to his man, who by the way was ouer burdened with too much money) carry what you may, and caſt away the reſt.
            
               Your La. howſoeuer, and whereſoeuer. Ad Cynthiam.
               
            
            
               
                  Nil forma natura tuae, nihil aſtra negarunt,
               
               
                  Vna ſupercilij ſi tibi dempta nota.
               
            
         
         
            
            To LITHOCARDIA.
            
               I Feare to prefixe (Hono. Lady) to theſe few Poyems, a long Epiſtle, leaſt ſome Diogenes ſhould bid mee ſhut the Portes of Minda ere the Towne runne out. Let mee this much kindly pray, & preuaile with your La. as to vouchſafe them ſome place in the bench of your bibliothek. Xerxes, whoſe Armies obumbrate all Helleſpont, was faine in a ſmall Fiſhbote for ſafetie of his life, to 
                  •
               lie from Greece. So may you at ſome idle howers deigne, and diſcende to behold my ruſticke Rymes, and kindly excuſe his errours, who ere long, hath purpoſe to preſent and pleaſe you with ſome bette
                  •
                Poyem. Till when, and euer,
            
               I am your La. owne. Ad Lithocardiam.
               
            
            
               
                  Vt nullae cunctis formoſa est faemina tantum,
               
               
                  ſic nulla est miſero tantum adamata mihi.
               
            
         
         
            
            To KALA.
            THeſe Poyems are, I confeſſe (ſweete Kala) vnwoorthy thy preſence, and ſo haue more neede of thy protection: But let (as Cicero writes in his Epiſtle to Octauius) Confeſsion be a medicine for Errour. Twixt Metellus Macedonicus, and Scipio Africanus, were mortall Warres: but when Scipio dyed, Metellus prayed the Citie-men to concurre, leaſt their Walles ſhould be ouerthrowen. Many louely iarres haue been amongſt vs; but in my abſence, thoſe my Papers like Citizens of a good republike, ſhall all concurre to pleaſe and honor thee: And I both at home, & abrod, ſhall continue
            
               Thine till death: Craige.
               
            
            
               
                  Et quanquam molli ſemper ſis dedita amori,
               
               
                  Candida nulla magis, nulla proterua magis.
               
            
         
         
            
            To LAIS.
            EƲery man (as Pittacus affirmeth) hath ſome imperfection: in mee Loue is moſt predominant. But a
                  •
                
               Alcibiades cut off his faire Dogs eares and tayle, & ſo droue him in the market place, that giuing this ſubiect of prattle to the people, they might not meddle with his other actions. So haue I preſumed to publiſh theſe my caſtrat Rimes vnder (ô laſciuious Lais) thy protection, that my chaſter Ʋerſes may appeare leſse faulty. Antinonides the Muſitian, gaue order, that before or after him, ſome bad Muſitian ſhould cloy and ſurfet his auditors. So when the Lector ſhall be weary to 
                  •
               uerread theſe lubricke Lynes, hee ſhall with more alacrity conſider and ouerlooke the reſt. And thus were not hereby I minded to beautifie my other Poyems, J could gladly conſent, that all thoſe Lynes of Lais, were ouer whelmed in obliuion, I glory not (God knowes) in my frailty: and more for euitation, then imitation, are theſe Songes foorth ſent to the view of the cenſuring world. And thus nor crauing, nor carefull of thy acceptance, O Lais, I ceaſe to ſerue, or more
            
               to be Thine.
            
            
               
                  
                     O miſeri qu
                           •
                        ru
                           •
                         gaudia crimen habent▪
                     
                  
               
               
                  
                     Dum furtiua dedit nigra munuſcula nocte,
                  
                  
                     Me tenet, abſentes alios ſuſpirat amores.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
            To ERANTINA.
            IT is a wounderfull delight I take to liue i
                  •
                Loue; it is euer at my heart, and moſt in my mouth: and ſuch aſsiſtaunce it giueth to my life, that it ſeemes the beſt munition I haue found in this humane peregrination. The Diſciples of Hegeſias, hunger ſtarued them ſelues to death, incenſed therevnto with the perſwading diſcourſes of his leſſons, til the time King Ptolomey forbade him any longer to entertaine his Schoole with ſuch murtherous preceptes. Though I weare the howers of the day, and waſte the dayes of my life in Loue: I muſe, I roue, and walke: I enregiſter my humors and my paſsions. Let none be entiſed by my example: for I am borne to loue, and to die
            
               Thy Louer.
            
            
               
                  O quid dura tuum ſic me contemnis amantem,
               
               
                  Neglectum
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      tuas deſpicis ante fores:
               
               
                  Frigidaſaenit Hyems, immitis et ingruit ather,
               
               
                  Excluſum pateris me tamen eſſe foris.
               
            
         
         
            
            To PANDORA.
            
               THE very ſame Sonets which a
                  •
                ſome time pleaſed you (modeſt Pandora) with much more courteſie and honour, then they, or I, any way deſerued, to receiue and reade, I haue (but without alteration or change) heere placed and reduced in a ſolide bodie. When Babilon was beſidged by Darius, the number of Women was ſo great, the Captaine commaunded euery man to chooſe one; which beeing accordingly performed, the reſt were put to death, that their victuals might the longer endure. Hadſt thou been there, and I Captaine of the Babilonic, armie, thou ſhouldſt been firſt of all thy ſexe ſelected to been ſaued. Pardon (peereleſſe Pandora)

the perſeuerance of my preſumption, in ſtill affecting thee: and for my ſake peruſe theſe Sonets, which may happily continue ſome dayes and yeares after mee: That ſince I could not be beloued being on-life, I may with deſperat Herostratus, be famous after death: Till when (as Socrates ſayd) as I may, I am
            
               Thy vnalterable man,
            
            
               
                  Ah nùnquam potuj lachrymis, aut fletibus vllis,
               
               
                  Efficere vt nobis mitior ipſa fores:
               
               
                  Hoc nocuit miſero ſeruiſse fideliter vnj,
               
               
                  Hoc nocuit tanta ſemper amaſse fide.
               
            
         
         
            
            To PENELOPAE.
            
               
                  ANtiochus in his youth, writ vehemently in prayſe of the Academie; but beeing old, hee chaunged copie, and writ as violently againſt it. While I am young, I muſt write of, and for Loue; and I muſt goe, becauſe I cannot ſtande ſtill: I am like the rowling Stone which neuer ſtayes, till it come to a lying place. As Infants repoſe in the rocked Cradell, ſo my ſpirit findes reſt in reſtleſſe Loue. Alexander diſdayned the Corinthian Ambaſſaders, who offered him the Freedome and Burgeoſie of their Citie: But when they tolde him that Bacchus and Hercules were likewiſe in their Regiſters, hee kindly thanked them, and accepted their offer. Doe

not (O vertuous Penelopae) diſdaine my ſmall and poore propine. O be not aſhamed to ſee thy name in the baſe Chattons of my Poeſie: Since better then Bacchus, and hardier then Hercules are in my Regiſters. Thus, kiſsing thy liberall hand, I hartily commende both mee and them to thy tuition.
            
               Your La. A. C.
               
            
            
               
                  Si qua videbuntur ſcriptis temeraria noſtris,
               
               
                  hoc conſtans veri pig
                        •
                     us amoris erit:
               
               
                  Conſilio regitur quiſquis moderantius ardet,
               
               
                  qui
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      amor eſt aliis fit furor ille mihi.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Queene her moſt excellent Maieſtie.
            
               APelles man did all his Wits imploy
            To paint the ſhape of Laedais Daughter faire:
            But when he ſaw his worke prou'd naught, poore Boy,
            He wept for woe, and tooke exceeding care:
            Then deck'd he her with Iewels rich and rare:
            Which when the braue Apelles did behold.
            Paint on (quoth hee) poore Boy, and haue no feare,
            When Beautie fayles, well done t'enrich with Gold.
            I am (faire Princeſſe) like the Painters man,
            As ignorant, as ſcant of skill as hee:
            Yet will J ſtriue and doe the beſt J can,
            To manifeſt my louing minde to thee.
            But to ſupply the weakneſſe of my skill,
            In place of Gold (great Lady) take goodwill.
            
               Craige.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            Amorous Songes and Sonets.
            
               TO IDEA.
               
                  IN Golden world, when Saturne did vpgiue
                  To Pluto, Joue, and Neptune, his Empire
                  They caſt their lots both how, & where to liue▪
                  
                  Becauſe it was old Saturns owne deſire:
                  
                     Joue ruld the Furnace farre aboue the Fire,
                  The ſtately Vault, beyond the ſtarrie round:
                  And Neptune gat the glaſsie Salt to hyre,
                  Then Pluto chooſs'd the Helliſh blacke profound:
                  When Cupid ſpied they gaue him but the Ground▪
                  
                  Impatient wagg, went out to walke abrod,
                  And conquering theſe that were but lately cround,
                  He made him ſelfe ouer all thoſe Gods a God.
                  Then Loue to thee, as to my Lord I yeeld,
                  I feare to fight, where Gods haue fled the feeld.
               
               
               
                  
                     Omnia vincit amor, et nos cedamus amorj.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               
                  DOwne frō the Skies for to behold my Dame
                  Came Goddeſſes, and all the Gods aboue:
                  
                     Joue, Saturne, Mars, bright Phoebus, and with thame,
                  Rich Juno, Minerue, and the Queene of Loue:
                  Her beauties fame, their mindes did ſo commone,
                  They run, and tooke no reſt till they came thare,
                  Thus armies proud, approch't for to approue,
                  And giue their doome, that ſhe was matchles faire:
                  Loue like the reſt, would faine look'd on, & ſweare
                  Vnknit (faire Dame) this Craip, quoth he, & thou
                  Both Bagg and Bow a bonie while ſhalt beare,
                  Shoote where thou wilt, and I ſhall well allow:
                  They change, & ſhe ſhot Loue, that he was faine
                  To ſkarfe his eyes, and begge the Bow againe.
               
               
               
                  
                     Caecus amor ſuperos ſuperat, lithocardia amorem.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               
                  OF late the blind, and naked Archer Boy,
                  A libertine, out through the plains would play
                  With ayre-deuiding wings without conuoy:
                  Hee vaging went, and wiſt not where away.
                  Sad 
                        Ʋenus wep't, and thus to mee can ſay.
                  Didſt thou behold my blind Babe any whare?
                  For hee is gone; O pittie ſtrange eſtray:
                  And he is fightles, ſyndo
                        •
                     les, and bare:
                  In Craigs and Rocks ſuch Elu's doe make repare,
                  And ſo perhaps hee harbers in thy hart.
                  It was too true, yet durſt I not declare
                  His beeing there, for feare of further ſmart.
                  To want her Babe, braue Venus ſtil doth murne,
                  ſhe drown's the world with teares, & yet I burne.
               
               
               
                  
                     Hei mihi quod nullis amor eſt medicabilis herbi
                           •
                        .
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               
                  LOue ſet his Bow, his Bag, and Bolts aſide,
                  And went out through the watrie vaults of ayre
                  Diſpoſd to play; he goes without a guyde,
                  And with the Winds he wauers heere and thare:
                  Till at the laſt a fleeting Caſtle faire
                  On ſmooth and glaſsie Seas hee doth eſpie:
                  Hee bords their Barke, the fiſhing craft to leare:
                  The poore men yeeldes, not daring to denie,
                  Hee hales their Hookes, and baites them by & by.
                  Then Thetis roſe, and ask'd if Loue would burne
                  The liquid ſeat wherein her Lord did ly,
                  Diſſwading him from ſuch a cruell turne.
                  Feare not ſayd Loue, I came to fiſh, thou ſees,
                  And left my flames in Lithocardias eyes.
               
               
               
                  
                     O non human
                           •
                         nata puella toro.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To CYNTHIA.
               
                  THe Hobbie Haulke can catch at all no pray,
                  Vnles aboue her ayme and marke ſhe flie.
                  The Palme doth beare the brauer boughs ſome ſay
                  From neighbour trees, the higher that it bee.
                  So far'd of thoſe my fanſies fond and mee,
                  In hope of hap, I cannot ceaſe to ſore.
                  If loued, I liue: and if diſdain'd, I die.
                  I pray, I prayſe, I pleade, and I implore:
                  Proud Cytherea loued Adonis poore,
                  And Cynthia ſeru'd Endimion Sheepheard ſwane;
                  So though I be inglorious and obſcure,
                  Yet may ſhe loue her Poet and her Man.
                  Mount then braue thoughts through water, fire & aire
                  And deſp'rately purſue the ſweete, proud, faire.
               
               
               
                  
                     Blanditiis amor eſt, et ſucco molli
                           •
                        r omni.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  SInce Joue him ſelfe was ſubiect vnto Loue,
                  And left the lift to catch a mortall pray.
                  If Neptune did from glaſsie Seas remoue,
                  And would for Loue, aſide the Scepter lay.
                  If Pluto loath'd his darke and pitchie Caue,
                  To ſpoyle Proſerpine Cer
                           •
                        s Daughter faire.
                  If proude Apollo Daphui deare to haue,
                  Left Phaeton to rule his fyrie Chaire.
                  If ſhaghhaird Satyrs mountaine-climing race,
                  Purſu'd Aenona through the Phrygian Woods.
                  If piping Pan from Muſicke ſweete did ceaſe,
                  To hunt the Naiad Nymp's by ban
                        •
                     es of Floods?
                  What can I doe (ſweet haar
                        •
                     ) but loue thee ſtill?
                  On whom nor Gods no
                        •
                      men can gaze their fill.
               
               
               
                  
                     Iuſsit amor, quis enim mag
                           ••
                         non ceda
                           •
                         amorj,
                  
                  
                     In cignum, in pluniam qui iubet ire Jonem.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               
                  NOr there where as the yoaked reſtles Horſe
                  With Phaeton begins their wonted race,
                  and leads their Lord throughout the lift perfor
                        ••
                     
                  
                  To circumgire the Earth into each place.
                  Nor there where as the hot and fyrie face,
                  The burning beames of Phaebus bright appeare,
                  When hee diuyds the day in equall ſpace
                  With glorious rayes in his meridian Spheare.
                  Nor there, whereas Apollo proude, for feare
                  Our comming night, his lingering ſhould control
                        •
                     
                  
                  With ſpeedie pace from our Horizon heare,
                  Is headlong hurl'd to view th'antarticke Pole.
                  Nor no where els can any match at all
                  be found to her; whoſe vertues makes me thrall.
               
               
               
                  
                     Tu mihi ſola places.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               
                  O Wounder to the world, whō woundering eyne
                  Doe wounder ſtill as on the rareſt fight
                  Of Natures frame; yet come to common light,
                  Or Hemiſphere, where our Horizon beene.
                  Sweete louely Laura, modeſt, chaſt, and cleene.
                  It ſeemes that Poet Petrarche tooke delight,
                  Thy ſpotles prayſe in daintie lines to dight,
                  By Prophecies, before thy ſelfe was ſeene.
                  And now faire Dame, ſince thou art borne to bee
                  That Comet ſtrange, and that prodigious Starre,
                  Whence life and death, and peace & bloody warre▪
                  
                  And calme and ſtorme proceed, as pleaſeth thee:
                  Shine ſtill, and ſtill with ſweete aſpect infuſe,
                  Eternall theame, and matter to my Muſe.
               
               
               
                  
                     At mea c
                           •
                        m multis placuiſſet muſa puellis,
                  
                  
                     Huic vnj, dixj, noſter inheret am
                           •
                        r.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               
                  THe chaſteſt Child will oft for mercie cry,
                  And bid the ſtriker ſtay and hold his hand:
                  Yea though he weepe, his teares he will vpdry
                  And kiſſe (ſuppoſe againſt his will) the wand.
                  With chiuering chin, but ſturring will he ſtand,
                  And patiently ſuppres his preſent paine:
                  Poore Babe he dare not but obey command,
                  And hold his peace, leaſt he be laſht againe.
                  Such is my ſtate, I ſaikles ſoule am ſlaine,
                  Nor can I get the ſmalleſt graunt of grace,
                  Nor dare I now, though I haue cauſe, complaine:
                  And though I durſt, my plaints wold haue no place
                  Thus am I faine for feare of further wrong,
                  Euen with the Babe to burſt, and hold my tong.
               
               
               
                  
                     Non tame
                           •
                         audebam tacit
                           •
                        s operire dol
                           •
                        res,
                  
                  
                     Ingenium metuens casta puella tuam.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To CINTHIA▪
               
               
                  IT ſometime chanſt, as Stories tell by chanſe,
                  That Hercules and Hylas were alone,
                  And ſeuerally they went apart to pauſe:
                  But hee and hee, accompanied with none,
                  Till Hercules to Hylas made his mone,
                  That hee for drouth was like to giue the Ghoſt.
                  Thus Hylas to Aſcauius Flood is gone,
                  To draw a drinke, and lowting life hath loſt.
                  So when mine eyes had ſpurd a ſpeedie poſt,
                  To ſet the floods of fauour to their friend,
                  My burning heart, which drouth of comfort croſt,
                  They dround them ſelues, & nothing els obteind:
                  So Deſtanies my dolefull death concludes,
                  By double force of Furious flames and floudes.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋror, et heu nostro manat ab igne liquor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               
                  THe Lipper man, whoſe voyce can not be hard,
                  With dolefull hoarſe vnpleaſant tune wil cry,
                  And craue for loue of Ieſus Chriſt reward,
                  And alm's of ſuch as chaunce for to paſſe by:
                  But when (allace poore ſoule) he doth eſpy
                  That no man heares, not yet regards his voyce,
                  No longer then takes he delight to ly,
                  But claps his diſh, and keepes his language cloſe.
                  Right ſo as curſt, and carefull is my Croſſe,
                  Suppoſe the Fates haue not deform'd my ſhape,
                  No words I vſe for to lament my loſe,
                  But make my Lines to be the Lippars Clap.
                  Goe Sonet then and beg, I thee beſeech,
                  Some grace to him, whom feare deterres from ſpeech.
               
               
               
                  
                     Dicere qua puduit ſcribere iuſsit amor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               
                  IN ſtately Troy which was by force of fire
                  Subdu'd in end, and turnd in embers cold,
                  
                     Apollo's Church while Priam did empire,
                  Was beautifull and braue for to behold:
                  In midſt whereof hung in a not of gold
                  A Coca
                        •
                     rice, that Spider, Bird, nor Flie,
                  To enter there, nor build durſt not be bold:
                  That famous worke from filth was kept ſo frie.
                  The like (faire Dame) may well be thought of thee
                  For why, before thy beauties Altar hings,
                  Canceld with prid, both blood and birth I ſee,
                  With cold diſdaine, which ſerue as certaine 
                        •
                     ings,
                  To warne a farre my fancie to refraine,
                  And rather wrake then once reueale my paine▪
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Cor dolet g
                           •
                        lidu
                           •
                         torpet ſub pert
                           •
                        re ſanguit,
                  
                  
                     Me tamen oppreſsum dicere vetat amor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  I Pauſe not on the gold of Tagus ſand,
                  Nor Erithrean braue and ſhyning ſhells:
                  Ilong not for the limits large of Land,
                  Wherein the barbar newfound Nations dwels:
                  I bid not of theſe bounds whoſe booſome ſwells
                  With birth of braue and coſtly Iewels rare,
                  Which with their Muske and Siuet ſweeteſt ſmels
                  In faireſt Chattons, ſet perfume the ayre.
                  My pridles Hart ſubdued with Loue and feare,
                  Seekes that thoſe Songes the Heralds of my hart
                  Might mooue the ſweet and flintie harted faire
                  Some fauour once, and pittie to impart:
                  Els that vpon the Alter of her wreath,
                  She would accept th'oblation of my death.
               
               
               
                  
                     At ſiue te regum Muneranulla vol
                           •
                        .
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE.
               
                  I Serue a Miſtris infinitely faire,
                  And (which I more eſteeme) exceeding wiſe,
                  In that, beyond the boundes of all compare:
                  And this in her the wondering world enuies,
                  Thence doth of loue my reſtles rage arriſe,
                  Thence flowes the font of all the harmes I haue:
                  Her wit my heart, her beautie charm'd mine eyes,
                  To 
                        Ʋenus thus and Pallas I am ſlaue:
                  If curious heades to know her name do craue,
                  Shee is a Lady Rich, it needes no more,
                  And wealthy Iuno wonted pride may leaue,
                  And gladly ſerue the Dame whom I adore:
                  
                     Rich, wiſe, and faire, to thee alone as thrall,
                  I conſecrate loue, life, lines, thoughts, and all.
               
               
               
                  
                     At mihi ſeruitium, et triſtis iam vita paratur,
                  
                  
                     Illa
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         libertas priſtina ſurripitur.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE.
               SHort is the day, but long (allace) to mee,
               Who liue in loue, and am not loued againe:
               My louely, faire, and loueles Saint I ſee,
               Doth guild with gold her hid & coy diſdaine.
               thinkſt thou faire dame, to buy my loue with gaine
               Cauſe thou art rich, I pray thee thinke not ſo:
               I am thy ſlaue, and for thy ſake am ſlaine.
               Nor can my Rim's reueale my inward woe.
               Put now a poynt Panelopa I pray,
               vnto this web ſo oft retex'd by thee,
               Pay loue with loue, and make no more delay▪
               
               O raine no more thy ſhewers of gold on mee,
               One kiſſe of thee would breed me more conten
                     •
                  
               
               Then make me king of Creſus Lydia
                        •
                     
                   rent.
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               By Anagram.
               
               
                  WHen Churches all of Aſia les and more,
                  By Xerxes great were burnt, & caſt to ground
                  Of pittie hee Dianais Church forbore.
                  A peece of worke whoſe like could not be found:
                  And yet by fames report to be renound,
                  
                     Herostratus did ſet the ſame on fire,
                  Which Xerxes great ſuppoſe a Monarch cround,
                  Did ſpare vnſpoyld for all his proud Empire.
                  Right ſo, when as ſo many did conſpire
                  To conquer mee a poore and Cuntrey Swaine,
                  My hardned hart withheld their hot deſire,
                  And I till now, vnconquerd did remaine.
                  That by my loſſe, I muſt enlarge thy fame,
                  And ſlay my ſelfe to ſerue a glorious Dame.
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Non ego ſeruitium Dominae tam mite recuſe,
                  
                  
                     Ah pereat ſi quis vincula et ipſe times.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA. Anagram.
               
                  AS Marigould did in her Garden walke,
                  One day, O ten times happie was that day
                  I thitherward to ſee my Saint, did ſtalke:
                  Where Floraes Imp's ioy'd with her feet to play,
                  And loe vnſeene behind a Hedge I lay,
                  Where I beheld the Roſes bluſh for ſhame,
                  The Lillies were empald vpon the ſpray,
                  The Violets were ſtaynd about my Dame:
                  My Miſtris ſmild for to behold the game,
                  And ſometimes pleaſd vpon the graſſe to ſport▪
                  
                  Which canging hew's new cullors did acclaime,
                  For blythnes of ſo ſweete a Saincts reſort,
                  And from that walke while as away ſhe w
                        •
                     nt.
                  They weepe with deaw, & I in teares lament.
               
               
               
                  
                     Spr
                           ••
                        it noſtras galatea querel
                           ••
                        .
                  
               
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  FAire Kala, fairer then the Wooll moſt faire,
                  Of theſe my faire and ſiluer fleeced Sheepe
                  Which are committed to my careles care,
                  And vp and downe thoſe daintie Dales I keepe:
                  Faire Sheppeardeſſe, for thee alone I weepe.
                  None heares my plaints but bleating beaſts and I,
                  And for thy ſake I ſigh when I ſhould ſleepe,
                  And on thy name amid my dreames I crie.
                  Thē ſince thou know's the thraldome of my mind
                  And how my necke to beare thy yoke is worne:
                  Haue pittie once, and proue not ay vnkind,
                  And laugh no more thy ſhepheard ſwaine to ſcorne
                  But if thou mind'ſt for to remead my mone,
                  Let fanſies then, flocks, folds, and all, be one.
               
               
               
                  
                     Tum miſtum ciuerem communi onerare ſepulchre,
                  
                  
                     Amborum
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vnus contegat oſſa lapis.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  What euer thou be that claimes or courts my deare
                  And in my abſence would ſupply my place,
                  If courts thou, I pray thee to forbeare,
                  Rob not my right, and latelie granted grace:
                  For if at were, I friendly craue thy caſe,
                  And thou had credit as I ſometime bade,
                  Were it not wrong, if I ſhould proudlie preaſe
                  To raue thy right? yes I may ſurely ſaide:
                  Be who thou wilt, I challenge thee therefore,
                  That with thy Daffings deauis my Lais eare;
                  Ceaſe from thy ſute, and in to time forbeare,
                  Els we can be companions true no more.
                  For put the caſe thou ſpeed, thou gaines theſe two,
                  A facill Dame, and of a friend a foe.
               
               
               
                  
                     Caſta ma
                           •
                        e nec te luſus, nec munera vinca
                           ••
                        .
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  EVen as a ventering Merchant skant of skill,
                  Whom Fortunes frowne or fate hath forc'd to fall
                  To recempence his former loſſe hee will
                  Within one Ship and Veſſell venter all.
                  So haue I vſed my Stocke, though it be ſmall:
                  My Hart I ſend halfe dround into diſpaire
                  Vnto my Saint, whom eue
                        ••
                     erue I ſhall:
                  Shee is the Shipp, and it the ventered ware.
                  Oft hath my minde bin cloy'd with clouds of care
                  When contrar winds, with cold and ſtormie raine
                  would threat my loſſe; but now frō bounds of feare
                  My ventring thus, hath made me rich againe.
                  Then ſhal my Muſe triumph & mourne no more,
                  Since ſecond windes haue brought my Shipp to ſhore.
               
               
               
                  
                     At nunc tota tua eſt, te ſolum candida ſecum,
                  
                  
                     Cogita et frustra credula turba ſedet.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               O Watchfull Bird proclaymer of the day,
               Withh
                     •
                  ld I pray, thy piercing notes from me:
               Yet crow, and put the Pilgrime to his way,
               And let the Worke-man riſe to earne his fee:
               Yea let the Lion fierce, be feard of thee,
               To leaue his prey, and lodge him in his Caue:
               And let the deepe Diuine from dreaming flie.
               To looke his leaues within his cloſe Conclaue:
               Each man ſaue I, may ſome remembrance haue,
               That gone is night, and Phoſphor draweth nie:
               Beat not thy breaſt for mee poore ſleepeles ſlaue,
               To whom the Fat's alternall reſt denie:
               But if thou wouldſt bring truce vnto my teares,
               Crow ſtill for Mercie in my Miſtris 
                     •
                  ares.
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               GO you o winds that blow from north to ſouth,
               Conuey my ſecret ſighes vnto my ſweet:
               Deliuer them from mine, vnto her mouth,
               And make my commendations till we meet.
               But if perhaps her proud aſpiring ſprit,
               Will not accept nor yet receiue the ſame,
               The breſt and bulwarke of her boſome be it:
               Knock at her hart, and tell from whence you came,
               Importune her, nor ceaſe, nor ſhrinke, for ſhame:
               Sport with her curl's of Amber cullour'd haire,
               And when ſhe ſighs, immix your ſelues with thame
               Giue her her owne, and thus beguile the faire.
               
               Blow winds, flie ſighs, where as my hart doth han
                     •
                  
               
               And ſecretly commend me to my ſanct.
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  IN Arcadie ſometime (as Sydne ſay's,)
                  
                     Demagoras a proud Lord did remaine,
                  In whom no thing I marke that merits prayſe,
                  Saue that he ſeru'd Parthenia ſweet with paine:
                  But when he found ſhe lou'd him not agane,
                  With leprocie he did infect her face,
                  Which cauſ'd the conſtant knight for to complane
                  But not to change his loue in any caſe:
                  
                     Pandora faire his wooſe infect'd allace
                  With leprocie of loathſome cold diſdane,
                  Bred by my foe, to further my diſgrace:
                  Yet neither fayth nor fancie ſhall refrane:
                  Yea, were her face deform'd as it is faire,
                  I ſhould ay ſerue, though I ſhould ay diſpaire.
               
               
               
                  
                     Fortuna potes inuita feciſse beatum,
                  
                  
                     Quem velis.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               A Very World may well be ſeene in mee,
               My hot deſires as flames of Fire do ſhine,
               My ſighes are ayre, my teares the Ocean ſea
               My ſteadfaſt fayth, the ſolid Earth, & ſyne,
               My hope my heauen, my thoughts are ſtars diuine
               My ieloſie the very pangues of Hell,
               My ſweete the Sainct, to whom I do propine
               For ſacrifice my ſeruice and my ſell.
               That hatefull Hagge, who neere my Dame doth dwell
               My riuall foe, my Loue the Sommer ſweet,
               My Spring-time, my deſerts which ſo excell:
               And my Diſpaires, the Winter cold and weet.
               But (O allace) no Harueſt can I ſee,
               Which ſpoyls my yeares, & maks me thus to die
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               
                  WEll may I read as on a ſnowie ſheet
                  Of paper faire, my fortune in thy face,
                  Since at my ſight thine eyes are both repleit,
                  With loueles looks preſaging but diſgrace:
                  And thou into my viſage wann allace,
                  May ſee in ſad characters of my care,
                  Since neither ruth nor pittie can haue place,
                  A boundles Booke, a volume of diſpare.
                  Thus like a Glaſſe my face may well declare
                  My loue to thee, and with my loue my paine:
                  Thine ſhow's againe (though it be matchles faire)
                  Thy hatefull heart and vndeſeru'd diſdaine.
                  O antipathie ſtrange to be ſuſteind,
                  I loue my foe, thou hats thy faithfull friend.
               
               
               
                  
                     Vidi ego quae veneris falleudo iura reſ
                           •
                        ſuit,
                  
                  
                     Perfidiae penas ſaepe luiſſe graues.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               The Brethren three whoſe hot perſut hath broght
               Death to them ſelues, & bondage to their land,
               When as their foe before them fled, they thoght
               The victorie was plac'd into their hand:
               And yet his flight inferd no feare they fand,
               For as they came, hee ſlew them one and one.
               A Parthian forme, whoſe fight in f
                     •
                  ght doth ſtand,
               For while they flie, their foes are kild anone.
               Euen ſo may I, vnhappieſt I complaine:
               But pittie thus to ſerue a Parthian Dame,
               Who ſhuns my ſutes, and makes my fancie fane,
               With hoſts of harm's for to purſue the ſame.
               O ſweet diſcord, O ſweet concord agane,
               She flies to kill, I chaſe her to be tane.
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               
                  FAire louelie Haebae Queene of pleaſant Youth,
                  Who bore braue Nectar to the Gods aboue:
                  Whoſe glanſing beames like Phaebus in the ſouth,
                  Do both bewitch and burne my breſt with loue.
                  O thou that wars the woundring world for woorth
                  Whom Nature made to laugh her ſelfe to ſcorne,
                  More excellent then I can ſet thee foorth:
                  Whoſe like nor is, nor ſhall againe be borne.
                  My flowing Songs I conſecrate to thee,
                  Good reaſon were, that they ſhould all be thine.
                  Thy preſence creats all thoſe thoughts in mee,
                  Which mee immortall, and maks thee diuine:
                  And ſuch delight I haue with thee to ſtay,
                  As twentie Moones do ſeeme but halfe a day.
               
               
               
                  
                     Et tua quod ſupereſt temporis eſſe precor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               
                  THou who began by Menalus to mone,
                  And lay alone for to lament thy loſſe
                  Amid thoſe greene and grouie ſhads to grone
                  Where Muſidorus knew thee by thy voyce:
                  Thou haſt of me a comfort in thy croſſe,
                  With Princes proud if poore men may compare,
                  For why my cares ſuppoſe I keepe them cloſe,
                  Ouermatcheth thine, tho thy mishaps were mare:
                  Thy thuartring thoughts were droūd in deepe diſpare
                  Mine haue no hope for to be brought to pas:
                  Thy heart has hurt, and mine of blis is bare:
                  Thou chang'd thy ſhape, I am not what I was:
                  In end thou ſped, I ware my worke in vaine,
                  I loue allace, and am not loued againe.
               
               
               
                  
                     Spe
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         timor dubia, ſpeſ
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         timore cadis.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  SEe Deianira, ſee how I am ſhent
                  By that ſame Shirt which Neſſus to thee gaue,
                  And thou againe to me by Lychas ſent,
                  I am inflam'd fleſh, bons, and all I haue,
                  That Ichthiophagic Aethiopian ſlaue,
                  Who boyls his angled Fiſh by Phaebus beams
                  Vpon a Rock, no other ſtire may craue:
                  Nor Sun, nor Rocke, but theſe my gliding gleams▪
                  
                  Yet ſweete thy ſworne Alcides will not die,
                  There is no deadlie Dipsas in thy Sarke,
                  I languiſh but till I may meet with thee,
                  With quent Dialogs in the quiet darke:
                  And ſo till time ſuch happie time afford,
                  My further will this bearer brings by word.
               
               
               
                  
                     Saepe greges inter requie
                           •••
                        us arbore terci,
                  
                  
                     Miſta
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         cum folus perbuit herba torum.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE.
               
                  THe Perſian King in danger to be dround,
                  Ask'd if no helpe in humane hands did ſtand.
                  The Skipper then caſt in the Salt profound,
                  Some Perſians braue, & brought the King to land.
                  Then Xerxes crowns the Skipper with his hand,
                  Who ſaues the King deſeru's (quoth he) a crowne:
                  But he at once to kill him gaue command,
                  Die die, ſaid he, who did my Perſians drowne.
                  My Ladie faire, a Xerxes proud doth proue,
                  My worthles Verſe ſhe doth reward with gold:
                  But (O allace) ſhe lets me die for loue,
                  And now I rew that I haue bin ſo bold.
                  As Xerxes crownd, and kild his man; right ſo
                  Shee ſeemes a frind, and proues a mortall foe.
               
               
               
                  
                     Credula res amor eſt. &c.
                  
               
            
            
               
               At IDEAS direction, theſe two Sonets were made. 1.
               MOre then I am, accurſed mought I bee,
               If er'e I did approch my deareſt Dame:
               But ſuch a great reſpect was ſtill in mee,
               As ay feare was equall to my flame:
               Suppoſe ſome ſots ſpoyld of the ſenſe of ſhame,
               Or feeling of my honeſt Loue, will ſay,
               And publiklie to my diſpraiſe proclame
               That I delight in loathſome Luſt as thay.
               You ſacred pow'rs, I ſtill inuoke and pray,
               That all my ſpeach turne poyſon in a clap,
               If either I by word or writ bewray
               One luſting thought her beautie to entrap,
               Let pale Enuie (faire Dame) admire and lie,
               With chaſt deſiers I ſerue and honor thee.
            
            
               
               To IDEA. 2
               
                  WIth chaſt deſires I ſerue and honor thee
                  Great Archi-miſtris of my rauiſht mind,
                  Moſt virtuous, wiſe, and faire, of all thy kind:
                  Whoſe leaſt command I vow to doe or die.
                  Chaſt was my Loue, yet is, and ay ſhall bee,
                  The prayſing Papers which I haue propin'd,
                  May well beare witnes how I am inclind,
                  And can (ye know) controull mee when I lie:
                  
                     Phroneſis erring could eſpie no place,
                  Meete on this mould, but in thy breaſt to dwell,
                  A virtuous mind adorns a beauteous face;
                  And thou haſt both, and in them both excell:
                  This maks my loue be chaſt, my paſsions ſtrange
                  And I had rather chooſe to die then change,
               
               
               
                  
                     Aſpice diuinas humano in corpore dotes
                  
                  
                     Nil mort
                           •
                        lae tibi faemina digna polo es.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To CYNTHIA.
               
                  HAdſt thou been blacke, or yet had I been blind,
                  my muſe had ſlept, & none had known my mind
                  Or yet couldſt thou as thou art faire, be kind,
                  I had not thus with ſighs increaſt the wind:
                  But loe theſe frowning fauours which I find,
                  To which allace thou art too much inclind,
                  By which thy poore afflicted man is pind,
                  Haue broke the heart, which beautie firſt did bind:
                  Smile then faire dame, & ſome time ceaſe to frown
                  For ſmiles pleaſe mee, and do become thee beſt:
                  And ſince thou ſees how I am ſworne thine owne,
                  Smile ſtill on him who loues thee by the reſt,
                  So neither ſhall I wiſh thee to be blacke,
                  Nor curſe my eyes, the cauſers of my wrecke.
               
               
               
                  
                     Nam ſi quem placidis facilis dignaris ocellis,
                  
                  
                     Nectaris huic fontes, ambroſia
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         fluunt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               THe Tyrant Nero houering to behold
               The wrack of Rome on top of Tarpe hill,
               He ſaw the rich, the poore, the young, the old,
               Amid the flams in in preſent poynt to ſpill:
               Yet woondering on that woonder, ſtood he ſtill,
               And (cruell man) would neither mend nor meene,
               But tooke his pleaſure to eſpie their ill,
               And ſmild to ſee them ſmart before his eyne:
               But had that man, that monſtruous man yet beene
               Reſeru'd on life by fatall Nimphs till now,
               To view theſe flames which may in me be ſeene,
               He would bewaile my poore eſtate I trow,
               whoſe boyling breaſt euen like mont Aetna burns
               When in his tomb the roaring monſter turns.
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  THe Perſian Kings all waters did abiure,
                  Saue thoſe which flow'd frō faire Ch
                           •
                        aſpes flood:
                  From age to age this they obſeru'd as ſure,
                  As though no Waters els could do them good.
                  This was a forme, no rather bondage ſtrange,
                  Which by no means theſe Monarch's braue would change.
               
               
                  I am as conſtant as a Perſian King,
                  And thou more deare then meat or drinke to mee:
                  For all th'entiſments beautie bright can bring,
                  With liſping toong, and ſoull entiſing eye:
                  In ſpight of all theſe all as I began,
                  I am thy true and neuer-changing man.
               
               
                  Thus will I ſurfet on thy beautie braue,
                  And Lyzard-like liue on thy looks diuiue:
                  In preſence abſence I am ſworne thy ſlaue,
                  And ſtill I would (were I a King) be thine:
                  And for thy ſake, till life and breath endure,
                  All other loue and ſeruice I abiure.
               
               
               
                  
                     Tu quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         iunge fid
                           •
                        s fido cum coniuge amor
                           •
                        s,
                  
                  
                     Ipſe etenim et coniunx ipſe et amator ero.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  ALlace that abſence hath ſuch force to foyll,
                  And to procure my euer pearceing paine,
                  Bereft of reſt I toſſe, I turne, I toyle,
                  Halfe in diſpaire that we may meet againe:
                  Think on my vowes (& think they were not vaine)
                  My countenance, and each thing els I pray,
                  Which then I vſ'd, when our goodnight was tane,
                  My inward wrack and woe for to bewray:
                  And when allone in claſped armes we lay,
                  With interchange of manie ſouleſooke kiſſes:
                  Thinke how we ſhed before the dawn of day,
                  With miriads of vnaccompliſht wiſhes:
                  Which with my ſelfe for lacke of preſens pind,
                  I recommend vnto thy vertuous mind.
               
               
               
                  
                     Sic mecum fixis herebas nixa lacertis,
                  
                  
                     Mutua cum placido trahebamus gaudia luſu.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To abſent ERANTINA.
               EVen as a man by darke that goes aſtray,
               Would faine behold and looke vnto the light:
               Or as a Pilgrem erring from the way,
               In wildſome wayes, would faine be ſet a right
                     •
                  
               
               As Mariners in blacke and ſtormie night,
               O'reſet with Seas, ſtrange winds, and ſtormie raine
               Longs to behold the beames of Phaebus bright,
               That after ſtorme, the calme may come againe:
               As he whom ſtill the Iayler doth detaine
               In bondage cloſe, of freedome would be glade:
               Right ſo ſhall I of preſence be as faine,
               To ſee the Sainct for whom my ſighs are ſhade,
               
                  Light, wisſhed way, calme, freedome, ſhould not bee
               So ſweete to them, as Preſence vnto mee.
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  Sore is my head and ſorie is my hart,
                  And yet for all th'emplaſters I applie,
                  No helpe hath Nature, nor no ayde brings Art,
                  Without, within, I burne, I fret, I frie:
                  A childiſh thing when Care doth come to crie:
                  Yet this doth moſt my Feuer fell infect,
                  I hid my harms, and ſo in ſilence die,
                  And thus my head muſt riue, my hart muſt breake,
                  But worſt of all, while viſage wan bewray,
                  What ſecret ſite my ſicke ſoule doth aſſale,
                  How I or'edriue in deadly dooll the day,
                  And how this longſome Equinoct I vale:
                  Shee cruell ſhee that ſhould my Surgeon bee,
                  Allow's my loſſe, and laughs, and lets me die.
               
               
               
                  
                     Nec tamen vlla mea tangit te cura ſalutis.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To abſent IDEA.
               
                  Faire dame, for whō my mornfull muſe hath worne
                  To want thy fight the black & ſable weede,
                  Whoſe houering haires diſsheueld rent and torne,
                  May ſhow what baill thy abſence long can breed:
                  Looke if thou liſt my Rimes, and thou ſhalt reed
                  But coaleblack woes in coaleblack words brought forth
                  thy abſence long, hath made my cōfort deed,
                  And makes my Verſes be ſo litle worth.
                  Shine then vpon my parched Sunburnd braine,
                  Chiefe ſtay of all my tempeſt-beaten ſtate:
                  Leaue not thy man diſconſolate againe,
                  Faire Goddes of my Fortune both and Fate:
                  All earthly hopes for thee ſince I refuſe,
                  Be thou my hope, my Miſtris, and my Muſe.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋt
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſupercilio ſpendo
                           •
                         nutu
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         loquaci,
                  
                  
                     Nonnihil ipſa meis m
                           •
                        ta venis precibus,
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               
                  OVtthrough the faire and famous Scythian land,
                  A Riuer runns vnto the Ocean mane:
                  Hight Hypanis with cleare and criſtall ſtrand,
                  Borderd about with Pine, Firre, Oake, and plane:
                  Whoſe ſiluer ſtreames as they delight the eye,
                  So none more ſweet to either taſt or ſmell.
                  Yet Exampeus erre his Lord he ſpies,
                  Maks him to ſtinke like Stigian ſtanks at Hell.
                  Eu'n ſo faire Dame (whoſe ſhap doth ſo excell)
                  Thy glorious rayes, thy ſhining virtues rare,
                  No Poets pen, nor Rhetors tong can tell
                  So farre beyond the bounds of all compare:
                  Yet are they ſpoyld with poyſning cold diſdaine
                  And ſuch as drink thy beauties floods are ſlaine.
               
               
               
                  
                     Nil noſtrae mouere preces verba irrita ventis,
                  
                  
                     Fudimus et vanas ſcopulis impegimus vndas.
                  
               
            
            
               
               PANDORA refuſeth his Letter.
               
                  THe ſaikles ſoule Philoxenus was ſlaine
                  By courtes kind Amphialus the Knight,
                  (Who for the faire Cornithian Queens diſdaine
                  Borne to his foreſaid friend had tane the flight:)
                  But when his Dog perceiu'd that ſorie fight,
                  He fawn'd vpon his maiſters fatall foe:
                  Who then with hart and handfull of deſpight,
                  Beats backe the Dog with manie bitter blo.
                  My deareſt Dame and ſeemlie Sainct euen ſo,
                  For whoſe ſweet ſake I daylie die and dwins,
                  Hath ſlaine her ſlaue with all the wounds of woe,
                  And loaths allace, to looke vpon my Lins:
                  That with the Dog my Ditties muſt returne,
                  And helpe their martird Maiſter for to murne.
               
               
               
                  
                     Quis Deus oppoſuit noſtris ſua numina notis.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               TWixt Fortune, Loue, and moſt vnhappie mee,
               Behold a chaſe, a fatall threeſome Reele,
               Shee leads vs both, ſuppoſe ſhee can not ſee,
               And ſpurs the Poſt on her vnconſtant wheele:
               I follow her, but while I preaſe to ſpeele
               My bounds aboue, I faile, and ſo I fall:
               Loue lifts me vp, and ſaies all ſhall be well,
               In hope of hap my comfort I recall:
               Wee iornie on, Loue is the laſt of all;
               Hee on his winges, I on my thoughts do ſote:
               I flie from him, ſuppoſe my ſpeed be ſmall;
               Shee flies from mee, and woe is mee therefore.
               Thus am I ſtill twixt Loue and Fortune ſlaine,
               I neither take nor tarrie to be taine.
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               GOod cauſe hadſt thou Euarchus to repent,
               The reakles raſhnes of thy bad decreit:
               Thy crueltie did ſpring from good intent,
               The grounds whereof were tedious to repeet:
               Yet when thy Sonne fell downe before thy feet,
               And made thine eyes confeſſe that he was thine,
               Thou wept for woe, yet could thou not retreat
               The ſentence ſaid, but ſigh'd and ſorow'd ſine:
               So may it be that once thoſe eyes diuine,
               Which now diſdaine and loath to looke ſo low,
               As to behold theſe miſeries of mine,
               ſhal weepe whē they my conſtant trueth ſhal know
               And thou ſhalt ſigh (though out of time) to ſee,
               By thy decret thine owne Pirocl
                        •
                     s die.
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               
                  I Feare not Loue with blind and frowning face,
                  His Bow, his flame, nor ſharpeſt hooked head:
                  A brauer Archer Death ſhall haue his place,
                  And put a poynt to all my paine with ſpeed:
                  And ſince it is my fate to be at feed
                  With her whom once I duelie did adore:
                  Yet fatall Atrops now ſhall cut the threed,
                  And breake the heart which ſhe enioy'd of yore:
                  For fauours floods which I did oft implore,
                  Of Letheis Lake I time by time ſhall teaſt,
                  Her Marbel heart ſhal make me moorne no more
                  The buriall ſtone my dolor ſhall digeaſt:
                  Then farewell ſhe, auth, loue, hard-heart, each one,
                  Come Atrops, Lethe, Death, and Buriall ston
                           •
                        .
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Nunc te tam formae tangit decor iſte ſuperbae,
                  
                  
                     Vt tua commorint taedia iniqua deos.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To inconſtant LAIS.
               
                  HOw oft haſt thou with Siuet ſmelling breath,
                  told how thou loud'ſt me, loud'ſt me beſt of al?
                  And to repay my loue, my zeale, my fayth,
                  Said, to thy captiue thou waſt but a thrall:
                  And when I would for comfort on thee call,
                  
                     Be true to mee deare to my ſoule, ſaid I,
                  Then ſweetly quheſpering would thou ſay, I ſhall:
                  
                  And echo-like deare to my ſoule, replie:
                  But breach of fayth now ſeemes no fault to thee,
                  Old promiſes new periuries do proue.
                  Apes turſe the whelps they loue from tree to tree
                  And cruſh them to the death with too much loue.
                  My too much loue I ſee hath chang'd thee ſo,
                  That from a friend thou art become a foe.
               
               
               
                  
                     Carminibus celebrata meis formoſa N
                           •
                        aera,
                  
                  
                     Aterius mauult eſse puella viri.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  SWeet Lais, truſt me, I can loue no more,
                  And which is worſe, my Loue is turnd to hate:
                  Thou art vnkind, and woe is mee therefore,
                  Inconſtant fals and to my griefe ingrate,
                  It is too true I lou'd thee well of late,
                  And euen as true thou lou'dſt mee well againe:
                  I haue allace, no pleaſure to repeat
                  Our wiſhes and our vowes ſince all are vaine:
                  What reſolutions and what plots prophane
                  Wee two haue had in loue to liue and die,
                  The time, the place, the tokens giuen and tane;
                  Yf they could ſpeake, can thy accuſars bee:
                  But ſince thou ſtill art falſe (I muſt confeſſe)
                  Thy loue was lightlie won, and loſt for leſſe.
               
               
               
                  
                     Ah crudele genus nec fidum faemina nomen.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               
                  Blind naked loue, who breeds thoſe ſtormy broyls
                  Which from my deare me to my dole debars:
                  To mee the pangs, to thee pertaine the ſpoyls:
                  Thou taks aduantage of our ciuill warres,
                  I liue exild, but thou remains too neare,
                  Yet like a tirant ſhee triumphs o're thee.
                  Her preſence maks thee more then blind I heare:
                  And abſence is farre worſe then death to mee,
                  Could I as thou, from ielous eyes be free,
                  Then ſhould I be as blith as thou art blind:
                  I ſhould not then diſpaire, nor wiſh to die,
                  Nor ſhould my ſighs increas the wauering wind.
                  O rigor ſtrange ſince Loue muſt ſtill remaine,
                  In preſence blind, and I in abſence ſlain.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋna di
                           •
                        s tantum eſt, qua te non femina vidi,
                  
                  
                     Et ſine iam videor ſeuſibus eſ
                           •
                        s 
                           ••
                        is.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE.
               WHen ſtately Troy by ſubtill Sinons guile,
               And Grecian force was brought to laſt decay,
               
                  
                     Ʋliſſes braue with faire and facund ſtile,
               
                  Achilles Arm's obtaind, and went away:
               In Afrike yet he was conſtraind to ſtay:
               For when his friends did taſte of Lotus trie,
               As Homers works do more at length bewray,
               They green'd no more the Greekiſh ſoyle to ſee.
               So fares with mee, O moſt vnhapie mee,
               Since I beheld thy faire and heauenlie hew,
               The glorious rayes of thy all conquering eye,
               My rendering heart and ſoule did ſo ſubdew,
               That for thy ſake, whom euer ſerue I ſhall,
               I haue forgot my ſelfe, my ſoyle, and all.
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               
                  MY Muſe ſhal make thy boundles fame to flie
                  In bounds where yet thy selfe was neuer ſeene:
                  And were not for my Songs thy name had beene▪
                  
                  Obscurelie caſt into the graue with thee:
                  But loe when cold and limping age ſhall bee,
                  A ſigne of death, and when the graue ſhall greene
                  And gape within her bosome to conteene
                  Her child, in spight of Death thou ſhalt not die:
                  For why, my Muse, my reſtles Muse ſhall eeke
                  Ten thousand wings for to enlarge thy fame,
                  And eu'ry quill of eu'ry wing faire Dame,
                  to preach thy praise ten thousand wayes ſhal seeke
                  Yet thou repayes my labors with disdaine,
                  Thou liues by mee, and I by thee am ſlaine.
               
               
               
                  
                     O ego non felix qui tam crudeliter a
                           ••
                        ,
                  
                  
                     Nulla
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         me redamat.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To frowning CINTHIA.
               
                  IF Caſtor ſhine, the Seaman hoyſeth ſaile,
                  With widkaſt womb the welcome winds t'embrace
                  which gladly graſps the ſare & proſperous gaile
                  And maks the Ship to run a fleeing race:
                  But if Orion ſhine, the ſtorme is me,
                  He lowes the Saile, which ſtood of late ſo hie
               
               
                  Such is my ſtate, if Caſtor-like thou ſmile,
                  I onelie liue to ſerue and honour thee:
                  But if thou frowne, allace allace the while,
                  As at the ſight of Gorgons head I die,
                  As in thy lift ſo in thy looks diuine,
                  
                     Orion black, and Castor braue do ſhine.
               
               
                  Then ſince thou art th'Orizon of my loue,
                  Thine eyes the fatall ſtarres which I adore:
                  With gracious blinks behold me from aboue,
                  Let me not ſinke, ſafe bring me to thy ſhore.
                  Or if thou loaths that I ſhould liue, then frowne
                  For die I, liue I, I am ſtill thine owne.
               
               
               
                  
                     Diccte me Juuenem perijſse in amore maeae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Vnita quod fuerit Cynthia cauſa necis.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               EAch thing allace, preſents and lets mee ſee▪
               
               The rare Idea of my rareſt Dame,
               Deepe ſunke into my ſoule the verie ſame,
               Whoſe view doth ſtill bewitch vnhappie mee,
               The ſhining Sunne, her hart tranſperſing eye.
               The morning red her braue and bluſhing shame,
               Night abſence, and day preſence doth proclame,
               foule wether frowns, & calme ſweet ſmil's may bee
               My ſcalding ſighs tempeſtious winds, and raine:
               But exhalations of my tragick teares,
               In froſt allace, her cold diſdaine appeares;
               In thaw, and fire, my melting heart agane:
               And thus each thing brings purpoſe to be pinde
               And to my thoughts cōmends the faire vnkind.
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  DEare to my ſoule, and wilt thou needs be gone,
                  And leaue thy Man behind thee but a heart?
                  Is this the pittie which thou doſt impart,
                  Disconſolat to let me die alone?
                  Thou haſt two harts; mine, thine, and I haue none:
                  Heere ſprings the surfe of my enſuing smart;
                  Yet play I pray the gentle Pyrats part,
                  And as thou lou's my life, yet leaue me one:
                  But brooke them both I gladlie grant and ſtay,
                  How canſt thou ride in raging raine and wind?
                  Yet thou muſt goe, and woe is me away:
                  Then take my heart, and leaue me thine behind.
                  I gaue thee mine, O then giue thine to mee,
                  That mine and thine be one twix mee & thee.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋna fides, vnus lectus, et vnus amor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  I Haue compard my Miſtris many time
                  To Angels, Sun, Moone, Stars, & things aboue:
                  My Conſcience then condem'd me of a crime,
                  To things below when I conferd my Loue:
                  But when I find her actions all are vane,
                  I thinke my Rimes and Poyems all profane.
               
               
                  With perfect eyes her Pageants I eſpy,
                  To no thing now can I compare my Dame,
                  But Theramenes ſhoo; the reaſon why,
                  It ſeru'd each foote: and ſhe can do the ſame:
                  She hears the ſutes of rich, poore, great, & ſmall,
                  And has diſcretion to content vs all.
               
               
               
                  
                     Si vitium leuitas, nulla puella hona eſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  FAine would I goe, and faine would I abide,
                  Sweet Hais agene, and kiſſe me erre I go,
                  Denie mee not ſince there is none beſide,
                  No teltale here, though thou wouldſt giue me two:
                  Yet giue me one, if thou wilt giue no mo;
                  But one is none, then giue mee two or three,
                  Thy Balmie breath doth ſtill bewitch me ſo,
                  As I muſt haue an other kiſſe, or die,
                  Thy Rubent bluſh now bids take leaue of thee:
                  Faine would I goe, and I would kiſſe as faine,
                  Then giue me one, or change a kiſſe with mee:
                  If neither giue nor change, take all againe:
                  When thine & mine are thus conturb'd, I kno
                  Thou canſt but ſmile, that I deceiu'd thee ſo.
               
               
               
                  
                     Mihi dulcia iunge
                  
                  
                     Oſcula, et in noſtr
                           •
                         molle quieſſe ſinn.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE.
               
                  WHile fierce Achilles at the ſiedge of Troy,
                  
                  (the fatall Nimphs had ſo decreed) was ſlaine
                  A ſodaine ſtrife aroſe who ſhould enioy
                  The Armes of that praiſe-worthie Grecian:
                  
                  
                     Aiax alleg'd he ſhould the Arm's obtaine,
                  And by the ſword to win and weare them vow'd,
                  
                     
                        Ʋliſſes ſaid, they ſhould be his againe:
                  And he them gaind, if Stories may be trow'd,
                  But lo the ſhield by Sea's was looſd, wee read,
                  And by a ſtorme driu'n from Vliſses ſight,
                  And rould to Aiax graue, though he was dead,
                  To ſhow the world that he had greateſt right:
                  So when my tombe ſhal end thoſe teares of mine
                  there ſhalt thou ſigh & ſay, I should been thine.
               
               
               
                  
                     Tum flebit cum mi ſenſerit eſſe fidem.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To CINTHIA.
               
                  OFt haue I ment with Muſicke, ſleepe, & wine,
                  The ſoueraine cur's for ſuperficiall cares,
                  For to reuiue this wounded heatt of mine,
                  And free my ſelfe from ſorow, ſighs, and teares:
                  Yet neither all, nor any one of thoſe,
                  Haue force to end, or cure, or change my woes:
                  My griefs are growne to ſuch confuſed force,
                  No number reſts for more, nor place for worſe.
               
               
                  If I had merit to be martird ſtill,
                  And with the furie of thy frowns abus'd,
                  I could digeſt thy gloomings with goodwill,
                  And neither looke nor craue to be excus'd:
                  I loue my Rod like Moſes; but if I
                  Perceiue it proue a Serpent, I muſt flie.
                  If thou wilt bind me ſtill to be thine owne,
                  Smile ſtil (faire Dame) if not, I pray thee frowne.
               
               
               
                  
                     
                        Ʋincuntur molli pectora dura prece.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               
                  FAlſe Eriphile ſometime did betray
                  Facidic wiſe Amphiaraus her ſpouſe,
                  (Who willing from the Theban warres to ſtay)
                  To hide himſelfe ſecure at home he trow's:
                  Thus while his driftes Adrastus diſallow's,
                  She (knowing that her husband ſhould be ſlaine
                  At Thebes) for a golden chaine auow's
                  To tell Adrastus where he did remaine;
                  And thus reueald, he goes againſt his will,
                  But leaues Alcmeon to reuenge his wrack
                  On Eriphile, which he did fulfill,
                  When dolefull newes of fathers death came backe
                  So ſince in loue thou art ſo vnloyall ſo long,
                  Some ſtrange Alcmeon muſt reuenge my wrong.
               
               
               
                  
                     Quae
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         prius nobis intulit illa ferat.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  WHen Creſſid went from Troy to Calchs tent,
                  and Greeks with Troians were at skirmidg hot
                  Then Diomed did late and aire frequent
                  Her companie, and Troil was forgot:
                  Thou lay alone, ſuch was allace thy lot,
                  And Paris brookt poore Menela thy Dame,
                  Shee twind in two the matrimoniall knot,
                  And tooke a ſtranger when thou went from hame.
                  Such is my caſe, if I may ſay for ſhame,
                  I floriſht once; once there was none but I:
                  I once was lou'd, and I haue loſt the ſame,
                  And as God liu's, I know not how nor why:
                  So that my Sainct for falſhood I am ſure,
                  May match the Grecian or the Troian whore.
               
               
               
                  
                     Non ſum ego qui fueram, mutat via longa puella
                           •
                        ,
                  
                  
                     Quantus in exiguo tempore fugit amor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  OFt haue I ſworne; oft haſt thou pray'd me too
                  No more to loue, nor more to looke on thee:
                  Since looks and loue haue made ſo much adoo
                  Twixt loueles thee, and vnbeloued mee:
                  Yet were I dam'd without redres to die,
                  I can not ceaſe from ſeruing thee faire Dame:
                  Yea thou and all the woondering world ſhall ſee
                  The fayth, the force, the furie of my flame,
                  Moſt like vnto the queſting Dogge am I,
                  Who ſtill doth on his angry Maiſter fawne,
                  While thou corrects, I kindly queſt and cry,
                  And more thou threats, the more I am thine owne
                  Thus loue or loath, or cherriſh mee or chide,
                  Where once I bind, but any breach I bide.
               
               
               
                  
                     Sit mihi panpertas tecum iucunda neaera.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  WHen Aedipus did fooliſhly reſigne
                  His Kingdome to his Sonnes, that he & he,
                  Aboue the Thebans yeare about should raigne,
                  And that his Crowne biparted ſo should be,
                  
                     Polinices firſt raignd, but faith we ſee,
                  He from the Crowne Eteocles debars:
                  Thus while they liue, they neuer can agree,
                  And after death, their burning bones made warrs.
                  My riuall foe againſt all right enioyes
                  That Crowne & Kingdome which pertains to me
                  That proud vſurper worker of my noyes,
                  Shall find a foe, vnto the day I die,
                  And were we dead, that are too long aliue,
                  Our Ashes in th'exequial vrne would ſtriue.
               
               
               
                  
                     Riualem poſsum non ego ferre Jonem.
                  
               
            
            
               
               At the newes of IDEAS death, Dialogue twixt the Poets Ghoſt and Charon.
               
                  Ghoſt.
                  COme Charon come:
               
               
                  (Ch)
                  Who cals?
               
               
                  (Gh.)
                  a wandring Ghoſt,
                  By fortune led vnto the Stygian shore.,
               
               
                  (Ch.)
                  What ſeeks thou heere?
               
               
                  (Gh.)
                  a ſafe tranſpor
                        •
                      with poſt,
                  As thou haſt done to many mo before.
               
               
                  (C.)
                  Who ſlew thee thus?
               
               
                  (G.)
                  euen she whom I adore,
                  Hath rould my name in ſcrowls of black diſgrace.
               
               
                  (Ch)
                  What made her thus into thy griefe to glore?
               
               
                  (G.)
                  
                     Loue was my foe, & chang'd in wars my peace.
               
               
                  (C.)
                  Go then aback, this Barke shall not imbrace
                  The ſmalleſt one whom Loue at fead hath borne.
               
               
                  (Gh.)
                  That shall I not, for lo before thy face,
                  I shall ou'r ſaile the flood and thou had ſworne:
                  The Darts of Loue both Boat & Oares, shal bee,
                  Sighs shall be winds, and Teares a Styx to mee.
               
            
            
               
               An other Dialogue to the ſame purpoſe.
               
                  Ghoſt.
                  COme Charon come.
               
               
                  (Ch.)
                  Who cals?
               
               
                  (Gh.)
                  a martyrd man,
                  Since Fame foorthtold the faireſt faire was deid.
               
               
                  (Ch.)
                  What ſeeks thou?
               
               
                  (Gh.)
                  Help to croce thy waters wan,
                  And I will pay thee for thy paines with ſpeed.
               
               
                  (Ch.)
                  Thou ſeems to be a quick & liuing leid,
                  And not a vmber, nor a palled Ghaiſt.
               
               
                  (Gh.)
                  Feare not for that, ſince I for paſſage pleid,
                  But let mee haue thy helping hand with haiſt.
               
               
                  (C.)
                  Though ſage Aeneas did o're-ſaile my ſtreame
                  By Sybils helpe, none els muſt goe againe.
               
               
                  (G.)
                  Then thinks thou Charon, to enioy my Dame
                  And ſtay my voyage from th'Eleſian plaine?
               
               
                  (C.)
                  Yes ſurely yes.
               
               
                  (G)
                  No Charon thou ſhalt lie
                  For Loue hath wings, and I haue learnd to flie.
               
               
                  
                     Panditur ad nullas Janua nigra prec
                           •
                        s.
                  
               
            
            
               
               IDEA after long ſicknes, becommeth weil; and as he wept for her, he wiſhes compenſation of her teares in his diſtreſſe.
               
                  O Beautie doomb aſtoniſh'd Maruels chyld,
                  The wanton obiect of my weeping eie,
                  Blith was my heart before I was beguyld,
                  And made to beare a ſeruile yoake by thee:
                  But now allace, though I by birth be free,
                  And not a ſlaue-borne Muſcouite by kind,
                  My Sainct ſo Lords my heart, that now I ſee,
                  There is no manumiſsion to my mind.
                  Faire heauenly Tigres, be no more vnkind,
                  I wept for thee, when weerds did all conſpire
                  Thy wrack; O then behold how I am pind:
                  Weepe thou for me, thy teares may quench my fire
                  As I did thine, ſo meene thou my eſtate,
                  And be not cald the worſt of ills ingrate.
               
               
               
                  
                     Sis ingrata licet fi modo bella manes.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To CYNTHIA.
               
                  PRoud Zeuxis gaue his Pictures all for nought,
                  Such was the loue he to his labors bore,
                  That by no gold nor price they could be bought,
                  And thus ſaue thanks poore man, he gaind no more
                  I am as poore, and euen as proud as hee,
                  For Loue nor Lines I craue no price from thee.
               
               
                  For if thou digne but with a gracious ſmile,
                  To looke my Lines, and ſpie how I am pind,
                  And with my toyes the ſwift wingd time begile,
                  Then am I paide according to my minde▪
                  
                  
                     Joues oath was Styx, and Phaebus Daphnes haire;
                  But from hencefoorth I by thy ſmiles wil ſweare.
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               
                  NO hart ſo hard, tho wrought of Vulcans ſteele,
                  Or fearcely forg'd of Adamantine ſtone,
                  That doe endure or laſt ſo long ſo leele,
                  As mine, who loues thee moſt vnlouing one,
                  Whoſe purpoſe is and plot, as I ſuppone,
                  Moſt cruellie her captiue thrall to kill,
                  Who onely liues to loue but her alone:
                  Though ſhe reward my true intent with ill:
                  Such is my ſtate, I but abide her will,
                  Shee has the fatall ſtick into her ſleeue,
                  And when ſhe liſt her furie to fulfill,
                  
                     Althea-like ſhe may my breath bereaue:
                  Nor leue vnlou'd, I rather chooſe to die,
                  Then beat the fire, and burne the fatall tree.
               
               
               
                  Nam mea crudeles tetigerunt corda ſagitte,
                  At
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      animam petijt vulneris aſperitas.
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  Canſt thou haue eares, & wil not heare my plaint
                  Canſt thou haue eies, & wil not wipe my teares
                  Haſt thou a heart, and feeles not how I faint,
                  Debating twixt diſpairing hops and feares?
                  Canſt thou not ſee thoſe ſad and ciuill weairs
                  Which are within the kingdome of my heart,
                  Where Legions of perſuing pangs appeairs,
                  My vtter wrake and ruine to impart?
                  Heere burns the fire, there ſticks the deadly dart:
                  Here teares me droun, there ſmoky ſighs me ſmore
                  Here Beauty wounds, there riuals runs athwart,
                  And ielous eyes do pry into each pore:
                  When al theſe al and thou my wrack contriues,
                  I can not laſt, and I had twentie liues.
               
               
               
                  
                     Perfida ſed duris genuit te montibus horrens,
                  
                  
                     Cantaſus, hircane
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         admorunt vbera tigr
                           •
                        s.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Newyeares gift to PENELOPE.
               THat Colatine did talke in Tarquins tent,
               His Ladie Lucrece was moſt chaſt moſt faire,
               Hee afterward had reaſon to repent,
               Shee died a deemd adultres in diſpaire.
               The Lydian King brought naked both and bare,
               His wife before his friend for to be ſeene,
               Which brought him ſelfe wee ſee into the ſnare,
               For he was ſlaine, and Giges brookt his Queene.
               Yet can not all theſe wracks forewarne my Muſe,
               To hold her peace, but prayſe thee more & more:
               I loue thee ſtill, and I will not refuſe,
               Though ſmall allace, be my reward therefore.
               And ſo (faire Dame) for Newyears gift receaue
               My heart thine owne, my ſelfe to be thy ſlaue.
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE.
               WHen Alexander did ſubdue and bring
               The coaſtly Iles of Inde to his Empire,
               Hee captiue tooke proud Porus Indian King,
               And bid him aske what moſt he did deſire?
               Nought ſaid braue Porus do I now require,
               But that thou vſe me as a King ſhould bee,
               Thou ſhalt haue friendly hoſtage to thy hyre:
               And for my ſake I graunt thy ſute (ſaid hee.)
               Long with my paſsions haue I borne debate,
               Oft haue I fought, and now haue loſt the feeld,
               It is my fortune for to be defeate.
               I am thy Captiue, and faire Dame I yeeld:
               As Macedo was to the King of Jnde,
               
               If not mine, yet for thy cauſe be kinde.
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               WHen Dioniſe was ſhut from Regall ſeat,
               And quite depoſd from his Imperial throne
               For tyrannies too tedious to repeate,
               Which made oft times the Siracuſans grone,
               When he was thus diſgrac'd, and left alone:
               He could not ceaſe to play the tyrant ſtill,
               He grew a pedant infants poore anone,
               He taught and quhipt to exerciſe his ill.
               I with my Loue haue plaid the licher long,
               And ſhee the loun with many moe then mee:
               This cuſtome vile, maks ſinne to ſeeme no wrong▪
               
               And she muſt turne a common Whoore I ſee,
               Though both be bad, and each of both vnſure,
               I rather ſerue a tyrant then a whoore.
            
            
               
               To abſent PANDORA.
               
                  LOng ſince hath Cynthia ſhown her ful fac'd prid
                  And now compeirs with creſcent horns againe
                  Since at the banks of Neptuns flowing tide,
                  I tooke my leaue and ſhew how I was ſlaine:
                  Allace allace, they haue not wept in vaine,
                  Who left vs annals of eternall date,
                  Condemning abſence for a cruell paine,
                  A foe to fayth, a vnfriend vnto fate:
                  A happy life had I in loue of late,
                  To ioy the ſweete fruition of thy face,
                  Now from thy ſight eſtranged is my ſtate.
                  Since all my life is darknes and diſgrace:
                  Yet midſt my woes I wiſh that well thou bee,
                  And with the winds I ſend thoſe ſighes to thee.
               
               
               
                  
                     Nulla mihi fine te rident loca, diſplicet aquor,
                  
                  
                     Sordet terra, leues od
                           •
                         cum retihus hamos.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE ſeeke.
               
                  WEre I as ſkild in Medecine as hee,
                  Who did reſtore Hippolits health againe,
                  When he was torne with horſe; then ſhouldſt thou ſee
                  I ſhould prepare emplaſters for thy paine:
                  But ſince I am no Aeſculap at all,
                  I am thy Bondman, and thy Beadman thrall.
               
               
               
                  
                     Phaebe fau
                           •
                        , laus magna tibi trib
                           •
                        etur, in vn
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     Corpore ſeruato reſtituiſſe duos.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Newyeares gift to IDEA.
               
                  THe Locrian King Zaleucus made a law,
                  That each adultrar both his eyes ſhould loſe,
                  But when his Sonne was faultie firſt he ſaw,
                  That ſacred Kings haue hid and ſecret foes,
                  Incontenent vnto the ſtage he goes,
                  And from his Sonne one eye, one of his owne
                  He cauſ'd pull out, and in the ſight of thoſe
                  A carefull King, a father kind was knowne.
                  In Janus Kalends faire and louely ſweet,
                  Time out of minde hath been a cuſtome old,
                  That friends their friends with mutual gifts ſhould greet
                  To keep true kindnes from becōming cold.
                  
                     Zaleucus-like theſe Lines are ſent by mee,
                  To keepe the law and kith my Loue to thee.
               
               
               
                  
                     Da veniam merui nil ego, iuſsit amor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To CINTHIA.
               Why loues thou more (faire dame) thy Dog then mee?
               what can he do but (as the Scholer ſaid
               At Xanthus feaſt) ſhake eares and tayle on thee?
               And I can do much more to make thee glade,
               With tedious toyle and longſome labour made.
               Hee can perhaps bring thee thy Glo
                     •
                  e, or whyl
                     •
                  
               
               Thy Kirchiff when t'is either left or laide
               Behind thy heeles with ſweet and backaſt ſmyles:
               But I, whom thou diſdainefully exyles
               From thy ſweet bed, and thy moſt ſweet embrace;
               Which fawning Currs with filthy feet defiles,
               I could doe more, but I l
                     •
                  ck leaue allace:
               Fie Natures baſtard, make no Dog thy Loue,
               Leaſt thou a Monſter, I a Martyr pro
                     •
                  e.
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  I Firſt receiud ſince did ſweet Sainct vnfold
                  Thy louely Lines, the legat
                        •
                      of thy mind,
                  And did with blith & ioy-ſwolne breaſt behold
                  How thou continew'd conſtant, true, and kind.
                  But when I did perceiue how thou waſt pind,
                  Pind for the abſence of thy loue-ſick ſw
                        ••
                     ne,
                  My toong was doomb, my ſilent eyes were blind,
                  I read and muſ'd, and muſ'd and read againe:
                  And be thou 
                        •
                     udge (deare hea
                        ••
                     ) if I was faine▪
                  
                  When I euolu'd from out the Pape
                        •
                      whit,
                  That Symboll, ſwe
                        •
                     te tranſparent pure & plaine,
                  Wherein ſome time thou 
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     oke ſo much delight:
                  Yea th
                        •
                     iſe each day▪ (faire Miſtris) till we meet,
                  I kis thy Symboll, and thy golden ſheet.
               
               
               
                  
                     Quiſquis ad hanc vertit peregrinam littera puppim,
                  
                  
                     Ille mihi de te multa rogatus abit.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               I Sweare (ſweet Kala) by my flames, thy eyes,
               O eyes: no eyes, but rather ſtarres diuine:
               Sweet Dionean twins into their skies,
               And by thoſe kind alluring looks of thine,
               I ſweare by all our teares whils thine, whils mine,
               Nor mine nor thine, but both combind in one:
               By all the ſighs blowne from the ſacred ſhrine
               Where Craigs true heart hath his heroick throne,
               I ſweare by all our ſecret vow's each one,
               Made in the darke, and reconfirmd by day:
               By all our kiſſes when we were allone,
               And all the wiſhes when I went away:
               Let Weerds and Fortune do the worſt they can
               I am in ſpight of Miſ
                        ••
                     s Noſe, thy ma
                     •
                  .
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  O How I long to heare from thee againe,
                  And vnderſtand the tenor of thy ſtate:
                  Thriſe hath the Moone begun to wax and wane,
                  With ſpheirs and horns ſince I receiu'd thy wreat:
                  Then giue mee leaue (ſweet Lady) to regrate,
                  Since thou may haue of traualing troups ſuch ſtore,
                  And I haue ſent ſo many lines of late,
                  Thou art vnkind, and woe is mee therefore:
                  Each one that comes from thee, or from thy ſhore,
                  In hope of newes, I entertaine for thee:
                  Each Poſt I meet, each Horne I heare, yeelds more
                  Harmonious ſounds, then muſicke ſweet to mee:
                  But when my hopes proue naught with ſory mind,
                  I ſigh & ſay, vnkind, vnkind, vnkind.
               
               
               
                  
                     Tempora fi numeres bene quae numeramus amantes,
                  
                  
                     Non venit ante ſuam noſtra querela diem.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To CYNTHIA.
               
                  WHen thoſe which at Ardea did remaine
                  With Aracins did many times contend
                  For Confind Lands, which neither could obtaine,
                  In many Battails, though much blood they ſpend,
                  Yet that ſometime the ſtrife ſhould take good end
                  Both they and thoſe referre them ſelu's to Rome,
                  
                  Imperious Romans parties both offend,
                  And to them ſelues the queſtiond Lands aſſume.
                  Long warres heue been betwixt thy Maid & mee,
                  Yf ſhee or I my loueſicke heart ſhould haue;
                  Shee thinks it hers, it was once mine, and wee
                  To end this ſtrife, thy ſacred ſentence craue.
                  Thou like theſe conquering Romans in this caſ
                        •
                     
                  
                  By ſpoyling both, poſſeyds my heart in peace.
               
               
               
                  
                     Cynthia prima fuit Cynthia finis erit.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               
                  THe ielous eyes which watch my louing Dame,
                  And Argus-like to trap mee ſtill attend,
                  They with my loſſe allace, but ſeeke her ſhame:
                  Which I beſeech thee louing Lord defend.
                  O would to God my honeſt courſe were kend,
                  Or that my breaſt were made of Criſtall cleare,
                  That triall might be tane what I intend:
                  And my true part in preſence might appeare.
                  But (O allace and weladay) I feare,
                  Theſe iarres ſhall ſoone ingender ſuch debate,
                  As ſhall but doubt debarre mee from my deare,
                  And enterchange my wonted good eſtate.
                  O harmonie vnhappieſt of all,
                  Bad chance brings change, and change hath fram'd my fall.
               
               
               
                  
                     Res eſt ſolliciti plena timoris amor.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTANA.
               
                  DIſordered Haires the types of my diſgrace,
                  The teſtimonies of my ſeruile ſtate:
                  Ou'ruaile my wanne and pale disfigured face,
                  And let my fauour anſwere to my fate:
                  For ſince I am th'vnhappieſt hee, I waite
                  That Loue, or Fortunes enuie can aſſaile:
                  What reſteth then? but ſtill for to regrate,
                  Since word, nor writ, nor prayers can preuaile:
                  And ſince my deare diſdainfullie doth deale
                  With hopeles mee, who was and is her owne,
                  My pearſing paines ſhall on my viſage pale,
                  With hoarie, rough, & crumpled skin be knowne.
                  And ſuch as ſees my furrowed face, ſhall ſay,
                  The faire Vnkind is cauſe of my decay.
               
               
               
                  
                     Illa dies fatum miſero mihi duſit ab illa,
                  
                  
                     Peſsi
                           •
                        a mutati cepit amoris hyems.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To ERANTINA.
               LOng haue I had long haires vpon my head,
               Long haue I had hid harmes within my heart,
               Yet none of thoſe are powerfull for to plead
               The ſmalleſt ſalue or ſoftning to my ſmart.
               Could I draw foorth the ſharpe and golden dart,
               Wherewith allace, I ſecretlie am ſlaine:
               Or put thoſe black vnpouled locks apart,
               For which the world accompts mee to be vaine:
               Could I to flit as to be faſt be faine,
               Or thinke that foule that I haue thought too faire,
               There ſhould no harme into my heat remaine,
               Nor ſhould my head be ouerhung with haire.
               Sweet, if thou loues me, powll thoſe locks I pray
               Yf not, cut life, loue, locks, and all away.
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  O What a world I ſuffer of extreames,
                  Twixt hot deſire and icie cold diſpaire:
                  Moſt like the ſwift impetuous tyds of Theames,
                  Are thoſe the ebs and flowings of my care:
                  I liue allace, a martire late and aire,
                  Coold with diſpaire, and burnd with hot deſire:
                  I ſee allace, and can not ſlip the ſnare,
                  In floods I frie, and freeze amid the fire:
                  In Seſtian ſeas to Her
                           •
                        
                      ſweet I ſwim,
                  And faine would touch the fimber of her goun,
                  Hoyſ'd with deſire vnto the clouds I clim,
                  But by diſpaire Leander-like I drown:
                  My D
                           •
                        lphin deare, let not Arion dee,
                  Saue mee vnſunke, and I ſhall ſing to thee.
               
               
               
                  
                     Quicquid 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        abor dicere uerſus erit.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               
                  FAire Sicil fertill firſt of Cruell Kings,
                  When Dioniſe did all thy ſtate ouerthrow,
                  And wrought ſo many ſtrange & monſtrus things
                  And led ſo long a life without all law:
                  Sad ſorrow was the Syracuſan Song,
                  And all ſaue old Hymera, wiſh'd him dead,
                  Shee wiſh'd him weel, cauſe many tyrants ſprong:
                  And were hee gone, a worſer would ſucceed.
                  It is my weird, and woe is mee therefore,
                  To ſerue and loue where recompence is none.
                  Oft haue I chang'd, and now can change no more
                  For badder ay ſucceeds, when bad are gone.
                  And this ſweet hart maks me thy beadman thral,
                  Leaſt by thy loſſe, in harder haps I fall.
               
               
               
                  
                     Quando ego non t
                           •••
                        ui graniora pericula verit.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               When Scythian Lords long frō their lands had bein
               Their ſlaues vſurp'd their abſent Maiſters place:
               both wealth & wiues they breok'd before their eine
               And did the ſame ſeuen yeares poſſes in peace:
               They turning home, and ſeeing ſuch diſgrace,
               fought with their ſeruants for their wealth & wiues
               But by the men the maiſters gat the chaſe,
               And hardly ſcap'd with hazard of their liues.
               Then they conſult with neither ſwords nor glaues,
               Nor open warres, to make their foes to yeeld,
               with whips & wands they bat their randring ſlaues
               And by the change of weapons wan the feeld.
               Since ſighs, nor teares, nor ditties can ſubdue thee
               I muſt (faire ſweet) with Scythian armes perſue thee
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               I Put my hand by hazard in the hat
               Where many names did intermixtly lie,
               With her and her were you and this and that,
               A fortune blind, or niuie nake to trie:
               And lo ſuch was my luckie lucke that I
               Among ſo many, found thy Noble name,
               And on my head, that thou and all may ſpie,
               I well auow the wearing of the ſame:
               It ſhall inferre no foyle vnto thy fame,
               That thou art borne vpon ſo baſe a head:
               A Begger find's a ſtone of curious frame,
               And yet the ſtone remaines a ſtone indead.
               So thou art thou, and of more worth to mee,
               Deare Valentine, then thou waſt wont to bee.
            
            
               
               To LITHOCARDIA.
               
                  GReat Alexander gaue a ſtraight command,
                  That euery Souldier in the Camp ſhould ſhaue
                  And that his face as haireles as his hand,
                  Both Greeke and Perſian time of warrs ſhould haue:
                  When Armes were put a part, he lent full leaue
                  To weare long beards; a ſigne of fat-fed peace:
                  And thus in Greece a ſtranger might perceiue
                  The Countries ſtate into the Souldiers face.
                  I am content that cuſtome to imbrace;
                  I haue no beard to ſhow my peace with thee:
                  But thou wilt ſay, my hairs portend diſgrace,
                  And diſcontent is in my downcaſt eye:
                  It is too true; but let me riſe or fall,
                  Or ſinke or ſwim, I am thy feruient thrall.
               
               
               
                  
                     Addimus his precibus lachrimas quo
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         verba preantis,
                  
                  
                     Perlegis, et lachrimas fi
                           •
                        ge iudere meas.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  WHy loue I her that loues not mee againe▪
                  
                  Why am I friendly to my fr
                        •
                     mmit foe?
                  Why doe I weare my wayting on in vaine,
                  In ſeruing her that hath deceiu'd mee ſo?
                  Why did I thus my freedome ſweet forgo,
                  To pleaſure her that plagu
                        ••
                      mee with diſdaine?
                  Or wiſh her weel that euer wrought my woe,
                  And would not ſigh ſuppoſe ſhee ſaw me ſlaine:
                  O fooliſh I, and haples I alone.
                  No then, O faythleſſe and diſloyall ſhee,
                  Whoſe try'd vntrueth thus maks me to complain
                        •
                     
                  
                  And wiſh before the fixed day to die:
                  For now tint time and trauell maks me ſure,
                  I playd the foole, and ſhe has playd the hoore.
               
               
               
                  
                     Periuriavidet a
                           •
                        aut
                           ••
                        
                        ▪
                     
                  
                  
                     Jupiter et ventos 
                           •
                        rrita ferre iubet.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  BRaue Troilus the Troian ſtou
                        •
                      and true,
                  As more at length in Chau
                           •
                        er wee may find,
                  Dreamd that a faire White Bull, as did inſue,
                  Had ſpoyld his Loue, and left him hurt behind.
                  The Phrygian Nymphe Aenona dround in drerd,
                  When Paris towards Grece made ſaile from Troy.
                  
                  In dreames foreſaw, as after did ſucceed,
                  Her Loue and foreine Ladie ſhould enioy.
                  When Hecuba the Wiſemen did imploy,
                  Her dreame of flaming Fire for to expon
                        •
                     ,
                  They ſhortly ſhew that Paris ſhould deſtroy
                  And ſet on fire faire 
                        
                           •
                        lion ſticke and ſtone.
                  Right ſo might I, if weer
                        •
                     s had not withſtand,
                  In dolefull dreames foreſeene the fall I fand.
               
               
               
                  
                     Quid tuneam ignere tunc
                           •
                         ta
                           •••
                         
                        
                           •••
                        ia d
                           •
                        wers.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To IDEA.
               
                  LAſt yeare I drew (faire Dame) by very chance,
                  Thy Noble name amongſt a number moe:
                  Glad was my ſoule to ſee the weirds aduance
                  The happy hazard of my fortune ſo:
                  And proud thereof, vpon my pate I plac'd thee,
                  With anagram's and Sonets ſweet I grac'd thee.
               
               
                  But now (wiſe Dame) behold a wonder ſtrange,
                  Which both I wiſh thee to beleeue and heare:
                  (I am ſo loath where once I chooſe, to change)
                  That in my heart thou harbours all this yeare:
                  Then from a Hat I drew thee err I ſaw thee,
                  Now from my hart it is my doome to draw thee.
               
               
                  Why ſhould I hazard what I haue ſo ſure,
                  Or ſcrape thy name into a ſcuruie Scrowle?
                  O thou art writ in blood's characters pure,
                  Within the center of my loueſick ſoule:
                  Let others try a fortune blind and beare thee,
                  Both on my head & in my heart I'le weare thee.
               
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  BLind Loue (allace) and Ieloſie vndoo
                  That conſtant heart which I bequeath to thee:
                  I loue thee moſt, and am moſt ielous too,
                  By this I liue, by that vndone I die:
                  Not that I thinke a fickle change can bee,
                  Where vertue dwels, but that mine owne vnworth
                  Is worſe then twentie riuall foes to mee:
                  My baſe eſtate theſe baſtard thoughts brings foorth
                  O were my moyane equall to my minde,
                  Or were my wealth as great as my goodwill,
                  Could I commaund the coſtlie Iles of Jude,
                  
                  Thou ſhouldſt be weell, and I ſhould feare no ill.
                  Then Fortune, Fates, & all yee Gods aboue,
                  Enlarge my luck, or els make les my loue.
               
               
               
                  
                     Venit amor grauius quo ſerius vrimur intus,
                  
                  
                     Vrimur, et ſecum pectora vulnus habent.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PANDORA.
               WHile gathering in the Muſes garden flowrs,
               I made a Noſegay, which perfum'd the aire,
               Whoſe ſmell ſhall ſauour to times lateſt hours,
               And ſhall for ay adorne thee cruel, faire.
               I laide mee downe vpon the graſſie greene,
               Where I beheld fruit's, flowr's, and hearbs anew,
               Foorthſpred by Flora glorious Sommers Queene,
               Whereon the calme and gentle Zephir blew:
               On haughtie hils, which Giant-like did threat
               To pearſe the heauens with their aſpiring head,
               Grew war-like Firs, ſtrong Oaks, & Ceeders great,
               Whoſe ſhaddie boughs the leau
                     •
                  e groues ou'rſpred
               Thus high and low I looked where I lay,
               Yet neither fruite nor flower was like my Hay.
               
            
            
               
               To KALA.
               
                  WHen ſilent night had ſpred her pitchie vaile
                  On all the parts of Vestais fruitfull lace.
                  And horned Luna penſiue fad and paile,
                  Was at thy preſence darkned with diſgrace;
                  Thinke (comely Kala) with what kind embrace
                  Wee ſhew the ſecrets of our ſigh-ſwolne ſoule,
                  How ſtrict a bond we ty'd in litle ſpace:
                  Which none but heau'ns haue credit to controul
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                  
                  Sweet Shippardes thinke on thy Loue-ſick ſwane,
                  Whoſe life, whoſe all, doth on thy loue depend:
                  Let nought ſaue death, deuide vs two againe,
                  And let our loues euen with our liues take end▪
                  
                  And when I ceaſe for to be true to thee,
                  Breath vaniſh in the winds and let mee die.
               
               
               
                  
                     Dij preter hoc iuheant vt euntibus ordine fatis,
                  
                  
                     Jlla meos oculos comprimat, at
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         ſuos.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To his Riuall and LAIS.
               
                  AS thou art now, ſo was I once in grace,
                  And thou waſt once diſgrac't, as now am I.
                  O wonderous chaunce, o cruell contrarie caſe,
                  O ſtrange diſcord, yet greeing harmonie.
                  I once was lou'd, thou loath'd; but now eſpie
                  How I am loath'd, and thou art lou'd alone:
                  In this the wheele of Fortune you may try:
                  I raignd, thou had no raigne; thou raignes againe,
                  Then happie thou, if ſo thou might remaine:
                  But fayth thou muſt come downe there is no dout,
                  And thou muſt be a partner of my paine,
                  The nixt muſt needs haue place his time about:
                  Els fortunes wheele ſhould whirle about no more
                  Nor Lais faire be fals, as of before.
               
               
               
                  
                     Turpius eſt pulchra nam meretrice nihil.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Farewell to LAIS.
               
                  Thou fawns (faire nimph) for frindſhip at my hand
                  And ſayes, thou ſeeks no more of worldly blis:
                  But feid forgot that friendſhip true may ſtand,
                  And cryes met mercie if thou made amis.
                  But harke my heart, and truſt mee weel in this,
                  I can not loue a faigned friend; no no:
                  Since I am ſo acquaint with Judas kis,
                  Shape not (my ſweet) for to deceiue me ſo:
                  For I haue read in Stories old, of two,
                  
                     Zethius and Amphion did diſcord,
                  Till time Amphion muſicke did forgo,
                  Which by his fellow was ſo much abhord:
                  Thy ſute (my ſweet) is ſeaſond with ſuch 
                        •
                     als,
                  We ſhall not friend ſo long as thou art fals.
               
               
               
                  
                     Non amo te fateor quid enim ſimulare acceſse eſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A ſparing farewell to KALA.
               
                  FOnd Celuis ſome time in a fooliſh vaine.
                  Would needs applie emplaſters to his foot,
                  And would as ſick men doe, ſigh, weepe, & plaine,
                  And make the world beleeue he had the Gout:
                  And by this cuſtome which he had, wee reed
                  Diſſembling Celuis tooke the Gout in deed.
               
               
                  How many broyls betwixt vs two haue beene,
                  Which I oft times of purpoſe would deuiſe,
                  That in that ſort our loue ſhould ſcape vnſeene,
                  And vndeuulged in a darke diſguiſe?
                  But fayth that cuſtome hath deceiu'd mee ſo,
                  That in effect I am thy fremcaſt foe.
               
               
                  When firſt our Loue was in the pleaſant prime,
                  Thou lou'dſt mee well, I lou'd thee well againe:
                  But heere behold the ſtrange effects of time,
                  My fire turns froſt, thy loue turns cold diſdaine:
                  Yet time may friend which made vs foes; til whan,
                  I wiſh thee weell, but am no more thy man.
               
               
               
                  
                     N
                           •
                        m
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         vbi non amor eſt vbi non miſcentur amoris,
                  
                  
                     Suauia nil lauti, nil
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         leporis ineſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               A wrathfull farewell to KALA.
               
                  THe whiteſt Siluer drawes the blackeſt skore,
                  In greeneſt Graſſe the deadly Adder lowrs,
                  The faireſt Sunne doth breed the ſharpeſt ſhowrs,
                  The fowleſt Toads haue faireſt Stons in ſtore:
                  So fairſ'd of Loue, and woe is mee therefore.
                  In greeneſt Graſſe lies hid the ſtinging Adder,
                  In faireſt ſhining Sunne the fowleſt wadder,
                  A precious Pearle plac'd in a poyſning Pore:
                  Shall I ſupp ſweet mixt with ſo ſowre a fals?
                  Or drinke the Gall out of a Siluer pot?
                  Or ſhall I caſt on libertie a knot?
                  Als faſt, als lows; als lowſe, als faſt, ay fals:
                  No, I beſeech the Gods that rule aboue,
                  They let me neuer leue, and euer I loue▪
                  
               
               
               
                  
                     Durius in terris nihil eſt quod viuat antant
                           •
                        ,
                  
                  
                     Nec modo ſi ſapias quod minus eſse velis.
                  
               
            
            
               
               To PENELOPE.
               WHen Tyndaris was broght from Troy againe
               and princely Pergam leueld with the ground
               And fatfed earth with Phrygian fleſh was faine
               Through ſhallow furrs faire fruit's for to refound,
               The facund wiſe 
                     Ʋliſses moſt renound,
               By fatall anſwers was foretold wee find,
               That he ſhould not in deadlie deep's be dround,
               Although withheld with many contrar wind:
               Yet that vnhappy and that baſtard brat,
               That Parricid which from a farre ſhould come,
               
                  Telegonus whom he with Circe gat,
               Should kill his father at his comming home:
               Though I haue paſt as many ſtorm's as hee,
               The laſt is worſt, and for thy loue I die.
            
            
               
               Elegie to KALA.
               REed this, and then no more,
               this ſhalbe laſt of all,
               And ſhould been firſt, if now I could,
               my publiſht Rymes recall,
               But they are gone abrod
               vpon the winges of Fame:
               Na, can the glyding Ocean waues
               put bounds vnto the ſame:
               The ſpacious Continent,
               Nor yet the bordering mane,
               Can neither h
                     •
                  ld the woes nor vowes
               of my vnquiet vane.
               Nor prayers, nor the prayſe
               which I haue pend for thee,
               Which makes me thus for to be pind,
               and thee ſo proud to bee.
               This then ſhall be the laſt,
               ſince firſt it can not bee;
               For I haue waird alreadie els
               a world of words on thee:
               But worlds Democrit ſaid,
               were infinite, and ſo
               
                  Thou looks to find infinites
               of worlds of words, or moe:
               No no; my Poyems haue
               proclaymd thy prid, my paine,
               And I am wo that I haue waitd
               ſo many words in vaine.
               For I haue dryd the braine
               of my inuention quit,
               And neither conquered my deſire,
               nor purchaſt thy delight.
               Lo then how I was led
               with Loue, that Lordly elff,
               That bred no pleaſure vnto thee,
               nor profet to my ſelff:
               But as Phaeneus poore
               for Phiſick ſought in vaine,
               And by his foe was cur'd, when as
               hee hop'd hee had been ſlaine.
               So thy diſdains haue cur'd
               my hurt and vlcerd hart,
               And I am weell againſt thy will,
               but ſenſe of old-felt ſmart.
               To Sea with ſweeteſt ſtreams
               flows Hypanis the flood,
               
                  But Exampeus poyſning well,
               maks bad which erſt was good.
               And thus vnlike it ſelfe
               grow's Hypanis: euen ſo
               Thy coy diſdaine hath changd a friend,
               into a fremmed ſo.
               Thou ſawſt my dwining looks,
               my ſcalding ſighs and ſobs:
               Thou ſawſt my teare ſwolne eyes were full
               of liquid pearlie globs.
               And yet, as Nero proud,
               when Rome was burnd, did grow
               As glad as at a Comick ſport,
               and laugh to ſee the low.
               So thou fals Tyran, thou
               from turret of thy prid,
               Thou ſmild at my mishaps as proud,
               as braue as Neptuns brid.
               But woorthy Phocion
               
               a Captaine braue and ſtout,
               For theſe vnkind Athenians,
               
               fought fourtie Batels out,
               And yet was ſlaine by them:
               and when he died, 'tis told
               
                  Hee pray'd his Sone for to forgiue
               his death, for kindnes old.
               So though I be in poynt
               by thy diſdaine to die,
               My heart ſhall charge my houering hand,
               to write no ill of thee:
               For like Themiſtocles,
               
               I rather drinke the Gall,
               Then fight againſt my once good friend,
               though now my loue be ſmall.
               Then ſometime friend, farewell;
               this is my moſt reuenge,
               To thinke no good, to write no ill,
               but laſt of all to change.
            
            
               
               His Reſolution of abſence and farewell to Lithocardia.
               
               
                  FAire Dame adue, for whom I dayly die,
                  And quicke and dead a martyr ſtill remaine:
                  Now muſt I 
                        •
                     lit o faireſt, farre from thee,
                  And flie the force of vndeſeru'd diſdaine,
                  Since I haue weard my warbling Verſe in vaine.
                  O Verſe to be my ſorows children borne,
                  Abortiue birth brought foorth with too much paine
                  And recompenſ'd too much with too much ſcorne:
                  Since Lines and I and all are all forlorne,
                  Faire Dame receiue this laſt enforſt adew,
                  For I ſhall ſee, if Fates haue not forſworne,
                  If change of Nations natures can renew,
                  If tract of time, if change of ſoyle or aire,
                  May helpe thy Loue, or hinder my diſpaire.
               
               
               
                  
                     Quid loquor infaelix, an non per ſax a per igne,
                  
                  
                     Quo me cun
                           
                              
                           
                           que
                         pedes ducunt me
                           •
                        s agra ſequetur.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His Reconciliation to Lithocardia after abſence.
               O Lautia poore was glad,
               when th'Amazon Queene of yore,
               Receiu'd a Noſegay from her hand,
               ſuppoſe ſhee ſmeld no more.
               
                  Cherillus heart was hoiſ'd
               to higheſt heauens hee thought,
               When Macedo ouer lookt his Lines;
               ſuppoſe hee lik'd them nought.
               So, if thou take my Verſe,
               a louing poore propine,
               Which ouer-ſhadowed with thy ſight,
               throughout the world ſhall ſhine.
               If thou the ſheet receiue,
               though thou vnfold no folds,
               Yet ſhall thoſe hidden Lines be blith,
               whilſt thou their backs beholds:
               And I poore hopeles ſoule,
               thy weell affected man,
               Shall be as blith as Cherill was,
               or yet Olautia than.
               
                  Take then my faultles Sheet,
               bedewd with mourning Inke,
               And if thou wilt not view my Verſe,
               to know the thing I thinke;
               Yet ſhall the Paper ſerue
               (O faire and matchles Dame)
               To be a Bottom to thy Silke,
               or ſafftie to thy Seame:
               But leaſt my mourning Inke
               like Niobe's blacke tears,
               Should blacke thy braue Mineruik worke,
               whilſt it thereto adhears,
               Pine with thy ſnow-white hand
               the Verſe before thy view,
               That they may not infect nor foyle
               the farfet Silks faire hew:
               And thou ſhalt ſee no more
               ſet downe before thy face,
               For to reueale my endles woe,
               but this one word Allace,
               
               Allace, allace, allace,
               Allace, allace againe,
               Ten thouſand times allace allace,
               can not expres my paine.
               
                  Allace I am thine owne,
               na haue I hap to vew
               
                  Heraclits flood of change thereby,
               my nature to renew.
               None knew of Hercules
               
               the poyſoning deadly ſhafts,
               But Philoctetes; none but I
               complains conceals thy crafts.
               Though thou haſt faild to mee,
               I am not falſe to thee:
               I am thy Beadman day by day,
               and bondman till I die.
               And would to God thou hadſt
               rich Amaltheas horne,
               To yeeld what fruites thou liſt, though I
               liue lightlied and forlorne.
               
                  Aeneas loſt at Troy,
               
               
                  Creuſa faire his wife
               And through and with ten thouſand Greeks
               
               hee made a deſperat ſtrife:
               And rooming vp and downe,
               emboldned with diſpaire,
               Hee cryd aloud Creuſa come,
               but could not find her there,
               
                  And ſtill he crid, till time
               her pallid ghoſt anone
               Appeard, and gaue him certaine ſigns
               that ſhe was dead and gone.
               So ſhall thy ſoule thy Ghoſt
               begin for to remoue,
               And leaue to be within thy breſt,
               before I leaue to loue:
               And when thy Ghoſt is gone,
               and paſt th'Eliſian lake,
               No Dido ſhall complaine of mee,
               nor ſuffer for my ſake.
               If Romans did returne
               in Arms of ſhining Steell
               Our Rubicon, then were they deemd
               foes to the common weell:
               But my returns to thee,
               are full of loue and peace,
               As witneſſeth this iterat,
               and oft ſaid word Allace.
               If I haue ſaid too much,
               let mee thy peace implore,
               And my Epiloge with a ſigh
               I ſeale and ſay no more:
               
                  Proteſting ſince thou knows
               how I am ſworne thine owne,
               And how thy Vertues by my Verſe,
               throughout the world be known:
               Thou wilt haue ſome remorſe
               vpon my carefull caſe,
               And let thy Courtaſies conclude,
               my long long-cri'd Allace.
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  THe faire faced Woman, and deformed Ape,
                  Hath Nature fram'd to want a taile wee ſee:
                  The ſillie beaſt with her vnſeemelie ſhape,
                  Seems well content and pleaſ'd that ſo ſhould bee:
                  And yet the Woman ſtriueth euen and morne,
                  To haue a taile and ſtill in Naturs ſcorne.
               
               
                  But let it be (for to ſupplie this want)
                  Each diſcontented whore ſhould haue one taile,
                  What reaſon is't (ſince Nature knew them skant)
                  A pockie Punck with pluralties ſhould deale?
                  This then is true, which I obſerue as ſure,
                  A Beaſt hath more diſcretion, then a Whore.
               
               
               
                  
                     Hac venit in thalamos dote ſuperba tuos.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His conſtant Reſolution to ERANTINA.
               
                  SHall abſence long, or diſtance farr of place,
                  With lowring looks of frem'd vnfriendly foes?
                  Shall tract of time for les or longer ſpace,
                  Haue any force to cauſe mee change my choyſe?
                  No ſurelie no; I am not one of thoſe:
                  I ſhall be found no falce nor flitting friend,
                  My loue ſhall laſt as long as life ſuppoſe,
                  Luck be not ſuch as ſometime I haue ſeen'd:
                  But what reme
                        •
                     d, I may not mend▪ but meen'd,
                  And with your will I hold mee well content:
                  Though many thwartering things haue interueend
                  To interturb and ſtay our true intent,
                  Yet all thoſe iarres ſhall not my minde remoue
                  The day of death ſhall be the date of loue.
               
               
               
                  
                     Dum paris aenone poterit ſpirare relicta,
                  
                  
                     Ad fontem xanthi verſa recurrat aqua.
                  
               
            
            
               
               Confirmation of his loue to ERANTINA.
               SHall abſence long bring change,
               or make my minde to moue?
               Or yet ſhall diſtaunce farre of place,
               vnlock the linke of Loue?
               Shall either this or that,
               yon, or the other thing,
               Haue force to breake the blocke we band,
               before the Paphian King?
               Thou art mine Hero ſtill,
               and though the ſtreams be ſtark,
               I through the waltering waues ſhall ſwim
               to thee but Boat or Barke.
               I am not Iaſons meat,
               
                  Maedea to beguile:
               My fayth is firme, this the cauſe
               exponis mee exile.
               Nor am I come by line
               of traytor Troians race▪
               
               I neuer thought no not by dreame,
               my Dido to diſgrace.
               
                  Nor am I hee who brought
               the black 
                     •
                  aill for the white,
               Leaſt Ariad
                        •
                     e kild his ſyre,
               and if their wrack was white.
               A Pyramus I am
               in deed, in thought, in word,
               And ſhould (wiſt I thou wert not weell)
               with blood imbrew my ſword:
               And if by Fames report
               thy pains I can perceaue
               As Hemon did, ſhall I giue
               the Ghoſt aboue the graue.
               No that I looke to find
               ſuch friendſhip on thy part,
               Or promis kept which ay ſhall be
               inſhrind within my hart:
               Or that I greeue for grace
               thy honor to degrade,
               For if my Sainct be ſafe and ſound,
               how can I but be glade.
               In tears as Biblus did,
               though I conſume away,
               Who was huerted in a Well,
               as auncient Writers ſay.
               
                  And though I be reſolued
               to loue thee tearme of life,
               Yet muſt I leaue thee for a while,
               
                  
                     Ʋlyſses left his wife.
               My word ſhall be my word,
               my kindnes ſhall be knowne,
               And with my oath I will no boure,
               for I am ſworne thine owne.
               And for thy ſake I vow
               the Pilgrems weed to weare,
               And when in wildſome wayes I walke,
               the Rod and Bag to beare:
               And this my hoarie head
               vnraſed ſhall remaine;
               A tipe of my continuing trueth,
               till wee two meet againe.
               And ſo with heauie hart,
               adue my deareſt Dame,
               In happie ſtate long mayſt thou liue,
               till I enuie the ſame:
               And would to God thy wealth
               were ſuch as I would wiſh.
               So till the Gods our meetings grant,
               thy ſnowie hand I kis.
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  IF Rodopae the loath ſome Strumpet vile,
                  Became to be a great Aegyptian Queene,
                  Put not ſweet heart thy hop's into exile,
                  Good luck may light vpon a life vncleene:
                  Shee was a Queene, thou muſt an Emprice bee,
                  For thou art thriſe as great a whoore as ſhee.
               
               
               
                  
                     Cui madidos minxit mentula 
                           •
                        ulta ſinus.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His vnwilling Farewell to PENELOPE.
               A Frind ſome time to Thracian Cotys ſend▪
               
               In ſigne of loue, a veſſell rich and rare:
               But back againe before the bearer wend,
               Hee brake the ſame in peeces heere and there;
               Not for contempt, but to preuent my care,
               I brake this gift which thou haſt brought, ſaid hee,
               For if my ſeruants breake the fame, I ſweare,
               They ſhould been bate, and I incenſed bee.
               I Cotys-like (proud Dame, to eaſe my paine,
               And that thou be not forſt to heare my cries)
               Muſt leaue to loue; nor ſhall my Songs againe
               Thy ſurfet breed, nor come before thine eyes:
               Not, that I loath, where I ſo long did loue▪
               
               Thou art vnkind, and I muſt needs remoue.
            
            
               
               His louing farewell to PANDORA.
               DEare to my ſoule once degne,
               thoſe paſsions to peruſe,
               The Swan-like Dir'ges and the Songs,
               of this my deeing Muſe;
               Which are Minerua-like,
               by beating of my braine,
               Brought foorth to shew the wondering world,
               my long ſuppreſſed paine:
               For like the doomb borne ſonne
               of that rich Lydian King,
               Now at the imminent of death,
               with toong vntied I ſing.
               Had Atis-like my foe
               thy wedding day been ſlaine
               By Tydeus fearce, then had I brook'd
               faire Iſmene allaine.
               Or had thou been a man
               like her whom Pheſtne bred,
               Whom Telethuſa promeſt with
               
                  Ja
                        •
                     the faire to wed.
               
                  Then had my riuall been
               as farr from thee as I,
               Nor had he now, nor thou been iudge
               to my complaint and cry.
               As Tantalus did cut
               poore Pelops corps a ſunder,
               And made a banquet of his Sonne,
               vnro the Gods rare woonder:
               Yet did they recollect
               his cutted Corps againe,
               And Tantall they condemd to die
               In hunger ſtaruing paine.
               So cruell thou hes karu'd
               ten thouſand wayes my hart,
               And thou indures obdurat ſtill,
               and ſenceles of my ſmart:
               Yet will the Gods, I hope,
               recure and purge my paine,
               And punish all thy cruelties,
               with cruelties againe.
               Had I Ixion-like
               made vaunt of Iunoes ſpoyle,
               With patience then I should abide
               thy furie and this foyle.
               
                  But ſince it muſt be thus.
               from Athens I will flie,
               With wiſe Demoſthen
                        •
                     s, and then
               in Neptuns aſyll die.
               Then cruell faire farewell,
               I may remaine no more,
               I mind before wee meet againe,
               to ſee the C
                        •
                     ltik ſhore.
               But howſoeuer I err,
               or whereſoeuer I vaig,
               In weell, in wo, in want, and wealth,
               thou ſhalt command poore Crag:
               
               Yea might I make a Feaſt,
               as did Democrits ſire,
               To all the Perſian troups, ou'r which
               great Xerxes bore empire.
               Or were I begging bread
               like Ithák Irus poore,
               Whom proud 
                     Ʋliſſes with his fiſt
               feld dead into the floore.
               Yea be I rich or poore,
               or poore and rich againe,
               At hazards all I am thy man,
               and ſo ſhall ay remaine.
               
                  Faire Homicid farewell,
               againſt my heart I goe,
               And that al-make
                     •
                   knows I make
               a voyage full of woe:
               But euen as At
                        •
                     ri
                        •
                     
                  
               
               with ſilence ſwee
                     •
                   doth 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               And none pe
                     •
                  ce
                     ••
                  's 
                     •
                  f vp or downe,
               or whither 
                     〈◊〉
                   the 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               So none ſaue thou ſhall 
                     〈◊〉
                  
               
               the caus of all my pai
                     ••
                  
                  ▪
               
               And none ſhall know wherefore I goe,
               nor when I 
                     〈…〉
                   againe.
               And ſo till time wee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               deare heart, whom I 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
               
               Farewell; ye
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   me leaue to 
                     ••
                  gh▪
               
               and ſay, Farewell once more.
            
            
               
               To his PANDORA from England.
               NOw while amid thoſe daintie Douns & Dales
               with Shepheard Swains I ſit vnknown to mee
               Wee ſweetly ſing, and tell paſtorall tales:
               But my diſcourſe and Songs-theame is of thee;
               For otherwayes allace, how can it be.
               Let Venus leaue her bleſt abod aboue
               To tempt my Loue, yet thou ſweet ſoule shalt ſee
               That I thy man, and thou shalt die my loue.
               No tract of time, nor ſad eclipſe of place,
               Nor abſence long, which ſometime were due cures
               To my diſeaſe, shall make thy ſlaue to ceaſe
               From ſeruing thee till life or breath indures:
               And till wee meet, my ruſtick mats and I,
               Through woods & plains, Pandoras prayſe shal cry.
            
            
               
               To LAIS.
               
                  
                     HArpaste poore, was blind of either eye,
                  Yet would thee not beleeue that it was ſo▪
                  
                  The roomes are darke wherein I dwell, ſayd shee,
                  Take mee abrod, and but a guyd I'le go:
                  The wife was led abrod into the wind,
                  And yet poore ſoule ſhe ſtill continued blind.
               
               
                  Thinks thou that change frō this to yonder place▪
                  
                  Can caus thy ſhame and ſcandall to decay?
                  No Lais no, I pray thee hold thy peace,
                  And put theſe fond opinions quite away:
                  For while thy life, or yet my ſins endu
                        ••
                     ,
                  The world ſhall ſay, thou art a ſhameles whore.
               
               
               
                  
                     Faemina nulla bona est, vel ſi bona contigit vlla,
                  
                  
                     Neſcio quo caſu r
                           •
                        s mala facta bona eſt.
                  
               
            
            
               
               His faythfull ſeruice to IDEA.
               MY wandring Verſe hath made thee known al
                     •
                   where
               Thou known by them, & they are known by mee▪
               
               Thou, they, and I, a true relation beare:
               As but the one, an other can not bee;
               For if it chance by thy diſdane I die,
               My Songs ſhal ceaſe, and thou be known no more.
               Thus by experience thou mayſt plainly ſee,
               I them, thou mee, and they do thee decore.
               Thou art that Dame whom I ſhall ay adore
               In ſpight of Fortune and the frowning Fats,
               Whoſe shining beautie makes my Songs to ſore
               In Hyperbolik loftie 
                     •
                  eigh conceits:
               Thou, they, & I throughout the world be known
               They mine▪ thou theirs, and laſt I am thine own.
            
         
         
            
            To my Honorable good Lord and Maiſter (the true Maecenas of my Muſe) George Earle of Dunbar, Lord Barwick, high Treſurar of Sotland.
            
               I Am (Noble Maecenas) a spendthrift, vnwiſely liberall; more prone to propine Preſentes, and make fooliſh Feaſtes, then to pay my Debts: All my babling Bils are alreadie baptized, and nothing left, ſaue theſe ſubſequent Songes; which to your Honor, in all duetifull loue and deuotion, I dedicate. Philopaemen did ſometime leaue his companie, and comming aloue to a houſe where he was expreſly looked for; his Hoſtes, who knew him not, and ſaw him ſo euill fauored a fellow, employed him to helpe her

Maydes to draw water, and mende the fire for Philopaemen. The Gentlemen of his traine finding him buſie at worke, enquired what he did? who anſwered, I pay the forfeyture of my vnhandſomnes. I haue thought good (my Honorable good Lord and Maiſter) to giue theſe Songs the laſt place in my Booke: if any demaunde the cauſe, I anſwere with Philopaemen, For their methodles and irregular vnhandſomnes. If your Honor doe not protege and defende them, ſome Paraſiticall Abdagaſis will ſeeke to kill Aſineus and his brother vnder truſt: But be you a royall and ſeconde Artabanus, who ſayd to Abdagaſis, (I can not cōſent to betray a man that truſteth to my protection; and ſince he hath giuen mee his hand, I will keepe the oath I haue made to him by my Gods:) Doe herein (deare Lord) as you will encourage mee hereafter to vndertake a greater taske. I haue highly (I confeſſe) abuſed both time and talent in theſe amoroſe and idle toyes. But your Honor vpon the gracious acceptaunce hereof, may haplie ere

long ſee mee recouer my eſtate, and reedifie the decayed walles of my youth. What I haue heere ſet downe, is for your ſollace; and ſo I beſeech your Honor to accept from the Table of my Chamber, at your liberall charge and allowance, the .5. day of Nouember 1606.
            
               Your Honors owne man to the laſt article of expiration, Craige.
               
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               
                  MArie of Vitezokia beyonde Iordane, flying to Ieruſalem when Titus and his Romans beſiedged the ſame, was enforced for hunger to kill her ſucking Sonne, and hauing eaten the one halfe, the reſt ſhee reſerued. The Enemies ſmelling the ſent of that ezecrable meat, threatned to kill her, vnleſſe they were ſharers with her. Then ſhee vncouered that part of her Sonne which ſhe had left vneaten. At which ſight they trembled, and horror fell vpon them. Then ſayd Marie, this is truely my Sonne, & my doing; eate you of it, as I haue done; be you no more effeminate then a woman, nor more mercifull then a Mother. My Poyems and Verſes are (beloued Lector) the birth of my braine, & the ofspring of my ill aduentured

youth. I haue theſe yeares bygone luxuriouſly feaſted and ſurfeited hereon, and haue with the Vitez
                     •
                  kian Woman, couered this part of my Child till now: I pray thee with patience, take a part with the Parent; next time (God willing) thou ſhalt fare better. But if any aske (how I preſumed to inuite my noble Ma
                  •
               ſter my Lord, my Mecaenas, my all, to this fooliſh and filthie Feaſt of mine?) I anſwere: Themiſtocles was animated to noble actions by beholding Miltiades trophies. And Alexander beholding Achilles Tombe, did greeuouſly ſigh with an honorable emulation. And his courteous welcomming of my vanities, will rauiſh braue mindes from the boundles troubles of the world, and win them to the contemplation of Vertue. And ſo his Honorable example in reading and reſpecting Learning and the Learned, ſhall pull donwe the Babell of ignoraunce. I confeſſe (as Plutarch
               
ſpeaketh of Ariſtophanes Poyems) my Verſes are written for no moderat mans pleaſure: yet ſince by his Honor they are countenanced, I beſeech thee (good Reader) vſe mee kindly; and for his ſake, ſit ſtill with him, and take a part of my profane Feaſt. My Lord payeth for all, it coſts thee nought ſaue thanks.
            
               Thine as thou behaues thy ſelfe, A. Craige.
            
         
         
            
            
               ALEXIS to LESBIA.
               
                  COme be my Loue, and liue with mee,
                  And thou ſhalt all the ſolace ſee,
                  That glaſsie gulfs or earth can bring,
                  From 
                        Ʋeſta's wealth, or Neptuns reigne.
               
               
                  For we ſhall on the Mountains go,
                  In ſhaddie Vmbers too and fro:
                  In Vallies low, and on the Bray,
                  And with thy feet the flowrs ſhall play.
               
               
                  And I ſhall make thee pleaſant Poſes,
                  Of Daſies Gilliflowrs and Roſes:
                  My Arms ſhalbe a Belt to thee:
                  Thine if thou wilt, the like to mee.
               
               
                  Of Floraes tapeſtrie thy Gowne,
                  Thy Cap ſhall be my Lawrell Crowne:
                  Which dreſt of Daphne's haire ſhall ſhine,
                  Whyls on my head, and whyls on thine.
               
               
                  
                  And thou vpon thy rock ſhalt reſt,
                  And heare the Echoes from my breſt▪
                  
                  For I ſhall ſing in Sonets ſhill,
                  the charming numbers of my quill.
               
               
                  Yea wee with woond'ring eyes ſhall gaze
                  On many ſundrie c
                        •
                     ous maze:
                  And view the Arc
                        ••
                     tecture fare,
                  Of rich and ſtatelie 
                        •
                     uddings rare.
               
               
                  And we ſhall looke a
                        •
                     out and ſee,
                  The wrack of time before our ee:
                  The pendul ſtones, their builders ban,
                  Imploring help at hand of man.
               
               
                  And wee ſhall ſee the Riuers rin,
                  With delicat and daintie din:
                  And how my Douern night and day.
                  With ſweet Meanders ſlides away.
               
               
                  To pay her debts vnto the Sea.
                  And like a wanton Nimph doth flie
                  Through blooming banks with ſmiling face
                  Her Lord the Ocean to imbrace.
               
               
                  
                  And wee ſhall ſee the towrs of tree,
                  Halfe ſeeme to ſwim, and halfe to flie:
                  Part in the Sea, part in the Aire,
                  And Eag'l heere, a Dolphin thaire.
               
               
                  Wee shall behold Nereid Nymphs,
                  Make waters welcome from their lymps:
                  And euery houre into the day,
                  Fresh Floods and th'Ocean billowes play.
               
               
                  And we shall heare the Roches ring,
                  While ſtorme-preſageing Mermayds ſing:
                  And on the Rocks the law's shall roare,
                  Salut and reſalut the Shoare.
               
               
                  And when Apollo taks his reſt,
                  With wearie Horſes in the Weſt:
                  And Cynthia begins to shine,
                  Thy Poets Tugar shall be thine.
               
               
                  Then shalt thou ſee my homlie fare,
                  And what poore riches I haue thare:
                  And if thoſe things can moue thy mind,
                  Come, come, and be no more vnkind.
               
            
            
               
               LESBIA her anſwer to ALEXIS.
               
                  IF all were thine that there I ſee,
                  Thou paynts to breed content to mee:
                  Then thoſe delights might moue my mind
                  To yeeld, and be no more vnkind.
               
               
                  Sith nought is thine that thou ſets downe,
                  Saue Songs, thy ſelfe, thy Belt, thy Crowne,
                  Thy Tugure, and thy homely fare:
                  And that poore wealth which thou haſt thare.
               
               
                  I might be compted moſt accurſt,
                  To dwell with thee, ſuppoſe I durſt:
                  And men might thinke mee more then mad,
                  To leaue the better for the bad.
               
               
                  Yet leaſt I ſhould be deemd ingrate,
                  To loath thee for thy poore eſtate,
                  Though Fortune be thy fremmit foe,
                  No reaſon were I ſhould be ſo.
               
               
                  Thy Lines allure mee to be thine,
                  And thou ſhalt ſee it ſoone or ſine:
                  The chriſtall ſtreams ſhall backward moue,
                  Ere I forget thy faythfull loue.
               
            
            
               
               A new perſwaſion to LESBIA.
               ONce more I pray thee be my Loue,
               Come liue with mee, and thou ſhalt proue
               All pleaſures that a Poets vaine,
               Can find on mould or in the mane.
               Wilt thou vpon my Paruas walke,
               And tread the Flowrs with leauie ſtalke,
               Which bud on my biforked tops:
               Bedew'd with ſweet Cactalian drops.
               On Thithorea wilt thou go,
               Or Hyampeus too and fro?
               Or wilt thou with Pierid Nimphs,
               Drinke of theſe euer-flowing Limphs,
               From Hyppocrene which diuall,
               Or ſprings of Aganippe wall?
               Wilt thou repoſe thee in the ſhade,
               Which Nature hath diuinely made?
               
                  Apolloes Laurell thou ſhalt ſee,
               And louely Venus Myrtle tree,
               
                  Alcides Popler full of ſtate,
               The Palme which thriues in ſpight of hate.
               
                  Mineruaes Oliue, and the Mirr,
               And of great Mars the warlike Firr:
               
                  Which Nature hath ſo well deſpoſed,
               And therewithall ſuch walks incloſed,
               As for rich Tapeſtrie ſhall ſerue,
               From beames thy beautie to preſerue:
               The Gilliflowrs and Roſes ſweet,
               Shall ſtoope their tops beneath thy feet:
               The V
                     •
                  olet and Primroſe faire,
               The Marigold with yellow haire:
               Both Moli and the Balme ſhall ſmell,
               With Miriads more then I can tell:
               The louely Herald of the Spring,
               The Philomel to thee ſhall ſing,
               Both Larke and Maues ſhall abo
                     •
                  e.
               Thy head their ſmall recordars toone:
               I'll make thee Garlands faire of Flowrs,
               With Amadriads in their bowers,
               With Myrtill boughs braue to behold,
               And paint their leaues with ſpangs of gold,
               Which I will checker all with frets
               Of prettie pinks and Violets:
               And when Apolloes Coach agaue
               Giues way vnto Dianaes Wane:
               Thy Poet on his pyping Reed,
               Thy fanſie with ſweet Songs ſhall feed.
               
                  Thou shalt want no content of mind,
               S
                     •
                  ue wealth, which ſeldome Poets find:
               If pouertie hath power to moue,
               Come, come ſweet heart, and be my Loue.
            
            
               A Letter to LESBIA, ſhewing his diſcontents.
               OFt haue I pray'd thee be my Loue,
               Come liue with mee, and thou ſhalt proue
               All pleaſures that a Poets vaine
               Can find on mold, or in the mane:
               Yet neither can my Loue (allace)
               Nor my oblectaments haue place,
               To moue thy hard and flintie hart,
               Some piti
                     •
                  s portion to impart.
               Diſpeaſure maks my Muſe be doomb,
               And Parnas barren is become:
               My Wels are dry, trite wayes my walks,
               My Flow'rs do fade vpon their ſtalks:
               Trees lack both leaues, and Larks to ſing:
               Thoſe Fruits thy falſet doth foorth bring,
               
                  Hadſt thou not known that I was poore,
               Then Luker might thy loue allure:
               Why art thou of ſo churliſh kind,
               To loue the moyan, not the mind?
               Proud in her heart would Phillis bee,
               To proue thy pediſeque, for mee:
               Shee followeth mee, and yet I flie,
               Purſew'd of her, and plagu'd of thee:
               But wouldſt thou to thy ſeruile ſlaue,
               Bequeath the credit which I craue?
               Muſe, Birds, Hils, Wels, Trees, Flowrs, & Walks,
               Would ſing, flow, floriſh on their ſtalks:
               And I reuiu'd by thee (faire Dame)
               My wonted courage would acclame.
               Then let me know thy vtter will,
               Vpon this Paper good or ill:
               And ſo till I the ſame receaue,
               I am thy well affected ſlaue.
            
            
               
               Sonet to LESBIA.
               TIme and my thoughts Togither ſpurr the Poſt,
               For once I thought to ſpend my time for gaine:
               Yet while I thought this thought, the ti
                     ••
                   was lo
                     •
                  t
               And left me there, to thinke my though
                     •
                   was va
                     ••
                  e
               And while I pauſe the poſting time to ſpend,
               Time ſpends it ſelfe and mee: but how I muſe:
               The more I muſe, the mo
                     •
                  e 
                     •
                   haſt my end.
               Thus Time doth mee, an
                     •
                   do Time abuſe:
               That Time once tint can not returne againe.
               A ſecret ſorrow doth poſſes my mind,
               But leaſt the world ſhould know why I complaine
               Deare to my ſoule I pray thee proue more kind.
               I dreame the darke, and driue in dooll the day,
               Thus waſt my time, and weare my ſelfe away.
            
            
               
               LESBIA her anſwer.
               DRiue not deare hart, in dooll the day,
               Waſt not thy ſelfe nor Time away:
               Doo not ſo much as dreame by night,
               Vnles thy Dreames be ſhort and ſlight.
               Though wauering wits in time will vaige,
               Be thou thy ſelfe a conſtant Craige.
               
               And for thy Loue thou bears to mee,
               I am thy debtor till I die.
               What I haue hight hap good or ill,
               But fraud or feare I ſhall fulfill,
               I am not of a churliſh kind,
               To loue the moyane not the mind,
               No contrar chauſe, nor fortune ſtrange,
               Shall make my ſetled mind to change:
               I am thine ſworne, and I ſhall ſeale
               What I haue ſayd; till when fareweale.
            
            
               
               CODRVS Complaint and Farewell to Ralatibia.
               
               
                  A Shepheard poore with ſtore of pains oppreſt
                  Beneath the branches of a leauie tree,
                  With Lute in hand deliuered his vnreſt,
                  When none was nie but Satyrs, Fauns, and hee
                        •
                     
                  
                  And hauing tund his baſe and treble ſtring,
                  Hee ſigh'd, hee ſob'd, and thus began ro ſing.
               
               
                  Why am I baniſht from thoſe bleſſed bounds
                  Where I was wont with pleaſure to repaire?
                  What cruell doome my comfort ſo confounds,
                  And caſts mee in the confins of diſpaire?
                  What haue I done, ſayd, thought (allace the while)
                  that can procure proſcription and exile?
               
               
                  I am condem'd, and no inditment heard:
                  There is no grace nor mercie in her eyes.
                  I plead for peace, and preſence is debard:
                  I loue, ſhe loath's; I follow, and ſhe flies:
                  All modeſt means that may be, I haue vſ'd,
                  My Songs, my ſelfe, my friends, are all refuſ'd.
               
               
                  
                  Why, was I borne to be the poynt of paine,
                  The ſcorne of Time, the obloquie of Fame?
                  My fellow Shepheards frollicke ouer the plaine,
                  They feed their flocks, & court the countrie Dame
                  On Holidayes their Sonets ſweet thy ſing,
                  And to their Loues their beſt oblations bring.
               
               
                  But I exild from Kalatibia's eyes
                  By her decret, whom I shall ay adore:
                  Muſt ſacrifice, ſigh, tears, plaints, gro
                        •
                     s, and cryes:
                  But all in vaine, and woe is mee therefore:
                  I long, I loue, I fry, I freeze, I pine,
                  No punishment can be compard to mine.
               
               
                  Allace, allace, my flocks both ſtarue and ſtray,
                  quit macerat to want their maiſters eye:
                  Which with Liciſcais harmles Barke would ſtay,
                  And turne againe from neighbour corns to mee:
                  My litle Lambs, my faire and fertill Ewes,
                  With ſad reports their plaints for mee renewes.
               
               
                  What madnes mooues remorſles faire, thy mind,
                  Since neither plaints nor prayers can haue place?
                  Haſt thou concluded ſtill to kythe vnkind,
                  
                     And day by day delight in my diſgrace?
                  O bee it ſo! if needs it muſt be ſo,
                  For I am armd for euerie kind of woe.
               
               
                  Since I am thus proſcrib'd, I pray thee take
                  (Faire Kalatihia) this inforc'd fareweale.
                  Since Fortune, Loue, and weerds, auow my wrake,
                  To whom ſhall I (deſpiſed ſoule) appeale?
                  O loue no more, nor leue no more a thrall,
                  Die Codrus die, end loue and life and all.
               
               
                  But Puſillany me poore and hartles man,
                  Why wouldſt thou die to pleaſe ſo proud a Dame?
                  Though thou be banisht for a while, what than,
                  Shee's not ſo cruell but shee may reclame?
                  Yet flie, be gone; let good or bad befall thee.
                  And care no more, ſuppoſe she neuer recall thee
               
               
                  And thus poore ſoule, from out the Groue he goes,
                  And leaues (allace) both Lines and Lute behind:
                  Which I (the true Secretar to his woes.
                  And fellow of his fortun
                        •
                     ) did foorth find:
                  And for his ſake I ſigh, ſing, ſay, & show them
                  that cruel ſhe, whō they concern may know thē.
               
            
            
               
               CODRVS his reconciliation to his heart, after he hath abiured KALATIBIA.
               
                  POore wandring hart, which like the prodig child
                  From reaſons rule hath run ſo long aſtray,
                  Miſled by Loue, with fancies fond beguild:
                  And now returnd with torne and rent array,
                  my halfe and better part ſince thou art come,
                  with true remorſe moſt kindly welcome home.
               
               
                  Laciuious looks of life bewitching eye,
                  Inconſtant oath's of moſt vnſetled mind,
                  You fals inflections of a Iudas knee,
                  You worthles vowes which vaniſh with the wind,
                  Diſpatch your ſelfe, and let mee liue in peace,
                  Within my hart thou haue no dwelling place.
               
               
                  Come ſit thee downe (deare hart) wee'l haue a feaſt
                  My fond Conceits I for a Calfe will kill:
                  I am thy Oaſt, and thou ſhalt be my gueſt,
                  Repenting Teares will furniſh Wine at will:
                  Our Muſick Sighs: and if I were more able,
                  Fayth thou ſhould find a banquet for thy table.
               
               
                  
                  With hartie draughts will wee to drinke begin,
                  Vnto the brim let reaſonn fill each bowll:
                  I'll lock the gate, and Loue shall not looke in,
                  That our contract may knit without controull,
                  In ſureſt ſort let vs betroth our ſelfe,
                  And band gainſt Beautie, and the blinded elfe.
               
               
                  Sigh ſorie hart, and I will weepe with thee,
                  Let no eclipſe diuide vs two againe:
                  Let Reaſon hencefoorth guyd and ruler bee,
                  And wa
                        •
                     t no more the ſwift wingd Time in vaine
                  And while my teares can intertaine thy feaſt,
                  Repenting heart thou art a pleaſing Ghueſt.
               
               
                  Now ſetlet heart ſecure and f
                        •
                     ee from feare,
                  Though all the earth ſhould ſinke in ſeas of Loue,
                  Fleet in the Arke, ſit ſtill in Reaſons chare,
                  And to the world giue verdits from aboue,
                  The life of Wiſedome in Experience lies:
                  Then let thine owne misfortuns mak thee wiſe.
               
               
                  
                     Faemineos poſt hac diſce canere dolos.
                  
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            To the Author.
            
               LOue now reſolu'd to work ſo rare a wonder,
            As to make Rocks bereauers, Stones a Streame,
            Straight to a Craig of Caledon hee came:
            Whoſe yet vndaunted prid hee gan to ponder.
            Haue I (ſaid hee) the Earth's deepe Center vnder,
            Made Phlegeton his floods to feare my flame?
            Did I the mightie Trident bearer tame,
            And threatned roo, the thrower of the thunder?
            And ſhall one onely Craig withſtand my dart,
            With that his Arrow to his eare he drew,
            which through the yeelding air loud whiſtling flew
            And turnd his hardnes to a humane Hart:
            
               From out whoſe wound, witnes you Nymph's but names
            
            
               Great Floods guſh out of ſweet Castalian ſtreames.
            
            
               I. M.
            
         
         
            
            Cragio ſuo.
            INgenij ſi verna ſeges primoribus annis,
            in tam laudandum luxuriauit opus:
            Quos fructus ſperare iubes cum forttibus annis,
            Iudicij accedit lima ſeuera tui.
            
               Robertus Aytonus.
            
         
         
            De Alexandro Rupoeo populari, familiari et amico ſuo qui ſupra plebem vulgus et populum.
            THreicij quiſquis credit modulamine vatis
            ſaxa, feras, ſcopulos reſsilijſſe locis:
            
               Orphea crediderit rediuiuum carmine Rupis
            
            
               Arctoae tumulo reſsilijſse ſuo.
            
               Arthurus Gordonus.
            
         
      
   