
      
         
            
            
            THE
DEFENCE
OF
CONSTANTINE:
VVITH A TREATISE OF
the Popes temporall Monarchie.
            Wherein, besides diuers passages, touching
other Counsels, both Generall and Prouinciall,
the second Roman Synod, vnder Siluester, is
declared to be a meere Fiction
and Forgery.
            By Richard Crakanthorp, Doctor
of DIVINITY.
            LONDON,
Printed by Bernard Alsop, for Iohn Teage, and
are to be sold at his Shop in Pauls Church-yard,
at the signe of the Golden-Ball.
1621.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE MOST
HIGH, MIGHTIE, AND
Religious Prince, IAMES by the
Grace of God, King of great Brittaine,
France and Ireland,
Defender of the
Faith.
            
               GIVE mee leaue
Most gracious Soueraigne, in all
humble and submissiue
manner, to present vnto
your Princely
view, or but lay
downe at your Royall foot, this Pledge
both of my seruice to God and his
Church, and of my dutifull and most
loyall affection to your sacred Maiesty.

Of whom more fitly might I seeke Patronage
for this Defence of Constantine,
then of him who is indeed the Great
Constantine of these latter Ages? Betwixt
whom, and the auncient Constantine,
there is in all Eminency of
Honour and Heroicall vertues so great
and so faire a correspondence, that who
so looketh on either of both, may in
him as in a resplendent Glasse, behold
the full and liuely portraiture of the other.
Both descended of most Princely
Progenitors: Both borne and bred in
this most happy Iland: Both Inheritors
and Possessors of the Imperiall Crowne
of great Brittaine: Both by treacheries
of malignant enemies to the Gospell,
first in tender
               Constantinus iuuenculus detentus in custodia à Galerio Aur. vict. in Constant. 
               yeares, then in riper
               Insidiae contra illum comparatae semel iterumque Eus. lib. 1. de vit. Colist. ca. 
                     •
                  4. 
               age, most dangerously assaulted: Both
by Gods only hand,Deus omnem dotum & fallaciam pate 
                     •
                  eat. Eus. lib. 10. hist. ca. 8. most gratiously
(and your Maiesty euen miraculously)
deliuered and preserued for those most
happy workes, which by your sacred
persons hee would effect: Both richly
beautified with Prudence, Iustice, Clemency,
Magnanimity, & all other Ornaments of

Regall Maiesty; especially with Piety,
which being the Fountaine and Foundation
of all other vertues, shineth in euery
part of the lines of both. Constantine
his Loue to God such, that as himselfe
Eus. l. 2 de vit Const. ca. 13 
               preferred God before his very soule;
so he gaue this as hisIdem lib. 4 cap. 35 
               chiefest Instruction
to his children, that they also should
preferre the knowledge of God, and his holy
Religion, before all worldly wealth, yea before
the Empire. His Loue to Gods Messengers
and holy Bishops such, that he had
               Idem lib. 
                     •
                   ca. 52. 
               them
at his owne table, had them in his iourneies (as
Guardians
               Idem lib. 2 ca. 4 
               of his soule, whersoeuer he went:
and looking on them not as
               Idem lib. 
                     •
                   cap. 35. 
               at men, but as
at Christ, whom he considered and beheld in
them, he most honoured those, who had
sustained most dishonour for Christ, as
he declared in B. Paphnutius, who hauing
lost his right eye, and vse of his
left thigh for the name of Christ, yet
this blind and lame Paphnutius: Would
               Ruff. lib. 
                     〈◊〉
                   ca. 4.
               he often call into his Palace, nor only most louingly
embrace him, but beleeuing
               Theol. lib. 1. ca. 11. 
               that he
should (as no doubt he did) suck a blessing
from those blemishes, hee would with greedy

kisses cherish the disgraced place of that eye,
which was pulled out for the profession of
Christ. His Loue to Gods seruice such, that
both for Praying, hee bestowed whole
               Eus. lib. 4. ca. 57.
               nights therein, and himselfe also, as a most
               Quasi 
                     •
                  acerdos quid am sacra faciebat. lib. eod. ca. 11. 
               holy Priest, did with zeale and feruency,
offer vp that Incense of a deuout and religious
soule vnto God: and for hearing Gods
Word, his attentiue affection and reuerence
thereunto, was far more then ordinary.
Eusebius relates,Id. lib. eod. ca. 33 how while
himselfe preached before the Emperor,
he though being in dutifull manner
requested by Eusebius; not onely refused
to sit downe, but when Eusebius fearing to
be too tedious, intended abruptly to
breake off his speech, the Emperour
would not permit him so to doe, but
exhorted him to proceed to the end of
his Sermon▪ and when Eusebius the second
time entreated him to sit downe
and take some ease, the Emperour againe
refusing, with a sad and seuere countenance
answered, It is not fit, either with
negligence or irreuerence, to heare the Word of
God. His loue to the Churches and Houses

of God such, that almost euerywhere
               Eus. lib. 3. ca. 47.
               throughout his Empire, he either builded
new, or repayred & enlarged the decayed
Churches, and that with such beauty
and Munificence, that hee spared
               Id. lib. 2. ca 44. 
               no
cost in so pious a Worke. His Loue to
the peace of Gods Church such: that he not
onely tooke awayRuff. lib. 1. ca. 2. the occasions of
quarrels among Bishops, but to preuent
contentions himselfe satEus. lib. 3. ca. 10. in their Synodall
assemblies; yea sat there, as the
Bishop
               Id lib. 1 ca. 37 & lib 4. ca. 24. 
               of them all, and by his vigilancy
and prudence, reduced all both
to vnity in faith, and amity in affection.
As the like sincere Loue vnto God, to his
holy Bishops, and to the peace and prosperity
of his Church, is relucent in your
Maiesty, and by innumerable demonstrations
made euident vnto all: So in
the manner and meanes of propugning
and propagating the faith, it may be truly
said, to the immortall honour of your
sacred Person, that neither Constantine,
nor any other Prince or Emperour is a
match therein. Constatine like Dauid, a
King of Warre, by the sword of battell

subdued the pride and rage of persecuting
Tyrants, and so with the borders
of his Empire, enlarged the profession
of Christ: your Maiesty like Salomon, a
King of Peace, by that depth of diuine
and vnexpressable knowledge and wisedome,
wherewith the God of Heauen
hath filled your sacred brest, with the
Sword of Gods Spirit, subduing the
Pride, Idolatries, and Impieties of that
Man of Sinne, hath made glorious the
true faith of Christ, not onely in, and
beyond the bounds of your owne, and
the Romane Empire, but from Great
Brittaine, euen to the vtmost borders of
the Earth. Constantine for his great learning
and loue vnto it, is most highly
and most iustly renowned. His vacant
times
               Id. lib. 4. ca. 29. 
               he bestowed in writing of most vsefull
Treatises, which custome he continued
               Id. ca. 29. 
               euen to his last age. The excellency of
whose writings may bee easily discerned,
partly by that one Oration, ad coetum
Sanctorum, which demonstrates an
heart, fraught with all humane and diuine
knowledge: partly by that auidity

which whole
               lb. ca. 29. 
               multitudes had, who
flocked to heare his Princely and diuine
discourses. But in truth, what are
these, to those so many 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               ? to those
exact and neuer sufficiently admired Apologeticals
of the Faith? to those diuine
and inimitable meditations, to those innumerable
and mellifluous Orations, which
haue, and still doe flow from the vnemptied
Fountaine of your Maiesties
sacred tongue and pen? which euen enforce
all iudicious and religious Hearers
and Readers of them, to breake
forth into those patheticall admirations
of the Queene of Sheba. It
               2. Chron. 9. 5. &c. 
               was a true
word which I heard of thy sayings and of thy
wisedome: but behold the one halfe thereof was
not told vnto me. Happy are thy men, and
happy are thy seruants, which stand before
thee alway, and heare thy wisedome. Blessed
be the Lord thy God, which loued thee, to
set thee on his Throne, as King instead of the
Lord thy God Because thy God loued Israel, to
establish it for euer, therfore hath he made thee
King euer them, to execute Iudgement & Iustice.
This Eminency of Piety, Knowledge

and Wisedom, as in all true Christian &
Religous hearts it hath, and will euer
most deseruedly purchase both Honour
and Admiration: So from the sonnes of
Belial, & enemies to the faith of Christ.
What else could bee expected, but the
bitter scoffes and scurrill Calumnies of
of their most virulent and venomous
tongues? In which kind of base and reuiling
Oratory, the Iulians, Zosimi, and
other heathen Maligners of Constantine,
doe by many degrees, come short
of the moderne Pacentij Parsonij, and
Scioppij of this age: all whose names shall
rot and become as dung on the Earth,
when the vnblemished Honor and the
most blessed names of the two Constantines,
shall as an ointment of most precious
Spickrard bee powred throughout the
whole Church of God: For God himselfe
hath foretold1. sam. 
                     •
                  . 30. of both. Them that honononr
me will I honour: but they that despise
me shall be despised. What in this Treatise I
haue now said, either for the Honor &
Defence of the former Constantine, or in
discouery of that forged Romane Synod,
               
which abetting the calumnies deuised against
him, was the first occasion of the
whole discourse, or of the Popes temporall
Monarchy, which vtterly subuerts the Imperial
Dignity and Rights both of Constantine
and all other Princes; I do heere,
most Gracious Soueraigne, with al humility
both of mind and body, lay downe before
your sacred Maiesty; in few, but feruent
words, beseeching the God of glory
that after a long and most happy Reigne
here vpon earth, your Maiesty not leauing
but exchanging this earthly, with
an heauenly Diadem, may both reigne
here in your Princely and Most blessed Issue
so long as the World endureth, and being
crowned with Immortality, may shine
as the Sunne in the brightnesse of celestiall
glory for euermore.
            
               Your Maiesties most humble
and dutifull subiect,
Ri: Crakanthorp.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               The Contents of the Chapters in the
first part, which is the defence of
Constantine.
               THe first reason prouing the second Roman Synod
vnder Siluester to be a forgery, taken from the
persons supposed to haue bin assembled therin. Ca. 1
               The second reason prouing the same Romane Synod
to be a forgery, taken firom the Acts and Canons
thereof. Cap. 2.
               The third reason prouing the same Synod to bee a
forgery, taken from the time when this Councell is
sayd to haue bene held. Cap. 3.
               The fourth reason prouing the same to be a forgery
taken from the supposed murder of Crispus by his father
Constantine. Cap. 4.
               The fift reason prouing the same Synod to be a forgery
taken from the supposed leprosie of Constantine.
Cap. 5.
               The sixt reason prouing the same Synod to be a forgery,
taken from the Baptisme of Constantine by
Pope Siluester. Cap. 6.
               The seuenth reason prouing the same Synod to be a
forgery taken from the Donation of Constantine,
and first of the Charter or Edict thereof. Cap. 7.
               That Constantine made no such Donation as they
pretend, and the reasons of Gretzer to proue that Donation
refuted. Cap. 8.
               Three reasons to proue that Constantine neuer
made any such Donation as they pretend, either by
word or writing. Cap. 9.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
Seuen witnesses alledged by Doctor Marta for
proofe of Constantines Donation examined: namely
the first Nicen Douncell, Eusebius Caesariensis, Ierome,
Pope Damasus, the acts of Siluester, Pope Gelasius
and Isidore. Cap. 10.
               The credite of foure Popes and two Councels, aledged
for proofe of the Donation examined: namely Hadrian
1. Leo 9. Eugenius 3. and Nicholas 3. the second
Nicene and the Councell at Constance. Cap. 11.
               
                  Sixteene other witnesses, alledged for proofe of
Constantines Donation, examined: namely, Anselm,
Iuo, Deus dedit, Adalhardus, Mart. Polonus, Antoninus,
Vincentius, Beluac. Sigibert, Ado, Gotofrid.
Otho Frising. Photius, Balsamon, Damianus,
Bernard & Litprandus Cremonensis. Ca. 12.
               Thirty Lawyers, Ciuilians and Canonists alledged
by Marta, to proue the Donation of Constantine, and
an answer vnto them. Cap. 13.
               
                  The testimonies of eight Emperors, Zeno, Iustinian
Charles the 1. Lewis, Henry the 2. Otho the 4.
Fredrick the 2. and Charles the 4. alledged by Marta
a
                        •
                      witnesses of Constantines Donation examined
Cap. 14.
               Foure reasons brought by Doctor Marta, and Cardinall
Albanus for the Donation made by Constantine
in the pretended Edict, refuted. Cap. 15.
            
            
               The Contents of the Chapters in the second
part, which is, Of the Popes Temporall
Monarchy.
               OF the Popes Temporall Monarchy, and what important
consequents do ensue thereof. Cap. 1.
               
                  
That Christ had no such Temporall Monarchy as is
now claimed for the Pope. Cap. 2.
               That Christ gaue no Temporall Monarchy to Peter
nor to any of his Apostles, nor any of their successors.
Cap. 3.
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned by
the iudgement of the Primitiue Church, and of generall
Councels: as also by the Fathers and learned writers
who liued from the 500. yeare after Christ. Ca. 4
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned
by the Fathers and learned writers who liued from
the 500. to the 1000. yeare after Christ. Cap. 5.
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned
by the Bishops and learned writers, who liued from
the 1000. to the 1100. yeare after Christ. Cap. 6.
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned
by the Bishops and learned writers who liued from
the yeare 1100. to the yeare 1200. after Christ. Ca. 7.
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned
by the Bishops and learned writers who liued from
the yeare 1200. to the yeare 1300. after Christ. Ca. 8
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned
by the Bishops and learned writers who liued from the
yeare 1300. to the yeare 1400. after Christ. Cap. 9.
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned
by the Bishops and learned writers who liued from the
yeare 1400. to the yeare 1500. after Christ. Cap. 10
               That the Popes temporall monarchy is condemned
by the Bishops and learned writers who liued from the
yeare 1500. to the yeare 1620. Cap. 11.
               That the Popes temporall Monarchy is condemned
by the Emperours, Kings, and Imperiall states, in the
seuerall ages of the Church. Cap. 12.
            
         
         
            
            Errata haec corrigat beneuolus lector.
            
               Parte 1. in Textu.
               Page 16. line 15. Artes reade Arles. page 64. line 1 doth represent,
reade, doth scarce represent. p. 65. lin. 14. 600. r. 1600. p. 78. lin. 29.
much bewrayes. r. much more bewrayes. p. 209. l. 29. Constantius.

                     •
                  . Constans. p. 
                     ••
                  0. l. 22. dele as, p. 260. l 1. would. r. as they would. p.
262. l. 21. q. 9. r. q. 1. p. 3 21. l. 14. Constantine. r. Iustinian. p. 326. l.
3. r. hauing. l. eadem dele totam. p. 348. l. 29. r. to vntruthes. p. 349▪
l. 28. portes r. parts. p. 25
                     •
                  . l. 22. Card. r. Corol.
            
            
               Part. 1. in Margine.
               Page 1. line 2. eap. 2. reade 22. p. 4. Trid. 87. r. Trid. 187. p. 6. l. 7.
c 2
                     •
                  . 4 r 23. p. 28. Pan. 3. r. Paneg. 7. p. 81. l. penul. lib. 5. de Synod. p
                     •
                  
2
                     •
                  0. r. lib. de Synod. p. 252. p. 83. post lin. vlt. addatur haec quotatio
Cornel. Epist. ad. Fabium. p. 100. lin. penult. p. 250. r. p. 252. p. 103. l.
2. nu. 63
                     •
                  . nu. 43. p. 107. lin. vlt. diuis. 1. r. diuis. 3. p. 112. l. 9. lib. 1. r.
lib. 2. p. 132. lin. penul. p. 91. r. pa. 86. p. 146. lin. penul. an. 430. r. 730
p. 190. 1. 
                     •
                  5. Inlij 20. r. Maij 22. p. 198. lin. vlt. adde hanc citationem
Steuch. p. 144. p. 201. l. 10. die 21. Iunij. r. die 22. Maij. p. 210 l. 42.
Psal. r. Fol. p, 216. l. 31. nu. 16. r. nu. 15. p. 217. l. 12. an. 1053. r. an.
1043. p. ead. l. vlt. paneg. 9. c. 3. r. paneg. 5. c. 4. p. 220. l. vlt. pane. 5. c. 4
r. paneg. 9. c. 3. p. 2 36. l. 18. an. 447. r. an. 347. p. 269. l. 7. c. 39. r. c. 44.
p. 271. l. 10. c. 7. r. c. 70: p. 275. l. 22. Apol. 2. r. Appen. 1. p. 293. l. 4. part
3. r. part. 4. p. 297. l. 1 Barth. r. Bald. p. 318. l. 9. Edict. r. Edit. p. 324. l.

                     •
                  9. an. 780. r. an. 800. p. 331. l. vlt. Tit. 27. r. Tit. 37 p. 341. l. pen. laic.
c. r. laica. p. 351. l. 1. an. 818. r. 817. p. 359. l. 4. nu. 25. r. nu. 26. p. ead.
lin. 13. nu. 25. r. nu. 24 p. 380. l. penul. lib. 11. §. lex. r. lib. 11. c. 6. §. lex.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               The first reason prouing the second Romane Synod vnder
Siluester, to bee a forgery taken from the persons
supposed to haue beene assembled
therein.
               
                  ALL the calumnies obiected
to Constantine
haue such dependance
on the second Romane
Synod held in Syluesters
time, that the due
examining of this one
Synod will bee a full
clearing of all the
chief calumnies which
they haue most malitiously deuised against him.
               Now this Romane Synode might iustly and
with much ease be reiected, and that by the warrant
of that true and memorable testimony of
Hincmarus
                  Hinc. Epist. 7. Ca 2. Bishop of Rhemes, who speaking of
some of the Decrees thereof, saith, Catholic
                        •
                     
Ecclesia inter Synodalia decreta non computat. The
Catholicke Church doth not esteeme the Decrees
made in this Romane Councell to bee Synodall.
But because it is cited both by Pope Nicholas
                  Nic. 1. Epist. 8. §. Consonat. & §. Hinc etiam. the first, and by Bellarmine,
                  Bell. lib. 2. de Conc. ca. 17. & lib 2. de Ro. pontif. cap. 26. as a worthy Synod
strengthning the Popes supremacie, magnified by

                  Baronius
                  Cum haec Rom. Synodus vt legitima in compluribus antiquis codicibus scripta habeatur, non est quod quis 
                        •
                     uspicari possit hum
                        •
                     num esse commentum. Ba
                        •
                     . an. 324. nu. 29. 
                  for an ancient monument of the Church, and
for a sacred
                  Quam & sacri Romani Concilij actis intelligimus confirmari. an cod. nu. 30. 
                  Councell, published for such an one, by
Binnius
                  Bin. tom. 1. Conc. pa. 299. & seq. and commended in their Roman Breuiarie
                  Breu. Rom: in fest. S. Siluest. Decemb. 31.,
to the publicke vse of the Church, let vs more
at large, and seriously consider the worth and
dignitie thereof: examining first, the persons
therein assembled. Secondly, the Acts and Canons
thereof. Thirdly, the time and some circumstances which
concerne the time, when it is supposed to haue beene
held: by euery one of which I doubt not but the
basenesse and forgery of this Synod will bee made
manifest.
               For the first, had there been any such true Councell,
the Church should not haue accounted that at
Nice, but this at Rome for the first generall Councel:
for this could not be thought a prouinciall Synod,
seeing vnto it were called, and present in it, as the
Acts do shew, of the Westerne Bishops 139. of the
Greeke Bishops 132. out of Rinocorura (which Ptolomee
                  Ptol. Tabul. 3. Africae.
placeth in the very vtmost part of Egypt,
farre beyond Alexandria) 57. Bishops. When out
of so many seuerall Prouinces, subiect to seuerall
Patriarkes, so many Bishops as 328. were called and
present: what reason can bee imagined why this
should not be a generall Councell as well as that at
Nice, wherein were present not so many Bishops,
nor in likelyhood out of so many distinct Prouinces?
And because it was held before the Nicene
Councell, it must needes (had there beene such an
one) haue beene reckoned the first of all generall
Synods. Seeing then the Church neuer so accounted
it, but euer held that at Nice (which was celebrated

after this) for the first, it is manifest by the
Churches iudgement that they knew not of any
such Romane Councell as this vnder Siluester.
               
               
                  Baronius to heale this sore, tellethBar. an. 32
                        •
                     . num. 124▪
                   vs, that in the
edition of Cresconius the Greeke Bishops are omitted,
and he giues a reason why they could not bee
present at this Councell, because there was not
time enough to call Bishops out of so remote countries:
adding further, that Syluester called onely the
Italian Bishops to the Synod. Baronius might as
well in plaine tearmes haue professed the Acts of
this Councell, wherein all these are sayd to haue bin
assembled, to be false and forged, (which is the
point we endeauour to proue:) but the Cardinall
was loth to speake so plainely, and after the Macedonian
fashion, to call a Spade a Spade. Let vs passe by
this his modestie: See but how vncertaine and
incoherent these coniectures of Baronius are. It is
very vncertaine how long or short the time was after
the Synod was first summoned till the Session
thereof: and why out of Greece they might not as
easily come to Rome vpon a short summons, as out
of Egypt and the vtmost part thereof (where Rinocorura
is) I thinke it would trouble Baronius to declare.
Againe, whereas Baronius would out of the
Cresconian edition haue the number of Bishops in
that Synod to be 230. he might haue obserued that
his fellow Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. 2. de pont. ca. 26, yea and their owne Breuiarie
                  Breu. loc. citat.
directly checketh that number, and telleth him,
that there were 280. or 284. Bishops present: and
yet neither of those numbers doe accord with the
ActsNam recē
                     sentur ex vrbe Roma & non longe ab ea (puta ex Italia) 139. ex Graecia 132. ex Rinocorura, 57. Act. conc. Rom.
of that Councell: for if the Greeke Bishops

and they of Rinocorura be both omitted, there are
but 139. which wants 90. of Baronius number, and of
Bellarmines 140. If they of Greece onely bee left out,
and the other of Rinocorura admitted, then were present
196. which wants of Baronius number 34. and of
Bellarmines 84. So incoherent and confused is their
account in seeking to defend the truth of this Synod.
Further, whom can Baronius perswade that in
Italie
                  Tantum Italiae Episcopos à Syluestro conuocatos fuisse Romam credimus. Bar. an. 324. nu. 124. alone there were at that time 230. Bishops,
as by this accountNam ex Cresconiana editione quam sequitur & probat, nu merat Episcopos, 230. ibid. there must, which onely number
of Italians (farre moreItali praelati. Tridenti 87. in Appen post sinem Conc. Trid. then was at Trent) might
haue ouerswayed in any ancient Councell whatsoeuer
the Pope had pleased.
               But leauing them thus intangled in their defence
of this Synod, I wish any indifferent man to thinke
with himselfe, what credit is to bee giuen to that
Councell, wherein the forgerer was not ashamed
to set downe the names and Chyrographos
                  Act. Conc. Rom. cap. 1. the
hand-writings of 132. Bishops as consenting to
that Synod: not one of which (as the Cardinall assures
you) were so much as present in the Synod: or
whether hee might not as easily forge a few Canons
out of his owne braine, as counterfeit the
names and hand-writings of so many Bishops
wherein his fraud might more easily bee perceiued
and controuled. This briefly for the persons.
            
            
               
               CHAP. II.
               The second reason, prouing this Romane Synode
to be a forgerie, taken from the Acts and
Canons thereof.
               
                  THE second consideration is of
the Acts and Decrees supposed
to be made in this Romane Councel,
wherein there are diuerse
euident demonstrations of forgerie.
In it was condemned Photinus
as their Breuiarie
                  Breu. loc. citat vbi iterum Arius. Photinus Sabellius damnati sunt. testifieth, and the like is affirmed
by the Epilogue,
                  Epil. breuis sequētis Rom. concilij qui Actis praefigitur. or rather Preface to that
Councell. An vntruth voide of all probabilitie,
seeing the heresie of Photinus sprung vp as Socrates
truly sheweth, diuers yeares after the death both of
Constantine and Syluester: for after the Councell at
Antioch in Encaenijs, heSocrat. lib. 2. cap. 14. saith; that at Sirmium noua
haeresis exoritur, a new heresie did arise, and that
was the heresie of Photinus. And againe,Socrat. lib. 2 cap. 24. when
Photinus Bishop of Sirmium endeuoured to diuulge
that doctrine which he had deuised, and tumult began
to arise about it, the Emperour Constantius commaunded
a Synod to be called to Syrmium, wherein they
deposed him from his Bishopricke. Thus Socrates, and
the like doth Sozomen
                  Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 5. affirme. Had Photinus bene
condemned in the great Nicene, and againe in this
Romane Synod by Siluester, (as their Breuiarie saith
he was) how did he continue Bishop of Syrmium
more then thirtie yearesSirmiense concilium habitum est, an. 357. Bin. in Not. ad id. conc. hoc autem Rom. habi
                        •
                     um 324. after that sentence? or

what needed the Councell at Syrmium to examine,
or condemne either him or his heresie, which both
by Pope Siluester had so long before bene condemned,
and also by the great Nicene Councell? or
how could either Siluester in the Romane Synod, or
the Nicene Councell condemne that heresie in
Photinus, who began first to broach his heresie neare
hand twenty yeares after the end of these two Synods?
Binius saw and confessed this, and therefore
saith;Bin. notis in hoc Concil. 3. Epilogus. That which is spoken of the Photinians to
be condemned in this Romane Synod, Planè falsum
est, It is vtterly false.
               In the third Chapter of that Councel is decreed,
That a Presbyter may not accuse a Bishop, nor a Deacon
a Presbyter, nor a sub-Deacon, a Deacon. Concerning
which Canon, let the iudgement of Hincmarus
be obserued. HeHinc. Epist. 7. cap. 21. & seq. at large proueth both by
Scripture and auncient Canons, the contrarie to
this: he cals this vanam opinionem, a vaine opinion,
and whereas some doe produce, saith he, Saint Siluester
to haue decreed these things: he tels vs, that
the Catholike Church doth not account them as Synodall
decrees. And after he hath recited the words of
this Romane Synod, and of this third Chapter
thereof, he saithIbid. 
                        •
                     ap. 24. of it; Quae dicta quam aduersa sibi,
& quam diuersa à Sanctis Canonibus & sacris legibus
sint nemo est qui dubitet: Which sayings, how contrarie
they are in themselues, how repugnant
to the holy Canons and sacred Lawes, there is
none that doubt. And after he hath professedly
refuted that Decree by sundry reasons, he in the
end concludes,Ibid. 
                  Quapropter credendum non est,
                  
wherefore it is not to be beleeued, that Saint Syluester
did make such Decrees. Thus their famous Archbishop
of Rhemes.
               
               In the third Chapter is set downe, That a Bishop
shall not be condemned vnder seuentie two witnesses
against him, nor a Presbyter vnder fortie foure, nor a
Deacon vnder thirtie sixe, nor a Sub-deacon, A coluth,
ex
                        •
                     rcist or Reader, vnder seauen: and th
                        •
                     se witnesses
                  Testes autem & Accusatores sine aliqua sint in
                        •
                     amia, vxores ac filios habentes. Italegit & citat v
                        •
                     rba Canonis huius tertij Hinem. Epist. 7. ca. 22. In edit. Biniana textus multo obscure tior est. 
                  must be such as haue wife and children. So the Synodall
Canon. It were worthy the learning, (seeing
the Canon presupposeth, that a Bishop and
Presbyter may be accused and condemned) who
they are that can possibly beare any witnesse against
them, not one Bishop or Presbyter against another,
for they are not such witnesses as may haue wiues
and children, if you will beleeue their Romane doctrinesCaelibatus iure Apostolico annexus est sacris ordinibus. Bel. lib. 1. de Cler. ca. 19.
and decrees. Not any inferior vnto them,
for that the same CanonCan. 3. conc. Rom. forbids; not any lay
person, for a Canon of a more ancient Pope,Marcel. 1. epist. 2. & 
                        ••
                     atur caus. 2. q. 7. ca. Laico. and
of as great authoritie as this of Siluester decreeth,
Laico non licet quenquam Clericum accusare. A lay
man may not accuse any Cleargie man. It was not
without good cause that Hincmarus said; The Canon
was repugnant to it selfe. And of the last clause
touching married witnesses, Hincmarus censure is
most iust, quam
                  Hinc. Epist. 7. cap. 23. 
                  absurdum sit ratio aperta demonstrat.
Manifest reason doth demonstrate that to be verie
absurd, that the testimonies of such as haue wiues
and children, should be more esteemed then such
as are continent, or married and haue no children.
               In this SynodCan. 6. & alibi. is mention diuers times of the
Cardinall Deacons of Rome, which Title of Cardinals

not to haue beene giuen to Deacons in Siluesters
daies, is more then probable. For the name Cardinall
being added to Bishop, Presbyter, or Deacon,
betokens a difference betwixt such and others,
the one
                  Hoc discrimen ponit Bel. Apol pro Torto ca. 4. §. At inquit, & §. Quod addit. 
                  hauing the dignitie and right to elect the Pope,
and bee of his Councell in gouerning the Church: the
other wanting both these. So to say that in Siluesters
time there were some Cardinal Deacons, or
Presbyters of Rome, implyes that some others of
the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome were not
Cardinals, or else it were friuolous and idle to vse
that addition. Now in Siluesters time, and long after
all the Presbyters, and all the Deacons of Rome
ioyned in the election of the Pope, and assisted
him in gouernment. Of the later (which is assisting
the Pope) those frequent Romane Synods vsed in the
times of auncient Popes, are witnesses, which since
the erection of the Colledge of Cardinals in growne out
of vse, as BellarmineConcilia Romana particula
                        •
                     ia exoleuerunt & in eorū loca Consistoria Cardinaliū successisse videntur. Bell. cap. eod. §. Quod addit. 
                  saith, and in their stead the
Consistories of the Cardinals haue succeeded. Of the
former, which is the election of the Pope, besides
innumerable examples, the fourth Canon of their
first Councell vnder Symmachus is a witnesse, where
the election of the Pope is signified
                  Con. Rom. 1. sub Sim. 
                  to be made by the
consent, totius Ecclesiastici ordinis, of the whole order
of the Romane Cleargie, or of the maior part of them:
And this was aboue 170. yearesConc. illud Rom. sub Simmacho habitum est an. 499. Bin. in Nor. ad 
                        •
                     d con. hoc sub. Siluestro an. 324. Bin. Not. in hoc conc. after this Romane
Synod. Bellarmine who hath laboured this point,
acknowledgeth this truth with vs. This, saith he,
Hoc solum interest inter antiqua tempora & recentia, &c. Bell. Apol. pro Tort ca. 4. §. At inquit. 
                  is the onely difference betwixt the ancient and the latter
times, because of old, by reason of the paucitie of persons,
omnes in communi hoc officio fungebantur, All

the Presbyters and Deacons of Rome did in common
performe that dutie (of electing and assisting the Pope)
and so
                  Non distinguebantur Presbyteri & Diaconi Romani Cardinales à non Cardinalibus. ibid. 
                  the Romane Presbyters and Deacons that were
Cardinals, were not distinguished from those that were
not Cardinals, but afterwards when the number of Presbyters
and Deacons did increase, it was needfull to select
some few that should performe this office, and those
were called Cardinall Presbyters, and Cardinall Deacons
of the holy Church of Rome. Thus Bellarmine,
who tels vs withall, that this reducing the Popes election
to a few selected Bishops, Presbyters, and
Deacons, is not late or new, seeing it is fiue or sixe
hundreth yeares old. Which antiquitie wee enuy
not to Cardinall Deacons, seeing the Cardinall
confesseth that for the first times (vntil 1000. yeares
after Christ) all the Romane Presbyters and Deacons
were Cardinals alike, no difference being among
them, for which some were to be called Cardinals,
and not others. Wherefore seeing this Romane
Synod giues the Title of Cardinals to Romane
Deacons, of which name at that time there neither
was nor could be any vse, it may thence be perceiued
that the deuiser of these Synodal Acts, bewrayed
both his malice in forging, and ignorance in doing
if so very vnskilfully, it being as ridiculous to
call those old Romane Deacons, Diaconi Cardinales,
(so the Synod saith) as to say Diaconi homines, or
Diaconi Clerici.
               
               Yea, but in Siluesters time all the Romane Deacons
were not Cardinals, (saith BellarmineBell. ibid. §. Non 
                        〈◊〉
                     .) but seauen
onely who were cheefe among the rest. Bellarmine
herein contradicteth his owne saying. For in

his Controuersies he teacheth, That there were
but seuen
                  Bell. lib. 1. de Cler. cap. 16. §. H
                        ••
                     c. 
                  Deacons in Rome in Siluesters time: And
that he proues by the Councell of Neocesarea,
                  Conc. Neoce
                        •
                     a. c
                        •
                     n. 14. 
                  Which decreed, that in one cittie, though it bee great
and ample, septem tantum debere esse Diaconos, there
ought to be onely seauen Deacons: Which Councell
was then verie fresh in memorie, (as heldHabitum est, an. 315. vt colligit Bin. Not. in id Concil. in
the time of Pope Siluester) and was withall approued
Distinc. 20. ca. de libellis. by the Romane Church: Now all those seauen
to haue beene Cardinals, both this RomaneDiaconi Cardinales vrbis Romae septem. Can. 6 Conc. Rom. Synod
auoucheth, and Bellarmine
                  Tempore Siluestri 7. tantum erant Romae Diaconi (Cardinales abundare videtur) & illi omnes 7. erant Cardinales, Bell. lib. 1. de Cler. ca. 16. 
                  expresly confesseth.
By what other Arithmeticke then he can finde any
Romane Deacons in Siluesters time, that were not
Cardinals, but by the rule of falshood, it is not easie
to coniecture. And although among seauen,
it were no incongruitie to call two or three of
them Cardinall Deacons, as chiefe among the rest,
yet to call them all Cardinals, as the Councel doth,
it is as absurd as to call all the thirtie two points,
Cardinall winds; which none but such as the vnskilfull
forgerer of this Romane Synod will affirme.
For if all be Cardinals, then are none Collaterall; if
all chiefe, then none inferior.
               In another Canon,Can. 5. 
                  Siluester is said to haue
appointed with a loude voyce, that no Presbyter
should make Chrisme, and the reason thereof the
Pope there giues, because Christ hath his, Name of
Chrisme. By which reason it is as forceably consequent,
that no Bishop, nor the Pope himselfe
may make Chrisme. The deriuation of Christs
name will inforce the one both as Logically and
Theologically as the other. And why may not a

Presbyter make Chrisme, as well as make Christ
himselfe? Or why shall not this reason exclude
a Presbyter from consecrating or transubstantiating
the Bread, as well as from consecrating
Oyle or Chrisme? Sure this and the former reason
concerning married Witnesses, were both
framed in one forge of simplicitie and folly.
               There are other like worthy reasons set downe
in another Canon,Can. 16. 
                  Which forbids any Cleargie
man to enter into the Court, quoniam omnis curia
à cruore dicitur, Because euery Court hath his
name of crueltie. Siluester, it seemes, was desirous
to shew his Papall authoritie in decreeing Lawes
for Grammarians as well as for Diuines, and making
a new Etymologicum. Pomp. Festus knew not
this Papall Etymon, whenFest. in voc
                        •
                      Curia. he said; Curia est
locus vbi publicas Curas gerunt, It is called the
Court of those publique cares, and vigilancie of
the chiefe Magistrate and his Ministers, for
the Publique good and happinesse of the Common-wealth,
who like Epaminundas, watch and
wake for the Cittie, while the rest by meanes
of their care, sleepe securely. Cicero knew not of
this Etymon, when he describedCic. orat: pro Milon. 
                  the Court to
be, templum sanctitatis, the Temple of sanctitie, of honour,
of wisedome, of publicke Counsell, and the like.
If euery Court hath his name of crueltie, what
shall be thought of the Romana Curia, of which it is
said; Non vult ouem sine vellere? Nay it were well
if they would onely fleece, but alasse, they flay and
worrie the sheepe of Christ. It is that Court

of which Espenceus
                  Claud. Espenc. Com. in Epist ad Tit. ca. 1. digress. 2. their learned Bishop speaketh,
wishing Pius the fifth would heare what an
Italian Poet and Diuine saith of it, There remaines
in the sheepefold the Boare, the Tyger, the Lyon, the
Liberd, the Griffin, the Panther and Beare. And
vnto Leo the tenth he feared not in plaine tearmes
to say; Romana graui maculata veneno Curia, The
Romane Court is defiled with poyson, the contagion
whereof hath infected all Countries. Thus
and much more Espen
                        •
                     eus, explaining how truly
Siluesters Etymon agrees to the Court of Rome.
               The Canon it selfe whereof thats a reason, is not
vnworthy obseruing; the Pope and Synod most
straightly forbid either Deacon or Priest, or any Clergie
man for their owne, or for any cause at all, to come, or
so much as enter
                  Nemo clericus propter causam suam quamlibet intret in Curiam. Can. 16. Conc. Rom. 2. 
                  into any (secular
                  Ita explicatur in vita Siluestri. Hic constituit, vt nullus clericus propter quamlibet causam in curiam introiret, nec ante iudicem ciuilem (id est saecularem) causam diceret, nisi in Ecclesia.) Court, for that is Idolatry; and if any doe it, Anathema suscipiat, nunquam
rediens ad matrem Ecclesiam: Let him bee accursed,
and neuer restored to the Church againe.
Thus decrees the Synod. Was S. Paul thē an Idolater
and Anathema for appealing
                  Act. 25. 10. 21. 
                  to Caesars Court? Or
is Constantines tribunall more accursed then Neroes?
Was Athanasius an Idolater, an Anathema, when
fleeing from the Councell at Tyre, he went to Constantinople
                  Nos adito principe, Eusebianorum scelera patefecimus, Athanas. Apol. 2. pag. 219., made complaint to Constantine of his
wrong: entreated and obtained audience at his
Court? Were all those holy ancient Bishops Idolaters
and accursed, who as subordinate officers to
the Emperour, and by commission from him, not
onely came into the Courts, but sat as Iudges therein,
hearing and determining not onely Ecclesiasticall

but ciuill Causes, and that with such a priuiledge,
that if any man would reiect the ciuill Iudge, and
appeale to the Bishops iudgements, the Bishops sentence
should stand firme, without any appeale: tanquam ab
ipso Imperatore prolata: as if it had beene giuen by the
Emperour in his owne person. This Sozomen
                  Sozom. lib. 1 cap. 9. witnesseth,
but more effectually the Emperors owne Edicts,
that of Arcadius
                  De Episc. audientia. l. 8. Cod. Iustin▪
                   
                  Honorius, and Theodosius;
wherin that which I cited is exprest, & another more
ancient thē theirs, made euen by Constantine himself,
whoL. 1. de. Episcopali iudic
                        •
                     o Cod. Theod. thus writ to Albanius. Omnes causae quae vel
praetori
                        •
                      iure, vel ciuili tractantur: All causes which
are handled by the Praetorian or ciuill law, if they be
ended by the sentence of Bishops, are ratified for perpetuall
stabilitie, neither shall it be lawfull to examine that
cause which the sentence of Bishops hath decided. Thus
we did once decree by an holesome edict, and this perpetua
lege firmamus, wee ratifie by a law to abide for euer.
Thus decreed Constantine. Let now any of iudgement
consider, whether it be credible that so wise
and religious an Emperour as Constantine, could so
crosse his owne Acts and Decrees, as in this Roman
Synod, to subscribe (as the Synodall Acts of this
Councell saySubscripserunt Episcopi 284 & Augustus Constantinus. Act. Synodi Rom. 2. ca. 20. & ca. 10. he did) to that Canon which accurseth
all Clergie men that come into any Court, and
yet establish the Episcopall courts and iudgement
in all causes, and that with such ample priuiledges as
he did in his edict now remembred: or whether this
edict of Constantine allowing with many honors and
immunities the presence of Clergie men in ciuill &
imperiall Courts, doe not conuince this Romane
Synod of forgery, which maketh Constantine subscribe

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
to the condemning and anathematizing of all
Clergie men that enter into any such Court.
               Another CanonCan. 14 Testimonium 
                        〈◊〉
                      aduersu
                        ••
                      
                     
                        •
                     aicum 
                        〈◊〉
                      recipiat. of this Synod is, that none ought
to receiue the testimony of a clergie man against a lay mā.
What? were Clergie men in Pope Siluesters time of
so little credit, that their testimony might not be accepted?
But of this Hincmarus
                  Hinc. loco 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ca. 23. iudgement is very
good, who affirmes and proues this canon to be repugnant
both to the sacred rule, to the determinations of the
Apostolick Sea, and to the lawes of Christian Emperours.
And because the Synod saith that Constantine subscribed
to this Canon, and so ratified it, it will suffice
both against the Canon is selfe, and the forgerers
vntruth touching Constantine, to oppose Constantines
owne expresse words in that Edict to Ablauius
before mentioned: who thus saith,L. 1. de Episc. Iudicio: Cod. Theod. 
                  Testimonium
etiam ab vno licet Episcopo perhibitum, omnes iudices
indubitanter accipiant: The witnes though it be
but of one Bishop, let al Iudges embrace as vndoubted,
neither let any other bee heard when the testimonie
of a Bishop in any part is deliuered. So Constantine.
               
               Now these so many and euident proofes of vntruth
in the Decrees and forgerie in the Synod, may
iustly perswade that there is no account to be made,
or credit to bee giuen to that Canon which Bellarmine
and others alledge out of it for the Popes authoritie,
which is the last Canon of all, that None
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  ought to iudge the first Sea. And though this also to
be a counterfeit and false Canon, not only the iudgment
and deposing of Pope Liberius (of which I
haue elsewhere entreated) but the testimony of Pope

                  Hadrian, and a Roman Synod with him declare; for
thereinAdrian. cum Synodo Rom. cuius acta extant. Act. 7. conc. 8. was decreed, that In case of heresie the Pope
may bee iudged: whereas by this Synod they would
absolutely exempt him from all iudgement; yet at
this time I will onely obserue that this Canon (admitting
the truth thereof) is not so helpfull to their
cause as they suppose and vainly boast. Had the Synod
sayd, prima sedes Romana, the first Sea of Rome, is
to be iudged of none, their pretence had bene more
colourable. But when it said no more then prima sedes,
why should this be restrained to Rome more then
to Alexandria, or to Antioch? Is not the name of prima
sedes common to all Patriarkes and such Primates
as had though not the name, yet the authoritie of
Patriarkes? Their owne Anacletus and Stephanus will
testifie this, In those citties, saith Anacletus,
                  Anac. Epi. 2 
                  which
were the chiefe of the Prouinces, and where the
heathens had secular Primates for iudgement, both
diuine and Ecclesiasticall lawes commanded that there
should be placed Patriarkes or Primates, (which
                  Qui vnam form 
                        〈◊〉
                      licet diuersa s
                        ••
                     t no
                     
                        •••
                     a. 
                  haue
one forme though they haue diuers names) and these
and no other should be called Primates: And Pope
Stephen
                  Step. Epist. 2 addes of these, Let no Metropolitans or other
Bishops bee called Primates, nisi hi qui primas sedes
tenent: but those that haue the first Seas. Seeing
then in the Easterne Empire there were seuen
Diocesses, and euery Diocesse had a Patriarke or
Primate, as Berterius
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . at large prooues; seeing also
sixe Patriarchall Primates were in the Westerne
Empire, for it contained
                     
                        〈…〉
                     . sixe Diocesses
euery one of which had seuerall Prouinces, as
by the Notitia Prouinciarum and Berterius is

manifest: and euerie primate by Pope Stephens testimonie
had a first Sea; this Canon of the Romane
Councel, as rightly belongs to any of those thirteen
Primates and first Seas, as to the Romane Sea or
Pope. The same appeares by the third Councell at
Carthage, wherein Saint Austen was present, and
to which he subscribed: they decreeCon. Carth 3. tempore Si
                     
                        •••
                     
                     ▪ ca 
                        •
                     6., that the Bishop
of the first Sea should not be called either the Prince of
Bishops, or the supreme Bishop, sed tantùm primae sedis
Episcopus, that is Primate or Bishop of the first Sea:
wherein they did certainely intend suchVt liqunet 
                        〈…〉
                      ciusdem Conc▪ vb: dic
                        •
                     
                     
                     
                        •••
                     . ad quod 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •••
                     lium omnes Pro
                     
                        ••
                     nciae quae prim
                        •
                     s sedes habent, ternos 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   as were
Patriarchs, or Patriarchall Primates, of which kinde
in the Diocesse of Africke was the Bishop of Carthage,
in the Diocesse of Italie the Bishop of Rome,
in the Diocesse of Gallia the Bishops of Artes, in the
Diocesse of Brittaine (as anciently it seemes) the Bishop
of Yorke (that beingNon tamen 
                        〈◊〉
                      (Londini▪) fuit antiqua huius Diocae
                     
                        ••
                      Metropolis sed potius E
                     
                        •
                     oracum, illic si quidem fuit Imperatoris Palatium, & Britanniarum Praetorium. Bert. Diatr. 1. ca. 3. p. 36. before and in Constantines
time the Imperiall cittie;) but since the comming
of Augustine, the Bishop of Canterburie, which
in the Heptarchy of the Saxons was the chiefe citty,
for which cause the Bishop of this Sea is expressely
called by William Malsbury
                  Guil. Malm. in Prolog. ad libr. de Gestis pontif. Anglo
                     
                        •••
                     . 
                  Totius Angliae Primas
& Patriarcha, the Primate and Patriarch of all England:
and the GlosseGlos
                        •
                     a in 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                      Cleros Distm. 21. on the Canon Law, saith that
the name of Primates comprehends other Patriarchs, as
by name he mentions the Bishop of Canterbury: yea and
Pope Vrbane the second in the Synod at Barre, called
Anselme Bishop of this Sea, Alterius orbis Patriarcham,
(so Berterius
                  Bert. Diatr. 2 ca. 4. pa. 199 
                        •
                      Malm 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1 de gest. pontif: Angl. pa. 127. cites it, and not Papam,
as William Malmsbury doth) but the sence was
one and the same, for he did not intend him to haue
a supreme and vniuersall authoritie, that neither

would Anselme accept, nor would the Pope euer
giue vnto him; but he so called him in regard of the
like Patriarchall authoritie which Anselme had in
England as the Pope had in Italie or in his Romane
Diocesse. The like might be shewed also in the other
nine Patriarchall Diocesses, whereinto the Empire
was diuided. But I wil not enter into that argument.
Seeing it is euident by that third Councell of Carthage
                  Conc. Carth. 3. tempore Siricij cap. 2. that there were other Bishoprickes called by
the name of first Seas as well as the Romane, why
should they restraine this priuiledge which Siluester
& the Roman Synod giues to the first Sea, only to the
Pope? or why shall not euery Patriarch or patriarchall
Primate chalenge the like exemption frō al humane
iudgment, because the first Sea is to be iudged
of none? Nay it is euident by another Canon of this
very Roman Synod, that it entended this as a cōmon
priuiledge vnto all Patriarches and Patriarchall
Primates, to all which the name of summus Praesul (in
speciall signification) is common. A Presbyter shall
not be condemned, saith the third Canon, vnder 44.
witnesses, a Bishop not vnder 72. Neque praesul summus
à quoquam indicabitur, nor shall the highest Bishop
be iudged of any. Now seeing in the same Canon
is meant the Subdeacons, Deacons, Presbyters
and Bishops of euery Diocesse, it is euident that
by summus Praesul the Patriarch or highest Bishop
in any Patriarchall Diocesse ought to bee meant
as well as the Italian or Romane Patriarch. And then
it is easie to perceiue both how vntruly this forged
Synode sayth, that the first Sea can bee iudged of
none, seeing Paulus Somosatenus
                  Paulus Samosatenus condemnatus est in Conc. Antioch. 
                        •
                     t liquet 
                        •
                     x Et s
                        •
                     b lib 7 ca. 23. & 24. id Conc. habitum est an. 272. Bin. N
                        •
                     t. in id con. Bishop of

the first Sea at Antioch, not long before Siluesters
time, had bene iudged, condemned, and deposed:
as also how little they gaine by this Canon, seeing
as the Pope by it is exempted from the iudgement
of other Patriarches; so also is euery Patriarch, &
Patriarchall Primate exempted from his and other
humane Tribunals, which will be no small preiudice
to the Popes supremacie. But this out of the Synodall
Decrees themselues, is sufficient to demonstrate
the falshood and forgerie of this Synod.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               The third Reason, proouing the second Romane Synod
vnder Siluester to be a forgerie, taken from the
time when this Councell is said to haue
beene held.
               
                  THE third consideration concerneth
the time of this Romane
Councell. It was held as the Acts
doe witnesse, on the thirtieth of
May, when Constantine the Emperour
was the third time Consul, and
with him Priscus: wherein the forgerer many waies
bewraies himselfe, and his owne audacious ignorance,
in counterfeiting these Acts. Let vs winke at
his eloquence and rare Dialect, who cals the Emperour
Domnus Augustus, and not after the vulgar
fashion in those times, Dominus. In the Fasti neither
Greeke nor Latine is any Priscus a colleague with
Constantine. It is Crispus who was Consull, whom

the vnskilfull fellow calleth Priscus, that is one errour,
and the least of all. A second is, that he makes
Crispus Consull with Constantine the Emperour the
third time. For when Constantine the Emperour was
the third time Consull, his colleague was neither
Priscus nor Crispus, but Licinius, as the Greek
                  Pa. 283. 
                  Fasti
and Latine
                  Pa. 281. also doe witnesse, and besides them Eusebius
                  Ann. Christ. 313. pa. 211. in his Greeke Chronicle, Cassiodore
                  In suo chro. pa. 47., Onuphrius,
                  In Fastis. pa. 281., Cuspinian
                  In Notis su 
                        •
                     s ad Fast pa. 401., and which is of mroe authenticke
truth then all these, the Imperiall Edicts dated
that yeare, as namely; thatCod. Iust. lib. 10. ut. 31. l. 14. to Euagrius, which
beares date in March, Constantino Aug. 3. & Licinio
3. Coss. and another toCod. eod. lib. 10. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 10. l. 2. 
                  Aemilius dated also in
March, Constantine the Emperour being the third time,
and with him Licinius, Coss. beside diuers the like.
Wherefore seeing the Acts do witnesse, that this
Synod was held when Constantine the Emperour
was third time Coss. and with him Crispus; and this
was neuer: euen by the Acts and date thereof it is
cleare, there was neuer any such Councell, or if it
was, it was held in no yeare.
               It is true indeed, that the Colleague of Crispus
                  Crispus 3. & Constantinus Caesar 3. vt in Fastis tam Graecis quam Latinis, sed in graeco B. mendose scribitur pro 
                        •
                     . was Constantine the third time Consull, but that
was not the Emperour Constantine, as the forgerer
expreslyConstantino Augusto 3. & Pris
                        •
                     . in Conc. Rom. affirmes, but his eldest Sonne Constantinus
Caesar, as the Fasti declare: and because it may
be, the forgerer intended that yeare when they were
Consuls, let vs further see, if yet the time and circumstances
will accord vpon that supposall.
               This Consulship of theirs was the nextVt ex Fastis liqu
                        ••
                     , 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                      Grae
                        ••
                     s quam Latin
                        •••
                     
                   yeare
before Paulinus and Iulianus, in whose time the
Councell of Nice was held; yea, and beganne also,

as Binnius
                  Bin. Not. in conc. Nic §. Paulino. and Baronius
                  Bar. an. 325. nu. 3. very truely doe teach,
whereupon they bothBin. not. in conc. Rom. 2. 
                        ••
                     b Sil. Ba
                        •
                     . an. 324, nu 127. doe of a certaintie collect
that this Romane Councell was held a whole yeare
before the Nicen began, or was either appointed or
summoned. Now I would here intreate Cardinall
Bellarmine to reconcile his contradiction vnto this:
for hee clearely affirmes that the Nicen Councell
was begun the yeare before Constantinus Caesar, and
Crispus were Consuls. It cōtinued, saith heLib. 1 de conc c. 5., three years
& it ended when Paulinus and Iulianus were Consuls.
Certainely either Bellarmine must confesse this Synod
to be forged, or else acknowledge his owne
grosse error in making the Nicen Councell to begin
a yeare before this: to say nothing that it seems some
incongruitie also for Constantine or Siluester to call
first a generall Synod to Nice, and during that
Councell, to call another as generall also to Rome,
wherein shall be more Bishops then at Nice; which
yet vpon Bellarmines assertion is euidently consequent.
But it is certaine that Bellarmine in his Chronologie
both in this and many other places is exceedingly
defectiue, and in making two Councels
to be held at one time, the one at Nice of 318. the other
at Rome of 328. (or 280. Bishops, as hee accounts)
he was not so well aduised as hee might and
should haue beene. So for Bellarmine, this Councell
and note of time in it, is a cleare conuiction of his
error.
               For the thing it selfe,The occasion of this second Roman Synod that this Councell was not
held in that yeare of their Consulship, as Baronius &
Binnius for a certainty affirme, there is one thing
specially to be obserued, which containes the whole

discouery of this fiction and the falsly supposed occasions
of this Councell, together with a clearing
of the most religious Emperour Constantine from
those slanderous calumnies and vntruths which Zosimus
and other heathen writers, & after them some
deceiued by their narrations did follow, but Baronius
and Binnius wittingly (that I say not malitiously)
against the euidence of truth, do not onely embrace
but earnestly defend.
               The narration out of their owne writings is this:
The end of this Synod was, that Constantine might
celebrateFuerunt haec celebrata, vt public 
                        •
                     quaedam pro accepto munere gratia rum actio. Bar. an. 324 nu. 124. a solemne thankesgiuing vnto God for the
benefite lately receiued in his Baptisme: that benefit was
the clensing of his leprosie, as the very Synod
                  Synod. Rom 2. 
                        •
                     ub Sil. ca. 1. 
                  it selfe
expresseth. And how he fell into this leprosie Baronius
out of Zosimus and some other, as also out of the
Acts of Siluester doth at large declare. The first originall
and cause thereof, as the CardinallBar an. 324. nu. 10 & 17. sheweth,
was the tyranny and vnnaturall crueltie which Constantine
had lately (to wit in the
                  Initio anni huius 324. Crispus 
                        •
                      patre occis
                        •
                     s fuit. Bin. Not. in hoc conc. §. Constantino. 
                  beginning of this very
yeare) shewed, in murdering his owne sonne Crispus.
the Consull this yeare, a most nobleCrispum nobilissimum. Caesa
                        •
                     ē, Christiana religione imbutum, &c Bar. an. eod. nu. 16. and religious
Prince, of whom Baronius saith, that hee was killed,
furore tyrannicae patriae potestatis, by the madnesse and
tyranny of his father. To this was added the like murders
of his owne wife Fausta
                  Constantinus malum, maiori malo sanau
                        •
                      nam cum Faustam b
                        •
                     lneo inclusistet mortuam inde extraxit. Bar. ex Zo
                        •
                     i no vt c
                        •
                     rtum narrat. an. eod. nu. 10. & approbat ibid. nu. 8., his nephew
                  Licinius iunior crudelissime inter
                        ••
                     citur, ex Eus. Che. citat. Bar. an. 324. nu. 1. & ipse probat hoc. nu. 8. & 9. & nu. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . propinqu
                        •
                     s adeo 
                        〈◊〉
                      non peper
                        •
                      it. 
                  Licinius,
and very many
                  Bar. an. eod. nu. 17. 
                  other of his friends. After these, tot
                  Ibid. 
                  tam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      immania scelera perpetrata, so many and so immane
cruelties committed, Baronius shewsIbid. out of

that Constantine being sore perplexed in his conscience,
went to his heathenish Priests (for as yet, saith
Sozimus,
                  Sozim. lib. 2. pa. 31. 
                  patritis sacris vtebatur, he vsed the heathen
rites, sacrifices, and religion) to be expiated
from these crimes by them. But the Heathen
Priests denying, that they had any meanes to lustrate
or purge so great and foule offences, Hee vnderstood
by a certaine Spaniard, whose name was Aegiptius
(Baronius
                  Egiptius, magum notat. ideo in eam planè sententiam i
                        •
                     imus, vt hunc magum Hispanum nullum alium existimemus quā Hosium Corduben
                        •
                     em. Bar. an. cit. nu. 27. thinkes him to haue beene the renowned
Hosius Bishop of Corduba in Spaine) Sententiam
doctrinae Christianorum, That by the doctrine
of Christians, any sinnes might be abolished and pardoned;
whereupon Constantine forsooke his ancient Religion,
and followed the Egyptians aduice. Thus Sozimus,
touching the murder of Crispus and the rest, to
whom Baronius
                  Anno eod. 324. nu. 27. in this manner applaudes, Vides
haec omnia, You see all these things set downe by Sozimus
and other Heathens, Esse in omnibus consentanea
veritati, to be in all points consonant to truth, and
worthy to be entirely receiued of all such as exactly follow
the truth. This was the first supposed cause of
the leprosie of Constantine.
               
               The other was a crime farre greater then this,
and that was his Persecution of the Church of God, of
which the Acts of Siluester make expresse mention.
When
                  Act. Siluestri apud Bar. an. 324. nu. 33. Constantine persecuted the Christians, Silueuester
with his cleargie fled into the Mountaine Soracte.
Pope Adrian mentions the same in his Epistle
sent to Constantine, and Irene, which was read and
approued in the second Nicene Councell, where he
saithHad
                        •
                     i. 1. Epist. 1.; That when Constantine ad fidem conuerteretur
was conuerted to Christianitie, the Apostles Peter and

Paul appearing to him in a vision, said vnto him; Syluester
Bishop of Rome with his clergie, Persecutiones tuas
fugiens, fleeing thy persecution, is hid in the Mountaine
Soracte, among the cliffes and dens of the Rockes.
And againe, When Constantine had sent a troupe of
Souldiers to bring Siluester vnto him, the Pope credidit
se ad Martyrij coronam eu
                        •
                     cari, Thought that they
had beene come to put them to death, and to martyre
them. Of the same persecution Baronius intreating
out of the Acts of Siluester, affirmesBar. an 324 nu. 33. 
                  Constantinum
adhuc patrita sectantem, persecutionem aduersus
Ecclesiam Dei concitasse; That Constantine as
yet following his heathen superstition, raised persecution
against the Church of God, Which Syluester
to auoyd, fled into the Mountaine Soracte. The very
same doth Binius
                  Bin. Not. in vitam Silu. §. Hic in. Constantinus adhuc avita 
                        ••
                     ctatus, persequutionem concitauit. &c. affirme, and then they bothBar. loc. cit. & Bin. Not. in vitam Silu. §. Quem curauit.
adde, Constantinum ob admissa flagitia fuisse à Deo lepra
percussum. That Constantine was smitten with
a leprosie by the hand of God for these crimes, to
wit, for those vnnaturals murthers, and persecution of
Christians.
               
               Thus we haue the disease and leprosie of Constantine,
and the two causes thereof: Now the cure of
it, as theyBar. an. 324. nu. 33. Legend in S. Siluest, & Edict. Const. de Donat. 10. 1 Conc. pa. 296. & Hadr. Epist, 1. quae etiam citatur in conc. Nic. 2. Act. 2. & 
                        •
                     re
                     
                        ••
                     iar. Rom. in Festo S. Silu, declare, was in this manner. Constantine
to get helpe of his leprosie, first consulted with the
Priests, who told him that he must make a pond with the
blood of Infants, and therein wash himselfe, and so hee
should be cleansed: but the▪ Emperour mooued with the
outcryes and lamentations of the mothers, refused such
a cure; and then in the night in a vision, did Peter and
Paul appeare vnto him, and willed him to send for Siluester,
who would shew him another pond, wherein after

thrice washing he should be cleansed and cured: withall
admonishing
                  T
                        ••
                      autem relicta omni idolorum superstitio
                        •
                     e deum vnu
                        •
                      adores, &c. Hadr. Epist. 1. 
                  him, to leaue his superstitious worship of
Idols, and to serue the onely true God. Constantine being
thus admonished from heauen, sent for Syluester,
and among other conferences, percunctabatur
                  Hadr. loc. cit. 
                  qui essent
dij Petrus & Paulus: what Gods Peter and Paul were? and when Siluester had told him that they were
two of the Apostles of Christ, and shewed their Images
vnto him, he was baptized by Siluester, and presently
                  Confestim 
                        ••
                     nitati restitutus est. Had. Epist. in conc. Nic. 2 Baptismo sanatur. B
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     . in Festo Siluest
                        ••
                     .
                  restored to his health.
               
               Here is the benefit which Constantine receiued of
Siluester by baptisme; the consequents whereof were
diuers. One, his erectingDe his vid. Bar. an. 324. nu. 63. & seq. Bin. Notis in Donat. Const. & 
                        •
                     rcu loco cit. of many Churches, adorning
them with Images and great gifts, particularly
with That Donation so famously
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 117. 
                  mentioned,
wherein the cittie of Rome, all the Prouinces in
Italy, and other parts of the West were conferred vnto
the Pope, and his successors for euer. A second, his
EdictsAnno citato nu. 82. for imbracing Christianitie euery where:
and specially a libertie granted to Christians to
build Churches, Quod ante negatum erat, which before
this time, or vntill then, was not permitted
vnto them, as their BreuiarieLoco citato. saith. And to omit
others, the holding of this Romane
                  Imperator 
                        •
                     am re
                        •
                     ens baptizatus, hoc Concilium (Rom. 2.) promouit eo fine, vt public
                        •
                     m quandam gratiarum actionem pro accepto beneficio deo ageret. Bin. Not. in hoc Conc. & Bar. an. 324. nu. 124. 
                  Synod, which
was to be a publike testimonie of his thanksgiuing for
such great benefits. This is the summe of that Narration,
by which Baronius and others, do maintaine
the truth of this Synod, whereof we now entreat.
               It were euen an Herculean labour to purge out
the vntruths of this their narration, which is as
foule, as euer was Angias stable. Leauing the rest,
I will principally ob
                     •
                  erue such points therein, as

tend most of all to declare the falshood and forgery
of this Romane Synod: and those are foure, all
of them depending on this circumstance of the
time when this Councell was held.
            
            
               CHAP. IIII.
               The fourth reason prouing this second Romane Synod
to be a forgery, taken from the supposed murther
of Crispus by his father
Constantine.
               
                  THE first circumstance discouering
the forgerie of this Romane Synod,
is the murther of Crispus. This Synod
did follow that murther, as Baronius
                  Ex his explorata prorsus habentur admissa dira ac parricidalia Constantini delicta, ab eodemque ad ea abluenda queasita remedia. Bar. an. 324. nu. 28. expresly teacheth, and proues
also out of Zosimus, seeing that murther and the
guiltinesse thereof was one occasion why Constantine
sought for remedie both of this sinne, and of
his leprosie: the cure of both which he obteined
by baptisme at Siluesters hands. Seeing then this
Synod followed his baptisme, as the Synodall Acts
                  Cap. 1. con. Rom. 2.
doe expresly witnesse: and Baronius
                  Bar a
                        •
                     . 324. nu. 123. with Binius
                  Postquam Imperator ia
                        •
                     . recens baptizatus, &c. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Notis in hoc Conc.
confesseth, it must of necessitie follow that murther
of Crispus also.
               Now that Crispus was neither murdered nor
dead, at or before the time of this Synod, will be
cleare, if we carefully obserue the time of both these.
The Synod ended on the 30. of May. in the yeare
when Crispus and Constantine the younger were the
third time Consuls. For so the corrected Acts doe
testifie, Actum in Traianas thermas 3. Calen. Iunij.
These things were done on the 30. of May, in that

yeare. That 30. of May, in the third Consulship of
Crispus, fals out to be in the end of the 18. yeare of
Constantines Empire, wanting onely two months of
the end thereof. For Constantine began
                  8. K
                        •
                     lend. August. succ
                        •
                     ssit Constantio Constantinus. Bar. an 306. nu 3. & Socr. lib. 1. cap. 1. 
                  his Empire at
Yorke in Brittaine on the 25. of Iuly, when Constantius
Clorus, and Galerius, were the sixt time Consuls,
which was an. 306. From that Consulship
exclusiue, vnto the third Consulship of Crispus,
(which was an. Ch. 324.) there being 18. Consulships,
and so 18. yeares, it is certain, that from the 25. day
of Iuly, in the sixt Consulship of Constantius Clorus,
to the 25. of Iuly, in the third Consulship of Crispus,
there are exactly 18. complete yeares, and no
more: whence it certainly followeth, that if Crispus
was murdered before the 30. of May, in the 3. Consulship
of Crispus, then must he be dead in the end
of the 18. yeare of Constantine the Emperor, seeing
his 19. yeare began not till the 25. day of Iuly next
following in that same third Consulship of Crispus.
               
               Let vs now examine the time of the death of
Crispus, and you shall see that he neither died in the
18. nor yet in the 19. yeare of Constantines Empire,
but in the 20. Of it Sozomen thus writethSozom. lib. 1. ca. 5.; Crispus
for whose murder Constantine is said to haue sought
expiation, vigesimo anno imperij paterni mortuus est,
died in the 20. yeare of his fathers Empire. Baronius
striues here against the streame, and sets this Glosse
vpon the words of Sozomen, that he meant Crispus
to haue liued
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 7. 
                  ad vigesimum vsque Imperij patris annum,
vnto the twentieth yeare of Constantine: now
s
                     •
                  ith he, Crispus peruenit ad 20. Constantini annum,
sed exclusiue, attained or liued vnto the 20. yeare of
Constantine exclusiuely, that is, he liued not in it,

but died in the next yeare before it; namely, in the
nineteenth of Constantine. Truly the Cardinals
Glosse is directly contrarie, both to the words and
meaning of Sozomen. For Sozomen saith not, as the
Cardinall with great fraud and falshood alledgeth
him, That Crispus came vnto the twentieth yeare of
Constantine, (which words may admit the Cardinals
Interpretation) but Crispus 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
died and ended his life in the 20. yeare of Constantine,
and so liued in some part thereof. Vnto Sozomen
herein accord the greek Fasti, where in the
20. yeare of Constantine, in the Consulship of Paulinus
and Iulianus, and after the Nicen Councel was
begunne, the time of Crispus death is expresly set
downe to haue beene 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , on the
eighteenth day of September, in that twentieth
yeare; that is more then fifteene moneths, after
that thirtieth of May, on which the Roman Synod
was ended, in the third Consulship of Crispus-Cassiodore
in his Tripertite History, affirmethCrispus vigesimo anno Imperij paterni defunctus est. Hist. Trip. lib. 1. cap. 6. the same
with Sozomen, and so doth Nicephorus
                  Crispus vigesimo Imperij eius (Constantini) anno decessit. Nic. lib. 7. ca. 35. and others;
yea, Onuphrius
                  Onuph. Com. in Fast. affirmes, he died not vntill the 7.
Consulship of Constantine, which was the yeare after
the Nicene Councell was ended.
               That which misled Baronius, or rather whereby he
labours to mislead others in this cause, is a sentence
in the Latine ChronicleEuseb. chro▪ Lat. of Eusebius, where it is
said, That Crispus was most cruelly murdered by his
father Constantine, anno imperij sui nono, in the ninth
yeare of Crispus being Caesar. Now that ninth yeare
of Crispus being Caesar, is the nineteenth yeare of
Constantines Empire, as Baronius
                  Bar. ann. 315. nu. 1. & seq. had proued. So
the murder of Crispus will fall out in the nineteenth
Hic planè annus perspicuè demonstratur esse eorundem Caesarum nonus quo dicuntur esse necati. Bar. an 324 nu. 1. & 7. yeare of Constantine.
               
               
                  
Doubtlesse, the Cardinall was in some exstasie or
passion, when he could not, or would not see how
directly this testimony doth ouerthrow his whole
purpose touching this Romane Councel, which he
striues to defend. For it is certaine, that the 9. yere of
Crispus being Caesar, is the 19. yere of Constant. seeing
Nazarius in his Panigyricke made in honour of the
Caesars, saithQuintum decimum annum Imperij princeps degit. Quinquenna
                     
                        ••
                     a beaussimorum Caesarum occupatos in gaudijs habēt. Nazar. Rhet. in paneg. 3., That the 15. yeare of Constantine, was
the 5. yeare of the Caesars; which is also euident by Eusebius:
for in one place he expresly saithEus. in chro. an. 8. Constan. tini, iuxta vnā editionem: an. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . iuxta aliam, That
Crispus and Constantine the younger, were made Caesars
at once, and in one yere. And in anotherEuseb. lib. 4. de vita Const. cap. 40. he expresly
affirmes, Constantine the yonger to haue beene made
Caesar decimo paterni Imperij anno, in the tenth yeare
of his Fathers Empire. So the 9. yeare of Crispus
being Caesar, falling out in the 19. yeare of Constantines
Empire, could not begin till the 25. of Iuly, in
that yeare when Crispus was third time Consul; seeing
on that day, in that yeare, began the 19. yeare of
his fathers Empire. Wherfore seeing both that Latine
Chronicle of Eusebius testifieth, and Baronius
confesseth that Crispus was murdered in that ninth
yeare, it ineuitably ensueth, that he was aliue two
months after the Romane Synod was ended, which
was on the 30. of May in that same yeare. So inconsiderate
was the Cardinall in producing this testimony
as his chiefest proofe, that by it he hath demonstrated
the murder of Crispus, neither to haue
bene any occasion of Constantines baptisme, or of his
holding this Romane Synod; neither so much as to
haue hapned before, but two moneths after the Synod
was ended.
               Besides, that Latine Chronicle of Eusebius is

many waies vntrue, and such as the Cardinall euen
in these times of Crispus reiecteth. In that Eusebius,
it is said that Crispus was made Caesar in the
eighth yeare of Constantine: Erroris arguitur
                  Bar. an. 315. nu. 3., saith
the Cardinall, Eusebius is in this point erronious:
why may not another giue the like censure of the last
yeare of Crispus, and say, Erroris arguitur, Eusebius
erred, in saying Crispus died in the 9. yeare of his
being Caesar? Againe, the ninth yeare of Crispus being
Caesar, and his murder, are both set downe in Eusebius
to be in the twentieth yeare of Constantine: of
this the Cardinall sayth,Bar. 324. nu. 1. 
                  Perperam positus est, This
yeare is placed amisse in Eusebius. May not another
say as iustly, the ninth yeere of Crispus is perperam positus, set downe amisse in Eusebius, to bee the yeare
when he was murdered? Hath Baronius a priuiledge
aboue others to play the Criticke with Eusebius?
               
               Last of al, there is more then a vehement & strong
suspition, that all this that Baronius citeth out of the
Latine Chronicle of Eusebius (that Crispus was murthered
in his ninth yeare) is but some addition that
hath crept into the text, for (as after you shall see)
neither did Euagrius nor Sozomen know of any such
thing in Eusebius: and to this day, in the Greeke
Eusebius there is nothing at all, either touching the
murther of Crispus, or touching the time of his
death. And the like corruption of Eusebius his chronicle
in other places, may easily be obserued; as to go
no further, in the verie next yeare before this, that
is, in the 18. or, as Scaligers edition accounteth it,
the seuenteenth yeare of Constantine, in the Latine
Eusebius there is this set downe, that Constantine
against

right and contrary to his oath put Licinius to
death at Thessalonica. This is out of doubt an addition
thrust in by some, who finding that calumny against
Constantine, set down in Zosimus (as it isZosim. lib. 2. pa. 31. neque multo post violata iurisiurandi religione laqueo vitam 
                        •
                     iad
                        ••••
                     . most
malitiously) thought good to insert it also into the
Latine Chronicle of Eusebius; whereas neither it is
in the Greeke, neither is it true that Constantine
brake his oath or promise therein with Licinius, for
his promise of life was conditionall, as Socrates
                  Licinius amicitiam simulate cum eo iungere, se astringere iu
                        •
                     a
                     
                        ••
                     ento, nunquā quicquam se moli
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     um in quo aliqua tyrannidis significatio existe
                     
                        ••
                     t. Atque certe non iurauit solum sed etiam peieraui
                        •
                     . &c. Constantinus vb
                        •
                     id intellexit eum occidi iussit. Socrat. l
                        •
                     b. 1. ca. 2. expresly
sheweth, and Licinius quickly violated the
condition by attempting a new rebellion. And Eusebius
in his other bookes is so farre from imputing
any blame or blemish to Constantine touching that
action, that he expresly saithEus lib. 2. de vita Con. c. 18. of Licinius, That he
suffered, meritas iustasque poenas, iust and deserued
punishment, which had it bene effected by the periurie
of Constantine had certainely bene vniust.
               But enough of this testimony out of Eusebius Latine
Chronicle, which besides this suspition, so many
waies doth contradict the Cardinalls owne assertion.
So that still it remaines sure, that supposing
Crispus to haue beene murthered, yet his murther
must fall out after the nineteenth yeere of Constantine
begun, as we haue proued, and then the Romane
Councell which was ended before that time, is certainely
conuicted to be a counterfeit.
               But what shall be said (to adde this in the last place
touching Crispus) if Crispus was not at all murthered
by Constantine? what then will become of the
seeking for expiation, or of baptisme to wash away
that sinne: of this Romane Councell, of the donation
of Constantine? all the other must needs be accounted

fables if that which is the supposed occasion
and foundation of them all be fabulous. For the
triall of this doubt, heare first what Sozomen sayth,
I am not ignorant, saith heSozom. lib. 1 ca. 5., that Constantine is reported
by heathen writers to haue murthered diuers
neere of blood vnto him, and by name his owne sonne
Crispus: for which fact afterwards being sory, hee
sought expiation of the heathens; but not obtayning it,
he began to be in loue with christian religion, and so became
a christian. Truly this seemes to me to be fained by
those who slander christian religion: So Sozomen. And
the very same doth Cassiodore
                  Trip. hist. Cassiod. lib. 1. ca. 6. in his tripartite historie
set downe.
               Heare againe what Euagrius saith professedly against
Zosimus the narrator of this murther and cruelty.
Zosimus, saith heEuag. lib. 3. ca. 40., is one of those who are addicted
to the nefarious and execrable religion of the heathen, &
therefore he is inflamed with spite against Constantine
because he was the first Emperor who forsaking that detestable
superstition, embraced Christianity. Againe,
Infinitis maledictis pium & magnificum Constantinum
lacerat; he doth with infinite calumnies disgrace the
holy Emperor Constantine. For he reporteth that hee
murdered his own son Crispus, and his wife Fausta; and
when he could not by his own heathen priests be expiated
from these crimes, then forsaking his ancient religion he
turned Christian. Quod autem ista omnino falsa sunt, mox
ostendam: But that these things are vtterly false I
shall straight declare. And a littleCa. 41. after he refutes
that slander of Zosimus concerning Crispus, not
only by other authours and reasons, but euen by Eusebius
who liued & was cōuersant both with Const. & Crispus
                  
Which I therefore mention not onely to reprooue
that calumnie of Zosimus, but to declare how iustly
the Latine Chronicle of Eusebius is to be suspected
in this matter, seeing in it this cruell murther is expresly
imputed to Constantine: wheras Euagrius by
the vndoubted testimonies of Eusebius, proues the
falshood of that narration. Againe, seeing both Euagrius
& Sozomen reproue this as a calumny deuised
by the heathen, and set out by Zosimus; who can
thinke that they would not much rather haue reproued
it in Eusebius, had he expressed the same, as in
that Latine Chronicle it is? Or why should Euagrius
reproue Zosimus because he reported that which he
heard, liuing long after, in the time of Honorius: if
Eusebius who liued and conuersed with Crispus had
so expresly deliuered the same?
               Heare Nicephorus: I know, saith heNiceph. lib. 7. ca. 35., what crimes
the Grecians do impute to Constantine, per sycophantiam
& calumnias, by slanders and calumnies; and then reciting
this heathenish narration of the murther of
Crispus, and after it embracing the Christian religion,
he addes: Haec manifesta figmenta, these are manifest
fictions, by which they doe traduce the faith and pietie
of Christians, veluti per comaediam, making as it
were a play or poeticall comedie thereof: Crispus
enim vigesimo imperii eius anno decessit, for Crispus
(for the murthering of whom they say Constantine
fought expiation in his nineteenth yeare) died in the
twentieth yeare of Constantine. So Nicephorus.
Heare lastly their owne Augustinus Steuchus
                  Steuch. lib. 2. de donat. Constan. cont. La
                        •
                     . Val p. 156, who
with great scorne reiects the authority of Ierome,
and saith, he speakes vntruely of Constantine, and hee

giues this as one reason, because he writes that Crispus
was cruelly murthered by him.
               
               It is true indeed that many writers doe mention
this murther as committed by Constantine; but the
first and most ancient in whom I finde it set downe,
is Zosimus, who liued about the yeare 400. after
Christ, who extremely hating the christian religion▪
in all places where hee can picke any occasion, is
desirous to publish any calumny against the professors
thereof, especially against Constantine, as Euagrius
truely obserued: from him it is like that Orosius,
Sidonius and others liuing in that age or neere
hand, first tooke it, and from them afterward many
receiued it, clausis oculis, not examining the truth or
circumstances of the narration. But seeing both Euagrius
and Sozomen diligently sifted and examined
the truth of that matter, and found it to bee but an
heathnish calumny (which the circumstance also of
time doth manifest) to disgrace the honour of that
most famous Emperour: there is more credite and
trust herein to bee giuen to them, then to many other,
who without tryall relate the same as they
found it repeated out of Zosimus, of such as tooke it
from Zosimus. And thus much of this circumstance
of time when this Councell was held, to wit after
Constantines murthering of Crispus in the yere when
Crispus was third time Consull, and with him Constantinus
Augustus, and this was in truh neuer.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               The fifth reason prouing that the second Romane
Synod is a forgerie, taken from the leprosie
of Constantine.
               
                  ANother circumstance discouering
this counterfeit Councell, is, that
it was held for a congratulation after
Constantine was purged from his
leprosie, as the Acts
                  Eodem tempore cum multi nobiles gauderent, quod Constantinus baptizatus à Siluestro, & mundatus 
                        •
                     uisset à lepra, pro beneficio quod accepit, &c. Conc. Ro. 2. ca. 1. & Bin. Notis in illud Conc. 
                  doe expresse.
And this also was neuer. For that
whole narration touching the leprosie of Constantine,
though it be approued not onely by Baronius
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 33. 36. 42. & alibi.,
by Binius
                  Bin. notis in Constant. donat. §. Ipse enim., by their Angelicall
                  Aquin. p. 3. q. 69. art. 8. 
                  Doctor, by the
ActsAct. Siluest. apud Baron. loco citato. nu 33. of Siluester, and by the Charter
                  Donat. Constat. apud Bin. pa. 296. 
                  of Constantines
donation, but euen by Pope Adrian
                  Hadrian. 1. Epistola prima qu
                        •
                     e citatur in Conc. Nic. 2. Act secunda, ibique probatur. pa. 313., by the second
Nicene Councell, and appointed in their reformed
Breuiarie
                  Breu. Rom. in fest. Siluest. 
                  for a parcell of a publicke lesson to bee read
in the Church, yet is it a very Legendary fable and euen
an incredible vntruth.
               Of it their owne Canus saythLeprae Constantinianae testis grauis & probatus ex 
                        •
                     eteribus nemo est. Canu. Loc Theol. lib. 11. cap. 5. §. Quod deinde: &, scriptores omnes veteres (de hac lepra Constantini) tacuerunt, non o
                        ••
                     fluri s
                        •
                     iciuissent, sci
                     
                        •
                     a
                        •
                      omnino rem si fuisset. ibidem., There is no ancient
writer who is a graue and allowed witnesse that mentioneth
this leprosie of Constantine. And againe, that

                  Constantine was sicke of a leprosie, apud idoneos authores
nusquam legi, I no where reade it in any author
who is a graue, worthy or fit witnesse thereof. So
Canus. And yet hee read it in the Romane Councell,
in Pope Hadrian, among the Acts of the second
Nicen Councell, in the Acts of Siluester, in
the Romane Breuiarie, in the donation of Constantine,
in Saint Thomas, in all these it is read, and
most of them Canus mentioneth. So by Canus
owne confession none of all these is either a graue,
and allowed, or a fit witnesse of this matter; that is
to say, none of them all, neither they all together
are such as may bee credited: Which is a very
hard censure, specially of this Romane Synod, of
Pope Adrian, of the second Nicen Councell, and of
the Breuiarie.
               Of the same writes Platina
                  Plat. in vit 
                        •
                      Marci. 1. in this manner: That
Constantine fell into a leprosie, as is vulgarly reported,
that he was clensed thereof by Baptisme; that he should
haue beene washed in infants blood as the fable is, Nullo
modo credo, I beleeue none of these in any sort; and he
giues this reason, for that, hac de re à nullo scriptorum
fit mentio, there is no mention hereof in any (faithfull)
writers, neither heathen nor Christian. Orosius would
not haue passed ouer this, nor Eutropius, nor those
who most diligently haue written the Acts of Constantine.
Thus Platina: and the very same sayth
Nauclerus
                  Nau in annum Chr. 314.. Now if in no ancient or faithfull writer
there be mention thereof, then out of question this
Roman Synod is neither ancient nor faithfull: the
donation of Const. is neither ancient nor faithfull:

the second Nicene Synod neither ancient nor faithfull:
the acts of Siluester are neither ancient nor
faithfull: the Epistle of Pope Hadrian neither ancient
nor faithfull: for in all these this fable is expresly
set downe and related. To the very like effect saith
Caietan
                  Caiet. Annot in p. 3. Aqu. q. 69. art. 8., Nuliius authoritate constat: it appeares by
the authoritie of none (to wit, who are worthy of
credite) that Constantine fell into a leprosie and was
purged thereof by baptisme. And he addes three reasons
of his saying; First, because the Acts of Siluester,
(those are they which Baronius magnifieth) are vncertain.
Secondly, because no good writer either heathē
or christian reports this. Thirdly, because it is repugnant
to the authority of Saint Ambrose. Thus Caietane.
               This might be sufficient for such as are not addicted
to their wilfull errors: but because Baronius and
Binius, & their applauders are men of another temper,
let vs now consider whether there bee either
likelihood or possibilitie in this narration. There are
two causes alledged why God thus smit Constantine
with a leprosie: the one his cruelty
                  Habent Acta Siluestri (quae ipse approbat & sequitur illo an. nu. 31.) Constantinum 
                        〈◊〉
                      admissa flagitia, lepr
                        •
                      percussum, &c. Bar. an 324. nu. 33. Inter 
                        •
                     a flagitia censet Crispi aliorú
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      occisionem an. eod. nu. 28. & saepe alibi. 
                  and vnnaturall
tyrannie in murthering Crispus, Fausta, Licinius,
and others. But that this possibly could be no cause
thereof (especially in that nineteenth yeere of Constantine
wherein he is supposed to haue beene a leaper)
is euident by that which before was declared;
seeing Crispus was liuing in the twentieth yeare
of Constantine, and seeing this was but a malitious
calumnie and sycophancy of Zosimus and other heathens:
so for that cause he could not be a leaper.
               The other supposed cause (which now wee are to
examine) was Constantines persecuting of the Church,

and his following of Heathenish Idolatries, and superstition,
vntill this time of his leprosie, and murther of
Crispus, from which by baptisme he was cured. Of
this Baronius thus writethBar. an. 324. nu. 33., The Acts of Syluester
(for the truth and credite whereof he earnestlyAn. eod. nu. 31. & seq: labours)
declare Constantinum adhuc patrita sectantem,
persecutionem aduersus Ecclesiam excitasse, That Constantine
vntill this time following the Heathenish
Religion of his fathers, did raise persecution against
the Church; for which crimes he was smitten with a
leprosie. Thus Baronius; affirming Constantine euen
adhuc▪
                   till that time of his leprosie, and till he had
killed Crispus, to haue beene an Idolater and embracer
of Heathen superstition. Of it their Romane
Breuiarie thusBreu. Rom▪ in Festo S. Siluest. saith; Constantine being cured of
his leprosie by baptisme, was inflamed, ad tuendam &
propagand
                        •
                     m, both to maintaine and propagate the
Christian Religion, giuing licence and power to Christians
to build publike Churches, Quod ante negatum est,
which till then, was not permitted vnto them. The
Heathen Writers do relate this at large. Sozomen
                  Zo
                        •
                     om. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. cap. 
                        •
                     .
reports how they write, That Constantine when he
could not obtaine of his Heathenish Southsayers purgation
from his crimes, by chance happened to meete
with some Bishops, and they promising to him expiation
for his sinnes, caepisse illum, illorum religionem in admiratione
habere & fiera Christianum: That he then
began to be in loue with Christian religion, and to
be a Christian himselfe, and draw his subiects to
Christianitie. Zosimus
                  Zo
                        ••
                     m. 
                        〈◊〉
                      2. pa. 
                        •
                     1. most cleerely relates this,
saying; That Constantine vntill hee fell into those
crimes of murder of Crispus, Fausta, and others, Patritis

adhuc sacris vtebatur, embraced and followed
his heathenish religion. And that When the Egyptian
(Hosius) being first admitted to his conference, perswaded
him to be a Christian, Tum patrita missa facere.
Then he forsooke or left his Heathenish Religion, Ad
e
                        •
                     que abolenda se conuertit; And turned himselfe to
abolish it. So Zosimus. Baronius hauing relatedBar. an. 324. nu. 17. & 27.
this and some other like passages out of Zosimus,
approueth them for true, and saithIbid. nu. 28.; These things
being confirmed, specially by the testimony of Heathen
Writers, atque exacta insuper adhibita examinatione
probata, certa veraque cognita, &c. Are knowne to
be approued, certaine and true by exact examination.
So he; teaching it with Zosimus, and other Heathens,
to be not onely true, but certaine, that Constantine
till hee fell into these crimes, and into this
leprosie caused by them, had beene not onely an
embracer of Paganisme and Heathenish Idolatries,
but a persecuter also of the Church: and that Interea
                  Bar. an. eod. nu. 33. 
                  fuisse ob admissa flagitia lepra percussum, That
while he was in this state, for those crimes of murther
and persecution, hee was smitten with leprosie.
               Truly, they could not haue deuised a more false
and palpable slander to dishonour the religious
Emperour: and though the heathen writers may
be winked at, yet Baronius approuing their malitious
vntruths for knowne and certaine truths, is vnpardonable.
Neither was Constantine a persecuter,
neither did he at that time follow heathenish Idolatries
and superstitions; neither was he then, but
many yeares before conuerted and become, and so

continued a zealous professor and defender also of
the true Christian faith. Of all which there are euery
where so many and so euident demonstrations,
that I may truly say, Inopem me copia fecit.
               
               Among many millions of testimonies, let vs
consider a few about that time, when he made wars
and ouercame Licinius. Those wars began about his
11. yeare, and there was a full conquest of Licinius,
and end of the wars against him, in the 12. yeare of
Constantine, as appeareth euidently by Constantines
EdictCuius est mentio, l. 1. De veteranis, Cod. Theod., (mentioning both his victoryEx die 5. Nonar. Iuliarum cum p
                        ••
                     
                     ma per Thraciam victoria vniuerso orbi illuxit. Ibid. at Thrace,
obteined the yeare before, and his dismission of his
souldiers after the end of those wars at Nicomedia)
bearing date the 10. of April, when Licinius was fift
time Consul, and Crispus his Colleague; which was
for the first part of their Consulship in the 12. and
after the 24. of Iuly, in the 13. yeare of Constantine.
               
               That Constantine at this time had vtterly forsaken
Paganisme, and was now an earnest protector of
the Church of Christ, against the cruell persecution
of Licinius: besides other, that one memorable
speech of Licinius is a most euident witnesse, which
he made to his souldiers in a groue, where they had
many Images of their Gods erected, to which they
set vp burning tapers, and wax candles, and offered
sacrifice. Thus saidEuseb lib. 2. de vit
                        •
                      Const. ca. 5. 
                  Licinius, Dij isti sunt
                        •
                     pasrij, These
are the Gods of our Fathers, which frō antiquity we haue
receiued of our ancestors to be worshipped, and which we
do religiously honour. But this Constantine who is to fight
against vs, patrijs institutis violatis, hauing violated the
ordinances of his fathers, & being blinded with error,
worshippeth a strange God, et turpi istius insigni, and

with that shamefull ensigne of his God (he meant the
Crosse) he greatly disgraceth his army: and in confidence
of this God he comes into the field, not onely against
vs, but much more, contra ipsos Deos, quorum cultum
vt proditor deseruit, against the Gods themselues,
whose worship he as a Traytor hath forsaken. Thus
and much more to this purpose said Licinius. Was
Constantine thinke you a persecutor of Christians
at this time▪ who fought against Licinius forLicinius persecutionem contra Christianos iam pridem ex
                        ••
                     
                     ctam de integro exuscitauit. Euseb. lib. 2. de vit. Const. cap. 1. persecuting
them? Was he an Idolater or worshipper
of heathen Gods, of whom Licinius complaines,
that hee came to fight against those their ancient
Gods?
               
                  See againe how Constantine prepared himselfe
to the battaile, He then especially (saith EusebiusPrecibus si vn
                        •••
                     am alias, ian
                        ••
                     sibi opus intelligens, dei sollicitare sacerdotes, &c. Eus. lib. eod. ca. 4.)
gaue himselfe vnto prayers, he called the Bishops, and sollicited
them not to depart from him, but to bee euer at
hand: whom he kept about him, tanquam animae custodes,
as the Watchmen and guardians of his soule; hee
consecrated allIbid cap. 12. 13. 14. the vacant time he had to poure out his
prayers to Christ his Sauiour: he made more account of
God, then of his life, Illius consilijs omnia transigere, he
did nothing but with the direction of Gods counsaile:
are these tokens of one as yet not conuerted? of a
persecutor of Christians?
               
               After the victory, as soone as he had now obteined
the so
                     •
                  e gouernment of the Empire, with what
care, pietie, and zeale, he aduanced the Christian
faith, all Histories are records, his imperiall Edicts,
the whole Empire, the whole world is a witnesse.
In his foureteenth yeare, the Greek Fasti sayEpit. Chro. 
                        〈◊〉
                      an. 14. Constantini., The
heauenly light of our Sauiour Christ shined through

the whole world vnto the Churches, Tyrants euery
where being dead, and their houses rooted out. The very
like doth Eusebius
                  Eus lib 
                        •
                     . ca. 19. & 23. witnesse. The wickedmen (to
wit, persecutors) being now destroyed and rooted out,
the world was illustrated as with cleare beames of the
Sunne, and the Emperour, Deum omnibus praedicare
coepit, began to publish the true God to all in his Empire.
In his 14. yeare, saith Cedrenus
                  Ced. in hist., When the whole
Empire was now come to Constantine alone, Omnes suas
cogitationes ad sacras res conuertit, He conuerted all
his thoughts to holy matters, he builded Churches, and
magnificently inriched the same: he made diuers lawes
also, one that such Temples as had beene consecrated to
Idols, should be dedicated to Christ and his seruice. Another,
that only Christians should go to the wars, that they
onely should beare rule both in time of peace and warre.
A third, that he who continued in the worship of the false
Gods, capite plectatur, should be put to death. So Cedrenus.
The like saith Sozomen
                  Sozom. lib. 1. ca. 8., When Constantine
had now got the sole
                  Id vero obtinuit devicto Licinio, quod ante 14 annū factum fuisse ex l. 1. De veteranis ante 
                        ••
                     
                     tata, liquet. 
                  Empire, by a publike Edict hee
commaunded his subiects, vti religionem Christianam
colerent▪ That they should imbrace the Christian religion.
And when he had by his Edict commaunded this
and much more, whereby he was perswaded that his
Subiects, ad veram religionem impelli, might bee compelled
to the true Religion, he abrogated all the Acts
and Decrees of persecutors made against Christians;
he appointed throughout his Empire such Gouernours
as were Christians, interdicerentque omnibus, and they
forbad all, either to erect Statues, to offer to Idols, or
Festa gentilitia celebrare, To obserue▪ their Heathenish
celebrities; he commauded that on the Lords day they

should abstaine from iudgement or doing any worke but
should consecrate that day to cal vpon God. So Sozomen.
               
               The very Imperial Edicts are verbatim recorded
in Eusebius
                  Eus. in vita Const. lib 2. ca. 24. ad 44. & à ca. 47. ad 60., wherein the seuerall branches of
those Lawes are set downe; two or three of
them were these. One, whereby
                  Lib. eod. ca. 44. 45. 
                  he forbad those detestable
and heathenish Idolatries, which were anciently
vsed in euery cittie or countrey; the other, Qu
                        •
                      iussit
templa exaedificari, whereby he commanded that Churches
should be builded, and that they should spare for no
cost therein, but that they should receiue monies out of
the Emperors treasury. A third, was touching restitution
Ibid. ca. 35. & 39. to be made to the Church, of whatsoeuer in time
of persecution had bene taken from it. If the publique

                        •
                     reasury possesse any such goods, it shall not bee free
to retaine them, yea, let no man dare to speake ought,
Contra sanctas Dei Ecclesias, against the holy Churches;
and what he hath by iniury for a time possessed, ea Ecclesiis
suis iure restituat, Let him restore that to the
Church, as in right he ought. The like Edict (besides
many other) for Immunity
                  L. 
                        ••
                     de Episcopis, Ecclesijs & Clericis 
                        •
                     od. Theod. Qui diuino cultui ministeria impendunt, ab omnibus omnino muneribus excusentur, ne sacrilego 
                        ••
                     ore quorund
                        •
                     m à 
                        〈◊〉
                      obsequijs anocentur. 
                  of the Cleargie, and that
no burthens should bee imposed vpon them, is extant in
the Code, and was published in Nouember, in his fifth
Consulship, and that was in the beginning of his
foureteenth yeare.
               Nor do I mention these decrees about his 13. or
14. yeare, as if Constantine had then first of all forsaken
and reiected the heathenish superstitions, and
imbraced the profession of the Christian faith, for
he had done that long before. His lawIbid. l. 1. is yet extant,
wherein he mentions, Priuilegia indulta, his priuiledges
which he had before granted to the Cleargic;
                  
contrarie to which, some hereticks did molest them.
but the Emperour cōmands that his officers should
see such iniuries redressed and hindered. This Edict
was set forth in October, when himselfe was the 3.
time, and with him Licinius Consull, which was in
the beginning of his eight yeare: and yet before
that, he had granted priuiledges vnto them. So
cleare it is, that long before his 13. much more before
his 19. yeare, he was a Defender of the Catholike
faith. Euen from hisHelena Constantinum filiú ad pi
                        •
                     tatem à puero instituit, ait Bar. an. 315. nu. 12. p
                        •
                     er Christianismum cōplexus est. Niceph lib 7. ca. 18. infancy he euer bare a louing
affection to Christian religion, which both
Constantius Clorus his father, and Helena his mother,
had before professed: but after he had once beene
confirmed in the same, by those two visions, which
in the sixt or seauenth yeareMax
                        •
                     ntius à Constantino superatus, occiditur anno Constantini sexto. Euseb. in Chron. ad an. 7 Constant. & in alijs eiusdē editionibus Latinis ad annum 6. Const. quomodo & in Graeca Eusebian. Chron. edit. ponitur. of his Empire, (when
he made war against Maxentius, & ouercame him)
was manifested vnto him, the one of Christs nameDe quo mentio est Crucis nomine in Fast. Graecis ad an. 6 Const. & in Euseb lib. 1. de vita Const. ca. 22. & 25. Vbi signum illud, non Crucem fuisse, sed duo prima nominis Christi elemē. 
                        •
                     aliquido demonstrat. 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      and 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      appearing in the ayre, in the day time, somewhat like a Crosse (for which cause it is vsually so called:) the other of Christ
                  
                  Ibid. ca. 23. 
                  himselfe in the night, manifesting
himselfe vnto him; after that (as Eusebius
                  Ibid. ca. 26
shewes) he set downe with himselfe, That he would
worship no God, but the God of Christians: he called the
Bishops vnto him, and was instructed by them; cultu
                  Ibid. ca. 35. 
                  et
obseruātia honorifice amplecti, he intertained them with
all loue, reuerence and honour, and set
                  Illos suae mensae participes effecit. 
                  them at his owne
table, whither soeuer he went, he had them with him,
hee decreed
                  Ibid. ca. 26., to bend his whole minde to the reading
of the Scriptures: in token of his publique profession
of Christ, hee carryed the first letters
                  Ibid ca. 25. in corona salutaris appellationis seruatoris nota ins
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     pta, duobus solum expressa elementis, 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      & 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , quae totum Christi nomen perspicuè significarunt. 
                  of Christs

name (vsually, but not fitly nor rightly called the
Crosse) in his helmet, in his ensignes, in his Diadem,
and at his
                  Ad pectus vsque continuè descriptum continuit. 
                  breast; he erected
                  Ibid. an 33. 
                  a monument therof
in the citie. After his victory ouer Maxentius, in the
beginning of his seauenth yeare, hee writ letters to
Cecilianus
                  Euseb. Hist. lib. 10. ca. 6. then Bishop of Carthage▪ signifying his
Bountifull gifts to the Ministers legitimae et sanctissimae
catholicae religionis, of the true and most holy Catholike
religion: to Anulinus
                  Ibid. ca. 5. about The liberties
and immunities which he granted to the Cleargie: after
that to Pope Meltiades
                  Ibid., and Crescus B. of Siracuse,
wherein he cals the Christian Profession, the
most holy religion: he cals
                  Euseb. lib. 10. ca. 5. 
                  them to a Councell, himselfe
was present among them at Arles, yea, (as Eusebius
                  Eus lib. 1. devit. Const. ca. 37.
saith) he was, tanquam communis Episcopus à Deo constitutus:
as a common or generall Bishop to the
Church; and time would faile to recount the thousand
part of those euidences, whereby is demonstrated,
that long before his 19. yeare he had both in
his owne practise, & by publike lawes quite abandoned
the Heathen worship of the Gods, and had
shewed himselfe not onely a professor of Christianitie,
but a protector of Christians, and a nursing
father vnto the Church.
               By these doe most clearely appeare the manifold
vntruths of that legendarie tale touching the leprosie
of Constantine, and what trust is to be giuen
to the approuers & abetters therof. First, that Constantine
til that 19. yeare of his reigne, wherein he
is said to haue murdered Crispus; did follow the
heathenish worship of the gods, & their superstition,
is a most manifest vntruth. This doth Zosimus
                  Patritis adhuc sacris vtebatur, & hoc consilio (Hosij) impulsus ad eiusmodi abolenda se conuertit. Zosim. lib. 2. pa. 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                  
teach, Pope Adrian
                  
                     
                        •
                     u autem in hac parte 
                        •
                     u
                        ••
                     
                     fica te vt relicta omni superstitione idolorum &c. Had. 1. Epist. 1. the 1. the 2. Nicen
                  Act. 2. vbi Hadriani Epistola recitatur & approbatur, p. 309. & 313. 
                  Synod, the
Author
                  Donat. Con. vbi idem recitatur quod ab Hadriano. 
                  of the donation of Constantine approoue,
and Binius
                  Bin. Notis in Donat. Constant. §. Ipse enim. & in Nota marginali ad Epist. Had. in Conc. Nicen 2. Act. 2. p. 309 seales vp this and the rest that follow,
with this note, Hanc totam historiam Hadrianus, the
Pope recites this whole story, and by the authority
of this edict doth confirme it.
               2 That till then, when Siluester came vnto Constantine
to baptize him, he knew not whether Peter
and Paul were Gods or Apostles of Christ, is a most
palpable vntruth: yet this doth Pope Adrian
                  Quae siuit Imperator, qua lesnam arbitraretur Deos esse Petium & Paulum. Hadr. & Conc. Nic. & Donat. Con & Bin. locis citatis., the
second Nicene Councell, the Author of Constantines
donation approue, and Binius seales it with his former
note: This story is confirmed by the authority of
Pope Hadrian.
               
               3 That Constantine was not conuerted to Christianitie
till this time, and this occasion of his murther
and leprosie, and in that nineteenth yeare, is an
vnexscusable vntruth. This doth the narration of Zosimus
                  Locis citatis. 
                  and all the former imply; and Pope Adrian
more plainely expresseth it, sayingHad. Epist▪ cit.: that this fell
out touching the leprosie of Constantine, and cure therof,
Cum ad fidē conuerteretur pius Imperator, when the
conuersion of the holy Emperour Constantine was
wrought: and the like doth their Breuiarie
                  Breu in festo S Siluest., where
Peter and Paul commanded him, that if he would be
deliuered from his leprosie, after that hee was baptized
by Siluester, hee should command throughout his
Empire, temples to be built after the Christian manner,
which till then had not bene permitted; and taking away
the images of vaine gods, he should worship the onely
true God. And Baronius
                  Haec exacta, adhibita examinatione probata, certa vera
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      cognita. Bar. an. 324; nu. 28. approues the narration of
Zosimus for true and certaine.
               
                  
4 That Constantine was at that time a persecutor
of Christians, is a most malitious vntruth, yet this
doth the writer
                  Siluester persequutiones tuas fugiens. Donat. Con. 
                  of Constantines donation affirme: Hadrian
the Pope approues
                  Had. & Con: Nic. locis citatis. 
                  and confirmes the same: the
second Nicen fathers applaude it, Anastasius
                  Cuius persequutionem sugiens. Anast. in vita Siluest. 
                  recordes
it, Baronius
                  Plane animo exhorrescit, qui audit ipsum Constantinum esse persequutū Ecclesiam. Bar. an. 324. nu. 34. &, tempora plane
                        •
                      Neroniana erant. ibid. nu. 35. 
                  striues to maintaine it, and Binius seales it
vp with his former sayingBin. loco cit. &, Siluestri & Constantini historia confirmata etiam literis & authoritate Adriani Papae. Bin. No. marg. ad Epist. 1. Hadr. loco citato., This whole history is recited
and confirmed by Pope Adrians authority.
               
               5 That Pope Siluester fled from the citie, and hid
himselfe with his Clergy in dennes and caues, or
mountaines, by reason of Constantines persecuting
of Christians, is another vntruth. How could they
flee that which was not? yet is this recorded by Anastasius
                  Anast. in vita Siluest. 
                        •
                     
                  , approued by the authour of the Donation
                  Locis citatis apud omnes., by
Pope Hadrian, by the second Nicen fathers, by Baronius,
and sealed vp by Binius as a truth confirmed by the
Popes authoritie.
               
               6 That Constantine by occasion of this persecution
was smitten of God with a leprosie, is a meere
fiction, subl
                        •
                     ta causa tollitur effectus. Seeing the causes
of this leprosie are fained, the effect flowing from
them, can haue no better realitie: yet is this leprosie
recorded by Anastasius
                  Quem curauit dominus à 
                        ••
                     pra Anast. in 
                        •
                     ita Siluest., approued
                  Locis 
                        •
                     itatis, ab omnibus illis approbatur. 
                  as a truth by the author
of the Donation; by Pope Hadrian, the 2. Nicen
fathers, by their Breui
                        •
                     rie, defended by Baronius,
who saithNe quid de hoc reliquum sit quod fidem lectoris retardare possit. Bar. an. 324. nu. 36., Hee would haue nothing remaine which
should stay the Reader from beleeuing it, and it is sealed
vp as a confirmed truth by Binius
                  Locis citatis..
               7 Constantines seeking to the heathenish Priests,
his preparation of a bath of infants blood, the information
of the Spanish Egyptian (that is, of Hosius) instructing

him then first of all touching the efficacy of
Christian religion, his vision of Peter and Paul, his
sending for Siluerster to be baptized by him, his enquiring
for the Images of Peter and Paul, and Siluesters
shewing them vnto him; his baptizme vpon this occasion
his deliuerance from his leprosie immediatly vpon that
baptizme, his Donation after that deliuerance: these are
so many appendices and latchets hanging vpon the
maine lie of his leprosie: one great or mother vntruth,
begetteth an 100. Yet are these by the former
authoursLocis citatis approued, applauded, and as Binius tels
vs, sealed with the Popes confirmation.
               8 By this may be perceiued what regard of truth
the second Nicen Councell had, and what worthy
and authenticall reasons they alledged for their adoration
of Images. This letter of Pope Adrian
was read and applauded
                  Dicat nobis beatiss. patriarcha Tharasius, consentitne literis sanctiss Papae veteris Romae, an minus. Tharasius respōdit, vim literarum lectarum confirm amus, &c. Sancta Synodus dixit, vniuersa sancta Synodus sic credu, sic docet & iterum, sancta Synodus dixit, sequimur recipimus & probamus literas sanctis. papae. Cone. Nic. 2. Act. 2. p. 313 
                  therein as a speciall testimony,
seeing the Images of Peter and Paul had bene so
carefully kept
                  Had. Epist. 1. to. 3. pa. 255. b, and were then so euidently demonstrated
to Constantine when he was in his leprosie: and
Baronius
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 40. tels vs, that the verie same table or picture
which was shewed then to Constantine, is yet in Saint
Peters Church in the Vaticane at Rome to bee seene.
Now seeing this is a verie Chymerical fiction; when
the Pope himselfe was glad to vrge such base forged
and indeede incredible legendarytales, for the worshipping
of images, the rest of the Synod you may
bee sure, would take heart to treade in his steps,
and so they did very mannerly; for that whole
Councell is fraught with such rales, and out of
the credit of them, was decreed an Anethema to
all that deny adoration of images. Of the like

writings alledged in that Councell, I shall perhaps
haue occasion elsewhere to entreate: by the way
let me here obserue touching this of Constantine and
Siluester, that whereas that Nicen assembly esteemed
it a principall reason for the honouring of Images,
it is, if it be truely weighed, a most manifest demonstration,
that in the primitiue ages, Images were neither
adored, nor yet set vp in Christian Churches.
Constantine as before I shewed, had bene not onely
a professor of the Christian faith, but a publicke defender
and protector of it, and of Catholickes against
Heretickes, for more then ten whole yeares
before he fell into his supposed leprosie
                     •
                  , as his law
before mentioned dated in his eight yeare is an irrefragable
witnesse. About his thirteenth, at most
fourteenth yeare, he set out those other lawes for reedifying
and repairing of Churches and Oratories,
for the speedy effecting whereof he was so religiously
carefull, that he writ to Eusebius
                  Eus. de vita Const. l. 2. c. 45 (and the same in
effect to other Bishops.) Quibuscunque Ecclesiis,
what churches soeuer either you are set ouer, or other
Bishops, Presbyters and Deacons, vbicunque terrarum
any where, you are all to see that those buildings be diligently
looked vnto, so that either those churches which
remaine may be repaired and enlarged, or where neede
is new may be builded: and what is needfull for that work
call for of the Gouernours of Prouinces, to whom I haue
giuen in charge, vt omni studio & propensione animi subministrent,
that they giue those things to you with all readinesse
and alacritie: and that this was accordingly
performed Eusebius
                  Euseb. lib. 10 hist. c. 2. 3. 4. witnesseth. Now when there
were so many magnificent Churches and Oratories

builded and beautified, specially in the chiefe cities;
either those Images of Peter and Paul and the
like, were not set vp; or if they were, Constantine
in all that time either came into none of those
Churches and Oratories, or at least adored not, no
nor saw those Images. And truely I shall neuer bee
induced to thinke that Constantine for sixe or ten
yeares together was a Recusant, and came not at the
Church of Christians, of whose zeale in praying,
loue to the word of God, and to the preachers therof,
there are so many vndoubted testimonies. Againe,
that he should come to those Churches (as
most certainly he did) had the Apostles Images bin
then set vp and adored by Christians, his irreligion
and negligence had bene without excuse, who in
all those yeares gaue no adoration to the two chiefe
Apostles, neither at Rome where he was often, nor
at Sirmium, nor at Millaine, nor in any other place
of his Empire; nay that hee did not so much as see
and know the Images of those two Apostles, till
Siluester at this time of his leprosie, in his ninetenth
yeare, shewed them vnto him, it is hereby euident,
that Images were in those dayes neither adored nor
set vp in their Churches and Oratories: But this by
the way touching the worth and worthy proofes
of that second Nicen Sinod.
               9 By this may further bee perceiued what true,
holy and religious lessons the Roman Church commendeth,
and practiseth in their publike Liturgy,
one of which in their Breuiarie containes the sum
of this poeticall fable touching the leprosie of Constantine
and the cure of it, by Siluesters baptizing,

yea the Breuiary addes one vntruth, which neither
in Hadrian, nor in the Donation of Constantine,
nor Baronius, nor Binius is obserued; and that is,
That Constantine being thus cured, gaue libertie vnto
Christians publikely to build Churches, quod ante negatum
erat, which before this time was not permitted
                        •
                     
                  
an vntruth easie to be refuted, by many other testimonies,
but those which I euen now cited out of
the Emperours letters, commanding the Bishops
euery where to haue care diligently to build
                  Sic ergo cum Maximinus è medio sublatus esset, ecclesiae per gratiam omnipotentis dei ex
                        ••
                     sis fundamentis renouabantur & erigebantur. Euseb. l. 9. hist. c. 11. &. l. 10. ca. 3. lā Maximinus (post cuius obitū haec facta sūt) obijt an. cōstantini 6. vt ait Euseb. in chron. sed anno 9. vt ait Bar. an. 314. nu. 8. 
                  and repaire
their Churches, and furnishing them with all needfull
things for that worke: the many Panegyrickes
which the Bishops vsed at the dedication of their Churches
and Oratories (some of which Eusebius
                  Eus lib. 10, hist▪ ca. 4. reciteth)
is so abundant to refute the lying Breuiary, that
I shall not need to adde more thereunto, This only,
I say, that they had need (and good reason) to
haue their Liturgy in an vnknowne tongue, least
the people vnderstanding what legendary fables
and vntruthes they reade instead of Gods word;
should abhorre, as iustly they ought, that seruice of
God, which is stuffed with so many vntruths.
               Lastly, wee see by this, that the Romane Synod
vnder Siluester, whereof wee doe intreate, is nothing
else but a base, euen a sottish forgery, the author
whereof could deuise no other occasion, then a
thankesgiuing after Constantine was deliuered from
his leprosie, who neuer was touched or affected
with that leprosie. I say no more, but seeing the
Councell it selfe is witnesse (and Baronius and Binius
defend it therein) that it was held after Constantine
was purged of that leprosie: and seeing hee

                  neuer was purged, nor needed any purging or clensing
thereof, it ineuitably followes by the testimony
of the Councell it selfe, that there neuer was
any such Romane Councell, as this is described to
haue beene. So much of the second circumstance,
whereby this Councell is discouered, namely the
leprosie of Constantine.
               
            
            
               CHAP. VI.
               The sixt reason proouing the second Romane Synod, to
bee a forgerie, taken from the Baptisme of
Constantine by Pope Siluester.
               
                  A Third circumstance to discouer the
same, is, that it was held after Constantine
was baptized by Siluester, as
the actes
                  Eodem tempore cū multi nobiles gauderent quod Cō
                     stantinus baptizatus à Siluestro esset, &c. Conc. Rom. 2, ca 1▪
                   
                  doe expresly affirme; and
this was also neuer. For the occasion
of that baptizing by Syluester, was the leprosie of
Constantine, which seeing wee haue before declared
to be a meere fiction, the baptisme of leprous
Constantine must needes bee like it, a legendary fable
also. And euen this alone were sufficient to be
spoken of that Baptisme, specially seeing Baronius
tells vs, that Constantines baptisme was to expiate
                  Per baptismū patratis facinoribus ablus & expiari iussus est. Bar. an. 324. nu. 41. dira & parricidalia delicta. an. eod. nu. 28. 
                  those former crimes, and as hee calles them, immane
murthers, and purge
                  Omnis te mala leprae valetudo deseret. Bar. ex. Hadriani Epi. 1. citat. an. 324. nu. 37 
                  away, as Pope Hadrian saith, his
leprosie. But seeing this baptisme by Syuester, is a matter
so certainly reportedSiluester ab exilio rediens baptizauit cō
                     stantinum. Anast. in vita. Siluestri, & Sander in sua visib. Monar. ad an. 314. Genebr. in Chron, in Siluestro, Bin: Notis in vitam Silu. §. baptizauit. by them, set downe in their
Breuiary
                  Breu. Ro. in fest. Silu., approued by Pope Hadrian
                  Had. 1. epist. 1., by the 2. Nicene
CouncelIn quo Epistola Adriani proba
                        •
                     a est Act. 2, p. 313. b., for defending wherof Baronius
                  Baro. an. 324. nu. 41. ad nu. 72. hath
taken such paines, that hee peremptorily tells vs,

                  how Constantine prepared
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 41. coronā d
                        •
                     posuit & vestē imperialem septem diebus. 
                  himselfe vnto it, laying aside
his crowne and Imperiall robes, how many dayes
of Catechizing he had, to wit seuen: who was his Catechizer,
to wit,
                  Hisce catechismi diebus cum ipsum ad fidem instrueretsummus Pontifex & catechista Siluester. ibid. 
                  Siluester: where he was baptized, to wit,
at Rome
                  Voluit fieri intra palatium Late
                        •
                     anēse, in. eodem. nu. 42. 
                  neere the Lateran pallace▪ what māner of Font
he had, to wit, such an one
                  Ibid. nu. 57. 
                  as was decked with a Lambe
of most pure gold; on the right hand of which Lambe
was our Sauiour of pure siluer (note by the way the
dignitie of the Lambe aboue Christ:) & on the left
hand Iohn Baptist holding this title, Ecce agnus Dei.
What number was present: it was not
                  Ibid. nu. 42. 
                  done publickely
by reason Constantine was so deformed with his leprosie:
but paucis duntaxat arbitris, a very few being witnesses
thereof: though of all these, and the rest which
are of this stampe, there can be no fitter sentence
pronounced, then Vanitas vanitatum & omnia vanitas:
yet I will adde somewhat to shew how these
men take paines to make and maintaine vntruthes,
euen such also as being admitted, they gaine nothing
at all to their cause thereby, vnlesse it be that
this Roman Synod might get, which it is neuer like
to do, some small credit by such fictions.
               That Constantine was not baptized, either in his
19. yeare, or at Rome, or by Siluester, as these Legendars
affirme, but in his one and thirtieth yeare
at Nicomedia, and that after the death of Siluester,
is by the ancient Ecclesiasticall writers with one
consent testified. Eusebius who liued at that time,
expresly witnesseth it. When Constantine, sayth heEuseb. li. 4. de vit. Const. 
                        •
                     61. 62,,
being very sicke▪ came to the suburbes of Nicomedia, he
called the Bishops together, and then signified his desire
of Baptizme, saying, It is time now, that at last we should

receiue that signe of immortalitie; telling them that hee
had so long deferred it because hee purposed to haue
beene baptized in Iordan, after the example of our Sauiour:
And then, saith Eusebius, his baptisme being
consummated, Incredibiliter animo gestiebat, By the
abundance of his faith hee did incredibly reioyce, and a
little after
                  Ibid. ca. 64 
                  that dyed. The like witnesseth Socrates,
                  Socr. lib. 1. ca. 26. 
                  When Constantine being sixtie and fiue yeeres olde,
was greatly afflicted with sickenesse, hee came to Nicomedia,
Et illic in suburbie, lauacro baptismatis tingitur,
Hee was there baptized; wherewith being exceedingly
comforted, he made his testament, and after a few dayes
dyed. TheodoretTheod. lib. 1. ca. 31. in like manner saith, that a yeere
and some moneths after that Athanasius was sent to
Triers (which was in the thirtieth yeere of Constantine)
when hee was sicke at Nicomedia, ibi donum
suscepit sacri baptismatis, hee there receiued the sacrament
of Baptisme, for vnto that time hee had deferred
it, Quia in Iordane se consecuturum sperauerat, because
he haped to haue beene baptized in Iordane. Sozomen
Sozom. lib. 2 ca. 32. accordes hereunto, When Constantine
was sicke and languishing, he was carried to Nicomedia,
Ibi sacrosancto baptismatis mysterio initiatus
est, there did he receiue the holy sacrament of baptisme,
wherein exceedingly reioycing and giuing thankes to
God, after that hee had made his testament, within a
few dayes he dyed, being sixtie fiue yeeres old. The
same doth Saint Ambrose
                  Ambr. orat. in obitum Theodosij. witnesse, who saith of
Constantine, Baptismatis gratia in vltimis constituto
omnia peccata dimisit, The grace of baptisme did free
him from all sinnes, being then ready to dye. The
same affirmes Saint Hierome
                  Hier in contin. chron Eusebiani. ad annum 340., who in the 31. yeere

of Constantine saith, Hee was baptized by Eusebius,
Bishop of Nicomedia, In extremo vitae suae tempore,
euen in the very last time of his life. The same doth
the Greeke FastiEpitome chron. ab Adom &c. an. 1. Olimp. 279. witnesse, Constantine gloriously and
religiously changed his life, hauing beene Emperour 31.
yeeres, being first made partaker of sauing baptisme, by
Eusebius Bishop of Constantinople, who had been formerlyNā Eusebius à Nicome media constantinopolin translatus est, vt docet Socr. lib. 2. ca. 5.
of Nicomedia. The same doth Pomponius
Laetus affirme, It is a maruaile, saithPom. Laet. in compend. Rom. historiae. in cōstantino. he, that
Constantine being deditissimus, most addicted to
the Christian faith, did deferre his baptisme, in extremum
vitae tempus, to the last part of his age; and
then answering this doubt, he did it, saith he, as I thinke,
volens id in Iordane efficere, desirous to be baptized in
Iordane, and hee was baptized of the Bishop of Nicomedia.
Such an harmony and consent there is in ancient
Writers, all testifying that to bee vntrue
which their Breuiary, Pope Hadrian, and this counterfait
Synod doe affirme; and which Baronius, Binius,
Sanders, Genebrard, and others doe maintaine,
that Constantine was baptized at Rome in the 19.
yeere of his Empire: of which Binius
                  Bin. Notis in Epist. de munificentia const. 10. 1. p. 295. addes one
most vast and vnexcusable vntruth, that the Nicene
Councell, consensu omnium, by the consent of all Writers,
was held after that Constantine was baptized:
whereas all those ancient writers before named, doe
with one consenting voyce proclaime the contrary.
               The same also sheweth another foolish errour of
those who suppose,constantinus à Syluestro baptizatus est. Rursus etiam, sicut in multis ac diuersis chronicis legimus, ab Eusebio Nicomediensi episcopo rebaptizatus fuisse natratur. Got of. Viterb. in suo chron. part 16. p. 383 fed falso hoc ascribit historiae Tripartitae Hist. Trip. lib. 3. cap. 
                        •
                     2. that Constantine being first
baptized by Syluester at Rome, was rebaptized by
Eusebius at Nicomedia; for they euidently witnesse,
that Constantine vntill this last time had deferred his

baptisme, & vpon what occasion he did so defer it.
               Now against this consent of ancient Writers,
to all which Baronius
                  Necessario affirmandum est, Eusebium esse mentitum. Bar. an. 324. nu. 48. & 54. &, figmentum vocat Binius, quod ab Eusebio alijsque ei cōsentientibus hic asseritur. Bin. Not. in vitam Silu. §. Baptizauit. giues the lie, if you consider
what Baronius and Binius doe oppose, that will
much more confirme one in this truth touching the
baptisme of Constantine. They could not name one
ancient Writer, who affirmes Constantine to haue
beene baptized by Syluester; their chiefe witnesses
are the ActesBar. an. 324. nu. 42. of Syluester, the Actes of Liberius, a
booke published by Anastasius, out of the Vaticane,
touching the munificence of Constantine. But who
are the authors of those Tracts, and what authority
they are of, Baronius and Binius were loth to speake.
They are all such, as to which belongs that censure
noted out of Gelasius by their owne Canus. Gelasius
and a Councell, saith heCanus. lib. 11. loc. Theol. c. 6. §. Quod. si., commands, vt eas historias
nullo modo amplectamur, quae sine authoris nomine proferuntur,
that wee should in no sort allow of such
histories, as are set out without the certaine name
of the authour, for such bookes doe smell either of
imposture or heresie. So Canus. Or if you rather desire
to heare Gelasius, and the Romane SynodConcil. Rom. 
                        〈◊〉
                      sub Gelasio. it
selfe, they professe indeede that they knew some
Catholikes in Rome, and so in other Churches, to
reade the Acts of Syluester, though it wanted the
authours▪ name; but their censure of namelesse
writings is this: Therefore by ancient custome and
singular care, such writings of the Saints are not read
in the holy Roman Church▪ because the names of the writers
are vtterly vnknowne, & ab infidelibus aut i
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     tis
superfula aut minus apta scripta esse putātur, and
relating things superfluous or lesse fit, they are

thought to bee written either of infidels or idiots.
So Gelasius with the Councell: which censure alone
is sufficient for reiecting those namelesse & worthlesse
actes, which are the verie best authors that
Baronius and Binius had in this cause.
               There is another testimony cited by Baronius,
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 49. & an. 325. nu. 61. which carryeth great shew of antiquity, and that is
of Dalmatianus Bishop of Cyzicum, who collecting
some Actes of the Nicene Councell, setteth downe
the Oration of Constantine vsed there before the
Bishops, wherein he often confesseth himselfe, Sacr
                        •
                     
baptismate initiatum, to haue beene baptized at that
time. Thus writes Baronius, and hence would collect,
that Constantine was the yeere before the Nicene
Synode baptized by Siluester.
               
               I answere, that the Cardinall both deludes his
Reader, and citeth a witnesse who is directly opposite
unto his owne position. The author whom he
intends is not Dalmatianus, nor yet Dalmatius (as
the true name of that BishopDalmatiumque Cyziceni episcopū Cyzici ordinant. Socr. l. 7: c. 28. quem Dalmatium scriptorē fuisse illorum actorum putat Alph. Pisanus praefat. sua in Act. Cōe. Nic. apud Bin. pa. 321. of Cyzicum was) but
an impostor, whom some would haue to bee
thought thatGelasius Cyzicenus cū Acta Synodi Niceni ex antiquissimo libro (qui quidē fuit Dalmatij Cyzicenorum Archiepiscopi) descripsisset, redegit ex illo multa, &c. Posseu. in Appar. verbo, Nicaeum Concil. Photius, Gelasiū hunc, authorem horum Actorum ait, & cundem vocat caesareae Palestinae episcopū, &, cyzicū fuisse ipsi patriam ait in s
                        •
                     a Bibloth. c 88. 
                  Gelasius, mentioned by Photius, and
is supposed to haue written about the yeerevt conijcit. Baro. an. 476. nu. 67 476.
Neither doth Constantine affirme in his Oration set
downe in that booke, that hee was baptized before
the Nicene assembly. The Impostor indeede relates,
or rather forgeth out of his owne braine, what
Constantine spake to the Bishops at the beginning
of the Councell; and hee hath deuised such a tedious

and witlesse speechOratio ea extat. li. 2. Act. Conc. Nic. in initio apud Bin. pa. 328., as neither is true, nor yet
befitting the Emperour. In that Oration the Emperour
saith; Quid ergo in meae mediocritatis iustificatione
dicere oportebat, What was to be said in the
iustification of my mediocritie, but that which the
diuine truth doth demonstrate? And againe, I truly
in this small furniture of my Oration, dare say no
more then animam meam iustificatam, that my soule being
iustified ought to conuerse in sinceritie: and lastly,
I will briefly assay to declare this, quatenus fides & animi
iustificatio facultatem dicendi dederit; so farre as
faith, and iustification of minde shall grant abilitie
of speech. Thus doth the Cardinalls forged Dalmatianus,
make the Emperour to speake, and
out of these three sayingsImperator saepius prefitetur se plane Christianum esse, sacroque baptismate initiatū. Bar. an. 324. nu. 49. Nota (inquit Bin. in illa Dalmatij verba) iustificationem iam tertio repetitam, contra Eusebium, qui Constantinū in fine vitae baptizatum scribit. & vox iustificationis baptizatum 
                        •
                     am fuisse, constantinum significat. Bin in marg. pa. 329. a. b., wherein the Emperour
is made to name his iustification, they
collect that sure the Emperour was baptized.
               I will not heere stay to shew how witlesse and
impertinent these sayings are, which the forgerer
hath made Constantine to vtter, I will onely
now demand of Baronius and Binius: if iustification
doth inferre baptisme, was not Valentinian
the Emperour iustified, though hee died
without baptisme? Saint Amhrose
                  Amb. Orat. de obitu Vale
                        ••
                     niani. saith of him,
that seeing hee purposed when hee should come into
Italy to bee baptized, certè quia poposcit, accepit,
surely in that hee had a purpose and desire of baptisme,
hee receiued the fruit of baptisme, that is,
grace and iustification. So may it bee said of Constantine,
euen before hee was baptized, seeing hee
had a resolution and earnest desire to bee baptized

where Christ was, in Iordan, Certè quta poposcit accepit,
vndoubtedly he had by this desire the fruit of
baptisme, though it was but then in voto, not in actu.
Or if one who beleeueth, but is not baptized,
hath not grace or iustification, then that Scripture
shal not be true, With the
                  Rom. 10. v. 10. 
                  heart we beleeue vnto iustification:
and he that beleeueth in me, hath euerlasting
life: And, credidit
                  Rom. 4. 3. 
                  Abraham Deo, Abraham beleeued
God, and that was imputed to him for righteousnesse,
euen before he was circumcised. It is an excellent
saying of Ambrose
                  Amb. loc. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . to this purpose: Qui habuit
spiritum tuum qu
                        •
                     modo non accepit gratiam tuam;
He that had thy Spirit, O God, how shall
not he haue also thy grace, thy Iustification? Or,
If because baptisme is not solemnly administred, this
doth mooue you (saith Saint Ambrose) then let not
Martyrs bee crowned if they bee but Catechumens:
for (by your saying) they are not crowned (nay, not
iustified) if they be not baptized: but if they be baptized
in their owne blood, et hunc sua pietas ab
                        •
                     uit &
voluntas: Truly this beleeuer, though a Catechumen
is baptized by his owne piety and desire of
baptisme. So Ambrose. This may suffice to shew
how very friuolous a collection they make from
iustification or faith to prooue baptisme, of which
I haue in another place shewed my opinion, without
preiudice▪ to others, that baptisme is not giuen
to any, (but without all doubt, not to adulti)
that they may haue grace or iustification, but because
they are supposed by the Church to haue
the first grace and to bee iustified, therefore
are they baptized, and receiue the seale of their

former, and an holy instrument of a second grace,
and further assurance of their iustification; But of
this else-where.
               And this I haue answered, supposing Constantine
to haue spoken as the Imposter makes him,
and so often to make boast of his iustification.
But that the Emperour said in truth no such thing
at all, it is witnessed by Eusebius, who was present
in the Councell, and heard the Emperours
Oration, and hath wholy set downeEuseb. lib. 
                        •
                     . de vita Const. ca. 12. the same. In
which both wise, eloquent, and religious speech
of Constantine, there is no such thing either saide
or signified: the same is in like manner related
by Sozomen
                  Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 18., of that which the Cardinall cites
out of his forged Dalmatianus not one syllable. And
this by the way may bee one strong presumption,
that the Authour of those Acts meant not truth
and good dealing, in the rest of the disputations and
Narrations he sets downe, when at the entrance he
was so bold as to deuise a false and witlesse Oration
for the Emperor. But if it please God that I may
euer finish my other Treatise concerning the eight
generall Councels, I purpose, and nothing doubt,
to demonstrate by vndeniable euidences, that
there is no truth nor credit at all to bee giuen to
that forged Authour, whom Baronius heere calleth
Dalmatianus Cizicus, and some other call
Gelasius.
               
               Lastly, what will you say if this Dalmatianus doe
euidently contradict the Cardinals owne position,
and teach that Constantine was baptized before his
19. yeare? In this Dalmatianus it is expresly affirmed,Deci
                        ••
                     o quidem tex
                        •
                     o ann. & sex mensibus regni sui, sanctam Concilium congregauit anno 20. conuentum d
                        •••
                     luit. Dalm vel Gelas. lib. 4 & apud Bin. pa 365. quod ex Graeco Vaticano etiam citaturiterum lib. 1 in fine. pag. 328.,

                  That the Nicene Councell beganne in the sixteenth
yeare of Constantine, and in the sixth moneth
thereof. Now by Baronis and Binius collection and
interpretation of Constantines saying, that he was
iustified, it vnauoydably followes, not onely that
Constantine was conuerted, and was no persecutour
in his nineteeth yeare, but that he was baptized also
two whole yearesN
                        •
                     m anno 19. Constantini, Consul erat Crispus 3. vt Graeci Fasti testantur & agnoscit Bar. an. 324. nu. 1. before the beginning of Crispus
his third Consulship, before he fell into his leprosie,
or sent for Siluester. And then by Dalmatianus
the Cardinals owne witnesse, the whole narration
of his murdering of Crispus, Fausta, and others; of
his leprosie, of his cure, of his baptisme by Siluester,
of his holding the Romane Synod for thanksgiuing
of his cure after his baptisme, are all clearely
proued to be (as in truth they are) meere fables;
all which they teach to follow the third Consulship
and murther of Crispus: whereas by Dalmatianus,
Constantine was baptized & held the Nicene Councel
two whole yeres before that Consulship of Crispus
began. So very vnprouident was the Cardinall
in alledging Dalmatianus in this cause. But enough
of him, and so of the witnesses which Baronius
could finde to speake for this baptisme of Constantine:
which as you see, are both few, and withall vncertaine
and worthlesse writings, vnfit to be opposed
to that consent of ancient Historians, which for
the contrary we produced.
               
                  Melchior Canus
                  Canus lib. 11. cap. 5. §. De baptismo., and Nich. Sanders
                  Sand. Visib. mo
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     ch. ad tempus Siluestri, pa. 282., adde the testimony
of Nicephorus to the same purpose, who
resolutely indeed, and too confidently, affirmesNicep. Callist. lib. 
                        •
                      cap. 35. & lib. 8. ca. 
                        •
                     4.,
Constantine to haue bene baptized at Rome: but Baronius
                  
was vnwilling to vse this testimony, which
he knew many waies to ouerthrow the maine point
at which he aymeth. For Nicephorus saith, That
with Constantine
                  Vnà cum ipso autem Crispus etiam filius eius dininum partucipauit lauacrum. Nic. lib. 7. ca. 33. 
                  was Crispus his sonne also at the
same time baptized; and then the fable of Constantines
murthering of Crispus, and falling into a leprosie
after that murther, all before his baptisme, is quite
spoiled. Againe, Nicephorus
                  Lib. 7. ca. 44. & seq. placeth the baprisme
of Constantine before his victorie ouer Licinius,
which as wee haue shewed, fell out in his twelfth
yeare; and then how the Romane Councell which
puts his baptisme in the Consulship of Crispus the
third time, that is, in Constantimes nineteene yeare:
how this can be salued, is not easie to declare. Baronius
had reason to omit and neglect this testimony
of Nicephorus. It is not the Baptizme of Constantine,
but the credit of the Romane Synod for which the
Cardinall striueth: and seeing that is so contradicted
and proued by Nicephorus to be a counterfeite,
Baronius thought it more fit to ouerpasse this witnesse,
then cite him, who in the maine point is so repugnant,
both to the truth, and to the Cardinalls
maine position.
               
                  Binius
                  Bin. Notis in vitam Siluestri. §. Baptizauit, Authoritate e
                        •
                     us (Romani) Conc
                        •
                     lij Anastasius recenset Constantini baptismum Romae habitum. anno Imperij ill
                        •
                     us 18. &c. vnto these adioynes a testimony of Anastasius,
who in his briefe Chronicle, by authoritie of
this Romane Synod vnder Siluester, teacheth, that
Constantine was baptized in his eighteenth yeare, and
the same by Zosimus and other writters is, as he saith,
confirmed. Suppose it were true. Binius could not
haue alledged any thing more effectuall against him
selfe. For we haue before proued that Crispus died
not till the twentieth yeare of Constantine, and Baronius
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 1. & 7.
                  
confidently affirmes and proues out of Eusebius,
that he was not slaine till the nineteenth yeare current
of Constantine. Wherefore if he was baptized
as Anastasius witnesseth, in the eighteenth yeare, then
was he baptized before the murther of Crispus, before
he fell into his leprosie, and so not onely Baronius
and Binius himselfe; but Pope Hadrian, their
Breuiarie, and this very Roman Synod vnder Siluester,
are clearely proued to be fablers, who all teach
his baptizme to follow the murther of Crispus, and
the leprosie of Constantine.
               
               Some may perhaps wonder that Baronius did
not alledge the Pontifical of Damasus in this cause,
for therein it is expresly sayd, That Siluester comming
from exile in the mountaine Soracte, whither he had fled
for the persecution of Constantine, baptized Constantine,
and cured him of his leprosie. Now Damasus is
an ancient father and Pope, liuing neere to that time
also. His name might haue gained great countenance
and credite to this baptizme by Siluester. But
the reason of the Cardinalls silence of Damasus
name, is euident. The Pontificall is vulgarly called
in deed and inscribed by the name of Damasus: but
Baronius
                  Bar. an. 384. nu. 15. himselfe confesseth that Damasus is not
the author of it: and Binius expresly saythBin. in Notis ante vitam B. Petri. pa. 19., Huius
libri Pontificalis Damasus author non est, Damasus
is not the authour of this Pontificall. Againe,
whosoeuer was authour of it, in that verie life of
Siluester, he directly contradicts Baronius and Binius
and demonstrates this Romane Synod to be a
counterfeite: for he placeth this Synod
                  Huius temporibus factū est Concilium in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . &c. Et in v
                        •
                     be Roma con
                        •
                     regatu
                        •
                      Episcopos 277. & damnauit iterum A
                     
                        ••••
                     , & Photinum. Vita Siluest. apud Bin. 
                  after the Nicen
Councell, and so the whole fable of Crispus murther,

of Constantines leprosie, cure, and baptizme, before that
Nicen Councell, is quite spoyled. To say nothing how
the Pontificall placeth the deathFuit temporibus Constantini & Volusiani ex die Kalend. Feb. vsque in diem 
                        •
                     anuarij Constantine & Volusiano Consulibus. Damas
                        •
                     vt vocatur. in vita Siluest. of Siluester in the
Consulship of Volusianus, which 
                     ••
                  llesBar. an. 314. nu. 1. in the
ninth yeare of Constantine (for Volusianus was Consul
in no other yeare during the raigne of Constantine)
and so by the Pontificall, Siluester dying in the ninth
yeare of Constantine, some ten yeares after that
should rise out of his graue to baptize and cure Constantine,
and hold this Roman Synod after the cure
thereof: or else because the same Pontificall sayth
that Siluester liued vntill the yeare when Constantine
and Volusianus were Consuls, which neuer was
yet, by the authoritie of that Pontificall, Siluester
is yet aliue, and Pope also. For these and such like
reasons I thinke Baronius did wisely not to produce
the Pontificall of Damasus.
               
               Besides these testimonies wherein you see is little
helpe for their cause, Baronius and others alledge diuers
reasons and collections, to perswade that Constantine
was baptized at Rome by Siluester. One is the
monument of Constantines Font, that wherein he
was baptized, which (as they say) is yet to be seene at
Rome. This doth Melchior Canus
                  Canu. leco cit. in testimonium certistimum Romae ass
                        •
                      natur. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  thinke a very pregnant
& certaine proofe. Baronius
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 42. doth also mention
the same, and tels vs, that hactenus visitur h
                        •
                     c baptisterium,
the Font wherein he was baptized is as yet to
be seene in the Laterane, but withall ne 
                     •
                  els vs that
which exceedingly doth discredit this ancient monument
of their Font. There remaines s
                        •••
                     e pritas
(saith heBar. an. 324. nu. 55. 56.) of that noble antiquitie, quam vix in chartis,
modo nobis antiquitas representa
                        •
                     , wh
                     •
                  en in

writing or in Bookes Antiquitie doth represent
vnto vs, but yet those Printes remaine by the
industry of Anastasius, Qui
                        •
                     tam memorabile monumentum
ab iniuria temporis vindicatum, memoriae
prodidit: who hath left vnto posteritie this memorable
monument, freed from the iniurie of time, and
these they are, quae nimia vetustate obsita, prout licuit
ex mendo so codice, which wee haue set downe as well
as we could out of a faulty, torne and too old a booke, very
rude, and not set out with Anastasius stile. Thus Baronius
touching this monument of Constantines
Font. When the memory of it must bee gathered
out of a torne, rude, and faultie booke; when the first
whom the Cardinall could produce for it, was Anastasius
the keeper of their Vaticane, one who liued
more then 500. yearesClaruit Anastasius, an. 860. Tritem, lib. de Eccles. script. & Bellar. lib. de Eccles. script. after Constantines death, and
who was (as I haue elsewhere declared) an arch-corrupter
of true monuments, and one principall mint-master
of their fabulous narrations; when the credit
of this monument must rely on him, it may iustly be
thought that there are neither ancient, true, nor certaine
proofes for this Font of Constantine.
               
               
                  Binius
                  Baptisterium adhuc extat, & à Marcellino eius aetatis scriptore. lib. 27. appellatur Constantinianū Lauacrum. Bin. Not in Donat. Const. 
                        •
                     . 298. cites a farre more ancient author then
Anastasius, to wit, Ammianus Marcellinus the heathen
writer, who, as Binius sayth, calleth this Font Lauacrum
Constantinianum, and this he sayth is a testimony
not to be contemned. Truely had Marcellinus mentioned
the font of Constantine, or called it by that name
it had beene a very cleare testimony: Binius should
not haue needed so to haue qualified or impaired
the same by saying it is non contemnendum testimonium.
But I feare Binius was conscious to himselfe

that the Lauacrum Constantinianum in Marcellinus,
is not any Font wherin Constantine or any other was
baptized, but the Thermae or Balneum, the bath which
Constantine made, as many other Emperours had
done the like before: as the bath which Maximianus
surnamed Herculeus, had a little before made at Millane,
is called by Ausonius
                  Et regio Hercule
                        •
                      celebris sub honore lavacri, Auson. De nobil. vib. Ep. 4, de Mediol. 
                  Herculeum Lauacrum: of
which Sigonius saithSig. de occid Imper. lib. 1. an. 301., that it was called Herculeae Thermae
siue Lauacrum Herculeum: And in Olympiodorus
                  Olymp. citatur à Lips. lib. 3. de magnit. Rom. c. 8.
are mentioned, Lauacra publica ingenti magnitudine,
very spacious and large bathes, of which sort of Lauacra,
Ammianus himselfe speaking, saithAm Marc. li. 16. §. Proinde., Lauacra
in morem prouinciarum extructa, there were bathes at
Rome as great as a Prouince: One of which, namely,
Antonianae Thermae, had sixe hundred seates in it for
such as would be bathed there, as Olympiodorus
                  Olymp apud Lyps. loc. cit. testifieth.
Such a bath was that Lauacrum Constantinianum,
which Ammianus mentions: which Binius
might easily haue knowne, partly by the description
of Rome prefixed to the Notitia Prouinciarum, and
set foorth also by Onuphrius
                  Onuph. lib. de deser. vrb. Rom. (where besides the generall
summe of bathes in Rome which exceeded
the number of 900. there is expresse mention of eleuen
principall, one of whichVt liquet ex desc. Rom. tam ante Not. prov. quam apud Onuph. was Thermae Constantinianae;
the same no doubt with that which Ammianns
                  Am. Marc: lib. 27. prop
                        •
                      initium.,
and after him Sigonius
                  Sig. lib. 7. de occid. Imp. calles Lauacrum Constantinianum,)
and specially by the very Text and
words of Ammianus; for there it is sayd, that the people
would haue set on fire the house of Lampadius, prope
Constantini Lauacrum, neere the bath of Constantine:
not neere his Font, of which Ammianus knew nothing.
And if the Font had beene meant by that

                  Lauacrum, hee would rather haue sayd, neere the
Church or Temple of Constantine, and not neere
the Font, which was in the Temple. So childish was
this collection out of Ammianus, that it may most
iustly be esteemed, testimonium contemnendum.
               
               Suppose some Font in the Laterane were called
Constantines: what if it was that Constantine which
was the sonne of Irene, and in whose time the second
Nicen Councell was held? Those gay and glorious
Images of the Agnus Dei, of Christ, of Iohn
Baptist, of the Angell, and such other Pictures, wherewith
the Font is bedecked; doe perswade that it was
rather his Font, then Constantines the Great. Or say it
was the great Constantines font, what if it was so called
because he bestowed it, & erected it, not because he
was baptized in it? as the very Laterane Church
(wherein that Font as they say yet remaines) is called
by the same Anastasius
                  Anast. libell. de munificentia Constantini, apud Bin. pa. 259., Constantiniana Basilica,
the Church of Constantine, not because Constantine
was baptized in it, (for it was builded after his baptizme,
as themselues also confesse) but because hee
builded it. Howsoeuer, till there appeare more certaine
proofe then is this of Anastasius; there are few
I thinke that will giue credite to such a late and fabulous
writer, and so vncertaine a monument, against
so many ancient records and testimonies, some of
those who liued at the same time with Constantine,
who with one consent do testifie, that he was baptized
not at Rome, but at Nicomedia.
               
               A second reason they take, and vrge it very earnestly
from Constantines presence in the Nicen councell:
whereupon they inferre, that certainely therefore

hee was baptized before that Councell. Who
can beleeue (saith Canus
                  Can. loco citat. lib. 11. c. 5) that the Nicen Bishops would
suffer Constantine to bee present in that Synod and at
their disputations, vnlesse he had beene first baptized?
Eumne sanctos patres passures (saith SteuchusSteuch. lib. de Donat. pa. 156.) would
the holy Nicene fathers haue suffered him to sit among
thē in the Councell if he had bin vnbaptized?
How could he (saith BaroniusBaron. an. 324. nu. 49.) haue bin present and sit
among the Bishops in the holy Synod, if he had beene but a
Catechume? Laturine essent beatiss. illi Antitistes, would
those most holy Bishops haue suffered or endured
this? This is forbidden (saith Binius
                  Bin. Not. in vitam Siluest. §. Baptizauit.) to all Catechumes
and sinners: and will you thinke that it was
granted to Constantine, guiltie of such crimes, and as
yet a Catechume? Thus reason they.
               For answer whereunto, I omit what insolency
they shew in their speech, as if Constantine who
was the chiefe and commander of all in the Synod,
might not sit there, but by the leaue, courtesie, permission
and sufferance of the Bishops? I entreate
them first to know what Bellarmine or the Cardinalls
Dalmatianus would say to this Obiection.
For both
                  Dur
                        •
                     auit tribus annis, & finitum est anno 20. Constantini, Bell lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5. §. Sed & §. liē. Dalmar siue Gelaf. Cyz
                        •
                     cenus. lib. 4. Act. Nic. p. 365. 
                  they make the Nicen Councell to begin
before the eighteenth yeare of Constantine.
And seeing Constantine was not baptized before
the murther of Crispus, before hee fell into
his leprosie, which was, as they account, in his
nineteenth yeare: what a foule ouer-sight was
it in Dalmatianus and Cardinall Bellarmine, to
thinke that Constantine beeing then but a Catechume
and not baptized, did sit in the Nicen Synod,
did heare their quarrels, take their bils of cōplaints,

and was present at their disputations & determinations?
Certainely this new found learning was not
knowne in the dayes of Dalmatius.
               
               Next, I wish them to consider of the Councell at
Arles, vnto which Constantine called very many Bishops,
no fewer then two hundred, ex locis diuersis ac
propè infinitis, almost out of infinite places (as the
Emperours owne lettersApud Eus, lib. 
                        •
                     o. hist. c. 5. doe witnesse) among
which were presidents also in the Councell, foure Legates
for Siluester, as Baronius
                  Bar. an. 314. nu. 51. obserueth, and after him
Bin. Not in Conc, Arel. §. Ad petitionem. 
                  Binius. That Constantine was present in this great
and holy Councell, Eusebius clearely testifieth, saying,Euseb l. 1. de vita Con. c. 37,
Constantine as a common Bishop appointed by God,
called a Councell (he meanes this at Arles) and in
media istorum frequentia ac congressu adesse, and hee
was present in the middest of the Bishops, he did not disdayne
to sit among them, (this is another manner of
speech them to say, theyQuod Constantinus ad huc Catechumenus interfuerit. patresconcessisse videntur. Bin. Not. la Conc. Ar
                        •
                     l. §. Ad. permitted or suffered him)
he was made partaker of their deliberations, &c. Now
this Councell was held, when by al me
                     •
                  s confession,
Constantine was a Catechume, for it was assembled
                  Vt Acta Concilij illius declarant.
                  in August, when Volusianus and Anianus were Consuls,
which was in the beginning of Constantines 9.
yeare. None of all those holy and worthy Bishops,
once vpbrayded the Emperor, that he was not baptized,
or that they might not suffer him being but a
Catechume to sit in the Councell. Seeing Baronius
& Binius both of thē confesse, that he was present in
this holy councel at Arles, though he were but a Catechume,
what per
                     ••
                  rse dealing is it in them to say
the Bishops at Nice would not haue suffered him to
sit in the Synod had he bene but a Catechume?
               
                  
And it is but meere dallying, which they adde of
this Councell at Arles, that the Emperour was not
to be excluded, (so Baronius
                  Bar an. 314 nu. 53. speakes) or that the Bishops
granted or gaue leaue vnto him to bee present, (so
speakesBin. loc. citato. 
                  Binius) because in this Councell was handled
no matters of faith: For both was there a question
of faith, inuolued in that cause betweene Cecilianus
and the Donatists, (as I haue else-where made euident,)
and where I pray you, doe they finde, that a
Catechume Emperour is to bee excluded, more
from hearing a cause of faith debated in a Councel,
then a cause of the facts and scandalous actions of
Bishops? For it is a manifest vntruth which Binius
                  Bin. Notis in vitam Siluest. §. Baptizauit. Constantio adhuc Catechumeno Mediolanensi Concilio interesse non fuisse permissum testatur Sulp. Seuerus: & similia fere habet Bar. ann. 355. nu 10. 11
affirmes, to be witnessed by Sulp. Seuerus, lib. 2.
That Constantius the Emperour was not suffered to be
present in the Councell at Millane, because he was a Catechume.
That he was a Catechume at that time, Seuerus
indeed affirmes: but that he was either for that
cause, or at al excluded, or not permitted to come
to the Synod, Seuerus hath not one syllable. Nay,
to see the vanitie of these men, Bintus
                  Cum huic Conuentui praesideret haereticus Imperator, quis legitimum Concilium vocet? Bin. Not. in Concil. Mediol § Reprobatum. plainely
professeth, that the Hereticall Emperour Constantius,
was president in that Councel at Millane: and so either
by himselfe or by his Deputies, was present therein.
Besides, of the two, it is lesse to be regarded, that
the errors, then the crimes and scandals of Bishops
be knowne to Catechumes, or to any others, as
Constantine wisely considered, when at the Nicene
Councell he Burnt all the bills
                  Ruff hist. lib 1. ca. 2. & Soc. lib. 1. ca. 5. 
                  of their particular
quarrels and accusations, giuing this as a reason, Ne
vllt hominum innotesceret simultas sacerdotum, adding
(as Theodoret
                  Theod. lib. 1. ca. 11. saith) That if himselfe should see

a scandalous fault in one of them, paludamento suo se
obtecturum sceleratum facinus, He would hide such a
fault with his owne Imperiall robe. Wherefore seeing
the Emperour being as yet vnbaptized, sate in so
great and holy a Synod, as was that at Arles: it is a
very friuolous obiection of Baronius and Binius, that
he might not be present at Nice, vnlesse he had bene
baptized.
               A third reason they make, Because Constantine was
present at the sacred mysteries
                  Bar. an. 324 nu 49. & Bin. Not. in vitam Siluest §. Baptizauit. 
                  at Easter, (they meane
theVsque ad sacratissimae oblationis finem perseuerasse, Bar. loc. cit. Eucharist) and was not commaunded by the Deacon
to depart, as Catechumes were wont to be: And this
they would seeme to collect out of Eusebius, who
saithEuseb. lib. 4. ca. 22. & 57., That he with all his strength both of minde and
body, did performe the diuine rites of that holy feast of
Easter. But neither doth Eusebius, nor any ancient
writer mention his presence at receiuing of that Sacrament.
Those Sacra, and Diuine rites, which Eusebius
intends, himselfe explaines to be, The ioyfull and
religious Vigil
                  Nocturnam in hoc festo peruigilationem tam clarā reddidit, quam diurnam lucē accensis tota vrbe quam celsissimis cereis candelis, & lampadibus, igneis, &c. lib. 4. ca. 22., which the Emperor obserued, in honor
of Christs Resurrection, and in token of his assured
beleefe thereof; His magnificence
                  Setuatoris benignitatem imitatus omnib
                        •
                     s beneficā & prolixam manum porrigebat, collaus in omnes maximis beneficijs, ibid., vsed as a token of
his ioy at that time, his zeale and feruency in praying
                  Imperator cum caeteris pernoctans vota precesque Deo suo persoluebat, lib. eod. ca. 57.,
and praising God; of which Eusebius faith in the very
same ChapterLib. eod. ca. 22., Ille deo suo quasi sacerdos quidam sacra
faciebat, he offered sacrifices, or prayers and praises
to God at that time, as one of the Priests. From
which words, they may as well, nay much better
conclude, that he consecrated the Host, then that he
was present at the consecrating or receiuing therof.
So idle is this their coniecture touching his presence
at the Eucharist.
               
                  
                  Steuchus
                  Aug. Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 160, out of Theophanes addeth a fourth, which
he cals validissimum argumentum, a most strong argument,
to proue that Constantine was baptized before
the Nicen Councell; and that is, Because if he had
not then beene baptized, he might not, orationes cum
diuinis patribus habere, not so much as haue prayed
with those holy Fathers, or beene present at prayers
with them, at which Constantine to haue bene present,
he affirmes (and that rightly) to be so certaine,
That to thinke the contrary, is, as he saith, absurdissimum,
a thing most absurd. Steuchus herein bewrayes
a far worse fault then ignorance. For who can imagine
Steuchus to haue beene ignorant, that Catechumes
(they were suchVt patet ex Cyrill. Alex. lib. 12. in Ioh. ca. 50. & August. tract. 4. in Iohan. as being instructed in the faith,
were not as yet baptized) were in ancient times permitted
to be present, at all other parts of diuine seruice,
(prayers, reading and preaching of Gods
word) saue onely at the receiuing of the Eucharist.
When that was to be celebrated, the Catechumes
were dismissed: euen as at the end of all, there was
Missa fidelium, a dismission of all the rest, who till
the end remained. And from this very custome of
dismissiō, the word Missa
                  Missae nomen significare etiam Mercatū seu
                        •
                      nundinas in const. Carol. Mag. tit. de Malla, ca. 2. & alibi obseruat Busaeus. Not. ad illud ca. Idem notat Ioh. Lidius in glo
                        ••
                      suâ La
                        •
                     inobarb. An vero inde dictae voces illae Michaelmas. Martinmas, & similes, alij viderint: nos pro officio diuino hic accipi mus., (which is corruptly now
called Masse) tooke his name, Missa, being anciently
vsed for Missio, as remissa
                  Diximus de remissa peccatorum. Tertul. lib. 4. cont. Marc. cap. 18. Aug. lib. 3 De bapt. ca. 18., for remissio, and collecta
                  Fecit Salomon collectā, &c. 
                        •
                     . Chron. 7. 9. & 1. Cor. 16. 2.
for collectio. Its called Missa, saith IsiodoreIsiod lib. 6. Etym. cap. 19., because
the Catechumes were sent away, the Deacons crying, If any
who is a Catechume remaine, let him depart. The like
saith Rabanus
                  Rab. lib. 1. Inst. cler. cap. 32., & Remigius
                  Remig. lib. de officio Missae.: Missa, saith Alcuinus
                  Alcuin. lib de diuin. offic. cap. de celebr. Missae.,
is so called, because it is a dismission, and the Missa of
Catechumes was, before the administration of the Sacrament,
the Missa fidelium, (that is, such as were

baptized) was after the celebration and receiuing of
the same. That Canon of the fourth Councell at
Carthage, (which was held aboutConc. Cart. 4. habitum Honorio 4. & 
                        ••
                     tichiano Cons. Act. Conc. apud Bin. pa. 553. is est an. 398. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Bar. ob
                        •
                     jt autem Constantinus an. 337. 60. yeares after
Constantine) doth clearely witnesse this: for thereConc. Carth. 4. ca. 84.
it is decreed, That no Bishop should hinder any to come
into the Church, or to heare the word of God, neither
Gentile nor Iew, nor Heretique, vsque admissam Catechumenorum,
vntill the dismission of the Catechumes.
And the like was decreed, concerning notorious
offenders, in the Councell at Ilerda in Spaine,
Where
                  Conc. Ilerdense can 4. habitum vero est ann. 524. 
                  they are permitted to stay in the Church no longer,
then vsque ad missam Catechumenorum, till the
dismission of Catechumes. Steuchus could not be
ignorant of this custome, continued in all ages of
the Church. It was meere hate of the truth, which
moued him to auouch, that Constantine a most religious
Emperour, might not be permitted to bee
present at prayers, with the Nicene Fathers, vnlesse
he had beene baptized; when the vse and custome
of the Church euen in that very age, allowed not
onely Catechumes, but notorious offenders, and
heretickes, yea Pagans and Iewes, to be present at
the same.
               Bishop Canus considering, that the baptisme of
Constantine could not effectually be concluded, either
from his presence at prayers, nor yet at the Eucharist,
goes one step further then either Baronius
or Steuchus durst aduenture: and out of Nicephorus
                  Niceph. lib. 7. ca. 35.,
telsCanus loc. Theol lib. 11. ca. 5. §. de baptismo. vs, (which is their fift reason) That Constantine
was particeps mysteriorum cum eis, partaker of the holy
mysteries, (that is, of the Eucharist) with the Nicene
Fathers; and they adde, Historia tradit, that

this is witnessed in the Historie. Verily, could either
Nicephorus or Canus, or any other of them all, produce
any one authenticall Historie to testifie this,
none would euer after open their mouthes against
them in this matter, touching Constantines baptisme.
But no Historie at all (as I thinke,) and certainely
none of credit, either doth, or can mention this.
For it is certaine, not onely by Eusebius
                  Euseb. Amb. & alij locis citatis., Ambrose,
Ierome, Theodoret, and many other, but euen by
Constantines
                  Apud. Eus. lib. 4 de vit. Const. ca. 62. owne words, That he deferred his baptisme
vntill a little before his death, nine yeares at least
after the Nicene Councell was ended; and he giues a
reason, Why he had so long deferred it. Seeing then
none vnbaptized, might partake of the Eucharist,
it is euident and certaine, euen by Constantines owne
testimonie, that he being vnbaptized at the time of
the Nicene Councell, neither might, nor did communicate
with those Fathers, as Nicephorus
                  Diuina mysteria participasse: & eiusdem mensae participem s
                        •
                     
                     isse ait Nicep. loc. cit. & ex eo Canus. saith hee
did, at that holy table, nor partake of the Eucharist with
them. That which misled Nicephorus herein, was the
mistaking of certain words in Eusebius, which is (in
all likelihood) the Storie that Nicephorus meaneth.
Eusebius declaring the deuotion, pietie and zeale of
Constantine, in obseruing the celebritie of Easter,
saithEus. lib. 4: ca. 22., That he performed 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      est sacroru
                        •
                      anti
                        •
                     tes & d
                        •
                     
                     ctor. the diuine
and sacred rites, or duties prescribed by the Bishops:
and againe, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . He sacrificed, or was as a
Priest to offer the sacrifices of prayers and prayses vnto
God. Nicephorus misconceiuing these words, affirmes,
The Historieto speake of the Eucharist, whereas
not one word is meant thereof: and to speake,

                  Of his receiuing those sacred mysteries, whereas
the Historie speakes onely, of his offering spirituall
and holy sacrifices vnto God: and to speake
Of the time of the Nicene Councell, whereas the
Historie speakes onely of Easter, at which time
there was no assembly of the Nicene
                  Nam Con
                        •
                     . Nic coepit 14. die Iunij, & terminatum est 25. die Augusti. eodem anno, Bin. Not. in id Conc. §. Paulino. Fathers.
Nicephorus is as fouly mistaken in both these sayings,
(that Constantine was partaker of the Eucharist,
and that the Historie witnesseth the same,) as
he was, saying, That
                  Niceph. lib. 8. ca. 14. 
                  the Nicene Councell was held
in the time of Pope Iulius, or, that there was a
Bishop
                  Ibid. 
                  of Constantinople at that time, or, that
Constantine
                  Niceph. lib. 7. ca. 33. 
                  was baptized with Crispus. All of
them (and many moe) are so vntrue, that no fitter
iudgement can be giuen of them, then Posseuine
giues in another matter: Mendacissimè
                  Posseu. Appar. in Nicephorus. 
                  asserit,
Nicephorus is a most lying Authour in them all;
And for Canus, who herein applaudsQuae duae rationes efficiunt, vt non temere ijs accedam, &c. Can. loc. cit. 
                  Nicephorus,
none can say otherwise, but that he wittingly
followed the lying reports of him whom their
owne Posseuine cals a most lying Authour.
               Besides these actions of peace, from which as
you see, the baptisme of Constantine by Syluester,
cannot be concluded, Baronius vrgeth a sixt reason,
drawne from his actions of warre; Were it true,
saith heBar. ann. 324. nu. 45., that Constantine was not baptized, till a little
before his death, then hee must be held for pietie
and religion farre inferiour to Constantius: for as
that time when Constantine dyed, hee was preparing
a warlike expedition against the Persians, and before
that he had made many battailes against his enemies;

all which time, and in all which warres, he remained
vnbaptized: whereas Constantius being to fight against
Magnentius, Ne lixam quidem voluit nisi ante baptizatum,
in hostem proficisci, would not suffer so much
as a Skull to goe into the battell, vnlesse he were first
baptized. So Baronius.
               
               You may clearely perceiue, that by the Cardinals
diuinitie, Constantine must bee proclaimed,
and that for a certainetie, to haue beene farre worse
then Constantius. For that Constantine was not till
neere his death baptized, is clearely and vndeniably
prooued, by all those ancient and vndoubted
Witnesses, whom before we produced. The
Cardinall was not a little glad so farre to dishonour
and disgrace Constantine, as to make him
worse then one of the most hereticall and persecuting
Tyrants, that euer the Church endured:
then one whom the Orthodoxall Fathers
accounted and calledQuid igitur hic (Constantius) quod Antichristi est omisit? aut quid ille vbi venerit, plus committere poterit? Athā
                     ▪ Epist. ad sol
                        •
                     t. vitam agent. pa. 238. 
                  Antichrist, and the Type
                  Quod vere imaginem referat Antichristi, ibid.
                  of the great Antichrist. But the Cardinall in speaking
thus to disgrace Constantine, hath most
fouly disgraced himselfe, and bewrayed his owne
want both of true diuinitie, and reason. For
though Constantius with his whole Armie, had
beene baptized, and had receiued all the Sacraments
in the World, yet seeing hee was euen
then an Heretique, and an impious oppugner,
and persecutour of the true and Catholique faith;
none of all his outward actions, though they bee
neuer so holy in themselues, could make him, I say
not equall, but not comparable in any degree to

                  Constantine, a most pious, religious, and sincerely
Orthodoxall Emperour. It is neither circumcision
                  Gal. 6. 15. Rom. 2. 28.,
nor baptisme, but a new creature, and an heart purified
and washed by Faith, and the loue of God,
which auailes with the Lord: and it is a very true
saying which is collected out of Saint Austen
                  Aug. s
                        •
                     rm. super gestis 
                        〈◊〉
                      Emerito, lit. 
                        •
                     .,
Habere omnia Sacramenta & malus esse potest; habere
autem charitatem, & malus esse non potest: A
man may receiue all the Sacraments, as Iudas
did, and yet bee a wicked man, yea a very Deuill,
as Iudas was; but haue the loue of God, the
loue of Gods true Church and Children, and
be a wicked man, he cannot. This loue of God,
and Gods Church, which Constantine inwardly
and sincerely embraced, made him (though for
the outward acte vnbaptized) by many degrees
more acceptable vnto God, and more honourable
in the Church of God, then the outward receiuing
of baptisme, or any other Sacrament could
make Constantius, in whom there was no sincere
loue to God, but an extreame hatred of Gods
truth, and of his holy seruants who professed the
same.
               And yet had the Cardinall sought by this his
diuinitie, to haue dishonoured Constantine alone,
though his fault therein had beene vnexcusable,
it might more easily haue obtained pardon.
But by this position of his, he hath made
both Valentinian, and Theodosius the Great, farre
worse then Constantius also. Of the warres made
by Valentinian, and his victories obtained against

the Almanes, the Illirians, the Quades, the Saxons, the
Brittaines, the people of Africke, and others: Beside
many other historians, Ammianus Marcellinus
                  An. Marcel. lib 28. 29 30. who
liued in those times, is a witnesse. For Theodosius,
that he by many and most victorious conquests, subdued
the Gothes, who then oppressed the Romane Empire:
Theodoret
                  Theod. lib. 5. ca. 5. and othersTheodosiu
                        •
                      rempub. Gothicis armis penè oppressā restituit. Egnat in Theod. declare. Now though
Valentinian
                  Audio vos dolere, quod non acceperit sacramenta baptizmatis. Ambr. orat. de obit. Valent. 
                  was neuer baptized, nor Theodosius at the
time of those happie conquests, yet are they both so renowned
for pietie, that Saint Ambrose (to whom the
whole Church consents therein) callsAmbr ibid. the one an
inhabitant of Paradise, clothed with celestiall light and
glorie: and of the other, he saithAmbr. orat. de obitu. Theodosij., he enioyeth eternall
rest and delight in the bosome of Abraham. But it is
meate and drinke with Baronius by any colour of diuinitie,
to impaire the honour of Emperors, and endeauour
to haue the most religious of them all, to
be accounted more impious then any persecuting
Tyrant.
               Besides all this which concernes the diuinitie of
Baronius, there are two speciall points to bee obserued
in his reason also. First, he saith, that Constantius
would not suffer, ne lixam
                  Bar. an 324
                        •
                      nu. 45. 
                  quidem, not so much
as a skull vnbaptized to goe with him to battaile.
Now in Theodoret, out of whom Baronius
                  Bar. an. 351. nu. 15. relates
this; Constantius
                  Vt apud Theod. liquet. lib 3. ca. 3. named neither skul nor cooke, but
onely socios belli. The Cardinall by this base and contemptible
addition, or comparison, was pleased to
vilifie the most renowned and religious Emperour:
and as elsewhere reprouing Iustinian, heeIllud vetus (
                        •
                     ust inian
                        •
                     ) occmendum, Non vl
                        •
                     ra crepidam. Bar. an. 550. nu. 14. 
                  compares
him to a Cobler, so here euery skull, if he hap to

be baptized, must with the Cardinall be compared
with, nay preferred before, and giue a check to the
religious and most holy Constantine.
               
               The other point which I obserue, is, an eminent
defect in the Cardinals reasō. Who would not perswade
himselfe, reading in the Card. this high commēdation
of Cōstantius, as being more pious then vnbaptized
Cōstantine; who I say would not assure himselfe,
that Cōstantius was baptized at the time when
he made the warre with Magnentius? for otherwise,
if Constantius also was then vnbaptized, you will certainely
iudge the Cardinall to haue dalied in this
matter, who by the pietie of Constantius condemnes
Constantine for going to warre being vnbaptized.
Now the truth is, that Constantius was not baptized
when he fought with Magnentius and ouercame him
in that battle in Pannonia, whereVt liquet ex Zosimo lib. 2. himselfe was present,
nor in seuen yeeres after. For he ouercame Magnentius
in his seuenteenth yeere
                  Bar. an. 353. nu. 6., and hee was baptized
butBar. an. 361 nu. 20. Moriens voluit baptizari, ait Athanas. lib. de Synod. pa. 250. 
                  a little before his death▪ in the fiue and twentieth
yeere of his reigne. What is now (thinke you) become
of the Cardinalls reason, or how is Constantine for
his going to warre vnbaptized, farre more impious
then Constantius, seeing that Constantius in all the
warres that he made was vnbaptized also?
               Neither will it helpe the Cardinall to say, that yet
the souldiers of Constantius were baptized, and
Constantius commanded that they so should bee:
but this much bewraies the malicious dealing of
Baronius, who heereupon preferres either the one
or the other before Constantine. Constantius indeed
commandedTheod lib. 3. ca. 3. 
                  that they should be baptized; adding further,

                  that if they refused it, they should be sent away;
but hee did that, not in pietie, but in meere policie.
Magnentius against whom at that time hee was to
fight, though he pretended himselfe to be a Christian,
yet was in heart a Pagan and an Idolater; and
when he had once vsurped the Empire, hee gaue free
libertie and toleration to such as would sacrifice and doe
worship to the heathen Idols, as the very law of Constantius
                  Aboleantur noct
                        •
                     ra sacrificia Magnentio authore permis
                        •
                     a: 
                        〈◊〉
                      Constantius
                        •
                      leg. 5. De paganis sacrif. Cod. The
                        •
                     d.,
dated after the death and ouerthrow of
Magnentius doth declare. Constantius knowing
how dangerous it were for him, to haue Paganes,
and such as were addicted to Pagane Idolatries, to
be in those warres against Magnentius, commanded
that all his souldiers should receiue baptisme, or else to
depart home; if they refused to be baptized. Had Constantius
done this in pietie, himselfe would first of all
haue beene baptized: seeing he was not, he shewed
therein an act of policie, and sought his owne safetie
and securitie; but there was no token of true pietie,
nor of seeking their saluation: nothing at all for
which he is to be compared with, much lesse to bee
preferred to the most religious Constantine. Againe,
had Constantine being required by superior and lawfull
authoritie, refused to bee baptized, his contempt
of Gods ordinance had proued him therein to haue
beene much inferiour to the souldiers of Constantius,
who at the Emperours command receiued that
signe of their Christian profession. But seeing
hee neuer refused to bee baptized, but hauing for
many yeeres votum baptismi, a sincere
                  Quam 
                        〈…〉
                     . Eu. li. 4. c. 6
                        ••
                     
                   
                  desire thereof,
deferred onely the act, and that for no other cause
but in an ardent desire to be more like vnto Christ, in

being washed with the selfe same waters of Iordan that
Christ was; his want of actuall baptizme, ioyned
with a sincere desire thereof, and feruent zeale to
imitate Christ, is euery way equal, if not more commendable,
then the actuall, but constrained receiuing
of this Sacrament in those souldiers, who neither
had like zeale vnto God, nor like cause to deferre
their baptizme as Constantine had. So the Cardinall
is euery way most iniurious vnto Constantine:
first, in preferring the souldiers, religious in deed, but
constrained act of baptisme, before Constantines zealous
deferring of the act, ioyned with a most pious
desire thereof: and againe, in preferring Constantius
vnto Constantine, for that which he not in pietie but
in meere pollicie required, himselfe all the while, remaining
without the act of baptizme, as well as Constantine,
and neuer hauing that pious affection and
zealous desire, either to God, or to any godly act or
Christian dutie as Constantine had.
               After this Baronius proposeth by way of demand,
a seuenth reason, to proue that Constantine did not
deferre his baptizme till his last age, and then by
consequent, that he was baptized by Siluester: and
thus he disputes: Quonam
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 45. 
                  quaeso maiorum exemplo,
By what example of those that went before, did Constantine
so long deferre his baptizme, euen vnto his decrepit
age, till he was ready to die? I againe demand of
the Cardinal, seeing himselfe puts Constantines baptizme
but twelue yeares before, at which time hee
was full fiftie three yeares old, by what example of
any before, did Constantine (who as the Cardinall
confessethBar. an. 3
                        •
                     5. 
                        〈◊〉
                      12., was trained vp in pietie euen from his

youth) deferre his baptizme for more then fiftie
yeares? I doubt not, but the Cardinalls friendes
would be as much perplexed to finde an example of
the one, as wee need to be for the other. Had all
such particulars beene expressed in Stories, there
might no doubt abundant examples bee produced
of either. It was an vse, (I doe not say how commendable)
but an vse it was, in the primitiue
Church, euen in Constantines age and long after,
to defer their baptisme, oftentimes till they thought
their last howre imminent, but vsually, for very
many yeeres. Theodosius the great, a most renowned
and religious Emperour, deferred his baptisme till
he was fortie fiue yeeres
                  Baptizatus est Gratiano 5. & Theodosio 1. Coss. Socrates lib. 5. c. 6. is est an. Ch. 380. iuxt. Marcel. & Bar. Obijt Olibrio & Probino Coss. Marc. in Chr. & Prosper. is est an iuxta Marc. & Bar. 395. vixit au
                        ••
                      annos 60. vt 
                        •
                     estatur Socr. lib. 5. ca. 25. 
                  old, and had deferred it longer,
but that returning to Constantinople with many
victories, he fell into an extreame sicknesse at Thessalonica,
by occasion whereof he was there and then
baptized: and this Theodosius liued euen in Constantines
dayes. The father of this Emperour was named
Theodosius also, and almost contemporall with
Constantine, a religious father of so religious a
childe, hee liuing very long, as Orosius signifies (calling
Oros. lib. 
                        •
                     . ca. 33. 
                  him a man, experientissima prouidentia, of
great prudence, arising from most long experience)
yet was he not baptized till hee came, as Baronius
speakes of Constantine, to his decrepit age; and then
by the malice of his barbarous enemies, being commanded
to be slaine, hee first desired that hee might
be baptized, which being done hee willingly offered
his necke to the executioner, and gloriously
died. Of Constantius the Emperour, and sonne of
Constantine, we shewed before, thatAthan lib 5. de Synod. pa. 280. 
                  moriens baptizatus

est, hee was not baptized till hee was at the very
point of death. Martine, Bishop of Turone, in
whose praise they loue to be hyperbolicall, (one so
holy, that Angells
                  Facie ad faciem cum eo est Angelus colioq
                        ••
                     tus. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Se
                        •
                     . lib. 3. 
                        ••
                     al. 
                  came to conferre with him while
hee liued, and who since his death is canonized
Mar
                        •
                     y. Rom. Nov. 11. for one of their greatest Saints) liued at the
same time also, and at least twentie yeeresNam natus est. 11. anno Constantini. Gre. Tur. hist. 
                        ••
                     an. li 
                        •
                     . c. 36. with
Constantine: and yet so holy as hee was, hee deferred
his baptizmeBaptizatus est anno 15. Constantij. cū esset annorum 35. Bar. an. 351. nu. 1
                        •
                     . 
                  till he was fiue and thirtie yeeres old, nor
in likelihood had then receiued that Sacrament, but
that being in warres vnder Constantius, when hee
fought against Magnentius, the Emperours command
enforced him so to doe. Saint Ambrose,
who liued likewise in Constantines
                  Nam obijt ineunte an. aetatis suae 64. anno Chr. 397 Bar. eo an. nu. 30. ergo natus est an. 334. triennio ante obitum Constantini. time, was chosen
Bishop of Millane, being but then a Catechume
                  Socr. lib. 4. ca. 25. 
                  and
vnbaptized, and no lesse then fortie yearesCreatur enim Episcop
                        •
                     s an. 374. Bar. eo an. nu. 7. of age.
The like is obserued of Nectarius, whom the whole
second generall Councell approued for Bishop of
Constantinople, though hee was vnbaptized
                  Sozom. lib. 7. ca. 8. 
                  when
hee was chosen to that high See. Yea this was so vsuall
among Christians in those times, that Binius
saith,Bin. Not. in Conc. Carth. 3. §. In oriente. 
                  Inoleuerae consuetudo, This custome was so
strong, vt plerique, that most men, both in the East
and West Church deferred their baptizme, vsque ad
prouectiorem aetatem, till they were well stricken in
yeares. So that the Cardinall had little reason
to deman
                     •
                  d examples thereof, there being so
many, euen of those who liued in Constantines
dayes.
               Nor did this custome begin in that age, as the
Cardinall not onely by his demaund implies, but
expresly affirmes, saying, that none before Constantine

                     Nullum ante hac d
                           •
                         ca
                           •
                        re praecessisse repetitur simile exemplū. Bar. an. 324. nu. 45. did thus defer their baptisme. There are many euident
proofes also, that it was frequent and vsuall in the
Church before Constantines reigne, or dayes either.
That many in the primitiue Church, euen till their
very death deferred baptisme, S. Ambrose shewes,
who mentions Cathechumenos
                  Ambr. de obitu Valentin: 
                  martyres, martyrs that
were but Catechumes and not at all baptized in water,
but in their owne blood. The same cleerely appeares,
by the 12. Canon of the Councell at Neocaesarea,
held 8. yeares before that Constantine, by their
owne accountConc. Neocaes habitū ante an. 316. proba
                        •
                      Bin. not▪ in 
                        •
                     l
                        •
                     ud Conc. § sub 
                        •
                     iluestro. was baptized: for there it is decreed,
that if any were baptized in the time of his sickenesse,
when they were clinici (that is, bedred, of 
                     〈◊〉
                   to
their bed, so that they could not walke, to whom
therefore Cyprian merrily opposedCyprian lib. 4. Epist. 7. 
                  Peripatetici)
such should not bee ordained Presbyters, vnlesse either
their subsequent zeale, or raritie of such as could bee
found willing to bee ordained, enforced it. The same
Canon to haue been of force long before, is euident
by that which Pope Cornelius, about 50. yearesCornelius coepit an. 254. Bin. in notis ad vitam Corn. Constantinus coepit imperare an. 306. before
Constantine, writ, reproouing the ordination of
Nouatianus, because bee was ordained Presbyter when
hee was Clinicus, whereas minime licebat quenquam in
lecto baptizitum in clerum assumi, it was nor lawfull to
assume any into the Clergie who was baptized
in his bed. Now this being mentioned by Cornelius
as an ancient law or cannon of the Church, demonstrates
that long before Constantines age, it was so
frequent and vsuall among Christians to deferre
their baptisme not onely to their old age, but
euen till they were at the point of death, that
sometimes there were no other but such as had

beene so baptized, to be assumed into the Cleargie.
That one memorable Storie concerning Genesius
                  Martyrologium Rom. & Mart. Vs
                        •
                     ardi in August. 25. diem.,
witnesseth the same custome, Hee being the chiefe
of the Theatricall Mimi, at the commaund of Dioclesian,
acted a play of the Christian religion before the
Emperour, in derision of the Christian Faith and Mysteries.
To expresse the custome of Christians, he
was laid as one Clinicus, on his couch vpon the
Theater, then he called for baptisme; the mimicall
Presbiter being brought, asked him if hee did beleeue,
who answering he did, he was mimically baptized:
and then apparelled in white, and then for
making that profession, he was in mimicall fashion
led to be executed. But this play was then turned
into sad earnest, for at that time he being truly and
sincerely conuerted to Christianitie, in stead of
cursing and deriding, began to blesse and adore
Christ, and seriously exhorted the Emperour, and
all in the Theater, to embrace the holy Christian
Faith, as himselfe did: at which the Emperour being
incensed with rage, commaunded him to bee
most cruelly tormented; and when by no torments
whatsoeuer, he could be driuen from the constant
profession of Christ, he was at last beheaded, and
is now enrouled among the blessed Saints and
Martyrs.
               If these be not sufficient, there are yet some more
ancient obseruances vsed in the Church, which declare
the same. For whereas Christians of all sorts,
both orthodoxall and hereticall, deferred their baptisme
not only to decrepit age, but to the very point

of death, Epiphantus
                  Epiph. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 28. expounds (and that not vnprobably)
the words of Saint Paul, Why1. Cor. 15. 29 are they
then baptized for dead? of such as being vicini mortis,
neere vnto death, are said by the Apostle to be baptized
for dead: as we say of one that is almost forsaken,
Habetur pro derelicto. And whereas many of them
died vnbaptized, not onely the C
                        •
                     rinthians
                  Epiph. ibid., and
Marcionites
                  Chrysost. in cap. 15. Hom in Epist. 1. ad Cor., vsed to Baptize others that were liuing,
for them that so dyed: but Tertullian
                  Tert. lib. 5. cont. Marc. ca. 10. & lib. de Resur. ca. 48. Ita exponit (de ijs qui pro alijs mortuis baptizantur) verba Apostoli, Tertullianus & alij, vt ait Bell. lib 1. de Purgat. ca. 4. §. Prima est. also, and Ambrose
                  Ambr. Com. in ca. 15. epi. 1 ad Corinth., doe approue of that Interpretation, and
custome also, as being intended by Saint Paul in
those words. I will not heere examine the sence of
the Apostles words, but by this which I haue saide,
it is euident, that according to both expositions,
many Catechumes did deferre their baptisme longer
then Constantine, euen vntill their death: and
that not onely in Tertullians time, that is, an hundred
yearesTert. scripsit eos libros circa an. 
                        •
                     09. Bar. eod. an. nu. 2. before Constantine▪
                   but as Epiphanius
thinketh, euen in the, Apostles daies also. So that
the Cardinall needed not to demaund, By what former
example (adding, that none could be giuen) Constantine
did deferre his baptisme so long, vntill he was
sixtie foure yeares olde, which the Cardinall spitefully,
and in disgrace of Constantine, calls decrepit age:
whereas himselfe, when he speakes not of an Emperour,
but of a Bishop, to wit of Saint Ambrose,
cals the 64. yeares of his age, But almost the
                  Mol
                        •
                     stissime accidit, ipsum decess
                        •••
                     e in ipso pe
                        •
                     è li
                        ••
                     ine senect
                        •
                     tis, 
                        〈◊〉
                      nu. 397. 
                        〈◊〉
                      30. 
                  entrance
into old age.
               
               Lastly, lets admit that Constantine had no former
example: what thinke you was become of the
Cardinals wit, learning, and iudgement; when
from this he would proue, that therefore Constantine
                  
might not, nay, which is farre more inconsequent,
that therefore he did not, de facto, so long deferre his
baptisme? May nothing, nay is nothing, de facto,
done, wherof a precedent example cannot be giuen?
Let me then put a few demands to the Cardinall,
what example before Benedict
                  Benedictus 9. puer f
                        •
                     rme decennis electus extitit, Glab. lib. 4. ca. 5. the ninth, can his
Cardinalship giue, that a Boy but tenne yeares old,
should be Bishop of Rome? or before Iohn
                  Inter fideles vitam & mores eius cognoscentes (Iohannes 23.) vulgariter dicitur Diabolus incarnatus, Co
                        •
                     c Constant. sess. 11. artic. 5. 23. that
a Deuill incarnate should be the Pope? or of any
Pope before Sergius
                  Sunt qui dicunt eum ob turpitudmem cognomenti Sergij nomen sumpsisse, eamque consuetudinem (mutandi pontificum nomina) hinc manasse, Plat. in vit. Sergij 2. & Wern. in fasc. temporum, ann. 844. the second, sur-named Swinesnout,
as Platina saith: or Octauianus
                  Hic reuera primus inuentus, qui mutauit sibi nomen. Bar. an. 955. nu. 4. & Bin. idem in Iohn 12., as the Cardinall
and Binius suppose, that changed their names;
or before Iohn the twelfth, that a Pope should drink
healths to
                  Diaboil in amorem vinum bibisse omnes ram clerici quam laici acclamarunt. Conc. Rom. sub Ioh 12. cums acta extant apud L
                        •
                     p
                        •
                     and. lib. 6. 
                  the Deuill, and giue holy
                  lbidem. 
                  orders in a stable?
or before Formosus and Stephen, that a Pope
deadBin. in 
                        ••
                     ta Stephani 7. pro c
                        •
                     rto tradit eum sic tractasse Formosum. Idem testatur Bar. an 
                        ••
                     7. 6. Plat. in vita Steph. 6. alijque▪
                   and buried, should be pulled out of his graue
brought in pontificall Robes before a iudiciall Tribunall,
arraigned, condemned, and then cast into Tyber?
What example before Syluesters time of assembling
a generall Councell? What example before
the first Nicene, of a generall Councell, decreeing
Arius and all Arians to bee heretickes? What
example before Constantine, of establishing Christianitie
by Imperiall Lawes, and banishing Heretickes?
Sure the Cardinall would bee impatient,
and iudge one little lesse then bereft of wit and vnderstanding,
who would conclude, that because
there were no precedent examples of these (and
a thousand thousand such like matters) therefore

                  Benedict the ninth, or Iohn the 23. were not Popes;
or Iohn 12. & Stephen 7. did not those abominations;
or that therefore there neither was, nor might bee
any generall Councels assembled; or that the Nicen
Councell did not, or might not decree Arians
to be Heretickes; or that Constantine might not,
and did not establish Christianitie by his Imperiall
Lawes. Its so poore, so silly and sencelesse a reason,
to proue a thing was not done, or might not
be done, because there was no precedent example
for doing the same, that I well hope some of the
Cardinals friends will cause this passage of his dispute
to passe one day vnder some Index expurgatorius,
and be quite wiped out of his Annales: that
the world doe not wonder to see so great and renowned
a Cardinall, to make so fond and feeble,
so silly and sencelesse arguments.
               An eight reason, which is proper to Binius
                  Bin. Notis in vitam Silu. §. Baptizauit., is
taken out of Eusebius
                  Euseb. lib. 3 de vit. Const. ca. 3., In whom Constantine is said
many yeares before his death, to haue shewed himselfe
in a Picture, hauing aboue his head the signe
of the Crosse, and vnder his feete the olde enemy the
Deuill, represented in the shape of a winding Dragon,
Medio ventre transfixum, thrust through the middest
with a Lance, and cast into the deepe sea. From this
Picture, thus disputes Binius. How could this be applyed
to Constantine, if hee was not then baptized?
For euery Catechume is energumenus, possessed of the
Deuill, and is so farre from killing the Serpent, that
he is rather possessed by him, Nam aliter à Catechumeno
non expellitur quàm per baptismum, For the
Deuill is not otherwise expelled from a Catechume,

then by baptisme. Thus Binius.
               
               Then by Binius diuinitie, Valentinian the Empeperor,
of whom before I spake, was still possessed
with the Deuil, for he was not at all baptized: Then
those Martyrs who die Catechumes, are still possessed.
And what a worthy peece of Theologie is this,
to teach, such as are possessed with the Deuill, to
goe straight to heauen? For so did Valentinian, as
Saint Ambrose
                  Credamus, quia ascendit ad illas florulentas delectationes, vbi ae
                     
                        •
                     ernae vitae 
                        ••
                     uitur voluntate, Ambros. Orat. de obitu Valent. 
                  shewes, and so doe all
                  Martyres ad p
                        •
                     aemium statim peruenire, Ecclesia semper credidit, Bell. lib. 2. de Purg. cap. 1. §. Haec. 
                  Martyrs. Againe,
if Constantine was till his nineteenth yeare
possessed of the Deuill: how did he, not onely by
his priuate pietie and zeale, but by his publique Lawes
and religious Edicts, abandon Idolatry and superstition,
destroy the tyrannical instruments and agents,
yea the very power of the Deuill, by aduancing the
Gospell and profession of Christ throughout his
whole Empire? as besides others, Eusebius
                  Deum omnibus qui 
                        〈◊〉
                      Imperij sui finibus continebantur palā praedicare caepit Constantinus, Euseb. lib. 2. ca. 19. hoc factum statim post de
                     
                        ••
                     ctum Licinium, id est, anno suo 12. vt ante proba
                        •
                     imus. whom
Binius citeth, is a most plentifull witnesse: was Sathan
then diuided against Sathan? And what may
Bellarmine thinke of Binius, and this diuinitie? for by
the CardinalsBell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 5. §. Item. Et §. Sed quia. position, that the Nicene Councell
continued three yeares, and ended in the twentieth
of Constantine, it vnauoydably ensueth, that Constantine
sate in the Councell of Nice among the Bishops,
before he was baptized, while he was by Binius
assertion 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; possessed with the Deuill. A
wonder, that none of al those two hundred holy Bishops
at Arles, none of those three hundred and
eighteene Bishops at Nice, did vse some exo
                     •
                  cisme,
to expell the Deuill out of those holy assemblies,
till Siluester did this, nine yeares after the one Councell,
and a yeare and a halfe after the Nicene was,

(by Bellarmines assertion) begunne: Or might one
possessed, thinke you, sit in the Councell at Arles,
as Binius himselfe confesseth Constantine did, and
not also at Nice?
               
               Besides, there are two answeres which specially
concerne this obiection. The former is touching
Eusebius, and that which hee conceiued of that Picture.
He thought it indeed To be
                  Vt liquet ex ipsis verbis Eusebij loco citato. 
                  the Picture of Constantine,
and that the Emperour meant to expresse himselfe
thereby. But what if Eusebius misconceiued Constantine? and whereas Constantine in that table, intended
to represent Christ like a valiant Warriour,
conquering and killing the old Dragon, treading
him vnder his feet, and casting him into the sea; Eusebius
thought this was indeed to expresse Constantine
himselfe. Sure euen that which Eusebius addes
in that place, doth much perswade, that Constantine
meant not himselfe, but Christ; for hee saith, That
many admired the wit and acutenesse of the Emperour,
that he, diuino afflatu pulsus, moued by the holy Spirit, figured
those same things, which by the words of the Prophet
                  Isa. 27. 1., were foretold of that dragon, that God should thrust
a great terrible sword into the dragon, and kill him in the
sea. Thus Eusebius, whereupon it is clearely consequent,
that Constantine intending to represent that
which the Prophet Isay in those words expresly applyed
vnto God, did not represent himselfe, but
Christ (of whom Isay prophesied) To be the killer &
destroyer of the old Serpent. But of this I haue spoken
more at large in another Treatise, touching St.
George killing the Dragon, and that which may be
thought to be signified thereby.
               
                  
The other answer is touching Binius his collection,
admitting Constantine to haue bene indeed represented
by that picture, as both he and all Christian religious
Emperours may well be, seeing they by their
zealous defending and propagating the Gospel, suppressing
the violent and fraudulent oppugners therof,
may truly be said by the power of Christ, to conquer
and kill the old Serpent, and tread him vnder their feete.
Now I would demand of Binius, how he knowes that
Constantine set forth this table or picture, after hee
was baptized, rather then before? Certainely by
Eusebius, who expresly auouchethLib. 4. ca. 61. 62. 63. his baptisme to
haue bene after his 30. yeare, when he was neare his
death, and this picture to haue beene erected long before
                  Nempe ante coactum conc. Nicen. vt liquet ex lib. 3. ca. 3. & 4.:
it is vndeniably consequent, that Constantine
had killed and troden vnder foote the Dragon long
before his baptisme, & so the witnesse of Binius doth
directly contradict that which he affirmes, & would
proue out of him. Againe, I would demand how he
knowes this picture was set vp by Constantine, after
his 19. yeare, rather then before it? for by Eusebius
narration it clearely appeares, that the Emperor set
it forth, vpon his subduing of those persecuting tyrants;
and therefore the Dragon which Constantine,
as Eusebius thought, killed, is thereLib. 3. ca. 3. said to haue oppugned
the Church impiorum tyrannide, by the tyranny
of the wicked. Now the last persecutor and
tyrant, in whom the dragon oppugned the Church
in Constantines time, was Licinius, whom Constantine
ouercame in his 11. or 12. yeare, as by his EdictL. 1. de vete
                        •
                     anis, Cod. Theod. we
before declared: vpon which conquest, or shortly
after, the Church enioyed
                  Impijs hominibus è medio sublatis & po
                        •
                     estate tyrannica deleta, mundus de reliquo, velut solis la
                     
                        ••
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      collu
                     
                        ••••••
                      
                     
                        •
                     uit, Eu
                        •
                     . lib. 2. ca. 19. cum iam Licini
                        ••
                      occisus 
                        •
                     sset. 
                  peace, together with the

free promulgation of the Gospel of Christ. Constantine
then erected that picture, as a publicke monument,
how by his meanes, the tyranny of Sathan was conquered
by the power of Christ: and Eusebius to signifie
that this picture had reference to those times,
about his 12. yeare begins his next ChapterLib. 3. ca. 4. in this
manner, Quibus rebus ad exitum perductis; These
things being ended, (to wit, touching the conquest
of tyrants, and of the fury of the dragon) yet the mind
of Constantine was much troubled for that pestilent
schisme, which he heard was in the churches of Thebes &
Alexandria, about the cause of Arius: and so hee proceeds
to that narration, (which he had a little interrupted)
touching the Emperours course which hee
took in the matter of Arius. So this picture, by which
Binius supposed, to proue the baptisme of Constantine
in his 19. yeare clearely proues, that he peruerts
both the writings of Eusebius, & the fact of Constantine,
both which do shew, that he had ouercome the
Dragon before his nineteenth yeare, much more
before his baptisme.
               The ninth reason, and that which carrieth indeed
greatest colour of truth, is vrged by Binius
                  Quod Eusebius affirmat Constantinū in extremo vitae cursu ab Eusebio Nicomediensi Artianorum antesignano baptizatum, impiū & à Catholica Ecclesiâ alienum, ex hac vita nigrasse, figmentum est. &c. Bin. Ioco cita. in Not. ad vitam Silu. 
                  That if
Constantine had beene baptized at Nicomedia, and by
Eusebius Bishop of that place, seeing Eusebius was a
knowne Arian, it would follow, that Constantine should
at the last turne to Arianisme, and so dye out of the
Church▪ out of the Catholicke faith, as not onely communicating
with Arians, but euen receiuing the holy Sacrament
of an Arian Bishop, in token of his communion with
them. All which Binius saith, (but most vntrulyNam Eusebius contrariū diserte asserit. Imperator (inquit, lib. 4. de vit. Const. ca. 64.) ad Deum suum assumptus est, & iterum, corpus humi relinquens animi partem intellgentem ac diuinam Deo suo c
                        •
                     iunxit, & cap. 72. ter beatum voc
                        ••
                     .)
Eusebius to affirme.
               
                  
For answer whereunto, it cannot be denied, nor
can any be ignorant therof, who is conuersant in the
Ecclesiasticall Histories, both that Constantine much
esteemed and fauoured Eusebius Nicomediensis, and
that this Eusebius was a very subtill and malicious
Arian; and yet that Constantine euen to his death,
extreamely hated and detested Arianisme. Of the
respect Constantine had of him, there are besides other,
two eminent tokens. The one, that when Athanasius
being most iniuriously condemned in the
Councell at Tyre, had cōplainedEpist. Syned
                        •
                      Alexand apud Athana
                        •
                     . Apol. 2. pag. 195. of their wrong to
Constantine: when the matter came to be heard before
the Emperour, Eusebius craftily decliningAliud crimen commentitium detulerunt, Apol. 2. pag. 219. the
former accusations, laid vnto Athanasius charge a
new crime, tending to a kind of treason: that Athanasius
had threatned to stay the Emperours shippes
and corne which was to be sent out of Egypt, and so
by that meanes (as might bee conceiued) meant to
weaken the Imperiall State, or raise a sedition or rebellion
in the Empire: which when Athanasius with
great griefe denyed, saying; That he being but a priuate
and poore man, was not able to doe such a matter,
Eusebius periuring
                  Eusebius de
                     
                        •
                     erauit Athanasium perquā opulentum esse, & satis virium & authoritatis ad ista patranda habere, ibid. pa. 195. 
                  himselfe, swore that he had both
wealth and authoritie enough to doe it: to whole oath
the Emperour gaue such credit, euen as holy Dauid
                  2. Sam. 16. 4.
did to Ziba, in the cause of innocent Mephibosheth,
That without further examination
                  Emicuit ibi Caesaris ira, adeo vt inaudita causa, è vestigio efferbuerit; & omisso iudicio, nos in Gallias relegarit, ibid. pa. 219. 
                  of the truth, hee
banished Athanasius: but afterwards repenting him
of that hastie act he purposed to cal
                     •
                  
                  Cum suis sed
                        •
                     bus hunc Episcopum pater Constā
                     tinus restitue
                        •
                     e 
                        •••
                     let, humana sorte praeuentus eit ante
                     
                        ••
                     am hoc impleret, ait constantinus Epistala ad Eccl. Alexand. apud Athanas. Apol. 2. pa. 219. him home againe,
but was preuented by death. All which is to
bee seene in the second Apologie of Athanasius.
                  
The other token of his loue and fauour to this Eusebius,
was his receiuing of the Sacrament of baptisme
at his hands, when he was so extreamely sicke and
neere his death, whereof before we cited very many
witnesses.
               It is true that some of the Ancients (as now Binius)
considering no more then those outward acts
of Constantine, thought him in his latter time to decline
to Arianisme: so did Lucifer
                  Lucif. lib. 1. pro Athan. pa. 57. 
                  Bishop of Calaret
a Confessor, who knowing the fact, but not the
cause of Athanasius banishment, said of Constantine,
that hee hated and banished Athanasius, quia noluerit
esse Arianus, because he would not be an Arian. So did
Saint Ierome in his Chronicle (if it be not falsly,Hier. in. Chron. an. 31. Constantini.
as may seeme, inserted thereinto) who looking to
the baptisme of Constantine by this Eusebius, collected
thereupon, that hee declined in Arianam Sectam,
to the Arian sect. They both did (and so doth
Binius) very iniuriously from these or the like facts,
conclude any change in the faith of Constantine: for
his faith and profession was still the same, that is,
Catholike; the change was not in him, but in Eusebius:
as if we obserue three seuerall times will easily
appeare.
               At the first, before and in the beginning of the
Nicene Councell, this Eusebius shewed himselfe in
his naturall colours an earnest Arrian: yea hee was
so obstinate in defence thereof, that they were as
vsually if not more, called from him Eusebians
                  Eusebiani passim vocantur à Synodo Alexandrina, apud Athan. Apol. 2., then
from Arius, Arians. When Eusebius was such, the
Emperor subscribed to his cōdemnation which the
Synod had decreed, Edictum Imperatoris Arium▪
                     
Eusebium, & Theognidem in exilium ire mandauit,
saith Socrates
                  Socr. lib. 1. ca. 5. p. 223., the Emperours Edict commaunded
that Arius, Eusebius of Nicomedia, and Theognis,
should be banished: but very shortly after both Eusebius
and diuers others, though dissemblingly, recanted
and subscribed
                  Vobis significamus, nos fidei confessioni consensisse, Epist. Eusebij Nico. & Theognidis. ad Patres Concili
                        •
                      Niceni. apud Socr. l. 1. c. 10. 
                  to the Councels decree; wherupon
they were receiued
                  In Synodo Nicena octo Episcopes Arianos susceptos scimus. Eusebius episcopus Nicomediensis. &c. Hier. aduersus Lucifer
                        •
                     to. 2. p. 145 
                  by the Nicene Councell. Eusebius
and the rest were permitted by the EmperourOmnia quae voluerat obtinuit. sic de hoc Eusebio scribit Imp. in suis literis apud Theod. 1. c. 19 
                  to enioy
their Bishoprickes: with their profession of change,
the Emperours displeasure was changed also.
               Some few yeeres after the end of the Councell,
Eusebius returned to his former byasse, and began
                  Eusebius Nicomediensis statim po
                        ••
                     . pro viribus laborauit vt A
                     
                        •
                     iū reduceret. Soc l. 1. c. 19. & Theod. l. 1. c. 19 
                  againe to labour for Arianisme. How Constantine
was displeased with him thereupon, his letters to the
Church of Nicomedia, for the banishment of him
and Theognis, set downe by Theodoret, are a most
pregnant testimonie: Thus hee writ: Wee
                  Epist. Constantini apud Theod l. 1. c. 19. 
                  haue giuen
commaundement, concerning these ingratefull
men (Eusebius and Theognis,) that being carried
from their Sees, they should be banished into most remote
places: adding withall, that if any man, eas Ecclesiae
pestes, vel memoria, vel laudibus celebrare aggrediatur,
if any should mention or praise those
plagues of the Church, hee should suffer condigne punishment
for so doing. Thus did the Emperour
shew his detestatiō of Eusebius when he shewed him
selfe an Arian. And vpon this charge frō the Emperor
was Eusebius
                  Illi (Eusebius & Theognis) 
                        〈◊〉
                      honoribus spoliati, Vrbibusque eiecti sunt. Theod. ib. depriued of his See & banished.
               Shortly after this the Proteus changed his profession
againe, but with like dissimulation and
fraud as he had vsed before, as Theodoret
                  Theod▪ l. 1. c. 19. &c. 20. sheweth,

and as Nicephorus
                  Nicep. lib. S. ca. 43. truely notes of him and
Theognis, ouium pellibus amicti, lupos agebant, they
put on the habite and shew of Catholikes, but inwardly
in heart they were wolues and cruell heretickes.
Constantine seeing but with mans eyes, vpon
his returne, receiued him not onely into fauour, but
into familiaritie
                  Familiaris Imperatori effectus. Theodo. loc. cit., hee craftily giuing sundry tokens
of loue to the Catholike faith. Yea Baronius
                  Bar. an. 33. nu. 5. himself
notes of him, that after his returne from exile, Nicenam
fidem coram ipso ardenter pofitebatur, he before Constantine
did earnestly professe the Nicene faith,
though in his heart hee hated it. And from thencefoorth
all the time of Constantine, that Eusebius and
Theognis and the rest did not nor durst prosesse
any other faith but the Nicene and Catholike,
Sozomen declares, They closely endeuoured, saith
heSozom. lib 2. ca. 30., to alter the Nicene faith, tamet si non auderent
palam denegare, though openly they durst not deny
the same: and he giues this as a reason, pro certo enim
sciebant Imperatorem ita sentire, for they knew of a
certaintie, that the Emperour did hold the Nicene
faith, and they durst not gainesay the Emperour
therein: yea they were so forward in shewing
an outward profession of the Catholike, and
dislike of the Arian doctrine, that not onely during
Constantines time, but fiue yeres also after that, while
Constans liued, they openly professed in the Synod at
Antioch
                  Quintus iam agebatur annus à morte Constantini Soc. l. 2. c. 5. in Encaenijs, nos certe
                  Eusebianorume, ist
                        •
                     la apud Athan. lib. de Synod. pa
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     48. & apud Soc. lib. 2. ca 7. Eusebium aurem ipsum Nicomediensem interfuisse concilio liquet ex Soc. l. 
                        •
                     . c. 9. & agnoscit Bar. an. 342. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 43. 
                  Arij acoluthi, id est,
fectatores nō sumus, of a cer
                     •
                  aintie we are not followers
of Arius: & in the very first canon of that Synod,
as followers and defenders of the Nicene faith, they

decreeCanon. 1. C
                        •
                     c. Antioch. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Encaen
                        •
                     js. 
                  that all should bee excommunicated, who durst
dissolue or gainestand the definition made for Easter by
the Nicene Councell, which was assembled in the presence
of the most religious Emperour Constantine. And yet
notwithstanding this outward and dissembling profession,
both in Constantines time, and after, they
not onely in heart imbraced, but secretly and craftily
laboured (as Athanasius shewes) to bring in the
heresie of Arius into the Church. Omitting other,
let Baronius owne testimony bee obserued touching
the outward profession of Eusebius, and the chiefe
Eusebians, during the time of Constantine. This
(saith heBar. an. 336. na. 37. 38.) is to be vnderstood, that the Eusebians so
long as Constantine liued, did forinsecus, outwardly
make a shew and profession of the Nicene faith, to which
they had once subscribed. And againe, so long as Constantine
liued, the Eusebians durst not so much as mutire
aduersus Nicenae fidei regulam, not once whisper
ought against the rule of the Nicene faith. So Baronius.
               
               Had Constantine fauoured Eusebius, or any Arian
Bishop, or receiued baptisme at their ha
                     •
                  ds, while
they had professed Arianisme and heresie, that blemish
of declining in his latter age from the faith,
and of fauouring the Arian heresie, had beene iustly
imputed to him. But seeing he communicated with
Eusebius, and receiued baptisme at his hands, as of
one,Ardenter profitebatur. an. 331. nu. 5. who was a Catholike professour, and earnest (as
Baronius faith) in that profession, who was Constantine,
that hee should search into, or iudge
of the heart? was hee to be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ? Was
not hee in charitie to iudge, that as Eusebius professed

with his tongue, so with his heart he beleeued
the Nicene decree? The Nicene Fathers themselues
gaue a cleere instruction in this point: for when this
Eusebius, Theognis, and others; yea euen Arius himselfe,
made an outward, but yet a fradulent & dissembling
professiō of the true faith, subscribed to it with
their hands, they receiued them into the cōmunion of the
Church, (as S. Ierome
                  Hier. loco citato. expresly noteth.) They iudged
them (and that iustly) to be Catholikes who made a
Catholike profession: yea the Apostles, and Christ
himselfe taught the very same, who held communion,
and receiued
                  Math. 26. 23. & seq. Christus primā Eucharistiam confectam manibus suis, Iudae sicut caeteris Apostolis tradidit August in psal 10. Adfuit Judas & illius sacrificij communicationem metuit. Chrvs. ho. de Iudae prodit. sic 
                        ••
                     rill. lib. 9. in Ioh
                        •
                     n. ca. 15. 
                  the sacrament with Iudas, so long as
hee kept the outward and Catholike profession,
though in his heart he was an Apostata, yea a deuill. By
all which this fact of Constantine in receiuing baptisme
of Eusebius Nicomediensis, and holding communion
with him, is clearely iustified: for euen in so
doing hee communicated with a Catholike Bishop
in the eie of the Church, though he was a detestable
Arian, and a very Iudas in the eye of God: he communicated
with him in that outward profession
which was Orthodoxall, and all that man could see;
he did not communicate with his inward beliefe,
which was hereticall, and which God did, but man
could not see. So this obiection touching Cōstantines
baptisme, is but a meere cauill of those, who if this
truth be admitted, would collect a declination & Apostasie
in Constantine, as if hereby hee should haue
beene exeluded from faith, and all hope of saluation:
whereas notwithstanding this, yea euen by this hee
gaue a token of his constant continuance in the Catholike
faith, which vntill his last gaspe he constantly

imbraced and most honourably maintained and for
this cause is honoured as a Saint in the Greeke
Menol. Graec
                     
                        •
                     ie 21. Maij.
Church, and expresly called Saint Constantine, by
PopeEpist. Steph. 
                        •
                     ad Basilium extat post. Act. Conc. 8. apud Bin pa. 900. 
                  Steuen the sixth, though in their Romane
Martyrologe, they would not vouchsafe that honour
vnto him.
               There are yet one or two doubts, which are in
this cause eagerly, but most maliciously vrged by
Augustine Steuchus. Hee not onely calls it in plaine
tearmes,Ad mēdacia multorum coarguenda de baptismo Cō
                     stantini. Steuc. pa. 160. 
                  a lye, that Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia, or by Eusebius Bishop of that place, adding
that the auncient Historians
                  Grauifissimi scriptores peccauerunt. ibid. pa. 158. & cō
                     plures errauerunt. ib. 
                  and Writers who say
this, doe erre therein, but he wil further also tell you,
how and by what occasion they erred and were
deceiued in this their report. Constantine, saith
heeSteuch. ibid. pa. 157. 158,, the sonne of Constantine the Great, was a
wicked
                  Fuit improbus atque in Arianorum dogma delapsus. ibid. ipse Arianus erat. ibid. 
                  man, an Arian, and an embracer of Arianisme,
hee expelled
                  E
                        •
                     ecit sanctū Foelicem. pa. 158. 
                  out of the Romane See Pope
Foelix, by whom
                  Ob heresin Foelix cum anathema
                        •
                     c percusserat. ibi. 
                  hee was anathematized for heresie:
and in further token of his loue to Arianisme, whereas
he had been formerly baptized, he was
                  Ab Eusebio Nicomed
                        •
                     ensi rebaptiza
                        •
                     us. ibid. 
                  againe baptized
in the last part of his age by the Arians, euen by that
Arian Bishop Eusebius of Nicomedia; all which hee
Quod Dama sus testa
                        •
                     ur. ibi. saith, is affirmed by Damasus. Now heereupon,
saith hee, those most graue Historians and Writers attributed
that to the Father, which indeed happened to
the sonne, both of them hauing one and the same name,
and they supposed that Constantine the father, was
baptized in his last age by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia,
whereas it was indeed his sonne Constantine. Thus
Steuchus: who much applaudes himselfe in this so
wi
                     •
                  tie a conceite.
               
                  
Truely I doe not know whether I should heere
reprooue his most grosse and supine ignorance, or
his extreame malice to the truth. I shall not neede
to shew how iniuriously and maliciously hee accuseth
Constantine the younger, to haue beene an Arian,
and a fauourer of Arianisme. The great loue
                  Intelligetis quantae apud n
                        ••
                     reuerentiae fuerit. & Athanasiū vocat admirand
                        •
                     e legis interpretē, & sacrum caput. Epist. Constā
                     tini 
                        •
                     unioris apud Athan. Apol. 2. p 219. 
                  and reuerend
respect which he shewed to Athanasius while
he was banished, and the religious care
                  Ego mihi conuenire puto, vt suis sedibus restituatur. ibid. 
                  he had to see
him with honour restored and put in quiet possession of
his See againe, doe vndeniably conuince Steuchus
to be a slanderer.
               That all the rest, which Steuchus hath heere heaped
together against the same Constantine, how hee
was rebaptized by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, how
hee persecuted Pope Foelix, how hee was anathematized
by the same Foelix, and the rest of the Narration is
nothing else but a meere calumnie and slander, euery
one may perceiue; and Steuchus himselfe (if either
ignorance or malice had not put out his eyes)
might easily haue discerned, seeing it is certain that
this Constantine was dead at least 15 yeeres
                  Constantinus iunior obijt Acindino & Proclo Coss. Soc. l. 2. c 3. is est annus Christi 340. Bar. Foelix autem P
                        •
                     ntificatum init an. 357. nu. 67. 
                  before
Foelix euer came to the Popedome. So blinded was
Steuchus with malice that hee regarded not, whether
he had so much as any colour of truth for his lies &
slanders. And wheras he pretends Pope Damasus, to
be a witnes of that which hee saith (to omit his simplicity
in thinking Damasus
                  Liber iste est Anastasij non▪ Damasi, vt notum est. Bell, 
                        〈◊〉
                     . descrip. 
                        •
                     ccl. in Damaso. to be the author of that
booke) Steuchus in this bewrayes himselfe to be void
of all truth, and most impudent in down-facing the
same. For in that Damasus, there is not one word of
this, which Steuchus alledgeth. It is Constantius
                  Hic declarauit Cons
                        ••
                     
                     tium haereti
                        ••
                     . ab evdem Cō
                     stantio martyrio corona
                        •••
                      Foelix. vita Foelic. 2. in Pontif. (vt vocatur) Damas
                        •
                     
                  
                  and not Constantinus of whom Damasus writeth,

that he was a persecuter of Foelix, that Foelix declared
him an Hereticke, that he was rebaptized by Eusebius
of Nicomedia; was this, thinke you, a small fault
in Steuchus, first to slander Constantine with all these
heinous crimes, and then to belye Damasus as affirming
the same, whereas that Damasus speakes
all, of the Arian Emperour Constantius, and
not one word of the most religious Constantine?
               
               Now because Steuchus pretends also that the ancient
Writers might another way mistake
                  Causa vna erroris quòd Constantius filius scribitur supremo vitae tempore baptizatus, Steuc. pa. 157. Potuit fieri vt scriptores tribuerent patri, quod accidit filio Cō
                     stantio. ibid, 
                  this matter,
and ascribe that to Constantine which happened
to Constantius his sonne: its further to be obserued,
that euen this which the Anastasian Damasus reports
of Constantius his rebaptizing by Eusebius, is so palpably
vntrue, that Binius
                  Bin. not. in vitam Foelicis 2. §. Hic. saith of it, falsis simum est,
it is most false. And well might he so say: for Constantius
was not so much as once baptized while
Pope Foelix liued, but as Socrates
                  Constantius baptismo ab Euzoio accepto, ad bellum rectà proficisritur, in eoque mortem oppetijt. Soc. lib. 2. 
                        •
                     a. 37. witnesseth, a very
little before Constantius owne death; which was three
Constantius obijt Coss, Tauro & Florētio. Soc. loc. cit. Is est an. Chr. 361. Bar. eo an. nu. 1. Foelix obijt an. 358▪ vt testatur Bar. an. 357. nu. 67 complete yeares after the death of Foelix. Againe
when he was baptized, it was not as that lying Damasus
                  Damas. in vita Foelic. 2. saith, by Eusebius, but by Euzoius Bishop of
Nicomedia: and this not only Athanasius
                  Athan. lib. de Synod. pa. 350., but Socrates
                  Soc. li. 2. c. 37. also expresseth. Whereby it is euident that the
ancient Historians did not (as Steuchus fancieth)
mistake the baptisme of Constantius the sonne,
instead of Constantine the father, seeing they
mention them bothSoc. li. 1. c. 26▪ agit de baptismo Constantini & l. 2. c. 37. agit de baptismo Constantij., as two diuerse baptismes,
aud expresse the diuers times at which, the diuers
persons by whom they were administred.

So euery way is Steuchus conuinced both of slandering
Constantinus the younger, and of belying Damasus,
and of imputing a very foolish error to those
ancient and graue Historians, as if they had erroniously
thought, that to agree to Constantine the Father,
which, as Steuchus fancieth, hapned eyther to
Constantine the younger, or to Constantius his brother.
               Like ignorance and malice doth Steuchus shew in
another fancie, touching the baptisme of Constantine.
He saithOperae pretium est nosse baptismum magni Constantini, quem scripsit Eusebius fuisse potiùs balneum calidarum aquarum, ad quas aeger Constantinus sanit
                        •
                     ti consulens accessit. Steuch. lib, cit. pa. 158,, That whereas Eusebius affirmes Constantine
to haue beene baptized at Nicomedia, its worthy
your labour, to obserue and know, that the baptisme
whereof Eusebius speakes, was not the Sacramentall
baptisme, but balneum calidarum aquarum, A bath of
hot waters at Nicomedia, wherein Constantine when
he was sicke was bathed for his bodily health. Is this
that which is operae pretium, to know? No, the recompence
of your labour must be to know, that
Steuchus for this his fancy, doth deserue for euer to
weare a bell and a bable. Doe but reade and consider
the most pious and religious speech, and actions
of Constantine, vsed at that time, and recorded
by Eusebius, (who, as it seems, was then present with
him) and you will not onely remaine assured, that
Constantine was not baptized either at Rome, or by
Syluester, but further also euen admire the stupidity,
and for euer detest the vile dealing of Steuchus, and
all such as follow him.
               
                  Eusebius
                  Euseb. lib. 4. de vit. Const. ca. 6
                        •
                      & 6
                        •
                     . declares, how while Constantine being
at Constantinople, grew sicke and very distempered
in his bodie, for that cause went ad calida ciuitatis

balnea, to the hot bathes of that Cittie; from thence,
saith Eusebius, he went to Helenopolis (a CittieHelinopol
                        •
                     n Bythinia trasitvt tbi profluentibus sponte sua aquis, & naturalibus lauacus vteretur, Niceph. lib. 8. ca. 54. in
Bythinia) to vse the bath of that place also: and departingInde (Helinopoli) discedens ad suburbana Nicomediae peruenit. Eus. loc. cit.
hence, he came to the Suburbs of Nicomedia,
and there calling the Bishops vnto him, hee said thus;
What I have these many yeares desired, brethren, this day
hath brought vnto me. Now its time that I should at
last be partaker of that
                  Vt tandem insigni illo per quod immortalitatem 
                        •
                     dipiscimur, perfruamur, ibid. ca. 62. 
                  signe, by which we obtaine immortalitie,
which I had purposed to haue done in Iordan,
after the example of Christ, but God seeing what is
most fit, doth vouchsafe these mysteries vnto me in this
place. And then, saith Eusebius, the prayers being ended,
and the accustomed ceremonies of the diuine Institution
being vsed, arc
                        •
                     norum mysteriorum eum participem
faciunt, They doe administer the holy and sacred
mysteries vnto him: and he, renatus & sacris initiatus,
Being then regenerate and initiated by the holy Sacrament,
did wonderfully reioyce and admire the diuine
Maiestie, and being attired with princely Robes, more
white then light, he laid away his Scarlet, nor would hee
touch it againe. Thus, and much more Eusebius. Can
any now sufficiently deride Steuchus, for peruerting
these words of Eusebius, and all the sacred actions
performed both by Constantine, and the Bishops,
as meant of an hot bath? Did he deferre this so
many yeares, that hee might goe to an hot bath at
Iordan? Or will Steuchus dare to say, that Christs
baptisme, was but an hot bath? Is an hot bath, a mystery
that is a Sacrament, or sacred signe of immortalitie?
Or who duly pondering these words of Constantine,
can euer doubt that he was now, and neuer
before, baptized, and that at Nicomedia? and therefore

that Pope Hadrian, Steuchus, Baronius, Binius,
and all the rest, who affirme, that he was baptized at
Rome, and by Syluester, do most certainly against the
euidence of vndoubted records, maintaine a most
euident vntruth.
               Now in the last place we are to consider how Baronius
declameth & inueigheth most eagerly against
Eusebius, who is the relator of this truth. He cals him
on Arian
                  Bar. an. 324 nu. 63., the ring-leader
                  Signifer Arianorum. ib. 
                  of Arians, a lyer
                  Eusebius mentitus est, ibid. nu. 48., one subtile
in deuising
                  Imbibit dolos ad concinnanda quotquot posset mendacia, ib. nu. 43. 
                  as many lyes as he could; adding, that
he lyes
                  Necesse est dicere Eusebium, (in hoc de Constantini baptismo) esse mentitum. ib. nu. 48. de baptismo est falsa narratio, ibid. nu 42. 
                  in this touching Constantines baptisme, that hee
was the
                  Comment
                        •
                      ab Ariano homine ex 
                        •
                     ogitatum, ibid. n
                        •
                      49. & nu. 50. v
                        •
                     cat hoc, A
                        •
                     iani hominis imposturam. 
                  architect who first forged and deuised this lye,
from whom as the spring
                  Exs
                        ••••
                     o 
                        〈…〉
                     ., others deriued this vntruth
and imposture, none euer before mentioning the same,
himselfe also contradictingIbid 
                        •
                     n 46. 
                  his owne
narration. Thus
doth Baronius (I say not) reason, but raue against the
reporter of this truth, thinking that by disgracing
him, he may oppresse & ouerthrow the truth it selfe.
               Its not my purpose wholy to excuse Eusebius, either
for his life or doctrine: Vitijs sine nemo nascitur,
optimus ille qui minimis vrgetur; yet had Eusebius
beene worthy of neuer so much blame, Baronius of
all men, was most vnworthy and vnfit to obiect the
same vnto him, Loripidem rectus derideat. The Cardinals
owne Annales, being so fraught with fables,
yea being a lumpe of lies, and a very masse of misreported
matters, he should haue beene more sparing,
in obiecting errors or vntruths vnto others; most
of all to Eusebius, whose Historie and Chronicle,
were the very best 
                     •
                  orch, to direct Baronius in that
whole course of time which they handle. But he,
most vngratefull person, hauing had so much help▪ &

receiued both light and warmth from the fire of Eusebius,
doth like Aesops Viper, disgorge the venome
of his mind and virulency of his tongue vpon him,
whom he should, and that most deseruedly, haue
honoured.
               Now though I cannot in all matters, nor intend
in any one error, to patronize Eusebius, yet can I
not endure to heare this Romane Rabsheca, so indignely
misuse a reuerend Bishop, and a most renowned
Historian: and specially for deliuering a
most cleere, certaine, and vndoubted truth. Omitting
many other, there are foure points in the
Cardinals Inuectiue, which I will touch in this
place.
               The first is the Cardinals acutenesse, in spying a
strange repugnancy in the sayings of Eusebius,
whereas he affirmesEuseb. lib. 4. de vit. Const. ca. 62., Constantine to be the first Emperour
that was baptized: Baronius to disgrace Eusebius,
as contradicting himselfe, and therefore as vnworthy
of credit, saithBar. ann. 324. nu. 46.; Planè immemor, Eusebius had quite forgot what himselfe had said in his owne Historie
                  Euseb. lib. 6. histor. eccle. ca. 33., that Philip who was Emperour long before Constantine,
was a Christian. Doe you not admire the
Cardinals subtiltie, who can see a repugnancy in
those two assertions, which are both true, and fitly
coherent the one to the other? Had Eusebius said,
that Philip the Emperour had beene baptized, the
Cardinall might iustly haue insulted, and declaimed
against him. But seeing Eusebius saith onely, that
he was a Christian, and saith not that he was baptized;
you may sooner see here the Cardinals hatred
to Eusebius, then any contradiction in his writings.

Its true that before Constantine, not onely Philip,
                  Philippus primus Romanorum principum Christianus fuit. Vin
                        •
                     . Lirin▪ ca. 23
                        •
                      & Oro
                        •
                     . lib. 7 ca. 20.,
but Constantius
                  Vt liquet ex Euseb. lib, 1. de vit. Const. ca. 11. 
                  Clorus also, the father of Constantine,
were Christi
                        •
                     ns, and embraced Christianitie, Though
neither of them were baptized, neither of them, by
Imperiall authoritie established Christianitie in
the Empire. But of all Emperours, Constantine was
the first, who to his Christian profession added baptisme,
and by his authoritie commanded all his subiects
to embrace the Christian faith. In which respect,
he is vsually called also the first Christian Emperour;
not simply, nor in regard of the profession
onely, but first of all, who was Christian in a complete
manner, who receiued the holy ensigne of that
holy profession: first, who by Imperial lawes allowed
and authorized the profession thereof. Some, I
confesse, following the namelesse and worthlesse
Acts of Pontius
                  Imperatores crediderunt & à S. Fabiano Papa baptizati sunt. Act▪ Pontij, apud Bar. an. 246. nu. 9 Idem ait Gilb. Geneb. in Chron. an. 252., say of Philip the Emperor and his
sonne, that they were baptized; but Eusebius saith no
more as of his owne opinion and iudgment, but that
Philip
                  Cum Christianus esset. Eus loc. cit. 
                  was a Christian: what is further added in Eusebius,
That Philip was excluded by Pope Fabianus from
the publicke prayers of Christians, and that he was set to
doe pennance among the vulgar sort of penitents, and
after that receiued into the Christian Communion: all
this Eusebius relates, onely as a fame and report of
others, (saying, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which Christopherson
rightly translates, fama est; others, de eo fertur) but
Eusebius himselfe approues not this report, as true;
nor is it indeede any way likely: but that Philip was
baptized, Eusebius neither as of his owne opinion,
nor yet so much as by a fame or report of others,
doth affirme. Nay Eusebius directly denies

the same, and this one testimony so confidently giuen
by Eusebius, that
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . lib. 4. ca. 62. 
                  Constantine was the first of all
the Roman Emperours that were baptized, is of more
weight to perswade that Philip was not baptized,
thē any which can be produced, that affirmes he was
baptized. Howsoeuer, seeing Eusebius saith it not,
Baronius, you see, herein proues himselfe a Sophisticall
trifler, but no way proues any repugnancie in
Eusebius.
               
               The second is, the simplicitie of Baronius, who
giues this as a reason, whyHaec demō
                     strat 
                        •
                      sunt, vt haec impostura fidem apud lectorem non inueni
                        •
                     t, sià quou
                        •
                     s id trad
                        •
                      reperiat, cū nullus alius praecesserit, praeter Eusebrum à quo id quisquam acceperit author Bar. an. 324. nu. 50. 
                  none should beleeue that
Constantine was baptized at Nicomedia, in whomsoeuer
this be found reported, seeing there is none before
Eusebius who hath reported the same. Was not the
Cardinall, thinke you, bereft of reason when hee
thought any before Eusebius could report either
when, or where Constantine was baptized? Eusebius
liued at that verie time, hee conuersed daily and
familiarly with Constantine; who could sooner or
better know it, more certainely relate it, then such
a Bishop? The Cardinall might as well proue that
none should beleeue that Constantine was Emperor,
in whomsoeuer this be found to be said, because no
Historian before Eusebius doth mention or write
the same. Nay, it may much more firmely be concluded,
that Eusebius his report hereof is most true,
seeing none in that age did controule or contradict
him therein: their generall silence being a seconding,
and approuing of his narration, all in that age,
knowing it to be so certaine, that they rested satisfied
in his report, they thought it needlesse to say the
same, and impossible with any colour of truth, to say

the contrary. And though none before Eusebius his
time did write thereof (for that was impossible) yet
euen in that very age, did others most worthy of credit,
Saint Ambrose
                  Amb. orat. de obitu The. od. and Saint Ierome
                  Hier. in Chron. write, and testifie
that which Eusebius had written before: and
both of these were aliueAmbrosius obijt an. 397. aetatis suae 64. Bar. on. 397. nu. 30. ergo natus est an. 333. Hier. obijt an. 420. aetatis suae 91. Bar. an. 420. nu. 39. ergo natus est an. 330. Baptismus autē Cō
                     stantini suit vltimo ipsius anno. Id est, 336. aut 337. when Constantine was
baptized, and one of them Bishop within 33. yeares
after. Against these so ancient and faithfull witnesnesses,
all liuing at this very time, the Cardinall cannot
produce any within 140. yeares of Constantine,
who writ the contrary, no nor after that time neither
can he alledge any, but the fabulous Acts of Siluester,
with the forged second Roman Synod (which
both seem to haue bin deuised about the 440. yeareNam extabant Acta Siluestri ante Conc. Rom. sub Gelasio, quod habitum est an. 494.
of Christ), and such as being in their credulitie abused
by their forgeries, do abuse others with false and
fabulous reports taken out of them.
               The third thing which I obserue in the words of
Baronius, is his most vnciuill vsage of this reuerend
Bishop, in so often and insolently giuing him the
lie, and calling him an Architect and deuiser of
lies. To this reuiling of Baronius, let mee oppose
that testimonie of Saint Ierome: Eusebius, saith heEcclesiast. historiam pulchre Eusebius 
                        •
                     exuit. Hier. epist. ad Pammach. & Oceā
                  , hath excellently written the Ecclesiasticall historie:
and againe, I
                  Hier. Apol. 1 aduers. Russin. 
                  haue praysed Eusebius for
his Ecclesiasticall historie, and for his Chronicle.
That of Euagrius, Eusebius Caesariensis is a man
most eloquent, so excellent in writing, that by his perswasion
hee enforceth his readers to loue and embrace
Christian religion. That of their owne learned disputer
                     
                        •
                     uag. lib. 1. ca. 1.,
Hee is the best and most ancient historian of all
                  Harts conference with D. Rain
                        ••
                     . ca. 6. 
                        ••
                     uis. 
                        •
                     .
                  
                  that euer haue trauelled in the Stories of the Church.
That of their Bishop Christopher 
                        •
                     on the translatour
of Eusebius, For Historie, saith heProoem. Christophers. in Eusebium, in fine., Eusebius hath so
set it downe, that Saint Hierome greatly approues it, Et
sic veritati adhaesit, vt nihil in illa error
                        •
                     s omnino reperiatur;
He so followed the truth, that there is no
errour to be found in his Storie. Or if this seeme
(as indeede it is) too excessiue commendation,
let vs heare their owne Bishop Canus, who supposing
Can. loc. The
                        •
                     l. lib. 11. cap. 6. §. Rei
                        •
                     cit., (as many other haue done) the writings of
Eusebius to bee condemned by Pope Gelasius, (the
occasion of which errour, I shall hereafter explaine)
could finde no reason, why Gelasius should so hardly
censure the Historie of Eusebius, but onely, Because
he sets downe the Epistle of Christ to Abagarus, (which
yet Eusebius onely reports, but approues not as true and vndoubted:) and certaine Epistles of Clemens Alexandrinus,
(wherein Eusebius deserues no blame at
all;) and the praises of Origen, (whose errours yet he
doth not there approue:) and Canus then addes,
Gelasius
                  
                     
                        •
                     aetara sibi ac Concilio pla
                        •
                     uisse mo
                     
                        ••
                     t, ibid. §. Praeterea▪
                   
                  did allow the rest in Eusebius; therefore if
you except that Epistle to Abagarus▪ and the prayses of
Origen, his Historie is such, cui fides omnino haberetur,
as may wholy bee credited. And for the
Chronicle of Eusebius, He was (saith CanusIbid.) a man
of great diligence and labour, of exceeding varietie
of reading, and of very graue iudgement. Neither
doe I know whether any Authour, either in the Latine
or Greeke Church, though he striue neuer so much,
can leaue more excellent Monuments of time.
Thus Canus: who hauing so diligently examined
and weighed this whole matter, his onely iudgement

ought not onely to ouersway, but vtterly abolish
and confound for euer the Cardinalls railing against,
and reuiling of Eusebius: especially for his
recording this of Constantines baptisme, wherein by
the testimony of Bishop Canus, his historie is worthy
to be wholly beleeued.
               
               The fourth and last point which I heere obserue,
is the Cardinalls imputation of Arianisme vnto Eusebius:
wherein he treads but in the steps of some of
the worthy Fathers of their second Nicene Councell.
Eusebius
                  Con Nic. 2. Act. 5 pa. 351. Eusebij verba cit
                        •
                     ntur. Act. 6 pa. 374. 
                  had taught that no image could fully expresse
Christ, being both God and man: the Nicene
Fathers, no
                     •
                   enduring that any should crosse their
doctrine of Images, reiect and anathematize
                  Sancta Synodus dixit, libros illius re
                     
                        •••
                     imus & anathematizamus. ibid. Act. 5 pa. 352. 
                  his
bookes, yea all that
                  Sancta Synod as dixit, Anathema & illis libris (Eusebi
                        •
                     ) & qui
                        ••
                     
                     los l
                        •
                     gunt. ibi. 
                  reade them; cal him an hereticke
                  Originem & ipsum autho
                        ••
                      (Eusebi
                        •
                     ) haereticos ostenda
                        ••
                     s. ibid. an
Arrian
                  Apparet ill
                        •
                     . Ariancae esse opinionis. Act. 6. p. 375. a., yea and a TheopaskiteO
                        •
                     mantur Chri
                        ••
                     ū ca
                        ••
                     ē sin
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      assu
                        ••
                     p
                        •
                     sse, &c. 
                        •
                     bid. 
                  also, one who taught
that Christ had no soule, but the Godhead supplied the
office of the soule, that so the Dei
                        •
                     ie might bee said to
suffer. Eusebius being of this sect, saith their Nicene
proctor, EpiphaniusIbid., imaginem Christi Theopascitarum
more reijcit, reiects the image of Christ, as the
Theopaskites doe, adding, that Eusebius
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      area domi
                        •
                     ica. (cath
                        •
                      licā dico ecclesiam) 
                        〈◊〉
                      sunt. ibid p. 374. b. 
                  is reiected and cast out of the Catholike Church.
               
               Had Eusebius writ inuectiues against Constantine,
calling him, as Baronius doth, a parricide
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     , 24, nu. 28. & 44., a persecutour
                  Bar. ib. nu. 33. 
                  of the Church farre worse
                  ann. e
                        •
                     de
                        •
                     , nu 45. 
                  then Constantius
(whom Catholikes counted and called Antichrist,)
had he told fables and lies of Constantines leprosie,
cure, and baptisme at Rome: or had he writ
for Images and adoration thereof, Eusebius had

beene a renowned writer with Baronius and the Nicene
Fathers; because he doth not this, he must bee
an hereticke, an Arian, and Theopaskite, one cast out
of the Church.
               First, for that calumnie of the Theopaskites, obiected
by those Nicene fathers, there is no truth at all
in them, nor are they worthy of any credit: for that
Eusebius did truly and rightly teach two distinct natures
to be, and to abide in Christ, the diuine and the
humane, all his bookes doe abundantly testifie. In
his Historie heeEuseb. lib. 1. Eccles. hist. c. 1. sets downe this as the foundation
of all that followes, That Christ being God, induit
hominem nobis similiter passionibus obnoxium, tooke
vpon him man, or humane nature, being by it
subiect to passion as wee are: and againe, that the
Deitie is impassible, hee plainely teacheth in that
Epistle of his which is recorded in Socrates and Theodoret,
wherein heEpist. Eusebij Caesar. apud Socr. li. 1. ca. 5. prope finem. & 
                        •
                     heod. l. c. 12. professeth the diuine nature to be
void and incapable of passion, affection, or mutilation.
To say nothing that the heresie of the Theopaskites,
(which those Nicene fathers impute to Eusebius) did
but spring vp, and was borne about
                  Exorti sunt Theopascitae temporibus Hormisdae Pontificis circa annū Do▪ 513. Pratelol. de haeres. in Theopasc. 
                  the yeere
513. more then 160. yeeres after Eusebius was
dead.
               For that other imputation of Arianisme; its
true, that Eusebius for a while enclined to that heresie,
and was an earnest propugner thereof: Saint
Ierome testifying of him, Arianum
                  Hier. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  fuisse nemo est
qui nesciat, there is none but know that Eusebius was
an Arian; and againeHier. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  , hee was Arij apertissimus
propugnator, an open defendour of Arius. But
that hee reclaimed himselfe and forsooke Arianisme

at the time of the Nicene Councel, it is euident
by many witnesses. Theodoret
                  Theod. 
                        ••
                     b. 1. ca. 12. and Socrates
                  S
                        •
                     c. l. b. 1. ca. 5. pa. 223. of purpose declare this, expressing that
forme of faith which Eusebius made and offered to
the Councel, so orthodoxall, that Constantine exhorted
all the Bishops▪ to subscribe vnto it, so that
this onely word of 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      were added thereunto.
To which Eusebius in that his owne EpistleEpist. Euseb. citata à Theod▪ & Socr▪ locis cit. saith,
that when hee vnderstood what they meant thereby,
hee assented thereunto; adding, that diuers auncient
and holy Bishops before the time of the Nicene
Councel, vsed that very word 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Sic tandem,
saith Socrates, vnà cum reliquis vniuersis cam approbauit,
& subscriptione ratam fecit: so at last Eusebius
with all the rest of the Councell approoued
that of Homousios, and subscribed vnto it. Athanasius
who was present in the Councell witnesseth
the same. Eusebius Caesariensis, saith heeAthan. cō
                     
                        •
                     . Atian. haeres. decreta. pa. 180,
subscribed to that sentence of the Councell, which
a little before hee had denied, and hee writ this to
the Church of which hee was Bishop, telling them,
eam esse ecclesiae fidem, that this was the true faith of
the Church and the tradition of the Fathers, confessing
in his Epistle that Christ was 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , of the
same substance with the Father. So Athanasius: then
whom a more authenticke witnes cannot be desired.
               That Eusebius perseuered in this orthodoxie of
faith, the most honourable and memorable testimony
of Constantine himselfe, with whom Eusebius
was most inward and familiar, is a most
cleere euidence. When the people of Antioch, being
in a great vprore about their election of a

Bishop, requested to haue Eusebius, and Eusebius
had refused the Bishopricke of Antioch, the Emperour
much commending that his fact, writ vnto
him, expressing his owne, nay the whole Catholike
Churches iudgement of Eusebius in this manner,
Sic
                  Epist. Constant
                        ••
                     m ad Eusebium l. 3. de vita. Const. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 59. 
                  putato, Thinke thus of your selfe, that you are
heerein blessed, in that by the testimony almost of the
whole world, you are iudged worthy to bee the Bishop

                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      of the whole Church, (or as others

                     
                        •
                     o
                        ••
                     nius 
                        〈…〉
                     . sed totius orbis. Hist trip. l. 1. c. 27. & 
                        〈◊〉
                     . l. 2. c. 18. haue it, of the whole world): and this also is
an ouerplus of your happinesse, that euery one is so desirous
of you, that they would haue you to bee and abide
with them. Thus Constantine. Would himselfe, being
a most religious Emperour, nay would the
whole Catholike Church, and almost the whole
world, giue so ample and honourable a testimony
of Eusebius, had he beene an Arian?
               Here I can not sufficiently both admire, and detest
the most fraudulent dealing of Baronius in this
matter. Hee to perswade you, as doe also the second
Nicene Fathers, that Eusebius after the Nicene
Councell, remained an
                  Eusebius postea in Conciliab
                        •
                     l▪ Tyr
                        •
                     o alijsque con
                        •
                     nenticulis pro A
                        ••
                     anis st
                        •••
                     t, omnibusque studijs Ario f
                        •
                     ui
                        •
                     . Ba
                        •
                     not. in Ma
                        •
                     tyr. Rō. Iun. 21. & similia habet. an. 355. nu. 8 9. 
                  Arian, most craftily tells you,
that this testimony was giuen by Constantine, not
after the Nicene Councell (as the narration in Eusebius
                  Eus lib. 3. de vita. Constāt. ca▪ 59. cum de Concilio Nic
                        •
                     no 
                        〈…〉
                     . 14. doth shew that it was) but that Constantine
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     .
                  writ this at that time, when Eustathius was chosen Bishop
of Antioch, which was certainely before the Nicene
Councell (Eustathius being one
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   of the chiefe Bishops
therein:) and that it was then, that the people of
Antioch being in a tumult, requested the Emperour that
Eusebius might be translated from Caesarea to Antioch.
Yea the Cardinall not onely reproues and declaimes

against the cra
                     •
                  t of Eusebius, for setting
this, as following after the Nicene Councell, whereas
it happened before; but also (with more then
Sinonian art) hee tells you why Eusebius thus
peruerted the times. I espie, saith heeBar. loc. cir., incredibilem
vafri viri versutiam, the incredible craft of
Eusebius heerein, and this it is; Hee was noted in
the Nicene Councell of Arianisme, and to couer that
blemish, hee sets this letter of Constantine in his
commendation, as written after the time of the Councell:
which if hee had set in his due place, and before
the Councell, his praise would haue beene darkened,
seeing all the Councell knew him to bee an Arian:
Thus Baronius. If any please to examine
this matter, hee will certainely see, not as the Cardinall
did, per transennam, but as cleere as the
light, incredibilem vafri viri versutiam, the incredible
craft of Baronius. For all those troubles at
Antioch about the election of their Bishop, and
desiring to haue Eusebius, (which Baronius recitesBar. an. 324. nu. 143.,
and sets downe as falling out at the election of Eustathius)
happened not at his election, but 18. yeeres
after, when Eustathius was deposed and thrust from
that See: Then it was, that the citie of Antioch was in
an exceeding vprore for a new Bishop: Then it was,
that they writ and sent to Constantine, entreating to
haue Eusebius; then it was, that Eusebius refused to
take that patriarchall See; then it was, that Constantine
writ the letter, giuing so high commendation
to Eusebius. All which is most euident, by the narration
not onely of Eusebius himselfe, but of Theodoret
                  Theod lib. 1. ca. 20 & 21., of Socrates
                  Soc. l. 1. c. 18., of Sozomen
                  Sozom. lib. 2. ca. 18., of Cassiodore
                  Cast. tripe
                        •
                     t. hist. l 2. c. 25.,

and of Nicephorus
                  Nic. lib. 8. ca. 45.; who all expresly mention this
offering of the See of Antioch to Eusebius, and his refusall
of it, to haue beene after Eustathius was deposed;
yea Socrates, Sozomen, Cassiodore, and Nicephorus,
expresse this very commendation of Eusebius,
to haue beene at that very time giuen vnto
him by Constantine, that hee was worthy to be the Bishop
of the whole world: whereas Baronius produceth
not (nor, as I doe verily beleeue, could not produce
or find) so much as one either historian or
other of his opinion, though hee to blemish Eusebius,
magisterially takes vpon him, against the euidence
of truth, and against so many euident
witnesses, to turne topsituruie, the historicall
narrations of eighteene yeeres. Say now in truth
if you doe not see, incredibilem vafri viri versutiam.
               
               Nay, its 
                     •
                  leere that Eusebius before, and till the
time of the Nicene Councell, was a fauourer, and as
Saint Ierome saith, a propugner of the Arians; so
that the Emperour, (and much lesse the whole
Church) could not then thinke Eusebius to be so
worthy a Bishop, or worthy of so high commendation:
But this testimonie, they hauing had long
experience of his orthodoxie and faith, some tenne
or eleuen yeares after the Nicene Councell,
might well giue vnto him. For the deposing
of Eustathius, fell not out three yeeres after Constantines
death, as Baronius
                  Bar. an. 340. nu. 30. 
                  foulie misconceiuing
the Chronologie of NicephorusBaronius fraudulenter asserit sex annos Vitalis poni a Nicephoro post imperium Constantini inceptum. Sed non hoc ait Niceph in sua Chron sed Vitalem fuisse ex ijs vnum, qui Antiochiae sederunt tempor
                        •
                      Christiani Impera
                        •
                     oris: & sedisse in vniuersum sex annos. sed tres aut quatuor 
                        •
                     orum elapsi erant, antequā ad Imperium peruenit Constantinu
                        •
                     , vt 
                        •
                     x ijs quae 
                        •
                     aximus, liquidò constat. 
                  Bishop of Constantinople
affirmes; but it happened about the
last yeere of Constantine: and seeing Eusebius,
                  
as Socrates
                  Socr. lib. 2. ca. 3. witnesseth, died shortly after the returne
of Athanasius to Alexandria (which was the next
yeere
                  Constantinus obijt an. 337. Athanasius restituitur an. 338. Bar 
                        •
                     o an. nu. 
                        •
                     . & seq. 
                  after Constantines death) you see what an honourable
testimonie this is, which the Emperour
and the whole Catholike Church giues of the perseuerance
of Eusebius in the profession of the Catholike
faith; and how slanderously Baronius
                  Bar. loc. citatis., and
the second Nicene Fathers sayCon. Nic. 
                        •
                     . Act. 6. pa
                        •
                      375. ma
                        •
                     sit enim vt Aethiops, non commutans cutem suam. of him, that he continued
in heresie like a Blackamoore, and that he did not
change his skinne.
               
               To these let vs ioyne Socrates, who in his Ecclesiasticall
historie, hath professedly writ an Apologie
Socr. l. 2. c. 1
                        •
                     
                   for Eusebius, wherein hee plainely calls them
slanderers, and reprochfull detractors, and contumelious
vexers of Eusebius, who accuse him (and so doe
the second Nicene Fathers, and Baronius) to haue
beene a fauourer of Arians, after the Nicene Councell:
and this he prooues, not onely because Eusebius
consented to the Nicene Councell, but out of
diuers writing of Eusebius, wherein hee directly teacheth
the contrary to the Arians. The same Orthodoxie
of Eusebius, and his constancie therein, is
witnessed by that learned man Georgius
                  Trap. praefat, ad Nich. papā in lib. de praepar. Euang. 
                  Trapezuntius,
who saith that Eusebius did willingly follow
the authoritie of the Nicene Father, and sanctissime
atque pie in Orthodoxia vixisse, that hee liued
most holily in the Orthodoxe faith. But omitting
others, I chuse rather to alledge Sixtus Senensis,
who declares the very occasion, how many haue
beene deceiued in imputing Arianisme to Eusebius
Caesariensis. Non defuere, saith heeSix. Sen▪ biblioth. in Eusebius,, There

haue not wanted some, who haue thought Eusebius
to haue beene an Arian, and an oppugner of the
N
                     •
                  cene Councell, being deceiued by the like name of
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia, who liued at the very
same time, was in great esteeme with Constantine,
and was Antesignanus Arianorum, the very ringleader
of Arians: the likenesse of the name, made
men to thinke that to bee meant of Eusebius Caesariensis,
which was both spoken and meant of Eusebius
Nicomediensis. Or else, saith heeIbid., they were
deceiued, because Eusebius Caesariensis did in the Nicene
Councell a long time doubt, whether the word
Homousios might bee allowed or no: but when it was
explained by the Nicene Fathers what they meant
thereby, decreto Homousianorum subscripsit, Eusebius
then subscribed to the Nicene Decree. So Sixtus.
               
               The very same is witnessed by Tritemius
                  Trit. lib. de script. eccles. in, Eusebius., saying,
that whereas Eusebius was first an Arian, comming
to the Nicene Councell, errorem deposuit, hee
abandoned his errour, and embraced the Nicene faith.
Tritemius addes one point further most worthy remēbring
for cleering of Eusebius. He at the appointment
of the Nicene Councell, composed that Creed,
which is called the Nicene Creed, and in token of his
most sincere faith offered it to bee read and confirmed
by them, In which Creed, hee so crushed the errours
of the Arians, that they approued it, without
either adding or subtracting ought at all from
that forme of faith which Eusebius had made.
Thus Tritemius.
               
               
                  
Whence it is cleere, that Eusebius was at no time
an hereticke, no not euen then when hee embraced
the heresie of Arius. Before the time of the Councel,
he erred indeede (as Cyprian had done in another
matter) but then the cause was not as yet fully decided,
& he was not obstinate no
                     •
                   pertinacious (which
onely makes an hereticke) in that error, but euen
then he was paratus corrigi: And his owne fact did
demonstrate the same: for after full discussion of the
cause, he submitted his, to the Churches iudgment:
he forsooke, and as Tritemius saith, deposuit, left his
error, and subscribed to the Catholicke faith, which
vntill that full discussion, he had erroniously, but
not pertinaciously, and therefore not heretically
oppugned. After the Councel he cannot be thought
an hereticke, being so constant (as we haue already
prooued) in the Catholicke faith, and that euen
to his dying day, as Tritemius
                  Trit. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . citato. witnesseth, saying;
Eusebius after the Nicen Councell, in orthodoxa
fide perseuerans, sancti
                        •
                     sime consummatus est,
perseuering in the Catholicke faith in a most holy manner
was consummate or died. For which cause hee is set in
the ranke and Catalogue of the blessed Saints and
Confessors. Vsuardus in his Martyrologie saythV
                        •
                     uardi Martyrologia quo Romana Ecclesia, ac permultae aliae vtuntur, iussu Carol
                        •
                      magni conserptū
                     ▪ in 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  ,
that on the twentie one day of Iune is obserued in Palestine,
the Celebritie sancti Eusebij, Episcopi, &
Confessoris, of S. Eusebius a Bishop, a Confessor, an Historiographer
of most excellent wit. Posseuine also
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  
witnesseth, that hee is reckoned among the Saints,
both by Pe
                        •
                     rus de Natalibus in his booke de Catalogo
Sanctorum, and by the Greeke Men
                        •
                     logie.
                  
Likewise in the Martyrologe of St. Notkerus, who
was canonized by Pope Leo the tenth, it is thus
saidMartyr. Notk
                        •••
                     . 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  ; On the twentie one day of Iune, is the death
Sancti Eusebij Episcopi, of Saint Eusebius a Bishop, celebrated
at Caesarea. This canonizing of Eusebius, and
enrolling him among the glorious and blessed
Saints, not only by Vsuardus, but, as Posseuine saith,
by Pet. de Natalibus, by the Greeke Menologie,
which both Canisius and Baronius commendHen. Can. in epist. ad left. post Finem Menologij., as
very ancient, and of best note; and specially by Saint
Notkerus, who liued about seauen hundred yearesNotkerus obijt anno dom. 912. Metzler. in admonit. ad 
                        ••
                     ct. ante Martyr. Notkeri.
since, and but a little
                  Conc. Nic. 2. habitum, ann. 787. Bin. & Bar. Carolus Magnus obijt an. 814. Bar. 
                        •
                     o an nu. 57. Notkerus valde dilectus Carolo Magno, c
                        •
                     itis nepos fuit. Echerhard in vit. B. Notkeri, cap. 29. 
                  after the second Nicene Councell,
is sufficient to wipe away that slander and vntruth
of their second Nicene Synod, (which Notkerus,
as it seemes, purposely intended to doe) where
they say, that Eusebius was shaken out like chaffe, and
cast out of the Church. For though he bee cast out of
the Idolatrous and Image-worshipping Church
heere vpon earth, yet is he (as you see) reckoned among
the glorious Saints of God, and receiued into
the tryumphant Church in heauen. Thus Baronius
by his disgracing of Eusebius, hath now occasioned
vs, not onely to defend the honour of Eusebius,
and vindicate it from his calumnies and slanders;
(wherein I confesse, I was very willing to take some
paines, for the benefit which the whole Catholique
Church hath receiued by his writings:) but further
also to leaue this baptisme of Constantine, witnessed
not onely by other ancient Fathers, Bishops, and
Historians, but by the vndoubted testimonie of that
Eusebius, whom Constantine and all the world honored
for a Catholique Bishop, while he liued, and

their owne Martyrologies honor for a blessed Saint
and Confessor when he is dead. And thus much be
spoken of the third circumstance, wherby the forgerie
of this second Romane Synod is demonstrated,
in that it was held after Constantine was baptized at
Rome by Pope Syluester, which as we haue clearely
proued, was neuer.
            
            
               CHAP. VII.
               The seauenth reason, prouing this second Romane Synod
to be a forgerie, taken from the Donation of
Constantine: and first of the Charter or
Edict thereof.
               
                  THE fourth and last circumstance
which I will mention, whereby
this Synod is prooued a counterfeit,
is the Donation, or as Steuchus
callethAug. Steu
                        ••
                      lib. 1. de Donat. Const. pa. 43. it, the Decree, or the Oracle
of Constantine. For that was
made a little after his baptisme,
and before this Synod, as the Acts of Syluester doe
witnesse: whereinAct. Silu. apud Bar. ann, 324. nu. 60. 
                  the priuiledges of the Church, are
said, to be giuen the fourth day after his baptisme. That
the Edict of the Donation, saith Baronius
                  Bar. an. 
                        ••
                     d. nu. 12
                        •
                     ., was made
the fourth day after his baptisme, the Latine copies doe
set downe. And Binius in his Marginall notes vpon
the Edict, expressethBin. to. 1. pa. 297. the same; Constantinus Imperator
quarto die, Constantine gaue this the fourth
day after his baptisme. And at the beginning of the
Donation, set downe in their Canon Law
                  Dist. 96. ca. Constantim 
                        •
                     ., as also

in Anselme
                  Anselm & Deusdedit citantur ibid àglosiat. Greg, and Deusdedit, it is said, Constantine
the fourth day after his baptisme, gaue this priuiledge to
the Romane Church, that is, to the Pope. Yea Pope Nicholas
the third in his decretall Epistle expresly affirmes
Nic. 3. c. Fundamenta de elect. & elect. pot. in Sexto, the pragmaticall constitution whereby Constantine
conferred this Donation of the Monarchie of
Rome to the Pope, to haue bin made quarto die baptismatis,
on the fourth day after hee was baptized. This
Councell then, following his baptisme, must follow
also his Donation; and seeing the Donation beares
dateDat. Romae 3. Kal. April. in fine Donat., the 29. of March, the Councell must be
held a month or two after it, seeing it endedAct. Conc. Rom. 2. c. vlt. 
                  the
30. of May in that yeare when this Donation was
made. Now this was in truth neuer. For that Donation
of Constantine to be a base and witlesse forgerie,
is of old by Laurentius Valla, and since that, by
diuers of our learned writers, so fully demonstrated,
that scarce ought can bee added vnto their labours.
Nor would I so much as once endeauour to intreate
thereof, but that many of the Popes late flaterers do
most pertinaciously, and shamelessely continue still
the claime thereof: and it must not seeme strange
to any, nor be thought vnfit, that wee should reiterate
our iust defence of the truth, so long as they reiterate
their cauills and vaine obiections against the
truth.
               
                  Eugubinus Steuchus hath writ two whole bookes
in defence of the Edict of that Donation, whereinsteuchus lib. de Donat. Const. pa. 189
he thinks and boasts, that he hath prooued most cleerly,
Constantinum sua manu scripsisse illam Donationem, that
Constantine writ this Donation with his owne hand.
AddingSteuch. lib. 
                        〈◊〉
                      pa. 208., that they who say this Decree is false or fained,

doe maximam iniuriam facere, exceedingly
wrong, not onely the ancient Popes, sed omnibus Graecis
ac Latinis Theologis, but all, both Greeke and Latine
Diuines.
               Cardinall Albanus hath a large TreatiseHier. Alban, Card. lib. de Donat. Constant. Is extat inter Tract. Doct. to. 15. part. 2., or book
rather, to proue the truth & validitie therof: wherein
he scornes and derides all that account it a figment,
telling vs, that all
                  Ibid. nu. 1. 
                  the words of this Charter of Donation,
ab originalibus excepta exemplaribus, were taken
out of the originall Records, and so left vnto vs:
That they
                  Ibid. nu. 3. 
                  who denie it, are led more by wickednesse,
then by reason; and he concludesIbid. nu. 21. & 33., This Donation of
Constantine to be not onely true, but of force and validitie,
and that, iure optimo, for most iust reason; he approues
alsoAlb. ibid. nu. 19. the saying of Panonormitane
                  Panor. in Cons. 24. nl. 2. vol. 1., Eum non
procul ab haeresi distare, That he is almost an hereticke,
who dares speake ought against it. Yea, the same Cardinall
addesIbid. nu. 5. one other clause worthy to be remembred,
that the Popes, nullum alium suae possessionis titulum,
quàm Constantini donationem attulisse, Haue produced
no other title, for their possession of those
territories, but onely the donation of Constantine.
               
               Cardinal Iacobatius
                  Card. Iaco. bat. lib. 10. de Conc. Art. 8. cap. vlt. concurs wholy with Albanus;
but he sets down his opinion, with more both pride
and ignorance. He after much insulting in his reasons
and authorities alledged, concludesIbid. nu. 34 36., Quod hodie
non sit dubitandum de validitate huius donationis,
That none must at this day doubt, either of the truth
of it, that it was made by Constantine, or of the validity
thereof, that being made, it ought to be of force.
               
                  Iohannes à Capistro, is so confident in this matter,
that he saith ofIoh. Capist. lib. de. Author. Papae. part. 2. nu. 
                        •
                     20. 
                  Constantine, Donationis paginam proprijs

manibus roborauit, hee confirmed this Charter
with his own hands; adding, that the same Charter is
said to be kept in Sacristia S. Petri bulla aurea roborata,
in the Registry of S. Peter, sealed with a golden Bull.
               
                  Boetius Epon, is another, and very eager disputerBoet. Epon. lib. Heroic. quaest. q. 3.
for this Charter. He mentioneth nine seueral formes
thereof, and sets downe verbatim foure or fiueIbid nu. 10. 11. 14. 16. of
them: one of Iuo Carnotensis: a second of Balsamon:
a third of Albericus: a fourth of Isiodore, which he
likethVidetur esse ipsissi
                        •
                     a illa quam Constant nus ip
                        •
                     e concepit, ibid. best of all, as being that which Constantine
conceiued, and which wholy agrees with that, which
is set downe inBin. tom. 1. Conc. 
                  Binius: a fift out of Eugubinus Steuchus,
to which he addes for a sixtEn tibi qui
                     
                        •
                     as, & cum Gratianea senas Donationis huius formulas, ad amussim, sirem spectes, inter se conuenientes. Boet. Epon loc. cit. nu. 28. that in Gratian.
And hee is so confident for the veritie of that Donation,
that hauing citedIbid. nu. 1. for a proofe thereof, a
Text of Melchiades
                  Ca. Futuram caus. 12. q. 1., the next Pope before Siluester,
he saithIbid. nu. 5.; Certo certius est Donationem Constantini inde
probari: It is more then certaine that Constantines
Donation is proued thereby.
               In their Canon Law lately corrected and illustrated
with notes, by the command and authoritie of
Gregory the 13. the Gregorian Glossators
                  Not. in cap. Constantinus. dist. 96. labour to
proue the truth of this Edict, as being set downe in
the Acts of Siluester, and invetustissimis Pontificalibus,
in their most ancient Pontificals, in Pope Hadrian,
and in many others.
               
               To these let Binius be adioyned, who not onely
affirmes, the same Edict and grant
                  Ea quae de dominio & temporali regno Rom. sedi colla
                        •
                     o hic (in Edicto) enarrantur, vera esse, &c. Bin. Not. in Donat. Const. 
                  of a temporall
kingdome and dominion, made therein to the Pope, to bee
true: but he addes, that the Emperors munificence and
pietie, sais apertè testantur, do euidently witnesse the
truth thereof. Again, whereas Constantine (saith heBin. Not. in vit. Silu. §. Siluester.)

                  iudged it to be an vnworthy thing, that the Citie, where
the Monarch of the whole Church was resident should be
subiect to the rule of a secular Prince, he most magnificently
gaue vnto Siluester, and to his lawfull successors,
the dominion and temporall iurisdiction, not onely of the
Cittie of Rome, but almost of all Italie, and other Prouinces.
Thus Binius, who further addesBin. Not. in Edict. Const. §. Ipse., That Pope
Hadrian confirmes the History of Constantines leprosie,
and baptisme by Siluester, veritate huius Edicti, by the
truth of this Edict: signifying, that Pope Hadrian
iudged this Edict to be true, and by the truth of it,
confirmed other matters which he deliuered as true.
               None of all these haue writ more earnestly for this
Edict and Charter, then some few yeares since, the
great Doctor of Naples, Marta; who is so confident
of the certaintie & truth hereof, that he saithDoc. Mart. lib. de Iurisdict. part. 1. ca. 30. nu. 20. & 26.;
Non esse vlterius dubitandum, None may hereafter
doubt, but that it was truly made by Constantine. For
proofe whereof, hee produceth the testimonies of
many Fathers, of many Historians, of many Ciuilians
and Canonists; yea, of Emperors and of Popes: vnto
all which he addes some, as he supposeth pregnant
reasons, to confirme the same. And lest that might
breed some scruple, because that chapter in Gratian
                  Dist. 96. ca. Constantinus.,
where this Edict is set downe, it is called Palea, that
is, Chaffe; at which Steuchus
                  Ab indoctis Canonistis Palea vocatur. Steu. lib. cit. pa. 43. was not a little chased;
the Doctour tels vs a Storie, well worthy remembring,
how it came to be called Chaffe. The narration
Mart. loc. cit. nu. 35. & seq. is this: When Gratian had composed his book of Decrees,
he brought it to Rome, to haue it approoued by the
Pope: but in token of reuerence, he gaue it to a learned
Cardinall, that hee should present it to his Holinesse.

The Cardinall being very ambitious, perusing the booke,
and liking it well, added heere and there, many other
testimonies and Texts of Fathers and Popes, and then
presented it to the Pope as his owne worke. Gratian disdaining
thereat, and remembring the verse, Sic vos
non vobis mellificatis apes; in presence of the Cardinal,
auouched before his Holinesse, that the Booke was his,
and not the Cardinals; and for proofe thereof, he repeated
without book, the order and summe of the Chapters,
omitting such as the ambitious Cardinall had inserted.
Whereupon when the Cardinall pleaded, that sure he
had not composed this booke, seeing he knew not of such
Chapters, Gratian answered concerning euery such
Chapter, as it was read vnto him, Hoc Capitulum non
est de tritico meo: Palea est, Palea est, This Chapter is
none of my Wheat, its Chaffe, its Chaffe. Wherevpon
to euery Chapter, which was not truly Gratians,
in stead of that ambitious Cardinals name, which
was deseruedly buried in obliuion, There was set, Palea.
But Eugenius the third then Pope, approued
                  Totus liber ab Eugenio 3. approbatus est, etiam cum omnibus Paleis, & vsu receptus, Mart. 
                        •
                     a. cit. nu. 37. 
                  the
booke, withall the chaffe therein. Wheate and Chaffe,
both were allowed by his Holines: they both tended
to aduance his See, they both were receiued, and authorized
to serue for the vse of their Church. Thus
pleads Marta for this Chaffe, and chaffie Charter:
whose treatise might be thought nothing inferior to
that of Steuchus, but that the book of Marta is dedicated
only to Paul the fift, whereas the other of Steuchus,
was thought worthy to be dedicated to S. Peter
himselfe; Steuchus telling S. Peter, That hee vndertooke
that labour, vni tibi Ecclesiaeque tuae, only for thee
O S. Peter, and for Thy Church, as himselfe saith, in

the EpistleDedicatio libri ad Sanctū Petrum. & Accipe quaeso, quos tibi sacro labores. &c. Steuc. Epist. ante lib. de Donat. Const. which hee writes to S. Peter, and prefixeth
it in his booke: though I feare me he found no
messenger that would deliuer either the booke, or
the Epistle to S. Peter.
               
               But that which giueth greatest countenance to
this Edict, is the Decretall Epistle of Pope Leo
                  Epist. 1. Leon. 9. c. 12. 13. 14. the
ninth, who verbatim repeates almost that whole Edict,
so farre as it concernes the Donation: as
namely, How Constantine writ in his Edict, that hee
would exalt the most holy See of Peter, more then his
owne Empire or earthly throne, giuing vnto that See,
potestatem, dignitatem, & honorificentiam Imperialem,
Imperiall power, dignitie, vigor and honour.
There the Pope of a Bishop, is made an Emperour,
and that aboue the secular Emperour himselfe.
How hee decreed, that the Romane See, principatum
teneat, should bee chiefe of other Churches, and haue
principalitie aboue the See of Alexandria, of Antioch,
of Ierusalem and Constantinople, and of all other
Churches in the whole world. There the spirituall
Prince-hood, aboue other Patriarches and Bishops
is conferred to the Pope. How hee gaue to Siluester
and his successours for euer, his Laterane Palace,
which is preferred aboue all Palaces in the world, his
Diademe and Crowne, his mandilion, his cloake, his
coate, & omnia imperialia indumenta, and all imperiall
robes which himselfe did weare; his imperiall
guard, his imperiall scepter, & omnem processionem
imperialis culminis, & gloriam potestatis nostrae, and all
the residue of his imperiall dignitie, honour and
power: There is his estate, such and so pompous,
that Constantine himselfe (as the Charter saith) held

the Popes bridle, and performed, officio stratoris, the
office of a groome of the stable, or yeoman of the
stirr
                     •
                  p, vnto the Pope. How to the end the Pontificall
height should not seeme vile, but be adorned more then
the dignity and power of the earthly Empire, hee gaue
vnto Siluester and his successours for euer, both
                  Ecce tā pala ium nostiū, quā vrbē Romā, & omnes totius Italiae, & omniū Occidentaliū re
                     
                        ••
                     gionū Prouinci
                        •
                     s, loca & ciuitates, concessimus, Edict. verba apud Isiod, Iucnem. Balsam. Alber. & Bini
                     
                        •
                     m. &, Scire 
                        •
                     nuenit, do
                     
                        •
                     asse Constā
                     tinū vniuersū Occidentem. Steuch. loc. cit. pa. 17. 
                  the
citie of Rome, and all the Prouinces, places and cities of
Italy, and the Westerne countries, decreeing all these his
grants, to be kept inuiolable and vnchangeable, vsque
in finem mundi, euen vnto the end of the world.
Heere is the Popes reuenewes and rich Patrimony
of S. Peter.
               
               This and farre more, doth Pope Leo verbatim, recite
out of the Edict or Charter of Constantine, all
which, hee saith, hee sets downe lest
                  Ne fortè de terrena ipsius dominatione 
                        •
                     liquis vobis 
                        •
                     ubietatis su
                     
                        •
                     rsit scrupu
                     
                        •
                     us ib. ca. 13. 
                  any scruple of
doubt should remaine touching the Popes terrene dominion,
nèue leuiter suspicemini, ineptis & anilibus fabulis
Sanctam Romanam sedem velle sibi inconcessum honorem
vendicare, & defensare aliquatenus: and lest
any should so much as but lightly suspect, that the
Romane See would challenge, or any way defend
their honour by foolish and vncertaine fables: yea,
hee addes of this Edict, and that which he cites out
of it, that hee therefore relates it, that heereby, veritas
fundetur, & confundatur vanitas, that truth may bee
confirmed, and vanitie confounded; and that all Catholikes
may know, nos, himselfe and other Popes, to bee
the disciples of that Peter, who saith2. Pet. 1. 16. of himselfe, Wee
haue not followed vnlearned, or sophisticated and falsely
deuised fables. And yet more to commend this Edict
hee adioynes; Know ye, that wee doe inculcate vnto
you these things, which we haue not so much receiued,

relatu quolibet, by any relation or hearesay, quàm quae
ipso visu et tactu comperta sunt, as which wee haue
found out by our owne sight and feeling. Thus
writes Pope Leo for the certaintie, truth, and credit
of this Charter of Donation, so Pontifically
and assuredly, as if hee had seene Constantine set
his seale vnto the same; or lay it with his owne hand
vpon the body of S. Peter, as the same Leo saith he did.
               I must needes confesse, that when I considered,
how besides Cardinall Albanus, Cardinall Iacoba
tius, the Gregorian Glossators, Steuchus, and Marta
Pope Eugenius also, Pope Nicholas, Pope Hadrian,
and especially Pope Leo in his decretall Epistle, had
so confidently approoued this Edict or Charter of
Donation, assuring all Catholikes, that hee followes
the certaine truth and no fables therein; I was not
a little desirous to sift and examine the same: partly
to see what worthy Charters and auncient writings
they commend to the world, as bearing euidence
to their cause: and especially to try whether
their holy Popes, (of whom I had good hope, that
of all men they would not countenance and writ
                     •
                  
decretall Apologies for forgeries) might bee cred
                     ••
                  ted
in this & like narrations, which concern the dignitie
and glory of their See, & papall Crowne. And
first I will speake of the Edict or Charter of th
                     •
                  
Donation, and then of the Donation it selfe, of both
which, that they are base and improbable fictions,
there are many vndeniable reasons: Some few of
which I will touch.
               For the Charter: All that wee haue formerly
said of the supposed leprosie, Persecution, and Baptisme

of Constantine by Siluester, are vndoubted Demonstrations
of the forgerie of this Edict of Donation:
for in the Charter are al these not only related,
as certaine truthes: but they are made the very
ground and occasion why Constantine made this
Charter. Seeing then there is neither truth, nor realitie
in the foundation, certainely there is no truth
at all in the Charter it selfe, which is builded vpon
such fictions and fables. But leauing these, I wil propose
a few other considerations in this cause.
               First, in this Edict is mentioned the See of Constantinople
as one of the Patriarchall Sees: whereas
neither it had Patriarchal dignity before the second
general Councell, (that is more then fiftieConc. Cōst. 1. habitum est, an. 381. 
                        •
                     uxta Baron. Edictū verò editū dicitur, an. 324. yeeres after
the Donation is supposed to bee made,) nor was
there at that time, so much as the name of Constantinople:
for the Citie was then called Byzantium: and
diuers yeeres after when Constantine had much inlarged
it, and made it, as Socrates saithSoc. l. 1. c. 12., parem
& aequalem Romae, equall to Rome; choosing it for the
Imperiall fear, it was then first called from his name,
Constantinople: and this was done, as Baronius himselfe
acknowledgethPost hoc (Conc. Nic.) Patres Constātinopolin perrexere. Bar. 325. nu. 196., a little after the Nicene Councell,
was ended: but as Sigonius
                  Sig. l. 4 de occid Imp. an. 330. more truely teacheth,
fiue yeeres after that Nicene Councell, when
Gallicanus and Symachus were Consulls. So very
stupid was the forgerer, that to gaine to the Pope,
and See of Rome, principalitie ouer Constantinople,
hee makes Constantine write of that citie, which
was not, no nor the name of it so much as extant in
the world at that time. I should thinke indeede,
that there was some fraud vsed in the inserting of

this name, but that all the seuerall formes extant of
this Charter, as that of Albericus, of Isidore, of the
Gregorian and corrected edition of the Decrees, haue
all the same name of Constantinople, and Pope Leo the
ninth, who assureth vs, that hee felt and saw the very
authentical Charter, mentioneth the same name in his
Decretall Epistle. Besides in the Greeke Edict, set
downe by Balsamon
                  Theod. Bals. cōm. in Pho
                        ••
                      Nomocan. Tit. 8. ca. 1. pa. 85., the same is extant, and the
Gregorian glossatorsNot. in Cap. Constantinus, dist. 96. 
                  testifie that the Edict, as it is
set downe in the Decree, is in a very ancient Manuscript
in the Vaticane, and that also accordes to their most ancient
Pontificalls: and Marta last of all tellsMart. loc. cit vs, that
the copie of the Edict, which hee sets downe (wherein
also this name of Constantinople is expressed) is in
the registry of the Vaticane. Seeing then there is
such an vniforme consent in all the formes and copies
of the Charter, both Greeke and Latine; seeing
the Charter is so safely kept in their Vaticane,
and ratified by the Decretall Epistle of Pope
Leo, for true and authenticall: there can bee no
suspicion of corruption at all in those wordes
of the Edict: The errour and corruption was in
none at all, but in the author himselfe, who
forged such an vnlikely, vnprobable, and vncredible
vntruth.
               2. Had Constantine giuen principality to the
Romane See, aboue all Churches in the world, as
the Charter saith hee did: what folly was it in Iohn
Bishop of Constantinople, Cyriacus and others, to
striue
                  Vt liquet ex Greg. lib. 4. Epist. 36. 38. & al 
                        •
                     s multis. 
                  for that preheminence? What meant Boniface
the third, that he would neuer shew this Charter
and grant of principalitie made by Constantine?
                  
Why did hee vse so much intreatie
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      3 & Anast. in vita eusdem 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  and meanes to
Phocas a murtherer, that the Church of Rome might
bee called the first of all Churches, when the same
was long, almost 300. yeers before, giuen by a faire
Charter to the Romane See, by Constantin so worthy
and renowned an Emperour?
               3. In this Edict Constantine is made solemnly to
giue vnto Pope Siluester, the Laterane palace: whereas
not only Sigonius witnesseth that this was giuen
long before to Pope Meltiades, Augustale palatium in
Laterano impertijt
                  Sig. lib 3 de occid. Imp. an. 312., Constantine gaue to Meltiades, the Laterane palace: but Baronius
                  Cum tam euidenter demonstratū sit, Melchiadē Papam à Constā
                     tino hoc an. in augustiffia
                        •
                     s Lateranenses aede
                        •
                      translatū &c. Bar. an. 312, 
                        •
                     u 85. and Binius
                  Domum Lateranensem Melchiadi ab Imperatore 
                        •
                     onatam esse, nemo prudens ampliu
                        •
                      dubi
                     
                        •
                     are potest. B
                        •
                     n Not. in lib. de Munific. Const. auouch
the same for a certaintie, and say, that no
wise body will doubt thereof. Those Augustissimae Lateranenses
aedes, say theyLoc ci
                        •
                     ., that most princely palace
of the Laterane was giuen by the same Constantine to
Pope Meltiades the predecessor of Siluester, and to his
successors, and that in the seuenth yeere of Constantine;
which was twelue yeeres before hee was either
baptized, or made this Charter of Donation.
Is not this now a piece of great munificence in
the Emperour, to giue that, which is not his owne
to giue, or to giue that to Siluester, which many
yeeres before that gift was Siluesters owne and his
successours for euer?
               4. In this Edict Constantine saith, Wee will haue
all people in the world to know, Construxisse nos
intra palatium Lateranense, that wee haue builded
vnto Christ, within our palace of the Laterane,
a Church from the verie foundation thereof,
together with a Font. Now seeing the Edict
was made in the fourth day after Constantine was

baptized, (as you haue seene themselues to professe)
whether it were possible, that such a princely
Church, should bee builded vp in foure dayes,
were a fit question for a 
                     •
                  urie of workemen to decide.
And for the possibilitie thereof, I leaue it to
their verdict. Onely I will intreat them to heare
one speciall euidence out of the Actes of Siluester
                  Act. Silu. apud Bar. an. 324 nu. 60, 61. 62.,
wherein when the author had told what Constanstine
did all the seuen dayes that he was, in Albis,
after his baptisme, on the eight day (saith hee) hee
laid aside his white garments, his diademe and imperiall
robes; & accipiens bidentem, and taking a spade
hee first of all digged and opened the ground, to lay the
foundation of that (Laterane) Church, and carried
twelue baskets of earth vpon his owne shoulders vnto it,
according to the number of the twelue Apostles. Thus
the euidence, euen those very Actes of Siluester,
which Binius
                  Bi
                        •
                     . Not. in vit. Silu §. De su
                        •
                     e epto. calls, Acta probatissima, most approued
Actes. Whereby the Iurors may easily bee informed,
whether the Church was builded on the
fourth day, whose foundation was but begun, and
the earth first digged, on the eight day after his baptisme.
               5. This Edict, as by the words thereof is euident,
followeth the leprosieDum valida squaloris lepra, tot
                        •
                     
                     ̄ mei corporis invasisset carnem &c. Verba Edict. of Constantine, and his baptisme
Bene
                        ••
                     t
                        ••
                     ; so
                        ••
                     e illic a
                        •
                     e trina mers
                        ••
                     
                     ne, vnda salutaris put
                        •
                     ficauit. ibid.; and so could not bee made before the nineteenth
yeere of Constantine, in which both these,
as you haue seene by Baronius and Binius, are supposed
to haue happened. Yet is it dated
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  in the Consulship
of Constantine the fourth time, with Gal
                        •
                     icanus.
Now the fourth Consuship of Constantine, (as
by the Fastiboth Greeke and Latine, besides other

euidences is cleere) was before the eleuenth yeere of
his Empire: by which account Constantine should
haue made this Edict and Donation 8. or 9. yeere
before the occasion & cause therof was offered; and
prophetically should tell, how he was a leper, baptized,
and therby clensed frō his leprosie, many yeeres
before hee had any leprosie, for which hee needed
any clensing. Againe, see the stupiditie of the forgerer;
not Gallicanus, but Licinius was colleague with
Constantine in that yeere, as appeareth both by the
Fasti, and by many Imperiall Edicts, dated in this
manner,L. 1. de Pignoribus. C. Theod. & quàm multae aliae leges. 
                  Constantino A. 4. & Licinio 4. Coss. Nay
I say further, seeing Gallicanus was neuer Consull
with Constantine, as by the Fasti is euident, it cleerely
followes, that this Edict which was made in the
Coss. of Constantine and Gallicanus, was of a certaintie
neuer made; for that yeere of their Consulship
was neuer.
               To these, let me adde the testimony of their great
Cardinall Baronius, to whom accordes Gretzer,
who hath writ an ApologieGret. Apol. pro Bar. ca. 21. & Append. 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                      lib. de 
                        〈◊〉
                     . principū. 
                        〈◊〉
                      86. &c. for him in this very
point. He by many reasons, and at large proues
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  ,
this Edict to bee, commentitium, prorsusque falsum, a
meere figment and forgerie, and as Gretzer saith
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  ,
commentis accensendum docuit, hee hath taught that
it is a counterfait. One reason is; The ancient
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  Popes
since Constantines time, had many occasions to dispute
against Princes, touching the rights and prerogatiues of
the Church, yet none of them before the thousanth yeere
after Christ, is read to haue defended the same, by authoritie
of this Edict: and yet they knew and mention the
Acts of Syluester. Another is this: It is certaine
                  
                  Bar. an. eod. nu. 61. 
                  the Emperours make no mention of that Edict of Constantines
Donation; and yet in the Charter of Henrie the
first there is a sure mention
                  Ibid. nu. 
                        •
                     9., de Imperatoribus singu
                        •
                     lis,
of all the former Emperours, who had made such
ample donations of Prouinces vnto the Romane See. A
third is, That this Edict
                  Ibid. nu. 52. 
                  was not in the ancient Actes
of Siluester, but was by forgerie inserted into them:
the time when this was done he defines, to haue
bene after
                  Alia Acta Siluestri non ante 1000. Christi annū cognita ab aliquo fuisse noscuntur. Quibus actis superadditum est ipsum recitatum à Theodoro, Constantini edictū. Ibid &, Illud constat non ante Othonis tempora (coepit 996.) à quoquam citatum. ibid nu. 60. 
                  the 1000. yeare of Christ: the parties by
whom this forged Edict was made and published,
he also declares: it was fained by some Graecian
                  Ibid. nu. 52▪
                  , vnder
the name of Eusebius, and set forth by Theodorus
Balsamon, whereas, à nullo Graecorum hactenus in lucem
editum, vntill then no Graecian had published it; and
from the Graecians it came to the Latines, and Westerne
Church: Leo the ninth being the first Pope, who makes
mention thereof. Thus the Cardinall. By whose acknowledgement,
you may see what truth there is in
their Popes, specially in Pope Leo, who in his decretall
Epistle, most solemnly commends this Edict,
for an ancient and vndoubted euidence, such as hee
knew by sight and sence to be the true deed of Constantine:
which yet their great Cardinall after long
sifting of Monuments and Records, testifieth to
be a forgerie, and that of the Graecians, first of all deuised,
as hee saith, about 700; and published 800.
yeares after the death of Constantine.
               
               Yet about the time of deuising and first publishing
of this Edict, which the Cardinall so precisely
sets downe, I can no way assent vnto him. If this
Edict was not deuised till after the 1000. yeare of
Christ, how doth Leo the ninth (who was not Pope,

till an. 1049.) mention it as an ancient Record and
Monuments? as besides that his owne words
                     
                        ••
                     9▪ Epist. 1. make
plaine, Gretzer
                  Gretz. App
                        ••
                     d. 1. pa. 87. also confesseth. Is fiftie yeares a
not
                     •
                   of antiquitie, for that, which is pretended to
be made 700. yeares before? Why do the Gregorian
Glossators sayNotae ad cap. Constan
                     
                        ••••
                     . of this Edict; That it is mētioned, in
antiquissimis Pontificalibus, in their most anciēt Pontificals?
haue they no Pontificall more ancient, then
1000. yeares after Christ? How was it either deuised
after the 1000. or first published by Balsamon after
the 1180.Circa illa tempora Balsa
                        •
                     onē scripsisse 
                        •
                     it Bar. ann. 1191. nu. 49. & Bell lib. de Eccles. scrip. yeare, or first mentioned by Pope Leo
the ninth in the Latine Church? seeing, as Binius
saithBin. Not. in Donat. Constant. §. Ipse., Pope Hadrian the first, (more then three hundred
yeares before Leo the ninth) confirmes the
Storie of Constantines leprosie, veritate huius Edicti,
by the truth of this Edict of Constantine: yea the
same Hadrian mentions also this Donation in another
Epistle, which though it bee not extant, yet
the contents thereof are recorded by Baronius, out
of a Vaticane Manuscript, in which it is saidBar. an. 795. nu. 7., Hadrian
(in this thirtie fift Epistle) meminit Donationis,
makes mention of the Donation made in Constantines
time to siluester, and of other Donations, and he saith;
in Lateranensi scrinio eas Donationes haberi, that those
Donations are extant in their Laterane Registry.
Nay, what will Baronius, or what can he say, to all
those who certainly testifie, this Edict to be a parcel
of those very Acts of Siluester, which Pope Gelasius
mentioneth? The Gregorian Glossators speaking
of that part of this Edict, which concernes the Donation
of Rome, Italie, and the Westerne Prouinces,
sayNot. in 62. Constantinus, 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 96.; It is set downe in those Acts of Syluester,

whereof Gelasius and the Romane Synod with him entreat.
Gelasius, saith Cardinall Alba
                        ••
                     us
                  Card. Alb. lib. de Donat. Const. nu. 1., one aboue
exception, reckons the Actes of Siluester among those
Bookes which deserue to bee approued in the Church: in
cis autem tota huius concessionis ratio continetur, and
in those Actes (so approoued by Gelasius) is the
whole forme of this Donation contained. Gelasius,
saith Cardinall Iacobatius
                  Gelasius Donationem factam suisse ponit. Iacobat. lib. 10. de Conc. Art. 8. ca. vlt. nu. 30., sets downe, that this
Donation was made by Constantine. The very like
saith Marta
                  Mart. cap. cit nu. 25. & 38.. Of Iuo Carnotensis, Steuchus thus testifieth
Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 
                        •
                     48., Iuo writeth thus; In the 
                        •
                     etes of Siluester,
of which Gelasius in a Councell of seauentie Bishops,
speakes, it is thus read: Constantine the Emperour in the
fourth day after hee was baptized, gaue this priuiledge
to the Pope; that all Bishops in the Romane world, should
haue him for their head. Steuchus himselfe was keeper
of the Vaticane Librarie, as well as Baronius;
heare, I pray you, with what confidence he assures
you of this matter. If you search, saith heSteuch. lib. cit. pa. 81., the
old Literane bookes, you shall see, ex illis Siluestri
Actis, out of those very Acts of Siluester, of which
Gelasius speaketh, that this Donation is described:
And besides his owne testimonie heereof, hee
addes; That both Anselme, and Iuo Carnotensis doe
witnesse the same: for they, saith hee, proferunt
Donationem, doe set downe the Donation, out
of those verie Actes of Syluester, of which Gelasius
speaketh. And in another placeSteuch lib. eod pa. 44. 45., hauing told
vs, that there are almost no other Actes of Syluester,
but those which hapned betwixt him and Constantine,
about his Baptisme, & the Donation, and
his leauing of Rome vnto Syluester vpon that donatiō,

he thus insults ouer Valla, and his words are euerie
way as effectuall against Baronius: Mirabilis hominis
impudentia, Truly it is a maruellous impudencie
in him that denies (and this doth Baronius
                  Bar. an. 1191 nu. 52. expresly
deny) That this Donation or Edict, is set downe in
those Acts of Siluester, of which Gelasius speaketh. Ego
testes omnes bibliothecas proferam, I can produce all
Libraries for witnesse hereof, All which haue together
with the Historie of Siluesters baptizing Constantine,
this Donation, priuiledge or Edict. Thus their owne
Champion, conuincing as an eye-witnesse, his fellow
Bibliothecarius, Baronius, both of impudency &
vntruth; first, for denying this Donation to be mentioned
in those Acts of Siluester, of which Gelasius
speakes; and next, for slandering the Graecians, as deuisers
of it, after the yeare 1000. which to haue bene
in their Vaticane and other Libraries 500. yearesConc▪ illud Rom. sub Gelasio habitum est an. 494. vt Bar. & Bin. agnoscunt.
before that, in the time of Gelasius, he for a certainetie
assures vs. How may we trust any Vaticane Bibliothecarij,
if Steuchus an eye-witnesse bee not to be
trusted in this cause? And if we credit him, who euer
hereafter will trust his fellow Baronius, that thus
insigniously downe-faceth the truth?
               Now if one might sit as an vnpartiall Iudge, betwixt
Baronius and Steuchus, in this cause, it may
rightly bee affirmed, that both of them doe in part
say truth, and both also in part doe erre. That this
Edict of Donation is a very figment, Baronius rightly
auoucheth, but Steuchus, and the rest, who hold
the same with him, doe herein speake farre amisse.
Againe, that this Edict was of ancient time in the
Popes Librarie, and in those Acts of Syluester, which

                  Gelasius mentioneth, in this Steuchus deserueth to
be credited; But Baronius in saying that it was not
extant till the 1000. yeare after Christ, nor published
before Balsamons time, in these the Cardinal
saith farre amisse. So with Steuchus we professe,
and haue prooued also, that this Edict of Donation
is ancient, as being knowne not onely in the time
of Leo the ninth, but of Hadrian, yea of Gelasius
also: and with Baronius we professe, and haue clearely
prooued, the same Edict to be nothing else but
a forgerie and figment. What they say amisse, wee
reiect in either: what they rightly affirme, we accept
of either: and vpon the true confession of
Steuchus, we conclude the Edict of Donation to
be ancient: againe, vpon the true confession of
Baronius, we conclude it to be a forgerie: And
vpon both these truths, which they seuerally professe,
we rightly and safely conclude it to be an ancient
forgerie.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VIII.
               That Constantine made no such Donation, as they
pretend: And the reasons of Gretzer to
prooue that Donation, refuted.
               
                  
                     THough the Edict, or instrument of
the Donation be forged or falsifyed;
yet the Donation it selfe may be good,
saith Gretzer
                  Gret. Appēd. 1. ad lib. de 
                        〈…〉
                      princ. pa 89. Haec cō equ
                        •
                     tio viriū est expe
                        •
                     s, Instrum 
                        〈◊〉
                      Do
                        •
                     ationis supposititium est, ergo & ip
                     
                        ••
                      Donatio., and for such hee
labours to defend it, telling vsNec pro prae cipuo fulchro potentiae temporalis habent Rom. Pontifices Constantinianum diploma, sed alio
                        •
                     ū Imperatorum Regum ac principum iudubitatas donationes. ibid. pa. 88.,
that the Popes haue indeed other vndoubted
Charters for their temporall dominions,
(which Cardinal Albanus
                  Car. Alb. li. de Donat. Const. nu. 5. flatly denies) quā uis ipsa
per se donatione Constantini merito quoque nitantur:
though their rights iustly or deseruedly relie also vpon
the very Donation of Constantine, seeing none did
euer yet euidently prooue it to be fained. So Gretzer,
who carpes and diuers times reprooues the learned
Protestant, whom hee would seeme to confute, because
hee did not (as he fancieth,) distinguish, as hee
should haue done, the Donation, from the instrument
or Charter of the Donation; the Diploma or Charter,
hee openly professeth commentitium esse, to be counterfait,
the Donatiō
                   to be such he denieth. And lest he
should be thought to haue deuised this subtiltie of
himselfe, hee saith, that Baronius is of the same minde.
Baronius
                  Ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ipsam Donationem, sed Donationis Diploma falsitatis accu
                     
                        •
                     ae
                        ••
                      Ba
                        •
                     onius, ibid pa. 89. 
                  did not accuse the Donation to bee false, but
the Charter or Edict of the Donation. Nay the Donation
                  Donationē certe probabilibus coniecturis, ni
                        •
                     i demonstrat. ibid. pa. 90. 
                  hee probably defends. Thus Gretzer, whose
childish and sophisticall collusion, let vs a little examine
in this place.
               
                  An accute Logitian (saith Gretzer
                  Ibid. pa. 89. Dialecticus paulo ocula
                     
                        ••
                     or oggeret, hoc non sequi. &c.,) wil say, fortassis
donationem per solos testes absque vllo Instrumento peractam,
that perhaps the Donation was made by witnesses

onely, without either scrip or scroule. But a
iudicious diuine, an expert lawyer, or prudent statesman,
will neuer say so; no not with a perhaps: Neither
when it is said, can any of those witnesses bee
produced to testifie that Donation, or any who euer
heard it of them. And why may not the Bishop of
Constantinople plead the very like Donation by word
of mouth from Constantine: that Rome and Italy was
giuen by Constantine, to him and his successours for
euer, and say it is prooued by witnesses, which now
are dead, without any Charter or instrument to testifie
the same? How can an acute Logician effectually
ouerthrow the one, & defend the other donatiō?
               But to silence the Iesuites acute Logician, three
seueralVt supra declarauimus. Popes are witnesses, that the donation of
Constantine was made, not by eare witnesse onely, but
by a Charter and Instrument: and two of those
Popes further testifie, that the Charter of that donation
was extant, & to be seene in their times, among
their recordes or in their registry. The first is Pope
Hadrian, who in the thirtie fift Epistle before mentioned,
faith of the donation of Constantine, and others,
In Lateranensi scrinio eas haberi, that they were
kept in the Laterane Registry: this was about the
yeere of Christ, 790. The second is Pope Leo the
ninth, Who saw (as he tells vs) and handled the very
Charter of Constantines Donation: and this was about
the yeere 1050. The 3. is Pope Nicholas the 3. who
saith, that Cōstantine left vnto Siluester the city of Rome,
and declared per pragmaticum Constitutū, by a pragmaticall
constitution, or writ of record, that hee and his
successors should haue the disposing or gouernmēt therof:
                  
and this was about the yeare 1280. To these may be
added Cardinall Albanus, who expresly thus saithHier. Alb. lib. cit. nu. 12.;
Donatio ipsa fuit scripto interueniente confecta, The
Donation was made in writing: Capistranus, Boetius
Epon, Steuchus, Marta, and the Gregorian Glossators,
who allVt ante de
                     
                        •••
                     atum est. assure vs, that the very Charter (writ, as
Steuchus saith, with Constantines owne hand) is extant
in the Vaticane, and that also, as Capistranus addes,
embossed or sealed with gold. Now whether three
Popes, with Cardinall Albanus, Capistranus, Steuchus,
and the rest, some of them being as themselues
professe, oculatitestes, or the Iesuites acute Logitian,
comming in, with a Portassis, be more to bee credited,
let any be iudge.
               
                  The acute Logitian, saith Gretzer
                  Posse
                        •
                     enim fier
                        •
                     , vt donationis factae legitimum instrumentum diuturnitate temporis perierit, aut additione, & detractione corruptum fuerit, Gretz. lib. cit. pa. 89., will further say;
It may be that the instrument or Charter, is either perished,
or corrupted by long continuance: So may also
another, and as good a Logitian say, of the Donation
of Rome and Italy, which Constantine made to the
Bishops of Constantinople. But who can suppose,
that the Romane Bishops, who are carefull to keepe
euidences for many little quillets, would suffer the
charter of so faire a patrimony, as is the Empire of the
West, either to be lost, or to perish, or to be corrupted?
Or if the originall had by some rare mishap
beene lost, would they lose al copies and extracts, all
records, and inroulments of so faire a Charter? Or
could all these be lost and perish, and none of the
Popes lament, or bemoane the losse of them? For to
say it was falsified or corrupted, vnlesse it were by the
Popes themselues, or their agents, (who had the custodie
of that Charter) is more then ridiculous.
               
                  
But to silence againe the Iesuites acute Logitian,
Steuchus the keeper of the Popes Librarie, assures
Steuch. lib. cit pa. 44. 45. vs, that this Edict of Donation, such as is now extant,
is set downe in those very Actes of Siluester,
which Pope Gelasius approoued, and that Gelasius by approouing
those Actes, approoued also this verie Donation:
yea hee further addes, that all Libraries, together
with those Actes, kept also this Donation, quaeremansit
omnibus testimonijs confirmata et roborata,
which remained, (then it was not lost) confirmed by
the testimonies of all those witnesses. Pope Leo the
ninthLeo 9. Epist. 1. ante cit. also auerres, and that in verbo sacerdotis, yea,
summi Pontificis, that hee saw and handled the very
true and authenticall Charter which Constantine
made, and with his owne hands laid vpon the bodie
of S. Peter. Whether, thinke you, is Steuchus with
all Libraries, yea with Pope Galasius, and Leo the
ninth, so assuredly testifying the Charter not to bee
lost or perished: or Gretzers Logician, comming in
with another Fortassis, more to be credited in this
cause?
               After these oppositions of the acute Logician,
Gretzer addes his proofes for the Donation: and
because they are such, as hee was conscious to himselfe,
could not necessarily inforce or inferre his conclusion,
hee calles them probabilities
                  Probabilibus coniecturis niti. Gretz. lib. cit pa. 90. haec non abs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      versi militudine pro Donatione disputare licet. idē. p. 91 & non improbalibiter hoc 
                        •
                     us ex Donatione der
                        •
                     uatur. p. 91, & coniectures.
Two of the best of them wee will heere examine.
The former is taken out of Baronius
                  Magnū sane de collatis ill
                        •
                     s Rom. Ecclesiae à Constantino muneribus argumentū, quod Francorum principes suis diplomatibus ea à Longobardis ablata, se Rom. ecclesiae 
                        ••
                     
                     st
                        •
                     uere prof
                        •
                     ssi sunt. Bar. an 324. nu. 117 & eadem habet Bin. not. in Donat. Constantini. § Edictum., to whom Biniusi also
consents. It is not for nothing (saith heGretz. loc. cit. pa. 90.)
that Cardinall Baronius noteth, that the French Kings

in their writs of Donation doeprofesse, that they restore
to the Romane Church, the dominions which they
tooke from the Lombardes. So Gretzer; who
from this Restitution, inferres that the Romane
Church had them formerly by the Donation of
Constantine.
               
               Truely by the Cardinalls leaue, this inference is
neither necessary, nor so much as probable. Restitution
will proue a former possession, or holding of
those Prouinces, Cities, or Lordships, which were
restored: but it will neither proue, that the Popes
possessed them by right, nor by any Donation;
much lesse by any Donation from Constantine. They
might be restored, though the Pope had got them
by inuasion, by wrongfull intrusion, by fraud, by
robbery, by rebellion, or treason; and so the Popes
got them in very deed.
               After that Iustinian had expelled the Gothes out
of Italy, who like Pyrates and robbers
                  Gothes Italiam praedonū more cepisse, atque muitis pristinis possesso ribustenuisse, ai
                        •
                      Belisarius, in su
                        •
                      ad Viticē Ocat. apud Sigon. lib. 13. de Occid. Imp pa. 307. quod fasius declarat contra Gothorū praetextus lib. eod. pa. 312. & 313, had inuaded,
and by violence intruded themselues, into a great
part of that countrey, from the time of Alaricus,
to the ouerthrow of Totilas, which is neere hand
160. yeeres
                  Italia post annū 
                     
                        •
                     ere 160. à Gothis liberata, Sigon. li. 20. pa. 352.; Italy from that time was gouerned by
the Easterne Emperours, tanquam Orientalis imperij
prouincia, saith Sigonius
                  Sig. lib. eod. pa. 345., no longer in manner
of a kingdome of Empire (for that being begun in
Augustus, ended for the Westerne part in Augustulus
                  
                     
                        ••
                     sperium Romanae gentis Imperium quod Augustus primus tenere coepit, cū Augustulo perijt. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . in Chron. ad an. 476. & Bar. an. 475. nu. 2., about the yeere foure hundred and eightie:) but
in manner of a prouince subiected to the Easterne
Emperour. That gouernement in Iustinians time,
was held by that noble and worthy Counsaillour
Narses
                  Sigon. l 20. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  , and after him by Longinus, who was the

firstPrimū Rauennae non Ro
                        •••
                      sedem praefect
                        •
                     uae posuit Longinu
                        •
                     , seque Exarchū Italiae. ae vocauit. Sig. lib. 
                        •
                     . de reg. Ital pa. 5. 
                  that tooke the name of Exarch vpon him, and
made Rauenna the chiefe citie for iustice: vnder which
rule by Exarches, sent
                  Longinus succesio
                        •
                      Narseti, à sustino 
                        •
                     issus. ibid. pa. 5. & ab hoc tempore in 
                        •
                     aioribus Italiae vrbibus Imperator praefectos praeposum ibid. 
                  from the Emperour as his Depu
                        •
                     ies or Lieutenants into Italy, the Easterne Emperours
held the right and gouernement of it about two
hundred yeeres
                  Hic finis eius praefecturae (Exarchatus) quae per a Cor: fere annos ltaliae 
                        ••
                     perauit. Sig lib. 3. de reg. Ital. pa. 75., vntill it was partly by the Pope,
partly by the Lombardes taken from him; the Popes
in the end possessing the Lombardes share also. The
Lombardes were as the Gothes, nothing else but pyraticall
intruders
                  Narses Imperatorem Italiae possessione deside ran
                        •
                      spoliare, ad Albomum Longobardorum in Pannonia Regem 
                        〈◊〉
                     , cumque ad inuadendum & occupandum Italiā inuitauit. Sig l. 1. de reg. Ital. pa. 5. & Longobardi an. 568. è Pannonia egressi, anno sequenti praedari in Italia coeperunt; tertio anno dominatū institu
                        ••
                     . Sig. p. 8 eadē omnino habet Paul. Diac. l. 16. hist. misc. verbis 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  , who inuaded the countrey; iniuriously
withheld from the Emperor a good part of it, & erected
a kingdome of their owne, from the time of Longinus
the first Exarch, when Alboinus inuaded it, vnto the
death of Aystulphus, and Desiderius, that is, about two
hundred yeeres. Whatsoeuer they either possessed
themselues, or gaue away vnto others, it was but
held by tyranny and vsurpation, the rightOmnes 
                        〈…〉
                     . perij famal: in Septentrionalibus vel occiduis parti
                        •
                     us 
                        〈…〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     cribit Synodus 125 Episco. in Sexta Synodo. Act. 4. Hoe fuit an. 8
                        •
                     0 quo tempore Longobardiregnū Italiae 
                        •
                     uaserant, & possessione tenebant. still was
in the Easterne Emperor. The Pope gained first one
great part, & after that almost all Italy in this maner.
               When the question concerning adoration of Images,
about the yeere 712. began to be rise in the
Church, Philippicus the Easterne Emperour, and after
him Leo Isaurus, and lastly Constantine (whom
they with no small note of their immodestie nickname
Copronimus, but rightly is hee called Iconomachus:)
did iustly and constantly oppose themselues
to that superstition, which was then not creeping,
but euen rushing into the Church. The Popes of

those dayes, Constantine, Gregory 2. Gregory 3. Zacharie,
and Stephen the 3. opposed themselues to the
Emperours, and stood earnestly, nay factiously, for
defence of the adoration of Images: and this was
the first eminent matter wherin the Popes & the Romane
Church made a publike defection frō the ancient and Catholike
doctrine, banding thēselues & making a strong
faction to maintaine the same. And of all men they
were the greatest gainers by this Schisme; for vnder
colour of heresie, they did not onely reproue
the Easterne Emperours, excommunicate them,
withdraw their subiects from their faith, loyaltie,
and obedience; but in the end quite depriued them
also of their Imperiall dominions, and most rightfull
possessions. Pope Constantine began this worke
with Philippicus, Pope Gregory, and Pope Stephen,
finished it in the time of Leo Isaurus, and Constantine
Iconomachus. Gregory the second (saith Zonaras
                  Zonar. Annal. to. 3. fol. 101.,) Vectigalia quae ad id vsque tempus imperio inde
pendebantur, inhibuit: forbad the Romanes and Italians
to pay the tributes, which vntill then had beene
paid vnto the Emperours. When Pope Gregory
the second heard, how Leo the Emperour dealt against
the venerable Images, Tributa Romanae vrbis
prohibuit & Italiae, hee forbad the tributes to bee paid
vnto the Emperours, out of Rome and Italy. So Paulus
Diaconus
                  Paul. Diac. hist. misc. lib. 21. pa. 657. And againe, Pope Gregory
                  Lib. eodem. pa. 663., remouit Romam
& Italiam, nec non & omnia tam Reipub. quam Ecclesiastica
iura in Hesperijs ab obedientia Leonis, remoued
from the obedience of the Emperour Leo Isaurus,
Rome and Italy, and all his ciuill and Ecclesiasticall
rights in Italy. And againeLib. eod. pa. 665., Romam cum tota Italia

ab illius imperio recedere faciens, Gregory caused Rome
and all Italy, to depart from the gouernment or obedience
of Leo.
               
               
                  Gregorie the 2. saith Alb. Stadensis
                  Alb. stad. an. 731., Italiam ab
eius imperio cedere fecit: caused Italy to forsake the
Emperour. Gregorie the 2. saith Abbas
                  Abb. Vsper. an. 718. 
                  Vspergensis,
omnia tributa Romanae vrbis & Italiae Leoni dari prohibuit, forbad any tribute to bee giuen to the Emperour
either out of Rome or Italy. At this time,
saith Iohn Marius
                  Ioh Mar l. de Schis. & Conc. part. 1. ca. 9., did the Popes begin to inlarge
their fringes, and lift vp their hornes more proudly
against the Emperours. For Gregorie 2. did anathematize
Leo, & vectigalium receptioni ei interdicere
ausus est; and was bold to forbid tribute to bee paid
vnto him. Gregory 2. saith Sigonius
                  Sig. lib. 3. de Reg. Italiae. pa. 63., vnderstanding
the proceedings of Leo, did excommunicate him,
loose his people or subiects of Italy, from the religion
of their oath, & ne ei aut tributum darent, aut alia
ratione obedirent, indixit: and hee commaunded
them that they should pay no tribute vnto
him, nor any other way obey him. Gregory the 2.
saith Bellarmine
                  Bell. l. 5. de Pont. Rom. ca. 8. §. Quintū., vectigalia solui probibuit, forbad
the Italians to pay tribute to Leo the Emperour,
and so depriued him, parte imperii, of one part of the
Empire.
               It is true that Gregorie the 2. at the first, and before
he excommunicated or depriued Leo, withstood
the Italians, and hindered them to make a
new Emperour; as not onely Platina, but long before
him, Anastasius witnesseth, sayingPlat. & Anast. in vita Greg. 2., that when
the Italians would haue chosen another Emperour, Gregory
the 2. authoritate sua obstare, and, compescuit tale

consilium, did hinder and withstand that course and
counsell: which gaue occasion to some learned men,
to thinke that Leo was not at all depriued of his tribute
by Gregory the 2. Yet both Platina
                  Gregorius 3. statim vbi. Pontificatum inijt, Leonem Imperio simul & cōmunione fidel
                        •
                     um priuauit. Plat. in vit. Greg. 3., Martinus
                  Mart. Pol. an 731. 
                  Polonus, Nauclerus
                  Naucl. an. 733., Wernerus
                  Wer an. 714, and others
expresly affirme, that Gregory the 3. next successor
to the former Gregory, did this to Leo: which to the
point in question is all one. But that which Platina,
& some others ascribe to Gregory the 3. was indeed
performed by his predecessour Gregory the 2. For
when hee, hauing vsed all faire and fauourable
meanes, could not preuaile with Leo, but still hee
continued to breake downe Images, and inflict punishment
vpon those that maintained the adoration
thereof, then hee proceeded to excommunicate,
and depriue the Emperour of his rightfull
possessions and tribute. Gregorie the 2. saith Sigebert
                  Sig. an. 7
                        •
                     8., quia Imperatorem incorrigibilem vidit, because
the Emperour would not bee amended, caused
Rome, Italy, and the West, to depart from his
obedience; et vectigalia interdicit, and hee forbad
them to pay any tribute vnto him. When the Emperour,
saith Binius
                  Bin. Not. in vi
                        •
                     ā Greg. 2
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                     . Post., would not obey the godly admonitions
of the Pope; then at length was that done, which
Theophanes, Cedrenus, and Zonaras affirme, that the
Pope (Gregorie 2.) anathematized the Emperour,
and exhorted all his subiects in Italy, ab eius obedientia
recedere, to forsake his obedience. When the
Emperour, saith Baronius
                  Bar. an. 430. nu. 4., remained impenitent,
and would not obey the Popes aduice, (about the
cause of Images) at last the Pope (Gregory the 2.)
accursed him, tumque Romanos tum Italos ab eius obedientia

recedere penitus fecit, and he caused both the
Romanes and Italians vtterly to renounce all obedience
vnto him.
               The Pope hauing thus depriued the Emperor of his
dominion, in the next place casts about & plots how
he might inuest himselfe in the possessiō of the same.
And this he did by hindering the choice of others,
that so himselfe might bee accepted for their Lord.
When the Romanes, who had thus reuolted from Leo,
would haue chosen another Emperour (saith Sigonius
                  Sig. lib. 3. de reg. Italiae. pa. 63.)
the Pope refused that, as an vnfit course: but afterwardes,
they subiected
                  Leonis imperium respue
                        •
                     unt, ac solenni sacramē
                     to se Pontifici obtemperaturos iurarunt. ibid. pa. 64. 
                  themselues to the Pope,
(who willingly, you may be sure, accepted their
seruice) binding themselues with an oath, that they
would for euer defend his life, and state, and in all
things obey him. When the Pope had thundered out
his curse (saith Baronius
                  Bar. an. 73
                        •
                     . nu. 5.) mox desciscunt penitus à
Leonis imperio, Apostolico Pontifici inhaerentes, they
straight forsooke the Emperour, and adhaered vnto
the Pope. Ita Roma, Romanusque Ducatus, and
by this meanes Rome and the Dukedome of Rome,
came from the Grecians to the Pope, sayth Sigonius
                  Sig. loc. cit..
               Is not this now a verie handsome conueyance,
wrought and finished by rebellion and treason, and
all vnder the colour of religion? And by this rebellious
reuolt, which himselfe had perswaded, the
Pope gained the Dukedome of Rome, wherein was
contained Rome with her castles, towers, and villages in
the parts of Hetruria, Portus, Circumcellae, Sutrium,
Anagnia, Capua, Tibur, with twentie cities besides, as
Sigonius
                  Sig ibid. sheweth. So by this meanes Italy, which

in right wholly belonged to the Emperours, was
now held by three possessors: The Pope held Rome,
and the Dukedome thereof: The Lombardes, and
their Kings, held Millane, Venice, Padu
                        •
                     , and the
farre greatest part: The Emperour by his Exarch,
held no more but the Exarchate of Rauenna. The
Emperour striued
                  Leo indign
                        •
                      ferens se Romana ditio
                        •
                     e exutum, & cō
                     munione piorum eiectum, Pontificem ac Romanos vindicare statuit, &c. Sig. lib. 3. pa. 67. 
                  to recouer his owne, either of the
other to inlarge their vsurped dominions. The Lombard,
against the Pope; the Pope, against the
Lombard; and both of them against the Emperour.
               The Lombardes as they did long and earnestly
thirst after the whole countrey of Italy, so especially
in the time of Luitprandus, and Aystulphus, they
assayed the same, and wonne diuers cities from the
Pope, by nameSigon. ibid. pa. 68. 
                  Ameria, Orta, Palmarium and Bleda:
Afterwardes they layd
                  Vrbi obsidionē admouit. Sig. ibid. 
                  very hard siege to Rome it
selfe. The Pope by many plausible and faire perswasions,
intreated the aide, first of Charles
                  Ad Carolum Martellū propere Legatos misit Gregorius, obtestans vt ecclesiae rebus succurreret. Sigon. ib. 
                  Martell,
and afterwardes of his sonne Pipine
                  Pipinū vltro Pontifex appellauit ac nouam Aistulphi &c. Sigon. lib. 3. de reg. Ital. pa. 77., who by the
meanes and Decree, as Sigonius
                  Cuius (Zachariae) decreto Pipinus ad fastigium dignitatis euectus. Sigon. ibid. & iterum pa. 76: saith, of Pope Zachary,
had obtained the kingdome of France, Childericke
the true and rightfull king, being deposed from
the same. At last when Aystulphus
                  Iam Longobardorum imperio omnia citra Romam tenebantur. Sigon lib. 3. pa. 75. hauing vtterly
ouercome the Exarch, and gotten the full possession of
the Exarchate of Rauenna, and all cities belonging
thereto, greedily now gaped
                  Animum ad Pontificiam ditionem adiecit. ibid. 
                  after Rome and the Popes
share, which onely was behinde, Pope Stephen intreated
                  Stephanus confestim, ad regem Pipinum misit, orare se, &c. Sig. lib. eod. pa. 76. and obtainedFacilè perenti Pontifici est obsequutus Pipinus. ibid. & pa. 77. 
                  of Pipine not onely that hee would

defend the cause of the Church, and restore vnto it,
such Citties as Aystulphus, and the Lombards had taken
from it: but further, that he would
                  Non solum bellum pro 
                        •
                     ecuperando Exarchat
                        •
                      Pentapoliqu
                        •
                      suasit, sed etiam ne ea redderentur Imperatori contendit: sed vt vtramque regionem B. Petro praecipui beneficij loco concederet. Sig. Ibid. pa. 78. 
                  giue vnto
it, and not to the Emperour, the Exarchate of
Rauenna, if hee should conquer the Lombardes.
Pipine willingly assented vnto his Holinesse; vowed
                  Ego (inquie Pipinus) polliceor, me, si victoriae compotem fecerit Deus, Exarchatum, Pentopolinque B. Petro, eiusque succestoribus traditurum, in perpetuum possidenda. Hocque fuo, filiorumque suorum iuramento muniuit. Sig. ibid., and sware to performe his request: yea, notwithstanding
the Emperour
                  Legati ad Pipinum ab Imperatore missi, quod in mandato ab Imperatore habebant, impense rogare Pipinum vt Exarchatum, et Pentapolim non Pontifici, sed Imperatori concederet. Sig. Ibid. pa. 79. & Sabell. Ennead. 8. lib. 8 
                  earnestly laboured with him,
that he would restore to Him, imperialia munera, as Anastasius
                  Anast. vit. Steph. 3.
speaks, those Imperial rights, or dominions;
giuing this as his speciall reason, Quia
                  Sabell. loco cit. 
                  Imperij essent,
non Pontificis, because in right they belonged to him,
and not to the Pope. But the Popes perswasion preuailed.
Pipine ouercame Aystulphus, restored whatsoeuer
of the Dukedome of Rome, the Lombards had
taken from the Pope; and further, by a writ
                  Pipinus Exarchatum, Pentapolim
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      
                     S. Petro & successoribus eius in perpetuum possidenda concessit. Atque ita scribam, referre ipsas in tabulas Donationis iussit. Sig. lib. 3. de Reg. Ital. pa. 80. 
                  of Donation
conferred vpon him, (that which neither hee
had right to giue, nor the Pope to receiue,) the Exarchate
of Ranenna, and Pentapolis, containing twenty
nineSig. Ibid. Citties, or rather Regions of Italy.
               
               Heere is the first and truest title, which the Pope
euer had to those Prouinces in Italy, the Dukedome
of Rome, and Exarchate of Rauenna. By which it
may be easily discerned, that as he got them by fraud
and Treason, so hee held them by open wrong and
Iniustice. For neither that which was giuen, nor
that which was restored by Pipin, did in right belong

to the Pope, but to the Emperour. From him,
both that which Pipine restored, was treacherouslie
detained by the Pope: and that also which Pipine
gaue, was first vniustly taken by the Lombards; and
being taken from them, was vniustly giuen to the
Pope: and so from one vniust possessor, was
conueied to another, but still, most iniuriously
with-held from the rightfull owner thereof.
               Are not Baronius and Gretzer now very politick
disputers, who from the Restitution
                  Pipinus misit Aistulpho, Ecclesiae ac reipub. restituenda iura. Anast, in vit. Steph. 3. pa. 221. &, Aistulphus professus est, se ciuitates redditurum, ibid. of some Citties,
it seemes of Ameria, Orta, Palmarium, and Bleda,
belonging to the Emperour, and vsurped a
while by the Pope, but afterwards takenAb eod em rege (Litprando) ablatae sunt à Romano ducatu ciuitates quatuor, Ameria, Orta, &c. Anast. in vit. Zach. 1. pa. 194. from
him, by the Lombards, and now restored by Pipine;
can proue a iust Title to those Citties, in the Pope?
yea, a title by Donation? euen a Donation from
Constantine? Whereas Pipine restored no more,
then a Robber had taken from a Traytor, the Lombard
from the Pope; and which both of them vniustly
with-held from the rightfull owner, who was
the Emperour. And truly I could not choose but
smile to see the subtiltie of these men, who making
this reason: Pipine restored some Cities to the Pope,
therefore Constantine gaue the same, adde this
                  Gretz. in Append. 1 pa. 90. & Bar. ann. 324. nu. 118. 
                  for a
confirmation thereof. For if the Church, say they, possessed
the dominion of them, before the priuiledges
granted by the French Kings, vnde illud sibi, nisi iure
debitum potuit vendicasse? How could the Pope
claime them otherwise, then as in right due vnto
him; seeing it is certaine
                  Cum certū sit nulla id factum armotū vi atque violenta grassatione. Gretz. & Bar. Ibid. 
                  hee got them not by Armes,
or by violent grassation. Thus dispute Baronius and
Gretzer. As if hee must needs hold them either by

right, or else by violent and forceable grassation.
But they wittingly and craftily omit that tenure, by
which alone the Pope held those Citties, and the
whole Dukedome of Rome, and that was by a perfidious
and trayterous reuolt of the Emperours subiects,
perswaded, and caused by the Pope; and by his owne
trayterous and vniust with-holding them from his owne
Lord the Emperour, the onely true owner of them. Seeing
thus they obtained them, neither any Donation
nor any Restitution by Pipine, could inuest in them a
rightfull possession. For though Pipine had a faire
pretence of restoring that, and giuing more to
Saint Peter, or the Church, to wit, for this end, To
                  Polliceor me pro remissione peccatorum impetranda haec B. Petro traditurum. Dixit Pipinus. Sig. lib. 3. cit. pa. 78. 
                  obtaine pardon of his sinnes: yet was this but a pretence;
to colour his iniust action. Nor could he by
this or any like Acte, euer expiate the iniquitie
and wrong; first of his deposing Childerike, and
inuading his Regall Throne, and then of his taking
by force, and without any iust cause of warre,
those Prouinces from the Emperour, and giuing
them vnto the Pope. GodMica. 6. 8. 
                  hath shewed thee (O man)
what he requireth. Surely, to doe iustly, and to loue
mercy:
First of all, God requires Iustice, and then
Mercy: To be mercifull and charitable in giuing
that which one hath vniustly got, or vniustly possesseth,
is not an Act of Mercy, but of tyranny
and iniustice; like those sacrifices, which God reiecteth,
as an abomination vnto him. Thou shalt
                  Deut. 23. 18 Deus hic quicquid partum est illicito & turpi quaestu repudiat. Calu. in ea verba.
                  not bring the hire of a Whore, (that is, nothing
got by vniust or vnhonest meanes) into the house of
the Lord. To this purpose S. Augustine
                  Aug. lib. de bono Coniugal
                        •
                     . ca. 14. truly saith,
If a man will giue very large almes, out of those grounds

which he hath vniustly inuaded, non ideo rapinam iustificat,
he doth not thereby iustifie or make amends
for his wrong. And againeAug. lib. contra mend. ca. 7. Quis ista dicat nisi qui res humanas omnes, legesque per
                        •
                     ertere conatur?, They subuert all Law,
who say, Let vs rob the rich, that wee may giue to the
poore: To the like effect Chrysostome
                  Foeneratus sum, aiunt, sed pauperi obtuli. 
                        •
                     ona verba quaeso. Talia sacrificia Deus non accipit. Chrys. Hom. 57. in Math. speaketh: I
haue got these goods, sayest thou, by vsury, and impiety:
but I haue offered them to the poore; O, saith he, God,
acceptes no such sacrifice. Pipine should haue restored
as well the Exarchate of Rauenna, as the Dukedome
of Rome to the Emperour: that had beene indeede
an Act of iustice; to take either the one, or the
other, from the Lombards, and giue them to the
Pope, was another Act of iniquitie, and an addition
to his former sinne: which both by the testimonie
of the ProphetEzec. 33. 15, and rule of Saint Austen
                  Iuxta verbū Augustini, Non remittitur peccatum, nisi restituatur ablatum. Alex. 3. lib. 5. Dec
                        •
                     etal. tit. de vsuris. ca. Cum tu., could
not be pardoned, vnlesse the goods, whether got, or
kept by wrong, had beene iustly restored: Iustly, I
say, to the true and rightfull owner of them; and
that was the Emperour, not the Pope. For, Nulla
                  Bern. epist. 77.
                  illi poenitentia remittitur peccatum, qui cum possit, non
restituit ablatum; by no repentance is the sinne of iniustice
pardoned to any, who when hee may, will
not restore the wrongfully gotten goods to the
rightfull owner. But enough of the former reason
of Baronius and Gretzer, to proue that Constantine
gaue those Citties, because Pipine restored them to
the Pope.
               
               The other Coniecture which Gretzer alledgeth,
concerneth the Popes patrimony in the Cottian Alps:
long before the time (saithGretz. Append. 1. ad lib. de Munifi. pa. 90. he) of Pipine, that other
Donation was made, which Paulus Diaconus
                  Paul. Diac. lib. 6. de Gest. Longob. ca. 28. 
                  mentioneth:
Aripert King of the Lombards restored the Donation

of the patrimony of the Cottian Alpes, which formerly
did belong to the Apostolicke Sea, but had beene
for a long time detained by the Lombards; and this Donation
written in golden letters, he sent to Rome: from
these words of Paulus Diaconus, Gretzer concludesLoc. cit pag. 91.,
Cum ergo certo certius constet, seeing it is most certaine,
that before Pipines time, yea before Ariperts,
(that is, before the yeare seauen hundred and foure,)
the Pope or See Apostolique, had diuers Prouinces subiect
to their Dominion, and there appeares no euidence
for any other title, whereby they should haue and hold
those lands, it followeth, that the right to haue them, is
not vnprobably deriued from the Donation of Constantine.
So Gretzer.
               
               I answer, that this reason is many waies defectuous,
sophisticall, and improbable. First, the proofe
is onely of the patrimony of the Cottian Alpes, but the
conclusion is of many
                  Varias Prouincias sus in ditione tenuisse. Ibid. 
                  Prouinces, whereas that patrimony
was so farre from containing many, or any
one Prouince, that it was but certaine villages, or
farme houses, in the North-west part of the Alpes;
which Gretzer himselfe cals
                  Gretz. loco citato, pa. 91., and that significantly,
Cortes & villas Alpium Cottiarum, Cottages or places
of prouision of corne, cattle, or fowle: for so
Cortes to signifie, both Varro
                  Cors exterior sit crebro operta stramentis ac paleis, conculcata pedibus pecudum. Var. lib. 1. de re Rust. ca. 13:, and Nonnius
                  Cortes sunt Villarum intra macerian spacia. Non. in voce, Certes. doe
declare. And by the same name of Cortes, doth
Ado Viennensis cal that patrimony of the Pope. Aripert
restored
                  Ado. in Chron. an. 699. 
                  to the Apostolicke See, Cortes & patrimonia
Alpium Cottiarum, those farme houses and patrimonies
in the Cottian Alpes, which had beene taken
from them by the Lombards. What is this to the
Donation pretended from Constantine? What are

a few Cottages, or Farme houses, to Rome; to all
Italie, to all the Western Prouinces and kingdoms?
Its true, I confesse, that the Alpes Cottiae, was one of
the seuenteene
                  Italia 17. Prouincias obtinebat. Liguria, Rhetia, Alpes Cottiae, &c. Sig. lib. 1. de Reg. Ital. pa. 2. & Paulus Diac. lib. 2 de Gest. Longob. cap. 14. & seq. 
                  Prouinces which belonged to Italy, and
into which it was diuided. But that the Popes patrimony
was not the whole Prouince, but some Cortes,
or villages therein, Sigonius euidently doth witnesse,
who saithSig. lib. 2. pa. 38.; There were at this times, when Rotharis was
King of the Lombards, (which was more then sixtie
yeares before Aripert) two Prouinces in the hither part
of Italy, adhuc Imperatoriae ditioni subiectae, which were
as yet subiect to the Emperors Dominion, and those were
Alpes Cottiae, et Opitergium. The Prouince then of
Alpes Cottiae, was the Emperors, and subiect to him,
vntill that time when Rotharis inuading it, Imperatori
                  Ibid. 
                  prouinciam eripuit, bereaued the Emperor of the Prouince,
and depriued the Pope, opulento patrimonio, of a
fat patrimony which of old he had in the same Prouince.
So Sigonius, speaking of this very patrimony which
Aripert restored to the Pope. Gretzer might as well;
nay much better conclude, that because some Nobleman,
hath a Mannor, and some Lordships, and
Farmes in the Wolds of York, therefore Certo certius
the dominion of al England in right doth belong to
him.
               Secondly, what a sory collection is this of Gretzer,
because Histories and Records make no mention of any other
title, by which the Pope had that patrimony in the
Alpes Cottiae; therefore he deriues it from the Donation of
Constantine? why? Is there no other means how the
Pope might get that, but onely by Constantines Donation?
what if the records of the conueiance thereof

made by some other, were lost or burnt, in some
of those often irruptions, sackings, and spoylings
by the Gothes, Vandals, or Lombards? What if those
lands came to the Church by no Donation at all,
but by defect of Heires, by vertue of that LawEus. lib. 2. de vit. Const. cap. 36. of
Constantine, If none of the kindred of Martyrs, Confessors,
and exiles be aliue, who may succeed as heires vnto
them, vt Ecclesia semper cuiusque loci haereditatem
adeat, ratum esto; be it enacted, that euery where, and
for euer, the Church shall haue and enioy their possessions.
Or why might not the Pope haue it by some
purchase, the oblations and treasures of the Church
being anciently so very great, that they might easily
purchase much more then that one patrimony, containing
Cortes et villas? Or what if he had it by Donation
of some other either before, or after Constantines
time? Certaine it is, that many priuate men,
gaue not onely goods, but lands & faire possessions,
both to other Churches, and to that at Rome. Prosper
                  Hilarius acceptis fidelium numerosis haereditatibus Ecclesiam Arelatensem ampliauit. Pros. lib. 2 de vita Contemp. ca. 9.
mentions this of the Church at Arles, that it was inriched
with the inheritances which many bestowed on it.
So many and so ample Donations of lands, were
made vnto the Church in Austens time, that both
Aurelius
                  August. ser. 49. de diuer. his predecessor, and himselfeAliquas cum haereditates recusasse nouimus. Possid. in vita Aug. ca. 24. also, sometime
refused lands that were offered to be giuen, sometimes
restored them, and that vnasked, after they were
giuen. The like donations might be shewed in other
churches; especially in the Roman, to which they were
so vsually made, that Christian Emperours, (as by
name Valentinian and Gratian) by their lawes
                  L. 20. De Epis. Eccle. & Cler. Cod. Theod.,
did some wayes restraine the same. Neither was this
vsed onely in, & after the time of Constantine, but euen

vnder the Heathen Emperours also, as the Edict of
Constantine set downe in Eusebius, doth manifest:
wherein he commaundeth Restitution
                  Euseb. lib. 2. de vita Constant ca. 39. & lib. 10. 
                        •
                     cc. hist ca. 5. 
                  to bee made
to the Church, of such houses, lands, orchards, and the
like, as by the tyranny of others had beene taken away,
and with-held from it. Yea, Gretzer (who holdsGretz. Defens ca. 14. lib. 2. de Rom. Pontif.
those Epistles which goe vnder the names of the
ancient Popes, to bee truly theirs, and no counterfeits)
will not deny such Donations of Lands, patrimonies
and possessions, to haue beene made in
the time of Vrbane the first, and of Pius the first, that
is, an hundred and sixtie yeares before Constantine
either was baptized, or made this supposed Donation.
For those Popes do expresly mention, praedia
                  Epist. 2. Pij. 1. & Epist. Vrbani 1. 
                  diuinis vsibus dicata, the Church lands or Patrimony:
and the one of them further insinuates, this
custome to haue beene long before his time. For
whereas many sold their lands, and brought the price of
them, and bestowed that on the Church; It was thought
more conuenient, saith he
                  Vrban. 1. Epist. citat., both for the present, and future
times, if they would giue, haereditates et agros, The
lands and inheritances themselues vnto the Church.
Whereupon Christians gaue their lands and patrimonies
to the mother Churches, and the same in each Diocesse was
in the disposing of the Bishops, who with his whole Cleargie
of Presbyters, Deacons, and other Church Officers in
that Diocesse, were in common to be maintained therwith.
Which same custome, Saint Cyprian obserueth, who
mentionsCypr. Epist. 34., Sportulas Presbyterorum et diuisiones mensurnas, the stipend & monthly allowance which the
Bishops allotted to the Presbyters. Seeing then by
the testimonie of those two Popes, it appeares,

that 160.Pius papatū inijt an. 158. Bin. Nous in vit am Pij. 1. Constantinū volunt baptizari an. 324. 
                  yeeres before Constantine made this supposed
donation, the Church of Rome had farmes,
inheritances, landes, and patrimonies bestowed vpon
it; and one part of their lands, as Sigonius
                  Ecclesia Rō. opimis agrorū fundorumque possessionibus erat instructa, quae per omnes fere Europae Africaeque prouincias dispersae, Rom. ecclesiae patrimonia dicebā
                     tur. In Italia Patrimonium Alpium Cottiarum, &c. Sig. lib. 1. de regno Occid pa. 3. sheweth,
was this very Patrimony in the Cottian Alpes, how
inconsequent is this reason of Gretzer? The patrimony
in the Alpes, was giuen to the Romane See, long
before Aripert, and no record appeares by whom: therefore
it was giuen by Constantine. Why may hee not
rather conclude, therefore it was giuen in Valentinians
time, or in Pope Pius, or in Vrbanes time?
for they both witnesse, that the Church had patrimonies
aud lands then giuen vnto them. Seeing the
Recordes are not extant, to testifie the gift of those
Cortes & Villae, what more probabilitie is there, that
they should be giuen by Constantine, rather then by
other Christians, either before or after him? The Iesuites
reason is much like, as if some noble man in
the time of Edward the first, (when they were called
to shew Quo warranto by what warrant or title they
held their landes, most of their euidences being in
the Barons warres lost or burnt) should haue thus
reasoned, My Auncestors held these Mannors and
Lordships, in the time of King Richard the first, and
long before, and because there appeares not by Recordes
any other title whereby they had them, it is
most probable, that they were giuen by King Brutus
vnto them.
               Thirdly the Iesuites reason and proofe, taken
from the fact of Aripert and Litprandus, doth directly
ouerthrow that donation of Constantine, which
he would thence conclude. For by Sigonius it appeares

that Aripert was very liberall
                  Ad caeteras ecclesias liberalissime donauit; erga Roman
                        •
                      praecipue munificus erat. Sig. lib. 2. de reg. Ital. pa. 55., and munficent
to the Church of Rome, and therefore gaue some
great gift vnto it. Now, in restoring that patrimony
hee was iust, and not liberall. And whereas both
Sigonius, and Diaconus, call the writing which Aripert
sent, a Donation
                  Eam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Donationem aureis litteris exaratam misit. Sig. ibid. & Paul. Diac. lib. 6. ca. 28.; they imply, that besides the restoring
of that patrimony (which was no Donation,
but as theyPatrimoniū Alpiū Cottiarum à Rothare ademptum, restituit. Sig. loco citato. Donationem patrimonij Alpium Cottiarū quae à Longobardis fuerunt ablatae, testituit. Paul. Diac. loc. cit. expresly cal it, a Restitution) Aripert gaue
some other lands to the See of Rome. But this in king
Litprandus is more manifest. Hee restored to the Pope
diuers cities, saith Sigonius
                  Sigon. lib. 3. pa. 70., atque insuper patrimonijs
donauit, and further hee gaue vnto the Pope a patrimony
at Naruium, another at Ancona; a third at Auximum,
a fourth at Humanate, with the vally of Sutrium
called Magna. Thus Sigonius. Had all Italy beene
giuen by Constantine to the Pope and his successors,
neither Aripert, nor Litprandus, could haue giuen
any lands, villages or patrimonies therein vnto him;
they should but haue restored them all; seeing then
they restored some, as by name that patrimony in
the Alpes Cottiae, and gaue others; it is cleere by the
very restitution of the one, and gift of the other, that
the whole was not iudged to belong to the Pope,
but some parcells onely; and that those (euen that
verie patrimony in the Alpes Cottiae) was giuen not
by Constantine (for his gift was of the whole countrey,
yea of all the Westerne prouinces:) but by some other,
who gaue lesser gifts either before or after Constantine.
               
               The fourth and last defect in the Iesuites reason
is, that whereas he was to prooue such a right in the
Pope, as Constantine is supposed to haue giuen, to

wit an imperiall
                  Tribu
                        •
                     ntes ei diguitatem, & honorificentiā Imperialem. verba Edicti., monarchical
                  Vtriuscue potestatis Monarchiā. Nich. 3. ca. Fundamenta. ante cit., a s
                        •
                     preme and independent
dominion in all Italy and the Westerne
                  Omnes totius Italiae, & Occidentaliū regionum prouincias, &c verba Edict. 
                  prouinces,
hee prooues indeed that the Pope had before
Ariperts time (which was 370. yeeresAripertus 2. regnare coepit an. 70
                        •
                     . Sig. li. 2. cit. pa. 54. after
Constantine) certaine villages, cottages, or farme
houses in the Cottian Alpes (which is a very sorie
proofe for the right of the whole West, or of
all Italy:) but that hee held euen that small patrimony,
or so much as those villages or farmes, as
an absolute Lord of them, and not as a tenant vnder
the Emperour, and with a dependance from him,
or with an acknowledgement of him, as an higher
Landlord: to proue this, the Iesuite speakes not one
word, not his witnesse Paulus Diaconus, nor his
master Cardinal Baronius. Nay that the patrimonie
of the Church paid tribute to the Emperors as an
acknowledgement of a soueraigntie and dominion
in them, both ouer the persons and landes of the
Clergie: that one saying of S. Ambrose doth make
euident, If the Emperour, saith heeAmb. Orat. in Auxet. post. epist. 32., demaund
tribute, wee denie it not: Agri Ecclesiae soluunt tributum:
the landes of the Church doe pay tribute.
And that the Romane Church was no more exempt,
then that of Millane, Sigonius doth witnesse,
who expresly mentionethSig. lib. 2. cit. pa. 50. 
                  the annuall rent
of 200. head of cattell, which the Romane See did
yeerely pay to the Emperour (and that but a little before
the dayes of Aripert) for certaine landes, or a
patrimony which that See had in Brutium and Lucania.
Yea Gretzer himselfe confessethGret. Apol. pro Bar. ca. de Const. Othō: & lib. 2. cont. Replic. ca. 15. of the dukedome of
Tuscanie, & Spoletū, that notwithstanding the donations
both of Constantine, Charles, and others, yet ius dominii

apud Imperatorem manebat, the soueraigntie, or right
of dominion remained in the Emperour. Nor is it
likely, that the Cortes & villae in the Cottian Alpes,
had a greater priuiledge then those other landes in
Lucania, or in the Dukedomes of Tuscane, and Spoletum:
specially seeing Bellarmine confessethAnte Iustiniani tempora, clerici non erant liberi à tributis quae pendi solent ratione possessionum: Bel. li. 1. de Cler. ca. 28. §. Quatta., that
till the time of Iustinian, (that is, 200. yeeres after
Constantine) the landes of the Church were tributarie to
the Emperours.
               
               I say further, that although by those after donations
of Charles the Great, of Lewis his sonne, of Otho
the first, and Henry the first, (of the truth and validitie
whereof I will not heere dispute) although by
these, the Pope may haue some title to the possessions,
reuennues, and commodities of those Dukedomes,
cities, and territories so bestowed vpon
him; yet that which they now claime, and which
they would perswade Constantine and other Emperours
to haue conferred, to wit, an imperiall, an absolute
                  Absolutam donationem complectitur diploma Othonis. Gretz. Apol. pro Bar. ca. 20., and independent dominion in the same, not any
of all those donations doe import; nay they manifestly
witnesse the contrary. For in the Charters
pretended by Otho, and Henry (which are of all most
ample) this is expressed, That they
                  Constit. Othon. magni. apud Bar. an. 962. nu. 7. Const. Henr. I. apud Bar. an. 1014. nu. 7. 
                  giue or confirme
vnto the See of Rome, those cities, prouinces, and territories,
to vse, enioy, and dispose, sauing in those Dukedomes,
nostra in omnibus dominatione, & illorum ad
nostram partem, & filij nostri subiectione, sauing our
dominion in them all, and their subiection to vs and
our sonne: and, salua in omnibus potestate nostra, sauing
in all these prouinces and territories, that
power which to vs and our successours doth belong, according

to the couenant, constitution and promise,
which was made with Pope Eugenius. What that
couenant made with Eugenius was, is, as Gretzer
saythGretz Apol. pro Bar. ca. 20., explained in the Charter of Otho, wherein it is
said, that none should bee consecrated for Pope, vntill hee
had solemnly made a promise to preserue all Imperiall
rights, as Pope Leo is knowne of his owne accord to
haue made.
                  Lib. eod. ca. 22. This Leo, Gretzer tells vs, is Leo the 4th.
and hee saith, hee is almost euen certaine thereof. I
will not striue with him about this point; though
it will breed no small doubt touching the truth
and credit of the Vaticane Charters, that in the
couenants agreed vnto by Eugenius the second,
Pope Leo the fourth should bee named, Eugenius
being dead full twentie yeeresEugen. 2. obijt an. 827. Bar. in illum an. nu. 26. Leo 4. coepit an. 847. Bar. eo an nu. 7. before Leo
the fourth entred into the Papacy. But let vs suppose
Leo the fourth to bee the man heere named:
what promise was that which this Leo made? Gretzer
                  Gretz. lib. cit. ca. 22. out of Gratian, Iuo, Panormitane, and Baronius,
tells vs, that hee made promise to the Emperours, de
vniuersis Imperii iurihus integre et inuiolabiliter conseruandis

                        〈◊〉
                     
                   to keepe intirely and inuiolably all the
rights of the Empire. So both by those Imperiall
Charters before mentioned, and by Gretzers owne
confession, it is certaine that none were to be consecrated
or held for Popes, till they had first made
this promise to keepe intirely and inuiolably all
the rights of the Empire. Now seeing Soueraigntie,
or supreme dominion, is one, and euen the
chiefest of all imperiall rights and royalties, it being,
as the Lawyer truely saithCouaruv. Pract. quaest. ca. 4. nu. 1., forma et substantialis

essentia maiestatis regiae, the very forme, substance,
and essence of Imperiall dignitie, and regalitie; it
is heereby cleere, that this was still reserued to the
Emperour, in those Donations of Charles, Lewis,
Henry, Otho and others. Yea Charles the Great, to
haue expresly reserued this royaltie and soueraigntie
of dominion to himselfe, and his successours,
is euident by Sigonius, who shewesSig. lib. 4. cit. pa. 90., that when
Charles, after the ouerthrow of Desiderius (the last
king of the Lombardes) and conquest of Italie, diuided
it as hee thought good; to the Pope (saith hee)
Charles permitted or confirmed the Exarchate of Rauenna,
of Pentapolis, the dukedome of Perusium, of
Rome, of Tuscanie, of Campiania, iure principatus et
ditione sibi retenta, reseruing and retaining to himselfe
the right of Principalitie and soueraigne dominion.
And although it bee cleere by the Charters
themselues, that Lewis
                  Salu
                        •
                      super eosdem Ducatus nostra in omnibus dominatione, & illorum ad nostram partem subiectione Constit. Ludou. Pij apud Bar. an. 817. nu. 12., Otho, and Henry heerein
followed Charles, whose grant theyConfirmo tibi Romanū ducatum, &c. sicut à praedecessoribus vestris vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      nunc in vestra potestate tenuist
                        •
                     s. ibi. & in Cōst. Othonis 1. confirme;
yet Sigonius further witnesseth, that in the time of
Otho, this right and soueraigntie of dominion was
acknowledged to bee in the Emperour, not in
the Pope. For speaking of those cities that were
subiect to the Pope, they esteemed, saith heeSig. lib. 7. pa. 177., the
Pope as prince of the cōmon-wealth, Regem vero, vt summum
Dominum: but Otho 
                  
                     •
                  he Emperour, their Soueraigne
Lord, and vnto him they paid their tributes
and performed obedience: Thus Sigonius.
               
               Let vs heare the iudgements of those who
are learned in the lawes, who of all men are most
fit to direct vs in this question, which is, de iure, and

not onely de facto. Antonius Rosellus, a man noble
                  Vir nobilis & eruditus. Poss. in Anton. Rossel. 
                  both for birth and learning, skilfull both in the Ciuill
and Canon law, one so farre from partialitie
on our side, that hee earnestly
                  Ant. Ross. Monarchiae part. 1. ca. 69. 
                  defends the donations
made to the Popes, by Charles, Lewis, Otho, yea
and euen this also of Constantine; hath at large and
diligently sifted this point. After long debating
the matter on either side, in the end hee thus concludes.
Firmiter teneo
                  Ant. Ross. li. cit. ca. 71. pa. 297. & seq. 
                  I doe firmely hold, for
those landes and territories which the Pope hath from
auncient time possessed (and in
                  Ibid. ca▪ 70. pa. 296: 
                  which prescription
is sufficient without any title) that the Donation of
Constantine, and others is good, for the possession, proprietie,
and vtile dominium, seeing thereby the imperiall
right
                  Iura imperialia in his bonis remanserunt, ibid. ca. 71. pa. 297. 
                  is not taken away: Sed directum dominium
est penes Caesarem, but the direct or supreme dominion
and iurisdiction, euen in those places, is in the
Emperour: Neither is it
                  Directū dominium est in ossibus Caesaris, irremouibile, vel inabdicabile. ibid. pa. 297., nor can it bee separated
from the bodie and bones of the Emperours
person. Habet ergo Papa executionem potestatis, therefore
the Pope hath the execution of the power, in
those territories which are giuen vnto him: but
hee hath not the dominion or soueraigne power
in them: that belongs to the Emperours, who in all
temporal goods, and possessions is the soueraigne prince.
AgaineIbi. pa. 297., as we daily see that the Emperour giues Dukedomes,
Earledomes, or Kingdomes, & tamen retinet in
directo dominio ipsam iurisdictionem; & ius imperij
in ipsis bonis, aliis commissis, and yet he retaines the
direct or soueraigne dominion and iurisdiction in
himselfe, & his imperiall rights, in the goods which
hee so commits to others: euen so in those goods giuen

by the Emperours to the Church or Pope, Ius imperij
& iurisdictionem retinuit, & retinet: The Emperour
still held, and doth stil hold the imperiall rights
or supreme Iurisdiction, quamuis vtile dominium
eius, etiam exercitium, Pontifici commisit, although
the profit of the dominion, and the exercise of the
iurisdiction hee committed to the Pope. AgaineIbid. pa. 298.,
The donation to the Pope is good, quoad proprietatem
& dominium particulare, sed non quoad iurisdictionem
totalem & ius imperii, good to passe away the propertie
and particular dominion in those lands, but
not good to passe away the whole or supreame Iurisdiction,
or the Imperiall right in them.
               The same Rosellus addes two or three other
points very worthy obseruing to this purpose. One,
that the Pope is not capable of Soueraigne dominion,
no not in those very territories which haue been
giuen vnto him. Although, saith heIbid. pa. 298., the Pope bee
capable of the Imperiall right, quoad subsidium, in respect
of the profit, non tamen est capax principaliter,
yet is he not capable thereof as the principall owner
of it; nay it is, saith he, impossible that in the same person
should consist the Imperiall authoritie, and the
priesthood, et ideo impossibile est per viam praescriptionis,
and therefore though the Pope prescribe neuer
so long time for his holding those territories, yet it
is impossible that by way of prescription, the Pope
should either in whole, or in part hold ius imperiale,
Imperiall or Soueraigne right therein.
               An other is, that Emperours being the supreame
Lords, may vpon iust cause recall any, or all the former
donatiōs, & take into their owne hands the possession

or propertie in those Territories, which the
Popes hold by vertue of those Donations. To which
purpose he thus saith; The
                  Ibid. pa. 298. 
                  Donations, for passing away
the propertie in those goods, is firme, yea it is not
reuocable by succeeding Emperours, if they haue no
cause to reuoke it; Cum causa autem posset, but vpon
iust cause it may be reuoked, by the successours of
those Emperours who made the Donations. Now
whether the Popes haue giuen, and that oftentimes,
many and iust causes, to reuoke those Donations,
I list not here dispute. Their so often iustling
with the Emperours, their vsurping that Imperiall
authoritie which belongs not to them, but to
the Emperour; their often misusing Emperours in
most base and indigne manner, and making them
of the Popes Lords, the Popes vassals; these may
seeme to any who are not factious on the Popes
side, to bee iust causes to resume all those lands,
which he either by Donation or vsurpation possesseth.
But I leaue this to their iudgement, to whom
in right it belongs; and those are the Emperours
and secular Princes themselues; as the same learned
Lawyer there rightly sets downe: If
                  Ca. eod. pa. 299. 
                  there happen,
saith he, a controuersie betwixt the Pope and the Prince,
concerning any meere temporall matter, (and such is
this touching the temporall possessions granted to
the Pope) I thinke the Emperour himselfe ought to be
iudge herein, seeing in temporall matters he is aboue all;
euen the Pope himselfe, and Ipse est iudex suae causae,
The Emperour is iudge in his owne cause, as the Law
teacheth. So he.
               The third is this, that whereas the Popes, to make

sure that authoritie which they vse in the patrimony
of S. Peter, cause the Emperour to sweare, that hee
                  Cum iuramento se astringat iu
                        •
                      Imperij & iurisdictionem in illa territoria non exercere. Idem ca. cir. pa. 297.
                  will not exercise that Imperiall authoritie which he hath
in those lands, but permit the Popes to enioy the same as
they haue vsed, (tying the Emperours by this oath,
from the exercise of any Imperiall iurisdiction in
those territories) the learned Lawyer teacheth, That
Emperors indeed, after
                  Cum iurisdictionē non exercere iurauerit, si facit, extra suum dist
                        •
                     ictum se ex tendit: imo periurus est. ibid. pa. 297. 
                  they haue once taken this oath,
cannot intermeddle in those lands, but ought by vertue
of their oath, leaue the iurisdiction therein to the Pope:
but withall he addes, which is worthy remembring,
that seeing the Emperour retaineth still the direct Dominion
in those lands, which Dominion he cannot possibly
passe away to the Pope, his successours
                  Quia hoc iuramentum est personale, certè successor ad ipsum praestandum non est asttictus. Ibid. pa. 297. 
                  need not to
take that oath; and not taking it, saith he, they may
actually vse their owne Imperiall rights, and iurisdiction
in the same, and it were better they would doe so.
               
               They may doe this. And what if they ought also,
so to doe? Math. Parisiensis
                  Math. Paris. in Iohan. ano. 1210. pa. 306. Otho memor sacramē
                     ti quod fecerat cum à Papa ad Imperium sublimatus fuerat, quod videlicet, dignitates Imperij conseruaret, & iura dispersa pro possibilitate sua reuocaret Ibid. sets downe the oath
which Otho the fourth tooke, and he mentions it as
an oath which other Emperours were wont to take,
as by name Henrie
                  Iurauit (Henr. 5.) quod obediret Pontifici, Saluo honore Imperij & Regni, sicuti Catholici Imperatores Pontificibus (iurare) solent, Leo Ostiens. in Chrō. Cassin. lib. 4. ca. 42. the fift did, and that is, to maintaine
the dignities and rights belonging to the Empire:
yea Baldus their great Lawyer, testifieth the
same oath to bee vsuall. The Emperour, saith heBald. in Prooem. de Feud. nu. 32.,
when hee is crowned, iurat nihil diminuere de bonis
Imperij, doth sweare that he will not impaire the
State of the Empire. And Lucas de Penna more
fully, The Emperour, saith heLuc. de Pen. Cod. de omni agro desert. l. Quicunque desertum. fol. 18
                        •
                     . col. 2., sweares at his Coronation,

iura regni sui, & honorem Coronae illibata seruare,
to keepe inuiolable the rights of his kingdome, and
the honour of his Imperiall Crowne. By vertue of
which oath, the Emperours are strictly obliged, in
dutie both to God and to the Empire, to take vnto
themselues, not onely all those large and faire territories,
which the Pope hath either by fraud or force
inuaded, decking himselfe with the plumes of their
Eagle, but specially they ought to resume, that
Dominion or Soueraigntie of authoritie, in those verie
lands, which the Pope now challengeth as his
owne. For this Soueraignetie being the most
proper and an essentiall priuiledge belonging to any
Imperiall Crowne, by vertue of this their sacred
oath, they ought vtterly to refuse (as the
Lawyer saith they may) that other coacted oath,
whereby they are most iniuriouslie tyed to permit
that man of sinne quietly to enioy their Imperiall
Possessions, Rights, and Royalties, and tread both
themselues, and their Crownes vnder his feete. It
was no maruaile if this whole passage in their learned
Lawyer, seemed verie distastfull, and worthy
of expunging, to their Romane Censurers,
who not enduring to see a testimonie so pregnant,
and preiudiciall to the Popes authoritie, and
whence so dangerous consequents may be collected,
to be recorded in the writings of so learned
a Lawyer, at one blow doe cut off, cashire, and expunge
for euer, that whole passage in his booke,
that it may neuer see the light, commaunding
                  Index Expurg▪ 
                     
                        •
                     uxta Concil Trid. decretum. Philip. 2. Regis Cathol▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      concinnatus. ann. 1571.
                  it wholly to bee abolished, though it containe no
lesse then 178. lines in a large folio.
               
                  
The like to that in Rossellus, is taught by another
of their famous Lawyers, Franc. Vargas
                  Fr. Varg. lib. de Author. Pontif. Axiom. 1. nu. 2., who alledgeth
Baldus, and diuers other Lawyers, as consenting
with him. He sets downe two assertions;
The one, that suprema Principis iurisdictio est prorsus
inabdicabilis, the supreame iurisdiction of the King
cannot possibly be giuen away from him: The other,
that it is impossible, that the Emperour should
make any, vel parem sibi, vel superiorem, either equall
or superiour to himselfe: for, as Baldus saith, Lex regia
contradicit, that is contrarie to the law or nature
of a King. Then out of doubt, neither Charles, nor
Lewis, nor Otho, nor any other Emperor either did,
or could by any of their Donations, passe away their
Soueraigntie to the Pope.
               The words of Baldus are very remarkable, hee
speaking of this Donation of Constantine, and expressing
with his owne, the iudgement of the Doctours
of Law, saithBald. in Prooem. de Feud. nu. 32. 33. thus; They determine that this
Donation, quoad expropriationem territorij, dignitatis,
et iurisdictionis, non valere nec possibilem esse; neither
is, nor possibly can be of force, to passe away either
the proprietie, or supreame Dominion in those territories,
or the Imperiall dignitie and iurisdiction
ouer them. The commodities, profits, et vtile dominium,
may be granted, saith he, salua semper ab Imperio,
recognitione et fide; alwaies reseruing and keeping
safe to the Emperour, recognition and feoltie, to
hold them from him: for to say, that the Emperour
would by his Donation, mutilate, or cut away the members
of the Empire, est species fatuitatis, is a kind of
follie. Thus Baldus; by whose cleere testimonie,

                  Gretzer, Marta, Steuchus, Albanus, Iacobatius, and al
that plead either for the Charter, or for the Donation,
or that an absolute Dominion was giuen by
Constantine to the Pope; they all by the iudgement
of Baldus, are a consort of fooles.
               
                  Aretine not onely assents to Baldus, but much
commends his iudgement herein. Eleganter tradit
Baldus, saith heAret. in Rubric. ff. de verbor. ob
                        •
                     igat., Baldus doth very well 
                     •
                  each; That
the Emperour, non potest dare quotam Imperij, cannot
giue away any quotient, neither a third, nor a
fourth part, nor halfe of his Empire; but he may giue
some goods belonging to the Empire. Whereby Baldus,
saith he, meanes that the Empire being an entire and
vniuersall power, the Emperour by giuing ought, ceaseth
not to bee vniuersall Lord of all belonging to the
Empire. Then by Aretines iudgement, neither
Constantine, nor any other Emperour, by any Donation
of Lands and Territories, either doth, or can
passe away his supreame and Imperiall right in and
ouer them.
               
                  Lucas de Penna, is very pregnant in this point;
Imperij Regalia, saith heLuc. de Pen. Cod. de omni agro deserto. l. Quicunque desertum. fol. 184. & 185., sunt inalienabilia, the Royalties
of the Empire cannot be giuen away, nor alienated
from the Empire. Whereupon hee inferres,
that though the Emperour should sweare that
he would not reuoke such royalties, as were alienated
to the preiudice of his Crowne and Dignitie; posset
tamen
                        •
                     ea, non obstante iuramento, reuocare; yet notwithstanding
this his oath, hee might recall such
grants and alienations. And he giues that reason,
which before was touched, because the Emperour
sweares at his Coronation, to keepe safe the honours and

rights of his kingdome: but by alienating his demaines
and Territories (much more his Regall Soueraigntie
and Dominion) he doth not preserue but impaire
the Imperiall rights. Thus he. By whose iudgement,
neither was by any of those Donations the
Soueraigntie and Royaltie past away from the Emperour;
and if it were, yea, and that also by an oath,
yet seeing such an oath was vnlawfull, and contrarie
to the Imperiall oath taken at his Coronation,
it can binde none, nor can it be vinculum iniquitatis,
a band to tie him to doe wrong, or contrarie
to his lawfull oath: and therefore notwithstanding
such an vnlawfull oath, Emperors (as he thinks) may,
and ought to reuoke such grants, and take from the
Pope their Imperiall rights and royalties, which he
now claimeth and vsurpeth.
               
                  Albericus de Rosate is abundant in this cause. Let
vs see, saith heAlb
                        •
                     r. de Ros. de Quadriennij praescript. l. Bene à Zenone. nu. 4. fol. 111. co. 4., whether Constantines Donation
could be of force to the preiudice of his Successours,
Accursius holds it could not: so doth Ioh. de Pari
                        •
                     ijs;
And he giues this reason thereof: Because none being
deputed to an Office, may doe ought against his
owne Office. But it is against the Office deputed to the
Emperour, to impaire his Empire, or cut and take away
any part from it. For by the same reason, that hee
cuts away one part, hee may cut away also another: and
so may his successours: and so the Empire should at last
be brought to nothing, and vtterly destroyed; which is
against the publique good, and the end why the Empire
is ordained. Ex quo verè credo. Whereupon I do
truly beleeue, that the foresaid Donation, de iure, cannot
be of force to preiudice the Empire, or the successors.
               
               
                  
But may not the Church, saith he, prescribe in this
matter? To this Albericus answeres by three diuers
steps and degrees. First, saith he, For corporall matters,
there is no doubt, but longissima praescriptione,
by most long prescription of time, the Church may defend
it selfe, praestitis tamen tributis & censibus, yet
so that it yeeld tribute, and due pensions as an acknowledgement
of the supreame right and dominion
in the Emperour. Secondly, For
                  Alber. de Iurisdict. omn. Iud. l. finali. §. per iniquum nu. 4. fol. 146. 
                  those things
which are of meere or mixt Empire, Praescriptio dat
tantum vtile dominium, directum non tollit, Prescription
doth onely giue the vsefull or profitable dominion
(to the Pope) but it doth not take away the
direct or supreame dominion from the Emperour.
Againe, Contra principem non nisi quoad vtile dominium
praescribitur, Prescription against the Emperour,
is onely of force, for the profitable dominion,
not for the direct or supreame, because the Pope in vsing
the dominion, doth it as the Emperours minister,
a
                        •
                     d in the Emperours name, and so the Soueraignetie
doth rest in the Emperor. Thirdly, may not by the
Canon Law, prescription, or long possession bee
good fo
                     •
                   the Popes right in this cause? To this Albericus
                  Alber. de Quadriennij praescript. loco ante cit. answeres, that it is least auaileable by that law.
For by the Canon Law there is required to a forceable
prescription, Titulus, et bona fides, both a good
Title, and also good dealing. Both which, saith hee,
seeme to be wanting in this case; for there is a Title pretended,
where there is no Title at all, quia datus per

                        •
                     um qui dare non potuit, because the Title was giuen
to the Pope, by him who could not giue it:
and because the alienation is made contrarie to Law,

as we haue shewed. Bona fides also is heere wanting,
because the Pope and their successours knew, res esse alienas,
hoc est, Imperij, that the things giuen vnto them
were not Constantines, but the Empires. Thus Albericus:
shewing plainely both by reason, by the
Ciuill, and by the Canon Law, that such Donations
of an absolute and Monarchall Dominion as
they pretend to be made by Constantine, Charles, Lewis,
Henry, and Otho, are of no force at all, nor can
be of validity, neither by vertue of any Donation, nor
of any Prescription.
               
               
                  Boetius Epon doth professedly, and at large discusse
this point, and thus writethBoet. Epon. Heroic. quaest. q. 3. nu. 43.. The Donation
of Constantine did no way concerne the alienating
or giuing vp of the Romane Empire, but onely the alienating
of all the places in Italy, and in the whole West.
ConstantineIbid. quaest. 5▪ nu. 19. 
                  did not abdicate his Empire, or giue
it to the Pope, ne per Occidentem quidem, no not in
the West, nor in Italie, nor in the verie Cittie of Rome.
He honoured the Pope as much as hee could, citra Imperij
vel abdicationem, vel alienationem vllo modo,
without either abdicating, or any way alienating
the Empire. Hee
                  Ibid. nu. 27. 
                  gaue to the Pope a certaine right of
iurisdiction and rule in the Westerne Regions, Impeperio
Romano inserius atque minutius, but inferior and
lesse then Imperiall authoritie. He
                  Ibid. nu. 34. 
                  gaue to the Pope,
Imperium honorarium duntaxat, & secundarium,
sed minime supremum, an honorable and secundarie
gouernment, but not the supreame, That supreame
authoritie, in solidum penes Constantinum remansit
et
                        •
                     am in Occidente, did remaine intirely vnto Constantine
(and so to his successours) euen in the West.

And in his commentary, which for the honour
and credit of Constantines Donation hee hath made
vpon it, heeBoet. Epo. Glossem. in cap. Constantinus. post. 
                        •
                      quaest. 5. nu. 21. sets this downe with a memorandum,
Notabis hinc, obserue hence, that the Empire or soueraigntie
in Italy, and in the West, was not transferred by
Constantine to the Pope, and very often doth hee repeate
the like.
               
                  Didacus Couarruuias, speaking of the soueraignty
or supreme iurisdiction which belongs to a King or
Emperour, saithCouarr
                        ••
                     . Practic. quaest. ca. 4. nu. 1., nullo modo à rege alienari potest, it
can no way be alienated or giuen away by the King,
though in giuing landes, cities, or territories, the King
vse neuer so ample and abundant wordes: and he giues
an euident reason heereof, because this Soueraigntie is
essentiall to regall maiestie; and therefore cannot bee
seuered nor giuen or taken away from it.
               Many others might be added, as by name Guilel.
Benedictus, Carolus Degrassatius, and Felinus; all
which teach the same, as Vargas
                  Varg. & Couar. loc. c
                        •
                     t., and Couarruuias
doe witnesse. But I will heere onely adioyne the testimony
of their Hier. Balbus both a Lawyer and Bishop,
who in his booke dedicated to Charles the
fift, in many places insists vpon, and diligently discusseth
this point. Hee first shewesHier. Balb. lib. de. Co
                        •
                     onat. pa. 83., that this soueraigntie
of temporall authoritie, was not in the Pope, but
in the Emperour, vntill the time of Phocas: vntill then,
that Emperours h
                        •
                     d the (supreme) power in Rome:
This is, saith hee, a most certaine argument: Because
Pope Boniface 4. desiring to build a Church in honour
of the blessed Virgin, in that place where the Pantheon
stood, necesse fuit ei facultatem obtinere à Phoca, hee
was of necessity to obtaine leaue of Phocas so to doe.

                  The Pope, saith he, being then, not Dominus sed Inquilinus,
not Lord, but tenant vnder the Emperour, omni
ditione carebat, wanted all temporall dominion in
the citie of Rome, so that hee could not so much as build a
Chappell, siue iussu Imperatoris, without leaue, allowance
and licence from the Emperour. Then hee
shewesIbid. pa. 84. the like for the next 800. yeares. The first
of the Popes, saith he, qui vrbis dominatum sibi vendicare
tentauit, who attempted to challenge the Soueraigne
dominion of Rome, was Boniface the 9. in the
yeare 1400. Yet Balbus is of opinion that hee challenged
it only, and obtained it not. For of Charles
the 5. in the third place he expresly saithIbid. pa. 86., and saith it
to the Emperour himselfe, that hee was primus ex Imperatoribus,
the first Emperour who gaue to the Pope the
citie of Rome, and other adioyning cities, and subiected
them to his power and dominion. Fecisti hoc Carole
Auguste, thou O Charles (the fift) hast done this; who
being, and being called the King of the Romanes, omnem
Romanae vrbis iurisdictionem 
                        •
                      te abdicasti, hast abdicated
and past away from thy selfe to the Pope, all
the Iurisdiction of the Romane city. Thus Balbus.
Vpon whose testimony it followeth that the soueraigntie
of Rome was by no Emperour, de facto, past
away or giuen to the Pope till the time of Charles
the fift, that is, till about the yeare 1520. And if de
facto, it was then done by him, yet, by the former
testimonies it is cleere and euident, that de iure, it
could not be done, and that the grant is not only of
it selfe inualid, but such also as may be any of his successours
be, and that iustly reuoked. And let this suffice
to haue declared the manifold defects and inconsequents

in that poore reason of Baronius and

                     
                        •
                     retzer, that because the Pope had a patrimony in
the Cottian Alpes before Ariperts time, therefore
Rome and Italy, and the Westerne Prouinces were
giuen by Constantine vnto him, and hee was made
the supreme, Imperiall, and independent Lord, or
Monarch thereof.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               Three reasons to prooue that Constantine neuer made any
such Donation as they pretend, either by
word or writing.
               
                  THE reasons of Gretzer, and his acute
Logician, being now cleerely refuted,
it were not hard by many euident
proofes to refute the position it
selfe, which hee and Baronius maintain,
that though the Charter be counterfait, yet the Donation
of Constantine is true, and to be so esteemed: Among
many, I will rather point at, then handle two
or three reasons, to manifest that Constantine made
no such Donation at all, either by word, or writing.
               
               The first, is the testament of Constantine wherein
hee disposed the whole Empire and diuided it among
his three sonnes. Constantine in his testament
(saith Sozomen
                  Sozom. lib. 2. ca. 32.) diuided the Empire to his sonnes,
the Westerne part hee assigned to Constantine and
Constans; the Easterne to Constantius. Constantine
and Constans (saith Zosimus
                  Zosim. lib. 2. pa. 35.) held all beyond
the Alpes, with Italy, Illyricum and Africke: to Constantius
                        •
                     
was giuen whatsoeuer was in Asia, the

East and Egypt. To Constantine and Constans was attributed (saith Zonaras
                  Zonar. to. 3. pa. 85.) Italy and Rome it selfe, Afrike,
Sicily, the Cottian Alpes, cum Gallijs, with the
countries of the Galles; to Constantius that which was in
the East. And though Zozimus affirme that the sons
diuided the Empire among themselues, yet that
they did it by the designement, and according to
the testament of Constantine, Eusebius
                  Deinde quae videbā
                     
                        •
                     ur, extrema quoque voluntate sua disponebat. Liberis suis regni haereditatem tanquā patrimonium relin quebat. Eus. li. 4 de vit. Cōst. ca. 63., Ruffinus
                  Liberis de successione Romani orbis testaniēto haeredibus scriptis, &c. Ruff. lib. 1. ca. 11., Socrates
                  Constantinū partibus imperij ad occidentem f
                        •
                     tis praefecit. Constantium, &c. Soc. lib 1. ca. 25., Cassiodore
                  Facto testamento, tribus filijs constitu
                        •
                     is haeredibus, est defunctus. Cass. tripert. hist. lib. 3. ca. 12., Nicephorus
                  Imperio filijs iam diuiso, Constantino & Constanti occidentales partes designauerat, Nic. lib. 8. ca. 54., and many more
doe expresly witnesse. To omit others, their owne
Sigonius doth declare, that to Constantius
                  Constantius accepto testamento imperium Orientale iniuit. Sigo. lib. 5. de occ. Imper. pa. 73. 
                  the East
was giuen by the testament of Constantine; to Constantine
                  Constans in Italia, Constantinus in Gallia imperium ex testamento patris inierunt, ibid. 
                  and Constans Italy and the Galles, or Westerne
Prouinces: who further addesIbid., that when there was a
difference betweene two of the brethren about the
boundes, Constantine the eldest, demaunding of Constans,
to haue Italy and Africke, Constans answered
him, se testamento patris stare velle, that hee would
stand to his fathers testament▪ and would defend
that being his last will. Vnto all which adde
the acknowledgement of Baronius. As soone, saith
heeBar. an. 337. nu. 51., as Constantine was dead, each of his sonnes, relictam
sibi ex patris testamento Imperii partem festinus
accepit, tooke that part of the Empire, which by their
fathers testament was left vnto them: and Constantine
with Constans to haue taken Rome, Italy, and the
West, himselfe doth declare.
               
                  
Is it credible, that if Constantine had formerly
made either by word or writing, an absolute Donation
of Rome, Italy, and the Westerne Prouinces to
the Pope, and that so solemnly, that as Leo 9. saith,
hee decreed that donation to abide firme and inuiolable,
in finem mundi, vnto the end of the world; is it credible,
I say, that so pious and prudent an Emperour
would within twelue yeares after doe contrary
to his owne act? especially in his last will and testament,
wherein hee would rather haue testified his
religious affection and loue to the Church, by an
addition of some other gift, then leaue so eternall a
blemish vpon his name of inconstancy, of iniustice,
of impietie, of sacriledge, and of making his owne
children inheritours of that which he knew was neither
his to giue, nor which they without open iniustice,
impiety, and sacriledge might accept, hold,
or possesse.
               The second reason is the perpetuall possession and
dominion which the Emperours had of Rome and
Italy with the gouernment thereof; which continued
still in them, not onely after Constantines time,
but euen while hee liued, vntill it was vniustly taken
from them, first by the Popes, and then confirmed
by Pipine, Charles the Great, and others. In the 20.
yeare of Constantine, the very next after this supposed
Donation, was Seuerus
                  Ad Seuerum Praef. Vr. Iuliano & Paulino Coss. l. 2. de Iudicijs. Cod. Theod. 
                  the praefectus vrbis,
President of Rome, appointed by Constantine to gouernei.
with the cities belonging thereunto, by the Imperial
authority as it formerly had bin. The next yeare
after, was Maximus
                  Ad Maxim
                        •
                      P. V. Constantino A. 7. & Constantino Caes. Coss. l. 2. ad legem Corneli
                        •
                     
                     ▪ de falso. C. Theod.; the 2. next yeares wasVt testatur Onuph. comment. in Fas
                        •
                     . lib. 2. 
                        •
                     pa▪ 283. 284. 
                  Anicius
Iulianus; next after that Optatianus, & throughout

all Constantines time, and euery yeare he had his
lieutenants and deputies to gouerne the citie of
Rome vnder him, and in his right. It were easie to expresse
almost in each yeare the seuerall praefectivrbis,
vnder Constans, Constantius, Valentinian, Theodosius,
and other Emperours, for more then an 100. yeares
after Comstantine. After the time of Valentinian the
younger, when the Westerne Empire by reason of
the irruptions of the Gothes and Vandal
                     •
                  s began to
decay, that the supreame gouernment of Rome and
Italy still remained in the Emperour, his appointing
the Kings of Italy, and after them of the Dukes of
Rome, & Exarches of Rauenna, is an euident proofe.
Leo the Emperour (saith Sigonius
                  Sigon. lib. 14. de Occid. Imp. pa. 234.) sent Maiorianus
into Italy to take the gouernment and Empire thereof.
                  
                     〈…〉
                   about the yeare 457, and within a yeare or
two after Rome had beene sacked by Gensericus: againe
Sigon. lib. cod. pa. 240. & 24
                        •
                     ., the Senate intreated Leo the Emperour, that hee
would send in those troublesome times, a Gouernour, or
Emperour into the West, and hee gaue to Anthemius the
dignitie of the Westerne Empire. Againe, when Odoacer
the Herule, had inuaded the kingdome in the
West, Zeno the Emperour gaue
                  Sig. lib. 15. p
                        •
                     . 
                        •
                     60. 
                  to Theodoricus the
Goth, Italy and the gouernment thereof, and hee committed
vnto him the people of Rome, the Senate, cum ipsa
vrbe ac tota Italia, with the citie it selfe and all Italy:
by vertue of which graunt Theodoricus, and some
few of his successours, had right (but yet with a subordination
to the Emperour) to the Italian kingdome;
and heereupon the Romanes receiued
                  Ibid. pa. 261. 
                  Theodoricke
for their King, and said they would obey him, vt
iusto domino, as their lawfull Lord (to wit, vnder the

Emperour) for they had already knowne the Emperours
pleasure to be such. Thus saith Sigonius, and this was
about the yeare 500.
               When after this, Iustinian the great (for so is he,
and that worthily called:) had expelled the Gothes
and Vandalls out of Italy, how hee made imperiall
lawes whereby hee ruled it as the other parts of his
Empire; how hee substituted Narses to bee vnder
him, and in his name the gouernour thereof; how
after that, the Exarches were sent from the Emperours,
who as deputies held (so farre as they were
able by reason of the Lombardes intrusion and violence)
the rule and possession of Rome and Italy, is
not vnknowne. Longinus the Exarch, saith Sigonius
                  Sig. li. 1. de regno Ital. p. 5, nouam Italiae
administrationem indixit, set downe
a new kinde of gouernment for Italy, hee set ouer euerie
citie their seuerall Dukes and Iudges to adminster
law vnto them, and this hee did specially at Rome and
Rauenna. AgaineLib. cod. pa. 12., Mauritius the Emperour sent
Smaragdus to be Exarchate of Rauenna, Gregory to bee
the Duke of Rome, and Castorius the captaine of the souldiers
and garrisons that there were kept, who with great
ioy were receiued into the citie: AgaineSig. lib. 2. pa. 50., Iohn the Exarch,
iudices Romam ad ius dicendum miserat, sent
Iudges to Rome for administration of right: and very
often the like, yea that both Rome and Italy in right
belonged to the Emperour and was subiect to his
gouernment, vntill the time of Pope Gregory the 2.
is euident by that which out of Paulus Diaconus, Zonaras,
Anastasius, Sigonius and Baroni
                        •
                     s was shewed;
they with one consent teaching that by the meanes
of that Gregory, Leo the Emperour was depriued

(vnder colour of pietie, but in truth, perfidiously
and traiterously) of the Westerne dominion: the
Pope, as Diaconus
                  Paul Dia. lust. lib. 21. pa. 665. saith, causing Rome and Italy to forsake
the Emperours obedience: and againeIbid. pa. 663, He remoued
Rome and all Italy, and the right both of the common
weale and of the Church in the Westerne parts, ab
obedientia Leonis & Imperij, from the obedience of
Leo and from the Empire. The Romanes and others
at that time adhaered to the Pope, and so by
this traiterous meanes hee got the possession of
much of that, which afterward by Pipine and Charles
the Great was confirmed vnto him. And that was
done by Gregory about the 730. yeare after Christ,
vntill which time, Italy, and Rome remained in the
Emperours possession and subiect to his dominion.
               Can it bee imagined that Constantine, if hee had
made such an absolute and solemne Donation of
Rome and Italy to the Pope, would immediately, euen
the next yeare after that, and all his life time,
haue continued the possession, rule, and gouernment
thereof by his lieutenants in such sort as hee
had done before? or may we thinke that both himselfe,
Constans, Theodosius, Valentinian, and other
most pious and religious Emperours, would haue
vsurped that gouernment and intruded themselues
into S. Peters patrimony? Or if all those Emperours
would haue beene so vniust and impious, may wee
thinke Syluester, Iulius, Leo, Gelasius, Gregory, and other
Popes, men of high courage to defend their
rights, that they would haue put vp so great indignitie,
without once so much as checking the Emperours
for so open wrong, sacriledge and vsurpation?

Or may not the silence of so many Popes, and continued
possession by so many Emperors, be thought
a iust reason to condemne that pretended Donation?
               The third proofe that Constantine made no such
Donation, is the testimony of their owne Writers,
whereof though it were easie to produce a long Catalogue,
yet I will heere cite but a few. The first, is
Bishop Canus, who thus writesMel. Can. lib▪ 11. ca. 5. §. Quod deinde.; Eusebius, Ruffinus,
Theodoret, Socrates, Sozomen, Eutr
                        •
                     pius, Victor, and
other Authors of good credit, who haue m
                        •
                     st diligently
written all the Acts of Constantine, not onely doe make
no mention of this Donation; but further they declare,
that he so deuided the Romane Empire among his three
sons, vt Italia vni eorū tota contigerit, that all Italy was
allotted to one of them. So Canus. And to him accords,
one of their later and most earnest defenders
of the Popes Regalties, Alex. Carerius, who thus
saithCa
                        •
                     . lib. 2. c
                        •
                     . 21. §. Acced
                        •
                     t., Of this Donation of Constantine, Compertum est,
it is certaine, that nothing is read in any approoued Historian,
specially in those, who writ in that or the next
Age. Eusebius doth not mention it, nor Hierome, nor
Augustine, nor Ambross, nor Basil, nor Chrysostome,
nor Ammianus, nor the tripertite Historie, nor Damasus,
nor Bede, nor Orosius. So Carerius.
               
               The second is Cardinall Bellarmine, who among
other reasons, why the Emperours consent was required
in calling the foure first generall Councels,
giuesBell. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 13 §. Secunda & §. Quarta. this, That the Pope in those daies was in his
temporalties subiect to the Emperour, & Dominum suum
temporalem eum agnoscebat, and acknowledged
the Emperour to be his temporall Lord; and because

the Emperours at that time, orbis terrae imperarent▪
                  
did rule ouer the whole world, there could no Councell
be called, nisi in vrbe aliqua Imperiali, but in some 
                     •
                  ittie
of the Emperour. So Bellarmine; who had he
knowne that Constantine had made either by word
or writing, such a solemne Donation of Rome, Italy,
and the Westerne Prouinces, to Sylucster and his
successours for euer, hee needed not to haue complained
of want of Cities, where to hold a generall
Councell without the Emperours leaue or consent:
he might haue called the Bishops to Millaine, to Ra
                     
                        •
                     e
                        ••
                     a,
to Capua, to Arles, to a thousand moe, euen
to Rome it selfe; but the reason why he did not this,
saith the Cardinall, was because Rome and all those
Citties, were the Emperors, and in the Emperors Citties,
withou
                     •
                   his leaue and consent, a Councel could
not be called.
               The third is Cardinal Cusanus
                  Nic. Cusan. lib. 3. de Concor. Cath. ca. 2. & seq., who at large hath
handled & examined this argument touching Constantines
Donation, and by many reasons refuted the
same. Ex istis constat, by these it is manifest, saith heIdem cap. 2.,
that Constantine gaue not to the Pope, Rauenna, Rome,
and the West, seeing the Emperours vnto the time of A
                        •
                     
                     stulphus,
held a continued possession of them, and that
pleno iure, by full right. Againe, we reade, saith heIbidem.,
that the Popes do confesse the Emperours, Dominos suos
esse, to be their Lords, and Pope Agatho writes to
Constantine the Emperor, who called the sixt Synod, that
Rome is, ipsius Imperatoris seruilis vrbs, a seruile cittie,
and subiect to the Emperor. In like manner, Pope
Boniface writes to Honorius the Emperor, that Rome is
the Cittie of his clemency; and to be short, saith he, the

contrary is no where read, but that vnto the time of Pipin,
the Emperor remained in possession of those places before
named; and then he concludes, Haec credo vera
esse, I beleeue these things to be true, notwithstanding
the famous opinion to the contrary, touching Constantines
Donation. So Cusanus.
               
               The fourth is Iacob. Almane, who intreating of the
Canon Constantinus, where this donatiō is expressed,
he not onely reiects it as being of no
                  In capite il
                        ••
                     lorum canonum, 
                        •
                     aquam non habentiū authoritatem ponitur palea. Iac. Alm. lib. de potest. 
                        •
                     ccl. & laica. §. Doctor iam. 
                  authority, but further
addes; that Constantine could not, if he would, giue
the Western Empire to the Pope, and if he had done it, yet
his Donation could not binde his successors; and for each
of these he giues seuerall reasons.
               
               The fift is one vnworthy of naming, being the
most impudent proctor that euer the Pope had, who
saithGas. Sciop▪ in Ecclesiast. cap. 51., Non semel risi eos, I haue often laughed at
those, who are so earnest for this donation of Constantine,
the Charter of which we beleeue to haue beene made by
the fraud of some Grecians, ad fac
                        •
                     endam Romanae Ecclesiae
inuidiam, to make the Romane Church to be enuied,
nor do we care much whether there were any such
Donation or no.
               
               The sixt and last, is Aeneas Siluius, who afterwards
being Pope, was called Pius 2. He in a Dialogue
written when he wasIn Dialogo, quem adhuc Cardinalis scripsit. Mart. ca. 30. 
                        •
                     it. nu. 34. Cardinall, doth professedly
refute this fable of Constantines Donation, calling the
professours of the Law, stolidos, very fooles for striuing
so much about this Donation, whether it were of force
or no, cum constet eam ne per somnium quidem in
mentem Constantino venisse, Whereas it is verie
certaine, that it neuer came into Constantines
minde, no not so much as in a dreame.
               
                  
This to haue beene indeed written by Aeneas Si
                        •
                     uius,
not onely othersAeneas Sil. inuehitur contra miseros Legistas qui tantum laborarunt an donatio facta Siluestro valu
                        •
                     rit, cum nunquam facta fuerit. Card. Iacob. lib. 10. de Co
                        •
                     c. Art. 8. ca. vlt. nu. 15. & idem ait Couar. lib. 4. Variar. Resol. ca. 16. pa. 69. & Hier. Balb. lib. de Coronat. pa: 80. testifie, but D. Marta himselfe
professethMart. loc. cit. nu. 42., who would gladly excuse this, in saying,
that Aeneas
                  Conscripsit 
                        •
                     uuen
                        •
                     s, in minoribus, Ibid. 
                  writ it when he was but a young man,
and that being made Cardinall and Pope, he forbad those
his bookes to be read, adding; that this is to be seene in
the Index, to wit, librorum prohibitorum. Marta deludes
herein, both himselfe and others. For in the
IndexIndex librorum prohibitorum authoritate Pij 4. primū editus, à Sixto 5. auctus, à Clemē
                     te 8. recognitus pa. 2., are onely forbidden those things of Aeneas
Siluius, Which himselfe recalled in his Bul of Retractation,
and in his Bull, he retracts indeed, whatsoeuerBu
                        •
                     la Retract. Pij 2. tom. 4. conc▪ pa. 512.
                  he had writ about the superioritie of a Councell aboue
the Pope, and against the supreame authoritie of the Pope:
but that euer he retracted his condemning of this
counterfeit Donation, Marta will neuer be able to
proue, vnlesse it bee against the authoritie of the
Pope, & dignitie of their See; that falshood should
not be counted truth, and a forged writing, should
not be held for a true and authenticke deed. And
Marta might easily haue perceiued this. For Aeneas
Siluius was not a young man, when hee writ that
Dialogue; He writ it, as Marta
                  Mart. ca. cit. nu. 42. 
                  confesseth, an. 1454.
which was but three yeares
                  Nam Pontificatū inijt an. 1457. Bin, in vit. Pij. 2▪
                   
                  before hee was Pope, at
which time he was 54. yeares old; for he liued
                  Ioh. Stella in vita Pij. 2. 
                  in
all but 64. and hauing beene Pope but seauen yeares
at most, he dyed
                  Bin. in vita. Pij. 2. 
                  ann. 1464. So his writing of that
Dialogue at that age, can no way come within the
compasse of those bookes which hee writ being a
young man, and which onely are prohibited; and
prohibited onely so farre also, as they speake against
the Popes supremacy.
               
                  
So both by euident reason, and by the cleere confession
of their owne Writers, it doth appeare, that
Constantine neither by word, nor writing, made any
such Donation to the Pope, as they now pretend
and claime from him: yea those forenamed, and
many other of their Writers, though they knew
right well what an hard censure of heresieVt supra ostensum est, cap. 7., not only
Panormitane, but Cardinall Iacobatius also, had
pronounced against them, yet chose rather by yeelding
to the euidence of truth, to be esteemed for litle
lesse then hereticks, then with the title of Papal Catholikes,
to approue such a false, fictitious, and forged
Donation.
            
            
               CHAP. X.
               Seuen witnesses alledged by Doctor Marta, for proofe of
Constantines Donation examined: namely, the first
Nicene Councell, Eusebius Caesariensis, Hierom,
Pope Damasus, the Acts of Siluester,
Pope Gelasius, and Isiodore.
               
                  I Would gladly here haue dismissed
both this Charter, and Donation
of Constantine, as vnworthy of any
further discourse or refutation, but
that their continuall exclaiming,
that none
                  Eam donationem Constantini fictitiam esse, nemo hactenus euidenter demonstrauit, Gretz. Append. 1. ad lib. de manific. princ. pa. 89. hacte. nus nemo exstitit qui hanc donationem euertere potuerit. Ibid. pa. 114. & saepe alibi. 
                  haue euer as yet euidently
disproued the same; and the manifold reasons and authorities
alledged by Aug. Steuchus, by the Gregoririan
Glossators, by Boetius Epon, by Cardinal Albanus,
                  
by Cardinall Iacobatius, and specially by their great
Neapolitane, Doctor Marta, do enforce me to enter
into a farther examination of this cause. And seeing
Marta is the latest, and withall most accurate in
handling this matter, who hath raked together almost
all, that any of the other hath pleaded for this
Donation, and he so triumpheth in his proofes,
that he feares not to sayMart. tract. de iurisd. part. 1. ca. 30. nu. 20, that none may hereafter
so much as doubt of the truth and validitie of this
Charter, it may suffice to go pedetentim, with him, adding
here and there, what others doe alledge, where
Marta ouerslippeth any proofe which is by them
produced.
               First of all, I wish you to obserue the wisedome of
Marta in this cause. He vndertaking, and proposing
                  Verba donationis Constā
                     tini sunt ista; quam intendimus comprobar
                        •
                     . Mart. loc. cit. nu. 1.
                  to proue this Charter to haue bin truly made by Constantine,
after he hath verbatim set downe the same, (not
changing or correcting so much as those manifest &
grosse errors of the name of Constantinople, and date of
the Charter) immediatly afterIbid. nu. 2. saith; Of this donation,
the most wise Cardinall of our times, Baronius writeth
in his Annales, an. 323. (he should haue said 324.Bar. an. 324. nu. 117. & seq.)
but some malignant
                  Non desunt inu
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     , &c. &. malignorum detrahentium iuribus Eccle
                     
                        •
                     iae. ibid. nu. 2. 3. 
                  persons, enuying the greatnes of the
holy Church, still affirme that it is a vaine figment. And
then hauing set downe one of those reasons wherby
others proue it to be a forgerie, he addesIbid. nu. 3. 4; To this
argument of these slanderers, most graue men haue answered,
and among others Cardinall Baronius in the
place alledged. Thus Marta. Let any but peruse Baronius,
and he will euen admire to see the most shamefull
dealing of Marta herein.
               1. Marta would perswade you, that Baronius doth

defend as himselfe doth, the truth of this Edict:
whereas it is as cleere as the sun, that Baronius in that
very place cited by Marta, cals it
                  Ex depra
                        •
                     ato illo à Graecis mutuato edicto. Bar an. 324. n
                        •
                     . 118. 
                  a falsified Edict;
and else whereBar. an. 1191. nu. 52. in plain tearmes, saith, The Donation
which is set downe in this Edict or Charter, penitus esse
commentitia, prorsusque fals a conuincitur, is conuinced
to be vtterly fictitious, and altogether false.
               2. Marta saith, that Baronius answeres the reasons
of malignant persons brought to proue this Edict
to be a forgerie. An vntruth so manifest, that there is
not one syllable in that place of Baronius, tending to
that p
                     •
                  rpose▪ Nay, Baronius is so far from answering
such 
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  ons, that he himselfe bringsBar. ibidem. some euident
proofe
                     •
                  , ex quibus by which, as he saith, This Edict is
conuinced to be vtterly false, and a very figment. Marta
to defend this lying Edict, makes bold to belie and
sl
                     •
                  nder their great Cardinall, but lies must euer bee
supported by lies.
               3. Marta commends
                  Sapientissimus nostri tē
                     poris Cardina lis, Baronius, Mart. loco cit nu. 2. 
                  Baronius for a most wise man in
handling this matter. Now if Baronius professing,
prouing and proclaiming this Edict to bee vtterly
fictitious, and altogether false, be most wise; what
must be thought of Marta himselfe? who contrarie
to the most wise Cardinall professeth, and striues to
proue the same Edict to be mostDonation
                        •
                      fuisse verissimam. Mart. ca. cit. nu. 26. & nu. 39. true.
               4. Marta telsMart. ca. cit. nu. 20. you, that none may doubt but that
the Edict was truly made by Constantine, whereas his
most wise Cardinal tels him, that it was not made by
Constantine, but forged
                  A Graecis mutuato edicto. Bar. ann. 324. nu. 118. arte Graecorū accessit. Bar. an. 1191. nu. 53. Hoc edictum à Graecis, perfida donatione acceptum ait Bin. Not. in Edict §. Edictum. 
                  by some of the Grecians, neere
hand 700.Bar. ann. 1191. nu. 53. 
                  yeares after Constantine was dead. Is not
Marta now a very wise man, to produce Baronius
for a defender with him of this Edict of Donation?
               
                  
Fiftly, Marta teachethMart. loc▪ cit▪ n
                        •
                     . 2. & 3., that this Donation was
made for the honour of the Romane Church, and that
therefore they who write against the Edict, doe
                        •
                     enuiously
seeke to impaire the dignitie and amplitude of that See.
Baronius tels him the quite contrarie. The
                  Bar. an. 324 
                        •
                     u. 118. 
                  rightfull
possession of the Church, ambigua potius redditur,
quam probatur, is rather made doubtfull then prooued
by this Edict; and this, he saith, is manifest to euery
one that diligently lookes vpon it. AgaineBar. an. 1191 nu. 52., The
Grecians are known to haue made this Edict, non Latinorum
amore sed odio; inque odium Romanae Ecclesiae, not
for any good will, but in hatred to the Church of
Rome, that what shee possesseth might be thought to bee
giuen by Constantine. Absit
                  Bar. an. 324. nu. 119. 
                  vero, vt ab homine eiusmodi,
but farre be it from the Church to challenge
her dignitie from such a man as Constantine. Now
whereas Marta accounteth and calleth those that
iudge this Edict a forgerie (one of the which is his
most wise Cardinall) enuious and malignant detractors
of the Church: I hope some good friends of the
Cardinall will admonish Marta of so foule a slander:
or if they will not, yet the Cardinal himselfe doth in
some sort cry quittance with him; I haue, saithBar. ann. 1119. nu. 61. he,
demonstrated this (touching this counterfeit Edict)
against those who haue this Edict in such high esteem, vt
stultè timeant, that they foolishly feare, if the Edict
be ouerthrowne, that then the whole Church will fal with
it. So Marta for making such reckoning of this forgerie,
hath purchased at his most wise Cardinals
hands, the honor to be esteemed a foole.
               
               In the next place Marta vndertakes to answere
that reason which is broughtApud Martam. loc. cit. nu. 2. & 3. against the donation,

                  for that Eusebius, Theodoret, Socrates, and others make
no mention thereof. To this Marta, saithIbid. nu. 4., he will answere
cumulatius, more fully then others before him
haue done; and his answeres are two. The first, that
it is a ridiculous
                  Argumentū est deridendū, &c. ibi. nu. 5. 
                  argument, being drawne, ab authoritate
negatiuè. But Marta heerein demonstrates himselfe
to be indeed ridiculous; for the argument is not
barely negatiue: They doe not mention this, therefore
it was not done; but the force of it is affirmatiue,
in this manner, Eusebius, Hierom, Ambrose, Socrates,
Theodoret, Sozomen, and others, are not only silent
of this donation, but they affirme that, whence it is
cleere that Constantine neither did nor could make any
such donation: for they testifie and affirme, that Constantine
was baptized at Nicomedia, and by Eusebius
Bishop of Nicomedia, and that but a little before his
death: and therefore from their testimony, it certainely
followeth, that hee did not make this Edict
of donation after his baptisme by Siluester, nor at
Rome, nor ten yeares before he died, as in the Edict
it is said that hee did. If Marta knew not this to bee
the effect of the reason, he was too supine, negligent,
and carelesse; if knowing it, hee thought it either
negatiue, or ineffectuall, hee is too ridiculous.
               In his other answ
                     •
                  re, Marta vndertakes to giueCur in antiquis historiis, tam rara monumenta extent de hac donatione. Mart: loc. cit. nu. 7. a reason why in those auncient Historians there is
scarse any mention at all of this Edict; the reason, saith
he,Summa ope ni
                        •
                     ebantur, ne vlla huius concessionis mentio in rerū gestarum monumentis haberetur; verùm deleta eius prorsus memoria, nullo vnquam tempore posteris innotesceret, Marta ibid. is this: This Edict was made in vltimis temporibus
Constantini, in the very last time of Constantine;
and Constantines successours did with all their might
endeuou
                        •
                     , that there should remaine no mention of this
Donation in any monuments, but that the memory of it

should vtterly bee blotted out, that at no time it might
come to the knowledge of posteritie; and for this cause,
scriptores, ne Principibus odio essent, omiserunt: Historians
and Writers omitted it, least they should
incurre the hatred of Princes. Thus Marta: In whose
words there is neither truth, nor so much as any likelihood
therof. First, it is a palpable vntruth that Constantine
(admitting hee made this Edict) made it in
his last time: for by the consent of those who thinke
the Edict to be true, Constantine made it the fourthVt ante ostensum est ca. 7. day after hee was baptized: which was as theyBar. & Bin. vt ante ostensu
                        •
                     . est. teach, An. 324. and therefore tenne yeares full before
hee died. Againe, by Martas
                  Mart. loc. 
                        •
                     it. nu. 13. owne confession
it followed the leprosie of Constantine, and the cure
thereof by baptisme receiued at Siluesters handes; was
Constantine a leper till his last time? was hee not
clensed and baptized before the Nicene Councell?
which was tenne yeares before Constantines death.
Or how could Siluester baptize him in his last times,
seeing before Constantines last times, both Siluester
and Marcus his successour were dead, Iulius being
Pope eight or nine
                  Iulius Papa factus 26. Octob. an. 336. Bar. eo an. nu. 65. Constanti
                        •
                     us obijt 20. Iūlij an. 337. Bar. eo an. nu. 1. 
                  monethes before Constantine died.
Further what notorious iniustice and fraud, doth
Marta impute to the most religious Emperors, who
succeeded Constantine? who first would seeke to
wrong the Pope and the Church, in withholding frō
them that which Constantine had giuen; and, which
is worse, would seek for euer to suppresse & smother
the right, quite abolishing all mention & memory of
that Donation? And of what base and abiect mindes
doth Marta make all the Writers and Historians of
those times to haue bin, who for feare of the Emperors,

would not somuch as mention the Popes right?
Had the Pope no Writers, nor Historians that durst
speake for the truth? for his right? or what needed
they feare the Emperor, when they had the patronage
of the Pope, who was now a greater Emperor,
as Steuchus
                  Steuch. pa. 187. calls him? Or would both the Emperours,
the Nobles, and Commons, with all
Historians, and Writers seeke to doe so open
iniustice, when Constantine had so straightly co
                     •
                  
                  iured
them all, saying, Wee
                  Edict. constan. apud 
                        •
                     in
                        •
                     to. 1 pa. 298▪ a. 
                  charge before the liuing
God, and by his terrible iudgement, all the Emperours
our successours, all our Nobles and Senators,
and all the people in the whole world, which are subiect
to our Empire, that it shall not bee lawfull for
them by any meanes to gainestand, infringe, or any
way conuellere, to weaken this our graunt to the Romane
Church and to all the Bishops thereof. Or if
any (which wee beleeue not) shall be a violator or
contemner heereof, let him bee subiect to eternall condemnation,
and let him feele the holy Apostles, Peter
and Paul to bee enemies to him, both in this life, and
in the life to come, and being burnt in the lowest hell,
let him fall with the diuell and all the wicked ones.
Would they notwithsting all these coniurations,
and direfull imprecations of Constantine, doe so
open wrong to the holy Church? would both
Emperours and Historians conspire in so great iniq
                     •
                  itie?
Say they would, yet what wit or iudgement
may wee thinke had they, if (as Marta saith
they did,) they had endeuoured to suppresse this
Charter? Had it bin made in the presence or with the
knowledge of some few, they might haue thought

the concealing thereof possible: but these things
were not done in a corner, but as the Edict
                     
                        •
                     ib pa. 297. a. testifieth,
it was made with the knowledge and consent of all
Constantines Lords and Nobles, of all the whole Senate
of Rome, and of all people subiect to the glory of the Romane
Empire? Was not this, thinke you, a wise and
worthy conceit in Marta, to imagine the Emperours
would striue to suppresse, and Historians to
conceale that Donation and all memory thereof,
which was publikely knowne (if the Edict say true)
to all the Nobilitie and Commons, to all both
Clergie and Laitie, euen to all people in the Empire?
and which being sealed
                  Huius imperiali
                        •
                      decreti nostri paginā p
                        •
                     op
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     s manibus roborantes &c ib. p. 298. a. 
                  and ratified by Constantines
owne hand, was giuen to be kept in the
Popes Registry? Hath not Marta, for this his wife
conceit, wel deserued the Cardinals liuery, which he
hath so dearely purchased?
               
                  Marta hauing now told you not onely that antient
Historians and Writers did, but why they did
omit and durst make no mention of this Edict, in the
next place, like the Esopicall Satyre, he will tell you
and proue also the quite contradictory, that many ancient
Writers, yea holy Fathers
                  A patribus f
                        •
                     de dignis tra
                     
                        •
                     ita sunt. Marto. cit. nu. 6. 
                  also, such as are worthy
of credit, doe mention the same: and therefore in a
vaunting manner heeMart. nu. 22. saith, Habemus plurimos
sanctos Patres, Wee haue very many holy Fathers,
Historians, Emperours, Lawyers, and sacred Canons
for witnesse of this Donation. Let vs then heare and
examine those witnesses, by which you shall see the
faire and honest dealing of Marta.
               
               The most ancient, and withall most honourable
witnesse which he produceth, is the first Nicene Co
                        •
                     ncell;
                  
of which Marta saithMart. cap. cit. nu. 21., The truth of this Donation
doth especially appeare by the Nicene Councell. No,
that appeares not, but the extreame folly and falsehood
of Marta doth euidently appeare thereby. But
first see the wit of Marta; Hee toldIbid. nu. 7. you this Charter
of Donation was made, in vltimis temporibus, in
the last times of Constantine, those were his 30. and
31. yeares; and heere hee tells you that the Nicene
Councell is a witnesse thereof. Now it is certaine,
that the Nicene Councell was held in the twentieth yeare
                  Eodem tempore (finito Niceno concilio) vigesimus Constantini annus cōpletus est. Euseb
                        •
                      lib. 3. de vit. Const. ca. 14. 
                  of Constantine. So that by Martas account, the
Nicene Councell should testifie this Donation to
haue been extant nine or tenne whole yeares before
euer it was made or thought vpon.
               See next the truth of Marta: where, I pray you,
doth the Nicene Councell beare witnes of this Donation?
Not in the Acts thereof: for of them there
is no more extant, but that which in Eusebius, Athanasius,
Socrates, Theodoret, and other ancient Writers
is recorded. In none of which there is any
mention at all of this Donation. Not in the Decrees
or Canons: They are extant and in euery
mans hand, and in them there is not one word touching
this Donation.
               Heare now I pray you, the wise answer of Marta:
because by the
                  Mart. cap. cit. nu. 21. 
                  Acts of this Councell, the Donation did
specially appeare, propterea toto conatu insidi
                        •
                     ti sunt isti
mali homines, therefore did those wicked men endeuour
with all their power to falsifie and suppresse the
Nicene Decrees, vt illius memoriam penitus abolerent,
that they might vtterly abolish the memory of this
Donation. By this Marta would perswade you that

this Donation is testified in some of the Nicene Canons
which were suppressed and lost. But if these
Canons be lost, how knowes Marta that this Donation
was mentioned therein? Or why may not
another say that Constantine made the same Donation
to the Bishop of Bizantium, and prooue it
by those Nicene Canons which are lost? How can
Marta refute this, but hee must withall condemne
his owne folly in alleadging for his proofe the Canons
which are perished? Againe, who were
those wicked men that did abolish the Nicene Canons
wherein this Donation was mentioned?
That Arrians and Heretickes, to the end they
might abandon the faith, laboured to falsifie the
Nicene Canons, hath beene often said and by many:
But that euer any man falsified or suppressed
any of those Canons to this end which Marta hath
deuised, that so they might abolish the memorie of
Constantines Donation, none, as I thinke, so much
as euer dreamed thereof before Marta, nor any I
hope, will euer abette him in so foolish a conceite.
               Now whereas Marta will needes vndertake to
prooue some of the Nicene Canons to bee lost,
though his labour therein be altogether vaine, (seeing
hee cannot, nor so much as once goes about
to prooue that this Donation was mentioned in
any of the lost Canons) yet is it worthy obseruing,
what rare proofes hee brings of this vntrue
assertion, also. It is testified, saith heeT
                        •
                     statur sanctus Athanasius, &c. Mart. ibid., by S. Athanasius
in his Synodall Epistle to Pope Foelix,
wherein hee requests the Pope to keepe safely the Nicene

Canons. And the same Foelix an holy martyr,
testifieth that many of those Nicene Canons
were abolished by heretickes, as may
                  Vt in eius decretis videre licet ca. 2. in Epistola Concilij Sardicensis. ibid. 
                  bee seene in
the Decrees of Foelix in the Epistle of the Sardican
Councell. Thus hee. Marta sure was scarce
his owne man when hee writ these things. First,
the authors whom he alleadgeth are not St. Athanasius,
nor St. Foelix; but Sr. forgerer, and Sr.
foole, the onely fit witnesses for Marta in this
cause. The formerExtat apud Bin. pa. 490. was writ by Athanasius from
a Synod at Alexandria, of which Baronius
                  Nullus plane▪ locus, vel tempus cogendae Synodi potuerit esse. Bar. an. 357. nu. 66 saith
truely, that there was no place where, no time when
that Synod could bee held. Besides, in that Epistle
the sottish forgerer makes Athanasius to saySignificamus paternitati vestrae, &c. Athan. Epist. loc. cit. pa. 49
                        •
                     
                  , that
hee receiued Episcopall consecration at Rome, and
by the handes of Pope Foelix, and in the fourth Indiction:
whereof not one sillable is true; for Athanasius
was created Bishop not at Rome, but at
Alexandria twentie yeares before Foelix, as the holy
CouncellEpist. Synodi Alexandrinae apud Athan. in Apol. 2. pa. 193. & seq. at Alexandria, wherein were diuers
Bishops that were present when Athanasius was
consecrated, doth testifie: Besides, there is no
yeare of Foelix Popedome, which falls out in the
fourth Indiction, as by the FastiIndictio omniū prima fui
                        •
                      7. anno Constantini. Onuphr. in Fast. anno vibis 1064. Bar. an. 312. nu. 110. it a annus ille quo Foelix fuit papa, nempe 357. (sedit 
                        •
                     o tan
                        ••
                     . Bar. eo an
                        •
                     nu. 67.) est Indictioni
                        •
                      14. is euident.
But that which conuinceth Marta to haue doted,
in alleadging these forged writings, and whereby,
(had hee not beene blinded with errour) hee
might easily haue perceiued both those Epistles
to bee vndoubtedly forgeries, is that which himselfe
addeth, that the Decrees of Foelix, are to bee
seene in the Epistle of the Councell at Sardica. For

the Sardican Councell was held in the time of Pope
Iulius
                  Concilium Sardicense habitum anno Iulij Papae 11. & Christi 347. Bar. eo an. nu. 
                        •
                     . Foelix autē non fuit Papa ante an. 357. vt ex Bar. patet., long before Liberius (to whom Foelix succeeded) entred into the Papacie. Is not this now
wittily done of Marta, to alledge an Epistle of
Pope Foelix mentioned in the Sardican Councell,
when the Sardican Councell by many yeares did
precede the Popedome of Foelix? Againe, if both
those forgeries were indeed true authors, yet is
Marta his vntruth most euiden
                     •
                  , for in that Epistle
of Athanasius there is no request made to Foelix (as
Marta saith there is) for preseruing the Nicene Canons:
neither in that Epistle of Foelix (which is an
answer to the former of Athanasius) is it said that any
of the Nicene Canons were perished. So not onely
the authors whom Marta produceth are forgeries,
but that which hee citeth out of those forgeries, is
also forged.
               
                  Marta further alledgethMart. lib. cit. c. 15. nu. 6. & 7 for the losse of some
Nicene Canons, an Epistle of Pope Marcus
                  Epistola Marci extat apud B
                        •
                     niū 
                     
                        •
                     o. 1. Conc. p. 346 writ
to Athanasius, and the Epistle of Athanasius
                  Extat ibid. pa. 345. also
to Marcus. In both which it is indeed affirmed, that
very many of the Nicene Canons are wanting. But the
very same doome must be giuen of these, as of the
former. All feathers of one wing, all of them base &
bastardly writings. Athanasius was not at Alexandria,
but in banishment at France
                  Nam Conc. Tyrium habitū est tempore Siluestri. B
                        •
                     r. an. 335. nu. 1. Ex isto Con
                     
                        •
                     eilio Athanasius rectâ profectus est Constātinopolim; inde à Constantino missus in ex
                        •
                     lium in Galliā, ibique moratus ad obitū Constantini, vt liquet ex Apologia 2. Athanasij pa. 219. & seq. 
                  al the time of Pope Marcus,
where hee liued both at ease and in great honour with
Constantine the sonne of Constantine the Great; and yet
the forgerer makes Athanasius to write
                  Athan. apud B
                        •
                     n. pa. 345. 
                  to him from
Alexandria, and write of the heauy
                  Quanta & qualia quotidie patimur audistis. ibid. 
                  persecution which
he there daily suffered. And that Epistle of Marcus

was written
                  Epist. Marci. in 
                        •
                     ine. 
                  on the twenty third day of October, when
Nepotianus was Consull; whereas Marcus is acknowledged
to haue died on the seauenth day
                  Marcus sedit tantùm 8. menses. Hier. in Chron. an. 331. Obijsse autem 7. di
                        •
                      Octob▪ testatur Martyrol: Rom. & Vsuard▪ in illum diem. 
                  of October
in the same Consulship. Or if it seeme nothing to Marta,
that such an holy Pope as Marcus was, should rise
out of his graue, to write newes about the losse of
the Nicene Canons, yet hee might haue learned of
Posseuine, of Bellarmine, and diuers others, that these
Epistles are vndoubtedly forged; Sine dubio non sunt
Athanasij & Marci, saith Posseuine
                  Posse
                        •
                     . in Appar. verbo Athanasius., These two Epistles
without all doubt, were not written by Athanasius
and Pope Marcus. Constat eas esse supposititias,
saith Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. de Eccles. scrip. in Athanasio., It is certaine that these two Epistles
are counterfeits. Then it is certaine also, that
Marta striues by forgeries to maintaine this forged
Donation.
               But to put Marta out of doubt, that none of the
Nicene Canons are lost or perished, the African Bishops
and their whole Councell, is a witnesse aboue
all exception. For when Pope Boniface and Zosimus alledged
                  Conc. Carthag. 6. apud Bin. 
                        •
                     o 1. pa. 616. 
                  a counterfeit Nicene Canon, the African Bishops
to conuince (as they didVt liquet ex Epistola. Conc. Africani ad Celestinum. Conc Afric. ca. 105. most cleerely) the
false dealing of those Popes, sought out with great
labour and charges, the ancient and authenticke copies
of the Nicene Canons, and hauing obtained
                  Epistolae 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & Cyri
                        •••
                     . ibid. ca. 102. & 103.
                  them both from Alexandria, and from Constantinople,
they found them for number, and 
                        •
                     ence to be the very
same
                  Bin. Not. post cap. 104, Conc. Afric. pa. 645. 
                  which themselues formerly had, and which are
extant in the Tomes
                  Tom. 1. Conc. apud Bin. & alios sub titulo, Canones Co
                        •
                     
                     cilij Niceni. 
                  of the Councels, in the African
                  Apud. Bin▪ to. 1. pa. 617.
                  Synod, in the Codex
                  Pag. 1. 
                  canonum Romanae Ecclesiae, in the
Codex
                  Pag. 3. 
                  canonum Ius
                        •
                     elli, and in many other places.
Seeing then those twentie Canons are all which the

                  Nicene Councell set downe; and seeing in none of
them there is any one syllable touching this Charter
or Donation of Constantine, it is cleere that
Marta in pretending the Nicene Councell as a Witnesse
of this Donation, belies all those 318. holy
Fathers, and was foolishly guld by Steuchus, when
he aduentured to say that the Nicene Councel doth
testifie the truth of this Donation.
               Besides all which, there are extantApud Bin. to 1. pa. 321. & seq. eightie Canons,
bearing the name of the Nicene Councell, together
with the Acts of that Councel, translated out
of Arabicke, and commended both by Turrian
                  Fran. Turrian. praefat. in Canon. Conc. Nicen., by
Alphonsus Pisanus
                  Al. Pisan. in praefat. ad Nicen. Conc. apud Bin. pag. 3
                        •
                     1., and by Marta
                  Mart. ca. 1
                        •
                     . nu. 8. 9. himselfe, that he
needed not to complaine of the want of Nicene Canons.
And yet in no part of all those Acts, in none
of all those eightie Canons, is there any mention
or memorie of this Charter, or of this Donation.
Seeing then neither the 20. true, nor yet the So. pretended
Nicene Canons, will helpe Marta in his plea
for this Donation, it is too apparent, that Marta &
Steuch
                        ••
                     , without any shame striue to vphold this
forged Charter by belying that ancient and most
holy Councell as being a witnesse thereof.
               Nay the insolencie, and impudency of Steuchus,
(the blind guideSteuc. pa. 119. & 122. of Marta) is most intollerable.
He shames not to say, that if one be in his wits, hee
must confesse the voyce
                  Steu. ibidem. pa. 122. Illa quae Imperator suo priuilegio edidit, redolere mentē ips
                        ••
                      Concilij, vocem illam Constantini 
                        •
                     sse vocem to
                     
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                      Concilij, qui
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      percipia
                        •
                     , modò 
                        •
                     pud 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  of Constantine in this Edict,
to be the voyce of the whole Nicene Councell; that this
priuiledge, natum est à Co
                        •
                     cilio Nicen
                        •
                     , had his birth
from the Nicene Councell; adding in a vaunting, or
rather a franticke manner: Is there any Parthian or
Turke, or enemy to Christianitie, so blinde and impious,

that doth not see the Nicene Councell, complecti Donationem,
to conteine this Donation, & totum illud edictum
fluere ab illo Concilio, and that this whole Edict
doth flow from the Nicene Councell? and this hee
saith, is irrefragabile testimonium, an vnanswerable
testimonie for the truth and antiquitie of this Charter.
If Steuchus could haue forborne rauing, hee
might haue knowne that other manner of men then
Parthians, or Turkes, and enemies to Christ, could
not see this Edict to flow from the Nicene Councel.
Nay to haue seene, that it could not possibly flow
from thence. For the Author of the Acts of Siluester,
(one much esteemed & magnified by Steuchus)
saw that this Charter was made the fourth day
                  Acta Siluest. apud Bar. an. 324. nu. 60. 
                  after
Constantine was baptized: Pope Nicholas the third
saw the same, when he saidTit. de elect. & electi potest. ca. Fundamenta. in Sexto., and that in a decretall
Epistle, that Constantine on the fourth day after his
baptisme, with all his Nobles, and all the Senate, and all
the people did grant, per pragmaticam sanctionem▪
                   by a
pragmaticall sanction, the Monarchy of Rome to Syluester,
and his successours. So either the Pope was
more blinde and impious then any Turke, or else
Steuchus himselfe was besotted and blinded with
folly, who thought hee saw this Edict springing
out, and flowing from the Nicene Councell,
which the holy Pope saw to be made and deliuered
into Siluesters hands, an whole yeareNam C
                        •
                     nstantinū baptizatum ponunt an. 324. idqu
                        •
                      ante 3
                        •
                     . diem Maij, nam tum finitum erat Conc. Romanum secundum. Concilium Nicenū inchoatum est 14. die Iunij, anno 325. Bin. Not. in Conc: Nic. §. Pa
                        •
                     lino before the
Nicene Councell, So this is indeed an irrefragable
argument, but not of the veritie of Constantines Charter,
but of the vanitie of Steuchus, and of his most
childish folly.
               
                  
The next ancient witnesse produced by Marta,
is Eusebius Caesariensis; of him Marta saithMart. cap. cit. nu. 15., That in
his bookes called Enneades, Eusebius writ the life of Siluester,
relating all those things which at Rome are reported
of Siluester and Constantine, of his Leprosie, of his
Baptisme, of his Font, of his Donation. The like saith
Steuchus, out of whom Marta borrowed it. This
whole Historie, saith heS
                        •
                     euch. lib. cit pa. 94. & 95., is written by Eusebius, one
who liued in Constantines time. The same Eusebius is
alledged also by the Gregorian Glossators
                  Not. in cap. Constantinus., and by
Anton. Augustinus
                  Ant. August. li. 1. de Emendat. Gratian. dial▪ 6. pa. 53., as prouing the truth of this
Edict.
               Truly this Euscbius is a very fit witnesse for Marta,
Steuchus, and the Gregorian Glossators, a most base
and vile Impostor, calling himselfe by the name of
Eusebius, not knowne to the world till 1000. yeares after
Christ, as their owne most wise Cardinall doth
tell them, who thus writethBar. ann. 1191. nu. 52.; After the 1000. yeare,
some of the Grecians counterfeited those Acts, and published
them, sub Eusebij nomine, vnder the name of
Eusebius. Of the same Impostor Posseuine saithPosseu. in Euseb. Caesariensi.,
The Author of those Acts, is fals
                        •
                      ascriptus Eusebio,
falsely ascribed to Eusebius Caesariensis. There are many
tokens, saith Couarruuias
                  Couar. lib. 4 Variar. Resol. cap. 16. nu 8., by which I doe easily beleeue
and constantly affirme, that Eusebius Caesariensis writ
not those Acts of Syluester. Yea Marta himselfe was
conscious, that this author was not the true & ancient
Eusebius. For had Eusebius writ this, why doth
Marta sayMart. cap▪ cit. nu. 7.
                  ▪ 
                  That Historians omitted the mention of this
Edict, and durst not for feare of the Emperours, mention
the same in their bookes? Besides all this, the true
Eusebius doth vndeniably conuince that Authour to

be a lying forgerer. For the true Eusebius doth exexpresly,
and for a certaintie affirme, that Constantine
was not baptized either at Rome, or by Siluester,
but at Nicomedia
                  
                     
                        •
                     useb. lib. 4. de vit
                        •
                      Constant. ca. 62▪
                  , by Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia,
and that but a little before his death, which was when
both Siluester, and his next successour
                  Nam Marcus obijt 7. Octob. ann. 336. Bar. eo, anno nu. 61. Constantinu
                        •
                      obijt 21. die Iunij, ann. sequenti. Bar. an. 337. nu. 4. were dead. It
was needfull, but very shamefull for Marta, Steuchus,
and the Gregorian Glossators, to support the forged
Donation by a forged Eusebius, knowen also by
Marta himselfe to be such.
               The next witnesse alledged by Marta, isMar. cap. cit. nu. 23. Saint Ierome
in his Commentarie, in Psal. 138. and in his Epipistle
to Eustochium, which begins, Saepissimo r
                        •
                     gatu. I
am of a strong opinion, that Marta in writing this
defence of Constantines Charter, had vowed to maintaine
that one forgerie, by diuers other forgeries
and lies. Saint Ierome vpon that Psalme, neither
names Constantine nor Siluester, nor the Donation,
nor the Charter of Constantine. That citation must
passe for an euident vntruth of Marta, and a belying
of Saint Hierome. The Epistle to Eustochium is a
meere forgerie ascribed to Saint Hierome; whereof
there are most euident proofes. In it Saint Hierome
is made to sayPer Syluestium patrem baptizatus est Constantinus. Hier. loc. cit., That Constantine was baptized by Syluester,
whereas the true Saint Hierome so plainely
deliuers the contrarie, namely that Constantine
                  Hier. in Chron. ad an. 31. Constantini 
                  was
baptized by Eusebius of Nicomedia, and that a very
little before his death; that Martas Master, Aug. Steuchus,
for this very cause, with great scorne and indignation
reiects Saint Hierome, sayingNihil mo
                        •
                     rabor quid Hieronimus scripserit. Steuch. l. b. cit▪ pa. 156., I care not
what Saint Hierome writes. In that counterfeit Hierome
Constantine saith of himselfe, that till 
                        •
                     e was

baptized hee worshipped the Heathen gods, and obserued
their Heathenish festiuities. A most false and
sl
                     •
                  nderous imputation laid to Constantine, whereof
the true Saint Hierome cleares him, saying of the
twentie sixt yeare of Constantine, (sixe yeares before
he was baptized, by Saint Hieromes testimonie)
Edicto
                  Hier. in Chron. 
                  Constantini Gentilium templa euersa sunt,
the Temples of the Gentiles were pulled downe
by the Edict of Constantine. In that forged Hierome,
it is said, that Augustus Caesar after the ouerthrow
of Antonius at Actium, returned with tryumph to
Rome on the first day of August; and then was reckoned
among the Gods, and the name of the moneth which
before was Sex
                        •
                     ilis changed to August; and that the
solemnitie of that first day of August, in memorie of
that victorie, was obserued till Constantine was baptized,
and then Constantine changed it to the honour
of Saint Peter ad Vincula. Not one word of all
which hath any colour of truth. For by the true
and most exact account of Dio Cassius, and others,
Augustus obtained the victorie at Actium, not
on the first of August, but on the second
                  4. Nona
                        •
                      Septembris. Dio Cass. lib. 51. 
                  day of
September; no
                     •
                   was Augustus referred into the number
of the Gods till he was dead, as both Dio
                  
                     
                        •
                     um (mortuo Augusto) immortalitatem ei tribuerunt. Dio. lib. 56. in fine. and
Suetonius
                  Suet. in Aug. ca. 100. declare. Nor did Constantine ordaine
the solemnitie of the first of August, in honour
of those bands of Saint Peter, which is the maine
point that the forged Saint Hierom aymes at. For
those two fetters of Saint Peter, which gaue occasion
to that festiuall celebritie, were not found till
the time
                  Temporibus Ioh. Chrysostomi praedictae ca
                        ••
                     nae erant reper
                        •
                     ae. Bar. Notis in Martyr. Rom. August. 1. 
                  of Chrysostome, nor brought to Constantinople

or Rome, till the time of Theodosius the younger,
and Eudocia
                  Harum (catenarum) altera Constantinopolim est delata, ab Eudocia Augusta; altera ab eadē Romam missa ad Eudoxiam eius filiam. Bar. ibid. & ann. 439. nu. 4. 
                  his Wife, more thenNam Constantinus obijt an. Chr. 337. Eudocia autem Hierosolimis (vbi vincula ac
                        •
                     epit) redijt, anno Chr 439. Hieronimus autem obijt. anno Chr. 4
                        •
                     2. vt ex Prosp. in Chron. liquet. an hundred
yeares after Constantines death, and more then eighteene
after the death of Hierome. At that time
one of those two bands wherewith Peter was chained
by Herod, being stayedBar. an. 439. nu. 4. by Eudocia at Constantinople,
the other was sent to Rome, to her
daughter Eudoxia, who in honour of those bands,
erected a Church at Rome, called Saint Peters ad vincula,
at the dedication of which, vpon the first
dayQuarum memoriae Kalendae Augusti 
                        •
                     uere à Rom. Pontifice consecratae, in e
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     mque nomen, dicta b
                        •
                     silica d
                        •
                     dicata. Bar. ibid. nu. 7. of August, the chaine of Peter, which came
from Hierusalem, was laid in it, and with that
another chaine also of Saint Peter, wherewith he was
bound at Rome by Nero: those two being (as theyAmbas has catenas, simul colla
                        •
                     as, sibi 
                        〈◊〉
                      d
                        •
                     uino 
                        ••
                     raculo copula
                        •
                     as, vt ex duabus vna efficeretur, tr
                        •
                     dunt. ibid.
report) miraculously and inseparably linked together,
vpon this occasion, so long after the death of
Constantine, there was instituted a yearely celebritie
to bee obserued on the first of August, in
remembrance of those bands of Saint Peter, as
Sigebert
                  Sigeb. an. 438., and after him Baronius doth at large declare.
               If these be not sufficient demonstrations of the
forgerie of Martaes Hierome, let him consider
what Erasmus his censure is, of that verie Epistle
which Marta alledgethE
                        •
                     as. annot. ante Episto
                        •
                     am illam ad Eustochium. tom. 4▪ pa 202., Planè sapit impostorem,
it plainely sauoureth of forgerie, and in
his PrefacePraef. ante tom. 4. Hier., he cals those Epistles Pseudepigrapha,
Bookes falsely ascribed vnto Saint Hierome,

adding that some of them (& this is one of the worst)
Nec vmbram vllam Hieronimiani pectoris referunt:
haue not so much as any shadow of Ieromes learning.
Let him consider what Baronius writeth of
the same Epistle. There is, saith heeBar. not. in Mart. Rom. Aug. 1., an Apocryphall
writing going vnder the name of St. Ierome vnto Eustochium,
concerning the bands of St. Peter, wherein the
lying author saith, that the celebritie for those bandes
was instituted by Siluester and Constantine, quae scriptio
ob omnibus improbatur, which writing is reiected
of all men: Or what Card. Bellarmine saith of the
same Epistles, Of
                  Be
                        •
                     l lib. de scrip eccles. in Hieron. 
                  a truth there is nothing in these
Epistles (set in the fourth Tome by Erasmus, among
which this to Eustochium is one) which is
worthy either of credit, or of St. Ieromes learning.
For which cause Posseuine
                  Poss
                        •
                     u▪ Appar. in Hier. pa. 
                        •
                     52. reckons this, with other
treatises, among those which are falsly ascribed to St.
Ierome. So foolish was Marta in citing this Epistle,
that hee bewrayes to all, his purpose to haue
beene plainely this, by false, fabulous, and forged
writings, to vphold that false, fabulous, and forged
Donation.
               Their next witnesse is Pope Damasus: Hee,
saith Marta
                  Mart. ca. cit. nu. 26., beares witnesse to this Donation,
yea expresseth the very forme
                  Eadem donationis forma scripta est in libro Pontificali Damasi Papae. ibid. nu. 20. 
                  of it in his Pontificall.
The Gregorian Glossators intend the same,
when they sayNot. in Cap. Constantinus. dist. 96., that this Edict is found, in antiquissimis
Pontificalibus, in their most ancient Pontificalls,
or writings of their Popes liues. Of
which kinde there is none so ancient as Damasus:
Steuchus speakes more plainely. Damasus,
                  
saith heeSteuch. lib. cit. pa. 
                        •
                     49., writ the liues of the Popes, and when
hee comes to Siluester, hee there writes of the baptisme
of Constantine, Totumque edictum donationis
explicuit, and hee there explaineth the whole Edict
or Charter of Constantines Donation. Truely
these men as they began with vntruths, so without
all shame they proceed therein. Doth Pope Damasus
beare witnesse to this Charter? Doth hee expresse
and explicate the whole Edict? Let any man
but looke vpon that life of Siluester, which falsly
beares the title
                  Vita Siluestri, ex lib
                        •
                     o Pontificali Damasi Papae. 
                  of Damasus, and hee will admire the
impudency of these men. There is not one word
spoken of this Edict, nor of this Donation. Further,
there is another, and that a large Tract adioyned to
the life of Siluester, and which is also (though falsly)
fathered vpon Damasus, intituled, of the Magnificence
                  Ad finem libelli de Munificentia Constantini, sic additur. Haec Damasus. Caeterum neque illius libelli, neque vitarum Pontificum, Damasus 
                        •
                     uth
                        •
                     r est▪ ait Beliar. lib. de ecc. Script. 
                  of Constantine. Heere, if any where, either in the
true or counterfaite Damasus, it was most likely that
this Edict should haue been explained, at least mentioned.
But to see the vile dealing of these men,
and their downe-facing the truth, there is not in
this Tract neither, which is a large enumeration of
the Magnificent gifts of Constantine, any mention
or signification of this Edict, or Donation of the citie
of Rome, of Italy, and the Westerne Prouinces.
If this be not enough let them heare their owne Carerius,
who tellsAlex. Carer. loc cit. them in plaine termes, that in Damasus
there is no mention of this Edict. The like doth
Card. Cusanus, This is not, saith heCusan. lib. 3. de Conc. Cath. ca. 2., found in the liues
of Popes written by Damasus. And againe, it is not
found in the historie of Siluester, which Damasus made.
Let them heare their most wise Cardinall, who

speaking of the ancient Popes, such as Leo he first,
Foelix, and others before them, saithBar. an. 1191 nu. 53., caruerunt hoc
Edicto, they had not this Edict. By all which it is
certaine that Pope Damasus is not, as Marta and
Steuchus boast, a witnesse of this Donation, but hee
is an vndoubted witnesse of their perfidious dealing
and falsification.
               Next to Pope Damasus follow the Actes of Siluester,
euen those which are mentioned by Gelasius,
as Steuchus
                  Mirabilis hominis impudentia, qui neget in historia 
                        •
                     iue gestis Siluestri quorum me
                        •
                     i
                        ••
                     t G
                        •
                     lasius, haberi donationem, seu priuilegium. Aug. Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 44. 
                  and Marta
                  In registris & Actis Siluestri quae sunt in Vaticano, Donatio fuit annotata. Mar. 
                        •
                     oc. cit. nu. 8. assure vs, as also that this
Donation is set downe therein. Now because these
Actes are indeed the best, fairest, and most ancient
euidence that is or can bee brought for this Donation;
and because they are the maine foundation,
not onely of this Edict, but of those other fables
touching the persecution, leprosie, and baptisme
of Constantine by Siluester; and because so many
Writers in all ages since Pope Hadrians time, being
either too credulous in beleeuing, or else too craftie
in seeming to giue credit to those Actes, haue beene
most shamefully gulled, and miserably m
                     •
                  sled into
many errours and vntruthes by those Actes; I may
not let this one witnesse of all other passe without a
strict and diligent examination in this place. And
although that which I haue formerly said touching
the persecution, leprosie and baptisme of Constantine,
(of all which the Author of those Actes was
the deuiser) bee so many demonstrations that the
author of them was a most impudent fabler; yet
omitting all those, there are other euidences
by which at this time I will make mani
                     •
                  est the
same.
               
                  
Among all, I will principally insist on that one
passage therein, which concernes the first Romane
Synod vnder Siluester. This Synod, as those ActesActa Siluestri apud Bar. an. 315. nu. 11. & apud Hadrian. 1. Epist. 3. ca. 53. & apud Antoninū par. 2. hist. ca. 1. declare, Constantine being conuerted to the faith, called
of purpose, that his mother Helena might also bee
conuerted. For the better effecting whereof, Pope
Siluester before Constantine and Helena, disputed in
that Councell with the Iewes, so stoutly defending the
Christian faith, that the Iewes
                  Siluester cū Episcopis tam per sacram scripturam qu
                        •
                      pe
                        •
                      miracula victores effecti sunt H
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     . loc. citat Idem 
                        •
                     abet Antonin. 
                  were both by reasons
confuted, and by miracles confounded at that time.
This part of the Actes I the rather make choise of
to examine, because Pope Hadrian
                  Loc. cit. hauing by his
Pontificall authoritie confirmed that narration, euen
in his Epistle to the Emperour Charles the
Great, and Baronius
                  Facta est Synodus in v
                        •
                     be Roma, &c. Bar. an. 315. nu. 10. Concilium facere consens
                        •
                     runt ex Had
                        •
                     iano ait Bar. ibid. nu. 17., and Binius
                  Concilium▪ Romanum 1. sub Siluestro. & hoc Concilio Romae habita est dispu
                        •
                     atio, &c. Bin▪ to. 1. Conc. pa. 279., hauing set it
foorth as an ancient, and holy Councell; it will
heereby appeare, not onely how false and fabulous
the author of these Actes is, but how their Popes,
and their Proctors take a pride in pestring the
Church with such chimericall Councells, and fabulous
writings, as haue neither truth, nor any realitie
in them at all.
               Let vs first examine the time of this Councell.
That is set downe in the ActsApud Bar. an 324. nu. 97. of Siluester to haue
beene, when Constantine was the fi
                        •
                     t time Consull, and
Crispus his Colleague: And that was in truth neuer.
For there was no yeare, wherein they two were Consulls,
as by the Fasti, both Greeke, and Latine is
euident. Baronius heere takes vpon him to play the
Criticke, and tellsEr
                        •
                     ore librariorum contingere potuit, vt loco Licinij, Constantini nomen sit positū. Bar. ibid▪
                   vs that Constantines name is inserted

in stead of Licinius; and so this Councell, and the
disputation therein, should happen in the Consulship
of Licinius the fift time, and Crispus, which is the
thirteenth yeare of Constantine. But so vnhappy is
the Cardinall in this his Criticisme, that himselfe
expresly refutes the same. For speaking of the tenth
yeare of Constantine, wherein Constantinus Augustus,
and with him Licinius were both of them Consulls
the fourth time, he saithBar. an. 315. nu. 10., Hoc ipso anno▪ in this very
tenth yeare of Constantine, and in this Consulship was
held that famous disputation at Rome, betwixt Pope Siluester
and the Iewes. And this hee saith, is testified by
the Exordium of the Actes of Siluester set downe in the
Vaticane Copies, and in two other ancient Manuscripts,
the one of St. Mary the greater, the other of his owne
Library. Binius further addesConstantino & Licinio 4. Consulatum agentibus, qui est Christi 315. & Siluestri 
                        •
                     . & Constantini 10. hunc conuentum celebratū fuisse Acta Siluestri, & lex 1. de Iudaeis, Cod. Theod. testā
                     tur. Bin. not. in Conc. Rom. 1. §. Sub., that not onely the Acts
of Siluester, but (which is a most shamelesse vntruth)
the very Imperiall law made in that tenth yeare against
the Iewes doth testifie the same. So infatuated was the
Cardinall in this cause, that what hee writes in one
yeare, not onely Binius, but himselfe also confutes
in another.
               But let vs see, if this his second correction, approued
by Binius, and confirmed by so many ancient
copies, and by the Imperiall law, will saue the credit
of these Actes of Siluester. Truely this note of time
doth vndeniably demonstrate those Acts to be altogether
false and fabulous. For it hence cleerely followeth,
that Constantine was not onely conuerted to
the Christian faith, but sought also to conuert others
in the tenth yeare of his Empire. Now the
Acts of Siluester, and Pope Hadrian, confirming them

as authenticall
                  Acta Siluestri ab 
                        •••
                     driano velut authentica c
                        ••
                     ata fuerunt. Bin. Not. in Conc. Rom. 1. §. Concilium., tells vs, that
                  Cū ad fidem conuerteretur pius lmp. Constantinus. Had. Epist. 1. 
                  Constantine was not
conuerted till hee fell into his leprosie, and vntill Peter
and Paul appeared to him in a dreame, at which time he
was so wholly ignorant of Christianity, that hee knew
not whether Peter and Paul were gods or no. Constantine
fell not into his leprosie as Binius assuresBin. Not. in vitam Silu. §. Siluester. vs, till hee had murdered his sonne Crispus: and
that was in the ninteenthVt liquet ex Bar. an. 324. nu. 1. vbi ait Hic plane ānus demonstratur esse, quo dicuntur esse necati. & Binius ait Crispū occisum, an 324. Not. in Conc. Rom. 2. §. Cō
                     stantino. yeare of Constantine. Seeing
then Constantine by the Acts of Siluester, was
conuerted to the faith, and become an earnest
maintainer of Christianitie, one who assembled
a Romane Councell of purpose for maintaining
the same, in his tenth yeare, when hee and Licinius
were the fourth time Consulls, it certainely
followeth, that all, which those Vaticane Actes
of Siluester, approoued by Pope Had
                        •
                     ian, report
of Constantines persecuting the Church, of his
leprosie, of his baptisme by Siluester, that all these
are false and fabulous lies, yea and that the very
selfe same Actes of Siluester (wherein they were first
of all deuised and forged) doe vndeniably conuince
them to be such.
               After the time, let vs consider the occasion of
this Romane Councell, and that famous disputation
of Pope Siluester therein. Helena
                  Acta Silu. apud Bar. an. 315. nu. 11▪
                   
                  being in the
East with two of her nephwes or grand-children, Constantine,
and Constantius, being then Emperours, she
as yet being a Gentile
                  Helen
                        •
                      gentilis adhuc, à Iudae
                        •
                     s pene Iudaea eff
                        •
                     cta. ibid., was almost turned to Iudaisme,
and 
                        •
                     earing that her sonne Constantine was conuerted
to Christianitie, and baptized,
                  Haec vbi Helena in Bithinia cosistens audiuit. Iac. Voragin Legen. Siluestri. & idē Nicepho
                        ••
                     s t
                        •
                     adit. lib. 7 ca. 36. & Antonin. part. 2. hist. c. 1. 
                  sh
                        •
                     e was offended

therewith, and thereupon
                  Co
                        •
                     mo
                        •
                      in 
                        〈◊〉
                     , infenso animo ad e
                        •
                     m sc
                        •
                     ipsir. Act. Silu. apud Bar. loc. cit. du
                        •
                     è 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Vorag▪ & Anton. locis ci
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  writ very angerly vnto
him, vttering in her letter many blasphemies
                  Multa blasph
                        •
                     mans in 
                        ••
                     ristum. Act. Silu. loc. cit. 
                  against
Christ; perswading
                  Ipsum ad Iudaeor
                        •
                      religionē amplect
                        •
                     ndum 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Act
                        •
                      Silu. apud Baron. & Antoninū loc▪ cit▪
                   
                  Constantine to embrace the
Iewish religion. Constantine thereupon writ backe to
his mother, and told her that hee would haue a publike
                  Ibid. 
                  disputation at Rome, Vt vtranam religio praestantior
foret, disputatione probaretur, To try whether
the Christian or Iewish religion were truer, willing
                  Vorag. & Anton. loc. cit. 
                  her to bring the best learned of the Iewes to
plead for their part. Whereupon there
                  Qui coram ipsorum p
                        •
                     trona Helena dissererēt. Act. Sil. apud Bar. loc. cit. 
                  came 120.Nicep. loc. cit. 
                  learned Iewes, sent from Isach the high Priest, with
Helena their Patrone, and disputed against 24. Romane
Bishops: In that disputation, Pope Siluester ouercame
                  Hadr. Epist. 1. ca. 53. 
                  the Iewes, by the iudgement of those two heathen
men Crato
                  Victores effecti sunt a bi
                     
                        •
                     rio Cratonis philosophi, & Zenophil
                        •
                     , quos ad id eleger
                        •
                     nt. Bin. ex Act. Silu. in Not. ad Conc. Rom. 
                        •
                     . De communi consensu duos Iudices gentiles statuerunt. An
                        •
                     ō. loc. cit. 
                  and Zenophilus, who were by the common
consent of both sides made iudges of that disputation,
whereupon Helena (with many others) prostrating
                  Helena nondū instituta, 
                        •
                     rudiri se & baptizari flagitat. Zonar. to. 
                        •
                     . psal. 
                        •
                     3. H
                        •
                     lena patriae religionis cultu relicto, ad Siluestri procidit p
                        •
                     d
                        •
                     s, ab 
                        •
                     odēqu
                        •
                     , fid
                        •
                     i mysteria edoct
                        •
                     . Nicep. loc. cit. Tūc regina, Iudaei, Iudices, & caeteri omnes cōuersi 
                        〈◊〉
                      ad. fidē
                     ▪ 
                     
                        •
                     ac
Vor. & Antonm. locis. cit. 
                  her selfe as Siluesters feet, was at that time conuerted
and baptized. This is the summe and effect
of that Romane Councell, as it is set downe in the
Actes of Siluester, and of those who tooke it from
those Actes, namely Pope Hadrian, Zonaras, as Nicephorus,
Cedrenus, Antoninus, the Arch-bishop of
Genoa, Baronius and Binius. In which legendarie fable,
there are not so many words as lies.
               1. That this Romane Councell followed the baptisme
of Constantine, is palpably vntrue. For
as Baronius
                  Bar. an. 
                        •
                     15. nu. 10. 
                  and Binius
                  Bin. not▪ in hoc. C
                        •
                     nc. 
                  haue assured vs, it was
held in the tenth yeare of Constantine, whereas by

their owne account Constantine was not baptized
till the ninteenth, but by the true account, not
till the one and thirtieth, or last yeare of his Empire.
Now that those Actes of Siluester doe put
this Councell after the baptisme of Constantine,
Baronius doth testifie, who for this ver
                     •
                  e cause
saithBar. an. 324. nu. 97., Praeter ordinem temporis ea hic inserta,
These things touching the first Romane Councell,
are heere inserted in the Actes of Siluester,
but against the order of time. For that Councell,
saith heeBar. an. 315. nu. 10., was held in the tenth yeare of Constantine,
that is, nine yeares before hee was baptized.
               2. Those Vaticane Actes affirme, the two sonnes
of Constantine, namely Constantinus and Constans to
haue beene Augusti, that is, Emperours, before the tenth
yeare of Constantine, when this Councell is supposed
to haue beene helde. An vntruth so notorious
that Baronius
                  Ibid. nu. 13. calls it, deforme mendacium, an
vgly lye.
               3. That Helena heard of Constantines baptisme as
by those Actes shee must, seeing hee was baptized
shortly after his conuersion) and as Nicephorus
                  sup. loc. cit., Antoninus, and the Arch-bishop of Genoa
say she did, is an euident vntruth. Constantine, as
we haue formerly prooued, was not baptized till his
last yeare, and a little before his death; and Helena
died diuers yeares before that time, as both
Eusebius
                  Eus. lib. 3. de vit. Conc. c 45, and Socrates
                  Soc. lib. 1. ca. 13. vbi morte Helenae declarata, subijcit. ca. 14. postea Imperator, &c. shew, and Baronius
                  Bar. ponit Helenae obitū an. 326 (eo. a
                        •
                     . nu. 
                        •
                     9.) id est 5. ann
                        •
                     s ante obi
                        •
                     um Constantini. confesseth.
               4. Those Vaticane Acts affirme, that Constantine
was conuerted to Christianitie before his mother

Helena, and that shee was a Pagane, a Iudaizing Pagane,
not conuerted to the faith till the time of this
Councell, when her sonne was a maintainer of the
faith. Of which, heare the censure of their owne
men. It is vntrue, saith Binius
                  Bin. not. in Conc. Rom. 1. §. Concilium., that Constantine
was a Christian before Helena. This is perspicuously
demonstrated, saith Baronius
                  Bar▪ an. 315. nu 12., to bee contrary to the
truth, that Helena was made a Christian after Constantine,
& he giues a reason out of Paulinus worthy obseruing▪
                  that Helena did instruct and traine vp Constantine
in pietie, euen à puero, from his very child-hood:
whereby you may further see what truth there is in
those Actes of Siluester, in the Edict of the Donation,
and in Pope Hadrian who approouedBin. loc. nu. per cit. those
Actes as authenticall, seeing those ActsAct. Silu. apud Hadrianū Epist. 1. and the
EdictEdict. Cōst. apud Bin. pa. 296. b. make Constantine so ignorant of Christianitie
in the nineteenth yeare of his Empire, when hee
was more then fortie yeareVixit annos 65. regnauit 31. Socr. lib. 1. ca 26. old, that hee then
knew not whether Peter and Paul were gods, and whether
Christians held them for gods or no.
               
               Now because all the rest of the narration, as well
the Romane Councell, as the disputation therein,
and all the consequents thereof, doe all depend
on this vntruth, that Helena was at that time a Pagane,
inclining to Iudaisme, & vnconuerted, seeing
this which is the foundation is a lie, (so Binius
                  Mendacijs scatent Acta. Nam, &c. Bin. not. in id Cōc. calls
it) all the rest must needes bee acknowledged
for fables and lies. I will onely point at some of
them.
               5. It is vntrue that Helena was displeased with Constantine
for imbracing the faith, as the Vaticane Acts
of Syluester, sayAct. Silu. supra cit. she was, 6. That she writ vnto

him in angry manner for that cause, as the Vaticane
Acts, Antoninus, and the lying Legend saySupra. shee
did. 7. That she vttered many blasphemies against
Christ in her letter, as the Vaticane Acts say she did.
8. That she perswaded Constantine to embrace Iudaisme,
as the sam
                     •
                   Vaticane Acts affirme she did.
9. That Constantine for this end, decreed
                  Constantinus statuit cō
                     uentum, &c. Act. Siluest. supra. 
                  to hold a
Councell, and haue a disputation at Rome, as those Acts,
Zonaras
                  Zona. tom. 3. 
                        •
                     s d
                        •
                     creuit, &c. and Antoninus
                  Anton. loc. cit. say he did. 10. That Issachar,
or Isaac, was high Priest at this time, as the same
ActsAct. Silu sup. say he was; It is exploratissimum, saith Baronius
                  Bar. an. 315 nu 13., most certaine that there were no high Priests among
the Iewes at this time, nor since the sacking of Ierusalem
by Titus. 11. That Helena brought either 120.
as Nicephorus
                  Nic. supra., or 140. learned Iewes, as Antoninus, &
the Archbishop
                     
                        •
                     ac. Vorag. in Leg. Silu. say she did, to dispute at Rome.
12. That there was twenty foure Romane Bishops to
dispute on Syluesters side, as Nicephorus
                  Ibid. saith there
was. 13. That there was a Councell celebrated at
Rome, or any assembly of those disputers, as the Vaticane
Acts
                  Act. Sil. sup., Pope Hadrian
                  In quo Concilio. Had. loc. cit., Nicephorus
                  In conuentu & colloquio. Nic. loc. cit., and after them
Binius
                  Binius vocat Concilium Romanum 1▪ sub Siluestro. affirme there was. 14. That there was had
in that Councell, celeberrima disputatio, as Baronius
                  Bar. an. 315. nu. 10. celebris disputatio.
and Binius
                  Bin. loc. cit. call it, a most famous disputation, is a
most famous lye; though Pope Hadrian
                  Had. loc. cit. approue it
for an authenticke
                  Hadrianus acta Siluestri velut authentica citauit▪ Bin. loc. cit. 
                  truth. 15. That Crato, and
Zenophilus were Iudges of that disputation, as out of
the Acts of Syluester Binius
                  Bin. loc. cit. obserueth; and Antoninus
with the Legendarian Arch-bishopAntonin. & Iac. Vor. loc. cit▪
                   sets
downe the very words, arguments, and answeres vsed
i
                        •
                      that disputation. Fit Iudges I wisle, heathen men
to iudge of Christianitie; and iudge, whether it or

Iudaisme were the true Religion; and iudge also of
the infallible iudges doctrine, whether it were truth
or heresie. 16 That Siluester was president in this
Councell, as Pope Hadrian saithHad. loc. cit. he was. 17. That
Siluester ouercame the Iewes not onely by reason, but by
miracles also, as the same Pope Hadrian
                  Had. Zonar. Nic. & Iac. Vor. locis ci
                        •
                     ., Zonaras,
Nicephorus, Antoninus, and the Archbishop of Genoa
affirme. 18. That Zambres the Iewish Magitian,
wrought a miracle to confirme Iudaisme; and that was,
to kill a most fierce Bull drawne thither by an 100. men,
onely by whispering a word in the Buls eare, as Zonaras
                  Zon. Anton. & Iac. Vor. l
                        •
                     c. cit., Antoninus, and the Archbishop say he did. 19.
That when Zambres could not restore the dead Bull to
life, Siluester did it by a word, saying, Surge 
                        •
                     aure, rise
vp dead Bull, and stand on thy feete, as Zonaras, Nicephorus,
Glicas, Antoninus, and the Archbishop of
Genoa affirmLoc. cit. he did; adding, that the dead Bull presently
rose vp and went forth, cum omni mansuetudine,
verie gently and mannerly. 20. That there was a
Dragon
                  
                     
                        •
                     adam Acta Siluestri habent de Dracone in specu morante & homines enecante. Bar an: 324 nu. 97. Cedr. Glic. ann. part. 4. pa. 345. 
                  then at Rome in a caue, which was 365. steps
deepe, which killed euery day 300.Multos 
                        •
                     aedebat. Cedr. & Glic. loc. cit. Anton. & Iac. Vorag. loc. cit. Quotidie 
                        〈◊〉
                      6000. hominū flatu suo interficiebat. Mart. Polon. ad an. 314. 
                  men and more, with
his breath, as Glicas, Cedrenus, Antoninus, the Archbishop,
the Actes of Siluester, and Mart. Polonus doe
affirme. 21. That the vestall virgins brought victuals
to this Dragon the first day of euery moneth, as the
Vaticane ActsDici
                        •
                     ur (in actis Siluestri) Kalendis sing
                        •
                     lis eidem Draconi à vestalibus virginibus suppeditari solita alimenta. Bar. ann. 324. nu. 98. say they did; but Baronius addes,
in nulla parte consistit, this is in no sort coherent. 22.
That Siluester after the disputation, further to confirme
the truth of Christianitie, and confound the Iewes, went
downe into the caue, and there bound the Dragons mouth
with a thred, and sealing vp the brazen gates wherin the

Dragon was, with the signe of the Crosse, commanded the
Dragon to stay there till the comming of Christ, as Antoninus
                  Antonin. & Iac. Vor. loc. cit., the Archbishop of Genoa, Mart. Polonus
                  Draconem aeneis po
                        •
                     tis conclusit & vsque ad diem iudicij ser
                        •
                     s ob fi
                        •
                     mauit. Mar. P
                        •
                     l. ad an. 314, and
the Acts ofEx Actis Siluestri citat: 
                        •
                     oc Bar. ann. 324. 
                        •
                     u. 97. 
                  Siluester affirme he did: which for this
very cause are reproued by Baronius in this manner:
Nothing
                  Nih
                        •
                     l fabulosius 
                        •
                     ffingi posse certum est, &c. Bar. ib. nu. 98. 
                  is more fabulous, then that which is affirmed
in the Actes of Siluester, that the Dragon should remaine
immortall till the comming of Christ. Thus Baronius,
who yet saithBar. ibid. nu. 97., rem gestam veram credimus, We belieue
(they had need of a very strong faith) that this
thing touching the Dragon was truly done; and the picture
                  Ibid. nu. 102 
                  of Siluester set vp in Churches with a Dragon
bound at his feet, is a Trophe or Monument of that victorie
of Siluester; and veritatem Historiae repr
                        •
                     sentat,
represents the truth of the Historie: 
                     •
                  e might better
haue said, it represents the fiction, and 
                     •
                  he notable
lie of that fable. 23. That Helena
                  Helenam tū pr
                        •
                     mum conuersā f
                        ••
                     sse a
                        ••
                      Nice. loc. cit. & Zona. to. 3. 
                        •
                     o. 83. Mart. Pol. loc. cit. Tunc Regina, Iudaei, Iudices & caeteri omnes ad 
                        •
                     idem conuersi 
                        •
                     unt, Anton▪ & Iac. Vor. loc. cit., the two I
                        •
                     dges,
& caeteri omnes, and all the rest of the Iowes were then
(vpon those miracles of the Bull, and the Dragon)
cōuerted to the faith of Christ, as Niceph Zonaras, Mart.
Polonus, Antoninus, and the Archb. of Genoa say; and
Christianitie was by these miracles enlarged, as saithDil
                        •
                     tantes Christianorum 
                        •
                     idem, tam per sc
                        ••
                     ptu
                        •
                     am, quàm per miracula. Hadr. loc. cit.
                  Adrian
                        •
                     
                   24. That the Empresse Helena being not before
instructed in Christian Religion, was now first
                  Zon. & Nic. loc. cit▪
                  
                  informed therein, and then baptized, as Zonaras, and
Nicephorus say. By all these, (besides a number moe)
which are so many latchets depending on that
grand lye, that Helena was not conuerted to the
faith before Constantine, or before the 10. yeare of his
Empire, it doth now clearely appeare, that the first
Roman Councell vnder Syluester, is a meere fiction,

and Chymera, and that those Acts of Syluester, which
they so often
                  Bar. an 315 nu. 10. & ann. 324. nu. 31. 33 40. 41. & saepe alibi. Bin. Not. in vitam Siluestri. §. Siluester. & §. De suscepto. & §. Quē. & Not. in Conc. Rom. 1. & No
                        •
                     . in Edict. Constan §. Ipse. Steuch. pa. 87. vbi ait historiam Siluestri, ab vniu
                        ••
                     so Niceno Concilio 2. approbatam. & praecipuè pag. 44. Marta. ca. 30. nu. 8., and with so great ostentation vrge in many
causes, are nothing else but a verie puddle and
sinke of lies. Besides these, there are other false and
fabulous narrations in those Acts of Syluester, as that
SiluesterHaec in Ac
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                      Siluestri haberi testatur Bin. Not. in Conc. Rom. 1. & Baro. ann. 315. nu. 16. 
                  abrogated the faest on Saturday, of which
Binius saith, it is a lie; that Siluester was ordained by
Melchiades, of which Binius againe saith, it is a lye;
that he instituted, that the first day in the weeke should
be called the Lords day: of which Baronius saithBar. loc. cit., it is
portentosum mendacium, a monstrous lie, and many
such like: for those Acts of Siluester scatent
                  Vt ait Bin. loco cit. 
                  mendacijs,
do flow and abound with lies: but I will onely in
the last place touch one other point, which much
concernes the honour both of Constantine and his
most religious parents.
               The Acts of Siluester either following or deuising
a lying fable, say, that Helena
                  Referunt Acta Siluestri Helenam ex Bythinia ori
                     
                        •
                     idam fuisse, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Bin. Not. 
                        •
                     n Conc. 1. Rom. sub Silu. 
                  was borne in Bythinia.
The fable touched by Zosimus
                  Zosim. lib. 2. vbi ait Constantinum natum ex muliere quae mater familias non esset, nec legit
                        •
                     me Constantio conuenit. pa. 23., but at large
set downe by Nicephorus
                  Nic▪ lib. 7. cap. 18., is this: When Constantius
Clorus was sent in an Ambassage to Persia, being at
Drepanum a towne in Bythinia, incensed there with
lust, he tooke Helena his hosts daughter for his Concubine,
and of her at that time begat Constantine, & then
returning home was made Caesar. A meere fiction; deuised
by the maligners of Christianity of purpose to
disgrace the honour of Constantine, as if he had been
base of birth; and the pietie of Constantius his father,
and his mother Helena, whom further in scorne and
contumely they called stabulariam, an Inne-keeper.
                  
That this whole narration is vntrue, there is an euident
proofe taken from the time; seeing Constantius
is said to haue beene made Caesar when he returned
either the same or the next yeare out of Persia. For
it is certaine by Eusebius
                  Constantius 16 imperij annodiem obijt. Eus. in Chron. an. 311., that Constantius reigned in
all but sixteene yeares, the three last of which, he was
Augustus or Emperour, and all the former but Caesar.
The same is cleare by the Fasti of Onuphrius,
whereConstantius imperauit Caesaris nomine annos 13. mē
                     ses 5. Onuph. in Fast. an. vrb. 1053. 
                  Constantius is said to haue bene made Caesar in
the Consulship of Tiberianus the second time and Dio;
from whose Consulship, to the death of Constantius,
are directly sixteene yeares. Cuspinian
                  Cuspinian. 14. annos tribuit in Fast. ann. Christi 294. & seq. giues one,
Epiphanius, and the Greeke Fasti two yeares lesseEpiph. lib. de Pond. & mensur. pa. 417. tribuit Constantio tantum 13. annos. Fasti Graeci solum 12. ei dant. pa. 283.
to the reigne of Constantius; but I am content to allow
the most. Now if this fabulous narration of Nicephorus
were true, Constantine being borne within a
yeare or two of his fathers being Caesar, and succeeding
immediatly in the Empire vnto his father, could
not possibly be aboue seuenteene, at the most not aboue
twentie yeares, when he began to be Emperor.
Whereas it is most cleare and certain, by Eusebius
                  Eus. lib. 4. de vit. Const. cap. 53.,
Socrates
                  Annū 65. ingressus, obijt Soc. lib. 1. ca. 26. & annos 31 regnauit. ibid., and others, that he was 31. yeares old at
that time.
               
               Besides, that Helena was not of Bythinia, nor Constantine
borne there, it is certaine and vndeniably
proued by the Panegyrist, (Eumenus as it is thought)
who in his Panegyricke made at the verie solemnitie
of Constantines marriage with Fausta, in the presence
of Constantine himselfe, and all the Nobles, said thus
vnto him; Thy
                  Paneg. Maximino & Constantino Paneg. 9. ca. 3. 
                  father Constantius did deliuer Brittanie
from bondage, tueas nobiles illic oriund
                        •
                      fecisti,
thou by being borne there, and descending of the Brittish

blood, hast made that countrey noble. The same is testified
by Pomponius Laetus
                  Pom. Laet. in Constantio Clo
                        •
                     o & Galerio., Constantinus natus est in
Britannijs, Constantine was borne in Britaine, of
Constantius and Helena: by Henric. Huntingtoniensis
                  Hen. H
                        •
                     nt. hist. lib 1., Constantine was a Brittaine, Genere, & Patria,
both by his descent, and by his Countrey: by Onuphrius
                  Onuph. lib. de Rom. princip. pa. 73., Constantine, natus est in Brittannia, was
borne in Brittaine. A truth so cleere, that Cardinal
Baronius; no well-willer to the honour of this Iland,
could not but with strong asseueration acknowledge
the same; apertissime
                  Bar. an. 306. nu. 16. 
                  constat Constantinum in
Britannia ortum, it is most cleare and manifest, that
Constantine was borne in Brittanie; againeIbid., certum
est, it is certaine, that Helena did bring forth Constantine
in Brittanie: and againeBar. Notis in Martyrol. Rom. August. 18., I haue proued elsewhere,
quòd Helena Brittanna fuerit; that Helena was a Brittish
woman. The very same doth Posseuine
                  Posseu. Appar. in Niceph. acknowledge,
confessing Helenam, Britannam fuisse, & Constantinum
in Britannia peperisse, that both Helena was
a Brittish woman, and that she brought forth Constantine
in Brittanie. Yea he reprooues Nicephorus
for saying the contrarie; which reproofe of P
                        •
                     sseuine
is sufficient also to refute that very idle, and vntrue
opinion of Iul. Firmicus
                  Iul. Firmicus vixit tempore Constantini, vt ex ipsius scriptis liquet. the Astrologian, followed
by Ioh. Leuinius, thatConstantinus apud That sum genitus. Iul. Firm. Mathematicus. lib. 1. (Leuin. falso citat. lib. 2) Mathes
                        •
                     s. ca. 4. Constantine was borne
at Tharsus. Certainely his Horoscope did much
deceiue him; placing Constantine not onely in another
House, but in another Region and Climate alalso.
Whose errour Leuinius might easily haue discerned,
seeing Firmicus affirmesIbid. further, That
Constantine, à primo aetatis gradu Imperij gubernacula
retinuit, held the gouernment of the Empire, euen

from his first age. For Socrates
                  Vixit 65. regnauit 31. annis. Socrat. lib. 1. c
                        •
                     . 26., and others do
truly and certainly teach, Constantine not to haue
beene Emperour, till after the thirtie one yeare of
his age. Nay the errour of Leuinius is vtterly vnexcusable,
whoIoh. Leuin Not. ad Pan
                        •
                     
                     gyric. 5. ca. 4. together with that opinion of Firmicus,
maintaines also the quite contrarie assertion of
Nicephorus, that Constantine was borne at Drepanum,
a Towne in Bythinia: which two assertions are
each of them contrarie to the other, and both contrarie
vnto the truth; the cleare and vndoubted testimonie
of the Panegyrist, vttered before Constantine
himselfe, in that nuptiall celebritie, giuing assurance,
that he was borne neither at Tharsus nor
Drepanum, but in Brittanie, and of Helena, a Brittish
woman.
               As for that other calumnie of Zosimus
                  Zosim li. 2▪
                  , and manyOros▪ lib. 7. cap. 25. ex concubina Helena. Idem ait Niceph. loc▪ cit. Mar. Scot. an. 305. Her. Contr. ann. 305. Rheg. an. 244. Got. Viterb. an. 290 alijque.
others, That Helena was not the Wife, but the
concubine of Constantius: it is clearely refuted by
Eutropius, who saithEutr. lib. 9▪ in Dioclesiano, that when Constantius and
Galerius were made Caesars, and married, the later to
Valeria, and Constantius to Theodora, the daughter
in law to Maximianus the Emperour, ambo vxores quas
habuerant repudiare compulsi, they were both compelled
to put away their former Wiues. The like saith
Aurelius Victor
                  Au. Vict. in Diocles. pag. 152., Constantius and Galerius were
ioyned in affinitie to Dioclesian, diremptis prioribus
Coniugijs, their former marriages being dissolued.
So also Pomponius Laetus
                  Pom. Laet. in Diocles., they married new, being
compelled, priores vxores repudiare, to forsake
their first Wiues. The Arrians and Paganes,
saith TheophanesTheophanis integer textus citatur Graece apud Aug. Steuch. lib. de Const. donat. pa. 159., doe slander Constantine to

haue bin a Bastard, but they lye: for he was borne of royall
parentage, his father Constantius, being the Nephew
of Claudius the Emperor, and of his first wife Helena he
begat Constantine the Great. Constantine, saith Zouius
                  Zou. eccle. hist. 
                        •
                     d ann. 306. nu. 5.,
was borne of Constantius Clorus, and Helena, non quidem
concubina, vt somniat Nicephorus, sed iusta vxore,
who was the lawfull wife, and not the Concubine
of Constantius, as Nicephorus dreameth. Helena the
Empresse, saith Onuphrius
                  Onuph. lib. de Rom. princip. pa. 70., was prima vxor Constantij,
the first Wife of Constantius Clorus. Helena, faith
Christ. Masseus
                  Chr. Mass. an. 337., was the daughter of Coel, quae nupta
Constantio, who being married to Constantius,
bare him three sonnes. Constantius, saith Volaterranus
                  Volat. lib. 3. Geograph.,
duxit in matrimonium Helenam, tooke to Wife
Helena. The Emperours Dioclesian and Maximianus,
saith Vitus Basinstochiensis
                  Vit. Basinst. lib. 5. Hist. pa. 432., adopted Constantius
Clorus, and Galerius, qui priores vxores repudiare
coacti sunt, who were thereupon compelled to put
away their former Wiues. And that the former
Wife of Constantius was Helena, heIbid: also affirmes;
adding, That Constantine
                  Ibid. pa. 427 
                  being borne (of her) in
Brittanie, attained to that honour which the Druides
had fore-told vnto him. Constantius Clorus, faith
Zonaras
                  Zonar. tom. 2. Annal. in Dioclesiano., declared that Constantine being his eldest
sonne, ex priore coniuge susceptus, borne of his former
Wife, should succeede to him in the Empire.
               The testimonies of the Panegyrist, and Eusebius,
both of them liuing in that age, is of more weight
and authoritie then all the former, yea then any else
who write of this matter. The former in the nuptiall
celebritie of Constantine, saidEumen. Pa
                        •
                     eg. 5. ca. 4., Imperium nascendo
meruisti, Thou, O Constantine, euen by

thy birth haddest right vnto the Empire, and wast
theNeque 
                        •
                     rat dubium quin ei competeret Haereditas. ibid ca 4. vndoubted heire thereof: whereas had hee
beene base of birth, hee could haue had no right
at all thereby, nor beene heire vnto it. Eusebius also
speaking of the second marriages, of Galerius and
Constantius Clorus, saithEuseb. in Chrō. an. 292., they both were compelled,
vxores
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Ens. Chron. Graec. 
                  quas habuerant repudiare, to put away their
former wiues; and the former wife of Constantius
was no other but Helena, as is by all confessed.
Whence it is certaine, not onely that Helena was
truely the wife, and not the concubine of Constantius,
(as Arians and Paganes did maliciously slander)
but that in another place of Eusebius Latine
ChronicleEus. Chron. lat. an. 309. in antiquis edit. sed an. 307. in edit. Lugd. cū. notis Iosep. Scalig., those words are corruptly, and both against
the minde of Eusebius and the truth, inserted,
that Constantine inuaded the Empire, ex concubina Helena
procreatus, being borne of Helena the concubine
of Constantius. For neither did he inuade, but
most lawfully entred into the Empire, and that by a
threefold title; First, by his birth
                  Nascendo meruisti. Eumen. paneger. 9. ca. 3. & neque erat dubium quin ei competeret haereditas, ibi. ca. 4., being borne heire of
the Empire: Secondly by the ioynt consent
                  Vniuersus in te consensit exerci-tus. ibidem cap. 8. &, Iam tunc coelestibus suffragijs vocabaris. ib. ca. 7., and ioyfull,
yea, celestiall suffrages and acclamation of the people:
Thirdly, by the speciall designement
                  manifeste sententia patris electus est Imperator. ibid. & apud Zon
                        •
                      loc. ante cit. 
                  of his pious
father, appointing him to be his successour: all which
the Panegyrist in plaine tearmes expresseth; yea,
Zonaras
                  Zonar. tom. 2. in Diocles. addes a further, and a fourth title, and that
is, the designement of God himselfe, who by an holy
Angell commanded Constantius to leaue the Empire to
his sonne Constantine: neither was hee borne of a
concubine, but as Eusebius
                  Loc. nuper. cit. himselfe professeth,

                  of the lawfull wife of Constantius; Neither are
those wordes extant in the Greeke Chronicle of Eusebius,
and therefore, no doubt, both maliciously,
and quite contrary to the minde and saying of Eusebius,
inserted into the Latine. Vnto all which
may bee added that most honourable testimony
of Iustinian the Emperour: who speaking of the
citie Helenopontus, saithAuthent. Tit. 7. Nou. Const. 28. ca. 1., that it was (o called by the
most pious Emperour Constantine, in honour, honestissimae
suae matris Helenae, & pientissimae mulieris, of his
most honest mother Helena, a most holy woman; which
Epithetes it seemes Iustinian of purpose giues, that
euen by his Imperiall law, hee might wipe away that
slanderous imputation which euen then was laid
vpon her. For certainly, those titles of honestissimae,
and pientissimae, had beene most vnfit, had either
Helena beene vnhonest of body, or Constantine base
of birth.
               Now for that last scoffe of Stabularia, some learned
men indeed, not so fully pondering this matter,
haue affirmed it, to bee certaine, and that, ex
sanctissimis Ecclesiae Patribus, by the testimonyes of
most holy Fathers. But St. Ambrose (who is for
ought I can finde, the onely Father that mentions
this) is not a little mistaken by them. He thus writethAmbr. orat▪ de obitu Theodosij.:
They say, she was at first stabularia. They say it,
They indeede, who were Paganes or Heretickes,
they who enuied Constantine, and scoffed at Christian
religion, they said it. Iulian the Apostate, an
enemy of Christ and Christianitie, was the first
that said it, callingConstantinus imperitus ac stolidus. Iuliani verba in Act. 
                        〈◊〉
                      j. citatis apud Ste
                        •
                     ch. p. 151 
                  Constantine a foole, and Helena
                  
                     
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     . Iuliani verba. ibid. pa. 154. 
                  base and ignoble: they who were the disciples and

followers of Iulian, they said it. But Ambrose himselfe
saith it not; hee onely shewes, in what a good
and pious sence shee may bee so called. A good Inkeeper,
who sought the manger of Christ so diligently;
a good Inkeeper, who was not ignorant of that
Hoste who healed the woundes of him that fell among
theeues; a good In keeper, who esteemed her selfe but
as dung, that shee might gaine Christ, and therefore
Christ lifted her from the dung (according to their
saying) to a kingdome. So Ambrose, not approouing
what others said, but turning that which others
said of her in derision, to such a sence as did
best expresse her pietie. And whereas Eutropius
                  Eutrop. lib. 10. in Constantio. calleth the marriage of Constantius Clorus with Helena,
obscurius matrimonium, a more obscure marriage,
his meaning is plaine. For hee neither
meant, nor said, that it was simply ignoble, but
speaking comparatiuely, and comparing it to his
second marriage with Theodora the daughter in
law to the Emperour; by which he obtained first to
be Caesar, and then Emperour; in respect of the
splendor of this second marriage, and the Imperiall
dignitie obtained thereby, hee did and might well
say, that the former was more obscure, or not so
illustrious; though in it selfe it was both very honourable,
and in no sort any disparagement
to Constantius. For Helena was the daughter of
Coel King of Brittany, as besides the vniforme consent
of WritersAccepit filiā Regis (cui nomen erat Coel) Helenā. Henr. Hunting. hist. lib. 1. &, tradūt Annales Britannorū Helenā filiā fuisse Coel regis. 
                        •
                      Cusp. lib. de Caesar. in Cō
                     stantino. of the Brittish story, is declared
by Nauclerus, an Historian both for diligence
in searching the truth, and fidelitie in deliuering
it, highly commended by Reucline
                  Nostra historia (i. Naucleri) proba est ac fida. &c. Ioh. Reucl. in sua praefat. ad Naucl.; and

his testimony is well worthy obseruing. Hee purposely
checking that saying touching Helenas
meane parentage, which hee supposed Ambrose to
vtter out of his owne, and not (as in truth 
                     •
                  ee did)
out of the opinion of other men, saithNaucl. gen. 11. an. 310., Helena the
wife of Constantius was the daughter, regis Coeli, of
Coel King of Brittaine, quamuis Ambrosius, though
Ambrose call her stabulariam. And againeIdē. sub an. Chr. 177. gē. 6, Asclepiodotus
King of Brittaine being slaine, Coel (who builded
Colchester) succeeded vnto him; then Constantius who
was (afterwards) Emperour, being sent into Brittaine,
did quiet the whole Iland vnto the Romanes, and ducta
Coelis filia Helena vxore, hauing married Helena the
daughter of Coel, hee alone ruled in the Iland after
the death of Coel. After him ruled his sonne Constantine
the Great, by whose fauour, (for that both
himselfe and his mother were Brittaines) the Kings of
Brittaine, imperiali diademate vsi sunt, did vse an
Imperiall Crowne. The like is affirmed by Genebrard;
Constantine, saith heeGilb. Geneb. Chron. ad an. 315., Helenam Coeli, qui
Britanniam occupauit, filiam vxorem habuit, tooke to
wife Helena the daughter of Coel, who held the kingdome
of Brittaine. This whole matter is at large
related by Vitus Basinstochiensis: Carausius, saith
heeVit. Basinst. lib. 5. Hist. pa. 433., perswaded the Brittaines to make him King, that
so they might free the Iland from the subiection of the
Romanes. The Romanes hearing thereof, sent C. Alectus
to destroy that vsurper, and to reduce the Kingdome
of Brittaine to the Romane dominion. Alectus hauing
slaine Carausius, held the kingdome for three yeares;
who being ouercome and slaine by Asclepiodotus, the
Brittaines with one consent chose Asclepiodotus for

their King. When hee had gouerned a while, there fell
out great enmitie betwixt him and Coel, then Duke of
Colchester; who hauing killed Asclepiodotus, hee was
made the King of Brittaine, by the name of Coel the 3.
Then the Romanes to recouer the Iland, sent Constantius
Clorus, a valiant aud wise man, who had a little
before subdued Spaine. Coel vnderstanding both of
his fame, and comming, entreated peace, and promised
subiection, vpon condition that hee might haue the
Kingdome, paying the yearely accustomed tribute to the
Romanes. Constantius consented to him
                  Constantio petenti nuptias Helenae, dat eam Coel in matrimonium ibid pa 435.
                  ▪ 
                  & desired Helena
his daughter, whom Coel gaue in marriage to him;
and because shee was his onely childe and heire, with her
hee left the kingdome of Brittaine to Constantius. The
beautie
                  Ibi. pa. 46
                        •
                     . 
                  of this Helena was such that shee excelled all
the women in the Prouince, nor was there any where, any
comparable to her for skill in musicke and knowledge of
the liberall Arts. So Constantius first, and after him
Constantine the Great, held the Kingdome of Brittaine,
together with the Romane Empire. So he▪
               
               Let them now cease by malicious slanders to disgrace
her whom both the Latine & Greeke Church
highly honoured while shee liued, and hath enroulled
her among the most blessed Saints
                  Sanctae Helenae (celebratio) Aug. 18. Martyr. Rom. Graeci, in Menologio, habent commemorationem Constantini & Helenae, Maij 21., euer since
shee departed. Let them also cease to disgrace
Constantius, the father of Constantine, whose most
worthy and deserued praises, are to all eternitie set
forth both by the PanegyristEumen. paregyr. 5. ca. 3. & 4., and by Eusebius
                  Eus. lib. 1▪ de vit. Constāt. ca. 9. 10. & 11.; he
being so beautified with pietie, (besides other vertues)
that Eusebius saithIbid. ca. 11., Omnem suam familiam vni
Deo consecrauit, hee consecrated his whole family to
the true God, putting away all Idolaters out of his

royall house, adding that most memorable reason,
They
                  Quomodo enim fidem erga Imperatorē seruare poterunt, qui aduersus Deum perfidi esse cō
                     uincuntur. ibi. 
                  will neuer bee faithfull to the Emperour, who
are perfidious vnto God: who also after his death, as
the PanegyristEum. Paneg. 5. & 9. passi
                        ••
                     ., and Eutropius
                  Eutr. lib. 10. in Constantio, say, was inter diuos
relatus. And for a conclusion of this whole point,
let vs heare that exclamation in the PanegyrickeEumen. Panegyr. 9. c. 9,
O fortunata & omnibus beatior terris Britannia, O
happy Brittainy, more blessed then any countrey, which
first saw and saluted Constantine Emperour. I say
more; which bred, and brought foorth both Constantine
himselfe, and his most blessed mother, and
had the first Christian Emperor, the renowned Constantine
the Great, to bee the ruler, and Imperiall
King of it. And thus much be spoken of those Acts
of Siluester. Concerning which I do now intreat but
a very reasonable request, which I hope will easily
bee granted; that considering those Acts are cleerely
demonstrated to be nothing else but a very sinke
of lies; none would heereafter giue credite either to
them, or to any who alleadge them as witnesses worthy
of credite, in which number, first Pope Hadrian,
then Albanus, Iacobatius, Steuchus, Marta, the Gregorian
Glossators, Baronius and Binius are all to bee
accounted.
               Their next witnesse is Pope Gelasius with a Councell
of 70. Bishops, Pope Gelasius, saith Marta
                  Mar. loc. cit. nu. 26., beares
witnesse to this Donation. Gelasius, sayAnnot in cap. Constantinus. dist. 96. the Gregorian
Glossators, as also Anton.
                  Ant. August. loc. cit. 
                  Augustinus, so speakes
of the Actes of Siluester (wherein this Donation is expressed)
vt videatur approbare, that hee seemes to approue
them. Card. Albanus
                  Alb. lib. cit. nu. 1., & after him Busaeus the
Iesuite, puts out videtur, and saithBusaeus No
                     
                        ••
                     s in Epist. 3. H
                        •
                     nc mari. §. Papae Siluestro., The Acts of Siluester,

à Gelasio Papa approbati in Synodo, which are approued
by Pope Gelasius in a Councel of 70 bishops,
haue this Edict; and Steuchus
                  Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 81. & pa. 44 Gelasius qui fatetur gesta Siluestri à plerisque legi & approbari, idem suo testimonio quae de donatione in ea historia scribuntur, comprobat. no lesse confidently
writes, Gelasius approoues those things which are written
in the Actes of Siluester, concerning Constantines
Donation.
               
               Truely, if Pope Gelasius doe (as these men auouch)
approoue those Actes of Siluester, hee
hath for euer blemished and disgraced the Pontifical
Chaire, by approuing such false & fabulous narrations,
as those Actes containe. But I trust, I
shall free and fully acquite Gelasius, and that ancient
Synod, from this their vile calumny and
slander.
               That Gelasius, with his Romane Councell did not
approoue those Actes, their owne Bishop Canus
doth cleerely testifie, when heeApud idoneos scriptores nusquam legi. Can. lib. 11. loc. Theolog. ca. 5. §. Quod deinde. saith that no
graue or allowed witnesse among the ancient Writers,
mention the leprosie of Constantine. Then certainely
the author of those Actes of Siluester, in which that
leprosie is set downe, is not an approued author:
Likewise their owne Carerius witnessethAlex. Carer. lib. 
                        •
                     . de potest. Rom. Pont. ca. 21. §. Accedit. the same,
Compertum est, It is certaine, that nothing touching
this Donation, is read in any approoued Historian: Then
certainely, the author of those Actes, (seeing in
him this Donation is read) is not approued, much
lesse by so honourable approbation of Gelasius, with
an whole Councell. Card. Cusanus at large declares
the same: This Donation of Constantine, saith hee,Cusan. lib. 3 Concord. ca. 2. pa. 
                        •
                     81., in
libris authenticis & in historijs approbatis non inuenitur,
is not found in approued histories, nor any
authenticall Bookes. Now seeing the Cardinall

knew that it was in the
                  Textus ille, Constantinus, est ex Legēda S. Siluestri extractus ibid. pa. 781. 
                  Acts of Siluester, it is plaine,
that hee iudged them not to bee approoued by
by Gelasius. AgaineIbid pa. 782, neither doth the Councell, vnder
Pope Martin, wherein those writings which were approued,
are repeated, nec quisquam approbatus Author,
nor any approued Authour, which I haue seene,
make mention of th
                        •
                     se Acts of Siluester. Then doubtlesse
the Author of those Acts was not approued by
Gelasius. For certainly Cardinal Cusanus, and Bishop
Canus
                  Gelasius author gra
                        •
                     issimus Can. lib. ci
                        •
                     . cap. 6. §. Quod si. also held him with this Councell for an approued
Author. The Cardinall yet addes; Let any,
saith heCus. loc. cit. pa. 781., looke vpon the 15. dist. Cap. Sancta Romana,
and what approbation Gelasius there giues to these Acts,
& inueniet pauci roboris, and he shall finde it to be a
verie cold approbation. For Gelasius saith, that
though the Authour of those Acts be vnknowne, yet
those Acts are read by Catholiques, and therefore they
may be read. In which words, what manner of approbation
there is, euery one, saith Cusanus, may consider.
For if from hence any will conclude, that Gelasius
approues those Acts, hee might as well conclude,
because a prouinciall Synod at London did say,
that many Catholikes in the Church of England, do
read the Aurealegenda, that therefore the whole Synod
and Church of England, do approue the Aurealegenda
for a faithfull Historie. Textus non dicit Historiam
veram, sed legiposse, saithCus. ibid. pa. 781. 
                  Cusanus, the Text
of Gelasius, doth not say, that the Historie of those
Acts is true, but that it may be read; and so also any
fable may be read. Bishop Canus goes yet further:
for though he sayCanus. lib. cit. cap. 5. §. Quod deinde., that Gelasius did not reiect those
Acts, (to wit, not in expresse manner, as he doth the

Acts of George, of Iulitta, and many others) yet that
in their generall censure of namelesse writings, the
whole Synod reiected them, Canus clearely auoucheth,
saying,Can. lib. 11. ca. 6. § Quod si., Gelasius with a Councell commands, that we
                  Vt eas histori
                        •
                     s nullo modo amplectamur, &c. Ibid. 
                  should by no meanes, accept or credit those writings,
which are published without the certaine name of the author;
for such writings doe smell either of imposture, or
heresie▪ Gelasius then, is so far from approuing (as they
boast he did) those shamelesse Acts of Siluester, that
by the confession of Bishop Canus, he did indeede
prohibit and condemne the same.
               And all this I haue said, supposing those Acts of
Gelasius, which are now extant, and which are set
downe in the 15. Dist. to be true and incorrupt. But
there are sundry, and effectuall reasons to induce any
man, that this, touching the Acts of Siluester, and
much more in those Synodall Acts, is falsely ascribed
to Gelasius and his Romane Councell. For in
some ancient editions of that Romane Councell,
This touching the Acts of Syluester is not set downe: as
Baronius
                  Bar. an. 324 nu. 31. vbi 
                        •
                     atetur ea de Actis Siluestri, desiderari apud Gelasium in aliquo 
                        •
                     odice. himselfe acknowledgeth. Yea but, saith heBar. ibid.,
they are in the collection of Cresconius, which is more
ancient then others. If Baronius meane that which is
called, Breuiarium Canonum Cresconij, or Concordia canonum,
as it seemes he doth, (there being nothing
else of Cresconius, which concernes Councels, mentioned
in Posseuine
                  Posseu. in Appar. in verbo Cresconius.) the Card▪ deludes his reader. For
in all that Collection or Breuiarie, this touching the
Acts of Siluester is no where mentioned. But say it
were; is that Collectiō of Cresconius, think you, most
ancient? No, there were many copies of the Acts of
that Councell, long before Cresconius, who liuing

after Ferrandus (the SchollerFerrandus, qui Fulgentiū vti magistrum magno in honore habuit, claruit ann. 529. Posseu. in Ferrand. of Fulgentius) made
not his collection, till about the yeare 540. some
fiftie yearesNam Conc. Rom▪ sub Gelasiuo habitū est an. 494. after that Romane Councell was held.
Baronius should haue said and prooued, (which hee
neuer offers to doe) that in some authenticke Copies,
this had beene extant. The Copies of any
Councell, in lesse then fiftie yeares may easily be
corrupted; especially if the corruption of them,
may aduantage the Pope and the Romane See. Yea
and this verie Councell to haue beene so corrupted,
Binius acknowledgeth, sayingBin. Not. in. Conc. Rom. 1. sub Gelasio., It cannot be certain-knowen,
Quae sit vera & pura lectio Gelasij, which is
the true Text or reading of Gelasius. Againe, that
in the best and most authenticke copies of that Romane
Synod, this, touching the Acts of Siluester,
was not extant, may bee perceiued by Gratian: for
Card. Cusanus
                  Non inuenitur in antiquis libris iste versus de historia Siluestri. Cusan. lib. & ca. cit. pa. 581. 582. witnesseth, That in the ancient Text
of Gratian, there is set downe no more out of Gelasius,
then vnto these words, (Item gesta Sanctorum Martyrum,)
after which, is that concerning the Acts of Siluester.
All that followes vnto the end of the decree,
is added to the old Text of Gratian. And this not
onely Cardinall Cusanus, but Guido surnamed Archidiaconus:
yea the Gregorian Glossators doe testifie
the same, who at these words, (Item gesta) thus
writeAnnot. Gregor. in cap. Sancta Romana. distinct. 15., From hence vnto the end of the Chapter, omnia
absunt à plerisque vetustis Gratiani codicibus, all is
wanting in most of the ancient copies of Gratian,
and this doth Archidiaconus also obserue. So
they. Certainly, had Gratian found that which
is now added, touching the censure of all those
Apocryphall Bookes, in the true Acts of the Romane
                  
Synod vnder Gelasius, he would not haue omitted it;
for hee had not onely fit, but necessary occasion to
expresse the same, as well as the former. Besides
this, let any of iudgement compare the appobation
giuen in that Synod to St. Augustine, St. Ierome,
St. Basil, St. Athanasius, yea euen to the foure
first generall Councells; with that which is giuen to
Orosius, Sedulius, Iuuencus, and some others of farre
meaner note: and hee will see it can no way beseeme
the wisedome and grauitie of that ancient
Councell. Of the former theyConc. Rom. 1. sub. Gelas. say onely, the Romane
Church, non prohibet suscipi, forbids not the reading
of them: of the latter they say, Wee
                  Ibidem. 
                  praise Orosius,
wee preferreIbidem. with great commendation Sedulius,
we admireIbidem. Iuuencus: a proofe too too euident,
that this vnequall censure proceeded not from so
equall iudges. And as for Eusebius Caesariensis, their
censure of him, is quite contradictory to it selfe: for
in one place, they say, that for his singular knowledge
of matters, they doe not
                  Vsquequaque non dicimus renuendes. ibid. 
                  reiect the history and Chronicle
of Eusebius: and a little after, they condemne the
history of Eusebius
                  Historia E
                        •
                     
                     sebij Apocrypha ibid. 
                  as apocryphall: adding, that the
author
                  Haec & omnia his similia, &c. cū suis authoribus, authorumque sequacibus, sub anathematis indissolubili vinculo, confitemur esse dā
                     nata. ibid., and approouers of him, or any other of those
apocryphall bookes, are for euer accursed by the Romane
Church with an indissoluble band of an Anathema.
Shall we thinke Gelasius and the holy Councell with
him, to haue played the Satyres, and blow both heate
and cold, commendation and condemnation of the
selfe same writings, with one breath? Or may we not
much more rightly conclude, that they (which I
verily thinke to be true) neuer gaue this censure of

                  Eusebius? Which many not obseruing, think the Historie
of Eusebius, the workes of Lactantius, of Clemens
Alexandrinus, of Arnobius, of Victorinus, and
diuers others there named, to haue beene condemned
in that Councell. They onely set downe their
Synodall iudgement, and approbation of those
bookes mentioned in the former part of the Synodall
Acts, which in the ancient copies of Gratian
were onely expressed; and some other with a false
hand, patched to the same Acts, the later part of
them, which in the ancient copies both of Gratian,
and (as Baronius confesseth) of some of the Synodall
Acts themselues, were omitted. Howsoeuer,
certaine it is, that if the Synodall Actes be corrupted
(in such manner as I haue shewed and prooued)
then Gelasius with that Romane Synod, approues
not the Acts of Siluester: if they bee not corrupted,
though in their particular mention of those Actes,
they say, They
                  A multis in vrbe Roma Catholicis legi cognouimus. Ibid. vbi nota, legi non publice in Ecclesijs Romae, sed priuatim, in vrbe. 
                  are read of many in the cittie of Rome,
and may be read, (as is, & may be read the lying Legend
also) yet in their generall censure of namelesse
writings, they certainly condemne the same Actes,
as being either forged, or hereticall; and whethersoeuer,
of no worth or credit at all.
               The next witnesse and last in this ranke, is Isiodorus
Hispalensis. He, saith Marta
                  Mart. ca. cit. nu. 26., beares witnesse to
this Donation. Isiodorus praesul Hispalensis, saith Card.
Iacobatius
                  Iacob. loc. cit. nu. 30., Isiodore the Bishop of Hispalis, affirmes
Constantine to haue made this Donation. Card. Albanus
addesAlb. lib. cit. nu. 
                        •
                     ., that Isiodore hath set downe the very forme of
this Donation, inter gesta Concilij Niceni, among the

Acts of the Nicene Councell. In this testimonie, besides
other, they shew three speciall frauds. First,
they belye Isiodore Hispalensis. For he is so farre from
bearing witnesse to this Donation, that he expresly
teacheth, Constantine not to haue made the same.
Constantine, saith heIsiod. Hispal. in Chron. an. mundi. 5535., In extremo vitae suae tempore, ab
Eusebio Nicomediensi baptizatus est, was baptized of
Eusebius Bishop of Nicomedia in the last part of his
age, or a little before his death: whence it vndeniably
followes, that he did not make this Donation,
which as the Edict it selfeEdict. Const. loc. cit., the Acts of Siluester
                  Act. Siluest. apud Bar. loc. cit. and
Binius
                  Bin. Not. in Edict. & in vit. Siluestri. assure vs, was made after Constātine was baptized
by Siluester, and that was at least ten yeares before
his death. Secondly, they pretend that Author,
who cals himselfe Isiodore, and who made the collection
of the Councels and Canons, to be Isodorus
Hispalensis. An vntruth so euident, that this Author,
in the PraefaceIsiod. praef. in tom. 1. Concil. which he praefixeth in suam Canonū
collectionem, to his owne collection of those Canons
and Decrees, makes mention of Pope Agatho and the
sixth generall Councell: and therefore certainely liued
after the time of that Councell, which was heldBin. in tit. illius Conc. & Bar. an. 681 an.
681. whereas Isiodore Hispalensis died 40. yeares before;
to wit an▪
                   636. as Baronius
                  Bar. an. 636 nu. 7. and Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. de Eccles. scrip. in Isiodorus Hispal. doe
witnesse. Their last fraud is in belying, and that most
shamefully, euen this Collector also (whom they
name Isiodore Hispalensis) as setting down this Edict
among the Acts of that Nicen Councell. A palpable
vntruth, as any may perceiue who looks but into the
collection of the Councels by Isiodore. This Edict is
entirely there set downe before he comes to the Canons,
or any Acts of that Nicen Councell: So also in

                  Binius
                  Bin. tom. 1. Conc. and others. Yea in the ancient collections of
Isiodore, the Edict, and the booke de Primi
                        •
                     iua Ecclesia,
was set (as the noteNot, ante lib. de primit. eccles. & Edictum Constā
                     tini, tom. 1. Conc. in the Councels of Nicholinus
his edition doth testifie, and Binius
                  Bin. Not. in Epist. de primit. Eccl. §: Melchiadi. confesseth the
same:) continenter post decreta Melchiadis: immediatly
after the decrees of Pope Melchiades, and therfore
before the life of Siluester, much more before the Nicen
Councell which was held in Siluesters time, and
is set after the life & epistles of Siluester. Thus in euery
one of these 7. (which are their prime, principall
& most ancient witnesses in this cause) you doe now
clearly see the vile & detestable dealing of Marta, &
the rest, who pleade for this Edict and Donation.
Either they belye their witnesses, as they doe the
318. Nicen Fathers, and Isiodore Hispalensis; or else in
stead of Fathers they obtrude most base, counterfait
and forged writings, as in Eusebius, Hierom, Damasus
the Acts of Siluester and Gelasius, we haue euidently
demonstrated.
            
            
               CHAP. XI.
               The credit of foure Popes and two Councels, alledged for
proofe of the Donation, examined: namely, Hadrian
1, Leo 9. Eugentus 3. the 2. Nicen, and the
Councell at Constance.
               
                  THE next witnesses alledged for this
Donation, are foure of their Popes,
whom all to beare witnesse to this
Donation, they
                  Mart. cap. 30. nu. 36. & 37. Steuch. pa. 89 Annot. Gregor. in ca. Constantinus. Ant. August. lib. 1. Dial. 6. pa▪ 53. 
                  boast, and we do willingly
acknowledge. Before we particularly
entreat of them, there are one, or two generall

answers to them all. First, how could any of
these, know the truth and certainty of this Donation,
seeing Hadrian was not Pope, till more
then 440. Leo more then 720. Eugenius more
then 800. and Nicholas more then 950. yeares, afterDonatio facta dicitur an. 324. nam co anno Constan. baptizatum asterunt. Bar. an. cod. nu. 41 & seq. Hadr. 1 coepit an▪ 772. Leo 9. ann. 1049. Eug. 3. an. 1145. Nichol 3. ann. 1277 Bin. in eorum vitis. 
                  Constantine is supposed to haue made this Donation?
Can any man thinke such to be fit witnesses of
a matter of fact, done so many hundred yeares before
their times, vnlesse they haue some certaine euidence
of former ages? And euidence they haue
none, better nor more ancient, then the false,
fabulous, and legendarie Acts of Syluester: to which
if any will giue credite, he demonstrates himselfe to
be altogether vnworthy of credit.
               Again, of all men in the world the Popes are most
vnfit to be witnesses in this cause. Did Marta neuer
heare of that in the Digests, Nullus
                  Dig. li. 22. tit. 5. l. 9. 
                  idoncus testis
in resua intelligitur, none is thought a fit witnesse in
his owne cause? that is, as theyCuius commodum & vtilitas ad se directo spectat. Venat. lib. 
                        •
                     . tit. 20. do rightly expound
it, when the profit redounds directly to him who is the
witnesse. So it doth in this Donation, to the Popes:
None do gaine so much thereby as they; nor is it a
pedling matter, or a fly that such Eagles get thereby;
the gaine of Rome, of Italy, of all the Westerne
Prouinces, will haue a strong operation in such witnesses,
as haue too well learned their lesson of Iulius
Caesar, Si ius violandum, regni causa violandum est.
The world is witnesse, that farre better Popes, of
a better faith, and of more fidelitie then Hadrian,
Leo, Eugenius, and Nicholas, haue for euer blemished
the Roman See, for defending forgeries, euen then,
when they looked but for motes and minnims,

in comparison of Rome, Italie, and the Westerne
Prouinces. Of many examples I will instance but
in one.
               Pope Zozimus and Boniface 1. that they might by
Appeales draw the gaine of some contentious businesses,
to the Romane Court, pretended and pleaded
                  Conc. Carth▪ 6. ca. 3. 
                  a Nicene Canon to haue decreed the same. That
Canon, an wholeConc. Afr. ca. 101. & 
                        •
                     05 in Epist. ad Celestinum. Councell of African Bishops,
by the authenticke copies of the Nicen Canons,
conuinced to be a forgerie. And yet this is not the
worst fault in those Popes. For (as Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. 2. de Rom. Pontif. ca. 25 §. Respo
                        •
                     demus & seq., Baronius
                  Zozimus & Bonifacius citarunt canones Concilij Sardicensis nomine Nicenae Synodi. Bar. an. 4
                        •
                     7. nu. 99., and others tell vs) Pope Zozimus, and Boniface,
when they named the Nicen, meant the Sardican
Councell: in the 7. Canon of which, is verbatim set
downe that very Canon, which Zozimus alledged,
and the fourth Canon is also in effect the same. In
both it is decreed, That it shall bee lawfull, out of
other Prouinces, to appeale to the Bishop of Rome, and
that hee shall haue power, to send if he will, Legates
à latere, to end causes in Africke or other Countries.
               
               Now this is a further demonstration, that the
Popes for their owne gaine, feare not to vrge and
vphold forgeries. For that these two Canons are
forged, and were not extant among the true
Sardicane Decrees, the same African Bishops (one
of which was Saint Augustine) and their whole
Councell doth euidently declare, sayingConc. Afric. ca. 105. in their
Synodall Epistle to Pope Celestine; That any should
bee sent from the side of your Holinesse, (to heare,
and end causes in other Prouinces) in nulla inuenimus
patrum Synodo constitutum, we finde it decreed

in no Synod. If in none, then for a certaintie it was
not decreed either in the Nicene, or in the Sardicane,
or in the first Constantinopolitane Councell; in which
onely (vntill that time) were made such Decrees
and Canons, as did binde the whole Church, of
which kind of Decrees the Africane Bishops speake
in that place.
               
                  Bellarmine
                  Augustinus non agnoscit aliud Sardicense conciliū, quā haereticū. Bell: lib. 2 de Rom. Pont. ca. 25. §. Adde., Baronius
                  Admirari nō desino quonam pacto accidisse po
                        •
                     uerit, vt verum Sardicense Cōcilium, Catholicos Africanae Ecclesiae praeteri
                        •
                     rit. Bar. an. 347: nu. 96. & 98., and Binius
                  Bin notis in Sard. Conc. §. Approbatum. lidem Africani patres viden
                        •
                     ur▪ illud Sardicense Concilium planè ignorasse. Bin not. in Conc. Carthag. 6. §. Hoc
                        •
                     idem., would gladly
perswade, that neither Augustine, nor those other
Africane Bishops knew ought of that holy Sardicane
Councel. A thing so incredible, that with reason none
can imagine it. How could they be ignorant of a holy
generall Councell? For that this Sardicane was
such, though some learned men (from whose iudgement
I craue leaue to dissent) haue thought the contrary,
not onely Athanasius
                  Athanas. Apol. 2. vocat Magnum Cōcilium. pa. 191. sic autem oecumeni cū vocat. vt eadē Apol. pa. 194. vocat Nicaenū Conciliū magnā Synodū, & alibi., Socrates
                  Edicitur Conciliū generale. Soc. lib. 2. ca. 16., Sulpitius Seuerus
                  Imperator iubet ex toto orbe apud Sardicā Episcopos congregari. Sul. Se
                        •
                     . lib. 2. sac. hist. §. His per., and Iustinian
                  Vniuersale Concilium, expresse vocat Iustin. in Edicto contra tria Capitula. quod incipit, Scientes., but the Councell of Chalcedon
                  Conc. Chalc. Act. 16. in Alloqu
                        •
                     t. ad Martianū. doth witnesse, wherein is mention of this Sardicane,
as of a generall Councell, such as was that at
Nice, at Constantinople, and Ephesus, among which
this is reckoned. Yea the Actes of the Councell
it selfe doe explaine the same. First, it is cleare,
that there were assembled 344. BishopsIn vniuersum subscripserunt 344. ait Athan. Apol. 2 pa. 208., (farre more
then were at Nice) and that out of 36. diuersRecensentur 36 Prouinciae ab Athan. Apol. 2. in principio & iterū in 2. Epistolis Concilij Sardicensis apud eundem Athan. Apol. 2▪
                   Prouinces,
to wit, Egypt, Libia, Palestine, Arabia, Pannonia,
Thessalia, Dacia, Misia, Thrace, Macedonia,
Achaia, Crete, Spaine, France, Italy, Sicily, Sardinia,
Africke, Brittania, and many more: yea there were

present in it, and subscribed to the Decrees thereof 36.Recensentur apud Athan. loco citato, pa. 207., Africane Bishops, one of which was Gratus Primate of
Carthage; Againe, the Councell bindes the whole
                  Sint vobis igitur Georgius &c. Anathema. sic omn
                        •
                     bus Episcopis totius Ecclesiae scribit Conc. Sard. in sine 2. Epist. apud Athan. loc. cit. 
                  Catholike Church to obserue their Decrees, which
no other but a generall could doe. How could they
possibly bee ignorant, I say not of this Synod, to
which so many of their owne Bishops had subscribed,
but of the Decrees also made therein? specially
seeing they vsed to bring home a copie of the Decrees
consented vpon in generall Councells, as
themselues sayCōc. Carth. 6. ca. 9., that Cecilianus brought with him
the Decrees made at Nice, at which hee was present.
               Their first Councell at Carthage, is a certaine &
vndeniable proofe that they knew right well this
holy Sardican Councell; for therein Gratus, in the
hearing of the whole Synod saidCōc. Carth. 1. habitū tempore Iulij. c. 5. thus, I remember
that this was decreed, in sanctissimo Sardicensi
Concilio, In the most holy Councel at Sardica: which
first Councell at Carthage, to haue beene knowne
vnto Augustine (to say nothing of the rest) none may
doubt: nay it is Nefas, saith Baronius
                  Bar. an. 347. nu. 97., to suspect Augustine
to haue beene ignorant of the Ecclesiasticall Canons,
considering hee by reason of his continuall conflicts
with Heretickes, Omnia Concilia scripta euoluit &
archiua reserauit, Tossed the Actes and Decrees of
euery Councell, and searched all Registries: yea it
seemes the Actes of this first Councell at Carthage,
were (among diuers others) read in that their sixth
Councell, wherein this cause of Appeales was moued
by Faustinus the Popes Legate, seeing they sayCōc. Carth. 6. ca. 9.,
Let the copies of the Nicene Decrees, Et quae Patres

hic constituerunt, and those things which our
fathers or predecessours haue heere (in Africke) set
downe to confirme the same, bee inserted into these
Actes.
               
               Besides, none can doubt, but those learned Africane
Bishops, especially St. Augustine, read and
perused diligently the bookes of Athanasius. Now
seeing in thoseApud Athā. Apol. 2., this holy Sardican Councell is described,
and their very Synodall Epistle expressed, there is
no doubt but St. Augustine both certainly knew, and
willingly embraced the same, which hee saw was
approoued by so many Bishops, and of so diuers
Prouinces. Further, St. Augustine himselfe witnessethAug. lib. 3. contra Cresc▪ ca. 34.,
that hee read the Synodall Epis
                        •
                     le of the hereticall
Councell at Sardica which was held by Arians:
How could he then possibly, but know of the
holy Sardican Councell held at the same time, by
Hosius, Athanasius, and other Orthodoxall Bishops?
of which the very Epistle of that hereticall Sardican
Councell, makes often
                  In suo conuenticulo habu
                        •
                     runt Osiū & Protogen
                        •
                     . & saepe similia Epist. Synodalis Conciliabuli Sardicensis▪ apud Hilar. lib. 2 in fragn
                        •
                     enti
                        •
                     . pa. 6. & seq & Bin. to 1. con. pa. 448. 
                  and expressem
                        •
                     ntion Or what
thinke you, was become of the wit and iudgement
of Binius, when hee saidPosteri in African
                        •
                      Ecclesia tempore Zosimi & Bonifacij vtrūque conciliū, Sardicēse, & Carthaginense 1. ignorauerunt. Bin. not. in conc. Sardic. §. canones. videntur plane ignoraste, Bin. not. in conc. carthag. 6. §▪ Hoc idem. 
                  Augustine was ignorant of
this holy Sardican Councell? whereas himselfe confessethBin▪ Not. in conc: Sard §. O
                        •
                     cumen
                        •
                     cū.,
that Augustine in his 162. Epistle cals it, Plenarium
vniuersae Ecclesiae concilium, A plenary Councell
of the whole Church: and Baronius speaking of the
Africane Bishops saithBar an. 347. nu. 97., it is satis compertum, cleere
enough and certaine by the very publike monuments of
the Africane Church, that the holy and lawfull Councel of
Sardica, was known to the Catholike Africane Bishops.
               
               Seeing then it is cleare and certaine, that St. Augustine
and the Africane Bishops, who writ that

Synodall Epistle to Pope Celestine, knew both of
that holy Sardican Councell, and of the true Decrees
thereof, the memory whereofEodem forme saeculo celebratum Bar. an. eod. nu. 96. was but then
fresh, that Councell being held not aboue eightie
yearesCōc. Sardic. habitum an. 347. Bar. eo. an. nu. 1. Celestinus coepit an. 424. Bar. eo an before they writ this to Celestine: seeing,
I say, they certainely knew all the Decrees thereof,
and yet for a certaintie professe to Celestine, after so
long and diligent search of that cause touching appealing
to Rome, that no Synod had decreed, that the
Pope vpon appeale might send his Legates to iudge and
determine causes in other Prouinces; it remaines as vndoubtedly
true, that (if no more) yet the Canon
which Zozimus alleadged (which is now the seuenth)
as also the fourth; wherein the authori
                     •
                  ie of receiuing
appeales, and sending such Legates, is granted
to the Pope, are not the true Canons of the holy
Sardican Councell, nor were among the true Canons
of that Councell, in the time of St. Augustine,
and of those Africane Bishops. For had they truely
beene there, they had as much furthered the Popes
claime of receiuing Appeales, and sending his Legates;
and they had as effectually procured the assent
of the Africane Bishops thereunto, as if they
had beene decreed by the great Nicene Councell it
selfe: The Sardican being as generall as the Nice
                        •
                     e,
and the authoritie of them both being equall, and
the whole Church by the very Sardican Decree, being
bound to obserue all the constitutions made by
it. But Zozimus, Boniface, and Celestine, were concious
to themselues, that those Canons (the fourth
& seuenth) were no true Sardicane Canons, but meere
impostures and forgeries, fathered on the Sardican
                  
Councell, to lift vp the authoritie of the Romane
See; and knowing further that if they had but once
alleadged these, as Canons of the holy Sardican
Councell, the Africane Bishops could, and would
much more easily haue conuinced them of fraud &
forgerie, then they did in alledging the Nicene Canons;
those Popes, I say, knowing this, durst not in all
those fiue yeares (so longQuinquennalem illā cō
                     trouersiam Africanorū, vocat Bin. not. in Conc. Afric. pa. 646. the contention about this
matter continued) so much as once whisper, or intimate
to any, that the Canon falsly alleadged by
Zozimus to bee a Nicene, was indeede a Sardican
Canon.
               And if any demand, whence this corruption of the
Sardican Canons should proceed, the answer is very
easie, by the old Cassian rule, Cui bono? Seeing the
gainers by those forged Canons were the Popes, the
forgerers of them must needes be either Popes, or
their fauourers. And heereof that which Pope Hadrian
the first affirmeth, giues a strong presumption,
seeing the Sardican Canons (in such manner as they
were in his time) were, as himselfe saithHadr. 1. in Epitome Canonum in Cōc. Sard., among the
Romanes, but not among the Grecians; who yet no
doubt, had all the true Decrees made at the Sardican
Councell. Photius also Patriarch of Constantinople
professethVt testatur Nich. 1. Epist. 6. §. post haec▪
                   of the Greeke Church, Non habere
vel recipere, that they had not, or receiued not the
Sardican Canons. Not meaning, as Baroniu
                        •
                     
                  
                  Non reperiri apud se canones conc. Sardic. turpiter mentitus est Photius. Bar. an. 347. nu. 53. 54. (
                     •
                  ailing
against Photius) misconceiueth him, That they
had not any copies at all of those Canons among them,
for Photius him
                     •
                  elfe in his Nomocanon
                  De ijs qui siūt episcopi ex L
                        •
                     icis, Syn. Sard. can. 10. Phot. in Nom. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1 ca. 11. sed. in 
                        •
                     anonibus Sa
                        •
                     d conc ab al
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     ibus vocatur 13. vt apud 
                        〈…〉
                      pa. 437. expr
                     •
                  s
                     •
                   
                  mentioneth
that very Canon, which Baronius vrgeth against
him, and saith
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                  , that Photius denieth that they
                  
had it or the rest among them:) but hee meant they
had them not in such esteeme, as the Romanes had:
which to be Photius meaning, his owne words doe
explaine, cited by Pope Nicholas
                  Supra., non habere, vel recipere,
they had them not in such manner, as to receiue
them for Synodall authoritie, or for the true
Canons of that Sardican Councell; In this sort, by
reason of the fraud of the Latines, inserting false and
fained Canons, they iustly receiued them not, nor
approoued them; which Gratian well obseruing, and
putting a difference betwixt the Greeke and the Latine
Church, in their hauing of these Canons, saithDistinc. 16. ea. Quod dicitis. in rubrica, & cap. Ipso.,
The Sardican Councell (in regard of the Canons therof)
Authoritate apostolica recipitur, Is receiued or approoued
by the Popes authoritie; but it is not receiued
among the Grecians. The Popes, or their fauorites,
hauing for their owne gaine, forged (if not all)
yet certainly diuers of those Canons, could doe no
lesse then approue them; the Grecians knowing the
forgery (if not of all) yet certainly of some of those
Canons, and by name of that seuenth, (which Zozimus
pretended for a Nicene Canon) could doe no
lesse then reiect and condemne them.
               It were easie by many other examples, to declare
that the Popes haue made this a very trade and custome
(as if it were a piece of Pope-craft) either thē
                  selues
to forge, or else (which is euery way as bad) to
abett, countenance, & maintaine by their authority,
such writings as were forged by others; and by them
to build vp their owne pompe and pontificall glory.
But leauing all the rest, I will now come to the examination
of the credit of those foure Pope, who are

produced as witnesses for this Donation.
               The first of them is Hadrian
                  Mart. ca. 30. nu. 26. Steuch. pa 87. the first; who of all
Popes that went before, is most shamelesse in vttering
vntruths, and maintaining false and forged
writings. I wil giue but a touch of either. For his vntruth,
take that in his EpistleHadr. 1. Epist. 1▪
                   to the Emperors Constantine
and Irene, which was readNic. 2. C
                        •
                     c. Act. 2. pa. 309. and appouedIbid. pa. 313. b. in
their second Nicene Councel: where he shames not
to say, That Churches were beautified with venerable Images,
euen from the Apostles time vntill then, and hee
further addes, that the Church, Sanctas eorum figuras
veneratur, Did from that time worship the holy Images
of the Apostles. A palpable vntruth, easie
to bee refuted by Origen, who liuing within a
hundred yeares of some of the Apostles, writ thus
against Celsus: It is impossible
                  Orig. lib. 7. cont. Cels. pa. 97. 
                  that one should know
God, and make supplication to Images: and as for Christians
hee addes, Nec simulachra quidem nos veneramur,
We doe not adore Images: Of Lactantius, who
liuing in Constantines time, saith, Non
                  Lact lib. 2. ca. 19. 
                  est dubium
quin religio nulla sit, vbi est Simulachrū, It is no doubt,
but that there is no true religion, where Images are
set vp and adored: Of Epiphanius, who liuing also
in that age, rent
                  Epiph. Epist. ad Ioan▪ Hieros. 
                  in pieces the image which hee found
set vp in a Church, saying, It was against the Scrìpture
to hang vp Images in Churches. Of which fact of his,
whereas someBell. de Imag. Sanctor. ca. 9. §. ad quintum. make doubt, Cassander saith, Constat
                  Cass Consult. ca. de Imag. pa. 167.,
It is certainly knowne that Epiphanius did so;
and for this cause not onely Waldensis reproues him,
and saith, As one Mr. Robert had done before; that
Epiphanius
                  Th. Wald. de Sacram. tit. 17. ca. 157. pa. 325. 
                  did that perhaps of zeale, but not according
to knowledge: but Alphonsus
                  Alp. à cast. lib 8. aduer. haeres. voce Imago. 
                  à Castro addes,

                  that Epiphaniu
                        •
                      though for this cause hee be not an heriticke,
yet hee did erre herein, and did contrary to the
Scripture. Of Pope Gregory the Great, who 600.
yeares after Christ, writing to Serenus Bishop of
Massilia, who had broken downe Images (which
the people began then to adore,) reproues him in
this mannerGreg. Epist. 9. lib. 9 Ind 4., Truely I commend you, Quod ea adorari
ve
                        •
                     uisses, That you forbade them to adore Images,
but I reprooue you for breaking them downe:
That should not haue beene broken downe, Quod non ad
adorandum in Ecclesiis, sed ad instruendas solummodo
mentes fuit collocatum, which was there set vp onely
for instruction, but not for adoration; then which
no cleerer testimony can possibly bee desired. But
omitting all the rest, I will heere onely propose the
words of their owne Cassander, which fully demonstrate
the falshood of Pope Hadrian: Certum est, It
is certaine saith heCass. loc. cit. pa. 163., that in the beginning of the Gospel
preached, there was no vse of Images; especially in the
Churches, as by Clemens, and Arnobius is euident. And
as for veneration, or adoration of them, hee further
declares, Quantum
                  Ibid. pa. 6
                        •
                     . 
                  veteres initio Eccl
                        •
                     siae, ab omni
veneratione imaginum abhorruerunt, How the ancient
Church did euen abhorre the worshipping of
Images; adding one thing of speciall note, Non
tunc valeba
                        •
                      illa ratio, That excuse would not then
serue the turne, which now is pretended; that they gaue
not that worship to the Images themselues, but to those,
who were represented by those Images: for this colour of
excuse, saith he, did the Paganes also vse; as Arnobius
and Lactantius declare: adding further, that such worship
as is giuen to God by Images, Non satis castum &

conueni
                        •
                     ntem Deo esse, Is neither chaste, nor fi
                     ••
                  ing for
God, but deuised by them that are superstitious. Thus
and much more Cassander. By whose testimony,
the vntruth of Pope Hadrian doth most cleerely appeare,
who affi
                     •
                  mes Images not onely to haue been
set vp in Churches, but adored also by the Church,
euen from the Apostles time.
               For his approuing false and forged writings, wee
need to goe no further, then to the lying and legendarian
Acts of Siluester, which hee
                  Hadr. 1. Epist. 1. 
                  c
                        •
                     tes as
                  Bin. not▪ in Conc. Rom. 1. sub Siluestro. 
                  authenticall;
or to the first Romane
                  C
                        •
                     tatur
                        •
                     d concilium ab Hadriano Epist, 3. ca. 53. 
                  Synod vnder Siluester, and
that famous disputation betwixt the Pope and the Iewes,
which we haue before demonstrated to be a famous
lye. Yet let mee adde one instance more, and that is
his alledgingHadr. 1. Epist. 3. ca. 34. for adoration of Images the booke
of Athanasius questions to Antiochus: wherein the
worshipping of Images is as cleerely taught, as in
the second Nicene Synod it selfe. For thereAthan. Archepis. Alexand. quast. ad An
                        •
                     ochum. q. 39. it is
said, That Christians doe adore Images; that they who
refuse them, are, dementes, madde people: and further
to shew what rare and admirable effects the adoration
of Images hath wrought, it is there declared:
How when a certaine Monke at Ierusalem, had
beene long vexed with a, diuel, (it was daemon scortationis,
as Sophronius
                  Sophronius citatur à Concilio Nic 2. Act 4 pa. 3
                        •
                     6. Vbi haec eadē historia r
                        •
                     citatur ex Soph. & approbatu
                        •
                      à Concilio. expresseth,) The diuel at one time
appeared vnto him, and said, If thou would not haue me
to vexe thee any more, doe not worship this Image of the
blessed Virgin, and then I will forsake thee. Quid ad
haec respondebunt, what can they, who forbid adoration
of Images, answere vnto these things? saith
Pope Hadrians Athanasius?
               
               What else can they, or should they answer, but

that Pope Hadrian striues to maintaine superstition
and Idolatry, by lying and forged writings? That
this author, cited by Pope Hadrian, as the writing of
St.Nā cū Concilium Francofordense de beati Athanasij Alexandriae Episcopi, verba f
                        •
                     cisset, Hadrianus co
                        •
                      refellens ait, Eiusdē Athanasij sententias fideliter proferimus. Hadr loc. citat. 
                  Athanasius of Alexandria is such, Posseuine will
tell them, Constat
                  Posseu. in verbo Athanasius. pa. 127., it is manifest that this is not the
booke of Athanasius, seeing Epiphanius and Greg. Nissene
are cited therein as ancient authors; who both followed
Athanasius. Bellarmine will tell them the
same: The questions
                  Athanasij esse nō possunt Bell. li. de scrip. eccl. in Athanasio. 
                  to Antiochus cannot be the booke
of Athanasius. And whereas Bellarmine himselfe had
sometimes alledgedBell. lib. de Notis eccl. ca. 9. §. Xenaias. & lib. 1. de Purg. ca. 6. §. Primus. this, as the booke of the ancient
and holy Father Athanasius, hee afterwards retracts
this his errour, and saith, I doe not thinke
                  Bellar. Recog. in lib. 4. de Concil & eccl. ca. 9. 
                  that
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria is the author thereof.
               
               Besides this, the sottishnesse and grosse ignorance,
which the forgerer in euery page of that
booke bewrayes, doth certainly demonstrate that
St. Athanasius was not the author therof. Qu. 52. it is
determined for an vndoubted
                  Haud dubie lux praecedit te
                        •
                     ebras. 
                  truth, that at the creation
light was before darknesse: quite contrary to the
ScriptureGen. 1. 2. 3., and the Iewish account euer since the
creation. Qu. 64. it is said, that Ionas died three
seuerall times, once when Elias raised vp the widowes
sonne of Sarepta; againe, when hee was in the
Whales belly; and thirdly, by his naturall death after
hee was deliuered out of the Whale: A fable, grounded
on the Synopsis
                  Dor. Syn. in voce Ionas. 
                  Dorothei, of which Bellarmine
saithIlla Synopsis plena est fabulis. Bell. lib. de scrip. eccl. in Dorotheo., (and saith truely) that it is full of lyes.
And yet this which hee sayth of Ionas, is as true,
as that the EunuchVt ibidem Doroth. Pont. whom Philip baptized,
and Caesar, were two of the seuentie Disciples of
Christ: or that Priscilla and Iunia (two women)

werePriscilla Colophouiae Episcopus fuit, Iunia Apamiae. ibid. Bishops. Quae. 47. Hee sets downe for a certaintie
that Paradise is the East of the whole earth, and
further East then India: adding, that the spices
which come from the East Indies, and other easterly
countries, are more fragrant, because they are neere
to Paradise; by the fragrancy of which, and the trees
therein, the Indian fruits are made more sweete and
odoriferous. A sottish conceit, not onely because
there is no absolute East of the whole world; but
because it is certaine, that Paradise was neere or about
Mesopotamia and Babylonia, as besides the consent
of the bestVid. Iuniū notis in cap. 2. Gen. Hopkins. in Synopsi Paradis
                        •
                     . Bened. Perer. Com. in Gen. lib. 3. q. 2. & 3. Writers, the riuers Tigris and
Euphrates, which compasse Mesopotamia, and which
watered the garden, doe infallibly demonstrate
Quae. 54. hee saith, That Christ was conceiued on the
25. of March, because on the very same day, God at
the beginning created Adam: where besides the reason,
void of reason, it is vtterly vntrue, that God
created the world in March, or at the vernum aequinoctium,
but (as in another Treatise I haue fully
prooued) about the aequinoctium hibernum. Qu. 65.
hee saith that Tharshis, to which Ionas fled, was
a citie of India; a verie fable. Witnesse Iosephus,
who saithIosep. lib. 9 Antiq. ca. 11. & Iosephū ita sensisse ait Hieron, in ca. 66. & ca. 2. Isaiae., Ionas taking ship at Ioppe, went to
Tharshis of Cili
                        •
                     ia. Witnesse St. Ierome: whose
opinionSensit per Tharsū, mare significa
                        •
                     i. Hier. in ca. 10. Daniel., though it bee not true therein, yet
hee expresly reiectsIbidem. 
                  that of his going to India; adding,
that most
                  Vt Ple
                        •
                     ique 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  Writers doe take Tharshis of Cilicia
to bee there meant. The text it selfe puts
this matter out of doubt: where it is saidIona. 1. 3.
                  ▪ 
                  that
Ionas went to Iapho, and there found a ship going
to Tharshis: And that Iapho is the same

with Ioppe, not onely Adricomius
                  Ad
                        •
                     ic. in Theat. terrae Sanctae. in Tribu Dan. nu. 29., Ortelius
                  Ortet. Synon. in Ioppe., and other
Geographers witnesse; but the very Italian
name of Ioppe, which to this day is called Iapho
                  Ortet ibid.,
doth demonstrate. Now Ioppe is a Maritime towne,
on the West side of Iury, situated on the mare Mediterraneum,
or as some call it, Syriacum; whence
there is a straight passage through the Mediterraneā
Sea to Tharsus of Cilicia, but notNeque en
                        •
                     m Ionas de Ioppe nauigans, ad Indiā poterat peruenire, ad quam illo mari non potest nauigari Hier. com. in ca. 2, Isai. to the Indies. If Ionas
had purposed then to flye to India, his passage
should haue beene on the East side of Iury, by the
redde Sea, and the Bay of Arabia; the same that Solomons
ships tooke from Ezion-geber
                  1. Kin. 9. 26. to Ophir, or
Tharshis. For that these are two Synonimal names of
the same place, (though Tharshis withall signifieth
the Ocean) the text it selfe imports: Seeing Iehosaphat
purposing to send whither Salomon had done, is
said in one place1▪ King. 22. 48., to send to Ophir, and in another2. Chron. 20. 36.,
to make ships to go to Tharshis; but God disappointed
his voyage, and brake his ships at Ezion-geber▪
                   in the
red Sea, so that they were not able to go to Tharshis. Besides,
the vulgar Latine translator, though hee knew
Tharshis in Hebrew to signifie the Sea, and so sometimes
translates
                     
                        〈…〉
                      in mari; vbi H
                        •
                     br, est 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. K
                        •
                     ng. 22. 49. it, yet speaking of Salomons sending
to Ophir, hee takes Tharshis for the proper name of
the Region, euen the same with Ophir; saying1. King. 10. 22., That
the Kings nauie, per mare ibat in Tharshis, went by Sea
vnto Tharshis, bringing gold from thence: and againe1. Kin. 9. 28.,
when they came to Ophir, sumptum inde aurum detulerunt,
They brought from thence gold vnto Salomon.
So he cleerely shewes Tharshis and Ophir to bee the
selfe same place whither Salomon sent for gold, and
from whence his Nauie brought gold vnto him.

                  Gasp. Varrerius, after diligent examination of this
point concludesGasp. Varre
                        •
                     . Cōment. de Ophyra region. pa. 55., that the sacred Scripture, candem
regionem modò Ophir, modò Tharshis nuncupat,
doth call the same region, sometimes Ophir, sometimes
Tharshis.
               
               Now omitting some vnlikely conceits where Ophir
was, (as that of Volaterranus and Ludou. Venetus:
who supposeVt testatur Varer. lib. cit. pa▪ 24. it to bee the Iland Sofala in the Ethiopian
sea, as the Chalde paraphrastChal. Paraphan. 1. Reg. 10. 22. takes Tharshis
for Africke, the Septuagint
                  Septuag. ibid. for Carthage:) there are
two opinions which are of all most probable. The
former, that Ophir is some region of East India:
either Iapan, as Maginus
                  Mag. in sua Geogr. pa 261 vbi Auream Chersonesum ait esse Iapanicā insulam, sicque M
                        •
                     r
                        •
                     atotorem sentire addit. and Mercator thought:
or, as Rab. Maurus, Lyranus, and Varrerius
                  Varr. lib. cit. pa. 22. 23. & per totum lib. (who
both cites the other, and earnestly contends for this
opinion) as also Acosta
                  Acost. li. 1. hist. Ind. c. 13., and Mounsieur de Plessis
                  Vt testatur Sr. Wat. Ragh. lib. 1. hist. ca. 8. §. 15.
affirme, Ophir is the same with that which Ptolomie
calles Aurea Chersonesus, and now is knowne
by the names of Pegu, Siam, Malaca, and Sumatra;
all situate beyond the gulfe of Bengala. To
them may bee added both Iosephus and St. Ierome:
whoHier. Epist. ad Princip. quae est 140. call Ophir, Regionem Indiae, A Region of India,
(they meane without all doubt East India.)
And againeHier. Epist▪ ad Marcel., Tharshis is a Region of India, as also Iosephus
teacheth. Of which Regions of Pegu, Malaca,
and Sumatra (though many trauellers in our times
doe report the quite contrary) yet Varrerius
                  Var. lib. cit. pa. 34. and
Acosta
                  Acosta loc. cit. confidently auouch, that in them, there
is, ingens copia, verie great abundance of gold, siluer,
precious stones, Iuory, Apes, Peacockes, and rare woods,
fit to make musical instruments; which were the chiefe

commodities1. King. 10. v. 11. 12. 22. that Salomon had from Ophir.
               
               The other opinion is imbracedOphir Postello Peru videtur; & idem affirmat Ar. Montanus. Abr. Orte
                        •
                     in Synon. Geograph. voce Ophir. by Postellus, and
Arias Montanus, That Ophir is a part of the West India,
or America, as they teach, Peru; as Franc. Vatablus
thinkes, Hispaniola. Now besides that affinityVtrisque Cheseph, argentum: Chet
                        •
                     n, aurum purū. Puah, igne 
                        〈◊〉
                      aut su
                        •
                     tlere (vt tra
                        •
                     sfert Iun. Psal. 12. 6. & Ezec. 21. 36.) notat.,
which some haue obserued betwixt that Indian
speech, and the Phenician or Hebrew language: besides
that coniecture which is taken from the Insulae
Salomonis, which are situate in the Mare del Zur,
neere to the coast of Noua Guinea: there is one perswading
inducement for this opinion; In that the
holy Scriptures speaking of that gold which Salomon
vsed in the Temple, and which in all likelihood
was the same which was brought from Ophir, expresly
calls2. Chro. 3. 6. it Zahab Peruaijm, the gold of Perüaijm,
or the two Perues: Perüaijm and by contraction Paruaijm:
being as Arias Montanus
                  Ar. Mont▪ tract▪ de Phaleg, & Gentiū regionibus. noteth, the Duall
number of Peru: whereof, as heeAr. Mont. loc. cit. saith, there were
two great Regions diuided by a great Isthmus (that is
where Mexico is sited) both which being peopled by Ophir
(the grand-childe of Phaleg
                  Gen. 10. 29.:) who planting his
posteritie there, and first inhabiting those countries,
left his owne name (of Ophir) vnto them both, and till
the time of Salomon, and after, they were so called. But
since then, by a little inuersion of the letters (the Radicalls
of Ophir, and Peru being the same) they were
called each of them by it selfe Peru, (which comes of
Parah to multiply or increase: this countrey being a
very great increase or addition to the former world:
and both of them together in the Duall number Perüaijm:
The name of Peru stil continuing to the one, called

also thence by Geographers in Latine Paruana,
or Perüana, that is, the Region of Peru: the other
is now by a new name, and new inhabitants called
Hispaniola. The like is declared by Shindler
                  Shindl. in suo Lexic. Hebraeo. a learned
Hebritian, who saith that by Paruaijm are noted
the two Regions, of Peru, and Hispaniola.
               
               I confesse the iourney from Iudaea to Peru, was
very long, specially in those dayes when Nauigators,
as is confessedAcost lib. & cap. eit. Varr. lib. cit. pa. 45. &, Sr. Wal. Ragh. loc. cit., not knowing that admirable
vse, and therefore not hauing the helpe of the loadstone,
Carde, and Compasse, were forced for many occasions,
but especially for their owne safetie and direction, littus
legere, to saile neere the shore. But seeing three
yeares (so long was Salomons
                  1. Kin. 10. 22 Nauie in going and
comming) is a long time also, there is no doubt
but a Nauie, though sayling along by the shoares
of Arabia, India, and the Moiuccae, and from
thence passing to Noua Guinea, (which is neere
vnto them) and so holding the coast of Noua
Guinea on their right hand, and in like sort the
Terra Australis, the streights of Magellane, and
the South side of America, might with ease both
goe to Peru (whither Salomon by his great and inspired
wisedome might direct them) and returne also
in that space of three yeares.
               To them who imbrace this second opinion I
might adioyne Goropius Becanus a Dutchman of
Traiectum in Brabant; for he also resolutely holdesGorop. Beca. lib. 7. Hispanic. pa. 112.,
Ophir, whither Salomon sent his Nauie, to be Peru, or
America, which hee calleth Orbis Atlanticus, because
Atlas, as hee fancieth, the grandchild of Iaphet,

first sayled thither passing from Africke through the
vaste Ocean, called Oceanus Atlanticus. But Goropius
doth so ouerflow with vncouth, vnprobable, and extrauagant
conceits, that I thought his name would
rather disgrace then gaine credite to this assertion.
For who can with patience heare that which hee
most confidently auoucheth. That not the Hebrew
                  Eorum assertio defendi non potest, qui linguam Hebraeam omniū primam esse contendunt Gorop. lib. 2. Hermathenae. pa. 25. & saepe alibi., but the low Dutch, or Germaine
                  Linguam Cymbricā primam esse contendimus ib
                        •
                     d. Cymbricam vero su
                        •
                     m vocat. lib. 1. Gallic▪ pa▪ 6. 
                        〈…〉
                      nullam lingua
                        •
                     , nostr▪ esse priorē. Lib
                        •
                     o 9. Her
                        ••
                     at. pa 2
                        •
                     4. Gall
                        •
                      & Te
                        •
                      o
                        •
                     es nec 
                        〈◊〉
                     . nec lingua differūt. Gor. lib. 2. Gallic. pa. 34. Cernimus cla
                        •
                     issimè Gallica
                        •
                     n linguam non cum Alemanica conuenire, sed prors
                        •
                     s cum ea quam h
                        •
                     ctenus Antwertpiani, caeterique Cymbri vtuntur. lib. 1▪ Gallic. pa. 11. & 6. Et; G
                        •
                     lli olim e
                        •
                     ndem cum Germanis linguam habuerunt lib. eod. 1. pa. 4. 
                  language (being
the very same with the Cymbrian, and also with
the old Gallican tongue, as hee teacheth, and which
hath great affinitie with our Saxon;) was the first
and primitiue language of the world: the verie
same which Adam spake, and was author
                  Primus no
                        ••
                     rae linguae Architectus fuit Orpheus Gor. lib. 5. Hermat. pa. 103. Is vero 
                        〈◊〉
                      ante Diluuium Orpheus dictus est, fuit Adam. lib 
                        •
                     od. pa. 104. 
                  of it also:
and which was vsed by all men till the confusion of
languages at Babel? Againe, that when the Hebrew,
Greeke, or Latine words are either the same, or haue
affinitie with the Cymbrian, that is, the old Gailike,
or the Germaine tongue, then they are, and must bee
deriued
                  E Cymbrica reliqua deriuantur. Gor. Hermat. lib. 9. pa. 204 
                  from the Germaine, as being the first language
of all. Vpon which ground hee deriuesLib. 4. Hermat. pa. 94 the Greeke
Ate, from the Germane Hate; and the Hebrew Adam
                  Ibid. pa. 95.,
from the Greeke Ate, and the Germane,
Dam, which signifieth a banke: because Adam was
like a banke continually assaulted with the waues of
Satans 
                     ••
                  ate, and temptations: and the L
                     •
                  tine Anima,
from the German Asem, which signifieth Breath.
To omit the rest (there are in him infinit of this kind)

the very name of Ophir he deriueth frō
                  Gor. lib. 7. Hispan. pa. 112 the German
Ouer, because it is beyond the Atlantike Sea: and Peru,
fromIbidem. the German Pher, which signifieth a custody;
and Peruaijm which is mentioned, 1. Chron. 3,
he deriuesIbid
                        •
                     m. from the 
                     •
                  ame German Pher and Heim,
an house; as if it betokened some house made by Atlas
for the safetie of merchandise to bee exported
from America. Such vnapt and inept assertions
(which abound in him) perswaded me to thinke him
vnworthy of citing for that opinion.
               Two exceptions are against this second opinion
taken by someSr. Wal. Ragh. loc. 
                        •
                     it. who thinke themselues expert in
these matters of Nauigation. The one, that the name
of Peru was giuen to that American region since the discouery
therof made by Americus and Columbus: The
other, that there is no possible passage thither, but by
crossing the maine Seas, and leauing the shores in a farre
distance: which reasons would easily perswade, and
more then perswade if they could be proued. But his
former proofe is very sle
                     •
                  ght and of no weight.
Fr. Pisarro, saith hee, hauing discouered those lands
on the South of Panama, some of them by signes enquired
of the Indian inhabitants, the name of that countrey:
and pointing with their hands ouer the riuer that ran by,
the Indians answered, Peru: therby noting, as he saith,
the name of the riuer, and from this their answer the region
was euer since called Peru. But herein his coniecture
is many wayes fallible: for why may not one
thinke that the Indians truely expressed the ancient
name of the Region? or, say they meant the riuer,
why may not that riuer take his name of the Region,
or the first planter in it, Ophir, whi
                     •
                  h by inuersion of

letters is Peru? Or why might not the Spaniards as
well misconceiue the answer of the Indians, as the
Indians mistake their demand? And for his second
reason, it may seeme euen a wonder, that one professing
so exact skill in these matters, could be ignorant
that there is a straight course, and that almost
fast by the shores, from the Moluccaes to the coast
of Noua Guinea, and so by Terra Australis to the
streights of Magellane and thence to Peru, as both
the Mappes of Ortelius, Maginus, Pet. Bertius, and
others, and much more the terrestriall globes of
Hondi
                        •
                     s, of Iohn Kereus, of William Iohnson, and
for ought I can perceiue, of all later Geographers,
doe make euident to the eye. Had hee well considered
either his Mappes or Globes, he might haue
sayde that iourney to Peru had beene long or tedious,
but hee neuer could haue truely sayd, it had
beene impossible. But leauing the iudgement of this
matter to the learned; it doth suffise for our present
purpose, that whether soeuer of the Indies, either
East or West be meant by Tharshis, the forged Athanasius
doth shew himselfe a verie witlesse man: it
being as ridiculous to say that Ionas tooke shipping
at Ioppa to goe to either of the Indies; as if one
purposing to goe from Hull to Barwicke, should
sayle first to Douer, and thence to Plimmouth, and so
hauing compassed the whole Iland of Brittaine,
should strike in at some Hauen nere vnto Barwicke.
               
               Lastly, in the 115. Quest. there is mention of the
heresie
                  Haec est haeresis corum 
                        〈◊〉
                      a
                        •
                     unt incorruptibile 
                        •
                     ort us assump 
                        〈◊〉
                      dominum 
                        〈◊〉
                      Virgin
                        •
                     . Orta 
                        〈…〉
                     . 
                  of the Aphthardokites; which springing vp
in the time of Iustinian from one Iulianus Bishop

of Halicarnassus, as both Liberatus
                  Liberat ca 19., and Leo
                        •
                     
                     tius
                  Leont. lib. de sect. Act. 5.
testifie, the forgerer as in euery part of that
booke hee bewrayes his grosse ignorance and folly;
so in this, hee demonstrates himselfe to haue
liued at least two hundred yeares after Athanasius.
And yet this sottish forgerie stu
                     •
                  t with such vntruethes,
doth Pope Hadrian alledge for the writing
of that most learned and renowned Bishop of
Alexandria Saint Athanasius.
               
               The next Pope cited by them as an approouer
of the Edict, is Leo the ninth, who though
hee bee most confident in this matter, alledging
this Charter as a record of vndoubted credit,
and whereof no scruple may be made: yet is hee as
insolent and shamelesse as Hadrtan, in maintaining
vntruthes and forged writings, if their Romane
See may gaine ought thereby. What an
insolent and vntrue saying is that of Leo, in this
veryLeo 9. Epist 1. ca. 32. Epistle, The faith of the Church of Rome,
nec hactenus defecit, nec deficiet in saecula, neither
hath yet, nor euer shall hereafter 
                     •
                  aile; whereas
the faith of Pope Vigilius, and the Roman Church to
haue failed, Vigilius definitiuely and iudiciallyConsti
                        •
                     utū Vigil
                        •
                     , apud Bat. an. 553. nu. 50. Et seq. defending
the three chapters, and so all the heresies of Nestorius,
the whole fi
                     •
                  t general Councel is an vndoubted
witnes; as in another treatise touching that
whole Councell I haue at large demonstrated. Of
Pope Honorius, that he dogmatized, and doctrinally
taught, defined & defended the heresie of the Monothelites,
the 
                        •
                     ixth
                  Conc gen. 6. Act. 12. 13. & 14., seuenth
                  Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 7. an Epistola Synod. ad omnes fideles., and eight
                  Conc. 8. Act. 7. 
                  generall Councels
are all witnesses, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                  , that if Leo and others
had not 
                     〈…〉
                   Adamants, they
would bl
                     •
                  sh to deny▪
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
               
               
                  
What credit can be giuen to this Leo in his alleaging
of ancient records, when in the very same Epistle
also hee saith, that Pope
                  Leo 9. Epist 1. ca. 10. 
                  Siluester did decree,
and Constantine the Emperour, vniuersa Nicena Synodo
apprebante & subscribente: the whole first Nicen
Synod approuing & subscribing to the same, that the
highest See should be iudged of none? An vntruth
without all colour fathered on the Nicen Councell.
For neither was that Canon which Leo speakes of,
made in the Nicen, but in the second Roman
                  Conc. Rom 2. sub Silvestto ca. 20. 
                  Synod:
neither was there euer any such second Romane
Councell, which decreed that, as beforeSup
                        •
                     a ca. 1. & 2. &c. wee haue
proued: neither did the Nicen Fathers euer approue
or subscribe to that Canon. Such shamelesse belying
of most holy, and defending of forged Councels
and Canons, doth demonstrate to euery man
how he may trust this Pope Leo in citing of ancient
records.
               In another EpistleLeo 9. Epist 4., the same Leo to proue the authoritie
of Metropolitans, and specially of the See
of Rome, cites the Epistles of Pope Clement the
first, Anacletus, and Anicetus, most base and sottish
forgeries. The Epistle of Clements which he intends,
is the first which beares Clements name: of which
Posseuine the Iesuite truly sayth, Non
                  Posseu. in A
                        •
                     par. verbo Clemens. pa. 366. 
                  potest esse Clementis,
it can be none of Clement. Nor can it indeed
possibly be his: for Clement is there sayd to haue writ
this by the direction of Saint Peter vnto Iames the brother
of our Lord seuen yeares
                  Epistola Clementis scripta est post annū 13. Neronis Bin. Not. in eam Epist. Iacobus autem mortu
                        •
                      est▪ ann. 7. Neronis, vt testatur Eusebius in Chro. & Hier. lib. de scrip. eccles. in Iacobo 
                  after Iames was dead:
& in this Epistle Clement aduiseth Iames being dead,
to keepe inuiolably
                  Vt seruari o
                        •
                     nia immaculata praecipias Clem. Ep. 1. in fine. 
                  all the precepts of Saint Peter. In
the Epistle of Anacletus,
                  Anacl. Epist 3. Haec est quam Leo 
                        〈◊〉
                     . the name of Cephas is ridiculously

(as their owne Ferus
                  Fer. com in ca. 1. Iohan. professeth) interpreted
to signifie caput. And of all those three Epistles
of Anacletus, their owne Cardinall Cusanus
sayth, Credo
                  Cus. lib. 2. de Concord. ca. 34., I beleeue them all to bee Apocriphall:
and Contius
                  Cont. in Cau. 6. q. 1. ca. B
                        •
                     atus. more plainely, there are many things
which demonstrate these Epistles of Anacletus to bee
counterfeite. The Epistle of Anicetus which Leo
mentions, is misdoubted by Bellarmine
                  Fortè falsum titulum prae se fert. Bell. lib. 2. de Monach. ca. 40. himselfe to
bee falsly entituled, but by the date thereof it
is demonstrated to bee a counterfeite, for in
the time of Anicetus Popedome, Gallicanus and
Ruffinus were not Consuls, nor in ten yeares
either before or after; as by the Fasti both Greeke
and Latine is euident.
               In the same EpistleEpist. 4. Leonis 9. is alledged a Canon out
of the Epistle of Eleutherius
                  Epist. Eleuth ad Galliae prouincias. ca. 2. & citatur Cau. 3. q. 6. ca. Quam
                        ••
                     s., that Primates and
Metropolitanes in other Prouinces may discusse and
examine the causes of Bishops, Diffinitiuam tamen
sententiam, yet they may not pronounce a difinitiue
sentence till they haue consulted with the Pope; to
giue such sentence, belongs onely to the Pope.
A forgerie also as the former: for besides other
proofes, certaine sentences in this Epistle,
taken verbatim
                  Illa verba Eleuther. Nec litigantibus, &c. desumpta sunt ex l. 1. de Iudicijs. cod. Theod Ba
                        •
                     an 187 nu. 2. 
                  out of the Imperiall law of Constantine
and the interpretation thereof, are a cleare
euidence: for the forgerer thereby bewrayes
himselfe to haue liued 100. yearesEleutherius obijt, an. 194 Bar. eo an. nu▪ 1. at least after Eleutherius
was dead.
               To omit the rest, (for Leo the 9▪ is full of them)
obserue but that one, which hee produceth as
an holy Canon, and by it would defend the
dignitie of their See. You must know, saith heLeo 9. Epist. 4., that

without the Popes consent a generall Councell cannot
be called, nor any Bishop deposed, as in the sacred
Canons you shall finde.
               
               This Canon is no where found, but in an EpistleEpist. Iulij ad 
                        〈…〉
                      to. 1 Conc. apud Bin p
                        •
                     . 399.
written to the Easterne Bishops in the behalfe
of Athanasius, bearing the name of Pope Iulius, and
out of that Epistle it is alledged by Gratian
                  Caus. 3▪ q. 6. ca. Dadum.. Now
this to be vndoubtedly a forgerie, many euident circumstances
doe declare. It is dated when Felicianus
and Maximianus were Consuls; and that was neuer:
for the colleague of Felicianus was Tatianus, as both
the Fasti Greeke and Latine, and the Imperiall EdictsL. 
                        •
                      de Cō
                     trah. empt. & l. 2. de excus. a
                        •
                     tif. Cod. Theod.
dated in that Consulship doe witnesse. Let
vs omit this, and thinke it a fault of the writer: suppose
(as Binius
                  Bin. notis in eam Epistolā quam esse Iul
                        •
                     j contendit. pa. 400. b. doth stoutly affirme) that it was
written in the Consulship of Felicianus & Tatianus;
yet that doth more certainely conuince the forgerie:
for thereinEpist. Iul. loc cit. ca. 2. 
                  Iulius reprooues the Easterne Bishops
for holding of Councels, and condemning Bishops
without his consent; whereas, saith he, the sacred Canons
doe forbid both these to be done. Whence it is euident
that this Epistle must follow the Councell at Antioch.
For after the exile of Athanasius, till then, the Eusebians
neither did nor durst hold any Councell against
him: the Emperour Constantine the yonger,
professingIntelligetis 
                        •
                     uantae apud nos reuerētiae fuerit. Epist. Constantini iunioris, ad Pop. Alex
                        •
                     nd. apud Athan. Apol. 2 pa. 219. such loue and patronage to Athanasius.
Yea it is cleere by Athanasius and Iulius
                  Vestri Legati Concilium à nobis indici postularunt. Iulij Epist. apud Athan. Apol. 2. pa. 199 himself, that
the Arians and other maligners of him, sent Legates
                  Quin & Eus
                        •
                     biani literas misere, Synodu
                        ••
                      
                     
                        ••
                     sserunt 
                        〈◊〉
                     , & ipsi Iulio si velle
                        •
                     , arb tri
                     
                        ••
                     m causae detulerunt Athā. Apol. 
                        •
                     . pa. 198.
                  to entreate of Pope Iulius that a Synod might bee held at
Rome for examining all the whole cause of Athanasius;
promising to come thither, & offering to refer the whole
cause vnto his hearing and iudgement. But afterwards

                  Constantine being dead, contrarie to their owne
promise, they found a fitter opportunitie by means
of Constantius, to hold a SynodSocr. lib. 2. ca. 5. at Antioch in Encaenijs,
where they condemned Athanasius; and this
their Decree they would haue to bee of force to
bind both Pope Iulius and all others, as if it were
the Decree of a generall Councell. Till this time,
Iulius had no occasion, nor reason to vrge that
Canon of holding generall Councels. And that
vpon this occasion hee vrged a Canon to that purpose,
both Socrates
                  Docet Iulius eos contra Ecclesiae canones egi
                        ••
                     e. Soc. lib. 2. ca. 13. and the vndoubted EpistleOportuit secund
                        •
                     m Canonem, & non isto modo fieri. Epist. Iul. apud Athan. Apol. 2. pa. 202
of Pope Iulius, recorded by Athanasius, doe testifie.
Whence it is cleere, that this Epistle which
the forgerer dateth, and Binius assures vs to haue
beene written in the beginning of Iulius Popedome
anno 337. cannot bee esteemed the true Epistle
of Iulius, seeing the Councell of Antioch was not
held till foure yearesVt liquet ex Socr. lib. 2. ca. 5. after that time.
               But the true and vndoubted EpistleEa extat apud Athanas. Apol. 2. pa. 198 of Iulius
written to the Eastern Bishops, quite different from
this, doth cleerely demonstrate the forgerie hereof;
And the Canon also which here is alledged for sacred,
makes euident the same. The Canon which
the forgerer intended, is out of all question, that
which Socrates mentioneth Iulius to haue alledged
against their Councell at Antioch. Iulius, saith heeSoc. lib. 2. ca. 13.,
writ to the Easterne Bishops, that they did against the
Canons of the Church, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
because they called not him, nor the Westerne Bishops
to the councell, wheras the Canon of the Church
forbids any decrees (which should binde the whole

would haue that at Antioch to doe) to be made without
the consent of the Bishop of Rome: to wit, without
his consent sought for. This to haue beene truely
and indeed the exception of Iulius, his vndoubted
EpistleIulij Epist. apud Athan. loc. citat. 202. written from a Romane Synod, doth euidently
witnesse. Oportuit scribere omnibus nobis, vt
ita ab omnibus quod iustum est decerneretur, you should
haue written to vs all, and called vs to the Councell,
that so what is iust might haue beene decreed by all.
The Canons most iustly forbid any decree (which
should haue force to binde all) to be made without
the knowledge of all, and vnlesse their consent were
sought for at least; vnlesse all who had right to come
to make the decree, were called to the Synod, and
to the making of that decree. Equitie and reason
teach, Quod
                  Sexti Dec. lib. 5 de Regu Iuris, Regul, 
                        •
                     9. 
                  omnes tangit ab omnibus approbari debet,
that which bindes all must be approued or decreed
by all. This being the true and indubitate Canon,
the forgerer whom Leo followed, makes Iulius
to say, that no Councell can be held, nor no Bishops bee
condemned without the Popes consent: but howsoeuer
others may examine the cause, yet the last and finall
sentence must belong to the Pope: which to be
a forgerie, and quite repugnant to the sacred Canons,
the Epistle of the Africane Bishops to Pope
Celestine doth demonstrate: for therein they testifieCone. Afric cap. 105.
the Nicen Councell to haue decreed, that the causes as
well of Bishops, as other inferiour Clearlees should be
referred suis Metropolitanis, to the Metropolitans of
each Prouince, and that the causes finiendae essent,
should be there ended where they did arise, leauing
no appeale from their sentence to any, no not to

the Pope, but onely to a Prouinciall first, and then to
a generall Councell.
               By this now it doth cleerely appeare how shamelesse
Pope Leo 9. was in seeking to maintaine the
dignitie of their See by forged authors, and counterfeit
Decrees, which hee magnifies for sacred writings,
and holy Canons. Now, if Leo would dare
to deale thus shamefully for the honour and gaine
of holding Councells, and of being a iudge of Bishops;
would hee not much more aduenture, to set
forth like forged Records, for gaine of Rome, of Italy,
and of all the Westerne Prouinces; to bring all
Emperors in subiection vnder his feet, and to hold
his stirrop, as Constantine in this Donation is said
                  Stratoris officiū illi (Siluestro) exh. buimus, ait Constantinus in Edicto donationis. 
                  to
haue done before?
               The third Pope alledged, as a witnesse of this
Charter, is Eugenius the 3. He, saith Marta
                  Mart. loc. cit. nu. 37., approued
the Decrees compiled by Gratian, both the Triticum
and Palea therein; and one of Palea is the chapter
Constantinus, wherein this Edict is expressed. Be it
so: yet hee approoued it no otherwise then as Palea.
And it had beene a point worthy of Martaes labour,
to prooue that the Popes approbation can transubstantiate
chaffe into wheat, or make of a forged, a true
and authenticall Charter. Againe, because Martae
doth so delight himselfe in this Palea, which the ambitious
Cardinall foisted into Gratians Decrees, I
would gladly know, of what truth and credit that
Cardinal was. Certainly, seeing he was so shamelesse
in lying and forging, as that in Gratians owne presenceVt liquet ex Marta. ibid. nu. 35. 36.,
and before his face, hee blushed not to challenge
the booke of Decrees for his owne worke,

wherein he was sure that Gratian would conuince
him of vntruth, how can any thinke, but that hee
would be most audacious and impudent, in belying
Constantine, and fathering that Decree on him,
wherein he knew that no such liuing witnesse as Gratian
was, could bee produced against him? Besides,
what credite can any man possibly giue to Pope Eugenius
(if hee approued, as Marta saith hee did) the
whole booke of the Decrees of Gratian, which is
stuft with forgeries and false writings? Dist. 16. ca.
Septuaginta, is cited, The Epistle of Athanasius vnto
Pope Marcus, concerning the burning of the Nicene
Canons. Whereas that burning happened diuers
yeares after Marcus his death: and Marcus was dead
also at that time, when hee writ (as they say) his answer
to that Epistle, as Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. de scrip. eccl. in Gratiano. witnesseth. Causa
24. qu. 1. ca. Haec est fides, he alledgeth a Canon vnder
the name of St. Ierome, which was certainly taken
out of the booke of Pelagius the Arch-heretike,
as the same Bellarmine
                  Bell. ibid. againe witnesseth. Causa 10.
qu 9. ca. Quia sacerdotes, hee cites another Canon, as
out of a booke of St. Ierome, of which Bellarmine confesseth
Bell ibid., that it is a counterfeite going vnder the
name of St. Ierome. Causa 22. qu. 2. ca. Nec artificioso.
He cites as the booke of St. Augustine, that Treatise,
de conflictu virtutum & vitiorum, which to bee a forgery,
Bellarmine
                  Ibid. rightly proues, seeing St. Benedict
is named therein, who liued more then an hundred
yeares after Augustine was dead. No marueile if Pope
Eugenius approuing these, and an hundred such like
passages in Gratian, approued also that Chaffe of
Canstantines Donation, which is of the same stamp

with the former. Chaffe it was, and for all the approbation
of Eugenius, or any other Pope, Chaffe it
will be euer, and ought for euer to be so accounted.
               As for Pope Nicholas 3. (to whom may be added,
Clement
                  Clementin. lib. 2. tit. 9. ca. Romani. 5.)
It was but a point of good manners in
thē, to approue that Charter, which they saw Hadrian
1. Leo 9. & Eugenius 3. to haue before them, commended
for authenticall. Who were they, that they
should giue the lye to 3. of their predecessours? But
that which disgraceth both thē & the former Popes
is, that Nicholas, and Clement, followed heerein Eugenius,
Leo, & Adrian; and they followed the Acts of
Siluester. Now those Acts being, as wee haue before
demonstrated, nothing but a very sinke of lies, and
sottish fables, the Popes by their approbation can no
way giue or gain any credit to such vntruths, but they
impaire their owne credit, and extreamely disgrace
thēselues, in seeking by such fabulous & forged writings
to vphold the dignity of their pontificall See.
               After the foure Popes, let vs examine two of their
general Councels, which are alledged as witnesses of
this Donation. The former is their second Nicene, of
which Marta saithMart. ca. cit. nu. 10., that it beares witnesse to the
Donation. Steuchus more plainely and confidently
affirmes, that this
                  Aug. Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 87. 
                  takes away all doubt concerning the
truth of this Donation, seeing the definitions of generall
Councells are of greatest authoritie.
               
               The answere is easie: first, in that second Nicene
Councell, there is no mention at all of this
Donation, nor ought whence it can be collected.
For though they approue that part of the Actes of
Siluester, wherein the persecution, leprosie, and baptisme

of Constantine by Siluester, is set downe, yet
of the other part of those Actes, wherein this Donation
is expressed, they make no mention at all. And
that the one may be approued, and the other reiected,
Card. Baronius is an vndeniable witnesse, who
admitsBar. an. 324 nu. 31, 32. 33. the former, and yet the later hee vtterly
condemnesBar. an. 1191 nu. 52. as a forgery. Againe, the second Nicene
Councell is of no truth or credite in the world.
They are so impudent in alledging lies, fables, and
forged writings, that three quarters of those Actes,
though they be very large (I speake it confidently,)
are nothing else, but either vntruths or forgeries.
The Councell of Frankford gaue a true and iust censure
of that their Nicene Synod, when it saidCar. Magni. lib. 3. ca. 30., that
those Fathers being destitute of proofes out of the sacred
Scriptures, turned themselues, Ad apocryphas &
risu dignas naenias, To apocryphall and ridiculous
toyes. Of a thousand, take but two or three examples.
               First, the Actes of Siluester, touching Constantines
persecution, leprosie, and baptisme, are approoued
                  Conc. illud probat primā Epistolā. Had. 1. Act. 2, pa. 313. In ea recitantur Acta Siluestri vt authentica. Act. 2. pa. 309. 
                  therein; which Acts to be not onely vntrue, but a
very puddle of lies, wee haue beforeSup. ca. 10. demonstrated.
               Secondly, that miraculous narration set
downe by Euagrius, of the Image of Christ made
without hands, and sent to Abgarus King of Edessa,
by which that citie was made vnconquerable, is approoued
Conc. Nic. 2. Act 5. pa. 354. in that second Nicene Councell. A very
fiction and fable, as by the euent, and diuers other
reasons is cleerely proued in the defence of Iustinian
against Baronius.
               
               Thirdly, in that Councell is related out of St.

                  Athanasius
                  Sermo B. Patris nostri Athanasij, de Imagine, &c. Conc. Nic, 2. Act. 4. pa. 329. Totus hic liber legitur & recipitur sub nomine S. Athanasij in Conc. Niceno 2. Bell. lib. de script. eccl. in Athanasio. pa. 116., the whole booke, De passione Imaginis
domini: How that Image of Christ, taken by Nicodemus
his owne hands, was brought to Berithus; how the
Iewes by chance getting it, vsed all the indignities to it,
which their fathers had done to Christ himselfe: they
scoffed at it, they crowned it with thornes, they gaue it
gall and vineger to drinke, they crucified it, and they
pierced it with a launce; how a great deale of blood issued
out of it, which cured the lame, the blinde, and all
diseases: vpon which miracle the Iewes were conuerted,
the blood put into glasses, was sent by the Bishop of Berithus
throughout Asia, Europe, and Africke, and a solemne
festiuall obserued for that miracle. This being
read in the Councel, all the Bishops were so moued
therewith, that they
                  Totam hāc congregationem, Athanasius, ad compunctionem & lachrimas cō
                     pulit. ibid. pa. 331. 
                  fell to sighing and weeping. And
for the truth and certaintie of this story, it is added,
Haec
                  Ib. pa. 330. b. 
                  certa est & manifesta, This is the certaine and manifest
narration, touching the Image at Berithus: and againe,
Haec est vera
                  Ib. pa. 331. a. 
                  & vehementer credita ratio, This
is the true and most credible story, touching the blood
of our Lord Iesus Christ, which came out of the Image
that was crucified at Berithus.
               
               Now this Treatise, De Passione Imaginis, not to
be the booke of St. Athanasius, that famous Bishop
of Alexandria, but a lying and fabulous writing, going
vnder his name, and inserted among his workes,
is by their owne writers confessed. This miracle, saith
Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. de script. eccl. in Athanasio., happened an. 766. (and that is more then
390. yearesAthanasius obijt an. 372. Bar. eo an. nu. 63. after the death of Athanasius:) They
erre, saith Baronius
                  Bar. an. 787. nu. 29., who thinke St. Athanasius, the
famous Bishop of Alexandria, to bee the authour of this
booke; it was, res recens gesta, a matter which happened

but a little before the 2. Nicene Councell: and
againe, Plane
                  Bar. notis in Martyr. Rom. Nou. 9. 
                  constat, It is certaine that the author of
this history touching the passion of Christs Image, is not
Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria: for this thing happened
in the reigne of Constantine and Irene: And they
entred into the Empire, but an. 780Bar. an. 780. nu. 5.. that is, but seuen
yeeresNam Concil. Nic. 2 habitum est an. 787. Bar. eo an. nu. 10. before the 2. Nicene Councel.
               Then it is certaine their Colen censure of Monhemius
is of no truth or credit; wherin it is confidently
auerredCens. errorū Catech. Monhem. Dial. 3. pa. 59., That this was the writing of St. Athanasius,
the most famous Greeke Writer; and most earnest propugner
of the faith. Certaine that their Fewar dentius is of
no credit, who by the warrant of this 2. Nicene Councell
saithFeward. cō. in Iren. lib. 1. ca. 24. §.. Nicodemus., that Athanasius writ this 1260. yeares before his time, and he said this, an. 1596. Nay it is certaine
also, that this their 2. Nicene Councell is of no credit;
for though Baronius labour to wipe away this
blemish, by sayingBar. an. 787. nu. 29. & 30. & Not. in Mart. Rom. Nou. 9., that those Nicene Fathers meant
not Athanasius of Alexandria, but some other Bishop of
that name, who liued after the yeare 780. (in which
Constantine
                  Hoc miraculum tempore horum Augustorum contigisse asserit. Not. in Martyr. loc cit. and Irene began to reigne:) yet he doth
but therein wash the Blackamoore. For that they
meant St. Athanasius Bishop of Alexandria, not only
Fewardentius (of whom I spake of late) witnesseth,
but Posseuine & Card. Bellarmine also, who both sayCitatur tanquā antiquissima historia in 7. Synodo. Bel. lib. de Imag. sanct. ca. 10 §. Tertia. Posseuin. in Athanas. pa. 127.,
that this is cited by those Nicene Fathers, vt antiquissima
historia, as a most ancient story; and it were too
ridiculous for thē to call this story most ancient, had
it happened but some 7. as Baronius, or some 20. years,
as Bellarmine accounts before the Nicene Councell.
               
                  Peter, Bishop of Nicomedia, who broughtAdfero diui Athanasij librum. ait Pet. Nico. in Conc. Niceno 2. Act. 4 pa. 329. the
booke of Athanasius into the Nicene Synod to bee

there read, puts this out of all doubt. For heRelatio miraculorū quae per Imaginem Christi facta sunt Berithi. ea extat inter. opera S. Athan. ante librum de passione Imag., in a
Councell held at Caesarea, wherein were present all the
Bishops of Asia, testified this to bee the booke, Athanasij
Alexandrinae vrbis Episcopi, of Athanasius Bishop of
Alexandria. And that Tharasius, and the whole
Nicene Councell thought no otherwise, it is cleere
by the very speech of Tharasius, who, after this was
read out of Athanasius, demandsConc. Nie. 2. Act, 4. p. 331 
                  Why miracles
were not wrought by our Images. Whereupon the marginall
Annotation, as well in the ancient editions, as
in Binius, is this, Cur hodie imagines non edant miracula,
signifying plainely that Tharasius demands why the
Images in his time, did not worke miracles, as they
did in the times of Athanasius: thereby euidently
shewing, that both hee, and the Councell thought
the Image at Berithus, to haue wrought that miracle,
not in his time, hut long before, euen in the dayes
of the great Athanasius. Such palpable forgeries as
this, being approued by those Nicene Fathers, the
Councell of Frankford did vpon good and certaine
proofe sayCarol. magni. lib. 3. ca. 26. contra Nice. nā Synodū 2. of this Nicene Synod, Pene omnia, almost
all, in that vaine writing, which they cal the 7. Synod, are
like vnto dreaming imaginations & phantasticall obumbrations;
and there is almost nothing therin, quod non
aut somnij vanitatem, aut alterius deliramenti hebetudinem
redoleat, which doth not sauour either of a
vaine dreame, or of a dull dotage.
               The other Councell produced by Marta, is that
at Constance, where Iohn Wickliffe was
                  Artic. Ioh. Wickl. condē
                     nati in Conci. Constāt. fes
                        •
                     . 8. Art. 33. 
                  cōdemned, (beside
other matters) for saying that Siluester and Constantine
did erre, dotando Ecclesiā, by endowing or enriching
the Church: Whence, saith Marta
                  Mart. ea. 30 cit. nu. 20., it is gathered,
Non esse vlterius dubitandum de veritate &

validitate huius donationis, That none must doubt of
the truth and validitie of this Donation. A verie
sleight reason I perceiue, will remoue great doubts
with Marta; whereas the sillinesse of this collection
of Marta, with men of reason, will make this Donation,
for which hee pleads, to bee farre more doubtfull.
For what a consequence call you this, Constantine
endowed the Church with riches and possessions,
therefore hee gaue all Rome, Italy, and the Westerne Prouinces
to the Pope? Is there no dotation of the
Church, but such an ample Donation of the Westerne
Monarchy? Thomas Waldensis professedly against
Wicklife proues in a whole chapterTh. Wald. Doctr. to. 1. li. 4. art. 3. ca. 38., That long
before Constantines reigne, the Church was endowed
with lands, goods, and possessions, in the time of Pope
Pius the first in the time of Calixtus the first, and specially
in the time of Philip the first Christian Emperour,
60. yeares before Constantine; of whom Waldensis
saith, Hee embracing the faith, multis praedijs & facultatibus
dotauit Ecclesiam, endowed and enriched the
Church with lands and great wealth: Of whom Gotof.
Viterb.
                  Got. Viter. Chron. an. Chr. 248. thus versifieth, Et dedit Ecclesijs praedia
multa suis. The like doth Waldensis shew of diuers others.
Now if Philips endowing the Church with
many and great possessions, will not proue, that hee
made a Donation of Rome and Italy to the Pope, it
was a very witlesse conceite in Marta, to thinke that
because Constantine endowed the Church, therefore
without all doubt hee made this Charter of Donation.
Bene referunt de quarundam Ecclesiarum Romae dotatione,
sed de Imperio nihil, saith Iacob. Almane
                  Iac. Alm. lib. de domin. ciu. li & eccles. Concl. 2. §. Primum est., histories
and writers doe well mention the endowing

or enriching the Church by Constantine, but of the
Donation of the Empire made by him, they speake
nothing at all.
               That Constantine endowed the Church, and that
in a most princely manner, is not to be doubted. His
bountie herein, is at large set forth by Eusebius. At
Euseb. lib. 3. de vit. Constant. ca. 39. 
                  Christs sepulcher he builded a most sumptuous Church,
adorning it with so many gifts of gold, siluer, and pretious
stones, as were numero fere infinita, almost infinite
for number. He beautified
                  Ibidem cap. 40. & 41., regalibus ornamentis,
with princely ornaments, a Church at Mount Oliuet,
and another at Bethlem: both which his mother Helena
had builded; the one in honour of Christs natiuity,
the other of his ascention. He builded most munificent
Churches at Mambre
                  Ibid. ca. 50., where Christ appeared to Abraham;
at Heliopolis
                  Ibid. ca. 56., and at Nicomedia
                  Ibid. ca. 49., commaunding
the like to bee done
                  Eus. lib. 4. ca. 39. & lib. 2
                        •
                      ca. 39. & in omnibus Prouincijs Ecclesias exstruxit. lib. 3. ca. 47. 
                  in other Prouinces, giuing
charge, vt
                  Ibid lib. a. ca. 39. 
                  pecunijs non parceretur, that they should
spare for no cost, but receiue it out of his treasurie.
At Constantinople he builded
                  Euseb. lib. 3. cap. 47. 
                  many temples, among
them, thatEus. lib. 4. ca 58. 59. 60. 
                  in memorie of the Apostles (where hee appointed
himselfe to be buried) was most sumptuous, couered
with Gold, without with Brasse stript with Gold,
he enriched it with houses, bathes, walkes, and all other
things either necessarie or conuenient. At Rome (if that
booke, De Munificencia Constantini, may be trusted)
he builded the Constantinian
                  Libellus de Munif. Const. (quem fidelissimum vocat Baron an. 324 nu. 67.) extat post vitam Sal. tom. 1. Conc. 
                  Church, another of
Saint Peter, another of Saint Paul, others of S. Agnes,
S. Lawrence, S. Marcellinus, diuers others at
Ostia, at Alba, at Capua, at Naples, all of them so magnificent
and costly, that besides the Lands, and reuenewes
giuen vnto them, the verie Gold of one
                  Ea est Basilica Constantincana. 
                  onely

Church came to 1900. and the Syluer to 154000.
of our pounds. Besides all these, Ecclesijs
                  Euseb. lib. 1 de vit. Const. ca. 35. 
                  copiosa suppeditauit
subsidia, he gaue abundance to maintaine
them, yea as Eusebius saithEus. lib. 4. ca. 28., Incredibile est & supra
omnem opinionem, he so enriched them with lands, with
corne, with ornaments, as is incredible, and aboue any
mans opinion. Seeing Constantine thus munificently
endowed the Church, (which is all that the Councell
of Constance saith he did) it was a very silly collection
of Marta, to conclude, That because the
Councell approued Constantines endowment of the
Church, therefore without all doubt, they teach
that Constantine made this Charter of Donation,
and gaue to the Pope, Rome, Italy, and all the Westerne
Prouinces.
               But to see the vanitie of Marta; there is euident
proofe that neither Wickliffe in his reprouing, nor
the Councell of Constance in their approuing this
fact of Constantines endowing the Church, did, or
could meane thereby this pretended Donation.
Had Wickliffe thought Constantine to haue giuen (as
by this Charter he is said) all the Westerne Prouinces
to the Pope, and the Church of Rome, he would
haue reproued in the West none, but Constantine for
endowing the Church, nor could he haue reproued
other Westerne succeeding Kings and Princes for
endowing the same, with their lands and possessions.
Those lands had not beene theirs to giue vnto the
Church, and endow it therewith, being formerly all
giuen by Constantine. Now its euident by the Councel
of Constance, that Wickliffe
                  Artie. Wiclef. 3
                        •
                     . & 39. 
                  reproued later Emperors
and Kings in the West for enriching the church: yea hee

reproued them more iustly, and farre more sharply
then Constantine. Constantine gaue much indeed vnto
the church, but they addedCu
                        ••
                     ulantur temporalia vsque ad putredinem, &c. verba Wiclesi apud Wald. 10. 1. lib. 4. ca. 41. much more. They were
taught that lesson which was neuer heard of in Constantines
time, In
                  Ant. Ros
                        •
                     el. part. 1. Monar. ca. 7. pa. 297. 
                  ecclesia omnis immensitas est mensura,
In giuing to the Church, there is no measure,
but to giue without measure. Whatsoeuer Constantine
gaue, was to maintaine the true faith & doctrine
of Christ: succeeding Emperours about the yeare
1200. after Christ, and 900. after Constantine, gaue
that superfluitie and excesse of Lands and Possessions
to the Church, for impious and superstitious
vses, to sing Requiems for their soules departed, to
vphold the Idolatrous worship of their Masse, of
their Images, of their Saints, and to lift vp the man
of sinne to the Zenith of his Antichristian pride.
What Constantine and other Emperours for 1000.
yeares, or thereabout after Christ, gaue to the Pope
and Church of Rome, they passed onely vsum fruc
                     
                        •
                     um,
the profit and benefit thereof vnto the Church;
the supreameVt liquet ex donationibus Caroli, Othonis & aliorum, ante citatis. Right, Dominion, and Iurisdiction
they still kept in themselues. Succeeding Emperors
and Princes gaue Lands in such sort to the Pope,
as that they acknowledged him to haue Soueraigne
dominionIn Imperatores, reges & principes saeculares iurisdictionem super talia (temporalia) à Deo mediante Papa accipiunt Carer. li. 2. de potest. Rom. Pont. ca. 14. both ouer themselues, and in those
Lands which they gaue. It was not so much the bare
dotation of the Church, against which Wickliffe inueighed,
for he expresly taughtPraelati Ecclesiae debent viuere, sicut vixerunt sacerdotes veteris testamenti, Wiclesi verba, citata à Thō. Wald. lib. cit. ca. 33., that Prelates of
the Church should liue as did the Priests in the old
Law, who had iure diuino, not onely Tythes and oblations,
but ample possessions of lands and houses, euen 48.Numb. 35. 3. & Iosh 21. 41.
                  whole citties, with their Suburbs, containing 2000. cubits
round about on euery side: but the excessiue pomp

and superfluitieQuod intellexit Wicle. fus cum dixit, Cumulantur temporalia. supra. hoc ca. of riches which they enioyed, their
abusing all that wealth to superstition, idolatrie, and
AntichristianismeVnde legem Antichristi vocat Wiclefus donationē istam, apud Wal lib. cit. ca. 37., and principally the SoueraigntieHinc reprehendit, quod Imperator Romanus fecit sacerdotes suos dominos, Wic. verba apud Wald. lib. cit. ca. 39.
of Dominion in them, which was then chalenged
by the Pope. These things kindled the zeale of
Wickliffe, and made him bend the tree as it were, to
a quite contrarie side, that so at length it might come
to some mediocritie of straightnesse. These were
the true causes which moued Wickliffe to reprooue
succeeding Emperours, and other endowers of the
Church, far more bitterly then he doth Constantine.
Of Constantine and Siluester, he onely saith, that they
erred
                  Errauerunt dotando Ecclesiam, Artic. Wicl. 33. 
                  by endowing the Church: of the other he saith,
that they were
                  Artic. Wiclefi. 39. 
                  seducti à diabolo, seduced by the deuil,
in giuing so excessiuely, after such a manner, and to
such ends as they did. Wickliffe in this his very blaming
the succeeding Kings and secular Lords, for giuing
so much to the Church, demonstrates plainely
that he thought not Constantine to haue made this
supposed Donation, nor to haue formerly giuen all
the Westerne Prouinces to the Church. For then
none at all of the Westerne Kings after Constantine,
could haue giuen ought to the Church.
               The verie same also shewes the iudgement of the
Councell of Constance: for seeing they condemne
                  Conc. Constanc. sess. 8.
                  Wickliffe, for that hee reprooued other succceding Emperours
and secular Lords for endowing the Church,
they doe heereby demonstrate their iudgement to
haue beene this, that other Princes and secular
Lords in the West, might endow and giue their
Lands to the Church; and therefore that Constantine
had not by any such Donation (as is this which

                  Marta and others pretend) formerly giuen all the
Westerne Prouinces to the Church. So the Councell
of Constance doth certainly reiect this Donation
as a forgerie, of which Marta boasts, that by that
Councell it is proued to be a true and vndoubted
Charter.
            
            
               CHAP. XII.
               Sixteene other witnesses alledged for proofe of Constantines
Donation, examined: namely, Anselme, Iuo, Deusdedit,
Adalhardus, Mart Polonus, Antoninus, Vincentius
Belu, Sigebert, Ado, Gotofride, Otho Frising.
Photius, Balsamon, Damianus, Bernard,
and Luitprandus Cremonensis.
               
                  AFter Councels and Popes, let vs
come to that confused heap of Authours,
Diuines, Historians, and
Lawyers, which they hudled together
as witnesses of this Donation.
Before Gratians time (sayNotae Greg▪ in ca. Constā
                     tinus. Anto. Aug. Dial. 6. lib. 1. pa. 53. the
Gregorian Glossators, as also Anto.
Augustinus) Anselme, Iuo, and Deus dedit recite
this Donation of Constantine. They doe so indeed:
but they recite it out of the Acts of Siluester: for
Anselme
                  Ausel. lib. 4. ca. 32. and D
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     dedit, in the very beginning of
that Chapter say; In the Acts of Siluester it is thus
read, and then they set downe the Edict: Anselme
& Iuo Carnotensis proferunt Donationem ex gestis Siluestri, saith Steuchus
                  Steuc. lib. citat. pa. 81., they recite the Donation out

of the Acts of Siluester. Their citing it, or reciting of
it, doth not proue that they thought it true, but their
citing it out of those most false and fabulous Acts
of Siluester (as the best and most ancient Authour
that they could finde) shewes plainely that it is
like the rest of those Acts, false, fabulous, and counterfeit.
               
                  Adalhardus, who liued in the time of Charles the
Great, is cited by Gretzer for a witnesse of this Edict.
For he, saith Gretzer
                  Gretz. Append. 2, ad lib. de Munif. Princ. pa. 118., mentioneth this Edict,
wherein Constantine gaue Rome to Pope Siluester. But
the same Adalhardus mentioneth withall, that Constantine
                  Adalhar. apud Hincmar. epist. 3. ca. 13.
                  made the Edict after he had beene baptized by
Syluester, and had beene instructed by the ministerie
of Peter and Paul appearing to him. Seeing then it is
certain, as we haue beforeSup. cap. 5. & 6. demonstrated, that Constantine
was neuer baptized by Syluester, nor euer
had any such vision of Peter and Paul appearing vnto
him, and instructing him in the time of his leprosie;
it certainely followeth, euen vpon Adalhardus
owne testimonie, that Constantine neuer made
this Edict. Adalhardus was familiarly
                  Adalhardus à Leone tanto familiaritatis officio susceptus est, vt nemo ante. Ratbertus apud Bar. an 807. nu. 7. 
                  acquainted
with Pope Leo the third, the next successour to Hadrian
the first: Hadrian hauing mentioned out of
the Acts of Syluester, and confirmed for authenticall,
that Edict, the one part of it in the second
NiceneEp
                        •
                     st Hadr. 1 lecta & approbata in Conc. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 2. Act. 2. Councell, the other in an EpistleH
                        ••
                     d
                        •
                      1 epist. 35. in 
                        〈…〉
                      donatio
                        ••
                     s Constantins, apud Bar. an. 795. nu. 7. which
then was extant; Adalhardus seeing the Acts of
Syluester recording, and Pope Hadrian confirming
that Edict, might easily thinke it to bee such as the
Popes Holinesse did commend it for. Hee was
not suspicious of that deepe fraud, which lurketh

in the Popes breasts. As Hierom not suspecting
any bad dealing in a Christian, in a Monke, was deceiued
Hier. Apol. 2. adu. Ruff. pa. 2
                        •
                     6. posui hunc librum à Pamphile editum, ita putans esse vt à re fue. rat divulgatū. by Ruffinus, and thought that defence of
Origen, to be the booke of Pamphilus the Martyr,
as Ruffinus said it was: Credidi
                  Hier▪ Apol. 3. cont. Ruff. pa. 238. 
                  Christiano, Credidi
Monacho: Non putaui tantum sceleris à te posse
confingi, saith Hierom. So Adalhardus, not suspecting
that the Popes Holinesse would commit such
horrible offences, as to commend and approue forgeries
and counterfeit writings, deemed the Edict
to be such as the Pope said it was, Credidit Christiano,
Credidit Pontifici. Had Adalhardus knowne the
Popes pollicies, had he examined the matter, or
had the truth of that Edict beene scanned in his
age, he would as certainly haue found the Edict to
haue beene a counterfeit, falsly ascribed vnto
Constantine, as Hierom found the other hereticall
booke to bee counterfeited, and falsly to beare the
name of Pamphilus. But what meant Gretzer to
seeke witnesses for this Edict? Of all men, it
least beseemes Gretzer to pleade for the truth of
it. For seeing himselfe
                  Concessio commentitia esse conuincitur. Bar. ann. 1191. nu. 52. Diploma quod hodie superest com. mentitium esse concedimus. Gretz. Apol. 2 citat. pa. 91. & pa. 115. 
                  following Baronius, proclaimes
to all the world the Edict to be a forgerie, he
thereby assures all, that Adalhardus in mentioning
that Edict, giues testimonie to an vndoubted and
knowen forgerie.
               
                  Martinus Cysentinus, (so Marta ignorantly cals
him in stead of Consentinus) is a witnesse of this Edict,
saith Marta
                  Mart. lib. cit. cap. 30. nu. 26.. A worthy witnesse indeed,
the Popes owne
                  Martini Poloni Archiep. Consentini summi Pontificis poenitentiarij. Chron. sic habet titulus libri. 
                  Penitentiarie, a domesticall witnesse,
against whomTestimonium domesticorum & familiarium iur
                        •
                      ciuili imp. obatur. Venator. Anal. iu
                        •••
                      Pont. lib. 2. tit. 20. the Law it selfe takes exception.
Besides, a most simple fellow, as Posseuine
                  Poss. Appar. in Mart. Pol. cals him,

                  one who obtruded fables for most approued truthes.
This which he telsMart. Pol. an. Chr. 319. 
                  of Constantines giuing all Imperiall
dignitie to the Pope, is euen as true as that which
in the same place hee tels also, that Helena was not
conuerted to the faith till Siluester disputed with the
Iewes in the first Romane Synod: which Baronius
and Binius haue assured you to be a lye. Or as true,
as that which he addesMart. Pol. loc. cit., that Syluester after that disputation,
shut vp the Dragon, to liue in the caue, vsque
ad diem iudicij, till the last day of Iudgement: or as
true, as that which else-where the same Martinus
telsIdem. lib. 2. ca. 4. pa. 72. 73 you, That diuers trees spake and made Orations
to Alexander the Great: and that a Vine of Gold, which
stood before a Temple of Gold, brought forth instead of
Grapes clusters of pearles and precious stones. All
which, this worthy witnesse of Marta, sets downe as
Historicall truths; and ought as certainly to be belieued,
as this Donation of Constantine.
               
               St. Antoninus is a witnesse of it, saith Marta
                  Mart. ca. 30 cit. nu. 26..
And so he isAnto. Sūm. par. 3. tit. 22. cap. 5. §. 16. & part. 2. Histor. ca. 1. of a thousand other lyes, fictions and
fables. This Florentine Archbishop, doth in that
kind, deserue the next commendation to their
Archbishop of Genoa, and his Legendaur. Heare but
what their owne Bishop Canus saith of him: Vincentius
                  Mel. Canus Loc. Theol. lib. 11. ca. 6. §. 
                        ••
                     x vero. 
                  and Antoninus did not so much endeuour to write
true and certaine matters, as to omit nothing
which they found in any Papers: nor did they vse
so much as vulgar iudgement to examine the same;
and therefore with men of grauitie and iudgement,
authoritate carent, they are of no authoritie or
credite. For this time, let this suffice to bee obserued,
that Antoninus not onely approoues

the Acts of Siluester, but expresly tells vs.Ant▪ 2. part. hist. ca. 1., that hee
tooke his whole narration touching Constantines persecution,
leprosie, cure by baptisme at Siluesters hands,
out of those very Acts of Siluester; as also that, about Helenaes
Iudaising, perswading Constantine to Iudaisme:
and of the Councell wherein Siluester disputed
with the Iewes, and ouercame them, both by reason
and miracles: which whole passage doth verbatim,
almost agree with the wordes, and wholly in sence
with the relation set downe in the Legendaur. Now
the Acts of Siluester, being nothing else but a verie
sinke of lies, besides ten thousand other, in this onely
narration touching Constantine, Antoninus is conuicted
at the least of an hundreth lies.
               
                  Vincentius Beluacensis is a witnesse of the Donation,
say two Cardinals, Albanus
                  Alb. lib. de Donat. Constāt. ante cit. nu. 1., and Iacobatius.
                  Iacobat. lib. 10 de Conc. A
                        •
                     t 8. ca. vlt. nu. 18.. He isVinc 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Hist. lib. 13. a. ca. 46 ad 57.,
I confesse, but euen iust such another as Antoninus.
Bishop Canus
                  Can. loc cit. his censure is the selfe same of them
both: that neither of them is of any authority or credit.
His narration is taken, as himselfe professethVinc. loc. cit., out of
those Acts of Siluester. And so much as is in the Legend
of Siluester in Voraginensis, is wholly and almost
verbatim, in Beluacensis; beside many other
heapes of fables and lies. Antoninus, Vincentius, and
Iacobus Voraginensis, are braue witnesses for Marta,
Iacobatius, and Albanus. Yet was it no small fault in
Albanus to sayAlb loc cit. of Vincentius, that he is, fidelis & integer
historiarum relator, A faithfull and vpright relator
of stories. Reade him who list, and he will
cleerely see that both Vincentius himselfe, and all
who approoue his relations deserue no other reward
at all but a Whetstone.
               
               
                  
                  Sigebert is a witnesse of the same, saith Marta
                  Ma
                        •
                     . loc. cit.. But
Marta could not tell where. Sigeberts Chronology
begins with the Empire of Theodosius
                  An. Chr. 381., fortie yeares
after the death of Constantine: and in all his booke,
(though I haue diligently sought the same) I can
finde neither volam nor vestigium of this Donation.
Besides, Sigebert testifiethSigeb. Chr. an. 607., that Pope Sabinianus,
(others say Boniface the third) obtained of
Phocas, that the Romane Church should bee the chiefe,
and head of all Churches. A very needlesse and foolish
thing, either for Boniface to seeke, or Phocas
to grant, or Sigebert to record, if any of them had
knowne, or thought, that this had beene granted to
the Pope by Constantine in so faire a Charter, almost
300. yeares before.
               
                  Ado Viennensis is a witnesse heereof, saith Marta
                  Mart. loc. cit.,
and the Gregorian Glossators
                  Notis in cap. Constantinus. also. Ado is a witnesse
of their vanity. He indeed saithAdo Vien. Chron. an. 306, (but saith vntruely)
that Constantine was baptized at Rome: and that hee
builded many Churches in Rome and other places, further
hee addes (which is vtterly vntrue,) that Constantine
gaue Rome in his last testament to the Pope: but of
this Charter of Donation, Ado saith not one word;
vnlesse Marta and the Glossators thinke, that this
Donation was the last testament of Constantine;
whereas the Donation to haue been made ten years
before his testament, by their owne confession is
cleere, and the same to bee directly contrary to his
testament, both Socrates, Theodoret, and other ancient
Historians doe expresly testifie.
               An other witnesse alledged
                  Loci
                        •
                      citatis. 
                  by Marta, and the
Glossators, is Got of Viterbiensis. A poore witnesse I

wisse. He declares,Got. Viterb. par. 16. in Constantino. both what the fauourers of the
Church say for this Donation, and also what the fauourers
of the Empire say against it: and then comming
to tell his owne minde, He thinkes that what the
Church possesseth, it holds that by right: but, Caetera super
his quaestionibus, for other things touching these questions
(to wit, about Constantines Donation) I leaue,
saith hee, to bee resolued by others. Thus Viterb. And
that hee did not indeed thinke the Donation to bee
true, may easily appeare, by his faint speech thereof,
sayingIb. pa. 385., By this Donation, Rome and Italy, videtur collata
Ecclesiae, seems to be giuen to the Church: It seems,
saith he; wheras had he thought this to be a true donation,
hee might and would without any videtur,
haue said, that they were indeed conferred vnto the
Church.
               Such another testimony is that which Gretzer alledgeth.
The Priests, saith heGret. Append▪ 2. ad librū de muni
                        •
                      sic. principum. pa. 117., did vrge this Donation
in the time of the Schisme betwixt Alexander the 3.
and Fredericke tho first, as by Otho Frisingensis doth appeare.
True, Otho saithOtho. Fris. lib. 4. Chr. ca. 3., that some did so; and these
were factious Hildebrandists, who stroue to aduance
the Pope aboue the Emperour: but Otho saith
withall, that the Imperialists, or such as fauoured
the Emperour, reiected and contemned this donation.
And he expresseth their reasons, for that Constantine
deuiding the Empire among his sonnes, gaue to
one the East, to another the Westerne Kingdomes, which by
this meanes descended to Theodosius and other religious
Emperours. Now they alled
                        •
                     e, saith Otho, that so
holy an Emperor as Cōstantine, would neuer leaue that to
his children, which he had formerly giuen to the Church,

nor would so religious Emperours, as Theodosius and others
haue vsurped that which was not their owne, but
belonged to the Church. So Otho. Who though he
saithQuae omnia de
                        •
                     inire praesentis negotij non est. Oth. ibid., that hee will not define this matter, yet by fortifying
the saying of the Imperialists, with so strong
and vnanswerable reasons, hee plainely shewes, that
the Popes faction made an vniust challenge, by that
pretended Donation of Constantine. But let Otho
stand neuter, he being not willing to shew his minde
in that place (which elsewhereIn Epistola ad Fridericum Imp. quae praeponitur Chronico. hee manifests to be
for the Emperours right aboue the Pope.) What
weight can there be, in the saying of some few factious,
and partiall Hildebrandists, approuing the Donation:
able to counterpoise not the saying onely,
but the most cleere and pregnant reasons of the
Imperialists, reiecting the same Donation, as a fiction
and forgery.
               To these which are of inferiour note, they adde
foure or fiue more eminent witnesses, which are
with more probabilitie pretended: and therefore are
more seriously by vs to bee examined. The first of
them is Photius, out of whose Nomocanon Steuchus
with great ostentation alledgeth, (and that in two
seuerallAug. Steuch. lib. de Don. Constāt. pa. 16. & 110. places) these words: The whole Church
must be ruled by the Bishop of Rome, as it is to bee seene
in the Edict of Constantine. This, saith Steuchus, is
written in the Nomocanon, which he calls the booke
Iurium Ecclesiasticorum & Imperialium; as if both
the Ecclesiasticall, and Imperiall lawes did confirme,
together with the Popes supremacie, the pretended
Edict or Charter of Constantines Donation. Suppose
that Photius had writ this; what account, thinke

you, doe they make of Photius, the Author of that
Nomocanon? He was a falsifier of Writings, saith
Posseuine
                  Posseu. Appar. in 
                        •
                     hoti
                        •
                     .; and out of Baronius he addes, sceleratissimus
& immanissimus persequutor Ecclesiae, A
most wretched and cruell persecutor of the
Church, worse then any other Schismaticke, Hereticke,
or Heathen. This should Photius gaine at
their hands, if he had beene a witnesse for them,
as Steuchus boasts he is. But in very deed, Steuchus
belyeth Photius herein: for in all his Nomocanon,
this testimony is not to be found. Marta to
help the matter saithMart. ca. 30. nu. 19.; The booke Iurium Ecclesiasticorum,
& Imperialium, was compiled by Theod.
Balsamon, (who was afterward Patriarch of Antioch,)
by the appointment of Manuel the Emperor, &
Michael Patriarch of Constantinople: And cut of
Balsamon, Marta cites it. But Marta was fowly
deceiued herein; for as Balsamon
                  Bals. in Praefat. pa. 1. & 2. himselfe testifieth,
that Nomacanon was made by Photius about
280. yeares
                  Nam Photius obijt circa an. 886. Bar. eo an. nu: 29. Michael fit Episcopus Constant. an. 1166. Bar. eo an. nu. 41. 
                  before Michael was Patriarch of Constantinople.
Neither did Manuel or Michael appoint
him to collect the Canons, (that was done
long before by Photius) but to expound
                  Bals. loc. cit. 
                  the same,
and shew which Canons were obsolete and out of vse,
and how some apparent repugnances might be reconciled
therein. Now its true that Balsamon doth very
often
                  Theod: Bal. Schol. in Tit. 1 cap. 36. pa 38. 39. 
                  mention this Edict, and cals it the Decree
or Constitution of Saint Constantine; yea, he expresly
sets downThe. Bals. Scho. in tit. 8. ca. 1. pa. 85. & seq. the whole Edict of Donation;
so that Marta and Steuchus had little wit, to cite
one poore and petite sentence out of Balsamon,
where the Edict is, obiter, mentioned; when they

might haue alledged the whole Charter it selfe
out of him. Neither doth Balsamon approue the
Edict; or say that Constantine did truly make it,
but when he saw it alledged, and set forth by the
Romanes, yea euen by Pope Leo 
                        •
                     . himselfe, more
then 130. yeares, before he writLeo obijt an. 1054 Bar. eo an. nu. 46. Balsamō scripsit, an. 1191. Bar. eo an. nu. 49. 50., Balsamon vpon
their credit, without examining the matter, cals it
as they did before, The Edict of Constantine.
               
               And who is Balsamon, that he should be thought
a fit witnesse in a matter of fact, done at least 800.
yeares before his time? Or whence had Balsamon
this Edict? Heare but the iudgement of Cardinal
Baronius touching this point. He, reiecting
                  Bar. an. 1191 nu. 51. & seq. 
                  this
Charter as counterfeit: among other reasons, euen
for this, that Balsamon (as he
                  Bar. an. eodē. nu. 52. & 53. 
                  slanders him) was the
first publisher of the same, declaimes against him in
this manner: Balsamon
                  Bar. ibid nu. 51. 
                  being a most crafty Companion,
hath by fraud and Sinonian arts, mingled apocriphal
and forged, with true and authentical writings.
So he did in the Canons of the Apostles; So in
the Canons of the sixt Councel; And in like sort, out of
the Acts of Syluester, which are counterfeited vnder
the name of Eusebius Cesariensis, did he publish this
Edict of Constantines Donation. So Baronius: expresly
testifying, both the Edict it selfe to bee
                  Bar. ibid. nu. 52.
                  forged: and Balsamon to haue taken it out of the
forged Acts of Syluester; who also addes, That
Balsamon
                  Bar. an. eodem, nu. 51. 52 & 62. 
                  published it not for any good will to
the Church of Rome, but dolo malo, very craftily,
and in hatred of the Romane Church. Such a witnesse
they haue now got of Balsamon for this Edict,
who as the Cardinall declares, is a witnesse
of the forgerie thereof.
               
                  
Lastly, to see not onely the solly, but the vile
dealing also, of Steuchus and Marta in this cause,
that one poore sentence which they alledge, and
Steuchus sets forth, in Greek also out of the Nomocanon,
is not at all to bee found in the best editions
Non in 
                        •
                     odice Harlei, non in Edit. Paris. 1620. ex editione Ioh. T
                        •
                     lij, cui access
                        •
                     t graecus textus ex Codicibus manuscriptis erutus, & inumeris locis emendatus. of Balsamon. In some, as in that of Agylaeus,
it is not as they alledge, Omnis Ecclesia a Papa
Romae ius accipit, butVt notatur in Supplemento, in Edit. Paris. & verba apud Balsa monem haberētur paulo ante decretum Constantini. Tit. 8. ca. 1. in Schol. pa. 85. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ,
let euery Cittie follow consuetudinem,
the custome of Rome. It was a prettie
slight in Steuchus and Marta, to turne the Cittie
into the Church, and in stead of following the custome
of the Citie of Rome, to say that euery
Church must depend on, and receiue lawes from the
Pope of Rome.
               
               But Steuchus and Marta were both of them willing
not to see the truth in this matter, and to deceiue
others by the name of Photius and Balsamon.
For though the books both of Photius & Balsamon
be extant, and vulgar to be read and seene; yet do
you thinke they took this testimony, either out of
the booke of Photius or of Balsamon? No, they did
not, but either knowing that the text they alledged
was not there; or not caring, whether it were
there or no: they tooke it as Marta confessethMart. ca. 30. cit. nu. 18. 19.,
vpon the credit of one Nicholas Hidruntinus, Who
going to Constantinople in the time of Pope Innocent
3. about the yeare 1200. writ the Edict of Constantine
out of that book Iurium Ecclesiasticorum, &
he, telling thē 
                  Hoc libro ostenditur, that in this book
Iuriū Ecclesiasticorū, it is shewed, that al other Churches
must depend on the Roman, as by Constātines edict

is to be seene. Steuchus & Marta vpon the word of
Nicholas cite that as the saying of Photius, or Balsamon:
Wheras in truth, it is in neither of them;
but falsely affirmed to be there by Nicholas, and
twice falsely auouched by Steuchus and Marta, to
be the saying of Photius or Balsamon, which was
but the lie and lying deuice of Nicholas of Hidruntum.
To say nothing what a simple man and lying
companion this Nicholas was, who at the end
of the Edict writVt Marta ait. ibid. thus; Finis testamenti ac Edicti
magni Constantini. Here ends the Testament and
Edict of Constantine the Great. Whereas neither
this Edict was the Testament of Constantine; neither
are those words extant in the booke Iurium
Ecclesiasticorum: out of which, as Marta saith,
Nicholas exscribed his Notes or Collections. But
enough of Photius and Balsamon.
               
               The next witnesse is Damianus, of whom the
Gregorian Glossators, as also Ant. Augustinus, sayNot. in cap. Constantinus. Dist. 96. Anto. Aug. lib. 1. dial. 6. pa. 53.,
That in his Synodall disputation betwixt the Kings
Aduocate, and a defender of the Church of Rome, hee
makes mention of this Edict of Constantine, and his
giuing of Rome and Italy to Pope Syluester. Who (as
it is there said) accepted some of the ornaments
which Constantine gaue him, to wit, such as were fit
for a Bishop, but the golden Crowne and other Robes,
which were rather ambitious then mysticall, Syluester
refused. Mee thinkes, they should not much
glorie in this Testimonie of Damianus; for as it
shewes the modestie, humilitie, and pietie of Pope
Syluester, in refusing the Crowne, being offered
vnto him; so it demonstrates the pride of their

later Popes, who take vpon them, not one, but
aMaxime Pontificum, triplicem qui fron
                        •
                     e Coronam, &c. Mantuan. ad Inno
                        •
                     . 8. de vita D. Lud. Morbioli. triple Crowne, a miter
                  Mitra auri phrygia
                        •
                     a. lib. 1. Sacr. Cerem. sect. 2. pa. 30. 
                  of Gold, auro
                  Ibid. sect. 1. pa. 17. 
                  & gemmis
ornatam, deckt with Gold & precious stones;
& that so sumptuous, that Pope Clement the fift,
when at his coronation
                  Pontifex ex equo deturbatus, solum carbunculum ex tiara amisit, pretij aureorum sex millium. Plat. in vita Clem. 5. 
                  in Lyons, by a mishap,
either of a fall from his horse, or of a pieceCecidit Corona de capite eius: in casu auulsus est carbunculus pretij sex millibus Florenorum. Supplem. ad Ma
                        •
                     t Polo. an. 1305. of rubbige
falling from a wall, his Crowne was smit from
his head, he lost one Carbuncle of the value of 6000.
Crownes: of which their pride, an eye-witnesse thus
writeth; I haue
                  A declaration of Francis Breton, a monke of the order of Celestines, made publickly at Vendosm, on the 28. of Iun. 1601. 
                  seene the Pope hauing vpon his head
a triple Crowne, where was written vpon his fore-head
in pretious stones, this word Mysterie. The verie
same word which Saint Iohn in his Apocalips
mentions, to be written in the fore-head
                  Apoc. 17. 5. 
                  of the
Queen of Babylon.
               
               But to this testimonie I answer, that the Authour
of that Booke is not Damianus, who was
sometime Bishop of Ostia: but some forgerer calling
himselfe by the name of Damianus. Baronius
                  In disputatione quae asseritur Petri Damiani. Bar. an. 1191. nu. 61. makes a doubt of that book: but diuers circumstances
puts the matter almost out of doubt. The
Treatise is called a SynodallDisceptatio Synodatis, &c. extat tum apud Bar. an. 1062. nu. 12. tum apud Bin. tom. 3. Conc pa. 1137. disputation, whether
Honorius who was called Cadolaus, or Alexander
the second, should be held for the rightfull
Pope. Now that disputation was not had in any
Synod; as by the booke it selfe is manifest, but beforeFiet hic Osboriense Concilium. Discep. Synod. Dam. in initio.
the time of the Synod at Osbore (a placeOsborium, locus nobis adhuc incompertus. Bar. an. 1062 nu. 21. Nec apud Ptolomeum, nec Melam, nec Maginum, nec Ortelium reperire potui.,

for ought is yet known in Vtopia.) Again, the Emperors
aduocate is there made to plead so ignorantly,
and withall, so partially, as if he were hired
to betray the Emperours cause. Damianus a man
of great learning and discretion, was neither so
simple as to write so vnlearned a dispute; neither
so presumptuous as to forestall the Synodal iudgment,
and before hand direct the whole Councell
what they should Iudge: neither so foolish as to
call that a Synodall disputation, no part of which
was disputed in the Synod.
               Againe, the Author of that dispute, saith; that
all other both Episcopal and Patriarchal Sees, were instituted
by some
                  Homo purus instituit. discep. Synod. 
                        •
                     . Cum beatitudo. 
                  meere man, but Christ alone instituted
the Romane Church. Who can thinke so foolish
and absurd a saying to haue proceeded from
Damianus? To say nothing of other Sees, did not
Saint Peter
                  Petrus primo instituit & ere 
                        •
                     it sedem patriarchalem Antio chenam. Bar. an. 39. nu. 16. himselfe found the Church and Patriarchall
See at Antioch, as well as at Rome? was
Peter more then a meere man, more then an Apostle,
when he founded the Roman? Or was he
lesse then an Apostle, when he founded the Antiochian
Church? If the Romane was not founded
(ministerially) as other Churches were,
by an Apostle, then is it not Apostolicall: If other
Churches be founded onely by men, and not
(principally) by Christ, as the Romane was, then
are they not Christian: neither of which Damianus
would euer haue said.
               Further, that Authour saithDisc. Synod. Damian. §. Quoniam vbi.; That the Empeperour
non habet in Ecclesia Romana potestatem, hath
no authoritie in the Romane Church. Who

can thinke Damianus so ignoram, as thus to say?
He knew right well, that Pope Agatho writing to
the Emperour, called Italie seru
                        •
                     lem
                  Epist. Agathonis in Cōc. gen. 6. Act. 4. pag. 12. 
                  prouinciam,
and Rome, seruilem vrbem, The Emperors
seruile Prouince, and seruile Cittie: That Gregory
the great professed, That the Emperour
                  Greg. Epist. 34. lib. 4. 
                        •
                     ud. 13. 
                  was
his serene Lord, and that he was readie to obey
                  Vobis obedientiam praebere de
                        •
                     idero. Greg lib. eodem 4 epist. 32 
                  his
Imperiall commaunds: and that also in Ecclesiasticall
causes, concerning one of which, the same
Pope saith, It well
                  Greg. lib. eodem epist. 34. 
                  beseemed our religious Lord
the Emperour, vt ista praeciperet sacerdotibus, to
command these things vnto Bishops.
               Besides, that which the forgeter affirmes, That
Christ
                  Disc. Synod. Dam. §. Cum beatitudo. 
                  gaue to Peter and his successors, terreni simul
et coelestis imperij iura, The rights both of the
Terrene and Celestiall Empire, is quite repugnant
to the mind and writings of the true Damianus,
who puts that true and right difference betweene
the Regall and Episc
                     •
                  pall functions, That
Kings
                  Pet. Dam. epist. 9. lib. 4. 
                  are to vse the secular, and Bishops the spirituall
swo
                        •
                     d, and not medle with the Temporall.
Was Damianus either so vnconstant, or so
forgetfull, that what hee taught in one place,
he would condemne and contradict in another?
               Say the Authour was indeed Damianus, Hee
liued in the time of Pope Leo the ninth: hee was
esteemed obnoxious in some matter to the
Popes censure; and therefore sought earnestly
to regaine the Popes fauour, as his owne EpistlePet. Dam. Epist. 4. lib. 1. ad Leonem 9. vt ostendat se de quibusdam criminibus falso accusatum.
to the Pope shewes. What if hee to
please Leo the ninth; Who had published
                  Leo 9. Epist, 1. 
                  the

Edict of Constantines Donation for an authenticke
Charter, did sooth the Popes Holinesse in such a
matter? What credit can it be to the Donation,
that it seemed pleasing to him, who durst not displease
the Pope? Or if notwithstanding all this,
they so much esteeme the authoritie of Damianus,
then must they for euer condemne Hildebrand,
who was afterwards called Gregorie the seauenth,
for a most impious person: For Damianus in his
Epistle to Pope Alexander the second, cals him,
a Tyrant
                  Blandus ille tyrannus. Pet. Dam. epist. 10. lib. 1., a man of a Neroes
                  Qui mihi Neroniana pietate semper condoluit. ibid. 
                  pietie, yea a very Deuill
                  Hoc ego sancto Satanae meo respondeo. ibid..
If they vpon the testimonie of Damianus,
will not a
                     •
                  count their St. Hildebrand, to be Saint
Deuill, they haue little reason to perswade vs, vpon
the like testimonie of Damianus, to accept a
forgerie for an authenticke writing.
               The next witnesse is St. Bernard, of whom
Marta saithMart. ca. 30. cit. nu. 23.; Aperte probat Papam Constantino
successisse, he euidently proues, that the Pope succeeded
to Constantine. O the rare stupiditie of
Marta! St. Bernard prooues no more, that the
Pop
                     •
                   succeeds to Constantine, then to Caligula, Nero,
or Dioclesian. In vsing imperiall pomp, honor,
and authoritie, (of that St. Bernard speakes) the
Pope succeeds, (yea goes beyond) them all; in
hauing right to vse it, he succeeds to neuer a one
of them all. St. Bernard tels the Pope, that de facto
he did succeed to Cōstantine, but that he succeeded
therein de Iure vnto him, St. Bernard saith
not. Nay he plainely reproues the Pope for such
succeeding, and vsurping the Imperiall Dignitie
de facto, to which de iure he had no right at all.
               
                  
The words of Bernard makes this most euident.
Suffer
                  Bern. lib. 4. ad Eugen. Quaeso sustine paulisper, supporta me, Imo da veniam, &c. 
                  me, (saith he to the Pope, carrying himselfe
like an Emperour) beare with me, yea pardon
me, I speake this not rashly, but timorously, which I
wish may be as fruitfull, as it is feruent. Hic, hic
non pareo tibi, vt parcat Deus, heerein I will not
spare you, that God may spare you. Hauing thus
prepared the Popes mind, to receiue with patience
his reproofe, he then addes; Either deny that
you are the Pastour of this people, or shew your selfe a
Pastour vnto them: you will not deny that you are
their Pastour, least you deny your selfe to bee Peters
heire, whose See you hold. Peter neuer went deckt
with precious stones, and silkes, neuer couered with
Gold, nor carryed on a white Palphrey, nor guarded
with Souldiers, and yet without these, he thought hee
could well enough fulfill that commaundement, If
thou loue me feede my sheepe. In his successisti non Petro,
sed Constantino. In these things you succeede
no
                     •
                   
                  Peter, but Constantine. Thus Bernard, cleerely
reprouing the Pope, first for omitting that which
belonged to his dutie, in that he should haue sed
the flocke as Saint Peter did, to whom in that he
did by right succeede; and then, for doing that,
which belonged not to his dutie, in that he tooke
Imperiall dignitie and honour vpon him, as did
Constantine, to whom in that he did not by right
succeede. For Saint Bernard, to haue thought that
the Pope was not in right to succeed them both,
beside many, those his owne words in another
place, are a most euident witnesse, Dominatio
                  Bern. lib. 
                        〈◊〉
                      de Cons. ad Eugen. 
                  interdicitur,
indicitur ministratio, you are forbidden

to vse domination or imperiall authoritie in ruling,
you are inioyned to vse ministration, or Apostolicall
sedulitie in feeding. Goe
                  I ergo tu, & tibi vsurpate aude aut dominans Apostolatum, 
                        •
                     ut Apostolicus Domn
                        ••
                     um. ib
                        •
                     d. 
                  to then, see
if you either hauing Imperiall domination, dare vsurpe
the office of an Apostle, or hauing the office of
an Apostle, dare vsurpe imperiall domination. Certainely
                  Pl
                        ••
                     e ab 
                        〈◊〉
                      prohibe
                        •
                     s, si vtrumque simi
                        ••
                     ter habere voles, pe
                        •
                     des vtrumque. ibid. 
                  you are forbidden the one of these; if you
will haue them both, you shall loose them both. So
Bernard; By whom it is now euident, that if the
Pope rightly succeede Saint Peter in his pastorall
vocation, he cannot rightly succeede to Constantine,
in his Imperiall domination; and therefore
by S. Bernards testimony, can haue no right at all
to this pretended Donation.
               The next witnesse vrged earnestly by Gretzer
                  Gretz Append 2. ad lib de Munif. princ
                        •
                     pa. 117., to proue the truth of this Charter, is Litprandus
Cremonensis, who in the Narration of his Legacy
to Nicephorus Phocas the Emperour, mentioneth
the pri
                     •
                  iledges granted by Constantine to the Romane
Church, sayingLitpr. Crem. in 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ad N
                        •
                     ceph quae t
                        •
                     ta 
                        •
                     xtat ap
                        •
                     d 
                        •
                     ar an 968. nu 11. & seq.; That Constantine bestowed
                  Litpr loc. cit. nu. 27.
                  many gui
                        •
                     ts vpon it, not onely in Italy, but in
Grece, Iudea, Persia, Mesopotamia, Babylon,
Egypt, and Lybia, and in all the Westerne kingdoms,
as his priuiledges Quae apud nos sunt, which wee
haue doe testifie: and further he protesteth, That
Otho who sent him in that Legacie, with-held frō the
Church, neither any Towne, Cittie, nor Village which
Constantine gaue, or if he did, deum negaui, I haue
denyed God, saith Litprandus. Heere, saith Gretzer,
it is manifest that Litprandus had respect to the very
words of Constantines Charter, wherein those
particulars are expressed. See the peruerse dealing

of Gretzer, he would by this Litprandus perswade
you, that the Edict or Charter of Donation is
true, which himselfe professethGretz lib. cit. pa. 115. and proclaimes
to be a forgerie; and therefore assures you, that
Litprandus is a false witnesse in giuing testimonie
to a forgerie.
               Againe, that testimony of Litprandus, demonstrates
the forgery of this Charter: for Litprandus
saith, That Constantine gaue
                  In omnibus pene occidentalibus regnis, Litp. loc, cit. 
                  almost in all the Westerne
Kingdomes, many Citties, Townes, and Territories
to the Pope or Romane Church. Whence it is
cleere, that the Charter is forged, wherein Constantine
is said, To haue giuen all
                  Vrbem Romam & omnes totius Italiae & occidentalium regionum prouincias loca & ciuitates. Edict Const. apud Bin. pa. 298. 
                  the Westerne
Kingdomes to the Pope and his Successours for euer.
               
               Besides this, there is another answer to this testimony.
Either Litprandus who was Bishop of Cremona,
is not the Author of that Treatise, or if he
be, then is he of no truth nor credit in the whole
world. Doe but take a taste of his truth, wit, and
iudgement. This Litprandus discribing how base
and sordid the Bishops of the Greeke Church in
those daies were, saith; I speak
                  Litpr. Crem. loc. cit. nu. 87. 
                  the truth, and lye
not, throughout Greece, Bishops are not hospital, they sit
alone at a table not couered, themselues doe both sell
and buy their commodities, themselues shut their
doores, themselues carrie their owne meate to table,
ipsi agasones, themselues play the Carters and Muliters,
themselues are Capones, I would say Caupones,
hu
                        •
                     sters, and keepers of victualing-houses, and Tauernes.
So their Litprandus. Can any but laugh
at the folly of this fabler, specially considering,

that Curopaletes in that very age witnesseth, the
pomp and excesse of the Greeke Bishops to haue
beene such, that Michael
                  Curopal. apud Bar. ann. 1057. nu. 38. 
                  the Emperour restrained
their Sybariticas epulas & delicias, The Sybariticall
delicacies vsed at their tables; yea, and this very
Emperor Nicephorus complained of them, That
they wasted the
                  Asserens ab Episcopis pauperum pecuniam consumi. ait Curop. apud Bar. ann. 964 nu. 34. 
                  treasurie of the Church: which by
such sordid basenesse could neuer haue bin done.
               
                  And yet his vilifying of the Bishops, is but a
toy, to his misusing the Emperor and his Nobles.
He cals the Emperor a monsterReptans monstrum. Litp. apud Bar. an. 968. nu. 21 Homo monstruosus. ibid. nu. 14., a pigmeePigmaeum, capite pinguē, oculorum prauitate talp
                        •
                     
                     num, ceruice digitali ventre extensum, ibid. nu. 14., his head
as fat as brawne, eyed like a Mole; a necke no bigger
then a finger, a gorbell
                     •
                  , swelling likeBufonis in modum tumefactus, ibid nu. 47. a Toad, a
spindle shankeCoxis longissimum, crutibus pa
                        •
                     uum. ibid. nu. 14., footed likeCapripes. nu. 21. a Goat, for colourColore Aethiopem, nu. 14. Siluanus vultu. anus incessu. agrestis, barbarus, setiger, villosus, nu. 21. a
Blackamore, for countenance a Satyre, for his gate a
Beldam, a rude, rusticke, and bristled clowne, wearing
oldNimis veternoso, & diuturnitate ipsa faetido ornamento indutum, ibid. nu. 14. and stinking apparell: and if all this bee not
enough, he cals him an AsseOnager iste, nu. 52., a wilde Asse, a very
puppetPuppam ipsam meus sibi depinxit mea, ibid. nu. 33., or a Iacke a thrums-riding on horsebacke,
adding; That his attendants went bare-footedVulgi ipsius potior pars nudis processerat pedibus. Sed & optimates nimia vetustate rimatis tunicis erant induti; nullus est cui
                        •
                     s a
                        ••
                     uus hanc nouam haberet, ibid. nu. 20., his
Nobles did weare torne and ragged coates, so old, that
none of their great Grand-fathers knew them to bee
new; his souldiersvere inquam non homines, sed hominum similes, quibus lingua pro cax, sed frigid a bello dextra ibid. nu. 5
                        •
                     . not men, but shadowes of men,
pear
                     •
                   of tongue; but faint of their hearts and hands,
such thatIbid. nu. 39. 400. of Othoes men, would driue all Nicephorus
Armies out of the field.
               
                  Is it credible that a Bish. would vse such base &
immodest termes, and withall vntrue, of the Emperour?

or was not some Tharsites the pen-man of
that Legacie? specially seeing of the valour of this
Nicephorus, Baronius saith
                  Bar. an. 969. nu. 5.; It is scarce credible how
many, how great, & how memorable victories he obteined
in few daies. Glicas saith
                  Glic. Annal. par. 3. pa. 430. 
                  more, There did shine
in this Nicephorus plurima multo preclarissima, many
and excellent ornaments: and Constant. Manasses
writing of him saith
                  Const. Manass. Annal. pag. 150.; He subdued al the barbarous
Nations; the Arabians feared him the Syrians
and Cilicians subiected themselues to him: adding
further, he was endowed with an absolute perfection
of vertue, and beautified with all gifts, with strength
of body, with fortitude of mind, with curtesie, prudence,
caeterisque tam animi, quam corporis dotibus insigniter
lucebat, and he was illustrious & eminent in
other guifts, both of body and mind. What think
you now of Gretzers Litprandus, and of his truth
& credit? O▪ if for all this, they wil yet stil account
this Litpr. Cremonensis to be an Author of worth
and credit, as Brouerius the Iesuite, Canisius, Card.
Baronius, and Gretzer esteemeMagno Dei beneficio factum puto vt ea Litprandi Relatio conseruata sit, quam à Chr. Brouerio missam ad Vel. serum Hen. Canisius excudendum curauit, quibus omnibus de antiquitate ecclesiastica bene merentibus, bene precamur. Bar. an. 968. nu. 6. him: Let them consider
what an honourable testimony he giues to
the Romane Emperors, and to all the Romanes, and
their Romane Nation: WhenLitp. Crem. apud Bar an. 968. nu. 23. Nicephorus the Emperor
said vnto him, you are not Romanes but Lumbirds,
Litprandus answered in this manner, Romulus,
of whom the Romanes haue their name, was a fratricide,
a bastard, one who erecting a sanctuary for
a company of fugitiues, slaues, homicides, and such
like, called themselues Romans, and of such progenitors
did discend the Roman Emperors, which Romans, we,
to wit, Lumbards, Saxons, Frenchmen, Loraners,

Germaines, Sueuians, and Burgundians, doe so
much disdaine, that we terme our enemies by no other
name of contumeli
                     •
                  , but cal them Romanes: In this
onely name of Romanes, comprehending all basenesse,
all dastardlinesse, all couetousnesse, all luxurie, all lying,
& quicquid vitiorum est, and whatsoeuer vice
can be named; this name of Romane is equiualent
to all these. Let the Romanists now glorie
in this their Litprandus, and produce him as oft
as they please, for a witnesse of this Charter of
Constantines Donation.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIII.
               Thirty Lawyers, Ciuilians and Canonists, alledged
by Marta, to proue the Donation of Constantine:
and an answer vnto
them.
               
                  AFter Diuines and Historians,
they alledge an whole troupe of
Lawyers, Ciuilians and Canonists,
to the number of thirtie,
or thereabouts, All witnessing,
as Marta saith
                  Mart ca. 30. nu. 28. 29., Constantines
Donation, Pro veris
                        •
                     ima haberi, to be held for most
true and certaine. For the Canonists, it skils not
much what they say in this matter: The cause is
the Popes, and they being the Popes Parasites,
must in dutie, Gnatonise vnto him with Ait, aio.
How insolent, nay impious and blasphemous they

are in flattering the Pope, that one saying of
theirs, Our Lord God the Pope, (which occasioned
others among them to thinke the Pope toNe sequatur scandalum pusillorum qui aestimant Papā esse vnum 
                        •
                     eum, qui habet potestatē omnem in caelo & terra. Gers, in R
                        •
                     s
                        •
                     l, cuca materiam Excom. consid. 11. bee
that one God who hath all power both in heauen
and in earth) may stand for a thousand. This aboue
all, I here mention, because the ring-leader
of their Iesuites father Parsons, not onely perswades
Pars. in his Warnword to Sir Francis Hastings wastword. Encoūt. 1. ca. 2. nu. 10. fol. 30., That no such saying is to bee 
                        •
                     ound in the
writings of the Canonists, and hard it is, saith hee,
to beleeue that any such text may be found; but turning
that whole matter to a verie iest, he scoffes
at Protestants, as if they had foolishly deuised
the same; Whereas some, saith he, found this written
D. noster D. Papa, that is, Dominus noster, Dominus
Papa, some cauelling horeticke iudging it inconuenient
to repeate Dominus twise, thought the later
D. to stand for Deus, and so read it Dominus, Deus
Papa; eu
                        •
                     n as a simple fellow, saith he, hauing a
letter, sent from some mariners, and indorsed, to the
Right honorable our good L. the L. Admirall, thought
the letter was to bee deliuered to the Lady Admirall,
saying▪ that seeing the former L. stood for Lord, the
second L. must needs stand for Lady. Thus the
grand 
                     〈◊〉
                   scoffes at Protestants as fainers of
this bla
                     •
                  phemous saying; which if hee had not
vowed to shut his eies against the truth, he might,
and all others may see, to be extant in the Glosse,
Cap. Cum inter. Extra. Iohn. 22. de verborum signifi.
in fine: Where the Pope is called Dominus
Deus noster, not onely in the old Glosse, but in the
new edition of it also, correctedBulla Gr
                        •
                     g. 13. praefixa nouae editioni Decreti., and expurged
from sundrie errors, by the authoritie of Gregorie
                  
the 13: euen there (as if this were no error,
nor a matter needing any correction or qualificaon)
is it recorded, for an eternall conuiction
both of their blasphemie in vttering this, and of
their impudencie in denying it. The words both
in the old and corrected Glosse are these, Credere
autem Dominum Deum nostrum Papam, conditorem
dicti decretalis & istius, non potuisse statuere prou
                        •
                      statuit, haereticum censetur. Let father Parsons and
his friends consider now, whether this be a Protestants
fiction to say, that some of their Canonists
call the Pope, the Lord their God. It is little to be
regarded then, what such blaspheming parasites
and patrones, of the Popes Omnipotencie
                  Vetustissima ac fere omnipotens ecclesiae. Rom. potestas. Aug. Steuchus, lib. de Don. Constant. pa. 195., say in
this cause. It is the custome of Canonists, saidSic sibi dixisse Pium 5. ait ipse Nau. Coment. in cap. Non liceat. cans. 12. q. 2. 
                  Pius
quintus, to giue too much to the Popes power: Fran.
Victoria rightly saidVict. Relect. 
                        •
                     . de potest. eccle. sect. 6. nu. 3. of them; They gaue this dominion
to the Pope, cum ipsi essent pauperes rebus &
doctrina, when they were beggerly both for learning
and liuing. Cynus
                  Cynus l. quoties Cod. de Iudicijs. rightly saide of them,
Canonistae fecerunt sibi iura pro libito voluntatis, the
Canonists make what they list to be Law.
               For Ciuilians I much honour them, so farre as
they keepe themselues within the bounds of the
Imperiall lawes, which they professe: but those
whom Marta alledgeth, liued in those times,
when there was such a mixture and confusion of
the Canon and Ciuill Law, as that in all matters,
which concerned the Pope, the Canon law euer
had the predominance: As Popes had then got
the masterie of Emperors, so was the Imperiall
Law ouer-ruled by the Pontificall: nor were any

then suffered to professe that Law, vnlesse he had,
I say not a tincture, but a deepe die of the Papacy,
and vnlesse they receiued his marke both in their
hands and foreheads. From hence proceeded
those exorbitant speaches of Baldus
                  Barth. l. sin. Cod. sentent. res
                        ••
                     di non posse.; That the
Pope is Deus in terris, a God vpon earth. And againBald. in cap. 
                        •
                     nter corporalia. Extrau. nu. 1.,
What things the Pope doth in cases reserued, hee doth
those non tanquā homo, sed tanquā Deus, not as Man,
but as God: & many the like both in him & others.
Now both sorts of Martaes Lawyers being thus
seruilly addicted to the Pope, (he being the sole
master of the Canon, & ouer-mastering the ciuil
Law) were so partiall in the Popes cause, that
what Aeneas Siluius saidPapam Pium 2. sic scripsisse Decano & capitulo Moguntino testatur auth. Paralip. Abb. Vsperg. pa. 418. of their Bishops, the
same fitly agrees to these. Etiam vera dicere contra
Papam, est contra iuramentum Episcoporum, To
speake euen the truth when it is against the Pope,
was against the profession of those Lawyers.
               Besides this generall exception, if it were
worth the labour to examine all the particulars
cited by Marta, it were an easie matter to shew
how few of them doe effectually prooue that
which he intends and vndertakes. But sparing
that labour, which would bee but irksome to my
selfe, and to the Reader tedious, I will giue you
in some of them, a taste of Martaes false and fraudulent
dealing, in alledging the writings of men
euen of his owne profession.
               The first and most ancient whom he citethMart. loc cit. nu. 28. Est Accursius de antiquissimis scriptoribus, qui scripsit circa, an. 1240., is
Accursius: who thus writeth of the Donation of
Constantine. We answere
                  Accur. l. Si plures. ff. de Pactis., quod de Iure non valuit,
that in Law this Donation was of no force. And

he giues a reason; Because had Constantine giuen
away his Imperiall Iurisdiction of the West, (as by
the Edict he doth) sic potuit perire totum Imperium,
the whole Empire might so be ruinated and
perish. This to be the true and finall iudgement
of Accursius, is witnessed by Bartholus
                  Bart. in 
                        〈◊〉
                      ff nu. 13., Accursius
finaliter tenet quod non valuit Donatio, Accursius
resolues and determines that Constantines Donation
is of no force: By the GlosseGloss in cap. Romani▪ Tit. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  , Accursius holds
that the Donation is not of force. By Couarruuias
                  Cou
                        ••
                      lib. 4. Va
                        ••
                     ar resol▪ ca. 16. pa. 70., Accursius in the Authentickes, holds and prooues that
the Donation is not of force: By Lupoldus
                  Lup ld. lib. de iu
                        ••
                     b. Imper. ca. 13., Accursius
holds that the Donation is not good: By Card.
Turrecremata
                  Turr. in Dist. 96. art. 1▪
                  , The Glosse vpon the Authentickes
holds, Quod Donatio illa non valuit, That this Donation
is not of force. And to omit many others,
by Alu. Pelagius
                  Alu Pel. lib. 2. de place. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ca 29., Accursius affirmes, that the Donation
made to the Church by Constantine, is not of
force, and that his successours may reuoke the same:
And he also addes a clause worthy Martaes obseruing,
Hoc communiter tenent legistae, The Lawyers
doe generally hold this with Accursius. What
thinke you, doth Marta now deserue for producing
Accursius as his first, most ancient, and most
noble Lawyer, to proue the veritie and validitie
of this Donation? A Lawrell, or the reward of
a lye?
               Another of Martaes
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   Lawyers, is Luc. Paulus
Rose
                        •
                     lus, whose testimony I thought fit to set next
to Accursius, because it will serue as a very faire
Torch, to see the faire dealing of Marta, both
with him and others. He in the very same place

whichLuc. Paul. Rosell. in Repertorio ad Francis Aretinum in verbo Donatio quantumcunque magna. 
                  Marta citeth for proofe of the Donation,
and to which he directeth vs, writeth in this
manner, and his words deserue to be writ in golden
letters. Whether that great Donation which
Constantine is said to haue made to Syluester, be of
force or no, diuers men thinke diuersly, and all are
intangled in this question; and why so? For it is not
lawfull to dispute openly against that Donation; because
the Popes and Cardinals, statim diris suis execrationibus
eos inuolutos reddunt, will presently enwrap
them in their direfull curses: Nay, they will
haue them to bee interdicted and forbidden the vse
both of fire and water. What then, haue you your
selfe nothing to say in this matter? Yes, saith he;
I will not omit or forbeare to say this, Etsi millies
indies mortemulctarer, though I should euery day
dye a thousand deaths: That this Donation, (if it
was euer made) was not so profitable either to the
Church, or topietie. Doth not our Sauiour say, that
his house should be called an house of prayer? But by
this Donation of Constantine, it is made Latronum
spelunca, & omnium vi
                        •
                     iorum receptaculum: a den
of Theeues, and a sanctuarie for all vices: And
then a little after he concludeth thus, Quare mihi
videtur, Wherefore I thinke, that that Syluester,
(who ere he was) that wittingly tooke this Donation
of the Emperour, Diabolus statim effectus est, was
presently vpon that acceptance made a Deuill,
and changed from an Angell of light, to an Angell
of darknesse: And citing the words of Christ,
Giue to Caesar the things that are Caesars, he saith; By
this it appeares, that neither the Emperour ought to

forsake, nor the Pope ought to accept those things
which belong to Caesar, quae etiamsi millies obtulerit,
which though the Emperour should offer a thousand
times, Yet a good and holy Pope would neuer
thinke it fitting to accept them: Thus Paulus Rosellus.
Say now in sadnesse if Marta for citing this
Lawyer, this Text, and these words, for a proofe
of the veritie and dignitie of Constantines Donation,
doth not ex condigno merit to bee crowned
with a garland of folly?
               A third Lawyer cited by Marta,
                  Mart. ca. cit. nu. 28., is Bartholus,
a man so wauering and vnconstant in his opinions,
yea euen sibi contrarius, as Ant. Rosel. saith,Ant. Ross. tract. de Concil. verbo Postquam. nu. 8.,
that he changed cum coelo animum, his mind with
the ayre, soile, and place of his aboade; thinking
it a point of wisedome, to speake omnia pro tempore
& l
                        •
                     co, what the present place and time perswaded,
not what the truth. What his true iudgment
was in this matter, appeares certainely by
these his owne words, in one of the placesBart. l. Hostes f
                        •
                     . de Captiuis. nu. 7. cited
by Marta. If any should say that the Emperour is
not the Lord and Monarch to
                        •
                     ius orbis, of the whole
world, esset hereticus, such a man should be iudged
an hereticke, because he speakes both against
the determination of the Church, and against the
text of the holy Gospell, where it is said; There
went out an Edict from Caesar, that the whole world
should be taxed. And in another placeBart. in Prooem. ff. nu. 14., Papa non
habet aliquam iurisdictionem, The Pope hath no
(temporall) iurisdiction at all. Thus Bartholus:
who denying all temporall iurisdiction to the
Pope, and holding him for an heriticke, that denies

the Emperour to be the temporall Lord and
Monarch of the whole world, doth euen thereby
hold all for heretickes, who defend the Donation
of Constantine; seeing by it the Pope is said to bee
the temporall Lord, the Monarch as Pope Nicholas
                  N
                        •
                     ch. 3. ca▪ Fundam. de Elect. & elect. pot. in 6.
                  cals him, and greatest Emperor, as Steuchus
                  Constantinus cessit maiori Imperatori. Steuch lib. cit. pa. 187. 
                  
                     •
                  earms
him, of Rome, Italy, and all the Westerne Prouinces,
that is of a great, and far the best part of the
Empire. That this was the true iudgement and resolution
of Bartholus, it is witnessed by Petr. de
Anchona; Bartholus, saith hePet. de Anchon. in Prooem. super. 6. Decr §. Sacro sanctae. nu. 5., doth effectually
proue, & concludit, and concludes also, that Constantines
Donation is not of force. Whatsoeuer Bartholus
any where saith contrary to this, (as indeed
he doth in diuers places) he speakes that, not ex
animi sententia, but as Lucius Paulus Rosellus saith,
Adulando Pontifici, in flatterie of the Pope, and for
feare of his direfull execrations and Interdicts; yea,
Bartholus his owne words import no lesse. For
when he comes to speake of Constantines Donation,
vide
                        •
                     e, saith heBarth. in Prooem; ff. nu. 14., marke this well, nos sumus in
territorijs Ecclesiae, & ideo dico Donationem illam
valere, We are now in the Popes territories, and
therefore I say that this Donation is of force, Bartholus
for law, was of the like mould and mettle,
as were those Romish Deuines, of whom it is recordedParalip. ad Abbat. Vrsperg. an. 1518 pa. 448.,
that priuately they vsed to say to their
friends concerning Transubstantiation, and such
other questions, Sic dicerem in scholis, sed tamen
(maneat inter nos) diuersum sentio. Thus I say
openly, and in the Schooles, but (keepe my
Councell I pray you,) I thinke the contrarie.

                  Bartholus saying, is altogether like. Thus I say in
the Popes Territories, or to please the Pope, The
Donation is good, but (keepe it to your selfe) I
thinke he con
                     •
                  rarie: for the Pope hath no (temporall)
iurisdiction, but the Emperour is Lord of all,
and he who saith otherwise, is indeede an hereticke.
               
               
                  Martaes next Lawyer is Baldus
                  Mart. loc. cit. nu. 28., the Scholer
of Bartholus; who had perfectly learned of his
maister, to Gnathonize to the Pope, and to whom
of all other, most fitly agrees that censure of Lucius
Paulus Rossellus, he durst not speake against the
Pope, but by flattery soothed him. Touching his
opinion, it is first to be remembred, that Baldus
in all his speeches concerning this matter, presupposeth
the Donation to haue beene truly
made by Constantine: the Popes both then, and
before, had taught him and others, not to call
that into question; and the Palea Constantinus being
long beforeEugen. 3. obijt an. 1153 Bar. co an. nu. 10. Bartolus objit an. 1355 Galter. saec. 14. Baldus vixit, an. 1390. Bell. lib. scrip. eccle. in Bald. either Bartholus, or Baldus daies,
allowedMart loc. cit, nu. 37. by Pope Eugenius 3. multum grani attulit
Ecclesiae, as one of their LawyersNich. Euerard. loc. Argum. legal. in loco 11. à Verisimili. nu. 16. saith, had
brought by that time, much corne and moulter to
the Popes mill. This being then presupposed to
be true, (which is vt
                     •
                  erly false) that Constantine
made that Donation, Baldus and other Lawyers
disputed onely whether this Donation supposing
it to be made, were in law good, and of force, or
not; or how, and in what manner it might be saide
to be good in law. Much like as Schoole Diuines
about the same time disputed, whether Christs
body were really present in the Sacrament by way
of Transmutation, or of Transubstautiation; both

the one and the other supposing (but not beleeuing
and granting) that which is vtterly vntrue,
that Christ is really and corporally there present.
Or as at this day, the Romanists contend
among themselues, whether the Pope hath directly
or indirectly, power and authoritie to depose
Kings, and take away their Kingdomes; whereas
the Pope in truth, hath no such authoritie any
way at all: as those disputers suppose on both
sides. The verie like did the Lawyers. They
would not, nor was it safe for them to question
whether Constantine made that Donation: but
supposing that, (which is vntrue) they onely disputed
whether being made, such a Donation was
good and forceable in law or not: or how and by
what right he could giue away so great a part of
the Empire.
               
                  Baldus to please the Popes Holinesse, holds
that the Donation is firme, and that after the surest
manner that can be wished, but withall after
such a manner, as is most vnlikely, and can neuer
be proued. First, by any Imperiall, any humane
authoritie, or law, Baldus professeth plainly, that
according to the determination of the ancient
Lawyers, Constantine could not make that Donation,
nor could it be of force, to passe away his Imperiall
right. Constantine or other Emperours
may passe away, saith heBald. in Prooem. de Feudis. nu. 32. 33., the vse, profit, or commoditie
of their Territories, reseruing alway feoltie and
recognition to the Emperours▪
                   but neither Constantine
nor any other Emperour, can
                  Non valere, nee possibilem esse. ibid. 
                  passe them
away, quoad Expropriationem territorij dignitatis

aut iurisdictionis, in respect of the supreame right,
or of Imperiall dignitie and Iurisdiction. Nay,
to thinke that any Emperour would thus mutilate
the Empire is, as Baldus there addes, species fatuitatis,
a point of folly. Seeing then as Baldus professeth,
neither the Imperiall right and royaltie
can possibly be passed away, nor the vse, profit,
and commoditie of so great a part of the Empire,
can by any humane law be giuen or granted▪
how, or by what meanes shall this Donation bee
thought de iure, to be of force, euen for the vsus
fructus? HeereBald. ibid. 
                  Baldus goes a note farre beyond
Ela, and tels vs, That this Donation (supposing it
was made by Constantine) potius fuit diuinitatis,
quam humanitatis, was an Act of God, rather then
of Man: and that it proceeded a fide catholica, from
the Catholike faith, not from any Imperiall Law.
Let either Marta, or Baldus, or any other proue,
that God either by himselfe, or by any Diuine reuelation,
or any other way known to the Church,
commaunded Constantine to make this Edict, and
we will most willingly assent vnto it, euen fide catholica.
Till they proue this, (which they are neuer
able to doe) both Baldus must bee held for a
base flattering parasite of the Pope in this matter,
and Marta for a trifling disputer, who from an
vntrue supposall of Baldus, and his vntrue collection
vpon that supposall, striues to proue an absolute
assertion of the veritie and validitie of Constantines
Donation, and that not onely for the
vsus fructus, which Baldus graunts in law to bee
good, but euen for the Imperiall rights and roialtie

which Baldus saith, to be granted away is impossible.
The censure of Paulus de Castro, falls
rightly vpon Baldus in this matter: Baldus, saith
hePaul. de Castro. in l. 1▪ Cod. Quando non pe
                        ••
                     ntium partes, & in l. Edita. Cod. de edendo. 
                  flyes through the ayre and clouds: that is, hath
loftie, but vnstaied opinions, founded on the
wind and clouds, All that he speakes tends to pomp;
& plerumque tantum subtilizat, vt scipsum frangat,
for the most part, (specially in this matter)
hee so followes subtilities, that hee confounds
himselfe.
               A fift Lawyer alledged, both by Card. Albanus
                  Hier. Alban lib. de Donat. Const. nu. 1. and Marta
                  Mart loc. cit. nu 28., is Albericus de Rosate: one so directly
opposite to the validitie of this Donation,
that Couarru
                        •
                     ias saithCouar. lib. 4. Variar. Resol. cap. 16 pa. 70. of him, Albericus holds the
Donation to be of no force; and Boetius Epo not onely
affirmes the same, saying, Omnium audacissime;
Albericus more boldly then any other, affirm
                        •
                     s
                  Boct. 
                        •
                     po. Heroic. q
                        •
                     aest. q. 3. nu. 7
                        •
                     .
                  the Donation not to be of force: adding also, that this
is the common opinion of the Doctors of the Ciuil law:
but for this verie cause of reiecting the Donation
as inualid, Epo himselfe calsQuaest. eadem. nu. 138. 
                  Albericus, hostem Ecclesiae,
a verie enemie to the Church. Albericus
owne words alledged before, doe conuince Albanus
and Marta, both of vntruth and folly; for he
Alber. de Rosat. l. Bene à Zenone. de Quadri
                        •
                     n. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . fol. 111. col. 4. & l. final. de Iurisdict. omnium ludic. §. per iniquum. nu. 4. fol. 146. directly affirmes, and proues, that this Edict of
Constantine, neither is, nor can be of force, eyther by
vertue of any Donation, nor of any prescription,
neither by the Imperiall, nor by the Pontificall law;
And further, That the successours in the Empire
may reuoke and recall the same. And though,
vpon the like false supposall as Baldus tooke,
that Constantine did make such a Donation,

                  Albericus thoughtAlber. in l. Bene à Zenon. supra. cit. it to haue beene made not
by any humane Law or authoritie, but by some diuine
instinct, and commaund from God; (which is a fancie
without all colour of truth:) yet withall hee
addes two or three remarkable sayings, touching
this Donation. The first, that it was onely personall,
and tyed Constantine alone, and not his successors:
to which purpose he saith, vere credo, I
doe verily beleeue, that this Donation is not of force
to preiudice the Empire, or the Emperours successour.
The second is a Memorandum, touching that fancie
which he borrowed of Baldus, that this Donation
proceeded from God. Albericus tels vs,
that himselfe heard some great men say, and that it
is recorded also in authenticis scripturis, in very
credible writings, that when this Donation was giuen,
and accepted (which certainly was neuer in
Constantines time, nor many hundred yeares after)
there was then a voyce heard from heauen, saying;
Hodie seminatum est venenum aspidum in Ecclesia
Dei, This day is the poison of Aspes powred into
the Church. A pregnant euidence that God
commaunded not Constantine, nor any else, to
make any such Donation: for God doth powre
grace, and not poison into his Church. The third
is a caueat for their Church, not to be too insolent
vpon this Donation. I haue heard, saith hee,
of men worthy to be credited, that in the time of Pope
Bo
                        •
                     iface the eight, a certaine Cardinall of the order
of Cistertians, a man of exceeding great reputation
and knowledge, openly in a festiuall Sermon said, or
foretold, per eosdem passus & gradus, that the

Church or Pope by the same pases and degrees,
whereby it had ascended in temporalities, should descend
also againe, till it come to the extreame pouertie
of Siluester. Sure that propheticall Card. spake
not farre amisse. For the spirit of God foretelleth
the like concerning Babylon, (which theyRibera Iesuit. com in cap▪ 14. Apoc nu. 38. & seq Babylon mater fornicationum quae casura praedicitur, Roma quidem est, &c. professe
& proue to be Rome,) In as
                  Reuel. 18. 7. 
                  much as shee hath
glorified her selfe, & liued in pleasure; so much giue ye
her torments & sorrow. Albericus by this Cardinals
prophesie, giues Marta and them all a faire warning,
not to be too proud in that or any like Donation,
for though they sit like the Queene of Babel,
and say they shall see no mourning; yet when their
sinnes are once ripe, their pl
                        •
                     gues shall come vpon
them, death, sorrow, and famine; and those ten hornes
by which they haue beene lifted vp, shall hate that
whore of Babylon (that is Rome) and make her desolate
and naked, and shall eate vp her fl
                        •
                     sh, and burne
her with fire, But enough of this witnesse of Albanus
and Marta.
               
               
                  Aretine is brought for another witnesse by Marta
                  Mar. loc. cit. nu. 28.:
but he speakes directly both against Marta,
and that Donation, and that also euen in the
place alledged by Marta. Baldus, saith heAret. in Rubr. ff. de verbor. obligat., doth
well teach, that the Emperour cannot giue away any
quotient of the Empire, neither a third part, nor a
fourth, nor one halfe. Then doubtlesse by Aretines
iudgement, Constantine neither did, nor could
giue Rome, Italy, and all the Westerne Prouinces,
(which is the better halfe of the Empire) to the
Pope.
               Cardinall Zabarella is another (a seauenth)

witnesse of Marta
                  Mart loc▪ cit. nu. 29.. But he affirmes not the Donation
to haue beene truly made, but onely supposeth
as others did, that it was made. Sufficiat
                  Card. Zabarel. in Clem. Pastor
                        •
                     lis. §. Illud. in 2. oppos. 
                  praesupponere, let it suffice vs to presuppose, that
the D
                        •
                     nation was made, and was of force. Marta
should haue knowne that there is great oddes betwixt
a pos
                     ••
                  ion and a supposition.
               
                  Lucas de Penna is another, (the eight) Lawyer,
cited by Marta
                  Ma
                        •
                     t. loc. cit nu. 28., who though he say hee will not
deny the Donation, yet he sets downe that which
doth disproue and ouerthrow the Donation. He
plainly affirmesLuc de Pen. C
                        •
                     d. de omni agro desert. l. quicunque desertum. fol. 185 
                  That the territories or d
                        •
                     maines
of the Empire, cannot be alienated or giuen away. Againe,
The Prince is the husband of the Commonwealth.
And therefore as the husband cannot alienate
bona dotalia, the dowrie of the Wi
                     •
                  e, so neither
can the Prince the Lands of the Empire: and then he
concludes, Interdicta itaque sit talis alienatio, therefore
such alienation is fo
                     •
                  bidden, least the commonwealth
by many, though but small alienations, ad nihilum
redigatur, be at length brought to nothing.
Yea he further shewes, That though such Donations
and alienations be already made, and that also with
an oath, yet may they, and ought they to bee reuoked,
non obstante interposito Iuramento, notwithstanding,
an oath (he thinks such an oath to be vnlawfull,
and therefore not of force to bind) be taken
to the contrarie.
               A ninth Lawyer, cited by Marta
                  Mart. loc▪ cit. nu. 28., is Antonius
Corsettus, who in that place alledgedAnt. Cors. tract depotest. reg. q. 4. by
Marta, demaunds, Whether a King may giue away
the goods of the Kingdome: his answere relying on

the iudgement of Pope Innocentius, is, That a
King or Emperour may doe it moderately, so that the
Regall Dignitie be not hurt thereby, non item immoderate,
but he may not doe it aboue measure, not in
such sort, vt laedatur dignitas Regalis, That the Regall
or Imperiall dignitie be hurt or impared by
such a guift or alienation. Now seeing this supposed
Donation, by which is giuen away Rome,
It
                        •
                     ly, and all the Western Prouinces, that is halfe
of the Empire: and that also in such sort as Al
                     
                        •
                     arus
Pelagius
                  Al. Pelag. lib. 1. de plane eccles. ca. 41. vaunteth. That by vertue of this
Donation, in verita
                        •
                     e Imperator nihil habet facere
Romae, necin toto Imperio occidentali, The Emperour
hath in truth nothing at all to doe with
Rome, or with the whole Westerne Empire: seeing,
I say, this Donation is such, that none can
doubt but that it is verie immoderate and excessiue;
yea as Baldus saith, a verie maiming of the Empire:
it followes by the iudgement of Martaes
owne witnesse, that Constantine neither might
make such a Donation, or if he did, that the Donation
is wholy void, inualid, and of no force or
effect. The same Ant. Corset
                  Ibid. addes diuers testimonies
to this purpose: the first of Baldus, cited by
Paul de Castro, Who saith that Baldus doth determine,
that if a King or Emperour giue away the goods of the
Empire totaliter, & expropriando, totally, & in such
manner that he passe away his Imperial right and
property therein, such a Donation is of no force.
The second of Durandus their Speculator, wh
                        •
                     
saith, that quando regnum enormiter laeditur, when
the Kingdome or Empire sustaines an enormous

losse by such Donations, then they are voyd.
The third of Oldrade, who teacheth, yea pulcre decidit,
defi
                     •
                  es excellently, as saith Corset, That a
King cannot giue away immoderatly that which belongs
to the Empire. The fourth, of Bartholus, Who
saith, that if the Donations made by Princes, tend
to a great or excessiue alienation of the rights of the
Empire, non v
                        •
                     lent etiam iuratae, such Donations,
though they be confirmed by oath, are inualid,
and of no force. Thus Corset: prouing clearely
not onely by reason, but by the consent of Bartholus,
Baldus, Durand, and Oldrade, foure of Martaes
owne witnesses, that this vast Donation of
Constantine, is of no worth or force at all.
               A tenth Lawyer cited by Marta
                  Mart. loc. cit. nu. 29., is Felinus,
whose words are so farre from helping Marta, or
supporting this Donation, that they indeed ouerthrow
the same. He in the placeFelin. in ca. Solitae, de Maior. & obed. which Marta
alledgeth, referres his Reader for this Donation
to Pius secundus, saying, Concerning this Donation,
vide la
                        •
                     e in dicto Dialogo Pij, vbi per multa tenet
quod Palea sit falsa. See the forenamed Dialogue
of Pius the second, where by many reasons he
proues, that the Palea (Constantinus) is false and
forged, And 
                        •
                     e inueyeth against the miserable Lawyers▪
who 
                        •
                     oyled themselues in disputing about the validitie
of that Donation which was neuer made. Doth
not Felinus now strongly proue the Donation?
And that Felinus his owne iudgement in this
ma
                     •
                  ter, concurred with this sentence of Aeneas
Syluius, to which he refers vs, Couarruuias expresly
witnesseth, sayingCouar. lib. 4 Var. 
                        〈◊〉
                      ca. 16 
                        〈…〉
                     ., Aeneas Siluius denyes that
                  
Constantine made this Donation, and so doth Hieron.
Balbus, and Felinus Cap. Solitae de Maiorit.
& obedi. which is the verie place that Marta citeth:
yea Hier. de Ceuallos not onely affirmes
                  Hier. de Ceual. in Spec. aureo opin. Com
                        ••
                     un. 
                  Felinus
to haue held the Donation to be of no force; but
further addes, that Felinus teacheth this to bee the
common opinion of the Lawyers.
               
               I list not, neither is it worth the labour to examine
the rest of Martaes Lawyers; you may by
these coniecture, what faire dealing he vseth in the
rest. Specially if you consider that foure moe of
them must stand for meere Cyphers, or else for
witnesses of Martaes fraud. For in the places
which he alledgeth out of Oldrade
                  Oldr. in Cons. 158., Iason
                  Ias. in l. C
                        •
                      qui ita §. qui ita ff. de verb. obligat. Nulla la
                        •
                     s lex est in eo Tit., Praepositus
                  Praep. in ca. Cum ad verū dist. 86.,
and Iohan. Andreas
                  Ioh. Aud. in addit. ad Spec. in tit. de prescript §. ratione, & §. Item quod., there is nothing
spoken touching Constantines Donation.
               Now least Marta should vainely imagine that
all his Maisters of the Law are wholy of his side,
as hee fancied these to bee: to those later foure
which are but cyphers, and the other ten which
we haue alreadie examined and proued to bee
more effectuall for vs then for him, I will adioyne
so many, as may in number equall, and in weight
preponderate the whole Catalogue of Marta his
Lawyers.
               
                  Of eight other moe, Hier. de CaeuallosHier. de Ceuall. loco cit. 
                  is witnesse.
The other opinion, saith he, that this Donation
was not of force de Iure, is held by Cagnolus, in
repet. rubr. ff. de Dolo. nu. 79. by Genadius sect. 3.
fol. 220. by Paulus Fuscus de visitat. lib. 2. cap. 21.
by Hier. Monte de finibus reg. ca. 1. by Hottoman de
Feudis. ca. 8. nu. final. by Vulcurnus de reg. mundi 2.

part. q. 4. by Sebastian de medicis. de l
                     •
                  g. & statut.
part 1. q. 3. nu. 1. 4. by Magdalenus de numer. test.
in testamen part. 1. cap. 12. nu. 20. The same opinion
is held, saith CouarruuiasCou
                        •
                     r. loc. cit. by Hier. Balbus. lib. de
coronat. pa. 81. by Carol. Molineus, (hee cals it a fable)
in Alex. Consil. 24. lib. 5. Col. vlt. by Hie
                     •
                  on.
in Practica. Cance
                     •
                  lar. fol. 9. & seq. as witnesseth Iacobatius
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      Iacob. lib. 10 de Co
                        ••
                     . Art. 8. ca. vl
                        •
                     . nu. 15. 1
                        •
                     .,
and by Iac. Beluisus in Prooem. ff. as witnesseth
Epo
                  
                     B
                           •
                        et, Epo. Her. 
                        •
                     u. q 3. nu. 78..
               To these twelue may be added Cynus Pistoriensis,
who thus saith.Cynus ad l. Comperit. Cod. de Praescrip. 30. vel 40. ann. nu. 1 
                  This text is against them who
thinke that the Romane Church may prescribe for the
Donation of Constantine, because for that which
belongs to subiection it cannot prescribe; (for contra
                  Vt ait Lupold. lib. de 
                        •
                     ure reg. ca. 11. & probat 
                        •
                     x C
                        •
                     p. cum non lic
                        •
                     at. Extr. de l 
                        ••
                     scrip.
                  obedientiam non currit praescriptio) No man can prescribe
for not yeelding obedience, and then not for
the Iurisdiction of the Romaine Empire, cui subiectus
est totus orbis, to which the whole world (then
certainly the Pope and Westerne Empire) is subiect.
Ioh. Igneus
                  Ioh Ign. R
                        ••
                     pet in l. Donationes nu 2
                        •
                     . who thus writes, Communis sententia,
It is the common iudgement of Historians,
that those Donations of Rome, and other cities in Italy,
were not made by Constantine: and in his SummarieSum. in idem cap. nu. 21.,
That Donation made to the Church, falso attribuitur
Constantino, is falsely ascribed to Constantine.
Pet. Ferrariensis, who saithPet. Ferr. in forma repons. rei con
                        •
                     en
                        •
                     ae in verbo. Praescriptionis. nu. 33., Italy will
neuer be at quiet till the Donation made (as is pretended)
by Constantine, be reuoked by some godly
and potent Emperour: seeing there is no good concord
betwixt Psalterium and Cythara, the Psalme and
the Cytheren, neither is it granted either by Christ,
or by Saint Feter, that they should possesse such things,

but they are commaunded to giue to Caesar that which
belongs to Caesar.
               
               
                  Alciat, who sets downeAlc. lib. 
                        •
                     . Pareg ca. 19. pa. 475. 
                  sixe effectuall reasons,
to proue that Constantine made not this Donation,
and then concluding, he declares, that not onely
the Donation it selfe, but the occasion also of it is
false and fabulous. Truly, saith he, that Constantine
was not baptized at Rome, nor by Syluester,
(both these the Edict expresly auoucheth) but at
Nicomedia, and by Eusebius Byshop of that place,
Hierom and other Writers do testifie. Againe, that
he was affected with a leprosie (this the Edict at
large sets downe) apud idoneos scriptores nusquam
legitur, is no where read in any good Writer, or
such as may be credited: But of Constantine the
fift, sur-named Copro
                     •
                  ius, it is said, that he was a
Leaper, vnde fortassis aequiuocatione nominis error
inductus, whence perhaps by the equiuocation
of the name, that leprosie is erroniously ascribed
to Constantine the first, which besell to Constantine
the fift. So Alciat: shewing this Donation to be a
false, lying, and fabulous writing, and coniecturing
also the same to haue beene forged after the
time of Constantinus Iconomachus, that is more
then 380. yearesConstant. magnus obijt an. 337. Constantinus Iconomachus natus est & baptizatus an. 719 Bar. eo an. nu. 20. after Constantine the Great
was dead.
               In the last place, to make vp the number of
thirty two, Couarruuias
                  Did. Couar. lib. 4 Var. Resol. ca. 16. pa. 69. & 70. may be reckoned. Who
besides sundrie authorities, by many effectuall
reasons, shewes that Constantine made no such
Donation. One is, For that by the consent of Eusebius
and all Historians, Constantine in his last will

and Testament diuided the Empire to his owne sonnes,
and gaue Italy and other places, (which are saide to
be giuen to the Pope) to one of them; quod profecto
non fecisset, which truly hee would neuer haue
done, had he formerly giuen the same to Syluester.
Another reason is this, Because neither Damasus,
nor Historians, either Greeke or Latine, who haue writ
the Acts of Constantine, vllam de hac refecere mentionem:
none of them haue made any mention
of this Donation; Procul dubio non omissuri, who
without all doubt, would not haue omitted it, if
either it had beene made, or if they had knowne that it
had beene made, whereof, saith he, they could not
haue beene ignorant, seeing they so diligently writ all
the Acts which concerned the Church in Constantines
time. A third reason he addes, Because it is
certaine by the consent of all Writers, that the Popes
for foure hundred yeares after Syluester and Constantine,
did not vse that Donation, nor had the temporall
iurisdiction of Rome. Thus he.
               By this now it appeares, how vainely Marta
mustred that troupe of his thirty Lawyers, as bearing
witnesse to this Donation of Constantine.
Those who among them are most fauourable on
his side, presupposing the truth thereof (which
neither he nor they can euer proue) vpon that
false supposall, striue to maintaine it to be de iure,
of force: but diuers, and some the verie best of
them, denying it to be of any worth, validitie, or
force at all: and vpon supposall that it was made
by any Emperour, teaching it, not to haue beene
made (as Baldus flatteringly fancied by Diuine

instinct, but by the Deuils suggestion, and the accepting
of it, to haue made that Pope who first accepted
it, (and them the rest who after him approued
it) a verie Deuill and Angell of the darke and
infernall pit.
               
            
            
               CHAP. XIIII.
               The testimonies of eight Emperours: Zeno, Iustinian,
Charles the first, Lewis, Henrie the second,
Otho the fourth, Frederick the second, and
Charles the fourth, alledged by Marta,
as witnesses of Constantines Donation,
examined.
               
                  AFter Councels, Diuines, Historians,
and Lawyers, Marta alledgeth
the Emperours themselues
as witnesses of this Donation.
Among them all he hath found
eight, who being of all his witnesses
most worthy to be heard in this cause, I
shall desire the Reader seriously to consider their
testimonies.
               The first is the Emperour Zeno, whose words
as Marta citethMart. ca. 30. cit. nu. 27. them, are these; Wee renew the
Constitution of Constantine, qui veneranda Christianorum
fide Romanorum minuit imperium: who
by the venerable faith of Christians, impared the
Romane Empire. Whence Marta concludes that

                  Constantine sure made this Donation, and so impared
the Empire.
               I am much ashamed, that Doctor Marta, euen
in his owne professionIura. ciuilia, quae ad nos pertinent. ibid., should bewray so notorious
ignorance: was there no way to impare
the Empire, but by making this Charter? What
if by his diuiding the Empire into three parts among
his three children, he be thought to weaken
it? Seeing in such causes those sayings seeme especially
to take place, Vis vn
                        •
                     ta fortior, and Imperium
impatiens consortis, and, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ; and
many the like. What if Constantine gaue away
some Citties, Forts or Castles, standing vpon the
frontire of the Empire? What if in building
Churches, hee bestowed so much of the reuenewes,
as that the want thereof seemed to some
to impare the Empire? It was a rare fatui
                     •
                  ie in
Marta, to thinke that the Empire could no way
be impared, but onely by giuing away Rome, Italy,
and all the Westerne Prouinces, that is the
better halfe of the Empire.
               Againe, see what a godly and religious mind
Marta beares to the Christian Faith. Hee will
proue by the Ciuill Law, that Christian Religion,
and the true Faith, is the imparing of an Empire,
or State, and that Constantine impared the Empire,
by the venerable Religion of the Christian
Faith. Impious and blasphemous Marta! worse
then Matchiuell: Religion and pietie was, and
euer will be the onely fortresse and bulwarke of
all Christian States and Kingdomes. If he would
not learne this of God, who warned Ioshua, and

in him all Princes, To doe that
                  Iosh. 1. 8. 
                  which God commaundeth,
for then shalt thou make thy way prosperous,
and then shalt thou haue good successe: if not
of this our most religious Constantine, who by experience
found it true and professedEuseb. lib. 10. histor. ca. 7., That when
Religion is neglected, the Common-weale comes to
wracke, but when it is maintained, the state flourisheth:
if not of Lactantius
                  Lactan. lib. 5. ca. 8., Ideo omnia mala, the
cause why all calamities dayly inuade the State, is the
forsaking of God; if not of Saint Cyrill, who saithCyril lib. de recta fide ad Theod. in initio. §. Caeterū.,
That pietie is inconcussum Regiae dignitatis fundamentum,
the sure prop and foundation of any
Kingdome: yet he might and should haue learned
this lesson, in those very bookes of the Law,
which he professeth; either of Iustinian, who
saith, It becommeth
                  Iustin. Cod. lib. 1. Tit. de summa Trinit, l. 3. Decere. 
                  vs to warne all our subiects,
to bee religious, for so wee shall obtaine more abundant
fauour from the Lord; Or of Pope Nicholas
the third, who saithNich. 3. ca. Fundamenta de Elect. & electi potest. in 6., Fundamenta militantis
Ecclesiae in montibus sanctis, The foundation
of the Church Militant is set in the holy
Mountaines; (that is on true pietie and Religion)
Vpon this holy Mountaine, tota Ecclesiae fabrica
confidenter inni
                        •
                     itur, the whole frame of the
Church doth firmely and surely relye; At least
hee should haue bin ashamed that the very Heathens
should reach him this lesson. All
                  Liuius lib. 5. in orat. Camilli. 
                  things
fall out prosperously to the worshippers of God, all
infelicitie to those that despise him; yea euen the
Heathenish Poets also, Iniqua
                  Senec. in Medea. Act. 2. 
                  nunquam
Regna perpetuo manent: And againeSenec. in Thieste. Act. 2., Vbi non
est pudor, nec cura iuris, sanctitas, pietas, fides,

instabile regnum est. One might be eloquent in refuting
this matchiuilian Doctor, it being verie easie
to demonstrate, that pietie, and prosperitie in
Princes, that the Church and Common-weale,
like the two twinnes of Hippocrates, doe stand and
fall, flourish and fade together. I will onely oppose
this one soueraigne Antidote, to his poisonfull
doctrine,

                     Arx est religio, murus aheneus,
                     O Rex, est pietas, principibus bonis.
                  
               
               And all this I haue spoken, supposing Marta to
haue cited the true words and text of the law of
Zeno. But now I must further answer, that Marta
finding the text corrupted (rather by errour,
as I thinke, then otherwise) wittingly and maliciously
embraceth (as did before him Cardinall
Albanus
                  Hier. Alb. lib. de Donat. Const. nu. 9.) that corruption, which is directly contrarie
both to the true reading, and true sence of
Zeno: for the true words are these; Wee
                  Zeno smper. Cod. Iust. lib. 5. Tit. 27. l. 5. Ditu Constantini. 
                  renew
the Constitution of Saint Constantine, who by the
venerable faith of Christians, Romanum muniuit
imperium, did strengthen and establish the Romane
Empire. So it is read in diuersEdict. Paris. ann. 1559. other, and
specially in that editionQuarta editio auctior & emendatior. Lugd. an. 1607 of the Ciuil Law, which
is called emendatior, more corrected; and their
learned Ciuilian Dionis. Gothofr. obseruesGotof. not. in dictam legem Z
                        •
                     nonis., That
the other reading of minuit, is reiected by Castrinsis
as false, & ita est, and it is false indeede, saith hee.
Besides other reasons, the very words themselues
doe shew this, seeing it had beene verie absurd

for Zeno to say, That Constantine by the Christian
faith had impared, but hee might most truly and
iustly say, That by the Christian faith, Constantine
had fortified and strengthened the Kingdome. Againe,
it had beene most absurd in the Emperour
Zeno, to call him Diuum Constantinum, St. Constantine,
and so commend him (as he doth in that
very place) for embracing of the Christian faith, if
he had meant, that by the Christian faith the Empire
had beene impared. But that which puts this
matter out of all doubt, is another Edict of the
same Zeno; called Henoticum, which thus begins,
Henot. Zenon. extat apud Euag. lib. 3. cap. 14. 
                  Quoniam procerto scimus Imperium nostrum à sincera
solum & vera fide tum initiam habuisse, tum
stabilitū esse, tum robur, ac praesidium, quod expugnari
nequit ex ea sumpsisse, Because we know assuredly,
that our Empire by the true faith, hath both
receiued the beginning, and beene established
and strengthened in such sort, that it cannot bee
expugned. How could Zeno say here, that the
true faith did impare his Empire, who certainely
knew it to bee the most inexpugnable prop and
stay to vphold his Empire. It was fit that Marta
for defending of a false, counterfeit, and corrupted
Donation, should be so farre infatuated, as that
euen in his owne profession he should alledge a
false and foolishly corrupted Text of the Law.
               Next to Zeno, the Emperour Iustinian is alledged,
from whom Marta
                  Mart. ca. 30 nu. 28. reasoneth in this
manner, Iustinian saith, that Leo the Emperour post
Constantinum fidei principatum auxit, did after Constantine
enlarge the Dignitie or Maiestie of the

Faith; From which words, saith Marta, it is gathered
that Iustinian also knew of the foresaid Donation.
Doe you not thinke that Marta had sent his wit
to Rome, when he writ this at Naples? Iustinians
words are plainely spoken of the faith; Marta expounds
them, as meant of the Empire. Iustinian
saith, Constantine planted and propagated, and
that Leo enlarged the faith; Marta thence collects
that Constantine diminished, and Leo encreased
the Empire, whereof there is not any sound at all
in the words of Iustinian. To conclude, from
Leo his encreasing the faith after Constantine, that
Constantine therfore impared it, is as if one should
collect, that Romulus impared the Cittie of Rome,
because Seruius Tullus after Romulus enlarged it.
And if it were graunted, (which neither is true,
nor any part of the meaning of Iustinian) that
Constantine had impared the Empire, yet doth it
no way follow which Marta collects, that therefore
Constantine gaue away Rome, Italy, and all the
Westerne Prouinces to the Pope; or that Iustinian
knew that Constantine made this Edict of
Donation. He might impare the Empire an hundred
waies, and not giue so much away, or not
giue it to the Pope. Besides all this, Marta to
make his false Glosse more colourable, clips away
those words of the Text in Iustinian, which euidently
manifest both the fraud of Marta, and the
true meaning of Iustinian; these are Iustinians
words, Leo
                  Iustin. in Authent. Coll. 2. Tit. 1. cap. v
                        •
                     am. 
                  of blessed memorie, after Constantine
fidei inter Imperatores principatum auxit,
among those that were Emperours, enlarged the

Dignity or Maiesty of the Faith, and ordained the
honor and discipline of holy Churches. Whence
it is cleare that Iustinian commends both Constantine
for planting and propagating, and Leo for enlarging
the faith, by making lawes for aduancing
the honor, and establishing the holy discipline of
the church, which at the first planting of the faith,
was not so fully done by Constantine. In which
words seeing there is neither mention, nor intention
of imparing or enlarging the Empire; euerie
man may conceiue, how well Marta deales with
writers of other professions, when he so malitiously
corrupteth the words, and peruerts the sence
of those verie Imperiall lawes of Constantine, in the
knowledge of which hee professethPercurramus iuta ciuilia, quae ad nos pertinent. part. 1▪ ca. 30. nu. 27 himselfe a
Doctor.
               The third Emperor whō they alledge, is Charles
the Great, whom to be a witnesse of this Donation,
they proue by diuers collections. First comes
in Steuchus, and telsSteuch. lib. cit. pa. 111. & 115. vs, That Charles the great
confirmed, id quod magnus Constantinus edicto statuerat,
that which Constantine had decreed in his Edict.
To this purpose Steuchus reci
                     •
                  esPag. 112. 113. 114. 115. an whole
Chapter out of the libri Carolini: And though in al
that large Chapter, there be no mention either of
Constantine, or of his Donation, or of his Edict, yet
Steuchus wil frō thence proue this Edict. And how
I pray you? Because there are some like sentēces in
that chapter of Charles, to those that are in Constā
                     tines
Edict. ConstantineSteuch. ibid. pa. 116. 
                  saith the Pope must be the
highest, and rule ouer al Bishops in the world: Charles
saith, The Romane Church primatum habet à Deo,
                  
hath Primacie, and is preferred to other Churches
by God. Constantine saith, we decree that the
Pope shall gouerne all which pertaines to Religion, and
stabilitie of Faith. Charles in like sort saith, That
learned and holy men, as by name Saint Hierom,
haue implored helpe from the Romane Church in doctrines
of Faith. From this similitude (there is, as
you plainly see no Identitie) of Charles his speaches
to Constantines, Steuchus collects, That
Charles both knew
                  Hoc sciens, perceptumque habens. Steuc. pa. 111. of Constantines Edict, and
confirmed
                  Confirmat quod Constant
                        •
                     nus statuerat. Ib▪ d pa. 115. 
                  the same.
               
               
                  Steuchus hath in many passages before, bewrayed
his leaden heart and brazen forehead: In
this he will yet once againe demonstrate the same
vnto you. Whats Primacie, to Supremacie?
Whats Primacie aboue Bishops, to a Temporall
Supremacie and Monarchie aboue the Emperor?
Or how can a Primacie giuen by God, inferre the
Donation of a Temporall Monarchie ouer Rome,
and all the Westerne Prouinces, giuen by Constantine?
But the eminency of Steuchus his folly
appeares in that from one or two somewhat like,
but yet different sayings, found the one in Charles
his words; the other in Constantines supposed Edict,
Steuchus inferres, that Charles knew, and
confirmed this Edict. Are those speaches of Primacie
ouer Bishops, and expecting the Popes iudgment
in causes of Faith, no where to be found before
the time of Charles, but in this base Edict of
Donation? Reade the third EpistleApud. Bin. 
                        •
                     om. 1. Conc. pa. 104. of Anacietus,
there it is said, This Apostolicke See of Rome, Card
                        •
                     
& caput omnium Ecclesiarum à Domino constituta,
                  
was appointed by the Lord, to be the head and
hinge of all Churches, and all Churches to bee ruled
by it. Againe, it is there also said, The Sea of
Rome, Primatum obtinuit, obtained from God Primacie
ouer all Churches. It is a witlesse reason,
and a Topicall place fit onely for Steuchus, from
similitude of speaches to conclude, that the one
writer knew or confirmed the writing of the other.
The speech of the Lyrick
                  Horat. lib. 3. Carm. Ode 16, Bene est cut Deus
obtulit parca quod satis est manu, is like to the saying
of Salomon
                  Prou. 30. 8.? Giue me not pouertie, nor riches;
but feede me with food conuenient. One might iustly
deride him, who from the similitude of these
sayings, would conclude; that therefore the Epicurian
hog knew what Salomon said, or meant to
confirme his Prouerbs. But the most witlesse reasons
are most fit for Steuchus.
               
               Next comes Boetius Epo, and among those seuen
reasons, which are brought by some wittie
disputers, to proue that Constantine by his Donation
transferred the Westerne Empire to the
Pope, sets this downe for the fift, which carrieth
indeed the fairest colour, and is of all the seauen
most probable. The Pope, say theyApud Boet. Epon. lib. Heroic. quaest. q. 3. nu. 60., gaue the Westerne
Empire to Charles the great, for so Pope Innocentius
the third witnesseth, saying
                  Cap. venerabilem. lib. 1. Decretal. tit. 6. de Elect. & elect. potest., the Apostolicke
See transferred the Empire from the Graecians,
in personā magnifici Caroli, to the person of Charles
the Great, and so to the Germanes; Now, say they,
the Pope would not giue the Westerne Empire to
Charles, vnlesse it were his owne, either by Constantines
Donation, or by his proper right from

Christ. His proper right or title from Christ, these
men could not finde, nor did thinke so good;
and therefore they inferre from this guift, That
the Pope
                  Constanti
                        •
                      nu. ipsum quoque 
                        〈…〉
                      videtur. ibid. nu. 55. 
                  had the Westerne Empire by the Donation
of Constantine.
               For answere to this reason, first it may be said,
that Leo the third was not so free hearted, as to
giue away his owne, yea, all his successours right:
specially to an Empire. Such large Donations
are not vsuall in their Popes. But, howsoeuer not
onely these disputers for the Donation, but Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. de Transl. Imp. vb. ait Imperiu
                        ••
                      translatum P
                        •
                     ntificis autho
                        •
                     ta 
                        •
                     . pa. 3.,
Baronius
                  Ex in
                        •
                     ita Romano pontifici authoritate, fuisse impl
                        ••
                     um affirma
                        •
                     us. Bar. an. 780. nu. 14. & seq., Carerius
                  Car. lib. 2. de Rom Pont. ca. 19▪ nu. 7., and many others
doe vainely boast of the contrarie: the truth is,
neither had Leo the third the Westerne Empire
to giue, neither did he giue it vnto Charles. All
that he conferred was but the Imperiall Coronation
and vnction, which were but accidentall 
                     •
                  ites
and ceremonies, the substance it selfe he did not,
he could not conferre. All the right that Charles
euer had to the Westerne Prouinces, was first by
Conquest, or Iure belli, and then by the vnanimous
consent of the Romane State, which is equall to
Ius electionis; they all accepting him for their
King and Emperor: which consent Pope Leo the
third, as a chiefe member of that State, in their
name, and as the mouth of the whole politick body,
signified vnto Charles, and expressed it, by
setting the Imperiall Crowne vpon his head.
               Of his former title by conquest, none can doubt,
who considers that Charles ouercame Desiderius
and the Lombards, & so made himselfe Lord of all
Italy, all the Citties thereof being either by force
compelled to yeeld, or else willingly without force

yeelding themselues vnto him. Charles, saith Rhegino
                  Rhegin an. 774.,
returned from Rome to Papia, and tooke it by
force, and then al the Lumbards cōming, de cunctis ciuitatibus
Italiae out of all the Cities of Italy, eius se
subdiderunt dominationi, sub
                     •
                  ected themselues to
the rule and gouernment of Charles; and he, Italia
subiugata & ordinata, Italy being now subdued &
set in order by him, with great triumph returned into
France: and in the yeare 781. comming againe to
Rome, his two sons were annointed Kings, Pipin King
(or Viceroy) of Italy, & Lewis of Aquitane. Charles
saith HermanusHerm. Cont. Cronic. breui an. 774. & in Chron. maiori. an. e
                        •
                     d. 
                  ouercame Desiderius, he subdued
Long
                        •
                     bardos cum Italia, the Lumbards with Italie,
and in triumph came to Rome. Charles, saith Otho
FrisingOth. Fris. l
                        •
                     b. 5. ca. 26. & 28. 
                  subacta Italia, hauing subdued Italy, returned
into France, and some yeares after comming
to Rome, his sonne Pipin was annointed King of Italie.
Charles comming into Italy, saith Athelmus
                  Annal. re
                        •
                     ū gest. 
                        •
                      Carolo, an. 774. Illius, lib authorem Adelmum aut Athelmum vocat▪ Pap
                        •
                     r Masson in Leon. 3. & Goldast. ante libros Carolinos pa. 83., ouercame
Desiderius, and tooke him captiue, compelled the
cittie of Ticinum to yeeld; which other cities in Italie
following, omnes se potesta
                        ••
                      Regis subdiderunt, they
all subiected themselues to the power of Charles,
who then returned into France, subacta & ordinata
Italia, hauing conquered Italie, and set it in order.
Charles, saith EginhertusEginh. de vit. Carol pa 4, did not desist nor giue
ouer war, till he had ouercome Desiderius, put to flight
Adalguisus his sonne, totamque Italiam suae ditioni
subiugaret, and had brought all Italy vnder the
yoake of his Dominion. Charles, saith Marian.
Scotus
                  Mar. Scot an. 774., went into Italie, and ouercame Desiderius
and the Lumbards, atque Italiam totam subegit, and
subdued all Italie. Charles, saith SigebertSigeb▪ 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      774., hauing

Italiam sub iure Regni Francorum redegit, brought
all Italie into subiection to the French. Charles
uing destroyed the Kingdome of the Lombards, totam
saith Aimonius
                  Aimon. lib. 4. de gest. Fran. ca. 70., forced the cittie of Ticinum to
yeeld; which other citties in Italy following, omnes se
Regis & Francorum potestati subdiderunt, they all
subiected themselues to the power of Charles, and
the King hauing subdued Italy, returned into France,
carrying Desiderius captiue with him. Charles, saith
LupoldusLupold. lib. de Iure Reg. & Imp. ca. 1., came into Italy, forced the cittie of Papia,
being the cheefe seat of the King of the Lumbards,
to yeeld; other citties in Italy following it,
dicti Caroli potestati se tradiderunt, gaue and subiected
themselues to the power of Charles, and he,
Italiae subiugatae, set his sonne Pipine as Viceroy ouer
Italy, being thus conquered. AgaineIbid. ca. 7., Charles
bello licito subiugauit, subdued and conque
                     •
                  ed by
iust warre, Italy, Saxonie, Frisia, and many other
Prouinces. And againeIbid. ca. 5. & it erum. ca. 9., Charles licite per bellum
acquisiuit, conquered, and that lawfully, Italy and
many other Prouinces, and got them to him and his
successours, because the Kings and possessours of them
dealt tyrannously against the Church.
               
               It is true that many Citties yeelded without
warre; but yet their voluntarie yeelding to a Conquerour,
hinders not his Conquest, but furthers
the same, and makes it more easie and and speedy.
And therefore it is a very friuolous cauill of
Bellarmine
                  Cum Rom
                        •
                     
                     nis nunquam pugnauit, &c. qua ration
                        •
                      igitur iure belli Romanos subiectos habuit. Bell. lib. 1. de Transl. Imp. ca. 7. pa. 127., That because Charles fought not with
the Romans, nor forceably entred the cittie of Rome,
as an enemy; therefore he obteined it not by conquest:
for neither did he fight with any Cittie that yeelded

it selfe sine sudore & sanguine, and yet he was
a Conquerour of them, as well as of the other▪
and of them all, none was so ready and willing to
yeeld as Rome it selfe and their State. Yea, they
were so forward in this submission of themselues
vnto him, That before
                  Siffrid. Epit: lib. 1. an. 781. 
                  hand, pactio interuenerat,
there was an agreement, a couenant and compact
made, betwixt the Princes of Germanie, and the
Pope with the Romanes, that when the Lumbards
were conquered, the Romane Empire should be transferred
vnto him. What needed force, when they
freely, and of their owne accord, offered subiection
to the Conquerour?
               To omit many other, their owne Sigonius
speakes most effectually to this purpose, sayingSigon. lib. 4. de reg. Ital. in initio.;
Desiderius and all the Lumbards being ouercome,
Carolus Regnum Italiae sibi, iure victorae vendicauit,
Charles chalenged the Kingdome of Italie as due
vnto him by Conquest: yea, hee further shewes,
that the Italian States vpon this Conquest, willingly
accepted him as their Lord. After that
saith heIbid., the people being demaunded, if they would
subiect themselues to this King Charles, and with
constancy and fidelitie obey him and his commaunds,
had answered, that they would; hee was according to
ancient custome crowned, and then annointed King,
and set in the Throne at Modoetia, by the Bishop of
Millane. Which things being done, Charles thought
it his dutie being now made the Lord of Italy, non solum
armis sed etiam legibus, not onely by Conquest
but by Law, to set in order the Commonwealth:
a
                     •
                  d then hauing told what Cities or Dukedomes

he gaue to others, and what to the Pope, for a testimony
of his Soueraigntie in both, Sigonius declares,
That in all the Lands and Territories which
he gaue or confirmed to the Pope, hee did still reteine
ius principatus & ditionem, Imperiall or suprcame
Dominion: and for the rest, all the Dukes were to
receiue an oath of fidelitie, euery one swearing to be
faithfull to him and his successours, vt vassallus Domino,
as a vassall to his Lord. Thus and much
more Sigonius. The like consent was expressed at
Rome, and that in a Synod, held shortly after his
conquest and crowning at Modoetia, For Charles
saith Sigonius, after this
                  His rebus Papiae atque Modoeciae actis, Carolus ad consilia cū Hadriano cō
                     municanda Romā iter intendit. Sig. ibid. 
                  returned to Rome
                  Iterum Romam redijt, Synodum constituit. Sigeb. an. 773. sed non ait factam eo anno▪ Nam & reditus Romam & Synodus habita, post expugnatam Papiam ann. 774 & idem declaratur Distinc. 63. Ca. Hadrianus & Theod. de Niem. lib. de de Iur. Imp. in initio. Herm. Cont. an. 774.: hee
appointed a solemne Councell to bee held; that Synod
was
                  Sigeb. Theod. de Niem. & Gratian. locis citat. Naucl. an. 772. Mart. Pol. an. 772. Lupol. lib. de Iur. regni. ca. 1 Rod. de Colum. lib de trans. Imp. §. Hoc. Mars. Patau. de trans. Imp: ca. 10. alijque. 
                  most solemnly celebrated in the church of our
Sauiour, at which were present not onely Bishops, Abbots,
and other religious persons to the number of
an hundred and fiftie, but iudges
                  Theod. de Ni
                        •
                     : loc. cit. 
                  also, Lawyers, and
others, ex vniuersis ordinibus almae vrbis, of all the
orders of the cittie, who sought out the customes and
lawes of the church and Empire, Populus itaque Romanus
legem condebat, the Romane people then
made a law after their vsuall manner, and Ius &
potestatem Imperij concesserunt, granted to Charles
the right and power of the Empire, & in 
                        •
                     um transtulit
omne suum ius & potestatem, and the people
transferred to him all their power and right. The
Testament of Charles set downe by Eginhertus
                  Eginh. de vita Carol. pa. 13.,
yeelds an vndeniable demonstration, that Charles
from the time of this Conquest, accounted himselfe

the supreame Lord and King of Italie, seeing
it beares date Anno Christi 811. of his Kingdome
in France, the fortie three, of his Kingdome in
Italy the 36. The first of which thirtie sixe fals
out directly in the yeare 774. By this now it appeares,
and that also by the consent and iudgement
of the best Historians, and others, that both
Charles esteemed himselfe to haue a right by conquest
vnto Italy, and that the Italians and Romanes
acknowledged the same right in him; and
that both the Pope, and the other Italians, held
their Territories from him as their supreame
Lord: In token whereof the Pope
                  Rheg. an. 796. Si
                        •••
                      eod. an. Aim
                        •
                     . lib. 4. ca. 86. Naucl. an. 796 Sigon. lib. 4. de reg. Ital. anno 796. 
                  and Romanes at
the Election of Pope Leo, sent to Charles the keies
of St. Peter, and the standard of the cittie of Rome,
and the rest swore fidelitie to him, and therein
professed him to be their Lord, and themselues
his vassals, and the whole State of Italie first at
Modoetia accepted, and crowned him for their
King, and then at Rome, in a Synod decreed the
power and right of the Empire to belong vnto
him.
               Now seeing both this Conquest of Italie
was made by Charles, and this vniforme consent
was declared by the Romanes, Anno. 774. as
Rhegino, Hermanus, and others affirmeRheg. Herm. alij que locis cit., euen
from that time Charles had the Soueraigne, and
truly Imperiall authoritie ouer Rome, Italie, and
other conquered Prouinces belonging vnto
the Empire, though he neither desired, nor they
gaue vnto him the Title and Name of Romane
Emperour, till more then twentie foureAnno. 800. quando Imp
                        •
                     
                     rator Rom. dictus & Corenatus est. yeares

after. For his power being then truly Regall,
was also truly Imperiall; seeing it is certaine that
Rex and Imperator, Regall and Imperiall authoritie
differ onely in name and title, not in realitie and substance.
How vsually in all writers are the Kingdomes
of Assiria, Persia, & Grecia, called three of
those foureSl
                        •
                     id. de 4. fummis Imperijs librū scripsit. Medorum Imperium vocat Perer. lib. 2. in Dan. pa. 104. & Imperium Persarum ac Graecorum idem lib. 15. p. 907. Imperiū A flyrior
                        •••
                     . Aeneas Syl. lib. de ortu Imp. ca. 4. 
                  summa Imperia, which haue ruled the
world. Aeneas Syluius calsAen. Silu. lib. cit. ca. 1., the sacred Empire
of Rome, Romanam regiam potestatem, the Regall
power of the Romanes. Sigonius hath writ twentie
bookes of the Westerne Romane Emperors, from
Charles the Great to Rodulphus. All his bookes he
entitles,Sig. à lib 4. ad 20. de Reg. Ital. 
                  De Regno Italiae, of the Kingdom of Italy.
The name of the Emperour, saith Mars. Patauinus
                  Mars. Defen. pac. part. 2. ca. 15. 
                  is vsed to signifie Regalis Monarchiae speciem, a
kind of Regall Monarch: to wit, such as is truly
Regall and Soueraigne. Hostiensis saithHost Extr. de verb. signif. ca. Super quibusdam, & cit. à Lupol. lib. de Iure reg. ca. 11., That
Imperiall vnction (at which ti
                     •
                  e the title of Emperour
is vsually giuen) non dat nisi nomen Imperatoris,
giues nothing but the name of Emperour:
The substance then is the same with the Regall
power, which before he hath. Pope Gelasius writing
to an Emperour, and of his Imperiall authoritie
also, cals it in expresse tea
                     •
                  mes, Regall power:
The world
                  Gelas. Epist. 8. quae est ad Ana
                        •
                     tasium Imp. 
                  is gouerned by two things, by pontificall
authoritie, & regali pote
                        •
                     tate, and by Regal power.
Pope Leo who crowned Charles, calsLeo 3. apud Krantz. Saxon lib. 2. ca 18. that Regall
power, which he had before his Coronation, Imperiale
culmen, the Imperiall height. Lupoldus handling
this point at large, saithLupold. de Iur. reg. & Imp ca. 7. of the Romane
King, that eo ipso quod est Rex, est Imperator, euen
for this cause that he is King, he is also Emperor▪
                  
and thatIbid. habet Rex. Rom. 
                        •
                     andem potestatē exercendi actus reseruatos Imperatori, quam habet post Coronationem. 
                  in those Territories which belong vnto
him, he may exercise all Imperiall Acts: and particularly
of Charles, he saithIbid. ca. 9.; That before his Coronation
to be Emperour, he had plenariam & omnimodam
potestatem, plenarie and al Soueraigne power
in Italie. He further addesIbid. cap. 7. Consuetudo generalis est omniū regnorum occidentalium, &c., That it is the generall
custome of all the Westerne Kingdomes, from time beyond
all memorie, that their Kings doe, and may exercise
all Imperiall acts in their kingdomes, and that
by reason of this custome, quae valet et licita est,
which is both lawfull, and of force, the Romane
King may before he be crowned Emperour, exercise in
his Kingdome all Imperiall rights, acts, and offices;
vpon which ground hee particularly affirmesIbid. ca 7.,
that Rex Galliae the French King, as now hee is called,
hath the same power in his Kingdome, that the
Emperour hath in the Empire: and the like is to bee
said of England, whose Crowne is expresly called
25. H. 8. ca. 21. 22. & 1. Mar Pa
                        •
                     l. 2. ca. 1. & 1. Eliz. ca. 1. 
                  Imperiall. To the like purpose Hier. Baldus
saithHier. Balb. lib. de Coron. pa. 68., that the King of the Romanes, and the Emperour,
idem omnino valent, et sunt Synonima, are all
one in substance, and are Synonimal titles: which
he proues, both because the yeares of ones Empire,
incipiunt fluere, begin to be accounted from the
time that one is elected King of the Romanes, and specially
by the lawCod. de Quadr. praescrip. lib. 7. tit. 27., Bene à Zenone, wherein, that
which is in one line called Imperialis maiestas, in
the very next, is called Regale culmen: whence it
is euident, and that by the Imperiall law, that the
Regall and Imperiall maiestie and height is the verie
same; yea, Charles himselfe to haue iudged
no otherwise is euident by his owne Act, for hee
                  
                  Eginhart. de vita & gest. Carol pa. 11. 
                  professed that if hee had knowne that▪
                   Leo would
haue crowned him Emperour, hee would not haue
come to Church that day, though it was one of the
chiefest festiuall daies in the yeare; euen the day of
C
                     •
                  rists Natiuitie. Now none may doubt, but that
if Charles had thought hee had got by Imperiall
Coronation, either a better right, title or interest,
or more authoritie and power then before
he had, to Rome, Italie, and the Prouinces which
he had subdued, he would most willingly haue accepted,
yea twenty yeares before that, haue sought
for Imperiall Coronation, and the Imperiall Name.
But knowing that though he got a more glorious
and pompous title, yet he obteined no power or
authoritie to, and ouer Rome, Italie, or the Prouinces
which he had conquered, then before hee
had; he in modestie declining the name of Emperour,
which he knew would breed enuy, (as afterwards
indeed it didInuidiā suscepti nominis, Constantinopolitanis Imperatoribus super hoc indignantibus, magna tulit patien. tia. Eginhart. Ibid.) contented himselfe with
the authoritie and power of an Emperour, which
before that solemne Imperiall inauguration, he
both had and exercised in Rome, Italie, and other
Westerne Prouinces, which he had got iure belli,
by Conquest and law of Armes.
               His other title was the willing consent of the
Italian States and people to haue him for their
Lord. And this was indeede sufficiently performed:
first, when after his Conquest, hee was
crowned at Modoetia King of Italie; and then at
Rome, when the Councell of all the Italian
States decreed him to bee their Lord and King;
yet the same was againe, and that with farre

more pompe and solemnitie then euer before
performed at Rome
                  Anast. in vita Leon. 3 alijque., in the Church of Saint Peter,
on the day of Christs Natiuitie, in the yeare 800Nam obijt an. Imperij 11. an. Chri. 811. vt ex Testamento eiu
                        •
                      ce
                        •
                     tum est a pud Eginba
                        ••
                     . pa. 13. Qu
                        •
                     d ve
                        •
                     o Ath
                        •
                     l
                        ••
                      Otho Fris. Rhegin. Herm. Sig
                        •
                     b. & alij Coronatum dicunt an. 801 hoc eo fit, quia olim annum inchoabant à die▪ N
                        •••
                     uitatis Christ, non vt nunc à die Circumcis onis, & Kalend. 
                        •
                     anua. Quod obseruat etiam Bell. lib. de Trans. Imp. ca. 4 pa. 105..
When Pope Leo the third, in the name of the Senate
and whole people of Rome, and so of all the
Italian States, Crowned him for the Westerne Romane
Emperour, and with many most ioyfull acclamations
expressed their full consent thereunto,
and so transferred the Empire vnto him. For
though Bellarmine, and other flatterers of the
Romane See, challenge this wholy and solely to
the Pope, that he onely
                  Vt ipse qui solus id facere posse
                        •
                     , Imperium transfe
                        ••
                     e
                        •
                      Bell lib. de Trans. cap. 4. pa. 103., and none else could
transferre the Empire; that heeBell. lib. 
                        •
                     od. in tit. ca. 12. 
                  suo iure, by his
owne Papall right, did transferre the Empire to
Charles, and that Charles
                  Ibid. ca. 12. pa. 207. 
                  obteined the Empire,
nullo alio titulo nisi pontificis maximi authoritate,
by no other Title at all, but onely by the Popes
authoritie: yet is this but meere ventositie, and
puffing vp the Popes pride. For neither hath he
right to giue or transferre any Kingdome: neither
at this time was there ought (either for Title or Power) conferred vpon Charles, but what
was giuen by the consenting Decree of the whole
bodie of the Romane State. And this, by the vniforme
consent of the best Historians & writers is
so cleere, that none but such as are peruicatious,
and wilfully wedded to their owne errors, can
doubt thereof.
               Athelmus, a most
                  Author Annalium Francorum, omnium co
                        •
                      sensu fidelissimus, & qui tempore Caroli vixit. Bell. lib. de trans. Imp. ca. 4. pa. 93. Is fuit Athelmus vt ante ostendi. 
                  faithfull author, and contemporall

with Charles, saithAthel. Annal. de reb. gest. Carol. an. 801 videntur autē Annales Francotum editae per Pythaeum, huius libri Epitome., Leo put the crowne on
the head of Charles, cuncto Romanorum populo acclamante,
all the people of Rome crying, To
Charles the Emperour be life and victorie, which
being done, à Pontifice more antiquorum principum
adoratus est, Pope Leo adored the Emperour, as
the ancient custome was to doe. the verie like
words, both for the Coronation of Charles, acclamation
of all the people, and adoration giuen
to Charles by the Pope, are set downe both in Almonius
                  Aimon. lib. 4 ca. 90., in Ado Vi
                        •
                     nensis
                  Ado Vien. an. 799., in Abbas Vspergensis
                  Ab. Vsp. an. 801.,
in Tritemius
                  Trite. de Orig. Franc. an. 801., and for the most part in Regino
                  Rheg. in Chron. an. 801.
All the faithfull people of Rome, saith AnastasiusAnast. in vit. Leon 3. §. Post haec.,
seeing how Charles had defended the Church, did
with one voyce proclaime Charles the Romane Emperour,
et ab omnibus constitutus est Imperator, and
he was made Romane Emperour by them all. Leo
the third, saith LitprandusLitp de vit. Pontif. in Leon. 3., purged himselfe by
oath before Charles the King, and all the Cleargie
and people; after which, ab omnibus praedictus Rex
Romanorum Imperator est constitutus, the same
King Charles was made Romane Emperour by al,
(by the Cleargie and people) and was crowned by
Pope Leo. The Romane people, saith PopeGreg. 7. oratio habetur apud Auent. lib. 5. p. 453. 
                  Gregorie
the seuenth; being the head of the world, and
Lords of all, may transferre the Empire, in quos libuerit,
vnto whom it list; as 275. yeares since it
transferred the Empire from the Grecians to the Germanes.
The Romane people did it, not the Pope.
Pope Leo, saith HelmoldusHelm. Chr. siau. ca. 3., called a solemne
Councell; omnium ergo votis, omnium laudatione, so
by the votes or suffrages of all, by the collaudation

of all, was Charles honoured with the Imperiall
crowne; and the Empire translated from the Grecians
to the Frankes.
               
               
                  The Romanes, saith SigebertSigeb an. 801, with one consent
gaue to Cha
                     •
                  les the imperiall praises, 
                        •
                     umque per
manum Leonis Papae coronant, and they crowned
him by the hands of Leo, and called him Emperour.
They crowned him, but by the hands of Leo.
The Romanes with one consent, saith Waltramus
NaumbergensisWalt. tract. de Inuestit. in initio.
                  ▪ 
                  praised Charles, eumque per
manus Leonis coronauerant, and they crowned him
by the hands of Leo. Gotofride Viterb. speaking of
the Imperiall title giuen to Charles, saithGot. Vit. Chron. in Carolo mag., Tollere
sic nomen curia tota monet, the whole Court (the
Cleargie, Senate and people of Rome) willed
Charles to take the title of Emperour vnto him.
Leo 3. saith PlatinaPlat. in 
                        •
                     eon. 3., populi Rom. Scito ac precibus,
Carolum magna voce Imperatorem decernit, by the
D
                     •
                  cr
                     •
                  e, and vpon the entreatie of the people of
R
                     •
                  me, with a loud voice decreed (that is declared)
Charles to be the Romane Emperour, and
set the Imperiall Crowne vpon him. Charles, saith
Beneu. de Rambaldis
                  Ben▪ de Ramb. libr. Augustali, an. 801. inter opera Pe
                        ••
                     arc., electus est Imperator à senatu
populoque Com. confirmatus à summo Pontifice, was
chosen Emperour by the Senate and people of
Rome, and was confirmed by the Pope. Leo saith
EgnatiusEgn. Bap. in Carcl. mag., Scito populi Romani, clerique rogatu, by
the Decree of the people of Rome, and by the request
of the Clergie, called and consecrated Charles
for the Romane Emperour. Pope Leo, saith SabellicusSabel. Ennead. 8. lib. 8▪ in fine.,
Scito rogatuque populi, by the Decree and entreatie
of the people of Rome, consecrated and

annointed Charles for the Romane Emperour. Leo,
saith Blondus
                  Blon. dec. 2. lib. 1., Crowned Charles with the old Diademe
of Emperours, populi Romani Scito, precibusque
Imperatorem Romanorum declaratum, being declared
to be the Romane Emperour by the Decree
and entreatie of the people of Rome. What
Pope Leo did, was done by the Decree of the
whole Roman State Pope Leo, saith Iac. Wimphel
                     •
                  ngiusW
                        •
                     mphel. in 
                        •
                      pit. rer. German ca. 9.,
Populi Romani scito ac precibus, by the
Decree & at the request of the People of Rome,
declared with a loud voyce Charles to bee the Romane
Emperour, and set the Imperiall Crowne vpon
him. Leo crowned Charles, saith Aeneas SyluiusAen. Sil. lib. 1. Epit. in Dec. Blond.,
After he was declared to be Emperour, populi Romani
scito, by the decree and entreatie of the people
of Rome. And againeAene. Silu. lib. de ort. & auth. Imper. ca 9., The Romane people, which
with their bloud (that is bloudie warres) had got
the Empire; and by their vertues and valour had
founded the Monarchie of the world saluted Charles
first Patricius, and afterwards Emperour, concurrente
summi Pontificis consensu, the consent of the
Pope concurring with them. They did it, the
Pope in that Act consented to what they did.
Pope Leo, saith OnuphriusOnuph praesat. in lib. 4. 
                        •
                     astor., Romani populi & procerum
Italicorum Scito, by the Decree both of the
people of Rome, and of the Peares of Italie; as
also by the entreatie of the Cleargie, called Charles
the Romane Emperour of the West. Phil. Achillinus
handling this very point, by whom the Empire
was translated to Charles, after that testimonie so
often mentioned of the peoples acclamation at
the crowning of Charles, These words, saith hePhil. Achil. in Somni. Viridar. ca. 183.,

                  seeme to imply that Pope Leo crowned Charles, de
voluntate, ac ordinatione populi Romani, by the will,
ordination, or appointment of the people of
Rome, to whom it did belong to dispose of the Empire.
Wherefore that translation of the Empire, was
made à populo Romano, by the people of Rome, the
Pope being included as one of them. And to this
purpose he brings this reason. To them principally
doth belong the translation of the Empire (if it ought
to be transferred) by whom it was instituted: but the
Romane Empire was instituted by the people, not by
the Pope; and therefore by the people, and not by the
Pope must it be transferred also. And againeLib. cod. ca. 185., I answere,
saith he, that this translation of the Empire was
made not by the Pope, but by the people, who did at
the beginning institute it, and from whom at first, the
Emperour looke it.
               
               
                  Pope Leo, saith GuiccardineFr. Guicc. i
                        •
                      Paralip. loc. 2. pa. 43., together with
the people of Rome, named Charles the Romane
Emperour, Verum Pontifex haud alia authoritate,
quam vt eius populi caput, but the Pope did
this by no other authoritie, but as the chiefe of
that people. The Romanes, saith Iohn de ParisijsIoh. de Paris. tract. de potest. Reg. & Pap. ca. 16▪
                  ,
commended and magnified Charles the Great, &


Imporatoris ei nomen dederunt, and they gaue
the name of Emperour vnto him. And this
was done, saith he, non per solum Papam, not
by the Pope onely, but by the people, in whose
power it is to subiect themselues to whom they will
without preiudice to another: and they did it vpon a
necessary cause to defend themselues against Infidels
and Pagans: nam populus facit regem, 
                  
                     •
                  or the people

by their consent make an (Electiue) King, and the
Armie an Emperour. The Romanes and other Italians,
saith Michael CocciniusMich. Coccin. lib. de trāsl. Imperij., seeing on the
one side the auarice and sluggishnesse of the Grecians;
and on the other, the fortitude and iustice of the Germanes,
transferred the Empire from the Grecians
to the Germanes, in the person of Charles, and this
translation of the Empire was made, Romanorum caeterorumque
Italiae populorum consensu, & authoritate,
by the consent and authoritie of the Romanes,
and other people of Italy. The Pope, Senate, and
people of Rome, saith AuentinusAuent. lib. 4. pa. 259., decreed, tacito
plebiscito (their consent being in effect as if it had
beene a written Decree of the Senate and people)
to transferre the Romane Empire from the Grecians
to the Germanes, and to Charles, and then was
Charles crowned by Pope Leo, all the people applauding
it, which done, Charles was adored by the same
Pope, and other Romanes.
               
                  Pope Leo, saith SigoniusSigon. lib. 4. Reg. Ital. ann. 801., put the Imperiall
cloake and Crowne vpon Charles, al the people applauding
it with their cries, & Imperatorius illi titulus à
populo confirmatus est, and the people confirmed
vnto him the title of Emperour. When the Roman
Noblemen, saith KraniziusKrantz. in Saxon. lib. 3., came to a Councel, the
Westerne Empire was translated to the Germans. AgaineKrantz. lib. 1. Metrop. cap. 14.,
Charles was proclaimed Emperour by all the
people: Pope Leo performed that sacred ministerie,
the people (cui ius ac fas esse videbatur de Imperatore
creando, who thought they had right to make an
Emperour,) willing Leo so to do. The Romane
Church, saith CanzoCanzo Turiens in gest. Carol
                        •
                      mag. ca. 7. citatur à Goldast. in suo Ration. part. 
                        •
                     ., cum Proceribus, together

with the Nobles or Senators transferred the Empire
from the Grecians, to the person of Charles
and the Germanes. The Romanes, saith Alb. ArgentinensisAlb. Argent. in Fragm Historic. inter Hist. Germ. editas à Chri: Vrstitio.,
praescripserunt, appointed vnto Charles
the Romane Empire, and he being moued by the request
of Leo, of the Princes of the Kingdome, and all
the chiefe men consented to the will both of God and
men, and was consecrated Emperour. Pope Leo,
saith BergomensisPhil. Bergō. lib. 11. Supplement. in princ., being entreated by the Romane
people, crowned Charles, being declared to
be the Romane Emperour. The translation of the
Empire, saith LupoldusLupold. lib. de Iur. Reg. & Imper. in praef., from the Grecians to
the Frankes, per eccle fiam Romanam facta, was made
by the Romane Church. The very same, saith
Radulph. de Columna
                  Rad de Colum, lib. de Trans. Imp. §. Quantum.. Now by this name of the
Church is meant, not the Pope alone, or
Cleargie; but the whole body of the Christian
State of the Romanes, as Lupoldus himselfe declares;
for both heLupold. lib: cit. cap. 6. 
                  holds, that the election of the
Emperour is still made by the seauen Electors, vice
& authoritate vniuersitatis principum ac populi, by
the authoritie of all the Princes and people of the
Empire; and particularly for Charles, hee saithIbid. cap. 
                        •
                     .,
That those lands and power which he held, he had
not from the Church, (that is from the Pope) either
in Fee, vel alio quocunque titulo, or by any other
title whatsoeuer, but hee held them either by
succession (as the Kingdome of France) vel per
bellum licitum, or else by iust conquest, as Italy and
other Prouinces which he subdued. Card. Cusanus
                  Cusan. Concor 
                        •
                     athol, lib. 3. ca. 3.,
though he knew and alledgeth the Chapter
venerabtlem, wherein the Pope is saide, to haue

transferred the Empire vnto Charles, yet directly,
denies any such translation to haue beene made; yea
he goes further, and shewes, that to make an (Electiue)
Emperour, the Popes authoritie is not
sufficient, Imperatorem
                  Ibid. ca. 4. 
                  facit consensus eligentium,
non Papa, the consent of the Electors, not the
Pope makes an Emperour, and heeIbid. sets this
downe, for a Maxime, Esse & posse Imperatoris ab vno
                        •
                     homine
non dependet, the Essence and power
of an Emperour doth not depend on one man,
(that is the Pope) and therefore euen at this day,
as he teachethIbid. ca. 4., the Electors of the Empire, radicalem
vim habent ab ipso communi omnium consensu,
haue power to elect, from the common consent
of all that are subiect to the Empire, that being
as the roote and foundation whence their election
hath force: And againe, The Election made by
the Electors hath force, non
                  Ibid. pa. 785 
                  ab ipso Romana Pontifice,
not from the Pope, but per
                  Ibid pa. 786. 
                  concordem omniū
qui subsunt Imperio transf
                        •
                     sionem in 
                        •
                     os, but from
this that all the subiects of the Empire, (one
                  In qua quidem concord a Rom. Pontif
                        •
                     x Gregor. 5. includ
                        •
                     batur. ibid. 
                  of
which is the Pope also himselfe) haue transfused, or
transferred their power of electing into those seauen
Electors: and so in their consent vpon any,
is virtually included the consent of all the subiects
of the Empire, euen of the Pope himselfe:
The verie same touching the Electors, doth Lupoldus
teach. They, saith heLupol. lib. 
                        •
                     it. ca. 6., are esteemed to elect
the Emperour in the s
                        •
                     ead, and by the authoritie of
all the Princes and people of the Empire. Now
vpon this true discourse of Cusanus, it cleerely
followeth; that if Charles was by any Election
                  
madeElection
                        •
                      principis ecclesiastici, as
                        •
                     e
                        •
                     imus Carolum & alios Germanos Impera
                        •
                     o
                        •
                     es 
                        ••
                     s Imoperij adeptos esse Bell. lib. 1. de Transl. Im. ca 7. pa. 126. Emperour, it was not, neither could it
be made by the Pope, but by the whole bodie of
the Romane State consenting vpon him; which
consent was onely vttered and expressed by
the voyce and act of Pope Leo, when hee nominated
and crowned Charles. Many moe authorities
(beside reasons) might bee alledged to
this purpose, but these being so cleere, are sufficient
euerie way to encounter Bellarmines fi
                        •••
                     ie
                  Aduers
                        •
                     s nostros circiter quinquaginta. ib
                        •
                     d. ca. 13. pa. 229.
wrested testimonies, whereof he boasteth.
               It is, and not without cause, disputed what effect
this Imperiall Coronation had in Charles,
and what 
                     •
                  e obteined by this making of him the
Romane Emperour. Some teach it to be onely
a 
                     〈◊〉
                   of Title, not of Realitie. So Hostiensis
                  Host. Extr de verb. signif. ca. Super quibusdam..
Imperial Vnction, giues nothing but the Name and
Title of Emperor. Whence Iohn de Parisijs saith
Ioh. de Pa
                        •
                     . lib de potest. regia. ca. 16. of this very Translation of the Empire, when
Charles was crowned, Non translulit veritatem,
sed Nomen, it did not transferre Imperiall power,
but the Imperiall name vnto him. And Cardinall
Cusanus
                  Cus. lib. 3. cit. ca. 4., It is euident that Vnction and Coronation,
nihil praestant Imperiali patestati; adde nothing
to Imperiall power. And to the same effect
Iacob. Almaine
                  Iac. Alm. lib depotest. eccle. & laic. ca. q. 
                        〈◊〉
                      ca. 10., Coronation giues no power, sed
est tantummodo solemnitas, but it is onely a solemnitie.
               And truly for Rome, Italie, and other Prouinces
which before that Coronation and translation
Charles had conquered, in respect of them,
their sayings are verie true. For it is most certaine,
that in respect of these, Charles obteined

thereby neither more right vnto them, nor more
power and authoritie ouer them then before hee
had: for hee formerly held them both iure belli,
and iure consensus populi: and his power which before
hee had being royall and supreame, was truly
imperiall: and so neither for right vnto, nor authoritie
ouer those Countries did hee receiue any increase.
In this respect the addition was onely
Nominall, as giuing him the highest stile and
name of Augustus, or Emperour, it was not Real, as
giuing him either more right, or more authoritie
in those Prouinces. Hier. Balbus teacheth this, sayingHier. Balb. lib de Coron. pa. 68.;
All interpreters of the law, vno ore, parique
consensu statuunt, do determine with one consenting
voyce, that what belongs to the Coronation, is
done honoris & officij causa, rather for honour and
office, then of necessitie, or that quicquam hac actione
Caesaribus accedat, that any thing should be added
to the kingly power. And hee further saith; That
the election alone is of the substance, the rest, to wit;
Confirmation, Coronation and Vnction, are onely matters
of solemnitie. Lupoldus
                  Lupold. lib. cit. ca. 4. & cap. 11. is earnest for the contrarie.
But if we rightly consider the point, the
realitie and power, which he thinks to haue beene
added to Charles by crowning him Emperour, is
not so great as at the first it seemes. He supposeth,
that by this
                  Virtute translationis huius Carolus eius
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      successores receperunt potestatem impericl
                        •
                     m in omnibus regnis, Prouincijs & terris occidentatibus quae non erant ante translationem sub potestate Caroli. Lup. locis ci
                        •
                     atis. 
                  making him Emperour of the West, the
Romane State did therein giue vnto him and his successours,
a right vnto all other Westerne Kingdomes
and Prouinces which formerly belonged to the Empire,
and which as yet he had not conquered, which
is the onely matter of realitie superadded, that he

could finde. But there must necessarily be added
two restrictions, to make good this assertion. The
one, that he had to those vnconquered Prouinces
such right onely, and so farre, as the people of
Rome and States of Italy could giue vnto him▪
                   Now
because there was in them no right at all at this
time to doe this, they hauing long before transferred
whatsoeuer power and right they had vnto
the EmperourVnde Roma seruilis vrbs, & Italia seruilis prouincia Cō
                     stantini pogonati vocatur, ab Agathone & occidentali Synodo. Act. 4 Conc. gen 6. of Constantinople, it seemes
that in him the right and rightfull power ouer
such Prouinces still resided, till either by iust conquest
those Prouinces were taken from him, or else
by voluntarie cession, or other right, he passed them
away. By reason then of this former defect, that
may be said of the peoples giuing or transferring
to Charles the right vnto those Prouinces not as
yet conquered, which was often saidNich. 1. Epi, 10 §. Quoniā. & Hadr. 2. Epist. 4. of the Ordinations
made by Gregorius Syracusanus, and
Phottus▪ Pater mous nihil habuit mihi dare, nihil
dedit; they had no power to giue ought, they
gaue nothing.
               The other restriction is, that admitting they
had rightly giuen such power vnto Charles,
vnto those as yet vnconquered westerne Prouinces
which once belonged to the Romane Empire,
yet was this right giuen onely ouer such Prouinces,
as were iniuria ab alijs occupatae, to vse Bellarmines
                  Bell. lib. 1. de Trans. Imp. ca. 13. §. Decimo sexto. own words, iniuriously with-held from
the Empire: for if any of those Countries or
Prouinces had either iure belli, or by the consent
                  Hi reges dicipossunt constituti sea creati à Principe, propter Tacitū ipsius consensū. Nam qui patitur rem praescribi, vel consuetudine induci, praesumitur consensum praestare. Lup. lib. cit. ca. 1
either Expresse or Tacit of the Emperour and his
State, or by any other iust title freed themselues

from the yoake of the Romane Empire, and so erected
a Soueraigne or Monarchicall kingdome
of their owne; as in Spaine, England, France, and
other westerne Kingdomes, is not to be doubted
Qui Imperatotem Rom. pto suo superio
                        ••
                      in temporalious non 
                        〈◊〉
                     . cu
                        ••
                      sic
                        •
                     t app
                        ••
                     et deregibus His
                     
                        ••••••
                      
                     
                        ••••
                     ciae, & alijs omni
                        •
                     bus regibus Occidentis. Lupold. lib. c
                        •
                     . ca. 13. but they had; for these, neither had the Romane
State any power to giue, nor did Charles by their
making him Emperour, receitie any right at all
vnto them. I
                     •
                   in respect of such vnconquered
Proui
                     •
                  ces onely, as were iniu
                     •
                  iously deteined,
the words of Lupoldus be admitted, that Charles
by being made westerne Emperour, receiued an
addition of reall power or right vnto them, so far
as the Romanes and Italians could giue the same,
it is not much materiall. But for the maine point
which concernes our present purpose, thus much
is euident and cleerely demonstrated, that whatsoeuer
it was that Charles receiued by his Imperiall
Coronation, and by being made Emperour at
that time, whether onely a Nominall Title, or some
Reall authoritie together with it, he both receiued
and held the same, not from Pope Leo, nor from
any Papalauthoritie and power, but from the ioynt
consent and Decree of the whole Romane and Italian
State; whose consent and Decree for giuing
that Title of westerne Emperour vnto Charles, and
either confirming what right he before had vnto
the conquered, or giuing a new right vnto some
vnconquered Prouinces iniuriously deteined,
was but signified and ministerially expressed by
Pope Leo, as the mouth and hand of that politicall
bodie. The Act it selfe was the Act of the whole
bodie, which being the onely principall agent,

translated both the Imperiall Title, and whatsoeuer
authoritie was with it conferred.
               Neither is is to be doubted at all (or so much
as questioned) but that Charles and his successors
had a most iust aad rightfull Title vnto Rome, Italy,
and other parts of the westerne Empire, which
he subdued: seeing hee first obtained them Iure
belli, and then Iure consensus populi, declared vpon
his conquest, first at Modoetia, then at Rome, in a
verie great assembly of all the States, and after
both these, An. 800. confirmed by the vnanimous
consent and Decree of the Romane and Italian
States at the time of his Imperiall Coronation.
Which his right
                     •
                  ull Title is yet more cleere, if
those two points bee rightly considered, which
both Baronius, and others of his stamp doe often
professe and teach. The one, that the Cause of those
warres by which Charles conquered Italy, was iust;
seeing it was for defence
                  Ecclesia liberatur à durissimo iugo, & dirissimo sceptro regū Lon. gob. Bar. an. 774. nu. 1. 
                  of Gods Church against inuading
oppressors, vndertaken also at the earnest solicitation
                  Deprecans Caroli excellentiam, vt succurreret occlesiae. Bar. an. 773 nu. 1., yea entreatie and supplication of the Popes
Holinesse; and furthered by the speciall, yea, miraculous
fauour
                  Fuga miraculosa Longobardorum. Bar. an. eod. nu 8. 
                  of God, who opened a way for Charles
                  Deus Carolo viam semper aperuit, tanquā Cy
                        •
                     o. ibid. nu. 7. 
                  to ouercome the Lumbards, as he did vnto Cyrus.
The other, that Titulus
                  Bar. an. 800. nu. 12. 
                  iuraque occidentalis Imperij
iacebant absque possessor
                        •
                     , both the Title and
Rights of the westerne Empire remained then
without any possessor, being taken, and that iustly,
as they teach, from the Grecians by the Popes authoritie,
for that they pertinactiously adhered to heresie:
All which are expressed, saith BaroniusSunt
                        ••
                     sta omnia expressa in fine Epistolae eiusdem Hadriani. Bar. ibid. 
                  by Pope
Hadrian in his Epistle to Charles. Now seeing a

Conquest made vpon a iust cause of warre, doth
iure Gentium produce a iust Title in the Conquerour,
it hence ensueth that the Title of Charles to
Italy, was iust, seeing his conquest thereof was
grounded vpon a iust cause of warre. Againe, seeing
the westerne Empire was then vacant both
for the Title and Right, it hence againe ensueth,
that Charles wronged none of their right or possession,
by taking vpon him Imperiall authoritie
in Rome, Italie, and other subdued Prouinces of
the westerne Empire; the right vnto them being
then tanquam ius in nubibus, did descend vpon
him, who was the first Occupant. So vpon these
their owne assertions, both the Conquest of
Charles was iust, in respect of the Lumbards oppression
of the Church: and his taking of Soueraigne,
that is Regall or Imperiall dominion of
the whole Countrey of Italy, was iust also in respect
of the vacancie of the Empire, the right vnto
it, and those Prouinces hanging yet in the
Clouds, and belonging to none but primo Occupanti,
and that was Charles.
               
               This is more then sufficient to answere that
doubt of the disputers in Epo, who inferre, that
Constantine gaue the westerne Empire to the Pope,
because Pope Leo conferred it vpon Charles. Yet to
this which I haue alreadie said, let me adde the
answer of Boetius himselfe, who contrarie to those
disputers, holding that
                  Boet. Epo. quaest. Heroic. 9. 5. nu. 31. & seq & Glossé. in cap. Constantinus. nu. 21. Constantine by his Donation,
transferred not the Empire of the West vnto Syluester,
or other Popes; to this their fift reason, answerethIbid. Quaest. 5. nu. 48.
in this manner. That which is added touching

the western Empire giuē by the Pope vnto Charles
the Great, is not rightly said. For the Pope as being
the head or cheefe of the Church declared Charles to
be Emperour, nomine totius populi Romano Imperio
subiecti, in the name of all the people subiect to
the Empire, the people themselues, sic desiderante,
desiring the same; the Emperour of Constantinople
being at that time iustly depriued of the westerne
Empire by the Pope. Dedit ergo populus Christianus
per Pontificem Imperium Carolo; therefore the
Christian people subiect to the Romane Empire,
gaue the Empire vnto Charles by Leo, that is by
his hands or ministerie. Euen as when the succession
of heires happens to faile in any Kingdome, the
people of that kingdome, per ordinum eiusdem regni
primores dat regnum nouo regi, giues that kingdom
to a new King, by the chiefe Peeres and Orders
of the same Kingdome. Thus Epo; who cleerely
both reiects and refutes that vaine boast of Bellarmine,
and others, that the Pope by his right, gaue
or transferred the Empire vnto Charles.
               But what shall bee said to Pope Innocent the
third, who in the Chapter venerabilem, doth expresly
affirme, that the Apostolicke See (that is the
Pope) transferred the Empire from the Grecians
to the person of Charles, and to the Germans. Truely
it might most iustly, and by the rule of the law,
be said, that Popes are vnfit
                  Nullus idoneus testis in re sua intelligitur, ff. lib. 22. t. t. 5. l. 10. 
                  witnesses in their
owne causes. It might againe be said with Albericus
de Rosate, That this Chapter
                  Alber. in Diction. iu
                        ••
                      in verbo. Elect. Imper. venerabilem, is
one of those Decretals, which are not iuri consonae,
consonant to the Law, but are set forth contraiura

& libertatem Imperij, against the right and libertie
of the Empire. But I rather chuse, to giue
that fauorable construction of the words of Pope
Innocentius, which others haue done before, and
which is consonant to the Historicall narration.
Innocentius
                  Philoth Achil in Somni. Viridar cap. 183. 
                  said, that the Pope transferred the Empire
to the person of Charles, either because he did
it authoritate Romanorum, by the authoritie of the
Romanes: or because the Romane people, tribuit Papae
potestatem transferendi, had then giuen or committed
to the Pope their power (so much as in
them lay) to make that translation, Vel quia Papa
persuasit, seu consuluit fieri, or else because the Pope
did perswade and aduise this translation to bee
made vnto Charles. Any one of which waies, if
the words of Innocentius bee taken, they are true,
and consonant to the Histories: if they be so expounded,
as that the translation was made either
by the Pope alone, or else by his owne, or any Papal
authoritie, they are vntrue, and to be reiected, as
vtterly repugnant to the vniforme consent of
the best Historians, as before we haue already declared.
               
                  Marta in the third place, will yet after another
fashion proue this Edict by Charles the
Great, Because he
                  Mar. ca. 30. cit. nu. 31. 
                  by his owne Donation made to
Pope Hadrian, confirmes this Donation of Constantine.
Marta hath so invred his tongue to
truthes, that one can scarse expect ought vnelse
from his penne. That Charles confirmed
what Pipine had giuen before, Anastasius
                  Anast. in vit. Had. 1. §. Alio. at
large declares. So doth Baronius
                  Bar. an. 774 nu. 5. & 6., and after

them both Gretzer
                  Gretz. lib. de Munif. princ. ca. 3.; and in all these, as also in
Leo Ostiensis
                  Leo Ost. in Chror. Cassin. lib. 1. cap. 9., is expressed the forme of that Donation
which PipinDonatio Pipini extat apud Anast. in vit. Steph. 3. §. De quibus. Bar. an. 755. nu. 26. Gretz. citat. ca. 1. 
                  made, and Charles confirmed.
Let any one peruse that Donation, and hee will
admire the vile and shamelesse dealing of Marta:
For neither in that which is mentioned of
Charles, nor in that of Pipine, is this Donation of
Constantine either confirmed, or so much as named.
I say more, those Donations of Pipin, and
Charles, doe euidently, and vndeniably conuince
this Donation of Constantine to bee a forgerie.
For in those Donations, is particularly expressed
what Citties, Dukedomes, and Territories in Italy,
Pipine gaue, and Charles confirmed to the
Pope: what was not expressed in their Donations,
neither Pipin, nor Charles iudged to belong
to the Pope. Nay Charles disposed otherwise
of diuers Dukedomes, and ports in Italie,
and gaue them to others, as Sigonius
                  Sigon lib, 4. de Reg Italian 773. pa 90. expresely
witnesseth. Apulia and Calabria he left vnto the
(Easterne) Emperour, as after the victorie of Iustinian
they were; and these afterwards became a
new Kingdome, which was called the Kingdome of
Naples. The Dukedome of Beneuentum he gaue
to Aragisus, the sonne in law of Desiderius: the
Dukedome of Spoletum, to Hildebrand; the
Dukedome of Foroiulium, to Rodgandus, what
remained in Italy besides, & these that which he
gaue to the Pope, of them Sigonius saith,Si
                        •
                     on. Ibid., Reliqua
ipse sibi nomine Regni retinuit, he reteined
all the rest to himselfe, as belonging to his owne
Kingdome or Empire. Had Charles confirmed

the Donation of Constantine, he neither would,
nor in right could, haue either reteined to himselfe,
or giuen to any other, any of all these, but he
should haue restored them all, and that onely to
the Pope, to whom by Constantines Donation
they belonged; yea hee should in iustice haue resigned
al the other western Proninces also which
himselfe held, to the Pope, not retaining any part
of them all. Besides, euen in those verie Territories
which he gaue, or confirmed to the Pope; to
wit, in the Exarchate of Rauenna, in Pentapolis, in
the Dukedomes of Rome, Tuscaine, and Campania,
Charles when he gaue, or confirmed them to the
Pope, he reserued
                  Sigon. ibid. 
                  in them all, Ius principatus &
Ditionem, the Soueraigne, and direct dominion
to himselfe. For Ius principatus, & ditio, import
the direct and high dominion, as Gretzer
                  Quid quaeso est, esse in 
                        •
                     ure, principatu, atque ditione a
                     
                        •
                     icuius, quam habere Dominium directum 
                        •••
                     us. Gretz. lib. 
                        •
                     . Cont. Replic. ca. 15. 
                        •
                     . Horribiliter. also
confesseth. Now had Charles confirmed the Donation
of Constantine, hee should haue passed away,
yeelded vp, or acknowledged the Soueraignetie
in them al, to be in none but in the Pope alone,
and the Pope to be a superiour Lord, both in those
Territories of Italy, and other westerne Prouinces
then himselfe. Seeing Charles did none of
these, his Donation or confirmation, howsoeuer
you call it, doth vndeniably demonstrate, that
Charles either knew not of this pretended Donation,
or if he did, hee contemned and condemned
it (as iustly he might) for a base and counterfeit
fiction.
               The fourth Emperour alledged by Marta, is
Lewis the sonne of Charles. He, saith MartaMart. lib. 
                        •
                     t. ca. 31. nu. 1.,

                  proues or confirmes this Donation. He confirmes and
demonstrates the vaine and vile dealing of Marta.
His Donation is set forth by Baronius
                  Bar. an. 818. nu. 9. 10. & seq., out of
their vaticane monuments (which are, you may
be sure, made to speake most fauourably for the
Popes cause.) Is either the Edict, or Donation of
Constantine, or Constantine himselfe so much as
once named therein? No verily: nor one syllable
whence ought for the Donation can be so much
as coniectured. But as the Donation of Charles, so
this of Lewes, expressing what citties in Italy he either
gaue or confirmed to the Pope, and how hee reserued
as Charles had done before, the Soueraigntie
to himselfe, at least in the Dukedomes of Tuscaine
and Spoletum, by the acknowledgement of
Gretzer
                  Gretz. lib. 2 contra Replic. ca. 15. 
                        •
                     . Porro vbi de Othone agit, sed par est ratio in Ludouici donatione. & in Apol, pro Bar. ca. 20. the most earnest Proctor for those Donations,
expressing this very clause, Salua super
eosdē ducatus in omnibus nostra dominatione, et ill
                        •
                     
                     rum
ad nostram partem subiectione; Sauing ouer
those Dukedomes in all things our Soueraigne
Dominion, and their subiection to vs. Besides,
as Card. Molineus
                  Car. Molin. contra paru. Datas in Epit. Gless. 15. sub
                        •
                      st. nu. 157. rightly obserues, nec verum
nec verisimile est, neither is it true, nor yet probable,
that Lewes surnamed Pius, would make a deed
of Gift of those things, Quae donare non poterat,
which were not his to giue (as particularly Calabria
and the Dukedome of Naples) which Charles
his Father, Graecorum Imperio reliquerat, had left
to the Greeke Empire, as before out of Sigonius
was declared. These besides many the like doe euidently
demonstrate, that Lewes either knew not
of this Constantinean Donation, or if he did, that

he reiected it as a forgerie. And the very like is
to be answered to the Donation of Henrie the second,
who is the fift EmperourMart. ca. 30. nu. 31. alledged by
Marta.
               
               
                  Otho the fourth confirmes this Donation, saith
Marta. That Otho the fourth confirmed to Innocent
the third the patrimonte of St. Peter. Otho de S.
Blasio
                  
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      de S. Blas. in append. ad Othon. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . ca. 52., Sigonius
                  Sig. lib. 16. de Reg. Ital. an. 1209., Nauclerus
                  Nauc. in Othone 4. ann. 1209., Cronicon Belgicum
                  Chron. magnum Belg. an. 1209., and many others doe witnesse. But that he
confirmed this Donation of Constantine, there is
not in any of them one word: and the patrimonie
of St. Peter Baronius shewes, was the same
                  Henrici priuilegium, quo patrimonia Rom. Ecclesiae ab antecessoribus Imperatoribus collata confirmauit. Bar. an. 1014. nu. 6.
                  which Pipine gaue, and which Charles and Henrie
the second confirmed to the Sea of Rome, in neuer one
of all which, the Donation of Constantine is so
much as mentioned; but in thē all, that is expressed,
which clearely proues the Donation of Constantine
to be forged.
               The very same must be said of Fredericke the
second, who is the next Emperour alledged by
Marta. He in his Aurea Bulla
                  Friderici Aurea bella extat apud. Baron. an. 1097. nu. 72. & apud Gold. part. 
                        •
                     . Imperial. constit. pa. 73., made Ann. 1113.
confirmes not onely what his predecessours, Charles,
Lewes, Otho and Henrie had done before, but further
he addes, that he will maintaine and defend the
right of the Pope vnto Sicilie, Corfica, and Sardinia.
But of this Edict of Constantine there is not
so much as one word, from whence the confirming
of it can so much as probably be concluded.
Nay, such particularizing of the Popes Title in
some parts of Italie, and some Prouinces or Ilands
in the West, manifestly proues, that hee neuer
meant to confirme all the westerne Prouinces to

the Pope, which by confirming of this one Donation
of Constantine he should certainly haue done,
yea, had he confirmed but this one, all the other
Confirmations had beene most idle, needlesse,
and of no effect.
               The last Emperor alledged by Marta is Charles
the fourth. That he (as Otho & Friderick had done)
confirmed the patrimony of S. Peter vnto the Pope, is
euident by Nauclerus, who saithNaucl. in Carol. 4. an. 1355., he tooke the vsuall
oath at the time of his coronation: yea, further
also, the Pope
                  Paralip. ad Abbat Vsper. an. 1346. & H. Mutius in Chron. Germ. lib. 25. an. 1355. 
                  refused to crowne him, till hee had
sworne neither to stay at Rome, nor in Italy. The Pope,
as they obserue, could not indure
                  Pontifex cō
                     sortis impatiens. Mut. ibid. 
                  any to be his peere
in Italy. Besides this, In the presence, and with consent
of all the Electors of the sacred Empire, and other
Princes, Barons, and Nobles, An. 1356, the same
Charles the fourth, made that large and most famous
Charter, called Aurea Bulla
                  Aur. Bull. Caroli. 4. extat apud Goldast. part. 1. Imper. Constitut. pag. 105., concerning
the rights of the Empire, of the Electors thereof, and
particularly of the kingdome of Bohemia, decreeingIbid. ca. 7.,
that the kingdome of Bohemia
                  Saluis semper priuilegijs iuribus & consuetudinibus Regni nostri Boemiae, super electione Regis, in casu vacationis, per regnicolas (qui ius habent eligendi Regem Boemiae) facienda, iuxta continentiam eorundem priuilegiorum, & obseruatā consuetudinē diuturnam à Diuis Romanorum Imperatoribus obtentorum, &c. Quae decernimus nunc & perpetuis futuris temporibus in omni suo tenore et forma, indubiam tenere roboris firmitatem. ibid. 
                  should for euer enioy
their rights, customes, and priuiledges which formerly
other Emperours had granted vnto them, that the Regnicolae,
people of the same kingdome should in the
vacancie thereof make choice of their owne King. Hee
made also another Imperiall Constitution
                  Constit. Car. 4. de libertate Ecclesiastica. apud Gold. part. 3. Imper. Constit. pa. 415. 
                  for the
liberties and immunities of the Church, and exempting
them from iudgement, imprisonment, and other

punishment by secular men. But in none of all these
is there any, no not the least mention of confirming
this Donation of Constantine. Nay, it is
expressed by Historians, How
                  H. Mut. Chron. Germ. an. 1355. 
                  diuers cities in Italie
belonged to the Emperour, performed all honour and
obedience vnto him, quod à subditis domino exhtberi
potest, which subiects can doe to their (Soueraigne)
Lord, that they sware feoltie to him, that
obruebant officijs, & donis, they euen oppressed him
with multitude of guifts and obsequies. An euident
demonstration, that when himselfe held (as supreame
Lord) so many Citties in Italy, that hee
neuer confirmed this Charter of Constantine,
whereby, Rome, Italy, and all the Westerne
Prouinces, were for euer giuen to the Pope.
               Besides, that none of all those forenamed
Emperors confirmed this Donation of Constantine,
Baronius whom Marta professeth to bee the
wisest Cardinall, doth euidently witnesse. Let
Marta heare, and seriously ponder his words,
and he wil see his owne folly in pretending them,
as confirmers of this Donation. Sed
                  Bar. an. 1191. nu. 61. 
                  nec Imperatores
eiusdem edicti meminisse Certum est, It is
certaine, that the Emperours haue not mentioned
this Edict of Constantine, Though Otho the
first and his sonne make mention of Pipines and
Charles his Donation, and Henrie mentions both
them, and that of Othoes also. If they mentioned
it not, then most certainly may Marta know, they
did not confirme it: yea the Card. addesIbid., That
the Popes to whom those Emperors made such grants,
de praetermissa Constantinianae Donationis mentione,

non inueniuntur questi, neuer complained that the
Donation of Constantine was not mentioned in
them: which doutlesse they would haue done,
had they knowne Constantine to haue made this
Donation.
               But all this will not serue the turne with Marta.
He will yet further proue, that those foresaid
Emperours did confirme this Donation. And
how I pray you? That Charles the first, Henrie the
second, Otho the fourth, Friderick the second, and
Charles the fourth, confirmed this Donation of Consta
                     •
                  tine,
it is gathered, saith he
                  Mar. ca. 30. nu. 31., from the Chapter
Romani, tit. de Iureiurando in Clem: by the Cap. Fundamenta,
tit. de Elect. lib. 6. Decretal. by the Chap. per
venerabilem. tit. Qui filij sint legitimi, and by the
Chap. Ego Ludouicus distinct. 63. Thus Marta.
               
               Against which proofe of his I might first oppose
the Imperiall Charters themselues, which
directly shew that none of those Emperors confirmed
it. I might againe oppose the Certum est
of his wisest Cardinall, It is certaine, that Emperours
made no mention of it. I might further
oppose another most iust exception, that the
Popes and their lawes are no fit witnesses in this,
which is their owne cause; specially seeing the
Imperiall Charters of those Emperours do testifie
the contrary. Yet, if in any one of these Chapters
it be said, that the foresaid Emperours confirmed
it, I will confesse, that Marta hath some
colour for his vntruth. But if you examine those
places, you shall find that there is not one syllable
in them whence this may be collected.
               
                  
In the Chapter Fundamenta, Pope Nicholas the
third saith, (but saith vntruly) That Constantine
gaue to Syluester and his successours, the Monarchy
of Rome, but that either Constantine gaue Italie,
and all the Westerne Prouinces to Syluester, (as
the Charter of Constantines Donation saith hee
did) or that any of the forenamed Emperours,
did confirme that Donation of Constantine, Pope
Nicholas saith not. Gretzer himselfe confessethCaput. Fundamenta, in 6. Donationem Constantineanam tam late non extendit, vt legenti planum fict Gret. Append. 2. ad lib. de munifi. princ. pa. 118.,
That this Chapter fundamenta, doth not so farre extend
as the Donation of Constantine. Besides, Nicholas
doth not once name in that Chapter, either,
Charles, Henrie, or Otho: and of Fridericke,
whom he names with great contumely & scorne,
(because he stoutly resisted the Popes tyrannie)
he speakes no better, but that he was
                  Frederici, colubri tortuosi, iusto ecclesiae iudicio reprobati. cap. Fundamenta. loco. cit. 
                  a Snake,
iustly reprobated and reiected by the Church, which is
a very poore testimonie to proue hee confirmed
this Charter.
               In the Chapter Romani, Pope Clement the fift
names indeed Constantine, Charles, Henrie, Otho,
and Fridericke, and mentions them to haue giuen
priuiledges
                  Priuilegia omnia per praedecessores concessa, &c. cap Romani. loc. cit. 
                  to the Romane Church. And many
priuiledges, and great guiftes, no doubt both
Constantine, and the rest did giue; but that either
Constantine made this Charter, and gaue so
large priuiledges as are conteined therein; to
wit, Rome, Italie, and all the Westerne Prouincences;
or that either Charles, or any of the
forenamed Emperours, confirmed this Edict
of Constantine. Clement hath not one word, nor
ought whence this can be collected. Whereof

if Marta will not bee perswaded by vs, let
him heare their owne Gretzer
                  Gretz. App. 2. ad. lib. de munif. princ. pa. 114., In the Chapter
Romani, nulla prorsus fit, mentio edicti Constantiniani,
there is no mention at all of Constantines
Edict; and then citing the very words of that
Chapter, to which Marta hath reference, he
saith, There is nothing heere specified concerning
the Edict of Constantine, but there is onely mention
in generall of priuiledges and Lands giuen by
Constantine to the Romane Church. Thus Gretzer:
which shewes plainely the vanitie of Marta,
who from the grant of some priuiledges
or Lands giuen vnto the Romane Church by
Constantine, would conclude that therefore
Constantine gaue Rome, Italie, and all the
Westerne Prouinces vnto the Popes for euer.
               In the Chapter Ego Ludouicus, is set downe
a parcell of the Donation of Lewis, of which
before I shewed, that in no part of that grant
of Lewis, either Constantine, or his Donation is
so much as named; but Lewis his confirming of
some parts onely in Italie to the Pope; being there
expressed, and his reseruing of Soueraignety to
himselfe, vndeniably proues, that hee thought
not all Italy to belong to the Pope, nor to him
as supreame Lord; and therefore this Donation
of Constantine, by which Italie and all the Westerne
Kingdomes are giuen to Syluester and
his successours, as to the chiefe Monarches
in them to bee a meere fiction and fable.
               
                  
In citing the Chapter per venerabilem, Marta
sheweth himselfe to bee more then foolish: for
neither is Charles, nor Henrie, nor Otho, nor Friderick,
nor Constantine, nor this Donation of
Constantine, nor ought that can inferre it, so
much as once mentioned in that place. Nay
Pope Innocentius the third in that Chapter, sets
downe that which directly ouerthrowes this Edict.
We, saith the Pope, haue in the patrimony of
the Church full power in temporall causes, but in other
regions (as particularly in France) we exercise
temporall power but by casualtie. Now seeing by
Constantines Charter, the Pope is made a Monarch,
as Pope Nicholas
                  Decernens Monarchiam Rom. Pontificibus, Nich. 3. ca. Fundamēta saith, A Prince and Emperour,
as Steuchus calsMaiori principi cessit Constantinus. Steuchus lib. de Donat. Const. pa. 17. & maiori Imperato
                     
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     rbem reliquit. ibid. pa. 1
                        •
                     7. him, to whom is giuen
                  In Edicto Constantini.
                  the gouernment of the whole West; it is euident,
that by Innocentius his decree, Constantine did
not make this Charter, for then the Pope should
haue had directly, and not casually, both in
France, and all other Westerne countries and kingdomes,
a supreame, monarchicall and temporall
iurisdiction. Thus you see, that for al which Marta
hath said in this cause, still that which his
most wise Cardinall auoucheth stands firme. Certum
est. It is certaine, that the Emperours doe not
make mention, much lesse doe confirme this
Edict of Constantine, for which Marta hath
mustered together, but with most vnhappy successe,
an whole armie of all sort of witnesses.
               We haue now examined the chiefe of Martaes
witnesses of all sorts, Councels, Diuines, Historians,
Lawyers, and Emperours. Some few I

confesse are omitted; Either for their vnworthinesse:
of which sort is Ptolom
                        •
                     us Pogius,
                  Eius memenit Marta. lib. cit. ca. 30. nu. 25. an Authour
so obscure and ignoble, that after long and
diligent search, I can no where so much as heare
of his Booke: or else because their testimonies are
too slight, and scarse worth refuting. Of this
sort there are three cyted in Marta. The first is
Christ▪ Masseus
                  Apud Mar. ca. cit. nu. 25., who saithCh. Massae. cron. an, 314▪
                   onely, that Constantine
yeelded to the pope his pallace in Rome: but of giuing
either all the Westerne prouinces, or all
Iraly, or but Rome it selfe to the Pope, Masseus
speakes not one word. Nay heIbid. an. 336. expresly declares
that Constantine by his last will and Testament gaue
the Westerne Kingdomes to Constantine his sonne,
and the East to Constantius. So that testimonie
of Masseus which Marta produceth for proofe of
the Donation, doth indeed directly ouerthrow
the Donation.
               Not much vnlike is Iohannes Hugo
                  Citatur a Mar. ca. cit. nu. 25., whom
Marta should haue ranked among his Lawyers:
for though in one place he sayIoh. Hugo lib. de offic. 4. praelat. seu quadriuio eccles. §. sed sunt., that Constantine
granted regall dignitie to the Pope, and subiected
Rome to the Church, yet a little after he withall
saith (that which cleerly demonstrates the falsehood
of this supposed Donation.) That
                  lib. eod. §. est autem imperator. 
                  the Emperour
is princeps and Dominus totius Mundi, the
Prince and Lord of the whole world, (then sure
Lord of Italy, Rome, and of the Pope himselfe.)
That all Prouinces and all nations (then Italie & the
west) are subiect to him; & that whosoeuer wil not be
subiect to the Emperor nec haereditatem habere potest,
he can neither hold any inheritance, nor other
                  
things which are humane. So by Hugoes testimonie,
the Pope must either ackowledge his subiection
to the Emperour, (and so this Donation
to be false) or else renounce all his earthly possessions,
and so all the right which he pretendes
to any part of his lands, either by other title, or
by this Donation.
               The third is of no better note. Iacob. de valenti
                        •
                     
                  
whoseCit. a Mar. loc. cit., words if Marta had duely considered, he
might haue seene directly to oppugne this his
pretended Donation. For heIac. de vaualenti. in Cant. expos. 10. saith, that Constantine
gaue to the Church, Rome with the adiacent
patrimonie, and 72 Cities in Italy, with
many other Townes, adding that other Kings by
his example bestowed such like giftes on the
Church. Had Valentia thought Constantine to
haue made this Donation, hee could not haue
said either that other Westerne Kings had done
the like, or that Constantine himselfe had giuen
some few Cities and townes in Italy, seeing by
this Donation, not onely all Italy, but all the
Westerne Kingdomes are giuen to the Pope.
               Besides all those that Marta produceth, there
is one passage in Lud. Viues, which I could wish
to ouerpasse in silence. But his wordes are so
iniurious and opprobrious to the most religious
Constantine, more beseeming Iulian, Zosimus, or
some malicious Pagane, then any Christian or
child of the Church, that they may not bee omitted
without that iust censure which they deserue.
Dies ille Constantini, saith heLud. viues lib. de vita sub Tur. ca. 
                  trist
                        •
                      pietati fuit; It
was a lamentable & an vnhapy day to the church,

                  wherein Constantine was made Emperour. Hee entred
into the Church not as a true Christian, but
bringing With him, wealth, honour, and pride into
the Church. Venit in Christi Domum comitatus
Doabolo, hee entred into Christs house accompanied
with the Deuill. Martyrdome then ceased,
zeale was cooled, pietie declined, and the faith began
to totter. Viues might as iustly commend Nero▪
Dioclesian, Galerius, or other persecutors, because
they made many Martyrs, and sharpened the
zeale and pietie of Christians; as dispraise Constantine
for bringing peace, and with it all the
blessings of peace to Gods Church, euen that
free passage of the Gospel throughout the whole
Empire, at which thogh heathens repined, yet the
holy Church, yea the holy Angels of God sung
Halleluiah, and sounded foorth many Hymnes
of praise and thankesgiuing vnto God. Hee
might as iustly declaime against Phisitians, for
freeing of those from sicknesse and affliction, who
in the timeHos. 5. 15. of their aduersitie seeke diligently vnto
God: or write inuectiues against Moses and
Ioshua, and call their dayes vnhappy, seeing they
brought the Israelites out of the fornace of Egypt,
annd out of the wildernesse, and brought
them to the land of their peace and prosperitie,
a land flowing with milke and hony, where being
fat with Gods blessings, they began to kicke
and spurne against the Lord. Was it not sufficient
for Viues to declaime against Constantine
alone, but to condemne also the pietie, faith and
zeale of the whole Catholike Church in those

happy dayes. Neuer was the faith more constantly
maintained, neuer did the zeale and piety
of Bishops more abound then in the dayes
of Co
                        •
                     stantine, and diuers hundreths of yeeres after.
If in some Christians that most happie peace
and prosperitie occasioned security, yet is the
fault thereof in no respect to be imputed to Constantine,
but to the corruption of their owne nature,
which waxeth wanton with Gods blessings
and being luxuriant with prosperity, turnes
his best blessings into a curse vnto them. Viues
should haue remembred that good or bad actions
are neuer to be measured by Euents, but by
their owne vprightnesse. But an inexcusable errour
blinded and misled Viues in this matter. He
supposed (not without a great blemish to his
iudgment & learning,) Constantine to haue made
this excessiue and exorbitant Donation. He had
heard it said that when this Donation was accepted
by the Pope, a voyce from heauen had proclaimed:
This day is poyson powred into the
Church. Vpon these erroneous supposals he inueyes
against Constantine as the giuer, against the
holy ancient Church, as the receiuer of this Donation:
wheras had he but with any diligence examined
the cause, he might haue easily discerned,
that this Donation was neither giuen nor accepted
in Constantines dayes, and that the poyson of
Antichristian souereigntie, pompe and pride
maintained by this Donation, neuer insected,
nor infested the Church, till the dayes of Pope
Hildebrand and his successours, to which times

that prophesie doth fitly, and onely agree.
               There remaines now but one more whom I
will mention, Remundus Rufus, in whom (seeing
Boetius Epo
                  Boet. Epo▪ Heroic quest. q. 
                        •
                     . nu. 
                        〈◊〉
                      quē cōmode Rusus refiraenauit. commendes him for a worthy defendour
of Constantines Donation) I expected
some more weightie perswasions then in others:
the rather because hee professedly writes against
Rem Rufi. responsio ad Molmeum de Donat. Constant. 
                  Carol. Molineus, who hath by many and very
pregnant reasons conuincedCar. Moli
                        •
                     . lib contra paruas Datas in 
                        •
                     pit. G
                        •
                     . 15. substiactionis nu 157. et seq. this Donation to
be a counterfeit, a lie
                  Me dacium mendacio cumulantes ibid. nu 167. and as he fur her calsIbid nu. 159 it famosam
fabulam, a famous fable. Now the trueth
is Remundus speakes so faintly for the Donation,
that vnder pretence of defending, he seemes
to be a refuter thereof. Nihil mehercule habeo, verely,
saith heRem. Rufus. lib. citat. pa. 614., I haue nothing at all whereby it
can be firmely prooued that Constantine made this
Donation: yet wee will not call 
                        •
                     t a Fable, as Molineus
doth, and this he striues to prooue by a foolish
definition of a Fable. AgaineIbid. 
                  Satis constat,
It is very cleare that before Pipins time (that is more
then 400. yeeres after Constantine) the Popes did
not vse that Donation, and this by diuers reasons
he declareth. Againe,
                  Rem. Rufns lib cit pa. 644. et seq. 
                  the Popes did not touch nor
meddle with that Donation, quoad Imperij Romani per
occidentem gubernacula, for the rule and gouernment
of the Empire in the West; nay they neglected
that, and for this cause ius illius Donationis
praescriptione extinctum fuisse ante Carolum magnum,
that the right of that Donation was by prescription
extinct before the time of Charles. Thus
Rufus professing what right was coserred by the
Donation to haue beene extinct, and so the Donation

it selfe to bee of no force, if it had beene
made, and yet so faintly pleading for the veritie
of the making thereof, that his most miserable
defence of the same, against the manifold and
solid reasons of Molineus, may iustly perswade any,
that it both is a most base forgery, as we haue
already demonstrated, and a famous fable, as
Molineus fitly cals it. And so much for the testimonies,
alledged by Marta and others for this
Donation.
            
            
               CHAP. XV.
               Foure Reasons brought by Doctor Marta, and Card.
Albanus for the Donation made by Constantine
in the pretended Edict, refuted.
               
                  AFter authorities, in the last place
there are brought by Marta and
Albanus, some few reasons to
confirme the truth of this
Donation, which are well worthy
obseruing.
               The first is drawen from the Iustice of God,
who
                  Nec est verisimile Deum omnipotentē
perferre potuisse, vt hoc figmentum in hanc vsque diem fidelium mentes, sanctā Ecclesiam Romanam obtenebrasset. Marta. ca. 30. cit nu. 32. 
                  being omnipotent would neuer, or as Marta
saith, could not haue suffered this Edict of Donation,
if it had beene a figment, to haue deceiued and darkened
the minds of the faithfull, and of the Romane
Church euen vnto this day.
               
               First Marta doth well, to acknowledge their

                  Romane Church, or as CareriusConstantini donationē Orthodoxi & veri Catholici, veramesse fatentur. Car. lib. 2. de potest. Pont. Rom. ca. 21. § Verū. saith, such as are
true Catholikes among them to hold this Charter to be
true. For seeing Leo the ninth in his Decretal Epistle
hath declared it to be the authenticall writing
of Constantine, their Church, and all who
are rightly catechised among them, with Super
hanc Petram, cannot chuse but hold and beleeue
it, to bee such as the Pope saith it is: heerein
they build vpon that Rocke, which will neuer
faile them. But I trust by this time Marta sees,
that herein both their Pope and Church builde
vpon sand, euen on a fond, fabulous, and forged
Donation. Againe, if true Catholiques, yea
and their Catholike Romane Church, hold this for
the true Charter of Constantine, what must bee
thought of Card. Cusanus, of Card. Baronius,
of Iac. Almane, of Gretzer, yea, of Pope Aeneas
Syluius, who all condemne and reiect this Edict
for a figment and forgerie? None of these in
Martaes iudgement, are of the Romane Church,
nor with Carcrius true Catholikes; They all
must now bee cashiered, and blotted out of
the booke of life, rather then this one base
and witlesse forgerie must be forsaken.
               Againe, whereas Marta saith, that God would
not suffer their Church and her Children to bee blinded,
deceiued, or deluded with this figment, he should
haue considered that to be most iust with God,
which the Apostle foretelleth, Because
                  2 Thess. 2. 10. 11. 
                  they receiued
not the loue of the truth, therefore shall God send
them strong delusions, that they should beleeue lyes.
Neither would it seeme strange to Marta, (if hee

were not a meere stranger to the word of God)
that the omnipotent and iust God, should suffer
them and their Church to be so long deluded
with a figment. The iustice and omnipotency of
God winkes at and suffers with long patience
greater abhominations in the Romane Church
then this. The aboundance of their Idolatries
and tyrannies, the Apostacy of the Romane Antichrist,
and his Antichristian Synagogue, God
seeth and suffereth long; But tarditatem supplicij
grauitate pensabit, Knowest thou
                  Rom. 2. v. 3. 4. 
                  not that the long
suffering of God, leadeth thee to repentance? But thou,
after the hardnesse of thine heart, that cannot repent,
heapest vp wrath against the day of wrath, and of the
declaration of the iust iudgement of God. He suffers
them, as he did the Amorites
                  Gen. 15. v. 16. 
                  and Iebusites, till
their wickednesse be full; but as soone as their
sinnes are ripe, he will powre downe at once, all
the Viols of his wrath
                  Apoc. 18. 2. 
                  vpon that proud Cittie,
which saithIbid. v. 7., in her heart, I sit as a Queene; and he
will cast Babylon (which theyBabylon, quae casura praedicitur, Babylon meretrix purpurata, mater fornicationum, Roma quidem est. Riber▪ in Apoc. ca. 14. nu. 38. Roma non tantum propter priora peccata, conflagratura est, sed propter illa quae extremis illis temporib
                        ••
                      commissura est. ibid. nu. 44. know and professe
to be Rome) like a milstone
                  Apoc. 18. 21 
                  into the bo
                        •
                     tome of the
Sea, yea into a lake
                  Apoc. 20. 10 
                  of fire and brimstone, where the
beast and the false Prophet that seduceth the world,
shall bee tormented both day and night for euermore.
               
               A second reason brought by Card. Albanus, is
drawne from the truth of God, who by the
mouth of his Prophets, foretold that Constantine
should make this very Charter of Donation.
This grant of Constantine, saith heHier. Alban. lib. de Donat. Constant. nu. 23., (and hee
speakes of that which was madeIbid. nu. 12 
                  scripto interueniente,
                  
by writing and Charter) diuinis traditionibus
vel maxime innititur, doth especially relye
on the Diuine Traditions, or Scriptures. And,
among
                  Ibid. nu. 22. 
                  them all, offert se vaticinium illud, that
Prophesie of Dauid
                  1. Chron. 29 14. offers it selfe to vs, Who am
I, and what is my people? or what can we promise to
thee O God. All things are thine: but these things
which we haue receiued at thy hands, wee giue vnto
thee. Quis neget hoc in loco concessionem illam Constantint
iam inde à primis temporibus à vate illo fuisse
insinuatam? Who may or can deny saith Albanus
                  Hier. Alb. loc. cit.,
but that this Donation of Constantine
was from ancient time intimated and fore-signified
by the Prophet Dauid? I answere, that whosoeuer
hath either wit or iudgement, or any learning,
either in diuinitie or humanitie, may iustly,
and ought to deny it. Is there any one syllable
there which can be proued to be propheticall, or
to foreshew what should come to passe? especially
touching the future guift of an Empire? of
giuing it by Constantine, rather then by Charles or
Otho? or giuing it to Sylu
                        •
                     ster? What proofe, either
from the words of the Text, or from the coherence,
or from the auncient Fathers, or from
the Rabbinicall, yea, or from the very Cabalisticall
Expositors, doth Albanus produce? Not any,
nor so much as any coniecture for his propheticall
prediction of this Donation. But seeing Albanus
is so delighted with voluntarie expositions
of the Scriptures, he may finde 1000. farre more
likely texts then this of Dauid, wherein this Do
                  
                     •
                  ation
is signified. That of the Prophet Ieremie
                  Ier. 23. 28.,

                  Quid Paleas, ad triticum? what is the Chaffe to the
Wheate, saith the Lord? A faire Propheticall
allusion, or insinuation of their Palea Constantinus.
Or that which Michaia
                  1. King. 22. ver. 22. foretold, I will goe
and be a false spirit in the mouth of all his Prophets:
Another faire allusion to those Prophets of Antichrist,
who either deuised, or who applaud this
lying Donation. Or that of the PsalmistPsal. 118. v. 85. in vet. vulgata lat. editione., Narrauerunt
mihi iniqui fabulationes, wicked men
haue told fables vnto me. Where the Prophet
both describes what this Donation is, a meere fable
and lye; and who they are that relate, embrace,
and defend it, none but wicked and vngodly
men. To euery one of which Texts, if
one should adde the words of Card. Albanus,
Quis neget hoc in loco, who can denie, but that the
Donation of Constantine, and all defenders of it,
are prophetically insinuated by these and like
Scriptures; all these expositions may be iustified
and proued against Albanus, in the same manner,
as the Venetians proued their right for tribute
in the Adriaticke Sea, against the Pope. Let
                  Respondent Veneti, Mirari se quod iuberentur oftendere priuilegia quorū Archetypa Pontifex ipse suis Archiuis custodiret: reperturus facile, si Donationis Co
                        •
                     stā
                     tini membranae partem exteriorem, in qua maiusculis literis ea scripta essent accurate inspiceret. Phil. Camer. meditat. historic. centur. 1. ca. 61.
                  the Pope, or Albanus, or any of them all looke on the
back-side of the Autographum of the Donation that
which Constantine writ (as SteuchusSteuch. lib. cit. pa. 189. tels you)
with his owne hands, and maiusculis literis ea scripta
esse accurate inspiciet, he shall cleerely see, that
all these texts, and expositions of them, are written
there in great Characters, yea euen in such
Golden letters, as Capistranus
                  Ioh a Capist. part. 2 de author. Papae. nu. 120. pa. 46 tels you, the Donation
it selfe is written in.
               
               A third reason, and that is Martaes, is drawne

from the Iustice of their Popes; Those holy Bishops,
saith heNec est verisimile sanctiss. pontifices, qui post Siluestrum bona haec tanqu
                        •
                     
                     ̄ ad se spectanti
                        •
                      vigore donationis Constantini possederunt, voluisse occupare. Mart. loc. cit. nu. 32., after Syluester held the possession
of those things by vertue of this Donation; and seeing
they would not, occupare, that is, vniustly inuade
them, therefore it is very likely that Constantine
gaue them. Truly, this kind of argument drawne
from the Popes iust and vpright dealing, is the
worst and weakest Topicke place, that was euer
deuised: There is neither tyrrannie, nor oppression,
nor fraud, nor forgerie, which may not very
easily by it bee iustified. But for this particular,
it is euident, that neither Syluester, Iulius,
nor any of those ancient
                  Ecclesia tempore Gregorij magni, (i. 600. annis post Chr.) nō
                     dum habuerat principatum politicum, sed possidebat bona tempo
                        •
                     alia ad eum modū quo priuati ciues possident. Bellar. lib. 5. de Pont. Rom. ca. 10. §. Quarto. 
                  Popes, none till Gregorie
the second, Zacharie, and Stephen, held or possessed
so much as those Dukedomes of Rome, Rauenna,
& other large Territories in Italie, which
they now enioy; much lesse did they possesse the
whole Countrey of Italie, and all the westerne
Prouinces, which by this Charter of Constantine
is giuen vnto them. Those ancient, more modest
and honest Popes, were content with a farre lesse
portion and patrimonie. But when afterwards
Gregorie the second, & other succeeding Popes,
had by treacherie
                  Vid. sup. ca. 8. 
                  and rebellion with-held some
faire possessions from the Emperour, and then
to cloake this their iniustice, had procured some
Charters from Pipine, Charles, and other succeeding
Emperours, to confirme (and that with an
ouer-plus) the same; when they saw that those
also were not large enough, theyHadr. 1. & praecipue, 
                        〈◊〉
                      9. sent abroad,
ratified by their Pontificall authoritie this forged
Charter, as if it had bin the true and authentick

deed of Constantine. So what they first got by
treachery and treason, that they after studied to
hold and enlarge by fraud and forgery. I must entreat
Marta for this one Argument drawne from
the Popes iust and vpright dealing, that he will
be pleased, not to call it a Topicall, but as it is
indeed a Sophisticall, a Treacherous, a Tyrannicall
place of arguing.
               The fourth and last reason is Martaes
                  Mart. ca. 30. cit. nu. 33. also: &
it is as he boasts, argumentum firmissimum, a most
strong argument, euen another Achilles Zenonis:
because the Emperours when they are crowned by the
Pope, do sweare not to violate or infringe the Donation
of Constantine. To the like purpose is that of
Alex. de Imola, The Emperour, saith heAlex. de Imol. in l. filio quem. ff. de liber. & posthumis., when hee
takes his crowne, iurat de non contraueniendo dictae
Donation
                        •
                     , sweares that he will not doe ought against
this Donation of Constantine. I answere:
first, that if it be indeede true which Marta and
Alexander say, that Emperours sweare to maintaine
this pretended Charter of Constantines Donation,
(for of thatVerba donationis, quam in ten simus cō
                     probare in hoc capite, sunt ista. Mart. loc. cit. nu. 1. they speake) then are the
Popes most vile and iniurious persons, who doe
not onely perswade, but enforce Emperours to
sweare to maintaine and defend a false, forged,
and Chimericall Charter, and to make God a
witnesse of that as a truth, which hath no realitie
nor truth at all in it. It may againe be answered,
that if this oath be offered to Emperors at their
coronation, they might, and still may vpon iust
warrant refuse to take the same: not onely, for
that it is impious & blasphemous for any (much

more for an Emperour) to sweare that they will
maintain that as a true & real Charter of Constantine,
which was neuer made by him: but because
it is most preiudicial also to their owne Imperial
rights and royall dignities. And they may more
safely refuse to take it, seeing the Pope vpon such
their iust refusal, may not rightly deny the crown
vnto them. Mich. Coccinius saithMich. Cocci. lib. de Imper. translat. prope finem. very rightly in
this case, Non potest Papa Regi coron
                        •
                     m Imperij denegare,
etiamsi Rex non iuret se Constantini donationem
quam vocant ratam habiturum, the Pope cannot
in right deny to crowne him, that is truly
chosen Emperour, although he doe not, or will
not sweare, to hold as firme and of force, that
pretended Donation of Constantine.
               
               But say the Pope doe refuse and deny to
Crowne him (though in right hee ought not)
what damage, hurt, or inconuenience doth insue
to the elected Emperour vpon such refusall?
Truly none at al, as the same Coccinius rightly declares.
For, ex ipsa electione, saith heIbid. fol. praeced., by vertue
of his verie election, hee may notwithstanding
exercise all Imperiall authoritie, and doe whatsoeuer
belongs to an Emperour after his Coronation;
neither neede hee seeke either the Popes Coronation,
or Approbation: And heereof he giues a demonstratiue
proofe: Because hee who is surrogated,
and succeedes in the place of another,
hath the right and power of him vnto whose
place hee succeedes. But by due Election made by
the Princes Electors, the elected succeedes in locum
populi Romani, into the place, and receiues the

authoritie of the whole Romane State; the consent
of them all being virtually included in those
Electors, into whom they transferred their power
of electing an Emperour. And seeing before
they transferred this power, or while they reteined it
in themselues, presently vpon their election, the party
elected, had full Imperiall authoritie, without expecting
either the examination, or approbation of any other:
the very same power also must presently
vpon the election be in the partie elected by
those, vnto whom they haue transferred their power
of electing; and seeing neither Constantine,
Theodosius, nor Iustinian, nor Charles the great,
(which is to be remembred) nor Lewis, nor the
Othoes, Fridericks and Henries sought for, or desired
of the Pope either nomination or approbation;
surely others who haue not or seeke not that Papall
approbation, may yet without it bee fully
Emperors, & exercise all Imperiall authority, as
the forenamed Emperors without it haue done.
               The same Coccinius giues yet another reason,
why the Pope may not deny the Imperiall
Crowne, though the elected Emperour refuse any
oath of feoltie, or homage, (and such is that
whereby they sweare to defend this Donation of
Constantine) offered to him by the Pope. For
the Pope saith heIbid., can doe nothing in praeiudicium
iurium alterius, to preiudice the right of another:
but by such an oath of feoltie or homage hee
should preiudice the Emperor, who by meanes of
this oath should become the Popes vassall, and hold his
Empire from him. But the Emperor holds his Empire

from God, not from the Pope. The imperiall authoritie
being conferred vpon him immediately by
God, vpon the consent of the Electors in which is
virtually the consent of the whole Romane state:
euen as Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. 2. de Rom pont. ea. 17. §. obseruandum Tria sunt in Potifice, Pontific
                        •
                     tus ipse, vt forma, persona, vt subiectum formae & Coniunctio vnius cū altero Ex his, pontificatus à solo Christo est, persona qua electus est, ab electoribus. Ipsa vero coniunctio est à Christo, mediante act 
                        •
                      humano electorum. saith of the Pope and of papall
or Episcopall authoritie, that it is conferred
immediatly from God to the Pope vpon the election of
the Cardinals or any other, to whom the
right of electing belongs. Seeing then by vertue
of the election, the whole imperiall power is
giuen to the elected Emperour, and seeing the
Pope cannot preiudice the Emperors right, specially
seeing the consent
                  In qua conco
                        •
                     dia Rom. pon
                        •
                     ifex Greg. 5. includebatur Cusan. lib. 3. concor. cathol ca 4. 
                  of the Pope himselfe, is included
in that of the Electors, it were iniurious, by
reason of the refusall of any such impious oath, to
deny the solemnitie, when the substance is fully
conferred vpon him, and that euen by the Popes
owne true, though implicit and virtuall consent,
though in this particular he should explicitè expresly
and actually happen to dissent.
               The like is taught by Lupoldus, I conclude, saith
heLu
                        •
                     old lib. de Iure Regni. & Imp. ca. 7.,
that the Romane King after his election by the
vnanimous consent of the Electors, or of the greater
part of them, habet eandem potest atem hath the same
power to exercise imperiall acts in the prouinces subiect
to the Kingdome and Empire quam habet post vncionem
& coronationem, which hee hath after
V
                     •
                  ction and Coronation. To this agree Hostiensis
                  Hos. Extr. de verb. signif. ca. Super qui busdam.,
and Card. Cusanus
                  Cusan lib. 3. Co
                        •
                     cor ca. 4., who both hold, that
Coronation addes nothing to Imperiall authoritie,
nor giues ought but the name and title: and specially
Hier. Balbus, who not onely affirmesHier. Balb. Coronat. pa. 68. and proues

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
it were admitted, that both Eugenius and Sigismund
intended this verie Charter of Donation.
But that neither in this promise, nor in those
formes of oaths set downe by Hildebrand and
Clement the fift, that in none of them the Charter
pretended from Constantine is intended, there
are three euident reasons. First, which of all the
Emperours that euer tooke this oath, acknowledged
Rome, Italy, Spaine, France, Germany,
and all the Westerne Prouinces to belong, and
that also as to the supreame Lord, to the Pope?
as by this Charter it is said they doe. For the
Kingdome of France, to say nothing of many
other westerne Kingdomes, seeing Pope Innocentius
the third professethInnoc. 3. cap. per venerabilem, qui filij sint legitimi. lib. 4. Decretal. tit. 17., That the King thereof,
superiorem in temporalibus minime recognoscat,
acknowledgeth none to be his superiour in temporall
matters, it is incredible that either the
Popes would require, or any Emperors, though
required by the Pope, would euer take a solemne
oath and sweare, that the Pope were a superiour
temporal Lord in that kingdome to him. Nay, if
Emperours sweare to maintaine that the Pope
was and ought to be the supreame Monarch in
Rome, Italy, and all other Westerne Prouinces,
how doth their owne Hier. Balbus say, and confidently
auouch vnto Charles the fift, the Emperour,
Charles 5. primus
                  Hier. Balb. lib. de Coronat. pa. 86. 
                  ex Christianis Imperatoribus,
first of all Christian Emperours, gaue the
Cittie of Rome, with the adiacent Townes to the Apostolike
See, abdicating from himselfe, and renouncing
all iurisdiction in the citie. Let either Mar-
                  
or Imola, or any other shew, by faire and vndoubted
recordes, that all Emperours since the
time of Clement the fifth, or Hildebrand, acknowledged
the Pope to be the supreame Monarch in all
the Westerne prouinces; or else let them esteeme it
no other then a slander of Imperial Maiesty, and
an imputation of periurie to al Emperours since
that time, to say, that they sweare to maintaine
the Charter of Constantines Donation. And yet
I say nothing all this time of that which Albericus
rightly obseruesAlberi. in diction. verbo electio Imperatoris., that this Chapter Romani is
another of those Decretals which are not iuri
consonae, and which were made against the dignitie
of the Empire.
               A second reason is taken from the confession
of Gretzer, who expresly professeth, that in the
Chap. Romani, there is no mention of this Charter
or Edict at all, There is nothing saith heGrets. Appen 2. ad lib. de munif. princ. pa. 114. §. In Epilogo., particularly
spoken of thus Edict, but Priuiledges granted
by Constantine are there specified: and priuiledges
Constantine might, and did no doubt grant many
to the Ch
                     •
                  rch, and yet not such ample Priuiledges
as this Charter speakes of, to wit, Rome,
Italy and all the Westerne prouinces. So they
might both take and obserue that oath, and yet
withall hold this Donation to be a forgerie.
               The last reason is, that other oath which Otho
the fourthOthonis iuramentum extat apud Math, Pari
                        •
                     . in Iohan. pa. 306. and Henry the fifthHenr. 5. iuramentum extat apud Leon. Ostien. in Chron. Cassin lib. 4. ca. 42., are recorded to
haue taken, and which to bee vsually taken by all
Emperours, out of Baldus
                  Sup. cap. 8. pa. 166. and Lucas de Penna we
haue before declared. Their oathApud Lu
                        •
                     , de Pen. loc. cit. is, iura regni
& honorē coronae illibata seruare, to keepe intirely,

and inuiolably the rights of their Kingdome,
and the honour of their Crowne. Can they possibly
sweare that the Pope ought to haue and enioy,
Rome, Italy, and all the Westerne prouinces,
and yet keepe inuiolate the rights of the Empire?
Is Rome and Italie no part of the Empire. Can
they againe sweare, that the Pope ought to bee
Supreame Monarch in all those, and yet
preserue or keepe inuiolate the Honour of their
Imperial Crowne? Is not Soueraigntie
                  Vt Ostensum est ex Couar sup ca, 8. pa. 
                        •
                     61. 
                  of Dominion
the honour, yea the very forme and essence of
Imperiall authoritie? Or may wee thinke that the
wisedome of Emperours can admit both these,
being directly repugnant, and contradicting
oaths the one to the other? Seeing it is certaine
that Constantine granted Priuiledges and Donations
to the Church, they may well with their
former oath, sweare to maintaine those, so farre as
they are or shall be made certainely knowen vnvnto
them: but to sweare that they will maintaine
this pretended Charter of Constantines
Donation, and withall sweare to preserue the
rights and roialties of their Empire, without open
and euident periurie they cannot. Nay I say
more, that seeing they are by vertue of this Imperiall
oath bound to maintaine both the Rights
& Roialties of their Empire, they are euen thereby
and by that sacred oath, bound not only to abandon
and abolish for euer this pretended Charter
of Constantine, which is most preiudiciall both to
their Rights and Royalties: but further also, to labour
and striue to recouer both their Imperiall

Soueraigntie in Rome and Italy, and whatsoeuer
Lands, Citties, or Territories the Pope vsurpeth,
and for which euident and certain proofe cannot
be shewed, that by iust and legall conueiance
they haue bene either for the vsus fructus giuen,
or otherwise passed vnto the Pope. But hauing
spoken of this point before, I will not now further
insist vpon it.
               You haue now seene, whatsoeuer of any worth
or weight, either Marta, Steuchus, Albanus, Epo,
Rufus, or others of that rancke, could finde to
gaine any credit or countenance to this Donation
of Constantine. All which being now fully
refuted, you doe see how desperate their cause
is, which they so eagerly and pertinaciously
striue to support, by such false, forged, and legendary
writings. But that which now after
the full refuting of this Donation, I would
specially obserue, is this: That seeing by this
Charter and Donation of Constantine, the Popes
neither haue, nor can haue any right or iust title,
either to Rome, Italie, or any Citties which
therein they possesse; and seeing againe Card.
Albanus telsHier. Alb. lib. de Donat. Const. nu. 5. vs, That the Popes nullum alium suae
possessionis titulum attulerunt, haue brought or
produced (they would no doubt if they could) any
other Title, but onely this grant and Charter
of Constantines Donation, it hereupon cleerely
ensueth, that the Popes neither now haue, nor
euer had any right or iust title, either to Rome
and Italie, or to those Citties and large Territories
which they possesse therein.
               
                  
Lastly for Marta, who hath of all most laboured
in pleading for defence of this base and witlesse
forgerie, though there can no more be said
for excuse of him, then was said for Faustus the
Manichee, that the badnesse of his cause enforced him
to plead so badly, yet may it, and will it still iustly
be answered, as S. Austen
                  August. lib. 16. cont. Faustum. ca. 26. did to Faustus; I grant
indeed, that in a bad cause you could not possibly
plead better, Mala causa vana loqui coegit, Malam
vero causam te habere nemo coegit. A bad cause
to vse a vaine defence inforced you; but to vndertake
a bad cause, no man enforced you.
               But for his alledging so many false, counterfeit
and forged writings, and giuing credit to
them, there is no excuse at all to bee made for
Marta, vnlesse one will say, that his credulitie
was such, as Melchior Canus
                  Mel
                        •
                     . Canus loc. Theod. lib. 11. §. Lex vero secunda. mentions to haue
beene in one of their Priests in his time, Cui persuasissimum
esset nil omnino esse fallum quod semel
typis excusum esset, who was verily perswaded,
that nothing was false which was
published in print.
            
         
         
            
               
               CHAP. I.
               Of the Popes Temporall Monarchy,
and what important Consequents
doe ensue thereof.
               
                  HAuing in the former Treatise
fully demonstrated the forgery
of that pretended Donation
of Constantine, there remaines
yet one consideration
touching the Popes title both
to those Kingdomes which
are said to be giuen therin, &
to all other Kingdomes in the world. For though
they magnifie & make much (as you haue seene)
of this and other Donations, yet doe you thinke
the Donation of Constantine, Charles, Henry, Otho,
or any other Emperors, by some
                  Nempe per Edictum Constant. 
                  of which Rome,
Italy, and all the Westerne Prouinces and Kingdomes
are said to be giuen to the Pope, that this will satisfie
the pride and insatiable auarice of the man of sin?
No, the whole world must be his Kingdome; and

his title to it, and euery part of it, must not be from
any mortall man; he in Christs right, and immediately
from him, will be the direct supreame temporall
Lord of all: from him must hold all Kings,
Princes, and all other persons whatsoeuer, or else
they can haue no right vnto either lands, goods,
or possessions in this world. But lest I may seeme
to impaire their Popes right, let vs heare their
claime and challenge in their owne words.
               
                  Goe to now, O ye most blessed Apostles (saith PopeGrrgorius 7 in sua ex
                        •
                     crationis Henrici Imperatoris, confirmatione, quae recitatur a Platina in vita Greg. 7. ja. 178 
                  Hildebrand vnto Peter and Paule,) doe you confirme
what I haue done, that all men may know, if you
being in heauen can binde and loose, that I also here
on earth can both giue and take away Empires, Kingdomes,
Principalities, & quicquid habere mortales
possunt, and whatsoeuer any mortal man can haue.
This ought, saith Pope LeoLeo 9. Epist. 1. cap. 13. the 9. to satisfie you
de terreno, & caelesti Imperio, imò de regali sac
                        •
                     rdotio,
that both the temporall and heauenly Kingdome, yea
a kingly priesthood is giuen to the Apostolike See, and
that diuinitus
                  Nobis diuinitus, & humanitus concessam gloriam ibid. ap. 39. 
                  by God himselfe, and not onely by
men. Christ hath committed to Pe
                        •
                     er saith Pope
Nicholas the 2. terreni
                  Nich. 2. in Epist. ad. Medi
                     
                        •
                     lanens. dist. 22 ca. Omnes sed 
                        〈◊〉
                      fals
                        •
                     ascribitur Ni
                        •
                     holao 1. qui longe ante P
                        •
                     t
                        •
                     um Dam
                        •
                     anum (is huius Nicholai legatus lici tur) obierat. 
                  s
                        •
                     mul & caelestis Imperii
iura, the rights both of the earthly and heauenly
Empire. When the Pope giues or sends a consecrated
sword, saith their bookeL
                        •
                     b 1. Sacr. Cerem. sect 7. 
                        •
                     ol 84. & 85. of sacred cerimonies,
to the Emperour or other King, which is vsed to be
done on the night of Christs natiuitie, he then by
Sixtus cuartus, is appointed to say, This Pontificall
sword do
                        •
                     h figure or betoken summam temporalem
potestatem a Christo Pontifici collatam, That the supreame
temporall power, is giuen by Christ vnto the

Pope his vicar, according to that saying, Data est mihi
omnis potestas, All power is giuen to me, both in
heauen and in earth; and according to that also: He
shall rule from Sea vnto Sea, and from the flood vnto
the worlds end. Pope BonifaceParal. Abb. Vsperg ad anni
                        •
                      129 
                        •
                     . pag. 343 & seq. 8. boasting that
he had the power of both swords, shewed this by his
actions also, when in the yeere of that grand Iubile
1300. the first day, he rode as Pope in his Pontificalibus,
and the next day, imperiali habitu, infula Caesarea
insignis, he rode in his imperiall robes with the
imperiall Crown, hauing a naked sword carried before
him, & one proclayming with a loud voice, Ecce
hic duo gladii, Behold here are two swords, the
spirituall and temporall, both giuen vnto me.
               The Papacie or papall authoritie is defined by
Alu. Pelagius
                  Alu. Pel
                        •
                     g. lib. 1. de plancti. Eccl cap 13. in this maner, Papatus est Principatus
tam in spiritualibus quàm in temporalibus, The
Papacie is a Supremacie both in spirituall & temporall
matters. The Pope, saith August. TriumphusAug Triump. de potest. Eccle
                        •
                     . q. 36. 
                        ••
                     t. 3. 
                  is greater then any King or Emperour, tam in
temporalibus quàm in spiritualibus, as well in temporall
as inspirituall matters: and as God is the Lord
of all by vniuersall iurisdiction, so is the Pope his Vicar
greater then any King or Emperour, both in spirituall
and temporall things. The supream power and
dominion, saith Thom. Bozius,Thom. Bozius lib. 1 de Iure statu
                        •
                      &c. ca. 1
                        •
                      sect. Ob hae
                        •
                     . 
                  which subordinates
vnto it all other domin
                        •
                     ons, datū est iure diuino
pon
                        •
                     ifici Romano, is giuen by the diuine Law
to the Pope: And by this, Pas
                        •
                     e oues meas which was
spoken only to Peter, significatur sacerdotalis ac regalis
potestas simul, is signified both pontificall and
regall power. So that in the Pope alone is Apex vtriusque

potestatis, the top of both powers, spirituall
and temporall. The temporall
                  Ibid. sect. Sic itaque. 
                  power rests and
resides in the Pope, tanquam capite sacerdotum mundique,
as in the head both of Priests and of the
World. The Pope, saith Rod. Sancius,Rod. Sanc. li. de orig. ac differ. princ. part 1 & cit. a Carer. lib. 2. de potest. Rom pontif. cap. 9. sect. Sequitur 
                  in Christs
stead is chiefe in the whole world, both in spirituall &
temporall affaires. To the pope, saith Rad. CupersRad. Cupers Com. ad Cap. Oportebat. dist. 79. pa. 253. nu. 23. 
                  God hath committed the rights both of the terrene
and heauenly Kingdome: againe,Ibid. pa. 257 nu. 64. 
                  The direct dominion
of the Empire belongs vnto God, and by consequent
to the Pope his vicar. The Pope, saith Antoninus,Anton. in Summa, par. 3. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 22. ca 5. sect 15. 
                  for vniuersall iurisdiction both in temporall
and spirituall matters is greater then any other
King or Emperor. The Pope, saith Lel Zeccus,Lel. Zecch. in Tract. Theolog. pa. 81. 
                  by
the Law of God hath power and temporall dominion
ouer the whole world. The supreame temporall iurisdiction
throughout the whole world, saith Franciscus
Bosius,
                     
                        ••
                     . Bos. lib. 1 de temp. Eccl Mona
                        •
                     c. cap. 3. pag 52. 
                  belongs to Peters successor, so that he is
both Hierarch and Monarch in all things, AgaineIdem lib. 5. ca. 18. pa. 807.
                  The supreame Monarchy in all temporal affaires, belongs
to Peters successor, and that iure diuino, by the
diuine Law expressed in the Scriptures. The scope of
his whole booke is, as himselfe declares, to shew,
that Peter
                  Th Boz. praef. ad Clement. 8. 
                  and the Pope succeed to Christ, as well
in his Kingdome as in his priesthood, and that Peter
and the Pope is both King and priest according to
the order of Melchisedeck. It is certaine, saith BaroniusBaron. an. 57. 
                        •
                     u. 28.
                  that iudiciall power (in secular causes) is
giuen to Bishops (to wit, to Christs vicars) not only
by Apostolicall institution, but euen by Christ, whose
priesthood is according to the order of Melchisedeck,
both a King and a priest. The secular power, saith

AquinasAquin. in 2. Senten. dist. 4 4 q. 9. Art. 2. & citatur a Tho. Boz. l. 1. de Iure status c. 13 sect. Primam. 
                  is ioyned in the Pope, with the spirituall,
the Pope hath vtriusque potestatis apicem, the toppe
of both powers spirituall and temporall, by the
disposing of him, who is both a King & a Priest according
to the order of Melchisedech. That the
Pope iure diuino hath power ouer the whole world,
as well in temporall as Ecclesiasticall matters, is
taught, saith BellarmineBel. l. 5. de Pont. Rom. c. 1. sect. Restat. by August. Triumphus
by Aluarus Pelagius, Hostiensis, Panormitan,
Siluester, and diuers others: yea Hostiensis teacheth,
that Christ by his comming, translated all the
dominion, euen that of Infidell Princes, vnto the
Church; and that this Dominion so resides now in
Christs Vicar, that hee may giue by his owne right
the kingdomes of Infidels to whomsoeuer hee will.
The Pope, saith MartaHabere summam lai
                        •
                     am potestatem &c. Mart p. 1. c. 18 num. 1. 
                  hath supreme laicall power
in temporall matters, and that not onely in order to
spirituall causes, but naturally and temporally. And
againIbid. nu. 5. 
                  As in the Church Triumphant, so also in the
Church Militant, there is but one supreme Gouernour,
to whom all other as well Clerkes, as laicks, both
Kings and other, are to obey, and that both in temporall
and in spirituall matters; and this supreame
GouernourIbid. ca. 18. per totum 
                  is the Pope. Again,Idē c. 22. 
                        •
                     . 1. 
                  The Pope hath
the same power that Christ had, and Peter exercised:
but Christ as man, had the fulnesse euen of temporall
power, and Peter exercised temporally, that temporall
power. Therefore the Pope hath and may exercise
the same temporall iurisdiction temporally, and in
his owne nature. Both by the Law Diuine and naturall,
saith Henr. GandauensisHenr. Gand. quodl. 6. q. 23., doth the priesthood
excell the Empire, & penes ipsum residet de iure

diuino vtraque iurisdictio, and both iuridictions
as well in temporall as spirituall matters, as also
the immediate execution of that iurisdiction doth
reside in the Priest, by the Law both diuine and naturall.
It is the common opinion of Schoole Diuines,
saith CareriusAlex. Carer. l
                        •
                     b. 2. c. 9. num. 1. & lib. eod. c. 13. num. 7., that the Pope hath iure diuino
plenissimam potestatem in vniuersum orbem terrarum,
the most full power ouer the whole world,
both in Ecclesiasticall and temporall matters. AgaineIbid, c. 16. n. 11.,
As the Pope cannot say that he holds not
Christs place here in earth, so neither can hee deny,
that he hath the temporall dominion of things; for
as the earth is the Lords, and all that is therein, euen
so are all subiected vnto Christ, and by him vnto the
Pope; to whom, being his vicar, Christ hath committed
the right both of the heauenly and earthly
Empire. Christ, saith Scioppius
                  Gasp. Sciop. in Ecclesiast. c 36 p. 122., is the Lord of
the whole world by a double title, of Creation, and
Redemption; and heIpse vtrumque (postquam in coelum ascendit) per Episcopos ex
                        •
                     rcet, imprimis autem per S Petrum cui soli dixit, pasce oues meas idem lib. eod. c. 38 p. 126. 
                  ascending into heauen,
made the Pope his Vicegerent in them all, to whom
he gaue not onely directiue, but coactiue power, that
he might rule them with a rod of yron, that is, by his
secular power
                  Esse autem virgam nihil aliud quam saecularem siue coactiuā potestatē, ex Is. 14. discimus. ibib.. Again, the Church, saith heEcclesia similis Vitulo, siue 
                        •
                     oui trituranti ibid. c. 38. p. 
                        •
                      29. in marg., is like
vnto a Calf, whose horn, that is, his secular power
                  Aduertendum quod Ecclesiae saecularis potestas tribuatur, per cornu significata, sed in capite residet postquaem scilicet iam adoleuit, ibid. p. 129.
                  is set in the head, (that is, in the Pope) which power
though in the yonger age of the Church, it was not
growne, yet afterward (when
                  Cornua cum 
                        •
                     tatis maturit
                        •
                     te habiturus sit. Vt ea postquam Ecclesia adoleuisset vteretur. Ibid. 
                  the Calfe was
stronger) he did with his horne, push at Kings and
Kingdomes, and bring them in subiection vnto him.
And a 1000. such like sayings, he, and others haue
to this purpose.
               
                  
Nor doe they holde this assertion of the
Popes supreame temporall dominion, as
a doubtfull opinion, but as a doctrine of faith. It is
tenendum recta fide, saith Rod. Sancius
                  Rod. Sant. l. de Orig. ac differ. princip. & cit. a Carer, l. 2. c. 9. n. 13., to bee
by the right faith, that the Pope, iure diuino, hath
the true and onely immediate principality ouer the
whole world, as well in temporall as in spirituall matters.
The Pope, saith Rad. CupersIure diuino Papam vtram que potestatem habere demonstratur. Rad. Cup. Comment. ad Cap. oporte bat. distinct. 79 p 48. num. 1., hath and that
iure diuino, both powers, temporall and spirituall
committed to him, and they
                  Ibid. p. 46. in Sumar. nu. 9. 
                  who deny the Pope to haue both these powers, Euangelium negant, doe
deny the Gospel. Tho. Bosius
                  Thom Boz. l. 5. de Iure status c. 10. §. Iohannes. approues that saying
of Hostiensis, That as it is Heretical to make two
beginnings, so it is hereticall to make two Vicars of
Christ heere vpon earth. As it is hereticall, saith
MartaMart. par. 1. c. 18. nu. 25., to hold duo principia, two Authors
of the world, so to hold that there are two Vicars
of God (the one in temporall and the other in spirituall
matters) est haereticum, it is hereticall; and
therfore the Pope himselfe saith, It is of necessitie of
saluation, that euery creature should be subiect to the
Pope, tam in temporalibus, both in temporll and spiritual
matters: & DantesIdem c. 19 
                        〈◊〉
                      5. & nu. 14. 
                  the Florentine who held
the contrary, was after his death condemned for an
heretike. Boniface the 8. saith CareriusAlex. Carer. l. 2. c. 3. nu. 16. 
                  and Martinus
PolonusMar. Pol. Chron. An. 1301. 
                  writ letters to Philip the French
King, wherein he told him, that the Pope is Lord
through the whole world, both in temporall and spirituall
matters, & contrarium sentire haereticum iud
                        •
                     cabat,
and he iudged it to bee hereticall for any
to hold the cōtrary. The same Carerius writing in
defence of the Popes direct, temporall, dominion

ouer the whole world, intitles his booke
                  Aduersus impios politicos, et huius temporis haereticos. tit. l. 
                  Against
impious polititians, and heretikes of this time; accounting
all for heretikes, who deny that temporall,
direct dominion; one of which is Cardinall
Bellarmine, against whom Carerius
                  Confutatur opinio Bellarm. Car. lib 3. c. 5, 6 7. & 8. professedly
writes.
               Nor is this the Censure of Carerius alone, touching
Bellarmine; Sixtus quintus
                  Bellarminus satisfacere non potuit ambitioni Sixti 5. Itaque parum ab fui
                        •
                      quin omnia illius Doctoris opera ab
                        •
                     leret. Guil. Barc. l. de potest. Papae c. 13. & delere atque extinguere in animo habuit. ibid. ca. 40. 
                  so condemned
that doctrine of Bellarmine, (although he indirectlyBel l. 5. de Pōt. Ro. c. 6. et seq.
yeelds as much as can bee desired to the
Pope) that because he did not hold this direct temporall
dominion of the Pope, he purposed to haue abolished
and burnt as hereticall all the books of Bellarmine.
               
                  Bartolus, as both Carerius
                  Carer. lib. 2. c. 10. nu. 1. & Covarruvias
                  Couaer. part. 2. Relect sect. 9. nu. 6 p. 505. obserue, confidently affirmed that opinion which
denies the Popes temporall Monarchy, to be hereticall.
And Card. Baronius
                  Bar an. 1053 num. 14. doubted not to
say, That the Catholike Doctrine, Haeresis errore
notauit omnes, hath branded with the errour of heresie
all those who take from the Church and
chaire of Peter, either of the two swords, and who
grant vnto it onely the spirituall sword.
               From this supreame temporall Dominion
which they thus giue to the Pope, they draw many
pretty conclusions. First, that neither the Emperour
nor any King hath any temporall authority,
power, or Iurisdiction, but only such as they deriue frō
the Pope. The reason hereof is euident; for seeing
all power, both spirituall and temporall, is giuen
first and immediately to him, none can haue
any part of either, but from him. As all starres,
                  
saith CareriusCarer. l. 2. c. 12. nu. 3 4▪ 5., haue their light from the Sun
which is the fountaine of light, so all power and authority,
quoad temporalium administrationem, euen
in the gouernment of temporall matters, depends
on that supreame power which is giuen to the Pope.
AgaineCar. l. 
                        •
                     od. c. 14. nu. 14., The Pope hath primò & per se, primarily
and of himselfe, the Dominion ouer all temporall
things; Emperors
                  Ibid. nu. 20. 
                  Kings, and secular princes, receiue
their power from God, but mediante Papa, by
the mediation of the Pope, that is, Recipit
                  Cap. e
                        •
                     d. n. 16 
                  a
Papa loco Dei, the Emperour receiues it from the
Pope in Gods stead. Againe, the Pope
                  Ex quibus concluditur pontificem esse orbis virum Idem c. 15. n. 10. 
                  is the
husband of the world (a very fit wife sure for the
Pope,) and all others depend vpon him as on the
Architect. The Empire, saith MartaMart 
                        〈◊〉
                      c. 19. nu. 9. 
                  depends
not on God, but on the Church and the Pope. The
power of iurisdiction, saith Aug. Triumph.Aug. Trium. de potest. eccl. q. 1. art. 1. 
                  in tē
                     porall
& in spirituall matters, est immediata in Papa
solo, is immediat in the Pope alone. AgaineIbid., The
power of Emperors & secular princes is such, that it
is giuen to them by another (that is, the Pope) & euery
one of thē, ab eo recognoscit esse omne quod habet,
must acknowledge whatsoeuer they haue to bee
from the Pope. It must be granted, saith Alv. PelagiusAlv. Pelag. l. 1. de Pla
                        ••
                     ct. eccl. c. 13.
                  That no Emperors did rightly exercise the
sword who receiued it not from the Pope. All secular
power, saith Th. BoziusTh. Boz. l. 2. de iure stat c. 19. § Ex 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  , in all things depends and
is from the power Ecclesiasticall, and that iure ipso
diuinissimo, by the most diuine Law.
               A second conclusion is this, that the Pope is an
higher temporall Lord, and Emperour, then any, yea
then all the secular Kings & Emperors in the world.
                  
The reason of this is cleere: For seeing hee is the
fountaine from which they deriue all their temporall
authority, the same Kingly and Imperiall
authority, must needes be more eminently in him,
then in them all, euen as light is more eminently▪
in the Sun then in the Moone and Starres which
borrow their light from it. It is knowne, saith PopeCap. Solitae, Extrav. de Maior & Obed. 
                  Innocent 3. that there is as great difference betwixt
the Pope and the Emperor, as there is betwixt
the Sunne and Moone. Now the Sunne being sixe
thousand fiue hundred thirtie nine times greater
then the Moone, as AstronomersIoh. Clav. com. in Ioh. de Sa
                     
                        •
                     robos. pa. 189. teach, (for
the CanonistsGlossan. Cap. Solitae, de Maior & Obed. ignorantly talke of 47 times) the
Pope is by Innocentius Decree, 6539. times greater
then the Emperor. There is, saith CareriusCar. lib. 2. c. 12. nu. 5.
                  that proportion betwixt the Pope and the Emperor,
as is betwixt the Sunne and the Moone; as the Sunne
then is farre more excellent and eminent then the
Moone, seeing she borrowes her splendor and light of
the Sunne, so is the Pope then the Emperour, seeing
his authority depends on the Pope, and is deriued
from him. Bishops, and the Priesthood, saith WaldensisTh. Wald. Doct fid to. 1. l. 2. ar. 3. c. 74.,
is as much preferred to the Kingly state,
as gold is to lead, or the soule to the body, or heauen
to earth. So much, saith OrichouiusStanist. Orich. in Chimaera. p. 97., doth the
Priest excell the King, as a man doth excell a beast,
yea, as much
                  Quantum Deus praestat sacerdoti, tantum sacerdos praesat regi. ibid. 
                  as God doth excell a Priest, and that
is by infinite degrees. Vpon consideration of these
so great ods, Steuchus
                  Aug. Steuch. l. de donat. Constant p. 187. saith, That Constant.
yeelded the City of Rome to a greater Emperor then
himselfe, and that was, to the Pope. The Canons,
saith MartaMart. par. 1. c. 19 nu. 7., put the Pope super verticem Imperatoris,
                  
aboue the very top and crowne of the
Emperour; and the Pope, saith Rad. Cupers,Rad. Cupers com. ad cap. Oportebat. p. 43. nu. 39. 
                  is
deseruedly accounted Rex regum & dominus dominantium,
The King of Kings and Lord of Lords.
Aug. Triumphus yet more triumphingly saith,Aug. Triump. in princ. summae de potest. Eccles. 
                  The Sonne of God hath declared the altitude of
Ecclesiasticall power, to bee aboue all principalities
and powers, that vnto it should bow euery knee, both
in heauen, in earth, and vnder the earth: and yet
Stephanus Patracensis goes one step further,
which will reach euen to God himselfe. In the
Pope, saith heOrat. Steph. Patrac. in Conc. Later. sub Leone 10. Sess. 10. p. 624., who is the supreame Hierarch in
the Church, there is omnis potestas supra omnes potestates
tam caeli, quàm terrae, all power aboue all
powers, both in heauen and in earth: whom Rad.
Cupers, following, saithRad. Cup l. citat. p. 3. nu. 7. 
                  The Lord hath so magnified
the Church, (that is, by his owne expositionPapa totaem ecclesiam significat. id. p. 125. num. 43. in Summ
                        •
                     r.
the Pope) that he hath preferred it not onely to
Kings and Keisars, sed omnibus sub caelo, & supra caelum
existentibus, but to all that are either vnder,
or aboue the heauens; and there is none, I thinke
aboue the heauens, but God onely.
               A third conclusion is this, That none can giue any
lands, goods, or possessions to the Pope, but onely restore
those things vnto him; The reason whereof
is euident, for all these are the Popes own before,
& that iure diuino, seeing as Marta saithMart. part. 1. ca. 15. nu. 14. 
                  Vniuersus
orbis est papae territorium, the whole world is
the Popes territorie. If it be found sometimes, saith
Thom. BoziusTho Boz. l. 3. de iure Stat. c. 5. sect. Quin audet. 
                  that certaine Emperors gaue some
temporalties to the Pope, as Constantine to Siluester,
that is not to be vnderstood, that they gaue any

thing which was their owne, they restored that which
was vniustly and tyrannically taken from the said
Bishops. Constantine, saith CareriusCar. si. 2▪ ca. 21. nu. 5. & ca. 16 nu. 31., did restore that
which before he had vniustly deteyned, he restored to
the Church and to the Pope those things, which he
had deteyned from him, and had long withheld and
abused by his tyrannicall power in seruing the Infernall
prince and Idols; therfore that Donation of Constantine
was in truth only a restitution: for seeing the
earth and all that is therein, is the Lords, and by consequent
the Popes, Constantine gaue nothing at all of
his owne, but he restored them, in recognition of the
Lords, and the Popes Dominion. AgaineIbid. ca. 21. 
                        •
                     u. 7. 
                  they are
vtterly deceiued, who thinke that Charles, Pipine, or
others, gaue Rome and other Cities in Italy to the
Pope. The Pope hath immediatly from God his temporall
dominion, the same he hath from Councels declaratiuè,
from Constantine promulgatiuè, that is,
Councels only declared, and Constantine proclaimed
the Popes right and temporall dominion in
them. We denie, saith MartaMart lib. in. ca. 25. n. 20. 
                  that the Pope founds
his iurisdiction vpon the Donation of Constantine;
for we haue alreadie proued that the Pope had, and
still hath the whole power which Christ had, as well in
temporall as in spirituall matters, neither did he preiudice
his own right in accepting those Donations, of
Constantine and other Emperours; they in those gifts
did but recognise
                  Idem cap. 29 nu. 13. 14. 
                  therein, his supream iurisdiction
and so int
                        •
                     rrupted that praescription of an absolute
domin
                        •
                     on which they did pretend, acknowledgingIbid▪ nu. 15.
their Kingdomes, Dominions, and States, to be held
of the Pope, as of the Fountaine of Iurisdiction, and

Dominion. I haue often, saith ScioppiusGas. Sciop in Eccles ca. 51. pa. 168. 169., laught at
those who altercate about the Donation of Constantine,
neither doe we care whether there be any publike
record either of any such Donation, or cession and
yeelding vp of Rome; for constat, it is manifest that
Rome could not be giuen to the Church: and the reason
is, not that which the Lawyers suppose, for that
Constantine could not alienate that, which belonged
to the Common-wealth, sed quia tantùm, iure diuino
tenet, but because the Pope holds Rome neither
by any Donation, nor by inheritance, nor by right of
warre, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      vllo alio humano iure aut titulo, neither
by any other humaine law or title whatsoeuer, but
onely by right from God. It is God that gaue Rome to
the Church, as meat to feed, as cloathes to apparell the
Church. Constantine
                  Idem ca. 52. pa. 17
                        •
                     . 
                  and other Emperors did but
performe the office of an hand to reach the meat to
the mouth, and put the apparell vpon the head.
               
               This right of the Pope, when diuerse Kingdomes
(as they teach) acknowledged, they yeelded
the possession of those Kingdomes to the
Pope, and so they became his. Of the Kingdomes
of Spaine, Pope Gregory the seuenth thus writes,
to the Kings and Princes thereof, (those were at
that time & long after seuen,Munst. Cosm. li. 2. pa. 57. Arragon, Castile,
Portingall, Granado, Lions, Nauar, and Gallicia,)
Notū
                  
                  Greg. 7. lib. 4. Epist. 28. Regibus caeterisqu
                        ••
                      principibus Hispaniae. 
                  vobis fieri volumus, we will haue it knowne
vnto you that which we may not conceal, and is needfull
for you to know; that the Kingdome of Spaine
in ius & proprietatem traditum, was for right and
proprietie yeelded to the Romane Church. And
againeGreg. 7. li. 1. Epist. 8., writing to all Princes that goe into

Spaine, We beleeue (saith he) that you are not ignorant,
that the Kingdom of Spaine from ancient time,
proprii iuris sancti Petri fuisse, & adhuc nulli mortalium,
sed soli Apostolicae sedi ex aequo pertinere,
to haue been the proper right of Saint Peter, and
now also to belong in right to no mortall man but
onely to the Apostolike See; for that which once
comes to the Church, can neuer be taken from the
same. Particularly of the Kingdome of Arragon,
SteuchusSteuch. li. de don. Const. pag. 193. out of Innocentius the third saith,
esse Apostolicae sedis, that it is the Popes. Of the
Kingdome of Portingall, Steuchus also saith,Steuch. ibid.
                  Ecclesie Romanae est, that belongs to the Church
of Rome, and because Hildefunsus knew it to belong
to the Romane See from ancient time, he offered it to
the Pope, and subiected it to him. Of the Kingdome
of France, Boniface the eight saidBonif. 8. lit
                        •
                     rae apud Carer. li. 2 ca. 3. nu. 16., It is subiect to
the Pope both in temporall and in spirituall matters.
Of the Kingdome of England, Alexander the
secondAlexand. 2. epist. pars quae id asseritur extat apud Baron. an. 1068. nu. 1. affirmeth, that euer since it receiued
Christianitie, it hath been in the hands and power of
Saint Peter. Of the Kingdome of Scotland, Pope
Boniface saith,Bonif. verba citantur a Pol. Virg. hist. li. 17. et a Marta lib. cit. ca. 26. nu. 60. 
                  that it is in the Popes power, and
that he may giue and take away the same. Of Italy,
Steuchus saith,Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 200. 
                  Tota Italia est Ecclesiae, all Italy
belongs to the Romane Church. Of the Kingdome
of Sicily, Marta saith,Mart. lib. cit. ca. 26. nu. 6. 
                  The lawes doe expresly
teach that it is a part of the patrimonie of the
Church; and Baronius hath writ an whole bookeBar. tract de Regno Siciliae to n. 11. Annal. an. 1097. nu. 18 & deinceps.
to confirme the same. Of the Kingdome of Hungary,
Gregory the seuenth saith,Greg. 7 li. 2 epist. 13. ad Salomonem regem Hungariae. 
                  Proprium ecclesiae
est, It properly belongs to the Church of

Rome. So doe also the Kingdomes of Croatia,
and Dalmatia, as out of the same PopeVerba citantur a Steuch. li. de do
                        •
                     . Const. pa. 191. Hildebrands
Registrie, Steuchus auoucheth. Of the
Kingdome of Russia, Steuchus out of the same
Hildebrand saith,Steuch. li. cit. 
                        •
                     ag. 190. & Greg. 7. idem declarat, lib. 2. Epist. 74. 
                  Est iuris ac ditionis Romanae
ecclesiae, the right and dominion of it belongs to
the Church of Rome. Of the Kingdome of
Denmarke, Steuchus out of Alexander the second
saith,Steuc
                        •
                     . li. cit. pa. 189. 
                  It is peculium & vectigal, the proper
substance and tribute of the Romane Church. And
what should I adde more, saith SteuchusSteuch. ibid. pa. 195., The power
of the Romane Church is most ancient, super omnibus
regnis & regibus, ouer all Kings and Kingdomes;
all monuments of the Popes are full, in
shewing this power, whereby Popes haue ruled
by their Empire, the whole World, habenas
omnium terrarum tenentes, holding the raines
and regiment ouer all Kingdomes in the Earth.
Thus Steuchus.
               A fourth conclusion is this, That as Emperors
and secular princes deriue all their authoritie, so doe
they hold all their Kingdomes, Crownes, Territories
and possessions from the Pope, as tenants, as homagers
and vassals vnto him, or else they are meere vsurpers
of the same. The reason of this also is manifest;
for seeing the whole world is the Popes Territory
                  Vt Marta s
                        ••
                     
                     ▪
                  , and he the Lord, yea the husband
                  Vt Carer. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                     ▪
                   
                  of
the world, none may, nor yet in right can, enioy any
part of his Territories, or company with his
deare Wife, but by his allowance and dispensation.
Whence hath he (Frederick the King) the Empire

but from vs? saith Pope Hadr.Hadr. 4. epist. cita
                        •
                     ur apud Auent. l. 6. p. 506. the 4. by election
of the Princes, he hath the name of King, by
our consecration he hath the name of Emperor; Imperator
quod habet totū habet a nobis, whatsoeuer
the Emperor hath, he hath it of vs. It is in our
power, vt demus illud (Imperium) cui volumus, to
giue the Empire to whomsoeuer we will. We are
placed of God aboue Nations and Kingdomes, to destroy
and roote out, to build and to plant. The Emperor,
saith Lel. ZecchusLael. Zech. tract. de Rom. Pontif p. 82. 
                  takes the Empire de manu
Pontificis, at the Popes hand, and to the Pope
doth belong the direct dominion of the Empire. AgaineIbid. p. 83.,
The Pope is absolutely the Lord of the
whole Christian world; Kings and Princes Imperia
& regna ab illo recognoscere habent, must acknowledge
their Empires and Kingdomes to be held of
him. The Emperor, saith MartaMart. lib. cit. c. 18. nu. 11. & 12. 
                  is Feudatarius
ecclesiae, & ab ea omnia recipit. He is feudatary
to the Pope, and holds in fee all that he hath from
him. AgaineIdem c. 20. n. 4▪
                  , We haue declared the Emperor,
vniuersa humana habere a Papa, to hold all his
worldly possessions and goods of the Pope. And
for this cause he sweares
                  Idem▪ c. 25. nu. 16. Papa Imperatorent confirmat iurantem sibi fidelitatem et homagium. 
                  feolty and homage to the
Pope: the forme of which oath, being expressed,
both in their booke of the DecreesDistinct. 63. c. Tibi domino. and of sacred
ceremoniesLib. 1. Sacr. Cerem. sect. 5. fol 48., Clem. 5. hath decreedCap. Romani in Clement. tit. de Iureiura
                        ••
                     
                     do. Declaramus illa iur amenta fidelitatis existere, & censeri debere. 
                  it to
be an oath of feoltie; and when Lotharius the Emperour
had taken that oathForma iuramenti Lotharii extat apud Bar. an. 1133. nu. 2., hee was thereby
made
                  Post homo 
                        •
                     it Papae, etc. Versus extant apud Radevic. lib. 1. de gest. Frideri 
                        ••
                     i 1. c. 10. & Sigon. lib. 11. de Regno Ita
                        •
                     . an. 1133. 
                  Homo Papae, the Popes man; that
is to say, the Popes seruant or vassall; (for the

                  word vassus
                  Episcopis, Abba
                        •
                     ibus, & vassis nostris dicimus, Capit. Carol. magni li. 2. cap 9 & de vassis dominicis qui intra casā seruiunt, ibid. li. 3. ca. 73 & Anima vestra de corpore nuda ac desolata sine solatio, et comitatu vassorum exibit. in capit. missis ab Episc. Rhem. ad Ludoui
                        ••
                     
                     ̄. V
                        •
                     ss
                        •
                      a Saxonibus La
                        •••
                      dicti. ait Glossari
                        •
                     m in capitu. Aliter, a vas vasis, vassal. 
                        〈◊〉
                      deducit Mart. par. 4. ca. 188▪ nu. 
                        •
                     ., whence commeth vassallus, signifieth a seruant) and then as MartaMart. li. cit. part. 1. cap. 18. nu. 2
                        •
                     . obserueth, Pope Innocent
the second permitted him, but in truth, as SigoniusSig. lib. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . an. 1133.
testifieth, mandauit, the Pope commanded
Lotharius to be painted on a wall in the Popes pallace,
quasi vassallum ad pedes prostratum, as a vassall prostrate
at the Popes feet. The King of Arragon,
saith SteuchusSteu
                        •
                     . li. cit. pag. 193., accepit in feudum, praedictum regnum,
tooke that Kingdome in fee of Pope Innocentius
the third: & recognoscitur a papa, saith MartaMart. li. cit. ca. 26. nu. 43. 44.,
and it holds of the Pope, by the annuall payment
of 250 duccates
                  Maximas 
                        〈◊〉
                      ait Marta, 
                        〈◊〉
                      Bar. an. 10
                        •
                     7. nu. 106. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                  . The Kingdomes of Nauar,
and Granado, saith MartaMart. ca. 26. nu. 53., were giuen by
Iulius the second to Ferdinand King of Spaine, and
his successors, cum pacto vt recognoscerent Romanā
ecclesiā in fidem & homagium, vpon this couenant,
that they should hold those Kingdomes by feoltie
and homage from the Church of Rome. The
Canary Ilands
                  Ibid nu. 54. 
                  and Nigraria, fuerunt datae in
feudum, were giuen in fee to the Emperour by the
Pope, and Lewes King of Spaine, did feoltie and homage
to the Pope for them, Anno 1343, binding himselfe
to pay yeerely for the same 400 florens of gould.
When Alexander the sixth gaue the Indies to the
Kings of Castile and Portugall, saith Marta,Ibid. nu. 55.
                  reseruauit sibi recognitionem feudalem ab ambobus,
he reserued a pension to be payd to the Pope by
them both, as an acknowledgment, that they held
both the Indies in fee from him. Iulius
                  Ibid. nu. 25. 26. 27. 
                  the second
gaue to Ferd
                        •
                     nand King of Spaine, the Kingdome
of Naples, in feudum perpetuum▪
                   in a perpetuall

fee, but so that Ferdinand should sweare feoltie
and performe homagium & vassallagium, homage
and vassalage to him: And that also for the Kingdomes
                  Ibid. nu. 29. 
                  of Sicily and Ierusalem he should pay yeerly
to the Pope 8000 ducats of gould, and a white palphrey,
in recognitionem veri dominij regni Siciliae et
Ierusalem, in acknowledgement that the Pope
hath truely the dominion of Sicily and Ierusalem.
And both Philip the second, and after him his sonne
Philip the third, Anno 1599. did take, as MartaIbid. nu. 31 & 34.
tels vs, this oath of feoltie and homage. The Pope,
saith MartaIbid. nu. 35. 
                  gaue in feudum, in fee the Kingdomes
of Sardinia and Corsica, which in proprietie
belongeth to him, but so that the Feudatarie do swear
feoltie, and perform homage, et plenum vassallagium
and full vassalage for the same, besides the pension of
200 markes of siluer, and finding of 100 furnished
horse with men for warre; And Iames King of Arragon
tooke this oath of homage, and after him Ferdinand,
and others. Of the Kingdome of France,
that it is held of the Pope, Boniface the eight boasteth,
who writVerba Bonif. citantur a Steu. li. cit. pa. 198. to Philip the French King,
Necesse esse pontificem vtì dominum regni sui venerari
ac colere, that he must of necessitie acknowledge
and worship the Pope as his Lord. And
Marta saith,Mart. lib. cit. ca. 28. nu. 1. 
                  Recognoscitur a Romana Ecclesia,
the Kingdome of France is held of the Church
of Rome. And at the time of the annointing their
Kings, the Archbishop of Rhemes saith, that he giues
the Kingdome, by the authoritie which Pope Hormisda
gaue to Remigius: And then heIbid. nu▪ 11 & 23▪
                   ads diuerse
reasons, That the Pope hath supremam potentiam, et

iurisdictionem in regno Franciae, the supream power
and iurisdiction in the Kingdome of France.
And Steuchus speaking both of France and
Spaine, saith,Steuch. li. ci
                        •
                     . pa. 189. 
                  They honour, yea adore the Romane
Church as a Queene, pensionibus persolutis, paying
their pensions and tribute vnto her: and the pension
in France was the annuall payment of a penie for
euerie house therein, as PopeDicendum est 
                        ••
                     mibus Gaellis & per veram obedientiam praecipiendum, vt vnaquae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      demus, annu a
                        •
                     tim vnum saltim denarium seluat B. Petr
                        •
                      Greg. 7. lib. 8▪ Epist. 23: Gregory the seuenth
declares, who expresly demaunded the same.
Of the Kingdome of England, they are vainely
confident, that it was semper
                  Stanis. Christan. in Exam. Cathol. fol. 33 
                  beneficiarium &
tributarium Romano pontifici, euer held in fee of
the Pope, and payd tribute vnto him. King Ina
                  Christ. ibid.
                  payd yeerely for it a penie for euerie house King Offa
confirmed the same Anno 740. The like did Adelphus
Anno 847. And the Pope had alwaies in England
his gatherers of this tribute, of whom the last
was Polydore Virgill. Of Henry the second, they
braggeBellar. Apol. pro Tort. cap. 3. sect Extat. Becan. Cont. Angl. q. 9. nu. 1. 2. et seq. Bar. a. 1173 nu. 9. 10. that he acknowledged the Pope to be his
temporall Lord, himselfe to be the Popes feudatarie,
and his Kingdome the Popes patrimonie. And of
King Iohn they neuer cease to boast, that he resigned
                  Christan. f 3
                        •
                      & seq. & Bell. Apol. pro Tort 
                        •
                      c 4. sect. Extat. Mart. lib. cit. c. 26. nu. 39 the Kingdomes of England and Ireland to
the Pope, and tookeReceptio 
                        •
                     orundem regnorum in feuaū
                     ▪ ita vt rex tanquam secun
                        •
                     a
                     
                        •
                     us dominus, 
                        •
                      Rom eccl▪ illa se habere agnoscat. et in signū subiectionis fidelitatē et homag
                        ••
                      praestare debent. nec no
                        •
                      in annos singulo
                        •
                      1000. marcas eidē numerare. Bell▪ et Becan. loc. cit. 
                  them in fee of him againe for
the annuall pension of 1000 markes, as appeares by
his Charter sealed with Gould. Thus said PopeRegnū suū Angl. et Hibern. Rom. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . cōcessit, recipiens illud a nobis in feudū sub am
                        ••
                     o censu 1000 marcarū. Innoc. 3. in epist. 
                        〈◊〉
                      omnes fideles; quae extat apud Math. Paris. pa. 356. regnū Angl. est suū propriū &c. 
                        〈◊〉
                      Innoc ibid. pa. 381.
Innocent the third, and the bull or authenticall
Charter hereof, is yet, as they boastCuius bulla authentica est in Vaticano. Mart ca. 26. nu. 4, extant in

the Vaticane. That by this meanes, the Pope hath
direct
                  Directū domi
                        ••
                     ū habet Eccl. in regnum Angl. et Hiberniae. Bell. loc. cit. 
                  dominion in those Kingdomes, and that
both King Iohn and his successors are made
                  Se summo pontifici vasallos constitue
                        •
                     ūt et tributarios Mart. loc. cit. 
                  feudataries
and vassals to the Pope, as the Pope himselfe
in a boasting maner, saidInnoc. 3 ve
                        •
                     
                     ba apud Math. Paris. in Ioh. p. 379 & 381., vassallus noster est
rex Angliae, the King of England is our vassall. Of
the Kingdome of Denmarke, as being tributarie
to the Romane Church, Pope Alexander
                  Alexandri verba citantur 
                        •
                      Bar▪ an 1062 nu 109 
                  the
second, warned Sueuus their King to pay the accustomed
rents or tribute for the Kingdome. The Kingdomes
of Croatia and Dalmatia, saith SteuchusSteuch. li. cit. pa. 191.
                  are the Popes, and the King is to pay yeerely 200 Byzantines
as a trybute for the same, and to sweare feoltie
to the Pope. That the Kingdome of Bohemia,
is tributarie to the Pope, Gregory the seuenth
boasteth, who saith,Sub nomine census misistis &c. Greg. 7. li. 2. Epist. 7. 
                  It payd vnto him a trybute
of a 100 markes of siluer. The Kingdomes of Suetia
and Norwey, saith SteuchusSteuch. li. cit. pa. 194., pay trybute to the
Church of Rome, and euerie house in Suetia paies
yeerely a penie to the Pope. The King of Hungaria,
saith MartaMart ca. 26. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 49. 50., declares that he takes and holds his
Crowne of the Pope, and Anno 1280. he entred an
obligation, to pay yeerely 100 markes of siluer, as a
tribute for the same. Now all these, besides some
other Kingdomes, to the number of twentie and
seuen, MartaMart. ca. 26. nu. 3. vbi 27. regna esse descripta in registro curiae Romanae ait. particularly recites, and tels vs, that
they are recorded in the Registrie of the Romane
Court or Exchequer, as Kingdomes feudatarie and
tributarie to the Pope. Thus are all Emperours,
Kings, and Princes, made to hold their Crownes,
Kingdomes, and possessions, of the Pope, as from
the supreame, direct, temporall Monarche of

them all. To him they must be subiects, feudataries,
homagers, and very vassals. The Popes, saith
Steuchus,
                     
                        •
                     is vti subiectis imperabant. Steuch. li. cit. pa. 183. 
                  tanquam eorum domini, as their
Lords, doe command kings throughout the world as
their subiects. The Emperour, saith Carerius,Carer. li. 2. c. 18. nu. 
                        •
                     . 
                  is
the Popes Minister, or Seruant: and MartaMart. li. cit. ca. 18. nu. 19. addes,
That it is the forme of the Emperors Coronation, that
he doth sweare se seruiturum papae, that he will serue
the Pope; yea both their doing of homage vnto
him, and receiuing vnction from him, doth witnesse
this; seeing as MartaIdē c. 27. n. 1 saith, Homage is maximum
subiectionis signum, the greatest token of
subiection and seruice; And againe,Idem ca. 18. nu. 11. in Summar. 
                  Reges qui
vnguntur ab Ecclesia, sunt vassalli ipsius, those kings
which are annoynted by the Church are made
her vassals; that is in effect, the Pope annoynts no
kings, but he thereby sets a marke vpon them that
they are his vassals.
               
               Now seeing they are become the Popes seruants,
and tenants, it is worthy remembring, first,
in what tenure they hold their Kingdomes, and
possessions from him. Secondly, what seruice they
are to performe to this their Lord. And lastly,
what account this land-Lord makes of his tenants,
and seruants. Their tenure is of all most base; for
howsoeuer in words, the Pope giues them fee-simple,
or fee-tayle, or any kind of free-hold, they
are in verie trueth no other, but meere Tenants at
will, to the Pope, so that he at his pleasure may
take their Crownes, Kingdomes, and possessions
from them, and giue the same to whomsoeuer hee
will. The Church, saith Steuchus,Steuch. lib. cit. pa. 189. 
                  suffers Kings

to raigne, modò dominam reginam
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      agnoscant, so
that they acknowledge the Pope to be their land-Lord.
If they once refuse this, they forfeit all
their estates, As by the examples
                  De quibu
                        ••
                      agi
                        •
                      Carer. lib. 2. ca. 19. per totū. 
                  of Henry the
fourth, Otho the fourth, Friderike the second, and
diuerse others is euident. The Pope, saith MartaMart. par. 1. ca. 29. nu. 12. et 
                        •
                     . 25. n
                        •
                      6. et 22,
is Lord of the Empire (and so of other kingdomes)
quia transfert illud ad libitum, because he transfers
it at his owne pleasure and giues it vnto whom
he will, as we haue proued. Popes haue giuen, saith
CareriusCar. li. 2. c. 19 nu. 26., and Thomas BoziusT. Bozius lib. 3. de iure stat. c. 4. sect. Sed &., great Empires
and Kingdomes, to those who had formerly no
right at all vnto them, taking them away from those
to whom by right they did belong, though they demerited
nothing, but were wise, industrius, pious, and
Catholike kings, such as had done nothing, or giuen
no cause at all, why they should haue beene
depriued; whereof there are diuerse illustrious examples.
Placuit Gregorio,Carer. et Tho. Boz. locis citatis 
                  It pleased Gregory the
tenth to take the Eastern Empire from Baldwine the
second, who was the rightfull Lord thereof, and giue
it to Michael Paleologus, who had no right at all to
the same. When Richard
                  Carer. et Tho. Boz. loc. cit. 
                  Duke of Cornewall, and
Alphonsus King of Castile, were chosen to the Empire
though the Empire in right belonged to the one
of those two, yet placuit Gregorio, it was the Popes
pleasure to admit neither of them both; and so Rodulph
of the House of Austria was then created Emperour,
Alphonsus in vaine gainsaying the same. And
by what
                  Idem Car. c. 21. nu. 14. et T. Boz. loc cit. sect. Neque id▪
                   
                  other authoritie or power did Alexander
the sixth giue to Ferdinand king of Arragon, and to
his heires and successors, the Ilands of the new found

world? (that is, the West Indies.) Truely by none at
all, but for this, that Christ gaue vnto the Pope his
Vicar iura vtriusque Imperii, the rights both of the
celestiall and terrestriall Empire, and so he might
at his own will dispose them to whom he pleased.
To these Scioppius ads one more, Spaine, saith heGas. Sciop. in Eccles ca. 141. p. 512.,
doth hold the kingdome of Nauar at this day, nullo
alio titulo, nisi quia pontifici sic visum fuerat, by no
other title but because, it is the Popes pleasure that
he shall haue it.
               As their tenure, so their seruice which they must
performe to this their Landlord, is most base, most
vnsutable to Imperiall Maiestie; Nor doe I meane
that seruice which Marta saith,Mart. lib. cit. cap. 8. nu. 19▪
                   
                  That the Emperor
swears se seruiturū Papae pro subdiacono, that the
will serue the Pope, for a subdeacon, that is, serue
him when he saith Masse with the Challice, and
other things; in regard of which seruice Durandus
saithDurand Rational. lib. 2. c. 8. nu. 6. 
                  That the Emperor being made a Canon
of the Romane Church, debet ordinem subdiaconatus
habere, must enter into the order of Subdeacon;
though this be by othersGloss. in Cap. Valentinianus Dist. 63 & Boe
                        •
                     . Epo. tract. de Regn. vel Iure princ. nu. 48. &. 51. denyed. But
the seruice which I meane, is, that the Emperor
like a groome of the stable must hold
                  Stapham equi papalis tenere debet Imperator et deinde ducere equum perfranum. Mart. lib. cit. ca. 18. nu. 19. et sacr. Cerem. lib. 1. sect. 5. p. 61. 
                  the Popes
stirrop, and leade his horse; So PipinePipinus vice stratoris iuxta pa
                        •
                     ae sellam properauit. Fredericus Hadriano 3. officium stratoris exhibui
                        •
                      Steuch. lib. cit. pa 135. 
                  did to
Pope Stephen, Fredericke to Pope Hadrian 3.
If more
                  Lib. 1. Sa
                        •
                     . Cer. sect. 2. p. 3
                        •
                     
                   
                  Kings be present; then the more worthy
King must lead the Popes horse on the right side, and
the other on the left. If his Holynes be not pleased
to ride, then foure
                  Ibid. 
                  of the greatest kings (euen the
Emperour for one, if he be there) must beare the Popes
chaire, and the Pope sitting therein, on their shoulders.

At his feast, the Emperour
                  Ibid. p. 43. 
                  or greatest king
must bring water to wash the Popes hands, they must
carry
                  Ibid. p. 45. 
                  the first dish of meat and set it on his table.
At his coronation
                  Ibid tit. 2. pa. 28. & 29. 
                  two Cardinall Deacons, must
hold the two sides of his Pluuiale (or loose vpper-garment)
and the Emperour, or in his absence, two
of the chiefest kings, must hold vp the taile thereof.
If they happen to offend the Pope, they must dance
attendance bare-footed at the Popes gates, as did
HenryHenricus, soris deposito cultu regio, nudis pedibus, leiunus a m
                        ••
                     e vsque ad vesperum persta. 
                        •
                     attriduo. Lamb Scaef
                        ••
                     ab. pa. 249. 
                  the 4. the Emperor, and that for diuers
dayes, and in a colde season; or they must be whipped
on their naked body with roddes
                  Caernem suam 
                        •
                     udam disciplinae virga
                     
                        •
                     um supponens a singulis viris religiosis quorum multitudo magna conuenerat ictus ternos vel qu
                        •
                     
                     ternos excepit. Matth. Paris. in Hen. 2. pa. 174. 
                  as was Henry
2. of Engl: or suffer the Pope to trample on their
neckes as Alexander 3. did
                  Papa Imperatoris 
                        •
                     ollum pede comprimens ait, Scriptum est, super aspidem & basiliscum ambulabis. Nauc. ad an. 1177. 
                  on the necke of
Fredericke Barbarossa; not without blasphemy also
abusing that Scripture for iustifying his proud
insulting ouer the Emperor, Thou shalt tread vpon
the Adder and the Basiliske.
               
               And yet that which in the third place I proposed,
to wit, the account which they make of kings,
and all secular persons, farre surmounteth all these
indignities, and to men of heroicall spirits, cannot
chuse but be more grieuous and insupportable then
all the rest. Omitting all their other opprobrious
& reuiling speeches (which are innumerable) heare
but the words of two of their late reuilers rather
then writers. The former is Becanus, who callingBecanus 
                        •
                     ontrou. Aug. q. 3 nu. 14. 15. & 16. the Pope a Shepheard, and Kings and Emperors
dogges
                  Per Canes intelliguntur 
                        〈◊〉
                      reges & Imperatores. Ibid. nu. 15. 
                  or Curres of this Shepheard, and sporting
himself with these titles, saith, Igitur hi Canes,
therefore if these Dogges be watchfull and trusty
they must be ready at the Shepheards hand; but

if they be lazy, mad or troublesome, the Shepheard
must presently remoue them, and put them from their
office. This doth reason teach, this doth the Councell
of Lateran decree. Againe, Christian kings are
sheepe, are rammes, are wolues, and are dogges.
Whence it is that the Pope carrieth himselfe in a diuers
manner towards them. As they are sheepe, if
they be scabby, he may put them out of the fold: as
they are rammes, if they be troublesome, and push
with their hornes, he may may shut them vp: As
they are Wolues, he may driue them away; Quatenus
Canes, as they are dogs, hee may put them from
their office, if they be defectiue therein: and some of
these, he doth by excommunication, some by depositiō.
So Becanus.
               The other is Gasp. Scioppius, whose words are so
contumelious, euen in the highest degree, that one
may iustly wonder that any of their Catholikes,
but especially their Catholike Kings, can patiently
digest them. The Church saith heEcclesia est Mandra, siue Grex▪ aut multitudo iumentorum▪ siue Asinorum, clitellariorum, aut Sagmario. rum Gasp. Sciop. in praef. ad Imper. in summae Cap. 147., is mandra iumentorum,
siue a sinorum, a great fold of beasts or
Asses; some are packe Asses
                  Cum nos Christiani simus dei 
                        ••
                     menta siue pecora subiugalia, equi, muli. siue Asini Cl
                        •
                     tellari
                        •
                     , dossuarij, sarcinarij, Idem in Eccles. c. 147. p. 534., some dosse Asses,
and others burden Asses. And then telling, cuiusmodi
                  Ibid. in Marg. 
                  Asini sumus nos Catholici, what manner
of Asses, himselfe, and other Catholikes are; We,
saith heIbid., must be beasts which haue vnderstanding
and reason to obey Bishops with all humility
and patience; for they
                  Illi enim sunt Homines, siue Agasones, Muliones, Iuga
                        •
                     ij: Illinos 
                        •
                     ranat, illi loao aelligant, nos agunt, nos s
                        •
                     imulant, n
                        •
                     bis iugum imponum ibid. pag. 534. 
                  are the Men, they the Muliters,
and Asse-driuers, they must yoake, bridle, and
saddle vs, put halters about our necks, load and driue
vs; for others
                  Ibid p. 535., they are like to beasts, but tame and
obedient beasts, such as must doe what they are commanded:

for a good
                  Bonus & intelligens Asinus audit consilia et praecepta sui Mulionis. ibid. p. 536. 
                  and vnderstanding Asse, is hee,
that heareth and followeth the direction and command
of the Muliter. Further yet hee addes concerning
Kings, that Reges
                  Ibid. in Marg. 
                  Catholici sunt Asini
cum tintinnabulis; Catholicke Kings are Asses
with belles about their neckes, as being the foreasses,
which leade
                  Tum caeteros Asinos, qui sonitum tintinnabuli de collo vestro pendontis audiunt, viam ingredi faciatis. Ibid. 
                  the way to other inferiour Asses.
And particularly for Charles the great, whom
he much commends, he saithIbid. p. 536. 537., that Charles was
a farre greater and wiser Asse, then those Kings who
cast off the Popes yoake; for Charles being tantus
Asinus, so great an Asse, cryed (or rather brayed)
out with a loud voyce, vniuersae Asinorum mandrae,
to the whole folde of Asses, that is, to the whole
Church, in this manner; For the memory of Saint Peter,
let vs honour the Romane Church, and though
the yoake which the Pope imposeth be such as we can
scarcely beare, yet let vs with deuotion endure
the same. Ex quibus verbis, saith Scioppius, verum
Issachar agnoscas, de quo Genes. chap. 49.
Issachar asinus fortis. By these words of Charles,
you may see that he was a verie right Issachar, of
whom it is said, Issachar is a strong asse. Is not
this now think you, a fine peece of Catholike Diuinitie,
to account and call the whole Catholike
Church a fould of asses, all Catholike Kings asses
with bels, all other lay persons, asses without bels;
none but Bishops to be Men and Muliters, and the
Pope the chiefe Muliter and driuer of all the
Asses. So shall the man be honoured, whom the
Pope will honour. The more zealous and deuout
one is in obeying him, and embracing his doctrine,

the greater Asse they account and call him.
Thus haue they not onely stript Emperours and
Kings of their Royalties and Imperiall rights, but
of their goods, lands, and possessions, yea of their
honours also; and in the end, for suffring all these
indignities at the Popes hand, they account them
to be verie Asses.
               Now though by this, they doe euidently demonstrate
the Donation of Constantine, of which
we haue hitherto entreated, to be of no force at
all, seeing neither he, nor Pipin, nor Charles, nor
any other could giue ought to the Pope; and therfore
all the claime which they pretend, to any
kingdomes, territories, or possessions, by such Donations
are but a meere mockage of the World;
yet because they doe hereby chalenge an higher,
a better, and far more ample title, to all that is subposed
by those Emperours to haue been giuen,
euen such, that in stead of praysing their munificence,
for that which they gaue, imputes open iniustice,
tyrannie, and sacriledge to them, for that
they gaue not all; let me entreat a litle of this
point also, and cleere the honour not only of Constantine,
but of all other Kings and Princes, (for
this concernes them all) whom by this doctrine
they make meere intruders and vsurpers of whatsoeuer
they doe not as tenants at will, hold of the
Pope. A large argument I confesse, and which
would require whole volumes, but purposing
summa sequi fastigia rerum, I will only speake at
this time of these three points. First, whether
Christ as Mediator and Redeemer of mankind, had

such a soueraigne and direct temporall Monarchy, as
for his vicares they now claime from him; which is
indeed the first and the maine foundation of their
papall Monarchy. Secondly, Whether Christ left
and committed any such temporall Monarchy to
Peter, which is their second foundation. Thirdly,
Whether this Monarchicall Empire now claymed for
the Pope, be not condemned by the iudgement of
holy and learned men in all ages and successions of
the Church.
               
            
            
               CHAP. II.
               That Christ had no such Temporall Monarchy, as is
now claymed for the Pope.
               
                  FOr the first, whether Christ was
such a Temporall King or no,
we must consider, that there is a
threefold Kingdome of Christ
mentioned & taught in the holy
Scripture. The first is his kingdome
of Power or Excellencie, whereby he being
God, is the supreame Lord of all things; for The
earth
                  Psal. 24: 1. 
                  is the Lords and all that is therein. Concerning
which Kingdome, foure things are cleare
and certaine. First, this Kingdome belongs to
Christ neither by vertue of his death, nor of his
resurrection, but by reason of the inseparable vnion
of the manhood to the Godhead in Christ, by which
he being that one person, which is both God and
man, from the verie first instant of his conception

that man being verie God, hath the same power
and Kingdome with God. And as himselfe saithIohn 10. 30 
                  I and my Father are one, so is this Kingdome of
God and Christs, both one. Of this Kingdome of
Christ, are those words to be vnderstood, All
                  Math. 28. 28
                  power is giuen to me, both in heauen, and in earth:
And that, He
                  Heb. 1. 2. 
                  hath made him heire of all things;
And that, T
                        •
                     e Father
                  Ioh. 13. 3. 
                  hath giuen all things into
his hands; And againe, Omnia
                  Ioh. 17. 10. 
                  tua mea sunt, all
that is thine, belongs also to me, and is mine.
               Secondly, this Kingdome of Christ, is Incommunicable
vnto any meere creature whatsoeuer, for it
is grounded on the Infinitie of Gods power, who as
by his infinite power, he made all things of nothing,
so by the same infinite power, he ruleth, ordereth,
and disposeth of all things. And because
no creature is capable of that Infinitie of power,
neither is any, capable of that vniuersall Kingdome
of Excellencie, whith ariseth from the Infinitie
of diuine power. And as Infinitie of nature
cannot be transferred vnto any creature, so neither
can Infinitie of power be giuen or transferred
vnto it, but this is, and resides onely in that
Infinite Essence of God, nor can it agree to any, but
to that person, which is truly God.
               Thirdly, this supereminent and vniuersall Kingdome
of Christ, doth neither abolish, nor hinder, but
establish and ratifie all other particular and secular
kingdomes. For as it was said,Daniel 2. 37 before Christs
incarnation, to Nebuchadnezer; The God of heauen
hath giuen thee a kingdome, so Christ also after
his incarnation, both approues and confirmes the

kingdome of Cesar, saying,Mat▪ 22. 21. 
                  Giue vnto Cesar, the
things that are Cesars.
               
               Fourthly, this kingdome of Christ is not temporall
or secular, but farre more eminent then any, yea
then all secular kingdomes in the whole world. Temporall
kingdomes are temporall, and mutable; this
eternall, and immutable: they administred by temporall
persons, by temporall meanes, by temporall
counsels: by temporall lawes, by temporall weapons,
by temporall punishments: This kingdome
is administred by the onely eternall God, by his
eternall, omnipotent, and immutable will, wisdome,
counsell, and prouidence; either with
meanes, or without meanes, or contrarie to
meanes, as it seemeth best to him; administred
also, so vnresistably, that nothing can resist the
power of this kingdome, for nothing can come to
passe without the prouidence and will of God,
either
                  Non fit aliquid, nisi Omnipotens fieri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat, vel ipse faciendo. Aug. Enchyr. ca. 95. Nec vtique nolens sinit, sed volens. Ibid. ca. 100. 
                  powerfully doing it himselfe, or willingly
permitting it to be done.
               
               The second kingdome of Christ is of Grace;
and the third is of Glory: Or if any like to call
them both but one kingdome, it is not amisse; that
kingdome of Glory being inchoate by Grace in
this life, which shall be perfected both in grace
and glory in the life to come. Of the former,
Wherby Christ rules by faith and grace in the hearts
of all his elect, euer since the world beganne, is that
ment, Psal. 2.Psal. 2. 6. 
                  I am appointed a king vpon his holy
mountaine Sion; And that of Zachary,Zach. 9. 9. 
                  Beholde
the king commeth, and that in Ieremy,Ier. 23. 5. 
                  I will
raise vp to Dauid, a righteous Branch, and he shall be

a king; And that in EzechielEzec. 37. 22 
                  I will make them
one people, and one king shall rule ouer them; And
that of our Sauiour,Matt. 6. 33. 
                  Seeke ye first the kingdome
of God and the righteousnes thereof; The
                  Luk. 11. 20. 
                  kingdome
of God is come vnto you, and is in
                  Luc. 17. 21. 
                  you:
which is compared to seede
                  Mat. 13. 24. 
                  sowne in good
ground, to a graine
                  Ibid. v. 31. 
                  of mustard seed, to leauen
                  Ibid. v. 33.,
and a number such like in the Gospel.
               Of the other which is his kingdome of Glory,
are clearely to be vnderstood those texts of Scripture,
Lord
                  Luk. 23. 42. 
                  remember me when thou commest into
thy Kingdome. It is
                  Luk 12. 32. 
                  your Fathers will, to giue
you the Kingdome. They
                  Luc. 13. 29. 
                  shall sit with Abraham,
Isaack and Iacob in the Kingdome of God. The vnrighteous
                  1 Cor. 6. 9. 
                  shall not inherite the kingdome of God.
By
                  2 Pet. 1. 11. 
                  this meanes an entrance shall be ministred vnto
you, into the euerlasting kingdome of our Lord and
Sauiour Iesus Christ. In all which, and many the
like, is meant that glorious kingdome of Christ,
whereby himselfe now, and euer since his ascension,
is in perfect and endlesse felicitie, both of body
and soule, subiect to no infirmitie of body, or
griefe of minde, as before he was; of which most
blessed kingdome, all the children of God are euen
now fellow-heires
                  Rom. 8. 17. 
                  with Christ, and shall▪ in
their due time, be made
                  2 Tim. 4. 8. 
                  actuall partakers and
possessors of that heauenly inheritance.
               Of both these Kingdomes there may two
things be obserued. The former, that they are
in a speciall manner called the kingdomes of Christ.
For though they be the kingdomes also of the
Father, and the blessed Spirit, because Faith
                  Gal. 5. 22. & 1 Cor. 12. 11. and

                  Grace are wrought in the hearts of Gods children
by his Spirit: and, God giueth both grace
                  Psal. 84. 11.
                  and glory; yet because the holy Spirit worketh
that grace, and the Father giueth this Kingdome,
for the mediation and merit
                  1 Pet. 1. 18. 19. 
                  of Christ, therefore
are they by a certaine p
                     •
                  erogatiue, saide to bee
Christs, for that he purchased and merited by the
infinite and inestimable price of his blood, and
bloody death, (which was sufficient to haue ransomed
and freed all,) that both Grace and Glory
should be giuen to whomsoeuer himselfe would;
and that is to All and Onely to the beleeuers in
him, to All and Onely the electEph. 1. 4. in Christ.
               The other is, that neither of these kingdomes is, or
can, with any colour of reason, be accounted a temporall
or terrene kingdome. Both of them in their
nature spirituall: The former is wrought by Gods
Diuine Spirit, and in the Spirits of the Elect, and
that by a spirituall manner of working; The later
is for place, not terrene but celestiall; for time,
not temporall, but eternall; and for condition, not
subiect to any disturbance or change, as temporall
kingdomes are; but setled in an vnchangeable
state of most happy tranquillity.
               Now seeing in the holy Scripture there is neither
set downe nor mentioned any other kingdom
of Christ, but one of these three, which wee haue
now described; and seeing it is cleare and certaine,
that none of these three is a temporall Kingdome,
but the first, onely diuine, the second onely spirituall,
the third onely celestiall; it remaines cleere
and euident, that Christ Iesus neither euer was a

temporall King, such as are the secular Princes and
Monarches here vpon earth; neither euer, either
had such a Kingdome, or executed and performed
the Offices of such a King. And it were easie
to demonstrate (if it were worth the labour) that
those Romanists who pretend Christ to haue had
a temporall Kingdome, doe either ignorantly, (as
Franc. Bozius) or Atheistically (as that Scurra Scioppus,)
or impiously, (as the rest) peruert the holy
Scriptures to their owne vaine and phantasticall
conceits.
               Let vs heare our Sauiour himselfe witnessing
this truth. When Pilate demanded of him, if hee
were a King, he answeredIoh. 18. 36., My Kingdome is
not of this world. He professeth himselfe to be indeed
a King, and to haue a kingdome; a Kingdome
of Excellency and power, as he is God; a Kingdome
both of Grace and Glory, as he is the mediator between
God and Man: but for any temporal and terrene
Kingdom, such as Pilate meant, he vtterly denies
that he was such a king, or had such a kingdom.
And he giues a plaine reason thereof, for otherwise,
my seruants would surely fight: As if hee had
said; Had God sent me to be a temporall King, I
would haue come with temporall pompe, with a
temporall guard, and temporall weapons to defend
my right, & reuenge my wrongs; & then neither
my self nor my seruants wold put vp all these
indignities: but because my kingdom is not terrene,
because I come to serue others & not to be serued
with such Princely seruice, by this my carriage O
Pilate, thou maist know, that my Kingdome is not

of this world, not a temporall or terrene kingdome.
               
               His facts declare the same, when the Iewes
                  Ioh. 6. 15.
                  had taken him to make him a temporall king, hee fled
away, refusing such a Kingdome, euen when it was
offered vnto him. When they came, desiring
                  Luc. 12. 13.
                  him to diuide the inheritance betweene two brethren,
he refused to doe it, saying, Man who made mee a
Iudge betweene you? As if he had said, the ordering
of such temporall affaires, belongs to temporall
Kings and their subordinate Iudges or Officers,
God hath giuen that authority to them; Seeing
I neither by Gods appointment, nor by delegation
from Cesar, haue that temporall authority, it
belongs not to me to intermeddle with those temporall
iudgements. When the Publicanes came
and demaunded,Math. 17. 24. 
                  An non soluit, Doth not your
Master pay (that is, vse to pay) tribute to Cesar?
Peter answered, yes, he vseth so to doe: by that his
vsing to pay tribute acknowledging himselfe, a
subiect to Cesar: euen as at the time of his birth,
his name was, as one of the subiects of Cesar, and
Citizens of Rome, recorded
                  Sub Caesare nobiscum describi voluit. Cyril. lib. 6. cont. Iulian. p. 55. Romano censu statim ascriptus, vt natus est. Or
                        •
                     
                     sius. lib. 6. ca: 22. dicendus vtique ciuis Romanus, census professione Romani. ibid. 
                  in their censuall
bookes. And though Christ, as himself teachethMath. 17. 26,
being the Son of God, to whom all Kingdomes
doe belong, might by beeing the naturall Sonne of
God, haue pleaded a freedome and immunity from
paying tribute in any kingdom, yet seeing withal he
was the Son of Dauid, he willingly payed tribute
to Cesar, as being in respect of his manhood and
humane birth, a subiect of the Empire and of Cesar:
Yea, Card. Caietane
                  Caiet. Com. in 17. Math., and after him Luc.
Burgensis
                  Luc. Burg. in eund. loc. doe teach that Christ payed tribute

not onely de facto, but de debito. For seeing, say
they, Christ said not, ne scandalizentur, but, ne scandalizemus,
lest we giue an offence vnto them; if
Christ (who had taken vpon him that state of
humility, & who was not yet known to the world
to be God) had denyed tribute vnto Cesar, Actiui
scandali rationem habuisset, he had giuen offence
vnto them, causing them to thinke that he had contemned
the Law of God. To which purpose Ierome
saithHier. com. in 17. Math., Christ as being the Kings sonne, was not
bound to pay tribute, but in that he took vpon him the
humilitie of our nature, debuit adimplere omnē iustitiam,
he was bound to fulfill all iustice; one part
of which, was subiection and paying tribute to
Cesar. So Christ both by his words, and actions,
witnessed his kingdome not to haue beene
temporall, while he was here vpon earth, neither
did he challēge, or euer vse the authority of a temporall
king, or hinder, much lesse abolish and take away,
as ScioppiusRegnum Christi tollit omnia alia Regna. Gas. Sciop. Eccles. c. 46. p. 151. saith he did, those kingdomes;
but establishing that authority which God had
giuen to them, for all such temporall matters, hee
carried himselfe as a subiect to temporall Kings,
submitting himselfe to death, euen to a most
shamefull death, vpon the iudgement of Pilate,
the Emperors deputy in Iurie, whom he acknowledgethRomani praesidis po
                        •
                     estatem Christus super se fatetur fuisse caelitus ordinatam, Bern. epist. 42 in fine.
                  to haue had power ouer him from God,
to iudge him.
               
               To these may be adioined, the consenting testimonies
of St. Austen
                  Audite regnae omnia, non impedio dominationem v strā. Aug. tract. 115 in Ioh. S. Cyrill
                  Principatus Christi mundanus non est. Cyril. lib. 12. in Ioh. ca. 10., St. Ambrose
                  Quod regnauit Christus non est contra Prophetiam (Ier. 22. 30.) non enim saculari honoreregnauit. Amb. l. 3. in Luc. p. 44., St. Ierome
                  Regnum Christi non erit terrenum et breue, sed coeleste & perpetuū Hier. in c. 22. Ier. v. 30, St. Chrysostome
                  Regnum suum neque humanū ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      caducū esse demonstrat. &, non humanū, sed longe maius at praestantius imperiū Chrys. hem. 82. in Ioh.,

St. Hillarie
                  Christus positus est rex non super illum terrenae ciuitatis montem, sed eius quae est in coelis, Hilar. in Psal 2. ya. 353, St. Epiphanius
                  Carnaliter non est impletum in saluatore, &c. Epiph. haer. 29., of Egesippus
                  Egesip. apud. Euseb. l. 3. c. 17,
Eusebius
                  Sedes Dauid per diuinum saluatoris nostri regnum, erectum est. Euseb. lib. 7. de Demonst. Euang., Bede
                  Regnabit in aeternum, non dixit in acquisitione gloriae, Gazarumque terrenarū, &c. Bed
                        •
                     n c. 1. Luc., Bernard
                  Dabit ei deus sedem Dauid, non temporalem sed aeternā, non terrenā sed coelestem. Bern. homil 4. super, Missus est. Lu. 1., and many others,
who not onely deny Christs kingdome to
haue been terrene and temporall, but explaining
how that prophesie in Ieremie, That none of Ieconias
posteritie, (of which they thought Christ to be)
should sit vpon the throne, or be a King, how this I
say is not repugnant to that saying of the Angell,
Gabriel, Luke 1. 32. God shall giue vnto him the
throne of his father Dauid; they answer that these
two are not contrary, seeing Ieremy speakes of a
temporall kingdome, and such Christ had not: and
Gabriell of a spirituall and eternall kingdome, and
such Christ indeed had. But omitting all the rest,
I will adde three or foure testimonies of their
owne learned writers testifying this.
               The first is Card. Bellarm. who thus writesB
                        •
                     l. l. 5. de Pont. Rom. c. i. 4. sect. Superest.,
Christ as he was man, while he liued vpon earth, neither
had, nor would accept any temporall dominion,
neither
                  Ibid. §▪ Quod de nique. 
                  did hee euer exercise any such temporall
power; and therefore it had beene in vaine for him to
haue had it, seeing that power is in vaine which is neuer
brought into act. And whereas some pretend,
that when Christ whipped the buyers and sellers
out of the temple, he did therin vse his kingly, temporal,
and secular power; the Card. rightly shewesIbid. §. Respondent. 
                  that Christ did that, not by any secular or kingly
power, but as a Prophet, and by prophetical authority,
such as Phinies vsed when he killed Zimbri, & Cosbi:
and Elias when he killed the Priests of Baal. The
same Card. ads, That
                  Ibid. sect. C
                        ••
                     
                     firmatur. 
                  such a temporall kingdome
& secular power, was neither necessary nor expedient
for Christ, but altogether superfluous & vnprofitable

for him. Againe, That Christ, saith heRecognit. lib. 5. de Rom. Pont. c. 4. p. 33., had an
vniuersall kingdome of power, as hee was God, a
spirituall kingdome of grace, and a third which is an
eternall kingdome of glorie, I do reade; but that he
had a fourth kingdome which is properly temporall,
such as other Kings here vpon earth haue, I find not
either in the Scriptures, or in the Fathers: Nay, I
esteeme such a kingdome to be contrarie to the pouertie
of Christ, mentioned in the Scriptures, and to sauor
of the error of the Iewes, & Heretikes. AgainLib. eod. Recog. pa. 35
                  I haue read the books of the Fathers, with what diligence
I could, and I haue often read them to denie
Christ to haue had a temporall or terrene kingdome,
but I haue no where read them to affirme that he had
such a kingdome, Thus Bellarmine.
               The next is Cornelius Iansenius, one of their
learnedest and best expositors of the Gospell.
The kingdome of Christ (saith he)Cor. Ians. Concord. Euan. c. 3. sect. Dabit. 
                  is called the
throne or kingdome of Dauid, not for that it is temporall,
sensible, or terrene, but because it was figured
by the kingdome of Dauid.
               
               The third is Adam Sasbout, who vpon those
words which theySededit super solum Dauid & super regnū eius, vt rex saecularis, ait Sciop. in suo eccles. ca. 36. p. 124. so often wrest, God shall giue
vnto him the seate and kingdome of Dauid, thus and
verie rightly writethAd. Sasb. comment. in ca. 9. Isai., The Iewes vnderstand this
text of a temporall kingdome of the Messias, such as
other kings haue here vpon earth, whereas the Scriptures
are most euident, which witnesse that Christs
kingdome shall not be such: but Christ is said to sit
vpon Dauids throne, because he ruleth for euer in the
Church, and in the faithfull people, of which Church
the kingdome of Dauid was a type.
               
               The fourth is Thomas Waldensis, who in a

whole ChapterTho. Wald. Post. fidei, to. 1. l. 2. Art. 3. c. 77 at large and effectually by many
Fathers, and reasons, proues that Christs kingdome
is not temporall. Christ (saith he) tooke away
all suspition from Pilate, when he answered negatiuely
touching a temporall kingdome, saying, My kingdome
is not of this world, that is, it is not humane, not temporall,
but it is farre greater, and more excellent.
Again, All with one accord write that secular princes
need not feare the kingdome of Christ, seeing it is not
of this world. And then he adds, finaliter definimus,
we determine and conclude finally, that Christ had no
right to the kingdome of Israell, who as God had an
vniuersall right to all kingdomes in the world.
               
               To all which may be adioyned that which being
taken out of Sedulius
                  Ex Hymno Sedulij, quem cot
                        •
                      ecclesiae publice canit Bell. lib. 5. de Rom pont. cap. 3, the whole Romane
Church approues and singes as an holy Antheme
in their publike lyturgie: Non eripit mortalia, qui regna
dat caelestia, Christ giues an heauenly, he
doth not take away earthly kingdomes, that is, as
Bellarmine
                  Loco cit. rightly teacheth, No secular king by
becōming a Christian looseth his right to his earthly,
but he getts a new right to an heauenly kingdome.
               
               Now to this vniforme consent of the ancient
Fathers, and the best of their latter Diuines, if we
should oppose that violent and indeed atheisticall
wresting of the sacred Scriptures, for intitling
Christ to a secular and temporall kingdome, vsed
by the Popes Proctors and Parasites, it would
much confirme any man in this truth. For who
can with patience heare them teach, Christi
                  Gas. Sciop. in Eccl. c. 46. p. 151 in marg. 
                  regnum
tollit omnia alia regua, Christs kingdom (and
that is the PopesChristus legatos constituit qui suo loco orbis haereditatem 
                        •
                     deant. Idem c. 36. p. 125. &, Papa Romanus est velut Prorex. li. eod. c. 55 p. 179. &, Christus ipse possessionē non capit, sed paulatim per suos vicari et ibid. cap. 36. pa. 125. in Christs right) takes away
all other kingdomes in the world: For he is properly

no king that hath any man superior vnto him.
Or that, Christ hath
                  Titulo Redēptionis Christus omnia regna & imperia euacuat, & cessare facit. idem li eodem. ca. 36. pa. 123. 
                  euacuated and made void all
principalitie & power, to wit, all besides the Popes.
Or that, I will
                  Lib. eod. c. 46 pa. 151. 
                  ouerthrow, saith the Prophet, the
strength of nations, that is to say, Delebo imperium
Romanum, I will abolish the Romane Empire.
Consider but the ground of this temporall kingdome
which they giue vnto Christ. That is, because
Christ
                  Christus vt homo titulo emptionis totius mundi dominus esse coepit. Sciop
                        •
                      lib. cit. ca. 41. pa. 139. Christus morte sua emit omnia, etiam infidelium regna, et, 
                        •
                     mnia suo sanguine emit Christus. Sciop. lib. eod c. 36 pa 123. &, Christus dominus omnium ratione Emptionis, ib. pa. 122. &, morte sua emit omnia totius orbis regna ca. 141 pa. 509 
                  by his death hath redeemed and
bought to himselfe (and by consequent to the PopeChristus per suos vicarios possessionem capit terrae, siue terrenorum & externorum bonorum lib. eod ca. 36. pa. 125. who is to take possession of all as Christs Deputie)
all temporall kingdomes in the world. To
which purpose, hauing wrested th
                     •
                  se words of
the Apostle,Coloss. 2. 14. 
                  he hath taken the hand-writing that
was against vs and fastned it to the Crosse, he adds,
Hic
                  Sciop. li. cit. ca. 36. p. 122. 123. 
                  perspicuum est, It is cleere by this, that Christ
by the title of Redemption hath obteyned not onely
spirituall, but secular power, according as it is said,
Thou hast put all things vnder his feet, not onely the
soules, but the goods and estates of all men; all are
subiected and brought vnto the dominion of
Christ, & by him giuen to his vice-roy
                  Papa Prorex. ibid. c. 55. p. 179. 
                  the Pope,
who in his right must haue the possession
                  Loc. cit. ca. 36. p. 125. 
                  of them
all. And againe, Christ
                  Sui sanguinis effusione, totius mundi imperium a diabolo, cui Adam illud per peccatum vendiderat, redemit. Idem. lib. eodem c. 41 p. 137. 
                  by shedding his blood,
redeemed or bought all the kingdomes of the world
of the diuel, to whom Adam by his sinne had sold
them, And a thousand such like.
               Truely, such diuinitie doth beseeme none but
such as Scioppius, who Atheistically peruerts euerie

text of Scripture that he lights vpon. That
Adam, and in him all mankind, by their voluntarie
transgression, forfeited vnto God their right both
to the celestiall kingdome, and to all the blessings
of this life, which God had promised vnto them;
and so made themselues by the iust iudgement of
God, seruants both to sinne and satan: That Christ
to redeeme mankind out of this miserable seruitude,
payd vnto God that inestimable price of his
owne bloodie death and passion; that by his most
pretious death on the Crosse, he purchased and
merited at Gods hands, first, remission of sinnes,
and then both grace in this life, and an eternall
Kingdome in the life to come for all his elect;
These, the Scriptures euidently teach, the Fathers
professe, and the whole Church of God euer beleeued.
But that Adam sold either the kingdomes
of earth or of heauen to the diuel, or that Christ
payd any price to the diuel, to redeeme either the
one kingdome or the other at his hands (who was
in truth nothing else, but the Iaylour or executioner
of Gods wrath,) or that Christ bought at all
any temporall kingdome, either of God or the
diuel, to bestow it on the Pope, is such diuinitie as
is fit to be preached onely to a fold of Asses, and
preached onely by him, who professeth himselfe
(and we enuy not that so iust a title should be giuen
vnto him) to be an Asse, and one of no small
vnderstanding in that fold of Asses. Now seeing
this, which is the best and fairest ground or title
that he could find either for Christs, or the Popes
temporall kingdome, is prophane, blasphemous, and

Atheisticall, you may well thinke, that the rest of
their building which relies on this, must needs
be sutable vnto it; that is, not onely impious and
blasphemous, but such as sets open a wide gappe to
Atheisme, and most contemptuous prophaning
of the holy Scriptures, and the most Sacred
mysteries thereof.
            
            
               CHAP. III.
               That Christ gaue no Temporall Monarchy to Peter,
nor any of his Apostles, nor any of their Successors.
               
                  THe second point which I proposed,
is, Whether any such direct,
temporall Monarchy of the
world, was granted by Christ to
S. Peter, and in him to the Pope,
as his Successour. Now this is
easily resolued by the former.
For it is certaine, that not Peter, and then not the
Pope (admitting him, which is certainly vntrue,
to be Peters heire ex asse) could haue this by any
right from Christ, vnlessePapa non h
                        •
                     
                     bet iurisdictionem coactiuam maiorem quam habuerit Christus cuius est vicarius. Occam. li. 6. part. 1. cap. 3. this had belonged
first to Christ himselfe, as he was man and mediatour
betwixt God and man; For Peter and his
Successours, represent
                  Bell. lib. 5. de Rom Pont. c. 4. sect. superest. 
                  Christ vnto vs no otherwise
then as he was, dum hic inter homines viueret,
whilst he liued here vpon earth. Christ himselfe
saying,Ioh. 20. 21. 
                  As my Father sent me, so send I you.
Seeing then we haue proued both by Scriptures,

Fathers, and by the cleare confession of their
best learned writers, that Christ had no temporall
kingdome, nor was euer a temporall, but alwaies
an eternall King of power, of grace, and glorie;
it most certainly followeth, that he neither gaue,
nor left, or committed to Peter, or any of Peters
Successours, any temporall Kingdome, or coactiue
power, but gaue vnto them onely a power of direction,
whereby they might guide others to faith
and sanctitie in this life, and to euerlasting glorie in
the life to come.
               Our Sauiour teacheth this fully, Math 20. and
Luke 22. When Iames and Iohn dreaming of a
temporall kingdome which Christ should haue,
desiredIpsi dicuntur hoc petijsse Mar. 10. 35. sed illam petitionem ipsorum mater Christo proposuit, ideo ipsa dicitur pro eis hoc petijsse Math. 20. 20. and made the motion by meanes of
their mother, to sit the one at the right, the other at
the left hand in his Kingdome, That is, to haue temporall
authoritie, power, and dignitie, next vnto
Christ himselfe; he correcting this their erronious,
ambitious, and vnfitting desire, said to them, and to
all his Apostles, and in them to all their Successours,
The Kings of the Gentiles, dominantur cis
haue secular and coactiue dominion ouer them,
(that is, ouer the Gentiles and people subiect vnto
their authoritie) and they that are great among
them, exercise authoritie ouer them (compelling
them to do what they command:) vos autem
non sic, But it shall not be so with you; but whosoeuer
will be great among you, let him be your minister
and seruant; euen as the Sonne of man, came not
to be ministred vnto, but to minister. In which
words, as S. BernardBern. li. 2. de Cons. ad. Eug. rightly obserues, is set

downe, forma Apostolica, the verie forme of the
Apostolicall authoritie giuen vnto them and their
successours by Christ, and what from Christ they
ought to challenge. And first, our Sauiour declares
what he would not giue vnto them; to
wit, not any temporall, ciuill, or coactiue authoritie,
such as the Kings of the Gentiles exercised, and
as they desired him to giue vnto them; and then,
what he would giue vnto them, to wit, authoritie
of Ecclesiasticall ministration, and seruice, which
himselfe exercised.
               That they desired secular, and coactiue authoritie,
such as is vsed in temporall kingdomes, and
desired Christ to giue this vnto them, is euident
by their owne words, Grant that we may sit (as
secular Iudges and Magistrates) the one at thy
right, the other at thy left hand (that is, in high
dignitie and place, euen next to thy selfe) in thy
Kingdome, which they thoughtRegnū Christi huius vitae ac saeculare fore opinabantur, Chrys. in cap. 20 Math. Hom. 66 should be a
temporall Kingdome. Christ not onely checketh
their ambition, and denies to grant this vnto
them, but giues a manifest reason of his deniall
thereof: The Kings of the Gentiles (those he
names, because at that time there were no other
Kings in the world) haue this temporall and coactiue
dominion which you desire of me, and they,
partly by themselues, partly by their deputies and
subordinate officers, exercise the same. To giue
this, belongs to them, and not to me. I haue it not
my selfe, and therefore I cannot giue it to you,
nor depute you vnto such rule. I came not to rule
temporally, but to serue; and that which I, as your

Messias, and ruler of my Church, doe giue vnto
you, is, to serue as my selfe serue, not to rule in
temporall sort, as I doe not so rule. If you would
haue this, you must seeke it of the Kings of the
Gentiles; they onely at this time, haue this power
vnder God, originally in themselues, they only
are to depute others to haue it vnder them, and
from them. But if Kings should thinke it conuenient
to conferre this subordinate secular and coactiue
authoritie vpon them, whether then they
should accept it or no, of that our Sauiour speakes
not one word. He onely denies that himselfe will
grant that secular power, which they desired him
to giue vnto them. But seeing our Sauiour doth
not prohibit it, and the Church euer since Kings
embraced Christianitie, hath allowed it, most
religious
                  Constantinus magnus sanxit vt cuiuis liberū esset in ciuili causa a praetore aut quouis alio saeculari iudice ad Episcopum appellare. Additque; Omnes ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      caus
                        •
                      quae vel praetorio iure vel ciuilitractantur, Episcoporum sententijs terminatae perpetuo stabilitatis iure firmantur nec licebit vlterius retractare negotium quod episcoporum sententia deciderit. Hoc perpetua lege firmamus. Lex illa tota extat leg. 1. De Episcopali iudicio Cod. Theod. 
                  Kings granting it, most religious Bishops
                  Inter hos Augustinus, qui sic de se ait. Homines quidem causas suas saeculares apud nos 
                        •
                     nire cupientes, sanctos nos appellant. Agamus aliquando negotium salutis nostrae & ipsorū non de auro, non de argento, non de fundis & pecoribus, pro quibus rebus quotidie submisso capite salutamur, Aug. Epist. 147. & Non permittor ad quod volo, vacare ante meridiem, post meridiem occupationibus hominum ten
                        •
                     or. Epist. 110. &, Testor deum, multo mallē per singulos dies aliquid manibus operari, quam tumultuosissimas perplexitates causarum alienarum pati de negotiis saecularibus, vel iudicando dirimendis, vel interueniendo praecidendis Aug. lib. de oper. monach. ca. 29. Idem
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ab aliis Episcopis factitatum, non est dubiū, cum lex illa Constantini omnibus episcopis idem ius iudicandi causas saeculares contulisset. 
                  accepting and vsing it, and the whole
Catholike Church in all ages euer since, approueing
both the giuing thereof by the one, and accepting
of it by the other; yea approueing it,
by the verie warrant of God himselfe, in the old

testamēt, where secular power was in diuers
                  Vt in Mose, Eli, Samuele, alijsque. 
                  ioyned
vnto spirituall: it is not to be doubted, but that
it is consonant both to the will of Christ, and the
word of God; of both which there can neither
be, nor be wished for, a better or more certaine
declaration in this cause, not determined by
Christ, then is the vniforme iudgement of the
whole Catholike Church and that in all ages.
               It is true I confesse that learned men, both on
our side, and theirsBel. lib. 5. de Rom. Pont. ca. 10. sect. Dico secundo. Cor. Iansen. in Concord. Euang. ca. 104. alijque., expound the words of
Christ in such such, as if Christ had denyed not simply
dominion, but onely tyrannicall and cruell dominion:
which they collect from the compound
verbes vsed by Christ, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , & 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which
import (as they suppose) vniust, cruell, and tyrannicall
gouerning. That Christ condemnes such
cruelty and tyranny in all, and especially in his Apostles,
there is no doubt; but that hee meant to
forbid it in these words, there is no likelihood at
all, nor no circumstance to enforce, that reason,
drawne from the compound verbes, sauouring of
gramaticall subtility, but neither of logicall, nor
theologicall soliditie. First, though these compound
verbes doe signifie sometimes tyrannicall
dominion, yet neither doe they so alway, (for Iosh.
15. v. 16. 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , signifieth simply preuailing
by force without either iniustice or tyrany:) And
that in this place, they ought not to be taken in
that signification, is euident, by all as I suppose that
haue translated the Text in the Bible. In the Syriack,
in Arius Montanus, in Isiod. Clarius, in Castalio,
in the French, in the Italian, in the Spanish, in

the English, in S. Ierome, the former word is constantly
translated, by Dominari, which is to haue
dominion and rule, and the latter, by exercising
authority; not one translating them, tyrannicè dominari,
or saeuam ac crudelem authoritatem exercere:
and which against those, with whom we deale, is
of most force, their vulgar Latine edition which
they hold
                  Conc. Trident. sess. 4 sect. Insuper. 
                  to be authenticall, and from which
they may nullo praetextu, by no colour depart; This, I
say, hath simply dominantur eorum & potestatem
exercent, rightly deliuering the sence of the words,
though with some incongruityNam, eorū, legitur pro, earum. of Latine, and
against Grammar.
               Againe our Sauiour in S. Luke
                  Luk. 22. 25., vseth the
simple verbe 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , which out of question, signifieth,
dominantur. Whereby it is certaine, that the
compound verbe in S. Matthew, doth signifie the
same also: or if it doe not, yet his words in Saint
Luke simply denie dominion to bee giuen vnto
them. The Kings of the Gentiles 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   haue dominion,
to wit, ciuill, coactiue, and temporall, and
vse it; but with you it shall not be so: not by any
grant from me.
               Lastly, had our Sauiour denyed onely tyrannicall
and cruell dominion vnto them, hee had not
fitly reproued them at this time, nor answered
their request, made vnto him. For they would
easily haue replyed, why, we seeke not any cruell
nor tyrannicall kinde of dominion; all that we desire,
is to be eminēt in secular & coactiue authority
and power, in thy temporall and earthly kingdome.
Seeing then it is certaine, that Christ denied

to grant that which they desired, and their
desire was not of tyranny, but of temporall dominion,
it is not to bee doubted, but our Sauiour denyed
that he would grant or giue vnto them any
secular, ciuill or coactiue authority at all, either
milde or tyrannicall.
               Now seeing Christ denyed to giue any secular
power at all to any of his Apostles, or to their successors,
à fortiori he must needs deny to giue that
which they now claime to the Pope, Regall, Monarchicall,
and supreme dominion, and that ouer all
kings in the world, either to Peter or Iames, or any
of all their successors. Our Sauiours words, are
farre more emphaticall and forceable against this.
The Kings of the Gentiles haue this dominion; If I
should giue this vnto you, I should contrary to
mine own precept, take from Cesar what belongs
to Cesar. The Kings of the Gentiles haue this dominion;
should I giue this vnto you, I should make
all of you Kings, and not seruants; now I appoint
you to be (as I my selfe am) seruants vnto your
brethren, not kings ouer all your brethren, and
least of all ouer all the world. S. Bernard very
rightly applying this text to the Pope, who then
carried himselfe like an Emperour, tels him, that
Apostolicall ministration which is inioyned to Peter
and all his successiors, is incompatible which Monarchical
dominion, which the Pope then vsurped,
and which is now challenged. If, saith heBern. lib. 2. de consid. ad Eugen., you
succeed in the Apostolicall vocation, you may not vsurpe
(Monarchicall) dominion, Planè ab alterutro
prohiberis, you are certainely forbid the one of

these two. If you will haue them both, you shall lose
them both. And to shew plainely that such independant
temporall dominion vsed by the Pope,
cannot possibly bee claimed from Christ, nor bee
iure diuino, he addes, Vt alia quacunque ratione, haec
tibi vendices, certè non Apostolico iure, by what
means soeuer you claime such dominion, it is certaine,
you cannot haue it by Apostolicall right.
And if it be not Apostolicall, then is it certainely
either humane (which they scorne,) or (which is
the truth indeed) diabolicall. To the same purpose
doth their learned Lawyer Ant. Rosselus
                  Ant. Rossel. Monarch. part. 1. c. 70. p. 298. say
Est impossibile quod in eodem subiecto sit totale sacerdotium,
& Imperium saeculare. It is impossible, that
the same man should bee both a full Bishop and
withall a ciuill Emperour or supreame Monarch.
And in another place, hee vndertakes in an whole
ChapterLib. 
                        •
                     od. c. 38. to proue, Imperium temporalium, non
esse in Sacerdotio, nec esse posse, that a supreame temporall
Empire, or dominion neither is, nor can be
in a Bishop. The reason whereof is, that opposition
which Christ hath made betweene them;
the one, to be the Lord and ruler of all his brethren,
and therefore subiect or seruant to none, but
onely to God; the other to be a seruant in performing
Ecclesiasticall ministration to all his brethren,
but specially to the Emperor; and therefore
to be subiect to him, who is by God appointed to
be the Lord of all his brethren.
               Our Sauiour againe teacheth this, by that commandement
which he giues both to his Apostles
and all others, and which himselfe obserued, Giue
                  
                  Math. 22. 21 
                  vnto Cesar that which is Cesars. Now among
other things due to Cesar, S. Paul by the direction
of Christs owne Spirit, reckons obedience, saying,
Let
                  Rom, 13. 1. 5 
                  euery soule to be subiect to the higher powers,
and that not for terror, or feare of punishment, but
euen for conscience sake.
               
               That, by the higher powers, the Apostle meant
no other, but Cesar and secular Kings, is euident by
that very Text, seeing of them the Apostle saith,
That they
                  Ver. 4. 
                  beare the sword, which certainly
none then did, but secular Princes; and that tribute
                  Ver. 6. 
                  is paid vnto them, which was then paid vnto
none, but only to Cesar, & secular kings: to whom
euen ChristMath. 17. 24. himselfe not onely vsed to pay it,
but Peter in whose house Christ was at that time,
paid the same, it being exacted domatim, of euery
housholder. S. Austen
                  Aug. epist. 54. writes to Macedonius
a temporall Gouernour, that the Apostle doth terrifie
wicked men not onely by the future punishments,
but euen praesentibus vestris saecularibus iudiciis, by
your present secular iudgements, when hee saith,
Let euery soule he subiect to the higher powers. S. Basil
more plainly to our purpose, The Apostle, saith
heBasil. Constit. exercit. ca. 22. 
                  commands all to be subiect to the higher powers,
potestatibus mundi, non spiritualibus, hee commands
this subiection to temporall and secular
powers, hee speakes not here of spirituall powers;
And this, saith Basil, the Apostle plainely declares, by
that which followeth, of paying tribute vnto them.
S. Chrysostome
                  Chrys. inca. 13. ad Rom. hom▪ 23., is more then abundant in declaring
this to be spoken of secular kings, whom
he often there calles Princes that doe imperare,
                  
rule ouer their subiects, Magistrates who are here by
the Apostle described veluti milites armati, as armed
to take vengeance of euill doers, to whom honour,
euen Imperiall honour (as he calsReddite timorem, Iemperialem honorem dicit. ibid. it) is due, and
due by all other. For all, saith he, whether thou bee
a Priest, or a Prophet, or an Apostle; siue quicunque
alius sis, or whosoeuer else thou bee, euery one is
commanded to obey these higher powers. The like
might be shewed by Tertullian
                  Quod attine
                        •
                      ad honores Regum vel Imperatorum satis praescriptum habemus in omni obsequio esse nos oportere, secundum Apostoli praec
                        •
                     ptum. Tert. lib. de Idolat. ca. 15., Ambrose
                  Principes hos Reges dicit. Ambr. com. in cap. 13. ad Rom.,
and many others: but the confession of Pererius
their Iesuite, may ease vs of this labour; who saithBen. Peter▪ com in ca. 13. ad Rom. disput. 1. 
                  All the ancient Writers almost (he might haue
left out almost) haue vnderstood Paul de potestate
tantū saeculari, to speak only of secular power, & the
Text of the Apostle doth of it selfe declare the same.
So Pererius. Seeing then it is cleere that all the
Apostles, and more specially Peter, (for this Epistle
of Paul was written to the whole Church of
Rome, at that very timeBaron. an. 58. 
                        •
                     u 46. Quem 
                        •
                     it fuisse Petri exquo Episcopus Romanus esse coepit, amūe 14. & eodem tempore ait Paulum forte priuatas literas ad Petrum (Romae agentem) mifisse. ibid. nu. 52▪
                  , when Peter, as they
teach, was Bishop therof) and then much more
all Peters successors, are commanded by the Spirit
of God, to be obedient to secular Kings and Princes;
it is vndeniably consequent, that Christ did
not giue a supreame temporall dominion either to
Peter, or to any other Apostle, or to any of all
their successors: for had he giuen that, then should
not they haue beene commanded to obey other
Kings, but all other both Kings and people should
haue beene taught and commanded to obey euen
in all ciuill and temporall matters, Peter and
Peters successors.
               If notwithstanding all this euidence, any will

yet exempt either Peter or the Pope, or any other
from this commandemēt of the Apostle, that may
be iustlie replied vnto him, which S. Bernard saith,Ber. Epist. 42. 
                  Si omnis anima, & vestra, If euery soule must
be subiect, to secular powers, then must you also bee,
who hath exempted you from this vniuersalitie? Si
quis tentat excipere, conatur decipere, if any attempt
to except you, he indeuours to deceiue you.
               But besides this of Bernard, I will oppose two
other euident reasons: The former drawne from
the scope and purpose of the Apostle in giuing
this precept. Bellarmine, as also Pererius, do rightly
obserue, that whereas Christians
                  Eo tempore accusabantur Christiani seditionis & rebellionis. Bel. lib. 2 de Pont. Rom. ca. 29. sect. Quod. Quin etiam authore Chrysostomo, sparso rumore percrebuerat, Apostol
                        ••
                      & praedica
                        ••
                     
                     res Euang
                        ••
                     u rerum esse Nouatores, atque ad euertendas leges ciuiles omnia dicere & facere. P
                        •
                     
                     rer. in cap. 13. ad Rom. disp. 1. 
                  in the Apostles
time were slandered to haue beene Nouatores,
Innouaters of the state, subuerters of ciuill gouernment,
seditious and rebellious persons; the Apostles to
cleere the Christian doctrine of these
                  Calummatores vocat Bell. eos qui haec obijciebant. & Per. ait, Apostolos laborasse vt hoc scandalum auserrent. loc. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  calumnies,
both in their Sermons and writings, did earnestly
perswade obedience vnto Emperors, Kings and secular
Magistrates. Now had Peter challenged, & the
other Apostles and Christians abetted him in that
claime, the supreame temporall Monarchie of the
world, then could Christianity neuer haue beene
cleared of that calumnie: nay it had beene no
calumny at all, but a certaine truth; for seeing by
the doctrine of Christians, Peter and his successors
were for euer to haue the supreame temporall dominion
ouer the whole world, all other kingdomes
and Monarchies had beene quite subuerted,
all Emperors and Kings should by this haue
become subiects, seruants, homagers and vassals to
Peter and the Pope. He should haue beene their

temporall Lord, whom they ought to obey, their
Landlord from whom they should haue taken and
held all their possessions, and their supreame Monarch
from whom they must deriue all their temporall
authority. Thus had the Christian faith
and doctrine, subuerted all other temporall Kingdomes,
to establish a new temporall Monarchy in
the Pope alone. Seeing then the Apostles taught
that accusation to be a most odious calumnie, because
they, as Chrysostome saithChrys. in cap. 13. ad Rom. in 
                        ••
                     tio., taught that
Christ by his Law non euertit politiam, sed melius instituit,
did not subuert any other ciuill state, common
wealth or Empire, but bring them all to better
order, by embracing faith, & with it piety, and
all godlinesse; it is hence most cleare, that Christ
neither before, nor after his resurrection, erected
that new-found temporall, Pontificall Monarchy,
which as ScioppiusGas. Sciop. ca. 46. Regnum Christi 
                        •
                     ollit omnia alia regna. Quod de Papali regno acceptum, verissime dicitur. 
                  truely saith, ouerthrowes all
other kingdomes and Empires in the whole world.
               
               The other reason is this, that if Christ had
meant to giue such a temporall Monarchy to Peter,
he would no doubt haue furnished him with
secular meanes, secular strength and power, first, to
obtaine, and then to vphold and maintaine that
Monarchy. Now the weapons of their warfare
were not carnall, as the Apostle saith2 Cor. 10. 4., but spirituall,
mighty to cast downe all the strong holds of Satan.
Certainly they might if they had had Christs
allowance, haue vsed their power to subuert Kingdomes,
and bring all to a temporall subiection vnder
Peter. They could most easily haue subdued
all the instruments of Satan, and all mortall men

who had opposed themselues to this Pontificall
dominion. For who could haue resisted them,
who with a word onely could smite their oppugners
with blindnesse, as Paul did
                  Act. 13. 11 
                  Elimas, yea
with present death, as Peter did
                  Act. 5. 5. 10 
                  Ananias & Saphira?
But because this power was giuen them,
onely to confirme the Faith, and enlarge Christs
Spirituall, but not their owne temporall kingdom;
they onely vsed it for the furtherance of Christs
glory, and neuer either did, or might vse it to set
vp their owne secular dominion, and lift themselues
aboue all Kings, and Princes. Nay, seeing
the Apostles were faithfull in the house of God,
and preached euerie part of that doctrine which
Christ taught vnto them; St. Paul testifying of
himselfe, which is also true in the rest, I haue
                  Act. 20. 27
                  kept nothing backe, but haue declared vnto you the
whole Counsell of God: and none of them all, euer
so much as once declared that Peter and Peters
Successors, were to haue a temporall Monarchy
ouer the whole world, and that all Kings must
hold both their Crownes and Kingdomes from
them; all to be tenants, homagers, and vassals vnto
them: it may hence certainly be concluded, that
this temporall Monarchy which they claime to
Peter and the Pope, is no part of Gods counsell; and
then without all doubt, it is no other but the verie
counsell of the diuell.
               
            
            
               
               CHAP. IIII.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchy is condemned
by the iudgement of the Primitiue Church, and of
generall Councels; as also by the Fathers, and
learned writers, who liued till the 500. yeeres after
Christ.
               
                  THe third point which herein
I proposed, was, to shew that
this direct temporall Monarchy
which they claime to
the Pope, with those consequents
& conclusions which
depend on it, hath been condemned
by the vniforme
consent of holy Fathers, and learned writers in all
ages of the Church. A worke in truth nothing
so difficult to proue, as laborious to collect; and if
I feared not to be too prolixe, I would make it
cleare by the testimonies almost of all writers of
account, in all the ages of the Church. But studying
breuitie, I will select some onely out of that
heape which I had not without great labour collected,
by which may be conceiued what the
iudgement hath beene of the rest in this point.
               First, there are two generall considerations
which may be here obserued. The one is the consenting
iudgement of Popes, Bishops, Martyrs,
and all▪ Christians of the Primitiue Church, so
long as Emperours persecuted the Faith; that is,

vntill the Empire of Constantine. Had Christians
belieued or knowne in those dayes, that the Pope
was an higher temporall King then secular Emperours,
and that none of those Emperours had any
lawfull authoritie to punish or put them to death,
seeing they had no authoritie at all from their supreame
temporall Monarch, the Pope, so to doe;
why did not those Popes command Christians,
(as they might lawfully haue done) to make resistance
by temporall force? why did they not (as
being superiour Lords they lawfully might) wholy
depriue those Emperours of all their authority
which they so tyrannously abused against Christ?
Specially considering that, as Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. 5. d
                        •
                      Rom. Pont. ca. 7 sect. Probatur▪
                   tels vs,
When Princes goe about to turne their people from
the faith, omnium consensu possunt, & debent priuari
suo dominio, by consent of all Romanists, they may
and ought to be depriued of their Dominion; yeaIbid. sect. Tertia. 
                  non licet Christianis tolerare, Christians may
not then so must as tolerate them. At least, why
did neither the Popes, nor any of all those Martyres,
vse that iust Apologie for themselues, that
none of those Emperours had any lawfull authority
ouer them, seeing they had none deriued from
the Pope? How were they not perfidious in Gods
cause, by concealing that truth, which if they had
taught, would haue quenched all persecutions?
How were they not iniurious to Gods Church in
suffering those tyrants, who had no lawfull authoritie
from their highest temporall Monarch, to
murder and massacre the Saints of God? Nay,
how can they be excused from being accessorie

to their owne deaths, when they vsed neither that
temporall authoritie of the Pope, whereby they
might iustly haue resisted; nor that iust defence
of speech, whereby they might haue repressed all
those tyrannies? For if any think, they had not at
that time temporall power, and strength sufficient
to haue made resistance, Tertullian plainely witnesseth
the contrarie. If (saith he)Tertull. Apologet cap. 37. 
                  we Christians
would be open enemies, should we want either
number or power? Are not we moe then the Mauri,
Marcomans, or Parthians? moe then any nation?
we haue filled all places that you haue, your Cities, your
Ilands, your Castles, your municipall Townes, your
Tents, your Tribes, your Pallaces, your Senate, your
Markets, onely we leaue to you the Idol Temples. Cui
bello non idonei fuissemus? What warre were we
not able to vndertake? But because both the
Popes and all other Christians then knew, that
they had no such lawfull authoritie to make resistance
to their Gouernors, they layd downe their
neckes, and endured all tortures, euen death it self,
vsing no other weapons, but teares and prayers:
Against Emperours being their Lords, they had
scutum, but not gladium. The Popes temporall
sword and secular Monarchy which might easily
haue resisted, and quenched all those persecutions,
was not knowne or once dreamed of among any
Christians in those first three ages of the Primitiue
Church.
               The other generall consideration, is the consenting
iudgement of holy generall Councels. I
haue in an other TreatiseA treatise of Councels which be generall and lawfull proued at large, that

besides the Sardican, and that vnder Mennas, there
were held no more but eight, which are rightly
to be counted and called Oecumenicall and lawfull
Councels. All that followed that eight, which was
held at Constantinople about the cause of Photius,
either in the yeere 869, in the time of Hadrian
the second; or in the yeere 879, in the time of
Iohn the eight, and both of them in the time of
Basilius, were in truth either not Oecumenicall,
or if such, yet not lawfull generall Councels.
Now by all those eight, which were only Oecumenicall
Councels, the Popes temporall Mornarchy
is clearly and certainly condemned. For all
those were both assembled, gouerned, and dissolued
by the authoritie of secular Emperours; all the
Bishops in all those Councels, by their comming
at the Emperours call and command; by their
willing submission to Imperiall gouernment, when
they were assembled; by their not departing,
but with the Emperours leaue, and licence, did
acknowledge and proclaime Emperours to be the
onely supreame Lords, Gouernours, and temporal
Monarches in the Church. All which points, because
I haue fully in my other Treatise out of the
Synodall Acts of euerie one of those Councels
made cleare, I will not here repeat the same. Let
me only now mention one testimonie out of that
which they call the eight generall Councell. In itConcil C
                        ••
                     
                     stant. 4. sub Hadr. 2. an. 869. Act. 1. 
                  Basilius the Emperour writ thus to the whole
Councell, and all the Bishops of the Councell
approuedRecte imperatores nostri monuere, dicunt legati Act. e
                        •
                     de
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   his writing, and saying: The gouernment
of the Ecclesiasticall Ship (that is, of the

Church) is by the diuine prouidence, nobis commissa
giuen or committed vnto vs. An euidence that
the whole Church belieued, and professed the
Emperour, and not the Pope to be the supreame
Monarch, Pilot, and Gouernour of the Church:
an euidence also so certaine, that whereas Binius
following Raderus the Iesuite, had in his former
editionEdit. Biniana Colon. Agrip. 
                        •
                     n. 1606. of the Councels, maliciously corrupted
these words, and turned Nobis into Vobis; quite
contrary both to the Greeke Text, to the ancient
reading, and the true sense of Basilius; Binius hath
now in his last editions of the Councels, corrected
that his errour, and rightly reades the words, as
they are also in their Romane edition of the
Councels, Nobis and not Vobis. So by the consenting
Iudgment of all the Oecumenicall Councels,
which as yet haue beene held, that is, of the
whole Catholike Church, whensoeuer it spake in
one voyce, this temporall Monarchy of the Pope
is most cleerely condemned, and the soueraigne
authority of secular Emperors aboue the Pope, is
most cleerely demonstrated.
               Heare now the softer voyce of the Church,
speaking in those Fathers and learned Writers,
who liued in the seuerall ages and successions
thereof. For though this question of the Popes
temporall Monarchy was not mooued in the
Church till more then a 1000 yeeres after Christ,
yet such is the force of Trueth, that euen before
this controuersie arose, that Antichristian pride
was by the ancient Fathers both condemned and
refelled, though not in expresse maner (which, the

questiō being not then moued, they could not do)
yet by many both certaine, cleare, and vndeniable
consequents.
               In the first age,Ab anno 1. ad 100. after our Sauiour,
                  
                     Christus Math. 22. 21 the head
of the whole Church, had once giuen that precept
of obedience, Giue vnto Caesar the things that
are Caesars; S. Peter
                  
                     Petrus Epist. 1. c. 2. 17. seconds him therein, commanding
to honour the King and submit themselues
to him, tanquā praecellenti, as being superiour to the
rest. And S. Paul
                  
                     Paulus Rom. 13. 1. explaines both who they are
that must obey, and those are Euerie soul; (I thinke
the Pope is one:) and to whom they must yeeld
obedience, and those are, the Higher (secular) powers,
who beare the sword, and receiue tribute. Ignatius
                  
                     Ignatius Epist ad Smir
                        •
                     . the next Bishop of Antioch after S. Peter,
in one of those which theirBaron. An. 57 nu. 55. & Bell. li
                        •
                     de eccl. scrip. in Ignatio. own writers commend
for his true and genuine Epistles, saith, It behooues
all to honour the King, Nec enim Rege quisquam
praestantior, for there is none (then certainly
not the Pope) more eminent then the King, nor is
any equall to him, in all things created. Which
words being so pregnant against the Popes Soueraignety,
are fouly corrupted and falsified (by
whose hands you may easily coniecture) both in
the Latine Edition of Ignatius at Paris Anno 1562
and in the Greeke also, of the same Edition. In
both which, in steed of Rege, is read, Deo. But in
the Bibl. patrum the words are, and that rightly, set
forth as we haue cited them, none aboue the king.
Iosephus
                  Iosep. Antiq. 
                        〈◊〉
                      17. ca. 3. shewes, that in his age there was an
impious sect of the Pharisies, who were oppugners
of regall authoritie, and who alone refused to sweare

fidelitie vnto the Emperour, cum tota gens Iudaeorum
fidem suam iureiurando obligassent Regi & Caesari,
whereas the whole nation of the Iewes did bind
their fidelitie to Cesar by an oath. It is not to be
doubted, but in the whole nation of the Iewes,
there were many thousand Christians
                  
                     Christiani primis
                        •
                     culi.; who
neither iustly could, nor would haue taken that
oath to the Emperour, as their supream Lord, had
they knowne that Peter and his Successors had
been the supreame Monarches of the world.
               In the second age,Ab an. 100. ad 200. 
                  Iustine Martyre
                  
                     Iust. Mart. orat ad An
                        •
                     o
                     
                        ••
                     num p. 128. in the
name of all the Christians of that age (one of
which was the Pope) professeth to the Heathen
Emperors, We adore only God, & vobis in rebus aliis
laeti inseruimus, and we willingly serue & obey you
in other matters. Irenaeus
                  
                     Ireneus. eius ve ba citantur a Ioh. L
                        ••
                     go in 
                        •
                     uis rotis ad Iust Mart orat ad Anton p. 117., Know ye O Emperours
what is committed vnto you; totus orbis sub manum
vestram subditus est, the whole world (then sure
the Pope) is subiect to your power and diadem.
Egesippus
                  
                     Egesippus apud Euseb. li. 3. Hist. ca. 17. declares that not Christs kingdome
(and then certainly neither Peters nor the Popes)
is a terrene or secular kingdome: For when Domitian
the Emperour, fearing to lose his kingdome, would
haue killed all that were found of the house of Dauid,
and inquired what manner of kingdome Christs was,
they answered 
                        •
                     hat it was no kingdome of this world.
Tertullian is most full in this point, Emperors know
                  
                     Tertullian in Apologet. 
                        •
                     ap. 30, 
                  who gaue to them the Empire, they know that they
are only subiect to the power of God, to whom they are
the second, and after whom the first, before all, and aboue
all other man, 
                  
                     •
                  hen sure aboue the Pope. And
againe, in the name of all Christians of that age,

                  We honour, saith heIdem lib. ad Scap ca. 2., the Emperor, vt hominem a
Deo secundū, & solo deo minorem, as one who is next
vnto God, and lesse onely then God, and who hath
all his power from God. And lest any should thinke
that this honour was giuen by Christians de facto,
but not de iure, Tertullian expresly addes, We giue
this honour to the Emperor, quomodo & nobis licet,
& ipsi expedit, as being lawfull for vs to giue,
and expedient for him to receiue.
               In the third age,Ab An. 200 ad 300. 
                  Clemens Alexandrinus
                  
                     Clemens Alex lib. 3. Paedag pa. 30
                        •
                     
                  :
Christs precept of giuing to Cesar the things that are
Cesars, (in which is commanded subiection of euery
soule, euen the Pope, vnto secular Kings) is a
law for administration of the Common-wealth. Origen
                     Origen. com. in Epist. ad Rom. lib. 9. in haec verba, Vis non timere potestatem.,
Whatsoeuer crimes God will haue to be temporally
punished, non per Antistites & Principes Ecclesiarū, sed per mundi iudices voluit vindicari, he
will haue them to be punished by secular Princes,
not by Bishops or Ecclesiasticall Prelates. Then
certainely not by Peter or any of Peters successors.
Cyprian
                  
                     Cyprian. de simpli
                        •
                     . prael. siue de vnitate eccles. 
                        •
                     a. 297., Christ gaue parem potestatem, equall
power, to all the Apostles; the rest were the same that
Peter was, endowed all of them pari consortio & honoris
& potestatis; With an equall fellowship
both of honour and power. Then either none, or
(which is impossible) they all were supreme temporall
Monarches of the whole world. Victorinus
                  Victorinus Com. in Apocal. cals the Caesarean Empire, Regnum Regnorum
in regard of the supreame dominion it had
ouer all. Who as vpon the greatnesse and power
of that Empire he supposed, that one of those Emperors
to wit, NeroExistimat Victor. Neronem nondum mortuum, ac futurum verum Antichristum Not. ad. Vict in 3 edit▪ B. B. Pat. in margine. 
                  did yet liue and should personally

come againe and be that mighty Antichrist;
so had he liued to see the Pope to haue Regnum
Regnorum, and to be a King aboue all Kings, euen
such, that if Nero were now aliue, hee must bee his
subiect and vassall, hee would not haue doubted
vpon that same greatnesse and absolutenesse of his
Tyrannicall power to haue called the Pope, much
rather then Nero, Antichrist.
               In the fourth age,Ab An. 300 ad 400. 
                  Eusebius saith
                     Eusebius lib. 2. de vit. Const ca. 19. of Constantine,
that he ruled the whole world, (then I hope, the
Pope) gubernaculis singularis potestatis, by his own
Imperiall power. Athanasius
                  Athanasius Apol. ad Cons
                           ••
                        ntium p. 156. writes thus to
Constantius the Emperour, If I were accused to others,
I would appeale to your Maiesty, as Paul said,
I appeale to Cesar. But seeing they accuse mee vnto
you, ad quem a te, quaeso appellare potero, nisi ad Deum?
vnto whom can I appeale from you, but only
to his Father, who saith, I am the Truth? Then
certainely hee knew not the Pope to be a superior
Lord, for else vnto him, he might, and would
haue appealed. Hillary
                  Hilarius. Can. 23 in Math. O plenam miraculi responsionem.
                   
                  with admiration commends
that answer of Christ: Giue to Cesar that
which is Cesars, and shewes that Christ, would not
haue the right of Cesar to be violated or hurt. Now
the right of Cesar (as we haue proued) is soueraignety
ouer all, and obedience from all vnto
him. Againe, he plainely sheweth that the Apostles
(none of which had other power then S.
Paul) had not ciuill and temporall power. Nunquid
                  Idem in Psal. 2. 
                  Paulo ius Praetorium, Had Paul ciuill and
praetorian authority, that he threatens to come with
a rod? was he to vse lictoris officio, the office of a

Sergeant? Non ita opinandum est, wee may not
thinke so. Gregory Nazianzene
                  
                     Greg. Nazianz. Orat. 25. p. 81., speaking of
Kings saith, Mundus vniuersus vobis subditus, the
whole world (then sure the Pope) is subiect to
you, and to your Diademe. Those things which
are aboue are onely Gods, those which are belowe, are
both Gods and yours. Gregory Nissene
                     Greg. Nissen. lib. de Beatitud. inillud, Beati qui persequ
                        •
                     
                     tionem patiu
                        •
                     
                     tur. 
                  Regia
dignitas supra se nullam habet tyrannidem, the kingly
dignity hath no humane power (then not the
Popes) aboue it: It is obnoxious to no other mans will
nor dominion. Cyrill
                  Cyril Hi
                        •
                     
                     ros. Catech. 
                     
                        •
                     5. Bishop of Ierusalem saith,
that Antichrist shall vsurpe potestatem Romani imperii,
the power of the Romane Empire, which,
as he saith, is greater then was any of the former
great Monarchies. A cleere token that Cyrill iudged
the Romane Emperor not to haue beene subiect
to any higher or greater temporall Monarch.
Epiphanius
                  Epiphanius h
                        ••
                     r. 29. 
                  demanding how that Prophecy is
fulfilled in Christ, He shall sit vpon the throne of
Dauid, saith, carnaliter non est impletum; This was
not carnally nor after a temporal manner fulfilled.
And then he shewes, that by this throne of Dauid,
is meant Sacerdotium in sancta Ecclesia, Christs
Priesthood in the Church, whereby hee giues to
the Church, power and Iurisdiction of binding and
loosing. Which though Epiphanius there calles a
Kingly dignity, yet it is certaine, that he meanes
not any secular or ciuill kingdome, for that hee
plainely denies vnto Christ; but he cals it kingly,
because Christ from whom it is deriued, is both of the
seed of King Dauid, and also an eternall King according
to his deity. Ambrose
                  
                     Ambrosius. Orat. de obitu Theod. saith of Theodosius
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
the Emperour, that he had potestatem super omnes,
power ouer all; (then certainely ouer the Pope:)
and againe,Idem. Apol. Dauid, lib. 1. ca. 10. & ca. 4. 
                  Kings are free from humane punishments
for their offences, tuti Imperii potestate, being
safe from all humane iudgement by the power
of their Empire, subiect onely to the power of
God. Ruffinus saith
                     Ruffinus in expos. Symb. pa. 176. & 206 of secular Kings, that their
bounty and actions, discussioni non est obnoxia, is
not obnoxious to the discussion (much lesse to the
punishment) of any man. Ierome
                  
                     Hieronimus in Epita. Nepot. ad Heliod. tom. 1. pa. 26. cleerely denveth
ciuill and coactiue authority to Bishops. The King
rules ouer men, though they will not; Bishops but ouer
such as will: kings make others subiect to them by terror,
Bishops are appointed to serue, not to terrifie.
Kings keepe and rule the bodies vntill death, the other
keepes and rules the soules vnto eternall life.
Prudentius
                  
                     Prudentius peristeph. hym
                     
                        •
                     o 2. saith of the Romane Empire:
Thou, O Christ, hast placed Rome in vertice rerum,
as the highest top of all things, Thou hast ordained
that the world should be subiect to the successors of
Romulus, & omne sub regn
                        •
                     m Remi mortale concessit
genus, and all mortall men, (then sure the
Pope) are subiect to the Kingdome of Remus, that
is, to the Romane Emperors.
               In the fift age,Ab An. 400. ad 500. 
                  Chrysostom
                  Chrysostom Homil. 2. ad pop. Ant. saith of the Emperour,
parem non habet vllum super terram, there is
none vpon earth (then not the Pope) equall to
him; He is summit as & caput omnium super terram
hominum, The head and top of euery one vpon
earth. Optatus
                     Optatus lib. 3. Cont. Parmen pa. 85. 
                  Super Imperatorem non est nisi
solus Deus, qui fecit Imperatorem, Aboue the Emperor
there is none but God who made the Emperor;

then out of question the Pope is not aboue
him. Augustine
                  
                     Augustine lib. 5. de ciuit▪ Dei ca. 21., Let vs not giue or ascribe the
power of giuing kingdomes and Empires to any nisi
Deo vero, but onely to the true God (then not to
the Pope:) He giues the Kingdome of heauen only to
the godly, but earthly kingdomes he giues both to the
good and bad, as it is pleasing to him, to whom nothing
but what is iust is pleasing. Prosper
                     Prosper lib▪ Epigr
                        ••
                     u. 34. 
                  teacheth
all Christians (is not the Pope one?) to be obedient
to secular Princes, Aequum seruire est regibus &
dominis, and he plainely distinguishethIdem lib. 2▪ de vocat. gentium. ca. 16. 
                  the scepter
of the Crosse, from the weapons of the Empire,
and arcem religionis, from solium potestatis, the
tower of religion from the throne of power. Orosius
                     Orosius lib. 2. ca. 1.,
That all power is of God both those who
haue not read haue felt, and those who haue read doe
know; and if all powers be of God, how much more are
kingdomes, frō which other powers are deriued: & if
kingdomes, how much more is the greatest kingdome,
cui reliquorum regnorū potest as vniuersa subiicitur,
to which the whole power of other lesser kingdomes
is subiect? of which sort was the Babylonian,
then the Grecian, then the Africane, at last the Romane,
quod vsque adhuc manet, which as yet remaineth.
Then had not the Pope any greater Monarchy
at that time. Sulpitius Seuerus
                  
                     Sulpitius lib▪ 2. sacrae histor. saith of
the Councell at Sardica, Imperator iubet ex toto
orbe terrarum, the Emperour commanded the Bishops
throughout the whole world (then he commanded
the Pope) to come to Sardica, to examine
the cause of Anathasius. Cyrill
                  
                     Cyrillus 
                           〈◊〉
                         lex. lib. 
                        〈◊〉
                      fide ad Theod. in princip
                        ••
                     . the most famous
Bishop of Alexandria writes thus vnto the Emperors;
There may be seene in you the image of Gods

Maiestie, Vos enim omni terreno fastigio superiores,
for you are superior to all terrene highnesse, you
are the fountaine of humane felicitie, Quicquid vsquam
est gentium hoc totum regni vestri solio substratum
est, Whatsoeuer is here vpon earth, (then
belike the Pope) is subiect to the throne of
your Maiestie. Theodoret
                  
                     Theodoret com. in Daniel. ca. 2. Orat. 2.) Bishop of Cyrus,
The Roman Empire orbis terrarum clauos tenuit, ruled
the whole world, and it did not perish, but flourish
at Christs comming, and had the world subiect
vnto it, and the same kingdome of the Romanes, vsque
adhuc permansit, hath continued vnto this
time. Then all (euen the Pope) were at that time
subiect vnto it. And that Popes ought de iure, so to
be, he shewes
                     
                        •
                     lem in cap. 1
                        •
                     . ad Rom. by the words of S. Paul, Let euery
soule be subiect to the higher powers, whether he be
any Priest or any Bishop, (then I hope the Pope) or
any Monke, he must yeeld subiection to those to whom
Magistracy is giuen. Theodulus
                     Theodulus com. in ca. 13. ad Rom. Bishop of
Coelesyria, expounds those words, Omnis anima
potestatibus subdatur, to be spoken not of euery superiour,
sed de ipso magistratu, but of the ciuill Magistrate,
and the Apostle shewes, saith he, that it is necessary
that euery one (then the Pope) should obey the
Magistrate, for the Gospell is not giuen to bee a subuersion
of publicke gouernment and order. Vincentius
Lyrinensis
                  
                     Vincentius Lyrin. in Common. ca. 42. 43. highly extols both Cyrill and
the holy Ephesine Councell, which was held but
three yeeres before he writ. Now it is true that
he there mentioneth caput orbis, but hee meanes
not the Pope thereby, as Bellarmine
                  Bel. lib. 2. de Rom, Pont ca. 16 § Octauus. most fraudulently
and falsly would perswade. The true

and onely Caput orbis, which he meaneth, was he,
of whom both Cyrill
                  Cyril. l
                        •
                     c. cit. saith, that all the whole
world was subiect to the Emperors throne, & whom
the whole Ephesine Councell calledConc. Ephes. in Epist Synodali, to. 4 Act, Ephes. conc. ca. 22. 
                  Christianisimum
fastigium, the most Christian toppe and
highnesse. Other Caput orbis, Vincentius knew
none. SocratesSocrates lib. 7, ca. 11., there was enuy at that time among
them, seeing the Bishop of Rome, no otherwise
then the Bishop of Alexandria, going beyond the
bounds of a Bishop, ad secularē principatū erat iā ante
delapsus, was now declined too much to secular
gouernment: what would he haue said, if they had
then attempted a secular Monarchy ouer the
whole world? Leo
                  
                     Leo 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . the great (a Pope that would
not lose one iot of his pontificall right) so farre
disclaimeth this temporal Monarchy, that he with
great submission makes earnest suite and supplication
to the Emperors, I requested
                  Idem Epist. 43. 49 
                  vt iuberetis,
that you would command the Synod to be deferred
to a more fit time. I
                  Idem Epist. 9 
                  request that your Pietie supplicationi
nostrae dignetur annuere, would vouchsafe
to yeeld to our supplicatiō, that you would command
that the Councell may be held in Italie; All
                  Idem Epist. 24. 
                  the Bishops (himselfe among the rest) cum gemitibus
& lacrimis supplicant, doe with sighes and
teares make supplication to your Mansuetude.
And when the Emperor would not yeeld vnto
his supplication, neither for the place, nor the
time, then he professeth,Idem Epist. 17. &. 25. 
                  I haue endeuored as far
as I can, vt Clementiae vestrae statutis pareatur, that I
may obey the statutes of your Clemency. Pope
Gelasius
                  Gelasius 1. Epist. 8., There are two things by which the

world is principally ruled, the sacred authority of Bishops,
and the Regall power: of which regall power
he addes, that the Emperor praesidet humano generi,
& imperat saeculo, is aboue all men in dignity, and
to rule in secular matters. And most cleerely in
his tome of Anathematismes; Before
                  Idem, in tom. Anathem. apud. Bin. to. 2. pa. 254. 
                  Christs
time some were both Priests and Kings, as was Melchisedech;
but after Christ was once come, who is
both King and Priest, vltra sibi nec Imperator Pontificis
nomen imposuit, nec Pontifex regale fastigium
vendicauit; Neither doth the Emperor take vnto
him the name of Priest or Bishop, neither doth
the Bishop challenge vnto him the Imperiall
highnesse. So Pope Gelasius, at once defines, that
Popes neither then had, nor euer ought to
haue, Imperiall authoritie: much
lesse a temporall Monarchie
aboue all Emperors.
            
            
               
               CHAP. V.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchy is condemned
by the Fathers, and learned writers, who liued
from the 500. to the 1000. yeere after Christ.
               
                  IN the sixt age,Ab an. 500 ad 600. the Councell
at TuroneConcil. Turonense 2. celeb. sub Ioh. 3 can. 25. professeth, that
besides the power of excommunicating
and anathematizing,
arma nobis non sunt
alia, we haue no other weapons.
Then had not the
Church, or Pope in that age,
power to inflict temporall, ciuill, and coactiue punishments.
An other CouncellSynodus Africana habita an. 23. Iustiniani apud Vict. Tununers. an. 10. post. Cons. Basilij.
                   of Africane
Bishops, Vigilium Romanum Episcopum synodaliter
a catholica communione recludunt, did exclude
Pope Vigilius from the Catholike Communion.
Now those Bishops, being as Baronius
                  Bar. an. 547 nu. 30. professeth,
Catholikes, it is a verie ill signe, the Pope was
not then knowne, so much as for a spirituall, much
lesse for a temporall Monarch in the Church.
Pope Symachus being accused of a most scandalous
offence (to wit, of AdulterieBar. an. 50▪ nu. 32. 
                  Theodorick
the King at that time, commanded the Bishops of
Italy, to come to a Synod
                  Synodus Romana 3. tempore Symachi. Cum regia pracepisses authoritas. ibid 
                           •
                        . 2. conc. p. 284. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   
                  for the hearing and examining
of this matter. He commanded
                  Iussus est praeceptionibus regis Papa Symmachus. ibid. 
                  also
the Pope, not to take againe the Patrimonie of the
Church, till he had purged himselfe of the crimes
obiected. The Bishops came at the Kings command
                  
                  Synodus ex praecepto regis congregat
                        ••
                     . ibid., the Pope
                  Ibid. p. 285. a 
                  also, vt causam diceret occurrebat,
came to plead for himselfe; and before the
whole Councell, he thanked
                  Ibid. p. 284. b 
                  the King for calling
the Synod. The King gaue
                  Commisimus vobis causam, 
                        •
                     os qualiter 
                        •
                     ultis siue dis
                     
                        •
                     ussa, siue indiscussa, causa proferte sententiā ibid. pag. 287. b 
                  such power to the Synod,
that they might either examine particularly the
whole cause, or leaue the particulars vndiscussed, but
yet giue sentence therein. The BishopsIbid. p. 285. b., perpensis
omnibus, hauing pondered the whole cause, iudged
that Symachus should be receiued as Pope, and that
his fact should be left to the iudgement of God. And
all this they did, secundum
                  Ibid. p. 285. b 
                  principalia praecepta
quae nostrae hoc tribuunt potestati, by command and
authoritie of the King, who had committed this
to their power. And though the Deacon Ennodius
                  Concilio, authoritatem con
                     
                        ••
                     a se indulsit. Ennod. Apol pro Symmacho pa. 293. 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                   and some others of the Popes Parasites
pretend, that Symachus in humilitie, and of his own
accord submitted himselfe to their iudgement, yet
Gerson
                  Gers. lib. de Auferibil. papa
                        •
                      Consid. 12., a man of more sound and profound
learning, saith, both of Symachus, and some other
Popes, they did vndergoe the iudgment of Councels,
nequaquam ex humili condescentione, not by any
submission of humilitie, as some doe faine, sed ex
debito & obligatione, but in dutie, as being bound
to stand to those iudgements. The same Pope Symachus
                  
                     Symachus Apol. a
                        •
                     duers. Anast. extat to. 3. BB. patr., in his Apologie to Anastasius, puts
this, and rightly, as a difference betwixt the Imperiall
and Pontificall Offices, Thou O Emperour gouerns
humane and secular affaires, Bishops doe dispence
the Diuine Mysteries; and he expresly cals
the Emperour, Principem rerum humanarum, the
Prince or chiefe in humane matters. Pope Hormisda
                  Hormisda Epist. 5. to the Emperour Anastasius, saith,

                  Your Mansuetude hath admonished vs, God commanding
you so to doe, to be present in the future
Synod: Your Pietie obseruing these things, may long
possesse Apicts & sceptra sua, your top of honour,
and your Scepter. I returne
                  Idem Epist. 6. 
                  vnto you not onely
words of supplication, sed vestigijs vestris aduoluor,
but I prostrate my selfe at your footsteps. Pope
Agapetus
                  Agapetus papae. Anast. in vitae Ag ap.
                   was sent in a legacie from Theodotus
King of Italy, to the Emperour Iustinian, and he
entreated
                  Liber. in Breuiar. cap. 21. 
                  him to recall his armie out of Italy, but
the Emperour supplicationes Papae noluit audire,
would not hearken to the Popes supplication.
Pope Vigilius
                  Vigilius. euocatus ab Imperatore egreditur. Marcell. in Chron. an. 546. 
                  was sent for by Iustinian, to come
to Constantinople, and he at the Emperors command
came, and stayed there about sixe yeeres, till he had
leaue to returne. Pope Pelagius
                  Pelagius 
                        •
                      
                     Epist. 16. the first, writing
to Childebert the King, saith, We must endeuour to
declare the obedience of our profession vnto Kings,
quibus nos etiam subditos esse sanctae scripturae praecipiunt,
to whom the holy Scriptures command,
euen vs (that are Popes) to be subiect.
               FulgentiusFulgentius lib 1. ad Thrasimundū prop
                           •
                         initium.
                  , The King hath receiued apicem
terreni principatus, the top or height of temporall
or terrene power. And againeVerba 
                        〈◊〉
                      Fulg. cit antur in Conc. Paris▪ habito an. 829 cap. 3. 
                  In saeculo, Christiano
Imperatore nemo celsior inuenitur, none is
found in this world (then sure not the Pope) to be
higher then the Emperour. Agapetus
                  
                     Agapetus, paranesi ad Iustin. Imper. nu. 61. a famous
learned man, and Deacon of the Church of
Constantinople, saith, to the Emperour Iustinian,
Seeing you haue receiued the Scepter from God, and
seeing, omnibus hominibus ab 
                        •
                     o sis praelatus, you are
preferred aboue all men (then sure aboue the

Pope) by God, seeke therefore to please him in all
things. And againeIbid. nu. 21, The Emperour non-habet in
terris se quenquam al
                        ••
                     orem, hath none vpon earth
(then not the Pope) aboue him. Which words
being recited by Antonius Abbas in his Melissae,
sound so strongly against the Popes Soueraigntie,
that the Romane Censurers, in their Index Expurgatorius,
for desire of the spirituall, are content
to forgoe and yeeld to Emperours the temporall
supremacy, and qualifie the words in this maner,Index, Rom. excus. an 1607 pa. 200.
                  write in the margent, Intellige inter saeculares et temporales
dignitates; Agapetus meanes, the Emperour
is aboue all in secular and temporal dignities.
In like sort the Spanish IndexIndex li. prohib. et expurgat. de consil. Stae. Inquis. Hispan. excus. Madriti. an. 1612. in Agapet. pag. 797., whereas it is said in
Agapetus, The Emperour hath none in earth aboue
him, write, say they, in the Margent, Intellige de potestate
politica, & saeculari, There is none aboue
him in politicall and secular matters; and often the
like. Enough for vs against the Popes secular
Monarchy. Primasius
                  
                     Primasius, Com. in Apoc. c. 17. sect. Habentem. saith of the Romane
Empire, Orb
                        •
                      monarchiae praefuit dominatu, it was
the Lord and Monarch of the world, And in the
name of Rome, is figured totius terreni regni potentiae
the whole power of any terrene Kingdome. Liberatus
                  
                     Liberatus in Breu. cap. 13. saith of Martianus, that he obteyned culmen
Imperij, the top of the Empire, and that at the
request of the Pope, he assembled a generall councell,
he thought not then the Pope to be aboue him,
or his commander. Euagrius
                  
                     Euagrius, li. 2. c. 18. sect. Est. both reports
and allowes the saying of Eusebius Bishop of
Dorileum, s
                     •
                  t downe in the Councell at Chalcedon,
That vnto the Emperour, was giuen by the

Diuine power of God, imperium mortalium & dominatus,
the Empire and rule of mortall men; one
of which I suppose was the Pope. Cassiodore
                  
                     Cassiodor. variar li. 10. pa. 626
sets down the Epistle of Theodohadus to Iustinian
the Emperour, wherein it is said, That in toto orbe
simile nihil haberet, in the whole world, none (for
power and dignitie) is equall to the Emperour.
And in an other placeIdem in Psal. 50 
                  If any of the people offend,
he sinnes both against God and the King, but
when the King offends, soli Deo reus est, he is guiltie
only to God, quia hominem non habet qui facta eius
dijudicet, because he hath no man (then not the
Pope) that may examine his actions, God alone
may discusse and iudge his offences Venantius Fortunatus
saith
                     Venantius Fort. li. 3. de vit S. Mart. pa. 313, Valentinian was Emperor mundo famulante, the whole world (then belike the Pope)
seruing or being subiect to him. And in his poemeIdem in supplew. p. 348 of Iustinus the Emperour, he often cals him
the head of the world, repeating this verse vnto
God, Qui das Iustinū, iustus, in orbe caput, adding,
that he did Rite super reges dominari; Romanoque
imperat orbi; An euidence that he knew not an
higher temporall Monarch in the Romane or
western Empire. Gregorius Bishop of TuroneGregorius Turon, lib. 5 Hist. ca. 18
speaking to Childerike the King of France, who
had obiected iniustice vnto him, thus answered,
If any of vs O King, doe transgresse the bounds of
Iustice, he may be corrected by you; but if you transgresse
them, who shall punish you
                        •
                      we speake vnto you;
If you be willing, you obey, but if you be not willing,
who can condemne you, but he onely who hath pronounced,
that he is Iustice? The Bishop sure knew

not all Kings to be punishable by the Pope as a
superiour Lord.
               In the seuenth age,Ab an. 600. ad 700. Pope Agatho
                  Conc. Romanum sub Aga
                     
                        •
                     hone, 
                        •
                     uius Epist. extat. in Conc. gen. 6. Act 4. p. 12. et p. 21., with an
whole Councell of Italian, and other western Bishops,
often professeth the Emperour
                  Piissimis dominis. Omnes 
                        •
                     os vest
                        •
                     i impe
                     
                        ••
                      famuli. ibid. pa 21. 
                  to be their
Lord, the Citie of RomeDe hac seruili principatus vestri vrbe. ibid. pa. 12. & 22., to be his seruile Citie,
Italy, his seruile
                  Seruilis pro
                     
                        •
                     inciae. pa. 12 
                  Prouince. Of himselfe he saith,
I was
                  Ibid. 
                  animated promptam obsequentiam exhibere
effectually to performe readie obedience in those
things which in the Sacred Writ of your Highnesse,
are commanded. I endeuoured, vt studiosa obedientia
famulatus nostri impleret, that the willing obedience
of my seruice might fulfill this; We haue
sent these our Legates, pro obedientia quam debuimus
for that obedience which we owe vnto you. This
your
                  Ibid. p. 13. 
                  Imperiall Clemencie did command, and our
humilitie quod iussum est obsequentur impleuit, hath
obediently fulfilled what you did command. Doe
these seeme to be the speeches of a Supreame
Monarch? and that to his owne vassall? Pope
Gregory
                  Gregorius Magnus lib. 4. Epist Indic. 13. ep. 34. the great saith of the Emperour, Deus
vniuerso mundo praeesse constituit, God hath ordeined
that he should rule the whole world. And
againe,Idem lib. 2. Indi
                        •
                     . 11 ep. 62 
                  Potest as dominorum meorum caelitus data
est super omnes homines, The power ouer all men
(then sure ouer the Pope) is giuen from heauen to
my Lord the Emperour.Serenissimus dominus praecepit. id em lib. 4. Epist. 34▪ cit. & Ego dominorū iussionibus obedientiam praebens. lib. eod. 4. 
                        •
                     p. 
                        •
                     2 et, Ego missioni subiectus. l. 2 ep. 62. 
                  My most excellent Lord
hath commanded me by his precept, ego praeceptioni
Pietatis eorum obediens, I am obedient to the Emperours
command. And he speakes not this of
humilitie, as some doe vainly pretend, but as acknowledging
this to be his dutie, Ego
                  Idem lib. 2. Epist. 62. 
                  quae de bui

exolui, qui imperatori obedientiam praebui, I haue
done what was my dutie to doe, both in obeying
the Emperour, and signifying also to you what I
thinke in this cause. Isiodorus Hispalensis
                  Isiodor Hisp. lib. Senteni. ca. 52., Let secular
Princes know, that they must giue an account
to God for the Church, the tuition of which they
haue receiued of Christ. He will call for an account of
them, qui eorum potestati suam credidit ecclesiam,
who committed his Church to their power. Leontius
                  Leontius li. de sect. Art. 4. saith of Theodosius, Coire iubet, he commanded
the Bishops (euen the Pope among others)
to come to the second Ephesian Councell: Pope
Leo (vpon that command) sent his Legat thither.
Iustus Orgelitanus,
                  Iustus Org. Com. in Cant. in illa verba, Quia 
                           •
                         caput meum plenū est
                   
                  Those who are eminent by
Princely honour in the Church, are noted quasi caput
in Christi corpore, as the head in the body of
Christ (that is, the Church;) those who administer
Sacraments are as the lockes of the head. Then are
Kings the head, and the Pope but as a faire locke
in the head of the Church.
               In the eight age,Ab An. 700 ad 800. the Romane CouncelConc. Rom. sub Hadriano 1. extat decretū eius Dist. 63. 
                           •
                        . Haedrianus.
                   held
An. 774. consisting of 153. Bishops and Abbots, in
acknowledgment of the Soueraigntie of Charles
then King of Italy, decreed the right of inuestitures
of Bishops (which is an Imperiall prerogatiue or
right of Soueraigntie) and particularly, the appointing
of the Pope himselfe, and ordering the Romane
See, to belong vnto Charles the great and his successors.
Baronius not being able dissuere nodum, to
answer this euidence of truth, takes vpon him
like an other Alexander, dissecare, to cut it quite
asunder. HeBar. an. 774 nu. 10. & seq. obstinately denies (as doth also

his Apologist,Gre
                        •
                     s. Apol. pro Baron. c. 1. & li. 2. cont. Replic. ca. 1. that either any such Synod was
euer held, or any such Decree made. And herevpon,
both of them, with most reuiling tearmes
declaime
                  Sigebertus ipse finxit. ador nauit imposturam. O scelus, O Impostura▪ Bar. loc. cit. Sigebertus huius figmenti figulus. Gret. Apol. ca. 1. sect. dices. huius cōmenti author. ibid. sect. In priore. Hoc ius architectatus ect Sigebertus. Apol. cap. 1. sest. postea. 
                  against Sigebert as the forgerer or first
inuentor of this Synod and Decree, or as they speake,
of this figment. But they do herein bewray their
most malicious obstinacie in downfacing the truth
and true records. For how could Sigebert who
writ his Cronicles, as Baronius and Gretser
                  Sigebertus an. 1112. sua scripsit. Bar. an. 774. nu. 10. Grets. Apol. c. 1. sect. Tertio. assure
vs, an. 1112. be the deuiser of this Decree, whereas
Henry the fift before
                  Dodoch. append. ad Mar. Scot. an. 1110. & Mat. Paris. ad 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1112. 
                  that, chalenged the right of
inuestitures, as a Royall prerogatiue belonging to the
Empire, and continued in the Emperours hands, not
only from the time of Charles, & Pope Hadrian, that
is, for more then 300 yeeres, & during the time of 63
Popes, but euen eorūdem authoritate et priuilegiorum
firmitate, by the verie authoritie of those Popes,
and by those priuiledges granted by them? Was
there any priuiledge for inuestitures, granted by any
Pope to the Emperor, frō the time of Charles,
but this of Hadrian and the Romane Synod? Vndoubtedly
had this Synod & Synodall decree bin
forged by any, the Emperor Henry 5. would not;
and had Sigebert deuised it, an. 1112. (at which time
he writ) the Emperor could not haue vrged it as a
knowne right, yea for such, as 300 yeeres together
had been continued vnto Emperors. How againe
could Sigebert be the first architect and deuiser of
this Synod & decree, seeing Pope Gregory 6 (who
was not pope within 64 yeres
                  Gregorio 6 in pon
                        •
                     ificatu successit Clemens 
                        〈◊〉
                      46 Bar. 
                        •
                     o 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1. 
                  before Sigebert writ
& perhaps not when Sigebert was born) doth not
only mention, but cōmend this decree of Hadrian
                        •
                     
                  
                  
HadrianVerba Gregorij et integra eius oratio extat apud Guil. Malsb. lib. 2 Hist. Angl sect. Si vobis. 
                  the first, our predecessor of worthy memory,
is commended, for that he granted Inuestitures
of Churches, vnto Charles; His very words are set
downe in Malmesburiensis. An euidence so cleare
to demonstrate Baronius, and Gretzer to be Calumniators
of Sigebert, and downe-facers of the
truth, that Gretzer
                  Grets. lib. 2 contra Replic. ca. 1. § Alter. Oratio illa a Malsburiensi appicta & aff
                        •
                     cta. is forced to slander Malsburiensis
also as an impostor and deuiser of this speech
of Gregory, as Sigebert was of the decreee of Hadrian.
Further yet, how could Sigebert first deuise
this Decree, seeing the Romane Councell, held An.
964. wherein Iohn the 12. was deposed, makes expresse
mention
                  Ad exempl
                        ••
                      B. Hadriani qui domino Carolo ordinationem Apostolica sedis & inuestitura
                        •
                      episcoporum cō
                     cessit. Conc. Rom sub Leon
                        •
                      8. cuius decretū extat Distinc. 96. c. In Synod
                        •
                     
                   
                  thereof, more then 140. yeeres before
Segebert writ? It is true, that here againe
both the CardinallBar. an. 964 nu. 22 et seq., and his shamelesse Apologist
Grets. Apol. pro Bar. cap 18, are driuen to their former shift; This also
must be an Imposture and figment. But it fals out
vnhappily, that Baronius forgetting the olde rule,
Mendacem oportet esse memorem, doth vpon another
occasion, where the Popes dignity is not impeached,
not onely allow Leo 8. for the true Pope,
(which elsewhere he stoutly denies) but acknowledgeth
this Romane Synod to haue beene truely
held by Pope Leo 8. and cals this very constitution
of Leo made in that Synod, Decretum
                  Bar. an 99
                        •
                      nu. 41 
                  Leo
                     
                        ••
                      is
Papae octaui, the Decree of Pope Leo the eight.
So not onely that Synod vnder Leo 8. but Baronius
his owne selfe, is a witnesse, that he and Gretzer
slander Sigebert, and fight with all their power to
oppresse the truth. Do you as yet require a more
ancient witnesse? How could Sigebert be the deuiser
of this Synod and Synodall Decree, seeing

                  Anastasius the Keeper of their Vaticane librarie,
one who liued either in or very neere the timeCarolus obijt an. 814. Bar. eo an. nu. 57. Anastasius floruit an. 858. B
                        •
                     llar. lib descrip. eccle. in Anast.
of Charles, and who in all likelihood saw in their
Vaticane, some authenticall copie of that Synod;
seeing he, I say, made mention both of this Synod and
Synodall Decree, and that, some 200. yeeres before
Sigebert was borne. It is true I confesse, that this
testimony is not now to be found in the Popes
liues written by Anastasius. But that there it was
once extant, and is now to their eternall infamy,
and wrong of Anastasius, yea of the whole
Church, expunged, there are two euident witnesses.
The one is Onuphrius
                  Onuphr in vita Gregor. 7. who telling how
the custome of Inuestitures, of which Gregory 7.
primus omnium, first of all did attempt to depriue
Emperors, had continued from the time of Charles
the Great, and was brought in by the authority of
Pope Hadrian, he thus concludes: Cuius rei meminit
Anastasius Bibliothecarius in historia Ecclesiastica;
Quem locum Gratianus Canonum collector notauit.
Anastasius the library keeper, mentions this
in his Ecclesiasticall historie, and Gratian in his
collection of the Canons, points at, or cites that
place of Anastasius. Gretzer could not deny Onuphrius
to testifie this, but because it is against his
and his Masters fancy, he saithGretz. lib. 2. cont. Replic. ca. 1. §. Dixi., It is an error of
Onuphrius; Onuphrius forgot himselfe herein.
Peruicacy will euer find one shift or other, but by
this cleere and true testimony of Onuphrius, (besides
that maine truth, of this Synod and Synodall
Decree) two things are cleere; the one that Anastasius
had set downe this whole matter in his

booke of the Popes liues; the other, that Gratian
tooke it, not out of Sigebert, as Baronius
                  Gratianus Sigeberti imposturam toridem verbis exscripsit, & veluti pontificum dec
                        •
                     etum vel Synodi canonem suo libro inseruit. Bar. an. 774. nu. 13 very
childishly fancieth; but out of Anastasius: and that
the very booke, out of which Gratian citeth it, called
by him historia Ecclesiastica, is the very booke
of Anastasius, and by that same name, called by Onuphrius.
The other witnesse is Platina who
saithPlat. in vit. Pascalis 1., Lewes granted to the Pope free power to
chuse Bishops, quam potestatem ab Hadriano Pontifice
Carolo concessam idem Bibliothecarius refert,
which power to haue beene granted by Pope Hadrian
to Charles, the same Bibliothecarius, (to wit,
Anastasius
                  Nam Anastasius vitas Pontificum (seu vt Possev vocat Historiam Pontificum) continuauit ad Hadrianum 2. vt put at Onuph. Annot. ad Plat. post vit. Nichol. 1. & Bel. lib. de script. Eccle. in Anast. Sed Baronius vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad Step. 6 Bar. an. 885. nu. 7. doth relate. Now besides Hen
                        •
                     y 5.
Pope Gregory 6. the Romane Councel vnder Leo,
and Anastasius, the truth of the same Synod and
Synodall Decree is witnessed by Eutropius Longobardus
                  Eurr. Long. lib. de. Iur. Imp., who liued before the EmpireVt ex fin
                        •
                      libriliquet. of Otho
1. that is, 100. yeares before Sigebert: by Iuo
Carnotensis
                  Iuo in suo decret. tit. de elect. pontifi
                        •
                     is, who writ also beforeSigebertus scripsit post Iuouem. Boet. Epo. tract de Regal
                        •
                     veliure princ. in Ben
                        •
                     ficijs eccl
                        •
                      nu. 144. 
                  Sigebert:
by Waltram Naumbergensis
                  Waltr. Naumb lib. de Inuestit. another writer before
Waltramus fit Episcopus Citzeus (is idem est qui Naumburge
                        •
                     sis Munst. Cosmogr. lib. 3. in Magdeburgo) an. 10
                        •
                     9 & an. 21. post obijt. Chron.
Citizen Paul. Laugij an. 1089 si
                        •
                      obijt biennio antequam scripsit Sigebertus. 
                  Sigebert: by Gratian
                  Grat Dist. 6
                        •
                     . ca. Adrianus. who liued in the
same age with Sigebert, by the Glossators
                  Gloss. 
                        •
                     n dist. 63. ca. In Synodo voce Affici. vpon
Gratian, by Lupoldus
                  Lupol lid. de Z
                        •
                     l-German. princ. ca. 8., Theodor. de Niem
                  Theod. de Niem. lib de priv. & Iurib. imperij § Post., Radulph.
de Columna,
                  Rad. de Colum. lib de Transt Imper. sect. Hoc ita
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     ., Marsilius Patauinus
                  Mars. Pat. lib. de transl. Imp. ca. 10., Occam
                  Occam. part. 3. tract 2. lib. 3. ca. 3., Anton. de Rosellis
                  Ant. Rossel. part. 2. Monarch. a. 8., Iohan. Semeca
                  10. Semec. distinct. 63., Card. Zabarell
                  
                  Fran. Zobar. lib. de Schism. sect. Quis., Card. Turrecremata
                  Turrecrem. in dist. 63., Card. Cusanus
                  Cusan. lib. 3. Concor. Catho. ca. 3., Card. Cameracensis
                  Card. Camer. lib. de eccles. author. par. 1. c. 1. sect. Ex eadem., Platina
                  Plat. loc. cit▪
                  , Nauclerus
                  Naucl. ad an. 772., Mart.
Polonus
                  Mar. Pol. ad an. 780., Wernerus
                  Wern. ad. an. 784., the Chronicon Richer spergense
                  Chr. Reich. ad an 774., Rob. Gagninus
                  Gagni. lib. 4. in Car. mag., Matth. Parisiensis
                  Mat. Pa
                        •
                     s. ad an. 1112., Matth.
Westmonasteriensis
                  Math. West. in Floril. an. 773., Onuphrius
                  Onuph. loc. cit., Boetius Epo
                  Boet. Epo. de Regal. nu. 162 & seq.,
who earnestly striues for the truth of this Decree:
and by many moe. So that vnlesse Baronius and
his applauders had shut their eyes, and hardned
their hearts against the truth, they would make no
doubt, either that this Synod was truely held, or
that the Emperor was then acknowledged, euen
by the Popes themselues, to be their Soueraigne.
               The Councell at Frankford
                     Conc. Francoford. in libell. Sacrasyllabo. in initio., professeth that
Charles was Dominus terrae, the Lord of the world;
that the Bishops
                  Ibid. 
                  assembled sacris obtemperando
praeceptis, obeying the sacred command of Charles,
as Charles himselfe also witnessethIbid. in Epist. Caroli ad Elipandum., Iussimus
Synodale Concilium congregari, we haue commanded
this Synod to be assembled out of all the
Churches ditionis nostrae, which are in our dominion.
Then certainely both hee commanded the
Romane Bishops, (for Rome was then in his dominion)
and the Pope obeyed his command, and
sentAdo Vien. an. 792. 
                  Theophilactus & Stephanus for his legates
to the Synod.
               Pope Stephen 3.
                     Stephanus 3. Epistol. 3. writes to Pipin and Charles,
in a most earnest and suppliant manner, entreating
their aid against the Lombards. Nay he not onely
entreats this himselfe, but he frames an Epistle
in the name of S. Peter
                  Petrus Apostolus Pipino. Carolo &c. Ego Petrus Apostolus &c. Inter Epist. Steph 3. Epist. 4. vnto them, wherein he

makes, both S. Peter, the Blessed Virgin, all the
Thrones, Dominations, Martyres, Confessors and
Saints in heauen, to sue for this at the hands of Pipin
and Charles, and euen to coniure
                  Protestor, ad m
                        •
                     neo, et coniuro vos Christi anissimos reges &c. ibid. 
                  them to helpe the
Romane Church in this their great distresse. What
needed such supplication, such poeticall fictions,
and coniurations, had Pope Stephen knowne himselfe
to be the Soueraigne Lord, who might command
Pipin, Charles, and all the Kings in the
world; and to whose command they ought all to
be obedient, vnlesse they would be rebels against
their supreame Monarch? Pope Adrian
                  
                     Hadrian 1 Epi. 1. Domini
                        •
                      pijssimis. the
first, acknowledged the Emperors for his Lords: We
are
                  Ibid. vt citatur in▪ Conc. Nic. 2. Act. 1. 
                  euen drencht with ioy for your command, in
that ye command this cause of Images to be handled.
Againe,Ibid. in fine. 
                  I offer this my iudgement with all humilitie
to your Screnitie, that it may be discussed: I entreat
and beseech your Mansuetude with all feruor of
mind: yea, I beseech you, as if I were present genibus
aduo lutus & coram vestigia pedum volutando, vpon
my bended knees prostrate at the sole of your
feet. Pope Gregory
                  
                     Gregorius 2. Epist
                        •
                      3 sect. Attu. the second, As the Bishop
hath no power or authoritie to looke into the Palace,
(that is, to intermeddle in secular affaires) ac dignitates
regales deferendi, nor to giue regall dignities,
so neither hath the Emperour power to looke into
Churches, and intermeddle in those duties; Let euerie
one abide in that vocation, whereunto he is called of
God. Germanus
                  
                     Germanus perstrinxit Italos tanquam Imperatori su
                        •
                      nō ob
                        •
                     ēperantes Bar. an. 730. nu. 6. Patriarch of Constantinople
hath a constitution (extant yet in the Vaticane)
wherein he repr
                        •
                     ues the Italians who disobeyed the
Emperour. Now the chiefe leader of those Italians,

who made that defection, and denied tribute
to him, was Pope Gregorie the 2, as before we
shewed. Venerable Bede
                  
                     Beda in Psal. 50, If the King offend, he
offends onely to God, quia nullus alius eum pro suis
peccatis puniet, because no mortall man (then not
the Pope) may punish him for his faults. Iohannes
Damascenus,
                  
                     Damascenus Orat. 2. de Imag. pa 736 
                  Regum est ciuilis administratio,
ciuill administration and gouernment belongs to
Kings, We obey thee O King in those things which
belong to ciuill and secular matters, in them, quantum
ad nos spectat, in respect of vs that are of the
Clergie, the gouernment is committed to you. But
in ecclesiasticall affaires, Pastors, and Bishops, haue
deliuered to vs lawes and constitutions, we may not
remoue those eternall bounds which are set vnto vs.
Bonifacius
                  
                     Bonifacius Mogunt apud Othlon, li. 2. de vit. Bonif. that famous Englishman, and first
Archbishop of Ments, when he was sent Legate
into Germanie, from Pope Gregorie the second,
with many ample priuiledges, suppliciter obsecrauit,
humbly entreated King Pipine, for the Monastery
of Fulda, and lands belonging to it; What needed
that, had he knowne the Pope who sent him, to be
the supreame Lord of the world? Paulus Diaconus
                  
                     Paulus diac. Hist▪ miscel l. 11 saith of Constantine, that he was Monocrator
totius Romani Imperij, the sole Monarch of the
whole Romane Empire. Then sure he knew not
the Pope to be an other, much lesse an higher
Monarch. Alcuinus
                  
                     Alcuinus epist. 4. ad Dauidem regem. that learned Englishman,
Scholer of Bede, and Schoolmaster of Charles the
great, saith of Charles (whō he vsually calsVt liquet ex Epist. 1 vbi se pr
                        •••
                     ptorē huiu
                        •
                      Dauidis fuisse not at et hoc idem obseruat Hen. 
                        〈◊〉
                      to. 6 
                        〈◊〉
                      lect. p. 520 king
Dauid) that there are three most eminent dignities
vpon earth; one is Papall, the second is Imperiall,
                  
(such as the Greeke Emperours had) the third is
Regall, in which saith he, Christ hath made you the
ruler of his Christian people, more excellent in power,
more high in dignitie, then either of the former.
Againe,idem Alcuin. i
                        •
                      li Carminum to. 6 Ant. lect. Henr. Canis. 
                  Rex Carolus caputorbis; Europae venerandus
apex, king Charles is the head of the world,
and the top of Europe. Then sure aboue the Pope.
               In the ninth age, The Councell at Paris
                     Cone. Paris. sub Greg. 4. in praefat.
held,Ab an. 800 ad 900. 
                  Anno 829. saith, That Christ hath committed
his Church to be gouerned by his seruants
Lewes, and Lotharius, then Emperours: and
they set downeEodem conc, cap. 3. this out of Fulgentius, for one
of their decrees, There is none in the Church (that
is, in Church affaires) better then the Bishop, and
none in secular affaires aboue the Emperor. The
Councell at Triburia
                     Conc. Triburiense in praefat. saith of Arnulphus the
Emperour,Celebratū est concilium sub Arnulpho Imperatore a. 895 Bin exvetustiss, codice hoc cita
                        •
                      ante d
                        •
                     cr
                        •
                     ta illius Conc. 
                  The King of Kings, Arnulphum omnibus
ecclesiasticae sublimitatis ordinibus praeferre
dignatus est, hath vouchsafed to prefer Arnulphus
our pacificall king, aboue all orders, both of ecclesiasticall
sublimitie, and of secular power. Pope
Stephen
                  
                     Stephanus 7 in Ep. ad Basil▪ quae extat inter ep Synodales Con
                        •
                      8. apud Bin. to. 3. p. 899 the seuenth, writes thus to Basilius the
Emperour, Your Maiestie knoweth, that the Priestly
dignitie, doth not proceed from your Kingly power,
quamuis enim supremam Christi in terris personam
formamque ger as, for although you be the highest
person representing Christ here vpon earth, yet
your care is only in politicall and ciuil matters, which
we wish to remaine long vnto you. And againe, In
things belonging to this life, vobis Imperium a Deo
est traditum, the Empire and rule is giuen by God
vnto you. Pope Nicholas,
                  
                     Nicholaus papa▪
                      
                     
                        •
                     ius verba citantur Caus. 33. q. 2. 
                        •
                     . Inter 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  Ecclesia gladium non

habet nisi spiritualem, the Church hath no other
but onely the spiritual sword; then hath it no temporall
Monarchy. Photius
                  
                     Photius episcopos euocat Synodum instituit, exauctorationem at
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Anathema in Nicholaum papam pronūciat. Nicet. Dauid in vita Ignat. paetriar. Constant. Patriarch of Constantinople,
was so far from thinking the Pope
to be a supreame Monarch, That he in a Synod,
iudicially, both deposed, and accursed the Pope.
Hincmarus
                  Hincmarus Epist. 4. cap. 1. Archbishop of Rhemes, There
are two things, whereby the world is gouerned;
Pontificall authoritie, and Regall power: And
then he shewes, That neither may thrust himselfe
into the office of the other; to which purpose
he in an other placeIdem epist. 5. ca. 38. cyteth those words
of Ambrose, Ad Imperatorem palatia pertinent,
ad sacerdotem ecclesia, Emperours are to deale in
secular, Bishops in ecclesiasticall matters; yea, he
setsInter Epist. Hincmari ep. 9. ca. 6. downe also that Epistle of Charles the second,
wherein is taught, that to these two (to Bishops
in Ecclesiasticall, to Kings in Secular causes) one
may appeale, but from these none may appeale. Then
is none in secular matters aboue the King. Amalarius
                  Amalarius praefat. ad li. de offic. eccles. 
                  Fortunatus writs thus to Lewes the Emperour,
I haue presumed to offer this vnto your Excellencie,
praesertim cum sciamus vos Rectorem esse
totius Christianae religionis quantum ad homines
pertinet, that you are the Gouernor of the whole
christiā religiō, as much as pertaines to man. Haimo
                  
                     Haimo com. in ca. 11. Hose. in ea verba, comedit capitae. saith, Princes are called in Scripture, Heads;
for, that they iure capitis caeteros regunt, gouerne
others (and among them the Pope) in the right of
an head. Theodulphus
                  
                     Theodulp. in lib. carm. 
                        •
                     pud Ken. Canis. to. 6. p. 504 Bishop of Orleans, saith
of Lewes the Emperour, Orbis te totus veneratur,
the whole world doth worship you, and Primus

in orbe micas, Te scio 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      praeit, you are the first
or chiefe in the world: I know, there is none,
(then not the Pope) before or aboue you.
               In the tenth age,Ab an. 900. ad 1000. the Romane CouncellConc, Rom. sub Othon. 1. Eius acta extāt apud Litpr li. 6 ca. 6. 7 et seq.
                   held
An. 963, for many and enormious vices, deposed
Iohn the twelfth, and placed Leo the eighth in his See;
Which act approued by Otho the Emperor, with
the whole Synod, is a verie ill signe they held not
the Pope for their supreame Lord, when they
iudged themselues to haue, and that de Iure, authoritie
aboue him.
               An other Romane Synod
                     Synod 
                           •
                        om. sub Leone 8. cuius decretum extat Dist. 63. c. In Synodo▪ et recit atur verbatim vt Decretum Synodi a Bar. an. 996. nu. 41. was held shortly
after, by Pope Leo the eighth, wherein he with the
whole Clergie, and all the Popes and States of Rome,
decreed and confirmed to Otho the great, and his successors,
for euer, power both to nominate his own successors
in the Empire, and also to order the pontificall
See (that is, to elect the Pope) and giue other Bishopricks
by inuestiture. The truth both of this Synod
and Synodall decree, is testified in their Canon
LawLoco cit., in Theodorick de Niem
                  The▪ de Niem li. de priuil. et Iur. Imp. sect. Conuenit., Waltram Naumbergensis
                  Wal. Naumb. li. de Inuest. sect. Papa Leo., Martinus Polonus
                  Mart. Pol. an. 964., Lupoldus
                  Lupold lib. de Zelo Germ. princ. ca 8.,
Marsilius Patauinus
                  Mars. Pat. li. de transl. Imp. ca. 10, Radulp. de Columna
                  Rad. de Colū. li. de trans. Imper. §. quantū.,
Platina
                  Plat. in 
                        ••
                     on. 8, Nauclerus
                  Nau
                        •
                     . an. 963, Card. Cusanus
                  Cusan. Conc. Cathol. l. 3. c. 3., Card.
Cameracensis
                  Pet. de Alliac. Card. Camer. l. de eccl. authorit. Part. 1. c. 1. § Ex eadem., and many moe. But against Baronius
and Gretzer, who are as eager against this Synod,
as they were against the other, held vnder
Hadrian, accounting
                  Bar. an. 964. nu. 21. et seq. vbi imposturam et adscititiam Synodum vocat. Gretz. Apol pro Bar. c. 18. Bulla, seu decretum est commentitium. 
                  and calling this also an imposture
and figment, and that among other reasons,
because this Leo the eighth, was not at all Pope,

but a pseudo. Pope
                  Bar et Gretz. l
                        •
                     c. cit.. I will only here oppose the
cleare confession of Baronius himselfe, who,
when his fit of furie was ouerpast, writeth in this
manner, and directly confutes a great part of his
owne Annals; Whereas
                  Bar. an. 
                        •
                     96 nu 41 
                  Emperours had not this
right to chuse their successors, this is found to be first
granted to Otho the great by the Pope. Extat de his
Leonis Papae octaui decretum, there is extant concerning
this the Decree of Pope Leo the eighth,
which euen the Nouelists and Centuriators also doe
recite: wherein among other things the Pope grants
power to Otho to chuse his successor. And hauing after
this repeated the verie wordes of the Synodall
Decree, as they are set downe in their Canon
Law, and in Theodorick de Niem, he ads, That Oth
                        •
                     
authoritate huius diplomatis, by authoritie of this
Decree, and Papall Charter, chose his sonne for his
successor: and so we see this power to choose their successors,
to come ex praescripto Romanorum pontificum
by the authoritie and charter of the Pope. Thus,
Baronius; acknowledging both Leo the eighth to
haue been the true Pope (which he most peruersly
                  Bar. an. 963 nu. 34. vbi vocat hunc Leonem, Monstrū. eius surerogationem iure nullam, et pseudo-Leonem hunc e numero pontificum explodendum ait. ibid. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 38 
                  else-where denies:) and further this Synod vnder
Leo the eight, to haue beene a true and reall
Synod, which he and Gretzer striues, but all in
vain, to proue a forgerie; & lastly, that this Synod,
and the true Pope with it, acknowledged the right
of chusing the Pope, and inuesting Bishops (which
is an Act of Imperiall Soueraigntie) to be in the
Emperor, & therfore not the Pope, but the Emperour
to haue been held for the supreame Monarch
in those daies.
               
                  Another Decree, either in this, or in an other
Romane Synod,Decretum Syn Rom. sub Leon 8 was made by the same Leo,
about that time also, whereby the Pope (in acknowledgment
of that Imperiall Soueraigntie
aboue himselfe, and of that supreame right which
the Emperor had to all the territories in Italy, (euen
to those which the Pope held) resigned them
all vnto Otho. The words of the Decree are recorded
by Albertus Krantzius
                  Alb. Crantz. li. 
                        •
                     . Saxoniae. cap 10. and Theodorick
de Niem,
                  Theo de Niem l. de priu et Iur. Imp. sect. Conuenit. in this manner, We giue vnto Otho and
his Successors for euer, whatsoeuer either Charles, or
Pipin, or Iustinian, or Aripert, had giuen of the Regalities
of the Kingdome to S. Peter, or the Romane
Church. And that you may haue and possesse them
for euer, by authority of this our Charter, we confirme
them to you for all generations; and if any shall infringe
this our authoritie or grant, or shall be found
a violator thereof, let him know, that he shall fall into
the ind
                        •
                     gnation of S. Peter, of Vs, and of our praedecessors;
yea if he doe not repent, let his goods be confiscate,
and he punished as one reus Maiestatis, guiltie
of high treason. So let it be. This Decree was made
as Theodorick saith,The. de Niem loco cit. in titulo cap. 
                  in generali concilio, he
meanes in a verie great Romane Councell, at
which were present
                  Kr
                        •
                     nt. et Niem. loc. cit 
                  and subscribed to it fifteene
Archbishops and Bishops, seuen Cardinals, & fifteene
chiefe Citizens of Rome. Did either the Pope himselfe,
or others at this time, esteeme the Pope a supreame
temporall Monarch of Rome, or Italy,
when he resigned these vnto the Emperour, as to
his Superior, yea Soueraigne Lord of them? Baronius
and Gretzer, are exceedingly netled with

this decree, and exclaim
                  Constitutio nomine Leonis con
                        •
                     icta. Bar. an. 964. nu. 24. a non legitimo papa promulgata ibid. n. 22 Impos
                        •
                     or fuit. ineptus, stolidus, insulsus ibid. n. 24. ficti tiam Bullam. commentitium diploma, vocat Gretz. Apol. pro Bar. c. 19. et l. 2 cont. Repl. c. 14 
                  both against it, and Leo,
as being no true Pope. But the Cardinall himselfe
hath refuted all that he, or any else can say against
Leo, when he acknowledged
                  Bar. an. 996 nu. 41 
                  him to be the true
Pope, and his Decree to be Diploma, a Pontificall
Charter of sufficient authoritie to giue the right of
choosing ones successor in the Empire. And for the
truth of this Decree, besides Theodorick, and
Krantzius, who are indeed witnesses beyond iust
exception in this cause, the same is testifyed by
Barnard, who saith,Barnardiverba citantur in Chron. magno Belgic. an. 962 pa. 84 
                  That Leo the eight, with the
consent of the Cardinals and Bishops, yea of the
whole Clergie and people of Rome, restored to Otho
and his Successors, the Donations made by Iustinian,
Aripert, Pipin, and Charles. It is further testified
by their owne Cardinall Cusanus, an eye witnesse
of this Charter, who thus writes,Cusan. li. 3. conc cath. ca. 2. 
                  Vidi Decretum
Leonis Papae, I haue seene the Decree made by
Pope Leo the eight, in the Romane Synod subscribed
by the Bishops, Clergie, and people of Rome, whereby
he restores to Otho the first, all the places which
Charles, Pipin, or Aripert (he is corruptly written
Robert) gaue to S. Seter, and the places are particularly
named in the Decree. And againe, I much
                  Ibid. ca. 3.
                  maruell that Gratian speaking of the inuestiture of
Bishops granted by Leo, which text proues Otho to be
Emperour (to wit, superior to the Pope) did not also
mention that restitution of those Cities which were
giuen to the Romane Church. So Cusanus. The
same Synodall Decree is yet further testifyed by
those foure famous Schooles of Learning, which
were then honored with the name of Vniuersities

or Academies; to wit, the vniuersitie of Paris,
of Oxford, of Prage, and of Rome, who in a
treatiseEpistola vni versitatum Paris. Oxon. Prag. et Rom. de authoritate Imperatoris. written by them all vnto Pope Vrbane,
and Wencelaus the Emperour, said thus: Pope Leo
the eight, by reason of the malice and turbulencie of
the Romanes, decreed that none should be made Pope,
but with the consent of the Emperour; and further
with the consent of the Cardinals, Bishops, Presbyters
and Deacons, yea of the whole Cleargie, and
people of Rome, he remised, granted and gaue to Otho
and his successours, those donations in Italie
which were made to the Romane Church, by Iustinian,
Pipin, Charles, and others. Thus witnesse
those foure famous Vniuersities, in whom is included
the iudgment of many other most learned
Diuines.
               
                  Eutropius Longobardus
                  Eutropius Longob. li. de Iurib. & priu. Imp.
                   professedly, & at large
shewes, that not onely before and in the time of
Charles the Great, but long after, the Soueraigne
power and gouernment of Rome was still in the Emperour;
and that Charles ordained that all the chiefe
men of Rome, as well Bishops as others, essent Imperiales
homines, should be the Emperours men or
vassals, and that they, as all the rest, should make fidelitie
to the Emperour; and that the Emperours deputie
should at all times stay in Rome, to determine
litigious controuersies; and this custome continued
to the time of Lewis the second, the sonne of Lotharius
(that is, till the yeere 880.) after which time the
Emperours authoritie in Rome, by the fraud of the
Romanes, began to decline. Luitprandus
                  Luitprandus lib. 6. cap. 6. 7. not only
relates, but approoues the iudgement of that

                  Romane Synod which deposed Iohn 12. And he not
only callesIbid. cap. 11. 
                  Otho, pium ac sanctum Imperatorem,
a pious and holy Emperour; and Leo then chosen,
summum & vniuersalem papam a Deo electum, the
highest and vniuersall Bishop, chosen by God; but
he further sets it downe as an act of impietie and
rebellion in Iohn 12. and others of his faction,
who resisted this Synodall and Imperiall iudgement;
Iohn (saith heIbid.) being deposed, sent messengers
to Rome, promising to giue them the money of Saint
Peter, and of all Churches (an holy offer for a Pope
to make) if they would rush vpon the Emperour, and
the new Pope Leo, eosque impiissimè trucidarent, and
if they would kill them both, (which Litprandus
saith, was a most impious enterprize:) and he adds,
that the Emperour thereupon returned, and slew a
number of them, so that none had escaped, vnlesse the
Emperour being inclined to mercy, (quae nulla debebatur,
which in no sort was due vnto them,) had
at the entreatie and supplication of Pope Leo spared
them. Rhegino
                  
                     Rhegino in Chron. ad. an. 963. & 964. both records and approoues the
same fact of the Synode, and Emperor, in deposing
Iohn; adding, that the Romanes sub iureiur ando
fidelitatem promiserunt, promised by an oath taken
vpon the bodie of Saint Peter, that they would
bee faithfull to the Emperour (as their Soueraigne
Lord,) and the new chosen Pope Leo. Abbo Floriacensis
                  
                     Abbo Floriac. li. 1. de obsid. Lutetiae, in initio. saith of Charles the Great, This citie was
committed to Charles our King, Imperio cuius regitur
totus prope cosmus post dominum, by whose Empire,
next and immediately vnder God, is gouerned
almost the whole world. Whitichindus
                  Whitichind. lib. 2. Gest. Saxonic.
                   not

onely calles the Emperour Henry, regum optimum,
maximum, the greatest and best of Kings, but sets
downe the forme of crowning the Romane King
at Aquisgrane, one part of which is this; Take this
sword, omni potestate imperii Francorum tibi authoritate
diuina tradita, all the power of the Empire
of the French (they had then and long before
beene the Romane Emperours) being giuen vnto
you by diuine authoritie. Frodoardus
                  
                     Frodoardus in Chron. an. 948. speaking
of the Popes letters, sent to the Synode at Virdunum,
in the behalfe of Hugo, who had beene
put from the Archbishopricke of Rhemes; Pope
Agapetus the second, commanding therein, the Bishops
to restore Hugh to that Archbishoprick, yet
saith Frodoardus, nihil authoritatis canonicae continebant,
the Popes letters contained no canonicall
authoritie: and the whole Synode notwithstanding
the Popes command, did (and that he saith,
iustly and by the ancient canons) adiudge the See to
Artaldus, and that Hugh should be excommunicated,
till he purged himselfe at the generall Synode;
and the generall Synod being shortly after assembled,
they did, notwithstanding the Popes command
to the contrarie, with one consent confirme Artaldus,
and reiect Hugh. Did they esteeme, thinke
you, the Pope to bee their supreame
Lord either in temporall or in
Ecclesiasticall matters?
            
            
               
               CHAP. VI.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchie is condemned
by the Bishops, and learned writers, who liued
from the 1000. to the 1100. yeere.
               
                  IN the eleuenth age,Ab an. 1000▪ ad 1100. this controuersie,
which till then
none durst euer set on foote,
beganne to bee rife in the
Church; Leo the ninth, at the
instigation of Hildebrand,
first claiming, and Pope Hildebrand
shortly after, vsurping
the same in his deposing of Henry the fourth,
and giuing his Empire to Rodulph, and after his
death to others. How this Hildebrandicall doctrine
was embraced, and what applause it then
had, is worthy obseruing.
               The Councell at WormesConcil. Worm. apud Abb. Vrsperg. an. 1076. & Lamb. Scaff. an. eodem.
                   was held ann.
1076. wherein were present almost
                  Ab. V
                        •
                     sp. loc. cit. & Albert. Stad. an. 1076 
                  all the Germane
Bishops: In it Hildebrandum papam abdicarunt,
they did reiect and forsake Pope Hildebrand,
pronouncing
                  Lamber. Scaff. loc. cit. sententiam promulgarunt. 
                  this iudiciall sentence, quod papa esse
non possit, that he could not be, nor indeede
                  Decretum est vt bannum Hildebrandi nullus curaret, nec papa esset. Marian. Scot. an. 1077. 
                  was
Pope, and that hee had no power either to binde or
loose by the priuiledge of the Romane See, and that
none should care for his curse; they writ
                  Abb. V
                        •
                     sp. an. 1076. & Lamb. Scaff. an. eodem. 
                  vnto him,
that whatsoeuer he did from thence command or decree,
irritum haberi, they would esteeme it void; and
that as he did not account them for Bishops, ita tu

quoque nulli nostrum amodo eris Apostolicus, so neither
shall you from hence forward be accounted
Pope by any of vs.
               In the Councell of Papia, held the same
yeere, 1076. Anathema
                  
                     Conc. P
                           •
                        p. to. 3. Conc. pag. 1283. 
                  in se prolatum in
Pontificem retorserunt, The Bishops returned the
like curse and Anathema to Pope Hildebrand as
he had denounced against them. The decree of
the Councell was this,Fit patrum consultum huiusmodi. Auent. lib. 5. Annal. pa. 452. 
                  Hildebrand who calles
himselfe Gregory the seuenth, hath inuaded the See.
He vsurpes both the Imperiall and Pontificall office,
as the old Heathen Emperours were wont to doe: hee
hath committed treason, in seeking to take away from
the Emperour both his crowne and his life, neither of
which hee can giue: for these causes, the most holy
Emperour, the Bishops, the Senate and Christian people,
do decree him to bee deposed. To this decree
subscribed at TicinumAuent. loc. ci
                        •
                     
                  , (or PapiaBinio hoc id
                        •
                      est cū Papiensi Concilio.) not onely
the Bishops
                  Auent. loc. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 
                  of Germanie and France, but of Italie
also, and they swore that they would neuer receiue
him for Pope againe.
               
               In the Councell at Gerstungan,Conuentus in Gerstunga
                        •
                      
                     apud Waltram lib. 2. Apol. pr
                           •
                         Henr. 4. cap. 
                     
                        •
                     9, it was prooued
by the sacred Canons, yea, out of the great Nicene
Councell, that Henry the Emperour (whom Hildebrand
had deposed) neither was, nor ought to bee
excommunicated: And the Bishops who disputed for
Pope Hildebrand to iustifie his act, ita confusi sunt &
deuicti, were so confounded and vanquished, that
they had not any thing to answer, because the
mouthes of them that spake wicked things were
stopped.
               
               In the Councell at Mentz held Anno 1079. it

                  was decreed
                  Conc. Mogunt. apud Sigeb. an. 1079. 
                  that Hildebrand should de deposed.
               
               
                  In the Councell held at Brixia
                  Conc. Brix 
                        •
                     ense apud Albert. Stad. an. 1030. et Mar. Scot. eod. an.
                   ann. 1080
wherein were 30. Bishops with the Nobles both of
Italie and Germanie, diiudicabant Gregorium depellendum,
they adiudged that Gregorie the seuenth,
was to be deposed and put out of the Romane
See, and they elected Guibert in his roome. The
decree of the Councell
                  Abb. V
                        •
                     sp. an 1080. 
                  was this: Because it is
manifest that Hildebrand was not chosen of God, but
by fraud and simonie put himselfe into the See; and
seeing he both subuerts Ecclesiasticall order, troubles
the Kingdome and Empire, defends a periured King
(Rodulph), sowes discord and strife among those that
are pacificall; therefore we being now gathered together,
God being the author, do iudge, that he being a
manifest Necromancer, led with an euill spirit, and
exorbitant from the true faith, is canonically to bee
deposed, expelled, and if he will not depart vpon the
hearing hereof, in perpetuum condemnandum, is for
euer to be condemned.
               
               
                  In a Councell at Mentz
                  Conc. Mogunt. apud Alb. Stad. an. 1085 
                  held ann. 1085. at
which Guibert called Pope Clement the third, was
present, all the Bishops who rebelled against the Emperor,
deponendi iudicantur, were iudged to be deposed;
and all other who tooke part with Gregorie the
seuenth, whom the Councell calles a traitor to the
Kingdome and Ecclesiasticall peace, are accursed and
anathematized.
               In an other Councel at Mentz
                     Conc. Mogunt. apud Ioh. Auentin. lib. 5. p. 464. & seq. (for it seemes
by many circumstances not to bee the same with
the former) where were present the Emperor, Peter
Bishop of Portua, the Legates of Clement the third,

Guibert (at the other himselfe was present:) many
other Bishops both of Italie, France, and Germanie,
communi omnium consensu Hildebrandi secta pietati
Christianae repugnans, explosa & exsibilata est, the
Hildebrandical sect, was exploded and hissed out,
as being contrarie to Christian religion. Besides,
Hermannus a king of Hildebrands making was proscribed,
and 14. Bishops of the Hildebrandicall sect
were deposed and condemned for periurie, homicide,
yea for treason in resisting their Emperour Henry,
though deposed by Hildebrand.
               
               
                  In the Romane Councell
                  
                     Conc. Rom. cuius Acta habentur inter Imper. Constit. to. 3. pa. 3
                        •
                     5. et in Fasc. rer. expet. pa. 43. 
                  held anno 1098. at
S. Maries, in the Church called Rotunda, wherein
were present three Cardinals, and diuers Italian Bishops,
they thus write; We will not haue you ignorant
that we are assembled to destroy the heresies, nouiter
ab Hildebrando inuentas, lately deuised by Hildebrand,
and to defend the Catholike Faith; and a litle
after, We call heauen and earth to witnesse, that we
giue no consent to their peruersnesse; and for testimonie
hereof, in the midst of the Church, in the sight of
men and Angels, incendio tradimus eorum decreta
haeretica, we burne in the fire the hereticall decrees
of Hildebrand and his adherents.
               
               
                  To these Synodall iudgements, let vs adde the
consenting voice of others in that age, equall to a
Synodall sentence. Plerique
                     Iudicium bonorū. apud Ioh. Auent. lib. 5. pa. 470. omnes boni, Almost
all good, ingenuous, and plaine dealing men did write
that the Empire of Antichrist did then beginne.
MostLib. cod. p. 455 men, both publikely, and priuately, cryed out
against the wickednesse of Gregory, they cursed him,
and prayed for all ill to happen to him; they cryed out,

that he was caryed headlong with the desire of domineering,
they called him Antichrist; they said he sate
in Babilon as in the Church of God, exalting himself
aboue all that was called God, boasting that he like
God could not erre. Further, that Hildebrand vnder
the title of Christ, did orbis Imperium ambire,
seeke to haue the Monarchy of the world: that he
esteemes others who would not consent to his sycophansies
and frauds, beasts, fooles, blockes and asses:
that he bent all his strength to oppresse the leader of
the flocke, that so the sheepe being destitute of the Emperors
helpe, he might at libertie vse his tyrannie.
That if all power be of God, most of all the Emperors,
to whom the gouernment of the whole world is committed:
that this nefarious and inexpiable crime of
Hildebrand is to be driuen farre from the Germane
nation, and Hildebrand is to be conquered not with
words or disputations, but with fetters and imprisonment.
               The Church of Leodium, writEcclesia Leod. in Epistola aduers. Pascalē 2. circ. an. 1107 a large treatise
against the Pope, in which they call the Romane
Church as then it was, Babylon; they prooue,
that they owe obedience to the Emperour, notwithstanding
he were excommunicated by the Pope; they
say of the Hildebrandists, that they did rent the
church nouello schismate et nouellis traditionibus, by a
new schisme, and new traditions, such as allow both
disobedience and periurie: And concluding that
point; By this, say they, all may perceiue, that he is
reus capitis, guiltie of treason, and of death, who
doth not obey Caesar (euen that Caesar whom Pope
Hildebrand had excommunicated and deposed.)

They further adde, that Pope Hildebrand was author
huius nouelli schismatis, the author of this new
schisme, and the first that lifted vp his Pontificall
launce, against the Crowne of the King, and who indiscreetly
excommunicated those that fauoured Henrie,
for which cause he afterwards reprooued his own
rashnesse: and further, that all Popes from Gregorie
the first vnto Hildebrand, vtebantur solo gladio
spirituali, vsed onely the spiritual sword, he was the
first who euer girded himselfe with the sword of battle
against the Emperour.
               
               The Deane and Church of Laurisham,Decanus & Eccl. Lauris. in suo libell. supplici.
                   writ
thus to the Emperour, Summo post Dominum
Regi, to the highest King next after God; They
also complaine of the Nouelties
                  Multae sunt aliae nouitates, dogmata▪ sectae. Praefatas hereses sectasque. Conciaat haec heresis▪ ibid. 
                  and Heresies
which Hildebrand and Pascalis did maintaine, and
entreat him to suppresse those heresies.
               
               
                  Rodolph
                  Rodulphus. the first to whom euer any Pope
gaue the Kingdome of a deposed Emperour, at
his death condemned both the Popes doctrine in
this point, and with it his owne fact also. For holding
vp the stumpe of his right hand (which he had
lost in battle) loe, saith he
                  Hel mold Chron. Slau. ca. 29. & Alb. Stad. an. 1080. 
                  with this did I sweare to
my Lord (Henry,) not to hurt either him or his honour,
but iussio Apostolica, the command of Pope
Hildebrand hath brought me to this, that I haue broken
my oath, and vsurped vnlawfull honour; you see
my end, and how in that hand wherewith I sware, I
haue receiued a deadly wound. Let those who instigated
me to this, consider how they haue guided mee,

                        •
                     nd let them looke that wee both (they and I) be not
carried headlong to eternall condemnation.
               
               
                  
Pope Hildebrand
                  Hildebrandus poenitens.
                   himselfe was at last displeased
with this his owne doctrine, and with his doings
also in this matter: for at the time of his death
(and note that he died in banishment at Salernum)
he called, saith Matheus Parisi.
                  Math. Par. an. 1086▪ in Guiliel. conq. 
                  some of the Cardinals
vnto him and confessed vnto them, That he
had greatly offended in his pastorall charge, & suadente
diabolo, and that at the suggestion of the diuell
he had stirred vp the anger and wrath of God against
mankinde. Sigibert who liued in that age, relatesSigeb. a. 1085
the same, as also Florentius Wigorniensis,
                  Flor. Wigor. in Chron. a. 1106 who
cites for a witnesse hereof the Archbishop of
Mentz. Cuspinian also saithCusp. in Henr. 4. prope finem.,
It is testified in vetustissimis
annalibus by the most ancient annales. Sigibert
                  Sig. & Floren. loc. cit., and Florentius also adde, that Hildebrand
sent his Confessour to the Emperour to aske
forgiuenesse of him, and of the whole Church; releasing
                  Florent. loc. cit. 
                  all, both Emperour and others, from those
bannes and curses which he had denounced against
them. And if one may beleeue visions of those
times, one of the Priests of Saxony
                  Ioh. Auen. li. 5. pa. 470., lying like a dead
man in a trance for three daies, when hee came to
himselfe, said, he then had a reuelation, that Hildebrand,
Rodulph, and Hermannus were tormented in
euerlasting punishment.
               
               
                  Lanfrank Archbishop of Canterbury, calles

                     Lanf. epist. ad Hug. quae est apud Bar. an. 1080. nu. 27 
                  Henry the fourth, though deposed by Pope
Hildebrand, gloriosum Imperatorem, a glorious
Emperour, and withall addes, that he could not obteine
so great a victorie (against Rodulph) to whom
the Pope had giuen the Empire) sine magno dei
auxilio, without the great assistance of God;

whom yet the Bishop did not thinke to giue assistance
to vniust causes.
               
                  Gerochus, one who in those daies had writ most
earnestly in defence of Hildebrand, at last seeing
his pertinacie, writ in this manner
                     Geroch. eiu
                        •
                      verba habētur apud Auen. li. 5: pa. 446.: The Romanes
(to wit, Hildebrand with his faction) vsurpe
Diuine honour, they will not giue a reason of their
actions, nor doe they patiently endure that one should
say to them, Cur ita facis: They ingeminate that of the
Satyricall Poet, Sic volo, sic i
                        •
                     beo. This is my will;
my will doth stand for a reason.
               
                  Venerius Bishop of Vercels, writ an whole
booke against Hildebrand: In it hee thus saith
                     Venerius li. de vnitate ecel. citatur in Catal. test. verit. lib. 13..
Christ taught his Apostles, not to dispose of Kingdomes,
nor to order them, nay himselfe did not affect
such a Kingdome, but fled from it. Wee reade Hildebrand
to teach, quod potestatem habuerit super reges,
that hee had power ouer Kings and ouer Kingdomes,
& that he might do that which the Psalmist
saith belonges only to God, He puts downe one, and
sets vp another. Hildebrand hath made a rent in the
Church, whence are growne ciuill warres, slaughters,
periuries, perfidious dealings, iniustice; these doe now
flowe and super abound, propter doctrinam Hildebrandi
Papae, by reason of the doctrine of Pope
Hildebrand. Is it Apostolicall, is it Catholike, is it
spiritual to take part with Hildebrand, to nourish and
defend such crimes?
               
               
                  Conrad Bishop of Traiectum in an open assembly
said,
                     Conradi Oratio extat apud Avent. li. 5. pa. 463. 
                  Hildebrand is carried headlong with
ambition, seeing he vsurpes the power of the immortall
God.
               
               
                  
Osbertus Bishop of Leodium speaking of Hildebrand
saith,
                  
                     Osbert Leod. li. de vitae Hen. 4. sect. Igitur Saxones▪
                   Quae dementia, what madnesse
hath armed you against the King and gouernour of
the world? your malignant coniuration will not profit
you. Whom God hath setled in the Kingdome,
your hand can not cast him out.
               
                  The Bishop of Triers,
                  
                     Epis. Treuir. cuius Epist. extat in li. Imper. Const. to. 1. p. 46 This Hildebrand, who
inuadeth the Apostolicke See, who is puft vp with
such pride as hath not beene heard off, who studies
prophanes nouelties, and is delighted with an ample
name, I know not how to call him a Christian, seeing
he hath not that Character, namely peace and charitie
which Christ hath imprinted in his Disciples.
Ther's nothing so impious and nefarious, nothing so
detestable and execrable which he regards, so that he
may arme others against the King. I will not obey
him hereafter, neither shall he by my iudgement sit in
the seate of Peter, whom he doth not follow.
               
                  The Bishop of Virdunum
                  
                     Epis. Virdunensis epist. extat ibidem., Hildebrand who
is called the head, iam est cauda ecclesiae, is now the
taile of the Church; he who is called the foundation,
is now the desolation of the Church; he who is said to
gather, doth now scatter; he who is said to loue, doth
now hate the Church; hee who is said to strengthen,
doth now weaken the holy Church. O the Arrogancie
of him, who glorieth that hee is aboue the
Church, doing wickedly aboue all malice, renting the
Church, and which is vnheard of, presuming to destroy
the Catholike King (Henry the fourth, then
deposed) condemning most wickedly those who are
godly, peruerting the decrees of the fathers, aduancing
an adulterous King (Rodulph) indeuouring to

extinguish the true and lawfull King with all memorie
of the kingly name. Hee calles periurie fidelitie,
faith he calles sacriledge, his father (the diuel) was a
lier from the beginning, and himselfe lyeth in all
things and contradicts the truth. Shall we call him
our head, who is a wicked, an execrated man, who subuerts
the members of the Church?
               Waltram Bishop of Medeburge, Let all
                     Walt. Episc. Medeb. ep. extat apud Dodech. in Append ad Mar. Scot. an. 1090. bee
confounded who resist the Lord; Rodulph, Hildebrand,
Egbert and diuers others, Dei ordinationi
in Henrico restiterunt, resisted Gods ordinance in
resisting the Emperour Henry, and behold they are
perished, as if they had not beene; and truly their beginning
must needs be euill, whom so bad an end did
follow.
               
                  Waltram Bishop of Naumberg hath writ two
books against the impieties of Hildebrand. Certum
est
                  
                     Walt. Naū
                        ber. lib. 1. de vnit. ecc. & Imper. cap. 18. its certaine saith hee, that Pope Hildebrand
hath attempted to violate the Sacred Scripture and
the commandements of God: he hath
                  Walt. lib. 2. quae vocatur Apologia cap. 2 
                  mingled
himselfe with the deathes of many Christians, kindling
the fire of warre almost through the whole Empire,
The Bishops
                  Lib. eodem ca. eodem. 
                  of Hildebrand, corporum simul
& animarum sunt homicidae, are murderers both of
bodies and soules, they are such as may deseruedly
be called the Synagogue of Satan. The Church
                  Ibid. cap. 11. 
                  hath
no sword giuen vnto it, nisi gladium spiritus, but
onely the sword of the Spirit: Hildebrand
                  Ibid. ca. 4. 
                  hath
vsurped regall authoritie, against the ordination of
God, and against the vse & discipline of the Church.
He hath vsurped the offices of both powers, temporall

and Ecclesiasticall, he hath maruellously resisted the
ordinance of God: yea he plainly cals
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   this doctrine
of Hildebrand an Heresie, Magna est haeresis
Dei ordinationi resistere. Its a great heresie to resist
Gods ordinance, which it is manifest that these Bishops
of Hildebrand haue done, when they went about
to destroy Henry the King placed by God.
               
               Pope Leo the ninth, Rome hath brought vp and
nourished Constantine,
                  Leo 9. Ep. 7 
                  & super omnes mortales constituit,
and set him aboue all mortall men; then sure
aboue the Pope.
               
                  Petrus Damianus
                  
                     Damianus lib. 4. ep. 9. ad Older. Firmanū
                  ; The offices belonging to Bishops
and Kings are proper to each of them, the King
is to vse secular weapons, Bishops the sword of the
Spirit. Ozias was smitten with leprosie for vsurping
the Priests office, what then doth the Priest deserue if
he take secular weapons which are proper to lay men?
Which words are so pregnant against the Papall
Monarchy,Bar. an. 1053 nu. 14. that Baronius taxeth Damianus as Hereticall,
for this saying.
               OecumeniusOecumenius in cap. 13. ad Rom.
                  , The Apostle instructeth euery
soule, though he be a Bishop or an Apostle (then
much more the Pope) to be subiect to secular
Princes.
               
               TheophilactTheophil. in 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 13. ad Rom.
                  : Vniuersos erudit, the Apostle teacheth
all, yea though he be an Apostle (then sure the
Apostles successors) that they be subiect to secular
Princes.
               
               
                  Anselme Archbishop of CanterburyAnselmue 
                        〈◊〉
                      26. ca. Math.. There
are two swords in the Church, the one materiall, the
other spirituall; and there are secular Ministers, to

whom belongs the handling of temporall matters:
and spirituall to whom spirituall matters doe belong:
the temporall sword is giuen to carnall (that is, secular)
men, the spirituall to spirituall persons: as the
King may not intermeddle with the priestly stole, so
neither may a Bishop exercise that which belongs to
the King.
               
               
                  Iuo Bishop of CarnotumIu
                        •
                      ep. 171. The disposing of secular
matters is giuen to the King, and they are fundamentum
& Caput populi, the foundation and head
of the people, and where they will not obey the admonitions
of Bishops, diuino iudicio sunt reseruandi,
they are to be left to Gods iudgement. Then is
not the Pope as a superiour Lord to iudge, punish,
or depose them.
               
                  Glaber Rodulphus
                  Glab. Rod. lib. 4. cap. 5.. At this time the Romane
See was miserably infected with a pestiferous disease,
for the space of 25. yeeres; they ordained a Pope about
12. yeeres olde, whom onely siluer and gold did
commend more then either age or sanctitie: but as hee
had an vnhappie beginning, so he had an vnhappie
end, for hee was deposed by the Emperour with the
consent of the whole Romane Cleargie, and a most
holy man put in his roome. Glaber approouing this
act of the Emperour, shewes plainly hee thought
the Pope tobe subiect to Imperiall authority, and
iudgement.
               SigibertSig. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1088: This Noueltie, that I say not Heresie,
was not before this time sprung vp in the world, that
Priests should teach the people that they owght no obedience
to wicked Kings, and that though they

sweare fidelitie vnto them, yet they owe not fidelitie,
and are not periured, if they disobey their King. Hildebrand
euen in this doctrine is by him accounted
an author of Noueltie and Heresie.
               Thus was this Hildebrandicall doctrine no otherwise
entertained at the very first arising thereof,
and euer since, then as a noueltie, a schismaticall,
a seditious, a pernitious and pestilent heresie.
It is true, I confesse, that the Imperialists also who
in this and the succeeding ages defended the right
of Emperours against the then challenged and vsurped
Papall Monarchy, were, and that euen eo
nomine
                  Vt liquet ex ijs quae hoc saeculo diximu
                        •
                     : et ex Decreto Lud. Baua
                        •
                     ri cū concilio procerū in quo ita dicūt Illos, quod a nobis & Imperio deficere nollent, quod crimen laesae maiestatis, & scelus perfidiae admittere recusarent, Haeresis nota in 
                        •
                     ssit papa. apud Auent. lib. 7. pag. 613. 
                  because they were faithfull loyall and obedient
to Emperours, both accounted and called Heretikes
by the Hildebrandists, or adherents to
to the Pope. But the name of Heretikes being
by either part giuen vnto the other both then
and euer since, yet there is a maine difference in
the veritie of this Appellation. The sentence and
censure of the Pope in this and following ages,
was for this point but the partiall and vniust sentence
of some factious, seditious and schismaticall
Hildebrandists, condemned by the Vniforme and
consenting iudgement of the whole Catholike
Church in all the seuerall ages thereof, till the
daies of Hildebrand. The sentence and censure
of the Imperialists was for this point the Orthodoxall
and consenting iudgement of holy Councels
and of the Catholike fathers for more then a
thousand yeeres together after Christ. If they
obiect, that some of the witnesses whom in this

or succeeding ages we produce, were accounted
Heretikes, we iustly reply, that those also whom
they produce against vs, in this cause, were accounted
Heretikes. Either by the iudgement of
the other, was counted and called Hereticall, and
so neither of both since this rent in the Church
made by Hildebrand, is an equall or fit iudge of
the other. The vnpartiall Iudgement in this cause
must proceede from the former, ancient, and consenting
voice of the Church before it was rent or
diuided in this question. And seeing with the Imperialists
in this point wholly concurres, and from
the Hildebrandists wholly dissents the consenting
voice and iudgement of the Catholike Church in
all the former ages thereof, that is, for more then
1000. yeeres together, it is an euident demonstration,
that the Imperialists, and those who are witnesses
on our part, in this doctrine, both in truth
are, and are by all others to be accounted and called
Orthodoxall; and that the Hildebrandists and
those who are witnesses on their part, in this doctrine,
both in truth are, and are by all others to
bee accounted and called Hereticall.
            
            
               
               CHAP. VII.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchy was condemned
by Bishops, and learned writers, who liued
from the yeere 1100. to the yeere 1200.
               
                  IN the twelfth age,
                     Ab an. 1100 ad 1200. there was
held about anno 1107. Concilium
Tircense (perhaps it
should bee Trecense.) In it
                  Conc. Tirc. apud Bin in vita Pascal. 2. pag. 1304. 
                  the Emperour Henry the
fift, complained that the Imperiall
rights were impaired by
the Pope. The matter-beeing
deferred till the Emperour came to his Coronation
in Italie (which was about a yeere after) then,
as Petr. Diaconus, who then liued, declares, one
of the Emperours part, seeing how Pope Pascalis
protracted the Coronation, and required a stricter
oath, then seemed fit, said
                     Petr. Diac. in Chron. Cassine
                           •
                        . lib. 4. cap. 40. 
                  Quid multis opus
est, what needs all this doing? know that our Lord
the Emperour will so take the Crowne as Charles,
Lewis and Pipine tooke it; And that was
                     Naucl. gener. 38. in initio. et Sigeb. an. 1111 
                  to haue
the inuestiture of Bishops, and all other Royalties and
Imperiall rights which Charles and other Emperors
had for 300. yeeres and more; yea the Emperour, saith
Alb. Stadensis
                  Alb. Stadens. an. 1111. 
                  would not sweare, but said (and said
most rightly) Imperatorem nemini debere iurare,
that the Emperour was not bound to sweare vnto
any man, seeing to him as supreame, all others are to
exhibite the sacrament of their oathes. When the

Pope would not accept of that oath, they
                  Petr. Diac. Chron. Cass. lib. 4. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 41. 
                  thrust
him from his throne, tooke him prisoner with diuers
Cardinals, and others that tooke part with the Pope,
and carried them to Sorecte: where the Pope was
kept in prison for the space of 61. daies. In the end
the Pope yeelded, and (swore,
                  Lib. 
                        •
                     od. c. 42, that he would neuer
either disturbe the Emperour or his Empire, as
violating the Churches right, neither anathematize
him for thus vsing the Pope: and further that hee
would priuilegio sub anathemate confirmare, confirme
by a priuiledge and that vnder a curse (and
so he did
                     Papa tradidit 
                           •
                        i in oculis omnium principū priuilegium de inu
                           •
                        stitura &c. Sigeb. an. 1111 in the sight of all) that the Emperour
should enioy the inuestitures of Bishops and Abbots,
and that whosoeuer were chosen for a Bishop, should
be consecrated of none vnlesse he were inuested by the
Emperour. The Emperour on the other side
(swore
                  
                     Petr. Diac. l. 4 ca. 42. (in such forme as he before had offered
and the Pope had refused) that hee would obey the
Pope, saluo honore Imperii & regni, alwaies sauing
the honour of the Empire and Kingdome, as other
                  Sicuti Catholici Imperatores solent. ibid. 
                  Emperours were vsed to sweare. So both the Emperour
knew and the Pope acknowledged, and
that vpon his oath, the Soueraigntie and Royalties
to belong vnto the Emperour. You will say,
the Pope did this in feare and by constraint. It is
true he was by iust punishment induced vnto it.
And none must euer thinke that Popes without
such strong inducements, will euer doe any right
to Kings or Emperours. But had the Pope
thought those Royalties not to be in right belonging
to the Emperour, why did he at all consent
vnto it? why did he not endure, I say not imprisonment,

but death for a righteous cause? Si homines
timerentur, Martyres non essent. All Princes
may see by this, how to haue right at the
Popes hand. If Popes once ouermaster them, they
will be sure to do as this same Pascalis did: as soone
as the Emperour was gone, and the danger ouerpast,
the Pope in a Synode in the Laterane, recalled
                  Abb. Vsperg. an. 1112. Alb. Stad. an. eodem Naucl. an. eod. & Conc. Later. sub Pascal. 2. pa. 1309. 
                  that his owne former grant, made with an imprecation,
vttered before the holy Altar, in the sight of
all the Princes, and said, it was Prauilegium not Priuilegium:
and contrarie to his oath of not disturbing
the Emperour nor his Empire, (for assurance
whereof he
                     Sigeb. a. 1111 had giuen and receiued the holy
Eucharist) the Councell then decreed,
                  Imperatorem a liminibus ecclesiae sequestrandum censuerunt. Alb. Stad. an. 1112 
                  that the
Emperour was to be excommunicated and shut out of
the Church, and the Pope
                  Papae legati Imperatoris excommunicationem publicant. Naucl. a. 1112 pa 739. 
                  published and thundered
out an excommunication against the Emperour,
set all the Empire in an vprore and combustion; nor
was Pascalis and his successours euer at quiet, till
they had forcedNaucl. a. 1112 
                  Henry (as in the time of Calyxtus
they did) to resigne and deliuer vp the Priuiledge
granted by Pascalis, and compelled him to yeeld the
Inuestitures of Bishops into the Popes hands. But
such coacted resignation, could not take away either
from that Henry, or from any of his successours,
those Imperiall rights, which belong to
their Crowne and which they ought, euen by the
words of their vsuall oath, Saluo honore Imperii,
still to maintaine.
               There was held anno 1160. a Councell at Papia,
(it may, in regard of the Bishops of so many
prouinces assembled therein, be called a generall

Councell) to determine whether Octauian called
Victor, or Rowland called Alexander the third,
was the right Pope. The Emperour Fridericke
the first called it, and writ thus,
                     Epist. Frid. 1. extat apud Radeu. lib. 2. de gest. Frid. 1. cap. 56. 
                  Whereas Christ
at his passion was contented with two swords, this is
fulfilled in the Romane Church (for the one) and in
the Romane Empire (for the other.) And, wee by
the counsell of all our Bishops and Princes haue appointed
a Councel at Papia, vnto which vocabimus,
we will call both those that tearme themselues Popes,
and all other Bishops in our Empire, as also of other
Kingdomes, France, England, Spaine and Hungarie.
And to Rowland who was called Alexander, hee
writ, MandamusRad. ibid. 
                        •
                     . 55 
                  we command and charge you in
the name of God to come to this Councell. When the
Councell was assembled the Emperour thus began:
Although
                  Orat. Frid. apud Rad. li. 2. cap. 64. 
                  I know that by the office and dignitie
of my Empire I haue power to call Councels, as
Constantine, Theodosius, Iustinian, Charles the Great,
and O tho haue done before; yet the authoritie to define
this great and weightie businesse, committo potestati
vestrae, I commit to your wisedome and power.
The whole Councell adiudgedRad. ibid. c. 6
                        •
                     
                   the See to
Octauianus, the Emperour ratified their iudgement,
placed him in the Pontificall throne. And
yet (so exorbitant are their Popes) notwithstanding
this so ample, so diligent, and exact examination
and Synodall iudgement, Rowland (whom
they truly called
                  Idolum sibi Roulādū 
                     
                        •
                     uexerunt. epist. Imp. ibid. cap. 71. 
                  an Idoll) without any right at
all, inuaded and held the See, and euer after bare
so implacable hatred to Friderick, for doing nothing
but iustice, and that in most equall manner,

that he could neuer be at quiet, till at Venice, he
had trampledNaucl. a. 1177 him vnder his feete, telling him
that he was subiect, Et mihi & Petro.
               
               When Pope Hadrian the fourth, in his quarrell
against Fridericke the first, had writEpi. Hadrian. extat apud Radeuic. lib. 1. de gest. Frid. ca. 15 to the Bishops
of Germanie, to mooue the Emperour to yeeld
to him, and had inserted in his letters, those words
at which the Emperour tooke great indignation,
Coronae beneficium tibi contulimus, wee haue giuen
vnto you the Imperiall Crowne; as if the Empire
and the Imperiall Crowne, were at the Popes disposing,
to giue to whom hee would; the Bishops
writEpiscopi German. quorum epist. extas lib. eod. cap. 16 backe to the Pope in this manner: A verbis
vestris commota est vniuersa resp. Imperii nostri,
all our common weale and Empire, were so mooued
by those your words, that neither the eares of
his imperiall Maiestie could patiently heare them, nor
the eares of the Princes endure them, therefore all
stopped their eares at those words, so that we consensu
aliquo approbare nec audemus, nec possumus, neither
dare, nor can by any consent approoue them, because
they are such as were neuer vsed nor heard of
till these times; & we beseech your Holiness, that like
a good Pastor, you would send other letters, priora
scripta suauitate mellita dulcorantibus, which may
soften and sweeten your former writings.
               There was about the same time, a very famous
assembly at Roncalia,Conuentus Roncal. apud Radeu. lib. 2. de gest. Frid. 1. cap. 1. & seq.
                   wherein were many
Archbishops and Bishops and other Ecclesiastical
persons, besides Dukes, Marquisses, Earles, and
Iudges of the Empire. Vna
                  Ibid. cap. 4. 
                  omnium sententia
haec erat, this was the sentence and iudgement of

them all. Thou O most excellent Prince art Orbis
& vrbis Imperator, Emperour of the Citie of
Rome, and of the World. It pleased you to consult
with vs the loyall people of your power, concerning
the lawes, iustice and honour of the Empire; therefore
know, that the whole right of the people for making
of lawes is granted vnto you. Tua voluntas ius est,
your will is law, according as it is said, Quod principi
placuit legis habet vigorem, that which pleaseth
the Emperour hath force of a law. Could they
giue vnto him an higher Soueraigntie?
               Pope Pascalis the second, anno 1110. thus decreed,
Pascalis Decretum extat in lib. Constit. Imper. tom. 1. pag. 54. 
                  We command that those Royalties which
belong to the Emperour, be resigned vnto King Henry
(the fifth) which belonged vnto the Empire in the
time of Charles, Lewis, Otho, and other their predecessours;
and we forbid vnder the paine of an Anathema,
that any Bishop, or Abbot either now or hereafter,
doe inuade those Royalties, that is, those Cities,
Dukedomes, Marquisates, Counties, monies, tolles, or
tribute, Aduowsans, Towers, and Castles which belong
to the Empire; neither shall it be lawfull for our
successors in this See, to disquiet either thee or thy
Kingdome in this matter. Now the supreame Dominion
and royalties in Rome, and throughout all
Italie, did certainely belong to Charles (as wee
haue formerly prooued): then by the Popes decree,
the Emperours are for euer to be held for the
Supreame Lords of the same.
               Pope Innocentius the third, in one of his decretals
defineth,Innoc
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     . 3 Cap. Per v
                           •
                        nerabil
                           •
                        m. lib. 
                           •
                        . Decretal. Greg. tit. Qui 
                           〈◊〉
                         sunt 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   
                  That though in his owne Patrimonie
he be a direct Lord, yet in other countries he doth

exercise that iurisdiction but casually, not preiudicating
the right of others; which words are so cleere
that though they wrest them neuer so much, yet
still they will demonstrate the Pope, euen by the
Popes decree, not to be a direct temporall Monarch
of the world.
               
               Pope Celestine the third,Celestine 3. Extra. de Iudic. cae. cum non ab homine.
                   
                  If a Clearke be incorrigible
he must be excommunicated, and then smitten
with the sword of Anathema; if he contemne that,
cum Ecclesia non habeat vltra quid faciat, seeing the
Church can goe no further (but to the censure of
Anathema,) he must be punished by secular power.
               
               The Senate and people of Rome write vnto
Conrade the Emperour, anno 1140. in this manner,
Senatus & populus Rom. Eorum Epist. extat to. 1. Constit. Imp. pa. 56 
                  Vrbis & orbis Domino, to thee, Lord both of
Rome and of the world: and they tell him, that
they desire to restore the Romane Empire which is giuen
to him by God, vnto that state wherein it was in
the time of Constantine and Iustinian, qui totum orbem
tenuere manibus, who had the whole world
subiect vnto them; wishing that the Rebels and those
who haue taken away the honour of the Empire, being
troden vnder feete, he may obtaine all things which
are due to Caesar, and the Empire: praying him to
remember, quot & quanta mala Papalis Curia, how
great and how many wrongs the Popes Court, and
those which sometimes were your citizens, haue formerly
done to the Emperours, and doe now attempt to
doe worse; but we, say they, haue iustly resisted them
according to our fidelitie, and haue expelled many of
them out of the Citie as the worst enemies to the Empire.
               
               
                  
The Bishops of Germanie writEpisc. Alemaniae. apud Rad. lib. 1. de ge
                           ••
                        . Frid. ca. 16 thus vnto
the Pope claiming the Empire to be his gift, and
at his disposing: Wee willingly yeeld fatherly reuerence
vnto you our father. The free crowne of our
Empire diuino tantùm beneficio ascribimus, we
ascribe onely to the gift of God. The Bishop of
Mentz hath the first voice in the election, and so the
rest in order; the Bishop of Colen conferres regall, the
Pope imperiall vnction, whatsoeuer is more then this,
ex abundanti est, a malo est, it is superabundant, it is
from euill. And that which they account to bee
more, is the Popes pretence of giuing the Empire
with the crowne and vnction.
               That the Greeke ChurchEccl. Graeca in this age, held not
the Pope for a supreame Monarch, may be perceiued
by that which Humbertus
                  Humber. lib. contra Graecorū calumnias, prope initium. witnesseth of
them, that they not only detested the pope & accounted
the Romane Church to be hereticall, but further vrged
them both, to receiue their opinions vnder the paine
of an Anathema. Yea, long after this they would
not suffer
                  Paul. 
                        •
                     emil. in Phil. 4. & Aeneas Silu. lib. 9 E
                        •
                     ist. in Blon
                        •
                     . 
                  their Emperour Michael Paleologus to
haue Christian buriall, because in a Councell at Lions,
he had professed the Greeke Church to be subiect to
the Romane See.
               
               
                  Theodorus Balsamon Patriarch of Antioch, hauing
alleadged many Canons why Cleargie men
should not vndertake ciuill Magistracie and secular
affaires, at length expoundsTheod. Bals. Comm. in Can. 16. Conc. Carthag.
                   them all to bee
so vnderstood, that they may not doe this sine iussu
Imperatoris without a command and commission
from the Emperour, for if they doe it by the Emperours
allowance, the Canons doe not forbid them: seeing

the Emperour is neither subiect to lawes nor Canons.
Againe,Idem. Comm. in Can. 7. Conc. 6. in Trullo. pa 369. 
                  Note this seuenth Canon, wherein
it is said that spirituall dignities are more excellent
then secular. Sed ne hoc eò traxeris, but do not straine
this, saith he, so farre as some do, that Ecclesiasticall
dignities are aboue Imperiall, eis enim subiiciuntur,
for Ecclesiasticall dignities are subiect to Imperiall.
               
                  Athanasius Patriarch of Constantinople, speaking
to the Emperour saith,Ath
                        •
                     n. Constant. li. de necess. episc. res. cap. 6. 
                  Curam omnium suscepisti
a Deo, you haue the charge of all (and then
of the Pope) committed vnto you by God.
               Euthymius,Euthym. in Psal. 50. 
                  Seeing I am a King, I haue
offended onely to thee O God, tibi soli iudici
subiicior, I am subiected to thee onely as a Iudge
of mee.
               Saint Bernard is so cleere in this point, that hee
Bernard. li. 2 de Consid. ad Eug.
                   expressely denies that the Pope or any who is
a successor to the Apostles, can haue that supreame
and independent temporall dominion. Planum est,
Apostolis interdicitur dominatus, It is plaine, Dominion
(independent) is forbidden to the Apostles.
If you succeed the Apostles, you vsurpe that
dominion: you are cleerely forbidden to haue them
both, if you will haue them both you shall loose them
both.
               
               
                  Hugo de Sancto victoreHuge de S. Victore, lib. 2 de Sacram. par. 2. cap. 4.. The terrene power
hath the King for head, the spirituall power hath the
Pope. Terrene or temporall matters belong to the
power of the King, those which are spirituall belong
to the power of the Pope: and,Lupold. lib. de Iure regum. & 
                        •
                     mp. cap. 9. 
                  Hugo tenet, Hugo
holds this conclusion, that the Emperour for temporall

matters hath his power onely from God, neither
in those is subiect to the Pope. Again, Hugo saith
                  Aug. Triump. de po
                        •
                     est. eccl. q. 36. ar. 3. 
                  that
the Pope is greater then the Emperour in spirituall,
but the Emperour greater then the Pope in temporall
matters: and he further saith, that the Emperour
doth not take the power of the sword and temporall
dignitie from the Pope.
               
               Petrus Cluniacensis,Pet. Cli
                        •
                     man li. 6. epist. 46 
                  You will say, The Church
hath not a sword, seeing Christ commanded Peter to
put vp his sword; It is true, It is true I say, Ecclesia
non habet gladium regis, sed habet virgam pastoris,
the Church hath not the sword of a King (not
the ciuill and temporall sword) but it hath the
rod or staffe of a shepheard.
               
                  Petrus Gratianus
                  Gratianus. Caus. 2 q. 7. ca. Nos si incompetenter.
                   the Master of their decrees;
Note that there are two persons whereby the world is
gouerned, the Regall, and Sacerdotall. As Kings are
the chiefe in secular causes, so are Bishops in the causes
of God. It is the office of Kings to inflict corporall,
the office of Bishops to vse spirituall punishment.
               
               
                  Peter Lombard
                  Pet. Lomb. lib. 2. sentent. dist. 44. ca. 3. 
                           〈◊〉
                         comment. suo in Epist. ad Rom. cap. 13. Bishop of Paris, and their
Master of sentences, Wee must know that those
words of the Apostle, He that resisteth the power resists
the ordination of God, are meant of secular
powers, to wit, of Kings and Princes, whom we may
not resist while those things which they command
are such as God doth not forbid. Now seeing that
precept concernes euery soule, as the text expresseth,
(euen the Apostles themselues and their successors,
as we haue before prooued,) the Pope by
this Bishops iudgement, may not resist, but ought
in all lawfull commands, obey secular Princes; for

the conclusion of the Master, saith Henry Goricon
                  Henr. Gor. com. in. cap. cit. lib. 2. sent. Pet. tomb. vpon that text is this, Quod semper obediendum
est potestati, that men must alwaies obey secular
power vnlesse they command against God.
               
               Petrus Blesensis,Pet. Blesensis Epist. 73. 
                  Let the Church first exercise
her iurisdiction, and if that will not suffice, then let
the secular sword supply that which wanteth. (u) To
Princes is the sword giuen, Animabus praelatus es
non corporibus, you are set ouer mens soules, not their
bodies. A prelate and pilate haue nothing common.
AgaineEpist. 42., to another Bishop, You being chosen for a
Bishop, sanguinolenta potestate exerces gladii potestatem,
doe with a bloodie conscience vse the power
of the secular sword; let him exercise the materiall
sword who hath receiued the power of that sword.
Secular powers are ordained of God that they should
haue that sword. If you take Christs ministery, abide
in that vocation to which you are called: dimittas
laicis populi principatum, leaue the rule or ciuill gouernment
of the people to Lay-men.
               
                  Iohannes Sarisburiensis
                  Ioh. Sarisb. Epist. 218. Bishop of Carnotum,
though hee bee violent in the Popes cause,
yet saith, Deus solus arbitrio suo regna & Imperia
transfert, God alone (then not the Pope) doth at
his pleasure translate kingdomes, hee sets vp, hee
pulles downe what powers he will.
               
                  Geruasius
                  Geruas. cuius epist extat inter Epist Al
                           •
                        xand. 
                           •
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                         Ni
                           •
                        ol. 
                           •
                        . 
                           〈◊〉
                         est nume
                           •
                        o 21. Archbishop of Rhemes writes
thus to Pope Alexander the second, It is reason
that wee of France should honour the successour of
Peter, seeing out of our kingdome Rome did chuse
(Charles the Great) quem sibi & mundo caput ordinaret,
whom it ordained the head both of Rome

and the world (then head also of the Pope, vnlesse
he were none of the world.)
               
                  Ioachim Abbas
                  Ioak. Abbas com. in Ierem. ca. 22. pa. 310. of whom Posseuine saith,
Posseu. Appar. in Ioa
                        •••
                     m 
                  that many beleeued him to haue had the spirit and
gift of prophesie, saith, Though secular Princes haue
taken somewhat by force from the Church, yet the
Popes on the other side haue taken much from secular
princes, which they neither should haue sought nor
haue receiued; and to this purpose Christ saith, Giue to
Caesar that which is Caesars, but because their couetous
prelates will not hearken to this word, they shall bee
burst like old bottles; and handling those words, As
an Asse so shall he be buried, those (Romane) Prelates,
saith heIbid. pa. 313., are truly Asses and fooles, and therefore
they shall lie open to their enemies: And as from
an asse is first puld his skinne, and then hee is cast to
the dunghill to be meat for beasts and birds, so shall
first be pulled from those prelates the skinnes of their
temporall possessions, and then shall they be cast as a
mocking stocke, on the dunghill, and be as meate for
the beasts of the Romane Empire and birds, that is
Euangelicall men who shall reprooue them. Againe,
Ibid. in ca. 24 pa. 330 
                  The Popes and prelates knew that those temporalities
which they desired, iuris esse Romani, did in
right belong to the Romane Empire.
               
                  Eberhardus
                  Eberhardus epist. extat apud Radeu. li. 2. de gest. Frid. ca. 71. Bishop of Babenberge, The part
which followeth Alexander the third, doth goe to
the enemies of the Empire, which seemes to bee against
wholsome doctrine, and they both loose men
from their oath of fidelitie, and forbid them to obey
the Emperour, and so make way for schisme which is
the worst of all.
               
               
                  
                  Otho
                  Otho Fris. i
                        •
                      epi. ad Frid. Imper. praefixa suo Chro
                        •
                     . 
                  Frisingensis, a man noble both for birth,
pietie, & learning. Whereas there is no other person
in the world which is not subiect to temporall lawes,
and by being subiect to them may be punished, soli reges,
onely Kings as being aboue lawes are reserued to
the iudgement of God, and are not restrained by secular
lawes, Then are they not subiect either to the
Popes iudgement or punishment.
               Helmoldus,Helmoldus in Chron. Slau. cap. 33. 
                  Dauid siuning & repenting, remained
still a King and a Prophet; Henry the fourth,
lying prostrate at the Popes feete intreating and repenting,
was gratis pessundatus, without cause depressed
and crushed. Henry found not that in the
time of grace which Dauid found in the hard time of
the law, But let others who dare, dispute hereof, this
one thing may be knowne, that the Romane See, luit
factum illud, doth to this day smart for that fact.
               Gotofridus Viterbiensis,Gotof. Vit. in Henr. 4 part. 16. pa. 499. 
                  Before this of Gregorie,
we doe not reade that any Emperour was excommunicated
by the Pope or depriued of his kingdome,
such a noueltie he noteth that fact of Hildebrands
to haue beene. He also notes that the cause of all
those broiles betwixt Henry the fourth and Hildebrand,
wasIbid. pa. 499 
                  for that Hildebrand tooke the Popedome
sine concessione Imperatoris without the grant
of the Emperour. Thereby giuing to vnderstand,
that as Hildebrand vniustly entred into the
See, so he thought hee could not hold it but by
depressing and oppressing him, by whose grant he
should haue held it, and without whose grant hee
did not rightly hold: it and that the whole quarrell
arose neither for any fault of Henry, nor zeale

of Hildebrand, either to God or to the Church,
but it began vpon Hildebrands owne vndutifulnes
and vnlawfull intrusion, and was continued for
maintaining his vniust and vsurped possession. So
holy a quarrell beseemed so holy a Saint.
            
            
               CHAP. VIII.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchy is condemned
by Bishops, and learned writers, who liued from
the yeere 1200. to the yeere 1300. after Christ.
               
                  IN the thirteenth age,Ab an. 1200 ad 1300. when
first Gregory the ninthBin. in vita. Greg. 9. et. Alb. Stad. an. 1240. and
after him Innocentius the
fourth, in the Councell of
Lions, had excommunicated
Conc. Lugdu. apud Mat Par. pa. 896. et. seq. an. 1245. 
                  Fredericke the second,
and deposed him propria
                  Alb. Stad. an. 1245. 
                  authoritate,
by their owne Papall
authoritie, and not by the iudgement and authoritie
of the Councell, diuers Princes
                     Principes. Alb. Stad. lo
                        •
                     . citatis. 
                  whom
those Popes sollicited, yea, vnder paine of excommunication
commanded, not to accept or account Fredericke
for Emperour, answered first Gregorie and
then Innocentius in this manner; Ad papam non
pertinere Imperatorem vel instituere vel destituere,
sed tantum electum a principibus coronare, that it
belonged not to the Pope either to make or vnmake
an Emperour, but onely to crowne him
whom the Electors had chosen.
               When Pope Innocentius the third, had sent an

                  excommunication
                  Lit. Innocent▪ recitantur a Math. Paeris. a. 1216. p. 370. 
                  and interdict against the Prelates
and Barons in England, who resisted King Iohn,
or sought to put him (being then as Innocent calles
Innoc ibid. him the Popes vassall) from his kingdom; the
Barons
                  Barones & Praelati Angliae. eorum verba habētur apud Mat. Par. an. eodem 1216 pa. 372. 
                  and Prelates being assembled together, dicebant
generaliter omnes, did all with one generall
consent say, that those letters were of no force at all,
partly for that they were (as they pretended) gotten
by surreption, & ex hoc maximè, and specially for
this reason, because the ordering of Laicall or Temporall
matters, belonged not to the Pope, seeing vnto
Peter, and his successours non nisi Ecclesiasticarum
rerum dispositio, the disposing onely of Ecclesiasticall
affaires was giuen by Christ; what haue Popes
say they, to doe with our warres? Behold they will be
the successours of Constantine, and not of Peter.
They imitate not Peter in workes, they are not to bee
likened to him in power. Phy on it, that marcidi ribaldi,
base ribalds, and ignoble Simoniackes (so they
tearme Popes) who know nothing of warre, and weapons,
iam toti mundo propter excommunicationes
suas volunt dominari, will needs dominere ouer
the whole world, by sending out their Excommunications
and Interdicts. How vnlike are they to
Peter who vsurpe the place of Peter!
               
               Pope Innocentius the fourthInnocent. 4 in cap. Nouerit. de Sententia excommunic. nu. 2., In temporall
things solus Imperator qui vniuersis & Clericis &
laicis in temporalibus praeesse debet, priuilegium concedere
potest, the Emperour onely who in temporall
matters ought to bee aboue all both Laicall
and Ecclesiasticall persons, (then sure aboue the
Pope himselfe) can grant a priuiledge in temporall

matters. Eberherdus Abusinus,Eberherdus apud Auent. lib. 7. pag. 546. 547. 
                  If wee bee not
blinde, we may perceiue that vnder the title of the
high priest and vnder a sheepes skinne, the pope
playes the woolfe. The Romane Bishops take weapons
against Christians, banish Vnitie and Concord, raise
vp warres and sedition from hell, they doe not prouide
for the good of the flocke, sed potius immanitate tyranni
debacchantur, but rather they are inraged
with tyrannous crueltie. They violate holy things,
abuse the couenant of God to deceiue men, they command
men to deceiue, to warre, to bee treacherous, to
resist the sacred Maiestie ordained by God. Hildebrand
about 170. yeeres since, vnder the colour of religion,
primus Antichristi imperii fundamenta
iecit, first of all founded the Empire of Antichrist.
Alexander Halensis, That which Saint Peter saith,
                  Alexa. Hal. part. 3. q. 40. memb. 5.
                  The King excelles, is true in suo ordine, scilicet ad
corporalem vindictam, true in his order, that is, for
inflicting secular punishment: in doing whereof if
he offend, non habet qui eum puniat nisideum, he hath
none at all but God (then not the Pope) to punish
him. And againe,Ibidem. 
                  The terrene power hath the
King for head, the spirituall hath the Pope. Nichol.
LyranusNich. Lyran. in Psal. 50. 
                  In that he was a King, non habuit superiorem,
qui possit eum punire nisi Deum, he had none,
but onely God to punish him for his faults. Aquinas,Th. Aquin. 1. 2. q. 96. art. 5. ad 3.
                  A Prince is said to be solutus legibus, free
from the lawes, quia nullus in ipsum potest condemnationis
sententiam ferre, because none, (then not
the Pope) may pronounce a sentence of condemnation
against him.
               
                  Conrad Abbot of VrspergeConrad Ab. Vrsp. in An
                           •
                        
                        ceph. post 
                           〈◊〉
                        . 1124 speaking of the

Popes deposing of Emperors, saith; Though popes
doe glorie that they haue done this, yet I obserue that
these things were rather done to Emperours by the
iudgement of God for the sinnes of those Emperours,
the Princes and people ioyning their mindes to make
resistance vnto them. And how ineffectuall hee esteemes
the Popes act of deposing, Emperours appeares
by that which he addes,Ibidem. 
                  that Fridericke
was excommunicated by Pope Hadrian and Alexander,
yet he neuer lost his Empire; so Philip the sonne
of Fridericke, though pope Celestine excommunicated
him, nunquam perdidit imperium, yet for all
that he lost not his Empire. Againe, entreating of
Pope Hadrians excommunicating Fridericke, hee
calles itConspiratio facta est. et, huic conspirationi. 
                        •
                     dem an. 1152. pa. 288. 
                  a conspiracie of the Pope and Cardinals;
addingeIdem pa. 289. 290. that God was not pleased with that fact
but brought that curse vpon them, which is foretold
by Dauid: They curse, but thou O Lord wilt blesse;
let them that rise against me be confounded, but thy
seruant shall reioyce. This, saith he, was most euidently
fulfilled in this businesse; for to the end that this
propheticall speech might bee fulfilled, the foresaid
Pope Hadrian a few daies after he had denounced excommunication
against the Emperour, walked abroad
at Anagnia to refresh himselfe, and comming
to a fountaine, hee dranke a little of the water; and
presently a flie entred into his mouth, and stucke so in
his throate, that by no skill of Phisitions, it could bee
taken away, and so he died. The Cardinals also who
were of that conspiracie, at their election of the next
Pope, made such a grieuous schisme in the Church,
that Roma cum suis conspiratoribus mansit in confusione,
                  
Rome with her conspirators (against the
Emperour) remained in confusion, and so in them
we see it to be fulfilled which was spoken by the Prophet,
Let those that rise against me be confounded: but
in the Emperour was fulfilled the other saying, Thy
seruant shall reioyce. Guntherus
                  Guntherus Ligur. lib. 6. pag. 369. speaking of the
Imperiall power saith:
Nullum caput ista super 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
                  Aspicit excepto Coelorum rege potestas, Imperiall
dignitie hath none aboue it, but onely the King of
heauen: then certainly not the Pope. Vpon which
words Spigelius the Scholiast obserues, That if one
should say so at this day, as Gunther then did, haeretici
nomen non effugeret, he would be counted an hereticke
by the Popes flatterers: and whereas Guntherus
addes, let
                  Ecclesiam ille diu ina
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iurae temperet: Imperium nobis, fasces
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      relinquat. ibid. 
                  the Pope gouerne the Church, and
order diuine not secular matters, the same Scholiast
obserues, that this is indeed consonant to Saint Pauls
precept, No man going a warfare for God, intangles
himselfe in secular affaires; but withall he addes,
that the Popes fauourers haue two answers to these
words of Saint Paul; the one is, that the Pope is not tyed
by the words or precept of the Apostle, Quoniam
inferior non habet imperium in superiorem, because
the Apostle being inferiour hath no power to
command the Pope who is his superiour. The other,
that secular affaires do most properly belong to
the Pope, because both swords are committed, and all
power is giuen vnto him. Durandus
                     Durandus lib. de modo celebrandi concil. part. 1. tit. 2. 
                  approoues the
saying of Pope Gelasius: There are two things by
which the world is gouerned, papal authoritie, and

regall power. Now Gelasius, as wee haue before
shewed, so distinguisheth these two, that as the
Emperour may not take vpon him the name or
office of a Bishop, so neither may the Pope Regale
fastigium vendicare, take vpon him Regall or temporall
soueraigntie. Petrus de Vineis,Pet. de Vin. lib. 1. Epist. 3. 
                  It is no
where read to be granted either by Diuine or humane
law to the pope, to translate kingdomes at his pleasure,
aut de puniendis temporaliter regibus iudicare,
or to iudge of Kings, by inflicting temporall punishments
vpon them in depriuing them of their
kingdomes. Petrus CassiodorusPet. Cassio. lib. de Tyrann. papae. §. Nonne.
                   
                  Is it not a maruaile,
that whereas Christ payd tribute for himselfe
and Peter, and refused kingdomes, and secular iudgements:
that hee who calles himselfe Christs Vicar
should striue to make subiect to his Dominion, Kings
and kingdomes, and that contra voluntatem illius,
against the will of Christ? Alexander named in
scorne by the Popes fauourers Cementarius
                  Al. Cement. 
                        
                           •
                        ius verba habentur apud Math. Paris. in Ioh. §. Ingessit.
                  ,
when Innocentius the third, had excommunicated
King Iohn, boldly and truly taught at that time,
(but he smarted for it after, as all martyrs haue
done,) That it did not pertaine to the Pope de Regum
vel quorumlibet potentum laica possessione, not to
intermeddle with the temporall possessions of
Kings, and other Potentates, nor with the gouernment
of their subiects, seeing Christ gaue to Peter
nothing but onely the power of the Church, and Ecclesiasticall
matters. Rainerius Pisanus,Rain. Pisan. Pantheol. part. 
                           •
                        . tit. de domin. 
                           •
                        ap. 2. 
                  The secular
power, non habet aliquod dominium supra se,
quod cum puniat poena vel vindicta corporali, hath
no dominion aboue it which may punish it with

ciuill, or corporall punishment. Vincentius Beluacensis
Vinc. Be
                        •
                     ua
                        •
                     . Spec. Hist. li. 26 ca. 84. speaking of Hildebrands facts and doctrine,
calles it a Noueltie, and almost an Heresie,
which till then neuer sprang vp in the world, that
men should be taught not to obey wicked Kings, and
that they owe no fidelitie vnto them, though they
haue taken the oath of fidelitie. This was the verie
doctrine and heresie of Hildebrand.
               
                  Iohan. Semeca,
                  Ioh. Semeca. apud Kran
                           ••
                        . l. 8. Saxon. c. 
                     
                        •
                     f. that excellent lawyer (who
first made a glosse vpon the Decrees,) not onely
opposed himselfe to Pope Clement the fourth, in that
exaction of tenths for redemption of the Holy land,
but when the Pope had for that cause excommunicated
him, appellationem opposuit, he appealed
from the Pope, and had many great men in Germanie
to take his part. The Lawyer belike knew some
higher Iudge then the Pope.
               
                  Accursius
                  Accursius in Authent. tit. Quomodo op
                           •
                        rtet Episc. 
                           〈◊〉
                         Conferens.
                   the famous Lawyer; It is plaine
that nec papa in temporalibus, neither may the
Pope intermeddle in temporall affaires, nor the
Emperour with spirituall. Iohannes de Parisiis
                  Ioh. de Parli lib. depotest. regia. & papali in 
                           〈◊〉
                        .
                   hath writ a large and learned booke of the Regall
and Papall power. There are, saith he, two contrarie
errors touching the pontificall power. The Waldenses
condemne all wealth and all secular dominion
(though delegated) vnto Bishops. The other error is
Herods, who thought Christs kingdome to be terrene
and secular; which opinion some in these daies embrace,
who so much decline the errour of the Waldenses,
that they fall to the quite contrarie errour.
Their errour is, that the Pope in Christs steed hath
dominion and iurisdiction in temporall matters, yea,

dominion aboue secular Kings and Princes, because
the Pope hath his power immediately from God, and
Princes haue theirs from the Pope: whereupon they
say, that solus papa est verus dominus temporalium,
the Pope is the onely true Lord of all temporall
goods, Princes and others they are but dispensatores,
stewards of them vnder the Pope. This opinion,
saith he, sprung from the errour of Herod, and sauours
of the errour of Vigilantius: it partakes also
with that pernicious doctrine of the Pharisies, who
to the end the people might giue greater oblations to
them, taught, non teneri populum ad censum reddendum
Caesari, that the people were not bound to
pay tribute and duties to Caesar. But what is your
owne iudgement in this matter? Hee following a
saying, which he cites out of Austen, Fides medium
tenet inter duos errores contrarios, saith, Veritas
medium ponit, Truth is in the middle betweene
those two errours; for Ecclesiasticall persons may
haue temporall dominion, against the Waldenses:
and they haue it not as being Vicars to Christ, but
ex concessione & permissione principum, by the
grant, permission and delegation of Princes. And
intreatingIbid. cap. 5. whether secular or Ecclesiasticall
power is more worthy, his resolution is, That in
spirituall matters the Ecclesiasticall power is more
excellent, but in temporall matters the secular power
maior est potestate spirituali, is greater then spirituall;
neither is it quoad ista in aliquo subiecta, in respect
of secular matters in any sort subiect to the
spirituall: and he giues this which is a true reason
hereof, Because the temporall power is not deriued

from the spirituall but they both immediatè oriuntur
a potestate diuina, doe spring from the supreame
power of God and that immediately. And hauing
Ibid. ca. 8. et 9▪
                   prooued that Christ as man had not this secular
dominion, he adds,Ibid. cap. 10. 
                  Dato quod Christus, Let vs
suppose that Christ had such secular power and dominion,
yet he gaue it not to Peter, & ideo Papae ratione
qua est Petri successor non debetur, and therefore
it is not due to the Pope as he is the successor
of Peter. And this at large he prooues.
            
            
               CHAP. IX.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchy is condemned
by Bishops, and learned writers, who liued from
the yeere 1300. to the yeere 1400. after Christ.
               
                  IN the foureteenth age,Ab an. 1300 ad 1400. 
                  Philip
the Faire, called a CouncellConc. Gall. apud Nau
                           •
                        l an. 1300. & Gagnin. lib. 7. in Phil. pulchro.
                  
of the Bishops and Peeres of
France, after Boniface the 8.
had depriued him of his
Kingdome, and forbidden any
of his Subiects to yeeld
obedience vnto him: The
whole Councell, notwithstanding the Popes excommunication
and deposition, resolued, That the
King, sine controuersia iure illa omnia tenere, did
rightly and without doubt possesse his Kingdome
and Dominions.
               Pope Iohn 22. anno 1323. had excommunicated
and deposed (as much as in him lay) the Emperor

                  Lewis of Bauare, denouncing him, and his adherents
to be heretikes; the Emperour thereupon
called a Councell:Conc. sub Ludouico Ba
                        •
                     aro. Lud. rex consilio habito. Naucl. an. 1323. 
                  the Popes proceedings were
examined by men learned both in the Ciuil & Canon
law, iudicabant eos penitus non valere, their iudgement
was, that the Popes doings were of no force
at all, yea many and great Diuines approoued both for
their life and doctrine, dogmatizabant Iohannem
Papam esse haereticum, did dogmatically define
Pope Iohn to be an hereticke. Thus writeth Hermanus
                  Vt secibit Hermanus. Naucl. ibid.
who then liued.
               An other AssemblyConuent. Trident. apud Zouiū an. 1327 nu. 1. vbi Co
                        
                           •
                        itūs vocat.
                   was held at Trent by the
same Emperour Lewis, anno 1327. vnto which
were assembled both many
                  Aderant plurimi Episc. praelati, & regulares, Zouius 
                        〈◊〉
                     . eod. nu. 
                        •
                     . 
                  Bishops and prelates,
and many great personages of Millane, of Mantua,
Verone, and other Italian States. These princes Sacramenta
fidelitatis praestiterunt, tooke the oath of
fidelitie to obey Lewis. The BishopsIbidem. they
taught these doctrines, that the pope and other Ecclesiasticall
persons are subiect to secular Emperours;
that the pope and Bishops haue no iurisdiction (they
meant ciuill, temporall or coactiue) from Christ,
but from the Emperour; That the pope hath no power
ouer the Emperour; That Imperiall dignitie is
immediatè ab ipso solo deo immediately from God
alone, and that the pope hath no power ouer it. That
the excommunications and other censures of pope
Iohn 22. against Lewis, were nullius momenti, of no
force at all, nor to be regarded; That Lewis of Bauare,
was the true and lawfull Emperour, quamuis a
sede Apostolica abdicatus fuisset, though hee were
excommunicated and deposed, by the Pope; That

                  Pope Iohn was a notorious Hereticke.
               
               An other verie great assembly was held at
FrankfordConc. Francoford. apud Krantz. lib. 9. Saxon. cap. 15., or as some sayAuent. lib. 7. pag. 6 10., at Rheginoburgum,
Anno 1342. at which were present the King of England,
the King of Bohemia, caeterique regni tam spirituales,
quam saeculares, principes, and the rest of
the Empire, as well spirituall, as temporal Princes;
They decreed
                  Krantz. loe
                        ••
                     
                     ▪ cit. 
                  many things behoofull for the Empire,
and among the rest, that he who is chosen of the
princes Electors, should haue Imperiall administration,
though he want the popes consent. For what was
brought in more then election, proceeded from flatterie
of some, and from the popes owne suggestion, nec
diuino iure, nec vlla patrum ordinatione, and neither
from Diuine law, nor from the ordinance of their
ancestors. Further, it was decreed, that the Emperour
being chosen, shall make vnto the Pope and the
Church an oath of defence, deuotion, and humilitie,
non fidelitatis, homagii, aut subiectionis iuramentum,
but not an oath of feoltie, homage, or subiection
either to the Pope or Romane Church, quia
temporalis dominii Papa Imperatori nihil tribuit,
imò Ecclesia sumpsit omnia illa ab Imperio, for the
Emperour receiues no temporall dominion from
the Pope, but the Pope and Church, receiued all
their temporalities from Emperours. The decree
made at Nouioburgum is verbatim set downe in
AuentinusAuent. loc. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . wherein the Emperour and States,
say, that Iohn 22. commands men to breake their
faith, to violate their promises and couenants, to deceiue,
to rebell, and conspire against the Empire. Hee
calles men Heretickes, non aliam vllam ab causam,
                  
for no other cause, but for that they are loyall to the
Empire. And shewing how wickedly the Pope
sought to vsurpe Imperiall power, These two, say
they, are farre different, a Crosiar, and a Crowne, a
Scepter and a sheephooke, an Emperour and a Pastor,
Corporall and Spirituall power, weapons and prayers,
Caesar and Seruant, Prince and Prelate, Lord and
Minister; adding this, that the same man should bee
an Emperour and a Bishop, is monstrum biceps, a two
headed monster, a very Hell-hound. Nay, they
call the Pope thus vsurping imperiall dignitie, not
onely a Cerberus, but Antichrist, and the very
Diuell himselfe.
               
               LupoldusLupoldus Babenb. lib. de Iur. regni & Imp. cap. 9.: The Oath which the Romane King
makes to the Pope, and Romane Church, (the forme
whereof, is set downe in their Canon
                  Dist. 63. cap. Tibi domino. 
                  Law) is not an
Oath of fidelitie, that is, homagij quod praestat vassallus
suo domino ratione feudi, not of homage, as a
vassall makes to his Lord, by reason of some lands
holden of him in fee; but it is an Oath of fidelitie,
that is, fidelis defensionis papae et ecclesiae impendendae
of faithfull defence which he ought to performe
to the Pope and Church. And for proofe of the
former part he alledgeth the saying of Hugo, that
Imperator habet potestatem a solo Deo quoad temporalia,
the Emperour hath his temporall power
from God onely, and in them is not subiect to the
Pope; and againe, Imperator temporalia immediatè
tenet a Deo, the Emperour holds his temporalities
immediately from God. Whereupon hee concludes,
That for his Kingdome and Empire, and for
the Prouinces and Lands belonging thereunto, non

tenet a Papa & ab Ecclesia in feudum, he doth not
hold them in fee of the Pope and Church; and
therefore the oath which he takes is not iuramentum
homagii, an oath of homage, or vassallage. For
the other part, that it is an oath of defence, he alleadgethCap. eodem.
                  that the Emperour is Aduocatus Ecclesiae,
as in their Canon law
                  Cap. venerabilem. extra de elect. & 
                        •
                     líct. potest. & Cap. Romani. in Clement. de Iureiurando. 
                  he is expressely called:
as CharlesGlossa. in cap. Adrianus, distinc. 63. verb. patriciatus. 
                  when hee was made Patricius had
thereby Aduocatiam Ecclesiae, the right of Aduowson,
or choosing Bishops in the Church.
Now Aduocatio
                  Lupold. ca cit. 
                  Ecclesiae nihil aliud est nisi ius
defendendi Ecclesiam, to be the Aduocate or haue
the Aduocation of the Church, is nothing else
but to haue a right to Patronize and defend the
Church. Whence the Patrons of Churches are
calledCap. Quia clerici Extra de iure Patronatus. vbi qui ius acquirit Patronatus dicitur Aduocatiam ecclesiae acquirere. 
                  Aduocates of the same; and to this purpose
heLupol. lo
                        •
                     . ci
                        •
                     . well applies that saying in the Canon law,
Regimen Ecclesiae Romanae est commissum Teutonicis,
the Gouernment of the Romane Church is
committed to the Germane Emperour. Seeing
then the Emperour is the defender, the Patron, or
Aduocate of the Romane Church, by right
whereof he had (by the Synodall Decree of Hadrian,
and Leo the eight,) and indeede still hath,
power and right of Aduocation, and nomination
of him, which is to be Bishop of Rome; from this
Lupoldus concludes, That the oath which Emperors
take, and make to the Pope, is only an oath that hee
will defend the Pope and Church, but not to bee an
homager and vassall either to the Pope or Church.
               
               
                  And if it be said, that some Emperours haue taken
the Empire in fee from the Church, to this Lupoldus
                  
answeres,Lib. eod. ca. 14 that the facts of some Emperours, can
not preiudicate the rights of the Empire, and hee
giues this, which is a true reason: because such
Recognitions and submissions (if any were made)
were not made with the consent of the Electors, of other
princes, and of the people of the Empire; and
therefore they may rightly contradict the same; because
equitie and naturall reason doth teach, that
quando per aliquod factum praeiudicatur pluribus,
id per omnes illos comprobari debet, When any fact
must bee of force to praeiudicate the right of others,
that fact must bee approouedQuod omnes tangit abomnibus approbari debet. Regul. Iur. 29. by them
all; and this, saith he, seemes to be that which both
the law of nations, as also the Ciuill and Canon law
doth teach.
               
               
                  Guiliel. Occam
                  Guil. Occam. part. 1. lib. 
                     
                        •
                     . cap. 9. the scholer of Ioh. Scotus, and
Theologus
                  Auent. lib. 7. pag. 609 
                  praestantissimus, a most excellent Diuine,
thus writes, The pope as he is Christs vicar hath
power to excommunicate, sed poenam maiorem nullatenus
inferendi, but he hath no power to inflict any
greater punishment. Againe,Occam. ca. cit. 
                  papa ratione
papatus non est solutus legibus imperialibus, the
Pope by reason of his Pontificall authoritie is not
free from Imperiall lawes, but subiect vnto them:
and againe, In temporalibus licet appellare a papa,
ad Imperatorem, a man may in temporall matters,
appeale from the Pope, to the Emperour; yea he
prooues by many reasons, that in temporall matters,
and for coactiue punishment, the Pope is and
ought to be subiect to the Emperor. One, because
                  Occam. lib. eod. cap. 4.
                  Christ himselfe as he was man, was subiect to the
iurisdiction of the Emperour▪ seeing hee professeth

that Pilate had power to iudge him giuen from God.
An other, because
                  Lib. eod. ca. 3 
                  neither Peter nor any other of
the Apostles had coactiue or temporall power giuen
them from Christ, as out of pope Gregorie and Bernard
he shewes, therefore neither hath the pope who
is their successour, any coactiue iurisdiction ex ordinatione
Christ; from Christ, or from his ordinance
and appointment. His bookes are ful of the
like.
               
                  Philotheus Achillinus
                  Phil. Achill. in Somino V
                           •
                        idarij ca
                           •
                        . 146. & 147. hath writ a very learned
Dialogue worthy euery mans reading, to this
purpose. The Clerke, or Proctor for the Pope,
to prooue the Popes temporall Monarchie, vrgeth
a text of Innocentius the third, who out of those
words of Christ; Whatsoeuer thou shalt binde, or
loose vpon earth, shall be bound or loosed likewise in
heauen, concludes that Peter (and so the pope) hath
plenitudinem potestatis, the fulnesse of power, and
therefore hath both Ecclesiasticall and Ciuill. To
this the author, in the name of the Souldier answereth,
That if the words of Innocentius be taken
in the largest sence, (as the Clearke tooke them)
then they are flatly repugnant to an other text of Innocentius,
where he saith
                  Cap. Causam. Extra. Qui fils
                        •
                      sint legit. sed caput illud a nōnullis tribuitur Alexand. 3 
                  Wee doe obserue that it
pertaines to the King and not to the Church, to iudge
of such possessions. Seeing then the pope who is the
Church, or head of the Church, may not iudge of
temporall possessions, then hath he not the fulnesse of
power in respect of temporall matters. Wherefore,
saith he, the words of Christ, whatsoeuer ye bind, &c.
are thus to be expounded, that Christ excepted nothing,
de his quae sunt necessaria regimini fidelium, et

non praeiudicant iuribus et libertatibus aliorum, Nothing
which was needfull for their spirituall gouernment
of the faithfull, and which did not preiudicate
the rights and lawfull liberties of other
men. But if they vsed their power of binding or
loosing in any thing which was not necessarie for
the spirituall gouernment, or which tooke away
the rights of others (of which kinde hee reckons
the deposing of Kings, the loosing subiects from
their oathes of fidelitie, of taking a temporall Monarchy
ouer al, to be:) in such needlesse and iniurious
binding and loosing, wherein they abuse their
power, Christus non promisit potestatem Petro,
Christ did not in such matters promise to binde
or loose, what the Pope did either binde or loose.
Againe,Lib. eodem cap. 163. 
                  The Emperour and King hath
not his power from man, sed a Deo solo, but from
God onely; as he at large and truly prooues; and
which is aboue all the rest to be remembred for
our purpose, The oath, saith he,Ibidem. 
                  which Emperours
make to the Pope is not an oath of homage, as if
they held their Empire in fee of the Pope, but of defending
the Church: euen as other Kings in their
Kingdomes sweare, that they will faithfully defend
the Church, and yet they doe not for this cause hold
their kingdomes in fee of the Church. Nam Imperator
non tenetur iurare summo pontifici tanquam
vassallus, sed è contra Papa, si vult retinere temporalia,
quae sibi Imperatores dederunt, tenetur iurare tanquam
vassallus Imperatori: for the Emperour is
not bound to sweare to the Pope as a vassal of the
Pope, but quite contrarie, the Pope if he will hold

those temporalities which Emperors haue giuen
vnto him, is bound to sweare to the Emperour as
one of the Emperours vassals. His whole booke
abounds with the like Embleames to prooue the
Papall Monarchy.
               Marsilius Patauinus,Mars. Patau. Defens. pacis. part. 2. cap. 4. sect. verum.
                   
                  It is certaine that Christ
being God, could haue giuen to the Apostles secular
and coactiue authoritie ouer all Princes in the world;
but he neither gaue it, nor did decree to giue it: Christ
                  Ibid. sect. Prosequentes.
                  both by his words, and by his example taught all
both Bishops, and others, that they ought to be subiect
to the coactiue iudgement of secular Princes.
ThisIbid. Nec ase. coactiue power he denied to his Apostles, as
well towards others, as among themselues: Vnto no
BishopsLib. eod. ca. 5 sect. Amplius. coactiue secular power is granted lege Diuina,
by diuine law, neither can any Bishop, no not
the Pope, haue coactiue secular power or iurisdiction
ouer any Priests or other, vnlesse the same bee granted
vnto him, per humanum legislatorem, by the secular
Prince or maker of temporall lawes. In whose
power it is alwaies, to recall the same iurisdiction, vpon
reasonable cause, cuius plena determinatio, and the
full determining whether the cause be reasonable or
no, is knowne to belong to the same secular Law-giuer
or Prince.
               
               
                  Michael Cesenas
                  Mic. Cesen. besides other things which
he deliuered against the pride and tyrannie of the
Pope, as that the Pope
                  Sic eum docuisse testatur Illir. in Catal. test. lib. 18. 
                  was Antichrist, and the
Romane Church the whoore of Babylon, taught,Hac ex Antonino. 
                        •
                      4. part. Summ. citantur. ibidem.
                  that the Pope non habet corrigere & punire, instituere
vel destituere Imperatorem, hath no power
to correct and punish, to make, or vnmake the

Emperour; and that neither the Pope nor other
Ecclesiasticall persons could punish any, punitione coactiua,
by ciuill, temporall, or coactiue punishment,
vnlesse they had power to doe so from the Emperour.
               
               Iohan. de Ganduno.Ioh. de Ganduno. in Informat. de nullitate process. Ioh. 22. contr. Ludouic. Bau. Imp.
                   
                  The Pope though neuer
so Catholike and lawfull, non habet potestatem, nec
authoritatem, aut iurisdictionem in temporalibus,
hath no power nor authoritie, nor iurisdiction in
temporall matters, specially not aboue the Empire,
quod est immediatè a Deo, which is immediately
from God.
               A great number of learned menPauperes de Lugdun. apud Christ. Massaū. li. 18. in princ.
                   in France
(whom they contemptuously called Pauperes de
Lugduno) taught, that the Emperour is not subiect
to the Pope, but onely in spirituall matters, & neminem
posse saluari qui aliter credit, and that none
who beleeues otherwise can bee saued. Can any
maruell if the PopeIoh. 22. bulla qua damnauit Mars. & Ioh. de Gand. extat apud Zouium an. 1327. nu. 7. Bulla alia qua idem Ioh. 22. condemnauit Occam. et Mich. Cesen. extat apud eundem an. 1328. nu. 7. condemned Occam, Marsilius,
Cesenas, the Lugdunenses, and such like for Heretickes?
but that which was in them counted
Heresie, in Austen, Ierome, Gregorie, and Agatho,
was the true Catholike faith.
               
                  Iohn Wickleif,
                  
                     Ioh. Wickl. apud Th. Waldens. doct. fidei tom. 1. lib. 4. art. 3. cap. 36. that worthy seruant of God,
the Hammer of the Pope and his pride, besides
many other things which he reprooued and condemned
in the Romane Antichrist, this was one,
that whereas Christ tooke not vpon him secular Dominion,
his vicars non debent supra Christum extolli
in Dominio saeculari, ought not to exalt themselues
in secular Dominion aboue Christ: Which seeing
they did, Wickleif thence among other

reasons concluded, that the Romane
                  Vt liquet ex Artic. Wicklief condemn. in C
                        •
                     n
                        ••
                     l. Const. Sess. d. art. Wic. 37. 
                  Church was
Synagoga Satanae, the very Synagogue of Satan.
               
                  Nilus Thessalonicensis
                  Nilus Thess. lib. 2. sect. Affirmant.
                   hauing recited the
twentieth Canon of the Councell of Chalcedon,
By this, saith he, we learne that to the Pope is giuen
Primacie before other Churches, non ab Apostolis
sed a patribus, not by the Apostles, but by the Fathers,
and for that the Citie of Rome was the Imperiall
Citie. From S. Peter hee receiueth no more then
other Bishops doe. And whereas
                  Lib. eod. sect. Quod vero. 
                  it is said, the Pope
iudgeth all, but is iudged of none, this is false, saith
he, and contrarie to the doctrine of the Apostles;
contrarie also to the determination of Councels, for
Pope Honorius was iudged and anathematized by
the sixt Councell. The Pope is subiect to all lawes,
which other Bishops are bound to obey. How can the
Pope be exempt from iudgement instar tyranni, as if
hee were a King? Seeing Nilus both exempts
Kings, and subiects the Pope to humane iudgement,
professing the Popes power which he hath
from Peter, to be no greater then other Bishops
haue, he cleerely reiects and condemnes the Spirituall,
and a fortiori, the Popes temporall Monarchy,
as repugnant both to Diuine and Humane
lawes.
               
                  Barlaam
                  Barlaam. de papa princ. ca. 
                     
                        •
                     
                   followes Nilus in euery steppe,
teaching, all the other Apostles to haue had parem
eundemque honorem, equall and the very same
power which Peter had: and that the Pope
                  Ibid. cap. 4. 
                  or Romane
See had primacie among other Bishops, neither
from Christ, nor from Saint Peter, sed multis postea
faeculis, but many ages after the Apostles, by the

gift and benefit of the holy Fathers, and Emperours,
as out of the 28. Canon of the Councell at Chalcedon
he declares. Againe, If, saith he,Ibid. cap. 3. 
                  the Pope be the
chiefe among Bishops, because Peter to whom he succeedes,
died at Rome, and so left that See to the pope,
then much more ought the Bishops of Ierusalem to be
accounted the chiefe among all Bishops, because
Christ died at Hierusalem, and to Christ the Great
Bishop ouer all, succeeds the Bishop of Hierusalem,
euen as the pope doth to Peter. Seeing Barlaam
reiects the Spirituall, much more hee doth
condemne the temporall Supremacie and Monarchy
in the Pope.
               
                  Nicephorus Callistus
                  Niceph. Callistus. lib. 16. cap. 43 professedly, and with
much indignation refutes that slander of Zosimus,
that the Romane Empire was decayed and perished
since Christianitie was embraced. O, saith he, if
thou wert not blinded with superstition, thou mighst
see that the Christian faith hath brought much and
great increase to the Empire. Sure Zosimus calumnie
must needs be iustified, and the Romane Empire
not onely impaired, but quite extinct, if the
Pope be admitted as a superiour temporall Monarch
aboue the Emperour.
               
                  Matheus Westmonasteriensis,
                  Math. Wemonast. lib. 2. in Guil. Conq.
                   speaking of
Pope Hildebrand saith, Iustè omnes Hildebrandum
fuisse depositum conclamant tanquam laesae Maiestatis
reum, all did proclaime Hildebrand to be iustly
deposed, as being guilty of high treason, seeing he
set vp another against the Emperor Henrie.
               
               Franc. PetrarchaPetrarcha, Epigram. in Romam. Delli Sonett. part. 1. Son. 108. calles Rome Babylon a
shamelesse strumpet, and saith also further,

                  Idem li. epist. sine titulo ep. 7. 
                  Quicquid de Assiria, whatsoeuer we reade of the
tyranny of the Assyrians, Babylonians, and Aegypt,
what of Auernus, of the Tartarian, and sulphurean
fennes, is but a fable and toy, if it bee compared to
this Tartarus of Rome. Here is that terrible Nimrod,
here is Semiramis, here is the inexorable Minos
and Radamanthus, here is Cerberus vniuersa consumens,
the three headed helhound deuouring all: I
haue escaped out of that wicked Babylon, where all
shamefastnesse is banished, where nothing that is
good is to be found, which is the Inne of miseries and
mother of errors, and hee esteemed the Papall
throne to bee so abhominable, hat hee was vsed
to say,Idem. vt citatur in Catalog. testium verit. lib. 18. 
                  Nullum maius malum cuiquam optari
posse, quam vt fiat Papa, that one could not wish
a greater mischiefe to any, then that he might bee
made a Pope.
               
                  Dantes Aligerius
                  Dant. Alig. lib. 3. de Monarch. §. Conclusit.
                   a learned Philosopher, and
Diuine, hath writ an whole booke to prooue, that
the temporall kingdome immediatè a Deo dependet,
& non ab aliquo Dei vicario: Depends immediately
of God, and not on the Pope or any vicar of
Christ as being deriued from him; and of the Canonists
who hold the contrary, he sayth, that they
Theologiae ac Philosophiae inscii & expertes, being
ignorant of diuinitie and all philosophy, do detract
from the imperiall right. He fully refutes their obiections
or cauils, who teach the contrarie, and for
a certaintie resolues thus, and most rightly, The
temporall kingdome non recipit esse, nec virtutem
(quae est eius authoritas) nec operationem a spiritu
                     
                        •
                     li,
neither receiues his being, nor his vertue (that

is, his authoritie) nor his operation from the spirituall
power; but this it receiues from it, vt virtuosius
operetur per lumen gratiae, that it worke more
Christianly, being illuminated with grace, and directed
by spirituall guides.
               Bartholus,Bartholus ff. leg. Hostes. tis. de Captiuis.
                   
                  If any should say the Emperour is
not the Lord and Monarch of the world, esset Haereticus,
he should be an Heretike, because he affirmes
that which is against the determination of the
Church, and the text of the holy Gospell. But hee
was vnconstant in this truth, for elsewhere, (belike
when hee was in the Popes territories) hee
taught the contrarie, and is for that cause reprooued
by CouarruuiasCouar. par. 
                        •
                     . Relect. sect. 9. nu. 6. pag. 505..
               BaldusBaldus in Pro
                        •
                     m. sup. ff. 
                        •
                     etus. n
                        •
                     . 8. 9., It is a Maxime among Lawyers, quòd
Imperator Romanorum in temporalibus superiorem
non habet, that in Temporall matters, the Emperour
hath none aboue him.
               CynusCynus in L. Bene a Zenone. Cod. de Quadrien. praescrip.
                  , As the Pope, so the Emperour hath
none aboue him, nam a Deo solo suum recognoscit imperium,
for hee holds his Empire from none but
from God.
               Albericus de RosateAlberic. de Rosat. in L. Bene 
                           •
                         Zenone. Cod. de Quad. praesc. nu. 4. fol. 109. et 110.. Hence it appeares that
the Papall and Imperiall powers are altogether distinct,
& neutram ab alia pendere, and that neither
of them depends on the other, but there is one immediate
spring of them both, and that is God. Againe,
Idem Cod in legē Gloriosissimo de summa T
                        •
                     init. nu. 6. 
                  Whatsoeuer they say, I beleeue these powers
are distinct, so that the one is chiefe in Temporall, to
wit, the Emperor, the other, to wit, the Pope is chiefe
in spirituall matters.
               
               
                  Iohan. de Rupescissa
                  Ioh
                        •
                     nn. de Rup. citatur in Catal. test. 
                           •
                        er. bib. 18. was famous for Prophesies

and predictions in this age. He taught, the Romane
Church to be the whoore of Babylon, and the
Pope the Minister of Antichrist, and the Cardinals
to be his false Prophets. He prophesiedChron. maegnū Belgic. an. 1356 many
things of Antichrist and the future Popes; and multa
de suis prophetiis visa sunt euenisse, many of his
prophesies seemed to be accomplished. Pope Innocent
the sixth, was so ill pleased with his prophesies,
that he imprisoned
                  Frossard. lib. 2 Chron. prope finem▪ cuius verba citantur in Catal. test. loc. cit. 
                  him at Auinion: and
no maruell; for one of them which is mentioned
in Frossard,Ibidem who saw him in prison, toucheth
the Pope and his pompe very neere. It was set
forth by a parable of the Bird, which being borne
without feathers, all the other birds deckt her with
their plumes, till the bird being growne gay and gallant,
not onely contemned all the other birds in respect
of her selfe, but would needs be master, and tyrannize
ouer them all. The Birds not well brooking
that pride, each of them pluckt away their owne feathers,
and left her naked. Euen so, said Iohannes, shall
it fall out with the Romane Church, Pope, and Cardinals;
The Romane and Germane Emperors, and other
Christian Kings and Princes decked the Church
with many gifts, ornaments, lands, and possessions.
Siluester is not read to haue gone in state, guarded
with 200. or 300. Knights, but he liued soberly as other
Bishops did. Constantine, and other Princes,
decked the Church so long, that the Pope grew insolent,
& tyrannicall, & would be Lord of all: wherfore
God is angrie, and will yet be more incensed against
those who follow; so that Kings and Nobles, who haue
liberally giuen lands, reuenewes and goods to the

Church will not onely waxe cold in giuing, sed etiam
prius donata auferant, but will vnplume the Romish
Iay, and by taking away their owne feathers
leaue the whoore naked and desolate, as S. Iohn in
his Diuine Reuelation doth for a certaintie foretell.
Was it not time for the pope to imprison such
a Prophet, propter haeresin
                  Zouius cont. An. Bar. an. 1357. nu. 4., for speaking such
heresies against the Romane See? And yet why
should they be so stomachfull against this Iohānes?
Did not Hildegardis some 200. yeeres before prophesie
the like? whose Epistle or prophesie is set
downe by Albertus Stadensis
                  Hildegardis prophetia extat integra apud Alb. Stad. post. an. 1149. p. 169 ad 178. one liuing neere
that age; The Romane Empire
                  Hild. ibid. pa. 174. this of the West)
shall decay, and those Princes who adhered vnto it,
shall separate themselues from it, and bee no longer
subiect to it; The imperiall Scepter decaying thus
without hope of repairing, infula Apostolici honoris,
the miter of the Apostolicke honour shall also
perish: for because neither Princes, nor other men,
shall finde vllam religionem, any religion in the Apostolicke
order (that is, in Popes) dignitatem nominis
illius imminuent, they shall take away the
honour of the Pope, that is, as Iohn said, vnplume
him: and the pope at that time by the diminishing
of his honour and pristine dignitie, vix sub sua infula
obtinebit Romam, shall scarce haue Rome and
a few adiacent places vnder his miter. Thus Hildegardis,
and Albert. Stadensis not onely much
commend her, and her prophesies, saying,Alb. Stad. pa. 169. 
                  that
shee writ them Deo iubente, imò cogente, God commanding,
yea inforcing her so to doe; but that
Pope Eugenius the third, also scripta eius canonizauit,
                  
hath canonized her writings, and that in the
Councell at Treires. Why should Hildegardis,
prophesying that the Popes pompe and pompous
Monarchicall State shall bee ruinated, and that
iustly, because there is no true religion at all found in
them, bee canonized for a Saint, if for the very
like prophesie, Ioh. de Rupescissa bee condemned
for an hereticke?
               Saint Brigit
                  Brigit. lib. 1 Reuelat. ca. 41. who liued and prophesied in
the same 15. age, and within few yeeres of Iohn
de Rupescissa, in her booke of Reuelations sets
downe an heauier prophesie against the Pope
then he did. Shee makes the Creator of all things
to speake thus to the Pope and his adherents:
Nunc conqueror superte, Now I complaine against
thee, which art the head of my Church. Thou which
should loose soules from sinne art a killer of them. I
appointed Peter to be a feeder of my sheepe, but thou
art a scatterer and destroyer of them: because thou
art like to Lucifer, more vniust then Pilate, more
cruell then Iudas, more abominable then the Iewes,
therefore I doe iustly complaine of thee. Hauing declared
their sinnes, then shee foretels the iudgement.
The Lord thus answered: I sweare by God the
Father, whose voice Iohn Baptist heard in Iordane; I
sweare by that body, which Iohn baptized in Iordan;
I sweare by that Spirit, which appeared in the shape of
a Doue at Iordane; that I will execute iustice vpon
these. Of the Head (that is the Pope) God said, Sedes
tua demergetur, thy seat shall be drowned as a heauie
stone which can not stay till it come at the lowest
bottome; For thy fingers, that is, thy assessors, they

shall burne with sulphureous fire, which can not bee
quenched. Thy armes, that is, thy Vicars, shall bee
adiudged to that punishment which Dauid speaks of,
Psal. 109. Let his children be Orphanes, &c. My simple
people which are vnder them, shall be separated
from them, and they shall inherite euerlasting confusion.
Et sicut per honorem & superbiam super alios
ascenderunt, and as they haue in dignitie and
pride ascended aboue others, so shall they descend
and be drowned in the lowest pit of hell. Thy members
(that is, all thy followers and fauourers) shall
be cut off, neither shall there any mercie come vpon
them, but they with their heads, being seuered from
all good, shall bee tormented. Thus Brigit, one of
their Prophets, and canonized Saints, who hath
writ seuen great bookes of such like Reuelations;
for the credit and authoritie whereof, this is prefixed
in the beginning, after the proheme: Blessed
be God, a quo hic liber inspiratus est immediatè, &
diuinitus reuelatus, by whom this booke is immediately
inspired and reuealed from heauen. Hath
not the Pope now good cause to tryumph in his
Soueraigntie and Monarchicall Highnesse?
            
            
               
               CHAP. X.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchy is condemned
by Bishops and Writers, who liued from the
yeare 1400. vnto the yeare
1500.
               
                  IN the fifteenth age the Councell
of Pisa
                  
                     Concil Pisanū
                      apud Bin. tom. 3. pa. 1553., held Anno 1409.Ab An. 1400: ad 1500.
deposed not onely Benedict the
12. who was a pseudo-Pope,
and intruder, but Gregorie the
12. also, who was the trueQui verus & legitimus pontifex erat. Bin. Not. in Concil. Constant. §. Concilium. and
lawfull Pope, for an hereticke and schismaticke. They
knew not belike the Pope to bee the supreame
Iudge and Monarch, who neither is nor ought
to be subiect to any humane iudgement. And
that the whole Church held their iudgement
herein to be lawfull, doth clearely appeare, for
otherwiseBell. lib. 1. de. Conc. ca 8. 
                  Alexander the fift could not haue beene
esteemed, as he was of all, the true and lawfull Pope,
nor could the next Alexander haue called himselfe
the sixt, but the fift▪ vnlesse Alexander the fift, who
succeeded Gregorie the 12. then deposed, had
beene held for a lawfull Pope, and no intruder.
               The Councell at Constance
                     Concil. Constant. apud Bin. tom. 3. pa. 1556., held An. 1414.
did the like, it deposed not onely two pseudo-Popes,
but Iohn 23. also, the true
                  Communis ferme opinio fuit Alexandrū & Iohannem fuisse veros pontifices. Bel. loc. cit. 
                  Pope, who for
his most enormous vices (he being vsually called
Conc. Constant. sess. 11, art. 5. a Deuill incarnate) merited that most

iust sentence. The same Councell further decreedConc. Constant. sess. 4.,
that the Pope might and ought to be censured,
punished and deposed, either in case of heresie
or of scandalous life, in both which cases, obedire tenetur,
he is bound, and ought to obey the sentence
of the Councell. Further yet, this Councell
hauing excommunicated Iohn Hus, saithIbid. Sess. 15 pa. 1600.,
They must leaue him to the secular power, seeing Ecclesia
Dei non habet quod vltra gerere valeat, the
Church hath no more nor higher punishment
then excommunication, that it can inflict. Certainly
that Councel, and the Church in that age,
thought not the Pope a temporall Monarch, nor
a supreame Iudge, no not in Ecclesiastical, much
lesse in secular causes, when they decreed, that
he is and ought to bee subiect, both to the sentence,
censure, and punishment of an higher
Iudge. And it is idly saidBell. lib 1. de Conc. ca. 7. §. Quintum., That this Councell in
this decree is not approued▪
                   for if the Councell did
not rightly in deposing those Popes, then was
not Martin the fift true or lawfull Pope at all:
and so the Decrees made therein against Wickliffe,
Hus, and the Bohemians, are of no force at
all, as wanting the consent of a true Pope to
confirme them. If Martine was true Pope, (as
with one consent they professe,) then may the
true Pope bee either for heresie in doctrine, or
criminall offences in life, censured, punished and
deposed by a Superiour Iudge. Much more idle
is that which is further saidBell. loc. cit., that the former sessions
of this Councel wherein this is decreed, are reprobated,
because the Councell of Florence hath decreed

contrarie to this at Constance, that a Councell
is not aboue the Pope; for by the very like reason, it
may as iustly bee said, that the Councell at Florence,
& the Decree made therein, is reprobated
by the other at Constance, which decreed contrary
to that at Florence, That a Councell is aboue the
Pope. The erronious decree at Florence, neither
hath nor can haue so much force nor authoritie,
to reprobate or adnull the decree of Constance,
as the true decree at Constance hath, and ought
to haue, to reprobate and adnull the decree at
Florence: the consenting iudgement of the
Church in all former ages, giues strength and
authoritie to the decree at Constance, none but
the late vpstart Hildebrandicall faction, doth
countenance or maintaine the Decree at Florence.
               The Councell at BasilConcil. Ba
                        •••
                     
                     ense sess. 33. pa. 79. & sess. 38. pa. 83. begun An. 1431. decreeth
the very same with the former at Constance,
yea they decree that to be a doctrine of the Catholike
Faith, such, as whosoeuer doth pertinaciously
gainesay, is an hereticke. So by the iudgement of
this whole Councell, all the Bishops in their
Florentine Synod, who denyed, and that pertinaciously,
the Pope to bee subiect to a generall
Councell, were all heretickes; and their Decree
both in it selfe hereticall, and made also by heretickes.
They further addeEpist. Synod. Conc. Basil. sess. 45. in Decreto quinque conclusionum. pa. 96. one point of speciall
consideration, that Nullus vnquam peritorum
dubitauit, None of skill and learning euer doubted,
but resolutely held the Pope to be subiect to the
iudgement of generall Councels in those things which

belong vnto faith. So the Councell declares, the
Pope neuer to haue had Spirituall, much lesse
Temporall Supremacie, as a Monarch ouer all,
and this to be so euident, knowne, and certaine
a truth, that none of learning and iudgement euer
thought otherwise. Then by the Councels
iudgement, all maintainers of the Popes supremacie,
either spirituall or temporall, that is, all
the Hildebrandian faction, are vnskilfull persons,
such as contradict the consenting voyce of
all learned men. That this Councell of Basil, as
also the decree thereof for the Councels superioritie
aboue the Pope, was ratified, approued,
and confirmed, both by Pope Eugenius, and
Pope Nicholas the fift, I haue at large in another
Treatise touching the Councell of Basil declared.
For this time I will onely in a word obserue,
that whereas they pretendBellar. lib. 1. de Conc. ca. 7 §. Sextum. & lib. 
                        •
                     . ca. 17. §. Denique., That this Councell at
Basil, and this Decree thereof was repealed by their
Laterane Councel vnder Leo 10: It is true that Leo
did what in him and that Synod lay to repeale it;
But neither
                  Decreta de fide
                        •
                     mmutabil
                        ••
                      sunt, nec pos
                        •
                     unt v
                        •
                     lo modo abrogari. Bell lib. 2. cit. ca. 17. §. Denique. 
                  are Decrees of faith, (such isEst veritas fidei Catholicae. Conc. Bas. 
                        •
                     ss. 33. this)
repealeable, they are all immutable and irreu
                        •
                     cable:
neither was the authoritie of Leo, of more force
to repeale the decree confirmed by Eugenius, thē
the decree of Eugenius, was to repeale and adnull
the decree of Leo. Nay that decree of Basil, fortified
by the vniforme consent of the Catholike
Church, and of all learned men, is able to annihilate
the partiall, nouitious, Laterane decree of
Leo, supported by none, but such as are illiterate
or vnskilfull men, by the iudgment of the Councell

at Basil. Lastly, it is not vnknowne, what the
Vniuersitie of Paris writ of that Laterane Synod
of Leo; they account it no other but an hereticall
conuenticle. Leo the tenth say theyAppellatio Vniuers. Paris. §. Sed Romani, in quodam caetu
nescimus qualiter, non tamen in spiritu Domini
congregato, in a certaine assembly (they thought it
vnworthy the name of a Synod or Councell)
gathered we know not how, but sure not in the
name of Christ, censu
                        •
                     t contra fidem Catholicam,
decreed that which is contrary to the Catholike
faith. Can an hereticall Conuenticle repeale or
adnull the Decree of Basil, to which the whole
Catholike Church consenteth?
               The Councell at Bytures
                  Concil. Bituricense, apud Gaguin. lib. 10 in Carolo. 7. pa. 226., held An. 1438. by
Charles the seauenth, the French King, made a
Pragmaticall sanction, and therein confirmed the
Decrees of the Councell at Basil in this manner.
Perpetua esto, let the authoritie of the Councell
at Basill, and the stability of the Decrees made there,
be perpetuall, and let no man, no not the Pope himselfe
presume at any time to take away or infringe
the same.
               
               
                  Aeneas Siluius
                  Aeneas Syluius lib de ortu & Author. Imperi
                        •
                      ca. 23, who was after Pope, saith,
Imperatorem super omnes mundi homines in temporalibus
Deus constituit, God hath set the Emperour
aboue all men in the world (then sure aboue
the Pope) for temporall matters: And
againeLib. eodem. ca. 16., There is none who may iudge the faults
of a King if he doe amisse. Tolerandumest patienter,
It must with patience be indured, till either his
heauenly Iudge, or his earthly successour do amend
the same.
               
               
                  
Petrus de Alliaco Card. of Cameracum
                     Card Cameracens. de resumpt. Concl. 1.,
Although both Christ and his Vicar, as he is the head
of the Church, hath a Spirituall Monarchie, non tamen
Regiam temporalem, yet he hath not a temporall
and Kingly Monarchy. AgaineIdem Pet. de Aliac. lib. de Eccles. authoritate in Prooemio. 
                  the errour
of the Waldenses was, that temporall dominion, is repugnant
to the Pope and Eclesiastical function. The errour
of the Herodians was that Christ was a terrene
King, whence the errour of those in our times is deriued,
who presume to teach that the Pope, as he is Christs
Vicar, hath immediatly authority, dominion, & iurisaiction
in Temporall matters, and ouer secular Princes.
The Catholike Church holds the meane betwixt these
two contrarie errours, and teacheth, that to the Pope
as Christs Vicar, temporall dominion is not due; against
the second errour: and that the Pope may haue temporall
dominion by the concession of secular Princes, or
deriuation from them; against the first errour.
               
               Cardinall Cusanus
                  
                     Card Cusa. nus lib. 3. de Conc. Cathol. ca. 3., speaking of Charles the
great declares, what dignitie by being Patricius
belonged vnto him; The Patricius saith he, being
pater patriae, habebat curam iudicij temporalis, & praefuit
in temporalibus, had the care of temporall
iudgement, and was the chiefe in temporall matters,
the Pope not intermedling in them; yea Patricius
by the ancient glosse in Ca. Hadrianus dist. 63. (that
glosse is now, for some good reason you may bee
sure, wiped away and expunged) was Pater Papae
in temporalibus, the father to the Pope in temporall,
as the Pope is his father in spirituall matters.
AgaineIdem lib. eod. ca. 41. 
                  the Pope hath the highest ministeriall
care, sed non dominationis Imperiū, but he hath not

Imperiall domination; the Pontificall and Imperiall
powers are both of them from God, either distinct
from the other, neither depending on the other, and
this was antiquorum omnium vera opinio, the true
opinion of all the ancient Fathers and writers,
although now it bee growen doubtfull by reason of
the sinister desire which many haue to speake pleasing
things. Card. Turrecremata
                  
                     Card. Turrecr. in Psal. 50. saith of King Dauid,
Against thee onely O God haue I sinned, as against a
Iudge, and one who hast power to punish me. Quia tu
solus es superior me, because thou onely art aboue
me. AgaineIdem in dist. 96. art. 1., if the Pope were the Lord of al things,
nihil sibi posset dari, there could nothing at all bee
giuen vnto him, and so the Donations made by Emperours
should be false. Now of Constantines Donation
he there addes, Donationem hanc vere potuit
facere, Constantine might truely make this Donation.
Card. Albanus
                        Card. Albanus lib. de donat. Constantini nu. 5., The Popes haue long time
possessed those lands which Constantine gaue, and
they haue produced, nullum alium suae possession is titulum,
no other title at all, but onely his Donation
for their right. Then did they not, nor
could they find any title to an vniuersal temporal
Monarchie from Christ: for certainly in so many
hundreth yeeres, they would haue produced
it. Card. Zabarell
                        Card. Zabarella lib de Schis. §. quis., The Emperour is the Aduocate,
and defender of the Church, and it so much belonges
to him to defend it, that if the PopeIbid. §. quarto. be suspected of
heresie, potest ab eo exigere, he may exact of the
Pope a declaration of his faith. The same Card.
not onely holds and prouesLib. eod. §. quintus., a Councell to be aboue
the Pope: but that the Pope may be an heriticke,

and may for Herisie be deposed, yea and for any other
notorius fault, whereby he scandalizeth the Church, if
hee be incorrigible, for such an one is esteemed an
heriticke.
               
               
                  Laurentius Valla
                  
                     Laur. Valla. lib. de Donat. Constantini. in princ., who was both the Prince of
Grammarians in his age, (that was 1420.) and
Theologus praestantissimus as Tritemius
                  Tritem. lib. de script Eccles. in Laur. Valla. cals him,
a most excellent Diuine, not onely refutes, but
derides that temporall Monarchie which Popes
then claimed in the West. Rome, say they, is theirs,
Sicile and Naples theirs, all Italie theirs, Spaine
Germany, Brittany, all the West theirs; What, saith
he to the Pope, will you rob all westerne Kings and
Princes of their Crownes and kingdomes, and cause
them to pay tribute vnto you? I rather thinke on the
contrary, iustius licere principil us spoliare te imperio
omni quod obtines, that it is more iust, that they
should depriue you of all the Dominions you
haue. AgaineIbid. non longe a fine. 
                  let euery Romane Emperour know,
that (as I iudge) hee is truely neither Cesar nor Emperour,
vnlesse hee retaine the Romane Empire; and
that he is periured, vnlesse he endeauour to recouer
Rome from the Pope, for Emperours in former times
were not forced to take such an oath, as now they doe,
but they did sweare that so farre as in them lay, they
would not impaire the Empire, but would labour to
vphold, yea increase the same: This, and much
more, elegantly to this purpose, doth Valla set
downe.
               Iohn Hus
                     Iohan. Hus. in Determinat. in Acad. Prag. an. 1410. de ablat Tempor. a c
                        •
                     er. nu. 27., Reges & Principes sunt capitales domini
bonorum temporalium, Kings and Princes,
are highest and chiefe Lords of temporal goods,

yea, he was so resolute against the Ecclesiasticall
(much more against the temporall) Monarchy
of the Pope, that he saidArt. 27. Ioh. Hus recitatus in Conc-Const Sess. 15., Non est scnitilla apparentiae,
there is not one sparke of liklihood, that
there ought to be one head in Spirituall matters to gouerne
the Church: further hee calsArt. 28 Ioh. Hus. such vniuersall
and supreame Bishops, capita monstrosa, monstrous
heads in the Church; addingArt. q. eiusdem., that the
Popes dignitie and preeminence aboue other Bishops a
Cesar is potentia emanauit, proceeded from Emperours
and from their appointment.
               
                  Gerson
                  
                     Ioh. Gerson. lib. de. Potest. Eccles. Consid. 12. that famous Chancellour of Paris,
The Papall power hath not the dominion and rights
both of the heauenly, and earthly Empire, so that hee
may at his pleasure dispose of the goods of the Clergie,
and much lesse of lay men: but he hath a dominion
in those goods, which is directiue, regulatiue, and ordinatiue,
not coactiue. And declaring this, he sets
downe two contrary errours; the one of Detraction,
Which would depriue the Pope and Clergie of all
dominion, and of all temporall iurisdiction, though it
be conferred by Princes. The other of flatterie,
which saith to the Popes (as hee protests some to haue
written, and some Popes haue beleeued) O how great
is the sublimitie of your power! how incomparable
to it, is secular authoritie! As to Christ is giuen all
power in heauen and in earth, so did Christ leaue
eam omnem all that power to Peter and his successours;
and as there is no power but of God, so is there
neither any Temporall, nor Ecclesiasticall power, but
from the Pope, in whose thigh Christ hath written,
King of kings, and Lord of Lords, and of whose

power it is sacriledge to dispute. These doth Gerson
condemne, as stult as, fals as, & insanas adulationes,
as being foolish, false and franticke flatteries; And
this is the very summe of their doctrine, of the
Popes temporall Monarchie. And then reiecting
both these errours, he saith, Discretion doth
hold the meane betweene them both, so that Clergie
men are such, as may both haue possessions of temporall
goods against detractours, and yet haue onely
a directiue and regulatiue power in them, against
flatterers.
               
               
                  Iohan. Maior
                  Iohan. Maior in distinc. 
                        •
                     4. q. 3. Concl. 
                        •
                     . sets this downe for a conclusion,
The Pope hath not temporall dominion aboue
Kings, and he proues it by sundrie reasons; first,
if he had, then should Kings be the Popes vassals, and
he might at his pleasure thrust them from their kingdomes;
but this may not be granted. Secondly, the
Popes themselues professe non spectare ad se iurisdictonem
temporalem, that temporall iurisdiction
doeth not belong vnto them. Againe, Kings receiue
not their power immediately from the Pope, nec
influentiam ab co vllam in temporalibus suscipiunt,
neither doe they receiue any influence at all
from him in temporall matters. For the temporall
power doth not depend on the Spirituall, but they are
both distinct powers, neither of them subordinate to
the other, nor depending of the other, for the King is
not the Popes vassall. Againe, the Pope hath two
swordes indeede, but the one, to wit the Spirituall
he hath in act, when hee excommunicates, or interdicts;
the other, to wit the Secular, he hath in habit, id

est potest rogare Princepes terrenos quatenus sint
sibi subsidio, hee may desire secular Princes to
helpe him with that sword. Againe, Though Petrus
Paludamus, and Turrecremata hold the contrary,
yet that which they hold, facultas nostra censuit
in fide haeresin, our facultie hath censured it to be
an herisie against the faith.
               
                  Iacobus Almane
                  
                     Iacob. Almaine. lib. de potest. Eccles. & Laica. hath writ a whole Booke
touching the Ecclesiasticall and Laicall power.
He hauing declared theIbid quaest. 1 ca 6. §. Quae. ritur. the difference betwixt
hauing Dominion or proprietie in goods, and hauing
Iurisdiction in those temporall goods, adds
two conclusions fitt for our purpose. The formerIbid. §. Istis.,
that the Pope hath not by Christs institution,
supremam potestatem Dominij in singulis hominibus,
& bonis ipsorum, not supreame dominion, either
ouer all persons, or ouer their goods, and
to say the contrary, is as hee out of Occam
teacheth, multum Haereticale & perniciosum, very
heriticall and pernicious. His other conclusion
is thisIbid. §. Secunda., The Pope hath not by Christs
institution, supremam potestatem Iurisdictionis
in rebus temporalibus, not the supreame
power of Iurisdiction in temporall matters,
and that hee prooues out of St. Augustine.
                  Idem. lib. eod. quaest. 3. ca. 8.
And after, enquiring whence the secular power
of Princes doeth depend, The resolution saith he y,
of this question is thus. Potestas iurisdictionis principium
saecularum non dependet a Papa, The power
of iurisdiction which secular Princes haue, neither
dependes on the Pope, nor on the Romane

Church: Nay the Pope hath no laicall Iurisdiction,
nisi ex collatione Imperatorum & principum, but by
deputation or grant from Emperours and Princes,
or by prescription, (in which is a tacit grant, or
consent of Princes.) His booke is full of the like
assertions.
               
                  Nichol. de Clemangis
                  
                     Nich. de Clemang lib. de corrup. stat. eccle. ca. 5. complaines, That the
Popes libidine dominandi, in their lust and desire of
dominering, exalted themselues aboue Emperours,
Kings, and Princes, of all Nations: that the Popes
Dominion
                  Lib. eod. ca. 13., nay their tyranny is omnibus nec iniuria
supra modum inuisa, detested of all, and that deseruedly;
To say nothing of that his TreatiseNic. de Clem. de egressu ex Babylone.,
wherein he proues, that wee must depart out of Babylon
(that they knowRibera. comm. in ca. 14. Apocal. nu. 44. and professe to be Rome)
not onely in affection and heart, but corporally also.
               
               Theodorick de Niem.Theod. de Nicon. lib. 3. de Schis. ca. 7. Episc. Verdensis, The
Imperiall power, as also the Ecclesiasticall depend immediatly
of God; and therefore fatue & adulatorie
loquuntur, qui dicunt quod Papa habet duos gladios,
they speake foolishly, and flatteringly, who say
that the Pope and Church hath two swords, spirituall
and temporall. These parasites and flatterers
haue bronght a very great error into the Church,
which raiseth perpetuall discord betwixt the Pope
and the Emperour.
               
               
                  Thomas Waldensis
                  
                     Thom. Waldenf. Doctr. 
                        •
                     d. to. 1. lib. 2. Art. 3. ca. 78. in a whole Chapter both
by reasons and by authoritie of fathers proues,
that Regall power is immedtatly from God. In praesumptione
delinquunt, they offend presumptuously,
saith he, who affirme that the roote of secular
power depends on the Pope, and that the execution of

it is deriued from the Popes grant vnto Princes. The
temporall power of Kings is reduced to none aboue
the King, but onely to Christ; the priest and the King
haue vnder Christ impermixt as potestates, powers
which are not conioyned in any one. By this it is
euident quod à sacerdote non habet Rex originem,
that kingly authoritie is not deriued from the
Pope. Regall power is giuen to the King by Christ.
There are duae primae potestates, two powers (pontificiall
and regall) both which, are first in their
owne order, & neutra ab altera secundum originem,
and neither of both takes his beginning from the
other, but either of them in the exercise of his owne
power is greater then the other: And very often the
like.
               
                  Will. Wideford
                  
                     Wil Wideford lib. aduer. Wiclef. art. 16. writing against Wickliffe, brings
in Iohn and Paul, speaking thus to Iulian the Emperour,
We doe you no wrong, nor doe set any man
aboue you in Dominion, but we set God aboue you who
created heauen and earth.
               
               
                  Dionisius Carthusianus
                  
                     Dionis. Carth. in 4. Psal. poenitent. speaking of Dauid,
saith, seeing he was a King, non habuit iudicem superiorem
in terra, he had no superior Iudge vpon
earth that could punish him.
               
                  Platina
                  
                     Platina. in Bonif. 8. liked not well of that Papall Monarnarchy,
when reprouing Boniface the eight, vsurping
that authoritie, he saith, he did rather terrifie
Emperours, Kings, Princes, and Nations, then
put religion into them, quique dare Regna & auferre.
who sought at his pleasure to giue and take away
Kingdomes; And inueying against the vices of
his time, specially in the Popes, he saithIdem. in vita Marcellini., What

shall become of our age wherein vices are growne to
that height, vt vix apud deum misericordiae locum nobis
reliquerint, that they haue scarce left any place
for God to be mercifull: and among other sins
he reckons the Couetousnesse, ambition, pomp, and
pride of their Cleargie, especially corum qui rerum
potiuntur, that is of the Popes: adding, that
there was little regard of Religion, that it was rather
fained then true, and their manners so corrupt
and detestable, as if inde laudem quaererent,
they sought for praise by the vilenesse of their
sinnes.
               
                  Wernerus
                  Wernerus in fascic. temp. an. 1294. saith of Boniface the eight, Hee did
vltra modum beyond measure, aduance himselfe to
that arrogancie, vt Dominum totius mundi se diceret
tam in temporalibus quam inspiritualibus, that hee
called himselfe the Lord of the world, as well in
temporall as in spirituall matters; This is hee of
whom it is said, He entred like a Foxe, reigned like a
Lyon, and dyed like a Dogge.
               
               
                  Iohannes Auentinus
                  
                     Iohn. Auen. lib. 5. Annal. pa. 470. speaking of Pope Hildebrand,
saith, falsi tum Prophetae, false Prophets,
false Apostles, false Priests did then arise, who
deceiued the people with a counterfeit Religion,
and who beganne to exalt themselues in the Temple
of God, aboue all that is honoured, and whiles
they endeuour to establish their owne power and
Dominion, they quench Christian charitie and simplicitie.
Sigebert, a Writer of those times, omnis diuini
humanique iuris consultissimus: a man most skilfull
both in diuine and humane Lawes, writeth

thus, (and Auentinus approues his writing
therein.) A most pernicious sedition, and let
me say it with the leaue of the godly, a most pestilent
heresie, then assailed the Christian people;
They are bould to teach not onely that men ought not
to obey such Gouernours as are placed by God ouer
them, verum etiam fraude, vi, quouis modo tollendos,
but that such are to be murdered or taken
away either by fraud or violence, or by
any meanes: Periuries, murders, ciuill warres,
perfidiousnesse, these they call pietie. They absolue
from obedience, those who are tyed to the
Emperour by the sacred band and oath of religion,
those who are faith-breakers, truce-breakers, violators
of oathes, they perswade such not to bee
periured. AgaineIdem. lib. eod. pa. 447., The holy Fathers did what
Christ taught, what the Apostles both taught and
performed, they honoured Emperours, vt in terris
à Deo secundos, & ante omnes mortales
primos, as the next vnto God heere vpon
earth, and as the cheefest among all mortall
men, calling them their Lords; they denyed
not tribute vnto them. But Hildebrand
boasteth, that both the Pontificall and Imperiall
authoritie is giuen vnto him by GOD, hee takes
both powers vpon him, he dispiseth Emperours and
Kings, vt precario regnantes, as ruling onely at
his pleasure and will. Thus and much more Auentinus.
               
               
                  Gagninus
                  Rob. Gagnin. lib. 
                        •
                     . invita Philip. Pulch
                        •
                     i., of Boniface 8. writeth; Thus dyed
Boniface, the despiser of all men, Qui Christi praeceptorū
minime recordatus, who not remembring

the precepts of Christ, sought at his pleasure to
giue and take away Kingdomes, whereas he was not
ignorant, that he was his Vicare, cuius regnum non
esset de hoc mundo, whose kingdome was not terrene,
nor of this world.
               
                  Petrus Ferrariensis
                  
                     Pet Ferrariens. in forma libell. in Action Confess. pro
                        •
                     seru. tit, 30. gloss. 
                        •
                     . §. Plenam., you see that the Pope
(who should follow the foote-steps of Christ)
doth indeuour to possesse and hold by armed
hand iurisdiction in lands, Citties, villages, and
places which naturally, and from the beginning
of the world, and by the ordinance of Christ,
belong to the Empire, according to that, Giue
vnto Caesar the things that are Caesars: Nay the
Pope indeuours to haue superioritie aboue the
Emperour, Quod ridiculum est dicere, & abominabile
audire, which to say is ridiculous, and to heare
is abominable. For naturally, and from the beginning
of the world, not onely Laikes, but
Clerkes, Erant sub potestate & iurisdictione Imperij,
were vnder the power and iurisdiction of the
Empire: Bene ergo et sancte faceret ipse Papa,
wherefore the Pope should doe well and religiously,
if he did remit the whole Temporall iurisdiction
into the hands of the Emperor: neither
without so doing will the Common-weale, and
specially Italy euer be at quiet, and by this means
both Pope, Cardinals, and the whole state of the
Cleargie, should liue more deuoutly, and bee
more gratefull and acceptable both to God
and men. Thus Petrus.
               
               
                  George Hiemburge
                  
                     Georg. de Hiemburg. in admonit. de iniust. vsurpat, paparum. at large refutes this vsurped
Papall Monarchie, (so he cals it) answering

their vaine pretences for the same, and hauing
to this purpose alledged the testimonie of Christ,
of S. Paul, of Hierom, Origen, Chrysostome,
Basil, and Bernard, by this, saith heIbid. §. Ex quibus., it appeares, fabulam
& figmentum esse, that it is a meere fable
and figment which is written in the Popes Decretals,
that the Pope hath the fulnesse of power giuen
him by Christ, and such a Dominion that he is aboue
Kings and Princes in temporall matters. AgaineIbid. §. Quibus.,
by these now it doth appeare more cleare then light,
that Christ gaue no temporall power at all vnto
Priests, much lesse did he giue the fulnesse mundanae
& temporalis potestatis, of terrene and secular power:
nay it doth cleerely appeare that this (supreame
and independent) power is both by Christs words
and example, forbidden to the Apostles and their successours.
               
               
                  Antonius Rosellus
                  Ant. Rossell. lib. de Monarch. part. 1. ca. 38. proues, that the Pope is vtterly
vncapable of Monarchicall and Temporall Soueraigntie,
whereof hauing giuen diuers reasons,
from hence, saith he, I doe conclude, haereticum &
insanum esse, dicere quod vniuersalis administratio
temporalium sit vel esse possit apud pontificem, that
to say the Pope either hath or can haue the vniuersall
iurisdiction and administration of temporall
affaires, is Hereticall, and a madnesse.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XI.
               That the Popes temporall Monarchy is condemned
by Bishops and learned writers liuing from
the yeare 1500. vnto 1620.
               
                  IN the sixteeneth age,Ab An. 1500. ad 1620. when Iulius
the second, non tam
                  Chron. Citiz. Paul. Lang. an. 1513. 
                  clauiger
quam armiger, one that vsed
Pauls sword more then Peters
keyes, sought partly by force,
partly by fraud to take Ferraria
from the French, Lewis the eleuenth
then King of France, calling certaine Cardinals
vnto him, summoned a Councell
                     Conc. Pisan. de quo. Nich. Basel in contin. Naucl. an. 1511 Generale Concilium Pisis indixerūt. Rex generalem conuentum indicendū curauit. Onuph. in vit. Iul. 2. to Pisa
Anno 1511, cited Pope Iulius ad causam
                  Onuph. loc. cit. 
                  dicendum,
to answere and plead for himselfe in the Councell.
A demonstration they held not him for
their supreame Monarch. The Pope
                  Nic. Basel. loc. cit. 
                  exhorted
the French King not to take part with the Cardinals,
but he, nihil horum aduertens not regarding a whit
the Popes admonitions, continued his resolution
against the Pope; Iulius excommunicated
him, which caused him to make warre against the
Pope, wherein the Pope was forced to flee to
Ostia, and was faine both to sue
                  Papa omnē operam dedit vt pacem cum Francorum rege feceret. Onuph loc. cit. 
                  for a reconcilement
at the French Kings hand and to appoint a
Councell at Rome in the Laterane of purpose
                  Quo Pisanum Conciliabulum tolleret, Romae Concilium in dixit. Onuph. Ibid. 
                  to diuert

and auoid the danger of the Councell at Pisa.
               
               
                  Anno 1561. was held an assembly at Paris
                  
                     Parisiens Conuentus. Thuan. hist tom. 2. lib. 28. pa. 41 & Bochel. lib. 5. tit. 3. ca. 6. against
Iohn Tanquerell, who held that the Pope was
both a spirituall and temporall Monarch, and that
Princes who rebell against the Popes precepts, are to
be depriued of their Kingdomes and Dignities. It
was there decreed by the whole assembly, that
Tanquerell should be punished, and because hee was
absent, that the Bedle in his name should openly declare
that Tanquerell was sorry for moouing that
question, which he acknowledged to haue bene handled
both rashly and inconsideratly; and that for this
cause he did most humbly beseech the King to pardon
his offence. And further it was decreed, that no
Diuines should handle (much lesse defend) such
questions, and positions as was this of Tanquerell;
of which the King himselfe said, It tended to sedition,
and to weaken that loyaltie of lawfull obedience
which is due to the King. This Decree ten daies after
was put in execution, where before some fiftie Diuines,
Petrus Gustus in the name of Tanquerell
retracted, errorem à Bonifacio 8. inuectum et post
eius mortem passim damnatum, that error brought
in by Boniface the eight, and euery where after his
death condemned.
               Another assembly
                     Paris. Conuent. apud Bochel lib. 5. tit. 4 ca 8 pa. 134 & 755. of the French State, was
held at Paris, anno 1595. against one Florentinus
Iacobus, and Thomas Blancius, their positions
were, that seeing Pope Clement the eight was
Christs vice-gerent in earth, there was no doubt, but
both Temporall and Spirituall power was from
the Pope. And againe, that the Pope had the power

of both swords, Spirituall and Temporall: It was
declared by the assembly, That these positions
were false, Schismaticall, contrarie to the word of
GOD, to the holy Decrees, Constitutions, Canons
and Lawes of the Realme, such as tended to rebellion,
and troubling of the peace of the Kingdom.
               
               In another assembly at Paris
                  Paris. Conuent. apud Bochel. lib. 5. tit. 20. ca. 45., anno 1595. Cardinall
de Pelleue, and other Prelates reiected certaine
Decrees of the Trent Councell; for whereas
the Pope and his Trent faction had saidConc. Trid. sess. 25. de Reform. cap. 19., that
if any Emperour, King, Duke, Marquesse, or other
temporall Lord, should grant any place within his
territories, for Duell, by so doing they are to be ipso
facto excommunicated, and depriued of their iurisdiction
and dominion ouer that Cittie, towne, castle,
or place, wherein they permitted Duell, the assembly
of those Prelates thus censure that Trent Decree.
This Trent Article is contrarie to the authoritie
of the King, who cannot be depriued of his temporall
dominion, respectu cuius nullum omnino superiorem
recognoscit, in respect of which he acknowledgeth
none at all (among mortall men) to bee
his superiour.
               When Leo the tenth his Laterane assembly,
had as much as in them lay, adnulled the
Pragmaticall Sanction made in the Councell at
Bytures, wherein the Decrees made in the Councell
at Basill were confirmed, the Vniuersitie of
Paris,
                  
                     Vniuers Parisien in Appellat à Conc. later. sub Leone. 10., an. 1517. not only appealed from the Pope;
thereby professing him not to bee the supreame
Iudge, no not in spirituall, (much lesse in temporall)

causes, but expresly saide of that Laterane
Synod, that it was an hereticall assembly, and had
decreed that which was contrarie to the Catholique
faith, as before we declared.
               The French ChurchGallicana Eules., (I meane those in that
Kingdome who imbrace their present Romish
faith) were so far from acknowledging the Popes
Soueraigntie in temporall, that they would not
admit it so much as in spirituall matters. This opinion,
saith that worthy relatourRelation of State and Religion in the West parts. pa. 129.; (that a generall
Councel is aboue the Pope) is very currant and strong
euen among such Catholikes in France, as fauour
the Papacie. Others hold their Romane Church to
be a true Church, but for the Pope, they hold resolutely
that he is Antichrist. This sort spreadeth
farre, and as themselues will say, is of the learned
sort. How did they account him their Soueraigne,
who not long since in the daies of Henry
the fourth. When
                  Ibid. pa. 1
                        ••
                     
                   
                  the Pope made scruple to blesse
the King, they were readie to withdraw thēselues vtterly
from the obedience of that See, and to erect
a new Patriarch of their owne; The Archbishop of
Burges was readie to accept that dignitie, and it
had beene effected, but that the Pope, in feare thereof,
did hasten his Benediction. How againe,
did that Church acknowledge the Pope for
a Monarch, when they would not accept nor
allow of his Lawes made in the Conncell at
Trent. The King
                  Innoc. Gentilet. in exam. Conc. Trid. Sess. 12. pa. 96, 97. & Ioh. Sleid. Com. lib. 22. pa. 33
                        •
                     . 
                  not onely in contempt,
calling it Conuentum, and not Concilium, at
which the Trent Assembly stormed not a little,

but professing also, se suosque subditos, that he and
his subiects would by no meanes bee bound to obey
the same: others of the same French Church
were so auerse from those Trent decrees, euen
vntill these daies, that but of late
                  Iac. Gaulter in sua Chron. Soec. 17. sub tit Concil. in fine., anno 1614.
some of the Prelates and Peeres, entreated this present
King Lewis the 13. that he would commaund,
that Oecumenical Councell per totum regnum recipi,
ac promulgari, to be receiued in his whole Kingdome:
But the loue which that French Church
Basiliensis concilij authoritas, & constantia decretorum eius perpetua esto, &c. Sanct. pragm. in Conc. Bitur. de quo supra. beareth to the Councel at Basil, and their owne
pragmaticall sanction made at Bytures, may perswade
that this Iesuiticall motion, will hardly
euer there take effect, although Gualter
                  Loc. cit. boasts
of the great successe it found in that yeare.
               
               Further yet how was the Popes Monarchie
there acknowledged, whenDecret. Parliament. recitatur apud Gold in Replic. pro Imp. ca 9. pa. 81. 82 
                  anno 1610. the doctrine
and Booke of Card. Bellarmine, written against
Barclay, (in which Bellarmine defends that
the Pope may excommunicate and depose Princes)
was so detested by that State, that in their publicke
assembly they did prohibit and forbid any, and
that vnder the paine of high treason, either to keepe
or receiue, or print or sell that booke continentem falsum
ac detestabile dogma, conteining that false
and detestable doctrine, tending to the subuersion
of the highest Magistrates, to rebellion against Princes,
to the withdrawing of due obedience in subiects:
They commaund further, and vnder the punishment
also of high treason, Ne quis Doctor, Professor,
that no Doctor, Professour, or any other,
should write or teach directly, or indirectly the same

doctrine of the Popes temporall power; to wit, that
hee hath power to excommunicate and depose
Kings, to giue or take away their Kingdomes.
And though it were true (which is all that Gretzer
                  Gretz. lib. 1. cont. Replic. ca 11. §. Etiam.
could hereunto oppose) that the present
King Lewis, at the sollicitation of the Popes Nuncio,
stayed the publishing of that Edict for a time, yet
the verie Decree of their whole State and Senate,
demonstrates that which wee intend and
proue, that this pestilent doctrine of the Popes
Supremacie, was abhorred and detested by that
whole State.
               Besides these, how many SynodsSynodi Eccles fiarum reformas tarum. held by
those of the reformed Churches in this age,
might be produced? diuers at Wormes
                  Vide Ioh. Funct. & Christ Heluic. in suis Chron. & Ioh. Sleid. comm de statu Relig., at Augusta,
at Spire, at Norimburg, at Ratisbone, at
Franckford, at many other places in all which the
Popes supremacie not onely Temporall, but Ecclesiasticall
also, was condemned. Of them all I
will mention but one Decree, of that late Nationall
Synod at Gape
                  Decretum à Nationali Synodo Eccle. Gallic. celebrata Gapinci, an. 1603. in France, which is this,
Whereas the Bishop of Rome, hauing erected a Monarchy
in the Christian Church, doth challenge and
arrogate vnto himselfe principality ouer all Churches,
and treadeth vnder
                        •
                     foote the lawfull authoritie
of Magistrates, giuing, taking away, and translating
Kingdomes, we doe steadfastly beleeue, and constantly
affirme him (the Bishop of Rome) esse verumillum
et Germanum Antichristum, to bee that true
and great Antichrist, and sonne of perdition.
               To these may be added the confessions of many
reformed Churches
                     Confessiones Reform. Eccles. vid. Harmon. Confessionum; of Auspurge presented

to Charles the fift, an. 1530. of Basil, an. 1532.
of Heluetia, an. 1536. of Saxonie, an. 1551. written
to be presented to the Councell at Trent, of
Wittenberg, an. 1552. presented to their Councel
at Trent, of France, an. 1559. presented to Charles
the ninth; of England, an. 1562. of Belgia, anno
1566. of Bohemia, an. 1573. of Scotland, an 1581.
and others; in all which with one harmonie is
condemned their Papall Monarchie, and that
euen in Ecclesiasticall, much more in Temporall
causes.
               What an infinite number of Witnesses in this
last age might be produced out of the reformed
ChurchesPretestantiū scripta., Luther, Melancthon, Brentius, Bucer,
Caluine, Musculus, B. Iewell, B. Horne, B. Bilson,
and those three Reuerend and most learned Bishops
now liuing, B. Andrewes, B. Buckridge, B.
Moorton: Dr. Rainolds, Dr. Whitakers, & a million
of other learned and godly Bishops, Pastors,
and Writers of the Church, who not onely reiect,
but haue by vnanswerable reasons refuted
that Papall Monarchie, which they now claime.
And though to these most worthy seruants of
Christ, the writers of their present Romane
Church in this age, are neither for learning, nor
pietie, in any sort to be compared, yet omitting
all these, I will alledge cheefely the testimonies
of some of their owne and best learned writers
in this age, most of them such as are extreamely
partiall on the Popes side, and earnest in his
cause, that themselues giuing testimonie to that
truth which we maintaine, and like Midianites,

sheathing their swords in the bowels one of another,
this Temporall Monarchy of the Pope like
the head of Goliah, may be cut off, though by
the hands of Dauid, yet with the Philistines owne
swords.
               It was no good token, that either Pope Hadrian
the sixt, or Marcellus 2.Marcellus 2., liked wel of their Monarchicall
Soueraigntie, when the formerPlat. in vit. Hadriani 6. 
                  caused
this to be written on his tombe; That he esteemed
nothing to haue beene more vnhappy vnto him, then
that he did Imperare; and the otherPlat. in vit Marcelli. 2. 
                  sitting at dinner
on a time, and there remembring that speech of
Hadrian, smiting his hand on the table, brake out
into this saying: Non video quomodo qui locum
hunc altissimum tenent, saluari possunt, I see not
how any Pope can be saued. The well meaning
Pope, it seemes, was conscious of some exceeding
vsurpation, transgression, or iniustice, generall
to all later Popes; (and what else should
that be, but their vsurped Soueraigntie) when
he grew to such a generall dispaire of the saluation
of them all.
               Card. Caietane
                     Card. Caietan. In Opusc. to. 1. Tract. 3. ca. 7., vnder the power of Peter it is
comprehended, that he rules ouer Kings and Princes
in order to the kingdome of heauen, nee enim huiusmodi
Imperium aliud est, quam aperire & claudere
regnum coelorum, for this power which the Pope
hath, is nothing else, but to open or shut the
kingdome of heauen; then hath hee no Temporall
Monarchy; and this to be the iudgement of
Caietane, Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. 5. de Rom. Pont. ca. 
                        •
                     . vbi. citat Caietan. in Apol. ca. 13. and Franc. de Victorra
                  Franc. à Victor. Relect. 1. de potest ceel. sec. 6. nu. 8. vbi cit at Caiet. in Apol. ca. 6. assure

vs. Caietane teacheth, that in the Pope there
is no meere temporall power.
               
               Ambrosius Catharinus
                     Amb. Cathac. in cap. 13. ad Rom., There are some, who
either in flattery, or in too great simplicitie, affirme
the Pope to haue Dominationē e
                        •
                     iam temporalem totius
orbis terrae, the Temporall Dominion of the
whole world. Verum ridicula haec profecto, But
truly thus to say is ridiculous. And he sets down
diuers reasons to disproue that ridiculous assertion.
One, because if it were so, then there should
none be truly Kings in the world but onely the Pope.
Another, because Christ himselfe refused to bee a
Temporall King, when the Iewes would haue made
him one: and he answered, to one of the brothers
who requested him to diuide the inheritance, who
made me a Iudge, or a diuider between you? Of which
words Catharinus thus saith; Hic locus videtur cogere
vt fateamur, This place seemes euen to enforce
vs to confesse, that secular iurisdiction was
not giuen vnto him. Againe, we doe not deny that
the Pope hath dominion of tempor all things, but this
we say, that such dominion is not giuen to him as
Pope, nor immediatly by Christ, sed illud habet quasi
vnus quilibet hominum, but he hath it as any other
man, vnto whom by humane right such power
befals. Againe, In this, that the Pope is Christ Vicare,
there is no force to proue, that power is giuen
to him, ad regendum omnia regna mundi in temporalibus,
to rule all kingdomes in temporall affaires.
Nay this doth rather perswade, that such power is
not giuen vnto the Pope, seeing Christ whose Vicare

he is, refused that honour, and tooke it not vpon him,
as hee was man, but was himselfe subiect to secular
powers.
               
               
                  Domin. Soto
                  
                     Dom. Soto. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      4. Sentu. dist. 25. q. 2. art. 1. concl. 3., The excellencie of the Ecclesiasticall
powers aboue the Ciuil, is not of this sort, that the
Pope should be Lord ouer the whole world in temporal
matters, And he giues diuers reasons hereof; one,
Christ left to his Vicar no other power, but what himselfe
as man had, nullum autem Regnum temporale
accepit, but Christ receiued no Temporall Kingdome.
Another, Pope Innocentius, in the Chap. per
venerabilem, qui fil. sint legit. confesseth ingenuously
that he hath not power in temporall matters in
the kingdome of France, and, quicquid alij somniant,
whatsoeuer others dreame, he vnderstands
this, de omnibus regnis, of all Kingdomes.
               
               Ioh. Driedo
                     Ioh. Driede, de libert. Christ. lib. 1. pa. 145. 146., This is to be knowne, that Christ
when he set Peter ouer the whole Church, giuing
him Iurisdiction ouer all the members thereof, non
simul dedit ei imperium temporale super vniuersam
Ecclesiam, did not with all giue him any Temporall
Dominion or Monarchy ouer the whole
Church: For he did not take from Kings and Emperours
their Empires, neither was it his will or intent,
that all Regall power should be deriued from
the power of Peter, or from the Pope. Neither doe
Christian Princes and Kings hold their Kingdomes
and Empires in fee from the Pope. Whence hee
concludes this to be manifest, That the Imperiall
power of one man ouer the whole Church, non est diuini
iuris, aut naturalis, is neither from the law of
God, nor nature, seeing neither naturall reason,

doth dictate, that one should be a Temporall Lord
ouer all, neither doth the Law of God command it.
               
               
                  Andradius
                  
                     Andradius defens. Trid. fid. lib 2. pa. 
                        •
                     04. commends very highly that saying
of Aquinas, Prudentissime docuit, Thomas
taught most wisely, That secular Princes are not
bound by lawes in respect of coaction, but of direction
That is, paenis cogi non posse, they cannot bee
compelled by punishments due to transgressors.
And the same Andradius addesIbid. pa. 
                        ••
                     3, That all learned
men, yea euen the Popes themselues, Innocentius
and Hadrian approue this saying of Thomas:
Then by the iudgement of Andradius, all learned
men, and Popes themselues teach, the Pope
not not be a superiour Lord, or Temporall Monarch
to Kings and Princes; for if they were,
they might inflict temporall punishments, and
vse coactiue authoritie ouer them.
               Claud. Espenseus
                     Clau. Espenseus. Com. in cap. 3. epist. ad Titum. Digress. 10., the Apostle following both
the example and doctrine of Christ, commaunded beleeuers
to be subiect to temporall powers; But some
turbulent persons making a controuersie betwixt the
Priesthood and kingdome, haue raised great troubles;
Chrysostom long after the Apostles, and many hundreth
of yeares, antehan
                        •
                      camerinam, before this
sinke was set open, neuer suspecting that any such
thing would happen, taught, that euery soule must be
subiect, whether he be an Apostle, an Euangelist, a
Prophet, or a Bishop; Theodoret, Oecumenius,
Theophilact, and all the Greekes follow Chrysostome.
Gregorie the Great ingenuously acknowledged,
that the Emperour ought, Dominari, to rule
ouer Priests. Bernard teacheth the same: yea Popes

themselues in their Decrees, fatentur se imperatoribus
subiectos esse, confesse that they are subiect
to Emperours. GregorieIdem cōm in epist. ad Ti
                        •
                     met
                        •
                     . D
                        •
                     gress lib. 2. cap. 6. 
                  the seuenth called
Hildebrand by a new schisme first of all, lifted
vp his Pontifical lance against the Imperial diademe.
               
               
                  Krantzius
                  Aib. Krantz. Saxo
                        •
                     . lib. 8. ca. 36. speaking of Hildebrand, triumphing
gloriously in his two swords, at the time
of the great Iubile, which hee first instituted,
with indignation thereat, saith, Behold O Peter,
thy successour, and thou O Christ, behold thy Vicare,
Vide quo ascendit superbia serui seruorum tuorum,
See whither the pride of the seruant of thy seruants
is ascended.
               
                  Iob. Nauclerus
                  Ioh. Naucl. ad an. 1085. handling, but very timerously,
this question about the Popes Temporall Monarchie,
in the end resolues as Gerson did, That
both Detraction is to be shunned, whereby all temporall
power and possessions are denyed to the Pope:
and also Adulation; whereby one ascribes so much
to the Pope, as if all kingdomes did depend on him,
which he with Gerson cals, slultas & fals as adulationis
insantas; moderate discretion keepes the
meane betwixt these two: Againe, Videntur per emnia
culpandi,
those Bishops seeme altogether to be
worthy of blame, who would smite the Kings with
that temporal sword, quem ipsi ex regum habent gratia,
which they haue frō the permission of Kings.
               Georgius Cassander
                     Georgy. 
                           〈◊〉
                        . Consultat. Art. 7. Cap. Cap. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . Pontif. Rom. pa. 58., this Controuersie
about the Popes supremacy in spirituall matters, had
neuer, as I thinke, risen among vs, but that Popes
hac authoritate ad dominationis quandam speciem
abusi, abusing this authoritie to a kinde

of domination, had exceeded the bounds prescribed
by Christ. This abuse of their Pontificial power,
which flatterers haue beyond all measure encreased,
gaue accasion of reuolting from the Church, and of
disliking that power, which they obteined by the vniuersall
consent of the Church. AgaineIbid. Artic. 16. de Magistratu., this ought
to be held without all doubt, that the power and authoritie
of Christian Kings and Emperours, is no way
lesse nor inferiour to the authority which the Kings of
Israel had in their Common-wealth. Now Carerius,
                  Alex. Car. lib. 2. de Pontif. Rom. ca. 18. nu. 14.,
and others, who are most violent for the
Popes Temporall Monarchie, professe, That in
the time of the Law, the Kings of Israel were superiour
to Priests, and had power and iurisdiction aboue
them: might punish and depriue them of their
spirituall offices and dignities; yea, euen kill them as
any other lay persons, if they were transgressours.
The King
                  Lib. eod. ca. 1. nu. 6. 
                  was then the substantiue, and the Priesthood
the adiectiue. Then by Cassanders iudgement,
it is also now and ought for euer so to be.
               
                  Sixtus Senensis
                  
                     Sixt. Senensis Bibl. sanct. lib. 6. Annot. 72., disputing this point, resolues
it out of Turrecremata. lib. 2. Cap. 113. in this manner.
An vniuersall temporall power is two-fould:
the one is Monarchicall, the other Pastorall: The
Monarchicall power is that whereby one is made a
Monarch and supreame Lord of all persons & lands
in the world, so that he may aduance whom he will to
Kingdomes, Empires, and Dukedomes, and depose
whom & when he wil: This Monarchical power the
Pope hath not, saith Turrecremata; and to him
Sixtus subscribes, and he giues this reason, because
Christ hath forbidden this to his Apostles; for

when they did striue, saith he, de Monarchia temporalis
regni, which of them should be a Temporal
Monarch, Christ answered, the Kings of the Gentiles
reigne, but with you it shall not be so. Pastorall
power in temporall matters in such, as the Occumenicall
Pastour may vse for the better administration
of the spirituall blessings in the Church, This the
Pope may haue, saith Sixtus, but he may not take vpon
him Monarchical domination; that is forbidden
by Christ.
               
               HosiusStan. Hosius contra Brent. proleg lib. 5. §. Quartum. cals Kings the heads of their kingdomes,
adding, that Christ being the principall head,
gouerneth by those who are ministeriall heads
vnder him, by Princes and Emperours hee gouernes
kingdomes; by the Pope, the Church, and vnto
Christ as the head of the Church, so the head of the
kingdome is subiect.
               
               Francis. à Victoria
                     Franc. a Victor. Relect. 1. de potest. eccle. sect. 2. nu. 7., The Apostles had power
and authoritie in the Church, ea autem non fuit ciuilis,
but it was not any ciuill power, seeing neither
their kingdome, nor power was of this world.
AgaineIbid. sect. 6. nu. 5., Temporall power doth not depend on the
Pope, the Pope giues no power to Kings and Princes,
for no man giues that which he hath not: AgaineIbid. nu. 4.,
the Ciuill power is not subiect to the Popes temporall
power, or to the Pope, tanquam Domino temporali,
as to a Temporall Lord. Whence it followeth
                  Ibid. nu. 5. 
                  manifestly, that the Pope hath no ordinary power to
iudge of the causes of Princes, of rights of dominion,
or title of kingdomes, neither may one appeale to
him in temporall causes. Further yet, In
                  Ibid nu 8. & Relect. 5. sect. 2. nu. 3. 
                  Papa nulla
est potestas mere temporalis, there is no meere

temporall power at all in the Pope; neither
                  Idem Rel. 1. sect. 2. nu. 9. 
                  doth
the temporall power depend on the spirituall, as an
inferiour art depends on his superior, as the art of
making bridles depends on horsemanship, and the
art of making weapons, on the Military skill. All
these and much more doth Victoria proue.
               Albert
                     •
                  s Pighius
                     
                        
                           〈◊〉
                        . Pighi. Controu 16. § Quod Christū pa. 254., That they say, Christum
spiritualem tantum potestatem Apostolis dedisse, etiam
nobis placet, that Christ gaue onely Ecclesiasticall
power to his Apostles, I like it well, and
say the same. Pighius reacheth, saith Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. 5. de Pontif. Rom. c
                        •
                     
                     ▪ 1. §. Tertia.,
that the Pope directly hath no Temporall Dominion.
               DuarenusDuarenus. lib. 1. de sacr. eccle. minist. ca. 4., Bishops haue not ius gladij & imperium,
the right of the sword, nor an Empire:
This belongs to ciuill Magistrates, as Christ cleerely
witnesseth when he said, My kingdome is not of this
world: and intreating of the Decree of Clement 5.
that all Kings depend on the Romane church, This
constitution, saith heIbid., did so far displease Cynus Pistoriensis,
that he feared not to say, this text proceeded
ex Pontificiorum errore, out of the error of
those who tooke part with the Pope: adding,
that most Lawyers are of the same opinion; and that
Bartholus in saying otherwise, speakes rather dicis
causa, then ex animo.
               Michael Coccinius
                     Mich. Coccin, lib. de transl. Imperij., Imperator Imperium tenet
à Deo, the Emperour holds his Empire from
God, and not from the Pope, and speaking of
the translating of the Empire; The Pope, saith
he, doth in no other sort transferre it from one to
another, quam Imperium transferentibus consentiendo,
                  
but by consenting to others who transferre
it, or by declaring that it ought to bee transferred;
but the translation hath his force and efficacie,
not from him, but from the consent of the people.
               
               
                  Hier. Balbus
                  
                     Hier. Balbus. lib. de Coro. nat. pa. 18. & seq., Episcopus Gurcensis, sets downe
many and vnanswerable reasons, ex quibus, saith
he, planè conuincitur, by which it is cleerely conuinced,
that neither the Pope nor the Emperour doe
one depend on the other, sed vtrumque à solo Deo
manare, but that both of them spring from one
and the same fountaine, and that is God; euen as
                  Ibid. pa. 21. Moses and Aaron did either of them receiue their
power from God: and for this opinion, pugnant
                  Ibid pa. 18▪
                  
                  omnes fere Caesarei iur is interpretes, almost all the
ciuill Lawyers doe fight, Bartholus, Albericus,
and others; yea, diuers also of the Canonists, especially
Pope Innocentius in Cap. licet ex suscept. de
foro compet, and Pope Iohn. Ca. Si Imperatori. dist.
96, and Archidiac. dist. 96. ca. Duo sunt. The same
also is taught, saith heIbid▪ pa. 2
                        •
                      & 18., by Petrus de Ancona and
Thomas Aquinas lib. de reg. princip. who saith,
that there are two mysticall bodies of Christ, the one
spirituall, in which the Pope is cheefe; the other temporall,
in which the Emperour is cheefe: and Christ
being the head, influit primario, doth immediatly
giue the influence of power and dignitie to either:
and then for the full resolution of the matter,
and least
                  Ibid. pa. 64. & seq. 
                  any should hereafter erre in this,
wherein the dignitie and maiestie of the Empire consists,
he sets downe verbatim the Constitution of
Lewis of Bauare, which was made, as he saith, omni
ambiguitate mature discussa, euery ambiguitie

being maturely and exactly discussed by Bishops:
one part of which Decree is this that the
Imperiall dignitie and power, à solo Deo dependet,
depends onely of God, and that it is a pestiferous
doctrine by which the Deuill hath raised strife and sedition,
to say that the Imperiall dignitie or power is
of the Pope.
               
               
                  Onuphrius
                  
                     Onuphrius in vita Greg. 7. speaking of the ancient Popes,
saith, They were honoured as heads of the Christian
Religion, and as Christs Vicares, but their authoritie
extended no further, then to doctrines of faith, and
they were subiect to Emperours, and did all things at
their commaund: they were created by them, to Iudge
of Emperours they durst not. Gregorie the seuenth
first of all, and besides the custome of his Ancestors,
contemning the Imperiall authority and power, was
bold to depriue the Emperour of his kingdome. A
thing not heard of before that age; for those things
which are reported of Arcadius, Anastasius, and
Leo Iconomachus are but fables.
               
               
                  Papirius Massonus
                  
                     Papir. Masson. in vita Bonif. 8, vtterly dislikes the fact of
Boniface the eight, in claiming the supremacy as wel
in temporall as in spirituall matters, he cites and
commends the words of Petrarch, wherein hee
saith, that Boniface like Iupiter Olimpius, fulminabat
de terris, thundred in the earth with threats
and menacing Edicts: he cals Boniface Tyrannum
Sacerdotum, a tyrant of Bishops; and in the
end admonisheth Popes, not to make Kings their
enemies, for let not Popes thinke that God hath made
them froenos regibus, to be as bridles to Kings,
to curb them as they list like vnruly Horses, let

them admonish, let them pray, to threaten to terrifie,
to make warres, Episcopos non decent, doe not
beseeme Bishops.
               Sir Thomas Moore
                  Sir Thomas Moore in exposit. passionis. de amputata Malchi aurie., That which Christ commanded
Peter, Put thy sword into thy scabbard, is as
if he had said, neither will I bee defended with this
sword, and I haue chosen thee into that place, vt non
tali gladio te pugnare velim, sed gladio verbi Dei,
that I will not haue thee to fight with such a
a sword, but with the sword of Gods word, Let
the materiall sword be put vp into his place, put
it into the hands of secular Princes, you that are my
Apostles, haue another sword to vse.
               
               
                  Steph. Gardiner
                  
                     Steph Gard. lib de vera obedien. writ a booke, de vera obedientia,
wherein he fully and substantially refutes the
Popes supremacie, and that euen in Ecclesiasticall
causes, prouing that the sword of the Church
extends no further, but to teaching and excommunication,
and that the Soueraignety of gouernment, as
well in Ecclesiasticall as in Temporall causes, belongs
to Princes. This also he confirmed by his sacred
oathIuramenti forma extat in Acts and Monuments in Hen. 8. pa. 964. I Steph. Gardiner do promise and sweare
to you Henrie my Lord, King of England and
France, atque in terris Ecclesiae Anglicanae immediate
sub Christo supremo Capiti, and the supreme
head of the Church of England, next and immediatly
vnder Christ, that I shall not giue, or
cause to be giuen to any forren Potentate, Prince, or
Prelate, no not to the Bishop of Rome any oath or feolti
                        •
                     ,
directly or indirectly▪ but shall performe faith,
truth, and obedience to your royall Maiesty, as to my
supreame Lord, neither shall I consent that the Bishop

of Rome shall haue or exercise here any authority
or iurisdiction. Further, I doe professe that the Papacie
of Rome is not ordained of God, and that the
Pope is not to be called supreame, nor vniuersall Bishop,
and much more to the like purpose. To all
this he swore, subscribed, and set his hand and
Seale, an. 1534.
               To this booke De vera obedienda, Edmund Bonner
                  
                     Ed
                           •
                        . Bonner praefat. ad lib. Gardineri.
B. of London prefixed a Preface, wherein
among other words tending to the approbation
of that Booke, he sayth of the Pope, That he is a
rauening Wolfe dressed in sheepes clothing; he cals him
Iupiter of Olympus, which falsly hath arrogated
to himself an absolute power without controulement;
that hee stirred vp other Kinges and Princes traiterously
against the King; that it is no new thing to bee
against the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome; that the
Popes supremacie is falsly pretended; that the booke
of Gard. will well content those who fauour the truth
and hate the tyranny of the Bishop of Rome, and his
Satanicall fraudulent falshood. Besides the same
Bonner did take the very like oath as Gardiner had
done, subscribing to it, and confirming it, both
by his hand and Seale.
               The like oath for acknowledgement of the
Kings Soueraignetie not onely in Temporall but
in Ecclesiasticall Causes, and condemning the
Popes vsurpation in them both, was taken by
Ioh. Stokesley
                  
                     Ioh Stockesley & alij, eorum Iurament. ex
                     
                        •
                     at in Act & Monum. loc. 
                        •
                     it. pa. 965., Bishop of London, Edward Le,
Arch-bishop of Yorke, Cuthbard Tunstall, B. of
Durham, and many moe.
               
                  
The Vniuersitie of Cambridge
                     Academ. Cantabridg. eius literae extant. ibid pa. 965., though then
addicted to Popish Religion, hauing debated
and discussed this point, resolued in this manner,
We affirme it as a conclusion vndoubted, that the Bishop
of Rome hath no more authority and iurisdiction
giuen him by God in the Scriptures, ouer this Realme
of England, then any other externe Bishop hath: and
that is none at all.
               Card. Poole
                     Card Poole lib. de summo Pontif. ca. 23., By these words it is shewed, that
Christs Kingdome was spirituall and celestiall; his
Church is not Regnum huius mundi, no kingdome
of this world, but of heauen: This Kingdome
Christ hath left to St. Peter, and his Successours;
And though he callIbid. cap. 29. it Imperium totius orbis, an
Empire of the whole world, yet hee plainely
shewesIbid ca. 24. in fine. that he meanes not that it is any Temporall
Empire, Such as takes away others Empires
and Kingdomes, but a Spirituall, such as by spirituall
direction corroborates, and confirmes them all,
by drawing them vnto faith and pietie.
               
               
                  Card. Alane
                  
                     Card. Alanus in Resp ad perseq Angl. ca. 3. pa. 319., one of their learnedest, and most
eager maintainers of the Popes supremacie in
spirituall matters, sets this downe as a rule; Quilibet
princeps, summus est suorum, etiam Episcoporum
gubernator, Euery Prince is the Supreame
Gouernour, euen of his Bishops, but not in all
causes: he meanes in Temporall, but not in Spirituall.
AgaineIbid ca. 5. in Princ., Princes quoad regnum suum &
ciuilem gubernationem nullos superiores agnoscunt,
doe hold none to be their Superiors, in respect
of their Kingdomes and ciuill gouernment: and
he euery where insists on this.
               
                  
The Diuines of Rhemes
                  
                     Rhemists Testam. in Math. 22. annot. 3. alledge and approue
that saying of Hosius, and call them godly words,
Neither is it lawfull for vs (Bishops) to hold an Empire
in earth, neither h
                        •
                     st thou O Emperour, power
ouer incens
                        •
                      and sacred things.
               
               Stapleton
                     Tho Stapleton in hjs Counterblast. lib. 1. diuis. 5. pa. 29., It is true that the Prince is supreme
Gouernour of all persons, as well Ecclesiasticall as
Temporall: And againeIdem, Doctrin. Princ. lib. 5. ca. 18., alledging and allowing
that saying of Constantine, You are Bishops
within and I without the Church; hee thus expounds
them, you doe praesse, are cheefe in Ecclesiasticall
causes (to wit, for deciding of doubts of
faith in them) I in secular affaires, and for ordering
them.
               
               Nich. Sanders
                     Nich. Sanders de Vis. Monar. lib. 2. cap. 4. § Quapropter., There are two powers in the
Church, vna tantum spiritualis cuiusmodi est illa
ministrorum, the former is onely spirituall, and
such is the power of Bishops: the other is mixt,
being originally secular, but in respect of the end
spirituall, such is the power of Kings. AgaineIbid. §. Non tantum., we
doe not say that all Kingdomes and Dominions are
in all things subiect to the Church by diuine law:
then certainely is not the Pope the Temporall
Monarch ouer them all.
               VegaDidac. Vega super 4. poenitent. conc. 2., Wee must here say as generally doe the
Fathers of the Church, Hierom, Austen, Ambrose,
Chrysostome, and Cassidore, that Dauid
said this, because being a King, nemini nisi Deo subdebatur,
he was subiect to none but to God, Hee
was bound by no humane lawes: for a King, though
he be subiect to humane lawes, in respect of direction,
yet not in respect of coaction.
               
               
                  
                  Pererius
                  Pererius com. in cap. 13. ad Rom. disp. 1. the Iesuite, saith of that precept of
St. Paul, Let euery soule be subiect to the higher
power; That it is meant onely of secular power: and
euery soule, that is euery man (is not the Pope one?)
ought to be subiect to those secular powers, in those
things which they may lawfully commaund.
               
               Bishop Canus
                     Mele. Canus, loc. Theol. lib. 6. cap 6. §. Aliud. 
                  approues the profession of faith
made by Pope Agatho, subscribed vnto and
allowed by the sixt Councell. Now in that profession
the Pope with all the Westerne Bishops,
most cleerely acknowledgeAct 4 Concil. gen. 6. the Emperor to be
their Lord, and themselues his seruants, their Citie
and Prouince, his seruile Cittie, and seruile Prouince.
An euidence that neither Agatho, nor the
sixt Councell, nor Canus, (nor any who approue
that Councell) thought the Pope a Temporall
Monarch aboue the Emperour.
               Corn. Iansenius
                     Cor Iansenius Conc. Euang▪ ca. 66. in illa verba, & tibi dabo claues, &c., Although Peters power bee
in earth, yet Christ said not that he would giue him
the keyes of the kingdome of earth, but of the kingdome
of heauen▪ that Peter might know, suam potestatem
extendi tantum ad spiritualia, that his power
did extend onely to spirituall matters, which
belong to the kingdome of heauen, and not to
temporall things, but onely as they are referred to
spirituall.
               
               
                  Franc. Costerus
                  
                     Fran. Costern. Euchir ca. 3. propos. 3. the Iesuite, Christ by his comming
did not change the Politicall administration or
gouernment, but left it vnto Princes, and commaunded
to giue to Caesar that which belongs to Caesar.
               
               
                  Iacobus de Valentia
                  Iac. de Valent. in Psal. 50. entreating of Dauid, saith,
that he offended only to God, Quia nullum alium

superiorem habebat, because he had none but God
aboue him, And being a King, he could be punished
by none other.
               
               
                  Lorinus
                  
                     Lorinus in Psal. 50. the Iesuite, God onely is able to punish
the sinne of him that was a King, nee superiorem
haberet, and who had none but God Superiour
vnto him. Againe, whereas Cassiodore saith,
that the King is punishable onely by God, Turrecremata
obserues, that this is not because the seculare
Magistrate, is with vs more worthy then the Ecclesiasticall,
but because Rex in suo ordine non habet
superiorem, the King in his owne Order (of secular
Gouernors) hath none aboue him.
               Hector PintusHect Pintus in Ezech. ca. 45., In spirituall matters Bishops
are aboue Kings, but in secular matters, Reges non
subijciuntur sacerdotibus, Kings are not subiect to
Bishops; Againe, Habent Reges in temporalibus
superiorem neminem, Kings haue none aboue
them in secular matters.
               Thom. Harding
                     Tho. Harding. confut. of the Apologie. part. 6. cap. 12. §. It was., The Kings place is cheefe among
the lay, euen when they are in the Church at
the seruice of God; and without the Church in all
temporall things and causes, hee is ouer the Priests
themselues.
               
               
                  Iames Bosgraue
                  
                     Iac. Bosgraue eius scriptum manu ipsius confignatum apud nos extat. Tortur. Tort
                        •
                     . pa. 24., a Iesuite, and with them an
holy Confeffour and MartyrNomina myrtyrum, Campianus, Bosgrauius. Concertat. Eccle. cathol. part. 2. pa. 60.; I professe before
God, that I doe thinke, and am in conscience perswaded,
that the Pope nec de facto, nec de iure, neither
hath, nor ought to haue power to loose the subiects
of any Prince from their fidelitie.
               
               
                  Iohn Rishton
                  
                     Ioh. Rishton. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     . in Tort. Torti. pa. 24., another of their Confessors also,

made the like profession; adding further,
as Bosgraue and Iohn Hart also did, That
                  Ibib. p. 227▪
                   
                  they
would not reuolt from the Queene, nor forsake their
obedience to her, though the Pope himselfe should
come with forces against her. The like profession
was made by Henry Horton
                  
                     Henry Horton ibid. another of their holy
MartyrsConcert. eccle. cathol. loc. citat..
               
                  Iohn Hart
                  
                     Iohn Hart. Epist. sua ante colloq. cum Ranoldo. another of their Confessors, I
thinke that although the spirituall power bee more
excellent then the temporall, yet they are both of God,
neither doth the one depend on the other. Whereupon
I gather this certaine conclusion, that the opinion of
them who hold the Pope to bee a temporall Lord ouer
Kings and Princes, is vnreasonable, and vnprofitable
altogether.
               
               
                  Dureus
                  
                     Dureus confut. respons. Whitak. fol. 321. the Iesuite, approues that saying of
Bernard, Both Swords are the Churches, but
the material is to be vsed for the Church, the spiritual
by the Church. Now it is as cleere as the Sunne,
that Saint Bernard denied temporall Monarchicall
authority to all Bishops, and particularly to
the Pope.
               
                  Adam Blackuodeus
                  
                     Adam Blackued. lib de coniunct. Relig & Imperij., If Kings offend, God only,
and no man is to be their Iudge. AgaineIbid.,
they are set in the place of God, to rule and restraine
others, not that they should be restrained
a quoquam, by any; then sure not by the Pope,
for Kings rule their subiects, but ouer Kings
themselues, Solius est Imperium Iouis, God only is
a ruler of them.
               
                  Guil. Barclay,
                  
                     Guil Barclaius lib. 4. contra Monarchom. cap 4 in
                        •
                     t. If Kings offend they are to be iudged
by God only, for they are subiect only to

God; which I meane of temporal iudgement & subiection.
AgaineIdem lib. de potest. Papae cap. 1. §. Est., speaking of Thomas Bozius, who
stiffely holds the Pope to bee a Temporall Monarch
of the World, he calls him, Parasitum Papalem,
the Popes Parasite, his opinion he calls it delirium
                  Deliriorum Bozij. ibid §. Huius.,
a very dotage: and whereas Card. Hostiensis
is of the same opinion, he saithIbid.; That opinion
of Hostiensis, à Theologis, firmissima ratione est dā
                     nata,
is condemned by Diuines, & that by a strong
reason. He addesIbidem. of the same opinion of Bozius,
and Hostiensis, that it is Putida opinio quae sol
                        •
                     s
ineptijs, & captiunculis suffulta est, a putid opinion,
which is supported onely by foolery and sophistrie.
Yea, he proceeds further, and condemnes
                  Ibid. §. Mihi 
                  both the direct and indirect power, claimed to the
Pope in Temporall matters; prouing
                  Per totum librum. 
                  that the Pope
neither directly nor indirectly & in order to the spirituall
good, hath any power to excommunicate or
depose Kings, or to absolue subiects from their othes.
               
               Ninianus Wincetus
                     Nin. Winc
                           •
                        t. lib cont. Bu canan. pa. 180. 
                  This is the true diuinity
of the Prophet, that a King, though hee bee neuer so
wicked, Dei iudicio relinquendus est, it is to be left
to Gods iudgement. Skulkenius
                  Skulken. Apol. pro Bell. contra Widd
                        •
                     ing. cap. 3. pa. 78. confesseth,
that thus much is meant by Wincetus, That the
King hath no politicall or temporall power aboue him,
to iudge or punish him.
               
               
                  Pet. Pitheus
                  Pet Pitheus lib de libert. Eccle. Gallic., in his booke published by the
authority of the French Court, saith, the liberty
of France re
                        •
                     ies on two Maximes, quas Francia
semper vt certas approbauit, which France hath
euer approoued as certaine. The one is this, that
the Pope cannot commaund or decree ought either in

generall or in particular, quod attinet ad res temporales,
concerning any temporall matters within the
kingdome of France.
               Iacob. Leschesserius
                     Iac. Leschesser apud Bochel. lib. 4. tit. 21. ca. 1. sets downe this as the
foundation whereon the liberties of the French
Church are built, that neither Pope, nor the whole
Clergie ius habet de vlla re temporali statuendi,
hath any right to decree ought in temporal matters,
multo minus de vllo regno, much lesse of any
Empire or supreame kingdome.
               Of late yeares there was a memorable controuersie
betwixt the Pope and the VenetiansRespub. Veta, the
Pope pretended their LawesVerba Legati Pontif. in Consid. P. M. Pauli. §. Quae aperta. pa. 95. 
                  to bee contrary to
the libertie of the Church; and therefore to be nullas
& inualidas, to be no lawes, nor of any force:
And he commaunded the State, vnder the censure of
excommunication, to reuoke and adnull the same
lawes. Did they regard these thundering threats,
excommunications, or Interdicts? Did they
hearken to his commaund, or yeeld obedience
to this their Monarch? No, they constantly persisted
in defence of their lawes, and plainly told
Respons. Senatus Venet. lib. eod. pa. 95. him, That the reuoking of those lawes, which for
so long time had beene continued, was the euersion of
the foundation of their State; that they were made
summi Principis authoritate, by the authoritie of
the supreame Prince; (by this they meant their
own State) and they conclude, that they were subiect
to no censure; yea they proclaimedTract. d
                        •
                      Interdicto. propos. 16. the Popes
excommunications and Interdicts against them to bee
an abuse of his power, to be such as that the person
or State who hath not Principem superiorem, a Superior

Prince vnto it (such they esteeme themselues)
may and ought to resist, by all meanes granted
by God. So in defence of their owne Soueraignetie,
they demonstrated to the eyes of the whole
world, the Pope not to be a Monarch, no not in
Italy, nor in his next neighbour Citties, much
lesse ouer all Kingdomes and Empires vpon
earth.
               
                  Anto. Quirinus
                  
                     Ant▪ Qu
                           •
                        rinus dissertat. de 
                        •
                     ure Reip. Venet. pa. 61. in defence of the Venetian
State, writes thus; Christ did not diminish the
rights of Empires, Cities and Princes, but he confirmed
the same, yea, he would not in any sort meddle in
that, quod res mundanas & temporales spectat, not
with temporall causes. AgaineIbid., It is most euident,
that the Venetian Common-wealth is as a free
Prince, qui à nemine pendet ex natura sui principatus,
which by the very nature of Principalitie,
depends on none: AgaineIbid. pa. 62., This Venetian Common-wealth
doth professe Dominium suum à solo Deo
habere quod ipsis est ius fundamentale, that it hath
their dominion from God onely, and this is the
very fundamentall law of their State; and to this
subscribed Antonius Rebetti, Michael Angelu, and
many others both Diuines and Lawyers.
               
                  Frier Paul
                  
                     Fr. Paulns. Consid. sup. Censur. Pauli 
                        •
                     . in the same quarrell writes in this
manner, The Venetian State potestatem sibi à Deo
datam, exerciseth that power which is giuen vnto
them by God, euen from the beginning of their
State vnto this time: And what power that is, he
declares, calling it antiquam & absolutam veri sui
Imperij libertatem, the ancient and absolute, (and
therefore not depending on the Pope) libertie

of their true Empire.
               Card. Bellarmine
                  
                     Card. Bellarm. lib. 5. de Pontif. Rom. ca. 2. & seq. at large handleth this Argument,
concerning which he sets downe
                     Ia. Gretz in sua defens. lib. 5. Bellar de Rom. Pontif. three
assertions, and proues them all. First, that the
Pope is not Lord of the whole world: secondly, that
he is not Lord of the Christian world: thirdly, that
the Pope iure diuino, by any right from Christ, is
not Lord of any Prouince or Towne, Nullamque habet
iurisdictionem mere temporalem, and hath no
iurisdiction meerely temporall. Yea Bellarmine
answeres and refutes, and that very soundly all
those reasons which are brought to proue that
Christ had any such temporall dominion.
               
                  Gretzer
                  
                     Ia. Gretz in sua defens. lib. 5. Bellar de Rom. Pontif. not onely defends Bellarmine herein,
but refutesGretz. ibid. defens. ca. 4. & 5. 
                  the whole dispute of Alex. Carerius,
for the Popes temporall Monarchie against Bellarmine,
and shewes how weake, feeble, and vniust
that Anathema
                  Ibid. §. Sed en. 
                  is which Carerius denounced against
Bellarmine, for denying that temporall Monarchie
to the Pope.
               
               Skulkenius
                     Adulph. Skulchen. Apol. pro Bellar. contra Widdring. pa. 70. saith of Anto. Rossellus, Omnino
nobiscum sentit, he is altogether in this matter of
our mind; For hee teacheth, that the Pope as Pope
hath not the direct dominion of temporall things, &
non esse vniuersalem totius orbis Monarcham, and
that he is not the vniuersall Monarch of the
world. Againe, speaking of those words of
Otho Frising. Reges nullum praeter deum supra le
habent, Kings haue none aboue them but God,
Otho, saith heIbid. pa. 78., meant this de superiori politico
siue temporali, of a Politicall or Temporall Monarch,
such an one Kings haue not aboue them.

AgaineIbid. pa. 108, The height of Emperours and Kings hath
not any temporall power superior to them. In this
sence, Independens est à potestate superiore temporali,
it doth not depend on a superior power, but
hath his immediate dependance on God.
               
               
                  Breirley
                  Breireley Apolog. protest. in Praef. sect. 20., in his Apologie for the Romane
faith, taken out of diuers wrested and miserably
peruerted testimonies of Protestants; and by
him called the Protestant Apologie, saith, They
exceed measure who load the supreame Pastor of
the Church, with incompetent attributes of Temporall
authoritie, and of the principalitie of the
whole world.
               
               
                  Rob. Parsons
                  
                     Rob. Persons Treatis of Mitigat. ca. 2. nu. 29., that Iesuiticall Polypragmon in
all States, Whereas they say, that wee Catholikes,
ascribe Monarchicall, ciuill power and Soueraignetie
ouer Kings vnto the Pope: this of ciuil Soueraignty,
is a meere fiction and calumniation, for wee ascribe
no such power vnto the Pope ouer Princes, or
their subiects, but that Soueraignetie onely which
belongs to the spirituall head, which is onely spirituall,
and for spirituall ends. AgaineIdem, in his answer to Sir Edw. Coke. ca. 2. nu. 31., Though Kings
and Emperours he Supreame in Temporall authority,
yet in Spirituall, Bishops are more eminent then
they.
               
               
                  George Blackwell
                  
                     Georg Blackwell epist. ad Bellar. Fateor me illud iuramentum sustepisse. their Arch-Priest, hauing
by solemne oath professed, That the Pope neither
of himselfe, nor by any authory of the Church or See
of Rome, hath any power or authority to depose
Kings, afterwards not onely maintained the
same assertion, but in more expresse manner explained
the same: of the opinion of the Canonists,

that the Pope is directly the Lord of the whole world
in temporalibus, he saithLarge Examin of Geor. Blackwell. pa. 35.; That as he sware, so hee
doth constantly affirme, that hee holdeth the opinion
concerning the Popes direct Dominion in Temporalibus,
to be vntrue: that
                  Ibid pa. 55. 56. & seq. 
                  the Pope is not Lord of the
whole world; nor yet of the Christian world; that
he hath no Temporall dominion of any one place iure
diuino. After this he professethIbid. pa. 70. 71. further, That
as the Pope hath no direct Dominion in Temporalibus,
so neither hath he indirectly, and in reference
to spirituall ends, authority to depose Princes, to absolue
subiects, or the like: and that Card. Bellarmines
reasons, to proue this indirect power in Temporalibus,
are weake
                  Ibid. pa. 65. 66., and insufficient. In summe,
that his
                  Ibid. pa. 79. 
                  iudgement is, that the Popes spirituall authority
extends no further, then to the censures of
the Church properly so called, and that the Pope hath
no authority in Temporalibus, either directly or indirectly
to depose Kings.
               
               
                  Temporall things, saith Suares
                     Suares disput. 16. de Excomm. maior. sect. 1., doe fall but indirectly
vnder the power of the Spirituall, that is, in
order to a spirituall end.
               
               Nauar
                     Nauar Relect cap. Nouit. de Iudic. not. 3. pa. 196., Ecclesiasticall power shall extend it selfe
so farre, as the order of things supernaturall doth require,
and no further.
               
               The Catholike AuthorLe Franc. d
                        •
                     scourse pa 14. of the Franck discourse,
entreating of this, which he calls a Iesuiticall
position, That the Pope hath power to excommunicate
Kings, to free subiects from their oaths
of Allegeance, to depriue them of their Scepters and
Crownes, calls it in expresse tearmes a pestilent and
pernicious doctrine, flatly
                  Ibid. pa 16. 
                  repugnant to the World

and will of God, adding, This
                  Pa. 18. 
                  hath euer beene the
iudgement of the Church of France, to excommunicate
all those that auouch these and such assertions,
as Authors of a barbarous and most accursed doctrine,
which begets a world of murders, and a sea of
ahhomination.
               
               Another of their Catholikes
                     Iesuites Catechisme lib. 3. c
                        •
                     . 17. §. For. in his Iesuites
Catechisme, We hold it for an Article firme and indubitate,
that our King is not subiect to the Popes excommunication;
And he not onely often inueigheth
against that Iesuiticall doctrine of excommunicating
and deposing Kings, but saithLib eod. ca. 9. in Titulo., That it
is an heresie, to approue the killing of Princes, though
they be Heretikes.
               
               
                  Permulti alij Angli Catholici
                  
                     English Catholikes vt testatur Widdring. in Apol. Princ. contr. Bell. nu. 3., very many English
Catholikes, doe professe that it is not sufficiently
proued, either by testimony of Scripture, or Apostolicall
tradition, or by authority of the holy Fathers,
or by Theological reason, summum Pontificem
vllum prorsus habere ex Christi institutione rerum
temporalium dominum, that the Pope hath any
dominion at all in Temporall matters granted
him from Christ, so that he may either directly or
indirectly, that is in respect of the spiriuall good, depose
Princes.
               
               
                  Mart. Becanus a Iesuite, published anno 1612.
a booke intituled Controuersia Anglicana, wherin
he hath these assertions, Catholikes
                  Becan. controu. Anglic. cap. 3. q. 2. nu. 1 
                  do affirme, and
that rightly, that the Pope who may excommunicate
Kings, may also depose them: hauing cited many
examples of Kings deposed by Popes, he saithCap. eod. q. 3. nu 14.,
What those Popes did, they did by right, and they had

power and authoritie to depose Kings. The
                  Ibid. nu. 17. 
                  vsuall
way of deposing Kings, is to absolue subiects à debito
vinculo subiectionis, from their due bond of subiection,
and this the Pope may lawfully doe: and many
the like. Of these and like assertions of Becanus,
the Facultie of Paris
                  
                     Censura Facult. Paris. de lib. Becani. pa. 15. giues this censure, that
he falsly ascribeth to Catholikes, the defending of new
errors and crimes, that he brings in dangerous
scismes, depraues the Scriptures, spoyles Temporall
Lords of their rights, makes the killing of Princes
which is execrable, to be thought lawfull. TheyIbid.
call this book of Becanus, Pestilentissimum librum,
a most pestilent booke: the doctrine conteined
therein, pestilentem doctrinam
                  Ibid. pa. 17▪
                  , pestilent doctrine,
which robs Princes of their supreame power,
and stirres vp subiects to rebellion and parricide.
Iohan. Filesacke a Doctor of that Facultie professethIbid. pa. 15.
after he had read that booke, alium à se pestilentiorem
nunquam visum, that he neuer saw a
more pestilent booke. Georg. Erogerius
                  
                     Censura Frogerii. de lib. Becani. ibid. pa. 23. 24. one of
the Sorbonist Doctors, saith, He could not choose,
but be exceedingly incensed against Becanus, dirum
et pessime feriatum hominum, that wicked and execrable
man, he could not but reiect, yea proculcare
trample vnder his feete, his maniacall, and demoniacall
book, and oppose the sacred scripture, aduersus
istam pestilentissimam, furiosissimamque Becani buccam,
against that most pestilent and furious doctrine
of Becanus. Claudius Aquauiua
                  
                     Censura Claud. Aqua
                           ••
                        iu. de lib. Becan. ibid. pa. 22., prouost
Generall of the Iesuites, censures the selfesame
booke, as written rashly, as being disallowed
by the societie of the Iesuites. Besides these,

Card. Bellarmine
                  
                     Censur. Card. Bell
                           •
                        rmini de libro Becani. ibid pa. 10., (whose very doctrine, and
no other, Becanus defends) yea Pope Paulus the
fift
                     Censura Pauli 5. de lib. Becan. ibid. himselfe, whose authoritie is therein maintained,
they both censure that booke as conteining
many false, timerarious, scandalous, and seditious
matters, and they vtterly prohibited it to be read,
or so much as kept by any, vntill it be corrected.
               
               And to alledge no more, (for it were euen an
endlesse and irksome worke to cite all, they being
in number so infinite) I will conclude with
that testimonie of Bellarmine
                  Bellar. l. b. 5. de Rom. Pont. ca. 1. This, that the Pope
as Pope hath not directly and immediatly any Temporall
power, but onely spirituall, est Catholicorum
Theologorum
                  Catholioi Theologi. 
                  communis sententia,
it is the common
iudgement of Catholike Diuines.
               Thus we see, that this Temporall Monarchicall
Soueraigntie now claimed for the Pope,
hath beene by Apostles, Councels, Popes, Fathers,
Bishops, and learned Writers; yea euen by the
most earnest Romanists, and chiefe pillers of their
present Church, with an vniforme consent oppugned
and condemned in all successiue ages of
the Church, euen from the daies of Christ vnto
this very present time.
            
            
               
               CHAP. XII.
               That the Popes Temporall Monarchy is condemned
by Emperours, Kings, and Imperiall States
in the seuerall ages of the
Church.
               
                  AFter Councels, Fathers, Bishops,
and learned Writers in all ages
of the Church, by which as
you haue seene the Popes temporal
Monarchy hath bin condēned,
there remaines in the last
place one consideration touching Kings and Emperours,
of whom they pretendVt supra ostensum est. ca. 1., that they not
onely haue acknowledged this Monarchicall Soueraigntie,
but in token thereof, haue subiected
themselues, and yeelded vp their Kingdomes to the
Pope.
How to this purpose Steuchus and Gretzer
haue published many Writings, Grants, and Donations
of seuerall Kings and Kingdomes, I haue
before entreated. To both these I must here adioyne
a Vaticane Manuscript of one Nicholas Card.
of Arragonia, from whom both Steuchus and
Gretzer borrowed, and with much ease exscribed
those very Gifts and Grants which they so venditate
to the world. This Nicholas, being as earnest
for the Popes Temporall Monarchy, as either
Bozius, or Scioppius, tels vs, that Popes
                  Nichol. Card de Art. M. s. fol. 61. 
                  as
Christs Vicares hauing the fulnesse of power, vtrumque

gladium possunt ad libitum exercere, may at
their pleasure exercise either sword, Excommunicate,
and depose Kings and Emperours. And that
both de iure and de facto diuers worthy Popes
haue exercised this power, hee shewesIbid. fol. 61. & seq. by an
whole Catalogue of Emperours and Kings, no fewer
then 28. deposed by them. For the further aduancing
of this Papall Temporall Monarchie, the
same Nicholas, hath, and that as he telsIbid. in Tit. lib. vs, with
great labour and industry, compiled out of diuerse Registries
and Chronicles, those same (and many other)
writings and grants made to the Popes, of
Rome, Italie, Spaine, France, England, Denmarke,
Hungarie, Russia, Croatia, Bohemia, and diuers others,
which for the most part in the bookes of
Steuchus & Gretzer are to be seen. Nor can either
the name of Nicholas, or the Manuscript left by
him, adde credit or countenance to those Grants
and writings. What worth and credit he and his
Records are of, it may be perceiued by his commending
of the Charter
                  Ibid. fol. 46. & seq. 
                  of Constautines Donation,
and diuers such like; but I will onely here mention
two of his passages, by which you may coniecture
his verity in the rest. The former is, That
                  Idem fol. 88.
                  whē Constātine builded the Church of our Sauiour in
the Laterane (that was as he else-whereIbid. fol. 46. saith, The
fourth day after he was baptized by Siluester) he placed
in that Church, the Arke of the Testament, which
Titus carried away from Ierusalem, the golden Emerods,
the golden Mise, the tables of the Testament,
the rod of Aaron, the golden pot, with Manna, the
seemlesse coat of Christ, the vestment of Iohn Baptist,
the sheeres wherwith Iohn the Euangelist was polled.
                  
Rare monuments, able to cause long pilgrimages
and deuout adoration, if the Romane Bishops
haue kept til these daies those Deposita. The other
is the prophesie of Romulus touching Christ. Nicholas
entreating of the Pallaces in Rome, (he reckons
16.) In the Pallace of Romulus, who builded
Rome, Romulus, saith heIbid. fol. 74., set vp his own statue made
of gold, saying, Non cadet donec Virgo pariet, This
my statue shall not fall till a Virgin bring forth a
child. And as soone as euer the Virgin Mary had
brought forth Christ, statua illa corruit, saith Nicholas,
that statue fell downe to the ground. Such
rare and admirable Records and Monuments hath
Nicholas compiled, and out of him Steuchus and
Gretzer published; which though in themselues
they might iustly be contemned, yet because the
Popes and their flatterers applaud and please
themselues with such toyes and fancies, let vs see
how weake they are to support that Monarchical
Soueraigntie, which they build on such sandy
foundations; and I nothing doubt to make it euident,
that by none of all their pretences, none of
those most renowned and glorious Empires euer
were, or euer will be brought vnder the yoake of
subiection to the Popes Temporall Monarchy.
               Here first in general for al kingdomes it may be
rightly said, that the admitting of this one Vniuersall
Temporall Monarchy of the Pope, is the
vtter ruinating, adnulling and annihilating of all
other kingdomes in the world. Scioppius truly
saithSciop. in 540 Ecclesiast. ca. 46. pa. 15
                        •
                     ., This one kingdome, tollit omnia alia regna
mūdi, doth abolish all other temporal kingdoms.

And to the like purpose Amb. Catharinus
                  Amb. Cathar. in cap. 13. ad Rom. §. Verum., If the
Pope be the temporall Monarch of the whole world,
nulli ergo vere terrarum Domini essent in temporalibus,
sed solus Pontifex, then should none else be
truly Temporall Kings here vpon earth, but onely
the Pope. For seeing Soueraigntie (which as I
haue formerly proued, is the very essence of Regall
authoritie) should then be in the Pope alone,
he alone and none else should truly bee
King: Al others should be but Viceroyes, Deputies,
or Lieutenants vnder him, subiect to him, as their
supreame Lord both for their persons & possessions.
So this very position of the Popes Vniuersall
temporall Dominion aboue all Kings, implyes
an euident and vnauoydable contradiction
to it selfe. For if the Pope bee such a Monarch,
there can be no other Kings to acknowledge this
Papall Monarchy. And if there bee any other
Kings to acknowledge this, euen eo nomine, for
that they are Kings, they doe directly deny and
ouerthrow his Monarchicall Soueraigntie.
               But if you please to descend to particulars, it
will cleerely appeare, that the acknowledgment
of this Papall Monarchy is neither so generall,
nor so true as they pretend and boast. Let vs begin
with the most Christian King, and his Kingdome
of France; for which there are so many
euidences easie to be produced, that by it alone
the pretended Temporal Monarchy of the Pope
is vndeniably refuted. Of it Ioh. Maior
                  Ioh. Maior in 4. Sentent. dist. 24. q. 3. Concl. 3. saith,
The Pope hath nullum titulum, no title at all in temporall
matters in the Kingdome of France. The French

King, saith Ioh. IgneusIoh. Igneus Repet. in le. Donationes. nu. 28., Non recognoscit superiorem
in temporalibus, doth not acknowledge any
to be his superior in Temporall matters. Guil.
Benedictus speaking of the French State, saithGuil Bened. in repet. cap. Rai
                        •
                     u
                        •
                     ij Decil. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 27. 28.,
If one doe appeale, it must be to the King, not to the
Pope, for seeing he is an Emperour in his kingdome,
and the Empire is notorie quoad temporalia à superioritate
Papae exemptum, notoriously knowne for
Temporall matters to be exempted from the superiority
of the Pope, there is no appeale from
the King, seeing the kingdome of France is none of
those which are held in fee from the Pope. Aegidius
Romanus writes veryAegid. Rom quaest. de vtraque Potestat. artic. 5. fully to this purpose, The
French King à solo Deo immediate tenet & possidet
Regnum suum, non ab homine quoquā, holds immediatly
his kingdome from God only, & not from
any man. He holds it not of the Pope, neither as he is
a man, neither as he is the Vicar of Christ. And if you
reply, that though he doe not de facto acknowledge
any Superior, yet de Iure, he ought so to doe. Respondemus
quod non, we answer (saith he,) that de
Iure he ought not. The French
                  Lib. eod. art. 4. 
                  King is not subiect
to the Pope, nec ei tenetur
                        •
                      respondere, neither
ought to answer him for the Fee of his kingdome.
The French King, saith CassaneusCassan. Catal. glor mundi part. 5. consid. 24 nu. 179., acknowledgeth
no Superior; He
                  Idem. part. 5. cons. 31. §. 1 
                  in his kingdome, like the Emperor
solus in temporalibus praeesse debet, alone ought to
be Supreame in Temporall matters. AgaineIbid. §. 2., Although
Boniface the eight by his Constitution sent to
Philip the faire, declared the kingdome of France to
be subiect to the Pope in temporall matters, yet Clement
the fift his successor, eam constitutionem reuocauit,
                  
reuoked that Constitution made by Boniface,
as it is euident in the Extrau
                        •
                      cap. Meruit. I
omit many other like euident testimonies, the rather
because I haue often before touched this
point; and that one expresse Confession, yea Decree
of Pope Innocentius is so cleere, that there
needeth no further proofe in this matter. The
French King, saith heCap. Per Venerabilem, extr. qui fil. sint Legi
                        •
                     ., superiorem in Temporalibus
minime recognoscit, doth acknowledge none to be
his superiour in Temporall affaires. Of which
words Cassaneus thusCassan lib. cit. Cons. 28. §. Ex quo etiā. writeth, I finde it determined
by the Popes, that the French King acknowledgeth
none to bee his superior in temporail matters,
ca. Per Venerabilem: which text loquitur de Iure, et
non de facto, speakes not of the fact, but of the right,
because the Pope (in his Decrees) namquam loquitur
in facto sed in iure tantum, neuer declares
what is done, but what in right ought to be done.
And though it were easie by very many examples
of the dealings of the French Kings with
the Pope to confirme this truth, some of which
I haue before expressed, yet I will mention at this
time no more, but that one of Philip the faire.
He to the letters of Boniface the eight, signifying
to him, that he was subiect to the Pope, both in temporall
and spirituall matters, returned an answere
to Boniface in this mannerLi
                        •
                     erae Philippi apud Nichol. Gillium in Phil. pulch.: Sciat tua maxima fatuitas,
Let your great foolishnesse vnderstand
and know, that in temporall matters we are subiect
to none, and those who thinke otherwise (one of the
cheefe of which was the Pope) dementes et fatuos
reputamus, we account mad men and fooles.
               
                  
For the Catholicke King, and his kingdomes
of Spaine, how directly repugnant to this Papall
Monarchy are those cleare and euident Testimonies
of their best learned writers of that Nation?
That of Cardinall Turrecremata
                  Turrecrem. in Sum. de Eccles li. 2. c. 113., The Pope by
reason of the Papacy hath no direct power in temporall
matters, extra principatum suum ecclesiasticum,
out of his owne Ecclesiasticall principallitie: no
part of which is the kingdome of Spaine. That
of Franc. à Victoria
                  Fr. à Victor Relect 1. de potest. Eccles sec. 6. nu. 8., There is no direct temporall
power at all in the Pope: then certainely no
Monarchicall soueraigntie in Spaine. Whereof
he giues a true reason, because there is no power
in the Pope, which is directed to a temporall end: and
such is that power which is meerely temporall. That
of Dom. Soto
                  D
                        •
                     m. Soto. in 4. sent. dist. 25. q 2. art. 1. concl. 5., Euery King (then doubtlesse the
King of Spaine) is in his owne kingdome the supreame
Iudge for temporall matters. That of Did.
Couarruuias 
                  r a Lawyer and Bishop also,Did. Couar. Pract. quaest. ca. 4. nu. 2. 
                  Semper
mansit apud Regem ipsum suprema iurisdictio, Supreame
iurisdiction remained euer in the King
of Spaine himselfe. And this he prooues besides
other reasons, by a pragmaticall sanction of Ferdinand
and Elizabeth, an. 1502. That of Iohn de la
Puente, their late and famous Chronicler, whose
scope is to shew the conueniencie of a double Catholicke
Monarchy.
                  Iuan de la Pu
                        •
                     nt. de la conueniencia de las dos Mo
                        •
                     arquias Catholicas. Cit. lib
                        •
                     i▪
                   The one of which onely, (to
wit the Spirituall) to belong to the Pope, whom
he compares to the Greater light, vt praesit vrbi &
orbi: The other (to wit the Temporall) to belong
to him, whom hee compares to the lesser light, vt
subdatur vrbi & dominetur orbi, the very frontispice
of his booke doth make most euident. To
these Spanish writers of best note, may be added

that of Iohn Maior
                  Ioh Maior. in dist. 24 q. 3. §. Tertia conclusio., The Pope nullum habet titulum
super regem Hispaniarum in temporalibus, hath no
title or authority ouer the king of Spaine in temporall
matters: And that of Cassancus
                  Cass
                        •
                     n. in Cacal glot. mundi part. 5. Consid. 28. §. 
                        •
                     mo. etiam., Those Princes
which do acknowledg any superior vnto them, are
called superillustnes. Among which hee expresly
reckons the Kings of Spaine.
               
               How distastfull was this Papall Monarchy to
that kingdome, when not many yeares since the
whole
                  Gold. in su
                        •
                      Repl c. 9. p 83. 
                  eleuenth tome of Card. Baronius his ecclesiasticall
Annales were by the kings Edict prohibited, &
that vnder the paine of high treason either to be printed
or sold in Spaine, because there was inserted into
that Tome, the booke of Baron, touching the
Monarchy of Sicilie, wherein he labors to proue▪
not the king of Spaine, but the Pope to be the Monarch
thereof? When Card. Columna further writ
a very sharp censureCensura Tract, Baronij de Monar. Sicil. per Card. Colum. both of Baron himselfe, and
of his book, taking it indignly (as iustly he might)
that the king of Spaine
                  Lib. cit. pa. 159. 
                  qui ea Monarchia potitur
et fruitur, who doth now (saith he) possesse & enioy,
& that also, haereditario iure
                  Ibid. pa. 161., by a rightful inheritance,
that Monarchy, should bee called by
Card. Baronius a monster
                  D
                        •
                     ram nimis vt is Ecclesiae monstrū dicatur & oftentum ibid, p. 
                        •
                     5
                        •
                     ., a tyrant
                  
                     
                        •
                     yrannus & Ecclesiae hostibus de terror. ibid., one worse then
the enemies of the Church. Will they patiently endure
the Pope to be called the Supreame Direct
Monarch and Temporall Lord of all Spaine, yea
of all the world, who so hardly can digest his Tē
                  porall
Monarchy in that one little Iland?
               Haue they not also giuen diuers eminent and
euident tokens of their dislike to that Monarchy?
When Clement the seuenth fearing the greatnesse
of Charles the fifth, then king of Spaine,
soughtOcculta eū venetis consilia inijt, vt Caesa
                     
                        •
                     em Mediola
                     
                        •
                     o exueret. Onuph. in vit. 
                        •
                     lem, 7. pa. 400 by cunning dealing to depriue him of
Millane, and for that purpose made an holy

league, as they called it, Charles being for this
& some other like causes incensed, sent an
                  Imperator nihil prius habuit quam exercitum in Italiam mittere. Parahp. Abb. Vrsperg. ann. 1527. 
                  army
into Italic vnder the leading of Carolus Burbonius.
When the Caesarean army approched to Rome,
the Romane Iupiter thunders out his ExcommunicationsIbid.
against the Lutherans, (so he called the
French;) and against the Marranes, (so in contumely
he called the Spaniards:) Did either the
Spanish or French feare or regard those censures?
Nothing lesse. They besieged
                  Append. ad Chron. Nauclan. 1527. & Guiccard. lib. 18. hist. pa. 774. 
                  Rome, tooke
it, and made such hauock therein, vt ab Hunnorum et
Gothorū diebus, that the like miserable spoyle had
neuer bene seene, since the dayes that the Gothes
and Vandals surprised Rome: or as Onuphrius
                  Onuph. loc. cit. pa. 402.
sayth: Neuer in the memory of man, maiori truculentia
saeuitū, was there greater cruelty vsed either
against Turkes or most deadly enemies. The
Pope and thirteene Cardinals who being taken
prisoners, and kept in the Castle of Saint Angelo,
were glad toOnuph. loc. cit. & Guiccard lib. 18. pa. 782. make couenants vpon very hard
conditions. First, that the Pope cuncta quae Caesar
imperasset se facturū polliceretur, should promise to
do whatsoeuer Charles the fift should command.
Next, that himselfe with his 13 Cardinals should stay
in prison till their ransomes (which surmounted
many hundred thousand pounds) were paid: then
to be kept at Naples or Caieta, and there exspect
what Charles the Emperour would decree of them.
               
               It is a wonder to see how shamelesse Surius,
Card. Alane, and others are, in striuing to excuse
Charles 5. in this action. All this was done (say
theySurius cōm. rer. in orbe gest. an. 1527▪ Card. Alan. in lib. ad Persequutores Anglos. contra Iustic. Britan.) insciente et inuito Caesare, Charles neither

knowing, nor approouing thereof: and in token of
his dislike heereof, as soone as the report came into
Spaine, presently the King commanded those sportes
and ioyfull celebrities (which then were vsed for ioy
of his sonne Philips birth) to be left off, yea hee diligently
excused himselfe both to the Pope and other
Princes. Thus they; whose whole narrations is
quite contrary to the truth. For first CharlesParalip. ad Abb. Vrsper. an. cit. pa. 472.
                  purposely sent his army into Italy, qui cunctis minaretur,
threatning reuenge to all who were confederates
in that holy league: and the Pope was author
conspirationis, the very author and ring-leader
of that conspiracie: Then, Guiccardine (who
is of all the most faithful relator of these matters,
happening in his owne time) expresly notesGuic. lib. 18 pa. 790.,
that Charles though in words he said he was sory for
the Popes being taken, tamen ei gratissimam fuisse
animadvertebatur, yet it was obserued to haue
beene gladsome newes vnto him. Neither did
he, saith Guiccardine, conceale this, seeing inceptos
ob filij natalem ludos, non intermisit, he did not
so much as breake off or interrupt those playes,
sports, and celebrities which was then begun for
ioy of his sonnes birth; yea, hee was so farre also
from excusing this fact either to the Pope or other
Princes, that hee purposed to haue brought
the Pope prisoner into Spaine: but partly the infamie
of doing so with the vicare of Christ restrained
him; and partly the earnest sollicitation of Henrie
the eight, King of England, of Francis the
French King, and others mooued him to send to
                  
Lanoy, the Generall of his armie, to set the Pope
at liberty.
               
               The same Charles vpon another displeasure
against the Pope, set forth an Edict
                  Guiccard. lib. 17 pa. 6. 8. in Spaine,
whereby he prohibited his subiects to haue their
causes debated in the Romane Court. Whence vpon
a solemne day of pleading, a Spaniard in the
Kings name openly in the Romane Court, commanded
diuers, vt a litibus in eo foro prosequendis
desisterent, that they should desist from prosecuting
their causes in the Popes Court.
               The like may be seene in Philip the second,
sonne of this Charles. He to reuenge the manifold
iniuries
                  Quae contra regem suum à pontificatus initio molitus fuerat sigillatim aperiens. Onuph. in vit. Paul. 4. pa 451 
                  offered vnto him by Paul the fourth,
sentGuil. Paradon. lib. de motibus Galliae. apud Scard. to. 4. Duke D'alua with a mighty army into Italy
against the Pope; Qui Pontificiae ditionis fines
perpopulatus, who hauing exceedingly wasted the
Popes Territories, besiedged the Cittie, spoyled
the Cittizens, burnt many faire houses, slew many
of the people, Pontificem sacra ditione exturbaturus,
and would haue thrust the Pope from
his patrimony and holy seat, if the French
King ayding the Pope, had not remooued the
danger at that time. Doe these seeme either
in Charles or Philip or others acknowledgements
of the Popes supreame and Vniuersall Temporall
Monarchy?
               Now whereas Carerius
                  Carer & Tho Boz. cit. ca. 1. pa. 22. and Thomas Bozius
boaste, that the Pope gaue the Indies vnto
the King of Spaine, by vertue of which
Donation hee still holds them; they are many

waies, and childishly mistaken in this matter. The
Kings of Spaine haue to those parts of the Indies
which they iustlie possesse, a farre stronger title
then any Charter from Pope Alexander, as
Franc. à Victoria at large declaresFran à Vict. Relect. de Indis.. Nay that
Charter of Alexander to giue them no title at all
thereunto, Card. Bellarmine doth witnesse, who
thus writeth; The
                  Bell lib. 5. de Rom. Pontis. ca. 
                        •
                     . §. At Alexander. 
                  Pope diuided the Indies betwixt
the Kings of Spaine and Portugall, not to this end
that they should subdue those Infidels, et eorum regna
occupare, and take their kingdomes vnto
themselues, sed solum vt eo adducerent praedicatores,
but onely that they should bring thither Preachers
of the Christian faith, and defend them,
and such Christians as they conuerted. There may
also another answer be giuen to Carerius, touching
that Papall Donation; euen the same which
Attabaliba an Indian King, of the Prouince of
Peruana, gaue in this very matter: but the answer
is such, as argues more acutenesse, magnanimity,
& wisdome, thē one would easily expect of a barbarous
Indian. Vincentius the Dominican, made
a pithyBenzo. Histor. noui orbis. lib. 3. ca. 3. Oration to perswade him to the Christian
faith, he declared vnto him both the Popes power,
who had giuen those vnknowne Countries to the
King of Spaine; and the puissance of the King of
Spaine, totius orbis Monarchae, as hee there cals
him: aduising Attabaliba to embrace his friendship,
and become tributarie vnto him; which if hee
would not willingly doe, he should vi 
                        •
                     t armis be enforced
thereunto. To this Attabaliba answered,
That hee did willingly 
                        •
                     ccept the friendship of the

highest Monarch of the world, but it was not equall
that a free King should become tributary to him whō
he neuer saw. And for the Pope he added, Pontificem
insigniter fatuum et impudentem esse, eo facile
prodi, quod alienatam liberaliter largiatur, the Pope
to be exceeding foolish and shamelesse is hereby
euident, in that he is so liberall in giuing that
which is none of his own, but belongs to others.
For the other example of the Kingdome of Nauar,
of which Scioppius saith, that it is held nullo alio
tuulo, but by the Popes Donation: were it free to discourse
of such points, it were easie to shew,
how their owne Genebrard
                  Gil. Geneb. in sua Chron. fets downe another,
and farre stronger Title to that Kingdome, yea
such also, as wholy excludes the Popes donation:
easie againe to shew, how by that, which some otherFrank. discourse.
of their owne Catholikes relate touching
that very kingdome of Nauar, that there is no cō
                  fort
for any Prince to hold any kingdome by
that title. But as it was vnfit for Scioppius to be so
peremptory, so neither is it fit for me, nor will I
presume to enter into the discussion of such arguments.
This which I haue already sayd being
sufficient to be spoken of the kingdome of Spain.
               For the kingdome of England, their insolency
in pretending the Popes Temporall Soueraignty
ouer it, enforceth mee more at large to manifest
the vanity of such their boasting. And I nothing
doubt, but to make cleere vnto them that which
Bracton sayth, and thatBract. de legib. & consuet. Anglo. lib. 1. c. 8. nu. 2. 5. most truely, Euery subiect
is vnder the King, ipse sub nullo, nisi tantum sub
Deo but the King himselfe is subiect to none but
onely to God. Let vs begin at the Conquest,

which fell out in that very age wherein both the
mists of superstition had much darkened the
faith, and the pride of the Romane See, by the
meanes of Hildebrand, was now aduanced to the
zenith of their highest exaltation.
               How farre that renowned Conquerour was
from acknowledging their Papall Monarchy, or
superiority in this kingdome, his owne Epistle
written to Pope Hildebrand, recorded in an ancient
ManuscriptCod. ille M. S extat in nobili Biblioth. Dom. Rob. Cottoni. & citat à Ioh. Pichardo ad Epist. 83. lib. 3. Epist. Anselmi. & à Ioh. Speed in Chron. in vita Guil. Rufi. among the Epistles of Lanfranc,
doth demonstrate. Hubert your Legate
came vnto me, warning mee from your Holinesse,
that I should doe feolty vnto you, and to your successors,
and warning me also to consider better of that
money which my ancestors vsed to send to the Romane
Church. I haue yeelded to the one, I haue not
yeelded to the other. Fidelitatem facere nolui, nec
volo, I neither would doe feolty to you, neither
will I. Because I neither promised it my selfe, nor
doe I finde, that my predecessours haue done that to
your predecessours. Could hee more fully or expresly
deny that Papall Soueraignty, and testifie
his Ancestors, the Kings of England neuer to
haue acknowledged the same?
               In the next Kings dayes there fell out great
contention betwixt William Rufus, the sonne of
the Conquerour, and Anselme Arch-bishop of
Canterbury. WhenMath. Paris. in Guil. 2. an. 1094 §. Hoc. 
                  Anselme shewed his purpose
to goe to Rome to Pope Vrbane, the King waxed
exceeding angry thereat, and told him, quod nullus
Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus Regni sui, curiae Romanae
vel Papae subesset, That no Arch-bishop or

Bishop of this Kingdome was subiect to the Romane
Court, or to the Pope. Specially, seeing
the King of England eandem potestatem haberet,
had the same power in his kingdome, (and that euen
from
                  Ex Eadmero citant tum Hollinsh chro. in Wil. Rufus. an. 1099. pa. 24. tum Speed. Chron. in Wil. Ruf. 
                  the Conuersion of this Realme vnto the Christian
faith) which the Emperour challenged in the
Empire, And what
                  Hollinsh. loc. cit. 
                  said he, hath the Pope to doe in
the Empire, or in my kingdome touching temporall
liberties? It is his duty to be carefull for the soule of
man, and to see that heresies doe not spring vp. Yea
AnselmeMat. Paris. loc. cit., ob hanc rem vt laesae maiestatis reus postulatur,
was accused as guiltie of high treason
for this very cause, of seeking to appeale to the
Pope: and to this accusation plurimi Episcopi suum
calculum adijciebant, most of the Bishops consented
that it was iust and right. Neither would the
King make any agreement with Anselme, nisi protestaretur
cum iuramento, vnlesse he made protestation,
and that with an oath, that he would not obey
the command of Pope Vrbane; but if hee would
sweare not to goe to the Pope, nec
                  Proposuit mihi Rex ne aliquando Apostolicum appellarem. Ansel. Epist. 40. lib. 3. 
                  pro quouis negotio
Romanae sedis audientiam appellaturum, neither
to appeale to the Romane See for any businesse
whatsoeuer, then he should enioy all fauour and
tranquilitie. If otherwise he would aduenture to passe
ouer sea, that is to say, to goe to the Pope, nullam
reuertendi spem in posterum ei futuram, hee
told him he should neuer returne into his Realm
againe.
               In the time of Henry the first, when Anselme
was recalled to his See, the contention about Inuestitures,
which was begun with William Rufus,
                  
continuing, Anselme
                  Epist. Anfel ni ad Pascalem. Quae re
                     
                        •
                     itatur in Act. & Monument. in Hen. 1. pa. 178. writ thus to Pope Pascalis,
I shewed them the Apostolique Decree, that
none should take Inuestiture of Lay men, or become
the Kings man for it: and that no man should presume
to consecrate him that did offend herein. When
the King, his Nobles, and the Bishops themselues and
others of lower degree, heard these things, they tooke
them so greeuously, that they said they would in no
case agree to this thing; (tam iniquo Papae decreto, as
othersVt ex Iornal. hist. & Walt. Couent. dicitur in Antiq. Brit. in Anselm. say;) and that they would rather driue me out
of the kingdome, and forsake the Romish Church,
then keep those things: or as othersIbid. set it downe,
rather then approue this Decree or sentence of the
Pope, à iure Regis Regnique consuetudine prorsus alienam,
being vtterly repugnant to the right of
the King, and custome of the kingdome. Thurstane
being elect Archbishop of yorke, obteined
                  Math. Paris. an. 1119. in initio.
                  leaue of the same King Henrie the first, to goe to the
Councell at Rhemes, but with condition, that hee
should not receiue consecration from the Pope. When
contrary to his promise, hee receiued the Papall consecration,
the King vnderstanding thereof, Omnem
dominationis suaelo cum ei inter dixit, he forbad him
to come within his kingdomes or dominions.
Euident tokens that the King and State of England,
held not the Pope for their Temporall
Lord, seeing euen in Spirituall causes they yeelded
so slender subiection, that they were ready
to renounce and forsake the Romane Church,
rather then consent to the Pope in those things.
               In the reigne of Henrie the second, the King
                  Math. Paris. in Hen. 2. ann. 1164. in initio
                  called a very great assembly to Clarendon, at

which were present the Archbishops, Bishops, Abbots,
Priors, Earles, Barons, and Nobles of the Kingdome.
In it was made a Recognition and confirmation of the
customes and liberties of the kingdome, anciently vsea
in the times of former Kings, and which debebant
in Regno, & ab omnibus teneri, ought to bee
obserued in this kingdome, and mainteined by
all. One of those ancient customes was this,
That no Archbishop, Bishop, or other person of this
kingdome, might goe out of the Realme (to wit, to
the Pope) abque licentia Domini Regis, without
the Kings leaue: and if the King granted them
leaue, yet they should put in security, that neither in
going, returning, nor staying, they should doe ought
to the hurt or dammage of the King or kingdome.
Another custome was, That if any appealed, it
should be from the Arch-deacon to the Bishop, from
him to the Arch-bishop, and from him to the King,
ita quod non debeat vltra procedi absque assensu Domini
Regis, from the King they might appeale
to none, nor proceed further in the cause without
the Kings licence. When the King and
whole State confirmed these decrees, they did
euen demonstrate, that they held not the Pope
to be a superior Lord or higher Iudge, then the
King, no not in Ecclesiasticall, much lesse in ciuill
causes. To these Decrees at Clarendon, Thomas
BecketHanc recognitionem Archiepiscopi, &c. cum proceribus cunctis iurauerunt, & firmiter pro miserunt obseruandas, &c. Math. Paris. ibid. pa. 135. & Iho. Cantuar. cum eas leges obseruare iuramento firmasset. ibid. §. His itaque. (whom they call a Martyr, but who was
in truth, one of the most insolent and periured
Traitors, that euer England bare or bred) consented
and swore to obserue the same, and that bona fide
& absque malo ingenio in perpetuum, faithfully

and without fraud for euer, as did also the other
Bishops, Abbots, and Clergie, with the Earles, Barons,
and all the Nobles. Beckot not long after (such
is the bonafides of a true Romanist) repented
                  Ibid. & §. Alexander. 
                  of
this 
                        •
                     ath, procured absolution from it at the hands of
Alexander, the supposed Pope: (for in truth he
was but an intruder and Pseudo-Pope, as by that
which I haue formerlySup. ca. 7. said, is euident) and attempted
                  Math. Paris. loe. cit. §. Videns. 
                  to goe to Rome without the Kings leaue,
but was driuen backe by the wind: for which
and other offences he was called, and came to another
great assembly
                  De quo Rog. Houed. part. 2. post an. 1165. pa. 283. & Paris. loc. cit. pa. 137. 
                  of the State, both Bishops and
Barons held at Northampton. Where fearing
what sentence would passe against him, he (being
againe periured) appealed to the Pope. The iudgement
                  Rog. Houed. loc. cit.
                  of the Barons was, that he was worthy to bee
apprehended and imprisoned: But before hee heard
their iudgement he went away, omnibus clamantibus
& dicentibus, Quo progrederis proditor, all crying
after him, and calling him Traitor. Did they account
the Pope the supreame Lord or Iudge,
when both by oath they binde all, not to appeale
vnto him, and iudged the very appealing to him,
to be an act of Treason?
               If we looke into the Acts of Parliaments,
wherein is expressed the consenting voyce and
iudgement of the whole kingdome, it is easie to
obserue, and euident to be seene, that in them
the Kings of this Realme are vsually called, The
Soueraigne Lords; as in the Statute of Merton, an.
20. Hen. 3. an. 3. Edw. 1. an. 1. Edw. 2. and in
like sort in the reigne of euery King following.

Can there be a more cleere and certaine demonstration,
that the Popes Soueraigntie and Monarchy
was not heere admitted, when by the
whole State the King is with one voyce proclaimed
to be the Supreame Lord? Or can any be Superior
to him that is Supreame?
               
               In the reigne of Edw. the first, in the Statute
at Carlile
                  Stat. an. 25. Ed. 1. quod repetitur. 25. Ed. 3., complaint being made, that the 
                        •
                     ishop
of Rome vsurping the segniories in Ecclesiasticall dignities
and Benefices, bestowing and granting the same
to aliens, and to whom he pleased, as if he were the
Patrone of them, it was decreed by the whole
Parliament, that such oppressions, greeuances, and
dammages, should not bee from thenceforth suffered,
yea, they plainely affirme, such vsurpation (so
they call it) of the Pope, to be the disinherison of
the King, Earles, Barons, and others, and to be the
destruction of the lawes of this Realme. In the same
Kings reigne there arose a very great contention
about the Dominion of Scotland, which King
Edward claimedVt vider
                        •
                      est, in literis Edw. 1. ad Bonisac. 8. apud Math. Westan. an. 1301. to belong to the Kings of
England, as the direct and supreme Lords thereof;
Boniface the eight (who challenged
                  Vt liquet ex literis Bonifacij 8. ad Edw. 1 apud Westmo. anno eodem▪
                   
                  most earnestly
the same kingdome to belong to the Pope, saying;
Nulli in dubium veniat, that none should
so much as doubt thereof:) writ to the King,
willing him toVolumus quod tuos procuratores & nuncios mittas &c. ibid. send his Procurators and Legates
to Rome, with a Declaration of his Title, that there
hee might receiue iudgement in that cause in the Remane
Court. The King resolutely, and constantly
refused either to write or send, in forma iudicij,
as if hee would receiue any iudgement

of the Pope therein. And calling a very great
assembly of his Barons to Lincolne, they with
one consent returned this answere to the Pope.
ThatLiterae Comitum & Baronū Angliae, Bonif. 8. ibid ē apud Math. Westmonast. 
                  the Kings of England, by the preheminence of
their royall dignity, and by the custome cunctis temporibus
irrefragabiliter obseruatae, which had beene
obserued in all times without any contradiction, neither
haue answered, nor ought to answere for the
right in that kingdome, aut alijs suis temporalibus,
or for any other of their temporalties, to any either
Ecclesiasticall or secular Iudge. And this is our
vnanimous consent, that our King for any of his
temporalties, nullatenus respondeat iudicialiter coram
vobis, nec iudicium subeat quoquo modo, shall
in no sort answer iudicially vnto you, nor by any
meanes vndergoe any iudgement: neither send
Proctor or messenger about such matters. And
hereof they giue this remarkable reason, because
the doing of it did manifestly tend to the disinherison
of the State of the kingdome, and to the preiudice of
those liberties, customes, and lawes, to the obseruing
and defending of which they were bound by oath;
Neither doe we, nor will we in any sort permit, sicut
nec possumus nec debemus, as indeed we may not
that our King shall doe so vnaccustomed, vndue,
and preiudiciall Acts. Could they more plainely,
or more constantly deny the Papall, and auer
the Regall Soueraigntie in temporall matters?
               In the reigne of Edward the third, and expresse
Statute was made, That if
                  Stat. of Purueiers an. 25. Edw. 3. ca. 22. 
                  any purchase or procure
any Prouisions from Rome of any Abbies or Priories,
he and his executors shall bee out of the Kings

protection, and that any man may doe with them as
with the enemies of the King; and he that offendeth
against such Prouisors in body or in goods, shall bee
excused against al people, nor shall euer be impeached
or greeued for the same. In another StatuteStat. of Prouisors, an. 25. Edw. 3. made
the same yeare, both the Statute of Edward the
first against Prouisors, was repeated and ratified,
and it was further ordained, that the King and other
Lords should rightly present to Benefices,
notwithstanding the Popes prouisions. And in
case the presentees of the King, or other Patrons bee
disturbed by such Prouisors, so that either they may
not haue the possession of such benefices, or being in
possession, be impeached by such Prouisors, then the
said Prouisors, their Procurators, Executors, and
Maintainers, to abide in prison till they haue made
fine and ransome to the King at his will, and agreed
with the party that shall be greeued. And further,
that they shall not be deliuered out of prison till they
make full renunciation, and finde sufficient suretie
not to attempt such things in time to come, nor to
sue Proces either by themselues or others, against any
man in the Court of Rome. It was not long after
by another StatuteStat. an 27. Edw. 3. ca. 1. enacted, That if any of
the Kings people, of what condition soeuer they bee,
doe draw any out of the Realme for any Plea, the cognisance
whereof pertaineth to the Kings Court, or
which doe sue in another Court, to defeate or impeach
the iudgements giuen in the kings Court, such should
personally answer for such their offence within two
moneths, and if they came not within that time, they,
their Atturneyes, Procurators, Eexcutors, and Mainteiners

should be put out of the Kings protection, and
their Lands, Goods, and Chattels, forfeit to the King.
And of such offenders, it is there expresly said,
that they did those things in preiudice and disinherison
of the King, and of his Crowne, and (which
I doe specially obserue) to the destruction of the
Common Law of the said Realme, at all times vsed.
So that neuer from the first erection of the
Kingdome, was the Popes Soueraignetie, acknowledged
therein, but at all times repugnant
to the Lawes thereof, by the consenting voyce,
decree, and iudgement of the whole State, the
King, the Nobles, and Commons. The very like
was againe enactedStat. an. 38. Edw. 3. ca. 1. in the same Kings reigne,
against such as procured Citations from Rome, vpon
causes, whose Cognisance and Finall discussion (obserue
Finall) pertaineth to the King and his Royall
Court▪ or who got Impetrations and prouisions of
Benefices or offices in the Church, Deaneries, Archdeaconries,
or the like, They all, their mainteiners,
Counsellers, and Abetters, if they be conuicted
of any of these things, shall haue the punishment
comprised in the Statute of 25. Edw. 3
before mentioned.
               In the reigne of Richard the second, it was ordainedStat. an. 13. Ric. 2. ca. 2.,
that for all Archbishoprickes, Bishopricks,
and other dignities and Benefices electiue, the Statute
made by Edward the third, should firmely hold.
And if any make acceptation of any Benefice contrary
to this Statute, and if it be duly prooued, if he bee
beyond the sea, he shall abide in exile, and be banished
for euer, and his lands, goods, and tenements,

forfeit to the King. If he be within the Realme, hee
shall be exiled and banished, and incur the same forfeiture.
In the same reignestat. an. 16. Ric. 2. ca. 4. & 5. complaint being
made of diuers Processes, Excommunications,
and Translations made by the Pope to the preiudice
of the Crowne, it was ordeined, That if any
purchased or pursued, or caused to purchase or pursue
any such Translations, Processes, Excōmunications,
Buls, or Instruments, or if any receiue them, or make
notification of them, both they and their maintainers
and abetters, should al be put out of the Kings protection,
and their lands, goods, and chattels forfeit to the
King. And if this be not sufficient, these expresse
words are set downe in that Statute, worthy to
be written in golden letters; The Crowne of England
hath beene so free at all times (note All
times) that it hath beene in subiection to no
Realme, but immediatly subiect to GOD, and to
none other.
               
               In the reigne of Henrie the fourth, it was
ordainedstat. ann. 2. Hen. 4 ca. 3., That if any prouision bee made by the
Bishop of Rome, to any person of religion, to bee exempt
of obedience regular, or of obedience ordinary,
or to haue any office perpetuall within houses
of religion, if such Prouisors doe accept, or enioy
any such prouision, they shall incurre the punishment
comprised in the Statute of Prouisors, made an. 13.
Richard the second; and that was perpetuall banishment,
and losse of all their lands and goods.
The like punishment was set downeIbid. ca 4▪
                   for those
who procured Buls from Rome, to be quit or discharged
to pay the dismes of their lands.
               
               
                  
In the reigne of Henry the sixt, the Pope
                  1. Hen. 7. 10. 
                  writ
letters in derogation of the King and his Regalitie:
and whereas the Church-men durst not speake against
it, Humphrey Duke of Glocester cast them into
the fire. So little did that noble and loyall heart
esteeme the Popes authoritie, when it was derogatorie
to the royall dignitie. In his reigne also,
whenHollinsh. in Hen. 6. ann. 1460. 
                  Richard Duke of Yorke had ouercome
Henrie, he claimed the Crown as in right belonging
to himselfe, and expressing the royall dignitie
thereof, said, That he was subiect to no man, but
onely to God.
               
               In Edward the fourths time, the Pope2. Hen. 7. 10 sent a
Legate to Callis to come into England, who
sent to the King to haue safe comming; the King by
aduise of his Councell would not suffer him to come
within England, vntill he had taken an oath that he
should attempt nothing against the King and his
Crowne, which oath the Legate tooke, and then
came.
               
               That in the reigne of Henrie the eight, this
Papall vsurping of Iurisdiction, was vtterly exstirpated,
and the Regall Dignitie or Soueraignty
of the Crowne declared, none is ignorant.
The whole State of the kingdome, both Ecclesiasticall
and Laicall, euen then when for other
matters, (as the Masse, Adoration of Images,
Purgatorie, and the like, they were as zealous
for the Romish doctrine, as at any time before)
with one voiceStat. an. 24. Hen 8. ca. 12: & an. 25. Hen. 8. ca. 21. declared, That this Realme of
England is an Empire, as by ancient and authenticke
Histories and Chronicles is manifest: that this Empire

is gouerned by one Supreame head and King, hauing
the dignitie and royall estate of the Imperiall Crowne
of this Realme: That this Realme recogniseth no superior
vnder God but the King: That the whole body
politicke, both the Spiritualty and Temporalty is
bound, and ought to beare a naturall and humble obedience
to the King thereof Next vnto God: That
the King hath plenarie and intire power, authority,
prerogatiue, and iurisdiction, to render Iustice, and
finall determination to all his subiects, in all causes
and contentions, without either restraint from, or
prouocation to any forreine Prince or Potentate in the
world: That the Pope by his Exactions, Procurations,
Prouisions, Buls, and Appeales, hath vsurped therein,
to the derogation of the Imperiall Crowne, and authority
royall, contrary both to right and conscience.
And that it might bee knowne to all, that these
Statutes whereby they abandon the Papall, and
manifest the Kings royal Soueraignty in all causes,
as well Ecclesiasticall as Temporall, that these, I say
are no Introductory Statutes, such as giue a new,
but onely Declaratorie, such as explaine the ancient
authoritie & rights of the King, they adde,
that in decreeing these, they did no other thing
then former Kings had done for the conseruation of
the prerogatiues, liberties, and preheminence of this
Imperiall Crowne, and by name, as Edw. 1. Edw. 2.
Rich. 2. and Hen. 4. had done.
               
               The same Soueraignty was acknowledged to
be in Queene Marie, the whole State declaring
Stat 1. 
                        〈◊〉
                      part. 2. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . that all Regall power, dignity, authority, and Iurisdiction
did, and of right ought to appertaine vnto

her, in as full and and ample manner, as it did to any
of her Noble Progenitors. By vertue of which
Supreame power, when
                     
                        •
                     ust. Britan. pa. 49. & Pars▪ answer to Sir Edw. Coke, ca. 14. §. 15. Pope Paul the fourth
being displeased with Card. Poole, meant to take
from him his Legantine authoritie, and giue it to
Fryer Peto; for which purpose the Pope chose
him Cardinall, and sent him the Cardinals hat,
and other ensignes of his new authoritie, as farre
as Callice; Queene Marie (for all her deuotion
to the Romane faith) by the aduice of her Nobles
and Iudges, in fauour of Card. Poole, sent to
Callice, straitly forbidding the Popes Nuncio so
much as to set foot within England, though he was
sent thither by the Romane Monarch. And
though the Pope threatned and stormed thereat,
yet Card. Poole quietly enioyed his dignity, but
Fryer Peto the Popes Minion, was faine to go vp
and downe the streets of London like a begging
Fryer, without his Cardinals hat.
               Thus from the Conquest to the beginning of
Q. Elizabeth (since which time the cleere light of
the Gospel hath most happily shined throughout
this Realme) the Popes Soueraignty hath beene
euer reiected by this most renowned kingdome.
And that long before the Conquest the like was
done, yea euen since the very first planting of the
Gospel in this Iland, there are pregnant euidences.
I do purposely passe by that of S. Edward
the Confessor, in whose lawesLeg. Sancti Edw. ca. 19. the King of England
is called the Vicare of the highest King, to rule
the holy Church, and defend the same. I omit also
that of King Edgar, who in a Councell at Winchester

speaking of himselfe, saithEdgari verba extant in cod. M. S. liter
                        •
                     s aur
                        •
                     is exarato in Bibl D Rob. Cotton., Vicarius Christie
eliminaui, I being the Vicar of Christ, haue
cast out troups of vngodly Fryers, which were in the
Monasteries of my kingdome. Who also vsed that
memorable saying to his Clergie, Ego Constantini,
vos Petri gladium habetis, I haue Constantines,
and you haue S. Peters sword: Let vs ioyne
hands together, and swords together, to cast out leprous
persons out of the Temple. Nor will I insist
on the saying of Pope Eleutherius, who in his
Epistle to Lucius King of Brittaine, saith thus vnto
him; that you may reigne with God, 
                        •
                     uius vicarius
estis in praedicto regno, whose Vicar you are in
your kingdome; and againe, Rex quia vicarius
summi regis est, the King, because he is the Vicar
of the highest King, is appointed to this end, that
hee should honour the holy Church, and rule it. And
yet I could wish to stay heere a little, to castigate
the vanitie, and shamelesse dealing of F.
Parsons, who to decline this testimony, would
gladly perswadePars. triple Conuers. part. 1. ca, 4. nu. 22. & 29. you, that this is but a fained
Epistle, yea euen fained
                  If it be true and not fained by Mr. Fox ib. nu. 20. 
                  by Master Fox. Whereas
beside other Records thereof, the samewhole
Epistle is Verbatim set downe in a very auncient
Manuscript, written diuers hundreth of yeares
before Master Fox was borne, which among others
my selfe haue, and others may see in the
most worthy Library of Sir Robert Cotton, that
honorable fauourer of learning, and learned Antiquities.
               The speciall reasons which I will vse to proue
the truth thereof, are two. The former is taken

from the Common Law of this Realme. A law so
ancientVid. 6. part. Reports of Sir Edw. Coke in Praefat. & the
                        •
                      Reports of Sir Iohn Dauis in Praefat., that no certaine beginning is knowne
thereof, (as neither of the Law of Nations:) but
it was receiued and grew into vse by the continued,
constant, and vnchanged practise of wise
and iudicious men in this Realme, euer since a
Common-weale hath beene setled therein: and
because it was both by Common experience of all
approued, as a most fit rule of Iustice, and also
generally or commonly practised
                  In omnibus nationum 
                        •
                     uarum (Britonum, Romanorū, Saxonum, Danorum, & Normanorum) & regum earum temporibus, regnum hoc (Angliae) 
                        •
                     sdem quibus 
                        •
                     am regitur consuetudinibus continue regulatum est. Fo
                        •
                     tesc. de Polit. Angl. ca. 17., first in the
reigne of the Brittanes, then of the Romanes,
then in the seuerall kingdomes of the Heptarchy
of the Saxons, then of the Danes, and lastly
of the Normans; it seemes to haue obteined
the name of the Common, that is the generally approued
Law of this Realme. That by it the Popes
Soueraigntie and Supreame Iurisdiction, was
neuer approued in this Realme, in the bookes of
Law are set downe many authorities. In Henrie
the seuenths time1. Hen. 7. 10, The Pope excommunicated all
such persons as bought Allume of the Florentines. It
was adiudged that the Popes excommunication
ought not to bee allowed. In Richard the thirds
time, it was holden2. Ric. 3. fol. 22., that a iudgement in the
Court of Rome, should not preiudice any man at the
Common Law. The like was held in Edward the
fourths time, that the Popes
                  12. Edw. 4. fol. 16. 
                  excommunication was
not to be allowed in the kings Court. In Henry the
fourths time, it was ruled for14. Hen. 4. fol. 14. Law, that it is no
plea for the defendant to say, that the plaintiffe is
excommunicated by the Pope, although he shew forth
the Popes Bull to witnesse it; For the Iudges ought

not to allow such an excommunication: and that the
Certificate of no excommunication is auaileable in
Law, but such as is made by some Bishop in England.
In Edw. 1. time30. Edw. 3. lib. 3. Assis. pl. 19., one brought an excommunication
against another from the Pope: The kings
pleasure was, that according to the law he should be
hanged and drawne, as a Traytor, but the Chancellour
and Treasurer kneeled for him before the
king; so hee had iudgement onely to abiure the
realme. Many the like authorities are set downe
in the booke5. Part of his Reports. of the right Honourable Sr.
Edward Coke, whose exact knowledge in that
profession is not vnknowne to any. But these
few, (which by the helpe of those who are very
learned in that profession, I was desirous to examine
for my owne satisfaction) are sufficient to
testifie the Popes authoritie, euen his Censures of
excommunication, not to haue beene of force in
this Realme by the Common Law thereof.
               And I was much more earnest and glad to be
satisfied herein, because with such as are not eyther
themselues expert, or seeke not, as I professe
I haue done, to bee informed by them who are
learned in the Law; the collusions of F. Parsons,
who would seeme to make some answerPars. answer to the 5. part of Reports set forth by Sir Edw. Coke. to that
Treatise, may perhaps cast a mist before their
eyes, whereas if the truth be duly and fully scanned,
the Iesuite by that his answere, hath maruelously
both disgraced himselfe, and bewrayed
the weaknesse of that cause of the Popes Supremacie,
which he vndertook to defend; but he could
no otherwise support it, but by flying to Impertinent,

Sophistical, and Reuiling euasions, on which
his whole dispute doth consist.
               Of the Impertinency of his dispute, take this
demonstration. We in all our writings do professe
and make euident, that by the Soueraigne authority
which we giue vnto kings in causes Ecclesiasticall,
we intend not any either Supreame or
subordinate power to preach, to administer Sacraments,
to ordeine, to suspend, excommunicate,
and absolue, or iudicially to decide and
define doubts of faith: This power is giuen to no
Laicall, but onely to Ecclesiasticall persons; and
giuen or deriued to them onely from Christ, by
the mediation of his Apostles and Bishops. And
because in all these there is a direction in the
waies of God, but no corporall force or punishment,
coacting men to walke in those waies,
therefore is this rightly called a Directiue power,
or a power of executing those Spirituall duties.
But the power which wee acknowledge to belong
to Kinges in causes Ecclesiasticall, is an
Imperiall, not Spirituall; a Supreame coactiue, not
a directiue power; a power Mandatorie, commanding
those Ecclesiasticall duties to be done, not
Executory, as doing those themselues: Such a
power, as by which all Kings and Princes are authorized
by God, as being his immediate Vicegerents
vpon earth, not onely to permit with libertie
and freedome, but to see all those spirituall
duties performed in their kingdomes by Ecclesiasticall
persons, yea, to coact and compell both them
to performe, and others to embrace the same duties

of pietie and religion. This being the doctrine
which we euery where proclaime, F. Parsons
not being able with any colour to oppugne
this truth, that he might seeme to say somewhat
in the Popes behalfe, and against vs, slily declines
the maine point touching the Supreame Coactiue
power, and as if we gaue vnto Princes the Directiue
power in causes Ecclesiasticall (which wee
neuer so much as once dreame of) he labours to
proue against vs, that Princes haue not that Ecclesiasticall
power
                  Spirituall power is a cō
                     mission of bindeing and loosing. Pars. lib. cit. ca. 2. nu. 7. The spirituall Ecclesiasticall power consisteth in binding & loosing sinns, by means of sacraments, in iudging causes of the Church, it is a power to teach and direct, to punish by spirituall censures of suspension, excommunication, &c. ibid. ca. 2. nu. 16. 17., not such power
                  They giue vnto her (Q. Eliz.) all & all manner of Iurisdiction, &c: 
                  as Popes, Arch-bishops
and Bishops haue: That it is absurd
                  Ibid ca. 3. nu. 23. The absurditie of the statute, &c. (which
he saith we teach) that all Spirituall power is originally
in a King; yea in a child, yea in a woman, and
from them must be deriued to others: That it is
likewiseIbid. absurd (which he perswades you, that
we teach) that a King, a child, yea a woman hath
power not onely to giue this Ecclesiasticall Iurisdiction
vnto others, but much more to vse and exercise
the same in their owne persons; as namely, to giue holy
orders, to create and consecrate Bishops, absolue
sinnes, administer Sacraments, teach, preach, iudge,
and determine in points of faith. Thus disputes the
great Iesuite against vs. In all which euery one
may see that this grand Master in their Romish
schoole, doth not so much as once touch the
point which he vndertooke, but fighteth onely
with his owne shaddow; and when he hath refuted
this idle and sottish conceit of his owne deuising,
then he insultes, and triumphs as if he had
killed the wise and worthy Vlisses, whereas in very
deed the blind Polyphemus hath done nothing

else but hackt and hewed in peeces one of his
owne hogges.
               As his dispute is Impertinent, so is it in euery
part Sophisticall. I will instance onely in this
whereof we now entreat touching the reiecting
of the Popes Excommunications. He seeing
that they were often and expresly by the Law reiected,
deuiseth this shift, (and it is very frequentPars. lib. cit. ca. 11. nu. 24. & ca. 12. nu. 15 & saepe alibi.
and vsuall in him) that the reiecting of
them proceeded not from any want of respect to
the Pope, nor from the denial of his authoritie in
this kingdom, but from want of a Certificate frō the
Arch-bishop or Bishop, that those writings were indeed
the Popes Bulls, and not counterfeit. Wherein
besides his supine ignorance, hee bewrayes
a resolute intent rather to cauil and wrangle, then
to dispute and argue. It is true, that in the books
of the Law there is often mention of hauing a
Certificate from the Bishop. But that Certificate was
not to testifie that this was truly and certainely
the Popes Bull or Excommunication, (for how
could any Bishop here, be able to certifie that?)
but to certifie that the partie (whom that excommunication
did concerne) was by the Arch-bishop
or Bishop himselfe excommunicated.
Which to be the true meaning of those words,
there are many cleere proofes. By the Statute
an. 27. of Edw. 3. cap. 1. it is expresly declared,
that the very suing to the Court of Rome, and seeking
by such courses to hinder or impeach iudgement
in the Kings Court, was the very destruction of the
Common Law, vsed at all times in this Realme. So

by the consenting voyce of the whole State, explaining
and confirming the Common Law, the
very Act of procuring the Popes Excommunication,
(and not the want of a Certificate of the truth
thereof) is declared to be an Act contrary to the
Common Law, and therefore to bee condemned
and reiected by that Law; and that also at al times.
Had the want of a Certificate from the Bishop, bene
once knowne to auoid the force of the Popes
Bull of Excommunication, would any, thinke
you, after that, haue beene so simple or carelesse
in their owne causes, as not to haue brought alwaies
with the Popes Bull, a Certificate thereof
from a Bishop? Would Edward the first haue
beene so rigorous, nay tyrannicall, as to condemne
one for Treason, and will that he should be
hanged and drawne, or but to be abiured the land,
for omitting a part of the forme in legall proceeding?
for want of a Bishops Certificate of the Popes
Bull? Did euer the Statute or Common Law
iudge such an omission to be so heynous, and euen
a Capitall offence against the Crowne? Long
before this, the ancient Lawes of the Land were recognised
and confirmed by all the States of the kingdome,
and that also by oath in the reigne of Henrie
the second, as both Math. Paris. whom before I
cited, and an Act of ParliamentAn. 10. Hen. 2. verba Parliam. citantur à D. Edw. Coke in 6. part. Relat. in Praef. vnder the same
Henry the second, witnesseth. It was then declared
to bee an Act vnlawfull and preiudiciall to
the King, for any to Appeale to the Pope in any
cause, without the Kings consent. Whence it is
cleere, that the very suing for the Popes Excommunication,

and not want of a Certificate was
the offence in Law taken at those writs. Nay the
Certificate, that such a writ was truly procured
from the Pope, had beene an assurance of the offence,
not an help to the offender. Besides, in the
14. of Henrie the fourth, fol. 14. it is said, that
the Certificate of no excommunication is auaileable in
Law, but only of such excommunications as are made
by the Arch-bishop or Bishop. And therefore though
the Popes Excommunication had beene by all
the Bishops in the Realme certified, yet in law
it was not auaileable, because it was the Popes
Excommunication, and not the Bishops. Nay it is
further there said (which is a cleere demonstration
of this truth) that though an Excōmunication
was certified by the Archbishop of Canterburie,
vnder his seale, yet for that the same Excommunication
was but in execution of a Sentence in the Court
of Rome, and was not vpon any cause originally
depending before the Archbishop, it was ruled,
that the said Excommunication should not be allowed.
How much more then was the Popes owne Excommunication
(though certified by a Bishop)
by the Law reiected, when euen those Excommunications
made and certified by Bishops,
which of themselues were of force, lost their allowance
in law, when they had reference and dependance
to the Pope, and at his solliciting of
the Bishops, were made against any for execution
of a sentence in his Court? Lastly, the reasons
why those Excommunications of the Pope are
in law reiected, doe vndeniably conuince this.

One reason hereof was, because
                  12. Edw. 4. fol. 16. 
                  it was against
the Kings regalitie and Crowne. To want a Certificate
that the Bull was truly the Popes Bull, none
can imagine to be preiudiciall to the King, or to
his royaltie: at the most that is but an error and
ouersight in the partie that pleadeth, it is no derogation
to the kings right. But to bring an excommunication
from the Pope, as from a superior Iudge
then the King; to bring the Popes authoritie and
writ, to hinder the proceeding of Iustice in the
Kings Court, & to ouermaster the Kings authoritie,
this indeed directly, and in Capite toucheth
the Crowne and the Kings royaltie; for in effect
it is a very deniall of the Kings Soueraignty, a
deniall that he is in truth a King. Another reason
which is often set downe in the bookes of Law12. Edw 4. fol. 16. & alibi.,
is this, because the Pope is not a Minister or Officer
to the Kings Court. Whereby is meant, that such
Excommunications as are of force in Law, must
be made by those who are ministers, and subiect
to the King. And the reason hereof is euident:
because if the Excommunication be vniust, the
Court in the Kings name may command, and the
King may compell them to redresse the same.
Now to the Pope, neither could the Iudges (as
they say) write, (to wit, authoritatiue to commaund
him) nor could the King compell him
to reuoke or redresse his Excommunication,
though it were neuer so vniust. By all which it is
euident, that the Popes excommunications were
by the Common Law, and that at all times reiected,
eo nomine, because they were the Popes, and

so were derogatorie to the royall dignitie; not
as the Iesuite cauilleth, because they wanted the
Bishops Certificate to testifie the truth of them: for
which his fancie as those who are very learned in
that profession, assure me, he hath no ground at
all in the bookes of the Law. But F. Parsons
thought by his equiuocating, and cauilling about
the Bishops Certificate (whereof he knew
there was mention in the bookes of Law) to delude
the simple and vnskilfull Reader, who either
cannot, or will not regard to enforme themselues
in such matters. But howsoeuer among
his owne ignorant proselites he may gaine an applause,
yet by his so vile and malicious sophisticating
with the Law, among all men of sound
learning and vpright iudgement, hee hath made
himselfe a very Ludibrium vnto them.
               
                  Parsons fearing his Sophistry would faile him,
as it hath in this, turnes him to his other shift,
which is indeed his last refuge, and that is open
Railing and Reuiling: an Art wherein of all that euer
I haue read, he is most skilfull and expert, able
to put Shemie, Rabshe
                        •
                     ah, and Thersites himselfe
to the schoole. I will not Camerinam mouere,
not offend your eares with stirring that sinke:
Doe but heare how contumeliously, how spitefully
he derideth and declameth against the very
Lawes of that land, which bred and brought vp
such an vnnaturall Viper. What is that Common
Law? saith hePars. lib. cit. ca. 11. 
                        •
                     u. 22., that ancient Common Law? How
was it made? By whom? Where? at what time? vpon
what occasion? To auouch a Common Law, an antient

Common Law, without beginning, authour,
cause, occasion, or record of Introduction, is a strange
Metaphysicall contemplation. This Common
                  Lib. eod. ca. 13. nu. 16. 
                  Law,
it is E
                        •
                     s transcendens, or rather Ens Rationis, nay it
is a very Chymera, (an
                  Ibid. nu 17 
                  old Chymera, an Imaginary
Law) such as hath no essence or being at all a parte
Rei, but onely in imagination. And in this common
place, as in a large field hee exspatiates almost
throughout his whole booke, and in deriding
the Law, makes himselfe most ridiculous. I
cannot more fitly answere him, then with the
words of S. Hierom, Imperitia confidentiam, scientia
timorem creat. Modesty and humility attend
vpon knowledge, pride and confidence are
the companions of Ignorance: or with that of
the Poet, Omnia quae nescit dicit spernenda colonus.
The dignitie and honour of this Law (vnder
which this renowned kingdome doth now most
happily, and hath for more then 16. hundreth
yeares, continued in a flourishing estate:) is by
so many most worthy men, and learned in that
profession, so amply set forth, that as it needs no
Apologie at all, specially not of me, so meane
and vnworthy an Encomiast; so can it no whit at
all be blemished by the contu
                     •
                  elies of him who
doth but reprehend, what he doth not comprehend.
Thus much onely let me say, that all his
scoffing and opprobrious demaunds do equally,
and with as much force fight against the Law of
Nations: yea, for the most part against the Law
of Nature also. What is this Law of Nations?
How was it made? By whom? Where? at what

time? Vpon what occasion? Seeing notwithstanding
all these friuolous demands, the Law of
Nations is acknowledged by all learned men, yea
euen by Parsons
                  Pa
                        •
                     s. answ to Sir Edw. Coke. ca. 2. nu. 7. himselfe, (who is to be ranked
in another predicament) to haue a true realitie,
let him either professe the like Realitie and essence
in the Common Law, or with it let him condemne
the other, as a Chymericall imagination;
and so at once bid battell, not onely to this one
kingdome, but euen to all mankind, and all Nations.
Now his booke consisting of these and
such like Impertinent, Sophisticall, and Reuiling discourses,
what other answer could he expect, or
should he receiue from him whom according to
the Prouerb, Dares Entellum, he made his (though
a most vnequall) Antagonist in this cause, but
that which he hath returnedSir Edw. Coke 6. part of his Reports in Prae
                        •
                     at. against him, a Writ
of Nihil dicit, for in very deed, he speakes Nihil
ad Rhombum. But to passe from him, seeing it is
now cleere, that by the Common Law, the Popes
supreame authoritie euen in Ecclesiasticall,
and then much more in Temporall causes, of
which wee intreat, is reiected; and seeing that
Law is the selfe-same now that it was alwaies, it
being a certaine, immutable and inflexible rule;
it remaines as cleere and certaine, that not onely
since the Conquest, but euer since there was a
Common Law in this Realm (that was euer since
there was a Common-weale therein;) which
knew the Pope, the Popes Soueraigntie hath bin
by the Church of this Realme, and that euen by
the law of the land reiected.
               
                  
The other reason to proue this, is drawne from
the Brittanes & their Church. That their Church
was not subiect to the Popes Iurisdiction, no not
in Ecclesiasticall (much lesse in Temporall) causes,
theBed lib. 2. hist. Angl ca. 
                        •
                     
                   
                  manner of their baptising, and others Ceremonies
far different from the Romane, & that euen
when Austen the Monke came hither, being sent
from Pope Gregorie the Great; and especially
their different obseruing of Easter, is a certaine and
vndoubted euidence. For seeing the Popes, specially
Victor, as Eusebius
                  Euseb. lib. 5 hist. ca. 24. shewes, were so earnest
to draw the Asiaticall Churches to the Romane
custome in the obseruation of that day, none may
thinke but that they would prouide to haue conformitie
in such Churches as were subiect to
their owne Iurisdiction. Besides this difference of
Rites, the Brittane Bishops manifestly declared
that they held not their Church nor themselues
to be subiect to the Pope, nor to his authority.
Pope Gregory appointed Austen to be their Archbishop.
We
                  Gregorij verba apud Bedam lib. 1. ca. 27 in Respons. 9. 
                  commit vnto you omnes Britaniarum
Episcopos, all the Bishops of Brittaine, that the
weake may be confirmed, and the obstinate corrected.
The Brittaine Bishops knew that Pope Gregorie
had giuen to Austen this authoritie ouer them, as
by Bede
                  Bed. lib. 2. ca 2. and others is euident, seeing Austen laboured
                  Amad. Xieriens▪ apud An
                        •
                     iq Britan. in August.
                  to bring them to his obedience Apostolica authoritate,
by the Popes authoritie. Had those
Catholike Bishops knowne and beleeued either
the Pope to bee a Supreme Iudge and Commander
in the whole Church in causes Ecclesiasticall,
or themselues to be subiect to his command and

authority in such causes, they would no doubt
haue yeelded obedience to Austen, and in him to
the Pope. See now how farre they were from doing
or acknowledging this. Austen vsed both
praiers & threatsMinitans p
                        •
                     aedixit. Bed. lib 2. ca 
                        •
                     . to moue them to consent, and
to conforme themselues to the Romane Church,
though not in other things, yet at least forIbid. 
                  their
manner of baptising and celebrating Easter. Neque
precibus, neque increpationibus Augustini assensun
                        •
                     
praebere voluerunt, they would neither yeeld to his
entreating, nor increpation, but told him plainly,
they would obserue their owne Traditions. When
he the second time required of them mihi obtemperare
                  Ibid., to be obedient to him in those motions,
their answer was, nihil se horum facturos, that
they would yeeld to none of them all: and they
further added, Illum pro Archiepiscopo se non habituros,
that they would not accept of him for
an Archbishop ouer them: YeaGalf. Monumet. lib. 11 ca. 7. 
                  Dinoth the Abbot
of Bangor, a man of great learning, made it appeare
by diuers arguments, when Austen required
the Bishops to be subiect vnto him, that they ought
him no subiection. They further added, as someAntiq. Britan. in August. pa. 46.
set downe, That they had an Arch-bishop of their
owne, residing at Caerlegion, or Legancestria (that is
Chester whither it seemes the Metropolitan See,
which while the Brittaine Monarchy continued,
was at Yorke, was now remoued:) Him they ought
and would obey, externo vero Episcopo minime subiectos
sore, but they would not be subiect to any
forren Bishop, and then not to the Pope, much
lesse to Austen.
               
               
                  
This example of the Brittanes is so ancient, and
withal so pregnant against the Popes supremacy,
and that euen in Ecclesiasticall causes, that Baronius
                  Baron. ann. 604. nu. 65.
being no other waies able to auoide the
force thereof, slanders those Bishops with the imputation
of schisme, because they would not yeeld
obedience to the Pope. Wherin Baronius shamefully
begs the maine question in that his dispute.
Neither could he, nor will others euer proue,
either that all Churches, or that this of Brittaine in
particular, did owe subiection to the Romane B.
The Church of BrittaineBert. in sua Diatrib. in ancient time, like
other Prouinces, had a Patriarch, or Patriarchall
Primate of her owne: to him the other Bishops in
this Church were subiect, as they in Aegipt to the
Patriarke of Alexandria, diuers in the Easterne
parts of Asia, to the Patriarke of Antioch; they in
Italy to the Patriarke of Rome, and so in other
Prouinces. Among these Patriarkes, and Patriarchall
Primates, by reason of the Imperiall seat,
and other seats of Iustice in seuerall Prouinces,
there was a Primacy, or Precedency of one before
another, but no authority of one aboue another,
no subordination or subiectiō
                   of one vnto another.
Admit those Bishops had then separated themselues
frō the Pope, (which yet doth not appear:)
it is not the separation from the Pope, or from any
Bishop, no nor from any Church, but onely
the cause of separation that makes a schismaticke:
And seeing the Pope then sought to oppresse the
ancient liberties of the Brittaine Church, and to
bring them vnder his yoake to whom they were
not subiect; the Cause of their separation from the

Pope being iust, could not make them Schismaticall;
but if the Pope and his adherents did for
this cause forsake or refuse communion with
them, or separate themselues from them, hee and
his adherents must rightly and truely bee herein
accounted Schismatikes. Of which point, because
in another Treatise: I haue at large euen
against Boronius entreated: I will adde no more
in this place.
               F. Parsons is more cholerike against the Brittans
then Baronius, and therefore imputes an
higher fault, euen the crime of Heresie vnto
them; and because they would not obey Austens
perswasions to obserue Easter, as the Roman
Church did, he makes them guilty of the Heresie
of the Quartadecimanes. To wch purpose he faith:Pars. triple. Conu. part. 1. ca. 8. nu. 27. 
                  The Brittons obserued a Iewish Ceremony against
the order and faith of the Church of Rome. And hee
accounteth this a substantiall point of faith, saying,Ibid nu. 28 
                  for other substantiall points of faith (this then
is one) they agreed with Augustine. And again,Lib. eod. ca. 9. nu. 4. 
                  Austen
at his comming, found no other substantiall difference
of beliefe, in the Brittish faith from that which
he brought from Rome. And yet more plainly.Lib. eod. ca. 3 nu. 14. 
                  The
Easterne custome of celebrating Easter, vsed by the
Brittans, hath beene co
                        •
                     demned, not onely for an errour,
but also for an Heresie. Wherin the Iesuit bewrayes
a great deale both of ignorance and malice.
For the Heresie of the Quartadecimanes, did
not consist in the bare obseruing of Easter, on the
14. day of the Moone of March, seeing not only
the Churches of Brittaine but diuers also in

Asia, as Eusebius testifieth,Euseb lib. 5. hist cap. 2
                        •
                     . 23 obserued that same
day, who were not held Hereticall in this point,
no not by the Romane Bishops, whoPraedecessores tui Enc haristiam miserunt Eccles
                        •
                     is, quae aliam cō
                     suetudinem sequutae sunt. ait. Iren. Victori. ibid. retained
commuinion with them. But the Essence and formality
of that Heresie, was their teaching that
Easter ought of Necessity to bee kept on that day
and none other: which Necessity they grounded
vpon the Mosaicall Law, wherein that day is precisely
commanded, from which law they thought
and taught others, that none might depart, and
so by their doctrine they couertly and closely laboured
to reduce Iudaisme, and all the Iudaicall
rites, one of which was this of Easter; and for
which, hauing most colourable pretences, they
vsed it but as a pully to drawe on the rest. Tertullian
sheweth this fully, who speaking of Blastus
the Author of that Heresie, saith:Tert. lib. de praescrip. cap. 53. iuxt. Pam. 
                  Latenter Iudaismum
introducere voluit dicens, Pasca non aliter

                        •
                     nstodiendum esse nisi secundum legem Mosis 14.
luna mensis. Hee indeuored cunningly to bring
Iudaisme into the Church, teaching that Easter
was on no other day to be kept, but on the 14. as
Moses commanded. With this Heresie (which
quite abolisheth Christ, & euacuateth the whole
Gospell) those famous Churches in Asia, and
this of Brittaine had no affinity. For although
they celebrated the same day that the Iewes did,
and the Quartadecimanes vrged, yet they kept it
neither after the manner, nor vpon that ground
that the Iewes and Heretikes did. The Iewes and
Heretikes obserued that day eo nomine, because
Moses in his Ceremoniall Law, prescribed it. The

Churches in Asia and Brittaine obserued it as a
tradition from Saint Iohn the Euangelist, and by
the example of St. Iohn, & all the Churches subiect
to him, as Policrates in Eusebius
                  Nec Policarpo per
                        ••
                     adere potuit An
                        •
                     cetus ne id re
                        ••
                     
                     neret quod cum Iohanne obseruasset. Iren apud Euseb. loc. cit. Iohannes Apostolus, Policarpus. 14. Luna Pasca obseruabant Euseb. lib. cit. cap. 23., and long
after him B. Coleman expresly declared in that disputation
which Bede
                  Ipsum est quod B. Iohannes cum omnibus quibus praecrat Ecclesiis celebrasse legitur. &, Iohannis Apostoli exemplū sectamur. Beda lib. 3. cap. 25. sets downe: and St 
                  Iohn to
haue obserued that day, B. Wilfrid
                  Iohannes 14 die mensis primi incipiebat celebrationem sesti pascatis, nihil curans, an haec Sabbato an alia qu
                        •
                     
                     libet feria proneniter. Wilf verba ibid. who was earnest
for the custome of the Roman Church expresly
confesseth. The Iewes and Quartadecimans
taught that it ought necessarily to bee obserued
on that 14. day, and on no other; the Brittane &
Asiaticall Churches, vsed it as a rite Indifferent,
which might either on that 14. or another day,
according to different custome of Churches be
celebrated: For which cause they did not renounce
Communion, nor breake the vnity of the
Church, with such as obserued another day, as by
that famous example of Policarp
                  Apud Euseb. lib. 5. Hist. ca. 24. and Anicetus
is most euident. And though the Nicene councell
decreedDecret Nicsynod. recitatur apud Euseb. lib. 
                        •
                     . de vit, Constant. cap. 17. & 18. that Easter should not bee kept
on the foureteenth day after the manner of the
Iewes, but one another, to which order of
the holy generall Counsell euery particular
Church was in duety to haue conformed it
selfe, yet because that Decree of the Councell,
was not a Decree of faith (no further then it condemned
the Necessity of obseruing the foureteenth
day, and so condemned the Quartade
                        ••
                     manes)
but a Decree of Order, of Discipline
and Vniformity in the Church, when it
was once knowne and euident that any particular
Church condemned the Necessity of

that 14. day, the Church by a Conniuence
permitted, and did not censure the bare obseruing
of that day, so long as it was obserued, but
as an indifferent and mutable rite, nor as a Mosaicall,
but as an Apostolicall tradition or custome:
euen as in that other Nicene CanonConc. Nic. Can. 20., that on euerie
Lords day from Easter to Whitsontide, none
should pray kneeling, but standing, the Church
both now and euer, vsed the like Conniuence, or
Indulgence. So long as there is a consent, vnity,
and agreement in the Doctrines of Faith, the
Church neuer vseth to be rigorous with particular
Churches, which are her owne Children for
the variety and difference in ourward Rites,
though commanded by her selfe. Euery particular
Church like the Kings daughter, must haue
the same glory of faith within, though they haue
diuersitie of rites, like variety of colours in their
garments without. And this to haue bene the very
iudgment of the church touching the Brittaine
Church and Bishops, her selfe declared: seeing
not long after that Nicene decree, both at the
Generall and holy holy Councell of Sardica, and
after that, in another at Ariminum, (which Baronius
and Binius
                  Bin. Not. in Concilium Ariminense. professe to haue beene also a generall
and holy Councell) and at which were
present about foure hundred Catholike Bishops,
they as willingly and gladly receiued the Bishops
of Brittaine
                  Episcopos Britanniae interfuisse Concilio Sardicensi, testatur, Epist Synodalis illius Conc. apud Athan. Apol 2. Tres 
                        •
                     tiam Britanniae, Epis. inter
                        •
                     ui
                        ••
                     e Concilio Arimine
                        •
                     si rest
                        •
                     tur▪ Sulp. Seuer. lib 2. hist. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . (though obseruers of the foureteenth
day) as any of other Prouinces, who obserued
another. Doubtlesse had the Church esteemed
either the bare obseruing of that foureteenth day, to

make an-hereticke, or the Church and Bishops of
Brittaine, for obseruing that day to be hereticall,
Hosius, Athanasius, and other, most holy and orthodoxall
Bishops would neuer haue admitted
them vnto, or permitted them to sit and giue
sentence with them in those holy assemblies. It
was some Ignorance, but much more Malice in
Parsons, to account those Brittanes who would
not yeeld obedience to Austen, Heretickes, and
taxe them as obseruing that rite against the Faith,
yea against a Substantiall point of Faith, whereas
it is cleere that they were at that time as Amandus
Xierixensis
                  Amand. Xierix. apud Antiquit. Brit. in August. Britones fuerunt Catholici. expresly and truly cals them, Catholikes;
euery way, if not more, as Catholike as
Austen himselfe.
               It doth now appeare, that the Popes supreme
authoritie in causes Ecclesiasticall, was not beleeued
nor receiued, but directly oppugned and
reiected in this Realme, at that time when Austen
came, seeing the Catholike Brittanes, Brittish
Bishops, and Church refused Austen for their
Arch-bishop, and in that reiected the Popes authoritie,
by which they knew he was appointed
to be their Arch-bishop. But there are besides
this, some other important consequents. First
Father Parsons tels vsPa
                        •
                     s. trip. Conu. part. 1. ca. 8. nu. 28. & ca. 9. nu. 3., that in all substantiall
points of faith, excepting that Ceremonie (so himselfe
expreslyA Iewish ceremonie obserued against faith. ibid. ca. 8. nu. 27. cals it) of obseruing Easter, the
Religion of the Brittanes did wholy agree with that of
the Romanes at that time, which was the time of
Gregorie the Great. Now seeing it is cleere that
the doctrine of the Popes Supremacie in causes

Ecclesiasticall, was no point of the Brittanes
faith, but a doctrine which both by their profession
and practise they did vtterly condemne and
reiect: it hence followeth, that the same doctrine
was condemned by Pope Gregorie, and all Catholikes
at that time. Againe, Parsons tels vsIbid. ca. 9. nu. 1. 2. 3. 6.,
That the faith which the Brittaines formerly had in
the time of Eleutherius, and before that also in the
Apostles time, was the selfe-same in all materiall
and substantiall points (excepting that Ceremonie
of Easter) which they had when Austen came▪
in all that time neither did the Church of Rome
change her faith, nor the Brittaines theirs. And
Galfr. Monumetensis leauing out that ridiculous
exception of Parsons, testifiethGalf. Monumet. lib. 11. ca. 7., (as Parsons also
confessethVerba Galf. citat. Pars. lib. eod. ca. 2. nu. 13. of him) that the same doctrine of
Christianitie which was receiued in the time of Eleutherius,
failed not among the Brittaines, but remained
in force when Austen came. Whence it againe
and certainly followeth, that seeing the doctrine
of the Popes supreme authoritie in causes Ecclesiasticall,
was no part of the faith of the Brittaines
when Austen came; therefore neither was
it any part of their faith in Eleutherius daies, no
nor in the Apostles neither: nay seeing the faith
of the Brittaines (as Parsons truly affirmethPars. ca. 9. cit. nu 2.)
was then the same which the Romane Church, and
all Catholikes embraced, it further followeth, that
the Popes Supremacie, was no part of the faith
of the Church of Rome, or of any Catholikes either
in Eleutherius, or in the Apostles time. So is it
cleerely prooued, and that with a large ouerplus,

that as the Supreme authority of the Pope
in causes Ecclesiasticall, (and a fortiori in Temporall)
was reiected by this Realme euer since
the Conquest, so was it also during the whole
time of the Saxons and Brittaines, euer since there
was a Church planted therein, and that is euer
since the daies of the Apostles, in whose time, by
the confession of all learned men, there was a
Church in Brittaine.
               
               To this Demonstration, and euident Deduction
of the truth, let me adde somewhat touching
those three pretences which they alledge, &
wherby they striue to proue the Popes▪
                   Soueraigntie
and Monarchicall authority in this kingdom.
The first, as you haue seeneSup. ca. 1., is the payment of
Peter-pence, begun by King Ina, about the yeare
716. and confirmed by Offa, Adelphus, William
the Conquerour, and others, till the time of
Henrie the eight: which payment, because Polydore
                  Pol. Virg. hist. Angl. lib. 4. §. Post hunc
cals a Tribute, they thence inferre, that the
Kingdome of England was Tributary to the Pope,
and he the direct or Supreme Lord thereof. But
what a slender witnesse is Polydore for so weighty
a matter? An Italian, one of the Popes Pentioners,
Collectors, and flatterers also: such an one
as Card. Bellarmine himselfe misdoubts in this
very matter, sayingBell. Apol. pro Tort ca. 4. §. Quanquam.; England is tributarie to the
Pope, si Polidoro Virgilio credimus. If we will beleeue
Polydore. And sure the Cardinall had reason
to doubt that Polydore meant not any such
thing as they collect: for he expresly saithPol. Vir. loc. cit., that
those Peter-pence were paid to the Pope, pietatis et religionis

causa, for pietie and deuotion. So by Polydores
testimonie, that was a tribute of Deuotion,
not of Dutie, a tribute giuen for Pietie, or giuen
in Pios vsus, not a payment of subiection, or
seruice. But what speake I of Polydore? That those
Peter pence were indeed nothing else but a voluntarie
Almes giuen to the Church of Rome, partly
for the vse of some English Church there erected,
partly for the releefe of English Pilgrims
and Trauellers who came thither, either vpon
deuotion or otherwise, there are such authentick
Records witnessing the same, that the poore and
petite testimony of Polydore, (on which, but with
extreame diffidence, they build that their idle
fancie) is not to be named, much lesse compared
with them. In that old Manuscript collection
of Nicholas Card. of Arragonia, of which
before I spake: among other Records there is set
downe a Writ or Instrument
                  Instrumentum quod Mr. Sintius Camerae dom. Papae clericus, Nuncius Apostolicae sedisin Anglia ad Curiā apportauit. Cod. M. S. ante citat. fol. 41. which Mr. Sintius
Clerke of the Popes Exchequer, and the
Popes Nuncio in England brought to the Romane
Court, concerning these Peter pence. In it
is expressed, both how those pence ought to be collected,
at what time, and where to bee payed, what
forfeiture for not payment thereof, and which I
principally obserue the very reason why the King
payed them to Rome, which is this, Quoniam
denarius hic Elemosyna Regis est, because those
Peterpence are the Almes of the King. Among
the Lawes of S. Edward the Confessor, which
are extant in another ancient ManuscriptCod. M. S. legum antiq. Inter leges. St. Edw. fol. 35: extat in Bibl. D. Rob. Cot., the
very same touching all those particulars, are expresly

and verbatim set downe, as in the Instrument
of Sintius, the same reason of payment is
there also expressed, Quoniam Denarius hic Elemosyna
Regis est. William Conqueror, to the endRog. Houed. Annal. part. 2. in Hen. 2. pa. 343.
he might bee vndoubtedly certified of the true
Lawes, which were formerly vsed by the Saxons
in this Realme, caused a collection of them to
be made by the consent of sworne men, 12 to be
chosen out of euery Shire of England. They all
(witnesses for number, antiquitie, and credit aboue
all exception) among other ancient Lawes
and Customes, mention this concerning Romescot
or Peter-pence, in the very same manner and
words as the former did; and this very reason,
for the payment thereof by them is expressed,
Quoniam Denarius hic Elemosyna Regis est. By all
which it is euident, that by those Peter pence, the
Pope and Church of Rome is certainely proued,
to be Elemosynarius a Beeds-man to the Kings &
kingdome of England, as receiuing that Annual
Almes from them, to the payment whereof they
voluntarie bound themselues. And from this voluntarie
guift of an Almes, to conclude that the
Pope is the highest Lord of England, is euen
such a reason, as if a begger from the guift of a
penny, or an Hospitall from the guift of twentie
shillings, which you promise or binde your selfe
yearely to pay, should conclude that they are
certainly your Landlord, and that you hold all
your lands and possessions of them, and in token
of recognition thereof, do pay yearely to the one
a penny, or to the other a pound.
               
                  
Their next pretence, and that wherein they do
most confidently & continually triumph, is that
famous, nay infamous, and as Math. Paris
                  Charta saeculis omnibus detestanda. Math. Paris. M. S. hist. minor in Ioh. §. Dum ita. Detestabilis illa charta. Idem. hist. maior. an, 1245, §. Di
                        •
                     bus vero,, and
Math. West.
                  Math. West. ad an. 1213., rightly call it that lamentable
execrable, and detestable Charter, made by King
Iohn, by which he resigned for the Popes vse, into
the hands of his Legate, the Realmes of England
and Ireland, and as Feudatarie, tooke them of the
Pope againe, for the annuall rent of 1000. Markes.
For answere whereunto, I wish them first to consider
what they will say to Sir Thomas Moore, an
holy MartyrSand de Schis. p. 29. among thē, who denyethSir Thomas Moore in the suplication of soules. 
                  the Fact
and that any such Deed was at all made by King
Iohn. For my owne part, I doe not consent to
their Martyr in this point. For besides that the
Copy of the Charter made to Pandulph the
Popes Legate, is set downe in Math. Parisiensis
                  Paris. an. 1213 §. Rebus,
and Math. Westmonasteriensis
                  Westmon. an. 1213., who liued neere
those times, there is extant a Bull of Innocentius. 3.
which (reciting Verbatim, euery word in Iohns
Charter to Pandulf,) the Pope sent vnto K. Iohn:
declaring how willingly and ioyfully hee accepted
the Kingdomes so resigned, and let them vnto
King Iohn againe. The very autographum of
that papall Bull, dated on the 4. of Nouember,
Anno 1213. signed with the Popes owne hand and
marke, witnessed by the subscriptions and markes
of 12. Cardinals and 3. Bishops, sealed also with
the Popes seale of lead, imprinted on the one side
with the name of Innocentius 3. and on the other,
with the Images of Peter and Paul, after I
had seeneIn Bibl. D. Rob. Cotton. and perused, it left no scruple at all

touching the fact in my mind. Besides this Charter
made to Pandulph at Douer, on the 15. day of
May, an 14. Iohannis; the Pope afterwards solicited
and induced King Iohn, by Nicholas▪
                   Bishop
of Tusculum, the Popes Legate, to renew
                  Exacta est a Rege & innouata, illa non formosa sed samo
                        •
                     a subiectio. Math. Paris An. 1213. §. Veniente. 
                  the
same grant of resignation; and so Iohn did. This second
Charter was made for the Popes vse to
Nicholas the Legate, at London, in the Church
of St. Paul, dated on the 3. of October, an. 15. of
King Iohn, and Anno Domini 1213. sealed
                  Charta prior caera signata fuerat, nunc auro bullata est Paris. ibid. Verba Chartae sunt ista, per hanc chartam aurea bulla munitam. 
                  with
gold, whereas the former was but with waxe. The
Copy of which Grant being wholly set downe
in that Manuscript Collection of Nicholas Card.
of Arragonia, of which before I spake, after I had
also seeneIn Bib. praedicta., perused, and compared with the
former, it did fully satisfie me for the Fact againe.
And though it be not easie to coniecture
what the Popes pollicy might bee in procuring
this second resignation, seeing for euery Materiall
and substantiall point, it doth Verbatim agree
with the former; yet thus much I thinke may bee
easily obserued, that both these may well bee inualide,
but that they both should be of force it is
impossible: the validity of either one, makes the
other vtterly inualid. For if the former was of
force, then Iohn hauing passed away all his right to
the Kingdome by it, hee could haue nothing to
passe by the later to the Pope; and then the later
is vtterly void and of no force at all: Againe, if
the later be of force, so that by it Iohn granted or
resigned the Kingdome to the Pope, then
was nothing at all past away, granted, or

resigned by the former, and then the former is vtterly
inualide. And of the two, though they esteeme
more of the gold, yet if I might aduise
thē, they should hold them to the waxe: specially
for that the golden Charter (as Parisiensis
                  Math. Par: an. 1245. §. Diebus. tels them
was said by many to haue beene melted in that fire
at Lyons, which Innocentius the 3. himselfe, was
thought to haue kindled in his own Palace, that vnder
pretence of that losse, he might more colourably exact
a Collection of the Clergie: the fire preuailing further
then the Pope intended, deuoured that golden
Iewell, and some other of lesser value.
               
               But on whether soeuer they set their rest, it is
certainely no better then a staffe of Reed, to support
the pretended Dominion of the Pope. For
though we suppose it to haue beene sometimes
of force, yet the saying of Polidore their owne
witnesse, and the Popes Fauourer is very true in
this case. Omnia
                  Polid. Virg. lib 15. §. His. dictis. 
                  illa onera Iohanni tantummodo
imposita sunt, non item successoribus; Those bands
tyed, and those burdens were laid vpon King
Iohn alone, they bound not any of his successors;
and this, saith he, Satis constat, is very cleere and
certaine. For as Accursius, Albericus, and other
Lawyers teachDe quibus vid. sup. part. 1. cu 8. pa. 170. of the Donation of Constantine,
that it could not preiudice his successors, the very
same may bee said of the Donation of King
Iohn: as the Charters, so the validity of them is
not vnlike. Yea, by the iudgement of Lucias de
Penna, the grant or Alienation of a Kingdome
though confirmed by oath also, as wasIurauit rex se iudicio Ecclesiae pariturum, Math. Paris. an. 1213. §. Rex denique. this,
could not be of force, no not against King Iohn
                  
himselfe. For though an Emperour, saith heeSup. par. 1. ca. 8. pa. 169.,
sweare that he will not reuoke such royalties as are
giuen away to the preiudice of his Crowne, yet he may
reuoke them notwithstanding that his oath. And the
reason is, because the Emperour at the time of his
Coronation, hauing sworne to keepe safe the honour
& rights belonging to his Empire, his second & contrary
Oath (whereby hee sweares to alienate the
rights of his Empire, or suffer them to be alienated
or withheld) being vnlawfull, neither doth
it, nor can it binde him to violate his former, iust
and lawfull Oath; for Iuramentum is not Vinculum
Iniquitatis. And this directly concernes the
very case of King Iohn. Nay, what if the Pope
himselfe adnulled this grant of King Iohn. Both
the Charters were made in that one yeere. 1213.
as by their date appeares. Of the next yeere thus
writeth the Author of the Eulogium;
                  Euglogium. Cod. M. S. in Bibl. D. Rob. Cotton. 
                  Anno 1214.
conuocatum est, This yeere there was a Parliament
called at London, the Arch-bishop and all the
Clergie, cum tota laicali secta with all the Laikes,
being present therein. Per domini papae praeceptum
illa obligatio praefata, quam Rex domino papaefecerat
cum fidelitate & 
                        •
                     omagio relaxatur omnino 1 die
Iulii. In this Parliament, that obligation spoken
of before, which the King had made to the Pope,
with feolty and homage done vnto him, was
wholly released by the Commandement of the
Lord Pope on the first day of Iuly. Thus the Eulogium,
euidently witnessing what force or validity
soeuer, was in either of the Charters granted
by King Iohn, the same by the Popes owne Act

of Relaxatiō, was the next yeere wholy adnulled.
               And all this I haue spoken, vpon supposall that
those Charters, or either of them, made by Iohn,
had sometimes bin of force. But the truth is, that
neither of thē was euer of any force to transfer or
giue away the Kingdome; but ab initio, euen from
the very first making of them, there was an inualidity
and a meere Nullity in those grants, both in
respect of the Giuer, of the Gift, of the Cause, and
manner of giuing thereof. The Giuer was Iohn,
who as he was neuer rightly
                  Iohannes nunquam fuit verus Rex. verba Philippi Regis Franc
                        •
                     
                     ae. apud. Mat. West. an. 1216 
                  King, so neither had
he, nor could haue any power at all to giue away
the Kingdome, which was not his, nor of right
belonged vnto him. For of the sixeHanc esse veram genealogiam filiorū Henr. 2. videre licet praeter alios in Chron. Ioh. Speede in 
                        •
                     n Hen. 2. nu. 102. & seq. & in Chron. Hollinsh. in Hen. 2 pag. 115 Sonnes of
Henry the second, Iohn was the yongest; William
and Henry dyed before their Father, and without
Issue; Richard the third sonne, raigned after his
Father, and dyed without Issue. The fourth sonne
was Geffray, who dyed a little before his Father;
but left issue, Arthur Duke of Brittaine; and Elenor,
called the Damsell of Brittaine. Phillip the
fift sonne dyed yong, and without Issue. After
the death of Richard, the Kingdome in right belonged
to Arthur; but Iohn (the yongest sonne
of Henry the second) by force inuaded, and by
force withheld the Crowne from him. After the
death of Arthur (which was in the fourth yeere,Speed Chr. in Ioh. nu. 19. & 20. after Iohn had taken the Kingdome) the whole
right to the Crowne descended, and in right belonged
to Elenor, the Sister of Arthur, who liued
full 23. yeeres after the death of Iohn: for
Iohn dyedMath Paris: Math. Westm. Hollins. Speede in Ioh, anno 1217. and Elenor dyedMath Paris. an. 1241 §. Et circa. pa. 770. & Speede in Iohane. 
                        •
                      n 20. 
                  anno
                  
1241. which was the 24. yeere of Henry the 3.
sonne of Iohn. After which time all the brothers
of Iohn and their issue also being extinct, the right
of the Crowne remained in the issue of Iohn. By
this now it is euident that Iohn at no time (and
least of all, when hee was deposed and depriued
of his Kingdome by the Popes iudiciall sentence
as then he was when this Charter was made) had
any right to the Kingdome; and seeing he had no
right to take it to himself, much lesse had he right
to giue it to another. He could giue no more thē
he had: Right to the Kingdome hee had none in
himselfe, right to the Kingdome hee could giue
none to the Pope. Of his gift that may bee said
which is vsually spoken in another matter,
Nihil habuit dare, Nihil dedit. And although such
Acts of Iohn as concerned the making of Lawes, or
administration of Iustice either betwixt subiect &
subiect, or himselfe and the subiects are to be held of
force, as were also the like Acts of some other,
and namely of Richard the third, one knowne
and confessed by all to bee an Vsurper: though
those Acts, I say, of Iohn be rightly iudged to be
of force, because the State of the Kingdome consented
to his gouernment, and yeelded obedience
vnto him, thinking it better to accept and
obey such a King as had but a pretended title, rather
then to haue no King or ruler at all; yet for
his other Acts betwixt him and strangers, such as
concerned the rights of the whole Kingdome and Regality
of the Crowne, and which tended to the
bringing of the whole Kingdome into bondage

and vassallage vnto others; for these, neither the
Acte of Iohn, nor of any other were, or were euer
iudged to be of force; there was an Inualiditie
in Iohn to doe such Acts, and when he did any
such, there was a meere Nullitie in the same.
               As the Giuer had no power to giue, so neither
was the kingdome such a Gift as could be passed
away by Iohn. For no Emperour can without
the consent of his State, giue his Empire to a
stranger; seeing in so doing, he should preiudice
the rights of others, and make them subiects
and vassals to another, without their owne consent:
whereas both equitie and naturall reason
teacheth, as out of Lupoldus
                  Lupol. de Iur. regni & Imp. ca. 14. was before declared,
that the Act which preiudiceth the right of others
must be approued by them all. Now although
in the Charters, King Iohn is made to say, that
he did this communi consilio Baronum, by the common
consent of his Barons; yet was that clause,
as many other, most falsely and fraudulently put
into the Charters by the Popes Legates. The Barons
and State were so farre from consenting to
this Grant, that when the first Charter was sealed
at Douer, Henrie Archbishop of Dublin the
principall man in that assembly, (in the name as
it seemes of the rest) did Reclamare
                  Math. Paris. an. 1213. §. Charta itaqae & Speed in Chron. in Ioh. nu. 48., openly disclaime
the same, and greeue thereat. And when
the second was sealed in Pauls, Stephen Lancton,
the Archbishop of Canterburie, (a Cardinall, and
the Popes owne creature, but in this a true louer
of his Countrey) Appellationes
                  Math. Paris 
                        〈◊〉
                     . 1231. §. Defunctae. 
                  solenniter fecit
ante altare, made solemne Appeales before the

altar against that writing, which was
                  Ibid. 
                  toti mundo
execrabile, detestable to the whole world. By vertue
of these appeales
                  Innixus iuri & Appellationibus Stephani. ibib., as also of the right in the cause
it selfe. Rafe Neuil Chancelor of England doubted
not openly to say, and his speech was related to
the Pope himselfe by Simon Langeton, That the
yoake
                  Excuteret Angliam de sub iugo domini Papae, &c. ibid. 
                  of the Pope to which Iohn had subiected England,
might iustly be shaken off, and that for so doing,
himselfe would striue euen to the losse of his
head. How much the Barons disliked this Grant
of King Iohn, his owne words to Pope Innocentius,
as also the Popes answer, doe witnesse: Our
Earles and Barons, saith heVerba Epist. Iohannis ad Innoc citantur in resp. ad Apol. Bellar. ca. 3. §. Frater., and the Pope writesIn illum insurgunt postquam ecclesiae satisfecit, qui assistebant eidem quando ecclesiam offendebat. in Epist. Innoc. 3. apud. Math. Paris. an 1214 §. Innocentius pa. 356. the like, were deuout and louing vnto vs, till we
had subiected our selues to your dominion, but since
that time, & specialiter ob hoc, and specially euen
for so doing, they all rise vp against vs. The manifold
opprobrious speeches vsed by the Barons
against King Iohn, for this subiecting himselfe
and his kingdome to the Pope, doe declare the
same▪ 
                  Iohn, said theyDerisionibus multiplicatis subsannando dixerūt Math. Paris. an. 1215. §. His peractis., is no King, but the shame
of Kings; Better to be no King then such a King: Behold
a King without a kingdome: a Lord without Dominion;
Alasse thou wretch, and seruant of lowest
condition, to what misery of thraldome hast thou
brought thy selfe? Fuisti Rex, nunc fex, Thou wast
a King, now thou art a Cow-heard, Thou wast the
highest, now the lowest. Fye
                  Idem. ann. 1216. §. Circa▪ h
                        ••
                     s. 
                  on thee, Iohn, the last
of Kings, the abhomination of English Princes, the
confusion of English Nobilitie; Alas England,
that thou art made tributarie, and subiect to the
rule of base seruants! of strangers! and which is

most miserable, subiect to the seruant of seruants!
Thou Iohn, whose memorie will be wofull in future
time, thou of a most free King, hast made thy selfe
tributary, a farmer, a vassall, and that to seruitude
it selfe: this thou hast done, that all might be drowned
in barathro Romanae auaritiae, in the Hel of the
Romish auarice. Yea, so detestable was both this
fact of Iohn, and dealing of the Pope, that Philip
the French King, though the mortall enemie of
King Iohn, hearing thereof, euen vpon this very
point, that the Barons and State did not consent to
that Act, did proclaime both the absolute freedome
of the kingdome of England, notwithstanding
this Grant of Iohn, and declaime also
against the Pope, for seeking to enthrall kingdomes
vnto him. For when GualoMath. West. an. 1216. & Math. Paris. hist. minor. M. S. in Iohan. 
                  the Popes
Legate, told him that the kingdome of England was
now become the Popes patrimony, by the guift of
King Iohn, Philip presently replyed, & his words
are very remarkable, Regnum Angliae patrimonium
B. Petri nunquam fuit, nec est, nec erit; The kingdome
of England neuer was, nor is, nor shall be
the Patrimonie of Peter. And the King gaue
two reasons of his so worthy and resolute assertion;
the oneMath. West. loc. cit., because Iohn was neuer King, and
therefore could not giue away the kingdome;
The other, becauseMath. West. & Paris. M. S. locis citat. 
                  Nullus Rex, No King nor
Prince can giue away the kingdome (which is the
Common-wealths) without the assent of his Barons,
who are bound to defend the kingdome; and if the
Pope being allured by the lust of Dominion, determine
to maintaine this error, he giues a pernicious example

vnto all kingdomes. At which sayingMath. West. loc. cit., all the
Noble men of France that were present, began
vno ore clamare, to cry with one voyce, That they
would stand to this truth vsque ad mortem, euen to
death, That the Pope cannot at his pleasure giue
kingdomes, or make Kings tributary, whereby their
Nobles shall be made slaues to whom he will: Nay,
they did not onely say it, but sweare
                  Math Paris. M. S. loc. cit. 
                  also, that
they would spend their liues in this quarrell. Besides
all which, there is yet a farre more authentick
proofe of the inualidity of King Iohns grant,
and that is the Iudgement of the whole kingdome
assembled in Parliament in the time of
Edward the third. This matter touching the
Grant which King Iohn made to the Pope, being
proposed and discussed in that Parliament;
Vpon
                  Ex Rotulo Parliam. an. 40. Ed. 3. nu. 8. 
                  full deliberation, the Prelates, Dukes, Earles,
Barons and Commons answered and said with one
accord, that neither the said King Iohn, nor any other,
can put him, nor his Realme, nor his people in
such subiection without their assent: and as by many
euidences appeareth, if it was done, it was done without
their assent, and contrary to his owne oath at his
Coronation. And besides this, the Dukes, Earles,
Barons, Gentlemen, and Commons, doe accord and
agree, that in case the Pope shall enforce, or attempt
by processe, or by any other manner of doing, to
constraine the King or his subiects to performe this,
(as it is said he will) these parties will resist and
withstand it with all their puissance. Thus are the
words of the Act: A demonstration aboue all
exception, that to the Grant or Charter made

by K. Iohn to the Pope, there was no assent of the
Realme; and therefore that K. Iohn neither did,
nor could by that his Grant, or by either of those
Charters, resigne or transferre his kingdome to
the Pope, but that in his very Act of doing it,
there is not onely an Inualiditie, but a meere
Nullitie.
               The third Nullitie ariseth from the Cause,
which moued Iohn to make this Grant to the
Pope. And though in both the Charters Iohn is
made to say that he did it, for pietie and deuotion,
to make satisfaction to God and the Church for his
sinnes; that he did it also bona nostra spontaneaque
voluntate, of his owne free accord, and with a
willing mind; yet are these in truth, nothing else
but pretences: An easie matter it was for the Pope
and his Legates, to make Iohn write what colourable
pretence they listed, when they made him
giue away his kingdome to whom, and as they
listed. The true and onely Cause inducing, nay enforcing
Iohn to make this Grant, was that imminent
danger and feare, to loose both his Crowne
and his life also, into which extremitie, both of
danger and feare, the Pope himselfe had now
first brought Iohn, that so he might bee plyable
to his owne perswasions, & then held him so fast
inwrapped and ensnared, that without the Popes
helpe he was now inextricable. His land was
now vnder a generall Interdict
                  Math. Paris. an. 1208. § Lo
                        •
                     doniensis., and had so remained
for fiue whole yeares, like an Heathenish
Nation, without celebration of diuine Seruice
and Sacraments. Iohn himselfe was by name Excommunicated
                  Idem. ann. 1209. §. Sub his.,

and had so remained for diuers
yeares: All
                  Idem ann. 1212. §. Circa hos. 
                  his subiects were released and freed à
Regis fidelitate et subiectione, from owing eyther
fidelitie or subiection to him; yea they were forbidden,
and that vnder the paine of excommunication,
so much as to company or conuerse with him, either
at Table, or in counsell, or in speech and conference.
Further yet, Iohn was deposed from his
kingdome, and that iudicially, à
                  Math. Paris hist min. M. S. in Ioh. §. Dum ita. 
                  iure regni abdicatus
et sententialiter condemnatus in Curia Romana,
being in the Romane Court depriued of
all right to his kingdome, and iudicially condemned;
and that Sentence
                  Westmon: an. 1213. & Math. Par an. eod. §. Anno 1213: 
                  of his Deposition and
Depriuation, was solenniter promulgata, solemly
denounced and promulgated, before the French
King, Clergie, and people of France. Neither onely
was Iohn thus deposed, but his kingdome also
giuen away by the Pope, and that euen to his
most mortall enemy. For the Pope
                  Paris. loc. cit. pa. 310. 
                  to bring his
sentence to execution, writ vnto Philip the French
King, perswading, yea inioyning
                  Westm. loc. cit. ex parte do. Papae regi Francorum alijs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      iniunxerunt & idē ait Paris. pa. 311. 
                  him to vndertake
that labour of dethroning Iohn (actually, as iudicially
he was before) and expelling him from the
kingdome, promising vnto him, not onely remission
of all his sinnes, but that ipse et successores sui
regnum Angliae iure perpetuo possiderent, he and his
heires should for euer haue the kingdome of
England: withall the Pope
                  Paris. loc. cit. 
                  writ letters to all Nobles,
Souldiers, and Warriers in diuers Countries, to
signe themselues with the Crosse, and assist Philip
for the deiection of Iohn. Philip was not a little
glad of such an offer, gathered forcesParis. & West. loc. cit., and all

things fit for such an expedition, expending in
that preparation no lesse then
                  Paris. ann. 1213. §. His ita 60 thousand pounds.
All
                  Idem an. eod. §. Rex Angl. 
                  these things being notified to King Iohn, did
not a little daunt him; And though he was too
sensible of the impendent calamities, yet to
strike a greater terror into his amazed heart, and
make a more dreadfull impression in his minde,
of the dangers which now were ready to fall on
his head, Pandulph was sent from the Pope vnto
him, to negotiate about the resigning of his
kingdome, to which if he would consent, hee
should finde fauour, protection, and deliuerance
at the Popes hands. Pandulph by a craftie kinde
of Romish Oratorie, at his comming to the
King, expressed, yea painted out in most liuely
colours all the difficulties and dangers
                  Paris an. cit. §. Dum autem. 
                  to which
the King was subiect, The losse of his Crowne, the
losse of his honour, the losse of his life. That
there was
                  Math. West. loc. cit. 
                  no other way in the world to escape them,
nisi sub alis domini Papae potenter protegatur, but by
protection vnder the Popes wings. IohnParis loc. cit. §. Rex denique 
                  seeing
dangers vndique imminere, to hang ouer him on
euery side, by the French abroad, by the Barons at
home, and being deiected, and mente
                  Ibid. 
                  nimis perturbatus,
vtterly dismayed and confounded with
the ponderation of them, resolued for sauing his
life, to loose his libertie and honour: and to saue
his kingdome from his open aduersarie, to loose
it and giue it quite away to his secret, but worst
enemie that he had: doing herein as if one for
feare of being slaine in the open field, should kill
himselfe in his owne chamber. It was not pietie
                  
but extreame perill; nor deuotion, but feare onely,
and dispaire that caused, and euen enforced Iohn
against his will, to make this Grant to the Pope.
Parisiensis rightly obserued this when he saidMath. Paris. hist. min. M. S. §. Dum ita.,
Demersus Rex in desperationem, King Iohn being
then drowned in Dispaire, made that shamefull agreement,
volens nolens, with an vnwilling will
to the Pope. And truly the very same cause induced
Iohn to make the second Charter. For besides
that the Interdict
                  Licet terra Interd
                        •
                     cta fuisset, (cum aduenit Nicolaus) &c. Math. Par hist. maior an. 1213. §. Eodem anno ci
                        •
                     ca. pa. 329. 
                  was not then released, K.
Iohn knew by experience, that if he had incensed
the Pope, by not yeelding to his motion, the
Pope would, and could as easily now as before,
vse his power of Excommunication, Deposition,
and giuing away his kingdome. As Feare
and Force imminent, caused him to make the first,
so Feare and Force foreseene, caused and compelled
him to make the second Charter. And what
validitie can there possibly bee in those Actes
which are done per vim & Metum? It is a rule
in the LawCod. de Transaction. l. Interpositas., confirmed by a perpetual Edict, Interpositas
metu transactiones ratas non haberi, that
such agreements as are made for feare, are of no
validitie. We command, say the EmperoursHonor. & Theod. Cod. de ijs quae vi & m
                        •
                     tu gesta 
                        ••
                     nt l. Venditiones., that
those Venditions, Donations, and Transactions bee
void, quae per potentiā extortae sunt, which by force
& power are extorted. Innocentius himselfe declares
the same, euen in another Act of this King
Iohn. The BaronsMath Paris. 
                        〈◊〉
                      1214. §. 
                        〈…〉
                     
                   not preuailing by perswasions
with him, tooke the Citie of London from him,
and being in armes, forced him to confirme some
liberties and lawes vnto them. Iohn hauing made

complaint thereof to Pope Innocentius, he thus
writIdem eod. an §. Innocentius pa. 357. of that matter, Iohn being destitute of helpe
and aduise also, durst not deny what they required,
vnde compulsus est per vim & metum, whereupon
he was compelled by Force and Feare (which
may fall into a man though he be most constant) to
make both a shamefull and wicked composition with
them; That composition reprobamus penitus ac damnamus,
we vtterly reiect and condemne; and all
the Couenants and Obligations conteined therein, we
make altogether frustrate and voide. Boniface 8.
entreating of some things done by the Kings of
Scotland, which seemed preiudicial to their right,
saithBonif. in suis literis ad regē Angl. apud Math. Westm. an. 1301., Ea vtpote per vim & metum elicita nequaquam
debent de iure subsistere, those things being
done by reason of Force and Feare, (which may
happen to a constant man) ought not in Law to
be of validitie, nor to redound to the preiudice of
the kingdome. Whose saying doth equally in euery
respect, shew the inualiditie in this Act of
King Iohn. Pope Pascalis with an whole Councell
decreed the like. Hee being imprisoned
                  Ab. Vsperg. an. 1112. Alb. Stad. et Naucl. eod. ann. & Conc. Later. sub. Pasc. 2. 
                  by
Henrie 5. by a faire Charter resigned vnto the Emperour,
the Inuesti
                        •
                     ures of Bishops, and ordering of
the See Apostolike. The Pope was no sooner at libertie,
and the feare past, but calling a Laterane
Councell, they reuoke and adiudge that Grant, euen
because it was per violentiam extortum, made
by constraint, to be of no force, to bee Prauilegium,
not Priuilegium. Were they not quite blinded
with partialitie, they could not chuse but confesse,
that much more this Charter and Grant of

King Iohn must be inualid; the Grant to Henrie
was iust and lawful, being that which in right belonged
vnto him: this Grant of Iohn was sundry
waies iniurious; iniurious to Iohn himselfe, it being
contrary to his iust oath formerly taken: iniurious
to the whole State and kingdome, whose
liberties it enthralled: iniurious to the Crowne,
as taking away the Regality thereof. Seeing they
vpon that rule of Gesta per vim et metū non valent,
adnull the iust Charter and Grant of Pope Pascalis
to the Emperour, they doe warrant vs by the
same rule to pronounce a Nullity of the iniurious
Charters and Grant of King Iohn vnto the Pope.
               The last Inualidity, ariseth out of the very Manner
of the Grant, and of the making thereof. For
after all that K. Iohn either resigneth, giueth or
granteth any way to the Pope, this Prouiso and
Exception, or Reseruation is expresly set downe,
Saluis nobis et haeredibus nostris, Iustitijs, Libertatibus,
et Regalibus nostris. Sauing to vs and to our
heires, our Rights, Liberties, and Regalities.
Which words being expressed in the former
Charter, the Copy whereof is vulgarly extant
& obuious vnto all, I supposed that the principal,
if not the onely reason, why the Pope procured
his second writing had bene, to haue this clause
(which adnulleth all the former Grant) expunged
and left out in the second and golden Charter.
But when I found the selfe
                     •
                  same Prouiso,
and that totidem verbis, expressed in both the
Charters, I did euen wonder to see their vanity,
and with what insolency they boast that Soueraignty

of Dominion is here giuen to the Pope,
and the King made an homager and vassall vnto
him by this Grant: all which this one Prouiso
doth manifest to be vntrue. For the Right of a
King is Soueraigntie of Dominion: The Libertie of
a King, is Freely and Absolutely to rule, without
being subiect or seruant to any other mortall
man. And the very essence of Regalitie, as I haue
before shewed, is Supremacy of authoritie, Independent
of any, saue onely of God. Seeing all these
are expresly and directly excepted in both the
Charters, they vtterly made void whatsoeuer is
before mentioned, either as granting Soueraignty
to the Pope, or as acknowledging subiection
in the King. In both these respects, by reason of
this one Prouiso & Exception, there is a certaine
Nullity of the Grant made in both the Charters.
Much more might be added; But for further satisfaction
in this whole point concerning these
Grants, I gladly refer the Reader to the History
of King Iohns life, so faithfully, exactly, and iudiciously
set forthEa est quae extat in Chro. Iohan: Spe
                        •
                     d., by my learned friend Mr Dr
                  Barkam, that were the rest of our Country Story
sutable thereunto, few humane Histories of kingdomes
could be preferred before it.
               Their third and last proofe, concernes Henrie
the second, father of this King Iohn. Card. Allen
                  Card. Allan. admonit. to the Nobil. an. 1588. pa. 8. & cit. in Blackw▪ larg. examin. pa. 18. pretends that Henrie the second, when hee
was absolued for the death of Thomas Becket,
made an agreement with Pope Alexander the third,
that none might lawfully take the kingdome of
England till hee were confirmed by the Pope.

And both Baronius
                  Bar. an. 1173 nu. 9. and Bellarmine
                  Bell. Apol. pro Tort. cap. 3 §. Extat., and after
them Becanus
                  Bec. Contr. Angli. q. 9 nu. 1. 2. & seq. and Gretser
                  Grets in cō. Exeget. siue Basil. dor. ca. 5 §. si temporalia. alledge to this purpose,
an Epistle of Henry the second, set downe among
the Epistles of Pet. Blesensis
                  Epist 136 inter Epist Pet. Bla
                        •
                     s., wherein
King Henry acknowledgeth the Pope to bee his
temporall Lord, and himselfe the Popes Feudatary.
Vestrae Iurisdictionis est Regnum Angliae:
The Kingdome of England belongs to your Iurisdiction,
and by Feudatary obligation I am bound
and obnoxious to none but to you. Let England know
what the Pope can doe; and because the Church vseth
not materiall weapons, let it defend the Patrimony
of Saint Peter by the spirituall Sword. Whereunto
I answere, that both this pretence of a Couenant,
and Feudatary subiection, is vntrue; and
that Epistle going vnder the name of Henry the
second, wherein this is acknowledged, is either
wholly forged, or in that part or passage corrupted.
Whereof there are so many euident profes,
or rather Demonstrations, that none of sound
iudgement duely pondering the same, can iustly
make any doubt thereof. Had the Pope knowne
this Kingdome to haue beene the Popes Patrimony,
and the Kings therof Feudatary vnto them
in the time of Henry the father of K. Iohn, or could
they haue shewed that King Henry had acknowledged
this vnder his hand and seale, would they
haue beene so simple as to haue laboured so earnestly
and craftily to draw King Iohn to make
those Charters of Resignation, and that grant of
the Soueraignty thereof vnto them? What could
either K. Iohn resigne, grant, or giue vnto them,

or the Popes receiue more then was their owne
before, and that by the authenticall acknowledgment
of King Henry? Seeing this acknowledgement
of King Henry, vtterly adnuls the Grant,
and both the Charters of K. Iohn, wherin they so
much triumph, & for which (as also for the Popes
earnest labour to obtaine the same) there are so
cretaine and vndoubtfull Records, euen themselues
must either confes this Epistle and acknowledgement
of King Henry, to be a Forgery, or else
for euer disclaime the Charters of King Iohn, and
whatsoeuer is granted therin vnto them. Had the
Pope knowne this Kingdome to be his Patrimony,
and himselfe to be the Lord thereof, by any
acknowledgement of King Henry, why did hee
not protect K. Iohn, and his Kingdome against the
Barons, against Philip the French K. and against
Lewis his sonne, as well before Iohn had made
those Charters, as hee did after? specially seeing
he giues this very reason why he protected Iohn,
because
                  Admonet papa Philippum ne permitter et Ludouicum Angliam hostiliter adire vel Regē Anglorum inquietare in aliquo; sed ipsum vt Rom. Ecclesiae vassallum protegeret & defenderet. Math Paris. an. 1216 §. Sub. his. pa. 375. Ecce qualiter patrimonium B. Petri Angliam ponti
                        •
                     ic
                        •
                     s defendunt, dicunt Barones, quorum inso: lentiam minis▪ & censuris cō
                     pescit Innoc
                        •
                     ntius 3. in suis literis apud Math Paris. an. 1215. pa. 362. 
                  he was his Vassall, and a Feudatarte vnto
him, one whom in duty he was to protect and defend.
For thus saidParis. an. 1216 §. Tunc: dixit. pa. 381. the Pope to the Legates of Lewes.
He ought not to make warre (no not iust warre)
against King Iohn, but he must make complaint to
Iohns higher Lord, to wit the Pope, Cui subest Rex
Angliae tanuqam vassallus eius, whose Vassall King
Iohn is. Nay why did the Pope incite K. Philip,
to inuade England, to dethrone King Iohn, and promise
his Kingdome vnto him, if it was the Patrimony
of St. Peter, by any Grant or acknowledgement
from K. Henry? Or how could Innocentius
                  
the third, in his BullBulla Innoc. de qua supra. of Acceptation of Iohns
Charter, haue said in such a glorying manner,
That now vpon K. Iohns Grant, was fulfilled, that
which Saint Peter saith: Regnum Sacerdotale, et
Sacerdotum regale. The Pope being now made (in
respect of England) like Melchisedek, both a
King and a Priest! That this and other Prouinces,
quae olim, which formerly held the Roman
Church, for her Mistresse in spirituall matters,
Nunc etiam in Temporalibus Dominam habeant specialem,
hath the same Church now (vpon King
Iohns Grant) for her Lady in Temporall affaires
also? Innocentius doth hereby cleerely witnes that
this Realme of England, neuer till K. Iohns time
acknowledged the Roman Church for her Lord
in temporall matters. And therfore by the Popes
owne iudgement, neither Henry the second, nor
any former King did euer acknowledge, as in
that forged Epistle Henry is made to doe, this
Realme to haue beene the Patrimonie of Peter, or
the Kings thereof Feudataries to the Pope.
               Besides this there are diuers reasons that may perswade
that K. Henry neuer writ that Epistle, at least
not that passage therein, nor euer made any such
acknowledgement. There is extant a LetterEpist. Hen. 
                        〈◊〉
                      in M. S. cod. in Bib D. Rob. Cot. of
this King Henry, to Pascalis the third, who succeeded
to Octauianus, called Victor the 3. and
was chosen Pope in the time when Rowland called
Alexander the 3. held the See. Pascalis is accounted
by themGalt. Chron. in saecul. 12. for an Antipope, but as before
I shewed, Alexander was indeede a Pseudopope,
which much impaireth the credit of Henries E-Epistle

and acknowledgement made vnto him.
Henry after congratulation for his election, and
signification how he sent that pension of Peterpence
vnto him, which he expressely calls Beneficium,
as noting it to be giuen in curtesie, and as an
Almes, not as a duty, he thus saith, What honour
and obedience your See had in the time of my father,
and Predecessors, the same I will that you haue in my
time: In this tenor that I also do entirely enioy those
dignities and customes in my Kingdome, which my
Ancestors had in the same: And I certifie you that as
long as I liue, the dignities and customes of my Kingdome
shall not (God willing) bee impayred. And
though I (which God forbid) should so much deiect my
selfe, yet my Nohles, imo totus Angliae populus
id nullo modo pateretur; yea the whole Kingdome
of England will not suffer the impayring thereof.
So cleerely and constantly doth King Henry protest
that neither himselfe would, neither would
his people permit the impayring of the dignities
and custome of the Kingdome: and therefore
that neither himselfe nor they would euer acknowledge
such Feudatary subiection to the Pope,
as in that forged Epistle is both against the
mind, the hand and seale of the King, and against
the consent of the Kingdome acknowledged.
Those other acts of King Henry, recorded in Historians,
do shew the same. He forbad
                  Rog. Ho
                        •
                     ed. Annal. part. 2. fol. 289 §. Amantissimo. 
                  any to appeale
to the Pope, and that also, qualicunque de causa,
for any cause whatsoeuer, without the Kings leaue.
He accounted and often called,Ille Thomas proditor. literae Henry 2. ad Episcop. Londin. apud Math. Paris. an. 1149. §. Per Idem: & ad Ludou. Regem Franc. scripsit ne inimicum suam ac proditorem Thomam 
                        •
                     oue
                        •
                     et. lit. Henr. apud Westm. 1168. & saepe alibi. 
                  Thomas Becket
a Traytor for applealing to the Pope, and seeking

helpe of him against the King: He entreated
                  Literae. Hen. 2. ad Frid. Imper. apud Westmonast. loco citato. 
                  aid
of Frederick the Emperour, to depose Alexander
the Pope, eo quod proditoris Thomae causam fouit, because
he tooke part with the Traytor Thomas against
him: He decreed, that if any
                  Rog. Ho
                        •
                     ed lib. cit. fol. 284. 
                  brought into
England either any letters or mandate from the Pope,
containing an interdict of the land, hee should bee apprehended,
and iustice without delay done vnto him,
Sicut de traditore Regis ac Regni, as on a Traytor to
the King and Kingdome. He decreed that
                  Ibid. fol. 290. 
                  neither
Archbishop nor other, should without his leaue go
out of the Kingdome, no not ad vocationem domini
Papae, though the Pope called him: He professedIbid. fol. 287.
                  obedience to the Popes sacred commands, but
with this Prouiso. Salua sibi sua, regnique sui dignitate:
alwayes sauing his owne dignity and the
Kingdomes (by which one Prouiso his regall Soueraignty
is kept safe.) His oath taken at that very
time when he was absolued, after the death of
Becket, is worthy obseruing. One part whereof
was this, that he
                  Ibid. fol. 303 
                  would not reuolt from Pope Alexander
and his successors, quamdiu ipsum sicut Regem
catholicum 
                        •
                     abuerint, so long as they entreated
him as a Catholike King (and that is, so long
as they touch not his regall Soueraignty, or attempted
ought against it.) Another part was,
that he
                  Ibid. 
                  would not hinder appeales to the Pope in causes
Ecclesiasticall (in ciuill he would) but yet with
this Prouiso (which kept his soueraignty safe) that
if any were suspected, they should put in security, that
they would not hurt either him or his Kingdome: Vpon
such security, he permitted onely, but allowed

not, and that onely in Ecclesiasticall causes, appeales
to the Pope. These and a number the like,
as they are cleare euidences, that he still as well
after as before the death of Becket, kept the Soueraignty
of the Kingdome in himselfe, so they demonstrate
that acknowledgement of the Popes
superior authority vnto him, and that himselfe
was a Feudatarie to the Pope, mentioned in that
Epistle to be a meere fiction and forgery, deuised
by some vnskilfull fauorer of the Pope.
               To all which may bee added the iudgment of
their learned Arch-priest, who entreating of that
accord betwixt King Henry the second, and Pope
Alexander the third, which Cardinall Allane
mentioneth, not only taxethGeorg. Blackw. in his large Examinat. pa. 18. 19 & 20. He must needs acknowledge his ouersight in that point. the Cardinall for ouersight
in that point, but further also of his assertion
resolutely saith: It is vntrue, adding that
King Henry the second neuer made any such accord,
for ought that he could euer reade in any Chronicle of
credit. Now it is not to be doubted, but that so
learned a man, exercised in the diligent search of
such matters, had both read and knew right well
of this Epistle, going vnder the name of King
Henry the second, so familiar and obuious in their
writings; but because he iudged that Epistle to be
of no credit, he therfore denyed any such grant to
haue bin euer made. But enough touching England,
to manifest the vanity of their boasting, that the
Kingdome thereof, euen ex quo Christi nomen ibi
clarificatum est, euer since Christianity was imbraced
therein, hath beene in the hand and power of
S. Peter, as PopeEpist. Alex. 2 ext. apud. Bar. an. 1068. nu. 1. 
                  Alexander the 2. saith, or as Stan.

Christanouic
                  Christanou. Examen. Cathol. sol. 33. explaines it, hath at all times bin tributarie
to the Pope: whereas we haue now by many
and by authenticke euidences demonstrated,
that euer since the first planting of the faith in this
Land, it hath still beene an Imperiall Kingdome,
subiect to none but onely and immediatly vnto God.
               
               For the Kingdome of Scotland, I will onely
heere mention two Testimonies. The former of
Cassaneus
                  Cassaneus citat. apud Episc. Roffe. contra Bell. lib 1. ca. 8.. The King of Scots, non habet superiorem
nisi ipsum Creatore, hath no superior vnto him
but onely God. The other of the whole State of
England. When Boniface the 8. challengedLiterae Bonif. 8. extant apud Math. Westmon. an. 1301. the
Kingdome of Scotland to belong pleno iure, in full
right to the Church of Rome, as to the direct and supreame
Lord thereof, the Earles, Barons and Nobles
of England after diligent examination of the
whole matter, with one consent returned this answereLiterae Gomitum & Baronum Angl. extat apud. 
                        •
                     und. Westm. an. citato.
to Boniface. The Kingdome of Scotland,
nullis temporibus, in temporalibus pertinuit, vel pertinet
quouis iure, ad Ecclesiam vestram, doth not
now, nor at any time did belong by any right vnto
your Roman Church. Which one authentick
testimony is enough to silence for euer their vaine
pretences for that Kingdome.
               For the Kingdome of Ireland, how farre it was
from acknowledgement of the Popes temporall
Monarchie, may certainely be discerned by their
condemning his Ecclesiasticall soueraignty, and
that by consenting voyce in their Parliaments. In
the time of KingStatute of Ireland. an. 10. Hen. 7. ca. 5. 
                  Henry the 7. all the statutes made
in England against Prouisors, were authorized, confirmed
and decreed to be of force for Ireland. The like

Statute against Prouisors was made in the time
of Henry the sixthAn. 32. Hen. 6 ca. 1., yea a more seuere law was
made in the time of Edw. the fourth, That
                  Stat. of Irel an. 16. Edw. 4. ca. 4. not printed, sed citat
                        ••
                      in the first pa
                        •
                      of the repor
                        •
                      of Sir Iohn Dauis, in the case of Praemunire fol. 87. 
                  such
as purchase any Bulls of Prouision in the Court of
Rome, as soone as they haue published or executed the
same to the hurt of any Incumbent, should be adiudged
Traytors.
               
               The like might be declared of the Kingdomes
of Denmarke, Suetia, Hungaria, Russia, and the rest,
which are mentioned in Nicholas Cardinal of Arragonia,
and after him in Steuchus and Gretzer: for
them all in generall, that one testimony of their
owne, Dom. Soto, being so full and cleare to our
purpose, may suffice at this time. Pope Innocentius,
saith heDom. Sot. in 4. Sent. distinc. 25. q. 2. art. 1. concl. 3. §. Quod si., ingeniously confesseth, that he hath no
power in temporall matters, ouer the French King: Et
quiquid alij somniant, id de omnibus regnis intelligit,
and whatsoeuer others dreame, the Pope vnderstands
this of all other Kingdomes. But omitting
other particulars touching them, I will only now
in the last place entreat of the Roman Empire,
which both by Act and Word, to haue reiected
their papall Monarchie, might by innumerable
testimonies and examples, be made euident. Of
them all, I will briefely mention but a few, hauing
in many passages before set downe much to this
purpose.
               
                  Constantine the great, the first Christian Emperor,
was so far from acknowledging that Papall
monarchy, that himself exercised supreme authority,
& that not only in Ciuill, but euen in Ecclesiastical
causes. The Donatists brought vnto him a

very troublesome cause, and many accusations against
Cecilianus. He being at the first vnacquainted
                  Imperatorem 
                        ••
                     arum rerum adhuc ignarū. Opt. lib. 1. cont. Parm. pa. 28.
                  with the Canons, durst
                  Non Ausus est ipse iudicare. August. Epist. 162. & 166 
                  not (personally, or by himselfe)
giue sentence therein, but he did that which
demonstrated his Soueraignty both of authority
& iudgement; for causam
                  Aug. Epist. 166. 
                  iudicandam atque finendam
Episcopis delegauit, he delegated and deputed
Bishops to iudge in his roome, and to end that
businesse: first Maternus,
                  Optat. loc. cit. & Epist. Constant. Miltiad. apud Euseb. lib. 10. ca. 5. 
                  Rhetilius, and Marinus, to whom he ioyned Pope Meltiades, & iunxit
                  Aug. in Breuic. collat▪ die. 3. §. Quinto ergo.
                  causam audiendam, and hee enioyned or gaue a
precept to the Pope and them to heare the cause,
and to end it. When the Donatists appealed from
the Synodall iudgement of the Pope▪ the EmperourAug. Epist. 166.
                  dedit alios iudices, appoynted other Iudges
at Arles, to iudge euen of the Popes iudgement.
When the Donatists yet againe appealed
from them also, Constantine though hee might
iusty haue reiected their appeale after so many
iudgements giuen by those Bishops, yet he tooke
the iudgement
                  Aug. Epist. 162. 
                  thereof into his owne hands, à sanctis
Antistitibus postea veniam petiturus, saith Saint
Austen, purposing to craue pardon of the Bishops,
for vndertaking to iudge in that same
cause which he had appoynted to bee ended by
thē. HimselfIdem Epist. 68. personally then heard the whole cause,
and Episcopalem causam cognitam terminauit, sayth
S. Austen, he made a finall conclusion and determination
of all that ecclesiastical matter; & withal
made a most seuere law against the Donatists. Can
there be desired moe, or more cleare euidēces, that
this most religious Emperor esteemed not the papal,

but his own Imperial authority to be supreme
in these causes? His delegating & appoynting of Iudges,
euen the Pope for one, his receiuing appeales,
and giuing other Iudges after the Popes iudiciall
sentence past, his owne personall hearing the cause,
and finall ending of it by his owne iudgement,
are euident proofes of his superiority aboue the
Pope. And this Imperiall iudgement was so approued
by the Church, that S. Austen little lesse
then triumpheth therein against the Donatists.
Constantine, sayth heAug. Epist 166., is dead, Sed iudicium Constantini
contra vos viuit, but the iudgement of
Constantine against you doth still liue. The Emperours
(Constantine, Gratian, Theodosius and Valentinean)
doe command the same that Christs commands,
because when they command what is good, per
illos non iubet nisi Christus, none but Christ doth
command by them: yea S. Austen, in this very
cause, besides this of Imperiall superiority aboue
the Pope, expresly declares that there is another
iudge in Ecclesiasticall causes aboue him: for
speaking of the Synodall iudgement of Pope
Meltiades, of which the Donatists complained as
vniust, Let vs, saith heAug. Epist. 162., suppose those Bishops who
iudged this cause at Rome, to haue beene ill iudges,
restabat adhuc plenarium Ecclesiae concilium, there remained
yet a generall Councell of the Church,
where the cause might be debated, cum ipsis iudicibus,
euen with iudges thēselues, one of which was the
Pope. No maruell if Stapleton
                  Staplet. Counterblast. ca. 
                        •
                     9 pa. 17. was so displeased
at this example, so ancient, and withall so pregnant
against their doctrine, that he, reuiling Constantine,
                  
for that very iudgement, for which S.
Austen and the whole Church honoured him,
shamed not to say of him, that he waded farre beyond
the borders of his owne vocation. But wisdome
is iustified of her owne children.
               
                  Iustinian in his Imperiall lawes fully declares
this Soueraignty of Emperours aboue the Pope,
There is saith heIustin. Novel. 133. in praefat., nothing exemptSic legitur in antiquis Cod. & sic legendū agnoscit. Stap. in suo Counterbl. ca. 19. p. 184. in nonnullis edit. aliter habetur. from the Princes
inquisition, who hath receiued from God communē
in omnes homines moderationem, & principatum, a
common Regiment and Soueraignty ouer all
men. His owne acts also, as by name the Banishing
of Pope Siluerius, the commanding Pope Vigilius
to come to Constantinople, and staying him
there till the Emperour gaue him leaue to depart,
and diuers the like, doe manifest that hee
iudged the Imperiall authoritie to be a superiour
euen a commanding power aboue the Papall.
               The like Soueraignty doth Basilius the Emperour
testifie to belong to himselfe and al the Emperours,
when in the presence, and with the approbation
of that, which they call the eight generall
Councell, he expresly thus saydConc. Gen. 8. Act. 1, The gouernment
of the Ecclesiasticall ship (that is of the
whole Church) is by diuine prouidence nobis commissa,
committed to vs who are Emperours.
               I would gladly stay a little in speaking of
Charles the Great, specially because Sciopius hath
so insolently and so vildly misused him, metamorphisingIs porro (Carolus) tantus Asinus, Sciop. c. 
                        •
                     47.
him into an Asse, into a right Issachar,
that is into a strong Asse, yea into an Asse
with Bels about his necke, that it will not seeme amisse,

for vindicating his honour against such railing
Shemeys to make manifest how this renowned
Emperor was in very deed the high cōmander
both of the Pope and all others in his Empire. See
first how by his commanding authority hee calls
the Pope and other Bishops out of their Prouinces
to the Councell at Frankford. IussimusRescriptum Caroli ad Elipandum. tom. 3. Conc. p. 425.
Synodale Concilium, we haue commanded a Councell
to be held at Frankford of all the Bishops within
our dominions. Among those Bishops the Pope
was one, who at the Emperours command was
present in that Councell by his two Legates
                  Athel. in Ann. Franc. an 794. Reghin. in eund. an. & Ado Vien. atque alij▪
                   
                  Theophilactus
and Stephanus, whom he sent to supply
his roome therein. Let Scioppius now say who
was then the Asse, the Pope, who obeyd the Emperours
command, or Charles who like the chiefe
muliter droue the Pope to what fould hee listed.
               See next how this great Emperour not onely
resisted the Popes doctrine and direction, and
that also in a matter of faith, but like the holy
Angell of God, reproued the Romish Balaam, and
his Baaliticall Idolatry, in their adoration of Images.
There are extant foure large bookes called
Libri Carolini, wherein not onely the doctrine
and decree of their second Nicene Councell about
Images is fully, and by many diuine authorities
and reasons refuted, but that second Nicene Synod
is as Hincmarus
                  Hincm. lib. cont. Hincma. rum laudum. c. 20. sayth, penitus abdicata, vtterly reiected
therein, yea Athelmus
                  Athel. loc. ci
                        •
                     
                     ▪
                   addes, that the second
Nicene Synod was so wholly reiected, vt nec
septima nec vniuerssalis haberetur, dicereturue, that
it should neither bee esteemed nor called the seuenth,

or any generall Councell. That Charles the
great was the Authour and writer of this booke,
Aug. Steuchus witnesseth, sayingSteuc. lib. de Donat. Const. p. 111., Charles the great
writing of Images in the first booke and sixth chapter,
thus sayth: and then hee repeateth that whole
Chapter of the Li
                        •
                     ri Carolini. The like is witnessed
by Eckius
                  Eck. in Euchir c. de Imaginibus., Charles the great quaituor libros
scripsit writ foure bookes against such as take away
Images. Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib. 2 de Concil. c. 8 §. Primo qu
                        •
                     a. is of opinion that they were
notIbid. §. Quod autem. writ by Charles, but by the Counsell at Frankford,
seeing there is set downe the very acts of that
Councell, and this both out of Hincmarus, and the
bookes themselues hee declares. Both their opinions
are in part true, for it is certaine, that some
parts of those bookes were written by Charles: Of
the Preface, in whichNam eodem ord
                           •
                        ne cum Ariminensi censetur Praef. lib 1 Carol. p. 97. their 2. Nicene Synod is reiected,
it is euident to be the preface of Charles, ThisIbid.
worke we haue vndertaken with the consent of those
Bishops which are set ouer Catholicke flockes, in regno
à Deo nobis concesso, in the kingdome giuen vnto
vs by God; which words can agree to none but
to Charles. Againe of the last Chapter, wherein
Charles professethSecundum quod continet Epist. 
                        •
                     . Gregorij ad Serenum. lib. 4. c. vlt. 
                  to follow the iudgement of Gregorie
the great, who writ thus to Serenus, Wee
                  Greg. Epist. 9. lib. 9▪ Indi. 4
                  praise you that you forbad them to adore Images, but
we reproue you that ye brake them downe. This chapter
to be the true writing of Charles the great, Pope
HadrianHad. 1 Epist 3. quae est ad Carolum. c. vlt 
                  expresly testifieth. So both the beginning
and ending of those bookes are the writing
of Charles. The rest of the bookes wherein all of
any moment which is set downe in the second
Nicene Synod is repeated and refuted, seemes

indeed to be written▪ as Bellarmine sayth, by the
Councell at Frankford, but yet so, that it was approued
by Charles. And because according to the lawCod. lib. 1. de veteri iure Eccl., Omnia nostra facimus quibus nostram impartimur
authoritatem, they were vsually and rightly
sayd to be the bookes of Charles. This, Hincmarus
witnesseth, sayingHinc. loc. cit▪
                  , By the authority of the Councell
of Frankford, the worshipping of Images was somewhat
repressed, yet Hadrian and other Popes after
the death of Charles, suarum pupparum cultum vehementius
promouerunt, did more earnestly labour
for the worshipping of their puppets, so that
Lewes the sonne of Charles, libro longe acriori insectatus
sit imaginum cultum quam Carolus▪ did in
a more sharpe booke write against the worshipping
of Images then Charles had done, where hee
plainely testifieth those bookes writ against the adoration
of Images to be the bookes of Charles.
The Councell at Paris held in the time of Lewes,
witnesseth also those books to haue bin written
with the allowance and approbation, yea in part
by the direction of Charles. When your father
Charles, say theySynod Paris. sub Ludouico & Lothario in principio., had caused the second Nicene
Synod to be read before himselfe and his Bishops (in
the Councell at Frankford) et multis in locis vt
dignum erat reprehendisset, and when hee had in
many places reproued it, as it well deserued, and
when further hee had noted and obserued certaine
chapters of the Nicene Synod which were to bee reproued,
he sent the same chapters by Euguilbert an
Abbot to Pope Hadrian, vt illius indicio et authoritate
corrigeretur, that they should bee amended

by Pope Hadrianus authoritie and iudgement.
Now seeing those bookes which Charles sent to
Hadrian, and which Hadrian answered, were no
other but these very foure Libri Carolini, as Bellarmine
                  Bell. lib de Concil. c. 8 §. Primo quia. rightly professeth, and as any who compareth
the one with the other, cannot chuse but acknowledge;
it euidently hence followeth, that
what Chapters of the second Nicene Councell
are in those bookes reproued, the reproofe was
either praenotata obserued, or at least allowed by
Charles. Seeing so great an Emperor as Charles
not onely reiected and condemned their second
Nicene Synod which Pope Hadrian had confirmed,
but writ or published large bookes, and
that vnder his owne name against that Synod,
yea when hee admonished the Pope to correct
and amend his Nicene Synod, and the Decrees
thereof: let Scioppius here againe say, who seemes
to him in this cause to bee the Muliter, and who
the Asse; and whether Charles be such a wise that
is obedient Asse as hee foolishly boasteth hee was.
               See lastly how in this very point touching the
Popes temporall Monarchy, (in respect whereof
Scioppius accounts and calls him one of their
greatest Asses) hee was in very truth one of their
Popes greatest Muliters and Commanders.
Charles the great, saith Iac. AlmaneIac. Alm. lib. de Potest. Eccl & lai
                        •
                     . 1. q. 1. c. 
                        •
                     4. §. De Inst. niano. 
                  did not acknowledge
any superiorem in temporalibus, to be aboue
him in temporall matters. Nay hee tooke,
and that rightly a Soueraignty aboue all, euen
in the Pope himselfe. Hee had
                  Dist. 63. c. Had
                        •
                     ianus. 
                  the election of the
Pope, he had the ordering of the Apostolicall See; he
                  
had the Soueraigne disposing
                  Sigon. lib. 4. de reg. Italan principio. 
                  of Rome and Italy,
hauing conquered and obtained it iure belli,
he gaue (as to Tenants vnder himselfe) Dukedomes
and Cities, to whom he would, Permisit pontifici,
he permitted the Pope to haue the Exarchate of
of Rauenna, the Dukedome of Rome, and other Cities,
and he permitted the Pope with this Prouiso to
haue them, Iure principatus & ditione sibi retenta:
he let the Pope haue only vsum fructum, the vse,
profit and commodity of those territories, but
the Soueraignty and supreme dominion hee reserued
still to himselfe, as Sigonius and 300. yeeres
before him, Eutropius witnesseth: who saithEutrop. 
                        •
                     ongobar. tract. de Iuris & priu. Imper. 
                  that
Charles ordained that all the people of Rome, tam Episcopi,
quam la
                        •
                     ci, as well Bishops as Lay-men,
should be Homines Imperatoris, the Emperours
men. Now because Scioppius saithDeus Romam Ecclesiae donauit, & hunc corpori suo velut cibum hanc gregi suo cau
                        •
                      
                     
                        •
                      am daturū se promisit Sciop. Eccles. ca. 51., that Rome is
the meate, and the fould of the Church, whether the
Pope and his Cardinals, who eate such Fodder,
and are couped in that Fould, bee to bee called
Asses, or Charles who allowed them this Fodder
and this Fould, I leaue it to the iudgement of any
saue onely Scioppius, who accounts himselfe▪
and not without cause, one of that fould
                  Cuiusmodi Asini simus nos Catholici. Sciop. lib. cit. ca. 14
                        •
                     . pa. 534 in marg. 
                  of
Asses.
               
               O but, Charles cryed out, sayth Scioppius
                  Ca. 
                        •
                     od. pa. 537. 
                  to all the
fould of Asses, lets honour the Roman Church (that is
the Pope) and beare with humility, whatsoeuer yoke
he imposeth though it be almost insupportable: which
is the saying of a right Issachar. But why doth not
Scioppius tel you, where Charles the great said this?
Or how knowes he, that Charles euer vsed such a

true Issachars saying? If he rely, as Baronius
                  Bar. an. 
                        •
                     01 nu. 10. doth
herein, on Gratians authority, whereDist. 19. ca. In memoriam. this is cited
vnder the name of Charles, their owne PosseuinePost. in Gratiane.
will tell him, and that most truely, that
Gratian very often erres in citing sayings vnder the
names of such Authors, as neuer writ them. And
this to be certainely one of those errors of Gratian,
that which I haue already said of Charles, doth
make euident. For Charles would neither himselfe
endure, nor suffer others to beare that yoke of adoration
of Images, though imposed by the Pope:
neither would he beare or indure to heare of that
other insupportable yoke of the Popes Temporall
Monarchie, but himself imposed his owne yoke of
Soueraignty vpon the Pope, permitting him no
otherwise to haue Rome, and other Cities in Italy,
but so that the Soueraignty and highest dominion
should still remaine in himselfe. So both the Doctrine
and Actions of Charles demonstrate that
Issachars saying to bee none of his. Scioppius may
learne of Burchardus
                  Burchardus citat. ex concil. Triburiensi. Nota Gregor. ad ca. citat. the whole Chapter; In
memoriam, which Gratian falsely ascribed to
Charles, was indeed a Decree of the counsell
                  Conc. Tribur. ca. 30. totidem omnino verbis decretū illum habet, vt apud Gratianum citatur. 
                  at
Triburia, held in the time of Pope Formosus, 80.
yearesConc. Trib. habitū est an. 895. Carolus obij
                        •
                      an. 814. after the death of Charles the great. But
whether soeuer of them was Author of that Decree,
certaine it is, that neither the one nor the other,
can thence bee prooued to bee such a very
Asse or right Issachar as Scioppius fancieth. For in
that Decree, there is neither mention nor intention
of bearing the yoke of the Popes temporall
Monarchie, wherein consisteth the very essence

of A
                     •
                  inity. This yoke Charles as hath bin vndeniably
demonstrated, could not endure, but he as I
haue shewed imposed vpon the Pope, the yoke
of his owne Soueraignty. The counsell of Triburia
also, was so farre from once dreaming of that
Papall yoke, that they directly subiect the Pope
to the yoke of the Emperours authority & Soueraignty,
sayingConc. Trib. in prooemio. of Arnulphus the Emperour, that
God had preferred him, omnibus ecclesiasticae sublimitatis
ordinibus, aboue all orders of Ecclesiastical sublimity,
then certainely aboue the Popes. The Decree
(which was indeede made by the CounsellAb Episcopis decretum illū factum iudicant, illa verba quae nobis est mater Ecclesiasticae dignitatis.,
and not by Charles) speakes only of Ecclesiasticall
Orders, Rites or Ceremonies as their own words
declare, Let vs say they, honour the Roman See, that she
who is the mother of priestly dignity vnto vs, esse debeat
Ecclesiasticae magistra rationis, may also bee the
Mistres of Ecclesiasticall reason; that is order &
discipline. So the true meaning of the Decree is,
that such Ecclesiasticall Orders, Rites or Ceremonies,
as that our mother Church imposeth on
vs, let vs with patience and humility obserue,
though otherwise the yoke of them be scarce tolerable.
From whence to conclude any acknowledgement,
that all, euen Kings and Emperours
must beare the yoke of the Popes temporall Monarchie,
it beseemed none but only such as Scioppius
is, one who is eminent in that his fould of
Asses.
               
                  Otho the great, besides many other wayes demonstrated
his Imperiall Soueraignty aboue the
Pope, and that also with the approbation of the

whole Church, when he deposed
                  Litpr. lib 6. ca. 6. 7. & seq. 
                  Iohn the twelfth
(though for age but a boy Pope, yet for wickednesse
a Monster) and placed Leo the 8. in his See, as
before we haue declared.
               Pope Hadrian the fourth, had writ a letterEpist. Hadr. extat. apud Radeu lib 1. cap. 9 & apud Nauc. an. 1155. to
the Emperour Frederick the first, wherein hee reproues
the Emperour of insolencie and arrogancy,
for setting in his letters, his owne name before the
Popes, telling him, that he conferred the imperiall
dignities vnto him: Coronae
                  Radeu. loc. cit. & ca. 15. 
                  beneficium tibi contulimus,
wee haue giuen vnto. you the benefit of
the Imperiall Crowne. Heere was a fit occasion
for the Emperour to haue acknowledged the
Popes right, if he had knowne it. But see how
the Emperour answeredEpist. Frider. extat apud Radeu lib. 1. ca. 10. & Naucl. an. citato. the Pope: Ad illam vocem
nefandam, at the hearing of that speech, detestable
and void of all truth, (that the Empire is
conferred by the Pope) not onely our Imperiall
Maiesty conceiued iust indignation, but all the Princes
who were present, were so filled with wrath & anger,
that they had condemned to death those 2. wicked
Priests who brought that message, vnlesse wee had
stayed them. Againe, seeing by the election of the
Princes, à solo deo regnum & Imperium nostrum sit,
our Kingdome and Empire is from God onely,
Whosoeuer shall say, that wee receiue the Imperiall
Crowne, pro beneficio à domino Papa, as a gift from
the Pope is guilty of a lye and of gaine saying, the diuine
Institution and Doctrine of S. Peter. AgaineApud. Naucl. 
                        •
                     oc. cit.,
Seeing Christ both for himselfe and Peter, payed tribute
to Caesar, he giueth you an example that you also
should doe so. Had Siluester any regality in the time

of Constantine? By Constantines concession, liberty
was giuen to the Church, & quicquid regalis, Papatus
vester habere dignoscitur, largitione principum
obtinet, & whatsoeuer regalitie the Papacie hath,
it obteined it by the bounty of Princes. This was
the Emperours, and most true iudgement of the
Popes Soueraignty.
               
                  Frederick the second though he was often excō
                  municated
and deposed by the Pope, not onely
                  Trit. in Chr▪ Hirsang. an. 1244.
                  contemned all the Popes censures, and sentence, quam
iniustam & friuolam esse dicebat, which he called
vniust & friuolous, but held his Empire with great
honour, the Princes, Nobles, and Imperiall citties adhering
to him, vs
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad mortē, euen to his dying day,
so that neither the Pope nor any other could preuaile
against him: yea he so vexed and punished the Pope
vt vitae taederet, that he was weary of his life, and
wished he had neuer deposed him. The same Emperour
saydEpist. 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     apud 
                        〈…〉
                      vinc
                        •
                     . Epist. 3. lib. 1
                        •
                     
                  , that it was a ridiculous thing to subiect
the Emperour, of whom to take punishment belongs to
God, and not to man, cum temporalem hominem superiorem
non habeat, seeing the Emperour hath no
mortall man aboue him.
               When there was great contention about the
right and dignities of the Empire, in the time of
Lewes of Bauare, omni ambiguitate mature solerterque
discussa, all doubts being maturely and exactly
discussed by the holy Bishops, the Emperour
made and promulged this law, which being set
downe by Alberic. de Rosate
                  Alber. 
                        •
                     . Bene à Zeo
                        •
                     e tit▪ de Quadrien. prae
                        •
                     c. and Hier. Balbus
                  Hier. Balb. l
                        •
                     b de Coronat. pa 65. is
most worthy to bee writ in golden letters, as expressing
the true dignity and authoritie of imperiall

maiestie: some parcels of which I will here
recite. He decrees, that the Emperour is truely made
by the election onely of those who haue right to elect
without either confirmation or approbation of any other,
quoniam in terris quoad temporalia non habet
superiorem, because the Emperour hath none vpon
earth his superiour. Againe, Their doctrines are
pestiferous and seditious, and their assertions detestable
who say, that Imperiall dignity and power is
from the Pope, and that the party elected is not truely
Emperour nor king vnlesse he be confirmed, approued
and crowned by the Pope. We by the consent of the Electors,
and other Princes of the Empire do declare,
quod imperialis dignitas & potestas est immediate à
solo Deo, that Imperiall dignitie and power is immediately
from God alone, and that vpon the consent
in election, he is forthwith truly Emperour, and
hath plenary imperiall power; nor doth he need either
approbation, confirmation, or consent of the Pope or any
other, and this we decree by a law for euer to be obserued:
and whosoeuer shall presume either to speake
or to consent to those who speake against those things
thus declared, decreed, and defined by vs, wee decree
them to be ipso iure et facto both by law and actually
depriued of all lands, iurisdictions, priuiledges and
immunities which they hold of the Empire; and further
to haue incurred, and to be subiect to all the punishments
which are due vnto Traytors.
               
               Hereunto may bee ioyned that of Guntharus
the next electedCuspin. in Carolo. 4. Emperour to this Lewes, who
renewed and ratified this Edict of Lewes, decreeing
Gunthari decretum extat inter Imperiales. Constit tom. 3. p. 414. by the like consent of the Imperiall states,

that the Pope, secundum omnia iura diuina ac humana
subesse debet imperio, ought to be subiect to the
Emperours according to the lawes both of God
and man, and that the Emperour nec illi nec vlli personae
in temporalibus subiectus est, is subiect neither
to the Pope nor to any other person in temporall
matters. He decreed also, that whosouer would
presume either to speake or doe ought▪ or to consent
to any who did speake or doe against this their decree,
such should bee accounted rebels to the Emperor
and Empire, and bee depriued ipso iure et facto of all
benefite and dignity which they hould of the Empire,
and should also bee subiect to all the punishments due
vnto Traytors.
               
               Many like examples and decrees of other most
worthy and renowned Emperours might be added,
but these few which I haue mentioned are
so pregnant that I will now end this whole treatise
with these so ample and euident demonstrations
both of the Popes subiection to Emperors,
and of the Emperors Soueraignty aboue the
Pope, by either of which their Babylonish
Monarchy doth of it selfe
fall to the ground.
               FINIS.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Errata in 2. part. de Tempor. Monar.
            
               In Textu.
               Page 7. line 4. to be reade, to be held. page 18. line 17. 200. read
2000. p. 23. l. 14. seruice which. r. seruice of which. p. ead. l. 15. that
the, r. that he. p. 45. l. 11. such such. r. such sort. p. 137. l. 4. twentith
r. twenty eight. p. 171. l. 5. powers. r. power. p. 184. l. vlt. Iohn. r. Edward.
p. 203. l. 18. who being. dele who. p. 219. l. 27. Edw. 2. r. Edw. 3.
            
            
               Part. 2. in margine.
               Page 6. line 20. cap. 38. reade cap▪ 37. p. 13. l. vlt. epist. 8. r. epist. 7
p. 19. l. 29 c. 4. sect. r. c. 3. sect. p. 24. l. 40. q. 3 r. c. 3. q. 3. p. 77. l. 26.
Dist. 96. r. Dist. 63. p. 79. l. 39. c. 10. r. c. 8. p. 101. l. vlt. c. 4. r. c. 14. p.
108. l. vlt. an. 1112. r. an. 1122. p. 109. l. vlt. c. 71. r. c 69. p. 136. l. 23.
an. 132
                     •
                  . r. an. 1329. p. 138. l. 4. c. 43. r. c. 42. p. 140. l. 9. nu. 8. 9
r. nu. 17. p. 153. l. 7. Act. q. r. Art. 9. p. 163. l. 6. Tit 3. r. Tit. 4. p. ead. l.
penul. 134. r. 734. p. 169. l. 2. & 4. Platin. r. Onuph. p. 175. l. 4. Quartum.
r. Quantum. p. eadem. l. 10. nu. 5. r. nu. 3. p. 187. l. 11. & 14. p. 95.
r. 91. p. 191. l. 19. p 106. r p. 96. p. 192. l. 14. q. 12. r. q. 2. p. 205. l. 15.

                     •
                  om. 4. r. tom. 3. p. 219. l. vlt. part. r. parlium. p. 223. l. 2. lib. 3. Ass. r.
lib. Assis. p. 225. l. 30. &c. r. &c. ibid. c. 3. nu. 19. p. 226. l. 3. nu. 15. r▪
nu. 28. p. 242. l. 6. c. 4. r. c. 3. p. 245 l. 
                     •
                  6. p. 29. r. p. 129. p. 256. l. 5. §▪
Circa hos. reade §. per idem.
               
            
         
      
   