
      
         
            
            
            A
SERMON
OF PREDESTINATION,
Preached at Saint MARIES in
OXFORD: By RI: CRAKANTHORP.
            LONDON,
Printed for Iohn Teage, and are to be sold at
his shop in Pauls Churchyard, at the Signe of
the Golden Ball. 1620.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT
VVORSHIPFVLL, SIR
EDWARD BARRET, Knight.
            
               SIR, I haue often wished, that some opportunitie
might be offered vnto me, to testifie
that louing and honorable respect
which I haue euer born vnto you. Finding
no other, I gladly embraced this present
occasion of publishing this Sermon, concerning Predestination,
which I long since preached, and of late reuiewed.
For seeing diuers conferences which I had at
your house, concerning this, and some other like arguments,
first of all occasioned me to think of the reuiewing,
and then of publishing thereof: I was desirous to offer
the fruits of that labour, as a testimonie of my louing affection
vnto you. And your vnfained loue to Gods
truth, and that religious affection, which from your honorable
Progenitors, as an hereditarie blessing, is descended
vnto you, doe perswade, yea, euen assure me, that

you will accept this not so much as a pledge of mine, a
                  •
               
of the loue of God vnto you. For that right and interest
which your selfe, and euery one of Gods children haue in
Gods Election, makes delightfull, yea, sweetneth vnto
them; as euery doctrine of Gods Word, so this especially,
wherein is contained the chiefest treasures of their
spirituall comfort. In the handling whereof, I haue endeuoured,
according to that measure of knowledge
which God hath vouchsafed vnto mee, to satisfie the
mindes of the godly, and cleerely remoue those principall
doubts, and cauils, which occasion some maliciously to
carpe; others, in the weakenesse of their vnderstanding,
to stumble and take offence at this holy doctrine. What I
haue performed in this so weighty and obscure an argument,
I willingly submit to the iudgement of Gods
Church and children, not doubting but the same God,
who put these meditations into my heart, will accompanie
the same with his owne blessing vnto the hearts of
many of his children, and seruants. In which confidence,
together with my hearty desire to God, that hee
will continue and multiply his blessings vpon you,
I remaine
            
               Your Worships in all duty,
Richard Crakanthorpe.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
SERMON OF
PREDESTINATION.
            
               2. PET. 1. 10.
                Wherefore, Brethren, giue rather all diligence to make
your Calling and Election sure: for if yee doe these
things, ye shall neuer fall.
            
            
               THE blessed Apostle, in these words, Right
W11. and beloued in the Lord, cleerely
sets downe, as you see, that holy doctrine
of Gods Predestination, and Election of
his children vnto eternall life; of which,
by Gods assistance, I intend at this time
to entreat. I am not ignorant, that some
of later times, following the old Massilians,
               
                  De his taceri exigunt, quorum altitudinem nullus attigerit: & Doctrinam hanc, 
                        •
                     tiamsi vera sit, non promendam di
                        •
                     unt. Prosp. Epist ad Aug. Quidam quaesti
                     
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     m inexplic
                        •
                     
                     bil
                        •
                     m dicunt. Hilar. Epist ad August. Quidam quaestionem esse inexplicabilem dicunt, & perpetuo sepiliendam silentio, ait Amb. Cathar. in Summar opinionum de 
                     •
                   raedest. Ex 
                        •
                     oc numero fuit Erasmus, cuiu
                        •
                      haec verba, Quid 
                        •
                     utilius quam h
                        ••
                     
                   evulgar
                     •
                  ? lib. contra Luther. not onely
themselues auoid and shunne this doctrine as a Rocke: but
by reason of the great and manifold difficulties which they
finde herein, iudge it a very perilous and dangerous doctrine to
be taught: not fit to be published, and preached in the Congregations

of Gods people; whose ouer-fearfull modesty, to say the
best of them, ought chiefely to bridle the rash curiositie of all
such, as not contenting themselues with those bounds which
the sacred Scriptures set downe, dare pry into the secret and
most hidden Counsels of the Lord; Let such men remember
what Moses
               Deut. 29. 29. teacheth, The secret things belong vnto the
Lord our God: and let them learne of Saint Paul,
               Rom. 12. 3. 
               not to presume
to vnderstand, aboue that which is meete to vnderstand: but
that they vnderstand according to sobrietie.
            
            Further also, their timorousnes
                  •
               e in this point, should
warne vs all to be very circumspect, and wary, vnto which
of Gods Children we deliuer and diuide this portion of the
food of life: for the Word of God, as it containeth milke
Heb. 5. 12, 13 and meats of easie digestion for Infants, and the weaker sort
of Gods houshold; so for them that be stronger in faith, and
of riper iudgement and knowledge, it hath store and plenty
of stronger meates. And though euery part of this spirituall
food be most wholesome for Gods Children, yet this doctrine
of Gods Predestination, and Election, which is most
strong, but most wholsome meat, is much more fit for this
and such like, most iudicious and learned Auditories, then for
those who are but children in vnderstanding, and nouices in
the schoole of Christ.
            But wholly, as they teach, to debarre the Church & people
of God, from hearing this most comfortable doctrine, what
is it else, but to conceale and suppresse the most gracious mercies
of God, and depriue his people of the chiefest comfort
which can enter into the heart of a mortall man? Nay, what
else is this, but euen to betray the truth of God, and to harten
and incourage most wicked men, who in the insolency of
their prophane hearts, cease not to oppugne
                  Scripsit contra doctrinam de Praedestinatione quidam Ioh. Scotus circa annum 850. quem docto & pio l
                        •
                     bro 
                        •
                      f
                        •
                     ta
                        •
                     it Ecclesia Lugdunensis. Ante hunc, circa 
                        〈◊〉
                      490. Epis
                        •
                     opu
                        •
                      quidam Faustus Rhegiensis, Pel
                        •
                     gianisinum ceculte d
                        •
                     fendens, libris duobus de liber, Arbit. Praedestinationem oppugnauit: & 
                        •
                     am tenentes H
                        •
                     reticos vocat. Et Lucidus in Epistola Fausti libro 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  ita inquit, Damno qui dicit alios deputatos ad mo
                        •
                     tem al
                        ••
                     s ad vitam. Quam Lucidi Epistol
                        •••
                     pro Catholica commendat Bar. an. 490. nu. 29. & 30. & clarius Annotat. praefix. lib. Fausti in BB. 5. patr. tom. 4. pa. 795. In euertenda Praedestinatione consentiunt Alb. Pighius & Georg. Siculus. Calu. l. de aetern. Praede
                     •
                  t. inter eius Opusc. pa. 950. this doctrine,
and in most reuiling manner to blaspheme this holy truth,

accounting and calling it (which without horror I can not
vtter,) not onely an humane deuice
               
                  Commentum vocat explodendum. Auth. libelli de Christi Seruatoris efficacitate. Rat. 7. Augus
                     •
                  inus 
                     
                        •
                     nduxit h
                        •
                     rreadum Praedestinationis dogma. Id
                     •
                  m Rat. 103. Absurdissimum est creder
                        •
                      Deum elegisse paucos quos seruaret, relictis caete
                        •
                     is. Idem Rat. 23. Haec distinctio, quae excludit bonam hominum partem, est à malo Spiritu. Idem Rat. 6. I abhor your horrible doctrine. Author libel. cui titulus, Confutation of the carelesse by necessitie. Sect. 23. 
               and figment, but euen a detestable and diabolicall doctrine, such as hath no ground
               
                  A capite ad calcem habemus scripturam nobis fauentem, & contrariam sententiam damnantem. Auth. l de Christi Seru. effic. Rat. 100. Quicquid de Praedesinatione 
                        〈◊〉
                      adim
                        •
                     s, Philosophica tantū argutia niti, non in Scriptura tradi clamat Georg, Siculus, Calu. libr. citat. pa. 989. 
               nor
warrant out of the Word of God. Shall they with such insolencie,
and impiety, blaspheme the truth of God? and shall the
Watchmen of Israel be silent at the hearing of these Rabshekaes,
thus to reuile the Lord of Hoasts? Doubtlesse if we be
silent, and hold our peace hereat, not onely the mouthes of
Babes and Children shall bee opened; but as our Sauiour
saith, the very stones shall defend the truth, and sing Hosanna
unto our God.
            Againe, the Word of God, as it is most perfect and sufficient,
not wanting any one point at all, which is needfull for
our instruction, and knowledge; so may we not once think,
without great dishonour vnto God, that any one iot or tittle,
much lesse any maine point of doctrine deliuered therein,
is superfluous for the Church of God: specially seeing
God himselfe hath told vs, that the things re
                     •
                  ealed belong to
vs, and to our children for euer: And againe, that whatsoeuer
things are written, are written for our learning. Seeing then this
doctrine of Predestination and Election, is not onely layd
downe, but often repeated and inculcated in the Word of
God: Why should wee be wiser then God, to conceale that
from Gods people, which God will haue both vs to teach,
and them in due time and season to learne, and beleeue?Deut. 29. 29.
               Rom. 15. 4.
            
            Now for the difficulties which in this case they pretend, I
can not in truth deny; but that as euery Article of our faith,
so specially this, may iustly seeme hard and obscure vnto vs,
whose knowledge is darkned with infinit mists both of our
naturall, and of that habituall ignorance which wee haue added
vnto it. But we are all to bee so farre from being dismaid
herewith, that this should rather be a spurre vnto vs, to stirre
vs vp euery day to growe and increase in the knowledge of

God, and of his Word, that so we might more plainely both
discern our selues, and be able to instruct others in that truth,
and point out vnto them euery part of that path which leadeth
vnto euerlasting life. Yet let vs euen herein also behold
and admire the wisedome and the mercies of our most gracious
God, that howsoeuer those things, for the continuall
exercise of Gods children, are wrapped vp in sundry difficulties,
so that an Elephant may swimme therein; yet, withall,
they are so tempered by Gods Spirit, and fitted for our capacities,
that neither this, nor any one point of all our faith is
without such euident & cleere proofes in the Word of God,
as that for the most a Lambe may wade in them, and for
them all, such as best serue for the instructing of Gods people,
and the full satisfying of any Christian and beleeuing
soule. For thy word
               Psal. 119. 105 
               is a light vnto our feet, and a Lanthorne
vnto our steppes, it giueth
               Psal. 19. 7. 
               wisedome and vnderstanding, euen
vnto the simple. And it is truely said by Saint Austen,
               In ijs quae aper
                     ••
                   in Scriptura posita sunt, inueni
                     •
                  ntur illa omnia, quae continent fidem moresque viuendi. lib. 2. de doct. Christ. c. 9. that
whatsoeuer belongs either to our Faith, or good life, that is plainely
set downe in the Scriptures of God. Wherefore they which
affray the people of God with these difficulties, do no otherwise
then those Messengers, and Spye
                  •
               , which Moses sent
to see the Land of Canaan. Surely, saidNum. 13. 28, 32. they, the Land floweth
with Milke and Honey, but the people are strong that dwell
in the Land, they be Gyants, and the sonnes of Anak, and the
Cities are walled, and exceeding great, we be not able to goe vp against
them, for they are stronger then we. So they brought an
euill report of the Land, causing the people to be faint-hearted,
and murmure against the Lord: So these men, hauing
like diligent Spyes, considered and viewed euery part of this
doctrine, know right well, that it is a doctrine of exceeding
comfort, and that it floweth with Milke and Hony; but
they bring an euill report vpon it, and vpon the Word of
God, when they affray Gods people from entring hereunto,
with the greatnesse of those difficulties, as it were with so
many Gyants and sonnes of Anak, which they haue 
                  •
               pyed
and seene herein, Let not vs, with those euill Spyes, prouoke

the wrath of God by our distrust & diffidence; but with Caleb
& Ioshua, men in this action, highly renowned of God
himselfe, let vs harten and encourage the people, and in confidence
and assurance of the aide of our God, say vnto them,
Let vs goe vp at once, and possesse the Land, for vndoubtedly
we shall ouercome it. Let vs then in the name and feare of
God enter into this doctrine, beeing guided though not
with Caleb and Ioshua, yet with the Prophets and Apostles,
and euen led by the hand of our Sauiour Christ: who all by
their teaching and preaching of this doctrine, haue chalked
out the way vnto vs, how we may enter into it, and take full
possession of those ioyes, and comforts, which are contained
in the knowledge and meditation thereof.
            In handling this doctrine of Election, I commend to your
godly consideration these three points, out of these words of
the Apostle. The first, our Election it selfe. The second, the
certainty and assurance of our Election; both of them set down
in these words, Giue all diligence to make your Election sure.
The third, the meanes of this assurance, one of which beeing
sanctitie, and holinesse of life, the Apostle expresseth in these
words: For if yee doe these things, ye shall neuer fall. Concerning
Election it selfe, two things are to be obserued. First, the
parties who are Elected: Secondly, the cause of their Election.
            
            Touching the parties elected, I shall not need to stay long
in refuting that no lesse impious, then senselesse opinion of
some who teach,Gods election before the world, is generall to all men. Confut. of the carel. by nec. Sect. 14. Cōcludi
                        •
                     
                   Pighius omnes si
                        •
                     e exceptione, ad vitam aeternā destinatos, Calu. lib. de aeterna praed. pa. 969. Georgy Siculi commentum est, non fuisse hunc vel illum proedestinatum ad salutem, sed Deum statuisse tempus, quo totum mundum seruaret. Calu. l. eodem. p. 951. Sensit ita etiam Nich. Heming. qui l. de gratia vniuer. pa. 34. dei electionem vni
                        •
                     ersalem vocat.
                that Gods election before the world is generall
to all men, so that euery one is alike chosen by him vnto
eternall life: which conceit of theirs, as it is directly controuled
by the expresse words of the Scripture, wherein is
mention of some, who are vessels
               Rom. 9. 22. 
               of wrath prepared to destruction;
and as Saint Iude
               Verse 4. saith, ordained to condemnation: so is it
repugnant euen to common sence, and reason. For who doth
not know, that to elect, or chuse, implyeth a reiecting and
refusing of some others? This very word of Election signifying
nothing else, but a separating and culling out of some
from the rest, as our Sauiour saithIoh. 15. 19. of his Disciples, that hee

chose them out of the world. Seeing then it is most 
                  •
               leere,
that some are chosen
               Ephes. 1. 4. 2. Thes. 2. 13. 
               and elected by God vnto saluation: certain
it is, that God separated them for a peculiar people vnto himselfe,
and pickt them out from the rest, which he refused, and
left in their sinne, to be led by their owne lusts into that destruction,
which is ordained for them.
            Now as errOur neuer wanteth some colour and shew of
truth; so these men, to maintaine this fancy, alledgeConfut. of the carelesse. Sect. 15. the
words of Saint Paul, Rom. 8. 29. where hee saith, that whom
God knew before, them also be did predestinate to be made like to
his Sonne. Seeing th
                  •
               n, say they, God knew all men without
exception, before the beginning of the world, it must needs
follow, that he did also predestinate, and elect them all vnto
eternall life. In which reason, as if it were insoluble, they
boast and triumph: but without all truth and substance of
reason. For they might easily haue obserued a double

                  Est in Deo duplex cognitio: Scientia simplicis 
                        •
                     otitiae quae est communis omnibus honis & malis: & Scientia approbationis, quae est honorum tantum. Aquin. quaest. Disp. q. de libro vitae. art. 8. knowledge of God mentioned in the holy Scripture. The
one, of beholding and seeing onely, which is a knowledge of appre
                  
                     •
                  ension; of which the Apostle saith, Heb. 4. 13. that euery creature
is manifest in his 
                     •
                  ight, and all things are naked and open to
his eyes: the other is a knowledge of louing and liking, which
the Schoolemen rightly tearme a knowledge of approbation; of
which it is said, Psal. 1. 6. The Lord knoweth the wayes of the
righteous: not onely the seeing and beholding them, for so
he doth know the wayes of the wicked also: but he knoweth
the wayes of the righteous, by louing, allowing, and approuing
their wayes, in which sort hee neuer knoweth the way
of any wicked man, seeing both himselfe, and his wayes, are
an abomination vnto God. Now it is most certain that all
men, euen the Reprobate, are foreknown of God, by his former
kinde of knowledge; for all things are manifest and naked
before his eyes. But this knowledge of apprehension can not
possibly be ment by the Apostle in the 8. to the Romans. For
whom God knoweth in that place, them he both iustifyeth in
this, and gLorifieth in the life to come, as the Apostle expressely
witnesseth in the same place. Now seeing hee doth

not iustifie and glorifie all, but will say to some, Goe into
euerlasting fire, who shall haue their portion in that Lake
which burneth with fire And brimstone; it remaineth euident,
that the Apostle speaketh not of that former knowledge
of apprehension, but of the later of approbation, by which
I may truely say vnto you, that God neuer knew any Reprobate,
or vngodly person; our Sauiour teaching in plaine
tearmes the same, Mat. 7. 23. Then will I professe to them, I neuer
knew you, Depart from me, ye workers of intquity. Wherefore
to returne their own reason against themselues; Seeing
God knoweth (that is, loueth and approueth) all those whom he
electeth, as St 
               Paul teacheth, but neuer knoweth in this sort any
Reprobate, or vngodly man, as our Sauiour professeth; it remaineth
true, and certaine, euen by that very Text whereon
they most rely, that not all men without exception, but only
some are elected of God, and ordained to euerlasting life.
            Concerning the number of which, the Massilians,
               
                  Nec acquiescunt Praede
                        •
                     tinatum electoum numerum, nec augeri posse nec minui. Prosp. Epist ad Aug. Eligendorum a
                        •
                      re
                        ••
                     ciendorum esse definitum numerum nolunt. Hilar. Ep. ad Aug. and
some other,Ambr. Catharinus putauit paucos a
                        •••
                     uot praedestinatos ad vitam, & eorum numerum certum esse ait. Reliquos 
                        •
                     mnes nec ad vitam nec ad mortem proedestinatos sensit, sed pro suo arbitrio vel seruari posse▪ vel perire, & quot ex his seruanai sunt, non esse determinatum in prouidentia Dei asserit. Cathar. Com in c. 4. Ge. & in Tract. de praedest. ad Conc. Trid. most ignorantly, and impiously taught, that it
was not defined, nor set downe by God, but left so vncertaine, and
depending on the wils of men, that according as they were
either willing, or vnwilling to embrace the grace of God, the
number of the Elect might be either augmented, or impayred.
A conceit so repugnant to the truth, that though their other
error, touching mens wils, were admitted, yet can it no
way stand with the praescience of Almighty God, who knowing
               Ioh. 21. 17. 
               all things; yea the very thoughts
               Psal. 139. 2. 
               of men long before, euen
before all eternitie, can not bee ignorant either how many
will, or how many himselfe will haue to embrace his grace,
and to be saued.
            Some others haue fancied, that though the number of the
Elect, (which the Schoolemen call Numerum formalem) bee
certaine, yet the persons who are to make vp this number, (called
by them Numerus materialis) is vncertaineQuidam dix
                  
                     •
                  runt praedestinatorum numerum certum esse formal
                     •
                  ter, sed non m
                     •
                  terialiter, ac si dicas quòd centum vel 
                     ••
                  ll
                     •
                   salmentur, non autem quòd hi vel illi. Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art. 7. and not
defined by God. A fancy indeed, seeing the Scriptures

plainely teach, that God in his secret Councell hath decreed,
not onely how many, but in particular also, who those are,
whom he hath chosen to bee heires with Christ. For when
our Sauiour saith,Luke. 10. 20 that euen your names are written in Heauen,
and that he being the good Shepheard, calleth
               Iohn 10. 3. 
               his Sheep by name,
& that he knoweth whom
               Iohn. 13 18. 
               he hath chosen: and when the Apostle
2. Tim. 2. 19. saith, The foundation of God standeth sure, and hath this
Seale, The Lord knoweth who are his: What else doe, or can
these import, but that God hath most certainly decreed and
set downe in writing, not onely how many, but euen particularly
who they be, yea, and what their names are, whom hee
hath chosen, and sealed vnto eternall life? and this number, as
Saint Austen
               Lib. de c
                     •
                  r. & grat. c. 13. saith, is so certainly set downe with God, that
neither any one of them can be taken away, nor any other can bee
added vnto them.
            
            Now what this number in particular is, 
                  •
               as to set downe, is
impossible for mortall man, so to search it out, were most
vaine and fruitlesse curiositie. Let this suffice vs to know, that
though this number, in respect of the wicked, is but small;
seeing Christ tellethMath. 22. 14. vs, that many are called, and few chosen:
and, that many
               Math. 7. 13. 
               going the br
                     •
                  ad way which leadeth to destructiō,
and few in the narrow, which leadeth vnto life: Few indeed in
respect of those many ryet euen those few, cōsidered in
themselues,
are an exceeding great number. For the seed
               
                  Gen. 22. 17. &c. 32. 12. 
               of Abraham
is like the Starres of heauen, or as the sand of the Sea shore,
such as can not be numbred.
               Gen. 16. 10. And I may truely say of the Elect,
they are a number, numberlesse; Saint Iohn himselfe warranting
this saying; Reu. 7. 9. where besides those thousand
thousands that were sealed of the Iewes, he saw a great multitute,
which no man could number, of all Nations, and Kindreds,
and People, and Languages, wh
                     •
                  ch stood before the Throne, cloathed
with long white Robes, and hauing Palmes in their hands: in
regard of which infinit number, our Sauiour tellethIohn. 14. 2. his
Disciples, that in his Fathers house are many dwelling places.
And let this suffice to bee spoken of the parties which are
elected.
            
               
The next point to be considered in our election, is the
cause thereof. Where first it is vndoubted, that the declaring
and manifesting of Gods glory, is the cause why God in generall
would elect some, and reiect some other, when all were alike
before him in the same masse or lumpe of perdition. That
one saying of Salomon doth sufficiently proue this, Pro. 16.
4. The Lord hath made all things for his owne sake: that is, for
his owne glory and honour. For when wee were all included
in the same masse of sinne, (out of wh
                  •
               chSola 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Catha
                        •
                     inus. Con
                        •••
                     in c. 4. Gen. contendit quidem
                     〈◊〉
                   c
                     •
                  natu, s
                     •
                  u 
                     〈◊〉
                   plane vn
                     •••
                  s electionem nen fieri ex massa 
                     〈…〉
                  , nam ex hac e
                     •
                  egi honun
                     •
                  s, & se. iptura 
                     •
                  ocet, & Aug plus nailies 
                     •
                  leclarat. Vide Ench. c. 27. & 33. & Epist. 106. &, Quid oderat in E
                        •
                     au, nisi originale peccatum? Epist. 105. God elected some,
and left others therein,) if God had then refused all, (as in iustice
if it had pleased him he might haue done,) neuer could
those glorious riches, of his mercy haue been knowne vnto
vs, which now are manifest in sauing his Elect by Christ. Againe,
if then by a generall Pardon hee had released all, (as in
mercy if it had pleased him, he might haue done,) then could
we not haue seene the glory of his iustice, which now in the
deserued punishment of the wicked is mightly and manifestly
declared vnto vs. So then, to make knowne vnto all, the
glory and praise of his mercy in the one; and the glory and
praise of his Iustice in the other: he framed of the same
Iumpe and masse of sinne, some to be vessels of mercy by electing them
vnto life; and he left others to be vessels of iustice, letting them
alone in that state of damnation, into which all mankind had
plunged it selfe.
            But if wee wade further into this doctrine, and search not
only why in generall God elected some, & refused others, but
why in particular these are elected rather then the other: as
namely Iacob, rather then Esau, and St 
               Paul, rather then Iudas,
seeing not onely they both were in themselues alike, but
Gods glory had no lesse been seene in electing the one, then
the other, if it had so pleased him, as now the cafe is more difficult;
so are there diuers men of diuers iudgements.
            Most fond, of all others, is the dreame of Origen, who
thoughtIntelligamus ammam egisse▪ antiquitus, propter quod in a
                     •
                  er
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  , in altero odio habita sit, vt aliae animae fierent in honorem, aliae in contum
                     •
                  liam materiar
                     •
                  
                  ̄ causarum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   mor
                     ••
                   praecesserunt. Hoec ex Or
                     •
                  gine citat Hier. 
                        •
                     pist. ad Auitu
                     •
                  . that mens soules were created long before their bodies,

and according to their good or ill deserts before their vniting
to the bodies; God elected some men unto life, and appointed others
vnto death, though none, as he
               Origines audet dicere, d
                     •
                  abolum id ru
                     •
                  sum fut
                     •
                  
                  rum, quod fuerat, & c
                     •
                  nscensurium regna coelorum. Hier. Epist. ad Ioh. Hier.
                
               supposed, to eternall death.
Which errour of Orig
                     •
                  ns, is not onely by all sound Philosophers
reiected, who rightly teach that the soules are not created,
before, but in the very instant of their coupling to the
bodies: so is it,Omnes cos errores Catholiea fides à corpore suae vnitatis abscidit, constanter praedicans, quòd animae hominum, priusquam suis inspirentur corporibus, non fuere. Leo Epist. 93. c. 10. & dicentibu
                     •
                   Animas peccasse antequam corporibus vnia
                     •
                  tur; A
                     •
                  athema denū
                  ciat Conc. Brach. 1. cap. 6. together with Origen the Author of it, and
with the Priscilian Hereticks, who after Origen reuiued the
same, most iustly condemned by the iudgement of the
Church, truely and constantly teaching, that the soules were
not, before their inspiring into the bodies. For this time
contenting my selfe with that one cleere testimony of the
Prophet, Zech. 12. 
                  •
               . that God formeth the spirit of man in him:
I will passe from this errour, as unworthy of any further expence
of time.
            Others there are who haue taught,Quid de nobi
                     •
                   praescire ac praordinare debeat Deus, quantum pertinet ad futurum, in profectu hominis defectu
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   consis
                     •
                  it. Faust. l. 2. de lib. arb. cap. 2. Dicunt ambo (Pigh. & Georg. Sicul.) h
                     •
                  c ex Dei confilio non pe
                     •
                  dere, quinam electi sint vel rep
                     •
                  obi, sed singulos sibi vtramvis fortunam, suo arbitri
                     •
                   statuere. Calu. lib. de atern. praedest. pag. 950. constat qu
                     •
                  mvis 
                     •
                  ieri posse reprobum sua malitia, & reprobationem non manare à voluntate Dei reijciente homines, sed à v
                     •
                  luntate hominum reijciente Deum. Auth. lib. de chri. seruat. 
                     •
                  f
                     •
                  icac. Rat. 77. & Constat neminem reprobatum esse a Deo, qui prior diuinum numen salutaria ipsi proponens ac suggerens non contempserit. Idem Rat. 67. & pessimè huc sonant ista Hemingij lib. de grat. vniuer. Efficimur hic electi, quando credimus, pa. 20. &, Abusus denorum Dei sunt causae abiectionis, & non consilium Dei, p. 22. &, Non est volentis aut currentis, sc
                     •
                  licet secundum carnem, sed est volentis & currentis secundum fidem. Idem pag. 31. God reprobated no man before he was: Author. Confut. of the errors of the carelesse. S
                     •
                  ot. 4. Hee reprobated none before the foundation of the world. Idem Sect. 8. Nulla est ab aeterna vit
                     •
                   reprobatio, ni
                     •••
                  quam sibi quis
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ob propria p
                     •
                  ccata ac flagitia acquisincrit. Ambr. Cathol. tract de praedest. ad Conc. Trid. that Gods electing
of these, and reiecting the other, dependeth wholly on the will
of men themselues, and not of the Decree or will of God: and that
there is none reiected of God, 
                     ••
                  ll by their owne contempt, themselues
d
                     ••
                   first reiect God, and by their wilfull obstinacie refus
                     •
                  
his grace when it is offered vnto them. How euidently do these
men oppugne the Scriptures of God? For if election and
reiection depend on the actions of men after they be borne,
how can it be true, which the Apostle teacheth,Ephes. 1. 4. that we are

elected before the foundation of the world? and that God
               Rom. 9. 11, 12 
               elected
Iacob, ad hated Esau before they were borne, when as yet
they had done neither good nor euill? Is not here a reiecting of
Esau, before he by his owne actuall contempt reiected God,
or despised his grace? Or did Esau, more then Iacob, reiect
God before he was borne? Or if we seeme to any to straiten
their opinion (though their bookes and writings do testifie
this to be their sence and meaning,) seeing our workes committed
actually in time, can no way be the cause of that Decree
which is eternall, and before all time: Let vs proceed, and see, if
the same works, being from euerlasting foreseene & foreknown
by God, as if they had been done, may truely be said, (as some

                  Graecipatres, nec pauc
                        •
                      Latinorum arbitrati sunt causam praedestinationis h
                        •
                     
                     minum ad vitam aeternam esse praescientiom bono
                     
                        •
                     um operum quae facturi erant, vel fidei. Sic Chrysostomus, Theodoretus, Theophylactus, O
                     •
                  cumenius, Origines, Ambrosius, Hieronymus, Sedulius, Perer. in Epist. ad Rom. ca. 8. d sp. 22. & idem docet Sixt. Senens. in Bibl. sua sanct. l. 6. Annot. 251. & 252. 
                        •
                     n eidem opinione Heming. Est inquit praes
                        •
                     ien
                     
                        •
                     a, regula electionis & praedes
                        •
                     ina
                        •
                     ionis. l. de grat. vniu
                        •
                     rs. pag. 21. & quia credimus, praesciti & electi censemur: nam quos praesciuit Deus credituros, eos ex gr
                        •
                     tia elegit. R. 27. &, Nos 
                        •
                     a
                        •
                     sam reprobationis contumaciam hominis praeuisam facimus. ibid. pag. 77. of better note haue taught,) to be the cause of our election
to eternall life.
            Now, if we will herein hearken to the Apostles doctrine;
we shall cleerely perceiue, that our faith, sanctitie, and all our
good workes, are so farre from being the cause of our election,
that they are in truth, the very effects therof. For we are elected
that we should be holy and without blame, Ephes. 1. 4. And the
Apostle saith of himselfe, 1. Cor. 7. 25. that he obtained mercy,
that he might be faithfull. Whence it is manifest, that God did
not first foresee vs good and faithfull, and therefore elected
vs; but first he elected vs, and for this cause decreed to make
vs faithfull, good and holy in his sight. And therefore Saint
Austen hauing sometimes taught
                  August. exposit. propos. in Epist. ad Rom. nu. 60. & 62. 
               that God did chuse vs because
he foresaw that we would beleeue; afterwards retracteth,

                  August. lib. 1. Retrac. ca. 23. & lib. de Praedest. sanct. cap. 3. & 19. and recalleth this sentence as erronious, and deliuereth a
truer lesson, that faith is the effect of Predestination, not the
cause: seeing the Apostle faith not, that hee obtained mercy because
he was faithfull, but he obtained mercy, that hee might be
faithfull. For we are not called, saith he,Lib. de Praed. sanct. cap. 19. 
               because wee did beleeue,
but that we should beleeue. Againe, when the Apostle

demandeth, 1. Cor. 4. 7▪ 
               Who separated thee? (which was an
other and principall motiue to Saint Austen, to retract
Lib eodem c. 3. quo praecipu
                     •
                  tessimonio 
                     ••
                  uictus sum, cum 
                     •••
                  
                  rem. his former errour) had the cause of our election beene either
our faith, or good workes foreseene: it would haue
beene easily answered, My owne faith, my owne workes,
my owne good will to embrace Gods grace: these being
foreseene by God, separated me, and moued God to elect mee
rather then others: but the Apostle knowing all these to
bee the gifts of God, and effects of his free loue, and election,
referres wholly our separating from the rest, to the
grace and good pleasure of him who saith, Luk. 12. 32. It is
your Fathers pleasure, to giue you the Kingdome: that so no man
might boast of himselfe, but he that gloryeth, might glory in the
Lord.
            
            In the 9. to the Romanes, the Apostle disputing this matter
of set purpose and at large; sheweth, that though Iacob
and Esau were in themselues alike before God, not hauing
done either good or euill, the one more then the other; borne at
the same time, and of the same parents: yet for all this equalitie,
God loued Iacob, and hated Esau. And because this might
seeme vniustin the eyes of man, that of two being altogether
equall and alike, the one should be loued, and the other hated
of God: the Apostle proposeth to himselfe this great difficultie,
as S. Austen
               Diffici
                     ••
                  ma
                     ••
                   quaeti
                     •
                  ne
                     •
                   v
                     •
                  
                  cat. Tract. 53. in Iohan. & Ep. 105. vbs hoc 
                     ••
                  
                  piose tractat. & in Ench. c. 98. rightly calleth it; What shall we say then, is
there vnrighteousnesse with God? Now if God had loued and
elected Iacob for his good workes, or faith foreseene; or hated
Esau for his prophanenesse, which from all etern
                  •
               tie hee
did foreknow; surely this question not onely might easily be
answered,Eo modo sol
                     •
                  er
                     •
                  t istam quaesti
                  
                     •
                  nem Apostolus, 
                     〈◊〉
                   nullam quam solui opus esset, saceret. Aug. 
                        •
                     nch. c
                     •
                  . 9. but there were no difficulty nor doubt at all
therein. For what vnrighteousnesse can this s
                  •
               eme to any,
that God should loue Iacob, who, hee knew would loue and
obey him? or why should he not hate Esau, of whom hee
foreknew, that hee would be a wicked, a prophane person,
and one that would hate the Lord? But the Apostle answereth
not in such wise; but knowing right well, that God,
without all respect to the good or euill actions foreseene in

the one more then in the other, loued Iacob, and hated Esau; and
knowing that the good actions of the one, were not causes,
but effects
               Quicquid est in h
                     •
                  mine ora
                     •
                  
                  nans i
                     •
                  sum ad salutem, est effectus Praedestmationis. Aquin. p
                        •
                     . 1. q. 23. art. 5. Vere quia Praedestinatio est praeparatio beneficicr
                     •
                  m De
                     •
                   quibus certissi
                     •
                  è l
                     •
                  beramur. Aug. lib. de bono Pers. c. 14. of that loue of God and of his grace, which he in
mercy gaue vnto him; and that the euill actions of the other
proceeded from the want of Gods loue and of his grace,
which hee in iustice denyed, or would not giue vnto the other:
He, I say, knowing all this, giueth another and better
answere, that howsoeuer this may seeme vniust to the eyes
of man, yet it is in truth most righteous, because it is the will
and the good pleasure of God so to doe: For I will haue mercy,
sa
                     •
                  th God, on whom, I will, and whom he will, he hardeneth.
And that we might plainely see, that there is nothing at all in
any one, which did or could moue God to loue and elect
him rather then another; the Apostle addeth this Conclusion,
as ensuing necessarily on that testimony of God: So then,
it is not in him that willeth, nor in him that runneth, but in God
that sheweth mercy. The true and certaine cause then, why
God in particular elected these, and rei
                  •
               cted the other, is no
way in themselues, nor in their workes, either actually perf
                     •
                  rmed
or foreseene and foreknowne by God, but it is wholly and
solely in God himselfe; It is euen his good pleasure and will:
who as he elected vs (that is, pull'd vs out of that masse of
perdition from the rest) according to the good
               Ephes. 1. 5. 
               pleasure of
his will; so by the same his good pleasure and will, did he leaue
others in that masse of sinne, whom he made vessels
               Rom. 9. 21, 23 of wrath;
and as Saint Iude saith, ordained to condemnation. The reason
of both which, is that which the Apostle expresseth,
Hee sheweth mercy on whom he will, and whom he will, he hardeneth.
            
            With what reprochfull speeches this doctrine, and the teachers
therofare reuiled, you are not ignorant, & their bookes
are too euident witnesses thereof. And no maru
                  •
               ll if they
shoot their arrowes of most venemous words against men,
seeing they feare not to open their mouths against heauen, &
in the insolent folly of their wits, plead against God, whose
most holy will & Iustice, in this case they seeke to ou
                  •
               rthrow.
            
               
First, say they
                  Dicit haereticus, pro voluntate Dei, tra
                        •
                     untur homines in perditionem, &c. Faust. Rheg. l. 1. de liber. arb. c. 19. Their damnation commeth not by the counsell & will of God, for hee is sorie for it. Auth. Confut. of the careles. Sect. 24., It can not withstand the will of God, to
ordain any to be vessels of wrath, or to destruction; for God
witnesseth, and that also with an oath, Ezech. 33. 11. that hee
desires not, nor would the death of a sinner, but that the wicked
should turne from his euill way, and liue: according as S. Paul
teacheth, 1. Tim. 2 4. That God will haue all to bee saued: and
S. Peter, 2. Epistle 3. 9. that God would haue no man to perish,
but would haue all to come to repentance. If God, say they,
He willeth not their destruction, and that which he willeth not, he doth not ordaine. Confut. of the carelesse. Sect. 24. would haue none to perish, then can it not bee his will to ordaine
any vnto death, who professeth hee would not their
death: vnlesse there bee two diuerse, yea euen contrary wils in
God, which vpon our doctrine theyCan you proue that God hath two wils? Is that which is not reuealed contrary to that which is reuealed? Then shal there bee contrariety in God, which is false. Was there euer any such monstrous doctrine? Idē Sect. 37. similia habet sect. 35. 36. & 45. suppose most necessarily
to follow.
            Which reason of theirs might haue some force with Epicures,
and all such as make God an idle spectator of the euents
in this world: For then perhaps he might see their death, and
either not will it, or winke thereat. But farre be these conceits
from vs, who haue learned out of the Word of God, that hee
not onely seeth, but by his counsell ordereth and gouerneth euery
thing in this world, so that not so much as one Sparrow can
fall to the ground, nor one haire from our heads, without the
prouidence and will of God. Nay, these most wicked men,
Herod, Pontius Pilat, and the other Iewes, & Gentiles which
put Christ to death, neither did, not could doe ought: but as
Saint Peter saith, Act. 4. 28. What thine hand, O God, and thy
Councell 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , had determined before, or decreed to be done.
Wherefore, if God would not at all haue the death and destruction
of those vessels of wrath which are of old ordained
to condemnatiō, as Saint Iude speaketh; then certainly, though
all the armies both in heauen and earth should band themselues
together, yet could they not all effect the death of the
meanest or weakest of them: for who is able to resist his will,
who is Almighty? And who saith of himselfe, Esay 46. 10.
My counsell shall stand, and I will doe whatsoeuer I will. Vnlesse
then we will deny the first Article of our Faith, which is the
omnipotency of God; wee must needs confesse, that the death

and damnation of those vessels of wrath, cōmeth to passe by
the will of the Almighty: for if he would it not, hee could;
nay, he would haue hindred it ten thousand wayes: and as St
               Aust
                     •
                  n
               Non fit aliquid nisi Omnipotens ficri velit, vel sinendo vt fiat, vel ipse faciendo. Ench. cap. 95. truely and excellently saith; There is not, there can not
be done ought, either in heauen or earth, vnlesse God will haue it
to be done, either doing it himselfe, or suffering it to bee done; and
he suffers
               Nec vti
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   nolens sinit, sed volens l. eodem. cap. 100. 
               it, not against his will, but with his will.
            
            Now this wil of God, though in it selfe it be but one and most
simple, yet in respect of vs, it consisteth of two
               Priorem, voluntatem signi, alteram, voluntatem beneplaciti vocat Magist. sent. l. 1. dist. 45. 46. & Aqui. p. 1. q. 19. art. 11. Et prior
                     •
                  m, voluntatem antecedentem, alteram voluntatem co
                     •
                  sequent
                     •
                  m vocat. Aqui. q. eadem art. 6. Et priorem voluntatem conditionatam, alteram voluntatem abs
                     •
                  lu ā esse declarat. ib.
                parts; the
one opened and reuealed in his Word; the other hid and secret
from our eyes, neuer knowne vnto any, vntill himselfe either
by the euent of things, or some other way make it manifest
vnto vs. Both which, are cleerely expressed in that true and
memorable saying of Saint Austen,
               Non fit praeter e
                     •
                  us v
                     •
                  luntatem, quod etiam fit contra eius voluntatem. Ench. cap. 100. where speaking of the
sinnes of men and Angels, he saith, It comes to passe by a wonderfull
and ineffable manner, that those things are not done besides
or without the will of God (not without his secret and permissi
                     •
                  e
will) which are done against, and euen contrary to the will of
God (contrary to his reuealed and preceptiue will.) All which
will easily appeare, if we rightly obserue the difference of the
one will from the other.
            In his reuealed will, is set downe, as our duties towards
God, and whatsoeuer he willeth,Praeceptum Dei, signum est Deum id velle, etsi (absolutè) fieri non vult. Magist. sent. l. 1. dist. 4
                     •
                  . that is, requireth or commandeth
to be done by vs, according wherevnto our liues and
actions are to be framed; so also is set down therein, the publishing
and free offering of saluation vnto euery creature, but
still with this condition, in regard whereof it's called his conditionall
will, that whosoeuer beleeueth in Christ, and leades a
sanctified life, shall be saued; but whosoeuer beleeueth not, but abideth
in sinne, he is condemned already. His secret will is farre
otherwise: For therein he hath absolutely set downe whatsoeuer
Voluntas beneplaciti consonat rerum eff
                     •
                  ct
                     •
                  bus, & ipsi effectus 
                     〈◊〉
                   ah illo non discordant. Fit en
                     •
                  m omne quod beneplacito vult fieri, & omne quod non vult fieri, equaquam fit. Mag. sent. ibid.
                euent doth fall out in the whole world: and concerning
the saluation of men, hee therein hath particularly, and without

any condition decreed, whom in mercy hee will haue to be saued;
and therefore in his due time will, by his effectual grace,
worke faith and sanctitie in their hearts that they may be saued:
againe, he hath therein absolutely set downe, whom in iustice
he will leaue in that masse of perdition, into which they
had cast themselues, and therefore will not giue his grace vnto
them, but leaue them to their owne hearts lust, that they may
willingly runne forward in sinne, and so most deseruedly fall
into that pit of perdition which is prouided for them. Hereof
we may haue some resemblance in this manner: Put case a
King, after the iust senten
                  •
               e of death passed against sundry
offenders, should proclaime and publish in one writing, that
he would freely pardon and saue all those that did bring vnto
him his owne Signet; and in another writing kept secret to
himselfe, should set downe which of those offenders in particular
he would saue, and therefore would send vnto them
his owne Signet, that they might bring 
                  〈◊〉
                vnto him, and so be
saued. The former of these writings may well bee called his
open and reuealed will, the later his hid or secret. Euen so it is
in the will of God; the conditionall part whereof, is euer since
the fall of Adam, reuealed and published vnto men, that hee
will in mercy pardon and saue all those, and onely those who doe
bring vnto him his own Seale or Signet, which is ingrauen with
the image of his Sonne, the print whereof is a liuely Faith,
working by charitie: but in another part of his will, as it were
in an other booke which is not, not can bee seene by man, he
hath absolutely set downe, whom in particular he will saue, and
therefore will giue his own Signet vnto them, imprinting in
their hearts both faith and holinesse, by which they are sealed
vnto eternall life.
            These two wils, or rather
                  Non est Dei voluntas diuersa, sed loqu
                        •
                     tio diuersa est de v
                        •
                     
                     luntate, Mag. sent. loc. c
                     •
                  t. two seuerall parts of Gods one
and most simple will, are so farre from being repugnant or contrary
the one vnto the other, as they ignorantly and impiously
affirme, that they doe most fitly, and euen subordinately agree
one with the other, which that we may perceiue; The
whole will of God, concerning mens saluation and damnation,

may bee fitly set downe in a reason, or demonstration,
drawne from the effect, to the cause. The proposition whereof
is this, Whosoeuer shall beleeue in Christ, and liue in pietie,
them hath God elected, and them will be haue to be saued; but
whosoeuer doe not beleeue, nor liue in piety, them hath hee
reiected, and will in the end condemne. And all this is reuealed
vnto vs, and it is the summe, or effect, of his whole reuealed
will. The Assumption which God maketh, is this; But these
and these men will beleeue, for I will worke faith and sanctitie
in their hearts: those and the other doe not, nor will they
beleeue, nor liue in pietie; for I will harden them, as I hardened
Pharaoh, not giuing my grace, nor working faith and
sanctitie in them: And this is part of the secret will of God,
not reuealed vnto vs, but onely in the elect themselues, and
some few whom God hath witnessed in his Word, either to
be heires of life, or to be partakers of eternall death. Of these
two premises, which are parts, the one of the reuealed, the other
of the secret will, this conclusion is inferred, which is the
absolute decree of God: Therefore these and these haue I elected,
and will in mercy saue: Those and the other haue I refused,
and will at the last day in iustice condemne, and cast into
euerlasting fire. Thus you see, that the one will doth no way
contrary the other; but with a sweet harmony they both
concurre in one Demonstration, wherein from the effect of
Gods will, which in giuing his grace is our beleeuing, and in
not giuing his grace, is our not beleeuing, wee proceed vnto
the cause of both, which is the absolute will of God in electing
these; and the absolute will of God, in reiecting, or leauing the
others.
            Nor is that in any sort to bee allowed, which some of later
times, following the fancy of Iulianus
               Iulianus exis
                        •
                     inabat De
                        •
                     m non velle absolut
                        •
                      vl
                        •
                     um s
                        •
                     luare, se
                        •
                      omnes sub conditione, si & ipsi vel
                        •
                     ni. bel. l. 2. de grat. & l. arb. c. 8. H
                        •
                     c
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      eum sensisse colligitur ex Aug. l. 4. cont. Iulian. c. 8. the Pelagi
                  •
                Heretick,
doe affirme,
                  Qui dicunt no
                        •
                      sine hac fidei & perseuerant
                        •
                     ae conditione electos esse ad vitam, Euangelium prorsus abolent. Heming. ib. de vniuer. grat. p. 63. God vseth not his absolute will in the matter of our saluation. 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      verba.
                and teach, that God vseth not his absolute, but
o
                     •
                  ely his conditionall will in this case of mens saluation; so that if
men doe beleeue, and repent, they shall then be saued, leauing
it to mens owne will, and choise, whether they will beleeue,
and repent, or no: For then would our Sauiour neuer haue

said, It is your Fathers wil to gliue you the Kingdom; but rather he
would haue said,Luke 12. 32. It is your own wil, in that ye belieue, for which
God doth, and wil giue the Kingdome vnto you. Nor could
that be true, which againe he saith,Iohn 15. 16. Electionem illam nec fides ipsa praecedit, ne priores illum eligisse dicanu
                     •
                  r, falsum
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   sit quod absit. Non vos me elegistis, sed ego vos elegi. Aug. I. de Praed. sanct. cap. 19. 
               You have not chosen mee,
but I ha
                     •
                  e chosen you; seeing if his will were in this case onely
conditionall, he should neuer chuse man, before man had first
chosen God, by choosing to beleeue in God; yea, the saluation
of each man should by this means depend wholly on him
that runneth, & him that willeth; and the Apostles words so
cleerely and certainly set down, should be vntrue: It is not in
him that runneth, nor in him that willeth, but in God that sheweth
mercy. By which words is cleerely signified, that the onely
cause why this man rather then another is chosen vnto life,
stands not in the will of man, but of God, who by his absolute
will decreeth to giue his grace vnto one, and thereby make
him to beleeue and runne the race of piety, and so be saued:
and by his like absolute will decreeth to harden; that is,Obduratio Dei, est nulle misere
                     •
                  i, non vt non à Deo i
                     •
                  rogetur aliquid, quo 
                     •
                  it homo deter
                     •
                  or, sed tantùm quo sit 
                     〈◊〉
                   non erogetur. Aug. I. 1. ad Simpl. q. 2. not
to giue his grace to another, & so leaue him to runne on the
race of his own wickednesse, vnto eternall perditio
                  •
               .
            This being obserued, it is not hard to answere those places
of Scripture: Where it is said, that God
               1. Tim. 2 4. 
               would haue all men to
come to repentance, and be saued. For if these, and the like speeches
be vnderstood, not of all sorts, or degrees of men, as besides
others, St 
               Austen
               
                  O
                        ••
                     es homines, id est, omne genas hominum, Reges, pri
                        •
                     atos, nobiles, ignobiles, &c. Aug. Ench. c. 103. & Epist. 107. Potest intell
                        •
                     g
                        ••
                     t fiat dis
                        •
                     ribu
                        •
                     io pro generi
                     
                        •
                     us s
                        •
                     . gulorū, & non pro singulis gene
                        ••
                     
                     ̄. Aquin. P. 1. q. 19. art. 6. often expounds them; but as they take
them, of all men, without exception of any, then can they no way
be meant of the absolute will of God; seeing then it were impossible

                  Mulis a veritate deuiaru
                        •
                     t, dicentes Deum multa velle fieri, quae non fiunt. Quis enim 
                        〈◊〉
                      desipiat, &c? Mag. sent. I. 1. dist. 46. 
                     •
                  x August. that any at all should perish: for if they did, the
will or wickednesse of man should make frustrate the wil and
Counsell of God. And who is able to resist his will? Of which
himselfe saith,Isay 46. 10. I will doe whatsoever I will: and of which
S. Austen
               
                  Aug. Epist. 107. Vbi de Infantibus loquitur, & in Enchir. c. 95. De populo Bethsaidae a
                     •
                  t, Deus noluit selu
                     •
                  s fieri. saith, that many are not saued: non quia ipfi, sed quia
Deus non vult, and, quia nolit saluos fieri: not because they
would not, but because God wil not that they shalbe saued: or

he had absolutely willed that euery one without exception
should be saued: how could Saint Paul haue said of those
vessels of wrath, that they are prepared? or Saint Iude, that they
are ordained? or as Saint Austen,
               
                  Quos i
                        •
                     st
                        •
                     prae destinauit ad poenam. Aug. Ench. c. 100. and after him, Fulgentius
               
                  Praedestinauit Deus quosdam ad gloriam, quosdam ad poenam. Fulg. I. 1. ad Mouim. Qui totus liber est de duplici praedestinatione, vn
                        •
                      bonorum ad g
                        •
                     oriam, altera malorum ad poenam.
                and others often speake, predestinate to destruction and coudemnation.
For none can
                  Pertinet ad fidem, vt Praedestinationem Dei in vtram
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      partem (tam ad mortem quam ad vitam) esse credamus, & si vtrumvisnegetur sacrilegum est. Ecel Lugdun. l. cont. Io. Scot. qui praedestinationem ad poenam negauit.
                doubt, but what God prepareth, ordaineth,
and predestinateth, that also he willeth, seeing predestination
               Quid est aliud Praedestinatio, quàm aeterna Dei voluntas? Eccl. Lugd, lib. cit.
                
               is his very will? Hence it is, that some,Nich. Heming. l. cit. p. 16. 19. & saepius.
                considering
that those testimonies could not be meant (as they suppose)
of the absolute will of God, seeing by it he will
               
                  Voluntate consequenti (quae absoluta est) Deus vult quosdā damnari. Aquin. p. 1. q. 19. art. 6. 
               haue many to
perish, doe expound them of his reuealed, which is called his
conditionall will; for by it God wil haue his Gospel preached,
and saluation conditionally offered vnto all, and so all conditionally
to be saued: to wit, all who performe that condition of
faith and sanctitie which is required of all.
            But I rather assent to the iudgement of others, and specially
of Saint Austen: who by those generall speeches of all,
and none; vnderstand not all men without exception, but all
Gods Elect and chosen children: expounding the places in
this manner, that God would haue all to come to repentance
and be saued; namely, all his
               
                  Ita dictum est omnes homines vult saluos fieri, vt intelligantur omnes praedestinati. Aug. l. de Correp. & grat. c. 14. & idem docet l. 4: cont, Iulian c. 8. Sic etiam de solis praedestinatis ad vitam explicat haec verba. Eccl. Lugdun. in l. contra Ioh. Scotum. 
               chosen, of what degree or condition
soeuer they be; and againe, he would haue none to perish;
to wit, none that beleeue in him, none of his elected seruants,
of what degree soeuer. Which restriction is the more agreeable,
seeing Christ himselfe seemeth of set purpose to set it
downe, Math. 18. 14 saying; It is not your Fathers wil, that
any of these little ones should perish. He said not, It is not Gods
will that any should perish; but granting this of some, hee
saith, It is not Gods will that any of these little ones, of these
chosen ones, who are little, meane, and contemptible in the
eyes of the world, that any of these should perish. And the
very circumstances in Saint Peter (Who is an expositor of

               Exechiel) do enforce the same limitation. For besides that h
                  •
               
writeth this to the elect of God, who had obtained like precious
faith with himselfe, he giueth this as a reason of the long
patience of God, and his slacknesse in comming vnto ludgement,
because God would haue no man to perish, but would haue
all to come to repentance. Now the reason of Gods slacknesse, is
not the repentance and saluation of all men without exception,
(for if he stayed for that, he should neuer come vnto ludgement)
but the reason thereof is the expecting and waiting till
the elect be all effectually conuerted, and their number fulfilled,
as it is most manifest, Reu. 6. 10, 11. where those blessed.
soules vnder the Altar, crying vnto God, How long, Lord, holy
and true, doest thou not iudge and auenge our bloud! receiue
this very answere that here S. Peter giueth, that they must
rest and stay yet for a little season, till the number of their fellow
                     •
                  
seruants and brethren were accomplished. Wherefore though
God will haue none of these his chosen children, and of their fellow
seruants to perish (for whose sake hee slacketh his comming,)
yet, as before we haue proued, it is the absolute will and
decree of God, concerning the reprobate and refuse of the
world, that they shall perish in their sinnes, and runne headlong
of their owne accord into the pit of destruction prouided
and ordained for them.
            O but, say they,
                  Siptucos seruaret, relictis caeteris, suiss
                        •
                     t non solum iratus & in
                     
                        •
                     lemens, sed iniquus, &c. Auth. l. de Christ. seru. effic. Rat. 23. Those men are more to be abhorred then Atheis
                     •
                  s. What greater cruelty & tyranny, then to create the most part of the world to cue
                     •
                  lasting damnation, & that onely because it was his pleasure and will? Then is God worse then the diuel. Auth. conf. of the carel. Sect. 6. & 7. ye cruelly affirm Gods ordinance to be the cause of damnation. Idem. Sect. 23. this can not stand with the Iustice of
God, that he should ordaine any, or create them vnto everlasting
death, and that for no other cause, but that it is his will and pleasure.
For death is the reward of sinne, and not of Gods ordinance
or decree.
            
            Wretched men, who being besotted with a spirit of blindnesse,
and daring to reprehend that which they do not comprehend,
doe most ignorantly confound those two
               
                  
                     •
                   
                  Innuit hos v
                     
                        •
                     rosq, actus, Caiet. comment. in part. 1. Tho. q. 23. art. 5. S
                        •
                     d, non recte effectus vocat. Reprobati
                        •
                      inquit, quo
                        •
                     d prim
                        •
                     um effectu
                        •
                     , N
                        •
                     gtionem actus mise
                        •
                      is ordiae seu gratiae exercet: quoad alterum e
                        •••
                     ctum, qui est 
                        〈◊〉
                     , Ius
                        ••••
                      act
                        ••
                     n exercet.
                
               acts of
Gods decree, which in this cause of the Reprobation of men are
diligently and necessarily, to be distinguished. The former is
Negatiue, and that is, the eternall purpose and decree of God not to

shew mercy, nor giue his grace vnto them, nor to pull them out, as
we doth the elect, but leaue them in that masse of sinne, and
most wofull state, whereinto both they and the elect vvere
now together falne. The other is Positiue, and that is, the eternall
purpose and decree of God to inflict that euerlasting punishment
vpon them, which is most instly deserued by that sinne, into
which they wilfully fall, and in which they stil abide, pursuing sinne
with all greedinesse. We neuer say, nor so much as once think,
that God either condemneth any, or appoints them vnto
death, without their owne most iust deserts. God himselfe
teacheth vs this lesson, Hos. 13. 9. Thyperdition, O Israel, is of
thy selfe; and the Apostle, saying, Rom. 6. 23. that the wages of
sinne, is death, cleerely witnesseth vnto all, that eternall death
is as duely earned by the wicked, and paid vnto them for
their iust recompence, and hire, as is the wages by any master
to his labourer, or seruant. And herein is that true which S.
Austen
               Lib. 3. contr
                     •
                   
                  Iul. cap. 18. saith, God is both good, and iust. Hee may without our
good deserts free vs, because he is good; but hee cannot without
our ill deserts condemne vs, because he is iust. Yea, in that last
and great Day, when God shall sit in his Throne of iudgement,
the wicked and reprobate, forced to confesse their
faults written in their conscience, as in a large booke, shall
then acknowledge both their owne deserts, and the Iustice of
God, in rewarding them with the due wages of their sinnes.
It is not then the will and pleasure of God, as they maliciously
slander, but their owne great and hainous transgressions, for
which they are punished, and for which God from all eternitie
decreed to punish them: sinne onely is the cause of this
later and positiue act in Gods decree.
            But for the former & Negatiue act in their reiection, whereby
God ordained, that when all mankinde was alike guilty
before him, all included in that one and the selfesame masse of
perdition, into which by their owne voluntary transgression
all mankinde had plunged it selfe (for in 
                  
                     •
                  Adam
               Rom. 5. 12. Ephes. 2. 3. all men sinned,
and so death and Gods wrath went ouer all) that hee
would not then in mercy pull these out of that masse, and

make of them vessels of glory, but in iustice leaue them in that
their sinfull and wofull estate to be vessels of wrath, leaue them
to their owne lusts, destitute of his grace, that so they might
runne out the race of their sinnes, and be as it were fatted for
the day of slaughter: the cause of this act, I say, is the very
will of God; which though we may not doubt, but that being
his will, who is most wise, it is also most reasonable,
               Cauendum est, ne dū voluntatē Dei magnificare volumus, voluntati eius derogemus. Si enim non esset alia ratio, quare istum elegit & illum non, nisi quia placet, certe 
                     •
                  am non occulta dicerentur diuina iudicia, sed manifesta, cum qu
                     ••
                  bet hāc rationem capiat: nec dicerentur mirabilia, sed potiùs voluntaria, quare dicendum est, qu
                     •
                  d voluntas illa Dei, est rati
                     •
                  
                  nabiliss
                     ••
                  a, & rationem habet, & ab aeterno habuit. Bonau. in lib. 1. sent. dist. 41. q. 2. 
               & grounded
both vpon most iust, wise, and diuine reasons, such, as perhaps,
in the life to come shall be made euiden
                     •
                   vnto vs; yet hereof no
other reason can possibly be giuen by vs, nor ought to bee
sought for in this mortall life, but onely this, I will haue mercy
on whom I will: and whom he will, he hardneth, that is, he wil not
shew mercy vnto them.Tunc non latebit, qu
                     •
                  d nunc latet, cur ille potiùs quàm iste fuerit assumptus, cum causa vna esset ambobus. Aug. Ench. cap. 95.
            
            Now why should this seeme vniust vnto thee, O thou
disputer against God? It is, as the Apostle tels thee, the will
of God; whose will, seeing he is infinitely wise, is euer most
iust; yea, it is the very rule
               Dei valuntas, non tantùm est recta, sed etiam regula. Bonau. loc. cit.
                
               of all perfect iustice. Again, in that
thou art a creature, thou art none of thine owne, but thou
art wholly Gods. Is it not lawfull for me to doe with my owne
what I will? saith the hous-holder in the Gospell: and shall it
not be lawfull for God, to doe, and to dispose of his owne, as it
best pleaseth him? Shall the Potter without controulement
frame of the same lumpe of clay, one vessell to honour, another to
dishonour, onely because it so pleaseth him? and wilt thou,
which art but dust and ashes, aske a reason of God, why of
that one lumpeSi artifex ex vil
                     •
                   materia, faciat vas pulchrum & nobilibus vsibus accommodatum, totum ascribitur bonitati artificis: sed si ex vili materia, vt ex lut
                     •
                  , faciat vas 
                     •
                  ccommodatum vitibus vsibus, non potest vas (si rationem haberet) conqueri, sed si ex pretiosa materia, vt ex auro, aut gemmis, vas faciat ad vili
                     •
                   officia, tū conqueri posset. Humana aut
                     •
                   natur a vi
                     •
                  itatem habet, non solùm ex materia, quia est lutum & limus t
                     ••
                  ae, sed quia est cor
                     •••
                  a peccato: vnde quicquid boni habet, debet bonitati figult. Aquin. comment. in c. 9. ad Rom. Et idem omnin
                     •
                   docet Aug. Epist. 106. Vbi massam 
                     •
                  llam ex qua Deus h
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   diuersa vasa finxit, nec integram aut mediam idest, nec bonam, nec malam) sed plane corrupt
                     •
                   fuiss
                     •
                   docet. of sinne, fit for nothing at all but to make
vessels of dishonour, he made thee, rather then another, a vessell
of dishonour, which of a silly Potter thou wouldest blush

and be ashamed to aske? Nay, the Apostle saith of the Potter,
that he hath not only power, but euen authoritie & a rightfull
power; (for so the word 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                importeth) to frame the clay
as he listeth, and of what part thereof he wil, to make a vessel
either for honor, or dishonour. How much more is there authoritie
and a rightfull power in God ouer all men? For the Potter
made not the clay, but God made, yea created vs of nothing: and the Potter, though by much and many degrees
he excell the clay, yet still the oddes and difference is finite.
But God infinitely excelleth all mankinde; and therefore his
authoritie is infinitely more ouer vs all, then is the Potter ouer
the least parcell of Clay. Yea, thou thy selfe wilt, for thy own
pleasure, sport, or glory, kill and slay of thy Deere, and fat of
thy beasts, which thou wilt, for slaughter: and yet because
thou thinkest they are thy owne, death it were for any of thy
seruants, to say to thee, no lesse then to the man of sinne, Domine,
               
                  Non Rex, non Synodus, non tota Ecclesia (Papae) dicere potest, Cur ita facis? Clau. Esp. com. in c. 1. ad Titum. pag. 77. 
               cur ita facis? yet thy beasts had no way offended thee,
but beene good and seruiceable vnto thee, so that thou hadst
onely the power of a Lord ouer them, but thou hadst no
cause of wrath and anger against them: How much more
may the Almighty, for his glory, designe or leaue which of
all mankinde he pleaseth, for the day of slaughter; seeing
both, they all had by their rebellion against God, incensed his
wrath, and prouoked his iust indignation against them; and
hee being the Lord of all Lords, and Creator of heauen and
earth, hath infinitely more authority ouer them all, then thou
hast, or canst haue, ouer the least and meanest thing that thou
doest possesse?
            Lastly, if God had beene indebted vnto thee, or bound to
shew thee mercy and fauour, then mightst thou haue had some
cause to complaine of his wrong. But the Almighty did
owe thee nothing, nor was he obliged to shew thee the least
fauour. And though hee was not, yet, to leaue thee vvithout
all excuse, hee enriched thee with his free bounty, and thou
hadst greatly tasted of his fauours, in that hee gaue thee thy
being, when hee might haue suffered thee to continue in

               Nothing: in that he made thee a man, when, if it had pleased
him, hee might haue made thee a beast; yea, haue made thee
a Toad: and especially in that hee created thee after his owne
image, decking thee with righteousnesse and true bolinesse, setting
thee in a most glorious and happy estate, and giuing vnto
thee free will, power and abilitie to haue continued so for euer,
if thou wouldest thy selfe. Now feeing thou, and all mankind
by their owne will and wilfull disobedience, didst depriue thy
selfe of all that glory; and pulledst downe his iust wrath and
vengeance vpon thee: Why doest thou now repine against
so good and gracious a God? or how canst thou imagine any
colour of iniustice in his doings, though hee shew not to
thee that vndeserued mercy which hee doth vnto others, to
whom he giueth both grace and glory? As one of those malefactors
before mentioned, caunot iustly complaine, that
the King doth wrong him, because he did not pardon him,
as he did some other in the like offence, and condemnation:
So though God deale in iustice with thee, and not in mercy, as
he doth with others, yet he doth no wrong vnto thee, seeing
he ought thee nothing: and to shew vndeserued
               In his quae ey gratia dantur, & non ex debito, potest aliquis, abs
                     •
                  , praeiudicio iustitiae, pro libito suo, plus dare cui vult, & cui vult, minus, dummod
                     •
                   nulli subtrahat debitum. Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art. 5. 
               fauour, is
mercy and loue; but not to shew it, is no iniustice, no wrong
at all.
Whence also may fully be cleered the iustice of God, in
his reiecting of the transgressing angels. There is, I confesse,
great oddes and difference in the reiection of them, and of
men. All mankind was included in one common roote, whence
all the rest should be propagated: so were not the angels. All
mankinde in that common roote had sinned,
               Rom. 5. 12. Ephes. 2. 3. and willingly
depriued themselues of blessednesse, and made themselues
subiect to the eternall hatred of God: so had not the angels.
In electing men, God vsed an act of mercy; I will haue mercy
on whom I will. Now mercy presupposeth sinne and misery: so
in electing of them, God in mercy puld them out of sinne
and misery, and in mercy gaue both grace and glory vnto
them. In electing the Angels, he cannot be said to haue vsed
this Act of mercy, seeing they were then neither sinfull, nor

miserable. His act in electing them, was onely an act of
free loue and bounty, in giuing such grace vnto them, as that they
should neuer sinne, neuer 
                     •
                  e willing to sinne, nor euer fall from
that most blessed estate, wherein they were created. In reiecting
men, God vsed an act of iustice: and that act was both Negatiue,
decreeing not to giue such grace vnto them, as should
free them from sinne and misery, as hee did to the elect; and
positiue, decreeing, for that sin into which they wilfully now
had runne, to inflict eternall punishment vpon them. All
which, God himselfe expresseth, saying of that reiected person,
I haue hated Esau: that is, I haue both in iustice decreed
not to shewDicitur Deus reprobos odrsse, quia non vult eis hoc bonum, qu
                     •
                  d est vita ae
                     ••
                  rna. Aquin. p. 1. q. 23. art. 3. Quod verum est respectu actus primi seunegatiui. such loue and mercy to him, as I doe to Iacob;
and in iustice also decreed to inflict that punishment on him,
which his sinne most iustly hath deserued. In reiecting the
Angels, God can not be said to haue vsed this Act of Iustice,
seeing hee could not decree to leaue them either in sinne, or
misery, into neither of which as yet they were falne. His act
of reiecting them, was onely Negatiue, decreeing not to
giue that grace vnto them, which hee gaue to the elect Angels,
such as would preserue them from sinning, but to leaue
them wholly to themselues, and permit
               Deus bona omnia vult volun, t
                     •
                  te effectiuā, quia ipse eorum author est & approbator: Mal
                     •
                   verò seu peccata nunquā v
                     •
                  lt voluntate essectiuā, sed tantum permissiuā, quia volens permittit ea fieri, cum non impediat ne fiant: ipse autem nec author corum est, aut causa, nec praecipit fieri, ne
                     •
                   facta approbat. Haec innuit Mag. sent. dist. 46, lib. 1. & alij Scholastici in eam dist. & Aug. in Ench. cap. 96. them of their owne
accord to fall into sinne: and his decreeing to punish their
sinne, was an act of his iustice on the parties reiected, rather
then an act of his reiection of them.
In all which, Gods dealing to haue been most iust, if wee
rightly consider thereof, will be cleere and manifest. For had
God at the Creation either made mankinde or Angels sinfull,
or hauing made them iust, had he left them impotent,
               Si hoc adiutorium (quo possent stare si vellent) vel Angelo, vel homini, quando primùm 
                     •
                  acti sunt, defuisset, non vtiq, suā culpā cecidissent, adiuterium quippe defuisset, siue quo ma
                     •
                  ere non possent. Aug. l. de. Cor. & grat. c. 11. 
               or vnable
to stand in that blessed estate if they would, or had hee
himselfe thrust them forward into sinne, compelling or causing
them to transgresse, then might they haue iustly complained
indeed of God: Complained first of want of goodnesse in
God, who had either made them euill, or forced them to be
euill; and then complained of his iniustice, who would punish

them for doing that euill, whereof himselfe had beene
the cause and author vnto them. But Gods proceeding herein
was farre otherwise. It was euery way most iust, and most
equall. For he not onely created mankinde and all Angels in
perfect righteousnesse
               Gen. 1. 27, 31. 
               and innocency, exceeding good, and
complete in all goodnesse, which was
               N
                     ••
                   habere voluntalem immutab
                     •
                  at
                     •
                  r bonum, soli Deo conuenit Creaturae autem Natura exigit, vt quia non est summe bon
                     •••
                  , id
                     •
                  o volunias cius non sit summè, id est, incom mutabi
                     ••
                  ter bona. Sed talis, quae possit de
                     ••
                  
                  cere, vel non defice
                     •
                  e. Aquin. in q. d
                        •
                     p. q. de P
                        ••
                     ou. art. 4. 
               sit for their natures,
but withall, he gaue vnto them (that which was requisite to
reasonable creatures) such a freedome of will, and so great assistance
and aboundance of his grace, that by these, they
might
               Dederat Deus primo h
                     •
                  mini adintorium, per quod posset perman
                     •
                  re si vellet, vt autem vellet, in 
                     •
                  iu
                     •
                   reliqu
                     •
                  t arbitriv. Aug. l. de Cor. & grat. c. 11. Quod idem 
                     〈◊〉
                   Angelis peccantibus dicendum est. 
               for euer haue perseuered in pietie, and continued in blessednesse,
if themselues had beene willing. And although God
might further haue giuen, both to the wicked angels, and to
all mankinde, such an ouerplus of grace, (as he gaue to the elected
Angels, and dayly giues to the elect
               Sanctis per gratiam prades
                     •
                  inatis non s
                     •
                  lum ta
                     •
                  e ad
                     •
                  utorium dati
                     •
                   (vt possirt sta
                     •
                  e siv
                     •
                  l. nt) sed tale, vt perseuerantia ipsa d
                     •
                  n
                     •
                  tur, si
                     •
                   vt per hoe donum non nisi perseu
                     •
                  rantes siat. Aug. ibid. cap.
                
               which are regenerate
and sanctified) that they should not onely bee able to perseuere,
if they would; but that they should also be willing so to perseuere:
yet seeing he was no way bound to giue this grace vnto
them, seeing that grace was meerely his owne, to giue it, or
not giue it, vnto whom he would; neither can mankinde, nor
any of the reiected angels, complaine of iniustice in God, for
not giuing such grace vnto them. May not I doe with my
owne what I will? May not I giue my grace to whom I will?
and withhold it from whom I will? Is thy eye euill, because
I am good? For seeing that grace was due to none of them all,
if he giue it to any, that's his bounty and a surplusage of his loue;
but in not giuing it to others, seeing hee ought it not to any,
he doth no wrong at all vnto them. In the very like sort,
when first the wicked angels, and after them all mankinde,
had by their owne wils, and most voluntary transgression, cast
off the loue of God, and so not onely depriued themselues
of that glory, which if they had been willing, they might for
euer haue enioyed, but made themselues lyable to Gods
wrath, and eternall condemnation: what wrong or iniustice
can this seeme to any, not to pull them out of that pit of perdition,

into which, with open contempt of God, both those
angels, and all mankinde, of their owne accord, and most
willingly had now cast themselues? If he had for euer left all
mankinde, as he did all the transgressing angels, in that wofull
and wretched state, hee had done no wrong to any, seeing
hee was not bound to shew his mercy or fauour vnto
any. In that he puls out some, it's a superaboundance of his
loue and mercy towards them. In that hee leaues the rest to
destruction, it's truely iustice on Gods part, and on theirs most
deserued punishment; for to giue vndeserued fauour, is mercy,
but not to giue it, or to render deserued punishment, is no
wrong.
            
            Now, whereas in the last place, they accuse
               If your saying were true, then were his workes full of cruelty, misery, damnation and destiuction. Auth. co
                        •
                      fu
                        •
                      of the carelesse. Sect. 23. He had then beene worse then the d
                     •
                  uell. Idem Sect. 7. Nulla est tam immanis bestia, quae velit creare pu
                        •
                     lum ad mise
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     m. Auth. confut. Artic. ex Calu. dece
                     •
                  p. art. 1. Quare creauit cos, si ad 
                        〈◊〉
                      non praedestinauit? Ob
                        ••••
                     o impiorum, in Dialogo Honorij Aug. de P
                        •
                     aedest.
                
               God not
onely of inuistice, but for tyranny and cruelty for creating so
many, whom hee would permit to fall into sinne, and then inflict
endlesse and insupportable torments vpon them; whereas,
if it had pleased him, he might haue giuen vnto them all such
grace, as would haue preuented not onely their destruction,
but their sinne also which was the cause thereof; they doe
herein bewray themselues, not onely to be besotted in errour;
but such as Gyant-like doe maliciously fight against
God. Art thou wiser then the Almighty? or wilt thou prescribe
a Law vnto God, whom, or how many hee should
create? or what measure of grace he should giue vnto them?
Art thou able to answere him one for a thousand? Was't
not sufficient to giue both to all mankinde, and to all angels,
so much grace and power, as that thereby they might for euer
haue stood in integritie, and haue inherited eternall felicitie
if they would themselues? In which one gift, consists the
effect of all that, which the oppugners of this truth, either
doe, or can say, to cleere the iustice of God
                  •
               , or free hish
from that cruelty, which against vs they obiect: Or had
God entended their death, or destruction, before he foresaw
their most wilfull rebellion; then might they haue had some
colour for their impious and blasphemous declaiming against
the Lord. But seeing no thought of punishing either

men or Angels, euer entred into the heart of God, but in order,
               Etsi in Dei 
                     •
                  oluntat
                     •
                   non sit ve
                     •
                  prius, vel pos
                     •
                  e
                     •
                  us (
                     ••
                  mpore) quia quaecun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   vult, ab aeterno volu
                     •
                  t, ordine tamen naturae, & pro nostro captu, non possismus al
                     •
                  
                  ter cogitare, qua hoc ordine Deum voluisse, & velle: sic vt resco ordine volucrit, quo inter sepositae sunt. Ita ordine natura, 
                     〈◊〉
                   voluit causas, deinde affecta, &c. Hie
                        •
                     . Zanch l. 3. de Attrib. Dei, c. 4. q. 11. Thes. 3. 
               though not of time, yet of nature and reason, after his foresight
of their voluntarie disobedience and rebellion against him:
why should they count it either iniustice or cruelty, to inflict
that deserued punishment on them, which they wilfully puld
downe vpon themselues. Or was God bound to giue them
such an antidote of his preuenient grace, as would haue preserued
them from sinne? Besides, that he was not so obliged to any,
in the infinitenesle of his wisedome, he saw it was not fit he
should giue that vnto them: for by giuing such grace vnto
all, it would haue beene thought, that it had been their own,
and their naturall power, which now, by not giuing it to
some, is declared to bee due vnto none; and by bestowing
it on others, is knowne to bee his free and supernaturall gift
and grace vnto them. Nay, by giuing such grace vnto all, hee
had for euer both damm'd vp all passage to his iustice and
mercy; and the greatnesse of his loue, wisedome, and goodnesse,
had for euer beene obscured. And therefore firstSic ordinauit Angelerum & l
                     •
                  minum vitam, vt in ea prius 
                     •
                  stenderet quid posset corum liberum arbitrium, deinde quid posset suae grattiae beneficium, institiae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   indi
                     ••
                  um. Aug. l. de corr. & grat. cap. 10. 
               he
                     •
                   would
let them know what of themselues, and by their owne will
they would doe, euen runne into destruction, that afterwards
hee might make euident and knowne all the exceeding riches
of his glory. The riches of his mercy; which could neuer
haue beene seene if he had suffered none to fall into misery,
whence afterwards himselfe would deliuer them by mercy.
The riches of his iustice; who is now seene to be so infinitely
iust, as that he hath an infinite hatred against all iniustice,
and therefore iustly inflicteth an infinite punishment
vpon it; and who therefore would not in mercy pardon all,
as he might haue done, lest it might seeme, that hee who is
Righteousnesse it selfe, had not in a iust and perfect manner
hated vnrighteousnesse. The riches of his wisedome; who is
now seene to be so infinitely wise, as that he could finde a
most blessed meanes, both fully, euen to the vtmost farthing,
to punish the offences, and so to satisfie his infinite iustice,
and yet wholly to pardon the offenders, and so to manifest
his infinite mercy; that euery one might with the Prophet

               Psal. 101. 1. say vnto God, Mercy and iudgement will I sing vnto
thee. The riches of his power and goodnesse; which both
are now seene to be so infinite, that hee is able to turne the
greatest euill, to our greatest good, and euen out of sinne, to
worke saluation; and out of death, to effect eternall life. The
riches of his lone to the elect: the infinite greatnesse whereof
could neuer haue beene conceiued, if they had not seene
in the iust punishment of others, from what infinite and
endlesse torments they are freed themselues, and freed by
his onely loue, either most louingly preuenting them vvith
his grace, that they should not fall into sinne, as hee did the
elected Angels: or most louingly deliuering them by his
grace, when they were falne into sinne, as he did all the elect
of mankinde. In regard of all which, it may truely bee faid
with Saint Austen,
               Omnipotens Deus, cum summè bonus sit, nullo mod
                     •
                   smeret malt al
                     •
                   quid esse, nisi vs
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   ade
                     •
                   esset omnipotens & bunus, vt benefacit etiam de 
                     •
                  alo. Ench. cap. 11. Nec 
                     •
                  ubitandum est Deum facere benè, etiam sin
                     •
                  nd
                     •
                   fieri, quicun
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   fiunt mal
                     •
                  . Qui
                     •
                   etsi mala, in quantum smala sunt, non sint bona, tamen vt nonsolūm bona, sed etiam sint & mala, bon
                     •
                  m est. Lib. eod. c. 96. 
               that God being both most powerfull and
most good, would neuer haue suffered euill to haue beene, vnlesse
hee had beene so infinitely good and powerfull, that he was able
euen out of euill, to bring good: and vnlesse
               Melius iudicauit de malis beneface
                     •
                  e, quàm mala nulla esse permittere. Aug. in Ench. cap. 27. Rectissimè credimus qu
                     •
                  d Deus, qui creauit omnia bona valde, & mala ex boms exoritura praesciuit, sciuit magis ad suam omnipotentissim
                     •
                  m bonitatem pertinere, de malis benefacere, quàm mala esse non sinere. Idem lib. de Cor. & grat. cap. 10. 
               he had knowne that
it was a farre more glorious worke, and would turne to his farre
greater glory, when some had sinned, euen out of sinne to worke
saluation, then not to suffer them to sinne at all. But what
though we in the shallownesse of our vnderstanding either
cannot giue, or cannot comprehend the reason of Gods
will herein? Shall we therefore presume to exclaime against
the Lord, or accuse him for thus doing? Doth not the Apostle
put to silence the insolency of this folly, when hee saith,
Rom. 9. 20. 
               O man, who art thou that disputest with God? Who art thou
that darest aske a reason of his will, whose very will is the
rule
               Dei voluntas est Ratiorationum, nec tantum recta, s
                     •
                  d regula. Bon. in l. 1. sent. dist. 41. q. 2. 
               of al reason? Much rather oughtest thou here euen with
amazement and admiration, cry out with the same Apostle;
Rom. 11. 33. 
               O the depth of the riches
                     •
                   both of the wisedom and knowledge of
God! how vnsearchable are his iudgements, and his wayes past
finding out! Yet euen by this little, which we haue now said,

you doe cleerely see, both the will of God to bee most holy,
and his iustice most vpright, and both his will and iustice to
be without all blame, in that his whole Decree, whereby hee
elected some, to giue freely vnto them both grace and glory,
and left others in their owne sinne, to bee led thereby into euerlasting
perdition.
            Howsoeuer then blasphemous mouthes doe barke against
Heauen, & against their Creator; yet let vs, & all Gods
seruants, not onely acknowledge, but magnifie, as in those
whom he refuseth, his Iustice; so in our selues, his exceeding
and vnexpresseable mercy: let vs cast all our crownes before
his footstoole, and sing an hymne of praise vnto him, who
not onely hath made vs of nothing, but which is the most
happy blessing that wee can wish or desire, hath made vs
vessels of loue, vessels of mercy, and glory; whereas if it
ha
                  •
                pleas
                  •
               d him▪ hee might haue left vs to haue beene vessels
of wrath and vengeance, as hee left the rest: for there
was no oddes at a
                  •
               l 
                  •
               etwixt them and vs, in our selues: the
onely odd, was in his mercy and will; Euen so, O Lord, it
was thy holy will, who hast said it, and it shall stand for euer,
Thou wilt h
                     •
                  ue mercy on whom thou wilt, and whom thou wilt
thou hardenest. And thus much be spoken of the first generall
point: namely, our Election it selfe, as well of the parties who,
as of the cause why they are elected.
            The second generall point proposed, was the certainty of
our election; expressed in this, that the Apostle saith, Make
your election sure. Now our election is said to be sure or certaine,
two manner of waves. First, it is sure and certaine, in
it selfe: secondly, it is called sure and certaine in respect of vs,
and of our perswasion or knowledge. Concerning the former
certainty, beeing not so proper to this place, I would not
haue at all entreated, if some malicious men had not with
most venemous tongues oppugned, and eagerly sought to
disgrace this truth: teaching that
                  Si quis defecerit á fide, des
                        ••
                     it esse electus. & reprobus efficitur. Heming. lib. de grat vniuers. pag. 26. Here you see, that they diuide all men into two forts; the one elected, which by no meanes can perish; the other reprobate, so that by no meanes they can be saued. What can the Diuel wish his members to teach more for the aduancement of his Kingdome then this? Auth. confut. of the carelisse by necessity. Sect. 27. By this you see, that the elect become reprobates by their wickednesse. Ibid. Sect. 30. & simi
                        ••
                     a illic passim. Idem sensit Alphon. à Castre, 
                        ••
                     i ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , Praedestinatos si
                        •
                      n
                        •
                     ces
                        ••
                     tari ad bonum, ait, vt peri
                        •
                     e neque
                        ••
                     t, ne
                        •
                     ; reprobos sic cog
                        •
                      ad gebeanam, v
                        •
                      vitam promcue
                        ••
                     ri non valean:. Lib. de haeres. vit. Predestinatio. Gods election is so vncertaine,

and changeable, as that the elect may become reprobates,
and the reprobate elect; the elect bee quite blotted out of
Gods fauour, and fall from their election; the other receiue the
cr
                     •
                  wne of glory, which was prepared for the elect.
            
            But wee are taught a farre more comfortable doctrine in
the Word of God, That Gods election is most firme, certaine,
and vnchangeable. For it it the Ordinance, Counsell, and Decree
of God, who hath chosen vs, Ephes. 1. 4. who hath predestinate,
that is, fore-ordained vs vnto glory, Rom. 8. 29. Now
if the ordinances and Lawes of the Medes and Persians, were
such as might not be altered; how much more shall the Decree
of God be immutable, of which himselfe faith, Isay 46.
10. My Counsell shall stand? The firmenesse of this election
our Sauiour teacheth, Iohn 6. 37. where speaking of his chosen
seruants which his Father hath giuen him; he saith, They
shall all come vnto me, and those that come vnto me, I cast not away.
And lest we should imagine, (as they doe,) that though
Christ would not put them away, yet either themselues, or
some other, might take them from him; hee addeth further,
Iohn 10. 28. of the same chosen sheepe, I giue vnto them eternall
life, and they shall neuer perish, neither shall any plucke
them out of mine hand. If not any, then not the World, nor
the Flesh, nor Satan with all the powers of darknes, no nor
they themselues, shall bee able to plucke themselues from
Christ, or take them out of his Fathers hand. And lest wee
should thinke that though they cannot be pluckt, or by force
drawne from Christ, yet by some subtiltie, or craft of Satan,
they might be ensnared, and, as it were, stolne from him, our
Sauiour preuenteth euen this doubt also, Math. 24. 24. telling
vs, that the wonders and lying signes of Satan shall bee
such, and so great, that if it were possible, they should deceiue the
very elect. Manifestly implying thus much, that not all the
sleights, deceits, and lying wonders of Satan, shall bee able
to deceiue any one of his Elect; because it is impossible by
any meanes whatsoeuer, to take or steale them away from
Christ, who being the Watchman and good Shepheard of

Israel, can neither slumber nor sleepe. Seeing then Christ
promiseth to receiue all the elect, and beeing once receiued
and come vnto him, neither himselfe will cast them away,
neither any force or violence shall bee able to pull them out
of his hand, nor any deceit or sleight of Satan shall steale
them from him, that remaineth as vndoubtedly true, which
Saint Paul teacheth, Rom. 8. 29. that saluation and eternall
glory; is by a golden chaine most infallibly and inseparably
linked vnto election; for whom God predestinateth,
them also he (effectually) calleth; and whom he so calleth,
them also he iustifieth; and whom he iustifieth, them also hee glorifieth.
            
            Here againe they open their mouthes wide against God.
abusing their wits, peruerting the Sacred Scriptures, and in
the insolency of their folly, euen in most reprochfull manner
slandering this holy truth of the certainty of Gods election;
yea, and the whole doctrine of Predestination also,
as a dangerous, pernicious, and pestilent doctrine, making men,
as they teach,
               
                  Obijciunt nomen gratiae vt abommandum sensum operiant blasphemi
                        •
                     . Subsidia enim orationis excludunt, & operandi laborem. Quid enim vltra speret quem iam gratia (electionis) suum fecit? In quo etiam non desperet, quem praefinitio violenta damnauit? In illo culp
                        •
                     , in hoc gratia locum non habet. In vtro
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      periclitatur iustitia. Salus illic ingerenda est, non quaerenti, huic auferend
                        •
                      etiam labora
                        •
                     ti. Faust. Rheg. (bomo hareticus,) quisub specie oppugnandi, Pelagianismum fortiter propugnat.) lib. 1. de libero a
                     •
                  b. cap. 4. By your poysoned doctrine ye infect the people of God, and draw them to a secure, idle, and carelesse life. Auth. consut. of the carelesse. Sect. 27. Why, Mas
                     •
                  ers, haue yee no conscience thus to cause the people to sinne? Ibid. If your opinion be true, the preaching of repentance is vaine; for if the elect cannot perish, what need they repent? and if the reprobate cannot attaine saluation, to what purpose should they repent? Ibid. Sect. 30. It is no matter what we do, if your doctrine be true. Ibid. Sect. 28. & huc 
                        •
                     lanè spectabat haer
                        •
                     sis 
                        ••
                     a quae Praedestinatorum dicta est. Omnia sic ex predestinati
                        •
                     ne suspendende, vt re
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      bona opera prodesse, ne
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      m
                        •
                     la 
                        •
                     pera obesse cuiquam possent. De qua Sigeb. in Chron. an. 415. Sed opinor eum non satis recte exposuisse istam haeresin.
                
               secure and carelesse of well doing, and of their
saluation. For if I be, say they, predestinate to life; what neede
I repent, beleeue, serue or loue God, let mee wallow in sinne, yet
seeing the elect cannot perish, nor fall out of Gods fauour, I am
certaine I shall be saued: But if I bee reiected of God, to what
purpose should I repent or amend my life; for though I walke in
all the statutes of God, yet can I not attaine to life, but must vnauoidably
be condemned?
            
            See how rightly the Apostles doome is verified of these

men, When they professe themselues to bee wise, they become
fooles, God making the wisedome of the flesh meere foolishnesse.
For know they not, that this dispute of theirs is euery
way as effectual against the Praescience and foreknowledge
(which yet themselues confesseAuth. confut. of the carelesse Sect. 15. & 18.) as it is or can bee
against the Decree and Predestination of God? his Praes
                     •
                  ience
being as certainely infallible, as his Decree is immutable.
If God then foreknow that I shall be saued, let me liue
as I list, and passe my time in sinne, yet I shall bee sure to
bee an heire of Gods Kingdome: But if God foreknow
that I shall be damned, to what end should I feare or serue
the Lord: for seeing God foreknoweth this, and what hee
foreknoweth must vnauoidably come to passe, though I
should wholly deuote both my soule and body to Gods
seruice; yet of necessirie I must at the last eternally perish?
Let them now either in plaine tearmes professe Atheisme,
and deny Proescience in God, and so deny
                  Quid aliud est negare in Deo praescientiam futurorū omnium, qu
                        •
                     m dicere, Deum non esse Deum? Quomodo e
                        ••
                     m Deus est qui futuro
                        •
                      um praescientiam non habet? Eccl. Lugdun. in lib. cont. Ioh. Scot. him to be God,
or let them cease with such vaine disputes, to oppugne the
Ordinance, Decree, and Predestination of God, the selfesame
difficulty as forcibly ouerthrowing the infallibilitie of the
one, which themselues confesse, as it doth, or can, the Immutabilitie
of the other, which we defend.
            See againe how Satan hath bewitched these men: they
seeme witty to themselues in pleading thus against their
owne saluation; but this their reason is with them of no
force at all, to make them secure and carelesse in their bodily
estate, or worldly affaires. God doth not onely foresee,
but foreordaine also concerning euery man, whether
hee shall be rich or poore, sicke or whole, liue or dye;
for none of these come from the earth, nor spring out of the
dust, as holy Iob
               Iob 5. 6. speaketh, that is, they come not by
chance or fortune vnto any; but as the Prophet saith,
Lament. 3. 38. Out of the mouth of God, (from his appointment
and Decree) proceedeth both good and euill. And yet
when will these disputers either perswade others, or resolue
themselues vpon this their reason, to set Cock on hoope, as

themselues speake,Let vs set cock on hoop, and let the world 
                     〈◊〉
                  , let vs eate and drinke, and rise vp to play, &c. Auther. confut. of the carel. Sect. 27. that is, to sit carelesse and secure, to
sleepe and sl
                  •
               mber, nor once trouble their mindes or bodies
in the eager pursuite of the wealth and pelfe of this
world? because it God hath decreed, or doe foresee, that
they shall haue wealth; let them doe what they will, sit
still, or ryot, waste and lauish all they haue, yet shall they
sure abound, seeing what God foreknoweth, or fore-ordaineth,
shall most infallibly come to passe: and if God decreeth
or foreseeth that they shall be poo
                  •
               e and miserable, though
they compasse Sea and Land, and load themselues with
all, both the East and West Indian treasures, yet by that
vnresistable Decree of GOD they shall bee put all into
bottomlesse bagges, and liue and dye in a poore estate.
Or would not these men thinke that hee did scoffe
and deride them, who would in serious manner perswade
them, neuer to eate or drinke, but rather to starue or stab
themselues; because, if God (who hath numbredIob 14. 5. all
our dayes) hath decreed, or doth but foreknow, that they
shall yet liue twenty, thirty, or forty yeeres more, doe
whatsoeuer they will or can, yet shall they attaine to
that period prefixed or foreknowne of God: and if
God haue 
                  
                     •
                  rdained or foreknoweth that they shall dye within
a moneth or a yeere, though they should eate nothing
but the fruit of the Tree of Life, and fill themselues
with Nectar and Ambrosia, yet could not all this
immortall foode prolong their liues one houre, or minute;
seeing the foreknowledge of God is without all errour,
and his ordinance without all change? When they can by
this their reason, wherein they infinitely please themselues,
perswade either themselues, or others, to this carelesse,
nay, franticke courses, then may they with some colour
perswade, that our doctrine of the Prescience and Predestination
of God will make men careles
                  •
               e of their eternall
saluation.
            But if laying aside the pride and wantonnesse of their
owne wits, they could bee content to submit their

reason to the wisedome of God, they should easily discerne,
how their whole dispute in this, and all like cases,
relyeth on no other stay, then a broken staffe of Reede.
For did God either foreknow or fore-ordaine any of these
ends, without respect vnto the meanes, which doe infallibly
leade therevnto, then had they some shew for their
pretended reason. But seeing it is most certaine, that
God neither de
                     •
                  reeth, nor foreknoweth of any, that the
shall bee saued, but withall hee both foreknoweth and decreeth,
that himselfe will make him to embrace those
meanes, and walke in those wayes which will bring him
vnto life: and seeing hee neither decreeth nor foreknoweth
the damnation of any, but of the same hee decreeth, and
foreknoweth, that he will leaue them destitute of his grace,
to be led by their owne lusts into sinne and impenitency,
which is the infallible meanes to bring them vnto death:

                  〈◊〉
                most cleerely hence followeth, that as none doe neglect
or omit the meanes, but the same also doe misse of the end,
so neither doe any euer faile to attaine the end, who doe
embrace the meanes that lead therevnto. Whence it comes
to passe, that though none of the Elect can either misse
of the end, or neglect the meanes of saluation, God by
his grace directing them in the one, and thereby leading
them vnto the other; yet vpon that suposall which
they make, if they should not beleeue, nor vse the meanes
of life, it may, yea, it must be said, that they should neuer
attaine to to the end, but eternally perish. Euen as Saint
Paul, though hee knew that God had decreed and foretold
               Act. 27. 30, 3
                     •
                  
                
               him also, that all who were with him in that dangerous
tempest, should come safe to Land, and not so much as an
hayre fall from the head of any: all which himselfe certainly beleeued;
yet when the Mariners, who were to bee the
meanes of their safety, were ready to fly away, and leaue
the rest to the rage of the sea, hee conditionally and truely
said, that if the Mariners abode not in the ship: that is, if
they vsed not the meanes of their 
                  •
               afety appointed by

God, there could none of them be safe: notwithstanding
both the Decree, Praescience, and Prediction of GOD for
their safety. Againe, though in respect of Gods immutable
Decree and Praescience, it bee simply impossible, that
any of the Reprobate should either beleeue, repent, and
leade a sanctified life, or bee saued; yet euen of such it
may and must bee sayd, that if they performe those duties,
which are the meanes of life, they shall asluredly attaine
vnto the end to which those meanes doe leade, which
is eternall saluation. Euen as our Sauiour, though hee
knew that God had decreed concerning Tyrus and Sydon,
two heathenish, proud, and prophane Cities, that neither
himself would worke those singes among them, whereby
they would haue beene conuerted and repent; nor
that they should either repent or bee saued 
                  •
                yet conditionally
and truely
                     •
                  
                saidMath. 11. 21. of those Cities, that if those workes had
beene done amongst them, which were done in Chorazin and
Bethsaida, they would haue repented, and so should haue
haue beene saued. The reason of all which, and of all
the like is, that which the Logicians rightly teach, that
a conditionall proposition
               Propositio conditionalis 
                     〈◊〉
                   po
                     •
                  t 
                     •
                  esse. 
               puts nothing in being, that is,
requires not the being or being true of either part thereof,
but it onely shewes what must follow and be granted,
if such a condition bee admitted, whether it bee true,
or false.
            But leauing their disputes; let now euery mans conscience
iudge, how vniustly they slander vs and this holy
Doctine, as an inticement
               Ye would intice the pecple by this doctirine, to fi
                     ••
                   ne. Auth. Censes. of the car
                        •
                     les. Sect. 28. Ye draw them to a lecu
                     •
                  e, and carelesse, life. Idem Sect. 27. 
               vnto sinne, and perswasion of
securitie. For seeing the Scriptures and the Spirit of God
teach, both that Predestination which wee haue deliuered,
and the immutabilitie thereof; let them take heede,
lest in reuiling the teachers of this doctrine, they do not
blaspheme the Spirit of God himselfe. For our selues, wee
will not desist: first, in generall, to exhort all men, to cease
from doing euill, and learne to doe well, telling them with the
Apostle, Rom. 8. 13. If they liue after the flesh, they shall dye:

but if they mortifie the deeds of the flesh by the Spirit, they
shall liue: and with the same Apostle, Galathians 6. 7.
Whatsoeuer they s
                     •
                  we, that shall they reape; If they sowe
vnto the flesh, they shall reape corruption and death: but if
they sowe to the Spirit, they shall reape life euerlasting. Then
for the Elect in particular; Wee exhort them with Saint
Paul,
               1. Tim. 1. 19. 
               to fight the good fight, hauing faith and a good
conscience: with Saint Peter,
               2. P
                     •
                  t. 1. 10. to g
                  •
               ue all diligence to
make their election sure; and with Iohn Baptist,
               Mctb. 3 8. to
bring forth fruits worthy amendment of life; For if they
doe not this, if they keepe not faith and sanctitie, which
are the Mariners to guide them to the celestiall Hauen,
they will certainly make shipwracke of their saluation,
the Spirit of GOD assuring them, that bee
               Iohn 3. 18. 
               that beleeueth not is condemned already, and that
               Math. 3. 10. 
               euery
Tree which bringeth not forth good fruit, shall be 
                     •
                  ewne
downe and cast into the fire. As for the rest, wee cannot
speake to any one in particular, as one retected of God:
for neither can any knew of another, no nor of himselfe
neither, that hee is a Reprobate, seeing at the last watch,
yea, euen at the last gaspe, God may effectually call and
conuert him: and wee in charitie are both to iudge and
hope the best of all: Yet euen them also (if wee know
any to bee such) wee would not cease to stirre vp vnto all
the duties of a Christian life; assuring them, that if they
will beleeue and liue in fanctitie and holinesse, they shall
be crowned with glory: God himselfe sayingGen. 4. 7. to Cain,
whom hee knew to bee a Reprobate; If thou doest well, shalt
thou not be accepted? and Christ proclaiming,Iohn 3. 15. that whosoeuer
beleoueth, shall baue euerlasting life.
            
            Besides which, vnto them both, whether they be Elect
or reprobate, it may be further said, that as by their refraining
from sinne, and doing that which is good, in either of
both estates, they shall be sure to gaine; so by their pursuing
of sinne, and heaping vp iniquitie, they shall, in either
estate, bee sure to lose thereby. For if they bee elect, though

by reason of Gods ordinance, they bee sure to obtaine
remission of sinnes, and eternall life, and to bee in the
number of those heauenly starres; yet because euen in that
eternall life, there are many
               
                  Io
                        •
                     n 14. 2. proqualitate mentorum (i. bo
                        •
                     orum operum) diuersae sunt mansiones. Hier. l. 2. contra Iouin. & Aug. tract. 67. in Iohan. 
               and diuers mansions, and
one Starre
               1. Cor. 15. 41, 42. Q
                     ••
                  d 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  Aug. & Hier. Io
                        ••
                     s 
                        〈◊〉
                     .
                
               differeth from another in glory; the moe, and
the more hainous sinnes that they doe commit, the lesse
portion
               
                  Qui suturi sint pro meritis, (i. benis operibus) praemiorum etiam gradus, honorum atq, gloriarum, quis est idoneus cogitare? Quod tamen (gradus) futuri sint, non est ambigendun
                        ••
                     
                   August. lib. 22. de ciuit. dei, cap. 30. Denarius quidem ille est communis omnibus, quo vti
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      denario, significatur vita 
                        •
                     terna. Sed multe mansiones diuersus meritorum (i. operum) in vna vita aeterna significant dignitates. Sancti, sicu
                        •
                      Stell
                        •
                      diuersas mansiones, diuersas claritates in cocle sortientur. Nec erit aliqua inuidia impanis claritatis, quoniam regnabit in omnibus vnitas charitatis. August. tract. 67. in Ioh. & idem iterum habet, l. de virg. cap. 26. Sic erit in resurrectione mortuorum, vt iusti in claritate solis luceant, & qui in sequents grad
                        •
                      sunt, lune splendore rutilent, vt alius Lucifer sit al
                        •
                     s A
                        •
                     cturus, & qui parce seminat, parce & metet, & in coelis erit maximus & minimus. Hier. lib. 2. cont. Iouin. vbi Iouiniani err
                        •
                     
                     rem resutat, qui docuit, Nullam esse diuer sitatem, nullos gradus in praemys Sanctorum, sicut ne
                        •
                      vollos agnouit in poenis damnatorum. Hinc etiam recte a Scholasticis dicitur, Praemtum essentiale Sanctorum esseaequale, nempe visionem Dei, sed praemium accidental
                        •
                      esse inaequale, quia c
                        •
                     arits alter altero Deum videt. Mag. sent. lib. 4. dist. 49. & Aquin. in distinct. 49. q 5. art. 1. 
               and weight of that eternall glory shall bee giuen vnto
them, as there is lesse light and glory in those which they
call obscure or cloudy starres, and those of the fift or sixt
magnitude; whereas if their liues had here shined in sanctitie,
in innocencie, in faith, in purity, and in sinceritie,
then themselues also should haue shined like those prime
and fairest
               Dan. 12. 3. Vbi iustos ait fulgere vt coelum, cos verò qui & i
                     •
                  sfisunt, & altos ad institian conuertu
                     •
                  , splendere vt Stellas, etsi Hier. verba illa aliter exponit. 
               starres, or like the Sunne in his strength and
glory. In like sort, If they be reiected of God, though
by reason of their owne peruerse wils beeing hardened in
sinne, they are sure to runne into etnerall death and perdition;
yet because euen in that eternall death, there are diuersities
and degrees of punishments, for some fewer,
               Luk. 12. 47, 48. & Toler
                     •
                  
                  bilius cri
                     •
                   
                  Tyro ac Sidoni, quàm vobis, Mat. 11. 22, 24. for
others moe and more bellish stripes, the more they restraine
themselues from sinne, and the more they practise those
workes of iustice and temperance, which for the substance
               
                  Potest seruart praeceptum Dei, quoad substantiam operis etiam cum peccato. Bell 
                     •
                  5. de grat. & lib. a
                     •
                  b. cap. 9. 
               of the worke are good, and such as Heathen men and Reprobates
               
may performe, euen by this they shall gaine thus
much, that their stripes and punishments shall bee farre
more easie, then if by their wallowing in sinne, and letting
loose the reines to impietie, they had treasured vp wrath
against the day of wrath. Seeing then, whether soeuer they
be Sheepe or Goates, they are sure by impietie to lose,
and by good workes to gaine, both of them in Tanto,
though neither of both in Toto; euen in this respect, if
there were no other, it behoues them both to labour and
striue to represle sinne, and doe that which is good; that
if they be elect, their reward may bee more glorious; and
if they bee not elect, their punishment may bee lesse
grieuous.
            Lastly, in whom, I pray you, doth or can this holy
doctrine breed securitie and carelesnesse? Not in them
who know or thinke themselues to bee elect. For this very
perswasion of Gods loue, in whomsoeuer it is, doth cause
a more feruent loue, and more earnest seruing of the Lord,
who hath vouchsafed them so great and vnexpressible
mercy: euen as the Apostles, who knew that their names
were written in heauen, were most ready and desirous to
doe and suffer all things, for the loue they had vnto God,
the loue
               2. Cor. 5. 14. 
               of Christ constraining them therevnto. For as
Saint Austen saith,Deum si amare pigebit, saltem redamare non pigeat; Nulla enim maior est inuitatio ad amorem, quàm praeuenire amando: & 
                     •
                  imis durus est animus, qui amor c
                     •
                  , &c. August. de Catech. rudibus, cap. 4. 
               Hee is too churlish and 
                     •
                  nkinde, qui
amorem si nolit impendere, nolit rependere, who if hee will
not bestowe loue vpon God, will not yet requite the
loue of God freely bestowed on him. Not in them, vvho
thinke themselues Reprobates: For seeing they doe not, nor
can know themselues to bee such; why should they deiect
their mindes, and not rather hope, by repentance, faith and
and sanctitie, to obtaine fauour with God, and bee found
in the number of those, of whom the Apostle faith,
2. Tim. 2. 21. If any man purge himselfe from these, he shall
bee a vessell vnto honour? Euen as in their bodily sicknesse,
and worldly estate, they labour and toyle, neglecting no
meanes to attaine health, wealth, and welfare, because

they know no other but that God hath decreed an happy
successe, and to giue a blessing to those meanes vvhich
are commanded and ordained by himselfe: So because
they know no other, but that God hath decreed to giue
saluation and eternall glory vnto them: why should they
not labour by faith, sanctitie, and all holy meanes, to attaine
vnto life, and leaue the successe vnto him, vvho
hath said and assured them, Ezekiel 18. 31. Returne and
cast away all your transgressions, so iniquitie shall not bee
your destruction? So many wayes is that their cauill of
securitie cleerely refuted: by which, as by the chiefest engine,
which their wits could deuise, they seeke to ouerthrow
both the whole doctrine of Gods Predestination,
and that certainty or assurance of our election: of which we
now entreat.
            But they further oppose the Scriptures against vs,
and against that assurance, which we before declared; seeing
Dauid, Psal. 69. 28 desireth of God, that hee would
wipe
               
                  Iudas (of whō among others that Psalme is meant) was wiped out of the Booke of Life; and as Saint Peter saith, was found vnworthy of his election. Hee was before chosen, &c. Auth. conf. of the carelesse. Sect. 32. 
               his enemies out of the Booke of Life. Now if any may
be wiped out, whom God hath once enrolled among his
elect; then is not our election so sure and immutable as wee
haue taught.
            For answere whereunto, I say with Saint Austen,
               In Psal. 69. 
               God neuer wipes out any, whom hee writ in that Booke: for
if a wretched man was so constant, that hee would not alter
his writing, but said,Iohn 19. 22. What I haue written, I haue written;
what indignitie were it to Almighty God, to thinke
him so wauering, that hee will write and blot out againe,
which a sinfull man, Pontius Pilate, was ashamed to doe?
Those enemies then of God, of whom Dauid speaketh,
who vnder the colour of an outward profession, cloaked
their inward hatred to God and his Prophets, were written
in the Booke of God, or seemed so to be, onely by the
iudgement of men, who saw no more then their outside and
fained profession; they were neuer written there in truth,
nor according to his knowledge, who tryeth the hearts and

reines. And Dauid, to whom Gods Spirit had reuealed
their hypocrisie, and deepe dissimulation, among other
curses, prayeth that this also may befall vnto them; that
whereas themselues or other men thought them to bee written
among his chosen children, and to bee of their number, God
would in his iustice, pull off that vizor of hypocrisie, and
make it knowneQuomode inde delentur, vbi nunquam scripti sunt? Hoc dictum est, secundum spem ipsorum, qui
                     •
                   ibi se scriptes putabant, vt ipsis constet, non se esse ibi scriptes. Aug. in illum Psal.
                to all, by brauding them with some
marke of his hatred, as hee branded Cain, that they neither
are, nor euer were of that flocke of his chosen seruants.
Which the Prophet expresseth, by two seuerall phrases,
the latter whereof doth expound the former; saying, Let
them
                     •
                  , bee wiped out of the Booke of the liuing, and not bee
written among the righteous: wiped out, according to mens
iudgement, who thought they were writt therein, but in
truth declared, not to bee, nor euer to haue beene written among
his rightcous seruants. Which to bee the Prophets
meaning, is most cleere by that of Saint Iohn, Renel. 17. 8.
where speaking of all the wicked, who shall goe into euerlasting
perdition, (of which sort none may doubt but
these cursed enemies of God were) hee faith, that their
names are not written in the Booke of Life from the foundation
of the world: that is, were neuer written in that Booke.
And if they were neuer truely, but only in the
                  Quidam phrenatici hoc practextu (precationem Mosis & Pauli) fidei nostrae caput de aeternae Dei Praedestinatione labefactant. Calu. in Exod. cap. 32. ver. 31. 
               iudgement of
men written in that book, neither were they, nor could they
be in truth, but onely according to the iudgement of men
(charitable I confesse in this point, but yet erroneous) wiped
out of the same Booke.
            That seemeth of greater difficultie, which they obiect
from the prayers of Moses, and Saint Paul, who
being without all doubt written in the Booke of Life, (the
Spirit of God witnessing of the one, that hee was
               Heb. 3. 2. 
               faithfull
in all the house of God: and of the other, that he was a chosen
               Act. 9. 15. 
               vessell, for whom was layd
               2. Tim. 4. 8. 
               vp the crowne of glory,) desired
of God that rather then his name should bee blasphemed,
or his glory impayred, he would euen blot
               Exud. 32. 32. 
               them
out of that Booke of Life, and make them a curse
               Rom. 9. 3. 
               for euer

to bee separated from Christ. Which thing, if Gods election
were immutable, had beene simply impossible, and
such as those holy men would neuer, as it seemes, haue
requested, and so earnestly prayed for at the hands
of God.
            I can no way here assent to the iudgement of Saint Ierome,
               Perict 
                     •
                  upit, non in perpeluii, sed in praesentiarum, & perire in carne. Hier. Epist. ad Algas. quaest. 9. who expounds these prayers to bee meant of a
temporall and bodily death onely, but not of the eternall. For
such a death could not haue made them accursed, or an
Anathema; nor haue separated them from Christ; nay, by
it they should haue attained blessednesse, and haue beene
eternally vnited vnto Christ. By which, and some other
reasons, Chrysosteme
               Chrys. hom. 16. in Rom. doth not onely refute, but euen deride
that opinion.
            Much lesse may wee consent to some other learned
men, who rightly vnderstanding in these prayers a totall
and eternall separation from God, doe thinke
                  Moses non satis reputal quid Deo conueniat, & longius progressus Paulus, &c. Sic confusum fuit votum, vt repugnantiam in ardoris venementia non videvint, ac si extra sè essent. Calu. com. in c. 32. in Exod. v. 31. & tanta vehementia abreptus fuit, ot lvquatur quasi ecstaticus, ibid. affectus praecipitanter 
                     •
                  ernontur, hve votum confuso animo erupit. Calu. in cap. 9 ad Rom.
                them to
haue beene somewhat rash, ouer-heady, and lesse considerate
positious, proceeding indeede from a minde full of zeale,
but so astonished, amazed, and carrted away with the aboundance
of loue vnto God, and to his people, that they considered
not, neither that it was vnfit for themselues to haue,
or for God to yeeld to these requests, nor yet how impossible
it was which they now desired. Such confusion and inconsiderate
zeale, wee may not admit in these holy men,
seeing Saint Paul did not speake, but write this, with most
serious and aduised premeditation, yea, by the inspiration
and guiding of Gods holy Spirit, protesting also and calling
God to witnesse of his hearts desire in this matter: and
Moses
               Perspicimus & Mosts & Pauli eundem fuisse affectum. Hier. loc. cio.
                in his prayer was moued for the same cause, and
directed by the same Spirit, to request the same thing of
God: yea, and the prayers of them both are such, if they
bee rightly considered, as euery true Christian and child of
God may, in the zeale of their hearts, present before the
Throne of God.
            For whereas they suppose it in no wise allowable, to

pray for that which either in it selfe, or in regard of Gods
Decree and Praescience is impossible, and cannot bee granted,
our Sauiours owne prayerMath. 26. 39. doth vndeniably teach
the contrary, when hee conditionally desired of God, that
if it were possible that cup of death might passc from, him:
And yet hee knew it, to bee no lesse impossible for him
to escape that Cup, then it was impossible that Moses, or
Saint Paul, or any elect vessell of God should eternally perish.
Now, that Moses and Paul did in their prayers imply
the like condition, is not to bee doubted: For seeing
their Petitions proceeded from a true faith, and aymed at,
nothing else but Gods glory, they could not chuse but be
accepted of God, and granted by him, in like sort as our
Sauiours was: Christ himselfe assuring vs, that whatsoeuer
               Iohn 16. 23. 
               wee aske in his name, and with
               Mar. 11. 24. 
               a belecuing heart, shall be
granted vnto vs: now they could no way bee granted, if
simply and without condition they had beene asked of God;
for then they had beene actually wiped out of Gods
Booke, and separated from Christ, who by his eternall
and immutable Decree were elected and ordained to bee
partakers with him in glory. Their prayers then were conditionall,
and in effect thus much, that seeing the glory and
honour of God seemed much to bee encreased by preseruing
his people of Israel, whom hee threatened to destroy
and cast away, these men inflamed with the desire of Gods
glory, request,Haec dicit, Si possibile esset vt per meam perditionem glorsficaretur Christus, & yudaei salui fierent, ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hoc detractare: siquide optarim, inqua
                     •
                  t, si possibile esset, si liceret. si mihi haec optio daretur. Oecum. in illum locwn: Optabam si fieri posset, esse Anat
                     •
                  ema. Aq. in c. 9. ad Rom.
                that if it were possible, and if it might stand
with Gods holy will, b
                     •
                  ee would rather destroy them, then so
great a Nation, and rather blot them out of his Booke, and make
them an Anathema, for euer to be separated frem God, then by
casting away those whom he had chosen for his inheritance and
peculiar people, suffer any part of his glory and honour to bee
impayred.
            
            Great loue I confesse vnto God, but such, as if any
thinke them too prodigall of their soules, hee therein bewrayeth
himselfe to bee of the minde and affection of Iudas:
who, when the box of Spikenard was powred on

Christs feete, mouedIohn 12. 4. Math, 26. 8. the Disciples to grudge and say,
What needed all this waste? Such men are too rife in this
last and worst age of the world, who if any thing bee bestowed
on Christ, or vpon his Church for the furtherance
of his glory, straightway they murmure and repine,
and cry out with Iudas, What needeth all this waste? But
when they themselues haue spent many boxes; nay, barrels
and Butts of Spikenard, to wallow in the lusts and
pleasures of their sinnes, yea, when they haue spent not
onely their Lands and goods, but their bodies and soules

                  •
               lso in the seruice of the Diuell; yet in all this, there is no
was
                  •
               e at all. Now if such vile and wretched miscreants
thinke nothing too much, nor too deare, for the honour
and seruice of Satan; why should Moses, Saint Paul, or
any of Gods children thinke any thing, though it be their
very bodies and soules, too deare or precious to bee bestowed
on God, or for his honour? I am verily perswaded,
that if the true Child of God, after serious meditation
of these two examples, should come vnto this strait,
that on the one side were proposed his owne saluation, with
the losse of Gods glory, on the other the glory of GOD
with his owne destruction, when hee should remember
that hee were made of God, and made onely for the
honour of God, that he, and euery one are in duty bound,
as Saint Austen
               An pliùs quis
                  
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   debct Deum cil gere qu
                     •
                  m suiplum. Aug. 1. r. de doct. Chr. c. 27. & incempvabiliter plus charitatis Dco debcmus, quàm nobis: nam Deum propter se, nos vero, & proximos prop
                     •
                  er Deum dil
                     •
                  gcre debemus. Aug. 1. 8. de Trin. cap. 8. truely teacheth, to loue God more then
themselues; and that his glory, as another saith, is more to be
regarded
               Vna Dei gloria praesuri merctur cantums mund
                     •
                  s. Calu. in Exod. 23. 
               then an hundreth worlds, and therefore certainly
more then one sally worme of the world, of which the
ProphetIsa. 40. 17. saith, All Nations before him are as nothing,
and they are counted to him or in comparison of 
                     〈◊〉
                   lesse
then Nothing: When hee should, I say, consider all these,
howsoeuer flesh and bloud would wrastle and resistawhile,
yet in the end hee would with Moses and Saint Paul,
much preserre the glory of his God, before the good
and saluation of his owne soule. To conclude this point▪
that which C. Blassius answered,Cic. lib. de Amicit. but very ill, concerning

his loue towards his friend Gracchus, that most fitly beseemeth
our loue towards God: When hee once said, that
hee so much esteemed his friend Graochus, that whatsoeuer
Gracchus would command him, hee would performe and
dee it. What, quoth Lelius, and would you euen burne the
Capitoll for his sake? Truely, quoth Blassius, Gracchus would
neuer will or wish me to doe that, but if hee should, I would
not refuse to doe it. Such should be our loue to God, and
zeale to his glory, that for his 
                  •
               ake, wee should suffer and
vndergoe anything whatsoeuer hee would haue vs. What,
will you say, should wee, being vessels of honour, suffer
our selues to bee euen a Curse, an Anathema, and to bee
separated for euer from God? I may heere assuredly answere
vnto you, that neither can this possibly be effected,
nor can God euer wish that hurt or 
                  〈◊〉
                vnto vs; but
if hee should require it, and if it were possible, thereby to
gaine him honour and glory, wee should not refuse, no
not to become an Anathema from GOD, as you see
Moses and Saint P
                     •
                  ul are so farre from refusing it, that in
the burning zeale of their hearts, they desire it of Almightie
God. And thus much be spoken of the former certainty
of our election, which is the firmenesse and certainty thereof
in it selfe.
            When first this Scripture did offer it selfe vnto my
minde, it was my speciall purpose and desire to haue entreated
of that which hath not yet beene once touched;
namely, of that other assurance of election which is in respect
of our selues, wherein is contained the greatest treasures
of our spirituall comfort. But God, you see, hath so
disposed of my labours, that I haue onely at this time, passed,
as it were, ouer the Red Sea, and thorow the wilderdernesse,
and but entered or taken possession in the common
and generall right of Gods children, of that good land, fighting
by the way with diuers sonnes of Anak; all which, by
the power and strength of our God wee haue put to flight
this day. When God shall grant mee opportunitie, I shall

be desirous, according as God shall enable mee, to performe
also that best and most blessed act of Ioshua, which
is, to diuide this good Land among Gods Children, and by
assuring euery one of them in particular of their owne election,
set each of them, as it were, in the blessed and peaceable
possession of his owne portion in this heauenly inheritance:
meane time and euer, I commend vs all to the grace, fauour,
and mercy of our God; to whom bee ascribed
by all, and in all places, all honour, praise, and
thanksgiuing, both now and for
euermore. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   