
      
         
            
            
            LONDONS LAMENTATION for her Sinnes: AND Complaint to the LORD Her GOD.
            Out of which may bee pickt a Prayer for Priuate Families, for the time of this fearefull INFECTION.
            And may ſerue for a Helpe to Holineſſe and Humiliation for ſuch as keepe the Faſt in Priuate: Together with a Souereigne Receipt againſt the PLAGVE.
            By W. C. Paſtor at White chappell.
            
            
               IER. 47. 6, 7.
               O thou Sword of the Lord, how long will it bee ere thou be quiet? Put vp thy ſelfe vnto thy ſcabberd, reſt and be ſtill. How can it be quiet, ſeeing the Lord hath giuen it a charge? &c.
            
            
               LONDON, Printed for G. Fayerbeard at the North ſide of the Royall Exchange. 1625.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT HONOVRABLE, THE Lord Maior of London, the Right Worſhipfull the Sheriffes and Aldermen, and the reſt of the Godly Citizens and Offiers, who haue eyther ſtayed in their Places and Duties during this Viſitation: or ſent their large and comfortable Beneuolence for the Poore. The Bleſſings of this and a better Life.
            
            
               RIGHT HONORABLE:
            
            
               IT was the Ordinance and Appointment of GODS owne Wiſdome in the Law, that all his Sacrifices and burnt Offrings ſhould be ſeaſoned with Salt, the Fire importing Zeale, by which euery Sacrifice

muſt be offered, and the Salt ſignifying Diſcretion with which it muſt be ſeaſoned: If it wanted eyther of theſe; it could not bee accepted. Now, as this literall Fire and Salt belonged to the Iewes, ſo the Spirituall is both commended and commanded to vs, that liue vnder the ſweet yoke of the Goſpell euen to the Worlds end: Namely, that all our Sacrifices & Seruice, if we mean to haue them acceptable to God, or auaileable to our ſelues, muſt not onely bee offered with the Fire of holy Zeale; but tempered with holy Wiſdome, and ſeaſoned with the Salt of due Diſcretion; therefore ſayth▪ Chriſt euen in his Goſpell,
                  Mark. 9. 49 
               Euery one ſhall bee ſalted with Fire, and euery Sacrifice ſhall bee ſeaſoned with Salt: Whereunto Saint Paul alluding exhorts
                  Rom. 12. 2. all Chriſtians to ſee that Their Seruice and Sacrifice, bee not only holy and liuely, but alſo reaſonable.
            
            Hence it is Right Honourable, and Worſhipfull, that as our gracious King, out of his Humilitie and holy Zeale, commanded publike Faſting & Prayer, for the diuerting of this publike Iudgement:

So now, out of holy and deepe diſcretion hath ſuſpended for a time thoſe publike meetings within the Citie: Out of no diſlike of Faſting and Prayer, nor any wearineſſe of thoſe holy Exerciſes, as ſome Malignant Spirits malitiouſly traduce Him. But out of conſcience to his God & care of his Subiects liues: wiſely conſidering (& in our knowledge moſt truely) that ſeeing the ſick & ſore (do what we Miniſters could to the contrary) mingled themſelues confuſedly, with the ſound (by which meanes its more then manifeſt, many thouſands haue periſhed in this Citie and Suburbs.) It therefore lay vpon him as Supreme Magiſtrate and Gods Lieutenant to looke to the liues as well as to the Soules of all his people, and to take order, that the Faſts ordained for the bettering of the Soule, ſhould not ſo be vſed, as to tend to the deſtruction of the body. Leauing vs therefore in this diſtreſſed Citie, the Lords Day or Sunday for our ſoules, which being of Diuine Inſtitution, can admit no Diſpenſation by humane power, and ſtill commending

and commanding vs that Day to faſt & pray in priuate, and all the Kingdome elſe to doe it in publike for vs: And for the ſauing of our liues, and to auoyd the tempting and prouoking of God. Hath wiſely forbidden all other publike meetings of dangerous concourſe in places Infected, till order can be taken (which is no eaſie thing to doe) to keepe the ſound and ſicke aſunder.
            Now as all thoſe that be well are notwithſtanding to repaire to the Church, to be partakers of the publike Prayers & the holy ſeruice appointed for that day, ſo, for a helpe, of Humiliation and holy Deuotion to them that ſtay at home, whereof alſo many thouſand Families eſpecially in our Suburbs are not able to buy the Booke, I haue therefore beene perſwaded to make publike this Meditation, Confeſſion, and Prayer, which in theſe dayes of publike Calamitie, I walking hourely through the valley of the ſhadow of Death, (burying forty, fifty, ſometime ſixty a day, and in the Totall, more then two thouſand alreadie) I poured out in the preſence of my

God: Firſt, in priuate for my ſelfe, afterwards for the vſe of thoſe many thouſand ſicke ſoules that are or haue beene in my great poore Pariſh: And laſtly, that hereby I might offer ſome Sacrifice and ſpeciall piece of Seruice in way of holy thankfulneſſe to the Lord our God, who hath hitherto pleaſed to preſerue me, and my Brethren the Paſtors of this Citie by his owne hand and power, beyond all humane helpe and hope; walking continually, euen in the midſt of the fiery flames alwayes in danger, and neuer in more perill then in the Pulpit: wherein the Lord hath beene ſo marueilous, & ſo magnified, his loue and power vpon vs, as if he ſhould now take vs away, yet hath hee ſo deliuered vs, in diſcharging our duties, and by his holy Angels kept vs, thus being in our way, till hee hath literally made good that promiſe in the Pſalme, yea, and much more: for alas wee haue not only ſeene a thouſand fall at one ſide of vs, and ten thouſand at another, but (alas, alas, that our ſinnes ſhould ſo prouoke our God) euen more then ten thouſand on

the one, and more then twenty thouſand on the other. Which mighty work of God, if wee ſhould ſit ſtill and ſwallow and ſuperficially paſſe ouer, and not commend it, to our Brethren in the Countrey, whoſe turnes muſt follow God knowes how ſoone, as ſure as God hath begunne with vs; and if we did not preſerue the memory of it, and repreſent it to Poſterity, for their inſtruction, and that the Generations yet vnborne may prayſe the Lord; all holy men would accuſe vs, Gods Church would cenſure vs, our own Conſciences would condemne vs, and God himſelfe take vengeance of vs, as moſt vnthankfull Caitiffes, euen Monſters of Mankind, & vnworthy to breath vpon the Earth.
            Being therefore in ſome ſort touched with the ſenſe of this hand of our God, both of his hand of Iuſtice and of Mercy, and being euerymoment put in mind of our mortality, eyther by the ſound in our eares, or ſights in our eyes; can we but be moued (vnleſſe we were ſenſeleſſe Stocks & Stoicks) to take into our ſerious and continuall Conſideration, the now

moſt lamentable Caſe, of this late ſo floriſhing a Citie, and of this whole Kingdome into which this wild-fire of Gods wrath begins ſo faſt to flie, and can wee but lay to heart ſo great a ſorrow? Or dare wee for our ſoules but deale truly with our God, in ſeeking ſincerely and carefully ſearching out the true cauſe in our ſelues, in our people, and in the whole Kingdome that ſhould thus prouoke the Lord againſt vs? Certainly ſome heauy judgement muſt fall vpon vs if we doe not, and will follow them whoeuer they bee that double and diſſemble with their God in this caſe.
            And if any that be abroad and yet vnviſited, thinke I deale too farre and too freely in this Confeſſion. I aske no more but to forbeare his judgment, til they be vnder the hand of God, as we haue bin now three moneths and more, and then they will iudge I am too ſhort: The while God in mercy pardon that, and wherin I may be thought to go too far, I ſhall eaſily anſwere it to God or Gods Anointed: & ſhal ſigh & ſob in ſecret to conſider the wrath & woes that wait for

thoſe wicked ones, who as they deeply haue had their hand in pulling downe this Plague, ſo careleſſely ſeeke to paſſe it ouer, and looke not after the God that hath ſmitten them, and the whole Land for their ſakes, and will if they turne not betimes, ſmite them downe to Hell: What ſtony hearted Stoicke can he be who ſees more then forty thouſand Chriſtians, many as good, and ſome better then Himſelfe laid in the duſt, in little more then twice forty dayes, and is not humbled vnder the Hand that did it, and ſenſible of the Sin that did procure it? Can hee bee a good Seruant of God or Subiect to his Souereigne, that beſides ten thouſand aged, weake, and poore, ſhall ſee an Army of ten thouſand more, braue, luſtie, and ſeruiceable young men, and tenne thouſand more comely and mariageble young women, and ten thouſand more young Infants, whoſe proofe and hope had beene ſtill before them, already taken out of one Corner of this Kingdome, and ſits not downe in duſt and aſhes mourning to that God that tooke them, for that King

that loſt them, with that Land that wants them. For that Sinne that pluckt them from vs? I dare pronounce vpon him from God whoeuer hee bee that can or dare thus ſleightly and ſliely paſſe by the workes of God, and laughes in his ſleeue at ſuch a judgement as this, is markt vp by God for ſome greater vengeance as ſure as the fourteenth of Ezekiel is Gods true Word. For if hee that mournes for ſinne be the man that is Markt by God for bleſſing and deliuerance, whats hee that makes a ſport of ſinne; and layes from his heart the Iudgements thereby procured, but one thats ſealed vp for confuſion and deſtruction: O therefore that my heart were a Fountaine, and my eyes Riuers of teares, that I might worthily bewaile the ſinnes of our Nation together with mine owne, and weepe for the ſlaine of the Daughter of my people: So cried the holy Prophet of the abundance of his holy Zeale; and ſo I am ſure in their ſeuerall meaſures doe all the Miniſters and men of God amongſt vs, that haue but taſted of the ſame ſpirit, mourning

for the deſolations of this Citie; and more for the Contagion that cauſeth it, and moſt of all, for the ſinnes that procured them both: And who would not care to ſacrifice themſelues what way the Lord ſhould pleaſe, ſo the wrath of God might bee pacified towardes this Church and Nation, and thoſe plagues remooued which are the cauſe of this Plague: And till theſe be remooued, we ſhall find the Prophets tell vs true, that eyther this Plague ſhall ſtil ſtay & creep like a Canker ouer our whole body, or elſe only make make way to ſome more fearefull that ſhall follow after it.
            That this may be preuented, he cannot be a Chriſtian that will not both cry to God, and confeſſe to him the publike, and priuate, and perſonall ſinnes that be the cauſe thereof. And as all that are enabled and taught by the holy Spirit of God; to poure out their ſoules in humble Prayer, and hearty Confeſſion, will in holy obedience to the holy ProphetsHoſ. 14. 2. counſell; Take vnto themſelues words, and returne vnto the Lord: So for thoſe that cannot open their mouthes as they deſire,

and yet haue hearts that groane after God, and ſoules that ſeeke the Lord. For their aſſiſtance only haue I beene perſwaded to publiſh this, which now I leaue to them, and them and it together, with our ſelues to the mercifull acceptation and gracious bleſſing of our Good God: who grant vs all in theſe dayes of danger (when ſomtimes almoſt a thouſand a day are pickt vp, and pluckt away before our faces) So to liue and ſo to dye, as when we dye we may be ſure to liue for euer. And ſo to part with one another here, as we may be ſure to meet in Heauen: And here ſo to confeſſe our ſinnes, as at the laſt Day Chriſt may confeſſe vs to be his owne. And ſo to pray here as we may prayſe God eternally in Heauen.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            LONDONS LAMENTABLE COMPLAINT to her GOD. Containing, A Prayer for the time of Infection: afore confeſsion of SINNE. A Meditation vpon the cauſes and remedie of this Plague: A Thankeſgiuing for Gods mercie euen in this Croſſe.
            
            
               Moſt high and holy Iehouah thou being of beings, who giues life and being to euery Creature, giue leaue vnto us, the moſt unworthy oues of all thy Children, to come before thee, and preſent our petitions at the

Throne of Grace; Wee durſt not ruſh ſo rudely into thy holy preſence, mightie Lord God, nor beg ſo boldly ſo great a ſauour, were it not that thou haſt gratiouſly vouthſafed, not onely to call and inuite vs, but euen
                  Matth. 11. Pſal. 50. command vs to come vnto thee, and call vpon thee in the day of our affliction, and haſt moreouer mercifullypromiſed, that thou wilt heare vs and deliuer vs, that we may glorifie thy great Name: In this confidence we take comfort, to come to thee O Lord, in this day of our trouble, and common calamitie of our Church and Kingdome. And firſt we doe all, in the name one of another, and wée for our parts, euery one of vs for himſelfe, humbly and freely couſeſſe, wee haue all had our hands in this blood, and each one borne apart, in pulling down theſe heauie plagues vpon this City and our Nation: O Lord wée doe none of vs excuſe our ſelues, but wee doe euery one of vs accuſe, and arraigue our ſelues at the barre of thy Iuſtice, and we doe all pronounce our ſelues guiltie in thy ſight: Nor are we onely tainted with Originall ſin in our natures, but Lord our liues are ſtayned, with all actuall pollutions, in our thoughts, words, and déeds, by ſins of Comiſſion and Omiſſion, by ſins not onely of Ignorance, but euen of negligence careleſneſſe and preſumption: Miſerable ſinners that wée are, wée haue not only committed ſoule and fearefull things, abhominable

to thy pure and holy Maieſtie, diſhonorable to thy holy Religion, offenſiue to thy holy Law, and therefore iuſt prouocations of thy Wrath: but alas, we haue ſometime totally omitted, and at the beſt alwaies failed in all the good and holy duties required at our hands: Wée haue not béene humbled for thy iudgements, nor thankfull for thy mercies, as wee ought to haue beene, therefore thy mercies being abuſed, haue heretofore made way for thy Iudgements, but wee wicked wretches haue beene bettred by neither of both. Thou haſt written
                  Hoſ. 8. 12. to vs the great things of thy Law, but wée haue not regarded them, Thou haſt reuealed to vs thy bleſſed Goſpell, but wée haue not belieued it; Thou haſt honoured vs with thy loue, but wee haue not walked worthie of it: Thou haſt afforded vs bleſſed meanes and many opportunities to doe good, and by well doing to come nearer vnto thee, but we haue, either ſo neglected them, or abuſed them, as thereby wee haue done much euill inſtead of good: Thou haſt alſo giuen vs time to turns & repent, but we haue turned it the wrong way, & miſpent it in vanities: Thou haſt ſhe wed vs the way, and offered vs the meanes to know and feare thée, but wee haue wilfully wandred in our owne wayes, and haue not cared to come neere thée, and haue put thy feare farre from vs, Such ſinfull Caittfs are wee O Lord, as

the meanes of thy honour, wee haue turned to thy diſhonour, our owne helpes into hinderances, our Comforts into Croſſes, and our Croſſes into Curſes, thy Mercies into Iudgements, and thy Uiſitations into vengeance: And the gratious bleſſings that were giuen vs, as helpes to bring vs neerer thee; Wée haue peruerted, to drive vs further from thée: Thy heauenly word, and holy Sacraments, which thou haſt gratiouſly giuen vs, (more then to many other Nations) to be the meanes of our Conuerſion, and Saluation, wee haue prophaned and peruerted, to our hardning in ſinne, and agrauating our condemnation.
            Theſe O Lord are the common and generall ſins of our times, of Us, our Citie, and our Nation, which as an vniuerſall deluge running ouer our Land, wée alſo haue béene carried away by the violence of theſe ſinfull ſtreames: beſides the perſonall ſins preuailing in this age, as baine ſwearing, inordinate drinkings, ſuper fluous feaſtings profuſeneſſe in gaming, vanitie and pride in apparell, oppreſſions and fraudes in bargaining, prophaning thy Sabbaths, neglect of thy poore members, contempt of thy Word, and holy Miniſters, formalitie in Religion, dulneſſe in deuotion, coldneſſe in charitie; In all which O Lord and euery one of them, we are not able to excuſe, much leſſe exempt our ſelues, beſides alſo the publicke

ſinnes of our State, in letting our Lawes bee laid a ſleepe againſt Idolatrie & Superſtition, whereby much Popiſh impietie hath not only beene practiſed in priuate, but ſo publickly profeſſed, that euen the Remiſh Dagon did ſtand in defiance with thy holy Arke, whereby thy Religion hath béene villified, thy Ordinances deſpiſed, thy great Name diſhonoured, and thy Sauctuarie troden vnder foot: Nor was this the ſinne alone of ſome ſet ouer vs, who by their places, ought rather to haue defended thy truth and maintained the Integritie thereof with their liues and blood, & yet either wickedly, or weakly haue giuen way to theſe enormities, whereby Poperte and Idolatrie, were in a ſort inuited and prepared for, before they came; But in this ſinne, like the ſinne1. Kings 14. 16. of Ieroboam, all our Iſrael hath ſinned againſt the Lord of Hoaſts, for alas wee haue all either had our hands, or held our tongues, and not béen zealous in the cauſe of thée our God And when for this our prophaneneſſe and preſumptions againſt thée, Thou haſt declared thy ſelfe angry againſt vs, both at home, and abroad, wée haue béene ſo far from fearing thée, and ſéeking thy face, in Prayer, & Faſting, and holy humiliation in true contrition, and hearty repentance: As contrariwiſe when other Nations were ſighing, and ſorrowing for our ſin and ſecuritie, wée were lul'd aſleepe, and cryed peace, peace,

when there was none: And when other Churches were faſting and praying, we alas were masking, feaſting and playing: And when as thy Goſpell had glutted vs, ſo as holy Lectures, begun to bee now held, like meate out of ſeaſon, and preaching in ſome places to bee put downe, pet euen then O Lord, were the Theaters magnified, and enlarged, where Satan is ſerued and ſinne ſecretly inſtilled, if not openly profeſſed. Thus haſt thou O mightie God béene little better then forgotten among vs theſe many yeares: And thus hath thy glorious Name béene diſhonoured, thy precious Religion billified, thy gratious Ordinances deſpiſed, thy fearefull Iudgements neglected, thy bounteous Mercies abuſed, thy holy Councels contemned, thy fatherly warnings not regarded, and thy ſacred Word in thew, and ceremonie aduanced, but indéed and truth troden vnder foot. It is true O Lord, wee thought and ſpake otherwiſe of our ſelues while our plenty pleaſed vs, our proſperitie bewitcht vs, and worldly carnalities blinded vs: Then wée ſéemed to our ſelues to be a glorious Nation, a beautifull Church and outwardly appeared to be a people that didEſ
                     •
                  y. Iob. righteouſneſſe, and forſooke not the Ordinances of their God; But now that affliction hath made vs wiſer, and thy corrections haue opened our eyes, now we ſee what we are, and are aſhamed of our ſelues: Now

we caſt the duſt of contempt vpon our owne heads, we goe out of our ſelues, and we cry to thée in the hearing of thy holy Angels, & all thy holy Churches vpon earth, wee are vncleane, we are vncleane; and like vncleaneLe
                     •
                  
                and loathſome Leapers deſerue to bee cut off from the bleſſed bodie of thy Church, May euen to bée rooted out of the Land of the Liuing, as being the Nation, next vnto the Iewes, who hauing béene honoured, and bleſſed by thée, aboue all the World, haue moſt diſhonoured thée of all other, playing with thy Mercies, dallying with thy Iudgements, and prophaning all thy holy things, not conſidering wee are no better then the flye playing with the candle, wée in our ſins being flaxe and ſtubble, and thou our God in thy furie a conſuming fire. Therefore itHeb. is O Lord, that now thy mercies are gone aſide, and giuen place vnto thy Iuſtice, and thy Iuſtice prouoked hath kindled thy wrath and the fire of thy wrath being now broke out in the moſt fearefull Peſtilence this Nation euer ſaw: Now our beautie is turned into Aſhes, our Melodie into Mourning, our Songs into howlings, our glorie into confuſſion of face, our triumphs into teares, aud our flouriſhing Citie into a Wilderneſſe, there being now at our doores nothing but death, deſtruction, and deſolation, nothing but miſerie and mourning, crying and confuſion in our ſtreets; This is our preſent eſtate

O Lord, and it is thy doing, and herein only are we happy that wee ſée thy hand, and know, and belieue it to bée thy doing: And wée all confeſſe O Lord, righteous art
                  Pſal. 119. thou in all thy wayes, and moſt iuſt are all thy iudgements: For ſéeing we all offended thee, therefore now thou makeſt vs one offend another; And becauſe we feared not thée, thou haſt now iuſtly made vs afraid one of another. And becauſe wee wickedly and careleſly miſpent our time, now thou haſt made vs wearie of our time, and brought to paſſe that which thou didſt threaten, that in the morning we wiſh it were euening, and in
                  Deu. 18. 67. the euening that the morning would appeare and as though we were either wearie of our time, or afraid of the ayre, wee breath in we vainly wiſh, the long deſired Sommer, would now flye faſt away, and turne vs ouer, to the cold and carefull Winter: And becauſe wee poyſoned all things by our ſins now thou iuſtly makeſt vs feare poyſon, in our very meate, drinke, and apparell: Nay but for thy ſpeciall mercy, we are not ſafe in our Pues, & Pulpits in our Church: And becauſe we delighted not to come to thy houſe, now thou makeſt vs glad to flye from our owne houſes. And becauſe we cared not to come to thy houſe for the food of our ſoules, thou haſt iuſtly brought it to this, that we knowe not whither to goe, nor to what houſe ſafely to ſend for the food of our bodies: & becauſe we haue wickedly ſet our hearts, vpon the miſerable

Mammon of this World, thou haſt now in Iuſtice made a great number at their wits and, not knowing what to doe with it, where to hide it, with whom to leaue it, nor whom to truſt with it, neither can they carrie it with them, nor dare they tarrie with it themſelues, and becauſe they would lend nothing in Charitie, they haue now none left, to lend vnto at all: And now they that loue it beſt, (by thy wonderfull Iudgement) are affraid to touch it, leaſt that which formerly poyſoned their ſoules, ſhould now infect their bodies; O Lord how wonderfull are thy workes, and how iuſt are all thy Iudgements.
            And now, O Lord, that wée ſée our caſe, and are ſenſible of thy hand that is vpon vs, what ſhall wée ſay, what ſhall wée thinke might bée the cauſe of this ſo fearefull a Plague? and that ſo mercifull and pitifull a Father, is now become ſo ſeuere and angry a Iudge? Shall we be ſo Fooliſh as to thinke it comes becauſe our King is not Crowned, as though former experience hath not proclaimed the contrary? Or ſo Prophane as to aſcribe it to the Summer, and Seaſon of the yéere, as though thou wert not God as1. Ki. 20. 18 well of the Winter as the Summer? Or ſo Proud as to thinke that becauſe we haue hitherto held vp thy Religion, better then ſome other Nations, and haue in ſome meaſure maintayned the Preaching of thy Word, and haue béene a Sanctuary and

Refuge, For ſome diſtreſſed Chriſtians of other Countries, wée may therefore with the Hypocritical Iewes truſt vnto our externall Prefeſſion, and cry, The Temple of theIer. Lord, The Temple of the Lord, as though thou hadſt néed of any Nation to kéep vp the credit of thy cauſe? Or ſo Preſumptuous, as to thinke that becauſe thou haſt taken vs to be thy Church, and ſome of thy Children are amongſt vs, thou canſt not therefore be angry with vs? Or becauſe we haue done ſome good, wée may be therefore the bolder in Cuill? Or becauſe there bee ſome holy Lots amongſt vs, therefore our Sodome cannot be conſumed? O, Lord, all theſe be the broken ſtaues of Egypt, theſe cannot comfort vs in this our Calamity. Theſe will not vphold vs in this day of our diſtreſſe, and this houre of temptation, that thou haſt brought vpon vs: No, Lord, all theſe and all other like to theſe, are eyther lyes or vanities: And thy holy Prophet hath told vs, and wée
                  Ionas 2. beléeue it, that thoſe who truſt to lying vanities forſake their owne mercies. Therefore, O Lord, wee renounce; for thoſe our Idle and Idoll conceits haue ſpoken vanitie, our Deuiners haue ſéene a lye, and haue told falſe Dreames, O, Lord, they comfort vs in vaine: For contrariwiſe thy Word hath taught vs, thy Spirit informes vs, and now our owne Conſciences tell vs, that our own wayes and doings haue procured this vpon

vs, and none but our ſelues, and nothing but our ſins haue pulled down this Plague, and that we haue forſaken thée the Lord our God, who didſt lead vs the right way, but with thy people Iſrael, we haue committed two euils, we haue forſaken thée, the Fountains of Liuing Waters, and haue hewes our ſelues broken Ciſternes that can hold no water. Thus haue wee requited thee the Lord our God, being a fooliſh people and vnkind, therefore now our owne wickedneſſe both correct vs, and our back-ſlidings doe reprooue vs, and haue made vs know, and ſée, and féele; how euill and bitter a thing it is that wée haue forſaken thée the Lord our God, and that thy feare was not in vs.
            And now, O Lord, that wée ſée our caſe, and ſée alſo the cauſe of it, now what ſhall we doe for remedie, where ſhall we ſéeke reliefe, whither ſhall wee goe, to whom ſhall we flie, but euen from thée vnto thée, euen from thy deſerued anger, to thy vndeſerued mercy? For deſtruction is from our ſelues, but Saluation is of thée, O Lord, and thou art hee that canſt both wound and heale, both kill and make aliue: None but thou couldſt haue laid this vpon vs, none but thou canſt remooue it from vs: To thée therefore doe wee lift vp our eyes, O thou that dwelleſt in the Heauens, and do beſéech thée helpe vs in this diſtreſſe, for vaine is the

helpe of Man, and though our ſinnes plead againſt vs, and make thée for a time kéepe backe thy comfort from vs, pet our eyes
                  Pſal. 123. 2. ſhall waite vpon the Lord our God vntill hee haue mercie vpon vs: For whateuer wée
                  Mal. 3. 6. be, thou art the Lord that changeſt not, for elſe thy Children ſhould bee all conſumed: We therefore take comfort, and ſay one to
                  Hoſ. 6. 1, 2. another. Come let vs returne vnto the Lord, for he hath torne vs, he will heale vs: He hath ſmitten, and hee will bind vs vp, after two dayes he will reuiue vs, in the third day he will ravſe vs vp, and we ſhall liue in
                  Pſal. 22. 4. his ſight. For art not thou he in whom our Fathers truſted and were deliuered? Art not thou the God that brought thy people through the raging Sea, and through the barren Wilderneſſe into the Land of Peace and Plentie? Art not thou he that ſaued thy Seruants in the fiery Ouen, in the Lions den, & in the Whales belly? And is there not
                  Pſal. 130. 4 mercy with thee, elſe there ſhould not be left a man on the earth to feare thee? And is not
                  Pſal. 100. 4 that mercy of thine euerlaſting, & endures to al Generations? And though we be caſt into the laſt ends of the World, and may fears that the Store-houſe of thy mercies is exhauſt and ſpent, yet haſt not thou taught vs
                  Pſal. 136. twenty times in one Pſalme, that thy mercy endures for euer? And in that mercy, haſt thou not made a couenant of Peace, Parson, and Reconciliation with the Sonnes of

men? And haſt thou not ſealed that Couenant, and made it firme in the bloud of thy bleſſed Sonne? And haſt thou not proclaymed thy ſelfe to be the God that kéepes Couenant and Mercy to thouſand Generations? Séeing then thou haſt vouchſafed to take vs and make vs thy people, and to receiue vs into thy holy Couenant, and haſt pleaſed to place thy holy Tabernacle among vs, and honoured vs with thy holy Word and Sacraments, and haſt among vs hundreds and thouſands whom thou haſt ſeparated from the ſinfull maſſe of Mankind, and ſanctified, and ſealed for thy ſelfe, ſo as they runne not riot with the wicked World, but waite on thee in the holy wayes of thine Ordinances, Iudgements, and Mercies, and lay to heart thy words and warnings, and mourne in Sion for the affliction of Ioſeph, and for their owne, and the ſinnes of others, and for the iniquities of the Time: Therefore our Faith bids vs beléeue, and the truth and certainty of thy Couenants cauſeth vs to hope, that thou wilt chaſtiſe vs to our correction, but not plague vs to deſtruction: And in this confidence wee come vnto thée, thou Father of Mercies, and are bold to beſéech thée to call to mind thy Couenant, whereby thou haſt bound thy ſelfe, to be our God, and to take vs to bee thy People, and neuer to forſake vs (although by our ſinnes we haue forſaken thée) as long as

by Faith we cleaue vnto thée, and in Repentance and Humilitie doe ſeeke thy face: And in the vertue and merit of that bleſſed bloud of thy holy Sonne, which hee hath ſhed for vs, and all Beléeuers, we take boldneſſe to our ſelues, to challenge at thy hands the performance of thoſe ſwéet promiſes, thou haſt made vnto vs, and ſealed in his bloud ſhedding.
            And firſt we begge at the hands of thy holy Maieſtie (euen rather then our lines, or beliuerances from this dreadfull Plague) peace and pardon to our poore Soules, and aſſurance of thy loue in Chriſt, for our eternall happineſſe: and then wee beſéech thée not ſo much to deliuer our bodies from this Plague, as to ſaue our ſoules from ſin which is the Plague of all Plagues, and the true cauſe of this Plague, therefore wee cry and pray with thy holy Prophet, Lord haue mercie vpon vs, and heale our ſoules, which haue ſinned againſt thee. Then wee beſéech thée, thou God of compaſſions, looke in mercie vpon this Land, make vs not like Sodome, Gomorrha, as wee haue deſerued, wee confeſſe wee are vnder thy Hand, and all the World could not haue laid this on vs, but only thou, O Lord, And it was time for thee O Lord, to lay to thy hand, for wee had almoſt made void thy Law: Thou haſt therefore iuſtly taken vs vnder thy hand, and becauſe thy gentle warnings were deſpiſed,

thy holy Counſels contemned, thy Iudgements neglected, and thy Mercies abuſed, thou haſt therefore iuſtly giuen way to thy wrath, and let looſe thy heauy Iudgements vpon our Land: Yet this is our comfort, and Man, nor Deuill can take it from vs, that we are in thy hand, O Lord, and with thée is mercie. And as we bleſſe thy Name, that thou haſt not giuen vs ouer into the cruell hands of mercileſſe men, the wicked bloudie Papiſts, ſo in this, our ſoules take comfort, that we are vnder the hand of our heauenly Father, whoſe mercies are great: And in the multitude of thoſe thy mercies, we looke vp to thée, O Lord, and beſéech thée, be mercifull to this Land. Thou art our Father, and we haue fouly offended, therefore thou muſt needs correct vs, or elſe thou louedſt vs not, & puniſh vs alſo, or elſe thou wert not iuſt: Correct therefore Lord, and ſpare not, but yet in thy Iudgement, not in thy furie, leſt we be all conſumed. And foraſmuch, as corrections are to worke our not onely Humiliation, but Reformation alſo, we begge not the remoouing of thy Iudgement, till it hath wrought thy worke, and not onely brought vs down vnder thy hand, but euen purged our hearts, and renewed the face of our Church & Common-wealth. And ſéeing till then, O Lord, wee neyther may expect, nor dare deſire thou ſhouldſt remooue it, wee beſeech thee to prepare vs all

to bee both willing and ready to meete thee our God, and now to be content, thou glorifie thy ſelfe in vs, and vpon vs by Life or Death, ſo thou ſaue our Soules: But when it hath done thy worke, and finiſhed that for which thou didſt ſend it vpon vs, then, O Lord, in mercie remooue it from vs: And preuent the other grieuous plagues that muſt needes follow vpon, and after this.
            And howſoeuer thy iuſt and long forborne Decree is now gone out againſt vs, ſo as yet our cryes and teares mooue thée not, Nay, the Prayers of our Prophets preuaile not with thee, Inſomuch as thoſe Noabs,
                  Ezek. 14. Daniels and Iobs, that are among vs, are onely able to deliuer themſelues (and ſcarce that, O Lord, ſo great is the Contagion of our ſinnes) yet we beſéech thée giue vs leaue to take comfort, in beléeuing thine owne Word, and truſting to that which no mortall Creature, no Humane Aſſurance, but thine owne holy Selfe haſt told and
                  Hab. 3. 2. taught vs: Euen that in Wrath thou remembereſt Mercie, and that thou keepeſt not anger for euer, but that thy mercies endure for euer. And that thou haſt not onely betrothed vs vnto thy ſelfe in faithfulneſſe
                  Hoſe 2. 19. 
                     ••
                  . and truth, but euen married thy ſelfe to vs, and though we wickedly, in our ſpirituall Idolatries, and other ſinfull courſes, cut off our ſelues from thee, and whoriſhly

giuen our ſelues to others: yet moſt mercifully haſt thou called vpon vs, to returne againe to thee, and thou wilt receiue vs: But miſerable Catiffes that wee are, wee cānot turn to thée, we could of our ſelues fal away from thée, but of our ſelues, wee cannot returne home vnto thee: Cauſe vs therfore to returne, O Lord, and ſéeing thou ſo loueſt vs, as thou wilt not leaue vs, wee beſeech thee alſo looſe vs not, nor ſuffer vs good Lord to looſe our ſelues, but renew our hearts towards thée, and cauſe vs to cry and mourne after thée, and ſay with Ephraim, turne thou vs and wee ſhall bee turned, conuert vs, and wee ſhall bee conuerted, thou art the Lord our God: And bring vs backe againe, O Lord, the right and holy way: Firſt, make our faces aſhamed of our back-ſlidings, and our Soules more grieued for the ſame, then for the Plague that is vpon vs: Then make vs ſeeke thee ſincerely, and not ſlauiſhly, and out of Loue more then Feare, and make vs turne vnfaynedly and with the whole heart: And let vs not come, with ſorrow onely in our hearts, but holy words alſo in our mouthes, and take vnto our ſelues the words that thou haſt taught vs,
                  Hoſ. 14. 2. 
                     •
                  
                and ſay vnto thee, Take away all iniquitie, and receiue vs graciouſly, ſo will wee render the calues of our lips.
            
               
And that our Prapers be not bull, let vs, whet and ſharpen them by Fatting; nor let vs bring thee Bare words, but let our humiliation be accompanied with works of Mercie, Pietie, Pittie, and Compaſſion: And that the Humiliation of vs bath Prince and People, may bee both more acceptable to them and auaileable to vs, ſtirre vp the holy heart of our holy Phineas, thy Seruant and our Souereigne, that hee may ſtand vp in the Zeale of his God, and execute thy iuſt Iudgement vpon the Zimryes, and Cozbyes, that bee amongſt vs, euen the great ſinnes, and bold Sinners of this Nation, that then, as thy Word hath told vs, thy Plague may bee ſtayed. To which end alſo make our Moſeſſes, to ſtand in the Gappe, and our Aarons, with the ſwéet Incenſe of their holy Prapers, to ſtand betwixt the liuing and the dead, and ſtirre vp our Prieſts, the Miniſters of the Lord, to wéepe for vs before thy Altar, and let them cry and ſay, Spare thy people, O Lord, and giue not ouer thine Heritage to reproach: Let not the Papiſts and Schiſmatickes inſult ouer vs; Let them not ſay at their Idolatrous Méetings, nor prophane Conuenticles, Where is now their God? for thou art our God, and thou art in Heauen, and thou doeſt what thou pleaſeſt, and all thy wayes are right, and the Iuſt walke in them, but Tranſgreſſors ſhall fall

therein: Let them know, O Lord, that thou being our Father, and wee hauing iuſtly prouoked thee, thou wilt take thy Children in hand, and that they ought not to haue reioyced ouer vs, in the day of our deſtruction: O ſuffer them not good Lord, to make thy correction, their aduantage: O let them not lay their hands vpon our ſubſtance, in this Day of our Calamitie, ſuffer them not to ſtand in the croſſewayes, to cut off thoſe whom thou ſhalt ſpare, and make a prey of thoſe that ſhall remaine: Wee ſhall euer acknowledge, how great ſoeuer this Plague bee, yet thy mercies are greater, in that thou tookeſt vs into thine owne hand to correct vs, and gaue vs not ouer into the hands, of theſe men the Ieſuited Papiſts, whoſe mercies are cruell, and their cruelties inſatiable: Therefore good Lord, when thou haſt remooued thy hand, let vs not fall into their hand, but ſaue vs for thy ſelfe, and let vs liue to call vpon thy Name, and let vs deſire rather now to dye vnder the hand of thee our Father, and in thy feare and loue, then to liue to heape ſinne vpon ſinne, and to be reſerued for further vengeance, or to be expoſed to the cruel Papiſts the wicked Enemies of Religion. O looke vpon vs in mercie Lord, who lye downe in the duſt of Deſolation, and are couered with confuſion of our faces, O look

downe vpon vs, who looke vp vnto thée, and who deſire to rend our harts though not our garments, and to turne to thée the Lord our God, O looke vpon this deſolate, and diſtreſſed Citie, who now may cry to all her ſtately Siſters the Cities of Europe, and to all her beautifull Daughters, the Cities of England, and with aſhes now vpon her head, inſtead of her ſtately & coſtly Crowne
                  Pſal. 46. cals vpon them all and ſayth, Come and behold the workes of the Lord what deſolations hee hath made in the midſt of my moſt wealthy and populous ſtreets, learne by mée,Eſay. and ſeeke the Lord while hee may bee found, left he pull downe your Pride: And reioyce not ouer mee, O thou mine Enemie, thou Daughter of Babylon, leſt the Lord turne his wrath from mee to thee, and haſten the vengeance, ſo long agoe deſerued by thee, and pronounced vpon thee; truſt thou in thy Horſes aud in thy Chariots, thy Idols and thy Idoll Superſtitions, We will rememberProu. the Lord our God, For thy Name, O Lord, is a ſtrong tower, and the righteous flying vnto it, are alwayes helped: Thou haſt ſpoken it Lord, and wee beléeue it, and in that beliefe are wee bold to preſſe vnto thee, nay, to preſſe thee with performance of thy promiſe. Therefore, O thou that art thePſal. helper of the friendleſſe, helpe vs in this City, who are forſaken by ſo many friends, and left deſtitute by them, that ſhould haue ſtood

to vs in this day of our deſolation, but haſtPſal. not thou told vs, that if our Fathers and Mothers ſhould forſake vs, yet thou Lord wilt take vs vp: Thou therefore who ſéeſt our friends faile vs and our acquaintance to ſtand afarre off, ſtand thou ſo much the néerer vs, O Lord our God: And now that humane helpes fall ſhort, Helpe thou vs OPſal. God of our Saluation for the glory of thy Name: O thou in whom the Fatherleſſe finds mercie, in thée let the comfortleſſe findcomfort, In thée let this deſolate Citie find conſolation.
            Looke mercifully vpon vs who come vnto thée, with teares in our eyes, ſorrow in our ſoules, Lamentations in our mouthes, heauineſſe in our hearts, workes of mercie in our hands, and humilitation of the whole man: And thou that looſeſt not a teare, forgetteſt not one deſire, but heareſt euery greane, and counts the very ſighes and ſobs of all thy Saints, giue vs comfort, and fill our hearts with hops, that this humiliation of our King and his people ſhall not be fruitleſſe, but after it is not barely performed but accompliſhed, and perfected, as thou appointeſt it ſhall then preuaile with thée our God, not onely to make an end of our miſeries, but to remember and renew thy Cauenant with vs, and to bring vs and this Citie, and our whole Land, both Court and Kingdome neerer vnto thée, and hauing in

this fire of affliction conſumed our corruption, and purged away our droſſe both in Church and Common-wealth, wilt make vs come out new creatures, both high and low, both publike and priuate perſons, pure as Siluer, and as Gold moſt precious before thée: And wilſt hereby worke out that inward Renouation, and that outward Reformation, in our Church and State, in our Court and Kingdome, and all that ſee itPſal. Pſal. ſhall ſay; This hath God done, for they ſhall ſhall perceiue it is thy worke: Then we that did ſowe in teares, ſhall reape in ioy: Then the long night of our ſorrow beeing ended, the long deſired morning of our ioyes ſhall ſhine forth: The voice of the Turtle ſhall beEſay. heard in our Land, Bleſſed ſhall then they all be that come to vs in the Name of the Lord: And beautifull the feete of thoſe, that bring vs the glad tydings of the Goſpell, whoſe faces formerly haue béene contemned, Olde things ſhall then be done away, and all things ſhall bee made new. Truth ſhall flouriſh, and Hereſie finde no footing, Iuſtice ſhall reigne, Oppreſſion ſhall be oppreſſed: The hand of Briberie ſhall be broken: The arme of iniuſtice cut off, and the Mouth of Iniquitie ſhall be ſtopped: Then ſhall our Sons grow as plants, and our Daughters bee like poliſhed precious ftones, Our Garners ſhall be full, and our Cattle ſhall increaſe, we ſhall feare no breaking of Enemies to inuade vs,

nor heare any newes or noyſes to affright vs, no cryes, nor clamours, nor complaynings in our ſtréets; Our poore ſhall eat and be ſatiſfied, and our rich ſhall reioyce in the bleſſings of their God: Our Prieſts ſhall be clothed with Saluation, and Sions Saints ſhall sing aloud for ioy: Our Princes ſhall be wiſer, and our Iudges better inſtructed, and inſteed of ſeruing themſelues and the time, will then learne to ſerue the Lord with
                  Pſal. 2. feare, and reioyce to him with reuerence. Then ſhall our King and Queene ioy in thy
                  Pſal. 21. ſtrength, O Lord, and exceedingly reioyce in thy ſaluation: Then all our friends ſhall reioyce with vs, and all our enemies be couered with confuſion, and the World ſhall ſay, Bleſſed are the people that bee in ſuch a caſe,
                  Pſal. 144 yea a thouſand times bleſſed the people, that haue ſuch a Lord for their God, who hath purged them, from their old pollution, and purified them for himſelfe, that now he may dwell among them for euermore.
            Heare vs G God of Mercie for thy Name ſake, But Lord wée beſéech thée begin with the better part firſt, euen the ſpirituall ſores of our Soules and of our Land, remoue thoſe Plagues firſt which hath pulled downe this Plague, therefore begin wée beſéech thée at the right end, and make vs not healthfull and found in body, and leaue vs ſicke in ſoule, and miſerable in our ſpirituall ſtate; Turue vs therefore O God of our ſaluation

cauſe thy louing countenance to ſhine vpon vs, and wée ſhall bée ſafe: Bring vs againe into thy Temples with ioy, and into thy Courts with praifs, ſatisfie vs early with thy Mercies, and comfort vs according to the dayes wherein thou haſt afflicted vs: Now let thy worke appeare vnto thy Seruants, and thy gloeie vnto their Children: Then we will gee into thy houſe with true Burnt offrings, and with théerefulneſſe of heart wil pay thee our vowes, which our lips haue vttered, and our mouthes haue ſpoken in the dayes of our affliction. And wée that bée thy People and ſhéepe of thy Paſture will giue thée thankes for euer, and ſhews forth thy Prayſes vnto the Generations that ſhall follow after vs, vnto the Worlds end.
            And this our poore Prayer which here wée haue preſented, and this▪our weake thankſ-giuing which wée haue here rendred to thy holy Maieſtie, we humbly beg may bée accepted, not for our ſelues alone, but for thy whole Church, euen the bleſſed body of thy deare Sonne. Nor for our friends alone, but euen our enemies, for whom we implore rather thy Mercie to couuert them, then thy Iuſtice to corfound them, yet if they will not be reclaymed, reſtraine their rage, good Lord, and fruſtrate all their furie, make the malice of Man turne to thy praiſe, and if our Prayers can doe them no good, at leaſt,

let their cauſeleſſe Curſes and curſed Plots doe vs no hurt: Stand by all the Armies and Forces of thy Church both by Sea and Land, and by all them that ſtand vp for thy holy Cauſe, eſpecially that chiefe Champion of thy Church, thy deuoted Seruant our Souereigne Lord, rouſe vp his Royal heart, inflame him more and more with zeale and loue to thée, that thy Church may finde him and thy foes may féele him to be the Great Defender of thy Chriſtian Faith, and the Man of Men whom thou haſt marked for thy ſelfe, euen a ſecond Cyrus raiſed vp anoynted
                  Eſay: 44. 
                     •
                  
                and ſanctified by thy ſelfe to performe all thy pleaſure, and to execute thy great and glorious Deſignes, not only for the building vp of our Ieruſalem, in the Reformation and Reſtoration of our Church, but to ſubdue the Nations before thee, and to weaken and looſe the Loynes of ſuch Kings as will not open their hearts to thée. The promiſe thou didſt pleaſe to make to Cyrus, who knew thée not, make good wée beſéech thée much more to Him who knowes thée, and feares thée, and ſubmits his ſoule vnto thée, and caſts his Crowne downe at thy féete: That is, Make him thy great Shepheard, hold vp his Right hand, ſubdue thine enemies before
                  Eſay. 45. 1▪ 2, 3, 4. him, open to him all dores of difficulties breake in pieces the gates of Braſſe, and cut in ſunder the barres of Iron, and goe before him when hée goes to make the crooked places

of the World ſtreight. To which end giue him good Lord beſide all thy other bleſſings, the Treaſures of darkneſſe, and hidden riches of ſecret places, that euen therby alſo he may know that thou the Lord who haſt called him and ſet him on work, art able to payhis Armies, & prouide for him; do this O Lord for Iacob thy Seruants ſake and Iſrael thine Elect. Bleſſe the Quéene. Thou that haſt made her His, make her alſo Thine, that ſo ſhe may be a helpe to him, a bleſſing to vs a cōfort to the diſtreſſed Churches of France and a Ioy to the Chriſtian World: Bleſſe therefore good Lord, and make powerfull all meanes of her Conuerſion publike and priuate, and for the ſettling of her ſoule in thy holy Truth, and in the waies of righteouſneſſe: And beſides the Prayers of vs, and thy whole Church ouer the World, daily made for Her, wee beſéech thée gratiouſly to regard the ſerious ſupplications which wée are ſure his Maieſtie daily powres out before thee, for her happie and ſpéedie Connerſion▪
               Eſay, that ſo ſhée may bée a Purſing Mother as he is a nurſing Father to thy Church Shine from Heauen with the beames of Loue and Mercy vpon thoſe glorious Seruants of thine, the King and Queene of Bohemia, and their Royall Branches, and as thou haft honoured them not only to beléeue in thée, but to ſuffer for thée, ſo giue them in thy good time; a bleſſed Iſſue of all their vniuſt

ſufferings, and in the meane time arme them with Faith and Patience to waite on thée. Looke downe in Mercie, and bleſſe with thy ſpeciall bleſſing the High Court of Parliament, be with them at their Méetings, Conſultations and Concluſions, ſet thy fear before their eyes, and let thy glorie bee their greateſt Ayme, knit the hearts of Prince and People one to onother, and all to thée; Confound all priuate Plots any way tending to the hinderance of the comfortable continuance of that bleſſed Méeting, till they haue firſt diſcouered, and then found meanes to cure the Corruptions, Plagues, and great diſeaſes of this Church and State. Bleſſe this whole Land, make his Maieſties Councell faithfull to thée, leaſt otherwiſe they proue falſe to him, Purge the Tribe of Leui, that their lips may preſerue pure knowledge, and their liues may expreſſe the Life of true Religion. Refine our Nobilitie, from the fil thie dregs of Poperie, and all ignoble bafeneſſe, Cleanſe the hearts and hands of our Iudges and Magiſtrates, and purifie our People in this furnace of Affliction, and humble vs all from the King vnto the Captiue, that ſo we may bée a People prepared for the Lord. And looke downe in Mercy as thou art a God of Mercy vpon thoſe many hundreds, nay yet, alas, alas, thouſands of our deare brethren in this Land, and eſpecially in this Citie, who ſtill lye groaning vnder

the burthen of thy Wrath, & the Sword2. Sam. 24. Lu. 13. 1. 2. of thy deſtroying Angell: Alas O Lord theſe Sheepe, what haue they done? Or are wee better then our Brethren? Or are theſe thouſands that fall before our faces any greater ſinners then the reſt? Or rather haue not wee ſinned more then they, and yet they are ſmitten, rather then wée? O how wonderfull
                  Rom. 9. are thy workes, how vnſearchable are thy Iudgements, and thy wayes paſt finding out. Againe, how infinite and vnmeaſurable are thy Mercies to all them that feare thée, and ſeeke thy Face? Therefore we beſéech thée
                  Pſa. 79. 11. let the ſorrowfull ſighing of theſe thy Pryſoners come before thee, and according to the greatneſſe of thy power, preſerue thou thoſe that are appointed to dye. At leaſt, wée beſéech thée as thou emptieſt the Earth, fill the Heauens, and whom thou takeſt from vs, Lord take vnto thy ſelfe and fill thy heauenly Manſions with their Soules, whoſe bodies haue left ſo many houſes deſolate in our ſtreetes. And for ſo many of vs whom thou pleaſeſt to preſerue, Lord, Let vs not liue, but to honour thee; therefore mark vs with
                  Ezek. 9. thy holy ſtampe, and ſeale vs for thy ſelfe; that when the Angell of Iuſtice ſees vs ſorrowing for our ſinnes, and for the iniquitie of the time, and mourning for the Miſeries and ſighing for the ſufferings of thy Saints, and laying to our hearts the affliction of Ioſeph, he may then not only paſſe by vs, but

euen in the midſt of this common calamitie leaue vs ſome badge of thy bleſſing, & ſome better Teſtimonie of thy Loue, in the holy vſe of this thy Iudgement, then the more ſecure times of our liues paſt haue formerly afforded vs.
            Thus Lord, haue wee powred out our ſoules into the boſome of thy Mercie: Thou art hee that heares the Prayer, vnto thee ſhall all fleſh come, and if all fleſh may come ſhall not then thy Children be bold to preſſe vnto thee? And ſeeing we haue poured out our hearts to thee, O poure not out the Uialls of thy Wrath vpon vs, but poure down vpon vs the new of thy fauour, the ſhowres of ſweet Compaſſion.
            Heare vs thou bleſſed Father, plead for vs thou bleſſed Sonne, helpe our infirmities thou bleſſed Spirit of Grace, and make thou Interceſſion for vs, with thoſe holy groanes
                  Rom. 8. that cannot by vs bee expreſſed: Heare vs and anſwere vs thou glorious Trinitie in holy Unitie, not for any Merits of ours, for wee lay our hands vpon our mouthes, nay, wee abhorre our ſelues in duſt and aſhes, but
                  Iob 42. 6▪
                only for the precious bloud-ſhedding, and all ſufffcient Satiſfaction of Ieſus Chriſt, the Suretie and Sauiour of our Soules, the Mediatour of our Peace, and the Eternall High Prieſt of the New Teſtament. In whoſe bleſſed Name and holy words,

wee ſhut vp this our weake Prayer, offer this our poore Sacrifice, and tender this pitifull complaint of our poore ſoules vnto the hands of thy heauenly Maieſtie, as hee hath taught vs, and left vs in his holy Goſpel the Charter of our Peace: Our Father, &c.
         
         
            
            A SOVEREIGNE MEDICINE FOR and againſt the Plague: Being an ancient and approoued Antidote, and the ſure and infallible way how to eſcape the Plague, or at leaſt the Plague of the Plague.
            
            
               TAke thy Heart (for there beginnes the Plague) and euery morning, waſh it, in the teares of true repentance and heartie ſorrow for thy ſinnes: But that it may bee throughly

waſht, ſee firſt thou ſtretch it vpon the tenters, or rather ſet it vpon the racke, of a ſtrict Examination, that ſo it may poure it ſelfe out, and make a free and full Confeſsion: Then mollifie it in the precious Oyle, and bathe it in the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt the true Balme of Gilead, by a true and liuely Faith. Being thus clenſed, then ſtrengthen it by cordiall comforts confected of nothing elſe, but the pure and ſweet promiſes of the Goſpell: And this Confection is only to be made; by the skilfull hand of the holy Phyſician and Spirituall Apothecarie, the Miniſter of God, whom thou ſhalt alwayes find at the ſigne of the Bible, or the Holy Lambe, and there thou art ſure of true and wholeſome Simples; But take heed of them at the Croſſekeyes, or the Signe of Agnus Dei, for though the Shops be gorgeous, and all things gloriouſly painted, thou art ſure to be coozened with counterfeit Drugs, and with the corrupt Balſome of Aegypt, in ſtead of the true Balme of Gilead.
            
            Thy Heart thus rectified, let it then

command thy tongue and lippes, to acknowledge that thou for thy part by thy ſinnes of Commiſſion and Omiſſion haſt had thy hand, and borne thy part in pulling downe, this Peſtilence and all other plagues of God: Let it then command it ſelfe to promiſe and vow, that if thou for thy part, may by the power and mercie of God bee preſerued, thou wilt performe ſome ſpeciall ſeruice to him, his Church or Children, more then before: And let it command the ſaid tongue and lips to vtter and publiſh the ſame promiſe, the better to bind it ſelfe to obedience. Let it then command the eyes, to turne away from beholding, and the eares from hearkening after vanitie, and yeeld themſelues, the inſtruments of holy Obſeruation, to marke and conſider the works of the Lord; It muſt then command the hands, to keepe themſelues free from corruption, and that they bee painfully, and faithfully imployed in the honeſt labour of thy lawfull Calling, and thy feet to walke in thoſe wayes, and tread onely in thoſe ſteps, which God hath appointed thee.
            
               
This done, then take for thy Breakfaſt, in the Name of the Lord, a Chapter of the bleſſed Bible, and ſo ſet thy ſelfe vnto thy worke, and faithfull labour of thy lawfull Calling. Then after thy dayes labour done, bodily refection, take for thy Spirituall Dinner and Supper thy heartfull of holy Obſeruations of thoſe mightie Workes of God, both of his Iuſtice and Mercie towards thy ſelfe and others: which all that day long, eyther thine eyes haue ſeene, or thine eares haue heard of. Then the day beeing done, ſee that thou and thine for your Banquet, or reare Supper, doe cloſe vp your ſtomackes, with thoſe true Sweet-meates, certaine ſelected Chapters of the bleſſed Bible: Then after a holy Commemoration, of what euery one hath heard or ſeene, or obſerued that day touching the wondrous Workes of God, and application of the ſame one to another: and each one to himſelfe, Let then the Heart command the Tongue with comfort and boldneſſe, to recommend the ſoules and bodies of Thee and Thine

into the bleſſed tuition, powerfull protection and ſafe keeping of the Keeper of Iſrael.
            
            But forget not noe thing as thou wouldeſt haue all this profitable, and to doe thee any good, namely, to learne (which thou maiſt doe, of that excellent Apothecary
               
                  Heb. 11. 38. Saint Paul) what it is to liue the life of faith, when naturall reaſon and humane helpes not only faile thee, but haply are all againſt thee: This Faith I tel thee afore-hand is not eaſily found, but I deale truly with thee who had it, and can teach thee how to get it, for though himſelfe cannot giue it thee, yet hee will both direct and lead thee, and bring thee acquainted with that holy Spirit, who gaue it him, and will not denie it thee if thy Tongue doe begge it, and thy Soule ſeeke it: Neuer ſo little of this Faith is precious, therefore ſo thou get it and haue it right, care not for the quantity; for it is a holy Elixir, a true Quinteſſence which will preſently and perpetually multiply, beyond ordinary beliefe, to the infinite inriching of the Soule that enioyes it.
            
               
But this Faith hath one ſtrange propertie, that although it will bee content to bee gathered vp by graines of young and weake Chriſtians, and treaſured vp by drammes and ounces of ſuch as be rich and ſtrong men in Chriſt, yet can it not abide to be meaſured or mixt with Scruples: For theſe Scruples are of a contrary nature to true Faith: but otherwiſe, be it more, be it leſſe, ſo it be true, its perfect, and thou ſhalt find thy ſelfe happy if thou haue it: for the leaſt quantitie of this Faith will affoord thee euery Morning and Euening a proportion of that true Treacle, or Methrydate, which yet was neuer made at Venice (except cloſely in ſome corners) by reaſon of that great Iugler the Pope, who conueyes in corrupt Drugs and falſe Ingredients: This Methrydate is made of more ſtrange Simples, then bee the bloud of Scorpions, or the fleſh of Vipers: For it is and muſt bee confected of the fleſh and body, and bloud of a Man, but ſuch a Man as the World neuer had a Second, for he muſt be the child of Adam, and yet the Sonne of no Man, and a

true Man, and yet no Man to be his Father: Now his bloud taken from him while he is aliue, and yet ſo taken from him as he muſt needs dye, is of that Souereigne excellency, and that infinite vertue and Merit, as the Quinteſſence that may be extracted out of it, (which only this fore-named Faith can doe,) Is that Superexcellent, nay, Superceleſtiall Methry date of that high infallible, and inualuable vertue, as the Soule that out taſtes of it Morning and Euening, did neuer periſh, nor ſhall to the Worlds end. Therefore, I ſay againe, as thou wouldſt haue this Medicine worke, and become powerfull for thy preſeruation, forget not to take a taſte of this continually, the firſt thing in the Morning, and the laſt at Night.
            Then lye thee downe in Peace, and ſecurely take thy reſt, for thou art free from the feare of all that are able to hurt thee. But bee ſure, for a ſigne whereby to know this Phyſicke workes well, that inſtantly when thou wakeſt thy heart, doe forth-with fixe it ſelfe on God, and vpon him beſtow thy firſt thoughts:

And ſo when thy body hath receiued ſo much ſleepe and reſt as may make it ſeruiceable for the Soule, then vp with it in the Name of the Lord, that ſo both Body and Soule may ſet themſelues to ſerue their God: Then taking this Medicine, and following all the former directions, thou mayſt ſafely enter vpon thy buſineſſe, and aduenture vpon the dangers of that day both thou & thine. Prouided firſt, that you alwayes intermixe (as occaſion is) together with the duties of your Calling, ſuch workes of Piety towards God, Iuſtice and Equity towards Man, Mercy and Charity towards the Poore, as the Diuine Prouidence ſhall lay before thee, or caſt in thy way: For take it for a Rule, that theſe foure muſt alwayes goe together, and God himſelfe hath ſo ioyned them all together, as curſed bee the Man that puts them aſunder, for hee carries ſuch a heart about him, as this Phyſicke can neuer doe him good: But where theſe foure are conſcionably conioyned, this Phyſicke neuer fayled to worke his worke: but where any of the foure is wanting,

and totally neglected, there the other three will doe no good, but contrariwiſe, if they cannot get the company of their companion, they mourne and pine away, and in a ſhort time will bee gone, and ſtay no longer there, where they cannot be compleate.
            Prouided alſo that Man, nor God doe euer find thee out of thy way, but alwayes eyther walking faithfully in thy lawfull calling, or elſe doing ſome good in the performance of ſome of the foreſaid duties of Piety, Iuſtice, or Mercie: For theſe bee the wayes of a Chriſtian, and hee that is found out of all theſe is vtterly out of his way, and conſequently out of that protection which God hath granted to them that wayte on him, which runnes in theſe words, That Hee hath giuen his Angels charge ouer
               
                  Pſal. 91. 11. 
               them, to keepe them in all their wayes, &c. And the power of this Protection no Creature can infringe. So as by vertue thereof, the Seruants of God haue walked in ſafetie in the midſt of ſuch dangers as hath beene an amazement to the World, and a wonder to themſelues:

And for the want of this, many thouſands haue miſcarried, not only of Gods Enemies, who walke in wrong and wicked wayes, but euen ſuch of his friends and followers, who being miſled by the World or their owne Preſumptions, tooke to themſelues the boldneſſe to ſtep aſide, out of their owne wayes, and ſo haue ſhifted themſelues out of that ſhelter or ſafetie, which otherwiſe they might haue challenged as their owne.
            And laſtly, Prouided that in all times of danger thou take heed of tempting God, for otherwiſe thou mayſt iuſtly prouoke him to deny his bleſſing to this Medicine, without which, as Souereigne and powerfull as it is, it can do no good. Now if thou wilt auoid this feareful and dangerous Sinne of tempting GOD, thou muſt take heed:
            Firſt, of putting thy ſelfe into any needleſſe danger: And it is then needleſſe, when without neceſſary cauſe or lawfull calling, eyther for gaine or pleaſure, or any priuate reſpect thou puts thy ſelfe into places, or among perſons infected.
            
               
Secondly, thou muſt alſo at thy vtmoſt perill, carefully vſe all good helpes of Nature and Art, which Gods good Prouidence affoords thee, whether they bee commended vnto thee by the Learned Phyſician, or approued by true and reall experience, and whether they be meanes Preſeruatiue, Curatiue, or Reſtoratiue.
            Thirdly, thou muſt bee wary of all wilfull diſtemper, and bee diligent in keeping a carefull and orderly dyet, not only for moderation and ſobriety, in reſpect of the quantity both of meate, and drinke eſpecially, but alſo for Wiſdome in the choice of the quality and condition of that little thou feedſt vpon.
            And laſtly, abhorre more then Poyſon or the Plague it ſelfe theſe wicked Opinions, and all that hold them.
            Firſt, that the Peſtilence is not infectious in it ſelfe, and of it owne nature, but ſo immediately, and only the hand of God, as none become infected, but only by his ſtroke.
            Secondly, that euery mans dayes are ſo numbred, as doe or not doe what hee

will, he cannot liue longer, nor die ſooner then his day and houre appointed.
            Thirdly, that therefore all carefull auoyding of perſons or places infected, and diligent vſing of meanes appointed for preſcruation are needleſſe and to no purpoſe.
            The fouleneſſe and falſeneſſe of all theſe three appeares:
            
               
                  Leuit. 13. &c. Firſt, in that the Leaper muſt bee ſhut vp, and all men auoyd him, yea, though
                  
                     •
                  . Kings. 15.
                he were a King, which being nothing ſo deadly as is the Peſtilence, (ſeeing ſome liued with it many yeeres) It is manifeſt it was ſo commanded, only in reſpect of the Contagion.
            
               
                  Iob 2. Secondly, that Iobs Friends being louing, wiſe, and Religious, and comming to comfort him, hauing the Peſtilence, Leproſie, or ſome ſuch contagious ſickneſſe, ſtood afarre off, and refuſed to come neere him.
            
               
                  Eſay 38. 5▪
                Thirdly, Hezekiah hauing (that which neuer man had elſe) a Leaſe of his life for fifteene yeeres, from him that was able to make it good, yet vſed all ordinary meanes and humane helpes, for

preſeruing his health, and prolonging his life.
            
               
                  Acts 27. Fourthly, Saint Paul hauing an expreſſe grant from God, of the liues of euery one in the Ship with him: yet the next day, when the Mariners, who are the means vnder God to command and rule, and ſaue a Ship, would haue craftily conuayed themſelues out, to haue ſaued their owne liues, leauing Paul and the reſt to be ſaued by that promiſe and power of God: Saint Paul plainly told
                  Verſe 31. the Captaine, If theſe men goe out of the Ship we cannot bee ſaued. For howſoeuer that condition of vſing meanes was not expreſſed, yet he knew it to be implyed, which was all one. Laſtly, our Lord Ieſus himſelfe, whoſe Deitie could deliuer
                  Mar. 39. 10 & 4. 1, 2. him from all danger, yet to teach vs to be carefull in vſe of all good meanes, and to let vs ſee how made theſe men be, when ſuch as had Plagues preſſed too neere vpon him, called for a little Ship to wayte vpon him, becauſe (ſayth the Text) of the multitude, leſt they ſhould throng him. Yet hee that refuſed the throng, refuſed not his dutie, hee that

fled from the danger, fledde not from his calling, but preacht Gods Word vnto them, himſelfe in the Ship, and the people on the ſhore.
            The laſt wicked opinion to bee auoyded, is, that none who loue, feare and ſerue God, and beleeue in him can dye of the Plague, and all that doe, doe want Faith: The wickedneſſe of which Doctrine appeares in this, that diuers of the deareſt of Gods Saints haue taſted, nay drunke as deeply the Cup of all externall Croſſes, and bodily afflictions whatſoeuer, as any Vnbeleeuers or Enemies of God haue done. Againe, in that many of Gods Children, who in common Calamities turne to the Lord in Faith and true Repentance, howſoeuer thereby they ſaued their Soules, yet for their bodily liues were ſwept away with the reſt, by the generall Iudgement: As a great number of them that periſhed in the Floud, and diuers of thoſe that dye by the hand of Iuſtice, and all Hiſtories and Ages affoord frequent examples.
            
               
And laſtly, if thou wouldeſt take heed of tempting God, ſtand in thy ſtation, make Conſcience to doe thy duty, Flie not with Ionah from the preſence of
               
                  Ionah. 1. 
               the Lord, for hee can follow thee, and find thee where euer thou art, and reach thee afarre off as well as at home, and make Ionah feele him (being fled from his duty) euen when hee thought himſelfe moſt ſafe, and ſlept ſecurely: Thou therefore that mayſt boldly begge Gods bleſsing in thy place and duty, how dareſt thou tempt and try the power of God, by flying from it. Vſe this Medicine and obſerue theſe Rules, and as ſure as God is true and juſt, thou mayſt boldly beleeue the Plague ſhall either not touch thee, or not hurt thee; but in ſtead of a Plague ſhall bee a Bleſsing to thee: And whereas many of GODS good Children haue taken and died of this Infection, as it is manifeſt on the one ſide they wanted not Grace, nor Faith for Saluation, ſo it is as cleere on the other; that thev ſome way failed in the vſe of this Medicine either, in not belceuing what in this caſe ought to be belieued,

or in not doing ſomething to bee done for their deliuerance in this danger: In all which Caſes, the Rule of Chriſt is certaine: according to thy faith, and conſequently thy obedience, which alwayes waits on true Faith, So be it vnto thee.
            
            This Medicine is ſo ancient and ſo approued, that ſince the World began it was neuer found to faile in one particular, ſauing only ſuch as either ſeeme to vſe it but did not, or vſing it in part; yet failed in ſome particulars which in the vſe of Medicines may not bee allowed. And by the vertue of this Medicine alone, many about this Citie haue beene preſerued to this day, whoſe Callings and Duties ineuitably bound them within the reach of ſuch dangers, from which all the humane helpes in the World could not haue deliuered them: And ſtill if they faile not in Faith, nor diſcharge of their Duties: God who is the Authour of this Medicine will not faile in performance of his promiſe.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   