
      
         
            
            
            CHRIST HIS CROSSE OR THE MOST COMFORTABLE DOCTRINE OF CHRIST crucified, and ioyfull tidings of his Paſſion, teaching vs to loue, and imbrace his Croſſe, as the moſt ſweete and celeſtiall doctrine vnto the ſoule, and how we ſhould behaue our ſelues therein according to the word of God.
             
               NEWLY PUBLISHED BY IOHN ANDREWES Miniſter and Preacher of the word of God at Barricke Baſſet in the County of Wiltes. 
            
            
               Wherein is contained, firſt the chiefe and principall motiues and cauſes, that ſhould moue and ſtirre vs vp to the earneſt meditation of his Paſſion. Secondly, with what minde we ſhould come to this meditation. Thirdly, how divers and manifold is the meditation of the paſſion. The fourth part intreateth of the Types, and Figures contained in the old Teſtament, touching the Paſſion of Chriſt.
            
            
               HEB. 13. 8.
               Ieſus Chriſt yeſterday, and to day; and the ſame alſo is for ever.
            
            
               PSAL. 119. 103.

               O how ſweet are thy words vnto my throate!
               Yea ſweeter then hony vnto my mouth.

            
            Printed at Oxford by Ioſeph Barnes. 1614.
         
         
            
            
            
               TO THE RIGHT VERTVOVS, Renowned, High, and mightie Monarch, JAMES, our dread Soveraigne, by the grace of God King of great Britaine, France, and Ireland, Defender of the ſaith, &c. All grace, true honour, continuall health, ioyfull proſperitie, with all other princely vertues in this life, and the crowne of glory, through the mercy of Ieſus Chriſt, in the life to come.
            
               MOST Gracious & Dread Soveraigne, vnworthy (I know) are theſe my endeavours, either to bee ſhrowded from the prejudice of contempt, vnder your Royall Majeſties protection, (a Prince of ſo great magnanimitie and iudgement) or offered vnto your learned view; yet your continuall bountifulnes and dayly favours towardes good learning (eſpecially ifit ſavour of divinity) as it doth exceed your Roialty or greatneſſe, ſo will it alſo (I truſt) excuſe my boldnes in this my humble entreating your gracious

Patronage of this my firſt & vnlearned Treatiſe, the which being rawly compriſed in a few ſcattered leaues, and as rudely compoſed in a ſort of ſcribled & vnlettered lines, the out ward haske whereof, although it be farre vnlike the lordly gift that Aconitanus offered vnto Alphonſus king of Aragon, being vnpoliſhed, may ſeeme vnpleaſant, yet (no doubt) the inward kernell once taſted, and well digeſted, may proue cordiall, and right fruitfull. And although I cannot with ramping Lyons run in with mightie prayes; yet with the little Ant by hawling in my wheaten graine, I am ready preſt to ſignifie the force of my loue, & loyalty towards your moſt excellent Maieſtie. And thus in al humility, I beſeech your Highneſſe to accept this mite of my poore labours: ſo ſhall I (if God ſpare me life) be cō
               forted & encouraged, vnder ſo mightie a favourer, to proceed in the like ſtudies; and according to my boundē dutie, inceſſantly with all humilitie pray vnto almightie God (by whom both Kings and Princes raigne) to his glory not onely to preſerue your Grace, in

Royall throne of Monarchie vpon earth, but alſo to be farre more adorned, to raigne with a celeſtiall crowne of glorie in the kingdome ofheauen.
            
               Your Royall Maiesties faithfull and ever loyally devoted ſubiect, Io. ANDREWES.
            
         
         
            
            
            TO THE CHRISTIAN REAder, health in the Lord.
            
               RIght well ſaith the Wiſeman, (gentle Reader) that there is nothing new vnder the Sunne; and further, that there is no end of writing bookes: for, how ſoever in a generality the ſubiect of any knowledge be declared, yet the particulars, that may bee gathered out of the ſame, be ſo manie, as new or more matter may bee produced to write thereof againe; and, as Horace alſo affirmeth, it is hard to entreate of any ſubiect, that hath not beene formerly handled by ſome other. Wherefore ſeeing that of all the benefits that ever Almighty God beſtowed on man from the creation of the world, as there is none more glorious & admirable, thē the giving of his owne deare, & welbeloved Son to vs, & for vs to be crucified: ſo likewiſe I thought it beſt to beſtow theſe my firſt labours in the meditation of his paſſion; becauſe that of all the duties that man can do, or are required of man to be done vnto God, there is none ſo high, nor ſo acceptable vnto him, as to imbrace the ſame, his crucified, and paſſionate ſonne by faith in our hearts, (which muſt not only be done for our owne practiſe, or private vſe, but alſo to endeavour our ſelues, to helpe & further others in the ſame.) For, it is the only doctrine, that availeth with God, the key alſo to binde and looſe ſinners, the touchſtone to try all doctrines, the lanterne & light that ſcattereth and expelleth the miſt and darknes of all hypocriſie, and a preſervatiue againſt all errour and hereſie, the mother of all goodworkes, the earneſt of everlaſting life, and title whereby we challenge our inheritance. And alſo, it is the only motiue, that I might in all humbleneſſe of duty, with theſe or ſuch like meditations, end and spend the reſt of my time in the divine ſervice of my Lord Ieſus, that hath called me from teaching of

Schoole, and brevity in writing, to become a Miniſter, for to inſtruct, and labour in the vineyard of the Lord. Wherefore (Gentle Reader) if I, that ſpent the whole prime of my youth in that forme or faculty, be now applyed vnto better labours, thinke though it be Serò, yet it is Seriò; and though theſe my firſt endeavors begin but in the Autumne, or declining of my age, yet doubt not, by the helpe of God they will continue the time of my whole life. Hoping you will grace mee with your favourable ſuſpence, vntill my deeds proue my doctrine; in which hope I kindly preſent you this Treatiſe, entituled my Saviours Croſſe. The which if you balance with the zeale of my minde, I ſhalbe ſure you will not miſlike it, in regard of the matter, although happily you may finde ſome diſtaſt in the method. For, what can be more commodious to reviue, & preſerue the ſoule of a good Chriſtian, then a ſerious meditation in the doctrine of our Saviours bitter Paſſion? which is the ſumme of my ſmal and vnlearned Treatiſe. Wherefore if you looke in the booke of God, where this my draught would draw you, you woulde not only finde there ſufficient ſalue to cure your owne ſoule, which conteines the full ſatisfaction of theſe my labours; but alſo it would be a motiue to animate me forwards to continue my endeavour in the like ſtudies. In which hope of your zealous pervſing and dayly practiſing of the ſame, I commit my ſelfe, and my booke, to your favourable cenſure, praying the Almighty, to giue you ſuch ſpirituall refreſhing vnto your ſoule, that neither Sathan may deceiue you, nor the Law terrifie you, but that you may rightly enioy the abundance of Gods mercies. Vale in Chriſto.
            
            
               Iohn Andrewes.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            THE FIRST PART.
            
               What the chiefe and principall motiues be, which ſhould enforce and ſtirre vp all of vs to the earneſt meditation of the Paſsion of Chriſt.
            
            
               THe firſt motiue is the ſevere cō
               mandement of Almighty God, which he gaue to Adam, ſaying, Thou ſhalt eat freely of all the trees in the garden, but of the tree of knowledge of good and evill, thou ſhalt not eate thereof. Which commandement if he had not violated, he had yet holden that goodly Eden, & pleaſant Paradiſe, wherin he was ſeated as Vice-gerent, & ſole ſupreame 
                  •
               overaigne over the whole worlde. Where no
                  •
               e, what harme and incōvenience our firſt Parent purchaſed vs, by the breaking that one commandement, which was given vnto him: if hee had carefully obſerved that one, then had not our Saviour Chriſt ſuffered his death, and paſſion on the Croſſe, for our ſins; neither had the other ten commandements beene impoſed vpon vs. As if he ſhould haue ſaid, in the ſeveritie of his iuſtice, looking vpon the guilt of Adams ſinne; haue I given thee but one commanndement ô Adam, and couldeſt not thou obſerue that?

Now therefore, I will charge and enioine a greater matter vnto thy ſeed after thee; I will charge them with ten commandements. Whereby we may note, that it was not ſo much the eating of an Apple that God reſpected, (when he plagued A
                     •
                  ā,) as the breach of his commandement, the which He hath charged that 
               Pſal. 119 4. 
               we ſhould keepe diligently. Wherefore the contempt & breach thereof, is the more dangerous vnto vs: for, if they were puniſhed in Adam, and ſo many millions of Gen 3 17. people, for once breaking of them; nay, If God ſpared not the Angels that ſinned, (which were a thouſand degrees 2. Pet. 2. 4. before vs,) but caſt them downe into hell, oh! what Iob. 4 18. Iud. 6. ſhall we looke for then, which haue oftentimes broken them, and committed ſo many ſinnes againſt him? If the poore man was puniſhed even vnto death, for gathering a few ſtickes on the Saboth day, and Vzza for touching the holy Arke, and Saul for ſparing Agag king of 
               Num. 15. 32. 36. 2. Sam. 6. 7. 1. Sam. 15. 2. 8. 
               the Amalekites (notwithſtāding their good meanings and intents) how carefull ought every one of vs to be in obſerving them. Diſcamus igitur fratres, let vs therfore learne brethren, and throughly conſider the firſt cauſe that ſhould ſtirre vs vp vnto the earneſt meditation of the paſſion of Chriſt. Which is (I ſay) the ſevere commandement of Almighty God: which ſpeaketh by Moſes, ſaying, Theſe words which I commaunde thee this day ſhalbe in thine heart, yea and in thy ſoule, and thou ſhalt binde them for a ſigne vpon thine hand, that they may be as frontlets betweene thine eies, that ye may 
               Deut. 11. 18. 
               meditate vpon them both at home and abroad, and when 
               Deut. 6. 7. 
               thou riſeſt in the morning 
               Deut 6. 6.. Likewiſe our Saviour ſpeaking

to a rich man ſaith, If thou wilt enter into life keepe the commandements 
               Mat. 19. 17.. Iob loued to keepe Gods commandements ſo perfectly, that he eſteemed them more then his appointed food 
               Iob. 23. 12.. And Chriſt himſelfe ſaith, who ſoever ſhall breake one of theſe leaſt commandements, and teach men ſo, hee ſhalbe called the leaſt in the kingdome of heaven 
               Prov 19. 16.: But to our comforts he addeth further and ſaith, whoſoever ſhall obſerue & teach men theſe commandements, the ſame ſhalbe called greate in the kingdome of heaven 
               Mat 5. 19., therefore ſaith he, If ye loue me, keepe my commandements, for he that loveth my commandements and keepeth them, loueth me, and he that loueth me, ſhalbe beloved of my father, and I will not only loue him (ſaith our Savior) but wil alſo ſhew my ſelfe vnto him, & dwell with him 
               Ioh 14 15. Ioh. 14 21. Ioh. 14. 23.. Wherfore ſaith David, I will meditate vpon the law of God both day & night 
               Pſal. 1. 2.. And ſo is Timothie likewiſe willed by his maſter Paul to meditate, Haec meditare, meditate, ponder, & cōſider of theſe things 2 Tim. 3. 14., & be not aſhamed of the teſtimonie of the Lord 
               2. Tim. 1. 8.. Thus meditation vpon Gods lawes and commandements hath alwaies beene the ordinarie exerciſe of the godly. David ſaith, I did meditate vpon thy commandements which I loved, o Lord how haue I loued thy law, it is my meditation all the day long 
               Pſal. 119 97.. And with what fervent, and vehement zeale he vſeth to make his meditations, he ſheweth, when hee ſaith of himſelfe, my heart did wax hote within me, and fire did kindle in my meditations 
               Pſal. 39. 4., yea the very zeale of thine houſe, hath even eaten me vp 
               Pſal. 69 9.. Thus we may plainely ſee, not only by the example of Moſes 
               Deut 6. 6. Deut 11. 18., Iob 
               Iob. 23 13., and Paul 
               
                  
                     •
                   T
                     •
                  m. 4. 13. 15., but alſo the vehemency of the

Prophet David 
               Pſ 39 4. may moſt cōfortably ſhew vs, how we ought to let the very entire loue of our ſoules 
               Sol ſong 3. 3 bend vnto the Lord in our daily meditations Pſal. 1. 2., that Chriſt may dwell in our hearts 
               Ioh. 14 13., and bee the very life of our ſoules 
               Eccle 23. 4. Ioh. 14 6., whereby wee may behold the faire beautie of the Lord, 
               Pſal. 27 4. 
               and make him our chiefe delight 
               Cant 1. 6., our ſweet ſolace 
               Wiſ. 16 21. 
               our Lord God 
               Heb. 11. 16. Ier 24 7. Pſ 7 1. 3. Mat. 4 7. 16., and the very glory of our ſoules 
               Pſal. 62. 7.. Thus God would haue vs to meditate vpon his commandements, lawes, & prophecies, that thereby the great benefits of him, and his ſonne might be knowne, and alſo reverently celebrated and meditated vpon of all mankind; as it is written, Narrabo nomen tuum, I will declare thy name vnto my brethren 
               Pſal. 22. 22., one generation ſhall praiſe thy works vnto another 
               Pſ. 145. 
                     •
                  4.: and hee ordained a law in Iſrael, that they ſhould teach their children the ſame, and that their poſteritie might knowe it, and their children which were yet vnborne; to the intent that when they came vp, they might ſhew it vnto their children 
               Pſ 78 7, 8.. Likewiſe Moſes commandeth, that they ſhould rehearſe them vnto their children, and to their childrens children cōtinually 
               Deut. 6. 7.. In like maner S. Paul commendeth his ſcholler Timothie, for that he had knowne the Scripture of a child 
               2 Tim. 3. 18. 2. Tim. 1 5., and that hee had learned the faith, that was in him of his grandmother Lois, and his mother Eunice: whereby it appeareth, what diligent care they had in bringing him vp in good learning, knowledge, and faithfulnes in religion. And Solon the lawmaker amongſt the Athenians made a law, that the child whoſe father never Solon. regarded to bring him vp in good knowledge, exerciſes, and learning, ſhould not bee bound to ſuccour or

relieue his father, no not in anie reſpect, what need ſo ever he were in. It is good therefore (ſaith the Wiſeman) that parents ſhould not only exerciſe thēſelues in Gods commandements, but alſo haue their children taught in the trade of their way, while they are young, that when they are old, they ſhould not depart from it 
               Prov. 22 6., but continue 
               Col 4 2. in their way as children of light 
               Eph 5 8., that they may be perfect to doe the will of their Father 
               Heb 13. 21. 
               which is in heaven 
               1 Pet. 3. 22.; that he may make them ſwift to heare his word 
               Iam. 1. 19. Rom. 2. 13. Eccl 4. 17. 
               and carefully prepare themſelues to giue thankes and praiſe vnto God the father in the name of his ſonne Ieſus Christ 
               Eph 5. 20., which is the giver of all things Iohn. 3. 27., and thus indeed, to this end is man created, that he ſhould continually with thankfulneſſe ſet forth the praiſes of Almightie God, as the Prophet David ſaith, let every thing that hath breath praiſe the Lord 
               Pſ. 159 6.. Not, that God hath any need of our praiſe, Act 17. 25. but it is needfull for vs to praiſe him; Philip. 2. 13. Ier. 10 23. Ioh. 15 5. that thereby we may obtaine grace & favour at his bleſſed hands. The Sunne hath no need of our aſpect to behold him, yet wee haue need of his heat and cleereneſſe that thereby we may be comforted with his brightneſſe, and cheriſhed with his heat. Moreover David asketh the Lord, ſaying, What ſhall I render vnto the Lord for all his benefits towards me? (and anſwering himſelfe, addeth) I will take the cup of ſalvation, and call vpon the name of the Lord. I will (ſaith the Prophet) praiſe the Lord with my whole heart, and call vpon him ſo long as I liue 
               Pſ. 116. 12. 13, viz. for his benefits. Thus in our prayers and dayly meditations vpon Gods commandements, wee ought to obey his will therein diligently Luk. 10. 27. Deut. 6. 5. Luk. 19. 18.,

imbrace it dutifully Mar. 1. 18., and to the very vtmoſt of our power keepe his commandements effectually Ioh. 2. 3. Heb. 10. 7., that therby we may avoid the ſnares of death, Prov. 22. 24. and thinke not to liue forever in the deceitfull cradle of ſecuritie Eſa. 47. 7., which dandleth careleſſe men in the lap of folly Eccle. 2. 2.. But with all diligence keepe Gods commandements with as great and intire loue as the careleſſe Ninivits had to Ionas preaching Ionah. 3. 5., the deſperate ſouldiers to Iohns ſermon Luk. 3. 14. 15, and the obſtinate Iſraelits to Peters perſwaſion Act. 2. 37.; yea, continue daily in the earneſt meditation thereof; as willing as the Macedonians were in the hearing of Paule, when they continued his doctrine vntill midnight 
               Act. 20. 7., or as the Eunuch in giving eare to Philips ſermō 
               Act. 8. 38., or Cornelius the Captaine with a great multitude were to heare Peter 
               Act. 10. 25.. Wee read that K. Agrippa almoſt became a Chriſtiā at once hearing of Paul 
               Act. 26. 27. Rom. 12. 1.. Oh then let it be farre from the hart of a Chriſtian, that may heare, reade, and daily meditate vpon Gods Commandements, to proue ſo vngratefull, as quite to forget, and not once to thinke or meditate vpon the ſame, a benefit ſo great and infinite. Finally let our hearts bee pricked on with the feeling of Gods incomprehenſible mercies towardes vs, in our daily meditations Pſ. 1. 2.; encouraged by his gratious promiſes of accepting our poore endeavours to doe him ſervice 1. Cor. 15. 58, yea raviſhed with the expectatiō of ſuch a reward as is aſſured vs, by the death and paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt Eph 1. 7. Col. 2. 13. 1. Ioh. 1. 7. 1. Pet 2. 24. Eſa. 53 5. 2 Cor. 5. 21.. And withall, let vs bee aſhamed of our ſelues in doing no more Pſ. 16. 2. Mat. 25. 36., and condemne the careleſneſſe of our owne hearts for doing our beſt

workes ſo vnperfectly Pſ. 130 3. Pſ. 143. 2. Dan 9 7. 8. Luk 21. 36. Mat. 
                     •
                  4 42. Mich 6 6. Rom. 11. 25. Rom. 12. Mat 10. Prov. 4 13. Eccl. 25. 5.. What ſhall J more ſay? ſeeing the whole courſe & canon of Scripture runneth that all Chriſtians in their keeping of Gods Commandements ſhould be Attenti, vigilantes, ſoliciti, inſtantes, ferventes, perſeverantes, ſine intermiſsione; that is, Attent, vigilant, carefull, inſtant, fervent, and perſeverant, without intermiſſion of the ſervice of God; becauſe therein is contained Fons vitae, radix prudentiae, corona & plenitudo ſapientiae, gloria & gaudium quod eſt feliciſsimum donum, that is, the fountaine of life, the roote of prudence, the crowne and fulneſſe of wiſdome, the glory and ioy which is the moſt happieſt that can bee given to man. A bleſſed gift! what wilt thou deſire more, to moue thee towardes the meditation of the paſſion of Chriſt?
            THe ſecond motiue is the Dignity, the Maieſtie, and highneſſe of the perſon ſuffering for vs. It was not the African Scipio, nor Hanibal, nor the peereleſſe Pompey, nor the mighty Perſian Cyrus, nor Darius, nor the renowned Marius, nor the Macedonian conquering Monarch Emperious Alexander, neither yet Caeſar, that in the Senate houſe received of ſixtie conſpiratours 23 wounds, and every of them mortall: But it is Ieſus the Creatour and preſerver of all mankind Pſ. 33. 12., it is that Alpha and Omega, the beginning and ending, which is, and which was, and which is to come 
               Rev. 1. 8. Rev. 18. 17. Rev. 11. 17. Eſa. 44 6. Eſa 48. 12., even the Almightie, which was crowned with glory and honour 
               Heb. 2. 9., at whoſe name all knees ſhall how 
               Phil. 2. 10., and at whoſe feet the foure and twentie Elders laid downe their

crownes 
               Rev. 4. 10., it is the ſtrong God 
               Pſ 24 8., the God of power 
               S
                     •
                  p. 12 16., the high and moſt mighty God 
               Eph 2. 14., yea the mighty Lyon of the Tribe of Iuda 
               Deut 32. 39., the Prince of peace 
               Eph. 2. 14 Heb. 2. 10., the conquerour of death 
               Hoſ. 13. 14. 1. Cor 15. 54., Hell 
               Heb. 2. 14, and ſinne 
               Gen. 18. 25., yea the great iudge of the world 
               Pet. 2. 25, and biſhop of our ſoules 
               1. Pet. 2. 25., Chriſt Ieſus our Saviour 
               Ier. 17. 10: it is he, that is Lord of Hostes, the righteous iudge, that trieth the reines and harts of all men 
               Ioh 14 6.: it is he that is the way, the truth, the light, and the doore to enter into heauen 
               Iohn 14 6., if anie man enter in by him he ſhalbe ſaved 
               Ioh. 10 9.: it is he that is the preuailing ſeed of the woman, which was promiſed in Paradiſe by God the Father vnto Adam ſaying, ſemen mulieris conteret caput Serpentis, the ſeed of the womā ſhal breake the Serpents head Gen. 3 15.: it is he whom David willeth vs to kiſſe and imbrace leaſt he be angry 
               Pſ 2. 12.. It is he that is Lord of Lords, and king of kings 
               Rev. 17. 14., yea the ſpirituall Rocke whom all our forefathers did eate and drinke of 
               1. Cor. 10. 3.: it is he who is acknowledged and confeſſed by his greateſt enemie, to be the ſonne of the moſt high God 
               Mark 5. 7., in whom God the father ſaide I am well pleaſed 
               Mat 3. 17.: it is the Lambe of God pointed at by Iohn, and ſent to take away all the ſins of the world 
               Ioh i. 29.; it is he that freely forgaue his ſervant the ten thouſand talents that he owed vnto him 
               Mat. 18. 27.: finally it is he that is the only mediator betweene God & man 
               1. Tim. 2 5., he is the Author, and finiſher of our faith 
               Heb. 12. 2., and without him we can do nothing 
               Ioh 15 5. Ambroſ. de Iſaac & anima lib..
            And as S. Ambroſe ſaith, Ipſeos noſtrum eſt, per quod ad patrem loquimur, oculus noſter per quem patrem videmus, dextra noſtra, per quā nos patri offerimus; he is our mouth wherwith we ſpeak vnto God, our eies where with we ſee God, and our right hand wherewith wee

offer our ſelues vnto God; who ſaith by the Prophet Eſay, 
               Eſa. 50. 7. 
               I gaue my backe vnto the ſmiters, and my cheekes vnto the nippers, I hid not my face from ſhame and ſpitting, and I haue hardned my face like a flint ſtone; yea I alone haue troden downe the winepreſſe, and there was not an 
               Eſa. 33. 3. 
               helper, neither King nor Keſar, neither Cherubin nor Seraphin, neither Angel nor Archangel, ſaith the Lord our redeemer, whoſe name is from everlaſting, yea I my ſelfe, ſaith he, haue done it. In which verſe Chriſt yeeldeth a reaſon of his new and ſtrange habite, & of the bloody colour mentioned in the firſt verſe. A matter differing as it ſhould ſeeme from mercy; wherefore the Church is moved to aske the queſtion, ſaying, what meaneth thine apparell, red? importing, I know not what, threatning or danger. In the anſwer whereof for that there lieth an Allegorie, it is more plainely to bee expounded thus. That in his anger hee would tread downe vnder foot, and deſtroy al the enimies of him & the Church. A very artificious & skilful ſpeech for the expreſſing both of the power of Chriſt, & ſeveritie of his iudgement. I, ſaith this great and excellent perſon whom we ſpeake of, by the Prophet, yea I will ſpurne and tread them vnder foot: ſetting downe through the vehemency and greatneſſe of his affection, none in ſpecial, but indeed vnderſtāding all his enimies whatſoever. And thē ſpeaking by another figure, the blood, ſaith he, of them ſhall be ſprinkled vpon my veſture: that is, as Chriſt comes with his garment dipped in blood, as one that came from Bozrah, and all the fiends in hel, like Buls of Baſan, ranne vpon him, yet

through his magnanimitie and worthineſſe in glorie, he makes their hornes to ſticke faſt in the tree of his Croſſe, as Abrahams Rammes hornes did in the buſh, & Gen. 22. 13. 1. Macab 6. 46 ſo he killeth them; but he did it in one maner as Daniel killed the Dragon or Eleazer the Elephant, that is, they died both together, even ſo that great enimie the Divell, in killing Chriſt, is killed himſelfe; but Chriſt being a mightie perſon, both God and man; & far ſtronger then the Dragon, ſtronger then the Elephant; and ſtronger then the Divell killeth the Diuel, & yet liveth himſelfe. Even as the Phoenix of Arabia when ſhe prepareth her ſelfe to death, ſingeth, Moritur, me nō moriente, ſenectus, old age dieth in me, & I die not: ſo Chriſt being immortal in himſelfe, dieth not, though death & mortality dieth in him; but like as Noahs braunch floriſhed Gen. 8. 11. in the waters, & Aarons rod, that budded in the Num. 17. 10. Heb. 9 4. Exod. 3. 2. pot, & Moſes buſh, that burned & was not conſumed; ſo Chriſt when he ſeemed moſt dead, he moſt lived, & like as David hackt of Golias head with his own ſword, ſo Chriſt killed the Divel, even with his owne weapō, that is, with death: as the Apoſtle ſaith, Chriſt by his death did not only overcome death, but poteſtatem 
               Heb. 2. 14. 
               mortis, him that had the power of death.
            THe third Motiue is the weakenes of our Nature, when we ſhal finde that we are continually ſubiect to ſinning to offending, to erring and conceiving amiſſe of the wil of God, to our eternal damnation.
            
               Man is borne in iniquity (ſaith David,) and conceived 
               Pſ. 51. 5.
               
               in ſin; for the corne of evill ſeed hath been ſowne in the hart 
               2. Eſd. 4. 30. Gen. 8. 21. Rom. 7. 23. 
               of Adam from the beginning: yea all the imaginations of mans hart are evill from his youth; & his naturall inclination leadeth him captiue: Wherfore Auguſtine ſpeaking of the miſerable eſtate and condition of man, ſets it downe in a Beſtiall reſemblance and ſpiritual bondage; Auguſt. lib. 6. conf. cap. 12. who being free, became captiue and bound, Ligatus eram non ferro, ſed mea ferrea voluntate; It was not yron (ſaith he) that troubled me, but my hard & ſtubborne yron minde that captivated and enthralled me. He addeth Auguſt. lib. 8. farther and ſaith, that his paſſions would needes perſwade him, (before his converſion,) that he ſhould neuer be able to abide the Auſterity of a vertuous life, eſpecially touching the ſins of the fleſh: wherein hee had liued wantonly vntill that time; it ſeemed vnpoſſible that he could abandon the ſame, and liue chaſtly, which notwithſtanding he felt eaſie, pleaſant, & without difficulty afterwards: for the which he breaketh out into theſe words, my God let me remember and confeſſe thy great mercies towards me, yea let my bones reioyce and ſay; O Lord who is like vnto thee, thou hast broken my 
               Pſ. 113. 5. 
               chaines, and therefore I will ſacrifice vnto thee a ſacrifice of thanksgiuing.
            
            And S. Bernard ſpeaking of the miſeries and weakeneſſe of man, deſcribeth his miſeries three waies, ſaying, Bernard in his 7 Serm. of the comming of Chriſt. 
               
                  
                     •
                  f we would diſcerne betweene good and evill, wee are deceiued, If we go about to do good, we quickly faint, if we endeavour to reſiſt evill we cannot endure, but are eaſily overcome. The conſideration of which frailty and miſerie made our Sauiour Chriſt graciouſly to admoniſh

his diſciples ſaying, watch and pray leaſt ye fall into temptation. 
               Mat. 26. 41. The third motiue therefore that ſhould ſtirre vs vp to the earneſt meditation of the Paſſion of Chriſt is (l ſay) our extreame neede, and miſerie, that being conceiued and borne in ſin, we are guilty of the wrath of God, of bodyly and ſpirituall, of outward and inward, of temporal and eternal puniſhment, ſubiect to dayly and howrely perils and dangers, environed with enimies, the Divel, the fleſh, and the world, the world doth allure vs, the fleſh deceiue vs, and the Diuell ſeduce vs. Here now our only comfort and ſafeſt refuge is the Paſſion of Chriſt, in whom, & by whom, we haue al things; wherefore marke I pray you, if thou deſire to be cured of thy forenamed miſeries, he is thy Phyſition, if 
               Ier. 33. 16. Iſa 42. 6. 1. Cor. 1. 30. Pſ. 24. 8. Eccl. 23. 4. Ioh. 1. 9. Ioh. 14. 6. 
               thou be grieued with the burthen of thy ſin, he is thy righteouſneſſe, if thou lacke helpe, he is ſtrength, if thou feare death he is thy life, if thou be in darkness, he is thy light; if thou wilt go into heauen he is thy way, if thou ſeekeſt meate he is thy nouriſhment, hee hath borne our infirmities and caried our ſorrowes, that is, our puniſhment due for Eſa. 53. 4. our ſins, for the which he hath made ſatisfaction for vs. He hath redeemed vs from the curſe of the law, when he was made a curſe for vs, for he hath put out the handwriting 
               Gal. 3. 13. 
               that was againſt vs, contained in the law, which was contrary to vs, even he tooke it out of the way, & faſtned it 
               Col. 2. 14. 
               vpō the Croſſe, & hath ſpoiled the principalities, & powers, and hath made a ſhew of them openly, triumphing over them in the ſame Croſſe. And as the people which in the wilderneſſe were ſtung with the fiery Serpent and ſo inflamed with the heate thereof that they ſtood in danger

of death, yet looking vpon the brazen Serpent ſet vp Num. 21. 69. Ioh. 3. 14 4. King. 18. 4. by Moſes vpon the pole, were healed, and recovered their ſtrength: Euen ſo whoſoeuer lifteth vp his heart by faith vnto the woūds of Chriſt, ſhal not feel his own, becauſe the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt hath cleanſed vs from all 
               1. Ioh. 1. 7. 2. Cor. 5. 15. Rev. 17. 
               our ſin; yea he hath ſo loued vs, that hee hath waſhed vs frō our ſins in his bloud. What ſhal I more ſay? if thou ſeek for cleanſing thy ſelfe from thy ſinns, it is in his bloud; 
               Heb. 11. 32. if thou ſeeke for newneſſe of life, it is in his reſurrection; 
               1. Ioh. 1. 7. if thou ſeeke for reliefe of thy curſe, it is in his croſſe; if thou ſeeke for reconciliation, it is in his going downe 
               Apoc. 15. Gal. 3. 13. 
               into hell; if thou ſeeke for mortification of the fleſh, it is in his buriall; if thou ſeeke for thine inheritance of Zach. 9. 11. Ioh. 19. 40. Rom. 8. 33. 34. the kingdome of heauen, it is in his very entrance into heauen: finally ſith the treaſures of al good things proceede from him, let vs not ſeeke them at the hands of the bleſſed Virgin Mary, nor of Paule, nor yet of Peter, nether of any other Saint whatſoever; but only at the hands of our Saviour Ieſus Chriſt, who ſuffered his death on the Croſſe for vs; in whō we may aſſure our ſelues, that what paines, torments, or death, ſoeuer he ſuffered, it was for our redemption which were dead in our ſins before; & that all his righteouſnes through faith is made our righteouſnes; for he himſelfe alone, hath fully diſcharged by his death, the debt which all we owed, and hath made vs by his paſſionate obedience, Gal. 3 26. Gal. 4 7. the ſonnes of God, and fellow heires with him of eternall life.
            Oh therefore let vs not forget ſo great an inheritance, but take an example of thoſe in the Deſert, who

hauing but a glimmering of light, being purblinde, & as it were halfe ſighted, yet if they could with their little ſight, perceiue and behold the Serpent (which was a type and figure of Chriſt) they were all cured. Even Num. 21. 9. ſo let not thy forenamed miſeries diſmay thee, for if thou haue but a little faith, if it were but as much as a graine of muſtard ſeede, thou ſhalt by looking vp with the eies of thy minde, vnto the Paſſion of Chriſt, be moſt ioyfully comforted, and relieved. Oh! da aman. tem, ſaith S. Auguſtine (ſpeaking of this matter) et ſentit 
               Auguſtine. 
               quod dico, ſin autem frigido loquor neſcit quid loquor, giue me a man that is in loue with God, and he feeleth this to be true which I ſay; but if I talke to a cold chriſtian, he knoweth not what I ſay. Againe S. Auguſtine ſpeaking of himſelfe, Turbabor, ſaith he, ſed non perturbabor, I ſhal be troubled, but not overcome, becauſe I Auguſtine. wil dayly thinke vpon, and call to minde, the woundes of my Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt.
            There is a threefold comfort againſt the temptation of the Diuel, the fleſh, and the world: which daily laboureth to attempt, trap, cauſe and procure vs to ſin, that we may forget our duty and remembrance, which we ought to haue on the Paſſion of Christ.
            
            Our firſt cōfort is in this, that we haue not ſinned againſt thē, but they haue offended againſt vs; ſeeing that which we doe, we doe it rather through the inſtinct of them; therfore tempt, accuſe, and condemne vs too they cannot. Therefore David ſaith, tibi ſoli peccavt, to thee O Lord haue I ſinned, and done this evill Pſ 51. 4. in thy ſight. Secondly, that I hide not, but confeſſe all

theſe things whereof I am accuſed: yea I doe accuſe mine owne ſelfe and ſay, Tibi Domine iuſtitia, nobis cō
                  fuſio facie i, To thee O Lord God, belongeth mercy & forgiueneſſe, and vnto vs good Lord ſhame and confuſion. And as the Begger in the high waies, ſheweth and layeth open all his ſoares to the paſſers by, that they may haue the more compaſſion on him, ſo O Lord, I confeſſe all my faults vnto thee, and ſay with the Prophet Dauid, Turne thy face away frō
                
               Pſ. 51. 9. 
               all my ſinnes O Lord, and blot out all mine offences. I am the wounded man, Bleſſed Samaritan helpe me: I am the 
               Luk. 10. 30. Luk 15. 19. 
               wandring child, that is not worthy to be called thy ſonne, make me as one of thy meaneſt ſervants: I am the loſt ſheep 
               Mat. 10. 6. 
               O ſeeke and ſaue me.
            
            The Oſtridge, as Hiſtoriographers write, will hide her head in her fethers, thinking her ſelfe ſafe enough, as long as ſhe ſeeth no body. And man ſuppoſeth all well enough, ſo long as his groſſe, grievous ſinnes are not laid open to the view of the world; as though hee feared the ſight of man (which can but puniſh the body) more then the ſight and wroth of God, which can deſtroy both body and ſoule.
            There is no hill ſo high, but a man may climbe to the top; no iourney ſo long, but may be gone in time, no ſea ſo deepe but may be ſounded with line & lead, nothing ſo hid, but in time may be revealed, N am verit as eſt filia temporis, time is the mother of truth; all only the heart of man excepted, which indeed is ſo ſecret vnto it ſelfe, that in ſeaven yeares one man cānot knowe anothers mind. But what thought? ſhall not he

that made the eie, ſee? and ſhall not he that made the heart, vnderſtand, and accordingly reward that which Pſ. 93. 9. is cloſely ſpoken, and ſecretly conceaued? yes verily, for he is Scrutator cordis, a ſearcher of the heart & reines. And therefore vnto thee O thou God Omniſcient. to whō al harts be open, and to whom no ſecrets are hid, do I come, confeſſing my ſins, & moſt humbly do beg at thy hands, according to the multitude of thy mercies, Pſ. 51. 1. to doe away mine offences, and giue me an hart to thinke on thee 
               Prov. 2. 1., a mind that may loue thee 
               Mark. 12 30, a ſoule that may remember thee 
               Deut. 9▪ 6, 7., and a reaſon that may alwaies stick faſt vnto thee 
               Mat. 10. 37. 38. Iohn. 29..
            Thirdly, wee are comforted in this, that the ſon of God taketh away the ſinnes of the world, & is become our propitiation for our ſinnes. Now our comfort againſt Ioh. 16. the world, & death is ſet downe in theſe words; Yee ſhall weepe and the world ſhall reioyce, and yee ſhall ſorrow and your ſorrow ſhall be turned into ioy. Boldly therefore doe we thus ſhake off the world and flie from it, Gen. 39. 12. (as Ioſeph caſting off his cloake, ran away from his miſtris) & ſaie, O world thou haſt done enough with me already; Oh leaue me now & take thy pleaſure of ſome other, as the Divels did the poſſeſſed, & entred the ſwine: 
               Mat. 8. 22. for I deſire to be diſſolued, & bee with Chriſt, into whoſe hands I commend my ſpirit, ſweet Ieſus receaue my ſoule. And crie with David, Lord remēber thy ſervant in all his troubles; with the Publican, God be mercifull vnto me a ſinner; and with the woman of Canaan, Ieſus 
               Luk. 18. 1
                     •
                  . 
               thou ſonne of David haue mercy vpon me, O Ieſu of Nazareth 
               Mat. 26. 71. Mat. 1. 24., O fountaine of mercy 
               Mar. 10 24. 
               remember my ſpirit 
               Act. 7. 59., O my

life, take my ſoule 
               Ioh. 14. 6., enter thereinto O my ioy, that it alway may ioy in thee 
               Pſal. 4. 4.: for thou haſt redeemed me O God faithfull and true, ſo that I am perſwaded, that neither 
               Rom. 8 38. 39 
               death, nor life, Angels, nor principalities, nor powers, nor things preſent, nor things to come, nor height, nor depth, nor any other creatures, ſhall bee able to ſeparate mee from the loue of God which is in Christ Ieſus our Lord.
            
            Concerning the comfort that is againſt the feare of the latter iudgement, our Saviour Chriſt ſaith, hee 
               Iohn. 
               that beleeueth in me ſhall not come into condemnation, but hath paſſed from death vnto life: they that haue an eie vnto him ſhall be lightned, and their faces ſhall not be aſhamed 
               Pſ. 34. 5.. Whither then ſhall I flie, but vnto thee? which art my Creatour 
               Col. 1. 16. 17, my redeemer 
               Gal. 3. 13., my father 
               Mal. 2. 10. Heb. 12 9. Mat. 23. 9., my brother 
               Mat. 12. 50., who art ſet on the right hand of the throne of God 
               Heb. 12. 2., to be my God 
               Pſal. 63▪ 1 Heb 11. 16., my iudge 
               Ioh 5 22, 23 Act. 10 42. Mat. 16. 27. Apoc. 12., my defender, my phyſitian, mine all and only Saviour.
            True it is that there was a great battaile in heauen, as we read in Apoc. 12. betweene two mightie armies, yea and ſuch a battaile, as before the birth of the woman there mentioned, was never ſeen or heard of, between Michael & his Angels with the Dragon. For whē as all ſinners through Adam were held guiltie by Gods iudgement, vnto this huge and mightie maſſe of mans miſeries fell out another no leſſe grievous, evē a moſt bitter accuſer in heaven, the old Serpent, who attempted the Lords Saints, with a continuall accuſation before the tribunall ſeat of the great iudge: whereby it came to paſſe, that none being found to take our matter in hand, to plead for vs, & to defend our miſerable

caſe, againſt the complaints of our accuſer, how could it otherwiſe be, but that this armed and ſtrong enimie muſt needs ſtill keepe his hold, and that in peace, ſo long as there was none to reſiſt him, or to ſtand vp againſt him in the defence of the poore Saints? Inſomuch as the invincible power of this cruell accuſer, could by no power or force of man, or Angel, bee reſiſted or any thing weakned, vntill the foreſaid womā, cloathed with the Sunne, and the ſtarres, & the moon vnder her feet, brought forth a man child.
            Now lo! a certaine new ſtrength, courage, & boldneſſe, poſſeſſed the Saints of God and Angels in heaven, wherewith the holy ones of God being ſtrengthned, with Michael, that is Chriſt, enter battaile with the Divell, whom, as a vanquiſhed vaſſall, they thruſt and tumbled out of heaven, and ſo freed the holy ſervants of God (though charged with a multitude of ſinnes) of all and every accuſation intimated by their bloody adverſarie againſt them. But how did they effect this victorie, how, I pray you, came it ſo to paſſe? not by our owne power or merits, but onely by the blood of the lambe, in whom, and for whom, all things are appeaſed: the hād writing of the law which was againſt vs put out, the power of the enimie abated, Col 2. 14. Heb. 2. 14, 15. 2. Cor. 5. 15. Ioh 5. 22. Gal 3. 13. the head of that helliſh Serpent broken, the ſinnes of all beleevers in Chriſt are forgiven, and all power of iudgement is given vp into his hands, who is not only our iudge, but our redeemer, not only a revenger of our ſinnes, but alſo a ſacrificer for our ſinnes.
            What felicitie then can bee wiſhed greater then

this; what comfort and conſolation, more full and cō
               plete then this; that the Saints of God be now ſo converſant in heaven, as they ſtand not in feare of any thing, and ſo thinke of the terrible iudgement of God as they need not feare the perill, and daunger of damnation? for what danger is there now, when as Sathan being with all his Angels quite overthrowne, there is Apoc. 12. 9. none any longer left to cōdemne thee, & where there is no accuſer, there is no crime produced for the iudge Rom. 4. 15. to condemne: for Eius quod non eſt, non eſt poena, peccatum remiſſum non eſt, Ergo peccati remiſsi non eſt poena, that which is not hath no puniſhment, forgiven ſins are not, Ergo forgiven ſinnes haue no puniſhment; as S. Paul ſaith, where remiſsion is given there is no more offering 
               Heb. 10. 18. Ier. 31. 14. 
               for ſinnes.
            
            Now if thou wilt be reſolved of the difference betweene the law and thy conſcience, that thou needeſt not feare the force of the law, knowe this: The law in a Chriſtian, ought not to paſſe his bounds, but ought to haue dominion only over the fleſh, which is in ſubiection vnto it, and ought to remaine vnder the ſame, when it is thus, the law is kept vnder his bounds, but if the law preſume to creepe into thy conſcience, and there ſeeke to raigne, ſee thou play the cunning Logitian, and make true diviſion; giue no more to the law then is convenient, but ſay, O law, thou wouldſt climb vp into the kingdome of my cōſcience, & there raigne and reproue it of ſinne, and wouldſt take from me the ioy of my heart, which I haue by faith in Chriſt, and driue mee to deſperation, as thou didſt Iudas, that I Mat. 27. 3. Gen 3. 14.
               
might be without all hope, and vtterly periſh. Truely this thou doſt beſides thine office, keep thy ſelfe within thy bounds, and exerciſe thy power vpon the fleſh, but touch not my conſcience. For as Satan himſelfe is caſt out of heaven, even ſo likewiſe doth the accuſation that any one can lay againſt thy conſcience, fall downe with him. Now if thou wouldſt knowe how, Ioh. 1. 29. I anſwer, by the blood of the lambe, who for our ſinnes was hanged vpon the Croſſe, who by faith iuſtifieth ſinners:  wherein, evē when we are accuſed, we do overcome. So that now there remaines nothing any more in heaven vnto the godly but peace and ſalvation, with fulneſſe of ioy and mirth without ſadneſſe, health without ſorrow, light without darkneſſe, and life without labour, where the very ioyes of Gods preſence ſhal be muſicke to their eares, a glaſſe to their eyes, hony to their mouthes, and a moſt ſweet and pleſaunt balme to their ſmell, there ſhall never bee any enimies to aſſaile, wily Serpents to beguile thee, or worldly baits to intice thee, but all is peace, all is reſt, all is ioy, & al is ſecuritie. Thus we way cōclude with the ſaying of a father;
            
               
                  Non meliùs poterit caro luxurioſa domari,
               
               
                  Quàm benè, qualis erit poſt mortē, praemeditari. 
               
            
            
               No better meane to tame the fleſh,
               That want on is and bould,
               Then wel to waigh what it ſhall be,
               Once dead and laid in mould.
            
            THe fourth Motiue, that ſhoulde ſtir vs vp to the earneſt meditation of the Paſſion of Chriſt, is the amplitude, and excellencie of the Doctrine,

touching many difficult and high matters therein cō
               tained; and chiefely theſe fiue following.
            The firſt point of the fourth Motiue and cauſe of the meditation of the Paſſion is the divine iuſtice of God, not forgiving ſinne without ſatisfaction; for the law without all exception bindeth either vnto obedience, or vnto puniſhment, & this order ſet downe in the law abideth:
            All mankinde hath ſinned, (Ergo) al mankinde is Rom 3. 23. 1. Iohn. 1. 8. condemned; for if we ſay we haue no ſin; we deceiue our ſelves, and there is no truth in vs. As corne cleane winnowed from the chaffe, yet hath nature in it, to yeelde chaffe againe, to that which groweth of it, when it is ſowne; ſo doth this nature of ours, to thoſe that ſpring of vs, yeeld corruption, & originall ſin, though we our ſelues were circumciſed, or baptized, & ſo purged thereby from it; becauſe that purgation which ſome by Baptiſme impute vnto vs, is ever to be vnderſtood thus, Non vt non ſit in nobis peccatum, ſed nō imputetur, not that we are cleared from the being of any evil in vs, but from the imputation of it to vs. Nay let vs know this; that although Antichriſt were aboliſhed, although Satan were aſleepe, admit the vngodlie were at one with vs, although wickednes were put to ſlight, although no euil example were giuen vs, although no outward ſtumbling blocke were caſt in our waies, yet haue we one in our ſelues and of our ſelues, (euen original ſin, cōcupiſcence or luſt,) which neuer reſteth attempting, entiſing, and alluring vs frō good vnto euil, and to deſile or ſtaine vs with al kinde

of pollution and vncleaneneſſe, according as S. Iames 
               Iam. 1. 14. ſaith, every man is tempted of his owne luſt. This original ſin is the breath of that venemous & ſubtil Cockatrice, which hath infected the whole ofſpring of Adam, this is the ſting of that old Serpent, whoſe woundes neither Chiron, Aeſculapius, nor Apollo can heale, no nor any wight in heauen or earth, ſauing only God in his Son Ieſus Chriſt. This is the bitter fountaine Exampus, which with his brackiſhneſſe marreth the ſweet riuer Hypanis, that is to ſay, the flowing ſtreame of all Gods graces in vs. To turne bridle therfore, & to the knitting vp of the concluſion of our Argumēt, it muſt needs be granted that as all mankind hath ſinned, ſo al mankind was cōdemned. This argument can none reſolue and diſcharge, ſaue one, euen the Son of God, who became man, and yeelded himſelfe, in the ſupply of vs al, vnto his eternal Father, as an vnſpotted & immaculate Lambe, in al things obedient to the law, and ſuffered puniſhment for all mankinde, who by his own ſatisfaction, without the help of any one, hath made vs partakers of his heauenly kingdome. If thou wert as good as an Angel, or thy meat as good as Manna that fel from heaven, or thy garments as precious as Aarons Ephod, or thy incenſe as ſweete as the perfumes of the Tabernakle, or the daies that thou keepeſt as honorable as the day in which Chriſt roſe againe from the dead, yet neither thou, nor thy garments, nor thy meate, nor thy daies can ſet one of thy feet within this kingdome, which is Chriſts: for he by his owne death and paſſion, hath ſatisfied for it alone,

yea he alone hath ſatisfied the law; and that fiue manner of waies.
            Firſt he hath ſatisfied the law Actiuely, in fulfilling it wholly.
            Secondly he hath ſatisfied the law Paſsiuely, in dying and ſuffering for vs.
            Thirdly Imputatiuely, in imputing vnto vs, that beleeue, his Righteouſneſſe, and innocency.
            
            Fourthly Inchoatiuely, in giving vnto vs the holy Ghoſt, which frameth in vs a beginning to performe vnto God a new and acceptable obedience.
            Fiftly hee hath ſatisfied the law Conſummatiuely, in al eternity.
            
               Chriſt dyed for all 2. Cor. 5. 15. Rom. 5. 6. 1. Cor. 15. 3. 1. Tim. 2. 6. 1. Pet. 3. 18., and with his bloud,
               He clens'd our ſoules from deadly ſinne 1. Ioh. 1. 5. Eph. 1. 7. Heb 9. 14. Eſa. 53. 6.,
               And gaue his life to ranſome thoſe,
               Which ſtedfaſtly beleeue in him Io. 11. 25, 26 Ioh. 6. 35. Ioh. 20. 29. Ioh. 3. 16.;
               On the third day againe he roſe 1. Cor. 15. 4. Mat. 28 6. Mar. 16. 6. Ioh. 20. 27.,
               And came where his Diſciples were Io. 11. 20. 29. Mar. 16. 14. Luk. 24. 
                        •
                     6. 1. Cor. 15. 6.,
               For to inſtruct them in his word Act. 3. 34. Act. 1. 5. Act. 4. 31. Eph 4. 11, 12, 13,
               That we thereby might liue for ere Act. 1. 9. 10..
               So he returnd to heaven againe Act. 17. 31.,
               There to remaine till day of doome 1. Theſſ. 4. 17,
               Then we muſt all to him appeale 2. Cor. 5. 10.,
               Yeelding account when he doth come 
                  l.
            
            
               The ſecond point contained in the fourth Motiue.
            
            THe ſecond part is the greatnes of Gods wrathful anger conceived againſt our ſins, wherein let vs conſider, that God is a iudge, not ſuch as our

own vnderſtanding doth imagine him to be; but ſuch a one as he is painted out in the holy Scriptures, with whoſe brightneſse, the ſtars are darkned; by whoſe ſtrength, the hils do melt away; by whoſe wrath the earth is ſhaken; by 
               Pſ. 28. 12. Pſal. 18 7. Apoc. 6. 14. Heb 12 26. Iob. 9. 6. 
               whoſe wiſdome, the wiſe are takē in their ſubtilty: by whoſe purenes, all things proue vnpure: whoſe righteouſneſſe the Angels are not able to beare, whoſe wrathfull vengeance, if it be but once kindled, preſſeth downe to the bottome of hel. For it is not Adramelech, nor Anamelech, Aſhima, nor Aſhteroth, Baalim, nor Chemoſh, Dagon nor Milchom, 
               2 King. 17. 30, 31. 2 King. 23. 13. 
               Moloch nor Nergal, Sucat beneth, nor Tartacke, nor any of the Idolatrous Gods, of the ſuperſtitious Gentils, whom we haue offended, and provoked vnto Anger; but it is the Maieſtie of the great and angry God Iehovah, the Lord of Hoſts, whoſe burning wrath wee haue ſo often kindled and increaſed. The which anger of this wrathful God was ſo great, that neither man, nor any creature in heauen, or earth could pacifie, nay though al Angels and men were ioined togither, yet they could not appeaſe it, much leſſe take it cleane away, therefore it is written, God is a conſuming fire, and 
               Deut. 4. 24. 
               a iealous God. For the appeaſing therefore of Gods anger, there was need of God himſelfe, his mercy, his counſel, and helpe, that is to ſay, the deprecation, and interceſſion of the ſon of God, and not this only, but alſo his Incarnation, Paſsion, Death; the Father ſpared not his only begotten Son, his only Innocent his beſt beloued Son.
            Thirdly the greatnes of ſin, and the deformity of The 3 matter 
                     〈◊〉
                   point contained in the fourth cauſe. mans whole nature in the ſight of God. There is no

ſin ſo ſmal that hath not caſt the ſon of God into a ſea of miſeries. The which ſinn that it may the better appeare in his likeneſſe, wee wil ſo Anatomize it, as both by definitions and deſcriptions thoſe ougly and loathſome Serpents ſhalbe plainely laid open, ſo wel as we can.
            It is written of the ſpotted Panther, a party coloured beaſt, (whoſe fur being dreſſed, is worne of great perſonages;) that his hinder parts are ſo faire & pleaſant, that what with the beautifulnes of his colour, & the ſweetnes of his ſent, al the Beaſts of the foreſt doe run and follow after him, whom when he hath gottē into a place of advantage, he turneth his ougly & fear ful face vpon them, and devoureth them. Even ſo the curſed bait of ſin, with his faire faced ſhews of his pleſantneſſe, and ſweetneſſe of his alluring entiſements, turnes and drawes men after him, which at firſt ſome ſmal ſparke of Gods grace within them will cauſe mē to bluſh at, and to be aſhamed to haue knowne what they do; although the entiſement of the Divel doe allure and embolden them to do it, yet they wil vſe all cloakes & colours that poſſible they can, to hide their wickednes from the ſight of the world, (having little or no care if God ſee them) but at the laſt they growe bold, and, by the ſweete and pleaſant baites of their diabolical practiſes, become impudent; even to ſaie what care we? And why? certainely becauſe this is the courſe of ſin in Gods iudgment; that it ſhal ſo benūbe and harden the harts, wherein it is ſuffered, & ſo ſeare vp the conſcience, & conceipt in time; that there ſhalbe

no ſhame left; but ſuch a thicke vizard pulled ouer their faces, that they cannot bluſh at any thing, either to ſay or do it: & then in the end wil their ſinne turne to a loathſome, deteſtable, and ougly deformed lookes vpon them, and deſtroy them, and crie in the eares of the Lord for revenge, with ſuch an alarme, that God can turne no way but they wil follow him. Thus ſin cauſeth the children of vnbeliefe Eph. 2. 2., ſo to dandle in the lap of folly Eccl 10. 10, that they neuer feare the fal of future inconveniences Iudg 8. 27. Mat. 25. 12., vntil they be ſerved with the writ of preſent penance Luk. 12. 19 46.; it blindeth the clearneſſe & bright ſight of many which in their owne conceipts do ſeeme to be wiſe Rom. 1. 22. Ier. 5. 22., and ſeparates them from God Eſa. 59. 2., & peruerteth many careleſſe men Ier. 15. 6. Eccl. 10. 13.. Wherfore marke I pray you, Whō Satan can divert from the milke of Gods word 
               1. Pet. 2. 2., he politikely plotteth against with the doctrine of vanity 
               Ier. 10. 8., whom he can frustrate frō the rocke of Religion 
               1. Cor. 10. 4, he vniteth vnto the God of Ekron 
               2. Kin 1. 2., whom hee can divorce from the ſweet ſpowſe of Chriſt 
               Rev. 21. 9., he deflowreth them with the foule whore of Babylon 
               Rev. 17. 3.. What then? Oh then, ſinne commeth ten thouſand times more ougly faſhioned, and deformed, then the aforenamed Panther 
               Iob 40. 20. Rev. 12 34., & bringeth with him his damned ſpirits Mat. 25. 41. Luk 13. 27., his howling helhounds Pſ. 22. 16. Reu. 22. 15. & roaring Lyons 1. Pet 5. 8. Pſ. 35. 17., prepared ready for their prey Rev. 12. 4..
            You may define ſinne thus; It is an effect or inclination, or an action ſtriving with the law of God, & making the ſinner guiltie of eternall puniſhment, vnleſſe there bee a remiſſion ofſinnes through the Son of God our mediatour. This is, as Schoolemen ſay, peccati

genuina definitio, the proper, peculiar, naturall definition of ſinne: for the Genus, or generall word (being as Cicero ſaith, notio adplures differentias pertinens, a generall voice comprehending ſundry particular kinds) is peccatum, ſinne; the difference of ſinne, is the ſtriving with the law of God.
            The proprium or propertie of Sin is the making of a ſinner guiltie of the eternal anger and wrath of God. The accident of ſinne, is in theſe words, niſi fiat remiſſio propter ſatisfactionē filij dei, vnleſſe there be forgiueneſſe through the ſatisfactiō of the ſon of God. Some ſay that ſin is the miſſing, or declining as it were frō a certaine marke, which wee conſtantly, & directly goe and reach vnto.
            Wee read in the 20 of Iudges of the 700 choſen of Iudg. 20. 16. the Beniamites, which every one could fling ſtones at a haires breadth, and miſſe not: wherefore when wee ſhould define ſin, we muſt looke vnto the mark, which is prefixed and ſet vp by God vnto all men. Sinne therefore is whatſoever doth ſwarue and decline from the Communion of Almightie God, whether it bee in the vnderſtanding and thought of man, either in will, thought, or deed; and I call the Communion of God the agreement and vnitie with his truth and will. So that in this point it is ſin not to thinke the ſame, not to will the ſame, and not to doe the ſame, which the omnipotent God willeth. As if a man would ſay, it is ſin in the kings Court, whatſoeuer is wide, and diſcrepant from the kings will and mind, which ought to bee as a marke indifferently ſet vp vnto all Countries to prick

vnto. Therefore ſaith the Wiſeman, Wiſh the King no evill in thy thought, neither ſpeake hurt of the rich in thy 
               Eccl. 10. 20. 
               privy chamber, for the foule of the aire ſhall betray thy voice, and with her fethers ſhall ſhe betray thy words. But as the greatneſſe and horribleneſſe of ſin, (being the third point of the fourth motiue) is the matter whereon we now ſtand; ſo let vs conſider how there are foure things, that make manifeſt the greatneſſe of ſinne.
            Theſe foure cauſes following ſhewe manifeſtly vnto vs the greatneſſe of ſin.
            
               The firſt is the anger of God, the curſe and thunder of the law.
               Secondly, Corporall puniſhment, Diſeaſes, corporal death
               Thirdly, eternall puniſhment.
               Fourthly, The Croſſe, paſſion, and death of the Sonne of God.
            
            Now the evill of ſin appeareth in three things following, firſt the deformitie; for God doth loath it. Secondly the iniquitie thereof, for the Divel doth loue it. Thirdly, the infirmitie thereof, for the whole world is infected with it.
            Touching the firſt, it is ſaid in the holy Scripture in many and ſundry places Odio eſt Deo impius & impietas eius, God hateth the wicked man and his wickedneſſe Wiſ. 14. 9. Pſ. 5. 4. 6. Pſ. 14 4. Pro. 15. 8. 9. 29 Iob. 11. 52. Eſa. 1. 15. Pſal. 4 9. too: he hateth all thoſe that worke iniquitie, and both the wicked man, and his wickedneſſe are in hatred with him: yea the whole life of ſinners, as much as their very thoughts, words, and works God hateth. And farther more, their actions alſo, are abomination in his gratious ſight: he cannot abide them, but ſaith, he that committeth

ſinne, is of the Divell 
               1. Ioh. 3 8., and therefore, their name ſhall rot 
               Prov. 10. 7., their dwelling place ſhall not remaine 
               Iob 8. 22., but their deſtruction ſhall come ſuddainely, when they leaſt think vpon it 
               Prov 24. 22. 1 Pet. 3. 10.. He doth not only ſay, their houſes ſhall be deſtroyed 
               Prov. 14. 11., but alſo they themſelues ſhall bee no more remembred 
               Iob 24. 20., becauſe they ſhall bee taken in the ſin of their owne transgreſſions 
               Prov. 11. 6.; and farther yet, hee cannot abide, nor permit ſinners to praiſe him, or to name his teſtament with their mouthes, as the holy Ghoſt teſtifieth. And therefore no marvaile, if he ſhew ſuch rigor to ſinners at the laſt day, whom he ſo greatly hateth and abhorreth in this life. Therefore let ſinners take heed, that they by true repentance, and ſtedfaſt faith in Chriſt, be able to diſcharge their reckoning; leſt they chance to heare the dreadfull ſentence of Chriſt, Quātum in delitijs fuit, tantum dato illi tormentum, look how much he Apoc. 18. hath beene in delights, ſo much torment doe you lay vpon him. And thus the diſſolute ſinner is vnto God farre more vile then the bafeſt creature of all, even the Droane, Caterpiller, or Toad: for what is hee elſe but a filthie dunghill of all abhominations, & vncleannes: the ſtinke whereof, hath infected heaven and earth, & no perfume could ever allay it in the noſtrils of the Lord; ſaving only the Paſſion of Ieſus Christ, being a ſacrifice of a ſweet ſmelling ſavour to Almightie God.
            We make it very dainty to come neere a Lazarus, that is full of botches, blaines, and ſores. But how much more are thoſe men to be abhorred, who having layne many yeares dead in their ſinnes, and therefore doe now nothing but putrifie, rotte, and ſtinke in

them, like ougly and loathſome carions, lingering in their iniquitie, vntill it come to maturitie, that God in his iuſt iudgement and meaſure of time, may lay his heauy curſe vpon them when they ſhall behold the great, terrible, feareful, and angry countenance of that mighty God Iehovah, aboue them to be their iudge, with a ſword of vengance in the one hand to terrifie them, and a ſcabart of iuſtice in the other hand, to iudge them, and their ſins on the one ſide to accuſe and cry vengance againſt them, and thoſe curſed caitifes Gen. 3. 14., thoſe ougly monſters Eſa. 27. 1., thoſe damned ſpirits Mat. 25. 41., thoſe houling helhounds Pſal. 22. 16., and roaring Lyons 1. Pet. 5. 8., wil then and there be in a readines with vaſa furoris, their veſſels of fury on the other ſide to execute the vengance of Gods eternal ſentence, and indignation vpō them, their conſciences within them gnawing, without them al damned ſoules bewailing, & beneath them the infernal pit of hel open, and the cruell fornace ready boiling to deuour them, without & on euery ſide of them, al the world burning on fire. Oh thē
                what ſhal they do, to go backeward impoſſible to appeare intolerable. Thus much concerning the infirmity of ſin, & how God doth loath it.
            
               Secondly, ſinne is evill, in that the Diuell doth loue it. Firſt let vs conſider, that it is not gold nor ſiluer that he would haue, but animas peccatrices, the very ſoules of ſinners, wherewith he is enriched and fed; whoſe note is Da mihi animas, cetera tolle tibi, giue me the ſoules, take thou the reſt; yea he is that rauenous bird that deſireth and delighteth in the heart of his prey.

The Diuel being once asked what he beſt loued, anſwered three things, viz: Primam Lunam, Rotam Solis, Canis iram,
               
                  
                     the firſt quarter of the moone
                     C
                  
                  
                     the circle of the ſun,
                     O
                  
                  
                     and the rage of a dog,
                     R.
                  
               
The ſecond ſigne and token, whereby wee may proue that the Diuel loueth ſin is thus; he is neuer wearied out with his ſeeking, roaring, attempting, and earneſt following after ſin. For, from the beginning of the world he hath done nothing elſe, but cauſe & procure ſin; who indeed being once asked of God (as in the booke of Iob) from whence he came, ſaid, from compaſſing the whole Earth.
            Thirdly he loueth ſin, becauſe he is neuer ſatisfied therewith: for how many thouſands and millions of ſoules hath he vanquiſhed, devoured and overcome! and yet like a hunger-ſtarved Lyon ſtil ſeeketh whom he may devour.
            
               Lastly ſinne is an evill, in that it corrupteth, and an infirmity that infecteth the whole world. It is like a tertian 
               1. Iohn. 2. 
               feaver, becauſe whatſoeuer is in the worlde is either the luſt of the fleſh, or of the eies, or pride of life. Secondly it is like a quartane Ague, for his 4. degrees, 1. cordis, 2. oris, 3. operis, 4. conſuetudinis. Thirdly, Sin is like a quotidian feaver being continually and that by the meanes of the ſin of pride which is euery where. Sin is like a gout in the feet, by the meanes of ſluggiſhnes and idleneſſe: when we ſhould go about any good workes, we lacke both hands and feet, but the gowt makes vs feele and confeſſe, that we haue both. It reſembles

the Palſey, by meanes of anger, which makes a man often ſhake through the vehemēcy thereof. It is like the Dropſie through inſatiable deſire of hauing; & like a leproſie by the means of luxuriouſnes. Muſculus in his cōmon places hath exquiſitely opened vnto vs the true Anatomy of Sin, drawn out of the firſt Chapter of S. Iames, where wee reade that every man is tempted, drawne, and entiſed of his owne concupiſcence afterward, when concupiſcence hath cōceiued, it bringeth forth ſin, then ſin perfected bringeth forth death.
            Herein is declared, how ſin beginneth in vs, encreaſeth, & is perfected. There is in vs a corrupt poiſoned ſtrength of concupiſcence readily giuen vnto al kinde of evil, whereof is bred al kinde of ſin in this ſort.
            Firſt there creepe into our harts temptations, whereof Suggeſtion. are innumerable ſorts of kindes: one mā through covetouſnes, honoureth gold as his God; another through ambition is tempted with pride, an other through laſciviouſnes, is become effeminate, & haunteth after the fleſh as careleſly, as an Oxe goeth to the ſlaughter, or a foole to the ſtoekes, for correction, another Prov. 7. 22. hath his thoughts environed with furiouſneſſe and wrath, an other to gluttony and ſurfetting, an other to drunkenneſſe, ſwearing, backbiting and ſuch like. Now the temptation creepeth into vs by ſuggeſtion, either of Satan (as it chanced vnto Iudas and Ananias) or of our remembrance, or of the ſenſe of the body, which is by ſight, hearing, ſmelling, taſting, or touching.
            After that Temptation is infected with a certaine Delectation.
               
delight, as it were a ſawce, to feed & draw vnto it the Gen. 3. 6. minde of man. So Evah was allured with the beauty and delight of the forbidden Apple.
            The children of the ſtrong were allured with the Gen. 6. 2. Mat. 26. 14, 15 Mar. 14. 10, 11 Luk. 22. 5. Zach. 11. 12. 3. Conſent. daughters of men; Iudas with the ſweetnes of gaine, and ſo forth. Afterward followeth a conſent to ſin; lo here is a conceiving of ſinne, done as it were in the wombe of concupiſcence, which vpon every light occaſion, concupiſcence the vnhappy mother of ſinne 4 Perfection. bringeth forth: whiles that the ſin, which is conceived within, by conſenting to temptation is in worke perfected abroad. But although the worke come not out, yet neuertheleſſe, the ſin is perfected before God, which by conſent is conceiued in the hart; wherof we may ſee, Mat. 5. He that ſeeth a woman, and luſteth after her hath committed adultery with her already in his heart. 
               Mat. 5. 28. Therefore ſeeing the beginning of ſin, & the proceeding is of this ſort, a vertuous man, and hee that feareth God, muſt haue a ſpeciall care and regard to mark diligently all the thoughts of his heart, and ſuggeſtiōs of ſinne, either bred within, or ſlyly ſlipping in from without; and as he findeth them, ſo preſently to overthrowe them, and caſt them away: for man hath before 
               Ier. 21. 8. Eccl. 15. 17. 
               him life, and death, good and evill, and ſo what hee liketh, ſhall bee giuen him, therefore hee ought to abandon ſinne, and to delight in the waies of God, and he will giue him his hearts deſire, yea hee will helpe him and 
               Pſ. 37. 8. Eccl. 2. 6. 
               order his waies aright, if hee wil carefully watch & pray, that God may take away his ſinnes from him, that hee may enioy eternall life.
            
               
Fourthly, of the infinite and vnſpeakable mercy of The fourth matter contained in the fourth cauſe. God towards vs moſt miſerable ſinners. The quantity of mercy is not ſtrange, it droppeth as the gentle dew from heaven vpon the place beneath, it is twiſe bleſt, it bleſſeth him that giues, & him that takes, it is mightieſt in the mightieſt, it becomes the throne of Monarchie better then his crowne; his Scepter ſhewes the force of temporall power, the attribute to awe & maieſtie, wherein doth ſit the dread & feare of kings, but mercy is aboue the Scepters ſway, it is inthroned in the hearts of kings, it is an attribute to God himſelfe, and earthly powers do then ſhew moſt like to Gods, when mercy reacheth iuſtice.
            Thus may wee ſpeake in ſome part and meaſure of mercy that ſhould ſomewhat lodge in the heartes of men authoriſed: But not deliver a full and cleere diſcourſe of the infinite, ineffable, and incomprehenſible, compaſſionate, and provident God towardes vs moſt miſerable, and wretched ſinners. God commends his mercy towards vs, that when we were ſinners Chriſt died for vs; much more now being iuſtified in his Rom. 5. 8. bloud, ſhall we bee free from wrath through him: for wherefore was it that he had experience of evil, wherfore was he abaſed? wherfore did he beare our ſins vpon his body & was truely brokē for our tranſgreſſions but that in his feeling of our ſorrowes, we might the more ſenſibly ſee, what was all his loue, and mercy towards vs. God humbled himſelfe vnto a low degree, that he might exalt vs that are truely humbled. Wee muſt ſuffer with him, that wee may come vnto him in

his glory; without him wee are borne in anger, in him we are reconciled through many afflictions. Therefore our Saviour Chriſt in his laſt teſtament, did commend vnto his Father his ſpirit, to the Iewes his body, to the good theefe Paradiſe, to the vnrepenting ſinner hell, to the Apoſtles his Goſpell, and to the faithfull afflictiō for their triall. He that liketh not through theſe afflictions to goe vnto glory, may lie downe againe in his ſhame, where Chriſt did finde him, and make the world witneſſe of his vnſpeakable folly; and hee that will murmure againſt theſe afflictions in this way of life, which are none other then Chriſt did ſuffer a thouſandfold more then hee hath left for vs, let him leaue his redeemer, & dwell againe in the bondage of death, that the Angels may be witneſſes of an vnthankfull wretch. So awake therefore thou that ſleepeſt, that thou maiſt well imbrace, and apply this mercy of God vnto thy ſelfe, by thy repentance and amendment of life.
            God, ſaith Nazianzē, is delighted with nothing ſo much, as the recovery and amendment of man. Paule ſaith, that God would haue all men to be ſaved, and to 1. Tim. 2. come to the knowledge of the truth.
            S. Bernard ſaith, to redeeme a ſervant God ſpared not his ſonne. God ſpared not his ſonne, ſaith the Apoſtle, but delivered him vp for vs all, for theeues, murtherers, enimies, &c.
            Fiftly, of the infinite loue and affection of our Saviour The 5 point & matter of the 4 motiue, and cauſe. P
                     ••
                  u. 8. towards mankind. Solomon ſaith, in the perſon of God, my delight and pleaſure is to be converſant among
               
the ſons of men; I will remember the mercies of the Lord, & for the great goodnes towards the houſe of Eſa. 63. 7. Iſrael, which he hath giuen them according to his tender loue, and according to his great mercies; & in the ninth verſe, in all their troubles hee was troubled, that is, God bare their afflictions, as if they had beene his owne. The Angell of his preſence ſaved them, in his loue, and in his mercy hee redeemed them: and as a Father ſaith, David hath compaſſiō on his childrē, ſo hath the Lord compaſſion on them that feare him; and as far as 
               Pſ. 103. 14. 
               the eaſt is from the weaſt, ſo farre hath hee remoued our ſins from vs. Cyrill ſaith, He can no more ceaſe to bee mercifull Cyrill. and louing vnto the repentant ſinner, then hee can ceaſe to be God.
            The tongues of all men living (ſaith Marlorate) cā
               not declare Gods mercies and loue towardes vs, nor Marlorate. the pennes of all the writers in the world, can never ſufficiently expreſſe the ſame; becauſe the multitude of all mans offences in reſpect of Gods loue and mercies, is like a ſmall drop of raine to the greateſt ſea, or like a ſpiders web before the boiſterous wind.
            
               Taulerus ſaith, that God ſo loued vs, as if the Eſſence and proper health of him did conſiſt in vs; this is that loue, which being once, as it were, quite quenched, with the everlaſting waters of our iniquities, Rurſum accēditur interceſsione atque obedientia filij Dei, is again kindled with the interceſſion & obedience of the ſon of God. And the ſtory of Carpus is wel known, which Dionyſius reciteth vnto Demophilus, where theſe words of Chriſt are read, I ſo loue mankinde, that I had

rather die for it than ſuffer it to periſh. And what greater loue can there be, ſaith the ſcripture, then a man to giue his life for his friends?
            Thus proue we our Saviour to bee as David ſaith, Pſ. 86. 15. 
               a pitifull God, mercifull and ſlow to anger, yea ſuch a God as his compaſsiō is of no ſhort continuance; but as the Pſalmiſt 
               Pſ. 103. 17. ſaith, it endureth for ever, and ſheweth his loue & mercies 
               Deut. 3. 19. 
               vnto thouſands of them that loue him.
            
            The fift motiue of the fift cauſe is the fruites The 5 cauſe mouing vs to the earneſt meditatiō of the paſſion. and effects of Chriſt his Paſſion, that is to ſay, all the benefits of Chriſt, and the applying of theſe every one of them vnto our ſelues, without doubting, without reſpect of perſons, without particularity, without any reſpecting of thoſe that do beleeue.
            The firſt benefites are ſuch as take away from vs, things evil, and mortal, whereof are ſeauen ſorts.
            The firſt is the freeing vs from Sin. Chriſt was delivered vp for our ſinnes and roſe againe for our iuſtification, 
               Rom. 4. and the bloud of Chriſt doth cleanſe vs from al our ſins. And without ſhedding of bloud is no remiſſiō. Chriſt is the 
               1. Ioh. 1. 7. Heb. 9. 22. 1. Ioh. 2. 15. Tit. 2. 14. 1. Pet. 2. 
               propitiation for our ſins. Chriſt gaue himſelfe for vs, that he might deliuer and free vs from all iniquity. Chriſt himſelfe hath offered vp our ſinnes in his bodie crucified, that wee being free from ſin, might liue vnto righteouſneſſe.
            
            The ſecond is the freeing vs from the curſe of the law being made a curſe for vs, Curſed is every one that 
               Deut. 21. 23. 
               hangeth on a tree.
            
            The third is the freeing vs from the wrath of God, God raiſed Chriſt frō the dead, & putting out the hand writing 
               Gal. 3. 13. Col. 2. 12. 14.
               
               of ordinances that was againſt vs, he even took it out 
               Eph 1. 20. Eph. 2. 15. 
               of the way.
            
            The fourth is, the freeing vs frō the tyranny of the Devil, Chriſt hath deſtroied through death, him that had 
               Heb. 2. 14. Hoſ. 13. 14. 1. Cor. 15. 35. 
               the power of death, viz. the devil. Our Sauiour Chriſt alſo came as S. Auguſtine ſaith, at ſuch time when learning moſt flouriſhed, and when the greateſt Empire, the Devil, the world, the fleſh, and al other ſubtil, or politique wiſdome ſhould acknowledge their wits, & crafty dealing to be meere fooliſhnes, and all powers weake before God.
            The fift is, the freeing vs from the world, & the vileneſſe thereof, Chriſt gaue himſelfe for our ſinnes, that hee 
               Gal. 1. 4. Luk. 1. 74. Gen. 22. 16, 17 Ier. 31. 33. 
               might deliuer vs from this preſent euill world; to the end, that wee beeing deliuered out of the hands of our enemies, might ſerue him without feare.
            
            The ſixt is, the freeing vs from death, Chriſt hath aboliſhed 
               2. Tim. 1. 10. 
               death, and hath brought life and immortality vnto light: Chriſt (ſaith S. Auguſtine) was cloathed with Auguſtine. death; for, death could not die, but in life. And as Elizeus made yron to ſwimme, which naturally ſinketh, (ſaith Cyrill) ſo Chriſt by his death, brought vs backe from death, & hell, which deſeruedly we ſhould haue Cyrill. entred. And therefore, in the praiſe of our Saviours victory, S. Paul reioiceth and ſaith, Death is ſwallowed vp into victory. 
               1. Cor. 15. 54.
            
            The ſeauenth is, deliuerance from damnation, and hel: the ſonne of God hath appeared, that he might deſtroie the workes of the deuill, and therefore, God ſent him not into the world, that he ſhould condemne the world, but that

the world through him might bee ſaued. Now followe ſeauen other benefits which we receiue by the Paſſion of Chriſt.
            
            The firſt is our reconciliatiō with God, By the death 
               Rom. 5. 10. 
               of the Son of God, we are recouciled vnto God, when yet we were enemies; Chriſt is our peace. And as a corner ſtone ioineth two wals togither, ſo Chriſt our true corner stone, hath reconciled, both Iewes, and Gentiles vnto God. 
               Eph. 2. 20. Chriſt hath made peace by the bloud of his owne body 
               Col. 1. 20. ſhed on the Croſſe, Chriſt hath once ſuffered for our ſins the iuſt for the vniuſt, that he might bring vs to God.
            
            The ſecond is the remiſſion of ſins, through Chriſt we haue redemption from our ſins, by his bloud, euen the whole forgiueneſſe of our ſinnes.
            
            The third is righteouſnes, Chriſt dyed for al, that they which liue, ſhould not liue vnto themſelues, but vnto him. 
               2. Cor. 5. 15. 1. Cor. 15. 3, 4.
            
            The fourth is the giuing of the holy Ghoſt, Know yee not that your bodies are the temple of the holy Ghoſt? for yee are bought with a great price, therefore glorifie God in your bodies, & in your ſpirits which are Gods: God hath powred into vs the holy ſpirit, yea and that plē
               tiouſly.
            The fift is our victory againſt ſin, the devill, and the world, Be of good comfort, I haue overcome the world, and 
               Ioh. 16. 33. 
               haue aboliſhed death, ſinne, and the Devill.
            
            The ſixt is ſaluation and life eternal, for if we beleeue that Ieſus is dead, and is riſen, even ſo them which ſleepe in 
               1. Theſſ. 4. 14. Tit. 3. Ioh. 14. 1. Tim. 3. 
               Ieſus, will God bring againe vnto life; through Ieſus Chriſt we are made righteous and heires of eternall life; God ſent his ſon into the world, that through him we may haue life

everlaſting, Chriſt came into the world to ſaue ſinners, hee 
               Luk. 19. 10. 
               came into the world to ſaue them which were loſt, and not to call the righteous, but ſinners to repentance. Therefore Mat. 9. 13. 
               every ſpirit, which confeſſeth that Ieſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh, is of God, and every ſpirit that confeſſeth not that Ieſus Chriſt is come in the fleſh, is not of God. 
               1. Ioh. 4. 2, 3.
            
            The ſeauenth is, A compendious Epitome and Catalogue of the benefits which a Chriſtiā enioieth by the death Croſſe, and Paſſion of Chriſt.
            
            Through Adams fall, thou haſt tranſgreſſed the whole law; By Chriſts paſsion, death & reſurrection, thou hast fulfilled it. Through Adam thou art before God a vile and loathſome ſinner; through Christ thou appeareſt glorious in his ſight. By Adam every little croſſe is the puniſhment of thy ſin, & a token of Gods wrath; By Chriſt the great croſſes are eaſie, profitable, and tokens of Gods mercy. By Adam thou art dead, by Chriſt thou art quickned and made aliue againe. By Adam thou art a ſlaue of the divel and the childe of wrath: By Chriſt thou art the childe of God. In Adā
                thou art worſe then a Toad, and more deteſtable before God; But by Chriſt thou art aboue the Angels, for thou art ioined vnto him, & made bone of his bone, mystically.
            
            Through Adam, ſin and Satan haue rule in thee, & lead thee captiue; By Christ the ſpirit of God dwelleth in thee plentiouſly: by Adam came death vnto thee, and it is an entrance into hell; by Chriſt, though death remaine, yet it is the only paſsage vnto life.
            
            Laſtly in Adam, thou art poore, blind, & miſerable; But in Chriſt thou art rich, and glorious, thou art king on

earth, and fellow heire with him in heaven. And as ſure to be ioint heire, and partaker of all the ioyes, that heaven containeth, as hee is now. Adam when hee muſt needs taſt of the fruits that God had forbid him, hee made vs all to rue it even vntill this day, but here thou ſeeſt the fruits that growe, not in the earthly Paradiſe, 
               Rev. 22. 
               but in the tree of life, which is in the heavenly Ieruſalem.
            
            Now therefore, feare no danger, be bold in Chriſt, to eate of the fruit, as God hath commanded thee, it will quicken, and reviue thee being dead; thou canſt do Satan no worſe diſpleaſure, then to feed on the godly fruit of this Tree, and to ſmell on the ſweete leaues, which it beareth continually, that giue ſuch a refreſhing ſavour.
         
         
            THE SECOND PART.
            
               With what minde we ſhould come vnto the meditation of the paſsion.
            
            THE ſecond part vnto the things which we haue already ſpoken of, being well conſidered, followeth, that wee bring with vs a true penitent minde: the practiſe and exerciſe whereof conſiſteth in theſe foure points of repentance following.
            
               1 Contrition of the heart.
               2 Vnfayned confeſſion.
               3 A beleeuing and full confidence ſetled in the paſſion of Chriſt.
               4 The fruits of faith.
            
            But firſt we will ſpeake of repentance. To the ende We may inſtruct our preſent age with what mind they

ſhould come vnto the meditation of the paſſion, is firſt the contrition of the heart, by the nature of Repentance, which for the moſt part little vnderſtandeth the doctrine, and leſſe practiſeth the dutie, wherefore firſt we muſt ſhew what repentance is.
            
               Repentance is the conſtant turning of man in his whole life from all ſinnes vnto God, which muſt bee done ſo directly, that he muſt hate and deteſt his former evill life, purpoſing to become a new man, that God may make him a new heart and a new ſpirit, (not Ecleſ. 18. 31. in ſubſtance nor quantitie, but in qualitie) ariſing from a true and liuely faith, with a full perſwaſion of Gods mercies by the merits of Chriſt, for the forgiuenes of his ſinnes. But firſt let vs conſider that there bee two 2. Repentāces kindes of Repentance, the one, a true repentance vnto life, the other a falſe repentance vnto death; and example we may haue by Iudas, who is ſaid to haue repented, 1. The falſe. and which is more, to haue confeſſed his fault, & which is moſt of all, to haue made reſtitution, and yet it was a falſe repentance, becauſe it ſprang not of a true faith, but rather of the feare of death, which hee ſaw imminent before his eies, of the griefe & tediouſneſe of paine, of the horrour of hel, and feare of Gods invincible puniſhment which he knew he muſt needs abide, becauſe he betraied the innocent blood. Cain repented, yet he was condemned; Eſau repented, yet hee was condemned; Antiochus alſo did repent, yet he is condēned becauſe their prolonged repentance ſprang not of faith. S. Paul ſaith, without faith it is impoſſible to pleaſe God, and without faith there can be no true repē
               tance. Heb. 11. 6.
            
            
               
Thus many Iudaſses and deſparing wretches wil ſay (whē a miniſter or preacher goes about to perſwade them to amend their liues, and returne vnto God by repentance, in ſhewing them that God is more mercifull then man can be ſinfull, if man will be ſorrowfull) this or ſuch like anſwere; You ſay well indeed, God is mercifull, but alas, I am ſo vnworthy of my ſelfe, and finde ſo many imperfections in me, that I am not worthy of the mercie of God, and therefore I cannot expect it. Oh marke I beſeech you, this common obiection is altogether without faith, and it riſeth not from humilitie, but from the pride of the heart, and thereby it maketh many careleſſe men to diſtruſt in God: the reaſon is, becauſe they would not bee beholding vnto God for his mercy, but would rather ſeeme to haue God to be beholding vnto them for their worthineſſe. But if they would haue God to haue the glory, as moſt of right they ſhould, they muſt not ſtand vpon their owne infirmities; for the more vnworthy they are in their owne ſight (if they truely repent and be hartily ſory for their ſinnes, with a full purpoſe to continue in newneſſe of life) the more worthy will they bee in the ſight of God, & the more acceptable, becauſe gods glory is then moſt magnified, who can make their ſins 
               Eſa. 1. 18. 
               if they were as red as crimſon, to bee as white as ſnow, &c. And as our Saviour Chriſts power was not ſo much magnified in curing one that was but a few daies ſicke, Ioh 5 8. as in curing him that was thirtie eight yeares diſeaſed, ſo the mercy of God is not ſo much magnified in curing a ſmall ſinner, or a few ſinnes, as in curing of

great ſinners his goodneſſe ſheweth it ſelfe: for when they haue ſo humbled themſelues, by returning vnto God by true repentance, that with the Centurion, they can ſend their friends (that is) their zealous and ful beleeuing prayers vnto Chriſt with this meſſage, Lord I am not worthy thou ſhouldſt enter vnder my roofe, but Luk 7. 6, 7. ſpeake the word and my ſinnes will be cured, or with Peter Lord depart from me a ſinfull man; then ſhall they finde Luk. 5. 8. their ſoules cured, their ſinnes pardoned, & Chriſt wil come to them in mercy. Thus much concerning the falſe repentance, with this ſhort perſwaſion to withdrawe men from the ſame.
            Now followeth the true repentance. Wherin firſt let vs conſider, that there is no doctrine in the Church 2. The true repentance of God ſo neceſſary, as the doctrine of repentance, & amēdmēt of life; neither doth the holy ghoſt ſo much labour in all the Scripture, as he doth to beate repentance into mens heads: it was the only ſermon which Iohn Baptiſt preached, while hee prepared the way for Mat. 3. 2. Chriſt, Repent for the kingdome of God is at hand.
            
            This repentance is not defined altogether by this word poenitentia, becauſe (as Divines ſaie) it doth not comprehend totum terminum, à quo & ad quem, from whom and to whom we muſt returne.
            But this is the true Repentance, which the latines interpret by this word Reſipiſcentia, or Conuerſio, which is not only a changing of the minde, but it is Receſsus à malo, a forſaking of euill, acceſſus ad bonum and returning vnto that which is good. reuertimini vſque ad me, ſaith the Lord, returne as far as vnto me; we

muſt returne vnto the Lord, wee muſt returne vnto him alone, for he is the truth, and the fountaine of all goodnes.
            For better proofe, that true Repentance is a turning vnto God, we may proue it by the Authority of the holy Scriptures plentiouſly, where God commandes vs to returne vnto him, O yee children of Iſrael (ſaith he) Eſa. 31. 6. 
               turne againe from your infidelity, wherein you drowned your ſelues. Againe, turne you, turne you from your euill 
               Ezech. 33. 11. 
               waies; for why will yee die, O yee houſe of Iſrael? And again, Eſa. 55. 7. 
               let the wicked for ſake their evill waies, and returne vnto the Lord, and he will haue mercy vpon them, for hee is mercifull, & very ready to forgiue. Hoſea exhorting the people vnto repentance, ſaith, Come and let vs returne vnto the Lord. And againe, O Iſraell returne vnto the Lord 
               Hoſ. 6. 1. Hoſ. 14. 2. Ier. 4. 1. Ezech. 18. 30 32. 
               thy God, for thou haſt falne by thine iniquitie. Likewiſe ſaith Ieremiah, O Iſraell if thou returne, returne vnto me. As much ſaith Ezechiah, returne vnto the Lord, & cauſe others to returne away from all their tranſgreſſions.
            
            Therefore this returning vnto the Lord (as a Father ſaith) ought not to be done careleſly, but Lavandum eſt cor poenitētiae lacrymis, we muſt waſh our harts in the troubled poole of Betheſda, in the troubled teares of repentance, having an inward ſorrow of the minde, wrought by the holy Ghoſt, for the ſins before committed againſt ſo good and gracious a God, ioyned both with a perfect faith, to be forgivē for Chriſt his ſake, and alſo with a full and determinate purpoſe, from henceforth to amende and lead a new life. Now beloued the holy ſcripture alleageth that true

repentance hath two principall parts mortificatio & vivificatio, mortifying the old man, & the quickning of the new man; mortificatiō cōtaineth, firſt acknowledging of ſin, ſecondly, a ſorrow and griefe for ſinne, thirdly, a flying and ſhunning of ſin; vivification which is the quickning of the new man, cōprehendeth thoſe things that are contrary to mortificatiō, which is firſt acknowledging of Gods mercy, & the applying therof in Chriſt, ſecondly a ioyfulnes thence ariſing, thirdly, an ardent, or earneſt endeavour to ſinne no more: we may adde vnto true repentance thoſe 4. parts as afore ſaid, the firſt Contrition of the heart, in the which wee ought for to be ſorrowful for theſe three things, firſt for the ſin we haue committed, ſecondly for the good we haue omitted, thirdly for the good time wee haue loſt, ſo that we may plainely ſee, that Contrition, is a feare and ſorrowfulneſſe of conſcience, which perceiveth that God is angry with ſin, & is ſory that we haue ſinned. Now to ſpeake more largely of it let vs knowe that contrition alſo comprehēdeth theſe two things, firſt the knowledge of God, requiring obedience, and diſcommending diſobedience, and not remitting ſin without a full and perfect ſatisfactiō, either in reſpect of obedience it ſelfe, or elſe in reſpect of puniſhment: ſecondly the diſcuſſing or examining our own nature of our thoughts, our wils, our affections, and al our actions and deeds, according to the ſquare and rule of Gods lawes in every point, whereby we are lead and brought to the knowledge, as wel of our filthines, as alſo of our iuſt condemnation. Therefore S. Paule willeth

vs to examine our ſelues and call our ſoules to daily 2. Cor 13. 5. account thus did Sextius when the day was ended and the night come, wherin he ſhould take his reſt, he would aske his minde, what evil haſt thou healed this day? what vice haſt thou ſtood againſt? in what part art thou bettered? In the which examination if wee throughly cōſider, we may eaſily finde, that we offend God three manner of waies, that is, by the delight of the thought, by the lapſe of the tongue, and by the pride of works; & thoſe three are to be cured, by three contrary remedies, the delight of the thought, by inward ſorrow and contrition of the heart, the lapſe of the tongue by confeſſion of the mouth in the examining of our ſelues, and the pride of workes, by our vpright liuing: al theſe being rightly done ſhewe, that we are in the way of true Repentance. And thus much for the firſt part.
            
               The ſecond part of Repentance.
               Secondly, Repentance requireth alſo confeſſion, not Auricular, but before God, and craving of pardon in ſeeking and moſt earneſt entreating the helpe & merciful fauour of our Saviour Ieſus Chriſt. Now of this confeſſion I haue already ſpoken of in the thirde motiue, which doth declare the weaknes of our nature: but to ſpeake more largely of it, Chryſostome ſaith that nothing pleaſeth God more then Confeſſion, if it bee ioined with true contrition, and that it is a part of humiliation, and ever ioined with true repentaunce, becauſe they cannot be truely humbled, & repent, who confeſſe not their ſins vnto God, neither wil he giue

them pardon, for God couers, when men vncouer & acknowledge, he iuſtifieth when men condemne, he pardons when men accuſe themſelues. And if any mā plead vnto God non est factum, and deny his deeds and debts of ſin, there is no reaſon why hee ſhoulde haue the acquittance of grace. Therefore ſaith Solomon, He that hideth his ſinnes, ſhall not proſper, but hee that confeſſeth 
                  Prov. 28. 13. 
                  & for ſaketh them ſhall haue mercy. Thus Dauid confeſſeth his ſins vnto God, and ſaith, Againſt thee O Lord haue I ſinned and done this evill in thy ſight, beholde I 
                  Pſal. 51. 4, 5. 
                  was borne in ſin, and in iniquity hath my mother conceived me. And in another place, I ſaid I will cōfeſſe againſt my ſelfe, my wickednes vnto the Lord, and thou forgavest me the puniſhment of my ſins. This confeſſion, as S. Augustine 
                  Pſ. 32. 5. ſaith, if it be ioined with true contrition of the hart, openeth the gates of heaven, and ſtoppeth the gates of hel; he addeth farther and ſaith, it is an expeller of vices, a reſtorer of vertue, an impugner of wicked ſpirits, and an impediment of the Divell. And S. Ambroſe ſaith when the confeſſion of the mouth proceedeth from the hart by true repentāce, then the vē
                  gance of God ceaſeth to purſue the penitent perſon: for if God heareth a ſinner (ſaith he) in true cōtritiō of the heart vtter but this one word, peccaui, I haue ſinned, hee is in a maner ſo charmed with it, that he hath no more power ouer himſelfe, & cānot chooſe but grant pardon & remiſſion: yea & his mercies are ſo great vnto penitent ſinners, that he ſaith, Before they cal I wil anſwere, and while they ſpeake I will heare. The Pelican 
                  Eſa. 65. 24. was never more willing to pecke out her owne heart

bloud to feed her yoūg, nor the nurſe to giue her breſt vnto the childe, then our Savior Chriſt is to giue pardon vnto thoſe that truely cōfeſſe their ſins vnto him. Oh therefore beloued ſeeing God is thus mercifull, let vs remember our owne eſtate in time, and liue no longer like ſlaues vnto ſin, but confeſſe our ſins vnto God, either with David, who cried vnto him in the bitterneſſe of his heart, ſaying, O Lord haue mercy vpon me & heale my ſoule, for I haue ſinned against thee; or with the Pſ. 41 4. prodigal ſon, let vs (in our confeſſion) cry vnto God, as he did vnto his Father, ſaying, O Father I haue ſinned against heaven, and before thee, and am no more worthy to 
                  Luk. 15. 18, 19 
                  be called thy ſon, make me as one of thy hired ſervants; or els with Manaſſes king of Iuda, who in his penitent praiers bowed the very knees of his hart before God crying, I haue ſinned, O Lord I haue ſinned, aboue the number of the ſands of the ſea, but I humbly beſeech thee to forgiue me and deſtroy me not with my tranſgreſſions: which in ſo doing we ſhal ſurely finde the Lord to be mercifull. And thus much concerning the ſecond part of repentance.
            
            
               The third part of Repentance.
               Thirdly faith, which is the ground of repentaunce, & it cauſeth men to hate ſin, & without hatred of ſin, there can neuer be any true repentance. Now hatred of ſin, riſeth from ſanctification: for, the vnſanctified man may leaue ſin, but not hate it, as ſin; it is holineſſe that hateth iniquitie.
               Now there can be no ſanctification, without iuſtification, and this cannot be without faith, for faith cō
                  prehendeth

iuſtification, that is, abſolution from our ſins, or the forgiueneſſe of our ſins, & an accepting & receiving vs into eternal life freely for Chriſt his ſake, the adopting vs into ſons, imputation of the righteouſnes, not for any works of mē, either paſt, preſent, or euer ſhalbe, but for the merits and righteouſneſſe of Ieſus Chriſt alone.
               Againe, the inward or inſtrumentall cauſe of repē
                  tance, is faith, which may bee called the mother of repentance, which bringeth it forth, as the word is the begetter, and ſo may haue the name of a father; for he that is without faith, though hee hath a name to liue, yet is he dead, for the iuſt ſhall liue by faith; no life then without faith, and no repentance without life. Hab. 2. 4.
               
               The fourth part of repentance, is the fruits of faith, holineſſe, and righteouſneſſe of life, towards God and our neighbours, thankſgiving, prayer, zeale, and other workes of Chriſtian charitie. Now ſeeing the fruites of repentance bringeth forth zeale, where there is little zeale, there is little repentance, and where no zeale there is no repentance, for hee that repenteth truely, the fruits of his faith will make him ſorry, when he cā
                  not further Gods glory as much as he would, if he cā
                  not enioy his word, if he ſee God diſhonoured, & falſe worſhip eſtabliſhed, hee will pine and grieue, and fall away, as it is written, The zeale of thine houſe hath eaten me. Pſ. 69. 9. & 1. King. 19. 10. Elias ſaith, I haue beene very zealous for the houſe of the Lord: it is ſaid, hee was ſo ſtriken with ſorrow, that he was ready to die, becauſe hee ſaw not the glory of God goe forwards: ſo that where

there is true zeale in their repentance, there alſo the fruits of their faith bringeth forth this affection of ſorrow and mourning, declaring thereby, the zeale that the faithfull can offer vnto God for their ſinnes.
            
         
         
            The third part,
            
                viz. How manifold is the meditation of the paſsion of Chriſt. The meditation of the paſsion is fourefold. 1. Literall or hiſtoricall. 2. Spirituall, which is proper to the beleeuers. 3. Exemplariall. 4. Allegoricall.
            
            WE muſt vſe our ſelues to the olde and accuſtomed words for our inſtruction ſake, ſeeing that wee haue none other, the Literall meditation is the knowledge of the reading, the hearing, the thinking of, and the reciting of the Hiſtorie of the Paſſion, as it is preached or written, printed or painted, ſo it be without any ſuperſtition. So as the deſire and ſtudy of learning, and practiſing of Repentance, and amendment of our ſinfull liues with confirming of our faith, may thereby bee the better ſtirred vp, and kindled in our hearts. This meditation therefore is not to be deſpiſed. For the cogitating or thinking of the hiſtory, is a beginning of the ardent and earneſt motions wherewith God indeed is well pleaſed. As it is written, faith commeth by hearing, & hearing by the word of God; herevnto pertaineth many godly ſermons, bookes, proſe, or verſe, treating of the Paſſion of Chriſt, all which without ſuperſtition, ought godly to be vſed and continued.
            There are many things in the reading of this hiſtory

to be thought vpon, as what the Paſſion is, what bee the cauſes: & in this paſſion, what is the difference between the paſſion of Chriſt, and the paſſion of other Saints of God; how it is to be applied, and what fruits may follow the applying of the paſſion. But becauſe theſe cannot be done without the ſpirituall meditation, we will ſpeake firſt thereof.
            The ſpirituall meditation thereof is this, firſt truely to tremble and feare at the knowledge of ſinne, and of Gods anger and wrath powred out vpon the ſonne of God; then to be illuminated with a new light, & cleerneſſe, and to reioice and ſettle it ſure in faith, that Gods anger is pacified by his ſonne, and for his ſake that our ſinnes be forgiven vs, and everlaſting life reſtored vnto vs, whereby wee may repoſe our whole confidence in God, being fully and aſſuredly reſolved, that remiſſion of our ſinnes, everlaſting righteouſneſſe, and life is given 
               Heb. 2. 4. Eph 2 7, 8, 9. Rom. 5. 1. Rom. 3. 24. 25. Act. 10. 43. Rom. 1. 17. 1. Ioh. 3. 36. 1. Cor. 1. 30. 1. Cor. 2. 2. 1. Ioh. 5. 10. 
               not to others only, but to vs alſo, and that freely through the mercy of God, for the merits of Chriſt alone, by whom we are made righteous before God, and heires of eternall life, becauſe our only ſatisfaction, and holineſſe of Chriſt, is our righteouſneſse before God, and we cannot apply it vnto our ſelues any other way, then by faith. In this meditation a godly mind ſeeth & rightly conſidereth what the Paſſion is: for what the Paſſion of Chriſt is, theſe wordes in the 27 of Matthews Goſpell, v. 46. doe very evidently declare, viz. Ieſus cryed with a lowd voice ſaying, Eli, Eli, lamaſabachthani, my God, my God, why haſt thou forſaken me? Obſerue the manner how Ieſus delivered theſe words, viz. crying out & that with a lowd voice,

for even as a vapour drawne vp by the vertue of the Sun, and Starres, aſcending vp into the middle region, through the heat that is in it, and the cold compaſſing it, breaketh out into a violent ſtroke, and a vehement noiſe, which cauſeth the thunder; even ſo Chriſt, through the extremitie that his humanitie ſuffered for our ſinnes, was driven to break out into this thundering voice, and cry alowd, Quare dereliquiſti me? why haſt thou forſaken me? God indeed had forſaken him vntill his anger was pacified, and his wrath appeaſed. Notwithſtanding that hee feeleth himſelfe as it were wounded with Gods wrath, and forſaken for our ſins, yet he ceaſeth not to put his confidence in God, and call vpon him. Which is written to teach vs in all affliction to truſt ſtill in God, be the aſſaults never ſo grievous to the fleſh. And yet this lowd crying noyſe was not of the feare of death; for, ſhould not hee that ſaveth all men, be able to ſaue himſelfe? Neither feare of his enimies, nor paines of his torments, as commonly it fareth with men, who ſuffer many torments at the hands of their enimies, without giving any knowledg or note vnto their adverſaries, of their paine, ſorrow, or griefe: for ſo might he as well as any haue borne it out with ſilence. Saul ſheathed his ſword in his owne bowels; Sampſon brought death vpō his own head, rather thē the Philiſtines ſhould triumph over him: But it was our ſinnes, and the heavy burthen thereof, (the waight whereof none elſe could ever haue borne) which this deepely tormented Chriſt did vndergoe. Through the which our ſinnes, & iniquities, God was

ſo highly diſpleaſed, that they being laid vpon his ſons ſhoulders, made him to cry out with a lowd voice, about the ninth houre of the day, ſaying, O my God, my God, why haſt thou for ſaken me? Oh therefore I beſeech you, let the horrour of it be freſh in our memories, & the meditation imprinted in our thoughts, ſo that our hands may tremble, and ſhake for feare, and our whol bodies quiver and quake with terrour of it, when any evill imagination is hatched in our hearts, or any wicked deed ſhould be acted with our hands, that we may be terrified from nouriſhing ſin within our boſome, that laid ſo heavie a burthen and ſo mightie a Croſſe vpon our ſweet crucified Ieſus, to make him cry with ſo lowd a voice. Oh what envie had robbed the hearts of the Iewes, and diſpoiled all their ſences of common humanitie, yea what infernall phrenſey, what Tyrannous impietie, what execrable Tyranny can bee compared to this Iewiſh crueltie, that they could finde no remorſe of pittie, to beſtow one mite of mercy to help & eaſe the intollerable paines of our grievous Saviour, when he cryed with ſo lowd and pittiful voice, ſaying, O my God, my God, why haſt thou for ſaken me 
               Mat 27. 46., whoſe bloody ſweat came trickling downe to the ground 
               Luk. 22. 44., yet notwithſtanding their eies were more hard then a rocke, that they could not yeeld one teare of pittie, & hearts more vnapt then Adamant, to relent with any tender compaſſion, when they ſaw ſo wofull & dolefull a ſpectacle, which was forcible enough to haue drawne ſtreames of teares out of the drieſt eie that ever was in the head of man, and to haue incited a multitude of

heavie and ſorrowfull groans, out of the hardeſt hart that ever God made. Oh! was there ever crueltie like vnto this; that they ſhould bee attempting, ſpitting, ſmiting, and mocking the ſonne of God, put the crown of thornes on his head, nayle him to the Croſſe, and when he was a thirſt, to giue him vineger to drinke, and crucifie him.
            
            So that now, I ſay, what the Paſſion of Christ is, theſe words do plainely teach vs, viz: O my God, my 
               Mat. 27. 48. 
               God why haſt thou for ſaken me: My ſoule is thirſty even 
               Mat 26. 38. 
               vnto death: theſe & many other examples may ſhewe vs the Croſſe of Chriſt. The firſt by diet, when he faſted 
               Mat. 4. 2. Mat. 26. 26. 
               forty daies, and forty nights, the ſecond by Electuarie, when hee gaue his moſt precious body and bloud in his laſt ſupper; the third, by ſweat at his agony in the garden, the Luk. 22. 44. Mat. 27. 30. fourth by plaiſter, when his face was ſpitted vpon by the Iewes, the fift by potion, when he tasted vineger mixed 
               Ioh. 19. 29. 
               with gall, the ſixt by letting bloud, when his hands and feet were pearced, yea when his hart vaine was ſtriken, Ioh. 19. 34. 
               his ſides goared with a ſpeare. But this one thing more note, that no man could take his life from him, but he laid 
               Iohn 10. 18. Act. 2. 24. 1. Ioh 1. 2. 1. Ioh 4 9. Ioh. 3. 16. Mat. 1 23. 1. Tim. 3. 16. 
               it downe himſelfe, for he being both God and man, had power both to lay downe his life, & power to take it vp againe that hee might by the power of his godhead ſustaine in his fleſh, the burthen of Gods wrath, and recouer for vs that righteouſneſſe which we by the fall of Adam had lost. And herein are we alſo taught a doctrine of his double nature, viz: his deity which hath many things that in the humanity was never performed; and his humanitie, having diverſe things not anſwerable vnto the godhead,

wherevpon ſpeaketh a Father in this manner? Whē Chriſt ſuffered death in his fleſh vpō the Croſſe, the godhead and manhood were ſtill togither, but his godhead did not ſuffer: that we might be iuſtified, not only in his fleſh, but alſo in his Divinity, & that wee might be ſaued, both in his godhead & manhood togither: for this cauſe was the whole enduring of al his baſenes, vilenes, and humiliation, of his taking vpon him our infirmities (ſin only excepted) which brought vpon him the horrible wrath of God, againſt ſinne, with griefes in hart, in ſoule and body, which he took, & ſuffered patiently, only for the making amends vnto his Father for our ſinnes, & the pacifying of Gods moſt wrathful iudgement, againſt mankinde, by this his offering himſelfe a ſufficient ſacrifice or equall price anſwerable fully for the ſins of the whole world. To cōclude, this his ſacrifice cauſed the ſweet ſtreams of pure water of life, to flow out of the cleare & continuall ſpringing fountaine of his mercies daily powred vpon mankinde, comfortable to coole the heat of our thirſty tongues, and as medicinable to cure the ſpreading malady of Adams fall, which infected our ſoules with the leproſie of ſin.
            
               The Paſſion of Chriſt is threefold.
               
                  1 Externall.
                  2 Internall.
                  3 Conſisting of both.
               
            
            Firſt Externall, being in the body members and parts thereof, as the tearing & rending of the vaines.
            Secondly Internall, as the ſorrow and griefe working

in the heart, & the great torment ariſing out of the feare of the tearing of the body, and death, and alſo the feeling of Gods wrath.
            Thirdly, that which conſisteth of both, is belonging to the body and ſoule, and to the whole Chriſt, God and man. The iniurie, afflicting, ſlandering, ſcoffing, the crowne of thornes, and other like torments concurring togither in his body, pearcing (as it were) & entring even vnto the Divinity, which it ſelfe never ſuffered, becauſe it is vnchangeable, and therefore impaſſible. Touching his Diuinity, it did alwaies ſupport his humanity, which Habacuck perceiving ſaith in his Hab. 3. 4. third Chapter thus, ibi abſeondita eſt fort it udo eius, he had hornes comming out of his hands, and that was the hiding of his power. For as the Sun when it is covered with a clowde is hidden, and yet it is not cleane ſpent, and gone, and that light, which ſpreading all the world over, illuſtrateth every thing, with his cleare brightneſſe, is included in a ſmall obſtacle from vs: even ſo was the Deity hid in that humanity which hee put on him, and yet ſeparated neither from body nor ſoule. We read in Leviticus that the ſacrifice that did purifie and cleanſe from Leproſie was on this ſort; Levit. 14. they tooke two male Sparrowes being aliue, one of them was killed and put into an earthen veſſel, hauing faire & cleare running water, the other Sparrow that was aliue his wings, with Cedarwood, and ſcarlet cloath, with hyſſop, were dipped in the bloud of the ſlaine Sparrow, which he that was diſeaſed, & infected with the leproſie, was ſprinkled withall. The ſlaine

Sparrow ſignifieth the humanity of Chriſt put to death: the Sparrow that was left aliue ſignifieth the Godhead of Chriſt, which was impaſſible. But yet for all this it was diverſly violated, and abuſed by the enemies thereof, and as much as in themlay, was hurt, blaſphemed, and debaſed.
            As when the high Prieſts accuſed Chriſt, for ſaying that he was the ſon of God, alſo whē they ſpat in his face, and bad him propheſie, tell who it was that ſtroke him, and alſo they bowed themſelues before him, they ſmit him with their fiſts, ſaying, Haile king of the Iewes, being mocked, crowned with thornes, overburthened, and laden with bearing of his Croſſe, which they made him to cary, nailed on the Croſſe, and being both with ieſts, and ſcoffes, gybed at in this wiſe, if thou be the ſon of God, come downe from the Croſſe, and ſaue thy ſelfe; here now was the word, even the ſon of God, yea the whole Trinity, moved both to a iuſt commiſeration, and a rightful indignation.
            Howbeit wee muſt vnderſtand, that this Paſsion of Christ had not then his beginning, when he was crucified. But all his life time after his conception, by the ſpace of thirty yeares even vnto the puniſhment, and paine of the Croſſe, to haue bin nothing elſe but a continual and full Paſſion, miſery, ſatisfaction and ſacrifice for our ſins. He was borne an infant, and laid in the manger, becauſe there was no roome for them in the Inne, but in the ſtable, in cold & want of all things Luk 2. 7. needfull, wherevpon ſaith Gregory, Chriſt came from heauē into a womans wombe, frō a womans wombe

into a cratch or manger, frō the manger to the croſſe, from the croſſe to the graue, and from the graue hee went to heauen againe. But to recite or ſpeake more of his troubles, (what can I ſay, but that which hath beene already ſpoken of by others?) in his infancie he fled from the tyranny of Herod, and was caried into Egypt. After his baptiſme, hee was oftentimes, and diverſly tempted, by the ſpace of two daies of Satan, whom afterwards acknowledged and openly confeſſed Mar. 5. 7. him to bee the ſon of the moſt high God. The princely Prophet David, in the 110. Pſalme, ſpeaking Pſal. 110. 7. of Chriſts afflictions, and his paſſion through the which hee ſhould enter into his glory, vſeth theſe words, He ſhall drinke of the brook in the way. The which for the diverſitie of interpretations, I am the more bolder to inſert, that among many the plaineſt & trueſt ſignification might bee beſt knowne and allowed. The lewes which alwaies fedde themſelues with the vaine hope of the cōming of ſuch a Meſſias, as ſhould be a certaine earthly, civill, and powerfull king, doe very fondly apply this ſentence vnto victories, for thus they expound it, Hee ſhall drinke of the brooke, that is to ſay, of the blood of them that are ſlaine; as if the Prophet ſhould ſay, that the Meſſias, as a mightie conquerour, ſhould performe ſo great a ſlaughter vpon his enimies, that the bloud of the ſlaine ſhould ſtreame & flowe like a brooke, and that the whole armie as victorious, and conquerours, might drinke of the brooke in in the way, as they are purſuing their enimies. In the which forme and maner of ſpeech they ſuppoſe it to

be thus ſignified, that Chriſt will bee ſatisfied with the bloud of his enimies. But ſeeing the text in this place, ſpeaketh nothing of bloud, neither can bloud bee thought a fit drinke for conquerours; except it bee figuratiuely ſpokē, as in the prophecie of Balaam, where the drinking of bloud is referred vnto the Lyon, neither is it ſpoken of the people of Iſrael, but by a figure among the later writers. Some think it a ſimilitude taken from the circumſtance of ſtrong and valiant captaines, who in their chaſe and purſuit of their enimies ſlacke nothing of their heat and fervency, neither will be hindred, with any care or deſire of meate, drinke, ſleepe, or any other pleaſure, to the end they might the better follow, and enforce the courſe and purſuite of the victorie, but content and very well pleaſed to quench their thirſt with water for their drinke, running out of every brooke, which they meet withal, never leaue chaſing and purſuing their enimies. As Gedeon made triall of the valour and vertue of his ſouldiers courage by their drinking of water. Iudg. 7.
            
            Thus therefore would they haue this verſe vnderſtood of Chriſt, as if by this maner of ſpeech, a warlike ſtrength and courage were to bee attributed vnto him, that he is ſo hot and haſtie, ſo eager and reſolute in purſuing his victories, that he will not ceaſe & leaue of, nor by any meanes, either for loue of meat, drinke, or any other delights whatſoever, bee revoked from his purpoſe; & ſo by this meanes may ſtrike it into the hearts of his enimies, how terrible and fearefull his power and ſtrength is. Howbeit we wil hold the moſt

plaine and ſimple ſentence that the phraſe it ſelfe doth yeeld & offer vs. The Prophets ſpeech firſt tended vnto Chriſt, the king aſcribing vnto him the chiefeſt power and victories over all his enimies; and therefore, leaſt after the maner of the Iewes, this ſhould bee vnderſtood of a corporall kingdome, hee addeth the doctrine of his paſſion, which ſhould open, as it were, a way from him vnto glory, and advancement in his kingdome, as it is ſaid, it behoued Chriſt to ſuffer, & ſo to 
               Luk. 24. 
               enter into his glorie. For, to drinke in the Scripture is taken thus, to be afflicted, for thus ſaith the Lord, behold, they whoſe iudgement was not to drinke of Ier. 24. 12. the cup, haue aſſuredly drunken; and art thou hee that ſhall eſcape free? thou ſhalt not go free, but thou ſhalt ſurely drinke of it: which is as much to ſay, I haue not ſpared my owne people, and how ſhould I pitty thee? Can yee drinke of the cup which I ſhall drinke of? But there is ſomewhat more contained in this phraſe, whē he ſaith, He ſhall drinke of the brooke, then if hee had ſimply ſaid, He ſhall drinke of the cup: for to drink of the cup ſiguifieth the ſuffering and enduring but of a part or portion of ſome certaine miſerie allotted vnto any one: but to drinke of the brooke in this place, ſignifieth the taſting of al kind of miſeries, and the vndergoing of the greateſt burdens of all miſeries, and calamities, even in the higheſt degrees. For Torrens a brooke, importeth both the greatneſſe and fierceneſſe of miſeries and calamities, ſtreaming & flowing of all ſides. For Chriſt felt the anger of God to bee powred vpon him, yea and the ſinnes of all mankind Inſtar Torrentis,
               
like a river brooke to runne & flow round about him on every ſide; therefore is hee ſaid to drinke of the brooke in the way: & by this his paſſion, ſaith the Prophet, ſhall he enter into the kingdome, & exalt abit caput, and ſhall lift vp his head, that is, he ſhall riſe againe from death vnto life, and ſhall rule in power, and this is to be held as a ſentence moſt ſignificant and plaine, ſhewing the kingdome of Chriſt to bee farre more otherwiſe, then that which the Iews fondly dreame of.
            For Chriſt through miſeries, afflictions, & through death, which he ſuffered is aſcended vp into the glory, that hath gotten him a name, that is, dignitie and renowne.
            Now then, ſeeing that it behoueth vs to be confirmed, Phil. 1. 9. and made like vnto the image of the ſon of God, let vs not thinke, or looke to haue the Church glorified, before ſhe be mortified, that is, toſſed, and confirmed through many afflictions and calamities. Our Saviour Chriſt dranke deepely of the water brooke, for he was made weake, he hungreth, hee thirſteth, hee is bitten with the cold of winter, and dryed vp with the outragious heat of ſommer, he weepeth, he watcheth, he is troubled, he is deſpiſed, and dayly beholdeth, and thinketh vpon the Tyrannie of Satan, working againſt mankind, and the extreame miſeries of all men, as alſo the horrible anger and wrath of God, powred vpō the ſonne himſelfe, with ſharpneſſe of puniſhment, and with all the great ingratitude of the greateſt part of the whole world, yea the careleſneſſe, and impenitencie even of Chriſtians themſelues. The perſequtions

of the godly, and thoſe grievous afflictions of his afflicted and troubled heart, doe theſe words ſet downe and declare, I muſt bee baptiſed with a baptiſme, and how 
               Luk. 12. 50. 
               am I grieved vntill it be ended.
            
            He came vnto his owne, and thoſe people receaved him not, his Diſciples are indocil and dull in vnderſtā
               ding his doctrine, Iudas betrayed him, the reſt doe forſake 1. Sinne. him. In mount Olivet he ſhaketh and trembleth, & mournefully lamenteth with ſuch great waight and heavineſſe, as exceedeth the hugenes both of heavē & earth, hee ſweateth blood, and being betrayed with a trayterous kiſſe, is apprehended of his owne people, and led forth like a theefe or a murtherer.
            
               In the houſe of Annas and Caiphas, & in the counſell 2. The law. of the high prieſts, with falſe witneſſes is hee brought forth, ſpit vpon, whipped and derided, and here hee wreſtleth with the law, and the curſe of the law.
            
               In the houſe of Herod he is deſpiſed, & mocked of the 3. The world. chiefe Lord, and of all that were in his Court, and being attired in a new and ſtrange habit, like a foole and an ideot with aſſes eares, having his nailes pulled frō his feet, clad in a long ſide gowne, with a booke in his hand, (for ſo thoſe Philoſophers the enimies of Chriſt painted and ſet him forth, as Tertullian writeth) hee is ſent vnto Pilate, and here Chriſt wreſtleth with the world. He is accuſed in the common hall, being overcharged 4 The Divel. with opprobrious nips & taunts, with blows, and blaſphemies, he is condemned to be crucified, and to be executed in puniſhment with two theeues, and here hee wreſtleth with the kingdome of the Divell.

He is ſtretched out vpon the croſſe, hee is hanged as a 5. The anger of God and death. moſt vile tranſgreſſour betweene two theeues, hee is mocked, and ſtriueth with the anger of God, and death it ſelfe, he is pearced, &c.
            Through the bitterneſſe & ſharpeneſſe of theſe his miſeries and calamities the ſonne of God cryeth, Saue 
               Pſal. 69. 
               me O God, for the waters are entred even vnto my ſoule, in this Pſalme we may ſee what the paſſion of Chriſt is, and what he ſuffered. Let vs now ſay ſomewhat concerning the cauſes of the paſſion of Chriſt.
            The principall efficient cauſe is the will of God, & his owne perſon, being ready to performe the obedience vnto his eternall father, whoſe wrathfull anger could not by any other hoſt or ſacrifice bee appeaſed. And therefore, ſaith the Pſalm, 40. 7. Lo I come, in the volume of the booke, it is written of me, I deſired to doe thy good will and pleaſure O God, yea thy law is within my heart.
            
            The booke is the old Teſtament, the Roule is the ſumme, the argument of the old Teſtament, are the fore mentions of Chriſt, the will of God is the exinanition, and debaſing of his ſonne, his obedience, his humbleneſſe & offering vp his body vpon the croſſe. He commeth forth as a bridegroome out of his chamber, & reioyceth like a mightie man to runne his race. 
               Pſal. 19. 5.
            
            The obiect moving the ſonne of God, is ſinne, and damnation of mankind, which hee would not that it ſhould vtterly periſh. Therefore, ſaith hee, in Eſa. 43. thou haſt made me to ſerue him with thine iniquities; I am he which take away tranſgreſſions for mine own ſake, and I will not remember thy ſinnes: and alſo the

tyrannie of the divell vpon mankinde.
            The impulſiue cauſe, is the great & exceeding loue of God the Father, and of the ſonne vnto mankinde, of whom it is written, God ſo loued the world, that hee 
               Pſal. 103, 13. 
               gaue his only ſonne &c. and David ſaith, As the Father hath compaſsion over his children, ſo hath the Lord on thē that feare him: for he knoweth whereof we bee made, he remembreth we are but duſt: & therefore the mercy of God, and the interceſſion of his ſonne, offering himſelfe to be puniſhed for vs is the Impulſiue cauſe.
            
            The Subiect or matter of the paſſion, is the very ſon of God made man, as the Prophet ſaith, I was not rebellious, neither turned I my backe vnto the ſmiters, & Eſa 50. 5. my cheekes vnto the nippers, I hid not my face from ſhame and ſpitting. 1. Cor. 2. they haue crucified the Lord of glory.
            
            The formall cauſe is the obedience of the perſon it ſelfe. The finall cauſes are foure, firſt that God ſhould be worſhipped, & praiſed for his loue, Iuſtice, & mercy. Secondly, that the ſcripture might bee fulfilled for the ſatisfying of the will and fore promiſe of God. Thirdly, that mankind might thereby be reconciled vn to God, and be ſaved. Fourthly, that the workes of the Divell might be deſtroyed.
            
               Of the difference betweene the paſſion of Christ, and the paſſion of other Saints of God.
            
            All Saints and holy men are ſinners, conceiued and borne in ſin, but Chriſt is both everlaſting God & man, free, from ſin, and vnſpotted, and being righteous and 1 Pet. 3. iuſt, died for the vnrighteous, and vniuſt. Moreover,

there is a difference of the cauſes of the Paſſions, for all we do ſuffer for our ſins: and if we had no ſin, there ſhould no puniſhment be laid vpon vs, but Chriſt ſuffered for vs, and laid downe his life for our ſins.
            
               There is alſo a difference of the paſſions.
            
            Touching both the matter, and forme thereof, we that beleeue, although wee ſuffer the death, yet through a ſtedfaſt faith and hope which we lay holde vpon Chriſt Ieſus our Savior & redeemer, our death wil be vnto vs, but a ſure and ioyful paſſage vnto eternall life. But Christ bearing the ſinnes of all the whole world, vpon himſelfe, which the firſt Adam cauſed to be committed, yet he as a ſecond happy and bleſſed Adam; nay more, a mighty Saviour, felt for our ſakes, al the heavy wrath and anger of God, which was powred out vpon him, and would not deny it, but contentedly ſuffered it, yea to be laid and done vpon his own body, and ſo thereby he ſet vs free from the wrath of God, and eternall death.
            Againe, although we ſuffer, we do not thereby deſerue either vnto our ſelues, or vnto any other, life & ſalvation, and therefore Chriſts Paſſion differeth from all other paſſion of Saints, firſt in the ſpecial property of his owne Paſſion, which is only a ſacrifice for our ſins, ſecōdly in the perſons, thirdly in cauſes: & fourthly in the matter it ſelfe, as is already ſaid.
            
               The exemplariall meditation of the Paſsion of Chriſt.
            
            The exemplariall meditation beholdeth Chriſt as a teacher, and obſerveth him as a guide and leader vnto eternall life, and ſtudieth to follow his humility, obedience,

meekenes, patience, as himſelfe ſaith, learne of me, for I am meeke, and humble heart; he that taketh not vp his Croſſe; & followeth me, is not worthy of me, be ye followers of Chriſt as deare children, and 1. Pet. 2. Chriſt ſuffered, leaving vnto vs an example, that yee ſhould follow his ſteps: & 1. Ioh. 2. he that ſaith he abideth in Chriſt, ought ſo to walke, even as hee walked. And Paule 2. Phil. Be yee like minded, every man eſteeme better of an other, then of his own ſelfe; look not every man of his own things only, but every man on the things of other men. Let the ſame minde be in you that was in Chriſt, for Rom. 8. It behoueth vs to ſuffer with Chriſt, that with him we may be glorified. Now it is wel known that our Saviour went through many afflictions; as whips, thornes, buffets, and the moſt ſhamefull death of the Croſſe. And through all theſe muſt hee bee contented to follow Chriſt Ieſus, that wilbe a Chriſtian if matter ſo require.
            Therefore our Saviour Chriſt in his laſt Teſtamēt did commend vnto his Father, his ſpirit, to the Iewes his body, to the good theefe Paradice, to the vnrepenting ſinner hell, to the Apoſtles his Goſpell, and to the faithfull affliction for their tryall. Furthermore let vs learne, that as there were two croſſes prepared for Chriſt Ieſus, the one of paſſiō, (as that wooden croſſe whereon his body ſuffered; the other of compaſſion, wherby his ſoul ſuffered) ſo there is prepared a double croſſe for every good Chriſtian, the one of the ſoule, the other of the body. The croſſe of Iobs body was that power that Satan receaued of the Lord, to afflict his

fleſh, the croſſe of his ſoule, was the curſed counſell of his wicked wife, who ſaid, curſe God and liue, Iob. 2. The croſſe prepared for king Davids body, was that Saul his father in law, and Abſolon his ſonne ſought his death; but this was that which afflicted his minde, that the man whom he had continually fed, ſhould be falſe hearted vnto his perſon. Pauls body was in many dangers by ſea, and by land, by night and by day, by theeues & by robbers, but that only afflicted his mind that he travailed among treacherous brethren, vnto his exemplanal meditation, do appertaine theſe foure parts, firſt the Croſſe: Secondly comfort. Thirdly, patience and humilitie. Fourthly, naturall loue, peace and concord.
            The allegoricall meditation, is that which conſidereth the tipes and ſimiles, repreſenting ſuch like things as ſhould happen to the Church & members thereof. The two theeues, are an image of the whole mankind, ſubiect vnto death, in the midſt, Chriſt is a redeemer, the one part is freed, the other abideth in death; the ſcoffes and taunts, are the furies and outrages of Hypocrites, whereby the Church is ſcorned and derided. The dividing and tearing of his garments, noteth Heretiques tearing the Goſpell in peeces, and the wicked ones, ſnatching away the faculties, and maintenance of the Church.
            
               A table, wherein is ſet downe a collation of the whole courſe of Christ, compared with the estate of the Church.
            
            Evē as at the birth of Chriſt, the cleerenes & brightnes of God, overſhined the ſhepheards. So in the primitiue

Church the glory of God ſhined over the Apoſtles, that they might finde Chriſt in the Scriptures, as the ſhepheards ſaw him ſwadled in his cloaths. As in the firſt yeare after Chriſt, was borne, Herod endeavoreth crueltie, & exerciſeth it vpon infants, that there by he might deſtroy Chriſt: So in the firſt yeare of the Iubile, of the new Teſtament, tyrants exerciſed cruelty vpon all the Apoſtles. As Chriſt fled into Egypt, and there continued vntill the death of Herod. So the doctrine of Chriſt long ſuffered perſecution, & corruptions, and lurked in the aſſemblies, and companies of the godly, vntill the death of Tyrants & Hereticks, Domitian, Diocleſian, Iulian, &c.
            
            As Mary loſt Chriſt in the 12 yeare of his age, and in vaine ſought him among his kinsfolkes, and at laſt found him in the Temple amongſt the Doctors, oppoſing and asking them queſtions. So the Virgin Mary, even the Church in the 12 yeare of Iubile, being troubled with many hereſies, had vtterly loſt Chriſt, had ſhe not found him in the Temple, that is in holy Scriptures, Propheticall and Apoſticall.
            After the 30 yeare of Chriſt, as Iohn Baptiſt teacheth in the wildernes, repentance and faith in Chriſt, who is baptiſed, and as it were with the figure pointed out, and ſhewed forth vnto the people. So in the 30 yeare of our Iubile, the true & ſincere doctrine of the Church, both of the law and the Goſpell, began by little & little to be reſtored in the deſert, not in the Hals of the high prieſts, and Palaces of the Caeſars and kngs of the world, but in a few certaine ſchooles and

cities. As neither Iohn Baptiſt, nor Chriſt himſelfe did openly teach in the Temple at Ieruſalem (whenas the high Prieſts did poſſeſſe the ſame) but in the wildernes, or in Galile. So the doctrine of the Goſpell hath no place in the kingdome of the Pope, but either privatly as it were in a deſert, or elſe vnder certaine Princes, & limits of ſome kingdomes, is it heard and favoured. As in the time of Chriſt Satan ſtirred and raiſed vp divers tumults, and vproares, through blaſphemous Iudas of Galile, Simon Magus, & ſuch like. So perturbers and hereticks doe alwaies hurt the Church by their bringing in, and giving of ſcandalous offences & ſtum bling blocks. As Chriſt after three yeares and almoſt halfe preached, afterward ſuffereth, is crucified, dieth, is buried, riſeth againe, aſcendeth vp into heaven, and raigneth in eternall glory. So after three yeares and a halfe, after the yeare of Iubile, from the renewing of true doctrine, after many ſufferings of the godly, which are every where common, the Church ſhalbee freed, & glorified forever, but the whole time ſhal not fully be expired, for the daies ſhall be ſhortned.
         
         
            THE FOVRTH PART.
            
               Which containeth the Types, Figures, Allegories, ſimiles and ſuch like of the old Testament, or propheſies of the Prophets.
            
            AS out of Adams ſleeping, is a Rib taken, & thereof Evah is made, ſo out of the celeſtial or ſecond Adam, that is, Chriſt ſleeping on the Croſſe, and making himſelfe to be as it were, nothing (in his Paſſion) and death, was the church framed, and made his Spowſe, Eph. 5.
            
               
               Abel both in name and deed is deſpiſed, who notwithſtanding is iuſt and innocent, hee is caried forth into the field, and is ſlaine of his brother Caine, Gen. 4. brethren Christ became a very worme, for vs, and is ſlaine of his Iſaac being ready to bee offered of his Father, is a Type, and figure of Ieſus Chriſt, Gen. 22.
            
               Ioſeph is not borne of foule Laea, but of faire Rachel, which word ſignifieth labours, and wearines, Chriſt is not borne of the Gentiles, but of the Iews, Eſay, 11. of the ſtocke of Ieſſe, Mich. 3. in Bethlehem where Rachel was buried Ioh. 4. and Bethlehem ſignifieth the houſe of bread.
            
               Ioſeph is ſent forth to ſeeke out his brethren, to refreſh thē, and recover thē againe to his father: Chriſt is ſent from the father vnto mankinde, which was loſt to ſeeke it, and reconcile it vnto God.
            
               Ioſeph is diveſted of his Pall, and ſtately coate & caſt it into the Ceſterne, Christ is dealt withal and handled, as a man bereaved of al divine glory, forſaken of God, and as one in whom there was no grace or goodnes, he is apprehended, &c. Ioſeph is ſold of the Iſmaelites, and is lead into Egypt, when as his brethren thought him quite caſt away. Christ is ſold and put away of the Iewes, given to the Gentiles, and to the people whoſe king and Saviour he becommeth when as the Iewes thought him to be of no reputation, Ioſeph is with lies accuſed of his impudent miſtreſſe, and is caſt into priſon; Chriſt is falſely accuſed of the Iews & heretiques, crucified and throwne into the graue, guiltleſſe Ioſeph lieth in priſon betweene two guilty offenders, a butler

& baker, of whom the one is ſlaine, the other is ſaved; innocent Chriſt, is condemned between two theeues, of whom the one, on the right hand is ſaved the other condemned, Ioſeph freed out of priſon is honoured; Chriſt eſcaping out of perils and dangers is crowned with honour and glory, Iacob and Ioſeph, do come togither againe, reviving in ſpirit, and there is one folde, and one houſe of the Iewes and the Egyptians; Chriſt & the beleeuers at the day of iudgement, ſhall all meete togither, and out of al Nations there ſhalbe one people in Chriſt for ever. The flaying of the paſcall lambe, Exod. 12. was a Type, and figure of Chriſt, as it is writtē 
               Ioh. 1. Behold the Lambe of God which taketh away the ſins of the world, the vnleavened bread, doth ſignifie purity ſincerity of the doctrine and life Evangelicall, the ſacrifices of ſins and offences, Lev. 14. were Types & figures of the true pacifying ſacrifice as, Heb. 5. The quicke Goate, that was ſpent and bearing the iniquities of the children of Iſrael, Levit. 16. is Christ made the ſlaughter for our ſins. A red Cow without ſpot, Num. 16. is offered vp for our ſins, Chriſt is the Red Cow, being for the weaknes of Nature, taken in the ſtate of humiliation, without ſin, cleanſeth vs, by his bloud from all ſins, as the brazen Serpent lifted vp vpō a poale, Num. 21. healeth thoſe that are bitten with Serpents, Ioh. 3. ſo Chriſt the ſon of man muſt be lift vp to aſcend into heaven, to heale the ſins of the whole world, Ionah lying three daies in the whales belly, is a Type and figure of Chriſt dying, buried, and riſing againe the third day.
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A SPECIALL TABLE OF THE COMmon places briefely containing the principall things handled in this Treatiſe.
            
               Firſt the chiefe and principall motiues and cauſes, that ſhould moue and ſtirre vs vp to the earneſt meditation of the paſſion.
               The firſt motiue is the ſevere commandement of Almightie God. pag. 1.
               The ſecond is the dignitie, the maieſtie and highneſſe of the perſon ſuffering for vs. 7
               The third motiue is the weaknes of our nature. 10
               The fourth motiue that ſhould ſtirre vs vp to the meditation of the paſſion of Chriſt is the amplitude and excellency of the doctrine touching many difficult & high matters therein contained, & chiefly theſe fiue following.
               The firſt is the divine iuſtice of God, not forgiving ſinn without ſatisfaction. 21
               The ſecond is the greatneſſe of Gods wrathfull anger conceaved againſt ſinne. 32.
               The third is the greatneſſe of ſinne, and the deformitie of mans whole nature. 24.
               In this third point of the fourth motiue is ſhewed how the evill of ſinne appeareth in 3 things, firſt in the deformitie for God doth loath it.
               Secondly the iniquitie, for the divell doth loue it.
               Thirdly the infirmitic, for the whole world is infected with it. 28
               The firſt point and matter of the fourth motiue & cauſe is the infinite loue and affection of our Saviour towardes man kind. 35
               The fiſt cauſe is the fruits and effects of Chriſt his paſſion, the firſt benefits are ſuch as take away from vs things evill and mortall, whereof are ſeaven ſorts.
               The firſt is the freeing of vs from ſinne. 37.
               
                  
The ſecond is the freeing vs from the curſe of the law. ibid
               The third is the freeing vs from the wrath of God. ib.
               The fourth is the freeing vs from the divell. ib.
               The fifth is the freeing vs from the world and the vileneſſe thereof. 38.
               The ſixt is the freeing vs from death. ib.
               The 7 is deliverance from damnation and hell. ib.
               Now followeth ſeven other benefits which wee receaue by the paſſion of Chriſt.
               The firſt is our reconciliation with God. 39
               The ſecond is remiſſion of our ſinnes. ib.
               The third is righteouſneſſe. ib.
               The fourth is the giuing of the holy Ghoſt. ib.
               The fift is our victory againſt ſinne. ib.
               The ſixt is ſalvation and life eternall. ib.
               The ſeaventh is a compendious Epitome and Catalogue of the benefits which a Chriſtian enioyeth by the death croſſe, and paſſion of Chriſt. 40
            
            
               THE SECOND PART.
               With what mind we ſhould come to the meditation of the paſſion.
               The ſecond part vnto the things which wee haue already ſpoken of (being well conſidered (it followeth that we bring with vs a true pemtent mind, the practiſe and exerciſe whereof conſiſteth in theſe foure points of repentance following.
               Firſt what repentance is. 42.
               Now followeth the true repentance. 44.
               This true repentance hath foure parts: the firſt, contrition of the heart. 46.
               Secondly vnfaigned confeſſion. 47.
               Thirdly faith, which is the ground of repentance. 49.
               Fourthly, the fruits of faith. 50
            
            
               
               THE THIRD PART.
               How manifold is the meditation of the paſſion of Chriſt. viz. the meditation of the paſſion is fourefold.
               Firſt litterall or hiſtoricall. 51.
               Secōdly ſpiritual. 67. 3. Exemplerical. 82. 4. Allegorical. 83
               The paſſion it ſelfe how manifold it is, viz.
               The paſſion of Chriſt is threefold. 1. Externall. 2. Internall. 3. Conſiſting of both. 56
               The cauſe of the paſſion of Chriſt.
               The principall efficient cauſe is the will of God. 64
               The obiect moving the ſonne of God is ſinne and damnation. 64
               The impulſiue cauſe is the great & exceeding loue of God the father, and of the ſonne vnto mankind. 65
               The ſubiect or matter of the paſſion is the very ſon of God made man. ib.
               The formall cauſe is the obedience of the perſon it ſelfe. ib
               The finall cauſes are foure, firſt that God ſhould bee worſhiped for his loue, iuſtice, and mercy. Thirdly that the Scripture might be fulfilled for the ſatisfying of the wil & force, promiſe of God. Thirdly, that mankind might thereby be reconciled vnto God, and be ſaved. Fourthly, that the workes of the divell might be deſtroyed. ib.
               Of the difference betweene the paſſion of Chriſt, and the paſſion of other Saints of God. ib.
               There is alſo a difference of the paſſions. ib.
               A table wherein is ſet downe a collation of the whole courſe of Chriſt, compared with the eſtate of the Church. 68.
            
            
               THE FOVRTH PART.
               Containeth the types, figures, allegories, ſimiles, and ſuch like of the olde Teſtament, or Propheſies of the Prophets. 70
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            MY Author did the impreſſion buy
            And from the preſſe he did me take
            That none ſhould ſell me certainly
            But he himſelfe which did me make.
            Except it be his neereſt friend
            Which may me ſell, both giue and lend.
            
         
      
   