
      
         
            
            THE
SERMON
PREACHED AT
the Crosse, Feb. xiiij. 1607.
            
               By W. CRASHAWE, Batchelour
of Diuinitie, and Preacher at the
TEMPLE;
Iustified by the Authour, both against Papist,
and Brownist, to be the truth:
            
            Wherein, this point is principally intended; that the religion
of Rome, as now it stands established, is still as
bad as euer it was.
            The second impression, reuiewed by the Author.
            
               
                  2 TIM. 3. 13.
               
               The euill men and deceiuers shall waxe worse, and worse, deceiuing
and being deceiued.
            
            Imprinted at London by H. L. for Mathew Lownes: and are
to be solde at his shop in Paule Church yard, at
the signe of the Bishops head. 1609.
         
         
            
            
            The XX. Wounds found to be in
the body of the present Romish religion,
in doctrine and in manners:
&
Proued in this Sermon, not to be yet healed.
            
               1. THe Pope is a God, & the Lord God, & such a head of the
Church, as infuseth spirituall life and heauenly grace into
the body of the Church. pag. 53. &c.
               2. The Pope hath done more then God for he deliuered a soule
out of hell. pag. 57. &c.
               3. God hath diuided his kingdome with the Virgine Marie,
keeping Iustice to himselfe, but committing and giuing vp
his mercie to her
                     •
                   so that a man may appeale from him to
hir. pag. 60. &c.
               4. The Popes decrees bee at least equall to the Canonical scripture. pag. 69. &c.
               5. The Christian Religion is founded rather from the Popes
mouth, then from Gods in the Scripture. pag. 71. &c.
               6. The holy Scriptures are therefore of credit, and to bee belieued,
because they are allowed and authorized by the Pope:
and being by him authorized, they are then of as good authoritie,
as if the Pope himselfe had made them. pag. 73. &c.
               7. Images are good books for lay men, and better and easier then
the Scriptures. pag. 80. &c.
               8. An Image of God or a Crucifixe, or a Crosse
                     •
                   are to bee worshipped
with the same worship as God and Christ, with latria
that is diuine worship.
and that we may speake and pray to the Crosse it selfe, as wee
do to Christ. pag. 
                  
                     •
                  2. &c.
               9. Frier Francis was like to Christ in all things, & had 5. wounds
as Christ, that did bleede on good-Fridaie
                     •
                   yea, hee did more
then Christ euer did. pag. 96. &c.
               10. The Pope may and doth grant Indulgences for a hundred
thousand yeares, and giue men a power to redeeme soules out

of purgatory. pag. 103. &c.
               11. The Pope may annexe Idulgences for many thousands of
yeares, to such beades, Crucifixes, pictures and other like
toies, as are hallowed by his hands. pag. 107. &c.
               The popish Church baptizeth bells. pag. 115. &c.
               12. The Pope denieth the Cup in the Sacrament to the Laitie,
tho Christ ordained the contrarie. pag. 120. &c.
               13. The popish Church alloweth many sorts of sanctuaries for
wilfull murder.
               14. Romish religion publickly tolerates, and permits Stewes, &
takes rent for them. pag. 132. &c.
               15. By the Popeslaw, he that hath not a wife may haue a Concubine. pag. 141. &c.
               16. By popish doctrine, it is a lesse sinne for some men to lie with
another mans wife, or keepe a whore, then marry a wife of his
owne. pag. 143. &c.
               17. Priests in popery may not marry, but are permitted to keepe
their whores, vnder a yeerly rent. pag. 147. &c.
               18. Such Priests as be contine
                     •
                  t, and haue no whoores, yet must
pay a yeerely rent, as they that haue, because they may haue if
they will. pag. 150, &c.
               19. Their Liturgie is ful of blasphemie, their Legend full of lies,
their Ceremonies of superstition. pag. 153. &c.
               20. A generall corruption of manners in al estates of the Romish
Church. pag. 156. &c.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE PRINCE
his Highnesse,
HENRIE,
The Hope of greate BRITAINE.
            
               MOst mighty Prince, Salomon being
but young, knew the God of
his Fathers
               Chron. 28. 9.; and Iosias being
but 15. yeares olde, set his heart
to seeke the Lord
               2. Chron. 34. 1. 3.: And blessed
bee God, who hath put into
your royall heart to set them as
examples before your eyes, and to
follow them in the best things. For, to be Kings (euen
greater then theyNero Iulian, &c. hath befallen the wicked, whose
names now rot on earthPro. 10. 7.: and they in hell wish they
had neuer beene: But, to be a good godly, and religious
Prince, few haue attained it1. Cor. 1. 26. &c.: but those that did, were
made happy by it. Noble Prince, this is the waie to
bee honoured of men, blessed of God, and beloued of
both1. Sam. 2. 30..
            
               In this holy path, you haue so happily begun to walk,
that your personall practise of Religion, and the religious
gouernment of your honourable houshold, may be a
patterne to all the greate families of these kingdomes;
wherin if Popery and profaneness found no better coū
               tenance
nor encouragemēt, then in the Princes Court,
it were happy for our Church and State.
            Goe forward, Princely Salomon, and walke still in
the waies of Dauid, your kingly Father: so shall our Israel
be happy and blessed by you: and all the world shall
praise God for you; for on whom are the eies of al Christendom
set, but vpon you & your fathers house? Surely,
the hope of the Christian world is, that God hath appointed
and annointed our gratious Souereigne, and
his royall issue, to hold vp his religion in these declining
daies, and to giue the Whore of Babylon that foil, &
fall, from which she shall neuer rise; euen that deadly
blowe, wherof she shall neuer recouer.
            Now, somwhat to stir vp and prouoke your heroical
heart, and princely spirits to a yet farther detestation
of popish impietye; vouchsafe (hopeful Prince) the reading
and patronage of this discourse: the scope whereof
is, to discouer that those would but deceiue vs, who
speake or write that popery is now well reformed in
manners, & refined in doctrine, and therfore they and
we by a reasonable mediation might well be reconciled
A pernicious 
                     •
                  book was published in frēch by that vnsetled H. C. called Le Pacificꝙ examen, &c. tending to that end, & it was turned into english by some papist.: for the truth is (if any man will search it out of
their owne records) Popery both for doctrin and manners,
is (at least) as bad as euer it was.
            This I affirming before an honorable audience at the
Crosse, the Papists gaue out, it was false, and I could not
prooue it, nor durst stand to it; but that wee may say

we care not what, that wee are set vp to raile on them,
and make them and their religion odious before our
people: and in the Country they dispersed, I was called
before Authority for it, and silenced, and censured for
railing on the Catholickes, and that I was striken by
Gods hand with a strange hoarcenesse after I began to
raile on them, and could not speake, &c.
            Therefore not so much to cleere my selfe, as to honor
the trueth, and to shew that it is no tricke nor policie
of our State (as it is in poperie
                  
                     
                        ••
                     ook was printed in english in the colledge at Rome, wherein it is affirmed that wee take catholicks, & draw vpō their legs, bootes full of hot boiling liquor, & vpō their feet hot burning 
                        •
                     hooes: & do put them into Bears skins, & cast thē to the dogs to be puld in peeces: all this and many such other set down in pictures.
                  
                     Feuardent a famous Frier, yet liuing at Paris, wrote in latine 7. yeares ago, that we reuile and reiect that praier to the holy Trinitie; Sancta Trinitias 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     Deus
                           •
                         misercre nobis.
                  
                  Thus writes hee in his Commēt. on 1. Pet. cap. 1. What will not he say, that daie say this
                        •
                      for, all our common praier-books, now, and those in Q. Elizabeths, & K. Edwards times, do test
                        •
                     fie
                        •
                      the contrary. Gretserus a sesu
                        ••
                     e was suffered to write within these 2. yeares, that we rackt and tortured Garnet, euen neere to death, to make him confesse himself guilty of the powder treason; but hee did not: & so wee hauing no proof hāgd him onely for being a Priest, and not for it. And that Ouē (his man) was puld in peeces on the racke; and when wee had so killed him, then wee gaue out hee had killd himselfe with a knife: But for the 1. wee appeale to publike records & the worlds knowledge; & for the second, there yet liue witnesses whose eies saw the woundes and bloudy knife, and whose eares heard him freely and penitently confesse hee did it with that knife, to escape the rac
                        •
                      which he said he feared but had neuer tasted.
               ) to set vp men with
authoritie to raile, and licence to lie, thereby to make
our enemies odious; I haue beene induced to publish
what was said, and to iustifie out of their owne records
what was affirmed of them: namely, that the deadly
wounds found to be in that diseased body of Poperie
many ages agoe, remaine rotting, rankling and vnhealed
euen to this day.
            This I demonstrate in 20. or more particulars. Concerning
all which wounds, if they be true as I haue laide
them downe; and being true, if yet they bee not healed,
then I hope your Highness, and al Christian Princes may
cleerely see, that seeing she is past hope of reformation,
there remains no more but that she is ripe for vengeāce
& destruction. Which as that Whore of Babylon hath
so long deserued: So God will put power into the hand,
and zeale into the hearts of our mighty King & noble
Prince, to reward her as she hath serued 
                     〈◊〉
                   & to giue
her double for all her iniquities: that so all the Kings
& Princes of the Christian world may rouze vp themselues,
& take example at the King & Prince of great
Britaine, to hate the whore and make her desolate, &

                     •
                  are her flesh, and burne her with fire; and that a
                  •
               l

nations, who haue stood amazed hitherto at the patience
and long suffering, may now reioice and admire to
see the zeale, courage & constancy of our kingly Dauid
and princely Salomon.
            
            The King of Kings, blesse this king and prince: and
the blessed Father, for his blessed Sonnes sake, double
and trebble the graces and blessings of the blessed Spirit
both vpon the father, and the sonne: whereunto, I
am sure all good subiects at home, and all true Christians
in the world, will say Amen, With
            Magna est veritas, & praeualet.
            Your Highnesse humble and
deuoted seruant,
WILLIAM CRASHAWE.
         
         
            
            To the Christian Reader whosoeuer, be he a true
Catholicke, or a Romish.
            
               TO preuent all misconceits
that might arise vpon the
so late comming forth of
this Sermon, (so many
weekes expected) I desire
thee good Reader be satisfied,
that the cause thereof, was a long & vnlooked
for iourney. And now that you haue
it, let mee desire all men in the reading and
iudging thereof, to deale with that ingenuity
and sincerity, as I haue indeuoured in the
writing of it. My conscience speakes for me,
I haue forged no new Author, I haue falsified
none, I haue corrupted none, I haue
to my knowledge misalledged none: I haue
taken no proofe vpon bare report, nor
haue I produced our men to proue what I
lay against them: nor is there one quotation

of any Author of theirs, which I haue not diligently
perused afore-hand, and the whole
scope of the place. If any should think of answere,
I desire him let passe all personall rayling,
and by-matters, and come directly to
the points in issue: which be these;

                  1 Whether the Church of Rome teach &
practice in these xx. or xxi. points, as I
haue charged her withall, or no.
                  2 If she do, whether they be healed of these
wounds as yet, or no.
                  3 If she be not, then how she can be the true
Church, which is so wounded, and will not
be healed.
               
            
            If they do not teach and practise so, I will
yeeld the Cause. And hee that can shew mee
that either she is healed since, or beeing not
healed, how she can bee the true Church, I
shall willingly hear him, & thank him. I desire
al that professe thēselues papists, or their fauourers,
not to be so wilfull as to condemne
what they know not; but only to giue it reading,
& then iudge as they see cause. Wright,
in his Articles, layeth to our charge manie
strange Paradoxes: as, that we are all Atheists,
and Infidels by our doctrine; that wee are
bound by our doctrine to doe no good workes,
               
& many such. And Kellison in his Survaie,
thrusts vpon vs that wee deny Christ to bee the
only Sauiour, and Iudge of quick & dead, and
many such abhominations; all which we renounce,
and detest: yet, do what we can, wee
must haue them laid vpon vs; and our writers
& teachers haue their speeches wrung and
wrested, beyond their meaning to make thē
sound that way. I dare appeale to the iudgement
of Gods Church, and al iudicious Readers
heereof, that I haue not done so with
them, nor taken vantage of their words, whē
it's apparant they meant otherwise; but charged
them only with such points of doctrine
& practice, as thēselues cannot deny but to
be their own: & that not of one or two, but
(for the most part) generally receiu'd. Cōmē
               ding
it to thy reading, & my selfe to thy praiers,
I leaue vs all to Gods blessing. At the
Temple. May, 21. 1608.
            Thy brother in the Lord,
W. Crashawe.
            
         
         
            
            
            The Names of the Popish Authors produced
in this Treatise; together with the impressions
heere vsed.
            
               A.
               AQuinatis summa. Ven. 509
               Idem, Antuerp. 85.
               Fr. Agricola de verbo dei &c.
Leod. 97. 8
               Cor. Agrippa, de vanitate scient.
            
            
               B.
               BReuiariū Romanum vetust.
Idem. 93. 4.
               Bernardini de Busto Manuale.
Lugd. 511, 4.
               Idem, Colon. 607. 4.
               Bellarmini opera. Ingolst. 601. fol.
               Bernardi Morlanensis poemata. 607. 8
               Brigittae reuelationes. 517. Nuremb. fol
               Bonauenturae opera. Romae.
               Cl. Bonarscij Amphitheatrum
honoris &c. 605. 4
               Berarduccius sūma Confessorū.
            
            
               C.
               Geo Cassan
                     •
                  ri Consultatio.
               Covarruvias variarum resolutionum.
               Corpus Iuris Canoniciper Greg. 13. Lugd. 91. 4.
               Idem cum glossis. edit. vetust. 507. & 510
               Constitutiones Pont. Rom. per
Pet. Mathaeum. Lugd. 88
               Caeremoniale Romanum. Aug.
Taur. 602. 4.
               Capella in Ieremiam. Tarracon. 86. 4
               Coccij the saurus catholicus. Col. 99. fol.
               Costeri Enchiridion controuersiarum
&c. Col. 600. 8
               Alp. Ciaconus, Apologia pro Tr
                     •
                  
                  iano &c. Ro.
               Concilium Trident. Ra. de Caesare.
               Caietanus, in Aquinatis summā. Ant. 68. fol.
               
                  
                     •
                  h. de Combis compendium theologicae verit. Lugd. 79.
               B. Corradus. Quaestiones cascons. Ven. 600. 4
               H. Cuickij speculum concubinariorum
&c. Lov. 600. 8.
            
            
               D
               Decretalium sextus.
               St. Durantus, de ritibus ecclesiae
catholicae. Ro. 91. 8.
            
            
               E
               D. Erasmi opera. Bas. 4. fol.
               Espencaeus, in 
                     •
                  itū par. 68. Idem.
de Continentia. 4
            
            
               
               F.
               Io. Ferrariensis Practica Papiensis.
               Feuardentius in Petrū. 600. homiliae. par. 605
               Firmamenta trium ord. S. Frā
                  cisci. Par. 512. 4
            
            
               G
               I. de Graffijs decis. aureae cascons. 604. 4
               Ado. Gualandus de morali facultate. Ro. 603. fol.
               Gregorius de Valentia. Ingolst. 98 fol.
               Ia. Gretserus de Cruce.
ibidem. 60. 4
               Anas. Germonius de sacrorum
immunitatibus. Ro. 91
               Io. Gersonis opera. fol.
            
            
               H
               D. Hessi Synodus protestātium.
Graeciae. Stir. 93. 8
               Heskins his parliament. Ant. 66. fol.
               Hosij opera. Col. 84. fol.
            
            
               I
               Io. Chrysost. a visitatione, de
verbis dominae. Ven. 600. 4
               Index librorum prohibitorum. Clem. 8. 97
            
            
               L
               Liber conformitatū beati Frā
                  cisci
&c. Bon. 90. fol.
               Llamas summa &c.
               Litaniae & preces profide Catholica
in Anglia &c. Ro. 603
               Liber voc. exercitium Christianae
piet. &c. Col. 92
            
            
               M
               Missalia vetust. & noua edit. 905 fol.
               Magnum speculū exemplorum. Duaci. 605. 4.
               Monumenta ordinis Minorum. Salmant. 511. 4.
            
            
               N
               Nauarri Enchiridion. Wirce. 93.
            
            
               O
               Onuphrius de praecipuis vrbis
Ecclesijs. Col. 84
               Oleaster in Pentateuchum.
               Onus ecclesiae Ant. 68. fol.
            
            
               P
               Posseuini Apparatus sacer. Ven. 603. fol.
               Pontificale Romanum vetust.
Ven. 520. fol.
               Idem, Romae. 1595. fol.
               Proctor his way home to
Christ. 8
               Pistorius contra Mentzerum.
               Peraldi summa virt. & vit.
Ant. 71. 8.
               Alb. Pighius decontrov. in com.
               Ratispon. 42. & 49. 8
            
            
               
               R
               Rhemes testamēt: at Rhemes. 82
            
            
               S
               D. Stapleton. doctrin. princip.
Par. 79 fol.
               Simancae Institutiones cathol.
Vallisol. 55. fol.
            
            
               T
               Tolleti instructio sacerdotum.
Ant. 603. 8
               H. Tursellinus de virgine lauretana.
Mag. 601. 8
            
            
               V
               Vi
                     •
                  aldi Candelabrum aureum.
Brix. 95. 4
               Vincentij ferrariensis prognosticon.
4
               Vasquez, de cultu adorationis,
Mog. 601. 8
            
            
               W
               Watsons quodlibets. 4
            
            
               Z
               Lae. Zecchius. Summa moralis
theologiae: de casibus conscientiae. Brix. 98. 4
               Ludouicus Viues de causis corruptionis
artium.
               Les voyages de Sr. de Villamont
A Arras 1605.
               Catalogus reliquiarū & Indulgentiarum
in 7. Ecclesiis vrbis:
Manuscript.
            
            
               Other Authors alledged, not
popish, or but in part.
               Augustinus.
               Concilia per Crab. Col. 57. fol.
               Eadem per Bininum. Col. 606. fol.
               Cābdeni Britannia. Lond. 607
               Colloquium Ratisbonēse. 4. 600.
               Epistolae Iesuiticae. 601. 8.
               Euangelium Romanum. 600. 8.
               Centum grauamina Germanorum. 4
               Hospinianus de Templis.
Tig. 603. fol.
               Harmonie of confessions. 4
               Zuinglius.
               Cyprianus.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A SERMON PREAched
at the Crosse.
            
               IEREMIAH. 51.9.
               We would haue cured Babel, but shee would not bee healed: let
vs forsake her, and goe euery one into his owne countrey: for
her iudgement is come vp into heauen, and lifted vpto the
cloudes.
            
            
               THis is not spoken in person of
the Angells that were set ouer
Babylon (as some thinke);
for Angells haue no charge of
curing mens soules: they mourn
for mens sinnes, and reioyce at
their conuersion
               Lu. 15. 7 10.; they guarde
their bodies
               Psal. 34. 7.; and carry their soules to heauen
               Luke 16. 22.: but
the curing and conuerting of the soule hath God delegated
to his Prophets, being men like our selues;
that so hee might make man to loue man, seeing the
hath made man a sauer of man.
            Neither is it the speech and protestation of hypocriticall
and fained friends, who say thus to Babel, to
make a great boast of their little loue (tho some hold
so, whose iudgement otherwise is of great respect):
for the reason heere giuen is too good, and the

cause too diuine, to proceede from a profane heart.
Her iudgement (say they) is come vp to heauen, &c.
            
            But rather, it seemeth to be the voice of the true
Church shewing their loue to Babell, and their longing
desire to haue done good to their soules: Bring
balme, (saith the former verse) if shee may bee healed.
Heereunto, the Church answereth: For our parts,
Wee woulde haue cured Babell, but shee could not bee
healed: we did our indeuours, but found her incurable;
therefore now, seeing we can doe her no good,
let vs looke to our owne safetie, let vs forsake her, &
goe euery man to his owne Countrey. For now we see
God will take the matter into his owne hands; seeing
man cannot heale her, hee will destroy her. Her
iudgement is come vp into Heauen, and lifted vp to the
cloudes.
            
            The particulars, considerable in this Text
                  •
                be 4.

                  1. The Churches loue to her very enemies, manifested
in her desire to haue healed them: Wee woulde
haue cured Babylon.
                  2. The malitious nature and incurable state of Babel,
causing a comfortless issue of the Churches labours:
Shee cannot be healed.
                  
                  3. The Churches dutie, vpon consideration of her obstinacie
and incurablenesse: namely to lose no more
labour vpon her, but to abandon her and looke to
herselfe: Forsake her, and let vs goe euery man
to his owne countrey.
                  
                  4. What becomes of Babylon being incurable, and
forsaken of the Church? what further remaines

for her? Vengeance and destruction from God:
her iudgement is come vp into Heauen, &c.
                  
               
            
            All these are true in a double sense: namely both

                  
                     in the literall
                     
                     Babylon.
                  
                  
                     and
                  
                  
                     in the mysticall
                     
                  
               
            
            There is a Babell spoken of & literally vnderstood
in the old Testament: there is a spiritual Babylon, mystically
meant in the Olde, and literally in the New
Testament. Both are spoken of in this place: the one
historically and literally; the other allegorically,
and in a mysterie: and this interpretation is not without
warrāt; for it is ordinary with the Prophets in the
old Testament, when they speake of matters literally
true at that time, in & vnder them to point at further
matters, of a more spirituall and higher nature. For
howsoeuer to destroy the literall and historicall sense
of the olde Testament (with some old, and many late
writers that be Papists) is worthily cōdemned by the
Church as iniurious to Gods word: Yet the literall
sense once layd, we may then warrantably extend the
text to the allegoricall sense, as far as we see the holy
Ghost in the New Testament, to goe before vs, or to
giue vs leaue. Thus Peter makes an allegory of Noahs
Arke, and makes that business a type of Baptisme
               1. Pet. 3. 20. 21:
andGal. 4, 24. &c 
               Paul of Sarah and Agar, saith by them another
thing is meant: and no lesse saith S. Iohn, of Babylon, as
we shall see hereafter.
            Touching the olde and literall Babylon, all these
points haue bene long agoe verified vpon her, since
the Prophet vttred them: The Church of the old Testament

               would haue cured her: But she2 
               could not be
healed: therfore she3 
               for sooke her: & God4 hath destroyed
her. And touching the mysticall Babylon, the
kingdome of Sathan and Anti-christ, partly they are
and partly shall bee made good vppon her. The
Church of the new Testament, 1
               would haue healed
her: But2 shee is found incurable: therefore when
Christendome3 
               forsakes her, God4 will destroy her.
The two first are already performed: the third is a-doing,
and the fourth is sure to be fulfilled in Gods good
time.
            Of all these in their order.
         
         
            Of the olde and literall
BABYLON.
            
               Touching the olde and literall Babylon, the
first point is the Churches loue and care of
her good, in these words;
               The first Point.
               
                  Wee would haue cured Babylon.
                  COncerning which point & all the rest, we will not
pursue the particular historicall matters: considering
that the history of Babylons carying Israel captiue,
of their vsage in their captiuity, of their forsaking
Babylon & returning home againe, & lastly, of Gods
iust vengeance and destruction of Babylon, are so
notoriously knowen. Therefore we will passe by the

story, and stand rather vpon matter of doctrine.
                  First therfore let vs obserue this generall doctrine,
namely; that a good man loues his very enemies, and
not desireth onely but euen seeketh their good: this
did the Church of Israel to their enemies & persecutors.
For these Babylonians had done the greatest
hurt to the Church and kingdome of Israel, that euer
one nation did to another: for first they inuaded their
land vniustly; then they besieged & tooke Ierusalem,
the 
                        •
                     ea
                        •
                     e of the kingdome, tooke and slew their kings,
ouerthrew their Kingdom, ruinated their state, burnt
their Temple, defaced their Religion, killed whom
they would, caried captiue whom they would, and
so left their land a heape of desolationRead for this purpose the last chapt. of this prophecy together with the ends of the books o
                           •
                         kings & Chronicles.: And yet
worse then all this; being their Captiues at Babylon.
there they mockt them in their misery, and scoft at
their Religion. Come, (say they) you that are these
singers, and haue had your Kings to be singers2. Sam. 23. 1. Dauid &c.:
you that are these great Psalme-men, and haue had
your Kings such base fooles, as some of them to bee
Prophets, some PreachersSalomon. Ec. 1. 1. 2. 
                           •
                        2., some song-makersDauid, Salomon, Hezekia. &c.:
Come make vs mery with one of your Psalmes; let vs
haue part of your Hebrewe musicke: Sing vs one
of your songes of Syon
                     Psal. 137. 3.. Psalme 137. The least of
these wrongs is heauie to be borne: but all put together,
and especially, for a Christian after all these miseries
to be mockt for his religion, and to see his God
dishonored, oh how bitter is it to the spirit of a man.
Yet, after all this what do Gods people? not only pardon
it and put it vp; but further, doe both wish and
seeke their good; We would haue healed Babell.
                  
                  Thus to doe is a marke of Gods childe, and a signe

of a true Church. For to doe euill for euill, and good
for good, is no more then nature; euen the publicans,
(saith Christ) doe so much
                     Mat. 5. 46.: to recompence euill
for good, is worse then nature; it is malice, & peruerse
corruption: and therefore (saith Salomon); Hee that
doeth so, euill shall neuer depart from his house
                     Prou. 17. 13..
But to doe good against euill; that is aboue nature, it
is grace, and a good euidence of Gods spirit: thus doing,
saith Christ, you are the children of your heauenly
father
                     Mat. 5. 44. 45.
                  Hereupon for the vse of this doctrine, we may see
a comfortable euidence, that our Church is the true
Church of God; seeing that wee pray daily for the
Church of Rome, which curseth vs: and it is very obseruable,
that whereas the Pope, with all solemnity
excommunicates & curseth vs all to hell, on the euening
before good-FrydaySee the Popes bull, set downe at large i
                           •
                         the first impression.; we, for recompence,
the next day morning in euery Church & chappel of
this kingdom, & many places more, pray for the cō
                     uersion
& saluation of him & all his sectSee one of the prayers appointed by publike authoritie in the common prayer booke for good-Fryday.: and so by
Gods prouidence it falleth out that our publike prayer
for thē, is the same or the next day, when they haue
publikely cursed vs: and this is the facte of our whole
Church in the publike liturgy, appointed of old, and
stil confirmed by authority. Therfore if Christs argument
be good, that priuate men, blessing their cursers,
are the children of God; then sure this is not ill: the
Church that blesseth her cursers, is the Church of God.
Let them therfore still go on in cursing, if they needs
wil: but let thē take heed, least as they loue cursing, so it
come vnto thē, & as they cloth themselues with cursing
like a garment, so it come into their bowels like water &

like oyle into their bones
                     Psal. 109. 17. 18.: we, contrariwise, let vs
not be weary of well doing: let vs follow that blessed
Peter, whom they pretend to follow but doe not,
(vnlesse it be in denying Christ) whose blessed counsell
is; Render not euill for their euil, nor curse for their
curse; but contrariwise blesse, knowing that we are
therunto called, that we should be heires of blessing
                     1. Pet 3. 9.;
thus doing, we haue Peters owne testimony against
thē, that we are a Church of blessing, a blessed Church:
and the Father of blessings, blesse it more and more,
and all that seeke the peace of it, Amen.
                  
                  Thus we see generally, they wished her well: But
what is the particular good they wished her? namely,
her healing and conuersion. We would haue healed her
                           •
                        
                     
here many things might be pressed; I will but point at
them.
                  1. That it is the property of a holy man, to wish aboue
al
                        •
                      things the spirituall good of them with whō
he liues: the wicked man seekes the spirituall hurt of
men; the naturall man, the carnall good: but the holy
man their spiritual & eternal good. Worldly matters
haue their time & place in his thoughts: but that that
takes vp, & possesseth his desires, is the spirituall good
of them he loues, namely, their conuersion, their repentance,
their saluation: these things be worthy
their prayers, & pains. Herein Gods children are like
to God their Father, who wishing good to his peopeople,
crieth out: Oh that there were in them (not the
skill to rise in this world, and attaine the honours and
ease of this life, but) a heart to feare me, and keepe all
my Commaundements, that so it might goe well with
them and theirs
                     Deut. 5. 25.. God wisheth no trifles to his

children: But oh (saith God) that Israel were healed
                        •
                     
and oh saith Israel that Babylon were healed! Thus
do God and good men accord in their wishes. Learne
thou, here, thy duty, if thou be Gods: thou wishest for,
and prayest for, and seekest for many things for thy
children, and thy friends, thy wife and family. Thou
clothest them, & feedest them, & prouidest for them
(else thou art worse then an infidell
                     1. Tim. 5. 8. and preferrest
them, and much more: but all this is for the body.
But, canst thou say, from a good conscience, I would
haue healed their spirituall diseases: I haue heartily wished,
and faithfully endeuoured their saluation. This
is to be a true friend, a true father, a worthy husband,
and a good wife: happie they that haue such friends
neere them.
                  2. Obserue further, they seeke the saluation euen of
their persecutors: so doth alwayes the holy man. Paul
was put in prison, the gayler tormented his body, and
Paul healed and saued his souleAct. 16. 24. to the 35.. Many a sinner, is
made a happie man, by his prisoner: and the Martyrs
oft times by their patience, their prayers and holy
instructions, conuerted their executioners & tormentors.
As in the former point, a holy man is like
to God: so herein, to Christ; who when Iudas and the
Iewes were conspiring his destruction, the same houre
was ordaining the holy sacrament, and establishing
the meanes of their saluation1. Cor. 11. 23..
                  Thirdly, Israel liues in Babel, & would gladly haue
her as holy as themselues; we would haue healed her.
It sheweth the excellēcy of the nature of holy things:
they are fire (not in the flint, hardly bet out; but) in the
bosome, that will not be concealed.
                     Pro
                           •
                        
                      A man is not couetous

of them: He is indeede greedy to gaine them;
but not to keepe them secret and to himselfe, as in
worldly things wee are: nay he desires and ioyes to
impart them to others; and it is the ioy of his heart
to see others as good or better then himselfe.Numb. 11. 29. 
                     Woulde
God (saith Moyses) all Gods people were Prophets: and
Paul wished from his heart, not Felix the president
and Agrippa the king alone, but that all that heard
him, were like him; not a prisoner and in bonds, but in
grace and goodness
                     Act. 26. 29.. Hardly shall a man heare such
voices in the world; I wish others were as rich as I, as
high as I, as learned as I, as much in credit and fauor
as I. No: these things make men base and seruile, self-louers
and priuately minded: but grace and holiness
is of a royall and excellent nature, and inlargeth the
heart wherein it is, with such loue to other men, as
nothing more contents him that inioyeth it, then to
make others as good as himselfe.
                  Lastly, where it is said, they would haue healed the
Babylonians with whom they liued; see what a good
neighbour, a holy man is: he comes, he dwelles, he
soiournes in no place, but hee seekes the good of it.
Lot would gladly do good in Sodom: if hee can doe
none, at least his righteous soule shal be vexed, for their
sinnes
                     2. Pet. 2. 8.. Israel soiournes in Babel, and had rather
be away; yet while they be there, they will cure her
if they can: and if she cannot, yet Babel shall thereby
knowe that Israel was amongst them. Thus the
whole shyre and parish shall fare the better by one
good man dwelling among them. Hee comes no
where but presently he considers what that people
wants, what is their disease, what he may doe to

heale them, or any way to helpe them: he comes no
where but he leaues behind him signes of his goodnesse,
monuments of his holinesse, and a sweet sauor
of his vertues. Thus euery place is better for him
where he comes: and when he is gone, his memory is
blessed,Extinctus amabitur idem. his vertues praised, his name honored, & his
person loued. Cōtrariwise, the wicked leaues behind
him the stinke of his vngodliness, and monuments of
his pride, his cruelty, his wantonness: Come (say they)
let vs leaue som tokē of our pleasures in euery place
                     Wisd. cap. 2. 9..
Thus euery place is worse for him, while he staies, &
his memorie rots when he is gone. Let vs learne of
Gods Church here, so to behaue ourselues in all places,
where we liue, or where we come, that the good
may be helped, & the euill healed by vs, that we may
be able to say; Them I found good, I encouraged:
whom I found sinfull, I would haue healed. Thus shall
we be honoured while wee are there, praysed when
we are gone, and euer loued and blessed both of God
and good men: and the mouth of wickednesse shall bee
stopped. And thus we haue the particular good they
wisht to Babylon; namely, her curing, that is her conuersion
and saluation.
                  Touching which healing of Babylon, there be three
particular circumstances, implied in these words;

                        
                           namely,
                           who
                           they would haue healed.
                        
                        
                           how
                        
                        
                           whom
                        
                     
                  
                  The first is Who they be that would haue cured Babylon:
the Text saith, We would, that is not the Prophets
alone, or the people alone, or the princes alone,
but Wee, that is altogether
                        •
                      the Prophets would, as

we may see in Daniel and Ezekiel
                     See their prophecies.: the Princes
would, as we may see in SHIDRACH, MISAK: and
ABEDNEGODan. cap. 3., Noble yong Gentlemen of Israel:
and the people would haue cured her, as is plaine both
here, and in the 137. Psalme.
                  Where we may learne, that howsoeuer properly,
and peculiarly, and more principally it is the office of
the Minister: Yet it belongs also to euery Christian,
to performe the duties of holy and spirituall edification,
to them with whom he liues, for their spirituall
good. Not onely the Prophets here would haue
cured Babylon, but euen those three young gallants,
being noble Courtiers, gaue a worthy example, to
all of their age and ranke, of admirable courage and
constancie in Gods cause, chusing rather to die, then
deny their God and worship an Idoll, checking the
Kings impietie, and condemning his idolatry to his
face, rather like Prophets then Courtiers. Such were
their speeches, and such their sufferings, their words
so wise, their sufferings so valorous, and all for their
God, that this alone had bene sufficient to haue cured
Babell, had she not beene incurable. Oh happy kingdome
where be such Nobles, and blessed that Court,
that cherisheth such Courtiers: the diuell should neuer
haue his Church, where God hath but his Chappell,
if it were thus in Christian kingdomes. The people
also had their hand in this good businesse, they
ceased not in all the time of their captiuitie, to vse all
the means they could to bring Babel from her gentilisme,
and Idolatry; and therfore here are bold to affirme
whē she is at the point of her destructiō. We for
our parts are no way guilty of it: nay, if she wold haue

beene ruled by vs, she had neuer come to this; for We
would haue healed her.
                  
                  But how would they haue healed her (may some
say) what meanes vsed they? it is soone sayde, Wee
would: words are cheape. But gaue they Babell nothing
but sweete wordes? Certainely, they were
carefull to vse all good meanes: which especially are

                        these 3.

                              Instruction,
                              Example,
                              Prayer.
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  1. By continuall instruction, laying open their
errors, discouering their impieties, and laying before
them the excellencie of true religion.
                  2. By their continuall example, practicing their
own religion euen before their very faces, not fearing
their scornes, and rebukes, no not the contrary lawes
made purposely against thē; as we may see in the example
of Daniels thrise a day praying to his God towards
Ierusalem
                     Dan. 6. 10.: the people also in midst of their
mirth would weepe when they remembred Syon
                     Psa. 137. 1. 2., &
would cast away their musicke and depriue themselues
of all comforts, when they remembred the desolation
of their religion. Which practices did no
doubt amaze the Babylonians, & had bin sufficient to
haue driuen them into deeper and better considerations
(had they not bin incurable) and it is to be hoped
that the sight hereof did good vpon some of them.
                  3. They endeuoured to heale them by their prayers,
praying continually and desiring God to heale
them: for as the Parent is said to blesse his childe, by
praying to God to blesse himGen. 27. per 
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        um. & 48. 15 &c. to 21.; so one may be said
to heale another, by praying that GOD may heale

him. And that they did this dutie, is no question:
for it was so commanded them by the Lord; Seeke
the prosperity of Babylō, & pray to the Lord for it
                     Iere. 29. 7..
By these meanes, they endeuoured the curing of Babylon,
tho they were no prophets: and by these means,
may one priuate man further the saluatiō of another.
Thus euery good man is as it were a litle pastor to his
neighbour: & happy were it for the Church of God,
if all priuate persons would performe these duties,
one to another.
                  The third and last circumstance is, whom they
would haue healed: the Text answereth; Babel: where
we obserue two points.
                  First, that the Israelites aymed not at the conuersion
of the great ones, and men of State only, but euen
at all the people of Babell. Whereby, it is apparant
they sought not themselues: for then they would haue
fisht for the great ones only or especially (as doe the
Iesuites, & craftier sort of Friers at this daySee Watson in his Quodlibets often.); but
they sought the saluation of soules, which they knew
to be all alike before God. For they had learned afore
they came at Babel, that euery soule is Gods, the soule
of the sonne, as well as of the father
                     Exek. 18. 4., and consequently
of the subiect & seruant as well as of the king
and commaunder, and the meanest mans as well as
the mightiest: and therefore they endeuoured the
conuersion of all.
                  The godly and conscionable Minister, must heere
learne to haue care of the least & poorest soule in his
parish, considering it is as deare and precious as the
best. For, as good hands made it, as the bestPro. 22. 2.: as precious
blood was shed to saue it, as for the greatest

mans on earthGal. 3. 28. 14. Therefore, let them not bee like
those proud spirits, & carnal minded men, that thinke
ordinary parishes not worthy of them, and therefore
will preach no where but at the Court, or in great &
solemne assemblies: nor like those, who in their parish,
will be acquainted with none, conuerse with
none, conferre with none, visit none, but the rich and
mighty; but as for the poore, they may liue and die as
they can, for them. Such men might remember the
blessed apostle, who kept back nothing, but taught (not
in Courts and Palaces, and great houses only, but)
through euery house
                     Act. 20. 20. vers. 31. vers. 26., and that he ceased not to warn
euery one, and stood vpon it boldly, that he was cleere
from the blood of all men (see: not some, but all): and
in another place expounding himself saith, his continuall
course is to witnesse Gods will both to small and
great
                     Act. 26. 22.. He that lookes for Pauls reward, at Gods
hand, must thus behaue himselfe to Gods people,
remembring his account is not for trifles, but for
soules, and to that God who hath told vs afore hand,
Euery soule is mine
                     Ezek. 18. 4.
                  
                  The good father of the family must learne here, not
himselfe, & his wife onely, but to see that his children,
& seruants & those not some of the chief, but all, euen
the meanest may knowe and serue God. Such a man
was Abraham, he was not carefull for Isaac alone, his
deere sonne, the sonne of the beloued: but oh (sayth
he to God) that euen Ishmael might liue in thy sight
                     Gen 17. 18.:
& therefore God becomes Abrahams surety, he giues
his word for him; I know Abraham that he will (not
looke to some of his principall officers, but) command
(not this son or that daughter, but) his sons & his family

to keep the way of the Lord
                     Gen. 18. 19: & yet in Abrahams
house were 318. persons borne & brought vp, &c.
                     Gen. 14. 14.
More shame for the great men of this age, both in
City and country (who though they bee great, and
daily plot to be greater, yet keepe they not so great
houses and families as Abraham did): in whose families,
many of their inferiour officers, and seruants, doe
scarce euer come to Church: And much more shame
to some parents, who being blessed of God with many
children do partially respect some of them, and
seeke their good of soule and body, & neglect others,
who it may bee are more worthy: what would they
do if they were profane and vndutifull Ishmaels, whē
they are so vnmindfull, and respectlesse euen of such
as be holy, and dutifull Isaacs? but let such children
comfort themselues in this, that God their better father
and best friend is no respecter of persons. These
are the ordinary faults of fathers & mothers in these
daies: but assuredly, those that be heires of Abrahams
faith
                     Gal. 3. 7., will distribute their loue to euery one, & care
for the soule of their meanest seruāts, & take order in
their families, that al their officers, euery day (at lest in
their course) may go to church, & their very kitchinboies,
& hors-boyes, may learne to know the God of
their saluation
                     1. Chr. 28. 9.; that so he may be able to say with a
good cōscience, I found my family a cōfused Babel of
disorder & profanenes, but I haue heartily endeuored
to make it a little Church: & tho my family be great,
yet there is not one whom I would not haue healed.
                  
                  Thus they would haue healed all: but where began
they? whom did they desire to win first & principally?
certainly the greatest: as namely the K. & Coūsellers of

State. This course tooke Daniel, in whom (more then
in any one) this prophecy was fulfilled: who after he
had done the busines for which the king sent for him,
thē fell he to the busines of God, wherof is spoken in
this Text, namely to see if hee could heale the king: ô
King (saith he) thou art a king; but there is a higher;
know, know, that the heauens beare rule. Wherefore ô
King, let my counsell be acceptable vnto thee, breake off
thy sinnes by repentance, &c. Lo, let there be a healing of
thine error
                     Dan. 4. 24.. Well knew Daniel, that if once the
King would abandon his Idolatrie, and imbrace the
truth, easily would the people be induced to follow
him: So, whereeuer is true reformation either of errors
in doctrine, or corruption in manners, it must begin
at the highest; els it will be to little purpose. To
little effect, were it in the naturall body, to heale the
hand & foot, when the head is deadly sick; but heale
the head first, and then more easily the body will bee
cured: So in the spirituall body, how should Babel be
healed, when the King will not? how should they become
Christian, when the king persists a heathen?
euen so in our State, how shal popery be extinguisht?
how shall vaine swearing, wantonness, profaning of
the Sabboth, bribery, and other the sins of this age be
reformed in the body of the people, if they be suffred
to harbor in the Court, and to creepe into the Kings
priuy Chamber? Priuate persons will hardly bee
brought to detest those sinnes, that are the common
practices & recreations of great persons. Therefore
we haue cause to blesse God for giuing vs such a King,
as hath care of religion, and who in his owne person,
is an enemie to poperie, a detester of wantonnesse,

and iniustice, and many vile sinnes too commonly
found in persons of his place. And let vs not cease
to pray, that God would confirme him in all goodnesse,
and that he may still go on with Dauid to reforme
the sinnes of the greatest, and them that are
neerest him: for when a King saith, No wicked person
shall serue me, nor abide in my sight; then all wicked
workers will easily be destroyed out of the land
                     Psa. III. see the whole psalme.. If
this had beene in Babel, she had beene cured: but the
want of this was the cause of that that followeth:
               
               
                  But she could not be healed.
                  The 2. point.
                  HItherto wee haue spoken of the first generall
point; namely, the louing and holy care of Israel,
They would haue cured Babell: Now followes
the second, that is, the ill issue of their good labours,
caused by the obstinate malice of the Babylonians,
She would not be healed; some read, she could not be
healed, some she is not healed, all to one end; for he
that will not be healed, is not, nay cannot be healed:
for God heales no man, conuerts no man, saues no
man
                        •
                      against his will: therefore, he that will not bee
healed, cannot be healed; and so Babel is incurable
because she contemned the meane, and would not be
healed. The godly Israelites did all they could: but
the Babylonians had their answere, (as ready as now
haue the papists; Think you, you (seely Israelites) that
you are able to teach Babylon a better religion then
it hath?The very same defence is daily made for popery, that Babel made for her Idolatry: and the same exceptions make they against vs, and the same arguments bring they against our religion, which they did against Israel: as is plaine to see in Y• books of Harding, Stapleton, Sanders, Allen &c. and of late in Persons, Kellison, Fitzherbert, and the rest. Is not hers of so many, and so many yeares
continuance? was it not the religion our forefathers
liued and dyed in? and is it not generall and vniuersall

ouer the world, and yours but in a corner? and is
not ours visible? and doth it not prosper and flourish?
and is not yours condemned by the consent of
all the world? and you for holding it, iustly ouerthrowen
and conquered by vs? is not your visible
Temple now defaced? your publicke daily sacrifice
ceased, and your succession cut off? and if you haue any
thing left, is it not inuisible, & in secret corners? &
what can you alleage for your religion? That you
haue many learned men. Alasse poore men! for one
learned Rabbine that you haue, haue not wee twenty?
are not the Chaldeans the famoust learned men
of the world, renowned for their high wisedom, their
skill in Astrology, interpretation of dreames, and
other the most secret and supernaturall Sciences? and
do you thinke it possible that so many learned Doctors
can be deceiued, nay all the world bee in an errour,
and onely you that hold a particular faction,
and a singular new found religion, by your selues,
should haue the truth amongst you? Go, go, poore
soules, and sing your Hebrue songs by your selues:
but meddle not with the high mysteries of the Chaldeans
religion. And what will you haue more?
Shew if you can one nation, of your religion, but
your selues: but all the world is of ours. You will
say you haue a succession from Noah, and haue not
we so too? you came from Shem: and came not
we also from him, or at least from some other of Noahs
sonnes? You are but one poore branch of Shems
roote: there be many others lineally descended from
him, greater nations then you are; and doe any of
them follow your faction? Looke into the world

at this day, and see if any Nation of all that came
from all the sonnes of Noah be of your religion: all
that came of Cham are of ours, all that came of Iaphet are of ours, and all that came of Shem, but only
your selues. See then what fooles you are to striue against
so strong a streame, and to forsake the auntient
and knowne high-way, so long, and so wel trodden,
and to take and choose a singular by waie of
your owne. For, did not all Nations walke in our
waie? and was there any one Nation of your Religion,
till one MOYSES, and after him one SAMVEL,
and DAVID, and a fewe others (to make
themselues great, and to bring to passe ther owne
purposes) made a publicke reuolte from the Religion
of all other Nations, and set you vp first a Tabernacle,
and then a Temple of your owne? Therefore
you are to bee deemed and condemned for
Schismatickes, who haue cut your selues off from
the auntient and vniuersall Religion of the World.
And what though you can pleade continuance of
some hundreths of yeares, yet what is that to our
time? for when you can scarce shewe three poore
housholdes in all the earth of your Religion, (as
namelie, in the daies of ABRAHAM and long
both before and after) then can we prooue that all
the Kingdomes and Nations of the whole earth were
of ours.
                  Neuer brag that Abraham was of your religion,
and therefore you are antient: for his Father and his
Grand-father were ours, and therfore we are elder. Againe,
during all the time you haue had your Kings
and Priests, shewe one nation by you conuerted,

or one that came and ioyned with you, of all that
time: and tho God suffered you for a time, yet see
how at the last he hath brought you downe; and as
you forsooke vs and the ancient religion, which we
will keepe and maintaine; so he hath now giuen vs
power ouer you, to conquer your kingdome and deface
your religion, as it hath deserued: therefore neuer
labour to bring vs to your noueltie and new fangled
religion; but rather come home to vs and to the
auntient religion of our forefathers: neuer endeuour
to seduce vs into your secret and schismaticall, and
inuisible Church; but rather come you into the light
and sun-shine of our glorious, vniuersall, and catholike
Church: neuer speake of healing vs: heale your
selues seely fooles, for you haue neede; as for vs, we
are well, we are farre better then Israel can make vs.
                  Thus did Babell cast away the good counsell that
the Israelites gaue them, and pleased themselues in
the like carnall arguments, & fleshly conceits, as Papists
in their poperie, and other profane men in
their carnalitie, do at this day; setting these and many
more faire glosses on their religion, and thinke
themselues in farre better case then the Israelites: &
yet when God comes to giue the verdite, they are
sick; and which is worse, are past healing. Here we may
learne
                  1 First the pittifull estate of wicked men, They are
wounded; nay, they will be wounded, but will not
be healed; they will wound themselues; but neither
can heale themselues, not will let others heale thē: are
not they worthy to perish? they are in the fire, & neither
will come out, nor let others pull them out; are

they not worthy to burne? being in prison, the doore
set open to them, and they will not stir to come out;
are they not worthy to bee slaues for euer? they are
deadly sick: the Physition comes to them that is able
to heale them, and they will not heare them: are they
not worthy to die? O deafe adders, that stop their
eares against the voice of the best and wisest charmers!
and yet these men are the mockers, and scorners
of them that be godly, and the discouragers of
many a man in the waies of God Some seeing their
worldly prosperity, stand amazed, and enuy their estate:
but alas, why should any man do so? for if their
estate be rightly considered, they deserue rather to be
pittied, then either enuied, or any way regarded.
                  Further, heere we may see how it fares with Gods
children in this world; oft times they must lose their
labour, when they haue sincerely, and zealously endeuoured
the conuersion of sinners. Israel would
haue heale Babel: but when all is done, she will not be
healed. So saith Salomon, Rebuke a scorner and he will
hate thee
                     Prou. 9. 8. No maruell, if this be so with priuate
men, when the Ministers and Prophets of the Lord,
find oftentimes so little profit of their great labours,
that they cry out; I haue laboured in vaine, and spent
my strength in vaine
                     Esay. 49. 4. And Ministers may not
thinke much hereat: for the Prophet makes that cō
                     plaint,
not in his owne person onely, and his fellow
Prophets, but euen in the person of Christ himselfe,
whose labour was much of it lost in this respect. For
it is apparant in the Gospell how little hee preuailed
with many of his owne nation, yea with the learned
Rabbines the Scribes and PharisiesLu
                           •
                        e. 7. 30.: And after

all the excellent sermons made all the time before,
went not Iudas away fuller of Sathan then hee cameIoh. 13. 27? And to conclude, did not God himselfe preach
from heauen, a notable sermon to Cain? and was hee
not worse for it? & being hellishly inraged, instantly
after the Sermon ran out and slewe his brotherGan. 4. 7.?
Thus howsoeuer Gods word neuer returns in vaine,
but prospers in the work whereabout the Lord dooth
send it
                     Esay. 55. 11: Yet, it is here apparant, that it is not alwaies
the sauour of life to life, but often of death to
death, in whose mouth soeuer it is spoken.
                  Wee must heare learne, not to bee discouraged in
our courses of seeking mens conuersions; Priuate
men to practice the dueties of admonition, exhortation,
&c. vnto their neighbours that bee out of the
way: Nor Ministers, to preach the word, with all diligence.
For howsoeuer thy labor may be lost to som;
yet know, thy labour is neuer lost before God: for be
it the sauour of life, or of death, it is a sweet sauour to
God, (sayth the Apostle2. Cor. 2. 14 15. 16.: and tho in regarde of
men that wil not be cured, thou hast laboured in vain,
and spent thy strength in vaine; yet, saith the Prophet,
My iudgement is with the Lord, and my work with my
God
                     Esa. 49. 4.. And let not the good man of God be too
much cast downe, tho he see little fruit of his great labours;
remembring that IESVS CHRIST and God
himselfe haue lost their labour vpon many men: and
heere the Church hath many yeares endeuoured to
cure Babel, and all is in vaine. For, she will not be healed:
And will shee not, what then remaines but this
that followeth?
               
               
                  
                  Let vs forsake her, &c.
                  The 3. point.
                  FOr, after all meanes vsed and all in vain, then what
should we do but forsake them that needs will bee
forsaken of God, and haue nothing to do with them,
who will haue no fellowship with the Lord? This is
the third generall point, and touching it there bee
three particulars

                        
                           examinable, namely,
                           1. how
                           
                              Babel is to be forsaken.
                        
                        
                           2 why
                        
                        
                           3. whē
                           
                        
                     
                  
                  For the first, how is Babel to be forsaken when there
is no more hope of curing her? the answere is, not
in loue and affectionate desire to do her good: but still
the wicked man is to be pittied, still to be loued, still
to be mourned for, still must the godly man wish wel
to him, tho he care not for it, but scoffe at all. Thus
when the Prophet had called vppon the people,Ier. 13. 16. 17
                     Heare and giue eare, be not proud, but yeelde & turne
and repent, and giue glory to God before he send darkenesse,
&c. He then addeth: But if you will not heare
and obay, my soule shall weepe in secret for your pride,
and mine eyes shall drop downe teares, &c. Thus the
good man sends vp many a sigh, and sheads many a
teare for the wicked, that neuer giue one groane for
themselues.
                  Nor must we forsake them in prayer; but though
they seeme to vs neuer so incurable, wee must still
praie vvithout ceasing to GOD for them: for that
that is impossible to vs, is possible inough with
the Lord (h) God forbid (sayth Samuel) that I should

cease to pray for you
                     1. Sam. 12.: and so must we say of all,
euen the greatest sinners; saue onely them that sinne
against the holy Ghost (which no priuate man, but
onely the whole Church can discerne and iudge of)
God forbid that I should cease to pray for them.
                  
                  Neither must we forsake them by a finall separation,
neuer to come at them, nor to assist them any
more: but still we must be willing to go againe, and
do our endeuour, if euer there be hope that they will
be healed. Forgiue (saith Christ) not seuen onely, but
70. times 7. times. When a sicke man is froward and
impatient, then the good Physition must be the patient:
& tho he haue come oft, & to no purpose, yet if
at last he will be healed, he must not forsake him; so
must Gods children reioice, if after neuer so many repulses,
the wicked will be content at the last to heare
and to be healed. Thus wee must still loue and pittie
them, still pray for them, and still be ready to do them
good: and in these three respects we must not forsake
them.
                  
                  But wee must forsake Babel. First in regard of conuersation:
we must separate our selues from the wicked
mans company and societie, as far as lawfully &
conueniently we may, after we see him obstinate and
incurable: it is Gods commandement, Flee from the
midst of Babel: depart out of the land of the Chaldeans
                     Ierem. 50. 8.: and do not this slackly and slowly (like Lots
wifeGen. 19. 26 
                     but be as the hee Gootes before the flock.
                  
                  Secondly, in regard of the meanes: for after that
by her often and obstinate refusall, (ioyned with
spightfull contempt both of the meane
                        •
                      and the men
that brings them) she hath shewed her selfe to be a filthy

swine, then pearles are no longer to bee cast before
her, holy things must no more bee giuen to such Dogges;
but they are to bee left to their vomit and mire, till
God shew either his mercie, or iustice vpon them,
either in their conuersion or confusion.
                  Thus must she be forsaken: and the reason why
(which is the second point) is double.
                  First, in regarde of our selues: wee must forsake
the wicked when they are incurable, lest in steede of
dooing good to them, wee take hurt our selues, by
beeing polluted by her contagion, or made partakers
of her sinnes; and consequently, of her punishment.
God giueth this reason himselfe: Flee out
of the middest of Babel, and deliuer euerie man his
soule, be not destroyed in her iniquitie
                     Ierem. 51. 6. Therfore
after that a christian man perceiues there is more dā
                     ger
to get hurt from them, then hope to do good to
them, he is bound no longer to stay; nay, he is bound
to leaue them & looke to the safety of his owne soule
and body.
                  Secondly, in regard of the meanes vsed to heale
them: which because they be the holy ordinances of
God, & pretious pearles; therefore are they not to be
exposed to the contempt of wicked men, not to bee
troden vnder the foule feete of their peruerse and
scornefull spirits: Both these reasons doth Christ cople
together. Giue not that (saith he) that is holy to
dogs, neither cast your pearles before swine; least they
treade them vnder their feete, and turning againe all
to rent you
                     Mat. 7. 6. Christ would neither haue his ordinances
abused, nor his children hurt by the wicked
men.
                  
                     Thus we see the maner how, and the reasons why:
Now let vs see the time when Babel must be forsaken;
when she is incurable, but not til then: first, long time
is to be spent, all meanes to be vsed, all waies to be tried,
all patience to be practiced, & all wisedome to be
exercised, all occasions to bee taken, that probably
may preuaile to doe them good. But if after all this,
they be incurable, and out of hope; then must we forsake
them
                           •
                        
                      but not till then, not till there bee no hope
at all: he that forsakes Babel till then, is wanting in his
duetie, and hath much to answere for before God. For
if the Physician may not forsake this vile body
                     Phil. 3. 21. as lōg
as there is any hope of life; then how may any man
forsake the soule that is pretious, & that cost so pretious
bloud
                     1. Pet. 1. 19? Surely, the spirituall Physician must
neuer forsake a Church, a people, or a man, as long
as there is any hope of curing and conuerting him.
                  Heere is condemned the practise of two sorts of
men amongst vs. First, such as be now tearmed of the
separation, formerly & vsually called Brownists; who
forsake our Church, and cut off themselues from our
congregations, and separate themselues to a faction,
and fashion, or as they call it, into a co
                           •
                        enant & communion
of their owne deuising; these men haue made
a grieuous rent, and giuen a deepe wound into the
peace of our Church: they vse this place and others
like against vs, & say; Wee would haue healed you, but
you will not bee healed, therefore we forsake you: but
they abuse the place; therefore, I will turne the point
of this their weapon against themselues: I meane against
their errors, and this their bitter and schismaticall
separation. To this end I would aske these men

but 4. questions: whereunto if they can giue me satisfaction,
I will be one of them.
                  First therefore, whereas you say that Wee are wounded
incurably, and will not be healed, I aske; Wherein
are wee deadly or incurably wounded? what fundamentall
wound is in our doctrine? what deadly corruption
is in our discipline, such as eats out the heart,
and life, & being of a Church? what booke of Canonicall
scripture receiue we not? what holde we for
Canonicall, that is not? what sacrament that Christ
ordained do we want? and what haue we more then
Christ ordained? what article of faith deny wee? or
what holde we for an article of faith that is not? what
fundamentall heresie doth our doctrine maintaine?
what haue we in our Church, that ouerthrowes the
beeing of a Church? what is necessarily required to
make a Church, that we do want? Do not say, These
be many questions: for if you will haue thē all in one
generall, I will end it as I began; Wherein are wee
deadly & incurably wounded? if I should walk a while
on your owne grounds, & grant you that which you
can neuer proue; yet wil it not follow that we are incurably,
or deadly, wounded. A man may want a finger,
or haue some blemishes in his face, and yet be a
strong and perfect man, sound, and heart-whole, and
able to ouerthrow his enemies: so, tho there were in
our Church, those wounds you speake of, yet do they
not come neere the heart, they be not deadly, they
may blemish the beautie, but indanger not the life of
our Church. The Churches of Corinth and Galatia,
had other kind of blemishes then ours hath; (blessed
be God.) Corinth doubted or erred in the great article

of the Resurrection. 1. Cor. 15. The Galathians erred
fouly in the high and maine point of Iustification; and
yet Corinth a Church of God sanctified in Christ Iesus.
1. Corinth. 
                        •
                     . 2. And Galatia, though almost remoued
to another Gospell, Galathians. 1. 6. yet not withstanding
a Church for all that. Galat. 1. 2. And if you
will adde to these fundamentall errours in doctrine,
corruptions in manners, and disorders in Gods seruice,
you can with no shewe of truth lay such to the
charge of our Church, as is apparant were rise in the
Church of Corinth: and then shall Corinth bee a
Church, and not England? Let the Lord bee Iudge
betwixt you and vs. Therefore, if wee should grant
vnto you that our Church were blemished or wounded;
yet not beeing deadly wounded, your separation
from vs is schismaticall and vniust: and more
hardly deale you with our Church, then did Gods
Church euen with Babell; who forsooke her not till
she was deadly wounded, and past life. To conclude, if
Israel might not forsake Babel till then; then what are
you that dare forsake a Church of God, wherein yee
haue found God, if euer ye found him yet; and wherin
the diuell himselfe cannot shew one deadly wound:
Blessed be the Lord that hath so healed vs.
                  Secondly, seeing they say that we are wounded, but
as for thēselues they be healed, & therefore they must
separate, and so keep the sound from the sicke; I aske
them this question: Are they healed? then where
were they healed? where were they called? where
were they regenerat & begotten to Christ? was it not
in the wombe of this our Church, & by meanes of the
immortall seede of Gods word, that is daily sowen in

our Church, and by the ministry of those men that
were called by our Church, and yet cleaue to our
Church, & mourn for their separatiō; & by the deaw
of that blessing frō aboue, which is dayly poured vppon
our assemblies, from Gods merciful right hand?
Then how can they deny that to bee a true Church,
a holy Church, a Church of God, wherein ordinarily
men are called, and brought to God? And how
vnthankfull and vndutifull are they to their spirituall
mother, to forsake her, and cast the dust of contempt
in her face, that bore them in her womb, and brought
them forth the sons of God? To auoid this, what can
they say, but one of these two things: either that there
is indeed a true ministery of the word amongst vs; but
it is not powerfull to any but thēselues: that we haue
the word truly preached, and so as it may conuert a
man; but it is not the sauour of life to anie, but such
as come into their couenant: (but from this horrible,
and hellish pride, good Lord deliuer them; or els
let them bee assured, such a height of pride, is sure to
haue a feareful fall.) Or if not this, then must they say
that they were not called, in our Church, but since
they left vs: But they haue bard themselues already
from that plea. For, it beeing obiected to them that
they haue left our Church, not out of conscience, but
out of carnall discontents, and vpon fleshly reasons,
and worldly grounds; they all stoutly answer and stifly
stand to it, that they do it not vpō any such groūds,
not for any reasons of flesh & bloud; but meerly and
only out of conscience, and for their saluation; and
that gladly they would haue staied, but with a good
conscience they could not. If this be true, then they

had conscience before they left vs: then where came
they to that conscience and care of their saluation,
but in our Church? Now, a good conscience cannot
bee seuered from regeneration and an effectuall
calling: therefore, they cannot deny, but they were
regenerate, and called in our Church; vnless they wil
say, they had no conscience when they forsooke vs:
which if they doe, then I will yeeld that my question
is answered.
                  If they grant they were called afore they went, and
that stil they who fall from vs to them, are called; then
how can that be but a true Church, wherin by their
own confessiō, men are ordinarily begottē to God? &
how can that be but a lawful & holy ministery, which
brings men to saluation? therefore, (vpon their own
grounds) they haue no iust cause to leaue vs. For that
Church and Ministry that brings a man to grace, and
to faith, is able to bring him to glory & saluation: and
that which is able effectually to begin, is able effectually
to finish the good work of God in any man.
                  Thirdly, if they be healed, and we still deadly woū
                        ded,
then I ask them: How haue they sought, and sufficiently
endeuoured our healing? and till they haue
done al that possibly can be done for our healing, how
dare they forsake vs? For if the Israelites might not
forsake Babel til then; shall they forsake vs, afore they
haue put all meanes to the farthest? if they be healed
already, why doe they not more seriously labour the
healing of others? They cannot but knowe, there be
many in our Church curable inough, if they coulde
shew them to need their healing: why then doe not
they stay amongst vs, to heale and helpe vs? He is no

good Physician, that flies and forsakes his Patient:
they therefore if they be healers, and would heale vs
as they pretend, why do they not stay with vs, & shew
vs our wounds, and apply the meanes to heale vs? But
contrariwise, they forsake vs, and runne into corners
and raile on vs, and call vs Babylon, Antichristian, and
the synagogue of the wicked, & that we are no church,
and Christ is not amongst vs. Are these the plaisters
with which you wil heale vs? is this the way to heale,
to make wounds wider and deeper then indeede they
be? Hee is a pittifull Physician, that makes his Patient
worse then he findes him: but he is not tolerable, that
makes him worse then indeed he is, or wil make him
belieue he is heart sicke and deadly, when his finger
aketh. They alledge persecution, and that therefore
they cannot stay with vs but are constrained to leaue
vs: but assuredly (were it true that they say, that wee
were deadly wounded, and they able to heale vs) then,
seeing they cannot say that all amongst vs are incurable,
they would care for no danger that could befall
their bodies, so that they might heale our soules and
gaine them to God. Therfore I conclude, that if we
would grant them their owne grounds, that they are
as good as they pretend to be, and wee as ill as they
would make vs; yet notwithstanding, their separation
is vnchristian: because its certaine none of them
can haue assured testimony to his conscience, that he
hath done al he can possibly for our healing: til which
time no man may forsake another; especially no christian
forsake another: and least of all a priuate man
forsake a Church.
                  Fourthly, and lastly, if they will needes leaue our

Church, whither will they goe? To leaue one thing,
for another no better, is seely; but for a worse, is folly
and madnes. But they will say, they leaue vs to take
the better: then shew me a better religion, and a better
Church then the Protestant Churches of Europe
are, and the religion amongst them. You will not go
to the Lutheranes, for they (you say) are worse then
we: much lesse to the Papists, for they apparantly are
worst of all: whither then? wil you go to the Church
of the Lowe-countries? but they are of our confession,
wil you go to the Churches of France? but they
are of our confession. will you goe to the Church
of Geneua, or the free Cities of the Empire? but
they are of our religion. will you goe to the Church
of Scotland, to the Cantons of Switzerland, to the
States, & Princes of Germany? but they are all of our
confession, and so professe themselues to beeSee the harmony of confessions..
Looke ouer all Christendom, and you shall not finde
a Church that condemneth ours, nor any that is not
of our religion, nor any one but that professeth it self
to be of the same confession with vs, and not to differ
from vs in any substantiall or fundamentall point.
Whither then will you go? or what remaines for you
to goe vnto, but vnto your corners & conuenticles,
where you are your owne caruers, your owne Iudges,
your owne approuers, but haue not one Church in
Christendome, to approue you.
                  So that then it remains, it must either be graunted
you, that you are better then all others, and that (notwithstanding
the Gospell preached thus long, since
the reuealing of Anti-christ) there is not one true
Church in the world but your selues: or els you must

grant that ther is no better Church for you to go vnto,
if you forsake vs. Therefore play the wise mens
part; forsake not our church til you can shew a better.
And tel vs not of France, Scotland, Geneua, Zurick, Basil,
&c. for they be all ours, and not yours: they wil &
do all approue vs as a glorious Church, and condemn
you, as factious, and sohismatical. And seeing you can
finde none better (all things considered) & haue none
to fly to but your selues (who are the parties now in
question, & therfore no fit Iudges of the matter) looke
well about you; and if vnaduized zeale haue caused
this bitter separation, then by your returne make vp
that breach againe, which by your reuolt you made
in our Church: Returne againe into the bosome of
the Church, aske pardon of that your Mother, who
brought you forth children of light: Come, & ioyne
with vs against the Papist, the common enemy; who,
by our diuision hath gotten ground vpon vs all.
                  Remember Peters answere, when Christ asked
the Apostles, after so many fell from him, what (saith
hee) Will you also goe awaie? Alas Master, sayth Peter,
Whither shall wee goe? thou hast the words of eternall
life
                     Iohn, 6. 61. So will you say, if true humility and sauing
grace possess you, when your deere mother in whose
wombe you were conceiued, and with whose brests
you haue bin fed, shall ask you (after so many reuolters
to popery) what, Will you also goe away? Alas!
whither should we goe from thee? thou hast the words,
and thou hast the Sacraments, of eternall life. Yea,
malice it selfe cannot denie but wee haue them; and
he who gaue them vs, grant we may long enioy them
Amen.
                  
                  
                     And as for you, my brethren (Brethren I call you,
because I am sure we had both one mother) look well
about you, and consider of the bitter effectes like to
follow, vpon this your separation: remember that
they will all lie heauy vpon you. And do not say, you
are driuen out: for if it be the Church, & if the words
of eternal life be here, nothing in the world ought to
driue you from it. Nay, your separation was wilfull:
therefore, let your return be voluntarie: and til then,
esteem as basely and censure as sharpely of vs as you
list; but knowe, that for this diuision of Ruben, are
great thoughts of heart
                     Iudg. 5. 15..
                  The second sort of men, whose practice is reprooued
by this doctrine, be such, as refuse publicke
places in the Church, and common-wealth, and retire
themselues into priuate and discontented courses,
and will not bee employed for the publicke; because
they pretend the dayes are euil, and many sores
in our body incurable, vnlesse there be other order
taken for their healing. To these men I would say but
two words.
                  1. Are the dayes euill? the more need haue they to
be amended by each ones helping hand. And if wee
have any wounds in Church or state, more cause hath
each one that loues the peace & health of Ierusalem,
to indeuour the present healing therof, least they fester
and growe worse.
                  But secondly, are the times euil? Nay, are they not
made euill by thee? at least, are they not the worse for
thee and thy sinnes? Who can shew his face and say;
I haue committed no sins, that may be in part a cause
to bring downe the spirituall and corporall plagues

that are amongst vs? Then what are they that are so
busie to complaine of the times, and so slacke to complain
of their sins? But it is a trick of hypocrisie, to be
so eagle eied in prying into the illnesse of the times, &
so blind and dull in considering his owne sinnes, the
cause of all that ill. Thou, contrariwise, out of a holy
and humbled heart confess, that seeing thy sins haue
made the times worse then els they would haue been,
therefore thou hast cause to endeuour for thy part to
make them better. Then set thy shoulder to the burthen,
and put thy neck to the yoke, remembring that
euen Babel it selfe is not to be forsaken, till it be altogether
incurable, & past al hope: But being incurable (as
here the text saith) shee is; therfore, saith the church,
Let vs forsake her.
                  
                  And now Babell beeing forsaken of the Church,
what remains to be expected? nothing but vēgeance
and destruction.
               
               
                  For her iudgement is come vp vnto heauen, &c.
                  The 4. point.
                  IN these words is laid down the last point; namely,
what becomes of Babel, when being incurable she
is forsakē by the Church: she is made ready for iudgement
and destruction. Here we may learne (amongst
many others) two most worthy doctrines.
                  First, what the wicked get by persecuting, and banishing,
and seeking to root out Gods children: surely,
euen nothing but the hastening of their owne destructiō.

The Babylonians cared not for the Israelites
company: but as soone as they were gone destruction
came vpon Babel. Whilst they stay, the wicked are
spared: but when they are gone, vengeance breakes
out. Whilst Lot was in Sodom it perished not: Nay,
(sayth the Angell to him) Haste thee away, for I can
do nothing til thou be safe from amongst themGen. 19. 22.. See,
God the good King is more carefull to saue one of his
owne seruants, then to destroy a thousand enemies:
but see their madnesse, they mocked and flowted this
Lot, scorned him as a stranger, and many wayes grieued
his righteous soule, were weary of him, and his
company, and tryed euery waie, to make him weary
of the Towne; for they held it worse, as long as hee
was in it: at last they haue their wills, and he forsakes
them; but with him their protection is gone, & now
fire, and brimstone, falls from heauen on them. So,
at this day doe the wicked and worldly men: whom
hate they, whom accuse they, whom abuse they, whō
lie they in waite for, whome persecute they, whome
would they destroie, whom banish they, whome are
they weary of, but of the godly men? When they dy,
they bid them be gone, and wish that all were gone
after them; not knowing (poore fooles) that if these
men stood not in the gap, the fire of Gods wrath had
long since broken out vpon them; and when they are
gone, then they are wel apayed, and are glad: But alas!
what haue they gained? euen as much as Sodom
did when they had cast out Lot.
                  
                  Secondly, we may heere learne, what a fearful and
daungerous thing it is not to bee healed by spirituall
Physicke (that is) not to profit by the word of God,

nor to be conuerted from sin, when God giues means
                        •
                     
For, what is this but an euident testimonie of Gods
heauie wrath, and a certaine forerunner of damnation?
Will not Babylon be healed? then what followes
but destruction? So in the new Testament, If our Gospell
be hid, (saith Paul, it is hid to them that perish
                     1. Cor. 4. 3.
For as if at noon day any man say the sun shines not,
it is because he is blinde and cannot see: So, if in the
sun-shine of the Gospell, some see it not, but in the
midst of that light liue in darknesse, its certaine they
are blinded by Sathan, & if they continue so are marked
vp for iust damnation. A fearful example we haue
hereof in the sonnes of Eli, of whom the Text saith,
their Father hearing of all the euil they did, called thē
and reproued them, and gaue them good & ghostly
counsell, able (a man would haue thought) to haue
turned their hearts; especially comming from a Father,
and from him that was the Iudge and Prophet
of the Church: But all in vaine; for, notwithstanding,
they obayed not the voice of their father:
                     1. Sam. 2. 25. and mark the
reason; because the Lord would s
                           •
                        ay them. Wherby its
apparant, there is not (ordinarily) a surer signe of a reprobate,
then not to obey the voice & word of God,
nor to profit by those meanes that God giues a man
for his conuersion.
                  A matter of speciall vse to our Church, which
hath so long enioyed the Gospell: but to you of this
Citie especially, who haue long and liberally beene
fed from heauen, with abundance & variety of spiritual
food. Therfore, euery one looke to thy selfe how
thou profitest by these good means. For be assured, if
any congregation or particular man haue vse of the

meanes and profiteth not, but runneth on hardned in
his sinnes; it is because hee is a vessel of Gods wrath,
and prepared for damnation: but contrariwise, hee
that heareth and yeeldeth, and obeieth, and repenteth,
it is an vndoubted pledge to him of his saluation,
layed vp in heauen assuredly for him. Therefore, let
euery one take heed: for otherwise his lot will be
like Babylons; of whom we here finde, that because all
meanes vsed to conuert her were in vaine, therfore
she is now iustly destroyed, and remaines a monument
of misery, and a spectacle of Gods iustice, to all
posteritiesRead, for this end, the 50. and 51. Chapt. of Ieremie, and other places of the Prophets..
                  
                     Thus concerning the literall Babylon wee haue
heard, 1. How Israel would haue cured her. 2.
How she will not be healed. 3. How therefore she
is forsaken of the Church. And 4. How beeing
past cure, she is therefore destroyed.
                  And hauing thus performed the first part of my
taske, namely touching the old and literall Babel:
it now remaines that we come to the Mysticall Babylon;
in and concerning whom, all these 4. are as true
as in the former.
               
            
         
         
            
            The Second Part, touching mysticall
Babylon.
            
               THat which wee haue heard of the
literall, is also true in the mysticall
Babylon, Mysticall Babylon is the
spirituall kingdome of darkenesse,
the kingdome of Satan. And this
kingdome is partly temporarie;
which is the kingdome of Antichrist:
and partly permanent, and perpetuall; & that
is the kingdome of Sinne. That the kingdom of Antichrist,
namely, the Church of Rome, is mysticall
Babylon, I will not stand to proue, seeing it is as good
as granted by Bellarmine
               Bellar. de Romano pontif. lib. 3. cap. 13. In resp. ad arg
                     •
                  . and other Papists, compelled
thereunto by the cleere authorities of some
Fathers, but especially by the euidence of the holy
Text in the Reuelation; where, by two notable arguments
it is ineuitably concluded. For first, if the mysticall
Babylon be the Citie seated on 7. hills
               Reuel. 17. 9 (as
the Text saith) then Rome is Babylon, which aboue
all or any Cittie in the world, is so: and that not on
seauen obscure or little hillocks, but seauen hills famously
and notoriously knowne by nameMo
                     •
                  is Coelius. Exquilinus. Palatinus.. Nor
is it any thing worth, to say that old Rome was indeed

so seated, but that now it is shrunk into the plain
of Campo Martio.
               Viminalis. Quirinalis. Auentinus. Capitolinus. For notwithstanding that it be true
for the body of the town; yet diuers publicke places
where Antichrist exerciseth his authority and tyrannicall
iurisdiction, are yet to this day on those hils; as
namely, & especially, the Lateran Church and Palace:
which Church one of their Popes hath by Bull and
Charter made the head of all the Churches of the
world; to wit Gregory the eleuenth, almost 250. yeares
agoe: and after him Pius the fourth, and of late, Pius
quintus haue by publick constitution confirmed the
same: and in which Church or Palace there haue bin
held by seuerall Popes, some 33. prouinciall or nationall,
and 5. general Councels, all or most of them for
the raising vp & establishing of Antichrists Throne:
and in which the most horrible and hainous canons
were concluded against God and his Church that euer
were before: as (to name but two.)
            
               1. That monster of transubstantiation, that the substance
of bread and wine in the sacrament ceaseth,
and is turned into the substance of Christs bodie
& bloud.
               2. That a King, an hereticke, not reforming himselfe
and his land, (meaning to popery), is to be deposed
by the Pope, his subiects to be discharged from his
obedience, and his land to bee giuen to Papists; to
whom the Papes gift shall be good and effectuall.
            
            This Church and Palace, besides many of inferior
note, stands to this day on the hil Coelius: and though
now the Pope for his pleasure hath remoued himselfe

                  •
               uer the Riuer to the Vaticane; yet in former times,
for many hundred yeares, (as Blondus himself confesseth)

it was the principall seate of the Popes: which
appeareth also by the verses written vp and down the
Church; especially those that are grauē ouer the marble
chaire, which is hard by the high altar where the
Pope sitteth at masse.

                  Haec est Papalis sedes & pontificalis:
                  Praesidet & Christi de iure vicarius isti:
                  Et quia iure datur, sedes Romana vocatur:
                  Nec debet verè nisi solus Papa sedere:
                  Et quia sublimis, alij subduntur in imis.
               
Thus its apparant, his chief throne is vpō one of the 7.
hils. And it is very obseruable, that howsoeuer they
make their succession frō 
               Peter; and that therfore in
reasō his Church should have bin chief: yet that God
may shew to the world that their Citie is the Whore
that sitteth on 7. hils; therfore, by Gods iust iudgemēt
they are so blinded, that they haue made a Church &
Palace, that is on one of the hils, superior to that they
cal S. Peters, which is not on any of the hils; and haue
giuen it not only priority, and precedence, but euen
priueledge & preheminence aboue S. Peters.
            
            Another vnanswerable reason out of the Text is;
That Citie (sayth the Text) is Babylon, which reigneth
ouer the kingdoms of the earth
               Reu. 17. 18.: but Rome & no other
City, at that day & long after, reigned ouer the world.
Therfore Rome is that Babylon.
            
            Seeing then the holy Text cleers it, the Fathers approue
it, Bellarmine himselfe grants it, and the Rhemists
also (vpon condition we will yeelde that Peter
was at Rome) doe willingly yeelde itRhemist in 1. Pet. cap. 5.; therefore
wee will not stand vppon further proofe. And as for
their distinction that Rome heathen is Babylon, but

not Rome Christian: I answere briefly, that if heathenish
Rome bee Babylon in regard of her sinnefulnesse
and persecution of the Saints; then this Rome is Babylon
also, seeing in her sinnefull abhominations and
cruell persecutions, shee is nothing inferiour to olde
heathenish Rome: as may be easily proued and shewed
at large, if this time and place required it; and as
hath been alreadie shewed in diuers learned writers,
and (in good part) confessed by many of their owne.
Now then to goe forward touching this mysticall Babell;
I propound these foure points to bee considered:

                  1. That we would haue healed her.
                  2. That she will not be cured.
                  3. That therefore we ought to forsake her.
                  4. That God will take iust vengeance on her.
               
            
            The 1. and 2. is past, the 3. is in hand, & the fourth
is sure to come: its true we would haue healed her; its
most true She is past cure; I hope it shal be as true that
we shall quite forsake her; and the last hastens fast on,
Her destruction is at hand and sleeps not.
            
            For the first: That we would haue cured the Papists,
we dare call the world to witnesse, and appeale euen
to God himselfe; and this not onely desired, but endeuoured
it by all good meanes, both in the dayes of
that renowned Q. Elizabeth of happie memorie, and
in the present gouernment of our Souereigne that
now is.
            The meanes we haue vsed for their healing be diuerse.
1. By instructing, and informing them in the
truth, and discouering their errours both by holy
Scriptures, and by the ancient Fathers of the best and

purest times. Iewel, Fulk, Whitakers, Rainolds, Perkins,
and manie other, who now sleep in Christ, haue left
behinde them such testimonies of this truth as shall
liue whilst the world lasteth, and neuer can be confuted;
as appeares in that they haue not dared to answer
most of their books to this day.
            Secondly, our continuall prayers for them, both
publick, and priuate; in performance of which duty,
both our Church in generall, and all amongst vs (that
vse to pray for themselues) haue the testimony of a
good conscience, that they haue not failed to indeuour
their healing by this means. This our diligence
in this duty, so shamed them for their negligence in
the same for vs, that iiij. yeares ago they published at
Rome a forme of Litanie, and publicke praier, for the
peruerting of the Realms of England and Scotland,
to Popery. But by the way let it be obserued, that as
when Cain left his frowning at his brother, and began
to make shew of friendship with him, & entised him
by fair words into the fields, thē he harbored the heauiest
malice in his heart and there slewe himGen. 4. 7.: So
when these men had conceiued, and hatcht at Rome
the pouder treason; then to make vs secure, and beleeue
they loued vs, they framed prayers for vs, as tho
the worst thing they wisht vs were our conuersion;
when as indeede they plotted the subuersion of vs all.
Hee that sitteth in heauen, and laughed both them and
hell to scorn, for that their deuise, knoweth wee haue
not dealt so with them. Well, if their Prayers hereafter
come so attended, let vs haue their curses, and
let their prayers turne into their owne bosomes.
            
            Thirdly, wee haue endeuoured to heale them by

our example, professing and practicing our owne religion,
daily in their sight: and many of our Fathers
professed it openly, euen in the times when they preuailed,
& gaue their liues in the fire for it. And heerin
the example of noble Q. Elizabeth is worthy of eternall
memorie, whose constant zeale to the truth was
such, as that al her daies they could not by their brags
and treasons, & curses, cause her once to fear thē; nor
by all their sleights, could euer win the least estimation
with her, nor gain an inch of ground in her hart:
nay, her last Proclamation, not two moneths afore
her death wounded them as deepely, or rather more
then euer any one beforeSee the Proclamatiō published in Feb. before h
                     ••
                   death..
            Fourthly, and lastly; we endeuoured their healing,
by deuising and enacting good and wholsome lawes
against their errours, superstitions, impieties, & seditious
courses: sometime in iustice executing them, oftentimes
in great mercie suspending them; thus trying
all meanes that might possibly perswade or work
vpon them: and in this course (our State by wise foresight,
and discreete managing the lawes; our Ministerie
by instruction and confutation, and all by their
prayers and example) did we continue to endeuour
hir healing, all the happie dayes of Q. Elizabeth.
            
            But especially dare wee call the Lord to witnesse,
that we haue endeuoured hir healing since the happy
comming of his Maiestie to this Crowne; wherein
all the forenamed meanes haue beene vsed, and one
more: their errours haue beene most learnedly discouered,
and confuted, their bookes and libells aunswered;
& if I may giue my iudgement of these daies,
the skirts of the Romish Whore were neuer better

discouered, her grossest absurdities and fowlest impieties
neuer so cleerly displayed, as haue beene by the
Diuines of this present age. I spare their names, in regarde
they bee aliue: and long may they liue, to the
happinesse of this Church.
            And beyond all meanes then vsed, and now continued,
his Maiestie hath vsed one more; namely,
admirable lenitie, and extraordinarie patience towards
them, notwithstanding all their ill deseruings:
which as it was alwayes great; so, since the hellish
powder treason it is incredible: for he whose patience
is not prouoked, and whose iust anger is not wakened
by such an attempt, sure there is somthing more then
ordinarily humane, in that man. Neither do I think
is there a King in Christendome, that after such a
treason would haue left one of that factiō in his kingdome,
but onely his Maiestie. Oh mirror of mercy!
how famously in future ages shal this princely bounty
be renowned! and how fit is hee to bee the Lords
anointed, and to be the Lieutenant of that God whose
mercy is ouer all his workes; seeing his mercie is so
largely extended euen ouer his worst deseruing subiects.
Thus heauen hath seene it, euen the Lord himselfe
will witnesse with vs, that as all his Church euerie
where ouer the world, so wee in England for our
parts, would gladly haue healed Babylon, and haue
done our full indeuour to that ende: But now alas
see the effect of our labours, all is lost; for shee is Babylon,
and therfore past cure: She wil not, & therfore
cannot be healed.
            
            Some will say this is harsh & bitter: but I say it is
true, and therfore is not to be cōcealed: let hir blame

them that haue made her incurable, and not them
that d
                  •
               scouer it: and for me that affirme it, I craue not
to be belieued, but rather to be reprooued, if the euidence
of the fact doe not fully prooue what I haue
sayd.
            To this end, I will first lay downe a ground or two.
            First, that in former times there haue beene great
cōplaints of foul deformities in the Romish Church,
made by men of great learning, and such as eyther
are, or at least whom they say are, their owne: and
these deformities not only in priuate persons, but in
the publick body; not in the members onely, but in
the head of their Church. I will not stand to prooue
this, it being not the end of my purpose at this time:
they that look into the monuments of elder ages doe
knowe this to be true; and whosoeuer will but looke
into the Reuelations of Saint Bridget, Bernards Epistles,
Vicentius Ferrariensis, and others of that age, wil
soone acknowledge it.
            Another ground: these deformities were so fowle
and so apparant, that the Councels of Constance, and
Basil, and (of later times) that of Trent, were called
to this principall end, for the reformation of the
Church both in the head and in the members. For that
of Constance, the Councell it selfe confesseth it in the
publick acts thereof more then once: and for that of
Trent, howsoeuer they pretended it against Luther &
his doctrine; yet it is confessed by a learned Bishop
of their sideEspencaeus in Titum. cap. 1., that it was wrought out and brought
to passe at last, and after much resistance, for the reformation
of the Romish Church, & euen of the Popes
owne Court; wherein there raigned at that time many

abhominable things, as one of the better sort of
Popes himself freely confessedAdrian the 6. Vpon these groūds
I proceed to lay downe 3. propositions, touching the
incurablenesse of Romish Babel.
            1. That these Councels assembled to reforme and
amend, did contrariwise establish diuers impious errors
neuer before decreed in the world.
            2. That those fowle deformities in the Romish
Church, both in the head and members, and both for
doctrine and manners, that were in that Church before
those Councells, and for the redresse whereof,
those Councels were called, did neuertheles, and yet
do, continue vnreformed.
            3 That since then, in steed of redresse and reformation
of the euills then found, there haue contrariwise
growen vp in their Church more horrible and haynous
practices, and more erronious and impious
doctrines then euer before; and at this day stand vnreprooued,
and maintayned by their Church. And
these three propositions being proued, I hope there
is none but will confesse that the Romish Church, for
ought that man can see is past cure, or at least, not yet
healed.
            
         
         
            
            The first Proposition.
            The last popish Councells decreed worse things
then anie before them.
            TOuching the first, I proue it by a fewe particulars
in steed of many: and first for the Councell
of Constance, that Councel decreed. 2. such decrees,
as tend rather to the ruinating of all religion, and ouerthrowing
all humane society, then any whit to the curing
of diseases either in the one or other.
            For first, whereas it is knowen and graunted, that
Christ, at his last Supper ordaining the holy Comunion,
did consecrate and giue it both in bread and
wine, and commanded his Ministers after him, Doe
this
               See all the Euangelists, & S. Paul. 1. Cor. 11
                     •
                   23. &c.: and tho it cannot be denied but that the primitiue
& ancient Church did so receiue it, as Christ
left it; yet for all that, comes the Popish Councell of
Constance, and cals it a peruerse fashion, and an ill order
of those that giue their people the Sacrament in
both kindes: and do further decree, that,

                  Notwithstanding Christ ordayned, and the primitiue
Church practiced it in both kinds: yet now
to say that it is necessary to receiue it in both, shal
be heresie, and punished as heresie; that is, with
death, and losse of lands, and goods, &c.
And howsoeuer Bellarmine
               Bellar. de Sacrā. Euch. lib. 4. cap. 2
                     •
                  . much ashamed of the
matter, will needs that the Non-obstante is not referd to
the institution in both kindes, but to the celebration

after supper (and therfore accuseth Luther & others,
as lyers, for so reporting of the Councell) yet many
others of his fellowes make no bones to grant it: and
if they all denyed it, the very words themselues of the
Canon are plaine inough.
            Now, thus to decree and make a Canon, contrary
to the direct institution & comandement of Christ;
what is it but to controll Christ himselfe, and to weaken
the certainty of all truth and religion?
            Secondly, whereas there can be no firm society amongst
men, if othes & couenants (especially made
by publick persons) be of no force, and therfore God
himselfe would haue the Israelites oath to the Gibeonites,
performed, though it was craftily extortedIos. 9. 19.;
and after seuerely punished Saul in his posteritie, for
the breach of it2. Sam. 21. 1. 2.: yet the Romish Councell in this
latter age hath decreed, that

                  Concil. Constant. sessione. 19. Though the Emperour or King giue a safe cō
                  duct,
to one accused of heresie, to come to a
Councell or Disputation, &c. and tho he binde
and confirme that safe conduct with any bonde
whatsoeuer, and tho the party would not haue
come, but vpon the assurance of the safe conduct:
Yet (hoc non obstante) this not withstanding,
he may be taken and proceeded against and
burned as an hereticke, without any preiudice to
the Catholick faith, &c.
            
            If this be good diuinity, that Oaths & Couenants
to hereticks are of no force, & binde not the makers;
then it is in vaine for men to haue any dealing one
with another: for if oathes be once of no force in any
one thing, they will in time be weakened in all things.
            
            
               Thus this Romish Councell that should haue amended,
hath contrariewise decreed two conclusions
of monstrous impietie: and such, as (for ought I could
euer see) were neuer till then decreed nor receiued;
no, not in the Romish Church it selfe.
            But is this reformed since? No, saith a great Spanish
Bishop, more then a hundred yeares after this Councell);
it is so farre from being altered, that contrariwise,
by the authority of this decree, it is now a rule
in our Church that faith made to an hereticke, by a
priuate man, is not to be kept; no, nor if it be made
by a Magistrate, as (saith he) is proued by the practice
of the Councel of Constance. Mark how they are healed:
afore it was true in publique persons; nor it is true
in priuate men also: afore it might be broken without
any fault; but nowe it may not be kept. See how
Babylon is cured.
            
            But the Councell of Trent is of later times: hath
not it done much good and reformed much ill? Nay
on the other side, it hath decreed and made two Canons
to the high disgrace of holy Scriptures, and
much derogating from the soueraign authoritie therof;
which till then were neuer decreed, not in the
darkest times of poperie, when her ignorance and
superstition was without all controll: As namely,
firstConcil. Trident. sess. 4.,
That the Apocriphall Bookes of Tobiah, Iudith,
and the rest, shall be held and receiued, of as authenticall
and Canonicall authority, as any parts
of holy Scripture, whose authoritie was euer sacred.
            
            This wrong was neuer offered to the holy Scriptures

before: neither was there euer any popish generall
Councell, so presumptuous afore this of Trent,
that euer durst add more books to the sacred Canon,
then we receiued from Christ and the Church of the
olde Testament. Some bold Papists say, that the Florentine
Councel, before Trent, did make them Canonicall:
which if it had, it had bin little materiall, seeing
it was but a smal time before Trent, scarce 100. yeares:
but the truth is, it did not; and therefore Bellarmine
and Coccius are more carefull of their credit, and will
not affirme itBellar. tom. 1 lib. de verbo Dei.. So that its cleer, there neuer was generall
Councell that made them Canonicall before
Trent,Coccius in the sauro cathol. tom. 1. nor any prouinciall but oneConcil. C
                     ••
                  
                  thag. 3.: and they are
not able to bring one Father that held them so, within
400. yeares after Christ, nor very many after till
of late; and contrariwise wee are able to proue, that
all the Fathers for 400. yeares did reiecte them, and
many after; yea, the greater part of all learned Papists
themselues till the Councell of Trent. And thus wee
see how Romish Babylon is stil the elder the worse:
But this is not all: a Romish Councell will neuer meete
for one euill. Therefore secondly they decreeConcil. Trident. sess. 4.,
That in all Disputations, Sermons Lectures, and
to all other purposes, that Latine translation called
the vulgar, shal be held the authentical text,
and that no man presume vnder any pretext to
refuse it.
            
            Heere is a strange decree, that the streame shall be
of more vertue then the Fountaine, a translation of
more authoritie then the Originall. The former ages
neuer heard of this indignitie: but whensoeuer doubt
was made, or difference found, recourse was forthwith

had to the Originalls for the determining of the
matter. Many learned Papists are ashamed of this, if
they durst vtter it. Bellarmine and Coccius do bewray
it by their slight handling of the matter; for they
would gladly prooue if they could, that Hierome was
the author of that translation: but as for the magnifying
of it (whosoeuer was the translator) aboue the
Originalls, they are wiser then to venture their credits
vpon so false a matter, and therefore doe wholly
leaue it vpon the credit of that conuenticle that concluded it.
Neither do I wrong, to call it a Conuenticle:
for tho I should grant the whole to be a Councel; yet
the number that past this bil, was so small, that I may
safely call it a Conuenticle. For as an ill motion may
pass in Parliament betimes in a morning before all
the house be set, so was this bill carried at Trent. For
whereas the Councel in his fulness consisted of about
300. that had voice of decision, they took the aduantage
at the beginning of the Councell, and carried
these two bils when ther were scarce 60. in the house
(wherof how many went against them is vncertain)
for the Pope durst not (for one of his Crownes) haue
put these 2. bils, especially the latter, to the full house:
for how would they haue entertained it, then when as
they had liberty of speech against it, who since their
tongues were tyed & the bil passed, yet haue dared (&
some of them who were of the Councel themselues)
euen to resist the decree,Arius Montanus, Sixtus Senensis, Oleaster, &c. and haue taken so contrarie
a course themselues in expounding the Scripture,
that howsoeuer they were tolerated for their learning
whilest they liued; yet being dead, their books are either
purged, that is altered, or els reproued: So that

its apparant to all that will vnderstand, that this decree
was so far from being established in any former ages,
that it is euen misliked of many of the better sort of
themselues now that it is made.
            And thus I hope we haue cleered it, that these two
Councells, called in the corrupt and declining times
of the Popish Church, in shewe to haue reformed
it, haue beene so farre from that, that contrariwise
they haue concluded diuerse enormous impieties
that were not before: Then is not the Romish Babylon
well cured?
            
         
         
            The second Proposition;
            Poperie is still as ill as euer it was.
            I hasten to the second Proposition: which is, that
the deformities that were before, both in Doctrine
and practice, both in head and members, and many
whereof were complayned on by some of themselues,
doe yet remaine without redresse or reformation.
            For the demonstration of this Proposition, I
might inlarge my selfe into many particulars; but I
will insist but vpon fewe: and those I shal produce
shall not be trifles, nor triuiall, but of great moment,
euen touching the maine and morall duties which a
Christian man oweth to his God; and which to deny
is to denie God, to falsifie his word and nullifie his
lawe. And to this ende, it were no hard matter, to

passe through the most of the 10. Commandements
of the Morall and eternall lawe: but I will stand vpon
some few of the principall.
            In all which, my course shall be fairest for them,
and safest for my selfe: for I will not relie vpon the
credite of any reporter nor other writer, how great
soeuer his authoritie bee; but produce the recordes
themselues, and the authenticall originalls of their
owne bookes, as they stand at this day allowed by
Authoritie.
            Now therefore, whether the Romish Babylon bee
yet cured or no, let the Christian world iudge by these
particulars:
         
         
            The first Wounde.
            THe pride of the Romish Anti-christ, in times past,
was such, that hee exalted himselfe, at least suffered
himselfe to be set in the throne of God; yea, and
to be called of men God, and their Lord God
               
                  The first wound; The Pope is a God, and their Lord God.: and
this not only in priuate Authors, but euen in his own
Canon lawe: these be the words in the glosse vpon the
extrauagants;
To beleeue that our Lord God the Pope, the maker
of this Decretal, may not decree it as he hath; may
be iudged hereticall.
            
            The words are plaine enough. But if any man say
this is but the glosse, and not the Text: I answere;
first that the glosse is of greater authoritie amongst
them then any, or then many Doctors. But further,
what if wee finde as much or worse, out of the verie

Text of the Popes lawe it selfe? Look in the Decree,
the 96. distinction, there the Pope himself frames this
argument, writing to the Emperor against them that
would call his Holinesse to account;
Its certaine that the Emperour Constantine called
the Pope God.
               But its as cleere that God may not bee iudged of
men. Ergo the Pope may not be iudged of any
man.
            
            Thus the Pope that canonizeth so many men and
women Saints, hath here taken paines to canonize
himself a God, both in the Text and gloss of his own
lawe: his glossers call him their Lord God, and hee is
content to take it to himselfe. Constantine (he saith in
the text) cals him God, and he is content both to take
it, and make good vse of it. Whether this bee not
Herods sinneAct. 12. at least, let him looke to it; but let vs
goe forward. Heere Babylon is sicke of a deadly euill:
but is she healed? I wish she were: but I cannot shew
it.The first wound not healed. If any say shee is, then let him shewe mee that
Pope, or name mee that Writer, Doctor, Inquisitor,
Bishop, or any other, who by commandment or authoritie,
or but with the approbation of the Pope,
hath confuted, or but as much as reproued this blasphemy;
or shewe any that hath reproued it, whom
they haue not blamed or condemned. But that shee
is not cured in this point, I can make it apparant. For
look in the Canon lawe reuiewed, and as they pretend
reformed and reprinted of late by the authoritie and
with the approbation of Pope Gregorie the thirteenth
vnder his bul; where though manie things be
altered, or taken out that made against the Popes

primacie: yet this that makes so much against Gods
holy Maiestie is not in one point helped, nor in one
word altered, but stil this is good & Catholick Diuiin
the Popes lawe, that
The Pope is God, and therefore may not bee iudged
of men.
            
            But will you haue yet better euidence, that Shee is
not cured? Hearken a little: A great Italian Doctor,
no lesse then a Bishop, writes thus to the Pope himselfe
(for to the Pope eyther the Authour or his Nephew
doth dedicate it) no longer then three or foure
yeares agoe;
From the Pope as from the Head there doe flowe into
the whole body of the Church, that is, into the
whole Christian world, spirits or spirituall life,
yeelding the feeling and fruite of heauenly graces,
and effectuall motion to eternall happinesse: therfore
he is worthily called (as God is) most holy &
most blessed, and is worshipped & adored as a God
of all christian men.
            
            Loe here as bad or worse then the former: the Pope
is such a Head of the Church, as infuseth spirituall life,
and heauenly graces into the body of the Church (Doth
Christ himselfe any more?) and hee is worthily worshipped
as a God. And this doth Pope Clement the 8.
suffer to be spoken and written of himselfe, and not 4.
yeares agoe to be printed vnder his nose at Rome; and
thence to be sent ouer the world: and now iudge, Is
not Romish Babylon well healed? nay, rather alasse,
doth not her wound fester and rankle more & more?
Well then seeing this is the Romish doctrine and
practice, both olde and newe, both long agoe and

now present, let vs make a little vse of it.
            First, we see here good reason, why a Papist should
holde the Pope aboue a Councell, and euen the holy
scripture it selfe: for the Pope is God; and we knowe
that God is aboue the Scripture.
            Secondly, why also the Pope holds himself aboue
Kings: for he is God, and God is King of kings: in a
word, no maruell why he should take appeals from
all the world, weare a triple Crowne, bee carried on
mens shoulders, giue his foote to be kissed, dispose
of kingdomes and kings at his pleasure; for hee that
is God may doe more then all these. And surely, wee
Protestants must needs grant, that as truely as he is a
God, so lawfully may he do all these. All these vses are
as good, as that is the Pope himselfe makes, when he
sayth: God may not be iudged by men; but I am God,
and therfore may not be iudged by man: these be his arguments:
but now he shall giue mee leaue to make
but one for him and his fellowes.
            The God that admitteth another Lord God, and to
be worshiped as God; is not the Lord IEHOVAH,
the true God: for the true God is God alone
               Deut. 6. 4.: but the
Papists God admits of another Lord God, and to be
worshipped as God; therfore he is not the true God.
If they deny the Maior, they denie Scripture: If the
Minor, they denie their Doctrine, and their owne
bookes: if they grant both, they are worthie of the
Conclusion.
            I would end this point: but I cannot omit to make
one vse more of this their doctrine. It hath bin made
a question amongst them, whether the Pope might
not emptie all Purgatorie, if hee see cause; and no

maruell: for he being God, surely (if there be a purgatorie)
God can empty it. Now to conclude, all
these do but equallize the Pope with God: but what
if hee haue made himselfe greater then God
               
                  The 2. wound; The Pope hath done more then God.? I will
be but the relatour, let the Reader iudge.
         
         
            The second Wounde.
            ALmost two hundred yeares agoe, hee did with
publicke authoritie and after long examination,
by a great CardinallThis Cardinall was Iohannes de turre cremata: as appears in the prefaces before the booke of the Reuelations of S. Brigit. and other Commissioners, approue
and after suffred to be published to the world,
a booke in latine, called
The Reuelations of Saint Brigite.
            
            Where it is dogmatically deliuered & as a matter
without question, That Pope Gregory by his prayers
lifted the heathen Emperour Traiane out of hell: and
another long afore, (whom they pretend also to bee
theirs) deliuereth it more amplie, adding further that
God answered the Pope thus: I haue heard thy prayers,
and I grant mercie and pardon to Traiane; but see
that thou hereafter offer me no sacrifice, for an vngodly
man (h). From hence I offer them this argument to
thinke on; The true God neuer deliuered a damned
soule out of hell: but the Pope hath deliuered a soule
out of hell: therefore he
                  •
                hath done that, that God
neuer did, not for ought that is reuealed euer vvill
doe.
            Heer is a foule wound, but is this healed vp? No,
The 2. wound not healed. this booke stands allowed by the the Pope: and in
his Catalogue of the bookes which hee forbids to

bee readVide Indicē lib. prohib. per Clem. 8., where many a learned and godly booke
is condemned, this is not toucht; and therefore, as
Posseuine himselfe (a Iesuite) grauntsPosseuinus loco citato. not two
yeares agoe, not onely the booke stands vncondemned,
but this foule blasphemie vncontrolled: and to
shewe that the head of Babylon, namely, the Pope is
incurable; let it be obserued, that tho many particular
learned PapistsMel. Canus. lib. 11. c. 2. Bellar. de Purgat. lib. 2. cap. 8. Blas. Vieg. in Apoc. c. 6. comment. 3. sect. 3. Baronius annal. circa temp. Traianj. haue misliked, and condemned it
as farre as in them lyeth; yet to this daie was it neuer
condemned, not the booke forbidden or amended
by the Pope: so vnwilling is Babylon to bee healed of
her wounds.
            Yea, the Pope is so farre from healing it; that contrariwise
he suffred a Spanish Dominican Frier to defend
it: and that not in word, but writing; not priuatly,
but openly: not in a corner of the World, but
to come to Rome within these fewe yeares, and there
euen to write and publish vnder his nose, and by his
authority, and apology of this blasphemous fable,
                  •
                endeuouring
to proue it by many arguments, that Gregory
did deliuer Traian out of hell
               Alphonsus Ciaconus..
            Thus tho it containe neuer so great an impietie against
God; yet, because it tends to the magnifying
of the Popes power and prerogatiue (let as manie
learned men as will speak against it) it shall stand and
be mayntayned: so true it is that Babylon will not be
healed of her deadliest woundes. And wonder not
tho I call them deadly; for consider of these consequences:
The Pope deliuered a soule out of hell;
Therfore he did that which God neuer did. Againe,
therfore there may be redemption out of hel. Again,
therefore the Popes prayers did that which Christs

prayers neuer did: againe, Christ sayth, I pray not
for the world
               Ioh. 17. The world, that is for the wicked & damned.: the Pope sayth, but I do; Ergo the
Popes pittie and charitie is more then Christs: Alas,
alas, is Rome the holy Church, and sees not these blemishes?
Is she the liuing Church, and feels not these
wounds? nay rather, is she not that Babylon that will
not be healed?
            
            But to conclude: all this is the worse because hee
hath razed out many sentences, and passages out of
many Authors, wherein he thought himselfe and his
seat to be wronged
                  Ludou. viues: Ferus, Erasmus, Stella, Oleaster, Espencaeus and infinite others.
               ; but this that so highly dishonoreth
God himself, he can patiently suffer: but had he
been as zealous of Gods glory as carefull of his own,
then he that forbids Espencaeus his commentaries on
Titus til they be purged, and the book called Onus Ecclesiae
(absolutely without any limitatiō) because they
touch his freehold too neere, would also haue forbidden
the Reuelation of S. Bridgit, til this foule blasphemie
had beene purged out: which seeing he hath so
carelesly and wilfully neglected, tho his Catalogue of
forbidden bookes hath so often been renuedIt was first made by Pius 4. and so since cōtinued renued & augmented till Clement the 8.; it appears
what an vnworthy Vicar of God hee is, who
looks only to himself, but suffers his master to be dishonored
before his face: Therefore, Arise, O Lord,
maintaine thine owne cause.
            
            Well then, seeing this wound is incurable, let vs
leaue it rankling and come to another.
         
         
            
            The third Wounde.
            SOme 120. yeares agoe, an Italian Frier wittie and
learned, as the most in those dayes, a principall
Preacher and as famous in his time as Mussus, or Panegirola
in these latter, by name Bernardinus de busto,
               Bernard. de busto Marial. par. 3. ser. 3. pa
                     •
                   96. editionis Lugd. anni 517 preached this doctrine publikely, after wrote it, and
sent it to. Alexander the 6. and vnder his name published
it,

                  That God hath diuided his kingdome with the Virgin
Marie
                  
                     The 3. wound; God hath diuided his kingdom with the Virgine Mary: And that a man may appeale from Gods iustice to the mercy of the Virgin Mary, because God hath kept iustice to himself, but committed his
mercy to his Mother.
                  
                     •
                  
               
            
            The impiety is so execrable & seems so incredible,
that I will put downe the words out of the booke it
selfe, as it was dedicated to the Pope.
A man may appeale to the Virgin Mary not only from
a Tyrant, and from the diuell, but euen from God
himself; Namely, when he feels himself grieued or oppressed
of Gods iustice: which was signified in the 5.
of Ester, where it is sayde that when king Assuerus
was angry at the Iewes, Queene Ester came in to
please & pacify him: to whom the king answered;
whatsoeuer thou askest me, tho it be the half of my
kingdom, I wil giue it thee. Now, this Empress prefigured
the Empress of heauen, with whome God
hath diuided his kingdom: For whereas God hath
iustice & mercy; He hath reserued Iustice to himself
to be exercised in this world, and hath granted mercy
to his Mother: therfore if any man finde himselfe
agrieued in the court of Gods Iustice, let him appeal
to the Court of the mercy of his mother.
               
            
            
               What is this we heare? do there lie appeales from
God? and from God to a creature? Is Gods iustice
such, as a man may iustly be agrieued at it? & further,
is Gods kingdom diuisible? and hath God indeed diuided
his kingdome? and diuided it with a creature,
yea with a woman? and hath God granted his mercy
from himself to a creature? we may say with the Prophet,
Oh heauens be astonied at this: and let all Christian
hearts tremble to heare such blasphemies: and yet
these be good doctrines in popery, fit for their pulpits,
and their people; and after they be preached worthie
to bee published to the world. Surely if they graunt
these be false doctrines; then blame & shame belongs
to the Papists that preach them, write them, publish
them and allow them for Catholicke doctrine: but if
they stand to them as true, then mark what consequē
               ces
will follow vpon them: first it is here taught, that
a man may appeale frō God. Hereupon this argument
is easily framed, but I beleeue not so easily answered;
            Popery teacheth there lies no appeale from the Pope:
and heere teacheth that there lyes appeale from
God.
            But in reason, he from whō no appeal can lie, is greater
then he from whom one may.
            
               Ergo, by popish doctrin the Pope is greater then God.
            This conclusion is ineuitable, if their doctrine be
true. Again, here it is taught that we may appeale frō
God to the Virgin Mary: if that be true, let them answere
this argument;
            
               He, vnto whom appeale doth lie from another
                     •
                   is greater
then hee from whome it is made; this is their
owne doctrine.
            
               But from the Lord God appeale doth lie to the Virgin
Marie. Ergo, shee by popish doctrine is greater
then God.
            If this conclusion be heresie and blasphemie; then
Bernardine de busto his bookes are to be burnt, & yet
they are both allowed & commended by the Romish
Church: but let vs goe forward.
            Thirdly, here it is taught, that God hath diuided
his kingdome with a creature, euen with a woman: This
being true, here we learne many points.
            First, the reason why they call her in their Seruice
booke allowed by supreame and soueraigne authoritie,
Reginam Coelorum, the Queene of heauen; for
shee that hath got possession of the halfe of Gods
kingdome, may well and worthily be held the Queen
of heauen.
            
            Secondly, heere is a very good reason, why the
Church of Rome keepes the Bible from the vulgar
people, and will not haue it divulged in their Mother
tongues: for if they had it in their own tongues, they
would startle at this doctrine; and when they heard it
deliuered in Pulpit, that God had diuided his kingdome,
would soone haue saide, that is false doctrine:
for the Psalme saith, The kingdome is the Lords
               Psal. 22. 29: and
Dauid in his thankesgiuing, at the preparation for the
Temple building, confesseth to God; Thine O Lord
is greatnesse, power and glorie, aeternitie and Maiestie:
Thine O Lord is the kingdome and thou excellest
ouer all
               1. Chr. 29. 11.: and if the Frier had obiected that the kingdome
indeede is Gods, yet not so, but hee may diuide
it to another; then they would haue answered,
that cannot be: for he himself sayth, I am the Lord, &c.

My glory, I will not giue to another
               Esa. 42. 8: and if hee still
obiected that to be true in the olde Testament, when
there was none capable and worthy of this honour,
because then the Virgine Mary was not; they would
readily answere, that in the new Testament after the
Virgine Mary was, and after shee was the mother of
Christ; Christ her son speaks to God his Father, (but
not to her his mother) Thine is the kingdome, power, &
glory
               Mat
                     •
                   6. 13.. The kingdom is Gods: and how long? (not
till she be assumed & crowned in heauen, as they say,
but) for euer and euer.
            
            And whereas they further teach, that he hath kept
Iustice to himselfe, but committed mercie to his Mother:
they would crie out vpon that doctrine & him
that taught it; and tell him that they finde it sixe and
twentie times in one psalme, that Gods mercy endureth
for euer
               Psal. 136. in euery verse. 
               and that his mercy is ouer all his works
               Psal. 145. 9: If ouer all; then ouer her also, or else she is not of
his making: and if his mercy be vpon her, without
which shee could neuer haue beene saued: then how
dare any say, that Mercy is hers, and not Gods? And if
mercy bee Gods, and that mercy of his endureth his,
(not for the time of the olde Testament onely, but)
for euer; Then it is foule and false doctrine to say,
that now since Christ, God hath resigned vp mercie
from himselfe to a creature: Thus would the people
come vpon him that taught this doctrine, and vpon
the Romish Church that alloweth it: and therefore
doth not that Church wisely, to keep the people from
reading the holy Scriptures?
            Thirdly, seeing it is doctrine currant in the Romish
Church, that God hath giuen vp mercie from himselfe

to the Virgin Marie, heere is a good defence of
their Ladies Psalter: wherein they turne the Psalmes
from Dominus to Domina, from GGD to our Ladie:
and when Dauid saith, Lord haue mercy on
me; they say, O Lady haue mercie on me: & in thee
O Lady is my trust. They say this was compiled by
Bonauēture: but tho he liued in il times, yet his other
writings giue cause to hope hee made it not: for h
                  ••
               
saith, that we must take heed wee so inlarge not the excellency
of the Mother, that we diminish the glory of the
sonne. Sure hee that saide so, would not be so lauish
and carelesse of Gods glorie, as to turne the Psalmes
from him to a creature.
            Fourthly, heere we see the reason why the popish
Synagogue do maime the Lords prayer, leauing out
the conclusion, For thine is the kingdome and power
and glorie for euer and euer
               See the Rhemish Testament in Mat. 6
                     •
                   & Luke the 11. & all their Mi
                  
                     ••
                  als and Breuiaries, Man
                     •
                  a
                     •
                  s and allowed primers: in all which they cut short the Lords praier, leauing out the words of the conclusion, for thine is the kingdom &c.. For if the kingdom be
diuided, then it is not all his for euer: no maruel therfore,
though they will haue their Pater noster in Latine
for their common people; for if it were in English,
there is none so simple but would see their vngodly
dealing.
            But to conclude, (leauing this robbery and sacriledge,
in cutting off part of the Lords prayer, for another
place and purpose) it is heere euident that no
papist in the World can with a good conscience say
the whole Lords prayer. For if God haue now diuided
his Kingdome, then how can he say with Dauid in
the olde testament1
                     •
                   Chr. 29. 11., & Christ in the newMat. 6. 
               Thine O
Lord is the kingdome for euer: therefore he must either
alter the Lords prayer and say, Thine is halfe
                     •
                   the
kingdome, &c. or neuer say it at all: or else curse and

detest his own teachers that write, and his Lord God
the Pope that alloweth such doctrine. Alas, poore

                  •
               oules, what should a simple honest hearted papist do
in this case! See therefore in what pittifull state they
liue, who haue subiected themselues to such teachers.
            Lastlie, let it bee obserued that heere they teach,
that there bee in spirituall matters touching the soule
2. diuine Courts: the one of Iustice, and that is Gods;
the other a Chancery, a Court of Mercy, & that is, Maries;
these bee their verie wordes: and further, that
if any man feele himselfe agrieued in Gods Court of Iustice,
let him appeale to the Court of mercie of his Mother:
Oh strange diuinity! Can Gods iudgements be
vniust, or his proceedings erroneous and vnequall?
If they bee not, then why do they talke of appealing
to a higher Court? For, why doe Writs of error
lie from one Court to another, but that it is presupposed
that they may erre? and why is there a Chauncery,
but that the rigour, and extremitie of the Lawe
maie bee mitigated? But if the Scripture saie true
in the text, Righteous art thou O Lord, and iust in thy
iudgements;
               Psal. 119 137 Then this is blasphemie of a high
nature, that there needes a Chancerie to rectifie his
proceedings and mitigate his iudgements. But as
for this doctrine, that the Chauncerie or Court of
mercie is not Gods, but his Mothers, and that therefore
Gods iudgements are to be mitigated by another,
and therefore that she and her Court are in this respect
aboue God and his Court: These blasphemies are so
execrable and odious to Christian eares, that I hope
ther is not a papist in this kingdome, that professeth to

know and serue God, but his heart hates them and
all that hold them.
            Against all this, what can bee obiected but this:
that he, being a priuate man, spake & wrot out of his
priuate iudgement; but this is not the generall doctrine
of their teachers, not their Church. I answere,
If none in the world taught this, but this one Frier;
yet how many soeuer knowing it, do approue, commend,
or defend it, or if they do not reproue & condemne
it, it is iustly to bee called their doctrine: and
by the lawe both of God & man, it is their sin as well
as his. For, by the lawe of Accessaries: he that anie
waie approues, or knowing it and hauing a calling to
it, reproues not a sinne, makes himselfe guilty of the
sinne: but the Romish Church, that is, the Pope
knoweth this hainous blasphemie; and sayth, that
he hath authority to condemne all such: therefore,
hauing not done so, but contrariwise, approuing it,
is guiltie of it.
            Shewe me then that Pope, Bishop, or Inquisitour,
that hath condemned this blasphemie, or this book
for it. I produce a Pope that allowed it, namely, Alexander
the sixt, who suffered it to passe vnder his
name, to the view and reading of the world: let them
bring one Pope since, that hath condemned it: or
shewe one writer (not reproued by them) that euer
reproued it, or (not condemned by them) that euer
condemned this blasphemie; if they doe not this,
then it is apparant that in this wound, Babylon is not
yet healed.
            
            But for better euidence, that she lies rotting in this
her filthinesse, and incurable in this woundThe third wound not healed.: Posseuine
               
the Iesuite; their great and allowed Censor of al
Authors, giues his publike censure of this booke,
to bee Sermons of the excellency of the Queene of heauen,
and full of learning and godlinesse. And this his
censure, no man that knoweth the present state of
their religion, can deny but that it is the censure of
their Church; and ought so to bee reputed: for that
worke of Posseuines was attempted, continued, and finished,
and printed and reprinted with as publick &
generall allowance as any thing can be.
            And yet for better euidence, that she is not healed,
nor reformed at all: let it be obserued, tha
                  •
                this book
is of so much estimation amongst them, that it hath
diuers times beene reprinted since Bernardine the
Author set it out: as namely in my knowledge
once at Brixia in Italie, almost twenty yeares agoe,
in three volumes, corrected and amended, as they
pretende.
            But that this impious doctrine is not amended, I
will make it euident: for of late, euen this present
yeare, this booke and all his other works were again
printed at Colein in Germany in three volumes: which
when I perceiued out of the last Catalogue, I could
not rest till I had obtained this new impression from
Coleine, hoping that now at last they had (for shame
righted this cause of God, and razed out that hainous
blasphemie: but hauing perused it, I see to my griefe,
that they will not be healed; for there the very same
words and doctrine stand vnreprooued, vncontrolled,
vnaltered: nay, not so much as hauing a Marginal
note to explaine them: but they are let to passe as
good, holy, and Catholicke Romish doctrine. And

that this is true I here pawne my credit to this honorable
assemblie, and will be ready to iustifie it to anie
(desirous to be informed in the particulars) by shewing
the books themselues, both new and old. Which
being so, I hope no man wil denie, but that it is apparant
she is not healed.
            
            And yet for the better satisfaction of all men, that
as she is not yet, so shee purposeth neuer more to bee
healed, nor to reform any thing, and that this is not
the priuate opinion of that or any other one doctor; I
desire al that loue the truth to take knowledge, that of
late within these seuen yeeres, an Italian doctor a Iesuite
and an approoued writer, writing a story of the
miracles of our Lady of Loretto teacheth euen the
same doctrine, and makes no bones to bluster out almost
the very same words: which for better assurance
I will put down.
The Virgin Mary both wil and can, is both willing &
able to deliuer such, as be compassed about with dangers
on all sides, and to heape vpon them all good blessings:
for, Almighty God, (as farre as it is lawfull)
hath made his Mother fellow and partaker of his divine
power, and Maiesty, &c.
            
            See heere the new and refined diuinity of the Iesuites:
what is this, but the same with that afore? for if
she be made partaker and fellow with God in his diuine
power and Maiesty, it is no maruell, that God hath
committed his mercy to her: and if from these words
we looke into the body of the booke, we shall find hee
ascribes such works and miracles to her, as can belong
to none but to him or her that is a fellow with
God, or rather God himselfe.
            
               
And as for this clause, as far as it is lawfull, is a
strange word to be spoken of God; for what can be
vnlawful to God, that is good, whose will is the holiest
law? If therefore it be good to make a creature fellow
with him in his deity, it must needes bee lawfull,
and so the clause is idle. If it be not good, but impious
and contrary to the nature of God, then to think it any
way lawfull, or possible to be done, is no losse then
to think it any way lawful for God to lie, or sin, or denie
himselfe: so that take it any way, this limitation
of the Iesuite both grossely a
                  •
               useth the Reader, and
containeth horrible impiety against God. So far is it
from being any shelter to the blasphemy that is deliuered
in the whole passage.
            Nor can it bee saide, the booke wants authority:
for it is formally allowed, dedicated to the Cardinall
Aldobrandin
                     •
                  , printed at Rome, and since often elsewhere;
and of late both the Author and his booke
highlie commended by the greatest Romish censurers.
So that now I will end my euidence, for this
point, and dare put the matter to a Iurie of any
conscionable men, whether this wound be healed yet
or no.
            
         
         
            The fourth Wound.
            NOw to go forward: from the Person and Maiesty
of God, let vs proceede to his Holy Scriptures;
and see how the Romish Church held of
olde, and yet holdeth, and teacheth of them. I will
not stand vpon those vile, and base speeches vttered

and written of them by Eccius, Pighius, Hosius, and many
other of that generation, for that they haue beene
both detected and with shame inough reiected by
many reuerend men of our nation, both in Latine &
EnglishWhitaker Fulke, lewel, Reinolds, and others.
               ; but vpon some that often haue not bin
touched by many, nor euer can bee sufficiently condemned
by any.
            In the Canon Law, the Pope spareth not to disgrace
the holy Scriptures in expresse tearms: sometimes equaling
his owne Constitutions with them, sometimes
preferring them.
            In the decree he shameth not to affirme that
                  The fourth wound; The Popes decrees bee equall to the Canonicall Scriptures. 
               his
decretall Epistles are numbred amongst the Canonicall
Scriptures
               Decret dist. 19. cap. 6., & impudently alledgeth Saint Augustine
to proue it, who neuer spake nor meant any such
thing; as in the later end of the decree they cannot
but confess with shame inough: this was his doctrine
in the old impressions of the Canon law, a hundreth
yeares agoe. But some will say, this wound is now healed:
No, looke in the new impression reuiewed at
the Popes commandement, and printed by his authority
within these few yeares, and there stand the verie
same wordes without the least reformation in the Rubricke
or title of the Chapter;
The decretall Epistles are numbred and reckoned amongst
the Canonicall ScripturesThe fourth wound not healed..
            
            Which is the more shamefull in it self, & shamelesse
in the dooers, in as much as in the same new edition
they are forced to confesse, that Augustine (out
of whom they cite the whole Chapter) did not at all
meane the Popes decretall Epistles, but the holy and
Canonicall Scriptures: and no maruell, for the name

of decretall Epistles of the Popes, was to get and to
beare, many a faire yeare after his daies.
            To conclude, let wise men obserue heer this point;
how vnwilling the Romish Church is to amend or
alter any thing, especially if it concern Gods honour
and not their owne free-hold: else, why should they
maintaine that blasphemy in the Rubrick and title
of the Chapter, which in the body of the Chapter
they condemn? But well doe they know, that many a
man reades the contents of books & chapters, which
neuer read more. Therfore because the words of this
title giue honour to his decretalls, tho they be neuer
so dishonourable to Gods holy Scriptures, they are
suffred to stand, whereas they haue put out many
things disgracefull to themselues: Thus vnwilling is
Babylon to be healed in any thing.
            
         
         
            The fift Wounde.
            THis doth but make them equall; and that may be
thought no great wound in that Church: but
shall wee see a deeper & more deadly; namely, where
the authority and determination of the Pope is made
higher, and of more respect then the holy Scriptures
themselues? In the same booke the XL. Dictinction,
the Pope alleadgeth for good doctrine, and canonizeth
for a law, these words taken out of one Boniface,
               
                  The fift wound. The religion of Christianitie is to bee founded rather from the Popes mouth then from the holy Scriptures, that is from Gods mouth..
And certain
                     •
                  y all men do yeelde so much respect and
reuerence to the Pope of Rome and his chair, that
they require and seeke for much of the discipline

of the holy Canons, and the ancient institution of
Chrstian religion, rather from the mouth of
the Bishops of that See, then either from the
holy Scriptures or the olde traditions: all they
care for or seeke after, is what he wil and what he
will not; that so they may conform themselues, &
frame their conuersation this waie or that waie,
according to his will and pleasure.
            
            Loe what doctrine is heere: the discipline, nay the
religion it selfe of christianity is sought for rather at
the mouth of the Pope, then at Gods mouth in the holie
Scriptures: and al that a Christian man cares for, is (not
what God, but) what the Pope will, and what hee wills
not; and according to that are they to frame themselues:
Is this a doctrine fit to be inserted in the popes lawe?
Is this the holie and the onely true Church that teacheth
this? If to be a Catholicke be to holde this, and
to denie this to be an heretike, I am content to be an
heretike; let who wil be the Catholicke: but if a true
Catholicke ought to holde the doctrine of the scriptures,
and to depend vpon the mouth and reuealed
wil of God; then woe be to that Church and religion
that teacheth, wee may rather depend on the Popes
mouth, then on Gods. But some will say, this is healed.
Nay alasse, they be so farre from thatThe fift wound not healed., that contrariwise
for ought that I know, that is not to bee
found in the elder editions: but I am sure it is in the
later and last of all, set forth by special authority from
the Pope; from whence also I cite it at this time.
         
         
            
            The sixt Wound.
            THus I haue shewed, First, that the Pope makes his
Decrees equall with the Scriptures; Secondlie,
that they are of greater authority then the Scriptures:
Is it possible to haue a worse? Yes: for the measure
of her iniquity will neuer be ful; and therfore she goeth
one steppe higher in this impiety, and teacheth
that the holy Scripture is so farre inferiour vnto the
Popes decrees, that vnlesse hee by his authority giue
them strength
                     •
                   they are not of credit, nor necessary
to be belieued.
            
            Let me be of no credit nor worthy to be beleeued,
if I repeate not their words truely out of their owne
booke; namely, their authenticall glosse vpon the
Popes Decretalls: where the Text of the Decretall
being no more nor lesse, then only one verse of the
26. Chapter of the Prouerbs, the glosse (that is, the
approued Commentarie) vpō that decretal is in these
words;Vide Decretal, lib. 2. tit. 23. de praesūptionibus. cap. 1. 
                     •
                  ic
                     •
                  t..
Obserue heere, that the wordes of the Text are
not the wordes of the Pope, but of SALOMON
in the Prouerbes, the sixe and twentieth Chapter:
but because that Text of SALOMONS is
heere canonized by the Pope
                     The 6. wound. The holie Scriptures are therefore of credit & to be beleeued because they are allowed and authorised by the Pope: & being so by him authorised, they are of as much authority as if the Pope himself had beene the Author of them. Therefore it is
of credite and implyeth necessity of beeing beleeued,
(or it bindeth as strongly) as if it had
been pronounced or vttered by the Pope, because
wee make all those things as good as our owne
vpon which we bestow or impart our authority.
            
            
               
The high & holy God, that is the Author of the holie
Scriptures, be mercifull vnto vs, in hauing any
thing to doe with this vnchristian blasphemie; and
graunt that wee may not any way communicate
with their sins, no
                  •
                haue fellowship with this wicked
worke of darkenesse. The Impiety and Atheisme
that lyeth in it is such, as if it had but crept into some
secret pamphlet, I would neuer haue brought it into
light: but being that it is registred in the Glosse vppon
their lawe, a booke of so great authoritie, and
so common in the hands of all the learned, I cannot
but discharge my dutie to the trueth, tho it may giue
vantage to the Atheist and Libertine. For what can
such men think, when they heare him that pretends
to bee Christs Vicar and Peters successor, teache that
Salomons wordes are not of as good authority as his
bee; when as Christ himselfe did approue and iustifie
himselfe, and all his wordes, and deedes, and doctrines,
by the olde Testament; and that the words of
God in the olde Testament do therefore binde, and are
therefore to bee beleeued, because the Pope pleaseth
to insert and canonize them in his lawe; & that
being by him so canonized, they bee therefore as good
as if the Pope himselfe had spoken them. What I saie
can they iudge, but that the Pope is one of their profession,
a plain Atheist, that holds the Scripture & all
religion, as farre as pleaseth his humour and serueth
his turnes.
            And if any of his faction hold this too hard a censure,
I would intreate him to answere mee but this
question (grounded vpon these words of his);
            
               
Whether is God the Author of the olde Testament,
or no?2. Pet. 1. 20. 21 If they say no, Saint Peter answereth;
that Prophecie came not in old time by the will of man:
but holy men spake as they were inspired of the holie
Ghost. If he be, then the Prouerbs of Salomon, being
a Canonicall Booke of the Olde Testament, is
Gods Booke; and the wordes of the Text are
Gods words, and not Salomons. This beeing so, let
vs then take the wordes as they are, in their true and
full meaning, and see what a peece of Popish diuinitie heere is;
Obserue that the words of the Text are not the
words of the Pope,A strāge peece of popish doctrine, that gods word if it bee authorized by the Pope, is thē of as good credit, as if the Pope himselfe had spoken it: therefore if the Pope please not to Canonize it, then it is not
                        •
                      So that either Gods word must b
                        •
                     e beholden to the Pope for the authority of it, or else it hath none. but of God: but because these
words of God are heer canonized by the Pope,
therfore they are of credit & worthy to be beleeued,
as well as if they had ben spoken by the Pope
himselfe.
            
            Loe heere the Pope in his owne colours: this is
Diuinity fit to be hatched at Rome, and to be coyned
in his mint
                  •
                Let the words be examined, and see what
can follow of them; but that either the Pope holdes
not the Prouerbs to bee Gods booke, but SALOMONS
(which is horrible Atheism) or else if he hold
them Gods, that the words of God beare no credit,
nor haue authority to binde mens conscience till the
Pope do canonize them; and that Gods word in a
booke knowne, receiued and graunted to bee Canonicall,
is not of as good authority in that booke,
as being translated into the Popes Canon lawe. If he
refuse both these, then let him refuse his owne lawe,
and burne his glosse vpon his decretalls
                  •
                as containing
Atheisme, and Heresie in a high degree.The sixt wound not healed.
            
            
               
But to goe forward; Is this wound healed? Surely,
if they haue left it out, or reformed it in any later
impression, so it be with open confession and detestation
of the fault, it is wel: But sure I am it is in the impression
I haue, and in al other which I could borrow.
And further I do not know any Pope, or popish writer
that hath with authority and allowance condēned
or reproued this Atheisme: if they know any, they
may doe well to produce them. Meane time, I am also
sure of this, that in stead of healing it, they haue
suffered their Doctors, & Writers, continually since
to speake and write almost as ill, if not worse. In
Queene Maries time, an English Papist wrote thus
Proctor in his booke called the waie home to Christ printed at 
                     •
                  ō
                  don in. 8.;
Religion is occasioned by Scripture: but perfected,
and authorized by the Church.
            
            See, we are more beholden to the Church then to
the Scripture, for our Religion. About the same time
Cardinall Poole out of his Pope-holy deuotion is said
to haue affirmed, that
The written word of God is but a seede of
TurcismeScriptura scripta est semen turcicum..
            
            And certaine Popish Doctors in Germanie, beeing
pressed in a disputation with the euidence of Scripture,
boldly answered,
We are not tyed to the Scriptures: those goose quils
do not tie vsNo
                        •
                      pen
                        •
                     is illis 
                        •
                     n
                        •
                     eri 
                        •
                     is minime su
                        ••••
                      alligati..
            
            I will not affirme both these two vpon mine owne
credit: but they haue beene charged with them both,
manie yeeres agoe, and neuer yet disprooued them.
But that that followeth I speake vpon knowledge.
            A little after, a great English Papist pretending to

summon a parliament for poperie, in his booke so
called, tells a story of one whome hee hearde, vpon
reading the Booke of Ecclesiastes, earnestly say,
that
The Booke of Ecclesiastes is a naughty
bookeHeskins, a Doctor of di
                     
                        ••••
                     ty, in his parliament of Christ, lib. 1. cap. 2. printed at Antwerpe 1
                        •
                     66
                        •
                      in folio..
            
            He voweth to God, and cals him to witnesse, that
this hee heard him, himselfe: but what was hee that
spake it, a protestant? no, a papist: and no mad fellow
nor ignorant foole, nor profane scoffer; but (sayth
Heskins) hee was a man of worship, of grauity, of wisedome,
of godly life and competent learning, able to vnderstand,
and likewise exercised in the Scriptures: and
this is all the censure he giues of him that spake these
wordes.
            Hee addeth further (a litle after in the same
Chap.) that a popish Gentlewoman hearing a text
(out of a booke that papists holde to be Scripture)
which shee misliked: and being tolde by him (for
he heard her speak the words) that the booke was
Scripture; shee answered, that if the Scripture
had such (I will not say what shee saide) words
in it,
            She would no more beleeue the Scripture; for it was
naughtHeskins in his parliament, the next page after.:
            And what was she that saide this? A vertuous Catholick
gentlewoman (saith Heskins) and one that feared
God
               Obserue wel, how a great popish doctor cōmends that man and woman
                     •
                   for de
                  
                     •
                  o
                     •
                  t and zealous papists, who blasphemo
                     •
                  sly saide, that the scriptures were naught & not to be belieued, and doth not reproue the parties for their blasphemie. So little doth it touch a papists hart to heare Gods word abused in the highest kind.. (Lo, what tokens poperie giueth of a vertuous
Catholick woman, and that feares God). And
tho Heskins cannot but graunt that these are blasphemies:
Yet did he not reproue the one nor the other;
but contrariwise, cōmends them both, & turnes it to

the aduātage of the Romish cause, & saith that hereby
we may see, what a perillous thing it is for lay people
to read the Scriptures. But (with his leaue) hereby
we may see, what a filthy heart & vile estimation
popish doctors haue of the holy scriptures, who hearing
their disciples thus horribly blaspheme them,
and God in them, doe not reproue it, but make vse of
it; nor burie and quench them, but write and publish
them, rather with an approbation, then any detestation
of them.
            But will you heare his owne wordes, and his owne
iudgement, not related from others (as these) but vttered
out of his owne heart:
How little incitement to vertue appeareth to bee in
the songs of Salomon? yea, rather how vngodly
and wanton seeme they to be, in the outward face,
rather teaching and prouoking (I 
                        •
                     raue pardon
of all Christian eares) wantonnesse then
godlinesse: and what can the vnlearned finde, or
vnderstand in many sentences? anie thing to edification
of godly life? or rather a prouocation
to wanton life. And after certaine sentences
alledged, hee concludes: The whole booke is
no better: like vnto these, saith he, is all that
booke.
            
            You haue heard how the Prouerbs were disgraced
in the glosse vpon the decretalls, and heere the
Canticles: Now that Salomon may not haue one book
left in credite, Heskins addeth touching Ecclesiastes;
               What may appeare more vehement to disswade a
man from wisedome, then the booke of the

Preacher? how much is wisedome, the goodl
                     •
                  e
gift of God, abused to appearaunce in this
bookeHeskins in the same book and Chapter.?
            
            And to conclude, of another booke which they
hold also to be canonicall scripture, & some of them
to be Salomons, he saith, that
The booke of Ecclesiasticus, seemeth to haue such
vnseemely wordes in it, as an honest men would
be ashamed to speake them: and I also (
                     
                        •
                     aith he)
would be ashamed to write them, if they were
not ScriptureHeskins a little after in the same chapte
                        ••
                     
                  .
            
            If the words be as immodest as he pretends they
be: then why do they hold such a booke to be Scripture?
And if they holde it to be Scripture, then how
dare a Christian man say, that it hath such speeches
in it, as an honest man would bee ashamed to speake
or write? I leaue this for them to answere: in the
meane time I goe forward.
            Not long after, comes Hosiu
                     •
                  , a greate
Doctor of theirs, and after a Cardinall, and writes
thusHosius editionis vlt. tom. 20. lib. de expresso dei verbo. pag. 5.;
The word of God (of it selfe doth not, but) as it is
written in the Scriptures, it dependeth on the
authority, testimonie and approbation of the
Church: and it ought no otherwise, nor no further
to bee esteemed the word of God, then as
farre foorth as it is approued by the authority
of the Church.
            
            Lo, what doctrine heere is: for hence it followeth,
that therefore if the Church should not allow the
new Testament it were not scripture.
            Put all these together, and then it will soone appeare,

how pittifully this wound is healed. Nay further
if the 
                  •
               ime & present occasion would giue leaue
to looke into their latter and moderne Writers,
we should see by the last, and latest of all, this wound
is so farre from being healed, that it rankles further &
deeper; euen like an incurable leprosie, that cannot be
healed: but this may be sufficient. Therefore let vs
go forward to another wound.
         
         
            The seuenth Wounde.
            THey taught the people in olde time, namely, for
two or three hundred yeares past, that images
were good lay mens bookes: and euen then, when they
denied them the Scripture as vnfit for them, and obscure,
and dangerous for seducing them to heresies,
were Images allowed and commended vnto them as
good meanes of Instruction
                  The seuenth wound; Images are good lay mens bookes..
            Some three hundred yeeres ago, liued a Frier called
Gulielmus Peraldus, learned (for that time) & wel
approued of their Moderne Censurers: hee writes
thus;
As the Scriptures are the bookes, and containe
the learning of the Clergie: so Images and the
scripture are the learning and bookes of laie
men (p).
            
            Lo heere, how Images are associated and ioined
with the Bible. Search the Scripture, saith Christ:
looke on them; and on Images saith the Pope; how
readest thou, saith Christ: what 
                  •
               eest tho
                  •
                saith the
Pope: It is written saith Christ: it is painted and grauen

saith the Pope: thy word (saith Dauid) is my light
(not the golden Cherubins): but nowe saith Poperie
euen in the new Testament, The scriptures and Images
are lay mens lights: What a wrong is this to God,
and what an iniurie to his worde?
            But is this healed? Oh that it were! but let the
Reader iudge, by that that followethThe seauenth wound not healed, but made worse and worse..
            One of their greatest Casuists, Laelius Zecchius, a
great Diuine, a famous Lawyer, and of late yeares
Penitentiary of Bresse, writing a great volume of Cases
of conscience dedicated to Pope Clement the viij.
amongst many other strange doctrines touching Images,
teacheth, that
It is not lawfull onely, but profitable to haue Images
in Churches; to cherish and encrease charitie
towards God and man, &c
                     •
                   and to preserue faith;
seeing Images are to bee held as bookes for them
that bee vnlearned, to draw them vnto knowledge,
memorie, and imitation of holy and diuine
matters, &c.Laelius Zecchius, Summa moral
                        •
                      theolog. & casu
                        •
                      no
                        •
                     
                     sci. tom. 2. cap. 90. art. 18. pag. 609.
               
            
            Lo here, this doctor; who beeing Penitentiary, is
by his place and calling to heale wounds and satisfie
Consciences, comming to touch this wound, handled
it so roughly, that in steed of healing it, he makes it
sorer then it was. For whereas Peraldus gaue Scripture
so much honour, as to be ioyned in commission
with Images, they 2. to be ioint teachers of the Laity;
Now comes the great Penitentiary, & is wel allowed
by the Pope to leaue out the scripture, as needlesse,
and to giue all the power to Images, not onely to put
men in minde, but euen to cherish and increase faith

and charity. And certainly, if Images can do so, it is
no maruell that Papists cast out the scriptures, and
in roome thereof, doe bring Images into the Churches.
            But to make vp the measure of this iniquity; Feuardent
the famous Franciscan 
                  •
               rier, yet preaching at
Paris, and to whome Possevine wisheth a long life,
goeth one step further, and to heale vp this wound
perfectly, teacheth this doctrine;
By sight and contemplation of Images, the common
and ignorant Laie men, doe easily and in a
short time learne those diuine mysteries, miracles
and workes, which out of the holy books they
shall verie hardly or not at all bee able to perceiue*.Strange and fearefull doctrine of poperie; Images are better and easier bookes for the laye people then be the scriptures.
               
            
            Heere now is Popery growen to his ful ripenesse.
And marke the degrees how this wound hath beene
made still deeper and wider.

                  First, they taught, the Scripture and Images together
were good bookes for Lay menPeraldus,.
               
                  Then, that Images without the scripture were to
be accounted bookes for Lay menLaelius Zecchius..
               
                  Now at last, Images are readier and easier, & therefore
better books for Layemen then be the scripturesFeuarde
                        •
                     
                     tius..
            
            So then seeing this wound is so well healed, let vs
leaue it, and search another.
         
         
            
            The eightth wound.
            IN former ages, as superstition grew, and religion
decayed, so Images began to be worshipped more
& more; & ceased not til at the last they came to this,
that euery Image was to bee worshipped with the
same worship that was due to him whose Image it is
                  •
               
so that some three hundred yeares agoe, or somwhat
more, it seemed by Aquinas to be their generall and
receiued doctrine, that
                  The eight wound; That an Image of God or a Crucifix are to be worshipped as God and Christ, that is with diuine worship.
               An Image of Christ, and the crosse wheron Christ
died, and a Crucifixe; are all to bee worshipped
with the same worship due to God and Christ Iesus,
that is with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  
                  Aquinas Summa par. 3 quaest. 25. ar
                        •
                     . 3.
            
            A fearefull doctrine, maintaining horrible Idolatry;
for nothing, but GOD, may bee worshipped
with diuine worshippe: but they teach that those
creatures may bee worshipped as God himselfe is,
that is, with diuine worshippe: therefore they make
those creatures God: and by this argument it is apparant,
that the present religion of the Church of Rome
is an Idolatrous religion, as long as this doctrine
stands vnrepealed.
            Let vs then see, if this bee healed:
               The eight wound not healed, but made vvider and deeper and deadlier euery day. But alas, it is
so farre from being in any part reforme
                  ••
                that it is rather
the generall and common receiued doctrine of
al their approoued writers. I wil not stand (as I could)
to shew it successiuely through all ages since the
daies of Aquinas, til these times: but sp
                  •
               ring that labour,

till better leasure, I will referre the Reader to
most of the elder Authors, and insist onely on some
fewe, and those of the latest: it beeing my speciall
purpose at this time to shew that the Romish Babylon
is euen now not healed of her deadliest wounds.
Which in this particular I will labour a little the
more fully to demonstrate out of the moderne authors,
now extant and approued, because this imputation
is generally cast off with this answere; It is
not so, it is but an ignorant or malitious 
                     •
                  lander: for the
Romish Church giues onely a certaine reuerence to
holy Images; but doth not worship them, at all, at
least with no diuine worship. And some of our owne
profession are either so ignorant they know it not,
or so malitious, they will not confesse it, or else so hollow
harted to vs, and such secret friends to them, they
would not haue it discouered though it be so: for my
part
                  •
                I pitie the Ignorant (knowing my own weakenesse)
I care not for the malitious, and I hate the hollownesse
of all dissembling professors. And therefore
let others couer and conceale her shame, and hide
the Whore of Babilons filthine
                  •
               , as they wil; I say for
my selfe, Let the tongue cleaue to the roofe of my mouth
if I spare to discouer her skirts, and lay open her filthinesse
to the world; that all men seeing her as she
is, may detest and forsake her. Therfore in the words
of truth and sobernesse, I do heere offer to this honorable
aud
                  •
               ence, that I will willingly come to this place
and recant it with shame, if I proue not apparantly to
the iudgement of euery reasonable man, that this is
the common and generall doctrine of the greatest
number of their best approued authors that haue

written in these latter daies; namely,
That an image of God, or a Crucifi
                     •
                  ce, especiallie
one made of the wood whereon Christ died, or
that Crosse it selfe, are to bee worshipped with

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, with the worshippe due vnto
God.
            
            And first of all, I will in this case spare Bellarmine,
               Vide Bellarminum to. 2. lib. de Imag. sanctorum 2. cap
                     •
                   20. 21. 22. 23. 24. & de Concil. lib. 2. cap. 8. seeing hee (as hauing some grace in him) seemes
somewhat ashamed of the matter, and therfore playeth
fast and loose: and betwixt God and his conscience
on the one side, and the Pope and his allegeance to him
on the other, hee cannot tell what to say: and therefore
winding himselfe into a labyrinth of general and
confused distinctions of per se & per acciden
                     •
                  , primariò
& secundariò, propriè & impropriè, and such other
which may serue for all purposes; at last hee leaues
the matter as doubtfull as he findes it: yet must it bee
confessed, if he incline either way, it is to the worse:
which (by conference of his other writings) I think
he doth rather for feare, or to please the Pope, then
out of his owne iudgement and conscience.
            Therefore leauing him, I begin with Gregorie de
Valentia a Iesuite, & a Professor of diuinitie as Bellarmine
is, of his owne sect, of his owne time, and accounted
by some papists more learned; but approoued
of all: he writeth thus;

                  Gregor. de valent. 
                        •
                     om. 4. disp. 1. quaest. 24. punct. 2. pag. 467. It is certaine that Images are to bee worshipped,
so as properly the worship shall r
                     •
                  st in them,
not for themselues, nor for the matter, nor formes
sake, but for his sake they resemble: & in this sēse
they are to be worshipped so, as they bee whome

they resemble; and therfore the Image of Christ,
as man, is to be worshipped with the same worship
due to Christ himselfe.
            
            Hee cannot denie, but manie learned of his own

                  •
               ide teach the contrary: but hee reproo
                  •
               es them all,
and embraceth this as the commoner and truer opinion,
and confirmes it and concludes it for truth.
            Next to him I produce another Iesuite, Gretserus,
of the same vniuersity, and either successor or fellow
to Gregory de Valentia in the same place and profession;
he who was chosen for the papists Champion, in
the famous disputation holden at Regensperg 1600; &
whome Posseuine the Iesuite calls the very hammer of
heretikes: Thus he writeth;
Thus we haue taught that the Crosse is to be worshipped:
But now with what kinde of worship is it
to bee worshipped? We answere and affirme, according
to the more common opinion & more receiued
in schooles, that the Crosse and all images,
and signes of the Crosse are to be worshipped with

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is with diuine worship.
            
            Can anie speake more plainely then both these
doe? Now, these bee Iesuites, and to these two I
could adde more: but let vs see what their Summists,
and Casuists saie to this matter; which are
the more to bee regarded, because they pretende
to write such resolutions as may settle vnquiet and
doubting consciences. If therefore any poore Papist
aske the Romish Confessors, and Casuists, How farre
may I worship a Crosse, and with what kind of worship;
               
hearken how they answere.
            And to let one speake for all, Ia
                     •
                  obus de Graffijs, a
Monke of greate name, and Graund Pe
                     •
                  itentiarie at
Naples, writing (as hee calls them) his Golden decisions
of cases of conscience, some 3. yeares ago, answereth
thus (g);Ia
                     •
                   de graff. decis. aur. ca
                     •
                  . cons. tom. 1. lib 2. c
                     •
                  p. 2 art. 3.
               Holy Images, considered as they be pieces of wood, or
metall, or some such things, are to haue no honor
giuen them: but in them another matter is lookt
at namely, the image of him whom they resemble,
and not the matter whereof they are made: in
which respect looke what reuerence or worship is
due to him whose Image it is, the very same by
good right is to be bestowed on the image.
            
            And to speake more fully and plainly, if it be possible:
a little after he addeth;
The first Commandement commaunds, that wee
worship euery Image with the same worship as we
doe him whose Image it is: for example, that wee
giue latria, that is diuine worship, to the Image
of God, and of Christ, and euen to the signe of
the Crosse, in as much as it brings to our mind
the passion of Christ
                     •
                   and hyper dul
                        ••
                     
                   to the image
of the blessed Virgin, and Dulia to the Images of
the Saints.
               
            
            How now? is not Babylon well healed? What can
be said against this? that these be priuate men? no, they
be publick professors, and their bookes allowed with
at great authority as can bee: But will you haue that
that is of souereigne authority, and that may not bee
questioned? Then looke in their publicke Liturgy,
which is of more credit & account then a 100. Doctors,

and there you shall finde the crosse saluted and
praied vnto in these wordsVide Breular. Rom. pa
                     •
                  . hyemal. in fine. Ara Crucis, lampas lucis, vera salu
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  hominum nobis pronum fac patronum quem tulis
                     •
                  i dominum. Salue lignum vitae, dignum ferre mundi pretium
                     •
                   Conser
                     •
                  sti plebi Christi crucis bene 
                     •
                  icium.;
Thou altar of the crosse, thou lamp of light, thou true
saluation of men: make thou that Lord, whom
thou didst bear, a louing & merciful Patron to vs.
Al
                     ••
                  ail thou wood of life: thou that wert worthy
to cary the price of the world, do thou bestow vpon
this congregation of Christ the fruit and benefit
of his passion.
            
            Oh admirable doctrine! First, heere is a prayer to
the Crosse it selfe (but of that heerafter): thē the Crosse
is made a mediator to Christ for vs. And surely we shal
lesse wonder heereafter that they make Saints Mediatours
to Christ; seeing heere they shame not to send
the wodden crosse to him, to make intercession for
them: but as for that, where they giue a power to the
Crosse to procure Christ to be good vnto vs, how it can
bee spoken without Atheistical blasphemie, let them
answere that made it.
            Further, obserue how the Crosse is said to haue deserued
to beare Christ: surely no maruell tho Saints
can mori
                  •
               , when a peece of wood can merit at Gods
hands. Lastly, let all reasonable men iudge what the
Romish Church holds of Christs death; seeing they
praie to a wodden Crosse, to bestow the fruite and
benefit of it vpon them.
            But sure (will some say) this is healed: I wil not
deny but that in some of their new and later Breuiaries
this is left out: but thereunto I answere;
            First, that it is not cured, bue couered: for to
the healing of a spirituall wounde, there needes confession
and publique satisfaction to the Church offended

by the fault: but heere is no confession of any
fault nor euill, in these words to the Crosse; only they
be cunningly kept out in the newer bookes: so that
they are ashamed of them, and yet haue not the grace
to confesse it, and therefore will leaue it out and yet
shew no cause why. Now if it be naughtt; why do they
not say so, and therfore put it out? if it be good, why do
they put it out? So then it may be couered but is not
cured.
            Secondly, I answer that though they haue left out
that, yet they haue kept in as bad or worse
                  •
                for euen in
their newest editions, and as they say most reformed,
there is this prayer to the CrosseBreuia
                     •
                  ium Rom. auto
                     •
                  itate Concil. Trident. & sūmo
                  
                     •
                  um pontificū, Pij 5. & al. restitu
                     •
                  um, & editū: Sab
                     •
                  ato infra hebdomadam passionis, in Hymno pag. 302 editionis in 4. O Crux aue spes vnica hoc passionis tempore: augepijs iustitiam reis
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      dona veniam.
               .
All haile ô Crosse, our onely hope: wee pray thee
in this holy time of Lent, increase iustice or righteousnesse
in godly men, and grant pardon to the
guiltie.
            
            Heer the very wodden Crosse is called vpon, & praied
vnto, to do that which Christ himselfe could neuer
haue done, if he had not ben God. Some wil say,
Surely they speake to Christ, howsoeuer the words
seeme to be spoken to the Crosse: I answere, if they
direct their hearts to Christ, why then direct they the
words to the Crosse? Verily Christ is worthy of both,
as well as one: But I answere further, it is a cleere case
that they make and direct this prayer not to Christ,
but to the very Crosse it selfe: else lo
                  •
                
               Aquinas bee
Iudge, who makes this argumentAquinas summae par 3. q 25. art. 4.;
That is to be worshipped with diuine worship, wherin
wee put and place the hope of our saluation: but
wee place the hope of our saluation in the Crosse
that Christ dyed on, for thus sings the Church

(and thē he alleageth this place & these words)
All haile ô Crosse, our onely hope: in this time
of Lent, do thou increase righteousnesse in holie
men, and graunt pardon to sinners: therefore
the Crosse is to bee worshipped with diuine worship.
            
            These be his owne very words, and are spoken of
the Crosse, and not of Christ; as any man may see
that will but looke on the booke it selfe: for, the question
in generall, beeing concerning the adoration of
Christ, hee diuides the generall into sixe particular
questions: which are these;

                  1. Whether Christs humanity be to bee worshipped
with the same worship as his diuinity.
                  2. Whether Christs humane flesh be to be worshipped
with latria.
                  
                  3. Whether the adoration or worship of latria bee to
be giuen to the Image of Christ.
                  
                  4. Whether to the crosse of Christ.
                  
                  5. Whether to the Mother of Christ.
                  
                  6. Howe the Relickes of Saints are to be worshipped.
               
            
            So that we see, heere is Christ and his Crosse, and
his Image, and his Mother are made 4. seuerall matters
& of seueral & distinct consideration: then falling into
the particulars; for the 2. first questions, he argueth
them negatiuely, but concludes them affirmatiuely;
touching which two we haue no controuersie
with them at this time: then comming to the 3. & 4.
which be these in question; touching the Image of
Christ, whether it be to be worshipped with latria or
no: he answereth, that it seemes no; & giues such reasons

as he nor the world is able to answere, but concludes
affirmatiuely that it is, as I haue set downe:
namely, that
Seeing Christ himselfe is to be worshipped with the
worship of latria: therefore his Image is also to be
worshipped, with latria.
               
So comming to the fourth question, which is of the
Crosse, demaunding whether it be to bee worshipped
with latria or no; He answereth, that it seemes no:
but concludes affirmatiuely that it is; and then giues
his reason as I haue aforeset it down; & 
                  •
               rom thence
drawes his conclusion in these words;
The crosse of Christ, namely that whereon Christ was
crucified, is to be worshipped with latria, for two
causes; both for the representation or resemblance
it hath to Christ, as also for that it touched
the bodie of Christ: But the signe of that Crosse,
or a crucifixe, of what matter soeuer, is to be worshipped
with latria, onely in the former respect.
            
            These be his very words. And heere by the way,
obserue how ridiculous and absurd poperie is, in this
point: for it giues greater worship to the dead Image
and wodden crosse, then to the blessed Virgin Mary the
mother of Christ; of whom he concludes in the next
article, that shee is by no meanes to be worshipped
with latria, but onely with an inferiour worship called
hyperdulia; and marke what wodden arguments
are giuen for it: One, Shee is a reasonable creature, &
therefore must not be worshipped with latria: Lo, shee
must not, because she is a reasonable creature, and yet
the crosse shal which is vnreasonable & dead. Another;
A crucifixe is like to Christ: therefore it shall bee

worshipped with latria: But is not she liker to Christ
then anie crosse can be?
            A third; the crosse did beare CHRIST, and did
touch his bodie: therfore it must bee worshipped with
latria. But did not she beare him, and touch him and
his blessed Bodie in a farre more excellent manner
then the Crosse either did or could? See what pittiful
arguments be here brought to fortifie this damnable
Idolatry. Who could think that so great learned
doctors should thus childishlie dally with holie
thing, and be so blinded in their vndestandings? But
this it is to bee drunke with the wine of the spirituall
Babylons abhominations.
            But to returne to the matter: by these wordes of
his, Aquinas hath cleared that doubt and aunswered
that obiection made afore; that these wordes are
not spoken to the crosse or image, but to Christ: No saith
Aquinas; they are spoken to the cross.
            What can bee saide to all this? but one thing
more, that in the time of Aquinas it may be this was
holden, but since then it is reformed, & now it is not
so. But I answere; this wound is not healed: for as it is
thus as I haue reported in the olde copies of Aquinas
both Manuscript, and printed; so is it also without the
least alteration in the new and later editions, reformed
and purged as they pretend: and printed within
these fewe yeares. And (which is more euill)
whereas, some thirty yeares agoe, all Aquinas was
reuiewed at Rome by commandement of Pope
Pius Q
                     •
                  intus, and purged and altered as they
thought good, and so printed: yet had not the
Pope so much grace in him; nor so much zeale of

Christs glory as to amend this horrible impietie, but
to the perpetuall blemish of Aquinas, and euerlasting
shame of their Romish synagogue, lets it stand for
good currant Catholicke doctrine, euen at this daie,
that
A Crosse is to be worshipped with the same worship
as Christ himselfe.
            
            Yet if any will stand vpon it, that this wound is healed,
then let him shew vs what Pope hath cōdemned
this doctrine; nay what popish Doctor approued by
their Church hath reproued this doctrine, or taught
and written the contrary. Which wher they or anie
other that take their part, shal not be able to shew: I
contrariwise to make it manifest to all the world that
this wound is not healed, but ra
                  •
               kles deeper, & spreds
further, will shew out of their latest and 
                  〈◊〉
                writers,
that this their doctrine is rather made worse
then any way reformed. To this end, let the Reader
bee pleased to marke the words of a great Doctor of
theirs well approued amongst them & a spanish professor
of diuinitie for the order of the Cistercians:
who not 7. yeares agoe writing 2. volumes of Commentaries,
which he entitles de verbis Dominae,
               Of the words of our Lady,
and dedicating his booke vnto the Pope himselfe
CLEMENT the viii. hath these words,
But what do wee speake so much of the Crosse,Ioh. Chryso
                        •
                     t. a visitatione, de verbis dominae. tom. 1. lib. 6. cap. 
                        •
                     .
seeing there is nothing vsed in the passion of
Christ that is without honour? the na
                     •
                  iles, the
speare, the coate, the crowne, and all such other
things, are honoured so much, as that (in regard
they touched Christ) men doe therefore worship

them, yet not with the same worship with which
we worship the Crosse it selfe: which inasmuch as
it represents vnto vs the figure of Christ extended
vpon it, and inasmuch as it touched the seuerall
parts of his bodie, and inasmuch as it was
died with a good part of his most pretious bloud:
Wee doe therefore worship it with the same
worship with which wee adore Christ himselfe;
namely, with the worship of latria.
For which cause it is, that we speake to the verie
Crosse it selfe, and pray vnto it, as vnto him
that was crucified on it, and do repose the hope
of our saluation vpon it heereupon the Church
singeth in the liturgie, 
                     〈◊〉
                   words of the Crosse:
All haile ô Crosse our onely hope: in this time of

                     •
                  ent do thou increase righteousnes in good men,
and grant pardon to sinners, &c.
            
            Lo
                  •
               , heere is a peece of refined popery indeed: we
worship the Crosse saith he as Christ, wee speake to
the Crosse it selfe, we pray to the Crosse it selfe, as well
as to him that died on it; and hee confesseth freelie,
that the prayer in the liturgie or masse booke is not
made to Christ; but to the Crosse it selfe. From hence
I gather these two conclusions;
1. That by P
                     •
                  pish religion the Crosse is a
God.
            
            This I collect thus: Latria (saith Augustine) is
that worship of religion, which is due onely and 
                     •
                  olelie
to God himselfe: and popery it selfe confesseth with
one consent, that prayer is a part of latria: But popish
religion prayeth to a wodden crosse, euen to

the crosse it selfe; therefore by popist religion the
wodden Crosse is a God.
               2. That the Crosse is made a God, not by the doctrine
and iudgement of their priuate Doctors, but of
their Church and religion.
            
            This I collect thus: Their Missalls and Breuiaries
which containe their Liturgy are confirmed both
by the Pope and the Councell of Trent
               Vide Miss
                     •
                  
                  lia & Breuiaria omnia ab anno 70 & deinceps.: but the
Popes determination, especially together with a
Councell is the publicke and vncontroleable act of
their ChurchNone acknowledging himselfe a papist can denie this.: Therefore the doctrine and practice
in their Liturgie is not priuate, or such as may be
questioned, or doubted of, but publicke and general,
and may not bee called in question. But in their late
and reformed Breuiary allowed and confirmed by
the Pope and Councell, they pray to the Cross and
call vppon the Crosse, as wee heard before, and
their owne doctors doe expound it that it is not to
Christ but to the CrosseAquinas of old; and Chrysostomus a visitatione of late.. Therefore by the doctrine
and religion of the Church of Rome the Crosse
is a God.
            
            
               Bellarmine would gladly heale this wound, or at lest
couer it ouer, and saithBellar in tom. 2. de Imag. sanctorū. lib. 2. c. 24. in re
                     •
                  p. ad argum.; that whereas the Church
praieth so, surely either the crosse is taken for Christ,
or else it is but a figure; as Moses saith, Hear O Heauens,
Deutro. 32. No, no, say the Romish Doctors, (that
wrote since Bellarmine) there is no such matter; that
praier is to the Crosse it selfe.
            And his brotherGa. Vazq. les. de cultu adorationis. li 2
                     •
                   disp. 3. cap. 4. Iesuit, Gabriel Vazquez beeing
also much ashamed of the matter, would gladly help
it, and to that ende is constrained to confesse, that
there is not (as Bellarmine sayth) one alone, but two

figures in that praier: which (saith he) vnlesse they bee
admitted, it is an vnapt & absurd prayer; for it speakes
vnto the Crosse as vnto our God and Sauiour. He therfore
for his part saith, hee should thinke that by the
crosse they meane Christ, and pray to him, not to the
Crosse: and further saith, that many others thinke so,
but hee names not one (tho in other points hee is a
plentifull citer of other authors): but against him or
who-euer else thinke so (beeing papists) I produce
the Cistercian Doctor Chrysostome a visitatione: who
writing sinec them alFor V
                     •
                  zquez wrote since Bellarmine: namely, about the yeare 92. but this Chrysostome wrote sinec V
                     •
                  zquez some seauen yeares agoe., and whose book is of more
authority then his,For Vazquez is dedicated but to a spanish ordinarie Bishop, but Chrysostome to the Pope himselfe., answereth all these doubts, &
preuents all other obiections; saying plainely that in
that prayer of the Church,
We speake to the Crosse it selfe, we call vpon and praie
to the crosse it selfe.
            
            And no more nor no worse, saith hee, then Aquinas
himselfe, totidem verbis spake before himAquinas summa par. 3. q. 25. art. 4..
Therefore (to conclude) til this doctrine of Aquinas
be condemned for heresie, and til this fellow that cals
him selfe golden mouth, be adiudged as he is, a leaden
mouthed and blacke-mouthed blasphemer, and his
booke burnt as heretical, and till the Romish Church
haue satisfied the world for this great wrong, til then
(I say) it is apparant to al men that in this wound She
is not healed.
            
            This wound hath beene deepe and wide, and therfore
long in searching; and seeing it is found incureable,
let vs vs proceed.
         
         
            
            The ninth wound.
            NOt many hundred yeares ago, liued a Frier they
called S. Francis, and ignorant man for learning,
but wittie; and the more, for that his wit was shrowded
vnder the shadow of great simplicity: hee beeing
the founder of the Franciscans, the Pope hath suffred
his fauourites and followers to set him vp as another
Christ
               
                  The ninth wound; An Italian Frier Francis was like to Christ in all things, and in some things did more then he, and bare S. wounds in his body as Christ did., and blasphemously to compare him, and
oftentimes to preferre him before Christ himselfe.
And to this end among many other vile onesVide monumēta ordinis fratrū Min. Salamācae. 1511. in 4. Et firmamenta trium ordinum D. Frācisci Paris. 1512. 4. & mult al., he
suffred to be published a great volume called, The golden
booke of the Conformities of the holy father S.
Francis with the life of our Sauiour Iesus Christ
               Liber aureus, inscriptus liber conformitatum vitae bea
                     •
                  i ac seraphici patris Frā
                  cisci ad vitam Iesu Christi Domini nostri correctus & illustratus aleremiah Bucchio ord. Min. doctore theol. Bononiae 1590.. In
which booke with strange impiety first they paint in
the first leafe Christ bearing a Crosse and Saint Francis
following him with one as bigge as his; where
Christ hath nothing but precedence: but after thinking
that too much, they paint one Crosse, and vpon
it one of Christs armes, and another of S. Francisces,
one a-crosse ouer the other: then begins the booke;
In the name of Iesus Christ and of S. Francis: where,
Iesus Christ is called our Lord and S. Francis our blessed
Father: and the Authour saith not, that he compiles
the booke to the honour of God, or Christ, but
of the foresayd holy father S. Francis.
            
            Then he salutes Saint Francis with a prayer(m) fit
for none but God himselfe: First, blasphemously calling
him typicall Iesus; then desiring him to cure the
sinnes and driue away the spirituall maladyes of their

soules, and to giue vnto them place in the glory of heauen.
            
            Then he comes to the point of Conformitie; and to
shew this the better, hee paints a tree; at the toppe
whereof is Christ, and at the roote Saint Francis: the
tree hath twenty branches on the right, and twentie
on the left side, and euery branch hath foure particular
fruits; in all eighty: these are equally diuided betwixt
Christ and S. Francis. 40, to the one, and 40. to
the other: & each couple or pair of these is one point
of conformitie betwixt Christ and S. Francis, consisting
in all vpon 40. particulars; wherein they begin
at the birth & conception, nay at the very prophecies
& promises made of Christ, & so proceed to his life,
his death, resurrection, and alcension: and in all and
euerie of these, and euery thing else whatsoeuer may
be saide of Christ, the very same doe they not shame
to affirme of that man Francis. For example, thus:
Christ was foretold by the Prophets: So was S. Francis.
Christ was sent from God: so was S. Francis. Thus
go they ouer all his life, in such a manner as there is
nothing giuen to Christ, but bare precedence. And
which surpasseth all admiration, those two thinges
wherein Christ did most apparantly, as God, declare
his power, and his loue as Mediatour; namely, his miracles
and his passion, euen in these two is this Francis
matcht with Christ our Sauiour: nay rather in his
passion he is matcht, but in his miracles aduanced farr
before Christ.
            And first for his passion, whereas by their doctrine
Christ had 5. wounds in his body (tho indeed he had
more) they make S. Francis nothing his inferiour in

that point: for they say that hee had wounds in his
hands and feete, proportionable to Christs; and had
certaine things like nailes in his feete and hands, so
diuided from the flesh, that they would open from it,
so as his wounds did continually bleede; insomuch,
as hee was faine to put tents into them to keepe them
from bleeding: which he continually did, sauing on
good Friday, when alwaies this popish Iesus did pull
out his tents, and let his wounds bleede, as the true
Christs that day did for our saluation; and this not only
in hands and feete, but that he had a wound in his
side like to that in our Sauiour Christ: & all this (saith
the book) was not fained nor imaginarie, but truly &
really imprinted in his body by the power of God,
that so he might make his friend Francis like to his son
Christ in al things. And all this was not the superfluity
of idle & superstitious Monks brains; but the publicke
act of their Church: and manie Popes one after another
haue allowed it, & by their buls & cha
                  •
               ters cō
               firmed
and a
                  •
               ouched the truth of this story, concerning
the wounds of S. Francis; & in monument and
memory thereof, they haue their holy day of the fiue
wounds to this day established by all authoritie.
            Thus Christ, touching his passion, is made equall
with a mortal man: & an ignorāt Erier (by the Popes
diuinity) is made equall with Christ in the manner of
his suffring; not in that fashion as euery Christian
may be, but so as none at al, no (saith this book) not
S. Iohn the Euangelist, nor the Virgin Marie her selfe
could be.
            But if we come to his Miracles, then surely Christ
must come after him; for whereas Christ wrought a

miracle, he (say they) wrought 10, & those that Christ
did are nothing to his. Christ neuer shewed that humility
& charity & patience that S. Francis did
                  •
                Christ
neuer gaue away all his clothes till hee was stark naked,
as S. Francis didFor al these being too long to write in the margēt I must refer the Reader to the book it selfe, if he wil not beleeue me: or else let him suspend his iudgement till I haue leisure to exemplifie these at large by themselues.: he neuer preached to beasts
and birds, as Saint Francis did: he neuer by his words
and the signe of the Crosse tamed & conuerted wild
beasts as Saint Francis did. All this may easilie bee
shewed and much more; but I wil insist onely in one,
& on that the rather, least they should take it in snuffe
that I say their Father FRANCIS conuerted beastes:
hearken therefore to the storie, and then iudge and
spare not.
            S. Francis on a time comming to preach at the city
of Eugubium
               Vide librū conformitatū lib. 1. conformit. 10. par. 2. pag. 140. Francis preacheth to a wolfe. Francis
                     •
                  calleth the wolfe brother: a couple of rauening Wolues well met. Francis offereth the wolfe his brother to make peace betwixt him and the towne. The Wolfe is content. found that the saide Citie was much
troubled with a greate and cruell Wolfe, that kild not
their cattell onely, but their people if they were vnarmed.
Francis would needs goe to him, to turne him
from his rauenousnes: and seeing the wolfe come against
him with opē mouth, he made the signe of the
Crosse vpon him, and commanded the wolfe to shut
his mouth and hurt him not: the wolfe presently obeied
& fel downe, as tho he had been a meek Lamb:
then spake Francis to him and saide; Brother Wolfe
thou hast shed much bloud and done much hurt; and
therefore art worthy to die, and all this Citty iustly
complaines of thee: but brother, if thou wilt bee content
I will make peace betwixt them & thee: the wolf
by wagging his taile, and mouing his eares, shewed
that he was very glad. Then brother Wolfe, (saith S.
FRANCIS) seeing thou art content to bee at peace
with them, I will take order that they shall giue thee

daily allowance of meate, if thou wilt promise mee
heereafter to hurt no bodie: the wolfe bowing his
heade aunswered by signes that hee woulde. Yea,
but then (saith Francis) Brother Wolfe, giue mee thy
faith and credit that I may beleeue thee
                  •
                & the wolfe
presently lifted vp his right fore-foote and layed it in
Francis his hād,Francis bids his brother wolfe giue him his hand and faith that hee will performe his order. therby giuing his faith that he would
perform it. Then Brother Wolfe (sayth Francis) I command
thee in the name of the Lord Iesus that thou go
with me into the Citie, and there feare not to make
peace,The holy name of God fearefully abused & taken in vaine. in the name of the Lord: the wolfe forth with
followed him as meeke as a Lambe. So comming
into the Citie, al the people, togither with the Magistrates
being assembled, S. Francis made vnto them
an excellent Sermon,Brother wolfe standeth by, whilst S. Francis preacheth to the people. the wolfe being by: which being
done he said to them these words;
            This Brother of mine, this Wolfe that standeth here,
hath promised me, & vpon his promise hath giuē me
his faith that he will be friends with you, and doe no
more hurt; prouided that you shall daylie giue him
an allowance and portion of meate: which if you doe
for your parts, then will I be surety for my Brother
Wolfe that he shal perform the conditions on his part
required. Then said S. Francis; Brother Wolf,
               Francis is surety for his brother wolfe to the towne. it is reason
that as thou did before, so here before al this people
thou giue me thy faith againe, that thou wilt keep
the couenants on thy part: and the wolfe immediatly
lift vp his right fore-foot, and laid it in the hand of S.
Francis, his surety, in the sight of all the people, and so
gaue his faith againe:Brother wolfe giueth his faith againe. and then al the people shouted
and wondred, and praised God for sending S. Francis
amongst them by whose merits they were deliuered

from the cruel wolfe. And from that day forward, the
people to the wolfe & wolfe to the people, performed
their couenants made by S. Francis: & the wolfe
liued 2. years after Francis was gone,Brother wolfe liueth in the towne, & takes his meate at the dores. and went vp &
down the streetes, and tooke his meate, from door to
doore, hurting no man, & was wel and daintily fed; &
there was neuer so much as a dog that barked at him.
And at last, after 2. yeares, Brother Wolfe
               Brother wolfe dieth & is lamented. being striken
in yeares dyed, for whose death the Citizens did verie
much lament.
            Heere is a miracle worth the marking. Now let all
Huguenots, and Heretikes shew such a miracle in
their religion; no, no, they neuer can doe it: And no
maruell; for Iesus Christ, who is the King & Captain
of their religion, neuer did the like in his time to this
Which S. Francis the king and captaine of the Franciscans
Francisce Iesuty dicè dux formaque Minorum. hath heere done.
            If the time would giue leaue, I could bring 20. more
as impious, as incredible, and as absurd in their kinde
as this: but leauing it to a further opportunitie, and
referring the learned to the booke it selfe, I proceed.
            What may be saide to all this? are not these wide
and wofull wounds?Ierem. 7. 12
                     •
                  
                Oh! but they are healed; I maie
answer as the Prophet doth: Were they ashamed when
they had committed abhomination? Nay, they were
not ashamed.
               18 The ninth wound not healed. For whereas this booke was written aboue
two hundred yeeres agoe by Bartholomeus
                     •
                   Pisanus,
a Franciscan Frier; it was then not only suffred
to passe to publique view in those daies of darknesse
and superstition, but now of late within lesse then 20.
yeares when one would haue thought they woulde

(if not repented of the impieties, yet) haue beene ashamed
of the absurdities; they contrariwise haue reprinted
the BookeThe new edition i
                     •
                   at Bononie in Italie. 1590. & is dedicated to a Cardinall: in this edition is al that I haue alleadged., and haue not taken out nor
reformed one worde of all these euilles, nor of manie
more, which doe so directly disgrace the merits of
Christ Iesus: onelie some things haue they altered,
which they thought might make against themselues,
but not one of these which doe so farre dishonour
God and Christ and all religion. Compare together
the olde and new bookes, who will; and he shall find
this to be true: wherefore the conclusion is, that this
wound is farre from being healed. Let vs then go forward; and see if we can find one wound healed in the
Romane Church.
         
         
            The tenth Wound.
            TWo or three hundred yeares agoe,
                  (19) The tenth wound. The Pope may giue Indulgences for 20000. yeers & grant men power to redeeme soules out of Purgatorie. the Popes
indulgences did growe to that height of rotten
ripenesse, that all men of vnderstanding, euen of his
owne brood, were ashamed of it: and many a one
of the wiser sort, euen in these mystie times, did see &
laugh at the nakednesse of Poperie in that point;
the excesse whereof grew so great, as they cannot
denie but it gaue at last an occasion of LVTHERS reuolte
from them. There is a Manuscript extant, written
some two hundred yeares agoe, and another not
much differing from it, some 130. yeares ago printed
at Rome, containing a catalogue only of those Indulgences
belonging to the parish Churches of Rome,
amongst which (they say) are 7. principall: let vs but

consider of some fewHe that wāts this book let him look in Hospinian de Templis. lib. 2. c. 28. pag. 348. editonis Ti
                     •
                  ur 603. where he sh
                     •
                  ll finde both mention of the booke & a particular recitall of a great part of it..
            In the Laterane Church, it is granted thus by Pope
Boniface;
               If any Pilgrime come for deuotion to this Church,
he shall be absolued from all his sinnes.
               And in the Chappel there called sanctum sanctorum
there is full and true remission of all sinne 
                     •
                  .
               And one day in the yeare, which is the day of the dedication
of the Church, there is full remission of
all sinnes both a poena & culpa: and this Indulgence
is so certaine (saith the booke) that when
the Pope first pronounced it, the Angells in the
hearing of all the people said Amen.Angels say Amen, to the Popes indulgences: but they shold first proue, that God saith Amē
                      to them; for else the Angels will not, vnlesse it be the euill Angels.
               
            
            If these things bee true, then it is strange that all
Papists in the world are not saued: for hee that hath
full remission of al sinnes, both à poena & culpa, dying
in that state cannot bee damned. And certainely, hee
that for the obtaining thereof, will not take the pains
to visite that Church one day in a yeer, is not worthy
of saluation.
            In Saint Peters Church, there bee euerie daie eight
and fortie yeeres of pardon, which is in one yeere aboue
fifteene thousand yeeres: Euerie daie of the
Annuntiation there bee one thousand yeeres; and
hee that with deuotion goeth vp Saint Peters staires,
hath for euery step seuen yeeres of pardon. Surely purgatorie
paines are not so fearefull as they beare the
worlde in hand; if going vp two and twenty-steppes
may purchase releasement of a hundred & fifty yeeres
thereof. And if these seeme too little, Alexander the
Pope like a liberall Lord opens his treasure, & giues
to euery steppe a thousand yeares: So that now there

is not a Papist in the world that needes to bee in Purgatorie
one day except hee will:XXij. thousand yeers of pardō grāted for going vp 2
                     •
                  . steps If the Pope say true in this, no Papist neede to come in purgatory. For, for going vp
twenty two steppes with deuotion, he may be released
out of Purgatory, for two and twenty thousand
yeeres: and I hope they do not think the World will
last so long, and Purgatory (they say) ends with the
World.
            Further,Three doores of one Church in Rome of so great vertue that whosoeuer goeth through them shall bee as free from sinne as when he was newly baptized. whosoeuer will go through the 3. doores
of the Laterane Church, shal be as free from al his sins
as hee was the houre hee was baptized. Likewise at
the Altar in Saint Peters Church, there bee xiiii. thousand
yeeres of pardon and deliuerance of one soule
out of Purgatorie.
            And in the Church of Saint Lawrence, whosoeuer
visiteth that Church euery Thursday for a yeere, and
sits vpon the stone wheron Saint Lawrence was broiled,Oh what a great power, the Pope hath, who can giue power to another so easily to deliuer soules out of purgatory.
shall deliuer one soule out of Purgatory.
            
            And in the Church of saint Iohn, at the gate called
Porta Latina, a man either by saying a Masse, or causing
it to bee said, may deliuer one soule out of Purgatorie.
            
            Are these true?How easie purgatory might be emptied by Popish doctrine. then why is there one soule left in purgatory?
or else where is the charity of the Papistes
(which they so much bragge of) seeing so easilie they
may deliuer so many thousand soules out of purgatorie
in one yeare? Certainely, if these be true as they
be written, then granting that there is a purgatory, it
might soone be emptied.
            But if it bee false, fabulous and friuolous, and hath
no other end but to mock poore people and to suck
out their siluer; then what a Religion is that which
maintaines such dealings? especially seeing this is

not the deede of any priuate men, but of the Popes
themselues: nor a few, but euen all since Boniface the
eight.
            Thus we haue searched deep into a foule and filthy
wound. Now what remaines? but to see if it bee healed
yet, or no.The tenth wound not healed, but groweth more desperate and deadly to this day.
            
            But alas, Babylon will not be healed: for as they feared
not to put these tricks vpon the people, 100. and
200. yeares agoe, in the times of superstition; so
haue they presumed euen still in these daies of light
to do the like. And as the whoore is shamelesse in her
sinne, so is this whore of Babylon in her impiety; for
she hath not at all amended this enormity, nor in any
sort reformed it, but rather lets it grow from bad,
to worse. For euidence whereof, let any man read Onuphrius
Pauvinius
               Vide Oauphrium Pauuinium, de praecipuis vrbis Romae sanctioribus b
                     •
                  silicis quas septem Ecclesias vulgo vocant Colon. 1584. passim., who not past 24. yeares ago,
hath written (with publike authority) a booke to this
very purpose of the seuen principal Churches of Rome,
and of the indulgences belonging to them; wherin al
that is deliuered before is auerred, & much more added:
some part whereof I would put downe, saue for
that it may be reserued to a further purpose and fitter
opportunity. And for better euidence, that as yet she
hath not, so shee purposeth neuer to heale vp this
wound; within these two yeares they haue allowed &
published with authoritie, the pilgrimage or voyages of
Seigneur Villamont,
               Les voyages du S
                     ••
                  de Villamont diuisez en
                     •
                  trois livies: derniere edition, reueuce & augmē
                  
                  
                     •
                  ee &c. A. Ar
                  
                     •
                  as. 1605. vide (inter alia) ibrum 1 cap. 12. &c., one of the Gentlemen of
the French Kings Chamber; wherein the poore deceiued
Gentleman, out of his superstitious deuotion
hauing visited all those Churches, and made himselfe
(as he saith) blessed by being partaker of all the indulgences
thereto belonging; & hauing ascended those

holie staires to euerie steppe whereof belong a thousand
yeeres of pardon: after all, returning home at
last much poorer, but nothing wiser then hee went,
he wrote a book of his voyage and pilgrimage to Ierusalem:
and taking Rome in his way, he describes at
large the Indulgences granted of old, and at this day
in force, to the Churches in Rome. Which book (being
written in French) whosoeuer list to reade, will
soon confesse, that in this wound the Romish Babylon
is not yet healed.
            
         
         
            The eleuenth Wounde.
            ANd heerunto I will adde another wound, because
it is so neer to this, in popish consang
                  •
               inity.
                  The eleuēth wound; Granting of Indulgences & thousands of yeares, and deliuerance of Soules out of purgatory, to Beades, Medals, Crosses, Pictures & such like toyes being blessed & hallowed by the Popes holy hands.
            
            The wiser sort of Popes, & the rest of the craftier
polititians in that hierarchie, perceiuing that all the
Nations of the earth, (many of them being so far distant)
could not come to their market of Indulgences
being kept in Rome, therfore lest they should lose
their traffick into those parts, they deuised a way, that
seeing a greate part of the world could not come to
Rome, Rome should send to them: To which end, out
of his bounty and spirituall liberality, for the incredible
good of mens soules, the Pope ordained that
certaine Crucifixes, and Medalls, and Agnus dei
               The principall of all these
toyes i
                     •
                   the Agnus dei, which euery one may not make, but onely the Pope: not he alwaies, but onely at E
                     ••••
                  nor at euery Easter but the first next his entrance, and euery seauenth Easter after: nor of any matte
                     •
                  , 
                     •••
                  in any manner, but precisely of such simples, & with such: ceremonies as are prescribed for that purpose; which together with the prayers (or rather coniurations) then to be vsed are to be seene in the booke called Caeremoniale pōtif. lib. 1. And hee that hath not that booke, let him looke in the Commentaries of Peter Mathew vppon the Constitutions of Gregorie the 13. Constit the 1.
and holy Beades and other such 
                  •
               ewels, should bee
first consecrated and hallowed by the hands of his
Holinesse, and haue all the holinesse powred vpon
them that hee can spare, and further should haue annexed
vnto them all those mighty Indulgences, or

the like, that are graunted vnto the Churches & stations
at Rome: and by this meanes they could sell
an Agnus dei, that is, a little peece of white wax
                  •
               
or a Crucifixe of a little metall, it may be brasse
or copper (such as the Iesuites of late sent into
England by thousands at once, as good inough to
serue the English Catholickes), or a little medal,
or a little beade or bugle, or other matter of no
more value: these toyes and trinkets, I say they
can sell by this meanes, and euery daie doe vtter at a
higher rate then the Ieweller can his pearles or his
diamonds.
            Thus did not only the former Popes gull the people
of elder ages in those times of ignorance, making
them beleeue that these toyes so hallowed and blessed
by them, were of such vertue as Christs bloud it
selfe could be of no more; as one of them sending an
Agnus dei to an Emperour, shamed not to write to
him, that
This Agnus dei breakes off sinnes euen as the bloud
of Christ:
            
            But euen in these times of light and knowledge,
these owles dare still flie abrdade: and euen of
late, nay euery yeere, the Pope shameth not to sette
his trumperies to sale, annexing vnto thē such large
and liberall Indulgences, as Christs owne bloud can
haue no moreThe eleuenth wound not healed.. I could insist vpon late and notorious
examples practised euen at home and vpon
our owne Nation: but I spare them at this time, because
the proofs thereof tho neuer so certaine to vs,
are not so authenticall to thē, as bee these two examples,
I shal now produce; one of them touching Poland,
               
the other France.
            
            For Poland: Not many yeares agoe,The eleuenth wound not healed. Pope Clement
the eight granted as followeth, as is to bee seene in
printed coppies.
            
               Vide libiū inscriptum E
                     •
                  uangel
                     •
                  um 
                     •
                  omanum, edit. anno. 1600. Indulgences graunted by the Holinesse
of our most Holy Father, Pope Clement
the eight,
At
The Instance of the most Illustrious and
most reuerend Lord Cardinall Radziuillius,
Bishop of Cracowe, and Legate
in Polande,
Vnto
Certaine Holy Beades, Crosses, Medals
and Images.
            
               1. Whosoeuer, hauing one of these holie beades &c.
shall say ouer the Rosarie, being confessed, or
hauing a purpose to confesse once a month, shall
for euery time hee doth so, obtaine v. yeares of
pardon.
               2. But if hee doe euery day after examination of his
Conscience, say three Pater nosters and three
Aue Maries &c. shall haue ten yeeres.
               3. But if hee vse euerie daie to saie ouer the Psalter
of our Lady, shall for euerie Saturday weekelie
obtaine a hundred yeeres.
               4. Hee that shal thrice in a weeke say ouer the Rosary
of our Lady, and confesse and communicate,

and pray, shall obtaine a plenarie, that is, a ful remission
of all all sins.
               5. And whosoeuer in the houre and point of death
shall but say in his heart, when hee cannot speake
with his tongue, the name Iesus, shall haue a plenarie
and full forgiuenes of all his sins: prouided
that he haue one of these blessed & holy Beads,
Medals, Crucifixes or Pictures.
            
            *All these Indulgences may bee procured and obtained,
by hauing either about a man, or lying before
him one or more of these holy Medalles,
Crosses, Beades, or Images, and obseruing what
is afore appointed: and his Holinesses will is, that
they shall be of force to all kinde of men and in euery
place.
            Printed at Rome by the Printer of his Holinesses
priuie Chamber, Paulus
Bladus, 1592.
            Lo here how Babylon is healed: If a man at the
point of death, canne in his minde but thinke of Iesus,
hee shall haue full forgiuenesse of all his sinnes,
if hee haue one of these holy Crosses, or Beades about
him. And is this the Diuinitie of the Romish
Church? is this procured by a Cardinall & graunted
by the Pope? then answere mee but one worde: Shall
the thinking or naming of Iesus, without true faith
and repentance, saue him tho hee haue a hundreth of
these holie Graines about him? or if he doo truely
repent and beleeue in CHRIST, though he haue

not one of these, shall hee not bee saued?
            If those both be true; (as who dare denie them?)
then phie vpon these Impostors and deceiuers, who
by these their Atheisticall mockeries expose religion
to all contempt: and these thinges beeing so common
& notorious, no maruell tho Italie, where (these
are ri
                  •
               est) be so full of Atheists.
            Concerning France: Of late yeeres Peroun the
French Cardinall, hauing made a costly Iorney to
Rome, comming home, procured of the Pope (for
the bearing of his charges) to bee the bearer of certaine
hallowed & holy matters, consecrated and blessed
by the Pope, in such a fashion, as if that were true
the Pope saith, he were more then madde that would
not (as the wise Merchant) sell all he hath to buie one
of them.
            
            (d) Indulgences graunted by the Holinesse
of our most Holy Father, Pope Clement
the eight,
Vnto
Holy Beades, Rosaries, Crosses, Crucifixes,
Medals and Images, being hallowed
and blessed by his owne holie
hands,
At the Instance of the Reuerende Father and
Lord, Iames Dauie, Bishop of Eureux,
               
Counsellor to the King in his Councell
of Estate, and also of his priuate
Counsell and principall Almoner
to his Maiestie.
1.1. A hundreth yeares of pardon, at an easie rate. *Whosoeuer hauing one of these beades, &c. shall
do any worke of mercy corporall or spiritual, or
heare a Masse or a Sermon, or shall but doe reuerence
to the Sacrament, or to a Crosse, or to a
holy Image, shall obtaine a hundreth yeares of
pardon.
See what a bountiful, father, the Pope is. Who would
offer lesse for a hundreth yeares? surelie hee that wil
not do thus much, he is worthy to lye and fry in purgatorie.
2. Whosoeuer shall confesse & communicate, or being
a Priest, shall besides his masse, say deuoutely
one Pater noster, or one Aue Mary, for the Catholick
Church, or for the holy Father, or for the
King of France, or for the peace of France, or for
the conuersion of Heretikes, or other sinners: shal
haue for euery time he doth this a plenarie indulgence,
and remission of al his sins; so as he haue about
him one of these holy beades, grains, or Crucifixes.
            
            And what if one want all these trumperies, shal he
not haue forgiuenesse, if he do truly beleeue and repent?
Oh when wil Babylon be ashamed of such abhomination?
3. Whosoeuer shall kisse one of these beads, &c. with
deuotion, shal haue for euery time he doth so, ten
yeares of pardon.
               
                  
4. Whosoeuer hath one of them about him, and praieth
for the successe of the Catholick Romish religion,
or for the K. of France, shall be (so oft as he doth
so) partaker of al the Sacrifices, Prayers, & Fasts
and other good workes done in any Abby, as well
as if he were a particular member of the same society.
               5. Hee that hath one of these about him, if hee bee in
danger of death, or in the battel, or in any place
where he cannot go to confession, and shall with
contritiō but repeate these words, Lord Iesus receiue
my spirit, or name the holy name Iesus, shal
haue forgiuenesse of all his sinnes, and be discharged
both à poena & à culpa.
               
               *His holinesse graunts that these indulgences shall
be good for all men, and in all places; but conditionally,
that those that be not French-men, shal
pray for the King and Realme of France: Except
alwaies the holie Beades; for those are limited to
belong onely to France, and to bee good to none
but onely French men.
               Imprinted at Rome with licence, &c.
            
            I haue named some, but not all; look for the rest in
the book: but in them all let it be obserued, that there
is not the least mention of faith in Christ, nor once
so much as the name of it, nor any relation to Christ,
nor his holy merits. No, these are well if they may
be vnderstood: and yet these men (if they be not Atheists)
doe knowe that all these their large promises
are but winde; and their Indulgences but fome and
froth, if there be not liuely faith and true repentance:
and if these bee in a man, then let vs see that Pope,

Cardinall, or other Papist, who dare say that hee shal
not haue full remission that neuer saw nor touched
one of their blessed beades nor hallowed Graines.
Thus we see how farre Babylon is from being healed
in this point.
            The twelfth and last wound, concerning the first
Table, shal be cōcerning the Sacraments: both which
are horribly peruerted & profaned by Romish doctrine
and practice.
         
         
            The twelfth wound.
            FIrst,
                  The 13. wound; The popish Church baptizeth Belles. 
               Baptisme is profanely applied, not to reasonable
creatures onelie, men and women, according
to the InstitutionMat. 28. 19.; but euen to an vnreasonable &
dead creature. For example: they vse to baptize bels,
in most points so as Christians do children, & in som
points with much more ceremony and solemnity.
            
               Bellarmin is ashamed of it, & would willingly hide
and couer it, tho he cannot cure it: but if hee were not
a Cardinal & a Iesuite, he would be ashamed to cloak
it with so loud a lie, as he doth: for (saith he)Bellar. de Rom. Pōt. Tō. 1. lib. 4. cap. 12. it is a
false slander of the Heretiks; we do not baptize bels,
neither in respect of the name, nor the matter of baptism:
look saith he the book of the Pontificale; there
is no such matter: only (saith he) we blesse them as we
do Chuches, Altars, Crosses, and other things, &c.
            Is it true? then let vs follow Bellarmines aduise, and
look into theVide librum inscriptū Pontificale Romanū, autoritate pontificia impressum Venetiis 1520. lib 2. cap. de Benedictione 
                     •
                  igni vel campanae. 
               Pontificale: & omitting the name or
word, let vs stand vpon the matter of Baptism. Compare
therefore their baptisme of a child and a Bell together,

and see then whether it may not be truly said
they baptize Bells.
            
            
               1.
               The Childe must first bee
baptized, before it can
be accounted one of the
Church.
               The Bel must first be
blessed, afore it may
be hung in the steeple.
            
            
               2.
               The Childe must bee baptized
by a Minister, or a
Priest.
               The Bell must, by a
bishop, or his deputie.
            
            
               3.
               For a Childes baptisme
must bee vsed holy-water,
cream, salt, oyle,
spettle, and manie
such.
               The Bells baptism or
blessing must also
bee in holy-water,
oyl, salt, cream, tapers
for light, &c.
            
            
               4.
               They giue the Childe a
name.
               So doe they to the
Bell.
               
            
            
               5.
               The Child must haue Godfathers,
&c.
               So must the Bel; and
they be persons of
greate note.
            
            
               6.
               The Childe must bee washt
in water.
               So must the Bel; and
that by none but
the Bishoppe and
Priests.
            
            
               7.
               The Child must be crossed.
               So must the Bell.
               
            
            
               
               8.
               The Child must be anointed.
               So must the Bell.
               
            
            
               9.
               The Childe must bee
baptized, in the name
of the Trinity.
               So the Bell is washt and anointed
in the name of
the Trinity.
            
            
               10.
               They praie for the
Childe.
               
               So do they for the Bell.
               
            
            
               11.
               At the Childes baptisme
the Scripture
is read:
               So at the washing of the
Bell, more psalmes are
reade, then at a Childes
baptism; also a Gospell:
            
            
               12
               
               
            
            
               And publick praiers made
                     •
                  
                and more prayers are
made, and (excepting saluation) greater things are
prayed for, and more blessings on the bell, then bee
for a childe.
            For better euidence heerof, and because the book
is not easie to come by, take heere a part of the prayers
they vse to that purpose.
Lorde, graunt that wheresoeuer this holy Bell thus
(baptized, or) washed and blessed shall sound, all
deceits of Sathan, al phantasies, al dāger of whirlwindes,
thunders, lightnings, and tempests, maie
bee driuen away, and that deuotion may increase
in Christian men when they hear it: O Lord sāctifie
it by the holy Spirit; that when it sounds in
thy peoples eares, their faith and deuotion may
increase, the diuell may be affraied, and tremble
and flie awaie at the sound of it. O Lord poure
vpon it thy heauenly blessing, that the fiery
darts of the Diuell, may be made to flie backward

at the sound thereof, & that it may deliuer from
danger of wind, thunder, &c. And graunt Lorde
that all that come to the Church at the sound of
it, may be free from all temptations of the Diuel.
O Lord infuse into it the heauenly dewe of the
holy Ghost, that the diuel may alwaies flie away
before the sounde of it, &c.
            
            Thus at Bellarmines request we haue lookt into the
Popes Pontificale; and let the Reader iudge what wee
haue foūd: he rebukes vs for laying it to their charge
that they baptize bells, & for proof that they do not,
sends vs to the Pontificale. But surely he thought that
we could not haue seene the book, els he would neuer
haue referred vs thereūto: for vpon sight therof,
it is apparant to be a more solemn baptism then that
of the child is; for the solemnitie is longer, the Ceremonies
more, the praiers to greater purpose, the minister
of greater place, then be required to a Childes
baptism
                  •
                & euery thing doth so concur in it that is in
baptisme, that Bellarmin himselfe confesseth tho the
pope doth not, yet others generally do call it the baptizing
of belles, because they see them sprinkled with
water, and haue names giuen themBellar. tom. 1. de Rom. pont lib. 4. cap. 12. Nomen Baptism
                     •
                  non a Pontificibus sed a vulgo campanarum benedictioni accō
                  modatur &c. quia vidēt eas aqua aspergiet e
                     •
                  s nomina imponi, &c..
            But it is not the name we stand vpō, but the matter:
cōcerning which, whereas they pray that the sound
of that bel, so washed & sanctified as afore, may driue
away the diuel and all his fiery darts, I would ask Bellarmine,
or anie of his Chaplains, whether this bee
spoken in iest or in earnest, in formality as words of
course, or in faith as a holy prayer. If they knowe the
prayer to bee impossible, not to haue any warrant,
but meerlie to be a State Ceremonie, and done to amaze

the poore people &c. then it appeares they be
Cozeners & Atheists, that make religion a pretence
to all their purposes: But if it be in earnest, and they
know it to bee a prayer of faith, and haue warrant
from Gods word for it, then it is possible inough to
driue away the diuell & all his temptations out of a
kingdom: for so many Belles might be hallowed and
washed, as might hang, one within the reach of anothers
sound; and so if the words of this prayer be true,
a Diuell might not stay in the realme: and that Realm
were very worthy to haue the Diuels companie, that
would not willingly bee at the cost to haue so manie
bels though they were of siluer, & to haue them baptized
though it were in costly water.
            To conclude, Bellarmine pleaseth to sport him
selfe a little with vs and sayth; The Heretickes obiect
to vs that we baptize belles: but its maruell (sayth
hee) that they doe not also say, wee catechize and instruct
them, that so they may sound out the Articles
of Fayth: But it is very likelie, the Iesuite had
not seene or not well perused the Pontificale:
for if hee had, hee might haue found that they pray
to GOD to giue the HOLIE GHOST to
the Bell, to blesse it, to sanctifie it, to purifie
it, to poure heauenlie blessings vppon it, and the
dewe of Gods grace. Certainelie if this bee a lawfull
an apt and fit prayer for the bell, they may also
catechise it: for it is doubtlesse as capable of instruction
from man, as of anie spirituall and heauenly blessing
from God.
            Thus it is proued, I hope, that the Romish Church
(in some sort for the name, but especially for the matter)

doth baptize Bells.
            
            It remaines but to seeThe twelfth wound not healed; for the Romish Church still baptizeth Belles. 
               if this wound be healed,
or no.
            But I answere, this was not the superstition of the
olde and ignorant times onely, but is euen the present
impiety of that Church: for of late, Clement the
eight, pretending to haue the Pontificall reuiewed &
reformed, caused it to be printed at Rome before his
faceVide Pontificale Roma
                  
                     •
                  um Clementis 8. Pont. Max. ius
                     •
                  u restitutum atque ed tum Romae 1895. et legatur eiusdem Clementis Constitutio ibid. praefixa, pro eiusdem libri authoritate & approbatione. by his authority, in a faire letter, & with most
goodly pictures: and indeed many things are left that
might make against the Pope, and many added that
may make for him.
            But as for this blasphemie and abuse of Gods holy
Sacrament, it stands vntouched, vnaltered, and allowed
for a good and Catholicke practice in euerie
particular as I haue afore set it downe, and in manie
more: Oh BABYLON, BABYLON, when wilt
thou be healed?
            
            The other sore of this wounde is touching the
Lords Supper
               
                  The other sore of the 12. wound; That though Christ ordained the contrary; yet it is not necessary for Christiās of the Laitie to haue the sacrament in both kinds, but onely the bread & not the Cup..) which they maime and mangle,
sacrilegiously taking the Cuppe from the whole Laitie.
This wound is not very deepe, for it is not olde:
but it is wide, for it is generall: and it is a foule one;
for it maimeth the Sacrament, and crosseth Christs
owne Institution. They were a hatching it somtime
before: but at last the monster was brought foorth
in the Councell of Constance; when they decreed
thus,Concil. Cō
                  stant. sess. 13.
               That notwithstanding Christ ordained the Sacramēt
in both kinds, and tho the eldest Church did so receiue
it, yet for all that, this custom is lawfully &

laudably brought into the Church, that the laitie
shal receiue but in one kinde onely, & that whosoeuer
shal hold the contrary, shal be proceeded against
as heretikes: & all Priests are commanded
vnder paine of excommunication, that they giue
not the Cuppe to the laitie: and they that do, and
recant not, shall be punished as heretikes.
            
            This wound hath Bellarmine, and other of the
craftier sort of them, sought to couer but not to cure:
& it would satisfie a man in this point tho he wauered
before, to see how slily and superficially he deales
in this questiō
               Bellar. de sacrā. Euchar. lib. 4. cap. 26. tom. 3.. This abuse is so horrible, the iniurie
to the Sacrament, & the wrong to the laitie so notorious,
the absurditie and impiety of the practise so
without all colour of defence, that if they were not
without grace and past hope of recouery, & such as
haue resolued to amend nothing, they wold haue reformed
this long agoe.
            But heerby it is apparant they are plain States-men
& Politicians, who haue nothing els in their head,
but to maintain the height of their hierarchie, & Maiesty
of their Monarchy. Euen this one particular is
sufficient to make demonstration hereof; seeing they
wil not amend that which they see & know to be cō
               trary
to Christs Institution; and whereof many of the
better sort of themselues are vtterly ashamed.
            But it is so farre from being healed at all, that it is
rather worse & worseThe latter sore of the 12 wound not yet healed, hut spreades further.. Looke in their newe edition
of the Councells this last yeere, and there is no
reformation of this euilVide postremam edit. Cō
                  cil. per Bininū. Colon. 1
                     •
                  06. Concil. Constant sess. 13. in 2. parte tomi ter
                     •
                  ii. p. 1589., no plaister laid vpon this
sore, not so much as a marginall note to qualifie the
Non-obstante to Christs Institution; but rather all is

made worse then it was afore in the former and elder
impressions.
            Nay, it is so farre from being healed, that contrariwise
it is made dayly a wider & deeper wound: For
now it is made in that Church a sinne against the first
Commandement of the morall law, for a man to receiue
the Sacrament in both kindesVide librū inscriptū Excercitiū pietatis in gratiam studiosorum, aut
                     •
                  ritate Cardinalis Radzivilii, scriptum & editum. Colon. 92. in cap. de methodo rectè confitendi.. So then seeing
we know Christ appointed it in both kindes, and
now the Romish Church prohibites it vnder paine of
mortall sin; alas what hope is there that this Church
will euer bee reformed, that condemnes the obedience
to Christs institution and commandement, as
a deadly sinne?
            Let vs now proceed to such wounds, as may bee
more properly referred to the second Table of the
morall lawe.
         
         
            The thirteenth Wound.
            TOuching wilfull murder, it hath beene their doctrine
and practice, since the misty times of ignorance,
that
                  The 13. wound; That it is lawfull to haue sanctuaries for wilfull murder. 
               Churches & Churchyards, and Bishops
houses, & some such other places be sanctuaries, that
is, places for refuge for the offender; vnto which if he
do flie, and settle himselfe, he cannot, nor may not be
prosecuted by course of lawe and iustice but is there
safe, as long as it pleaseth the Cleargie to retaine
him.
            Thus writeth Pope Innocent the 3. in his Decretalls
to the King of Scotland, who in those euil daies
(poore man) held himselfe not of power to punish

malefactors of his owne kingdome that had taken
sanctuarie, vntill he had sent to the Pope for his aduise.

                  Corp. Iuris Canonici Decretal. li. 3. tit. 49. cap. 6. To your question Sir (saith the Pope) I answere
thus; If he that hath taken sanctuarie be a freeman,
then is he not to be takē violently out of the
Church, not tho he haue committed neuer so grieuous
crimes: neither may he be condemned thereupon
either to death or other
                     •
                  punishment; but the
Clergi
                     •
                  , and gouernours of that Church are to obtaine
for him libertie and safety of life & limme
&c.
            
            Some may here obiect, that afterward in the decretall
he makes exception of some crimes: true, of night
robbers, but not of murderers. Neither was this proper
to Italie or to Scotland, but the generall sore of al
nations. In England we had manie, but especially 3.
most famous sanctuaries:
            One at Beuerley, in Yorke-shire, erected by K Athelstane, where in the Church was set a chaire of stone,
and this inscription written ouer it;
This stone chaire is called Freedstoole, that is, the
chaireVide Britā
                     niā Camdeni in Com. Ebor. of peace, whereunto if one that is guilty
doe fly and sit in it, he shall haue all-sufficient
security.
            
            Another at Battel Abbie in Sussex, where the Conquerer
wonne the victorie: and in memory thereof,
building that Abby, hee endowed it (with the popes
consent) amongst others with this priuiledgeVide eundē Camdenum, in com. Sussex.;
If any theefe or Murderer, or any other malefactour
(whatsoeuer his fault bee) for feare of death doe
flie and come to this Church, he shal not be hurt by

any meanes; but shall bee dismissed, and let goe againe
with safety and freedome. And further it
shal be lawful for the Abbot of the saide Church,
in all places wheresoeuer he shall hap to com
                     •
                  , to
saue one theefe from the gallowes.
            
            These bee the very words of the Charter.
            The third & not the least was at Westminster: wherof
there is often and famous mention in our Chronicles,
as being a place of frequent & ordinary refuge
for great Malefactors; and the name remains there to
this day. And these were not so much the facts of ignorant
and superstitious Kings, as the generall receiued
doctrine of the Romish teachers, & the publick
deed of their Popes them seluesVide decretal. Sext. & Clement: in tit. de ecclesiarum & coemeteriorū immunitatibus, &c..
            This was so in the olde time (will some say) but
now it is otherwise. I answere: Nay, this is not healed,
but rather is much worse. To this end, let vs consider
a little of some of their latest & principall writers
in this caseThe 13. woūd not healed; for Poperie alloweth sanctuaries for wilful murder still.. A greate Clarke of Rome; a fauourite
of Pope Gregories the xiiii. and one of his principall
Secretaries, some 12. yeares agoe writes a great volume
of this and other Immunities, which he saith by
their religion belong to holy persons and places; let vs
obserue a fewe of his wordsVide Anaslasium Germoniū de sacrorum immunitatibus. lib. 3. cap. 16. art. 1. &c..
Not Clergie men onely, but euen the very Churches
themselues haue their priuiledge: for Malefactors
flying to them, are in a sort made sacred or holy
thereby; insomuch as they may not be taken awaie
thence, nor be cast into prison, nor be toucht in life,
nor lim, but shal there be safe from all pursuers, as
in a Castle or most strong holde, &c.
            
            And not onely puts he downe this for Catholicke

doctrine, but hee wil also needs haue it to bee ex iure
diuino: and whereas Couarruvias (as learned as himselfe
at least) disproues it very sufficientlyDidac. Couarruvias. variarum resolut. lib. 2. cap. 20. Num. 2. v. 2 & 3. & concludes
it to bee but de iure positivo, this dearling of
the Popes wil not suffer so much amendment as this,
but condemnes Couarruvias, tho he cannot confute
his reasons, and concludes it to bee de iure diuino.
               Idem Germonius ibid. art. 7..
            And whereas one Iohannes Ferrariensis, a famous
and learned Lawyer, argueth soundly and truly that
Churches should not receiue murtherers not be sāctuaries
for theeues, seeing Christ cast out euen buyers
and sellers which are not so ill
               Ioh. Pet. de Ferrar. practica Papiensis. cap de forma inquisi. vers. ex his potest.; The Popes Secretarie,
scornfully casteth away both his opinion & his
reasonGermonius ibid. art. 15.; yet is he neuer able to ouerthrow eyther
the trueth of his opinion, or strength of his reason:
but so vnwilling are they to bee healed in any thing,
that if any one of them doe begin to see the trueth, &
do but glaunce at it, or incline to it, presently hee is
nipt in the head & condemned, as heere the old Lawyer
is reproued by the later; and when he would haue
had this wound healed, this fauorite of the popes will
not suffer him, but answeres that his reason is naught
and not worth a rush.
            And yet not content, he goeth further, and faith;
that not onely Churches consecrated, but tho they be
not as yet consecratedIdem ibid. art 23. 24., yet they be sanctuaries: and
not the Church onely, but euen the Churchyard; yea
tho it be disioyned from the ChurchIdem ibid. art 30. & 34..
            Nay further, that euen hospitalls
               Idem ibid. art. 27., yea priuate
Chappels in mens houses, if they were built by the Bishops

authorityIdē ibid. art. 29., haue priuiledge of sanctuary to
receiue a murderer flying vnto them. And least murder
should not finde sufficient shelter in Romish religion,
he tells vs further, that euen the Bishops Palace
is a sanctuary, if a murderer fly vnto it, if it bee within
40. pases of the Church; or (tho it bee more then
40. pases off) if it haue a Chappell in itldē ibid. art
                     •
                   43 &c.. And yet
further, if a murtherer going to execution, after a iust
sentence, or afore triall, being pursued, doe meete a
Priest carying his breaden God, and doe fly to him, he
is priuiledged from the power of the laweIdē ibid. art. 52..
            And least we should thinke it strange, to giue this
honor to the Church that is Gods house, or to the
bread which they say is their God, he goeth yet one
steppe further, and tells vs thatIdē Germonius ibid. lib. 3. cap. 6. art. 51. &c.,
A Cardinall of Rome not onely is so holy a person
in himselfe, that he may not bee touched without
sacriledge; but if a murderer or malefactor, that
is carying to executiou, haue the good happe to
meete a Cardinall, and can touch either his hat or
his robes, hee is discharged from the sentence of
the law.
            
            Loe, heere is a holy person, indeede; a Cardinalls
coate, or hat, shal haue more priuiledge then had eyther
the coate or the flesh it selfe of Christ Iesus: hee
would not deliuer any murderers from death, onelie
one he deliuered; namely, Barrabas, but he himselfe
died in his roomeSee the storie of the passion.: and if my Lords the Cardinals
should do so, surely they would meete no murderers
in the streete.
            But to goe forward; the lawe saith, the Murderer
shall dieGen. 9. 6.; and Christ saith, hee came not to dissolue

the law
                     •
                   but to fulfill it
               Math. 5. 
                     •
                  8.: but the Cardinalls will not
fulfill the law, but dissolue it. The Murderer shall die,
saith God: true, saith the Pope, vnlesse hee happe to
touch the hem of one of my Cardinalls coats; for thē
he is acquitted.
            But is this healed and reformed? nay alas: one Antonius
Corsetus, a learned Lawyer, misliking this, because
as he saith truely (l); this being so, there will be
an occasion giuen of much euil, & bloudy men wil hereby
take liberty to offend: He is not suffered to make anie
motion for reforming of anything, but is cōtrariwise
turned away with this censure, that his reasons
are slender and nothing worth. And thus, when hee is
dasht out of countenance, who would haue healed
this wound, then comes the Popes Secretarie (a true
childe of Babylon that will not be healed) and to make
the wound wider & deeper, brings a reason for this
power of Cardinalls, worthy of himselfeIdem Germonius ibid. cap. 6. art. 51.;
If (saith he) the Virgin-vestals in Rome heathenish
had this power, that if a person condemned met
one of them in his way to execution, & could get
to touch them, hee was thereby deliuered from
death; as he proueth out of Aul. Gellius
                  Aul. Gellius, noct. Att. lib. 10 cap
                        •
                      15.: Then
much more ought the Cardinalls to haue this honour
in Rome being now Christian.
            
            Yea, but is there not danger to multiply murders,
& defeate the law by this meanes? for may nor a Cardinall
come for fauour, & on set purpose? may he not
be intreated? may he not be corrupt and bee hired to
come? There bee now also many Cardinalls, about
60. or 70. if any of all these be in the
                  •
                streetes, murderers

may escape; and there bee fewe daies, wherein
some of these stirre not abroad. To all these materiall
obiections, what doth he answere? surely an easie
answer hath he for all:
This priuiledge belongeth,Germonius Ibid. art. 52. without all question, to the
Cardinalls person, if he come by chance, and not on
set purpose: for so it was also in the case of the Virgins
vestall.
            
            But how shall it appeare, that hee comes not purposely?
In that case, the vestall Virgins, that neuer
might sweare, were put to their oathAul. Gellius ibid..
            But for al that (saith this Popes dearling) my Lords
the Cardinalls may not sweare, they may not be so
disparaged as to be put to their oathes. How shall it
then appear? he must (saith heGermonius ibid. art. 53. be beleeued vpon
his bare word. So then if a Cardinall haue but the
conscience to tell a lie (which, how small a thing it is
in poperie, and how many excuses it hath, who knoweth
not?) thē it is here apparant, that the vilest thief,
and murderer in a countrie, may easily escape the halter
at Rome.
            
            Now to conclude, see how many helps there bee
for a Murderer in Romish religion; first by places,
then by persons priuiledged.Were this so in London how should any murderer be brought to the bar or to executiō: for no streete could he passe through but he shal finde one of these fiue places. 
               Places priuiledged be,
1. a Church, 2. a Churchyard, 3. an Hospital, 4. a Bishops
house. 5. a priuate Chappell; all these shall deliuer
a man from triall. Persons priuiledged be, first, a
Cardinall riding by: which because it is but in fewe
places; therfore the second is a Priest carying the Sacrament,
and that is in euery town: To touch either
of these, dooth deliuer from death a murtherer condemned by law.
            
               Thus we see, a bloudy Church is a defender of bloud
and murther; for let any wise man consider, how many
thousand murders in a yeere, may be sheltred and
shuffled ouer by these meanes. And yet sanctuaries
are but one meanes to cloak murther; they haue many
more (not so fit to be stood vpon at this time); but
the end, and effect of them all is this, that poisoning,
stabbing, killing, and all kind of bloud-shedding is so
rife in popish States, that the better sort of thēselues
do bitterly complaine of it. Oleaster a spanish Inquisitor
(and therfore not partiall on our side) hath these
words;

                  Vide Hieronimū ab Oleastro inquisitorem vlissiponens. in suis Cōment, in Pentat: 
                        •
                     n cap. 4. Genes. pag. 17. I see daily (saith he) murders are committed: but
I doe not see the murderers are punished: for wee
haue at this day a thousand waies to excuse murderers;
whereof one is to appeale to the Church,
& to say he is a Cleargie man, & presently to get
from the Pope such Iudges or Commissioners, as
thēselues will, who by & by discharge & absolue
them, vpon a little punishment or none at all, and
thus murders are multiplied euery day, &c.
            
            Let these words be wel obserued, and what he was
that spake them; & if this be so, so farre from Rome as
Portingale is, thē we may easily iudge how the world
goeth at Rome and neere vnto it.
            Against al this what can be said? that this Anastasius
is an author suborned by vs? Nay, Posseuine the Iesuite
will for that answere for vs, hauing canonized
him in his catologue of catholick DoctorsPossev. Ies. appar. sac. tom lit. A.: what
then? that he is but a triuiall fellow; and of no credit
nor authority? Nor so: for he was publicke professor
of the Popes law, at Turin, & in great office & authoritie

both with Gregory the 14. & Clement the 8.idem. Posseu. ibid.
and his bookes be dedicated to the Popes and Cardinals,
printed at Rome with soueraigne authority, &
special commendation. Nay, the pope himself with
his owne mouth commended the book to the Cardinalls,
and said that the whole Clergie, and the Councell
of Cardinals by name were greatly beholden to the Author
for it
               Vide eiusdem Anastasij Epistolam dedicat. ad Gregorium 14. Pont. Max.: So that it is more then impudency
for anie papist, to make question of the authoritie of
his doctrine.
            What then can be said? that these sanctuaries stand
indeed allowed for some faults, but not for murder?
Indeed if it were so, the fault were lesse: but the truth
is otherwise.
            For tho it be certain and confessed by themselues,
that by the ciuile law, Murderers, and Rauishers, and
Adulterers are exceptedIn § Quod fi delinquentes Authent demand princip.; Yet Germonius shameth
not to answere that the Ciuile law is corrected in this
point by the popes law, and that therefore wee are to
stand to it
               Germonius de sacrorū immunitatibus, lib 3. cap. 16
                     •
                  7. &c. and not to the Ciuile law. Now who are
excepted by the popes law? onelie night robbers, and
setters of high wayes
               Germonius ibid. art. 56, ex lure Canonico & communi sententia.: but as for murderers, adulterers,
and rauishers, these finde fauor in the popes
law; for they be Amici Curiae but theeues & robbers
are not so: and therefore this Germonius concludes
that tho the Scripture be plaine and many Doctors;
yet, a murderer is not to bee taken out of sanctuarie,
vnlesse there be more then murder, as deceit and trechery.
What then may be said? that this Germonius is
but one Doctor, and his opinion is not to bee taken
for a doctrine. I answer, his iudgement is allowed by
the Pope himselfe, & his opinions are fortified with

consent of other popish Doctors: But that wee may
see he walks not alone in this way; one Stephanus Durantus,
writing also of late, of the rites of the Romish
Church, deliuereth the same for a general doctrine of
that church: tho he being a French-man, is therefore
the bolder, & saith that neither in France nor in England
they haue beene permitted by the kings with
such absolute allowance as elswhere.Stephanus Durantus de ritibus ecclesiae catholic Rom
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   ad Gregor. 
                     •
                  4 vid li. 1. 
                     •
                  a art. 10.
               Such saith he is the honor & immunity of Churches,
that malefactors flying to them may not bee taken
out, nor haue any violence offred them.
            
            This book also is of speciall authoritie, dedicated
to P. Gregorie the 
                  •
               4. and by him accepted with special
allowance: and in a Bull or constitution of his, he
affirmeth it is a worke seruing greatly for Gods glorie,
and the edification of Christian people, & that it is approued
and allowed by the greate Mr. of his palace,
to whom belongs the soueraigne and highest authoritie
to censure all sort of bookes.
            And last of al Iacobus de Graffiis, the great Casuist
and Grand Poenitentiarie, within these 7. yeares hath
determined this question; affirming that the murderer
may not bee taken out of the Church, no not tho hee
broke prison and fled thither, vnlesse it were murder
ioyned with treacherie and treason
               Iacobus de Graffijs decis. aur. cas cons. to 1. cap. 48. libri secūdi art. 5. 6
                     •
                   7..
            Thus we see how Babylon is healed in this wound.
And heereby it is apparant to all that wil see, that she
is a bloudy Babylon; and as in many other respects for
her crueltie, so this waie also, for this doctrine and
practice, she is a bloudy sinagogue: and no maruel tho
the holy Ghost say, that in her is found the bloud, not
only of the Prophets & Saints, but of al that wer slain

vpon the earth
               Reuel 18. 24. For as she hath made her selfe the
principall agent in shedding the bloud of Saints and
Martyrs: so hath she made her selfe accessary by this
her doctrine and practise, to all the murthers & bludshed
vpon the earth: for, to maintain so many refuges
and defences for a sinne, is to maintain the sin it selfe.
Therefore leauing this bloudy Church weltring, and
wallowing, and bathing her selfe in bloud, let vs proceed
to that remaines.
         
         
            The fourteenth Wound.
            TOuching the honorable estate of marriage, and
the dishonor of it, which is adultery & fornicatiō,
it is lamentable to see what is the doctrine & practice
of the Romish Church. For first, they giue a publick
and open toleration of the stewes, wherein whoredome
is practiced as dayly and commonly, as other
ciuile and lawfull actions
                  The 14. wound; Romish Reliligiō permits stewes publickelie.: nay their rent is rated
and duely paide, (a part of it) to the Pope, or as hee
shal appoint it: Thus complaines and cries out Agrippa,
a man of no meane place, nor ordinary vnderstanding,
among themselues.Cornel. Agrippa de vanitate scient. cap. 64.
               The Corinthians (saith he) and Cyprians, and Babylonians,
& other heathen Graecians did increase
their reuenue, by the gain of the stewes, which in
Italie also is at this day no rare nor vnusual matter:
for the whores of Rome do paie weekelie to
the pope a Iulio a piece (about sixe pence sterling)
the whole reuenue whereof in the yeare, doth often
exceed the summe of twenty thousand Duckets,
&c.
            
            
               Alas will some say, the pope cannot hinder this:
therefore seeing he cannot helpe, he hath vsed (such
was the wisedome of elder ages) to make the best vse
he can of an ill matter.
            But I answere; first the holy Ghost commands vs
to haue nothing to doe with an ill matter, but keepe vs
farre from it
               Exod. 23. 7. Ephes, 5. 11., though we cannot hinder it. Again,
if the pope could not hinder it, yet he can refuse
to haue any gaine from it; and so hee would, but that
he thinkes it sweete: but if he were of Dauids religion
who would not drinke that drinke, that cost men the
venture of their liues
               2. Sam. 23. 14., surely hee would not take
that gain that costs men and women their soules.
            But I answere further, He could and might hinder
it, and will not. If he himselfe and his fauorites speak
trueth; he wants no power for nothing that hee will
doe: therefore for reforming the stewes, it is cleere
he wants wil, but no power. Hee whose power stretcheth
through purgatorie, reacheth euen to hel, doth
it not reache to Rome his owne seate? Can hee empty
purgatory and not the stewes? can he command
the diuels, & not whores? can he dispose of kingdoms
and depose kings when he seeth cause, and cannot he
or seeth hee no cause to depose the stewes? Against
Gods truth, and vs the professors of it, whom he calls
heretikes, he wants no will, and therefore hee wants
no power. Let him punish whoredome, as hee doth
that, that he calls heresie (tho it be the trueth): let it
be as vnlawful in Rome to keepe or frequent stewes,
as to haue a Protestant Church, and then we should
soone see as fewe, and fewer whores in Rome, then
there be good Protestants. But whoredome is none

of the vnderminers of his State, nor enemies of his
Crown as our religion is: therfore our religion must
downe when stewes must stand. But some wil further
obiect, If this haue bin so, it is the fault or corruption
of his officers, and not to be imputed to his Holines.
But I answer: the pope vseth not to be so negligent of
his estate, as not to looke at a reueneue of 20000.
duckets a yeere. And to take away al cause of this cauill,
& to make it more apparant that the pope is the
head of the whore of Babylon; Pope Sixtus 4. scarce
120
                  •
                yeares agoe,Ad perpetuamrei memoriam: to his euerlasting honour. built a stewes in Rome, of his owne
erection & foundation, so saith the same Agrippa.
               Cornel. Agrip. de vanit. scient. cap. 64.
               Licurgus & Solon, heathe
                        •
                      law-giuers, erected publick
stews: but that is no maruel, for of late yeers,
pope Sixtus the fourth builded a goodlie stewes
Rome.
            
            Lo heer, the Popes Holines, the founder of a Colledge
of diuels, a stewes for whores: surely because he
scorned ordinary company, he built that for himselfe
& his Princes & his peers, the Cardinals: who if their
owne brethren say true, make it nothing dainty to be
conuersant with courtizans. Thus we see it confessed
and proued by a learned papist, that a 100. yeeres ago
stewes were maintained, nay erected by the pope: &
that he takes gain & rent of them. If any man obiect
against Agrippa, as no competent witnesse: I answer,
the pope indeede hath prohibitedVide indicem. lib prohibit. Clementis 8. in litera. H. his bookes to
be read; but it had beene more reason to haue disproued
and confuted his assertions: but let the pope condemne
him as he wil, for his bold speaking of truth; it
is knowen to all that know him, or his books, he was
a papist for the most part: & whatsoeuer hee was, he

had no reason to bely the pope; we hired him not, we
thanke him not for any thing but truth: yet for more
certainty hereof, hearken to another, who being an
Inquisitor, is beyond all exception that way.
            
               Thus complains Oleaster (a Spanish Doctor), vpon
that text of Deuteronomy
               Deut. 23. 18. thou shalt not bring into
my house the hire of a whore; for it is abhominable.

                  Oleaster in Comment. suis in Pentateu. in Deut. cap. 23. fol. 270. Filthy gaines, saith he, were euer abhominable to
God, & therfore he forbids to bring into his house
the hire of a whore. But now in the new Testamēt,
when the Church and Ministers therof should bee
much more cleane, and pure then afore, al manner
of filthy gaines are accepted and taken; how vile
so euer they be, and whencesoeuer they come.
            
            Thus all gaine is sweete, & al rent welcome to the
Pope, tho it come frō whores: so true a frend to stews
and whores is the whore of Babylon.
            
            But wil some say, this might be so in the elder times
that were of more liberty, because al was quiet: but
now since Luther rose, & the Church hath bin wakened
by heretikes, this wound is healed.
            No, this wound is not healed: as I will proue by their
late and moderne writers.The 14. woūd not healed: for the Romish religion, doctrine and practise tolerate stewes still.
            
            Nauarrus one of their greatest Canonists of this
last age, & one whom the popes held worthy to bee
cald to Rome, for his continual aduise & direction
               Martinus Azp
                     •
                  l. Nauar. Hisp. Iuris canonici sciētis. idemque theolog. insignis &c. Haec Poss
                     ••
                   in apparatu sac. tom 2. lit. M.
               deals very plainly in this matter, and saith, that
               Nau Manuāl. c. 17. nu. 195.
               It is lawful for the magistrate to permit whores and
stewes to be in some conuenient part of the city. And
in some places he saith that patrōs & officers are appointed
for them, and houses are let & rented to
them deerer then to honest women. And hee
confe
                     ••
                  eth, that in Rome, houses are daylie let

out to whoors; the Pope both seeing it & suffring
it, and that of long time it hath been so. And that
the confessors do absolue and so haue euer done
those Land-lords so disposing of their houses to
whores, yea thogh they haue no purpose to abstain
from letting them to these vile persons.
            
            See heere a peece of spanish deuotion & modesty:
Surely, no maruell though this man were sent for,
from Spain to Rome: for it seemes by this doctrin he
was for the Popes tooth, & much more for his Cardinalls.
            Alphonsus Viualdus, another learned Spaniarde,
wrote a booke of matters of conscience not long agoe,
of so greate account amongst them that they
call it the golden Candlesticke. It hath been often printed,
and within these 7. yeares was by the popes speciall
commission purged, and reprinted: hee writes
thus
               Martinus Alphonsus Vivaldus, the ol
                     •
                   Iuris canon, professor, & poenitentiarius maior, &c. In Candelabro aureo. tit. de Confessione, numero 60..
First, he makes a question, whether in the yeerly excommunication
pronoūced by the Bishop, against
thē that do not confess & communicate, whores
in the stewes be comprehended, or no: and hee resolueth
that they be not, tho they neither confesse
nor do communicate; and giues his reasons. 1. For
that whores in the Romish Church, be neuer published
nor denounced excommunicate. 2. No man
refuseth their companie, notwithstanding that
yeerely excommunication: and concludeth further,
that though one continue a whore for twentie
yeeres long, yet doth shee not incurre the Cens
                     •
                  ures
of the Romish Church.
            
            
               Oh excellent doctrine, and fit for the Romish
Church! but al this wil some say is salued by this that
followeth. Nay, cōtrariwise say I, the wound is made
worse; & by the craft of that that followeth, obserue
the subtilty, and iniquity of Romish teachers: for this
is done (saith hee) in detestation of their ill life: the
Church doth so detest their manner of life, that shee
will not thinke them worthy of her censures; oh notable
shift! are they too bad to be punished, and not
too bad to be suffered? doth the Romish Clergy think
them so vile that way, & yet allow them? see the iniquity
& filthines of this religion.
            Thus its apparant by the great Confessor Viualdus,
that the Romish Church excommunicats not common
whoores, nor them that go to them: & another
as greate a Clark as himselfe, saith, it is the common
opinionlac. de Graffijs. tom. 1. lib 1 cap 9. art. 8. & 9..
            
               But yet to shew better that this wound is not healed,
harke a little what the grand penitentiary, Iacobus
de Graffijs, saith;
               
                  Iacobus de Graffiis decisaur. cas. cons. tom. 1. lib. 2. cap. 75. art, 3. et 4. pag 348. But if fornication be a sinne, then why doth the
Church her 
                        •
                     elfe permit stewes, & consequently
fornication, which is a mortall sinne? I answer
(saith he) that the Church sometime tolerateth
a lesse euill present that she may auoide a greater
euil to come, that is probable to fall out: and
this hee proues out of the Canon law; and so
concludes that the Church doth tolerate stewes
and whores, to auoide greater sinnes: not approuing
the sinne of fornication; but by conniuence,
or dissimulation tolerates it, that so shee
may restraine and keepe yoong men from adulteries,

incests, and other crimes of that kind: then
he goeth further to proue his conclusion; which he
doth out of the practise of heathen lawgiuers, &
by the ciuile law, & would proue it out of the Fathers
and then to make vp the measure of his iniquitie,
he addeth that the law doth so far foorth
tolerate fornications in stewes that it takes order
to compell the whoores to refuse no man, if he offer
her, her pay: the words are too bad to be repeated
in english.
            
            And to shew that he is a true child of that Babylon
that wil neuer be healed, & that hee is as gracelesse in
this point as his mother, afterward in his 2. tome
(which he put out in his more mature yeeres) he hath
againe the same doctrine in as ill or worse words;Idem Graffius ibid. tom. 2. li. 3. c. 28. art. 36.
            
            And to conclude, the better to encourage women
to be whores, and the better to please their carnall &
wicked mindes, Cardinall Tollet a Iesuite, out of his
Iesuitical modesty, and his Cardinallike respect to
the stewes, deliuers this doctrine;Frā Tolletus Ies. Cardinall. Instructio sacerdotum. lib. 5. cap. 17. art. 3
               That Whores, taking money of men, for their sin, be
they maried or vnmaried, tho it be neuer somuch
aboue their due, are not bound to restore any of
it againe, if it be once giuen them; and giues a reason
for it because, saith hee, this action is not against
iustice, &c.
            
            Certainly the stewes are much beholden to Cardinal
Tollet for this doctrine: but, what Iustice & modesty,
and the Church, and the truth and God himselfe
do owe him for it, hee feeles afore this time, except
he repented.Obijt Tolletus. Romae. 1596
            
            Thus it is the present doctrin of the Romish Church

that she alloweth stewes by publick toleration, to auoide
greater euills, and censureth not the whores
for it; nay, ties them by a lawe to refuse no man, and
tyes men by a law to pay the hire; and for this ende
allowes them Courts, Iudges, and Officers, and takes
part of the benefit arising. Now, that their practice is
according to this doctrine, I appeale to all that haue
trauelled in those parts where poperie reigneth; as
Spaine, Italy, &c. And further to giue one euidence
out of my owne reading for the practice, Iacobus de
Graffijs telles vs plainely in these words,Iacobus de Graff decis. aur. cas. cons. tom. 1. lib. 1. c. 28. art. 20.
               It is lawfull for Lords and owners of houses to let
out their houses to whores, euen whom they know
so to be, so it be with this mind, not purposelie
that they may sin, but with this that the women
may get their liuing, & be able to pay them good
rents. Now tho they know they wil get their own
liuing, and paie them their rent out of whordom,
yet if they haue a dislike of the sin, they may do it
lawfully: and such, saith hee, is the common practise
at Rome.
               
            
            Thus both for Romish doctrine & practice, it is
apparant that stewes are allowed to this day, & common
whores not censured.
            Against al this but one thing can be obiected; namely,
that al these be priuate doctors that teach the doctrin, & secular princes that allow the practise, I answer,
thē let vs see what the pope doth. Doth he supply
the negligence of other Bishops? they do not excō
               municate
thē: doth he? No, no, he is as bad or worse
then the worst. Princes tolerate them, so doth heNay, by the places alleged afore, it is manifest that it is not princes, but the Pope & the Church that tolerates and permittes thē, & princes permitt them, because the Church doth.;

they in their kingdoms, he in Rome: they build them
houses, so did he: they take part of their gain, so doth
he: the Bishops excommunicate them not, no more
doth he to this day. For this end wee are to knowe,
that besides all particular and personall excommunications,
hee vseth once a yeere, that he may meete
with all his enemies at once, and pay them at one
payment, to excommunicate together all such sorts
and kindes of people, as hee holds his enemies. But
are whoores any of them? no such matter: nay these
be they;Vide Bullam Coenae in Cō
                  stit. Rom. pōt. per Petrū Mathaeū ed. inter Cōstitut. Sixti quinti pa. 883.
               
                  1. Caluinists, Lutherans, and such heretikes.
                  2. All that appeal from the Pope to a general Councell.
                  3. Forgers and Falsifiers of the popes hande, or
seale.
                  4. All that hurt and hinder Pilgrimes that come to
Rome.
                  
                  5. Al lay men that draw Clergymen to their Courts,
or would bring them vnder their iurisdiction.
                  6. All that hinder the iurisdiction of the Clergy.
                  7. All that seize vpon any lands belonging to the
Pope, &c.
               
            
            These and such other like to the number of 17. or
18. be the enemies against whō the Pope hath cause
to plant his ordinaunce; but as for whores, & stewes
and such other hainous transgressors of the morall
law, these neuer hurt the Romish Church, and therefore
she bends not her power against them.
            So then, seeing popery and the stewes are so linked,
that (we perceiue) do what wee can; man cannot separate
those whome the diuel hath ioyned together:

let vs then leaue the stewes in Rome, and the Pope in
his stewes; and mourning for their miserie, let vs proceed.
         
         
            The fifteenth Wound.
            THe next wound is this: That whereas God hath
euer allowed and honoured marriage, in the old,
and new Testament; and Concubines were neuer allowed
in the olde, and absolutely condemned in the
newe: Now comes popery, and makes it as lawfull to
haue a Concubine as a Wife
                  The 15. wound; He that hath not a wife may haue a Concubine. and this is done by
no priuate persons, but the Popes law it selfe. Thus
saith the Canon;Decret dist. 34. cap. 4.
               He that hath not a wife, but for a wife or instead of a
wife, a Concubine, let him not for that be kept frō
the Communion; yet so as that hee bee content
with one woman, either a wife or a concubine.
            
            Is not heere a piece of good licentious poperie? I
know they say they haue this from the first councell
of Toledo, which is ancient: true, but what if Spaine,
not long ago conuerted to the faith, was not purged
as yet from these dregs of heathenisme, and Iudaism;
are they therefore fit to be taken vp by the Pope, and
inserted in his law, as a Canon to binde and direct
for euer? If they thinke that poore prouinciall Councel
(but of 19. Bishops) bee a sufficient warrant for
this decree, then why take they not all? and why put
they it not downe a wife or a Concubine, as it pleaseth
him; for so it is in the words of the CouncelConcil. General. per Binniū. Col. 1607. tom. 1. pa. 560. In Concil. 1. Tolet. cap. 17..
            
               I know also, that they haue coyned a distinction,
whereby they would couer this wound, and say that
a Concubine heere is to be taken for a woman whom
a man hath, and keepeth with the affection of a Husband;
onely in outward fashion and solemnity shee is
not a wife, nor publickly married: but I answere, the
best of it is naught if we did graunt them all they say:
but distinguish as they can, the wordes are so plaine,
that the suttlest distinctiō they can deuise, wil be too
short a cloak to couer the shame of it: nay the shame
of this Canon is written in the fore-head of it: for the
Rubrick or contents, written with red letters, is worse
then the text it selfe;Vide decretū cum glossa, editionis lugdun. in fol. 1510 dist. 34. cap. 4. Is, qui non habet vxorē, loco illius debet habere concubinam.
               Hee that hath not a wife, ought, or at least may haue,
a Concubine in her reome.
            
            These be the very words in the impression at Lions,
1510. tho I confess the Diuines of Paris, hauing a
little more care what past their hands, ashamed
of the word debet (that is, ought to haue) put it out
and put in liceat, that is, hee may haueVide decretū edit
                     •
                   Parisiens. in fol. anni 1507. ibid. Is qui non habet vxorem, loco illius, concubinam habere liceat.
               : but take
the best of all, and is it not bad inough? well let vs goe
forward; this wound is olde & wide, and deepe.
            But is it yet healed? No, not to this dayThe 15 woūd not yet healed
                     •
                   for stil by the Popes Canon law he that hath not a Wife may haue a Concubine.; for
the Popes Canon law was of late yeares commaunded
by the Pope to be corrected and purged, as well
the Text as the Glosse: and is this amended, or lefte
out as being false and filthy doctrin? No: other places
indeed are altered, for the greater vantage and honor
of the Pope: but this dishonorable Canon, so
disgracefull to Gods lawe, stands vntouched in this
new & last editiō of alVide corpus iuris Canonici, authoritate Gregorij. 13. pōt max
                     •
                   emē
                  datum et editum. 91. et 600.: only the Rubrick, or title, or
Contents, wherof we spake before is altered thus;

                  
                  Ibid. dist. 34. cap. 4. Is qui non habet vxorem sed loco illius concubinam, a communione no
                        ••
                      repellitur. Hee that hath not a wife, but for a wife a Concubine, is not repelled from the Communion.
            
            Thus it is amended; but in a poore fashion, as wee
may see. But what may the Church of Rome meane
to amend the Rubrick or title, & not the Text? Surelie
because they know manie a one hastily runnes ouer
the Contents, and titles of books and Chapters, who
neuer looke into the body of the bookes themselues.
But take this wound healed as it is: Is this good diuinity
at Rome, that he who hath no wife, but in a wiues
steade keepes a Concubine, shal not for that be kept
from the Communiō? Is not this a holy table of the
Romish Sacrament, from which he shall not be forbidden
that openly keeps a whore, in room of a wife?
Certainly this wound is notably healed: let vs then
goe forward to the next.
         
         
            The sixteenth Wounde.
            VVE haue heard that a Wife is made equall to
a concubine: but what is she be made worse
then a Whore, an Adultresse, or a common strumpet?
None dare say this, none dare vndertake this, but
the Whore of Babylon: but shee dare. For this is her
doctrine, that it is a lesse sinne for many men to lye
with another mans wife, or a common whore; then it is
to marry a wife of their owne
               
                  The 16. wound; Some man had better lie with another mans wife, or keep a whor
                     •
                  , then marry a wife of his owne.. Marriage which
God hath made so honorable, hath bin of long time
disgraced in poperie; but not in this high measure (I
speak of) abused, that I know, till these latter & more

shamelesse times that the whore hath got her a brazen
face.
            In Luthers time, not yet a 100. yeeres agoe, liued
one Albertus Pighius, one of the Popes Champions
Albert Pighius scripsit in Lutherum
                     •
                   &c de ecclesia catholica bene meritus. Posse
                     •
                   appar. 
                     •
                  ac. tom 1. lit. A., who for the defence of that hierarchy and maintenance
of the cause, amongst other his bold & blasphemous
assertions, teacheth this hoggish and hatefull
doctrine;Pighius explicatio controuersiarum: contr
                     •
                  u. 15. de Caelib. et coniug Sacerdo
                     •
                   215. edit. Parisi. 1549.
               Go to (saith he) suppose all that vowed continency,
do not keep it so wel as they should: What thē? had
they better marrie? Nay assuredly: for wee must
resist the temptation by all meanes we can: but if
sometime we be too remisse, and so by infirmity
of the flesh do fall (into fornication or &c.) Certainlie
this is a less sinne and more tolerable offēce,
thē it is to marry; for this is wholly to cast off
Gods yoke: not that wee allow fornication (in it
selfe); but here we compare a slip or fall of infirmity
to mariage, which in this case we account no
better then a resolued, or deliberate, or continual
Incest, vtterlie without all shame.
            
            Heere is a piece of holy popery indeed: but it is
pope-holy, that is, beastly and profane; so filthie that I
had rather the particulars were considered of by a
mans owne discretion, then deciphered by mee. But
let vs see if this be healed or no: For the Iesuites may
say, this Pighius wrote so hoggishly in licentious
times, and when we were in the egge and scarce hatched
For the Iesuites order was established by Paul the 3. and this booke of Pighius published within 3 yeeres together, namely, about the yeare. 1540.; for had we then been in that power & place
as now, we would haue restrained him.
            But the truth is, that contrariwise this impious and

filthy doctrine was obscurely & timorously broched
by Pighius; but hath beene since bouldly and plainly
blustered out by the Iesuites:The 16. wound not healed
                     •
                   for this is still the doctrine of the Romish Church.: hee brought forth
an imperfect heape, but they haue lickt it & brought
it to forme & perfection. Costerus a Iesuite of greate
name amongst themVide Poss. appar. sac. tō. 1. lit. T. writing a book, fit to bee (as
he calls it, & they esteem it) in euery Catholicks hād,
deliuereth this for sound and dogmatical doctrine.

                  Costerus, Enchiridion controuersiarū &c. cap. de coelibatupropos. 
                        •
                     . p. 528. A Priest
                     •
                   if he commit fornication, or keep a whore
at home, though he sinne grieuously, yet sinnes hee
more grieuously if hee marry a wife.
            
            This is one of his propositions or conclusions. But
hee wrote this many yeeres agoe: is it not since healed?
No, the booke hath indeed bin often printed, &
with many alterations.Vide Posseuinum ibid.. But this stands in his last
impression vntouched, as a doctrine for the Pope to
glorie in: which I speake not at randon, but vpon too
good ground. For this doctrine, and the writer of it
haue been often reprooued by our Diuines: but in
stead of reformation, Costerus hath beene defended,
and the doctrine iustified by other of his learned
brethren. I will name but one example. Chamier a
learned French Minister obiected it to the Iesuites at
Turnoue; and it is at large defended by Ignatius Armandus,
the principall of the Colledge there, for
Catholick and good doctrine.Vide Epistolas Iesuiticas, part. 2. in epistola 1. Iesuitae Ignatii ad Chamierum. pag. 33. &c. The Epistles on
both sides are in print to be seen. And if these be not
of authority sufficient, let Bellarmine come to helpe
them. Thus he teacheth:

                  Bellarm. tō. 2. lib. 2. de Monachis, cap 30 pag. 545. That speech of the Apostle (They that cannot containe
let them marrie: for it is better to marrie
then to burn) cannot be rightly said of them that

haue vowed: for both are naught, both to burn &
to marry: yea it is worse of the two to marry,
whatsoeuer the Protestant babble to the contrarie.
            
            And a little after in the same Chapter:
She that marrieth after a single vow, contracteth
indeed a true Matrimonie, yet in some sort
shee sinnes more then shee that playes the
whore.
            
            Thus this pope-holy doctrine is now brought to
ripenes and perfection, by the diligence, deuotion,
and modesty of the Iesuites. But they haue a reason
for all this, so good and so strong, as they thinke, that
thereby all is well healed: for, say they, fornication
or whoring we do not simply allow to be better then
mariage, but in respect that a man hath afore made
a vow not to marry,Bellar. ibid Costerus ibid Ignatius ibid. therefore to marry after the
vow, is to breake promise with God. A notable reason,
if it bee well considered: for here by it is apparent
that poperie teacheth her people to vow against
mariage, but not against fornication; against wiues,
but not against whores. Alas, alas, what doctrine is
this, doth marriage breake their vow, and not fornication?
God keepe a
                  •
               l Christians from such vowes.
But that this true I say, let Bellarmine iudge.

                  Bellar
                        •
                      ibid She that marrieth after a simple vow, in some
sort sinneth more grieuously then shee that commits
fornication, because (marke his reason)
shee that marrieth makes her selfe vnable to
keep her vow, which shee doth not that commits
fornication.
            
            Thus it is plaine: Poperie voweth against mariage,

not against whoredome, adulterie nor fornication.
And thus three great Iesuites haue made good
what Pighius taught, and that more plainely and palpably
then he did. And to make vp a messe of Iesuites,
Posseuinus their grand Censor, comming to giue
his censure of Pighius,
               Posseuinus in Appar. sac. tom. 1. lit. A. findes many faults and errors
in his bookes: but as for this he hath nothing to
say against it, but passeth it ouer as good, holy, catholike
Romish doctrine: therefore seeing (as Bellarmine
said afore, say we what we can) they will not forsake,
nor amend this doctrine, let them keepe it; and let it
bee one of the sweete flowers of the Popes Garland.
         
         
            The seuenteenth Wound.
            THe next wo
                  •
               nd is neere a-kin to this,
                  The 17. wound. Priests in popery may not marry, but are permitted to keepe their whores, vnder a yeerelie rent. namely,
that their Chuch hauing alwaies forbidden
mariage to their Clergy, hath notwithstanding either
tolerated and permitted them concubines, or at
least not punished it to reformation.
            Thus was it complained of almost an hundred
yeeres agoe, by the Germane nation, then being papists.

                  Vide Centum grauamina Germanicae nationis: grauamen 75. & 91. In most places (say they) Bishops and their Officials
do tolerate and suffer the Priests to haue concubines,
vnder paiment of a certain annual rent
of money, and further doe euen permit them to
keepe their whores openly, and haue them in
their houses, and to beget children of them &c.
               
            
            
               Of these and certaine other grieuances (one hundred
in all) the Germane nation complained to their
Bishops and Clergie, in their owne Diets or Parliaments
held at home. But hauing no redresse they
went further, and about the yeere 1522. complained
to the Popes Legats and Nuntios at Noremberg,
who gaue them good wordes, and promised they
would make report thereof to his Holinesse, and
procure them a gratious answere. But hauing long
waited to no ende, they published their grieuances
and sent them to the Pope, crauing with much
humility, audience, redresse and reformation; promising
vpon that condition, they would still
and euer shew themselues dutifull and obedient
children to the Pope, and all whom he set ouer them:
but if they had no redresse, they assured him they
could not, nor would endure them longer. Heereupon
the Pope, not willing to venture the losse
of so faire a childe as Germanie, pacified them for a
time with goodly promises. But what re
                  •
               ormation
followed in whole or in any part, the stories of those
ages make it apparant. But for the particular I haue in
hand,The 17. woūd not healed: for still in poperie to this day, their Clergie are forbidden mariage, but whores and co
                     •
                  cubines are not taken from them. what notable reformation was wrought
herein, let a Bishop of their owne
                  •
                
               Espencaeus, as wise
and learned as that age did yeeld, let him, I say, deliuer
for mee; who fortie yeeres after, writing of this
matter saith:

                  Espencaeus de Continentia lib. 2. cap. 7 pag 17
                        •
                     . In stead of pure and honest single life, succeeded
impure fornication, and filthy keeping of concubines,
in such sort as neither can they be concealed
for multitude, nor seek they to be, they are so
shamelesse. Nay of later times this tolerancie hath

spread further, insomuch as in some places, both
Clergy & laity haue their whores permitted thē,
vnder a yeerly rent: whereof (saith he) the Germane
nation complained long agoe too truely and
vpon too great cause.
            
            But was not this wound healed, and this abuse reformed
vpon this complaint of Espencaeus? A man
might haue thought it would, and the rather seeing
he was a man of so great esteem in those daies, not
in France onely; but euen in the Court of Rome.
Espencaeus was in speciall fauor with Pope Paul the 4. insomuch as after much consultation had with him, he found him so wise and learned a mā, as hee had made him Cardinall if he had liued: this is apparent in his bookes de Continent. lib. 3. cap. 4. and in his cō
                     mentary on Titus. cap. 1. pag. 91. But what amendment insued, let himself tel vs in
his Commentary vpon Titus, which he wrote many
yeeres after his former booke.
Our Bishops and Archdeacons, &c. (in Poperie)
when they ride their visitations, doe not so much
punish the euil doers, (for which end the visitations
were first ordained) as rake vp siluer, & suck
it both from laitie and Clergy, vnder false & fained
pretēces of iurisdiction: but it is most filthy
of all that they suffer them to keepe their whores
in their houses, and haue children of them, at a
certain annual and yeerlie rent, &c.
               
            
            This is the healing and reformation wrought in
those daies. Oh but (wil some say) that is 40. yeares agoe,
sure it is better in these latter daies. Indeed this
enormitie was so generall and so scandalous, that euen
the Councell of Trent it selfe was ashamed,
and made great adoe for reformation of it.Vide Cōcil Tr
                     •
                  d 
                     •
                  es
                     •
                   24. cap. 8. But what effect it tooke, how they executed it, and
what is done in the matter, let another Bishop of
theirs tell vs, who in these late daies, scarce seuen

yeeres agoe,Henricus Cuickius: Rutemundensis Episcopus scripsit speculum concubinariorum, Sacerdotum, Monachorum & Clericorū: Colon. 8599. found it to bee so common and
shameless a sin al ouer all the low countries, (where
Poperie reigned) not onely in secular, but euen in
Monkes, Friers and regular priests, that hee writes a
book against the sinne, bitterly but iustly inueighing
against it, and shewing how dangerous and damnable
a sinne it is: and so much the more (saith hee) because
it is so common and little regarded, and so far
are they from shaming with it, that (marke how it is
healed) they wil take their concubines and whores, and
carrie them vp and downe the countrie (as men doe
their wiues) to feasts and meetings, and challenge place
and precedence for them as for honest Matrones) And
further freelie confesseth (but with great griefe and
shame) that there bee very few in their Clergie, free
from this crime.
               Idem Cuickius, in prae fatione eiusdem libri.
            
         
         
            The eighteenth wound.
            
               The 18. wound: Such priests as be continēt & haue no whores, yet must pay a yeerly rent as they that haue, because they may haue if they will.
            And no maruell though there bee but few of their
Clergy that haue not concubines, seeing they
take that course they doe with them, which is such
as though they would inuite, nay hire, or rather
presse and prouoke men to the sinne. For was it not
also complained on at the same time by the Germanes,
that

                  Grauamiua 100. Ger. grau. 91. Not onely those Priests that had their whores
paid yeerly rent for it, but euē those that were cō
                  tinent
and would haue no Concubines, yet for al
that must pay the rent? for, say they, my Lorde

the Bishop hath need of it, and cause to imploy
much money: therefore pay you must, and then
bee it at your owne choice, whether you wil haue
a concubine or no.
            
            What is this but euen to try mens strengths, and
as it were to presse them to the sinne: for hee that either
by constitution is vnfit, or out of morall honesty
will not, or out of conscience dare not keepe a concubine,
seing he must pay his rent as well as hee that
doth, will not this make him say to himselfe, I see
this is done by my superiours, they haue more learning
and knowledge then I: I am to follow them, &
may rather trust them then mine owne conceit: and
certainely if it were so great a sinne as I haue imagined
it to be, our Bishops would not take a yeerly rent
to suffer it; and if they would, yet his Holinesse, it being
so old and so notorious a practise, would haue
reformed it long ere this. Therefore seeing the case
stands thus, and that I must and doo pay, doubtlesse
I will not pay for nothing, &c. Surely he must haue a
great measure of grace, that liuing vnder popish subiection,
can resist this temptation and the like: and
therefore no maruell though, as themselues confess,
not one of their Clergie of a great number that hath
not his whores in corners, or else publickly in their
houses Erasmus liuing about that time, or soone after,
complaineth of it, and saith:

                  Erasmus annotat. in 1. Tim. 3. Eee that considereth the state of these
times how innumerable the number is of such
Monks and Priests as liue in open whoredome &
incest, would thinke it perhaps more conuenient

to giue leaue to such as cannot containe, rather to
marry then, &c.
            
            And not long after him florished Cassander, a mā
of great name and account in his time, both for wisdome
and learning: and hee finding the world still
worse in this point, confessethCassander lib. Consult. art. 23. cap. 1.
               Now the world is come to this passe, that a man shal
not find scarce one of a hundred that keepes himselfe
free from this fault.
            
            Thus we see the fruit of this their practise to take
rent for concubines, and to make them pay that had
none, that almost none of their Clergy, but are stained
with this pollution.
            But is this healed?The 18. woūd not healed: for such as haue no concubines must pay their rent because they may haue, if they will. No, saith Espencaeus, it is
too horrible to beleeue. But it is too true, that

                  Espencaeus de Conti. lib. 2. cap 7. Those that be continent and will haue none, yet
are compelled to pay the whole taxe or rent,
and so haue it lawful and in their choice to haue
a concubine or to haue none: Oh execrable abhomination,
&c.
            
            Thus here was no amendment for forty yeares after
the villanie was discouered, and the grieuance
complained of: and that there was nothing done in
the daies of Espencaeus, which was for some 10 yeers
more, we may see by his words in his other booke.

                  Idemi
                        •
                      Titum. ca. p. 67. They take the rent not onely of those that haue
concubines, but in some places euen of thē that
haue none; for (say they) he may haue if he will,
therefore let him pay for his liberty: and though
there bee so many of these Priests that liue thus,
yet where is there any one of them punished otherwise
then thus by the purse? &c.
            
            
               Since the time of Espencaeus, whether this wound
be healed or no, I cannot tell: and therefore if any of
that side can shew me any good authority that now
it is reformed, and that either no Priests pay yeerelie
rent for concubines at all, or at least not those that
haue none; I shall be willing to heare it, and to see
that any thing at all is amendedBut whosoeuer wil but look
                     •
                   into their latest Cas
                     •
                  ists & S
                     •
                  mmists, as be Tollet the Cardinal, lac. de Graffi
                        •
                     s, Loel Zecchius, Baptista Corradus, Berarduccius, Raphael de Caesare, 
                        ••
                     amas & others, will find it more then suspicious (though now they couer it more cunningly then formerly they did) that this wound is far from being healed.. Meane time I
haue proued it apparantly that till that time it was
not amended: & whosoeuer reades the Low country
Bishop Cuickius his booke aforenamed, written
but seuen yeeres agoe, will iudge it as ill in these
daies still, as it was in the time of Espencaeus the
French Bishop.
            These Authors I haue named, hauing some remorse
of conscience and feare of God, ingenuouslie
and honestly wished that rather marriage might bee
permitted then whoordom should so preuaile ouer
the world. But what hath bin done? They for their
labour are ill spoken of when they are dead, their
bookes partly prohibited to be read at al, partly purged
and altered as they list;Opera Erasmi, Espencaei, Cassandri prohibentur donec expurgentur. Vide Indicem lib. prohibit. per Clem. 8. & Indices expurgatorios. Hisp. & Belg.; and for the matter it
selfe, marriage is still forbidden, whooredome still
practised and winkt at, if not permitted, stewes still
tolerated, & that vnder the Popes nose, and no where
so much as euen in Rome it selfe: and still this doctrine
is Catholike and currant,
They had better go to whoores then marry.
And why (alas) all this, but because Mariage hath bin
an enemy to the Popes Crowne and dignity? but
stewes, adulterie and fornication neuer were. Let vs
hasten forward.
            I must needes say (if I say truly) I could discouer

many more of these particular old festring wounds,
not as yet healed; but this time wil not wel permit it:
therfore referring it to a further oportunity, I will
stand but vppon one particular more, and so come
to a generall, which shall conclude all.
         
         
            The ninteenth Wounde.
            IT hath bin long ago laid to their charge
                  The 19. wound: Their Liturgy is full of blasphemie: their Legend full of lies, their Ceremonies of superstition. that
their Liturgies are full of idolatry and blasphemies,
their Legends full of lies, their Ceremonies of
superstition: which I will not at this time (beeing almost
past) stand particularly to prooue; seeing for
their Liturgie and Ceremonies, the Pope himselfe,
Vide Bullas Clem. & de Pontificali, anno 9
                     •
                  . & de Ceremoniali anno. 1600. or else his Conuenticle at TrentVide Cōcil Triden
                     ••
                   Sess. vlt. Dec. 4. haue granted
it, and pretended that they should bee reformed;
and touching their liues of Saints and their Legends,
a greate Doctor of their own long agoe found them
so full of ridiculous absurdities, impieties and vntruths,
that he affirmed him to be a manLudouicus Vi
                     ••
                  es. lib. 2. de Caus. corrupt. art. de Lūbardica historia. 
               of a brazen
face, and a leaden heart that wrote them. Now al
these three sorts of bookes are in shew reformed of
late: but the truth is, there is neuer a material vvound
healed, but rather a number made worse.
            1. For their Liturgy and seruice either publike or
priuate, it is cōtained in their books called, Missalia,
Breuiaria, Officia, Manualia, Portiforia, and such other:
all these haue beene reuiewed, and (as they say)
corrected since the Councell of Trent.Vide Bullas Pontif. praefixas. Missal. & Breuiareditionis 70. & post. But let
them be examined and compared together, & I dare
say, that for one euil taken out there is another put in,

and tenne stand vnremooued, and that both in diuers
pictures, as also for points of doctrine, they are as ill
as the former,Compare for this end the Missals, breuiaries Manuals & Primeri, printed before the Councel of Trēt, with those printed since. at the least.
            2. Their Ceremonies of state, or as they say, of deuotion,
are contained in the bookes called, Pontificale
Romanum, and Ceremoniale Romanum
               
                  Adde heereunto also their Processionale, Rationale, and Sacerdotale Romanum.: wherin
what apish to yes there be, what absurdities, what
superstitions, sometimes ridiculous, sometimes impious,
is incredible to them that see it not: insomuch
as some Papists,Vide Epistolam Alberti Castellani ad Leonem 10. praefiram Pō
                  t
                     •
                  f
                     •
                   vlt edit. Vene
                     •
                  . yea the later Popes,Vide Bullas praed. Clem. 8. haue not
spared to confesse that they need great reformation,
and therefore vndertooke that worke thēselues.
But if a man did see how they haue amended them,
they would out of this one (if there were no more
euidences) conclude, that Rome is that Babylon that
will neuer bee healed: for looke into the Pontificale,
and the Ceremoniale; which were reformed, and are
indeed much altered by the authoritie of Clement the
eightth and printed at Rome within these few yeeres;
and you shall finde some small deformities taken away,
but many greate enormities suffered to stand, &
some put in that were not that there before:Compare for this end the Pō
                     tificale and Ceremoniale, new and old. which
I will not stand at this time to particularise,(40) The 19. wound not healed: for al these are as bad still, as afore. both because
the particulars are so manie, and also for that,
seeing the bookes beeing so rare are not for each
mans reading, it may hap heereafter that the exact
comparison of them together, the old with the new,
may be a work of it self not vnworthy of some mens
labours.
            3.These were read in the Churches when the Scriptures were kept out. Their stories, or tales, are comprised in the
bookes called, Speculum exemplorum. Vitae Sanctorū,
Legēda, Festiualia, &c. These also are lately reformed

as they pretend. But how? If any would know what is
done herein, take but one exāple. The Iesuites in the
Low countries, pretending these Legends or stories
needed much reformation, tooke the matter vpon
themselues, because it was of greate waight and consequence,
and appointed it to some of their societie
to be reformed, and now of la
                  •
               e they haue published
it at Doway, some two or three yeeres agoe, & would
make vs beleeue that it is amended in innumerable
places.Vide librū intitulatum: Magnum speculum exemplorum, ab innumeris mē
                  dis, &c. vindicatum per quendam Patrem è societate Iesu & per eundem locupletatū: Duaci. anno 1605. But if any man haue lost any time in turning
ouer their Legends, and perusing the prodigious
stories there laid downe, let him venture euen a
little more, and compare this new reformed Speculum
exemplorum, with the former; and if hee finde as
impious and ridiculous Legends, as improbable, and
as impossible tales in that, as in the other; thē let him
make report what good reformers the Iesuites bee,
and how well the Romish Church is healed in this
wound.To this end compare the old Speculum exē
                     plorum or the Legend with the new Magnum speculū exemplorum, set out by the lesuites this last yeere. The conclusion is, that the Missals and
Breuiaries, though vndertaken by Trent; the Pontificall
& Ceremoniale, though vndertaken by the Pope;
the Legend and Speculum, though vndertaken by the
Iesuites, and all in shew reformed; yet stand all at this
day as foule and deformed, and though some things
bee taken out, yet (all laid together) as bad or worse
then they were afore.
            These straits of time hinder me from inlarging
my selfe any further: therfore to conclude, and wrap
vp all in one generalll exception:
         
         
            
            The twentieth wound.
            THe last point wherewith I will charge the Romish
Church and religion, is not so fitly to bee
called a wound, as a leprosie, or a generall consumption;
but all to one end: for as it is no difference vpon
the matter, whether a man bee deepe and desperately
wounded, or haue a leprosie over all the body,
or a generall consumption, for both are deadly, and
both incureable: so is it in this case; wherein the exception
I take against them, is, that their Church &
State declined long agoe, into that general corruption
& vniuersall pollution in all estates,
                  The 20. wound. A generall corruption of manners in all estates. That the
prophanenesse, licentiousnesse, and sinfulnesse of all
sorts of people in that Church, both head & members,
is like a spirtuall leprosie without, or a generall
consumption within, threatning ruine to the whole
body. This point is worthy to bee enlarged: but I
must deferre it, and referre the Reader to the records
of antiquity, I meane such as be their owne men, but
hauing some remorse of conscience, & feare of God
did confesse freely, and bitterly deplore the miserie
that the sinfulnesse of the popish Church, and religion
would bring vpon all the world. Let them read
(that haue them,) these bookes named in the margent,Vide Gersonis opera passim. Reuelationes Brigittae
                     •
                   Vincentij Ferrariens. prognostic. Petrū de Aliaco de reformatione eccl. Nicolai de Clemangiis opera: in Bibliotheca Patrum, editionis primae.
and those that haue them not, it may bee
shortly they may haue some helpe therein, and then
you will graunt with mee, that former and better
times, confessed that which I now laie to their
charge.
            
               I will insist particularly but vpon two: the one of
so greate antiquitie,Poem
                     •
                  ta Walteri Mapes. Maillardi & Menotti Sermones. Holcot in Sapient. lect. 82. & passim. & Onus Ecclesiae passim the other of so greate authority,
as both are beyond exception. Some 400 years ago
liued a Monk learned for those times, called (as Posseuine
confessethVide Posseu. in Appar. sae. In apped. priori ad tom. 1. lit. B. 
               Bernardus Morlanensis: he wrote
three bookes of the contempt of the world, in an artificiall
kind of Poetry, but much more artificially
describing, and zealously deploring the sinfulnesse
of the Romish Church, and state in those daies, from
the head to the foote, describing particula
                  •
               lie their
adulteries, drunkennesse, ambition, idlenesse, dissimulation,
deceits, cosenages, murders, whooredomes
of all estates: then particularly for their
Clergie, their ignorance and negligence, their
Sodomie, their Simonie and other corruptions in
attaining places in the Church; and then at last
comming to Rome it selfe, so layes open the filthinesse
of the whoore of Babylon, as it is doubtfull
whether her sinfulnesse be more hateful then his
boldnesse is admirable. Let him that would be able
to answere all their false slanders, which they lay
to the charge and disgrace of Protestant Churches;
and to retort vpon themselues their obiection
of the liues of our Professors; and he that
would see the Church and state of Rome in her
her owne naturall colours; let him, I say, reade but
that one Author: who beside that hee is Manuscript
in many Libraries, was also published at Amsterdam,
or somewhere neere thereabouts, this present
yeare 1607.
            And after he hath discouered her corruptions, and
layd open her sinnes from head to foote, then he vrgeth

her vehemently to repentance and reformation:
which because he seeth no hope of, but that
still shee falleth from euill to worse; therefore hee
denounceth Gods iudgements against her, and assures
her, that vengeance, ruine and destruction shall
fall vpon her. Some part of his owne words I haue
heere put downe in Latine, but not in English, because
the sinnes hee laieth against her are such, as
some of them are better vnnamed then reprooued.
What can they say to it? Is he some fained and forged
new found Author, deuised by some of vs, or
was he some late writer hired by Luther, or suborned
by Caluine to raile on the pope or poperie? Nay,
Posseuine the Iesuite confesseth in the place aforenamed
(and if he did not, it is well enough knowne by other
good and ancient records) he was a professed
Monke, and liued aboue foure hundred yeeres ago:
therefore his testimonie in this case is beyond exception.
            Now whether these wounds and corruptions in
the Romish Church and state were healed, in the
subsequent ages, or no; if any man doubt, let him
looke vpon the Authors named afore, who liued in
the ages succeeding, one after another. Gualterus
Mapus, and their Saint Brigid, not much more then a
hundred yeeres after him: about 100. yeeres after
them, Bonauenture and Wicklieffe: about a hundred
yeeres after them, Gerson, Clemangius, Vincentius, &
others: these if any man look vpon, he shall see that
those wounds stood vnhealed, and those corruptions
vnreformed, vntill we come to the yeere 1500
namely to this last age of all: and though Posseuine
               
malitiously conceale the name of Gualter Mapes, because
he is too plaine, yet he cannot deny, but many,
whereof some hee nameth,Posseu. Appar. sac. tō. 2. lit. I. Iacobus Iunterbeck German Carthus. anno. 1460. scripsit auisamentum ad papam. pro reformatione Ecclesiae, &c. did in all ages write
to the Pope for reformation, and tolde him plainelie
what would follow if hee did not reforme the
Church.
            Now what good all these men could doe, and
what reformation followed at last, let a pope himselfe
speake, one of the honestest hearts that euer had
the hindrance, to be a Pope, Adrian the 6. the best
that was these many yeeres, and of whome (if it bee
possible of any) there was expectation of some reformation
in the Church: for, as Peter Mathew in his
life confesseth, hee was not so proud, nor couetous,
as most of them are.Petr. Matthaeus in Cō
                  ment
                     •
                   suis ad papales cōstitut. de Adriano 6. How hee found the Romish
Church when he came to it, and how hee left it at his
sudden taking from it, iudge by his owne pitifull and
passionate speech, which hee commanded his Nuntio
to deliuer from him, and in his name to the assembly
of the States of Germanie, in their Imperiall
parliament, about the yeer 1522. These be his words
as Epencaeus a learned Bishop of their owne reporteth.
            Tell them from vs, that we freely confesse, God hath
sent this trouble and affliction vpon the Church, for
the sinnes of men, and especially of Priests and prelats,
from whose sinnes (the scriptures are plaine) be deriued
the sinnes of the people: therefore our Sauiour (about
to heale and reforme Ierusalem a diseased citie)
first enters into the Temple, that first of all he may correct
the sinnes of the Clergy (especially concerning buying

the good Physition, who begins to heale a wound at
the roote and bottome.
            We know, that for many yeeres there haue beene many
abhominations euē in this holy Apostolike seat, abuses
in the cariage of maters spiritual, excessiue enormities
in our commadements, & in a word, all things turned
topsy turuy, & from ill to worse; and no maruell if
the disease grow frō the head into the members, that is,
frō the popes into common persons.
            I confess, all we (that is, all prelats of the Clergy) haue
gone out of the way, each one into our owne waies, neither
hath there been of a long time any that did good:
therefore there is good reason that wee all giue glory to
God, & humble our selues, eu
                  •
               
               ̄ our soules vnto him: let
each one of vs remember whence we are fallen and rather
iudge our selues, then stand to be iudged of God in
his wrath and furie.
            Wherein, for our parts, make promise in our name
that we will giue all diligence, that first of all this our
Court of Rome may be reformed; from which it is
likely al this mischiefe hath proceeded: that so, health
& reformation may begin there, to the good example of
al, whence the corruption first bred, and spred to the ill
example and hurt of all. To the furtherance and effecting
of which happie reformation, wee hold our selues so
much the more straitly obliged, by how much the more
earnestly we see the whole world to expect & desire it.
            These were the wordes of this good man, too
good to be a Pope, at least too good to be long a
Pope: for after that hee had so much forgot himselfe,

and his papall dignity, and the honor of his Apostolicall
seate (which cannot erre nor doe amisse, as hee
like a foole confessed) to graunt, that not the Church
alone, but the holy Court of Rome did need reformation,
forthwith there was order taken that hee
should not trouble the world nor disgrace his place
any longer; for shortly after he died: and for his sake,
they prouided that their seate should neuer bee so far
abused & abased againe by any plaine hearted Northren
man,Since Adriā, haue bin. 15. Popes, but all Italians. making sure from that day to this, that
the Popedom should not be trusted out of the hands
of an Italian, lest hee should euer haue a thought of
reformation. For what followed after all this? Was
there any reformation in the Romish Church? were
any of the euills and diseases, confessed by Adrian,
redressed? I had rather Espencaeus their owne Bishop
should tel, then I: which because he doth very largely,
I will contract it into a compendium and hope
that some will take paines to put all that wise and
learned discourse of his, into our vulgar tongue: the
rather for that it containeth much matter of greate
moment, and yet not vulgarly knowne to this daie.
Meane time the effect of it is this:
            
               Legatur Espencaeus in Comment. ad Titum cap. 1. à pag. 65. ad. 91. That after all Christendome had complained
of the enormous and intolerable grieuances, sustained
from the Pope and his Court of Rome, al which
and more the good pope Adrian had confessed
(but was taken away, lest hee had redressed) and
after at their motion, hee had intended a Councell
should be called for reformation: all this determined
by his death. His successor Clement the 7. was

not so idle to hearken to such toyes, nor giue way to
such innouations, hee would haue no Councell,
hee saw no cause of reformation. But from his successor
Paul the 3. plaine necessity did wring out an
vnwilling consent: and so after many difficulties,
the Councell of Trent was called, wherein first of all
this point of reformation was so vrged, that a Committee
was chosen of nine principall Diuines, some
of them Cardinalls, to consider what reformation
was requisite in the Church. Who after mature deliberation,
plainely told the pope, that all these euills
proceeded from the abuses raigning in the Court
of Rome: and concluding something for reformation
of pluralities (one onely abuse) the pope did
so interpret it, and alter it, when it came to him, as it
did no good but hurt. He then dying, and the Councell
being intermitted, was set on foot againe by
his successor Iulius the 3. who also confessed there
were innumerable abuses in administring the Sacraments:
but when it came to reforme them, instead
thereof hee suspended the Councell; though
many Bishops that desired reformation, did protest
against it, affirming confidently that they had not as
yet dispatched one of the businesses, for which they
had assembled: but the pope preuailed, and so for
tenne yeeres it was discontinued. And at last being
again assembled by Pius the fourth, he made shew he
would referre the whole matter of reformation to
the Fathers of the Councell: but when it came to
trial, it was with a prouiso, that, First, they should not
meddle with the Court of Rome: Secondly, that in

their reformation, laid vpon other persons and places,
they should alwaies enact it thus; Sauing alwaies
holy and vntouched the Authority of the Apostolicall
Sea: for which their courtesie to him and his seate,
hee afterward gaue them thanks in an Ora
                  •
               ion in the
Consistory at Rome, assuring them (out it was in the
worde of a Pope) that he would bee more rigide and
seuere in purging his owne Court, and house and offices,
then they would haue beene. With these good
words, the pope dissolued the Councell. But frō that
day to this (saith this Bishop) through these so many
yeeres, nothing is done, nothing is changed, nothing is
amended in the Church: and no maruell (saith
hee) for nothing haue they amended in Rome vnder
their owne nose, where they might reforme any
thing if they had conscience and will to doe it. So
that now, seeing all is finally referred and reserued
to the Pope, there is (saith hee) no more hope
of anie reformation left, nor any thing else remaines,
but to see one miserie after another fall vpon the
Apostolicall seate, and the whole Church of Rome:
to which let all good Christians say Amen.
            
            These and many more words, to this purpose,
hath this wise and learned Bishop. Out of all which
I conclude: Therefore 30. or 40. yeeres agoe in the
daies of Espencaeus, the Church of Rome, beeing
found and confessed to be most fearefully corrupt, is
not healed no
                  •
                reformed, nay that al hope of reforma
                  
                     •
                  n
is now taken awaie. Since which time, I shall
thanke him that will shewe mee that there hath

beene any publike and generall reformation of the
notorious abuses in that Church: prouided hee
prooue it out of as good records,For as for the third point I haue vndertaken, namely, that in steade of beeing healed & reformed, there haue contrariwise growne vp in the Romish Church, more horrible and hainous practises, more erroneous & impious doctrines, then euer before were knowne or heard of, and at this day stand maintained
                     •
                   at least vnreproued by their church: This, I' say, I must bee constrained to refer to a peculiar Treatise by it selfe. and with as faire
euidence, as I haue done the contrary. Which as I
should reioice in my heart once to behold: so till
then I must needes with griefe of heart conclude,
that
The Romish Church is that Babylon that
will not bee healed.
            
            And wil she not? what then remaines? but as our
text leades vs,
Let vs forsake her.
            
            But how? not in loue or affection; let vs neuer
cease to wish to her as to our owne soules: nor let vs
cease to pray for her, publikely and priuately; yea let
vs blesse her when she curseth vs.
            But let vs (as we haue well begun) proceed to separate
our selues from her society, and empty our
Church and kingdome of her and hers. And if they
say we be schismatiks for separating from her: we answere
nay; she is the schismatike that hath separated
herselfe from Christ.
            Now therefore you honourable Magistrates and
Iudges of this nation, set your shoulders to the work
of your God, rouse vp your spirits to execute the
good lawes your selues and your forefathers haue
enacted: our lawes are enow and good enough,
they want nothing but execution, and that belongs
to you: vnto which dutie wee of the Ministery

doe exhort you in the Lord: execute our lawes
against them, yet rather against poperie then the papists:
remember the blessed promise in the Psalme;
though it was spoken of literal Babylō,Psal. 137. 8. 9. it hath a mystical
& true relation to spirituall Babylon: O daughter
of Babylon, worthy to be destroied, happy shall he be
that rewardeth thee as thou hast serued vs, yea blessed
shal he be that taketh thy yong children and dasheth
them against the stones. Oh pull this blessing on your
heads, kill her infants, that is, her errors, impieties, superstitions,
blasphemies, idolatries, equiuocations,
treasons, &c. these be her Impes, her naturall brood;
but, now they are of more age & grown to greatnesse,
the more daunger is there of them, and more
cause to kil them; which if you doe with diligence &
discretion, you see you draw a blessing from heauen
vpon your selues. If you doe not, you do for a time
maintain pricks in your eyes, and thornes in your sides,
and your negligence will prouoke the great & iust
Lord, to take the matte
                  •
                into his owne hands: which
as hee hath already, not onely threatned, but begun,
so he will, (though he deferre it till his owne time)
bring it to full execution: For
Her iudgement is come vp into heauen, and
lifted vp to the clouds.
            
            And then when she hath drunke vp the d
                  •
               egges of
the cup of Gods wrath, & by the breath of his mouth
is fearefully confounded, then I say, shall all her
Merchants and al her louers (whereof we haue too
many that lurke amongst vs, and euen some that notwithstanding

will needes bee of vs) be ashamed for
their louing of her, whom they see God hated; & for
their labouring so basely to couer her filthy skirts,
which God would haue to her shame discouered to
the view of the world: and then shall they shrinke to
beare a part of her punishment, which so much delighted
to wallow with her in her pollution. Therefore
let the holy Ghost make the conclusion, and
giue vs our last lesson: Go out of her my people,
and be not partakers of her sinnes,
               Reuel. 18. 4. 
               least you receiue
of her plagues. From both which, the good Lord deliuer
vs. Amen.
            
            And thus much for the kingdome of Antichrist.
            There is also another mysticall Babylon, and that
is the kingdome of sinne, the throne whereof is in
this world; for hell is the place of execution, rather
then of sinning: of this also is this text verified: for
we do naturally (without grace) so loue this world,
that though we finde it miserable and confused; yet
by our sensuality, and dayly deuising and practising
new pleasures, we endeauor to heale it, and to make
it a paradise, and they that are bewitched with it,
would here set vp their rests. But when all is done
that can be, it cannot be healed, but it is still a very Babel
of confusion and disorder, a miserable worlde, a
vale of teares, and a sea of trouble and turmoile to
whosoeuer hath the sweetest portion of it. Therfore
though wee bee in it,1. Cor. 7 31. yet let vs vse it as though wee vsed
it not, let vs not set our hearts vpon, but let vs
for sake it, and go euery one to his owne country, that is

to our blessed inheritance the kingdome of heauen,
that is a Christians mans countrie: for as for this
world, her sinnes are so vile, that her iudgement is
gone vp vnto heauen, & God will assuredly destroy it.
But there is a better world, euen an inheritance, immortall,
vndefiled, & that fadeth not, which is reserved
in heauen for vs:
               1. Pet. 14. hereof wee are borne heires by
grace in Christ. Therefore forsaking the wicked Babylon
of this world in our hearts and affections (seeing
it is past cure) let vs aspire after that, and long to
haue our parts in it.
            Now there are also besides these two greate Babels,
certaine other little petty Babylons, namely, incureable
sinnes amongst vs, which are Babels, or atleast
daughters of Babylon, and sprigs of that cursed
roote. As,
            1. That great Sacriledge and Church-robbing
committed by Impropriations, (in which case at this
day almost halfe of this kingdome is) whereby it
comes to passe (aboue any other one meanes) that
an ignorant and vnteaching Ministery is set ouer a
great part of our people; which is the sourse and
foūtaine of all other euils in our Church: this is a deep
wound, yet once was it cureable enough, namely,
when the Abbies were first dissolued; and since was
it cureable enough: but now (alas) how incurable it is,
and by the crafty plots of the diuell how incureable
it is made, more and more, hee obserues but
little that sees not. Oh happy hee that can say in
his conscience, I would haue cured this daughter of
Babell: and happy also hee (though not so much)

that hath had no hand in making this wound incurarable:
such plots and deuises arise out of hell, & heauen
will confound them, though the earth for a time
beare the burden of them. Meane time, vnlesse the
Kings Maiesty vouchsafe to take the matter into his
hands, and to heale the wounds that he neuer made;
(otherwise it is incureable; or as the Kings euil, to be
healed by none but by a King) till then wee may say
with griefe of heart; It is an impe of Babylon that
will not be healed.
            
            2. The vngodly Playes and Enterludes so rise in
this nation; what are they but a Bastard of Babylon,
a daughter of error and confusion, a hellish deuice
(the diuels owne recreation, to mock at holy things)
by him deliuered to the Heathen, from them to the
Papists, and from them to vs? Of this euill and
plague, the Church of God in all ages can say, truely
and with a good conscience, wee would haue healed
her. The ancient Fathers, in the time of the Primitiue
Church, spared no paines to discouer the vilenesse
and vnlawfulnesse of themTertullian: Cyprian: Chrysostome. &c. Deut 22. 5.: in these latter
daies, manie holy and learned men haue laboured
by preaching, writing, and conferring to haue healed
them, and neuer was there Diuine of note and
learning, that I know, that durst so farre prostitute
his credite as to write for them. They know all this,
and that God accounts it abomination for a man to
put on womans apparell, and that the auncient Fathers
expound that place against them:Cyprian: Chrysost. Sexta Synod
                     •
                   in Trull. Can. 62. they
know that Cyprian resolued, (being asked the question)

                  Cyprian
                        •
                      in Epistola 61. Oh that all players would reade that Epistle, and regard it
                     •
                  
                
               that a player ought not to come to the Lords

table; and that he that teacheth children to play, is not
an instructer, but a spoiler & destroyer of c
                     •
                  ildrē: they
know they haue no calling, but are in the 
                  〈◊〉
               
warts on the hand, or blemishes in the 
                  〈◊〉
                they
know, that therefore they are saine to sh
                  ••
               ud themselues
vnder such shelters, as at the hou
                  •
               e of death, &
day of iudgement, will proue but figge leaues: 
                  •••
               y
know they are defended with the same arguments, as
the stewes in Rome bee, and little better defence can
be made for them, being as they are.
            All this they are daily made to know, but all in
vaine, they be children of Babylon that will not bee
healed. Nay, they grow worse, and worse; for now
they bring religion and holy things vpon the stage:
no maruell though the worthiest and mightiest men
escape not, when God himselfe is so abused: Two hypocrites
must be brought foorth;
               In a Church in London, euerie day in the week praiers, & a sermon at 6. of the clock in the morning: ablessed and rare example. 
               and how shall they bee
described but by these names, Nicolas S. Ant
                     ••
                  ngs,
Simon Saint Maryoueries? Thus hypocrisie a child
of hell must beare the names of two Churches of
God, and two wherein Gods name is called on publikely
euery day in the yeere, and in one of them his
blessed word preached euery day (an example scarce
matchable in the world): yet these two, wherein
Gods name is thus glorified, and our Church &
State honoured; shall bee by these miser
                  •
               ants thus
dishonoured, and that not on the stage 
                  •
               nely, but
euen in print. Oh what times are wee east into,
that such a wickednesse should passe vnpunished
                  •
               
I speake nothing of their continuall profanenesse
in their phrases, and sometime Atheisme and blasphemie,

no
                  •
                of their continuall profaning of the
Sabbath, which generally in the country is their play
day, and oftentimes Gods diuine seruice hindred, or
cut shorter to make roome and giue time for the diuels
seruice.
            Are they thus incurable? then happy hee that
puts to his hand to pull downe this tower of Babell,
this daughter of confusion; happy he that helpes to
heale this wound in our State: but most happy that
Magistrate, who, like zealous Phin
                     •
                  hes, takes some
iust vengeance on that publike dishonor laid vpon
our Churches. But if wee bee negligent in this cause
of God, then he himselfe will take the matter into his
owne hand, whose Church, whose religion, whose
holy ordinances and most holy name are dayly profaned
by them: for as their iniquities are hainous,
and their blasphemies against heauen; so doubtlesse
their iudgement is gone vp vnto heauen and lifted vp
vnto the cloudes. So wishing their repentance, I proceed.
            3. The horrible abuse of the Sabbath day, in this
citie, and ouer this kingdome: in some places by
Faires and Markets, by May-games and Moricedancers,
by Wakes and Feasts: in all places (almost) by
buying and selling, and bargaining: in this citie by
cariages in and out, by selling betimes in the morning
and after dinner: by playing in the streetes, and
in the fields.
            Oft hath this bin complained of, and some haue
endeuoured to heale it: but it is an Impe of Babylon
that will not be healed, but rather it creepes as a canker

               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
thorow our whole State, from the foote to the
head. But let vs take heed: for it will eare out the
heart and life of a State,Ierem. 17. euen this one sinne. Did
not our Fathers thus (saith noble Nehemiah) and therfore
God brought all this euill vpon vs?
               Nehem. vlt. See; captiuity,
destruction, and desolation of a goodly and
flourishing setled kingdome, for the publike profaning
of the Sabbath: O therefore happy hee
that puts to his helping hands to heale this wound,
which yet is cureable enough, if wee would doe
our duties: for the Commandement is, thou and
all within thy gates,
               The fourth
Commandement. Keepe my Sabbath. Now who
is there within this Realme, but is within the gates of
the Kings house? who within this Citie, but within
the gates of the Lord Maior? who any where, but
is of some mans family, & within some mans gates?
If then Fathers and Magistrates would looke to all
within their gates, this sinne could not bee so grieuous,
this wound not so wide and desperate as it is.
Therefore you my Lord Maior bee exhorted to attempt
the healing of this wound, in your yeare; set
before your eyes, the noble example of worthy Nehemiah:
               Nehem. vlt.
it will excite you to this holy dutie; and
then at the end of your yeare, you may with the
comfort of a good conscience say with him; Remember
mee O my God in goodnesse,
               Nehem. vlt. 1
                     •
                  
                
               according to all that
I haue done for this people. But if we still neglect this
cause of God, and suffer his Sabbath daily thus to bee
profaned; then let vs looke for nothing but continuance
and increase of these grieuous plagues that
haue so long lien vppon vs: and let vs be assured,

God will take the matter into his owne hands, and
some way or other get himselfe glorie vpon vs. For
hee will lose his honour at no mans hand: but whosoeuer
will not glorifie him in his conuersion, hee
will glorifie his owne name vpon him in
his confusion. Which heauie iudgement
that God may turne from
vs, let vs turne to
him, &c.
            FINIS.
         
      
   