
      
         
            
            
            THE
POETICAL
RECREATIONS
OF Mr. ALEXANDER CRAIG
OF ROSECRAIG.
            
            
               AT EDINBVRGH
Printed by Thomas Finlaſon. 1609.
WITH LICENCE.
         
         
            
            
            TO
THE MOST HONORABLE
MY SINGVLAR
GOOD LORD AND PATRON
G. E. OF DVNBAR, LORD AND
GOVERNOVR OF BERWICK, HEIGH
Theſaurer of Scotland, great Maiſter of the Minerals
there, Lieutenent of the middle Shyres
of Great Britane, one of his Majeſties honorable
privie Counſell, and Knight
of the moſt noble order of the Garter.
            
               
                  WHEN PHILIP OF
Macedon came to conquere Corinth,
the carefull Corinthians
did fortifie their ruined walles,
ſome caried stones, ſome trees,
ſome lyme, ſome clenged and dreſſed
their armour, ſome taught & trained the neoterick
ſogers; no man was found idle to withstand the common
enemie ſaue Diogenes, he vn-able for any ſervice

in the republick, did roll himſelfe in his Tub vp
and downe the ſtreets. One of his familiars asked
what he did: Al the Corinthians (anſwered Diogenes)
are buſsie, and I muſt be doing ſome thing: Each
man (my honorable good Lord) at this great Court of
Parliament is buſsie, and leſt I alone like Diogenes
be noted as idle, I will roll my ſelfe in theſe foolish
rymes vp and downe the ſtreetes; that it may be ſaid
I am doing ſomething: the goodes and children of the
bond-man belong to the maſter: Theſe paſsions are
my goodes, or rather my children Minerva-like borne
from their fathers brane, without a mother, and ſo
due to your L. Take then your owne (dear Lord)
from this hand, who according to the antient cuſtome
hath bored his eare with a boidkene, to shew that he
shall ſtill remaine your Honors most faithfully devoted
and voluntarie ſlaue.
            
               AL. CRAIG.
            
         
         
            
            TO THE READER.
            EXcuſe me (good Reader) for the methodleſſe
placing of theſe Paſſions: They are my children,
you haue them as they were borne: And
ſo the Primo-genit muſt haue the prioritie at the
Preſſe. Amongſt ſo many children ſome muſt
miſ-thriue and proue naght: Cheriſhe (I pray
thee) the good, and leaue the faultie to be reformed
by their father.
            Fair-wel.
         
      
      
         
            
            TO HIS MOST EXCELLENT
MAIESTIE
THE HVMBLE PETITION OF
his Heighnes Orator AL. CRAIG
at Christmas in VVhitehall.
            
               APelles ſome-time came
            To Ptolomaeus feaſt,
            And had well nye return'd againe
            Inglorius and diſgrac't.
            For Ptolomaeus ask'd,
            Who cald him to that place,
            Then with a coale vpon the wall,
            He painted Planus face.
            The King knew Planus well,
            And did at once proteſt
            That hee ſhould faſt, and hee would feaſt
            
               Appelles with the beſt.
            So am I come Great King,
            Vnto thy Chriſtmas chere,
            And Povertie againſt my will,
            Invit's me to be heere.
            You are a greater King
            Then Lagus ſonne, altho
            
               
With Aegipt, Afrie, he vſurpt,
            And was th' Arabians fo.
            Let Povertie I pray,
            Receaue his due diſgrace:
            And let thy Poet at this feaſt
            Supplie the Painters place.
            But Lacon ſome-time ſaid
            Vnto a begging ſlaue,
            Giue what I will it is thy craft
            To beg, and ever craue.
            Be not affrai'd for that,
            (Though for this time J cry)
            Jf ſuccurd once, nor ſeeke againe
            J rather ſterue and dye.
         
         
            COMPLAINT TO HIS
Majestie.
            
               
                  LOue, Want, and Cares, all contrare me conſpyre,
               Firſt, ſecond, laſt, for me too many bee:
               
                  Want breakes my heart, and drown's my high deſyre,
               And makes my Muſe ſo lowe a courſe to flee.
               But were J rich, the cruell fair wold rew,
               Then ſould J ſing and bid my Cares adew.
            
            
               O happie Artiſt, and Mechanick ſlaue,
               Thou mai'ſt a price vpon thy paines impoſe:
               My wair is ſuch, I know not what to craue,
               And ſo but looke both Loue and Lynes I loſe:
               Strange thing betwix my Soveraigne and my ſant,
               I waiſt my wits, and rape but woes and want.
            
            
               
               Yet might theſe two reward me if they wold,
               And purge me both from povertie and paine:
               She with good wil, my royall Syre with gold,
               And ſo preſerue, and ſaue their ſlaue vn-ſlane.
               With modeſt lookes, and ſilent ſighs J ſerue,
               The ſhameles begger thriu's, and yet I ſterue.
            
         
         
            TO JOHN LORD RAMSAY,
Vicunt of Hadington, the Author bemoneth
his hard Fortunes in England.
            ALas, why ſould Caliſthenes remaine
            Where Agis both and Cleo beare the ſway,
            Theſe Sicophants and Paraſites profaine,
            Draw Macedoes magnific minde aſtray:
            Jf Ariſtip in Court make any ſtay,
            Some Tyran ſtraight ſhall ſpit into his face,
            Thus feeling ill, and fearing worſe each day,
            A miriad of miſ-fortunes I embrace.
            How carefull is Entimeon poore thy caſe
            At home, abrod, ſince Fortun is thy foe;
            But ere thou turne to Griece with more diſgrace,
            Jn Perſia die, and there intomb thy woe:
            To him that liues, and muſt die Fortunes ſlaue,
            Jf nothing elſe, good Perſians grant a graue.
         
         
            
            AD EVNDEM DE EODEM.
            BEyond the Mountains of the froſtie North,
            I ſome-time ſeru'd a Caledonian Dame:
            The firſt of all for Vertue, wit, and Worth,
            
            That ever yet adorn'd the rols of fame:
            She fed my heart on fanſies ſweeteſt flame,
            Yet haue I left both heart and her behind,
            And to this land ſpoild of my heart I came
            To follow Fortune, which J can not find:
            Strange is the ſtate wherein I ſtand, J ſee
            Twix Fortune heere, and my affections there:
            I fled from theſe, this flees againe from mee,
            Here Povertie, and yonder ſprings Diſpare.
            
            Blind Cupid thus, blind Fortune are againe mee,
            My Loue at home, my Luck abrod diſdaine mee.
         
         
            NEW YEARE GIFT TO
his Majeſtie.
            TO Creſus rich ſhall Codrus gifts propyne,
            To Maro wiſe muſt Mevtus ryms preſent:
            O pearles Prince, OPoet moſt divyne,
            My Muſe is dead, my moyen all is ſpent:
            Wiſe Maro writ, weake Mevius wonder ay,
            Rich Creſus giue, poore Codius beg and pray.
         
         
            
            TO HIS MAJESTIE IN NAME
of his Noble Master.
            
               THe faithfull heart is ever fraught with feare,
               And jelouſie is ſtill conjoind with loue:
               How can J then (dread Liege) be frie from care,
               Since from thy ſight J ſee J muſt remoue:
               And thou my Phoſphor, yea my Phaebus bright,
               Whoſe preſence day, whoſe abſence breeds my night
            
            
               Yet feare J not for that within thy minde,
               That ouglie ghaiſt vnkindnes can haue place:
               But cauſe J know, ſome claw-backs are inclinde
               With all their force my Fortunes to diſgrace:
               Be thou the poynt, and J the circling line,
               Mine be the pangs, and all the pleaſurs thine.
            
            
               J' lekyth a conſtant Palinure to thee,
               A truſtie ſteirſ-man both in ſtorme and calme;
               That in my works the wondring world ſhall ſee
               The trueſt hand, that ever held a helme:
               Thogh (I confeſſe) I am not skild like him,
               Yet let me ſink, ſo ſweet Aeneas ſwim.
            
            
               Thus will J goe, becauſe thou do'ſt command,
               Even for thy ſake from out thy ſight ſome ſpace:
               And after kiſſing of thy ſacred hand,
               J pray the Gods protege thy ſtate in peace:
               And when J ceaſe for to be true to thee,
               Curſt be my life, and wretched may J dye.
            
         
         
            
            TO MY LORD SARVSBVRIE.
            TWo potent Kings over Siciles two Empyre,
            That famous Ile where Siracuſa ſtood:
            Where gainſt the heavens Encelad voms his fyre,
            King Philip bruks with much Iberian blood:
            But wiſe King Iames (O bleſt and happie caſe)
            Commands a Cecill of more price in peace.
         
         
            TO MY LORD HAY, AT HIS LEgation
to France.
            SInce thou muſt ſail to ſee the Celtick ſhore,
            From titular to him that keeps the Crown:
            Which with thy Name thy Nation ſhall decore,
            And fett more quils to further thy renown:
            My wiſhes both, and prayers ſhall attend thee,
            At home, abroad, the living Lord defend thee.
         
         
            TO MY LORD ADMIRALL AT
his mariage with Ladie Margaret Stewart.
            
               MArs, Hercules, and Iupiter we finde,
            With Venus, Lyda, Laeda were in loue,
            And for obedience to the Archer blind,
            The Sword, the Club, and Scepter they remoue:
            And Neptuns deput leau's the fomie ſtrand,
            To pearſe a Margarit fet from Murray land.
         
         
            
            A Counſell to Courteours.
            
               THe bibull Spoynge in tepid water ſet,
               Drinks till it fill each ſmall and greedie pore:
               But if the Barber in his hand it get,
               He wrings all out, which it hath drunk a fore:
               You that in Court with Kings and Princes ſtay,
               Mark well in minde the water-ſpoynge I pray.
            
            
               For if you ſtand on top of Fortunes wheele,
               Be ware leſt with the bibull ſpoynge you ſwal,
               Drink not too much as gluttons, govern well,
               Clim not too hie, incaſe you catch a fall:
               The King makes vp, the King againe makes downe,
               Both wealth and wrack awaits vpon a Crowne.
            
         
         
            To my Lady Hartfurde at his Majeſties
firſt progres to Totnem.
There the wyld farne ſmelled as ſweet as perfume, naturaly.
            THe tempeſt beat and falling Farne (fair Dame)
            Receaves new life, new ſtrength, new ſmell wee ſee:
            And for thy ſake thy Soveraigne weares the ſame
            Heigh on his head to ſerue and honour thee:
            Theſe are the frutes thy bewtie braue brings forth,
            Thy leaſt propynes are valued of moſt worth.
         
         
            
            TO HIS DEAR FRIEND Mr. AL.
DICKSON Mr. of the Art of Memorie who
dyed at Wincheſter in England.
EPITAPH.
            THat Thracian forme at birth of friends to weepe,
            And to be glad when as againe they dye:
            My ſigh-ſwolne heart can not content to keepe,
            Since J deare friend muſt ſigh, and murne for thee.
            Now haue I loſ'd my ſecond ſelfe J ſee,
            To whom ſhall J (ſince thou atr dead) bemone:
            Moſt rich of all (the Scythians ſay) is hee
            That hath true friends, now I, alas, haue none:
            No other death of ould the Hircans chooſ'd,
            But to be kild by theſe ſame dogs they fed:
            Diſpleaſure ſo to be ingratlie vſ'd,
            Hath broght braue Dickſon to his cognat bed.
            Thou taught the Art of Memorie to thoſe
            That ſeemd thy friends, yet prou'd in end thy foes.
         
         
            TO HIS VNKINDE FRIEND.
            OF all the wounds whereof that Roman great,
            Braue Iulius Caeſar in the ſenat died:
            The wounds from Brutus (burreau moſt ingrate)
            Did grieue him moſt, on Brutus ſtill he cri'd:
            So were my life to take laſt leaue of mee,
            Still wold I cry (vnkinde, vnkinde) on thee.
         
         
            
            TO HIS CVSNING FRIEND.
            
               
                  AThenian Chares promiſ'd much to many,
               Moſt prodigall of ſmooth perſwading words:
               And yet perform'd no thing at all to any,
               Such are the frutes falſe eloquence affords:
               Like Larus leane of fleſh he had no ſtore,
               But multitude of fethers fair, no more.
            
            
               Since Chares thus concludes to play the knaue,
               And ſtill perſiſts proud, impius, falſe, profane:
               Shall he begyle, and gull me like the laue,
               Yes, faith, once more to exerciſe his vane:
               Yet ſince experience Chares maks me wiſe,
               I ſhrew my heart, and thou begyle me thriſe.
            
         
         
            TO COVETOVS COVRTIERS.
            
               A Greedie Mouſe did by a privat way
               Steale to the pantrie of a wealthie man:
               VVhere many diſhes were, and wold aſſay
               Each diſh of all: but at the laſt began
               To teaſt an Oiſter, when her guts were filled,
               The Oiſter cloſ'd, and thus the Mouſe was killed,
            
            
               Thou that haſt crept in credit but by ſtealth,
               And teaſts each diſh, ſib to the greedie Mouſe:
               VVho builds and maks of others wrack thy wealth,
               And ſoulles man will not overſee a ſouſe:
               Thogh Prince behold, and privat men muſt thol thee,
               Some ſharp-ſheld oiſter ſome-time ſall controll thee.
            
         
         
            
            TO VIRTEOVS AND NOBLE
Cynthia.
            FAne wold J render thanks for thy good-will:
            But thanks are words, and words compenſe no deeds,
            And thus muſt J remain thy debter ſtill,
            For which my heart within my boſome bleeds:
            But if it chance that in thy debt I die,
            My froward Fortune hath the fault, not I.
         
         
            TO HIS DEAR FRIEND, AND
fellow ſtudent Mr. Robert AEton.
            SIng ſwift hoof'd Aethon to thy matchles ſelfe,
            And be not ſilent in this pleaſant ſpring:
            I am thy Echo, and thy Aerie elf,
            The latter ſtrains of thy ſweet tunes I'll ſing:
            Ah, ſhall thy Muſe no further frutes forth-bring,
            But Baſia bare, and wilt thou write no more
            To higher notes, J pray thee tune thy ſtring:
            Be ſtill admir'd as thou haſt bene of yore,
            Write Aethon writ, let not thy vain decay,
            Leaſt we become Cymerians dark, or worſe.
            If Aethon faill, the Sun his courſe muſt ſtay,
            For, Phoebus Chariot laks the cheefeſt horſe:
            Thogh Fortun frown, ah, why ſhould vertue die,
            Sing Aethon ſing, and J ſhall Echo thee.
         
         
            
            AETHON
CRAGIO SVO.
            FAne wold I ſing, if ſongs my thoghts culd eaſe,
            Or calme the tempeſt of my troubled mynde:
            Fane wold J force my ſilent Muſe to pleaſe,
            The gallant humor of thy wanton vane▪
            
            But O a miſer mancipat to paine,
            Sould ſlaue to ſorrow, wedded to miſchief,
            By mirth of ſongs, perhaps more greefe might gane,
            Jn vane of them J ſhould expect releif:
            Then ſacred Craig if thou wold eaſe my greef,
            Jnvite me not to wantonize with thee:
            But tune thy notes vnto my mourning cleif,
            And when J weepe, weepe thou to Echo mee.
            Perhaps the teares that from a Craig ſhall floe,
            May proue a Soveraigne balme to cure my woe.
         
         
            AGAINST THE SELLERS
of Tobacco.
            THou that haſt made of ſelling ſmoak a trade,
            And Jew and Gentill but remorſe do'ſt gulf,
            And by theſe baſe Nicotian bleads are glade
            To ſpoill, mar, blek, the ſtomach, brane, and skull:
            As thou deſeru'ſt Turinus-like J doome thee,
            By ſelling ſmoak thou liv'ſt, let ſmoak conſume thee.
         
         
            
            TO HIS LORD AND Mr. GEORGE
Earle of Dunbar.
            
               BRaue Alcibiad curious once to know
               Jf all were frinds, that ſo appeard to bee,
               To each of all in ſecret he did ſhow,
               The purtrate of a new-ſlane-man, ſaid hee:
               This is a friend whom J haue kild, J pray
               Jn quiet forme come cary him away.
            
            
               Yet none of all that Crew wold giue conſent,
               Nor help to put the painted tree a part:
               Saue Kallias kinde, who only was content,
               Hap what might hap, to help with hand and hart:
               Such is my luck (moſt loving Lord) I ſee,
               J haue not found a Kallias kinde, but thee.
            
            
               Thou art the great Maecenas of my Muſe,
               My patron, Lord, my Maſter, and my All:
               Whom (whil J liue) but change in me I chuſe,
               To loue, to ſerue, and to attend as thrall:
               Thogh time and abſence breed ſuſpect, what than?
               J am in ſpight of Fortuns noſe thy man:
            
         
         
            TO LADIE ANNA HAY COVNTES OF
Winton, one of the Ladies of her Majeſties moſt
royall bed chalmer, at her return from England.
            
               AH, whither now ſweet Ladie wilt thou go?
               From Court to Cuntrie, what new change is this?
               And wilt thou needſt (ſweet Sant) be gone? and ſo
               Bereaue ſouth-Britan of ſo rare a blis,
               Yes thou muſt go, J ſee there is no ſtay,
               And take ten thouſand Thouſand hearts away.
            
            
               
               Take then my heart, my better part with thee,
               My wiſhes, vow's, my prayers, all theſe all:
               For J am thine devoted till J die,
               And ſtill ſhall beare the bloodie yock as thrall:
               And when my head ſhall turne to hoarie gray,
               The world ſhall ſee that I ſhall ſerue An Hay.
               
            
         
         
            A DISSVVASION TO HIS
friend from his intended mariage.
            FAir famous Ile where Zoroaſtres raign'd,
            Where Bactru
                     •
                  
                once the ſtatelie cittie ſtood:
            VVhich (when th'ould name Artaſpe) was diſdain'd,
            VVas Bactria cal'd from fertill Bactrus flood;
            VVhere ſome-time Ceter, Arams ſonne began,
            Of thouſand citties the foundation ſure.
            In thee the wyues abuſe the maried man,
            And both with ſlaue and ſtranger play the whoore,
            The Dame with Diſtaff beats her yeelding Lord,
            And for her pryde but puniſhment skaips free:
            And poore Acteon dare not ſpeak one word,
            From Bactrian wyues the Lord deliver thee:
            Nor lead a life infamous, heart-brock, thrall,
            Far better were to wed no wife at all.
         
         
            
            A DESCRIPTION OF A PARdond,
yet still vnrepenting proditor Plexirtus.
            WHen falſe and proud Plexirtus did conſpire,
            His King and Lord Leonat to dethrone:
            He found the fates were foes to his deſire,
            At laſt when all his baſtard-hopes were gone,
            A halter fair about his hals he tyes,
            And on the Prince for pardon ſtill he cryes.
            The Clement King Leonat was contented
            To pardon all his faults and foull offences:
            And yet we read the Rebell noght repented,
            Saue that he could not practize his pretenſes:
            It's pittie then the Prince can not perceaue,
            
               Plexirtus was, and will be ſtill a knaue.
         
         
            EPITAPH OF IOHN FIRST MARques
of Hammilton.
            BLeſt was thy life, and bleſſed didſt thou die,
            Thy Oyle was burning, and thy Lamp gaue light,
            VVhen lifes prowd foe, pale death did ſummond thee
            To render earth her due, and heavens their right:
            Thogh death did then thy ſoule and bodie ſever,
            Once thou ſhalt be conjoind, and liue for ever.
         
         
            Aliud.
            HEre reſts within this Tomb of truth th'vnm atched zeale
            The father, & the faithful friēd, of Church, & cōmon wel:
            In ſtorme and calme inclind to doe his Kings command,
            Of peace the parent, child of Mars, cheef glorie of the land.
         
         
            
            FORTVNA SAEVO LAETA NEGOtio:
tranſmutat incertos honores.
            STrange are the changes of this changing age,
            The cloun turns knight, the knight again turns colun:
            Now is he Lord, who, was of late a page,
            And he that threatned all, is now thrown doun:
            Thriſe happie he, whoſe heart can be content,
            To ſerue his God in peace with ſober rent.
         
         
            To his afflicted friend.
            IN wether fair, and in a temperat ſpring,
            The waikeſt bird with warbling ſongs will ſoare,
            But in a ſrtome, or winters rage to ſing
            With mirrie notes, deſerues a praiſe much more:
            Thy ſpring is gone, thy winter growes, O than
            Sing ſweetlie now, and ſhew thy ſelfe a man.
         
         
            To his fortunate friend.
            THe Fox and Kat, were walking by the way,
            (As Aeſop fains) and lo for all his wits
            The Fox became to hungrie hounds a pray,
            Whilſt in a trie the Kat ſecurlie ſits.
            Since Foxes falſe (dear friend) muſt fall, and die,
            Climb with the Kat, and make the truth thy trie.
         
         
            
            Vivitur parvo bene.
            
               HE that can walk on ground that's fair and plane,
               Shall ſeldome fall, or if he chance to fall,
               He meaſures but his lenth, he'ill riſe agane,
               And haue no harme, nor any hurt at all:
               But he muſt fall of force that climbs too hie,
               And if he fall, it's ten to one he'ill die.
            
            
               Heigh hoiſed ſailes giue vantage to the ſrtome,
               And if thy ſtate be ſtately, large, and fair,
               The farer mark for miſchief to deforme,
               With ſpightfull ſport proud Fortun play's her there:
               Fair marks are hit with ſhots and ſhafts miſchivous,
               Which make the wounds more deep & much more grievous.
            
            
               Contented Codrus with his Cuntrie Dame,
               Suppoſe his Farme were ſet on fire he fear's not,
               His wife and he will warme them with the flame,
               Come what can come, his compts are caſt, he cares not:
               Jf want and wealth were alwaies at my will,
               Away with wealth, let me be Codrus ſtill.
            
         
         
            A Prayer for his impriſoned friend.
            
               THe famous Perſians had a forme, we reed,
               That if a Noble were condemd to dee,
               They ſpar'd himſelfe, and hang'd his cloaths with ſpeed,
               Poore priſoner, God grant the like to thee:
               
                  Vcalegon his houſe is ſet on fire,
               A neighbor kinde wold quench leſt it burne nyer.
            
            
               When Pollio proud did to his feaſt requyre
               
                  Auguſtus Caeſar, at a ſolemne time:
               
                  
He needs wold kill a ſerving ſlaue in yre,
               For breaking of a banquet glaſſe, ſmall crime:
               But Caeſar ſaid, poore ſlaue, thou ſhalt not dee,
               Th'offence is naght, feare is eneugh for thee.
            
         
         
            To Idea for his long abſence.
            
               
                  ATtilius ruler of the Roman hoſt,
               Beg'd leaue his wife and children deare, to ſee
               His poore effairs he did performe with poſt,
               And made returne with all the haſt might bee,
               He was for this no run-away, but rather
               A loving husband, and a faithfull father.
            
            
               J haue like him (wiſe Dame) at home a wife,
               With whom in peace the poaſting hours I ſpend,
               Yet will J loue thee, whill J haue a life,
               And till J die my loue ſhall never end:
               My poore Adoes withdraw me oft from thee,
               Yet where thou art, my heart ſhall ever bee.
            
         
         
            To eloquent Erantina.
            
               CLeombrotus a Heathen man did heare
            Wiſe Plato, with ſuch reverence and reſpeck,
            As for the loue he to his leſſons beare,
            He went abrod (kinde man) and brok his neck:
            Thy charming words inchant me ſo that J
            Doe nothing now, but mourne, ſigh, weep, and die.
         
         
            
            To his abſent and loving Lesbia.
            
               DEare heart, dear heart, dear, dear, dear heart againe,
               More dear then writ can ſhew, or waxe can ſeale:
               O! if thou knew the care, the woe, the paine
               I felt ſince laſt I tooke from thee fair-well:
               The night in black chimerick thoghts I ſpend,
               Ere Phlegon riſe, I wiſh the day to end.
            
            
               The dark is lothſome, and the day ſemes long,
               Becauſe, alas, J am not where thou art:
               This is not mine, but frowning Fortunes wrong,
               Yet hope (deare heart) vp-holds my dying heart:
               Look then for me, before few dayes take end,
               Till when my thoghts to thine, I doe commend.
            
         
         
            To abſent Idea.
            
               WIth puiſſant pow'r when princely Pompey went,
               And made him for Pharſalic battell bowne:
               With heavie hearts his ſogeors did lament,
               And oft look'd back to Rome their natiue towne:
               Each in him ſelfe a civil combat felt,
               To leaue the place wher friends, wiues, childrē dwelt.
            
            
               I may for this be deem'd a Roman borne,
               I am ſo full of kindneſſe and of loue,
               In deepeſt ſort (deare heart) I dare be ſworne,
               My minde from thee no diſtance may remoue:
               And for thy ſake (beare witneſſe naked God)
               I loue thy Bonus wherein thou mak'ſt abod.
            
         
         
            
            To Idea at her bownes.
            
               AH, whither now (ſweet Sant) art thou retired?
               Souls-raviſer, alas, where art thou gone?
               Thy bewtie now can be no more admired,
               Since thou delightſt to lurke and liue alone:
               Now Hermit-like thou hantſt, the more the pittie,
               And for the Farme forbear's the famous Cittie.
            
            
               Look to thy ſelfe, thou dwel'ſt too neere the ſea,
               
                  Neptun no doubt will from thoſe rocks bereaue thee:
               And with his wife divorſe for loue of thee:
               Yet am I glade, none but a God muſt haue thee:
               VVhen winds and waves, and all are at thy will,
               Proue not vnkinde, J pray thee loue me ſtill.
            
         
         
            TO HIS BANISHED FRIEND
            TWo wofull weeds, the mother Church muſt weare,
            One Crimſon rid, the other mourning black:
            The black betokneth ſorrow, pane, and care,
            The rid bods death, fearce perſecution, wrack:
            It maters not what rags ſhe beare abrod,
            Once ſhe'ill be cloth'd in robs of white with God.
         
         
            To his ſingular good Lord and Maſter.
            LOng mai'ſt thou liue an argument of praiſe,
            A lordlie ſubject to my loving pen,
            That on thy worth the wondring world may gaiſe,
            A magiſtrat admir'd amongſt all men.
            Yea, more and more heavens grant thee from aboue,
            The Makers mercie, and the Maſters loue.
         
         
            
            Auream quiſquis mediocritatem.
            IT merits praiſe to manage litle well,
            A cunning coachman turns in litle roume:
            In poore eſtate a rich content I feell,
            And ſmyle to ſee a wretches wealth conſume:
            J'ill ſtudie then to ſteward what J haue,
            And not be curious more and more to craue.
         
         
            His regrate for the loſe of time at Court.
            O How Time ſlips, and ſlelie ſlids away,
            God is forgot, and woe is me therefore:
            J waſte the night, and weare away the day,
            I ſleepe, dres, feed, talke, ſport, and doe no more:
            Far better were with care to haue redemed,
            Nor ſell for noght the thing I moſt eſtemed.
         
         
            To his aſpyring friend.
            SInce charge and honor march together ſtill
            For charge but honour were a toyle too great:
            And honor but a charge were eaſe at will,
            To want them both is not the worſt eſtate:
            I loath thoſe loads which lightneſſe firſt pretend,
            But break the neck before the journeys end.
         
         
            Nulla dies ſine linea.
            THe ſtanding poole will quicklie ſtink and rott,
            The currant ſtreame is cleanlie both and cleare:
            The idle man is Sathans prey, God wott,
            A verteous minde the Devill darr not draw neare,
            My fantaſies can profit few, and yet
            It hurteth none, but doth me good to writ.
         
         
            
            The praiſe of Glad-povertie.
            THree ſorts of men vnto the market go,
            One buyes, one ſelles, an other doth behold,
            Great greef and care is in the former two,
            Th'expectant waiks ſecure and vncontrold.
            He liu's (poore man) contented with his lot,
            Vſing the world as if he vſ'd it not.
         
         
            His vnambitious minde.
            THree things there be for which J'ill not contend,
            The Way, the wall, and Tables higheſt ſeat:
            What foole is he will frown, or yet offend
            For any place, ſo hee can reach his meat.
            But in good faith, the idleſt ſtrife of all,
            Js in my judgement for the way, or wall.
         
         
            To his friend who ſeemd ſorie when he left Court.
            I Scorne to liue at Court, becauſe J ſpy
            The wicked heaps vp wealth, the foole hath grace:
            The wiſe man weeps, and in diſgrace muſt die,
            And vanitie muſt march in vertues place:
            Far better were on ſhore ſecure t'abide,
            Nor ſaill in vane againſt both wind and tide.
         
         
            Againſt Pryde.
            TH' ambitious man no greater foe can haue,
            Then is himſelfe, for whilſt he ſtill aſpires,
            He grinds his heart for greef vnto the graue,
            With fooliſh hopes, with fear's, and fond deſires:
            
               God grant my pryde may grow to this degree,
            Jn earth his child, in heaven his Sant to bee.
         
         
            
            To vnfortunat and pure Aemilian at Court.
            
               EMilian begs with heart half-brok for ſorrow,
            Yet finds not frute at all, but long delay:
            As leaue me now, or come againe to morrow,
            My laſure ſerues not yet, I pray thee ſtay:
            None pitties thee Aemilian, do not griue,
            They get no thing, that haue no thing to giue.
         
         
            That he neither loues to be too gladnor too ſad.
            IOyes come like oxen heavie peaſ'd and ſlo,
            But tak their leaue like horſes running poſt:
            Greifs come at poſt, on foot againe they go,
            And leaue ſad diſcontentment with their hoſt:
            Both Ioys and Griefs as paſſingers J'il vſe,
            They ſhall not be my ghaiſts, if J can chuſe.
         
         
            His contents at his Tugur.
            WHen loſe of Tyme at Court was all my gane,
            To take my leaue, J thoght it was my beſt:
            And in ſome privat manſion to remaine,
            Where J might frie from Envyes rage take reſt:
            Now bleſt be God, no Portar bars my doore
            By day, by night none keeps me but my kurre.
         
         
            Againſt ignorance and ill example.
            THe law of God is Lanterne full of light,
            And good example beares this Lantern ſtill:
            Which ſhews the way to walk, and march vpright,
            To doe all good, and to decline from ill:
            Without this light who walks, he can not ſee,
            And ſuch (will God) ſhall be no gyde to thee.
         
         
            
            To Miſtres Hartſide at Orknay her natall ſoyle.
            PRoſcribed Orcas though J hate thy forms,
            J muſt commend and praiſe thy courage ſtill,
            I ſaw thee proue both wiſe and ſtout in ſtorms,
            And thou art barren ſore againſt my will:
            For had thou ſonnes of thy Amazon ſtamp,
            They might be Captains of the Emperors camp.
         
         
            Perſwaſions of oertainties are vnneceſſarie.
            NO greater fools then Philodoxes fond,
            And ſuch as loue opinions of their own:
            Thy wit (wiſe Plato) when I think vpon'd,
            Made men to doubt on things that were well known:
            Theſe Why, How, What, mad queſtions of thy ſchools,
            Wold make the wiſe men of our age ſeeme fools.
         
         
            Againſt drunkards and lichers.
            IN ſinfull Sodome to liue cleane and poore,
            Jn Aſia chaſt amid allurements ſuch:
            To hate in Rome the bordell and the whoore,
            And to be ſtill abſtemius with a Dutch:
            Do'th merit praiſe, yet this much with correction,
            J find but few can haunt them but infection.
         
         
            To his Lord and Maſter G. E. Dunbar.
            
               ALas, that Time ſhould be a foe to fame,
               To clip the wings of true report in rage:
               Alas, that th'earth ſhould march a noble name:
               Like to a bird thats compaſt with a kage:
               Fame clip'd with time, & hemb'd with earth's embrace
               By Poets yet out ſtrips both time and place.
            
            
               
               Thy fame (dear Lord) is frie from all diſgrace,
               (Still be it ſo till fire diſſolue this frame)
               Till when about the worlds broad ſpatious face,
               My ryms ſhall run t'immortalize thy Name:
               Foill to thy fame no time, no place ſhall giue,
               So long as Craig, or yet his lines can liue.
            
         
         
            Againſt ingratitude.
            FIrſt let me die before I proue ingrate,
            No, let the earth devore me ere J die:
            Before I liue in ſuch a wretched ſtate,
            To haue no hand but one, no tongue to cry:
            Vnthankfull mouths are graues, then if J take,
            I will at leaſt giue praiſe and prayers back.
         
         
            To his Lord and Miſter to be ware of envy.
            
               DEepe danger lyes (deare Lord) in ſmootheſt looks,
               Envy is falſe, and waits thee at thy back:
               The poyſning bate is hung at golden hooks,
               They ſerue as friends that fane wold ſee thy wrack.
               Envy awaits on vertue as her ſlaue,
               Yet ſtill delights in digging vertues graue.
            
            
               O pale Envy, the ouldeſt childe of Pryd,
               The Dame of Murther, Treaſons onely nurſe,
               Of glore the ſtane, of ſquint-ey'd fraud the bryd:
               The bleſſe of Hell, and Heavens cheefeſt curſe.
               God grant my Lord be harmeles from thy hate,
               Thy blood thy drink, thine owne heart be thy meat.
            
         
         
            
            TO JOHN EARLE OF MONTROSE
firſt Vice-Roy of Scotland.
EPITAPH.
            IF Rhadamanthus in th'Eliſian field,
            VVith Aeacus and Minos Judges bee.
            And Gods over ghoſts, they all of due muſt yeeld,
            For Pietie, Truth, Juſtice, place to thee:
            At leaſt Montroes for Minos muſt command,
            And beare his Scepter in the bleſſed land.
         
         
            The Rapt of Proſerpina.
            
               SHall Ceres daughter ſtill remane at hell?
               Shall Pluto comb her eurling loks of amber?
               Shall bewtie braue in loathſome bondage dwell?
               And be impriſon'd in a pitch-black chamber?
               Ah, ſleuthfull Ceres, thou art much to blame,
               Thy negligence hath broght thy child to ſhame.
            
            
               
                  Proſerpina hath bewtie both and wealth.
               A pleaſant prey entiſeth many a theif:
               Of bewtie rapt, of riches muſt be ſtealth,
               And from the hels we heare is no releif:
               
                  Proſerpina is Plutoes wife it's known,
               The devill is black, yet let him bruke his own.
            
         
         
            
            Againſt Sycophants and Paraſits.
            
               FAlſe Sycophant that wrongs the virteous name,
               Proud Paraſit thou poyſons him that hear's thee:
               And brings the abſent to diſgrace and ſhame,
               Who neither cares for forged lies, nor fear's thee:
               When Titan ſhyns we ſee the vermin ſwarme,
               Thou dwel'ſt at court becauſe thou know'ſt it's warm.
            
            
               Falſe flattering foole, thou art but friendſhips Ape,
               Camelion-like thou changeſt every hew,
               Saue white alone: thou loath's an honeſt ſhape▪
               
               As cheef companion of the curſed crew:
               Proud Trencher flee thy panſh once fild, thou'ill goe
               And proue to him that feeds thee beſt a foe.
            
         
         
            The praiſe of humilitie in his L. and Mr.
            IT ſeems (me think) a thing of ſmall effect,
            When Fortun frowns for to be meek and lowlie:
            But he that can eies, heart, looks thoghts, deject,
            VVhen Fortun fauns is happie both and holie:
            He looks like God, and hath his makers ſhow,
            VVhoſe pow'r is much, whoſe ſprit is meek and low.
         
         
            Of true friendſhip.
            IN ſhaddie night the glow-worme ſhines like fire,
            And yet no heat to froſtie hand ſhe lends:
            In calme who ſwear's he lou's thee, is a lier,
            He'ill ſhrink in ſtorme, and ſo his friendſhip ends:
            Let Pythias then take Damon by the hand,
            VVho for his friend in Fortuns ſtormes can ſtand.
         
         
            
            TO THE MOST HONORABLE
and religious Lord G. Earle Marſchell, great
Commiſsionar of Scotland for his Majeſtie.
            BRaue Cincinnatus from his houſe was broght,
            To be Dictator in the towne of Rome:
            Thou in this ſort, (Religious Lord) art ſoght,
            Thy Princes place and ſeat for to aſſume:
            He in a month put Rome to reſt and peace,
            And thou haſt done much more in much leſſe ſpace.
         
         
            Contempt of Death.
            
               MEn ſeldome wiſh to die, thogh nev'r ſo old,
               This day of death they doe adjorne▪ till morrow:
               And by them all this fond excuſe was told,
               (The life is ſweete) ſuppoſe they liue in ſorrow:
               Blind, lame, dumb, leaf, ſick, poore, and more we ſee,
               Men dam'd wold liue, yet know they needs muſt die.
            
            
               My wofull heart muſt weepe to ſee ſuch fools,
               As th'ould, poore, blind, leame, damd, diſeaſ'd, deaf, dum:
               Broght vp and traind in Epicurus ſchools,
               Can not beleeue there is a life to come.
               
                  God ſaies, I haue a Crown of glore to giue thee,
               Then call, kill, Crown, for Lord I doe beleeue thee.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
   