
      
         
            
            
            THE Eſtate of the Church, With the diſcourſe of times, from the Apoſtles vntill this preſent: Alſo of the liues of all the Emperours, Popes of Rome, and Turkes: As alſo of the Kings of Fraunce, England, Scotland, Spaine, Portugall, Denmarke, &c.
            
            With all the memorable accidents of their times.
            
               Tranſlated out of French into Engliſh by Simon Patrike, Gentleman.
            LONDON Printed by Thomas Creede. 1602.
         
         
            
            
            TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPfull Syr VVilliam VVray of Glentworth, in the Countie of Lincolne Knight.
            
            
               THis worke (Right Worſhipfull) called the Eſtate of the Church, from the beginning of the raigne of the Emperour Augustus, to the firſt yeare of Rodolph the ſecond, now liuing; Firſt written in French, by I. Criſpinus, and lately tranſlated into our mother tongue by a Gentleman of deſert: at the requeſt of my very friends, I haue bene intreated to propagate to this preſent time. For him, although ſome hold, that tranſlation is not capable of that elegance, as is the original, becauſe the one hath full libertie of inuentiō, the other is by neceſſitie tyed to obſeruation: yet in my opinion the Author hereof, for his faithfull & ſignificant indeuour therin, hath deſerued to be ranked with the choiſeſt inuentions. For my ſelfe in the continuation, as I haue alwaies in matters of ſmall conſequence, ſhewed the mightie perturbation of my mind, feare; ſo in this labour of extraordinary moment, eſpecially in preſuming of protection vnder your worſhips patronage, I am confounded, ſince the ſhewe of my deuotion is begun with ſo meane a ſacrifice: for to this heape I haue onely added an handfull. In the whole diſcourſe

is ſet downe at large, the originall of Papacie (that ſlaughter-houſe of conſciences) the aduancing & increaſing therof, the beginnings of all hereſies, the perſecutions of the faithfull, the chaunge of religions, the decrees and Councells of Biſhops, the Canonie and lawes of the Church. The iudiciall knowledge wherof is a light, illuminating the blindneſſe of ſoules, and deliuering them from the more then Cimerian darkeneſſe of ignorance. This rectifieth the iudgement of man, and teacheth him rightly to diſtinguiſh between true Religion and ſuperſtition, who both haue one ground, which is his ſoule. This proſpectiue ſhewing the ſpots and errors of the Church of Rome, with the darke & ſullen colours of hypocriſie & hereſie, (which two venemous wormes like ſnakes do poyſon and infect the floriſhing eſtate of a ſetled Church,) will manifeſt the right Diaphonia and concord thereof. But iealous of this ouer-boldneſſe I take my leaue: humbly dedicating my poore labours to your Worſhips true-iudicial conſideratiō, deſiring withal, your gentle hand of approbation to this eſſentiall teſtimony of my moſt dutious loue.
            
               Your Worſhips humbly at commaund,
            
         
         
            
            IOHN CRISPIN to the Church of Ieſus Chriſt.
            
               SVch as apply their ſpirites to collect Histories ought to look vnto this principall marke,The true end of hiſtories. to propoſe as in a glaſſe, the power, wiſedome, iuſtice, and admirable bountie of the liuing and eternall God, to the ende hee may leſſe nothing among men, of that which appertaineth vnto him. As indeed he propoſeth and ſetteth out nothing in the world, be it in the perſon of kings or of ſuch as be of baſe condition,For what purpoſes changes do ſerue vs. wherein he meanes not to ſhew that it is hee which ſetteth his hands to all things, that men may learne to depend vpon him, to hope for all good things at his hands, and to honour and tremble vnder his iudgements.
            When we ſee an Hiſtorie,A glaſſe for the comfort of ſuch as be afflicted. that ſome kingdome hath bin eſtabliſhed and brought into good eſtate, which before was diſſipated & diuided: or elſe that ſome man hath bene deliuered from ſome great calamity, and hath recouered ſome prosperitie: behold heere is a glaſſe to let them know which reade ſuch things, what good and happie iſſue they may attend at Gods hands, after long and troubleſome calamities, if they truſt in him. Againe, if we encounter ſuch an example,A glaſſe for them of Geneua. that a Common-wealth, which otherwiſe was of no great force to reſiſt many enterpriſes attempted against it; yet it ſtandeth fast, only making it ſelfe ſtrong vpon the ſuccours it looked for at Gods hands: behold here a Painter to repreſent vnto vs liuely, with what wiſedome God worketh, breaking the counſels of the proud which abuſe their power, to confound and oppreſſe ſuch in the middeſt of which he hath eſtabliſhed his ſeate to be honoured.
            Moreouer when ſuch witneſſes appeare, as the greatnes, force, magnificence, the long ſpreading & ſtretching of great Monarchies,

cannot often hinder,A glaſſe to cō
                  template the incomprehenſible iudgements of God. but all this hath bin ouerthrowne, or at the leaſt comen to ſome decay; this is an other portrait which ſhould make vs thinke vpon the admirable iudgements of God raigning, who therein ſhewe euidently has ſtrong and outſtretched arme from aboue: and would giue men to know, that if he can reduce and bring to nothing powers eſtabliſhed in ſo apparant aſſurance, farre more eaſily can he ouerthrow euery arrogant and proud head: to the end there may be no humaine creature of what condition or estate ſoeuer it be, which trembleth not in the conſideration of ſuch wonderfull iudgements.
            Moreouer, ſo many chaunges and ſtraunge mutations which the diſcourſe of time bringeth vs, do demonſtrate vnto vs what may be the aſſurance and felicitie of all the frame of the world, and what may be the common condition of men.Things here below ſubiect to changes. As indeed there is nothing ſo well gouerned vnder the Sunne, be it neuer ſo well ordeined and eſtabliſhed, which is not ſubiect to diuers chaunges. We ſee the Crownes of kings fall downe to the earth: the ſcepters of Emperours bruiſed, yea broken in pieces; the glory of Common-weales fade and decaie, but ambitiō,The cauſes of changes and mutations. proud ingratitude, inſatiable auarice of ſuch as were ordeined to rule and acknowledged not God, are the cauſe of ſuch ouerthrowes and mutations.
            But ſince all men ſeeke to finde ſome firme estate wherein they may ſubſist & ſtand the reading of ſuch examples ſhould bring them to behold their God who is the firmitie & aſſurance of all things, and without whom,The alone Church of God remaineth firme. nothing can remaine firme one minute of time. And as he hath ſhewed this aſſurance in the middest of his Church againſt all tempests and ſtormes, and against all the aſſaults & machinations of Antichriſts, as is clearly ſhewed in this preſent collection, ſo ſhould this bee the refuge of euery one to finde out that hee would ſeeke for. The Church may well be ſhaken,The Church may be ſhaken, but not ouerthrowne. but it can neuer be ouerthrowne: for it leaneth vpon the foundation of the truth of God: It may be toſſed by tempeſts, waues & ſtormes, but her ancre aſcendeth euen to heauen, and is ſure held by the hand of him which cannot be remoued out of his place.The condition of the kingdomes of the world. But contrary, men perceiue not the ſtormes and tempests which are to ſettle and ſinke the great kingdomes of the world: yet it is ſo, that without being ſhaken they fall & vaniſh away as of thē ſelues. But the ſpirituall kingdome of the ſonne of God, which is his Church, ought not to be esteemed after the daungers of this preſent

life: for it is preſerued in the middest of the fierceſt waues. As is ſaid in Eſay 60. Thou ſhalt haue no more the Sunne to ſhine by day: neither ſhall the brightneſſe of the Moone ſhine vnto thee: For the Lord ſhall be thine euerlaſting light, and thy God thy glory, and thy Sunne ſhall neuer goe downe, neither ſhall thy Moone be hid: for the Lord ſhall be thine euerlaſting light, and the dayes of thy ſorrow ſhall be ended.
            
            The aſſurance then of the Church ought not to be conſidered according nor in regard of things preſent,The Church of God is ſubiect to change becauſe it is eſtabliſhed in God and feareth no chaunges: For God is her light: ſo that ſhe hath no need to borrow any brightneſſe from either Sunne or Moone. And although the faithfull be not depriued of the commodities of this preſent life, but rather there is nothing either in heauen or earth which God hath not created for the loue of them: ſeeing he hath a particular care of them: yet is there one thing much more excellent which the children of God do enioy; namely the heauenly light: which from all times hath bene cast on it. We must then lift vp our ſpirits vnto God, who gouerneth all both aboue and below,
                  The heauenly light peculiar to the childrē of God.
                  How examples written in hiſtories are to be taken.
                and not attribute any thing to Fortune, as prophane men doo: heereunto men pretend to bring all the faithfull.
            Therefore hither men come not to feede the ſpirit of fooliſh curioſitie, or here to learne any thing to babble with vaine ostentation, or to take pleaſure to heare a well adorned language: and aſſoone as the eyes are taken from off the booke, all fruite of that reading is lost: but there is neither fact, nor chance, nor iſſue,Examples of proſperitie. which euery man oght not to borrow for himſelfe. If he finde that ſome vertuous and well liuing man hath bene well beloued of God and honoured of men, that vertue ought to be vnto him as a flame to lighten his heart, that following ſuch a man he may come to a like felicitie.Examples of aduerſitie. If contrary he encounter and light on one who for his vices fell into ſome greeuous inconueniences, it is an example to ſerue him for a bridle, that hee do not precipitate and throw himſelfe headlong into the ſame ditch: and aboue all, ſuch as haue great dignities and are called to doo great things, ſo much more as their ruine is daungerous, ſo much more alſo ought they to be carefull to looke how faithfully they acquite themſelues in their charge committed vnto them.
            But well hath one ſaid, that The Historie is a treaſure which

ſhould neuer depart from the hands,The aduerti
                     ••
                  me
                     •
                  t that we h
                     •
                  u
                     •
                   
                  
                     •
                  y like hiſtories. wherwith men being aided▪ may more commodiouſly handle their affaires like to ſuch as they finde registred in histories: ſeeing that almost alwaies alike cauſes happen and come to paſſe This ſmall aduertiſement may profit, if it light not vpon crooked and brutiſh ſpirits, vnto whom this labour will not be profitable, but onely vnto ſuch as with an honeſt pleaſure will ioyne a good deſire to carry an humble reuerence to all the workes of God.
            But then O Church of God, ſeeing all things come and are done for the loue of thee, it is good reaſon that thy litle estate (or rather glaſſe of thy condition & of that thou haſt endured ſince the comming of thy espouſe) be dedicated and conſecrated vnto thee. On the one ſide thou ſhalt know the heretikes, ſchiſmatikes, mockers & contemners, with the tyrants and violent oppreſſors which haue done vnto thee a thouſand euils: but on the other ſide thou ſhalt ſee Ieſus Chriſt the ſtronger: who hath not declared himſelfe thy head for a world or two: but for euer a protector of thine. And now is there any vnderſtanding that can cōprehend, & leſſe tongue to expreſſe what he hath done for thee in theſe laſt dayes: when from thy renting and treading vnder foote we ſee ſo many children each where of ſo fruitfull a mother. O admirable bountie! O indicible ioy and conſolation, to ſee the meruailes of the Lord in theſe laſt times: Let vs pray that hee will continue that hee hath begun and aduanced, to his glory and honour. So be it.
            
               
                  Thine in the Lord, Iohn Crispin.
            
         
         
            
            The order of the Biſhops and Pope of Rome, after this Booke.
            
               SAint Peter vpon falſe tokens called the firſt in number of the Biſhops of Rome.
               
               Linus.
               Cletus.
               Clement.
               Anacletus.
               Euaristus.
               Alexander.
               Sixtus or Xistus.
               Telesphorus.
               Higinus.
               Pius. 1.
               
               Auicetus.
               Soter.
               Eleutherius.
               
                  Ʋictor.
               Zephirin or Seuerin.
               Calistus.
               
                  Ʋrbain.
               Pontian.
               Antherus.
               Fabian.
               Cornelius.
               Lucius.
               Stephanus.
               Ziſtus. 2.
               
               Denis
               Felix.
               Eutichien.
               Caius.
               Marcellin.
               Marcel.
               Euſebius.
               Melchiades.
               Siluester.
               Marcus
               Iulius
               Liberius.
               Felix.
               Damaſus.
               Siricius.
               Anaſtaſius. 1.
               
               Innocentius 1.
               
               Zozimus.
               Boniface. 1.
               
               Celestinus 1.
               
               Sixtus 3.
               
               Leo 1.
               
               Hilarius
               Simplicius.
               Felix 3.
               
               Gelatius
               Anastaſius 2.
               
               Simmachus
               Hormiſda.
               Iohn 1.
               
               Felix 4.
               
               Boniface 2.
               
               Iohn 2.
               
               Agapetus.
               Siluerius.
               Vigilins
               Pelagius 1.
               
               Iohn 3.
               
               Benit 1.
               
               Pelagius 2.
               
               Gregorie 1.
               
               
                  Sauian or Sabinian.
               Boniface 3.
               
               Boniface 4
               
               Deus dedit
               Boniface 5
               
               Honorius
               Seuerin
               Iohn 4
               
               Theodorus 1
               
               Martin 1
               
               Eugenius 1
               
               
                  Ʋitalian
               Adeodatus
               Donus
               Agathon
               Leo 2
               
               Benit 2
               
               Iohn 5
               
               Conon
               Sergius
               Iohn 6
               
               Iohn 7
               
               Siſinius
               Conſtantine 1
               
               Gregorie 2
               
               Gregorie 3
               
               Zacharie
               Stephen 2
               
               Paulus 1
               
               Conſtantine 2
               
               Stephen 3
               
               Adrian 1
               
               Leo 3
               
               Stephen 4
               
               Paſchal
               Eugenius 2
               
               Valentine 2
               
               Gregorie 4
               
               Sergius 2
               
               Leo 4
               
               Iohn 8
               
               Benit 3
               
               Nicholas 1
               
               Adrian 2
               
               Iohn 9
               
               Martin 2
               
               Adrian 3
               
               Stephen 5
               
               Formoſus
               Boniface 6
               
               Stephen 6
               
               Romaine
               Theodorus 2
               
               Iohn 10
               
               Benit 4
               
               Leo 5
               
               Christopher
               Sergius 3
               
               Anaſtaſius 3
               
               Lando
               Iohn 11
               
               Leo 6
               
               Stephen 7
               
               Iohn 12
               
               Leo 7
               
               Stephen 8
               
               Martin 3
               
               Agapetus 2
               
               Iohn 13
               
               Benit 5
               
               Leo 8
               
               Iohn 14
               
               Benit 6
               
               Donus 2
               
               Boniface 7.
               
               
                  Benit 7
               
               Iohn 16
               
               Iohn 17
               
               Gregorie 5
               
               Iohn 18
               
               Siluester 2
               
               Iohn 19
               
               Iohn 20
               
               Sergius 4
               
               Benit 8
               
               Iohn 21
               
               Benit 9
               
               Silueſter 3
               
               Gregorie 6
               
               Clement 2
               
               Damaſus 2
               
               Leo 9
               
               Victor 2
               
               Stephen 9
               
               Benit 10
               
               Nicholas 2
               
               Alexander 2
               
               Gregory 7
               
               
                  Ʋictor 3
               
               
                  Ʋrbaine 2
               
               Paſcall 2
               
               Gelaſius 2
               
               Calixtus 2
               
               Honorius 2
               
               Innocent 2
               
               Celeſtine 2
               
               Lucius 2
               
               Eugenius 3
               
               Anaſtaſius 4
               
               Adrian 4
               
               Alexander 3
               
               Lucius 3
               
               Vrbain 3
               
               Gregorie 8
               
               Clement 3
               
               Celeſtine 3
               
               Innocent 3
               
               Honorius 3
               
               Gregorie 9
               
               Celestine 4
               
               Innocent 4
               
               Alexander 4
               
               Vrbain 4
               
               Clement 4
               
               Gregorie 10
               
               Innocent 5
               
               Adrian 5
               
               Iohn 22
               
               Nicholas 3
               
               Martin 4
               
               Honorius 4
               
               Nicholas 4
               
               Celeſtine 5
               
               Boniface 8
               
               Benit 11
               
               Clement 5
               
               Iohn 23
               
               Benit 12
               
               Clement 6
               
               Innocent 6
               
               Vrbain 5
               
               Gregorie 11
               
               Vrbain 6
               
               Clement 7
               
               Boniface 9
               
               Benit 13
               
               Innocent 7
               
               Gregory 12
               
               Alexander 5
               
               
                  Iohn 24.
               
               Martin. 5.
               
               Eugenius 4.
               
               Felix 5.
               
               Nicholas 5.
               
               Calixtus 3.
               
               Pius 2.
               
               Paul 2.
               
               Sixtus 4.
               
               Innocent 8.
               
               Alexander 6.
               
               Pius 3.
               
               Iulius 2.
               
               Leo 10.
               
               Adrian 6.
               
               Clement 7.
               
               Paul 3.
               
               Iulius 3.
               
               Marcel. 2.
               
               Paul 4.
               
               Pius 5.
               
               Gregorie 13.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            
               
                  A Table of the Romaine Emperours, with the declaration of the yeares which euery one raigned.
                  
                     
                        
                           AVguſtus raigned 56. yeares, that is to ſay, 12. with Antonius and Lepidus, and 44. alone.
                        The yeare 42. of his Empire, was our Sauiour Ieſus borne.
                     
                  
                  
                      
                     yeares.
                     moneths.
                  
                  
                     Tiberius
                     
                        23.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     The 18. yeare of his Empire, was Chriſt crucified.
                  
                  
                     Caligula
                     
                        3.
                     
                     
                        10.
                     
                  
                  
                     Claudius
                     
                        13.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Nero
                     
                        14.
                     
                     
                        7.
                     
                  
                  
                     Galba
                     
                        14
                     
                     
                        7
                     
                  
                  
                     Otto
                      
                     
                        3
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Ʋitellius
                      
                     
                        8
                     
                  
                  
                     Vespaſian
                     
                        9. or 10.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Titus
                     
                        2
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Domitian
                     
                        15
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Nerua
                     
                        1
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Traian
                     
                        19
                     
                     
                        6
                     
                  
                  
                     Adrian
                     
                        22 or 20
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Antonius Pius
                     
                        23
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Marc Antonin
                     
                        18
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Commodus
                     
                        13 or 12
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Pertinax
                      
                     
                        6
                     
                  
                  
                     Iulian
                      
                     
                        4 or 3
                     
                  
                  
                     Seuerus
                     
                        18
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Antonius Caracalla.
                     
                        6
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Macrin
                     
                        1
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Heliogabalus
                     
                        4
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Alexander
                     
                        13
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Maximin & his ſon.
                     
                        3
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Gordian
                     
                        6
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Phillip
                     
                        6. or 5.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     During the raigne of this Emperour one 1000. yeares is accounted ſince the building of Rome.
                     
                  
                  
                     Decius
                     
                        2
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Gallus & his ſon
                     
                        2
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Eucilian of ſome is not accounted
                  
                  
                     Valerian
                     
                        6
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Gallien
                     
                        9
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        Egnatius ſaith he raigned 15 yeares, namely 8. alone, and 7. with his father Valerian.
                     
                  
                  
                     Claudius
                     
                        2
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Aurelian
                     
                        5. and a halfe.
                      
                  
                  
                     Tacitus
                     
                        6
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Florian
                      
                     
                        2
                     
                  
                  
                     Probus
                     
                        6
                     
                     
                        4
                     
                  
                  
                     Carus with his two ſonnes, Carin and Numeran
                  
                  
                     Diocletian and Maximini, or Maximinian
                     
                        15
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Theſe two freely reſigned the Empire.
                  
                  
                     Conſtans & Maximin
                     
                        2
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     
                        Maxencius
                     
                        2. alone, and with
                  
                  
                     Licinius and Conſtantin
                     
                        16.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Conſtantine the great alone
                     
                        13. yeares.
                      
                  
                  
                     Conſtantine, Conſtant, and Conſtans, his 3. ſonnes, diuided the Empire.
                  
                  
                     The first raigned
                     
                        3
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     The ſecond
                     
                        13
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     The third
                     
                        24
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Iulian the Apostate
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        7
                     
                  
                  
                     Iouinian or Iouian
                      
                     
                        7
                     
                  
                  
                     
                        Ʋalentinian
                     
                        11
                     
                     with
                  
                  
                     Valence his brother
                     
                        3
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Gratian with his father,
                  
                  
                     Valentinian
                     
                        8
                     
                     with
                  
                  
                     Valens his vncle
                     
                        3
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Theodoſius
                     
                        4 or 6
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Theodoſius alone
                     
                        11
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Arcadus and Honorus his brother.
                  
                  
                     Theodoſius 2
                     
                     
                        26
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Valentinian
                     
                        5
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Martian
                     
                        7
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Leo 1
                     
                     
                        18
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Leo the yong.
                     
                        1
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Zeno
                     
                        17
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Anaſtatius
                     
                        27
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Iustin
                     
                        9
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Iustinian
                     
                        38
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Iuſtin 2
                     
                     
                        11
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Tiberius 2
                     
                     
                        7
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Mauricius
                     
                        20
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Phocas
                     
                        8
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Heraclius
                     
                        29. or 31
                     
                     after ſome.
                  
                  
                     Conſtantine
                      
                     
                        4
                     
                  
                  
                     Heraclenas
                     
                        2
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Conſtans
                     
                        28
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Conſtantine the bearded.
                      
                      
                  
                  
                     Iustinian after ſome
                     
                        10.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Leoncius
                     
                        3
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Abſimarus, or Tiberius
                     
                        7.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Phillippicus
                     
                        1
                     
                     
                        5
                     
                  
                  
                     Anastaſius
                     
                        3.
                     
                     after ſome one yeare and 3. moneths.
                  
                  
                     Theodoſius
                     
                        1
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Leo Iſaurian
                     
                        24
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Conſtantine Coproninius
                     
                        35.
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     Leo 4.
                     
                     
                        5.
                     
                     after ſome one yeare.
                  
                  
                     Conſtantine
                     
                        10
                     
                      
                  
                  
                     His mother Himene alone
                     
                        3. yeares.
                      
                  
                  
                     Charlemaigne made Emperour.
                  
               
            
            Wee account from Auguſtus till Charlemaigne was crowned Emperour, about 843. yeares. From the building of Rome, 1550. or as ſome ſay, 1530.
            
            
               
               
                  The names of the Emperours of Conſtantinople, after Charlamaigne.
                  
                  
                     NIcephorus, and Stauracius his ſonne. 
                     9 yeares. 
                  
                     Michael Curopleus. 11 yeares.
                  
                     Leo Armenian. 7 yeares.
                  
                     Michael le Begne. 8 yeares.
                  
                     Theophilus. 12 yeares.
                  
                     Michael his ſonne. 14 yeares.
                  
                     Baſile. 20 yeares.
                  
                     Leo the Philoſopher. 25 yeares.
                  
                     Alexander. 1 yeares.
                  
                     Conſtantine. 39 yeares.
                  
                     Romaine Lecapen. 26 yeares.
                  
                     Romain Leon. 13 yeares.
                  
                     Nicephorus. 6 yeares.
                  
                     Iohn Zimiſcus. 6 yeares.
                  
                     Baſile and Conſtantine. 53 yeares.
                  
                     Romain Argiropilus. 5 yeares.
                  
                     Michael de Paphlagonia. 7 yeares.
                  
                     Conſtantine Monomache. 12 yeares.
                  
                     Theodora the ſiſter of Zoe. 2 yeares.
                  
                     Michael. 1 yeares.
                  
                     Iſaac. 2 yeares.
                  
                     Conſtantine Ducas. 7 yeares.
                  
                     Romain Diogeues
                  
                  
                     Michael, Conſtantius ſonne. 6 yeares.
                  
                     Nicephorus Botoniate. 3 yeares.
                  
                     Alexius Commene. 27 yeares.
                  
                     Calcian. 25 yeares.
                  
                     Manuel. 38 yeares.
                  
                     Alexie. 3 yeares.
                  
                     Andronice. 2 yeares.
                  
                     Iſacie Angel
                  
                  
                     Alexie
                  
                  
                     Alexie the yonger.
                  
                  
                     Baldwin Earle of Flanders.
                     . 6 yeares.
                  
                     Henry. 11 yeares.
                  
                     Peter of Auxerre
                  
                  
                     Robert his ſonne
                  
                  
                     Balwin.
                  
                  
                     Michael Paleologus. 11 yeares.
                  
                     Andronicus
                  
                  
                     Andronicus the yonger
                  
                  
                     Iohn Paleologus
                  
                  
                     Manuel
                  
                  
                     Iohn
                  
                  
                     Constantine.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The reſt of the Romaine Emperours after Charlamaigne.
                  
                  
                     LEwis the gentle his ſonne, raigned 26. yeares.
                  
                     Lotharie 
                     15 yeares.
                  
                     Lewis 2
                      
                     19 yeares.
                  
                     Charles the bald 
                     2 yeares.
                  
                     Lewis the ſtutter 
                     2 yeares.
                  
                     Charles the groſſe 
                     10 yeares.
                  
                     Arnulphe 
                     12 yeares.
                  
                     Lewis 3
                      
                     12 yeares.
                  
                     Conrade 
                     7 yeares.
                  
                     Henry 1
                      
                     17 yeares.
                  
                     Otthon 1
                      
                     37 yeares.
                  
                     Otthon 2
                      
                     10 yeares.
                  
                     
                     Othon 3
                      
                     18 yeares.
                  
                     Henry 2
                      
                     24 yeares.
                  
                     Conrade 2
                      
                     15 yeares.
                  
                     Henry 3
                      
                     10 yeares.
                  
                     Henry 4
                      
                     1 yeares.
                  
                     Henry 5
                      
                     20 yeares.
                  
                     Lothaire or Luder 
                     13 yeares.
                  
                     Conrade 3
                      
                     16 yeares.
                  
                     Frederic Barberoſſe 
                     37 yeares.
                  
                     Henry 6
                      
                     8 yeares.
                  
                     Phillip 
                     8 yeares.
                  
                     Othon 4
                      
                     4 yeares.
                  
                     Frederic 2
                      
                     44 yeares.
                  Some ſay 33. yeares, others 37. yeares.
                  A Schiſme in the Empire 23. yeares as ſome ſay: others ſay 28. yeares.
                  
                     William of Holland 
                     2 yeares.
                  
                     Rodolph 1
                      
                     18 yeares.
                  
                     Adolphe 1
                      
                     6 yeares.
                  
                     Albert 1
                      
                     10 or thereabouts. yeares.
                  
                     Henry 7
                      
                     5 yeares.
                  
                     Lewis 6
                      
                     33 as ſome ſay. yeares.
                  
                     Charles 4
                      
                     33 yeares.
                  
                     Wencelaus 
                     22 yeares.
                  We paſſe ouer Ioſſe and Robert, becauſe of the ſchiſme in the Empire.
                  
                     Sigiſmond 
                     29 yeares.
                  
                     Albert 2
                      
                     2 yeares.
                  
                     Frederic 3
                      
                     53 yeares.
                  
                     Maximilian 1
                      
                     25 yeares.
                  
                     Charles 5
                      
                     29 yeares.
                  
                     Ferdenand 1
                      yeares.
                  
                     Maximilian 2
                      
                     14 yeares.
                  
                     Rodolphe 2.
                      at this preſent raigning. yeares.
               
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            THE ESTATE OF THE Church, with the diſcourſe of times, ſince the Natiuitie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, vntill this preſent yeare, 1601.
               Auguſtus.
            
            
               IT was foretolde by Daniell that the Meſſias ſhould bee borne vnder the fourth Monarchie, which Iulius Caeſar conſtituted about 47. yeares before the Natiuitie of our Lord: after he had brought the Romane Empire vnder his ſubiection. Pompey before tooke by force and pilled the Towne of Ieruſalem: and then the Scepter and politicke gouernment of the Iewes began to ſtoupe. See Ioſephus in the 14. booke of Antiq. Chap. 2. This came in the yeare of the world, 3903. and threeſcore yeares before Chriſt.
            
               Augustus the ſonne of Iulius Caeſars Siſter, ſucceeded his Vncle beeing adopted of him. Vnder whoſe Empire the eternall ſonne of God was borne, taking fleſh of the Virgin Mary in Bethelem, a Towne of Iury, the yeare of the worlds creation, 3963.
            This is the ſeede which burſt the Serpents head, and deliuered vs from the mortall ſting thereof. This is the ſoueraigne head of the Church, without which the body thereof can haue no forme. He takes a particular care thereof, and cauſeth his preſence to be there felt with efficacie: And in the middeſt thereof will be inuocated, ſerued, honoured and glorified. The ſtate whereof is to be deducted in this diſcourſe.
            So ſoone as Chriſt the true annointed of God was borne

and manifeſted in the world, Herod ſtirred great perſecution. The occaſion thereof was by the wiſe men which came from the Eaſt, which brought newes of the Meſſias to them of Ieruſalem. He cauſed all the children in the coaſts of Bethelem to be ſlaine, which were two yeares old and vnder.
            This Herod who obtained of Augustus the title and dignitie of King in Iudea, was the ſonne of Antipater the Idumeen, ſonne of an other Herod which was a Secretary in the Temple of Apollo, in the Towne of Aſcalon. Philo the Iewe rehearſeth, that in the 13. yeare of his kingdome, he killed the ordinarie Iudges of the houſe of Dauid, and ſubſtituted others in their places. Hee was brought into ſuch a rage, that hee made ſley his owne ſonne, which he had of a wife of the line of Iuda. Macrobius reciteth, that when Augustus heard it rehearſed hee ſaid. It were better to be Herods Swine then his Sonne.
            
               Behold the iudgement of God.His execrable deeds remained not long vnpuniſhed, and it is profitable we ſhould knowe the iſſue worthie of ſuch a Tyrant. Ioſephus in the 8. booke of Antiq. Chap. 17. deſcribeth it thus. The kings maladie encreaſed, and God ſhewed openly that he would puniſh his impietie. For he was burned with a ſlowe heat, yet without, none could perceiue it, only he felt it within, becauſe it grated & waſted his entralles. He was ſo hungry that he tooke no leiſure to chawe his meate, but deuoured all that entred into his mouth: and ſo ſtill ſome muſt caſt meat into his mouth. His entralls were wounded and vlcerated, and he was tormented with collicke paſſions. His feete were ſwelled with flegmaticke humours, through which you might ſee the day. His ſhamefaſte parts were rotted and full of wormes: his breath was ſtinking that none durſt approach vnto him. And in the 21. Chap. of the firſt booke of the Iewes warres, the ſame Hiſtoriographer writeth thus. All his bodie was taken with a diſeaſe, and hee was tormented with diuers dolours. He had a burning and intollerable heate in him. The Chollick tormented him inceſſantly: his feete were ſwelled betwixt the skinne and the fleſh: he ſought to aduance his owne death; and calling for a knife lifted vp his right hand,

but Archilaus his coſen-germane perceiuing it,Tiberius. ranne to him and held his hand: hee died 5. dayes after he made his ſonne Antipater die, hauing enioyed the kingdome the ſpace of 34. yeares after he had cauſed Antigonus to die, and 37. yeares after hee was declared King by the Romanes. In all other things he was happie, yea if euer King were; for a man of ſo baſe condition to acquire that Kingdome and keepe it ſo long a time, and at laſt leaue it to his children. But concerning his domeſticke affaires, none could be more vnluckie, &c. Hitherto Ioſephus.
            
            
               This Hiſtorie is worthie of memorie, that all that read ſuch a vengeance of God, may learne to feare his iudgements.
            
            After the death of this Herod, the Iewes not being able to ſupport the ruling of a ſtraunger, ſought to raiſe vp ſeditions, but they were repreſſed by Archilaus.
               
                  Archilaus Herodes ſucceſſor, of whom there is ſpoken. Math. 2. But whileſt Archilaus and Herod Antipas pleaded one againſt an other in Rome, againe other troubles aroſe in Iewrie; In ſo much as Augustus diuided Herods kingdome.
            He conſtituted Archilaus the Tetrarch of Idumea, Iudea, and Samaria, and the reuenew of thoſe Regions amounted yearely to ſixe hundreth Talents.A diuiſion of the kingdome of Iudea. He diuided the other part into two Tetrarches. He gaue alſo to Herod Antipas, Galilie and Perea, out of which Regions he had yearely 200. Talents. And to Philippes he gaue Bathania, Traconite, Aucanite, & Calcide, of which places the reuenew came by yeare to an hundreth Talents. This Archilaus was chaſed from Iudea, and finally baniſhed to 
                  Ʋienne, which is in Gaul nigh to Lions, where he dyed.
            At this time the adminiſtration of the Kingdome was againe chaunged in Iudea. The Romanes placed Gouernours there, one after an other, as Coponius, Marcus, Anius, Rufus, Valerius, Gracchus, Poncius Pilate.
            
            
               Tiberius ſucceeded Auguſtus his father in lawe, and raigned 33. yeares. He gaue himſelfe to Idleneſſe and drunkenneſſe, ſo that in mockerie he was called Claudius Biberius Nero, in

place of Claudius Tiberius Nero. See Suetonius and Cor. Tacitus, Historiograph.
            
            
               Iohn Baptist began to preach the preſence of the Redeemer, ſhewing with his finger the Lord Ieſus: he reprehended the falſe ſeruices inuented by men, ſo that perſecutions began to ariſe. The moſt enraged perſecutors were the Phariſies, I meane ſuch as were great in the Church of Ieruſalem. Theſe crimes they laid againſt him: namely that he vſurped the Miniſterie to teach without the will of ſuch as had charge in the Church. That he brought a new doctrine, diuerſe from the vſe of the Sinagogues. That he ſhewed a Meſſias, who had no appearance of a King, but abiect and poore. That hee vſed hard and ſharpe words, and affirmed that the gouernment of Moſes was come to an ende, and that they muſt haue a new Religion. That he foretold the reiection and ruine of the Iewes, and the vocation of the Gentiles. Mat. 3. Luk. 3. Iohn. 3.
            But becauſe the people came euery day in great multitudes to him, and was held for an excellent Prophet, his enemies were brideled.
            But he endured an other perſecution of Herodes Antipas (the firſt king Herods ſonne) the Tetrark of Galilie, who tooke Herodias, his brother Philip Herods wife, and made him die, to pleaſe the appetite of that Herodias and her daughter Salome, after ſhe had daunced at a banquet. As it is Mark. 6.
            
               Three Sects in Ieruſalem.There were amongſt the Iewes at this time three Sects; namely Phariſies, Saduces, and Eſſes, as appeareth.
            
               Touching the Temple.All the Nation of the Iewes had but that onely Temple which was in Ieruſalem, called the Temple of God. Mat. 21. It was 46. yeares in edifying. Ioh. 2. Nabuchodonoſer pilled and burned the ſtately Temple of Salomon, and raſed it by Nabuzardam Generall of his Armie, when the reſt of the people were carried into Babilon.
            
            
               Cyrus the firſt of that name King of the Perſians, at the perſwaſion of Daniel, gaue leaue to reedifie it. And the ſecond yeare of Cyrus raigne, the Iewes began to build it, but they had great hinderances. The death of Cyrus followed. Cambiſes followed him, a man full of impietie and crueltie, hee cauſed the

building to ceaſe. Darius Hiſlaſpes ſucceeded after him, who made an end of the Temple. And this was the cauſe it was ſo long in building.
            This Temple was ſituated in an imminent and high place, therein was great magnificence, and great gifts were giuen for ornaments thereof, as may be gathered in the 24. of S. Math. Mark. 14. Luk. 21. See Ioſeph. in his laſt chap. of the 15. booke of Antiquit.
            
            The Eccleſiaſticall gouernment of the Iewes was this.The Eccleſiaſticall gouernment which was then. They which held the preheminence in the Church of the Iewes were called principall high Prieſts.
            It was ordained of God that there ſhould be one high Prieſt,Soueraigne high Prieſt. who might remaine in that office vntill the end of his life, & after his death an other was ſubſtituted, Exod 29. Nomb. 20. When Chriſt came, all was confuſed, all was ſolde for money, or by deceit and ſtealth. As Iohn. 11. It is ſaid that Cayphas was chiefe Prieſt that yeare.
            After the high Prieſt,Prieſts. there was a great troupe of other Prieſts, which were diſtinct amongſt themſelues. For Dauid diſtributed the ſucceſſors of Aaron into 24. orders. Therefore it is ſaid, Luk. 1. that Zacharie was a Prieſt of the Family of Abia, which had the eight Lot. 1. Chro. 24.
            There were after Leuites, whereof is ſpoken,Leuites. 
               Iohn. 1. and 10. Chap. There were alſo Scribes, which were Doctors of the Lawe. Luk. 5. There was the Maiſter of the Sinagogue, who was the principall Doctor. Mark. 5. Luk. 13.
            There were they which were called Rabbi or Maiſter,Maiſters. which was an eſtate or office of teaching. Iohn. 3. Art thou a Maiſter in Iſrael and knoweſt not theſe things?
            The Elders of the people,Auncients. were they which they choſe from among the people, hauing charge of things which belonged to the Temple, to Iuſtice, and the gouernment of the Church. When Ieſus had chaſed from the Temple the buyers and ſellers, the next morning the high Prieſts and Elders of the people came to him, asking by what authoritie he did thoſe things. Math. 21.
            About the 20. yeare of Chriſt, and the fift of Tiberius, as

               Euſebius ſaith in his Chronicle,Caligula. thirteene Townes of Aſia were ouerthrowne by an Earthquake: namely, Epheſus, Sardis, Meſthenes, Megechiere, Ceſarea, Magneſia, Philadelphia, Hincel, Tenus, Cume, Mirthina, Apollonia, Diahyrcania.
            
            
               Such iudgements of God ought to ſerue for aduertiſements and inſtructions vnto vs.
            
            Our Lord Ieſus Chriſt exerciſed his Miniſterie and office the ſpace of three yeares, three moneths, and tenne dayes: and the beginning is taken from his thirtieth yeare, becauſe in S. Luke, it is ſaid, that Ieſus began to be about thirtie yeares of age.
            He ſuffered death and paſſion the yeare 34. according to the ſupputation of many authors.
            
               Caius Caligula was an horrible Monſter, who by his wicked life deſpited heauen and earth, vttering his furie through all the iuriſdictions of the Romane Empire, and by his Edicts would needs make himſelfe a God. But finally he was taken with a ſtraunge death. Ioſephus maketh a ſingular recitall thereof in the 1. Chapter of the 20. booke of Antiquities. Chareas, Sabinus, Aquila and others, which of long time had conſpired his death, ſlew him cruelly after he had raigned three yeares, tenne monethes, and eight dayes. His body as Suetonius rehearſeth, was ſecretly carried to the Gardens of Lamius: and being halfe burnt, was couered with a litle earth. He was of the age of 24. yeares.
            
               Such a Tirant who had prouoked both God and men againſt him, could no otherwiſe end his daies.
            
            
               Caligula baniſhed Herod the Tetrarch (who went to Rome at the perſwaſion of Herodias, the yeare 40.) into the Towne of Lions in Gaul, where he died in pouertie with the ſaid Herodias his harlot.
            The ſame yeare the Iewes endured great afflictions. One was at Alexandria vpon this occaſion. Caligula had ordained

that through all the Iuriſdiction of the Romanes, there ſhould be builded vnto him Temples and Aultars, where they ſhould worſhip him as God. The Iewes alone reſiſted his impietie. Then were there many Grecians in Alexandria who wiſhed death vnto the Iewes, therefore then they tooke occaſion to make them odious vnto the Emperour except they obeyed his ordinance. When it came to proofe, the Iewes reſiſted it ſtrongly, and the ſedition about it was ſuch, that many were ſlaine on both ſides. The cauſe was finally debated at Rome: and Caligula a peruerſe man made chaſe away Philo the Iewe, who pleaded the Iewes cauſe. Who then ſaid.Naucle. It behooueth vs whom the Emperour hateth to take courage. For it is neceſſarie that God ſhould helpe, when humane ſuccours faileth. Caligula vſed to ſay; Would to God the Romane people had but one Head.
            The Iewes alſo were greatly afflicted in Babilon of the Chaldeans, and in Seleucia of Siria.
               Two bretheren Iewes. There were two brethren Iewes of baſe condition: the one named Aſniens, and the other Anileus: the which being Robbers and Theeues, they gathered together a great number of Rake-hells and diſordered perſons. Artanabus ſeeing this euill encreaſe, thought good to remedie it. But it was too late. And finally mooued with the proweſſe of theſe two yoong men, receiued them into amitie, and gaue them the gouernment of the Kingdome of Babilon. See Ioſeph. in the 18. Booke and laſt Chapter.
            Ieſus Chriſt aſcended viſibly into Heauen to confirme his Reſurrection the better, and the glorie of his Kingdome, 40. dayes after his Reſurrection. His Diſciples yet dreamed of an earthly kingdome of Meſſias, & asked of him if he would not begin it. But Ieſus Chriſt after he had ſpoken of the eternall Kingdome and had bleſſed them, was lifted vp aloft, and a bright Cloude receiued him into Heauen, where he ſitteth at the right hand and power of God.
            Now then we muſt conſider what aduancements and encreaſe the Primitiue Church made by the Apoſtles and their Diſciples; that all the faithfull may know that Ieſus Chriſt the King of glory remaineth not Idle in Heauen: but by an admirable

manner maintained, gouerneth, and aydeth his, that his Goſpell may be ſowne through the world.
            But as God ſhewed that honour to the Land of Canaan, as to giue it the promiſes touching the Redeemer, ſo there alſo by his death he obtained ſaluation vnto mankinde.Churches in Aſia the leſſe. Aboue all Countries Aſia the leſſe had at that time the moſt flouriſhing Churches. After the Aſcention of Chriſt, there was an excellent Church in Ieruſalem. In the firſt of the Acts it is recited that there were about ſixe ſcore perſons at the beginning.
            
               The holy ſcripture calleth Churches the publicke aſſemblies of many faithfull.
            
            Tenne dayes after the Aſcenſion, was the Feaſt of Pentecoſt. The Lord Ieſus then raigning in Heauen at the right hand of his Father, powred viſibly and ſenſibly the holy Ghoſt vpon the Apoſtles which then were aſſembled at Ieruſalem.
            
            The word of the Lord tooke his courſe, and the number of the faithfull by litle and litle encreaſed in Ieruſalem, by the preaching and miracles of the Apoſtles. Behold the booke of the Acts, for the firſt preachings and the perſecutions which came after the death of our Lord.
            
               Steuen ſtoned.The 34. yeare after the Natiuitie of Chriſt, and the 19. of the Kingdome of Tiberius, after the death of S. Steuen, the high Prieſts of Ieruſalem ſtirred more and more grieuous perſecutions againſt the Church.
            
               Saul (which is alſo Paul) was choſen to perſecute the faithfull: for before his conuerſion he burnt with falſe zeale, eſpying into each houſe, and drawing into priſon all he could catch. S. Ierome reciteth that S. Paul his parents dwelt in Siſchal a Towne of Iuda, but when the Romanes tooke the Countrie they went into Tharſis, which is in Cilicia, where Paul was borne. His father was a Iewe of the Tribe of Beniamin, and a Burgeſſe of Rome. Act. Chap. 22.
            Many then were Martired, others were conſtrained to retire themſelues into Countries adiacent, which occaſioned

the Goſpell to be further ſpread abroad.
            About the yeare fortie and fiue after the Natiuitie of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, and twelue yeares after his Reſurrection, the third yeare of Caligula, a great perſecution was ſtirred by Herode Agrippa againſt the Chriſtians, wherein Iames the brother of Iohn was beheaded. Peter put in priſon, but the Angell of the Lorde drewe them out moſt miraculouſly.
            Soone after the Lord reuenged the death of his. For it happened that this Herode went to Ceſarea. The cauſe was for that hee hadde enterpriſed a warre againſt the Tyrrians and Sidonians, which they preuented by gaining the Chamberlaine Blastus, and demaunding of a peace. One day Herode ſumptuouſly adorned ſate downe in Throne and ſpake to them, and the people made an acclamation as if GOD himſelfe hadde ſpoken vnto them. But Herode was incontinently ſtrooken by the Angell of the Lorde, and was conſumed with vermine and died miſerably, becauſe hee yeelded no glorie vnto God, and ſo the perſecution ceaſed.
            
               Heere is a ſecond mirrour of Gods iudgement againſt ſuch as oppreſſe the Church.
            
            Saint Paul after his conuerſion returned fiue times to Ieruſalem. At his laſt beeing there, hee recited the Hiſtorie of his Miniſterie in the aſſembly of the Elders of the Church.
            His preachings were greatly ſpread abroad, neither ceaſed hee to plant the Goſpell whereſoeuer he went, as it appeareth in the Acts. He preached at Rome by the ſpace of two yeares, although he was a priſoner. Where before there was an aſſembly of the faithfull as the Epiſtle to the Romanes witneſſeth.
            
               Philippe the Apoſtle preached in Samaria, where there was a Church: which retired thither after the death of Saint Steuen. In Azote the Church aſſembled; from thence it went

into the Maritine Townes.
            
               Peter the Apoſtle alſo preached the Goſpell in many Townes, as is at large ſeene in the Hiſtorie of the Acts. Origine in his Tome vpon Geneſis ſaith, it ſeemeth that Peter preached in Pontus, Galatia, Aſia, Bithinia, and Cappadocia, to the diſpearced Iewes.
            There was alſo a Church in Babilon, as he himſelfe witneſſeth in the fiſt of his firſt Epiſtle. In Phinicia and Siria, in Tyre, Sidon, Serentia, Silicia, Pamphilia, Piſidia, Attalia, Lycaonia. Alſo in Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, Aſia, Bithinia, Miſia, and Phrigia. Vnto theſe did S. Peter write.
            The ſeuen Churches of Aſia are named in the Apocalips: namely, Epheſus, Smirna, Pergamus, Thyatirus, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicia.
            
            Aboue all, the Church of Antioche was moſt famous, where the Diſciples were firſt called Chriſtians. Some ſay this was the thirtie and eight yeare after Chriſt: others fortie. Paul and Barnabas remained there one whole yeare. Acts. 11. and 13.
            Saint Iohn the Apoſtle and Euangeliſt, after hee had preached the Goſpell through all Aſia, he finally retired into the Towne of Epheſus, where he remained many yeares. From thence the Church might eaſily ſpread it ſelfe into Europe, which was nigh therevnto.
            
               Now we ſee the beginning of the Kingdome of Christ, and as it were a renewment of the world.
            
            
                About the yeare 42. the vengeance of God fell vpon Pilate. For after the Iewes had accuſed him of too great crueltie, Lord 
                  Ʋitellius then Gouernour of Siria, commaunded him to goe to Rome, to anſwere the accuſations that were to bee laid againſt him. But as hee was in the way hee died. Tiberius as Ioſephus reciteth in the eighteenth of Antiquities, Chapter fiue. Eutropius in his ſeuenth booke ſaith, that Pilate was nipped and pinched with ſo great anguiſhes, becauſe Caligula troubled him, that ſtriking and beating himſelfe

with his owne hands, he ſought to deſtroy himſelfe.Claudius▪
                See Euſebius in his 2. booke, Chap. 7.
            This ſame yeare it is held that Saint Mathew writte his Goſpell in Iudea. The ſame yeare the Tetrach ſhip of Herodes was deliuered to Agrippa, and a great diſcomfiture now the ſecond time was made of the Iewes in Babilon. See Ioſephus in the laſt Chapter of his Antiquities.
            
            
               Claudius the fift Emperour was choſen to the Imperial dignitie the aforeſaid yeare, and raigned fourteen yeares and nine moneths.
            
               Herodes Agrippa the yeare 15. and the third of Claudius, held the Kingdome of Iudea, of the gift of Caligula and Claudius. Beeing departed from Rome to come to Ieruſalem, hee thought good to make a ſhew to the Iewes that he loued their Religion, and after to gratifie the high Prieſts, he put to death certaine of the faithfull.
            At this time Churches were gouerned by the Apoſtles which were inſtructed in the ſchoole of the ſonne of God, and therefore there is no gouernment to be compared to this.
            Yet in this time the dwell had his inſtruments in Churches gouernment; that is to ſay, falſe Apoſtles and falſe bretheren. Euen alreadie wrought he the ſecret of Iniquitie by his Antichriſt. 2. Theſſa. 2. and 1. Iohn 2. and 4.
            There were Heretickes, Titus 3. Dogges, Philip. 3. Wolues and men ſpeaking peruerſe things. Acts 20. People which were neither hotte nor colde. Apoca. 3.
            
               If at this time Sathan had ſuch licenſe, how bolde thinke we will he be now that they are gone?
            
            Amongſt them which now gouerned the Church,Difference of degrees in the gouernment of the Primatiue Church. ſome were giuen Apoſtles to viſit Churches. Their charge was to ſowe the Goſpell throughout the world. They had no place aſſigned. Beſides the twelue, Paul and Barnabas are called Apostles. Acts 14. Epaphroditus is called the Apoſtle of the Philippians. Philippians 2. Andronicus and Iunia,
               
are called notable amongſt the Apoſtle. Romanes. ſixteene.
            Prophets are they which had the gift not onely to Interpret ſcripture, but alſo to apply it to the true vſe. S. Paul preferreth Prophecie before all other gifts.
            Euangeliſtes hadde an office which came nigh vnto the Apoſtleſhip. The difference was onely in the degree of dignitie.1. Cor. 12. Ephe. 4. Of this eſtate was Timothie, and his like, which ſuccoured the Apoſtles. 2. Timoth. 4.5. Philip is called an Euangeliſt. Act. 21. b. 8.
            Doctors were for the conſeruation of the puritie of Religion, that the holy doctrine might bee kept and publiſhed. Saint Luke ioyneth Prophets with Doctors. Acts. 13. a. 1.
            Prieſt ſignifieth Auncient; not for that they were of an age, but becauſe age commonly hath with it more wiſedome, experience, and grauitie. Vnder this name, are comprehended as well Paſtors, as ſuch as were ordeined for the Regiment of the Church.1. Pet. 5. S. Peter calles himſelfe Prieſt, ſhewing thereby, that it was a common name.
            Deacons is a general name of ſeruice, but is taken for ſuch as had the charge to diſpence the Almeſſes. Actes. 19. a. 22.
            Miniſters or ſeruants are called Adioints, or ſuch as accompanied the Apoſtles in their viands. Timothie and Eraſtus miniſtred to S. Paul. Act. 19. a. 22.
            Biſhop and Prieſt was then one ſame name and office. Saint Hierome in his Epiſtle to Euagoras witneſſeth it. But afterward whileſt Schiſmes endured, one was choſen from amongeſt the Prieſts and ſet in the moſt principall place, and called Biſhoppe, or Superintendent. And therefore the office of Biſhoppe was after helde to bee higher then the Prieſts.
            Saint Paul commaunded Titus to place in euerie Towne Prieſts or Biſhoppes. Titus. 1. a. 5.6.7. See Acts 20. f. 28.
            
               With the good ſeede which was all ouer as is ſaid diſperſed, there beganne alſo hereſies to be caſt into the Lords field.Hereſies at this time. The firſt and moſt pernitious were the Simoniaques. The originall whereof was Simon Magus, borne in a Towne of Samaria, which Iustin calleth Triton, and Euſebius Gitton; a man exerciſed in Letters, who by his Arts enchaunted many in Samaria before Philip had conuerted them. As is recited in the Acts. Chap. 8.
            After S. Peter had diſcouered his wicked Hipocriſie, hee went away in ſuch deſpite, that making a mingle-mangle of the dreames of Philoſophers and Painims with the religions of the Iewes, and that which he learned of the Goſpell he corrupted, and tranſferred to his owne perſon, that which was ſpoken of Ieſus Chriſt, of the holy Ghoſt, and of the ſaluation of man. And as the light of the Goſpell got aboue his myſts and cloudes, he came to Rome in the time of Claudius the Emperour, leading with him an whore called Selene or Helena, which he had drawne out of the common Stewes of Tyre in Phinicia, he called her the firſt conception of his vnderſtanding, and the mother of all, by whom from the beginning hee had conceiued to make Angels and Arch-angels. He attributed alſo vnto her, almoſt all things which the holy Scripture yeeldeth, vnto the eternall word of God, in the creation. Hee ſaid alſo of himſelfe, that he was the ſoueraigne God which deſcended, and was tranſfigured to correct things which had bene euill adminiſtred by the Angels. And although he appeared in an humane forme yet was he not man, and although men thought he ſuffered in Iudea, yet he ſuffered not. So promiſed he ſaluation to all them which would truſt in him and in his Selene, and full libertie to do whatſoeuer their appetite deſired. For men ſhould be ſaued by his grace and not by their owne good workes. For ſuch workes were not after his nature but from his Angels, which by his permiſſion had made the world, and had impoſed ſuch workes vpon men to drawe them into bondage. Behold heere the doctrine of this Maiſter, who afterward brought out the like fruite, as pailliardizes, adulteries, thefts, drunkenneſſe, blaſphemies againſt the true God,

and other the like fruites. Briefly Ireneus calleth him the fountaine and father of all Heretickes, in the Preface of his third booke of Hereſies. Of his manner of death, Epiphanius accordeth not with Theodoretus.
            
            
               Menander the Diſciple of this Simon, was alſo a Magician.
            The yeare fortie foure as many thinke, Saint Peter came to Rome, and gouerned that Church twentie and fiue yeares: but hardly can they ſhewe that he was at any time there, nor at what time, nor vnder what Emperour. For firſt, if Saint Peter were at Rome, he came not to Rome at the time they ſay: namely in the yeare fortie foure, after the Natiuitie of our Lord Ieſus, and that which they ſay, that hee ruled the Church twentie and fiue yeares, hath no likelihood. For it may eaſily be gathered from the Epiſtle to the Galath. that hee was in Ieruſalem the yeare 51. where the Apoſtles great Councell was held. Let the yeares be numbred. The yeare thirtie and fiue S. Paul was cōuerted, to which adde ſeuenteen, euen vntill that Councell, and it comes to fiftie and two. How could he then before ſeuen yeares bee at Rome? If hee were there he returned ſoone. But S. Luke then would not haue concealed it if it had beene ſo: neither is it found in any Hiſtorie of credit, that after Saint Peter was entred Rome, hee left that place to returne into the Towne of Ieruſalem. Moreouer it is certaine he was not at Rome the yeare fiftie eight, and three ſcore. And that it is ſo, when Saint Paul was ledde thither priſoner, he remained there in an hyred houſe two yeares. Heereof Saint Luke makes no mention of Saint Peter. And by the ſecond Epiſtle to Timothie, it may be plainely knowne that Saint Peter was not at Rome at the time that S. Pauls death was ſo nie. For then S. Paul hauing occaſion to make mention of all that was with him, would not haue forgotten Saint Peter if hee hadde beene there.
            Many wiſe and good men haue handled this matter at large, vnto which I referre you.
            The ſame yeare Herod the brother of Agrippa, was

made King of Calcide.
            
            The yeare 45. S. Marke the Diſciple of Saint Peter
                preached Ieſus Chriſt in Egypt, and Euodius was firſt ordeined Biſhop of Antioche. And there was Iames the brother of Iohn beheaded, and Peter deliuered from priſon by the Angell.
            The yeare 46. which was about the ninth and tenth  of the Kingdome of Claudius the Emperour, there was a great Famine through all Greece, at Rome, and in other parts of the earth, and this Famine was foretolde in Antioche by the Prophet Agabus. Who being mooued with that hee heard ſay of the Churches proſperitie of Antioche, departed from Ieruſalem to come thither with other faithfull. Dion and Euſebius make mention of this Famine.
            At this time Helena Queene of the Adiabenians, and the King Iſares were accounted to ſerue God faithfully. Ioſephus ſpeaketh amply thereof in his Antiquities, Lib. 15. Chapter 2.3. and 5.
            The ſame yeare Agrippa who was called Herodes,
               Agrippa called God, is ſtraight puniſhed. Act. 12. died after a ſtraunge maner. In an aſſembly at playes he ſuffered the people to call him God, and therefore the Angell ſtrooke him, for that he gaue not glory vnto God, and he was conſumed with Lice. Ioſephus reciteth it at large: and herevnto agreeth the holy ſcripture. But it is worthy to be noted,The death of Heod Agrippa. Lib. 9. cap. 17. that when he felt the horrible pangs of death, beholding his friends he ſaid. Looke vpon your God: I am now conſtrained to chaunge my life. And the neceſſitie impoſed vpon me redargueth  your lye. You called me Immortall: but now behold how I am drawne to death. Ioſephus reciteth theſe things more at length in his Antiquities. His Kingdome was chaunged into a Prouince, and Cuspins Fadus was made Gouernour of the Iewes.
            The yeare fortie and ſeuen, Abbarus raigned ouer the Arabians, and Caſſius Longinus was made Gouernour of Siria.
            
            The yeare 48. Marie our Lords mother died after the common opinion of the age of fortie nine yeares. Nancle.
               
See alſo Epiphanius, Lib. 3. of hereſies. If we will beleeue ſome dreames, ſhee was in body carried vp to Heauen, but that tale is ſo friuolous, as he that cannot ſee it is more then blinde.
            
               
                  Ʋpon ſuch foundations Papiſts began by litle and litle to build the Articles of their faith: namely vpon tales and dreames.
            
            The Councell of Ieruſalem, recited in the 15. of the Acts, was about this yeare, and the 6. of the Kingdome of Claudius, and the 14. yeare after the conuerſion of S. Paul, as appeareth by that which is rehearſed in the Galath. 2.
            The ſame yeare during the ſaid famine, Tiberius Alexander was made Gouernour of the Iewes.
            
                The yeare 49. which was the ſeuenth of the Emperour Claudius, there was ſo great a ſedition in Ieruſalem vpon Eaſter day, that twentie thouſand men were ſtifled betwixt the gates, as Ioſephus ſaith, but as others, thirtie thouſand. The ſame yeare Cumanus was Gouernour of Iudea, and Quadratus of Siria.
            
            
                In the 50. yeare, a numbring was made of the people of Rome, and there were found three skore and foure hundreth thouſand, an hundreth three and fortie. The ſame yeare Herod the brother of Agrippa dyed, and his Kingdome was giuen to Agrippa the younger. This was he that gaue audience to S. Paul. Act. 25.
            
               Oroſ. ch. 6.The ſame yeare were ſeene three Sunnes, which by litle and litle ioyned themſelues together. There was alſo an horrible Famine in Greece, and the Iewes were chaſed from Rome by Claudius.
            
            
                The yeare 52. S. Paul did that which is conteined in the 21.17. and 18. Chap. of the Acts. This yeare he came firſt to Corinthe,
               Act. 18. where he remained a yeare and ſixe monethes. At this time the Emperour appeaſed the ſeditions which were betwixt the Iewes and the Samaritanes.
            
                The yeare 53. the Emperour Claudius tooke the Kingdome of Chalcide from Agrippa, which hee had held foure

yeares, and gaue him the Tetrarchie of Philip, with Traconite,
               Nero. 
               Bathane, and Abele:
               Felix. and conſtituted Felix Gouernour of the Iewes.
            
               Iudea was maruellouſly afflicted about this time by inteſtine  conſpiracies and robberies, which was committed by the greateſt men of Ieruſalem. Ionathan the high Prieſt had admoniſhed the Gouernour Felix, to acknowledge the true God. But Felix was ſo grieued hereat, that he ordeined an other high Prieſt, namely Ioſeph, who was a familiar friend of the ſaid Ionathan. Ioſeph aſſembled together a band of theeues and ſlew Ionathan. Theſe theeues which remained vnpuniſhed for this, in an aſſembly of people fell vpon all they thought good, neither carrying reuerence to any perſons nor places, how holy ſoeuer. And the true cauſe of all this miſchiefe was, that ſome falſe Prophets and ſeducers ioyned themſelues with theſe theeues. But ſo ſoone as they were come vnto them, Felix made them die as ſeditious perſons. Amongſt them was a renowned Egiptian, of whom Ioſephus makes mentiō in his Antiquities. This deceiuer perſwaded the common people to aſcend with him into the Mount Oliuet; ſaying that from thence he would ſhewe himſelfe to them, and that by his commaundement the walles of Ieruſalem ſhould fall:Act. 4.21. towards the end. lib. 1. 2. Chap. 29. of the Iewes warres. Euſebius.
                and promiſed them that thereby they might enter. Felix hereof aduertiſed, made arme certaine people, and with a great number of horſemen ruſhed vpon that diſguiſed band, which was of thirtie thouſand, and ſlewe about 400. of them, and tooke 500. aliue. In the meane while this abuſer eſcaped and was neuer after ſeene. Thoſe theeues againe perſwaded the people to make warre againſt the Romanes, and no more to yeeld them obedience. They burnt and pilled ſuch Villages as reſiſted them.
            The yeare 56. S. Paul went to Ieruſalem,
               Act. 19.20.21.22.23. & 24. where he was  taken and ledde to the Gouernour Felix.
            
            
               Domitius Nero ſucceeded in the Empire, and raigned fourteene yeares, two monethes, and certaine dayes. Hee was as very cruell man, and inſatiable in whooredome and Homicide, euen in ſleying his owne mother, his ſiſter,

his brother,Church. his wife Octauia, and an other wife called Pompeia, whom he ſlewe with a blowe of his foote. Hee killed alſo his Schoolemaiſter Seneca, and a Romane Conſull, named Atticus, the better to enioy his wife called Statilia.
            
            
                The yeare 57. after the death of of Aziarius, King of the Emeſicians,
               Chap. 2. of the Iudaik warre. his brother ſucceeded him. See Ioſephus. And Nero gaue the principallitie of the leſſe Armenia, to Aristobulus the Sonne of Herode King of Calcyde: and the Kingdome of Agrippa the younger, was thereby greatly encreaſed.
            
                The yeare 58. after Felix was departed from Iudea, there was a great ſedition in Ceſaria, which is in Palestine, where a great number of Iewes were ſlaine. The ſame yeare S. Paul was ſent priſoner to Rome. There was a ſedition alſo in the other Ceſaria.
               Act. 27. Feſtus. And Festus ſucceeded Felix in the gouernment of Iudea.
            
            The yeare 59. in the Towne of Thoulouze which is in Gaul, there was a verie renowned Rethorician called Statius Surculus. The ſame yeare the Towne of Magunce was repaired by the Romaines.
            
               Chro. Euſ.The yeare 60. In Rome was a great earthquake, and an  Eclipſe of the ſunne, at the time when Nero exerciſed his Parracides and whooredomes.
            
                The yeare 61. a boy of eight yeares of age in Italie, in the time of Fonteius and 
                  Ʋiſpanus Conſuls,
               Iulius. Solinus. Chap. 6.
                did runne fortie thouſand paces, from noone till the euening. The ſame yeare there was an Eclipſe of the Sunne the laſt day of Aprill.
            
                The yeare 62. Albinus was made Gouernour of Iudea.
            
            
               Hiſt. Eccle. Lib. 2. Chap. 23.
               The yeare 63. Iames the brother of the Lorde Ieſus, which was called Iust, accounted Biſhop of Ieruſalem, was ſlaine by the Iewes. The high Prieſt Ananias thinking to recouer libertie, cauſed him to be called into iudgement, and accuſed him as a corrupter of Moyſes Lawe. Some ſay hee was caſt downe from the toppe of the Temple, and as

hee prayed for them which put him to death, hee was ſtrooken with a Fullers Bowe on the heade, whereof hee dyed. Then did Albinus gouerne Iudea, ſucceeding Festus.
            
            The yeare 64. a Thunderbolte fell before Nero his Table. The ſame yeare Saint Marke the Euangeliſt died,Oſnald. Mic. which was the eight yeare of the raigne of Nero, hee was burnt for the Goſpell in Alexandria which is in Aegypt, where hee preached. At this time Agrippa augmented the Towne of Ceſaria Phillippe, and called it Neronia.
            
            The yeare 65. after S. Marke his death,Hiſt. Eccle. Lib. 2. ch. 23 
               Annianus was ordeined the firſt biſhoppe of Alexandria, and gouerned the Church 22. yeares.
            The yeare 66. beganne the firſt perſecution, which was  the tenth yeare of Nero, and endured till his death. By the commaundement of this tyrant,Crime impoſed vpon the Chriſtians. fire was lightned in the Towne of Rome, and that none ſhould ſay it was his act, hee laide the fault vppon the Chriſtians, and made them die of many kindes of deathes. They that called themſelues Chriſtians (which name was as odious vnto all men as if they had beene enemies of mankinde) and they alſo which were accuſed by the priſoners beſides all other euills done vnto them, endured alſo this opprobry,The firſt perſecution againſt the Chriſtians. that beeing couered with Beaſts skinnes, they were with dogges torne in peeces; Some were faſtened to Croſſes and Gallowes. Others burnt with fire, in ſo much that of them they made fires to cleare and lighten the night. Cor. Tacitus rehearſeth this.
            After Festus vnder Nero, ſucceeded in the gouernment of Iudea, Albinus, and after Florus, vnder whom the Iewes beganne to fall into ſuch rebellions and diſſentions, that neither menaces nor torments, exactions, nor occaſions, could repreſſe them.
            In Aſia three Townes periſhed by an Earth-quake: namely Laodicea, Hierapolis, and Coloſſa. All Townes

which had receiued the Goſpell whilſt S. Paul
               Linus. liued, who had inſtructed them partly by writings, partly by his Diſciples, as by Epaphras.
            
            
               A mirrour of Gods iudgement, who cannot endure the deſpiſing of his word.
            
            
                The yeare 60. the Church of the Lord Ieſus in Ieruſalem, as it was aſſembled was diuinely admoniſhed and transferred into the Towne of Pella, which is beyond Iordaine. This ſame yeare 
                  Ʋespaſian was ordeined by Nero to ſet an order in the Countrey of Iudea: who did many things worthy of memorie.
            
                The yeare 68. began the warres of the Iewes vnder Florus, becauſe of his great crueltie, whereof Ioſephus makes mention, Lib. 2. Chap. 13. & Egeſippus, Lib. 3. Chap. 4.
            
                The yeare 70. if we will beleeue the catalogue of the Romaines.
            
               Linus ſucceeded S. Peter. S. Hierome, Nicephorus. Euthalius Deacon and others ſay, that S. Peter was crucified the 14. yeare of Nero, which was the laſt of his raigne, and the 27. yeare after the conuerſion of S. Paul. How then could this be, that Linus ſhould ſucceed him in the Apoſtolicke Sea as they ſay, ſeeing Linus was Martired a yeare before S. Peter? For ſo is it rehearſed by a certaine Monke reſtorer of the Papaltie, who made two great bookes of Counſell in the Towne of Colongne. Hereby may we ſee how aſſured the foundation of Poperie is. If Linus were the high Prieſt or ſoueraigne Biſhop of Rome in the time of Nero, it is certaine S. Peter was not there. But to prooue the Inſtitution of Popiſh ceremonies by the example of the Elders, they ſay that Linus ordeined that women ſhould not enter into the Church vnleſſe their heads were couered: yet that was not an ordinance of Linus,
               1. Cor. 11. but of S. Paul.
            
            There is a great diuerſitie in the Romiſh Catalogues of Biſhops, that hardly can the writers thereof be agreed in their differences, which is a great argument that the Papaltie of

               Rome leanes vpon vncertaine arguments.Galba. You may alſo ſee this in Cletus.
            
            This yeare 
                  Ʋespaſian war ſent by Nero againſt the Iewes.
            
               Nero hated of all, and ſearched to be ſlaine, killed himſelfe, of the age of thirtie and two yeares, and the yeare of his Empire fourteene.
            
               Galba Sergius ſucceeded, of the age of 43. yeares, and raigned ſeuen moneths. He became cruell, Auaricious, a Glutton, and a Sodomite.
            He was ſlaine of his ſouldiers by his ſucceſſor Otho, in the place where men pleaded cauſes. His head was preſented to the ſouldiers, and expoſed for a deriſion and mockery.
            
               Otho the eight Emperour, like in all vices to Nero.
               Otho. Hee raigned three monethes. He ſlewe himſelfe with a ſtroake of his Poinard in his left Pap, after the battaile he loſt againſt Vitellius.
            
            
               
                  Ʋitellius Spinter the ninth Emperour,Vitellius Spinter. raigned about ſeuen or eight monethes. He was a great whooremoonger, cruell, bloudie, and a Glutton. It is rehearſed of him, that at one ſupper he was ſerued at his Table with two thouſand ſundrie ſorts of Fiſhes, and ſeuen thouſand ſorts of flying Fowle, he was ſo exceſſiue.
            He was miſerably ſlaine and drawne naked through the ſtreetes. And after hee had beene launced and pierced with many Darts, was caſt into Tiber. Hee was of the age of 57. yeares.
            The yeare 71. Ignatius was ordeined the ſecond Biſhop  of Antioche. And in this time all Mathematicians were driuen out of Italy. Fabius Quintilianus was drawne from Spaine by the Emperour Galba, and brought to Rome.
            
            
               Veſpaſian the tenth Emperour of Rome raigned nine yeares:
                  Ʋespaſian. a man wiſe, prudent, loyall and affable, modeſt and patient: one onely vice brought diſhonour vnto him, namely Auarice,Couetouſnes or inordinate deſire. and couetouſneſſe of ſiluer, yea euen to impoſe tribute vpon vrine, ſaying. That of all things the ſmell of gaine is good. As he died he ſaid; that an Emperour ſhould die ſitting.
            
               
               Veſpaſian.The yeare 72. the Citie of Ieruſalem was beſieged by  the Romanes.Suetonius. There hath bene no Nation (that we can gather by any Hiſtorie) that hath bene ſo much tormented as that of the Iewes. So much the more familiarly the Lord declared his mercies towards this ingrate and hard hearted people, ſo much the more was it needful he ſhould viſibly ſhewe horrible ſignes of his anger vpon it. No woe nor trouble could be imagined, whereof God gaue not ſome proofe vnto this miſerable Natition. The recitall whereof may ſerue vs for a glaſſe to ſhewe vs what end ſuch may attend as are obſtinate and mockers of the grace of God, ſuch alſo as enhardē themſelues againſt his bountie. After their reuolt which was the 12. yeare of Nero, the Romanes ceaſed not by the ſpace almoſt of ſixe yeares to powre horrible euils vpon the Countrey of Iudea. Although a man ſpeak not of the waſte of the country, who can poſſibly eſteem as belongeth therevnto the onely miſeries of that Towne? For before it was beſieged by the Romanes, it was horribly afflicted by domeſticke enemies, with ſo many factions of audatious Theeues which fought one againſt an other which of thē ſhould commit moſt rapines,Three bands in Ieruſalem. murthers, oppreſſions: And not one of al thoſe bands (which were diuided into three principal: that is to ſay Zelators, 1. ſuch as followed Ilion, & thirdly them of Simon the Gadarean, and of his ſonne Eleazar) thought he mainteined his place well, but in ſurmounting one an other in all manner of wickednes. And finally, their rage was ſo ouerflowne, that there needed no more but only to haue an opinion of modeſtie and true religion, for to be put to death. They ſought one with an other who ſhould be the firſt to ſley the Rich, to robbe them of their goods. To ſley the common people, ſuch as were poore and of baſe condition, was but to take away ſuch as were vnprofitable, and ſuch as were like to be but a charge to the Towne alreadie threatned with a ſiege, and to prepare the Towne to ſuſtain a longer ſiege. To giue to know by any one word, or to ſhew any countenance of griefe at ſuch vnbridled licence to all euils which were then, this was called treaſon, and to complot with the Romanes. When any lamented his parent or friend wrongfully ſlaine, hee was ſtraight

brought to ſome greeuous torment. To pollute the Sanctuary by ſlaughters and murders, this was to combat for the conſeruation of the Temple and the Countries Religion. To take away the ſacred money out of the Temple and diſpend it vpon diſſolute villaines, was to borrow their neceſſaries for the defence of the Ceremonies ordained of God. It was held a crime worthie of death, to ſeeke to withdrawe himſelfe out of the middeſt of theſe euilles. And they which remained in the Towne beſides other miſeries and publike griefes, were conſtrained to ſee before their eyes, their wiues, their children, and their goods, to ſerue the appetite of all ſorts of villains. Finally, this miſerable people needed not feare any new oppreſſion of the Romanes, wherwith before they had not bene tormented euen by themſelues, which called themſelues their defenders. But after the Towne was beſieged by the Romanes,Horrible famine. there was ſo horrible a famine that during the ſiege eleuen hundred thouſand men dyed. Beſides ſuch as were ſlaine by the enemies at aſſaults, and ſuch as were ſlaine when the Towne was taken: and during that warre, there was about 97. thouſand taken. Some part of them were ſolde, others were carried to great Townes to ſerue for Princes paſtimes, in expoſing them to beaſtes to bee torne in peeces: Others were put into ſome paled parke, where they fought till they ſlewe one an other: Others were led into 
                  •
               ands, there to ſpend their liues. The 14. day of Aprill of the foreſaid yeare, Titus laide ſiege before Ieruſalem, during the feaſt or Eaſter, the yeare of Chriſt  73. vpon which day in reſpect of the ſolemnitie, there were infinite people aſſembled. The 22. of that moneth hee made platformes and Rammes, and beganne to beate the Towne. The 7. day of May he tooke the firſt wall, and the new Towne called Bezeth. The 12. day of the ſaid moneth the ſecond wall was again taken, with the baſe part of the towne,The taking of Ieruſalem. from whence the Romanes had before bene chaſed. The 21. of the ſaid moneth hauing gotten 2. parts of the towne, he gently inuited thē to require peace, but ſeeing they would not, he cauſed his platformes to be ſet vp againſt the fort called Antonia, nie the 3. wal which the Iewes burnt: but a new wall was made by ye Romans,

enuironed all the Towne to hinder the lewes from flying and ſeeking victualls. The firſt day of Iuly Titus mooued with compaſſiō for the people which ſuffered and endured ſo much by the hard obſtinacie of ſome, beganne to beate Antonia and the third wall. The ſixt day fell one part of the wall of the Fortreſſe, on that ſide where the Iewes had a conueyance out of the Towne. The eight day of the moneth of Auguſt, the Iewes repreſſed by great outrages and blowes of arrowes, Heraulds were ſent by Titus to make them harken vnto peace, that the Temple might haue bene ſpared. The temple was taken by force, and againſt the Edict and defence of Titus, it was burnt. The 20. day he began to batter the high Towne, which is called the Citie of Dauid, after the Iewes had againe refuſed peace. The ſeuenth day of September this high Towne was taken, whereof the Temple was the Fortreſſe, as Antonia was the defence of the Temple. The eight day of the ſaid moneth, all the Towne was put to fire and bloud.
            The 24. day of October, Titus celebrated the day of his brother Domitian his Natiuitie, in a Taritine Towne of Ceſaria: and there he made paſtimes of diuers ſorts, wherein were brought about three thouſand Iewes Captiues. Some were diſpatched by beaſts, others were ſet in order of battaile to ſley one an other. The like was done in Berith, a Towne of Siria, the 27. of Nouember. Where Titus celebrated the Natiuitie of his Father Veſpaſian.
            
            When we heare this Summarie recitall (which is not the tenth part of the euils and fearefull calamities that this miſerable Nation endured,Rom. 10.) let vs not ſtray into fooliſh imaginations, but thinke with our ſelues, if God ſpared not the naturall braunches, what ſhall become of vs. Let vs behold the benignitie and ſeueritie of God. His ſeueritie vpon them that are fallen: his benignitie vpon vs, which are planted in the place of the Iewes.
            This ſame yeare Veſpaſian cauſed them to be ſought which were of the family of Dauid: for that there was a great perſecution againſt the Iewes.
            
               Ceſennius Gouernour of Siria, chaſed Antiochus King of

               Comageniens out of his kingdome, & ſent him captiue to Rome.
               Titus.
            
            In this time Lucilius Baſſus was ſent Embaſſador into Iudea.
            
            There happened a ſedition in Alexandria, wherein many Iewes were ſlaine.
            
               Achaia, Licia, Rhodes, Bizantum, Samathrachia, Cilicia, and Comagene, which before were free and vnder the iuriſdiction of Kings, friends, and confederates of the Romanes, were made ſeruants and reduced into Prouinces.
            
               Aſcanius Pedianus an Hiſtoriographer flouriſhed at this time, who in the 73. yeare of his age became blinde, and liued yet 12. yeares in great honour.
            An Earth-quake ouerthrew three Townes in Ciprus.
            
            
               Titus the eleuenth Emperour Veſpaſians ſonne, raigned  two yeares and twentie dayes. Hee was liberall and gentle, eloquent in the Greeke tongue. Hee vſed to ſay that none ought to goe from the preſence of a Prince ſad or deſolate.
            
               Linus Biſhop of Rome by the commaundement of the Conſul Saturnine was beheaded vpon falſe accuſation for Art Magicke.Linus. Naucler.
            
            The 2. yeare of Titus, horrible things happened in Campania (which is now called Terra Dilauoro, the Land of labour.) The mount Veſnue which lookes toward the Sea on Naples Coaſt, and hath comming out of it as it were great ſprings of fire, burſt in ſunder at the top, and caſt out ſo great flames that it burnt the Townes adiacent, with the men therein.
            There came alſo at Rome a litle time after when all men were ignorant of that which happened in Campania, great and horrible calamites, in ſo much that many were of opinion that all things would be ouerthrowne and the Sunne would fall on the earth, for the multitude of aſhes and ſmoake which were diſpearſed in the ayre.
            The yeare following Titus went to ſee the calamitie which was come, and in the meane while many things were burnt at Rome, and the fire came out of the earth. For the Bathes of Agrippa, the Temple of Serapis and Ifis, the

Theatre of Balbus,
               Cletus. the Pantheon, the Parkes and many other places were altogether conſumed with fire, whereby may be coniectured of others which periſhed by the ſame fire. Dion reciteth all this at large.
            
               Chro. Euſeb.The Amphitheatre was now builded at Rome by Titus.
            
            
               Theſe things are recited, to the ende that by the knowledge of ſuch iudgements of God, we may learne to feare him.
            
            
               Cletus a Romane Biſhop of Rome, gouerned a 11. yeares.  He approued the viſitation of Saint Peter, ſaying that ſuch viſitation was much better then a faſting two yeares. This was the firſt Biſhop that put in his Letters Salutem & Apoſtolicam benedictionem.
            
            There are none of the Elders which make mention of this Cletus, neither do they ſufficiently expound, if Cletus and Anacletus were two, or both one. Onely Damaſus ſpeaketh, but yet ſo confuſedly, that there can be no agreement of the time.
            
               Titus the Emperour, of the age of 42. yeares, nigh to his death lamented ſore; Saying, muſt I die and neuer deſerued it? He was deified by the authoritie of the Senate after his death.
            
               There you may ſee how the Panim Gods came, created, and forged by the wills of men.
            
            
               Ioſephus an Hiſtoriographer and a Iewe, flouriſhed at this time. He was Duke of the Hebrewes Hoaſt, and being Titus his priſoner, was ſet at libertie: which hee vſed, in compoſing ſeuen bookes of the Iewdaicall Hiſtorie, which he preſented to Veſpaſian and Titus, who ſet vp an Image of him at Rome.
            
            The 72. yeare, which was the ſecond yeare of the raigne of Titus, Linus hauing gouerned the Church of Rome 12. yeares,  reſigned the office to Anacletus, who was the ſecond Biſhop of Rome. Ireneus and Euſebius doo witneſſe this, without making any mention of Cletus,
               Anacletus. which ſome ſay was the ſucceſſor of Linus.
            
            
               Domitian the 12. Emperour, raigned 15. yeares and ſixe moneths. This man was exceeding wicked, cruell, adulterous,

chollericke, a coward, proud, a rauener.Domitian. He committed Inceſt with his brothers daughter, whom he rauiſhed and tooke out of her husbands hands.
            Three Virgin Vestalls were buried aliue for whoordome.Euſeb.
            
            
               Domitian hauing by publike Edicts commaunded that he ſhould be called Lord and God, cauſed Images of himſelfe of gold and ſiluer to be erected.
            He caſt out of Rome all Philoſophers:Faſc. Tem. he ſent into exile many Senators and Nobles, and ſome he ſlew. He builded the Pantheon at Rome.
            
            He ſtirred the ſecond perſecution againſt the Chriſtians,The ſecond perſecution againſt the Chriſtians. and cauſed all ſuch to be put to death as he found to be of the ſtocke of Dauid. For he feared the comming of Chriſt. Afterward he cauſed the perſecution to ceaſe.
            S. Denis, Ruſticus, and Eleutherus, preached the Goſpel in Fraunce.
            
            The yeare 87. Albilius was conſtituted the ſecond Biſhop  of Alexandria, and was Biſhop 12. yeares.
            The yeare 88. Domitian by the conduction of Fuſcus paſſed ouer Danaw, and ledde his Army againſt Dorpaneus, King of the Gothes or of the Dares. The Gothes ouercame the Romanes, and Fuſcus was ſlaine, and the Campe pilled or ſpoiled.
            
               Clement a Romane the fourth Biſhop of Rome, ruled nine  yeares. He inſtituted notaries to write the acts of the Martirs,Notaries and pronotaries, their conſtancie and patience, for example and perpetuall remembrance.
            
               Domitian of the age of 45. yeares was ſlaine in his Pallace by the coniuration of his familiar friends, & conſent of his wife. He was buried without any honor, & all his Images caſt down.
            The Senate diſanulled all his ordinances, and called againe  ſuch as he had exiled.
            S. Iohn the Euangeliſt from his exile of Pathmos (which is an Ile in the ſea Egea: which is betwixt Aſia the great,The death of S. Iohn the Euangeliſt. & the leſſe) returned into Epheſus, where he died of the age of an hundreth yeares or there abouts, and was there buried.
            
               Nerua Cocceius now olde, was made the 13. Emperour,The Chron. of the Emper. and raigned one yeare, 4. moneths. He died at the age of 71.

yeares.Clement. Being Emperor, he pronounced al Chriſtians abſolued, whether accuſed or baniſhed, and called them backe. Hee was wont to ſay that men muſt rather reſpect a mans vertue then his race or country. He was by the Senate deified.
            Now roſe there many hereſies in the Church after the death of the Apoſtles.
            
               Traian a Spaniard the 13. Emperour, raigned 19. yeares, 6. moneths, and 15. dayes.
            Hee was greatly praiſed of Hiſtoriographers as a debonaire and gentle Prince, yet he perſecuted the Chriſtians. Vnder him was Clement martyred.
            
               
                  Euſebius.
               Foure Townes periſhed in Aſia, and two in Greece, with Earthquakes.
            
               The third perſecution. Suppl. Chro. The third perſecution made againſt the Chriſtians in the time of Traian. He feared ſome hurt ſhould haue come to the Romane Empire by the encreaſe of Religion.
            There were each day a great number of Martyrs ſlaine. In ſo much that Plinie the younger hauing then the adminiſtration of a Prouince, namely Bithinia, and ſeeing the great number of men which then dyed, writ to the Emperour how each day many thouſands of perſons were put to death, yet was there not found that they committed any fault, neither did any thing againſt their Romane lawes: but only for that they ſung certaine Hymnes and Pſalmes afore day,Singing of Pſalmes auncient. to a certaine God they called Chriſt. And finally, that Adulteries, Homicides, Thefts, and other crimes, were prohibited them, and did keepe themſelues from ſuch faults, liuing carefully according to common Lawes. Wherevnto the Emperour gaue anſwere and commaundement to make no more any Inquiſition againſt Chriſtians. Yet was not thereby the occaſion taken away from them, which had a will to ſhew cruelty againſt Chriſtians.
            
               Faſci. temp.
               Timotheus a Martyr in this time.
            
               Anacletus 5. Biſhop of Rome borne in Greece, an Athenian, ruled two moneths and ten dayes.
            We now enter into the times which were incontinent after the Apoſtles, and take their beginning in the kingdome of Traian.
            
            
               
               Anacletus ordeined that no Clarke ſhould weare a beard,Anacletus
               
                  Naucle, Now none but the Prieſt communicateth.
                  Suppl. Chro.
                and commaunded all the faithfull that were at the adminiſtration of the Lords Supper, either to communicate or to be driuen out of the Temple.
            
               
                  Euſebius placeth Anacletus in the place of Cletus, after Linus; and after Clement, immediately he makes mention of Euariſtus, which is the cauſe of the diſcord that is found amongst Historians in this place.
            
            
               Anacletus ordeined that the Cleargie two times in the yeare ſhould haue Sinodes or Congregations,Sinode. for the affaires of the Church.
            In his writings amongſt other things he admoniſheth the people to carrie honour and reuerence to their Miniſters, and to ſupport them. He that ſpeaketh euill of a Miniſter ſaith he,In the firſt volume of Councell. ſpeaketh euill of Chriſt; and he iudgeth him to be ſeperate from Chriſt. He was put to death vnder Traian.
            
            Hereſies at this time grieued the Church within,Heretickes. and publicke perſecutions without.
            1. Cerinthus the Hereticke,Suppl. Chron. held that Moyſes lawe muſt bee kept alone.
            Alſo that Chriſt was not riſen againe,S. Aug. but that hee ſhould riſe againe.
            He made the Kingdome of Chriſt carnall.Euſebi, Sup. Ch.
            
            2. Ebion held Chriſt to be a pure man, engendred as others: And he called S. Paul, the Apoſtle of the Lawe.
            3. Menander, a Nigromancian, &c.
            4. Baſilides,
               Euſebi. theſe did infinitely ſpread their imaginations touching the procreation of their Gods and Angels. And to yeeld the more aſtoniſhment, they vſed diſguiſed and barbarous words.
            5. The Nicholaites would women to be common.Hiſto. Ecclec. Lib. 3. cap. 26.
            
            6. Saturnin following Simon Magus, ſaid alſo that men might vſe women indifferently, as the Nicholaites.
            
            
               Papias Biſhop of Hierapolis, Policarpus Biſhop of Smirna, Ignatius Biſhop of Antioche, good and Catholicke Paſtors,

Diſciples of S. Iohn the Euangeliſt.Euariſtus.
            
            
               See how God deſtituted not his Church of true Pastors to withstand Heretickes.
            
            
               Anno. Chriſt. 121.
               Euariſtus the 6. Romane Biſhop ruled 8. or nine yeares.
            He ordeined that ſeuen Deacons ſhould be choſen in euery Citie,Euſeb. which ſhould marke and keepe by the Biſhop as hee preached and taught the people. He appointed them alſo for witneſſes of the word of God,Faſci. Temp. that none might impoſe that he had preached euill againſt the truth.
            He ordeined that marriages ſhould be publikely ſolemnized in Churches.marriage pub. like.
            
            That the Church ſhould obey his Biſhop, and that the Biſhop ſhould not leaue his Church during his life, no more then the woman her husband.
            There be two Epiſtles found of him. In the firſt he makes that Apoſtolicke ſeate head of the Church: wherevnto he wils that all doubtfull affaires ſhould be brought: yet in his ſecond Epiſtle he contradicts it.
            In Gallatia three Cities periſhed with an Earthquake. Euſebius.
            
            
               Euaristus was Martired the laſt yeare of the Empire of Traian.
            
            The Pantheon of Rome burnt with lightning.
            
               Euſeb. Lucian.
               Lucian the Apoſtate and Atheiſt compoſed his dialogues vnder Traian.
            
            The towne of Antioch was ſo ſhaken, that euen the Mountaines nigh did ſhake and quake, yea euen the Mount Caſſius, the higheſt in Siria, the Flouds there dried vp, and the earth ſounded in a ſtrange maner. Tiles falling clattered in ſuch ſort, and the cries of men ouerthrowne were ſo fearefull, and with duſt the obſcuritie was ſo thick, that there was neuer ſeene or heard ſpeake of ſo ſtraunge things. The Emperour Traian was then there, and likewiſe people of all Nations of the Romane Empire.
            
               
               Dion writeth this horrible confuſion,Alexander & the calamities which proceeded this Earthquake which happened at Antioch.
            
            
               Ignacius Biſhop of Antioch was led priſoner to Rome to be caſt vnto beaſts, and ſo to be aſpectacle vnto the people.Euſeb. As he went from Siria to Rome, and paſſed through the Countrie of Aſia, in all places where he came he preached to the people and Churches the Chriſtian faith, exhorting them to perſeuer and keepe themſelues from the infection of Hereticks which then began to ſpring, in carefully keeping the doctrine receiued of the Apoſtles.
            The cauſe was, that in Antioch hauing reprehended the Idolatrie of Traian, he was apprehended as one ſeditious & guiltie of treaſon, & was giuen in charge to 10. ſouldiers, or rather tormenters, to be led to Rome and be put to Lions: wherof Ignacius himſelfe ſaith. I haue had to fight with beaſts from Siria to Rome, by ſea, by land, night and day amongſt 10. Leopards, &c. Ireneus in his fift booke ſpeaking of Ignacius, beeing condemned to beaſts, he ſaid (ſaith he) I am the wheat of Ieſus Chriſt, and ſhalbe grinded with the teeth of beaſts, to the end I may be made the bread of God.
            
               Alexander the 7. Biſhop of Rome, was a Romane, and gouerned 10. yeares; namely from the 12. yeare of Traian, til the third of Adrian.
            
            Many things are ſpoken of the integritie of his life, wherby many of the Romane Senators were drawne to the Chriſtian faith, ſeeing in him vertues truly Epiſcopall:De cenſe. diſt. 2. cap. in Sacramento. Diſt. 10.102. to. Si quib. 10, Diſt. cap. Relatum. yet it is attributed vnto him, that he ſhould firſt bring in new ceremonies of the Church, as the holy water ſo keepe in houſes and Churches againſt the diuell, and for remiſſion of ſinnes: Alſo to mingle wine and water together at the Lords ſupper: Alſo the Aſperges vpon the people: Alſo that Bread ſhould be without Leauen, and not commō bread as before. They make him the firſt, which by decree excommunicated them who reſiſted Apoſtolicke meſſengers.The firſt addition to the Lords Supper. He ordeined that no Clarke ſhould be accuſed and drawne before a ſecular Iudge: he is ſaid to be the firſt which added to the Lords ſupper (Caena pridie quàm pateretur,) &

made that ouerture to his ſucceſſors to adde thervnto:Adrian. which haue not ſince ceaſed vntill the whole Supper of the Lord was corrupted and chaunged.2. Teſſ. 2. de conſe. diſt. 2. cap. Sufficit. Alſo he ordeined to celebrate but once a day.
            
               The Popes afterward forged their decretalls.Note heere generally for the Biſhops which were firſt at Rome, that many Epiſtles haue bene attributed vnto them, which mention greater number of Ceremonies then there is in other Churches, and ſuch as were vnknowne to them which writ in that time, which made them then ſuſpected. For the Popes which came after, haue made thoſe firſt Biſhops their buckler for authors of their lyes and dreames.
            
               Alexander receiued the Crowne of Martirdome vnder the Emperour Adrian, by the commaund of his Gouernour Aurelian, who demaunded of Alexander why hee held his peace when the fire was lightned about him to burne him. He anſwered that he was ſpeaking to God (ſignifying that he prayed) and therefore it was not lawfull for him to ſpeake vnto men. Honorius and Nauclerus Dion rehearſeth of the Emperour Traian, that before he died his members were retracted, and al his body ſenſleſſe. His ſences alſo were dulled, and after that, he became to be full of the dropſie, and greatly ſwelled. He finally died in Selinion, a Towne of Cicile. Some ſay his body was brought to Rome and deified by the Senate after his death, after the maner of the Romanes.
            
               Although this Prince had great politicke vertues, yet is he to be placed in the third ranke of the cruel enemies and perſecutors of the Church of God.
            
            
               Anno Chriſt. 101.
               Adrian the 16. Emperour, raigned 22. yeares, gentle, and cunning in all knowledges. He perſecuted the Chriſtians. But when he knew the truth of their life, he cauſed the perſecution to ceaſe.
            
               Suppl. Chro.
               Quadratus Biſhop of Athens, the Apoſtles Diſciple, preſented an Apologeticke booke to the ſaid Adrian, in defence of the Chriſtian Faith.
            
               Aristides a Philoſopher of Athens, a faithfull man, made a

like Booke: wherevpon Adrian ſent to Minutius Fundanus,
               Sixtus. Proconſul of Aſia, that he ſhould no more perſecute the Chriſtians. But if they did any thing againſt lawes, he would that he ſhould therein deale according to the qualitie of the crime. And if any ſlaunderoufly accuſed them, he commaunded ſuch ſhould be chaſtiſed for their malice.
            
               Nicomedia and Nice were ruinated by an Earthquake, and afterward reſtored by the liberalitie of Adrian. Euſeb. Chro.
            
            All euils which came to men were laide vpon the Chriſtians, ſaying they came all for their cauſe, whether they were Earthquakes, warre, or other calamities.
            
               Sixtus or Xiſtus a Romane, 8. Biſhop of Rome, ruled about 10. yeares.Not to touch Challices. He decreed that none ſhould touch the conſecrated ornaments, Veſſels, Challices, &c. vnleſſe they were Church-men.
            He added to the Communion of the Euchariſt. Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus, Dominus Deus Sabaoth.
            
            He graunted this priuiledge to Clarkes, that they might appeale from their Biſhop to the Apoſtolicke Sea.
            In his Decretalls he is called Arch-biſhop of the Romane Church. Item vniuerſall Biſhop of the Apoſtolicke Church.
            About this time, thoſe words Arch-biſhop, Metropolitane, and Clergie, beganne to be vſed in Epiſtles.
            He appointed certaine puniſhments for Prieſts or Miniſters that were negligent in baptizing Children before their deaths.
            At this time the Supper of the Lord was called Euchariſt: The words Sacrifice or Maſſe were not yet brought in. And although Ireneus ſometimes called the Euchariſt, Oblation, hee declares his meaning therein in his 4. Booke and 34. Chapter.The word Oblation. We make vnto him an Oblation ſaith he: not as to him which ſtands in need thereof; but as giuing him thankes for the good he hath done vnto vs. And againe he willes alſo that we giue offerings at the Aultar: and often, and without ceaſing. But the Aultar is in heauen (ſaith he) and thither muſt we addreſſe our prayers and Oblations.
            
               
               It may well be that then this word Oblation was in common vſe, becauſe the cuſtome then was to offer Loaues of bread in great abundance for the vſe of the Supper: wherewith the Miniſters liued, and the poore were nouriſhed.
            
            
               The laſt deſtruction of the Iewes.The Iewes ſurpriſed with a new rage, beganne againe to take armes againſt the Romanes. Dion ſaith the occaſion thereof was for that Adrian had builded there a Temple to Iupiter, and placed there Idols of the Gentiles. The Iewes choſe for their Captaine,
                  Barrochabas the Iewe. 
               Barrochabas, who named himſelfe the ſonne of the Starre. This man exerciſed great crueltie againſt Chriſtians, becauſe they woulde not ioyne with the Iewes: But Adrian repreſſed thoſe ſeditious people, and famiſhed them, and tooke away their waters, and finally diſcomfited them nigh to Bethera, a little Towne by Ieruſalem, and in one onely battaile hee ſlew fiftie eight thouſand men. After Nicephorus Ancelme, ſpeaketh of fiftie thouſand Iewes ſlaine, fiftie holdes taken, and nine hundred eightie fiue Villages deſtroyed, as well by famine, as by fire and bloud, and all the reſt of the Iewes miſerably driuen from Ieruſalem into far Countries, and ſold ouer all the world.
            The Emperour Adrian would not that the Citie of Ieruſalem ſhould any more retaine his auncient name, but hauing againe made it, he called it by his owne name Aelia Capitolina. Honorius and Euſebius ſay that hee made Edicts be publiſhed, whereby it was not lawfull for the Iewes, no not ſo much as to regard a farre off their Country of Iudea.
            
            
               The firſt ſo terrible a deſtruction might haue ſufficiently taught them that the kingdome was taken from them as the Prophets had foretold. But God would that a ſecond time they ſhould feele a puniſhment almoſt as horrible as the firſt.
            
            The Chriſtians after dwelt in Paleſtine with ſome aſſurance, and there had Churches.
            
               Sixtus ſent many to preach the faith in France, hee was

afterward martyred vnder Adrian.
               Teleſphorus.
            
            Pernitious hereſies now did ſpring, Saturnin, Baſilides,
               Hereſies in the Church. 
               Carpocrates, Valentia, and Tatien, tore in peeces the doctrine of God, forging many Gods, & denying the humanitie of Chriſt.
            
               Valentine and Martian forged that Chriſt brought from heauen his humane fleſh.
            
               Martian ſaide there was two beginnings, the one good, and the other euil.
            
               Montanus denyed the Diuinitie of Chriſt, and affirmed of himſelfe that he was the holy Ghoſt.
            They admitted and allowed whoredomes and villainous filthineſſe againſt marriage.Epiphanius.
            
            Many were turned from the true doctrine by theſe hereſies & blaſphemies which proceeded from thoſe horrible monſters, Inſtruments of Sathan.
            
               Telesphorus 9. Biſhop of Rome a Grecian, ruled ſixteene yeares of the time of Adrian and Antonine. It is attributed vnto him that he ſhould enioyne Church-men to abſtain from fleſh 7. weekes before Eaſter. The Decretall likewiſe attributed vnto him, makes mention of Clarkes, but not of laie people; yet after by ſucceſſion of time, Lent became obſerued of all. He inſtituted three celebratiōs of Chriſts natiuitie, one at midnight, an other at the point of day, and the laſt at three. He added Gloria in excelſis Deo &c. Some ſay it was S. Hillary others Symmacus. This hymne ſeemeth to haue bin writtē againſt the Arrians, as ſhall be ſaid hereafter. And the fourth Councel of Toledo, Chap. 12. makes mention that this Cauticke was made by the Eccleſiaſticall Doctors. Henry Bullinger Lib. 2. of the beginning of his Decad. Chap. 7.
            He ordained alſo that none ſhould preſume to celebrate in the morning before 3. a clocke. In this Decretall hee is called Arch-biſhop of Rome.
            
            
               Carpocrates an hereticke, was the inuentor of a Sect & manner of people called Gnoſtici:
               Gnoſtiques. For he taught them ſecrets of Magicke, & dreames of loue, which came by diuelliſhilluſiō. Many hereby were deceiued & led to deſtruction. They which were not yet inſtructed, ſeeing the execrable life of thoſe villaines which called thēſelues Chriſtians, would therefore aboliſh the

Chriſtian faith as if all were alike.Adrian. And all the ſlaunders wherwith they charged the Chriſtians, namely that they were cruell, and that they medled with all women carnally without any regard of bloud or parentage, yea that they did eate little children, came not but from thoſe pernitious heretickes.
            
               So it falls out at this day: For the errours of Anabaptists and Libertines are without difference attributed vnto ſuch as follow the Goſpell, and with a common name they are wrongfully called Lutherans.
               
            
            
               Adrian builded a Temple and a Sepulchre vnto Antinous, whom hee had wickedly abuſed in his life, and ordeined that men ſhould euery yeare celebrate the playes and paſtimes called with his name Antinoens. He alſo founded a Citie of the ſaid Antinous name,A Buggerer, worſhipped as God. which hee called Antinoe. Where for feare of the Emperour, Antinous is worſhipped as God, although men knew what a man he was.
            
               Adrian died very miſerably; There came vnto him a great fluxe of bloud: hee was alſo taken with great paine and fell to the dropſie: he aſſayed by Arts Magicke to drawe that water out of his body: but nothing helped him, neither ceaſed the bloudy Fluxe. Sopartianus reciteth, that hee called of his Phiſitian for poyſon, and ſeeing he would not giue it him, he demaunded a knife, promiſing great things to him that would deliuer him one.The death of Adrian.
                He dyed of the age of 62. yeares, hauing no member in his body which was not vexed with torments. Aurelius Victor.
            
            
               He was puniſhed with bloud, for the bloud he ſhead.
            
            The perſecutions in Aſia were exceeding great. See Euſe. Lib. 5. Chap. 15. where at length he deſcribeth the Martyrdome of Policarpus. Lib. 4. Chap. 23. The Athenians offended at ſo great perſecutions wherein they had loſt Publius their Biſhop, almoſt reuolted from the faith.
            
               Torments and cruelties againſt Chriſtains.There was no torment nor puniſhment that the Inſtruments of the diuel could deuiſe, whereof the Chriſtians were

not iudged worthy:Pius. for they were eſpied in and without their houſes. They cried againſt them in all publicke places. They whipped them, trailed them, ſtoned them, pilled their goods, impriſoned them, plates of yron were applyed to their naked fleſh: They locked them in an Inſtrument of Torture euen to the fift point, they were put in obſcure and lowe places in priſon: Some ſtrangled them, ſome expoſed them to beaſts, and other infinit torments. The dead bodies in priſon, after they were caſt into the fields, they ſet Dogges there to keepe them that they might not bee buried.
            In theſe hard torments Chriſtians gaue courage one to another, and were very carefull to take ſuch order as none ſhould fall from their profeſſion, either by infirmitie, or for want of abilitie to endure the torments.
            The number of Martyrs of this time were too great to be recited in this litle Treatiſe. But Iuſtine, Euſebius, Baſile the great, and other auncient Doctours, haue carefully ſet them downe in writing.
            
               Theſe examples ought to encourage vs conſtantly to maintaine the truth of the Gospell.
            
            
               Antonius Pius a Gentile,
                  An. Chriſti. 123.
                  
                  In the booke he writ to Strapula.
                  
                Emperour 16. raigned 23. yeares or thereabout, a man benigne and modeſt. He ſaid often that he had rather ſaue a Citizen, then to ſley a thouſand of his enemies.
            
               Tertullian witneſſeth that hee was not altogether gentle towards the Chriſtians, and eſpecially in the beginning of his raigne: When Arrius Antonius (ſaith hee) ceaſed not to perſecute in Aſia, the Chriſtians aſſembling in a company, preſented themſelues before the Iudiciall ſeate. And after hee had ſent ſome fewe of them to the Iibbet, hee ſaid to the reſt, O miſerable men, If you haue an affection to die, haue you not cords to hang yourſelues? or high places to caſt your ſelues downe?
            
               Higinius an Athenian, a Philoſophers ſonne,Higinius. gouerned the Church of Rome 4. yeares.
            
               He ordained that Churches ſhould be dedicated by ſolemne ceremony. Item that the number of Temples ſhould neither be augmented nor diminiſhed without the conſent of the Metropolitane. See the Decretall. De conſe. diſt. pri. ca. Omnes Bacilicae.
               Pope. This was the firſt who entituled himſelfe Pope, in his ſecond Decretall.
            
               De conſe. diſt. 1. ca. Lignae. He for bad that Summers, Sparres, Tyles, and other matter of Temples, ſhould be after applied to any prophane vſe, but burnt or giuen to other poore Churches and Monaſteries, and not to the vſes of Laie men.
            He inſtituted that at Catechiſme, Baptiſme, and confirmation, there ſhould be a Godfather or Godmother. De conſe. diſt. 4. ca. In cat.
            
            
               36. Hom, 10. cap. 1. Si qua nud.He ordained that if any woman came to the ſecōd marriage by whom ſhee had iſſue, that that iſſue could not be married to the conſanguinitie of the firſt husband vntill the fourth degree.
            Item, that no Metropolitane except the Pope, ſhall condemne any of his Cleargie, Prieſt, Suffragane or Biſhop of his Prouince, vnles firſt the cauſe be handled and knowne in the Councell of other prouinciall Biſhops, otherwiſe the ſentence not to be vailable. 8. q. 3. c. Salus in omnibus.
            
            
               Galen the Phiſitian flouriſhed at this time.
            
               Valentine the hereticke a Platonician, denied the reſurrection of the fleſh.
            
               S. Auguſt.Hee affirmed that Chriſt tooke no humane fleſh off the Virgines wombe, but that hee paſſed through it as through a conduit.
            
               Cerdon the Stoike, ſaid at Rome that the holy Ghoſt deſcended not vpon the Apoſtles, but vpon himſelfe.
            
               Note here the ſaying of Tertullian, namely, that the Philoſophers are Patriarkes of heretickes.
            
            
               Martian the Stoike a follower of Menander, made two contrary principles.
            This Pope (ſeeing hee named himſelfe ſo) was a learned

man,Anicetus.
               Supp. Chro. and made a booke intituled De Trinitate & vnitate Dei.
            
            
               Pius firſt of that name 11. Pope of Rome, an Italian of  
               Aquilia, ruled at Rome a 11. yeares.
            Some ſay hee ordeined that Eaſter ſhould be celebrated vpon the Sunday, by the perſwaſion of Hermes,
               Eaſter celebrated vpon a reuelation made to Hermes.
                who ſaid it had bene reuealed vnto him by an Angell, in likenes of a ſhepheard. And this ordinance was after confirmed by many Pope.
            That hee decreed puniſhments for Eccleſiaſticall perſons which adminiſtred the Sacraments of the body and bloud of Chriſt negligently. That is to ſay, that he that by imprudency & negligently, let fal vpō the earth any of the blood of Chriſt (ſo ſpeakes he) ſhould do penance 40. dayes. If it fell vpon the Aultar, 3. dayes. If vpon the Chalice cloth, 4. dayes. If on any other cloth, 9. dayes. And that the ſaid bloud ſo falne, ſhould be licked, ſcraped or waſhed, and after all burnt, and kept for the Sacriſteres.
            
            
               By litle and litle then the Romane ſeate beganne to forge ordinances.
            
            Alſo that Virgins or Nunnes ſhould not take vpon them the vaile before the age of 25. yeares.
            Item,Swearing and blaſpheming. that if any Eccleſiaſticall perſon did ſweare or blaſpheme he ſhould be depoſed, and euery Laie perſon excommunicated.
            
               Anicetus 12. Pope a Sirian, ruled 10. or a 11. yeares, wiſe, and of good life.
            Some attribute vnto him that hee ordained the Crowne for Prieſts.Prieſtes Crowne.
            
            He was martyred vnder Marcus Aurelius.
            
            In his time Egeſippus an Hebrew came to Rome, & dwelt there vntill Eleutherius.
            
            
               Iustinus a Chriſtian Phyloſopher, writ a booke in defence of Faith and Religion, to the Emperour Antonius Pius, who alſo was much enclined to maintaine it.
            He writ againſt Martian.
            
            
               
               Marcus Aurelius.
               Policarpus Biſhop of Smyrna in Ionia, which is in Aſia the leſſe aboue Epheſus, came to great age. Ireneus ſaith that he was ordeined Biſhop by the Apoſtles, and it is likely that he began his miniſtery the 2. or 3. of Traian. S. Ierome in his Catalogue ſaith he was placed there by S. Iohn the Euangeliſt, who dyed the yeare 68. after the paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt as moſt ſay. Ireneus reciteth of him, that one day as Marcian encountred him and ſaid vnto him; Take knowledge with vs. Policarp. anſwered him: I know thee for the firſt ſonne of Satan. And Ireneus ſaith further: There are ſome haue heard him ſay that Iohn the Diſciple of Ieſus went into Bathes to waſh himſelfe, and ſeeing Cerinthus the hereticke there,The company of heretickes daungerous. he went out, and waſhing himſelfe ſaying: Let vs flie from hence leaſt this houſe fall vpon vs, where Cerinthus enemy of the truth waſheth.
            
               Note how the Diſciples of the Apoſtles had this rule, not to communicate with them which falſifie the truth of the Goſpell.
            
            Whileſt Policarpus was at Rome, he withdrew many from their hereſies.
            
               Marcus Aurelius, Antoninus Verus the brother of Antonius Pius, obtained the Empire 18. yeares.
            
               Lucius Ʋerus his ſonne in lawe, gaue himſelfe to dice, and to haunt the Stewes. Therfore was he ſent into Siria, by Marcus Aurelius,
               Chro. of Emper. and at laſt as ſome ſay poiſoned. After ſome, he dyed of an Apoplexe. So Marcus Aurelius Antoninus raigned alone.
            The fourth perſecution after Nero was ſtirred againſt the Chriſtians by Marcus Aurelius.
               The fourth perſecution. And as Euſebius ſaith, many euils happened in Italie: great peſtilence, warre, earthquakes, Invndations of waters, and a multitude of Graſhoppers.
            In the meane while by the perſecutions as it were continuall, the Chriſtians affaires encreaſed from day to day by the doctrine of the Apoſtles Diſciples. Wherof yet many then did liue: that the Chriſtian Religion tooke ſtrong roote being thus bedeawed with the bloud of Martyrs.
            
               We muſt not here forget the ſentence of Iustine ſpoken in a colloquie with Trypheus. Hee ſaith thus;Soter. Men may each day perceiue that we which beleeue in Chriſt cannot be aſtoniſhed nor turned backe. Let them cut off our heads; Let them crucifie vs: Let them expoſe vs to beaſts, to fires, or other torments: and ſo much more as men torment vs, ſo much more do the number of Chriſtians encreaſe. Euen as when a Vine is cut, it is but to make it more fertile: So the Vine which God hath planted and the Sauiour Ieſus, that is his people, cannot but multiply by torments, &c.
            
               Melito Biſhop of Sardis, writ to the Emperour for the Faith and Chriſtian Religion.
            
               Apollinaris Biſhop of Hierapolis, was at this time.
            
               Theophilus Biſhoppe of Antioche, writ againſt Martian.
            
            
               Denis Biſhop of Corinthe.
            
            
               Iustus Biſhoppe of 
                  Ʋienne, a Martyre for the Faith. Attalus, Blandina, Photin Biſhop of Lions, a Martyr alſo for the Faith.
            Perſecution in Aſia.
            
            The end of the life of Policarpus was at this time.
            
               Marcus Antonius Verus, and the chiefe Gouernours of the Empire, cauſed ſuch a perſecution that it came euen to the Chriſtians which dwelt in the Towne of Smyrna, whereof Policarpus was Biſhoppe, and had beene a long time, and was there burnt, hauing ſerued the Church of God about three ſcore and tenne yeares, which was the ſeuenth of this Emperour. Some ſay hee was of the age of foure ſcore and ſixe yeares.
            The Prayer of Policarpus before his death, is in the Eccleciaſt. Hiſtory, Booke 4.
            His bones taken out of the fire were laide in a Sepulchre.
            
               Pionius Martyre.
            
               Soter an Italian, 13. Pope,Anno Dom. 169.
                helde the ſeate about tenne yeares. He endured many aduerſities, and in the ende was Martyred.
            
               
               Montanus.He ordained that none ſhould celebrate without two men preſent.
            That Nunnes ſhould carry Vailes on their heads.
            
               Not to touch Chalices.That they might not touch ſacred Ornaments, as Chalices, Corporalles, and that they ſhould not Incenſe in the Temple, nor about Aultars.
            In his ſecond Decretall he calleth himſelfe Pope.
            
               7.9.1. ca. Illud Diuini.Hee inſtituted that each Prieſt doing his Office ſhould haue with him an other Prieſt: If there chaunced ſome ſuddaine neceſſitie to happen.
            
               22. q. 4. ca. 51 quid.Hee ſaide that an oath made imprudenly which redounded to an euill ende ought not to be kept. For it were better ſaith he to periure himſelfe, then for keeping his oath to fall into a greater crime.
            At this time Peregrine a Philoſopher, did publickely at Piſe caſt himſelfe into the fire vpon vaine-glorie.
            
               CataphrygesAt this time beganne the Cataphryges heretikes by Montanus with Priſcilla, and Maximilla.
            
            
               S. Auguſtin. They vſed in their Sacrifices a Childes blood, which they mingled with Flowre or with Breade. If the Childe whoſe blood was drawne out dyed, they held him for a Martyr. If he liued, for a great Prieſt.
            
               Montanus was of Phrygia, of a Towne called Ardaba.
            
            Hee called himſelfe the Paraclet. Hee forbadde marriage, and inuented and inſtituted Faſtes.
            Againſt thoſe Heretickes writte Apollinaris Hierapolitaine, and before him Milciades and Apollonius.
            
            
               Appelles the Diſciple of Marcian, (whome Theodotius, called the great Hereticke) put a beginning to God. Alſo that Chriſt appeared in a fantaſticke bodie.
            
               Tatianus and his followers, Encratites and Seuerians, in this time.
            Theſe abſtained from all kindes of fleſh, and drunke no wine.
            
               They blamed Marriage as well as fornication. They caſt off the Epiſtles both of S. Paul and S. Peter.
            
            The Doctrine of Chriſtian libertie beganne at this time to bee greatly obſcured, and by little and little the errour tooke encreaſe.
            For although yet there was no forbidding to vſe the good thinges or God,The vſe of things indifferent. yet the Hiſtorie of Alcibiades recited in Euſebius, Booke 5. Chap. 3. ſheweth that by little and little men beganne to place a certaine Religion in ſeruices forged at pleaſure.
            This Alcibiades was one of the Martyres which ſuffered death in Gaul, vnder Marcus Antonius Verus the Emperour.
               Alcibiades. Hee vſed to liue ſo auſterely as hee did eate onely bread, and drunke water. In ſo much that beeing in priſon hee would vſe no other diet.
            
               Attalus a Romane (a man renowned amongſt the Martyrs) being alſo impriſoned, ſhewed Alcibiades a better way, and brought him to this point, that after hee vſed indifferently the creatures of God, without ſcruple and with thankeſgiuing.
            
               Eleutherius borne in Greece at Nicopolis,
               Anno Domi. 179.
                ruled at Rome 15. yeares and more.
            Hee made a commaundement againſt the hereſie of the Seuerans which then raigned, that no Chriſtian for any ceremonie ſhould reiect any ſort of meates whereof there is an accuſtomed vſe.
            Alſo that none ſhould be diſmiſſed of his Office, vnleſſe firſt hee be accuſed and conuinced of crime. That Biſhops ſhould finiſh nothing in an accuſation intended againſt a Biſhop, without knowledge of the Pope: but they might determine by Sentences the cauſes of other Church people.
            That a Clarke may not be drawne into any cauſe but before his Biſhop, from whom (if there were cauſe of ſuſpition) he might appeale.
            Chriſtian Religion then greatly augmented, and came

into farre greater ſuertie then before.Commodus
            
            
               Lucius. Naucle.
               Lucius King of England and his Countrey, receiued the Faith.
            Many Nobles of Rome with their wiues and children were conuerted and Baptized.
            The ſaid Lucius left his Kingdome, and went to preach the Faith firſt in France, after in Almaine, where hee was martyred.
            
               Chroni. Euſeb.
               Smyrna in Aſia, whereof Policarpus was Biſhop, was ouerthrowne by Earthquake: and for the repaire of it, tributes and tallages were laid.
            
               Naucler. Chron. of the Empe.
               Commodus the 18. Emperour, raigned 13. yeares, cruel, luxurious, inceſtuous of his owne Neeſes: hee held in his Pallaice three hundreth Concubines, and three hundreth buggering boyes.
            In a wicked rage he ſlew Lucilla his ſiſter. Being at the hot houſes, and but pricked with a Flea, he caſt the maiſter of the houſe into the Furnace.
            
               Ireneus Biſhop of Lions, flouriſhed.
            The Temple of Serapis burnt in Alexandria.
            
            The Capitoll at Rome, and the Librarie, burnt by lightning.
            
               
               Chro. Euſe. Sup. Chro.
               Apollonius a Senator of Rome, accuſed to be a Chriſtian, preſented to the Senate a booke, conteining a defence of the Chriſtians. He was beheaded, becauſe the Imperiall lawe had ſo ordeined it.
            
               Heereby appeares that Popes or Biſhops of Rome were not as at this preſent they are. Apollonius a man of authoritie could not ſhunne the ſentence of death: onely becauſe he was a Chriſtian, hauing ſo many friends at Rome.
            
            
               Edict Imperiall.The Imperiall Lawe then was, that ſuch as were in Iudgement conuicted to be Chriſtians, ſhould be puniſhed with death.
            
               Perſecution.
               Commodus made die many Noble perſons.
            
               It is recited in the Hiſtory of the Martyrs of Gaule,
               Pertmax. that the Painims ſollicited, and by torments conſtrained the ſeruants of Chriſtians to confeſſe of their maiſters things impoſſible once to be imagined. Namely, that they did eate the fleſh of litle children: that they committed paldiardizes and whoredomes, ſuch as is vnlawfull to name. In ſo much as they which before had vſed ſome moderation in Chriſtians cauſes, gaue themſelues greater licence to exerciſe crueltie againſt them. This happened at Lions, and at Vienne. Euſebius reciteth it in his Epiſtle of the faithfull of Lions, and of 
                  Ʋienne, in Chap. 1. of the 5. booke.
            At Rome the Pallace and the Temple of Vesta, and of  Peace, and the greateſt part of the Towne was conſumed by fire.
            
               Commodus the 13. yeare of his Empire was ſtrangled, of  the age of 32. yeares, by the counſell of Martia his chiefe Concubine, who fauoured the Chriſtians and other her friends which he had condemned to death, becauſe they ſhewed him certain his inſolencies, but they by this meanes preuented him: and little there wanted that the bodie of this Tyrant was not drawne into Tyber by the common people.
            
               Aelius Pertmax the ninteenth Emperour, held the Empire by the ſpace of ſixe moneths. His couetouſneſſe cauſed his death for retaining his ſouldiers wages. He was of the age of ſeuentie yeares.
            
               Didius Inhanus of Millaine, 20. Emperour, raigned foure,Didius. or ſeuen, or two moneths as ſome ſay. Hauing ſlaine his predeceſſor, hee was ſlaine of his Succeſſor of the age of 56. yeares. For his auarice he was hated of all. Some ſay he was ſlaine by a ſouldier of little eſtimation within his Pallaice.
            
               Victor Biſhop of Rome, borne in Affricke, ruled tenne yeares.
            He ordeined,Reconciliatiō
                that ſuch as would not reconcile themſelues ſhould be depriued of the Table of the Lord.
            Hee inſtituted, that vnleſſe it were in caſes of neceſſitie, Catholicke Baptiſme ſhould be celebrated in the time of the feaſt of Eaſter. As we may ſee in the firſt Decretall Epiſtle

attributed vnto him.Seuerus.
            
            It were incredible (if all Hiſtorians did not witneſſe it) that for the day of celebratiō of the feaſt of Eaſter, ſo great a ſchiſme ſhould happen in the Church, that of a diſſention and queſtion thereof, ſo terrible a warre ſhould come, and all by this Victors meanes, who would needs haue the feaſt of Eaſter celebrated on the Sunday, becauſe of the myſterie of the reſurrection: and would not haue the Faſtes broken but on that day. 
                  Ʋictor writ to Policrates, who was a Ruler amongſt the Biſhops of Aſia, and gaue commaundement in his Letters, whereat all the Biſhops of Aſia were greatly offended.
            
               
               Seuerus.
               Septimus Seuerus Pertinax borne in Affrica, 21. Emperour, raigned 18. yeares, and dyed of the age of 70. yeares in England.
            Many Sinodes were held in diuers Prouinces touching the Feaſt of Eaſter, vpon what day it ſhould be celebrated: and by common accord it was agreed that the ſaide Feaſt of Eaſter ſhould be celebrated vpon the Lordes day, on which was his Reſurrection, and on no other day.
            But the Biſhops of the Countrey of Aſia were of a contrary opinion: ſaying that they ſhould keepe the cuſtomes of of their Aunceſtors touching that.
            Which 
                  Ʋictor ſeeing, would needs haue depriued generally all the Churches of Aſia, and the nigh Prouinces therof, of the Churches communion and ſocietie, and ſent out Letters to declare them excommunicated:Ireneus Biſhop of Lions. whereof hee was greatly blamed and reprehended. And eſpecially of Ireneus Biſhop of Lions, by Letters which hee ſent vnto him. That there was great folly for the difference of a Ceremonie to breake the peace and vnion of Churches, and to ſtirre vp Schiſme therein. Alleadging to his purpoſe that the diuerſitie of Faſtes neuer broke the vnion of Churches, and ſo no more ſhould they in this. Euſebius in the Eccleſi. Hiſt. Lib. 5. Chap. 5.
            With this warre the tranquililtie of Churches are troubled, and the doctrine of Chriſtian libertie obſcured. The Romanes ceaſed not to moleſt them of Aſia to ſubſcribe

to their opinion, and they became ſo outragious therein, that they which obſerued the Feaſt of Eaſter the fourteenth of the Moone, were called Quatorzian Heretickes,Quatorzians. condemned as Nicepho. reciteth. Lib. 4. Chap. 39.
            This Schiſme gaue Montanus and other heretickes occaſion and ouerture to lift vp themſelues at this time in Phrygia. They publiſhed certaine lawes touching Faſts. Alſo to breake marriages. Affirming that the holy Ghoſt had not taught all to the Apoſtles, and that he had in himſelfe the gift to conferre the graces of the holy Ghoſt. And other ſuch blaſphemies whereby hee looked to come vnto ſome Primacie.
            The Romaine Biſhoppes now became more audacious to forge new Ceremonies, yea and that to force them vpon other Churches.
            The authoritie to excommunicate, conuerted into abuſe, and ſo became deſpiſed, becauſe of not obſeruing certaine humaine traditions.
            The diſſention touching the obſeruation of Eaſter, cauſed ſixe principall Councells to be aſſembled. Euſeb. Lib. 5. Chap. 23.
            
               Victor in his ſecond Decretall calls himſelfe Arch-biſhop of the Romane and vniuerſall Church.In the volume of Councells. Of Tertullian
            
            
               Tertullian a Prieſt of Carthage, who otherwiſe did well ſerue the Chriſtian Church, finally reuoulted, and drewe him ſelfe vnto the enraged Prophecie of Montanus.
            
            Saint Hierome alleadgeth this the occaſion: That Tertullian beeing ledde with enuie and hatred of the Church of Rome, could not at the laſt endure the arrogancie thereof.
            He held one errour touching the Kingdome of Chriſt, and the voluptuous life of the faithfull in this world before the conſummation of all things.
            Hee maintained the ſuperſtitious and ridiculous Faſtes of Montanus, calling him in many places the Comforter.
            
               He brought in extreame vnction after Baptiſme, the ſigne of the Croſſe, offering for the dead, and for feaſts of Natiuities, and other the like dreames of the Montanists. His writings witneſſe that he was very deſirous of Martyrdome, and that a Chriſtian man ought not only to beare it conſtantly, but to purchaſe and ſeeke it alſo.
            
               Ammonius the Phyloſopher, Origens Schoole-maiſter, perſwaded in the Chriſtian faith euen vntill death. Although Porphirius ſay of him that he reuolted.
            
               Victor with good cauſe depriued of the communion of the Church, an hereticke called Theodotus, who was a blaſphemer and prince of the hereſie, which afterward Antemon followed, and Paule Samoſathonus reuiued. For hee was the firſt that durſt ſay publikely at Rome that Ieſus Chriſt was but pure man, of mans ſeed procreated as well as others. See Nice. Lib. 4. chap. 21.
            
               A Schiſme by the occaſiō of Montanus.
               An other Schiſme or diuerſitie of iudgements touching the hereſie of Montanus and his companions, and alſo of Priſca and Maximilla Prophiteſſes, which Montanus had filled with his fury. Some ſaid they were taken with a Spirit of Prophecy, and that, that they ſaid were Oracles. Others maintained that contrary to the cuſtome of true Prophets, they were tranſported and carried away in their mindes, and taken with furie and extaſie; they were alſo giuen to couetouſneſſe and ambition, contrary to the ſcripture, which forbids Prophets to take gold or ſiluer. The faithfull of Aſia aſſembled many times to examine thoſe doctrines, and ſo newly forged Prophecies. The faithfull of Gaul writ their opinion touching the furious errors of Montanus, and ſent Ireneus into Aſia with Letters. See Euſeb. Lib. 5. Chap. 4.
            
               This Schiſme as it was to the condemnation of Montanus and his complices: ſo the true Church was aduertiſed more neerly to trie ſpirits whether they were of God or no.
            
            Whatſoeuer heauie chaſtiſements the Iewes before had, the Lord forgat not his mercy, but gaue ſufficient witneſſe that he calleth his enemies to repentance.
            
               He preſerued Doctors and Paſtors, and a litle number of faithfuls in Ieruſalem, which honoured the true God. From the ſacking or deſtruction that Titus made, vntill that of Adrian,
               The Biſhops of Ieruſalem. The Church of the Gentiles in Ieruſalem. the Church of Ieruſalem had ſucceſſiuely 15. chiefe or high Biſhops. Euſeb. numbreth them. Lib. 3. Chap. 5. After the deſtruction made by Adrian the Emperour, there was no more any Church gathered of the Iewes at Ieruſalem, but onely of the Gentiles, and of them were there Biſhops ordeined. Al the Iewes were driuen away (as it is ſaid) by Adrian. Marcus then iſſued of Gentiles, was choſen the 16. Biſhop, the 10. yeare of the Emperour Antoninus, after Caſſianus the 17. Publius the 18. Maximus the 19. Iulian the 20. Gaian the 21. Symmachus the 22. Caius the 23. Iulian 2. the 24. Capita the 25. Thus dooth Euſebius rehearſe it. Lib. 5 Chap 12.
            And in this time wherein we now are (that is vnder the Emperour Commodus, Maximus the 2. was the 26. Antoninus 27. Valens 28. Dolichian 29. Narciſſus 30. Elius 31. Garmanian 32. Gordius 33. Narciſſus. 2.34. or rather Narciſſus the firſt returning from the Deſart, whither he withdrew himſelfe (for that his enemies had accuſed him to liue vnchaſtely) of whom Euſebius ſaith, that he had the gift to worke miracles, and that his falſe accuſers were puniſhed according to the Imprecations which euerie one made. As for the time of all theſe Biſhops, Euſeb. ſaith that he could not well diſcerne, namely in what time euery one of them gouerned the Church.
            Seeing then the Church of the Gentiles had already their habitation in this place, the Lord would declare that the true Meſſias was come, and ſo we need looke for no other.
            
               This numeration here made of the Biſhops of Ieruſalem, ſheweth that other Churches may well number their Biſhops, as that of Rome glorifieth her ſelfe in the continuation of hers.
            
            After the fift perſecution raiſed by Seuerus againſt the Chriſtians, came ciuill warres amongſt the Romanes.The fift perſecution.
            
            
               Ireneus had liued long inough in the middeſt of ſo many

perſecutions.Zephyrim. The greateſt renowne that he had was vnder the Emperour Commodus. As for the contention concerning the feaſt of Eaſter, the time in the which it was moſt lighted, was the 4. yeare of the Empire of Seuerus. He then bore the Office of a Miniſter 23. yeares. The errour of the Chiliaſtes was attributed vnto him, yet it is not expreſly ſeene in his writings we haue at this day.The death of Ireneus.
                The manner of his death is vncertaine. They which haue written of the Martyrs ſay that he and a great multitude of his ſheepe were finally ſlaine for the confeſſion of the name of Chriſt, vnder Seuerus.
            
            
               Leonides the father of Origenes, martyred for the Faith: vnto whō 
               Origenes his ſonne being but of the age of eighteene yeares ſaid; O good father take heed that for vs you chaunge not your purpoſe. This Origen after his fathers goods were confiſcated for the Faith, he nouriſhed his mother and 6. brethren by being a Schoole maiſter.
            
               
               Zephyrim a Romane, the 14. Biſhop of Rome, ruled ſeuenteene yeares as Euſebius ſaith.
            In the firſt Tome of Councells we finde two of his Decretall Epiſtles, one vnto the Biſhops of Cicilie, the other to them of Egipt, which repreſent vnto vs no other forme of gouernment then that we ſee deſcribed almoſt in all the Epiſtles attributed vnto the Biſhoppes of Rome. In the firſt hee makes mention of iudgements, which ought to be conſtituted by 12. Iudges, in cauſes of Patriarkes and Primates.
            Not to admit indifferently all ſuch as accuſe Prieſts. He ſought to eſtabliſh the Supremacie, and that men ſhould appeale vnto the Apoſtolicke ſeate of Rome: And therefore he called himſelfe Arch-biſhop.
            In the ſecond hee eſtabliſheth certaine ceremonies in Prieſts orders, to elect ſuch as were wiſe and approued, and in the preſence of all.
            
               Damaſus attributed vnto him the decree to vſe in the Euchariſt Cuppes of Glaſſe or Tinne, and not of wood. Alſo to receiue the Euchariſt once at the leaſt in the yeare, from the age of 12. and aboue.
            
               
               It ſhall afterward be ſhewed what eſtimation men ought to make of thoſe things, and of the Epiſtles called Decretalls,Baſsianus. which are attributed vnto the Romane Biſhops.
            
            He excommunicated Natalius the Confeſſor for ioyning with Heretickes; ouer whom he ſuffered himſelfe to be made Biſhop. Zephyrim would not receiue him to his repentance, vnleſſe openly he ſhewed good tokens thereof.
            
               Baſſianus Antoninus ſurnamed Caracalla, the 22. Emperour  of Rome,
               Execrable Inceſt. raigned ſixe or ſeuen yeares (after ſome) Inceſtuous and cruell, he tooke his mother in lawe to wife, called Iulia: and ſlew his brother Geta, and his Vncle. Of his Couſin called Saeuis or Seua, or Semyamira, or Seulaſyra, he engendered Heliagabalus, who was after Emperour.
            He was ſlaine of the age of 43. yeares by the Ambuſh of Macrinus his ſucceſſor as he diſcended from his horſe, and drew aſide to make water.
            
               Papinianus a Lawier was ſlaine by the Emperour, becauſe he allowed not the murder commited againſt his brother Geta.
            
            
               Macrin Optius the 23. Emperour borne at Maruſia,
                raigned a yeare and two monethes, a man laſciuious,Macrin. ſhameleſſe in words, impudent, ſacralegious, and bloudie: hee was ſlaine with Diadumenus his ſonne, of the age of 50. yeares and more.
            
               Heliogabalus called Varius Heliogabalus the 24. Emperour,Heliogabalus. raigned foure yeares. He was rather a Monſter then a Prince, as giuen to al vncleanneſſe & filthineſſe, a contemner of all Religion, except he reuerenced the Sunne, whoſe high Prieſt hee had bene, and therefore called himſelfe Heliogabalus. Hee died of a death worthy his life, ſlaine by a military tumult with his mother, and their bodies were drawne through the ſtreets, and after caſt into Tiber.
            
            He raigned two yeares, eight moneths, and adopted Alexander Seuerus.
            
            He builded a Citie called Oresta, where he commaunded

to ſacrifice humane Hoſtes and reaſonable creatures.Calixtus.
            
            
               Calixtus or after Euſebius, Calistus a Romaine, the 15. Biſhop of Rome, ruled ſixe or ſeuen yeares.
            The Epiſtles attributed vnto him, ſhewe the forme of his gouernment. One vnto Benit the Biſhop, and the other vnto the Biſhops of Gaul. There is attributed vnto him an Edict common to all Biſhops, that no accuſation ſhould be receiued againſt Clarkes: and commaunded that each one ſhould take heed they made no conſpiration againſt Biſhops.
            
               It is credible, in the time wherein perſecutions were continually kindled, that ſuch an Edict ſhould be commaunded the faithfull, which ſcant durſt ſhewe themſelues.
            
            Item that none might communicate with ſuch as were excommunicated. And that marriages of Couſin-germaine ſhould not bee admitted, and if they were made, to breake them.
            
               A place of S. Paul euill Interpreted.In one of his Epiſtles there is an euill expoſition; that the wife of a Biſhop is interpreted a Church or a Pariſh, of which it is not lawfull during his life to diſpoſe any thing without his will, nor to enioy the company; that is to ſay, ordination of an other.
            The firſt decretall, inſtituteth the Faſt of the foure times and ſeaſons of the yeare.
            
               Damaſus ſaith that he ordeined a Faſt of three times, becauſe of Corne, Wine, and Oyle. And further: That Calixtus made three times orders in December, and ordeined ſixteene Prieſts, foure Deacons, and eight Biſhops in diuers places, and finally, that hee ſuffered Martirdome vnder Alexander the Emperour.
            It is vncertaine whether it was this Calixt that made the ordinance for the ſingle life of Prieſts. For concerning this, the two Decretalls attributed vnto him, make no mention thereof, neither is it found in the firſt volume of Councells. Againe in the Councell of Nice, there is nothing alleadged

of the ſaid ordinance: yea and that more is;Alexander. there was made there a ſtatute to the contrary, at the exhortation of Pathuntius, as ſhall be ſaid after.
            
               Alexander Seuerus the ſonne of Mamea, the 25. Emperour, was excellent and vertuous, he raigned 13. or 14. yeares, a friend of the Chriſtians: his mother had beene inſtructed by Origen: he was ſlaine with his mother of the age of 19. yeares by treaſon, by Theeues which in the time of Heliogabalus hauing bene in honour, had bene caſt out from their dignities and offices.
            He cauſed to be publiſhed this lawe, to be inuiolably kept. Doo to an other no other thing, then thou wouldeſt ſhould be done vnto thy ſelfe.
            
            
               Porphirius of Cicile a Philoſopher, left the Faith,Porphirius. and was an Apoſtate in deſpite of the Chriſtians, of whom he ſaid hee had bene iniuried.
            
               Vlpianus a Lawier in this time.
            
               Vrban a Romane, Biſhop of Rome, ruled eight or nine  yeares. Damaſus ſaith he, was of an holy life. So that he drew certaine Gentlemen, as Tiburcius, and 
                  Ʋalerian, S. Cecile her husband, to the Chriſtian faith.
            Some attribute vnto him a Decretall Epiſtle to all Biſhops ſpeaking of a common life, ſuch as was in the time of the Apoſtles, but he ſpeakes not as it was. Some attributes vnto him Edicts to aſſure the Gods of the Church, as they call them. And he ſpeakes a litle of the vowe of ſuch as promiſe to poſſeſſe nothing of their owne. He Inſtituted the confirmation after Baptiſme by impoſition of the Biſhops hands to obtaine the holy Ghoſt, and that they are made full Chriſtians, &c.
            
               There is none but he may ſee herein not onely a Sacriledge but alſo an execrable blaspemie forged in the ſhop of this ſlauiſh Decretists.
            
            
               Damaſus attributeth vnto him the ordinance, that the Communion Cuppes ſhould be no more of Glaſſe, but either of

Siluer or at the leaſt of Pewter.Maximin. Wherevpon Boniface Biſhop of Magunce ſaid. In old time goldē Prieſts vſed wodden Chalices,Wodden Prieſts. but now wodden Prieſts vſe Golden Chalices.
            That Confirmation ought to be with Creame.
            That the foure times Faſt ought to be obſerued.
            That Churches ſhould haue lands, medowes, and poſſeſſions, and their goods ſhould be common, and diſtributed to nouriſh Miniſters,Notaries, and Protonotaries. the poore, and Notaries called Protonotaries which writ the Acts of the Martyrs.
            
               Origines the tenth yeare of the Empire of Alexander, fled from Alexandria into Ceſaria of Paleſtine, for a popular ſedition there.
            Some ſay hee was marteried vnder Alexander. For although Alexander fauoured the Chriſtians, yet were many martyred by his Officers. For he made no Edict to prouide for the affaires of the Chriſtians.Pontian.
            
            
               
               Pontian a Romane, Biſhop of Rome, ruled 6. yeares, or nine, after Damaſus.
            
            Two Decretall Epiſtles are attributed vnto him, which haue this common argument with many others, not to moleſt nor accuſe Prieſts. By Damaſus it is attributed vnto him, that hee ſhould ordaine ſixe Prieſtes, 5. Deacons, and 6. Biſhops.
            
               Martian the Scottiſh Hiſtoriographer ſaith, that Pontian was ſent into exile into Sardinia, the firſt yeare of Maximin.
            
            At this time at Rome were 36. Prieſts, Cardinalls (that is to ſay,The beginning of the Cardinals. eminent and principall amongſt others) which eſpecially had care of the ſaluation of ſoules. Of which they ſay Marcellius ordained 15. to bury the dead and to baptiſe Children.
            
               Our Cardinalls of this time would heere take their originall. But indeed they beganne in the time of Innocent the fourth, about the yeare of Chriſt, 1244.
               
            
            
               Iulius Maximin, borne in Thrace, 26. Emperour, without authoritie of the Senate, but by the Souldiers: becauſe he was  a great and puiſſant man: he raigned about three yeares. A man inhumane and furious, he was ſlaine of the ſouldiers at the age

of 60. yeares, with his ſonne of the age of 19. yeares, and their bodies caſt into the Riuer.
            He raiſed the ſixt perſecution againſt the Chriſtians,The ſixt perſecution. and eſpecially againſt the Doctors of the Church, for hatred to Manea the mother of Alexander his Predeceſſor, of whoſe death he was culpable, and with his owne hands murdered the houſhold ſeruants of the ſaid Alexander.
            
            The Romane Senate for hatred it bare vnto Maximin, choſe new Emperours to maintaine the Common-wealth, namely, Pupian, Balbin and Gordian. The two firſt were ſlaine in the Pallace at Rome by a ſedition of warriors, and Gordian remained alone Emperour.
            In this time ſome Hiſtoriographers of ſmall authoritie, ſay that Syriacke was the ſucceſſor of Pontian as Faſciculus tempo. Henry de Hereford, Bergomenſis and Naucler: yet is there not one approoued Author or Hiſtoriographer which makes any mention of this Siriake.
            
            They ſay that he occupied the ſtate a yeare, three moneths and 13. dayes; and that after he went to Almaigne into Colongue, with a great number of Virgines, and that there he was Martired with them.
            And the reaſon why he was raced out of the Catalogue of the Biſhops of Rome; they ſay it was becauſe that willingly he forſooke his dignitie, againſt the will of the Cleargie.
            
               Let euery one iudge what faith ſuch Hiſtorians merite, or ſuch authors or forgers of Decretall Epistles attributed to Romane Biſhops.
            
            
               Celſire an Epicurian Philoſopher,
                  Celſus the Heretick. writ then a booke which he Intituled, The Truth: wherein hee purſued the Chriſtians with villanies & lies. Origen writ eight bookes againſt him.
            
               Anter Damaſus ſaith, that by Nation he was a Grecian. Iſnarda
                writeth that he came to be Biſhop of Rome, becauſe Pontian going away ſubſtituted him. There is great difference in the ſupputation of the time of his gouernment. Euſeb. giueth him a moneth. Damaſus 12. yeares and a moneth.
            
               
               Fabian.A Decrerall Epiſtle is attributed vnto him, vnto the Biſhops of Betique and Toledo, wherein hee pronounceth it lawfull for Biſhops to remoue from one place to an other if neceſſitie require it, and the profit of the Church: he was Martired vnder Maximin.
            
            
               
               Fabian Biſhop of Rome after Anter. a Romane, gouerned 13. or 14. yeares. His election is deſcribed too miraculous; namely by a Doue. See Euſebius. 51.6. Chap. 19. Three Decretall Epiſtles are attributed vnto him, that the Conſtitutions of the ſeuen Sub-deacons, which ought alwaies to be with the Notaries which gather together the deedes of the Martyrs.
            Hee was Martired and his wife Darfoſa vnder Decius, vnto whom he was married before his being Biſhop.
            
               Gordian.
               Gordian choſen by the Senate, was a Prince of a noble heart: wee finde not that hee made any cruell Edicts againſt the Chriſtians. After he had raigned ſixe yeares he was ſubtilly ſlaine by Phillippes, which ſucceeded him.
            
               
                  Proclus an hereticke.Many hereſies which roſe vp in former times renewed at this time. At Rome Proclus mainteined the hereſie of the Cataphrygians.
            
            
               Berillus who otherwiſe was an excellent Doctor in Arabia, fell into the hereſie of Artemon, which denied Chriſt to haue bene before his Incarnation. Origines diſputed againſt him.
            Vnder Gordian there was ſo great an Ecclips, that the daylight ſeemed an obſcuritie as darke as the night. There was alſo ſo terrible an Earthquake that ſome whole Townes were ſwallowed with the ouerturne of the earth.
            
               
                  Sapor King of the Perſians.
               Gordian obteined many victories againſt the Perſians, and chaſed Sapor King of the Perſians euen to Antioch, which then was held of the Perſians. He recouered both Cares and Niſible, and by this meanes came it to paſſe that the Eaſt was brought ſubiect vnto the Romane Empire, Iulius Capitolin rehearſeth it in Gordians life.
            
               The Councell of Philadelphia
               To confute Berillus, a Councell was held vnder Gordian at Philadelphia in Arabia, where Origenes was, who ouercame

him and brought him into a good way.Phillip.
            
            
               M. Iulius Phillippus an Arabian, with his ſonne alſo called  
               Phillip, ſucceeded Gordian in the Empire.The firſt Chriſtian Emperours. They were Chriſtians conuerted vnto the Faith by Pontian or Pontius a Romane Senator, and baptized by Fabian. Hee, his mother Seuera, and his ſonne Philip, deſirous to reſort into the company of the Chriſtians, Fabian would admit them vnto the laſt Vigiles of Eaſter, although he had great deſire to perſiſt in the congregation and prayers of Chriſtians vntill he had confeſſed his ſinne (which was a murder as is thought) and ioyned himſelfe with them of whoſe ſinnes Inqueſt was made, and ſo placed amongſt the Repentants. Euſebius. Lib. 6. Chap. 34. This Philip refuſed not to do, but accompliſhed whatſoeuer was enioyned him by the Biſhop.
            In the raigne of this Philip there were Heretickes in Arabia, which mainteined that the ſoules die with the bodies, and that together they ſhall riſe at the day of Iudgement. Origines went towards them beeing ſent thither, and confounded them.
            
               There are at this day certaine Anabaptistes which ſay that when man dyeth, his ſoule ſleepeth vntil the day of iudgement, which is an execrable hereſie.
            
            There were other Heretickes called Helcheſcites,Helcheſites Heretickes. as Euſebius ſaith, Lib. 6. Chap. 38. or Elſecians after Epiphanius and Saint Augustine, which dwelt in Arabia in the Region of the Moobites; They reiected the Epiſtles of Saint Paul, and mainteined that in the time of perſecution it was no ſinne to renounce the Faith with the mouth, if ſo bee the heart remained faithfull. This Hereſie was before ſowne by Baſilides, and confounded by Agrippa Castor, an excellent Doctor.
            
               O what great hurt this wicked hereſie hath brought to the Church in perſecution.
            
            
               
               Phillip and his Courtiers receiued the doctrine of the Goſpell, and renounced all Painim Idolatries. But this felicitie endured not long for the Church.The death of Phillip. For as Phillip did to his predeceſſor, ſo was done vnto him by his ſucceſſor Decius: yea and to his ſonne who was ſlaine at Rome, and the Father at 
                  Ʋerone. This was their ende after they had raigned 7. yeares.
            
               Decius Phillip Decius borne at Bubalie a Towne of baſe Panonia, was choſen after Phillip. Hee was a Prince worthie praiſe, but that hee ſtirred the ſeuenth perſecution againſt the Chriſtians, becauſe of the euill will hee bare to his predeceſſor Phillip. Euſeb. Lib. 6. Cap. 39. This hatred as Sabellicus and Bergomenſis ſay, proceeded hereof, that the two Phillips being in perill of death, gaue their treaſures to Fabian. Saint Ciprian rehearſeth other more vrgent cauſes. And theſe be his words in his fourth booke and fourth Epiſtle.The cauſe of this ſeuenth perſecution vnder Decius. We muſt needs confeſſe that this waſte which hath pilled our Flocke, and the theft yet at this day practiſed, comes becauſe of our ſinnes: for that we hold not the way of the Lord, but giue our ſelues to gaine, to pride, to enuies and diſſentions, &c.
            Of this perſecution Nicephorus ſaith in Lib. 5. Cap. 29. that it was as poſſible to number them that ſuffered in this perſecution, as to account the ſand of the ſea.
            
               Alexander Biſhop of Ieruſalem.
               Alexander Biſhop of Ieruſalem honoured for his pietie, once was drawne before the Gouernours ſeate in Ceſaria, and after hee had made a confeſſion of his faith he died in priſon. Babilus Biſhop of Nichomedie, Aſclepiades of Antioche, Germanie, Theophile, Ceſarius, Ʋital, Polychronius Biſhop of Babilon, Serapion, Apollonia a Virgin, and infinit others, were martyred in this horrible perſecution.
            Aboue all other Townes Alexandria then was as a ſcaffolde when the faithfull muſtered. See Euſebius Lib. 6. Chap. 40.
            
               The torments of the Martyrs.Diuers kindes of torments were vſed againſt the Martyrs, as Euſebius ſaieth. As ſharpe needles againſt the face and eyes, burſting betwixt ſtones, burning, pearſing the entralles, caſting downe from high places to lower, tearing in

peeces by cardes of Iron, plates being applied to their ſides, the rage of ſauage beaſtes, condemnation to digge mettalls, &c.
            Saint Ciprian beeing in exile, writ verie conſolatorie Letters to them which ſuffered ſuch euilles. And as Tertullian, in his time defended the Chriſtians againſt Scapula: So alſo did Saint Ciprian the like againſt Demetrian a Painim Gouernour, ſhewing thereby that the calamities of the world are fully imputed vnto the Chriſtians.
            
               Denis of Alexandria writ, that after the publication of Decius Edict confirmatiue of this horrible perſecution, many of the moſt excellent ſhewed themſelues ſo fearefull, that of their owne motion they made abiurations and ſacrificed vnto Idols. Ciprian made a Sermon of ſuch as fell, namely of ſuch as perſeuered not in the confeſſion of Ieſus Chriſt. There hee ſets downe examples of Gods puniſhment of ſuch as abiured; hee affirmeth that many of them were tormented with euill ſpirits. Hee ſaith one became dumbe incontinent after hee had renounced. An other alſo after his renouncing, comming to take the Supper with others, found in ſtead of bread, aſhes. Alſo a maide taken with a diuel, bitte off her tongue with her teeth.
            Many things are attributed to Fabian conteined in Gratians decree, which are not worth rehearſing, and as vnworthy that Biſhop.
            
               Beda and Euſebius write, that Fabian ſuffered Martirdome at the beginning of Decius raigne. For he bare him euill will, becauſe Phillip gaue him his treaſures.
            
               Euſebius in his Chronicle ſaith that Fabian gouerned the Romane Church, 13. yeares. Damaſus and Marian the Scot ſay, 14.
            
               Origene writ to Fabian touching the puritie of doctrine, as Euſeb. Lib. 6. Chap. 6.
            
               Decius died miſerably before hee had raigned two whole yeares. Pomponius writeth,The death of Decius.
                that in a warre againſt the Gothes hee was ſwallowed vppe of a Gulphe, into the

which he caſt himſelfe,Gallus. that he might not fall into his enemies hands.
            Hereupon note the ſaying of S. Cyprian.
            
            
               Cyprian in his booke againſt Demetrian toucheth it ſaying: Certaine we are that all that we endure ſhall not long be vnpuniſhed: And ſo much more as the outrage of perſecution ſhall be great, ſo much the greater ſhall the vengeance be for that perſecution, and ſo much the more manifeſt. Although we keepe not in memory things of olde, yet the doctrines of things newly happening do ſuffice, that in very little time and ſo ſuddenly, ſo horrible a vengeance hath followed, &c.
            
               
               Gallus and 
                  Ʋolucian his Sonne, ioyntly ſucceeded in the Empire. Hee was otherwiſe called C. Verus Trebonian of Gaul.
            
            
               This perſecution counted the eight. The death of Gallus.Hee was happie enough at the beginning as Denis writeth, but continuing the perſecution which fell into his hands by his predeceſſors, he proſpered not. For before two yeares were paſſed, hee and his ſonne Voluſian were miſerably ſlaine in a warre againſt Emilian,
               The Romanes tributaries. hauing before gotten an opprobry vnto the Romane people to make thē tributary vnto the Scythians by an alliance he made with them, as Eutropius and Pomponius Laetus write.
            
               
               Cornelius a Romaine, was three yeares Biſhop of Rome. By the Epiſtle of the Romane Cleargie written to Saint Cyprian, we may knowe that the Romane ſeate was vacant certaine time, and that Cornelius ſucceeded the Biſhop Fabian, at the beginning of the raigne of Gallus and Voluſian.
            
            Saint Cyprian defended his election againſt the calumniations of Nouatus the hereticke, ſaying in his fourth booke and Epiſtle to Antonian, that he occupied not his Biſhoppricke by bribes, nor of his owne deſire, neither by violence, as many doo, which are ſwelled with their owne pride: but that hee came thither by the will of God, then, when the Tyrant envenomed with mortall hatred againſt Prieſtes the ſeruants of God, vttered horrible menacies.
            
               The things then attributed vnto Cornelius in his Decretall Epiſtles: how can they agree with ſo excellent a Doctor,Lucius.
               Decretalls examined. who alwaies was at the combat? As that which is written in his firſt Epiſtle; that at the requeſt of a noble woman he cauſed to be tranſported the body (or rather the rotten bones) of S. Peter and S. Paul, which long time had bene kept in a Sepulchre.
            The ſecond Epiſtle is to Ruffinus a Biſhop of the Eaſt, touching the maners of Prieſts.
            
               Euſebius and Saint Hierome who moſt diligently writ of this holy perſon, make no mention of thoſe Epiſtles, but they mention his determination to haue a Councell held at Rome againſt Nouatus.
            
            
               Damaſus and others haue written that Cornelius was baniſhed, and finally Martired vnder Decius: but S. Hierome transferreth his adminiſtration to the time of the Emperours Gallus and 
                  Ʋolucian, whoſe authoritie we haue followed.
            
               Euſebius 51.7. cap. 2. writeth that Cornelius gouerned the Church of Rome three yeares: yet in his Chronicle he giueth him but two.
            
               Lucius ſucceeded Cornelius, he was a Romane. Euſebius
                ſaith he, was not a Biſhop 8. whole moneths. Nauclerus, Platina and Sabellicus giueth him 3. yeares and more.
            
               Gratian attributes vnto him this decree; that Prieſts,Decretalls attributed vnto Lucius.
                Deacons, and other Miniſters of the Aultar, ought to bee choſen ſuch, as they can keepe themſelues without marrying, and that no Clarke ſhould frequent the company of women.
            There is attributed vnto him an Epiſtle written to the Biſhops of Spaine and Fraunce: wherein is propoſed a kinde of gouernment, which ſeemes not to agree with the time of Lucius. Therein is ordeined that in all places there ſhould be two Prieſts, and three Deacons, with a Biſhop, to keepe him company whereſoeuer he went, as witneſſes of his life.
            
               As if then there had bene ſo great tranquilitie, as a Biſhop might goe take his pleaſure or ſhewe himſelfe with great companies.
            
            
               
                The yeare 257. the hereſie of Noetus and Sabellius after Theodoret,
               Noetus and Sabellius. got a paſſage, although before it had beene debated in Affrike by Praxeas and Hermogenes. They ſaid that God the Father ſuffered, and therefore S. Augustine ſaith, they were called Patripaſſians.
            
            Many Hiſtories make mention of an horrible peſtilence in the time of Gallus; the infection whereof came into Aethiope, and after it had conſumed the Southerne people it came into the Eaſt, and there laid holde on the other parts of the world, ſo that many places were left deſolate. And this wound endured ſo long time, that ſcant it finiſhed before the end of tenne yeares.
            Of this ſo terrible and extraordinary an euill, S. Ciprian tooke an argument to make his booke, Intituled Of the crueltie.
            
            
               Emilian ſucceeded Gallus and Voluſian after he had ſlaine them. Hee was a man of baſe condition, iſſuing from Mauritaine, and was Emperour but three moneths.
            
               
                  Ʋalerian Licinius Valerianus choſen Emperour, a man of noble race, excellent in knowledge and honeſtie, an examplarie of a true Cenſor and Senator in all his life. But in him all theſe vertues were defaced. Firſt for that he ioyned with him in the Empire his ſonne Galien, who was a monſter in all abhominarion.
            Item by the perſecution that he ſtirred againſt the Chriſtians.
            Of all the Emperours there was not one before him which at the beginning hadde beene ſo ſoft and milde towards Chriſtians, yea familiar, in ſo much as his Court was full of them. But after he gaue himſelfe to Deuines and Aegyptian Enchaunters, hee was perſwaded to put to death the ſeruants of GOD,The Art Magicke ouerthrew 
                     Ʋalerian.
                as they which hindered thoſe wicked Enchaunters; to kill poore children, and to offer vppe the ſonnes and daughters of theyr miſerable parents.
            
                A litle after hee had begunne to perſecute the Chriſtians, hee went to make warre vppon the Perſians, and in a

battaile hee was taken aliue.Lucian.
               The miſerie of Valerian.
                
               Sapor King of the Perſians vſed ſuch crueltie towards 
                  Ʋalerian, who was of the age of ſeuentie yeares, that when hee mounted on horſebacke, hee ſerued himſelfe with 
                  Ʋalerians backe to get vp. Eutropius, Pollio, Aurelius Ʋictor, Sabellicus and Laetus, doo recite this, and ſay hee vſed his age in this miſerable ſeruitude, Euſebius in the Oration which hee made heereof to the whole congregation of the faithfull, ſaith that Sapor commaunded that 
                  Ʋalerian ſhould bee ſcorched and ſalted.
            
               Gallienus raigned then alone and gaue himſelf to Idleneſſe, diſſolution, and whoordome.
            In his time there was no place in all the Romane Iuriſdiction, except Italie alone, wherein there were not ſeditions and rebellions. Trebellius an Hiſtoriographer, accounteth thirtie, all which at one time were named Emperours; ſome in one Region, and ſome in others.
            
               Cilicia, Cappadocia, and Syria, were pilled and waſted by the Perſians, vnder Sapor.
            
            The Almaines after they had tormented the Gaules, entred by force into Italie.
            
            The Gothes pilled Pontus, Aſia, Macedonia, and Greece. See the Romane Hiſtories.
            Vnder his rule monſtrous things came to paſſe, horrible ouertures and Earthquakes, whereof many there were which died of exceſſiue feare. Rome was ſhaken, Libia trembled.
            
               Aurelius Ʋictor ſaith, that Gallien was ſlaine with his ſonne at Millaine, or with his brother Valerian, as Eutropius ſaith.
            They which haue ſet downe in writing the Romane affaires, were of opinion that theſe miſchiefes happening to the Romane Empire, came by the wicked gouernment of the Princes. But we thinke that the iudgement and vengeance of God prouoked by the former perſecutions, as well of others as of himſelfe, fell vpon them.
            
               
               Lucius.
               
                  Ed. 9. The death of Saint Ciprian.
               S. Ciprian hauing bene ſent into exile vnder 
                  Ʋalerian and Gallien, by Paternus gouernour of Affrike, and vnder Maximus, who ſucceeded him in the gouernment, was finally beheaded in the time of Lucius after Sabellicus.
            
            
               Marianus Scotus ſaith, that Lucius Biſhop of Rome was baniſhed for the confeſſion of Chriſt in the perſecution of Valerian and Gallien,
               The death of Lucius.
                and that afterward he was permitted to return vnto his Miniſterie; and that finally he was beheaded, and ſo might he be Biſhop the ſpace of three yeares and more.
            
               Athenodorus Gregor, of Neoceſaria.
               Theodorus and Athenodorus, Biſhops of Pontus in this time.
            
               Theodorus was after called Gregorie, as Euſebius ſaith, Lib. 6. Cap. 30. Theſe two hearing the great renowne of the learning of Origine, came to Ceſaria, where Origine read publikely, hauing forſaken Alexandria, and were perſwaded by Origen to let goe their Philoſophie, and to apply themſelues vnto the holy ſcriptures.
            
               The hereſie of Sabellius buried.
               Baſile the great ſaid, that the hereſie of Sabellius was extinguiſhed by this Gregorie the great.
            If Nicephorus deſerue credit, Theodorus or Gregorie liued very long, namely vnto the time of Diocleſian. Yet Baſile in his 62. Epiſtle, which is to the Neoceſarians, writeth that hee was not very olde when he died.
            
               Paul Samoſatane.
               Paul called Samoſatenus of the Towne of Samoſate, which is in Meſopotania of Siria vpon the floud Enphrates, was ordeined  Biſhop of Antioch after Demetrius, the thirteenth yeare of Galien.
            
            The Biſhops which aſſiſted the Councell of Antioch to refute his wicked doctrine and blaſphemies againſt God and the Lord Ieſus, haue ſufficiently witneſſed of him.
            
               The end of Origenes.
               We may not here let paſſe the Hiſtorie of Origines end: that is, that after the yeare wherein Demetrius ordeined him in the office of Catechist, vntil the time he died, it ſeemeth he trauelled fiftie two yeares and more, and the moſt part of that time hee employed in teaching, writing, buſie in the affaires of the Church, and refuting of hereſies; In ſo much that Athanaſius ſaith of him, that hee was admirable of great

labour. Finally,Stephen.
               
                  Suidas. counteth this of Origen and Nicephorus after him. after he had conſtantly endured many greeuous torments, he was led before an Aultar, vnto which they had brought a wicked Aethiopian, and there was propoſed vnto him two things, the one, either to offer vp ſacrifice vnto the Idoll, or elſe abandon his body to the villainous Aethiopian. Origen made a ſigne that hee had rather offer ſacrifice.The fall of Origenes. Then they thruſt a Senſor into his hand. For which Impietie he was after excommunicated out of the Church of Alexandria, from whence hee retyred into Iudea, and being come to Ieruſalem, the Prieſts and Elders requeſted and after conſtrained him to ſpeake in the congregation of the faithfull, becauſe he was a Prieſt. Origen roſe vp as if he ſhould make a Sermon, but hee only recited his Theame of the 50. Pſalme. And God ſaid to the Preacher; Wherefore preacheſt thou my Iuſtifications? And wherefore takeſt thou my Teſtament in thy mouth? &c. And incōtinently ſhut the booke, then ſat he downe ſheading teares, and lamenting with great cry being not able to ſpeake, and all that were preſent wept with him. Suidas addeth, that hee was buried in the Towne of Tyre. Euſe. Lib. 7. cap. 1. ſaith it was vnder the Emperour Gallus, 255. or thereabouts: and then was it betwixt the yeare 50. of his age, or 69. after Nicephorus. And as it may be thought he dyed in great pouertie and miſerie, if not in diſpaire.
            S. Ierome although he ſometimes handled him rudely, yet he admireth him, and praiſeth him, becauſe of his great knowledge, in the Epiſtle to Pammathus and Ocean. He praiſeth his ſpirit, but not his faith.
            
               This ſhould make vs walke in feare and care in our vocation.
            
            
               Stephen borne at Rome, was Biſhop of Rome, and the ſucceſſor of Lucius.
            
            The greateſt paine that he had in his gouernmēt was that he oppoſed himſelfe forcibly againſt S. Cyprian and all the Councell of Affricke,
               The differēce of rebaptizing heretikes. touching the difference that then was moued to rebaptiſe heretikes, as it is recited by Euſebius. Lib. 7. ca. 2. & 3.
            The contents of the two Decretall Epiſtles attributed

vnto him deſerue no credite. The one to Hilarie Biſhop, and the other to all the Biſhops of the Prouinces touching accuſations made againſt Prieſts. For it ſeemes not that the Romane Church was in ſuch proſperitie then, that Stephen Biſhoppe thereof, had no other thing to do and ordaine, but with what reuerence a man muſt handle the Chalice and holy garments, or (as Iſidore and Polydore witneſſe of him) that he was the firſt Inuentor of the Couerings of the Aultar.
            
               Damaſus attributes vnto him two ordinances, in which ſixe Prieſts, fiue Deacons, and ſixe Biſhops were ordeined: and ſaith that after he had gouerned ſeuen yeares and fiue moneths he was martyred. But Euſeb. Lib. 7. cap. 5. ſheweth that hee was but two yeares in his office.
            S. Cyprian writ vnto him certaine Epiſtles which are in his workes.
            
               The death of Denis Biſhop of Alexandria.
               Denis Biſhop of Alexandria, excellent in doctrine, although he ſuffered not martyrdome but watched in the midſt of the Church, therfore God preſerued him from Martyrdom as Niceph. ſpeaketh. Li. 15. ca. 28. Notwithſtanding he endured terrible afflictions & diuers baniſhments in two violent perſecutions vnder Decius, and after vnder Valerian. He died very olde, and it hapned at what time the two Councells were held againſt Paul. Samoſaten. An. 12. of Gallien, and of Chriſt, 288. hauing gouerned the ſtate of Alexandria 16. yeares, and the Church 17.
            About this time many Nations caſt themſelues vpon the marches of the Romanes. The Countrey of Denmarke was taken out of their hands. Likewiſe the Almaines came euē to Rauenna, putting all to fire and blood.
            This was the firſt waining and decreaſing of the Romaine Empire: For the Countrey was neuer after recouered. Egipt reuolted, France was loſt: Macedonia, Pontus, Aſia, waſted by the Gothes: Pannonia by the Sarmates. Zenobia Queene of the Perſians ruled in the Eaſt. To vnderſtand all this diminution and fall of this Empire, See Trebellio Pollia, a Romane Hiſtoriographer.
            
               Phillip Biſhop of Alexandria martyred, and his daughter Eugenia at Rome.
            
            
               The great Temple of Diana in Epheſus,
               Sixtus. was pilled and burnt by the Gothes.
            
            A ſecond Cerinthus hereticke,Chiliaſtes renewed.
                promiſed in the kingdome to come, great ſtore of meates and women, and that after a thouſand yeares ſhould bee the reſurrection, and the kingdome of Chriſt ſhould be on earth.
            
               Xiſtus or Sixtus, the ſecond of that name, ſucceeded Stephen, he was of Athens. He was ordeined Biſhop of Rome by the election of the Cleargie comming from Spaine where he was preaching. There are attributed vnto him two Decretals, the one to Gayus Biſhop, the other to the brothers of Spaine: the which containe nothing but the forme of the common gouernment which they make vs beleeue was thē. Item touching the vowes of Prieſts. But we may eaſily ſee that all is forged at pleaſure. Damaſus after his maner reciteth that hee made orders twiſe, ordeining, Prieſts, Deacons, and Biſhops.
            
               Bergomenſis & Sabellicus recite, that Xistus trauelled much to take away the hereſies of the Sabellians, Cerinthians, and Nepotians. Finally, that he was accuſed by them before Gallien: and vpon his commaundement beheaded, and with him 6. Deacons. S. Ambroſe in his Offices li. 1. cap. 41. reciteth, that as he wēt to death,
                  Laurence a Deacon of Rome. it is ſaid that one Laurence a Deacon ſpoke to him in this ſort. Father wilt thou goe without thy ſonne? And Xistus anſwered him. My ſonne I ſhall not leaue thee. There are greacombattes for the Faith prepared for thee: thou ſhalt follow me three dayes after. In the meane while if thou haſt any thing in thy treaſure diſtribute it to the poore.
            This Laurence was the chiefe of the ſeuen Deacons of the Church of Rome, which had the handling of the goods deputed for almes.
            The Gouernour of Rome being hungry of ſiluer, and perſwaded that the Church had gold, ſiluer, & moueables,The hiſtory of Laurence.
                as Candleſticks, Chalices, and ſuch like things, would needs haue forced Laurence to haue tolde him where thoſe treaſures were. Laurence to do this hauing taken the terme of three dayes, diſtributed it all to the poore whatſoeuer he had.
            Then hauing gathered together on an heape all the poore, lame and diſeaſed, which were maintained of almes,

At the day aſſigned,Denis. hee prayed the Gouernour to goe with him to that place, and ſhewing him al thoſe poore and diſeaſed people he ſaid. Behold the veſſels of ſiluer, yea the Talents in order, receiue them, and thou ſhalt adorne the Citie of Rome, and enrich the Reuenewe of the Emperour and thine owne. The Gouernour ſeeing himſelfe mocked, commaunded hee ſhould be ſtretched on an Iron grate red hotte, and ſoone after the tormentors laid him on it, who with great courage endured that cruell and long torment, and finally prayed and inuocated the Lord, and ſo yeelded his happie ſoule. Prudencius a Chriſtian Poet in his booke of Crownes deſcribeth this martirdome.
            
               
               Denis ſucceeded Xiſtus, and as Damaſus ſaith of a Monke, was made Biſhop. But it appeareth rather by that which Euſebius Lib. 7. Ca. 7. and S. Hierome, ſay, that he was a Prieſt of the Church of Rome, the yeare of our Lord 266. and the 10. yeare of Gallien.
            
            Two Decretall Epiſtles are attributed vnto him. In the firſt he exhorteth Vrbain to follow the true Religion. The ſecond diſtributeth and makes partitions of Churches into Pariſhes and Dioceſſes.
            Item that two ſeuerall times he held orders.
            But Euſebius ſaith, Lib. 7. Cap. 30. that Denis died without martyrdome, hauing gouerned 9. yeares. Others ſay ſixe yeares, and ſixe moneths.
            
               The Councell of Antioche.The Councell of Antioche againſt Paul Samoſetaine was celebrated in his time, wherein the ſaid Paul was condemned, and caſt out of the communion of the vniuerſall Church, and Donus a man accompliſhed with vertues was ordeined in his place. He was the ſonne of Demetrian, who had ruled in that Church without reproach. Hiſt. Eccle. Lib. 7. Chap. 17.
            
               Married Biſhops. Hiſt. Eccle. Lib. 5. cap. 15.
               Note how the Sonne ſucceeded the Father in their Biſhopricks. And ſo in Victors time Polictates a Biſhop of Aſia, ſaid that he himſelfe was the 8. Biſhop of his Aunceſtors.
            
            Some ſay that Galien ſeeing the long & horrible ſeruitude of his Father vnder Sapor King of Perſia (as is ſaid) cauſed to

ceaſe the perſecution by publicke Edicts,Claudus. permitting euery one to liue after his owne lawe.
            Hee was ſo giuen to his pleaſures, that when it was tolde him that many Countries were reuolted from him, hee did but laugh. In ſo much that his ſouldiers ſlew him at Millaine, at the age of 50. yeares, hauing raigned 15. yeares: that is to ſay, ſeuen with his Father, and eight alone.
            Thirtie Tyrants roſe vp which ſore afflicted the Romane Common-wealth. Ignatius ſaith it.
            
               Claudus the Emperour raigned almoſt two yeares. 
               Trebellius ſaith that in his kingdome the Gothes and diuers other people of Scythia, pilled the Romaine Prouinces, and that there were three hundreth thouſande men of barbarous Nations, which by force entred into the Romaine Territories, againſt which people as well by ſea as by land, the Emperour Claudus obteined victorie the firſt yeare of his kingdome, and finally chaſed them away.
            After him Quintilius his brother was choſen of the Romane Senators, and raigned but ſeuenteene dayes,Quintilius. and was ſlaine: or as ſome ſay, he cauſed his owne foote to bleed in water, hauing vnderſtood that Aurelian was choſen Emperour.
            
               Aurelian the Emperour,Aurelian. is rather to be numbred amongſt neceſſary Princes then good: for ſo much praiſe as his militarie Art deſerueth, ſo much his domeſticke crueltie takes from him, which he exerciſed euen againſt his ſiſters ſonne.
            
               Vopiſcus witneſſeth, that the Emperour Aurelian the firſt yeare of his kingdome recouered Gaule, after hee had vanquiſhed Tetrike who before occupied it: this was in the yeare of Chriſt, 274. after Euſebius.
               
            
            He alſo deliuered from the Barbarians the Inhabitants of Auſpourge, which were beſieged by the ſaid Barbarians. After this he tryumphed ouer Zenobia, and the Perſians, hauing vanquiſhed them.
            Some ſay hee founded Orleans and Geneua, renowned Townes.
            
               Euſebius ſaith of him, that he was towards Chriſtians very peaceable at the beginning, but ſoone after he chaunged

his good opinion at the perſwaſion of wicked people:Aurelian. Inſomuch that he determined to perſecute the Churches: and letters of his Edict were written, and wanted but his ſignet and hand for to ſend them vnto the Prouinces: but God by his  diuine clemencie hindered it. For hee dyed ſuddenly before he could execute his will. Some ſay a Thunderboult light nigh vnto Aurelian and ſuch as followed him, euen when he began to perſecute the Chriſtians, and that ſoone after he was flaine by one of his houſhold and familiars, as hee was going the ſecond time to warre vpon the Therikes.
            
            
               Herein would God giue his to know, that his choſen are not executed at the pleaſure of men, but when it pleaſeth him.
            
            
               The ninth perſecution.This was the ninth perſecution againſt the Chriſtians, which endured not long for the death of the ſaid Tyrant.
            It ſhould alſo be noted, that euen whileſt Aurelian the Emperour raigned, foure Tyrants inuaded the Empire, namely Firmian, Saturnin, Bonoſus, and Proculus. As 
                  Ʋopiſcus ſaith.
            After the death of Aurelian, the Empire was voyd ſeuen moneths.
            
               Tacitus.And after him Tacitus was choſen Emperour, a wiſe and graue man, but he was ſlaine the ſixt moneth of his Empire.
            
               Florian.
               Florian his brother tooke from him his Empire, not by the Senates authoritie but of his owne will, thinking it belonged vnto him by hereditary right; yet notwithſtanding a while after he was ſlain nigh Tharſus, hauing raigned 60. daies. Some ſay he cauſed his owne veines to be opened.
            
               Probus.
               Probus iſſued from Dalmatia, was declared Emperour, a man excellent both in peace and warre, hee raigned 6. yeares  and foure moneths. The firſt yeare of his raigne he recouered Gaul, which the Barbarians and Almaines had againe occupied, and brought them vnder the firſt obedience of the Romanes. He reduced all Germanie into a Prouince. He tooke away olde Tyrants and brought peace into the world: So that he ſaid there ſhould be no more any need of ſouldiers, which cauſed them ſo to malice him, that they conſpired to ſley him.
            
               
               Manes the hereticke at this time compoſed many bookes,Felix. and almongſt others, one hee Intituled, The Miſteries of Maniche. He was a Perſian by Nation. And ſeeing many abhorred his lyes and blaſphemies, ſought all meanes to giue authoritie to his doctrine. He made the King of Perſia beleeue that he would heale his ſonne, who was greeuouſly ſicke. But after the Kings ſonne was taken from the Phiſitians and put into the hands of Manes, he died. The King of Perſia cauſed him to be apprehended, and made him to be broyled aliue vpon an hot Iron. Suidas and Epipha. recite it.
            Hee was a great Magician, and S. Auguſtine ſaith, that the bookes of the Maniches are full of fables of Aſtronomie. S. Ierom in the preface of the Dialogues againſt the Pelagians ſaith, that the Manicheans affirmed that when they are come to the higheſt degree of perfection, they can no more ſinne, no not in thought, nor by ignorance.
            
               Felix borne at Rome was ordeined Biſhop after Denis, the  yeare of Chriſt, 280. after Euſebius, and the firſt yeare of the raigne of Probus.
            
            The laſt Authors attribute vnto him two Epiſtles Decretals, without authoritie of the Elders. The firſt is written to Paternus Biſhop. The 2. to all the Biſhops of France: wherein he declareth that he had determined in a Councell that Meſſes ſhould be celebrated vpō the memory of Martyrs, leaſt it might be quenched.
            
               The word Meſſe, doth manifeſtly enough ſhew the deceit and forging of thoſe decretals. For it was not yet vſed, neither are there found any Authors of that time which haue written thereof.
            
            
               Felix finally ſuffred martirdom after he had bin biſhop of Rome 5. yeares: after Euſe. But after Dama. 4. yeres, 3. months & 5. daies
            
               Eutichian a Tuſcā
                of the towne of Lunes, ſucceeded him, the  year of Chriſt, 284. & the 1. yeare of ye
                raign of the Emp. Probus.
            
            Two decretal Epiſtles are attributed vnto him: the 1. to them of Boetia, cōtaining certain doctrines of ye
                Incarnatiō of Chriſt, of his body, of his Croſſe, of his death, of hell, & of our ſaluatiō.
            
               Damaſus attributeth vnto him, a ceremony touching the oblation of Gummes & fruites, as Beanes, Peaſe, Raiſons, and ſuch like.
            
               
               Probus.The ſame Damaſus ſaith of him (if we muſt needs beleeue him) that with his owne hands he buried 342. Martyrs, and that he ordained that none ſhould bury any Martyr without a Damaltike or a Sacerdoll coate, and without fire.
            
               Whoſoeuer vnderſtands the horror of the perſecutions of this time, way eaſily coniecture the lyes of ſuch ceremonies.
            
            
               Gratian the great Forger, reciteth that Eutichian made many conſtitutions: That Abbeſſes and Nunnes ſhould not put vailes vpon widowes or maydens which ſhould be Nunnes.
            Item that ſuch as came to Councells about deliberation of the Churches affaires, ought to take oathes: and after he reciteth others:
            He ſuffered Martyrdome after he had gouerned the Romane Church almoſt ten moneths, as Euſebius witneſſeth, Lib. 7. cap. 32. Damaſus and Platina ſay one yeare and a moneth. 
                  Ʋolareran, 8. yeares.
            Many things are recited of the conqueſts of Probus the Emperour, which the Romane Hiſtoriographers deſcribe.
            
               Carus ſucceeded him the yeare of Chriſt, 284. and aſſociated his two ſonnes in the Empire, Numerian and Carinus.
            
            He beganne new warre againſt the Perſians, which Probus had left imperfect. He ſent Carinus to the Gaules, to maintaine them, and led with him Numerian. He recouered in that warre Meſopotamia, and hauing waſted all the Region of the Parthians, he got all the kingdome of the Perſians. See Vopiſcus. Carus ſtrooken with lightning dyed ſuddenly. Numerian was of great modeſtie, giuen to ſtudy, eſpecially of Poeſie. His Father in lawe hauing laid ambuſhes,Numerian ſlaine. Carinus. ſlewe him as hee was in his Coach. His brother Carinus a man giuen to all wickednes, defiled himſelfe with the bloud of the faithfull, hauing the Empire alone. Theſe three then raigned not long. For all their times endured not three whole yeares, as Eutropius Victor and Latus recite.
            The gouernment of thoſe aforeſaid Emperours brought ſome releaſe to the Chriſtians, and ſo things happened fauourable

vnto them:Diocleſian. Inſomuch that ſome of them were aduanced to Offices and gouernment vntill the raigne of Diocleſian, and ſhall be ſeene in his place.
            
               Caius Biſhop of Rome was of Dalmatia, of the family of Diocleſian the Emperour after Damaſus. Euſebius ſaith he was ordained Biſhop the ſame yeare that Eutichian was, who with much adoo remained but ten moneths Biſhop.
            There is attributed vnto him a decretall Epiſtle, wherein he ſpeaketh but meanly of Chriſt the Mediator, and of Iuſtification. Hee after ſaith, that to aſcend vnto the dignitie of a Biſhop, men muſt goe by degrees, and by Eccleſiaſticall orders, as firſt hee muſt be Portier, then Lector, &c.
            
               Damaſus witneſſeth, that he liued during the time of Diocleſian the Emperours perſecutions, from which he hid himſelfe and dwelt vnder vaultes; yet finally hee was drawne to death the 12. yeare of the ſaid Diocleſian, after he had gouerned the Church 15. yeares after Euſebius, or eleuen and foure moneths after Damaſus.
            
            The Lord (as hath beene ſaid) gaue ſome releaſe to his Church, vntill the kingdome of Diocleſian, as Euſeb. Lib. 8. Cap. 1.
            
               Diocleſian Emperour, borne at Dalmatia, the ſecond yeare of his kingdome, aſſociated to the Empire, Maximiam Herculean, in which yeare he brought vnder the Empire the Gaules, which had bene occupied by the Ruſtikes, which were called Bagaricles, from thence he went into Affrike, and vanquiſhed the Gentians.
            
            Theſe two ſeeing the affaires of the Empire might be better decided by many, named two Ceſars to gouerne vnder thē, namely Galerian, and Conſtantinus, who was Father vnto Conſtantine the great. Euery of them were imployed in conquering that which was loſt; & aboue all to recouer Egipt, which Achillas had gotten. And this was the yeare of Chriſt, 298. The Eaſt  alſo which Narſus had gotten. They brought vnder the yoake fiue Prouinces beyond the floud Tigris, which reuolted from the Romanes ſince Traians time. Alſo Britaine (which is now England) ten yeares after her reuolt, and after hauing chaſed

away Gareſius or Cranſſius,
               Marcelline. who had made himſelfe King. Euſeb. and Pomp. Laetus.
            
            
               Diocleſians pride.After that things were thus ordered, in the place to acknowledge this good of the Lorde, Diocleſian cauſed himſelfe to bee worſhipped as GOD. Laetus in his Abridgement of Romaine Hiſtories ſaith; Whereas the firſt Emperours contented themſelues to be called Conſuls, and to be ſaluted of the people by that name, this man was the firſt that wold be adored, naming himſelfe brother of the Sunne and of the Moone. Before Emperours gaue to kiſſe their hands to Nobles,Kiſſing of ſhooes. and their knees to the common people. But Diocleſian made an Edict that all men without difference of whatſoeuer race, ſhould kiſſe his feete: vpon which alſo he placed certaine markes of adoration, and had his ſhooes garniſhed with gold and pretious ſtones, which alſo Caligula had done as is ſaid.
            
               The Popes and Antichriſts of Rome haue bent Imitators hereof, and haue well held this ordinance of Diocleſian to conſerue their dignitie.
            
            
               The tenth perſecution.The tenth perſecution raiſed againſt the Chriſtians, endured tenne yeares in the Weſt Countries. This was the greateſt and cruelleſt perſecution of all. For in leſſe then thirtie dayes, through diuers Prouinces were martyred about 18. or 20. thouſand perſons, as well men as women.
            
               
               Marcelline borne at Rome, ſucceeded Caius in the gouernment of the Romane Church, his Father was called Proiectus. During this perſecution hee was very greeuouſly preſſed by the Tormentors, vnder Diocleſian and Maximian Emperours, wherein being taken, with feare of torments and puniſhments, he offered a graine of Incence in the honour of Idols, but afterward he acknowledged his fault in a full Synode aſſembled at Sinneſſe, & did penance: and after came euen to reprooue Diocleſian, and voluntarily preſented himſelfe to death. Hee was martyred with Claudius Cyrinus and Antonius, after he had gouerned the Romane Church nine yeares after Damiſen, eight after Marianus, and foure after 
                  Ʋrsperge. This was the yeare of Chriſt 303.
            There are attributed vnto Marcelline as to others, two

decretall Epiſtles. The firſt written to a Biſhop called Salomon.
               Diocleſian. And the other vnto the Weſterne Biſhops.
            
               Diocleſian was of opinion that there was no meane more meere to pacifie the world, and to bring the Romane Empire into the face and brightneſſe of his auncient maieſtie, thē to aboliſh all new religions. His determination then was to begin to take away from the middeſt of the people the diſſimilitude of the Chriſtian Religion: and many Sophiſters and Philoſophers drew him on herevnto. As for the faithfull, Euſeb. in his 8. Booke, Chap. 1. ſaith, that the too great peace and libertie of the Church made them degenerate, and brought debates and queſtions about words, ſo that at laſt they came to flames, and there could not be found a more ſingular meane to extinguiſh and bring it to nothing then this perſecution.
            
               Diocleſian might haue bene numbred amongſt the Princes worthy of praiſe, if he had not contaminated and obſcured the vertues he had, with the Chriſtians bloud he ſhead. His companion in the Empire, was Maximian Herculeus, a man meete to exerciſe all cruelties.
            The chiefe ſeate of the Eaſterne Emperours was then at Nichomedia in Bithinia; wherein the Imperiall Pallace was conſumed by fire. This being imputed to the Chriſtians, he ſent commaundements all ouer to perſecute them, yea & to burne the bookes of holy ſcripture, & to take from the place of Magiſtracy with ignominy all them that were Chriſtians.
            
               Diocleſian perſecuted the Eaſt, and Maximian the Weſt. Crueltie was ſharpe in Syria, and it began at the Biſhops. See Euſeb. lib 8 cap. 6. This fury ſpread into Meſopotamia, Cilicia, Pontus, Phrigia, Armenia, Egipt, yea euen to the Iles of Lesbos, as witneſſeth Sabellicus, Enne. 7. lib. 8.
            
               Arithimus Biſhop of Nichomedia, after he had made a confeſſion of his Faith, hee was beheaded with a great troupe of Martyrs.
            
               Serena, Diocleſians wife, endured conſtantly martyrdome.The Empreſſe Martyred. This perſecution was ſo cruell that none were ſpared. Hermanus Gigas.
            
            In Europe, at Rome aboue all places was there greateſt

number of Martyrs. The Prouoſt Rictiouarus in Gaul, made a great maſſacre, eſpecially at Cullaine, at Treuers, and towards Moſelle. Beda writeth, that this perſecution came euen into England, and then that Saint Alban, a man very renowned, receiued the crowne of Martyrdome. From this time they beganne to finde out diuers kindes of torments, but how much the more horrible they were, ſo much more exquiſite appeared the conſtancy of Martyrs. Euſebius ſaith he beheld the perſecution made at Thebaida; and ſaith that the glaues, axes and ſwordes of Tormentors were blunted and turned againe with ſo great ſlaughter, and were altogether tyred, when the Chriſtians with ioy of hart ſinging Pſalmes preſented them ſelues to death. Sulpitius in the holy hiſtory, li. 2. ſaith that Chriſtians then more ardently deſired martyrdome, then the ambition of the Cleargie afterward demaunded Biſhopprickes. Beda de temptat. and Oroſius lib. 7. cap. 25.
            
               Diocleſian crooked with age, after he had aſſaied all cruelties that could be deuiſed to extirpate the Chriſtians, willingly diſmiſſed himſelfe of the charge of the Empire, and went to Nichomedia, and being toſſed with rage and fury led a priuate life. Maximian his companion, who obeyed him, as the leſſer the greater, depoſed himſelf at the ſame time in the Towne of Milaine. Diocleſian at Solone paſſed his time as a Gardener. This change was made after they had raigned together the ſpace of twentie yeares. What deaths they had ſhalbe told hereafter.
            
               Marcel borne at Rome, one Benets ſonne, was choſen Biſhop, about the 20. yeare of Diocleſian, after the Chronicle of Henry the firſt. He was a true Paſtor of the Lords Church. In the booke of Councells there is attributed vnto him two Epiſtles. The one to them of Antioch, wherein he exhorteth to follow the Romane Church, and that without authoritie thereof no Sinode can bee called. But any bodie may ſee it is but a counterfeyt, and not agreeing with the time which then was. The other written to Maxentius, is altogether impertinent: wherein after he hath commended Chriſtian charitie, hee reciteth things which are as pertinent ſo the time of that Church, as conuenient to haue bene written to a Tyrant who afterward

was named Emperour.Cōſtantius.
            
            
               Such Epiſtles doo ſufficiently ſhewe that they wore forged by them which after thruſt themſelues into the ſheep-folde of the Lord, not to feed, but to rule.
            
            He confirmed in the faith, Maurice, as hee came from Syria to goe into Gaul, with the Legion which was called of Thebes.
            
            
               Conſtantius Chlorus and Galerius Maximin, or Maximian, were made Auguſtes to goe through with the warres which their predeceſſors Diocleſian and Maximian Herculeus left. Eutropius the Father of Conſtantius a Romane knight, of a noble houſe was diſcended from Aeneas. The Empire as thus parted, that Conſtantius gouerned Gaul, Spaine, Italie, and Affrike: and Galerius, which Diocleſian had adopted (giuing him his daughter Valeria) the reſt, namely Slauonia, Greece, and the Eaſt. Yet Conſtantius who was neither ambitious nor couetous, refuſed Affrike & Italie, cōtenting himſelfe with Spaine & Gaul, which he gouerned well and peaceably, was well beloued of his ſubiects, and no enemy of the Chriſtian faith. He had two wiues: the firſt Helena, which was of baſe condition, of whom he had Conſtantine the great: which wife he was conſtrained to leaue, and take Theodora, the daughter of the wife of Maximian Herculeus. He died of a mallady in England, two yeares after Diocleſian had depoſed himſelf from the Empire: for long time before had he bene made Caeſar, and adopted by Diocleſian. Some attribute vnto him thoſe two yeares of raigning, beginning from the natiuitie of our Lord, 505. See Pomp. Laet. During his raigne there was ſtirres of warre. He was called Chlorus, for the colour of his bright ſhining face. Ignat. Lib. 1.
            He had of his wife Theodora, Conſtantius, who was father of Gallus and Iulian.
            
            
               Maximian Herculian ſolicited Diocleſian to take again the Empire: Some ſay Diocleſian anſwered, if he once vnderſtood the pleaſure of Gardens hee would neuer thinke of raigning. The Hiſtoriographers write that Diocleſian dyed in a rage and fury, feeling an infection in all his members.The death of Diocleſian.
                See Nicepho. lib. 7. cap. 20.
            
               Some ſay hee poyſoned himſelfe tenne yeares after he depoſed himſelfe from the Empire, fearing Conſtantine and Licinius who bitterly reprehended him as a fauourer of Maxentius. See Eutrop. lib. 9. and Bapt. Igna. lib. 1.
            
               Seuerus was adopted and made Ceſar by Galerius, when Conſtantinus had left the adminiſtration of Italie and of Affrike, and to Seuerus was giuen the charge of the ſaide Countries. But at Rome Maxentius was made Emperour by the Pretorian ſouldiers, and without contradiction of the Senate, Seuerus not thinking himſelfe ſtrong enough to reſiſt Maxentius, thought to retire into Slauonia to Maximin, but hee was entrapped and ouercome at Rauenna. Pompon. Laet.
            
            
               Maxentius ſonne of Maximian Herculian, being choſen Emperour by the Pretorian ſouldiers in a tumult, and hauing gotten the victory vpon Seuerus, waxed proud, and gaue himſelfe vnto pleaſures & cruelties. Then Maximin or Maximian the ſiſters ſonne of Galerius, who alſo by him was made Ceſar with Seuerus, and had once the charge of the Eaſt, adopted Licinius which he left in Slauonia, after comming to make warre vpon Maxentius was tolde of the treaſon of his people, and ſo retyred. See Pomp. Laet. in the life of Conſtantine and Galerius.
            
            
               Galerius then hauing made Licinius Ceſar as is ſaid, a litle time after fell into a terrible diſeaſe which fretted his entralles, whereof he died. This was becauſe of his exceeding great lecherie towards all, and horrible crueltie towards Chriſtians. For an vlcer he had in his bladder did eate his priuy members, and as all that part of his bodie rotted, wormes came out, and no remedie could be found for it. So the Phiſitians abandoned him: For the ſtench was ſo intollerable, that neither Phiſitian nor other durſt approach vnto him. Wherefore in the ende hee dyed of a death worthy ſuch a man,The ende of Galerius.
                after hee had raigned two yeares alone, and with the Ceſars and companions of his Empire the ſpace of 16. yeares.
            In the perſecution moued by Maxentius, Marcel Paſtor of the Church of Rome was apprehēded to ſacrifice vnto Idols, and to renownce his office, but hee deſpiſed all threatnings,

and ſmiled, which the Tyrant Maxentius ſeeing, commaunded he ſhould be beaten and chaſed out of the Towne. He retyred into an houſe of a widowe named Lucine, and there ſecretly maintained a Church. Which the Tyrant hearing, made a ſtable of it for horſes and other beaſtes of the houſe, & there locked vp Marcel. Being thus condemned, he left not to do the office of a true Paſtor, by Epiſtles which he writ to many. But finally being tormented by the filthineſſe and ſtench of the place, in the end he yeelded his ſpirit to God, the yeare 308.
            
            
               Euſebius a Gretian by Nation, a Phiſitians ſonne, after Damaſus ſucceeded in the gouernment of the Romane Church, in the great perſecutions in the time of Maxentius the horrible Tyrant. The Authours of the Eccleſiaſticall hiſtory make no mention of this Euſebius.
            
            The booke of Councells attribute to him three Decretall Epiſtles. The firſt to the Biſhoppes of Gaul. The ſecond to the Egiptians. The third to the Biſhoppes of Tuſcane, and Campania. His ordinances contained in thoſe Epiſtles are theſe in effect. That ſheepe ſhall not draw their Shepheard or Biſhop into Lawe, vnleſſe he denie the Faith. That a mayd which ſhall be eſpowſed only by words of the preſent time, may enter into Religion. That the Sacrifice of the Aultar be conſecrated, not in cloath of ſilke, but in linnen cloth, and ſuch like bables which the infamous fauourers of the ſeate of Popes, haue not beene aſhamed to aſſigne to thoſe good and faithfull Miniſters of the Lorde, to disfigure and defile with their orders this honeſt face of the primitiue Church (which follow his head Ieſus Chriſt in continuall perſecutions) to eſtabliſh their ſeate of perdition, and to pollute the bloud of thoſe holy Martyrs.
            But contrary Euſebius trauailed much in the harueſt of the Lords word, as well at Rome as other where in the time of perſecutions vnder Maxentius, vntill that (as Christianus Mattoens ſaith) hee finiſhed his life by martyrdome, the yeare of the Lord 309. But amongſt Hiſtogoriographers, there is great diuerſitie for the number of yeares.
            
               Licinius born in Dare, was made Auguſtus, & companiō of the Empire with Maximin Galari, after the death of Seuerus, the

yeare of our Lord,Conſtantin the great. 308. He was a warlike man, and Slauonia was firſt giuen him to gouerne after the Eaſt: he was noble, although he came of a peſant: he ſhewed himſelfe cruel towards the children of Galerius, his ally. He was an enemy vnto letters, as hauing no knowledge, no not to write his owne name. And he called the liberall Arts a publike poyſon and peſtilence. Euſeb. lib. 4. ca. 13. He deſerued praiſe, in that he repreſſed abuſes, the boldneſſe & inſolencies of the braueſt of his Court, which he called the Moathes and Rattes of his Pallace. He raigned 14 yeares, liued 60. See Pomp. Laet.
            
            
               Conſtantine the great, ſonne of the Emperour Conſtantius and Helena, S. Ambroſe in his funerall Oration of Theodoſius ſaith, that hee was a ſeruant in a ſtable, and was borne in England. Hee was inſtructed in the Militarie Art vnder Galerius. He tamed the Sermates a fearce Nation & barbarous, brought their Duke captiue to Galerius, who cōceiued enuy at the glory of this yong Prince, whereof being aduertiſed, he retired from Rome towards his Father into England, who dyed ſoone after. By the fauour of Princes he was declared Emperour, the yeare 309. The Senate writ vnto him Letters to aduertiſe him of the euil gouernment Maxentius, for the great cruelties hee exerciſed at Rome, wherevpon he marched towards Rome, and purſued Maxentius, who retiring into the Towne, made couer Tyber with Boats, nye the bridge Miluius, which by ſubtil deceit (as hee thought) he made ioyne together to deceiue Conſtantine, and to haue drown'd him whē he followed him. But he himſelf as furious firſt comming out to flie, & not remembring his owne ſtratageme that hee practiſed for an other, entred on horſebacke with a fewe people vpon the bridge,The death of Maxentius.
                where he was drowned in Tyber, the 6. yeare of his Empire. For this happie deliuerance, honors were giuen to Conſtantius, ſo he acquited Italie and Affrike. For his Father had only left him the Gaulois and Spaine, and would ſo haue contented himſelfe, had it not bene for the warre that Licinius raiſed, making himſelfe Ceſar, and was eſtabliſhed in the Eaſt.
            
               The iſſue of Maximinian
               
               Maximian (as we haue ſaid) with his great griefe had forſakē the Empire, being greeued ſo long to lead a priuate life, did his

beſt by the meanes of Maxentius his ſonne choſen Emperour, to returne to the Empire, but becauſe hee ſucceeded therein not well, he retired towards his ſonne in lawe Constantine, vnto whom he had giuen his daughter Fausta, and ſought by ambuſhes to caſt him out of the Empire. Which Fausta perceiuing well, reuealed to her husband, preferring him before her father. Wherefore the ſonne in lawe beſieged him at Marcellis,
               
                  Maximian choſe his owne death. tooke him aliue, and bad him chooſe whatſoeuer kind of death he would. He ſtrangled himſelfe with a cord or girdle. And ſo this wicked and bloudie man which had ſhead ſo much Chriſtian bloud, vnluckily finiſhed his life: of his age ſixtie.
            
               Licinius at the firſt had ſome great familiaritie with Conſtantine, and to pleaſe him made a ſhew to loue the Chriſtians, in ſo much that he married Constance the ſiſter of Constantine, and by a mutuall conſent together, cauſed to publiſh lawes for the Chriſtians, but afterward comming againe to his nature, and forgetting the honour that Constantine had done him, began to conſpire againſt him, becauſe Constantine ſo fauoured Chriſtians, whoſe enemie he declared himſelfe, alleadging this cauſe, that in their aſſemblies they prayed for Constantine, and not for him. Licinius then beganne the perſecution by his owne houſe; after he ſtretched it farre by Lawes and Edicts, into the Prouinces of the Eaſt, forbidding, eſpecially Biſhoppes to make aſſemblies and Sinodes. Secondly, that men and women to auoyd ſcandalles and offence, not to aſſemble at prayers. Thirdly, that ſuch as were appointed priſoners, as tranſgreſſors of Edicts, ſhould not be viſited nor ſuccoured, in paine to incurre the like condemnation, &c. He then ſet himſelfe againſt the Biſhops, not openly for feare of Conſtantine, but made them die ſecretly by his Committees. Euſeb. Lib. 10. Chap. 8.
            In the Towne of Sebasta, Loſias killed in a poole fortie ſouldiers, whoſe Martirdome, Baſile the great deſcribed, and other Martirs which were cruelly murdered.
            
               Licinius increaſed more and more his crueltie: but the Lord ſent Conſtantine to repreſſe him, who experimented againſt him the Forces of the Gaules and Italie, hauing ouerthrowne him in Hungarie, and purſued him into Macedonia,
               
where he repaired his forces. He was chaſed into Aſia, and in the end yeelded himſelfe, ſeeing he was vanquiſhed by ſea and by land, and was ſent into Theſſalonica to liue priuately, yet could he not ſo eſcape the true vengeance of his boldneſſe, crueltie, and infidelitie: For hee was ſlaine by Conſtantines ſouldiers, about the yeare of our Lord three hundred twentie and foure, after ſome writers.
            
               
               Melchiades the thirtith Biſhop, ſucceeded in the Church of Rome, and was of Affrike, after Damaſus: A man of great pietie, and a true ſeruant in the holy Miniſterie of the Goſpell, and in the affaires of the truth of God, vntill hee was put to death vnder Maximin Galerius, the yeare of the Lord, 314. Read herevpon the Eccleſiaſticall Hiſtory of Euſebius, where he reciteth diuers cruell kindes of death wherewith the Saints of that time were perſecuted.
            
               Carſulan, Platina, Stella, and other of the Popes flatterers, attribute wrongfully to theſe holy Martyrs of the Lord Ieſu, whole Chariots full of lying decrees; to the ende the diuelliſh ordinances of their ceremonies or rather blaſphemies might be approued by their authoritie.
            They attribute vnto him the forbidding of Faſtes on the Sundayes or Thurſdayes, becauſe on them the Painims celebrated the ſolemnities of their God Saturne. Item a decretall touching Baptiſme and the Confirmation. De conſecratione distinct. 5. cap. Spirit. ſanct. & cap. De his &c.
            
            
               Note this for the Biſhops of the Romaine Church, vntill Silueſter the firſt.
            
            But what man would thinke that poore and ſimple Miniſters of the word and Paſtors of the Church, ſuch as then were the Biſhops of Rome, inhabiting in ditches and caues, attending nothing vnder thoſe Tyrants from day to day, but only death, could haue thought vpon this pride & arrogancy, which after thoſe Popes vſed in buildings and other ordinances, ſeeing they had neither Temples nor houſes whether they might retire? Peace was not yet giuen to the Church. They yet

enioyed not that vnprofitable Idleneſſe, nor the ſoueraigne delights of this world: nor that whoore which by litle and litle roſe vp, had not yet her bedde ready, yet ſuch haue bene the inuentions of falſe Prophets, to ſet out the whoores body: and ſo is the Popes Sinagogue founded vpon ſo euident lies, as nothing more.
            Aſſuredly it were great folly to giue faith to ſuch ridiculous dreames of Sathan, forged for the gaine and profits of Prieſts. Better therefore it is in this caſe to prooue the ſpirits; namely, whether they be of God or not, as it is ſaid, 1. Iohn. Chapter 4. ſeeing many falſe Prophets are come into this world.
            Vntill this time Paſtors were as Starres in the Firmament of the Church, ſhining as well in doctrine as in good example: they were alſo garded by the right hand of him that walked in the middeſt of the ſeuen Candleſtickes.Apocal. 1. li 16 Hitherto men eſteemed them as Angels, preaching the word of the Almightie God, without fiction, yea that more is,Apo. 1.2. hitherto they were figured by the white horſe: becauſe in the miniſterie they carried the victorious Ieſus Chriſt, as well in their hearts as in their bodies, and as well in mouth as worke.
            
               Ceremonies in the celebration of the Supper.
               The memorie of the Lords Supper was not performed but in publike aſſemblies, and therefore the Synode of Gangre vnder the Emperour Constans, condemned Eustace Biſhop of Seluste in Armenia, becauſe contrary to the order of the vſe of the Church, he permitted ſome which diſdained to come into the Church to Communicate in particular houſes. Socrat. Lib. 2. Cap. 43. Neither was it lawful to celebrate the Supper in a prophane place, as appeareth by Athanaſius in the Epiſtle to them of Antioche. Hierome againſt Iouinian reprehendeth the maner of doing in other Chriſtians at Rome, which Communicated in houſes. Wherfore ſaid he entred they not into Churches? &c.
               Deacons diſtributed the Supper of the Lorde, Prieſtes beeing preſent, with one diuiding the Euchariſt, and this

was after the Canon of the Councell of Nice.
               
               
                  Epiſt. ad Ruſticū. Momacū.The Prieſts diſtributed the Cup of the bloud of the Lord; Doctors of this time often call it Cup or Miſtike veſſell. S. Hierome writing of veſſells to diſtribute the Lords Supper in, ſaith of a Biſhop of Tholouze called Exuperius; There was nothing ſo rich as that which carried the body of our Lord in an Oſier basket, and the bloud in a Glaſſe.
               By the firſt booke of Euſeb. of the Euang. 92. Demonſt. Chap. 10. One may eaſily knowe that Chriſtians daily celebrated the memorie of the body and bloud of Ieſus Chriſt. And S. Ambroſe in his fift booke of Sacraments, Chapter. 4. reprehendeth the Eaſterne Churches, becauſe they communicated but once a yeare.
               
                  
                     Ʋigills.In the Churches of Affrike, they which ſhould communicate, paſſed the night in watchings & prayers. As Athanaſius reciteth in the Apologie of his flight: adding, that all mutually ought before to be reconciled together. And in the Weſterne Churches, al communicated except the Catechumeniſtes, and ſuch as did penance: as appeareth by Hierome vpon the 7. Chapter of the 2. to the Corinthians.
               
               About this time water was giuen with wine, as appeareth by S. Ambroſe firſt Chapter of his fiſt booke of Sacraments. They put ſaith he into the Cup wine & then water, &c. which being mingled, was conſecrated with the wine.
               The maner of the Churches was, to giue the Euchariſt in the hand of him that tooke it, as appeareth by the words of S. Ambroſe to the Emperour Theodoſius. Reacheſt thou out thy hands which yet are bloudie, and which yet diſtill the bloud by thee ſhead, to take the holy body of the Lord? Dareſt thou apply to thy mouth the precious bloud of the Lord? &c.
               The Prieſt as he diſtributed the bread, ſaid. Take the body of the Lord: and in diſtributing the wine; Take the bloud of Chriſt: and at both, the Communicant anſwered, Amen. Ambroſe in the 4. booke of Sacraments, Chap. 5.
               
                  The Euchariſt giuen to ſicke perſons.To ſuch as were nigh their deaths they brought the Euchariſt. Horatius a Prieſt of the Church of 
                     Ʋerſeil, carried it to Ambroſe nigh his death. Paulinus in the life of S. Ambroſe reciteth it.
               
                  May abuſes began in this time to ariſe. Such as made any great voyage either by ſea or land carried the Euchariſt,Abuſes of the Supper. as appeareth in the Oration of Saint Ambroſe vpon the death of Satyrius.
               
               Touching the ceremonies vſed in adminiſtring the Sacrament, Denis hath left by writing that which followeth.Ceremonies in adminiſtrating the Supper. The Biſhop hauing ended the prayers before the Aultar, began to perfume and compaſſe all the place, after returning to the Aultar, he began to ſing Pſalmes, and all followed. This done, the Miniſters in order read ſomething of the holy ſcripture. That read, they cauſed the Catechumeniſtes with the Enenguinians to goe out, and ſuch as were admitted to penance. One part of the Miniſters kept themſelues before the portall of the Temple ſhut, the others did ſuch things as belonged to their charge; Such as are elected to miniſter with the Prieſts, preſented the bread before the Aultar, and the Cup of bleſſing.
               Whileſt all the Churchmen ſung praiſes and Himnes to the Lord, the Biſhop which ſaid the praiers pronounced peace to all. And after euery one had ſaluted one an other, the Prieſts and the Biſhop waſhed their hands with water. After the Biſhoppe in the middeſt of the Aultar, enuironed with Prieſts and Miniſters, began to praiſe and magnifie the workes of the world, and propoſe to the people the ſignes of the Supper, and to declare them vnto them, and inuite them to the participation thereof, which finally ended in thankes-giuing, &c.
               The word Meſſe was not found amongſt the writers of this time.The word Meſſe vnuſed. And as for the two preparatiue prayers of the Prieſt meaning to ſay Maſſe, which are ſhufled into the workes of Ambros; Eraſmus himſelfelfe iudgeth them not to be S. Ambroſes. They containe alſo errors contrary to the doctrine of him: As the adoration of the Sacrament, the Inuocation of Saints, and chiefly of the Virgin Marie.
               
               The Emperour Constantine hauing ouercome all theſe tyrants, namely, Maxentius, Maximian, and Licinius, the Lord gaue reſt to his Church, which was almoſt ruinated and troden vnder feete; and gaue a gentle ſpirit to Constantine to repaire

by a Monarchy, the great diſſipation and diſcord which the miſgouernment of many had brought.
               
                  Constantine was long ere hee could vnwrap himſelfe out of his auncient and Ethnicke ſuperſtitions, his wife Fausta maintaining him therein; but after hee ſawe himſelfe peaceable in his Empire, there was courage giuen vnto him to applye his power vnto the matters of the Church.
               True it is, as for Baptiſme, that hee deferred it a long time, becauſe hee alwaies determined to goe againſt the Perſians, and vpon deuotion without knowledge to be baptized in Iordain. Euſebius reciteth it in his life: yet after all, hee honoured it, and authorized it by Edicts and Lawes which hee cauſed to be publiſhed.
               Hee had a burning heart to the Faith, and was maruellous carefull to helpe the neceſſities of the Church: hee was of nature ſoft and benigne, and delighted in all good workes: and not onely reuoked the tyrannicke and cruel lawes that were before made againſt Chriſtians, but gaue to Churches great priuiledges. It was not inough for him to account Miniſters equall to himſelfe, but hee honoured and preferred them before him, as repreſenting the diuine Maieſtie. And by ſuch meanes hee was both loued, honoured and cheriſhed, not as an Emperour, but as a Father. Euſeb.
               
               
                  
                  Siluester a Romane, was conſtituted Biſhop of Rome after Melchiades, and gouerned the Church a long time.
               Being ordeined Biſhop, he exerciſed not onely the office of a Paſtor in teaching, but alſo in reprehending the vices of the Cleargie.
               There are attributed vnto him certain miracles, by which he drew many to the Chriſtian faith.
               When Maxentius raigned at Rome, to ſhunne his crueltie, Siluester retired out of Rome, and remained a certain time at the Mount Soracte: and returned vnder Conſtantine, after the death of the ſaid Tyrant.
               
                  Constantine eſtabliſhed many lawes. Firſt that Chriſt

ſhould be worſhipped of all, as the true God.
               Item that whoſoeuer ſhould doo iniurie to any Chriſtian, the halfe of his goods ſhould be confiſcated.
               Hee permitted all ſuch as were vnder his Empire, not onely to be Chriſtians, but alſo to found and build Temples.
               The word Martir, was vſed in the time of Constantine,
                  Martir. then when in remembrance of the Martirs men builded Temples, and about the thirtieth yeare of Constantine, a Temple called Martirium Magnum, was builded in Ieruſalem,
                  Temple. in the place called Cranium. See Sozom, Ich. 2. Cap. 26.
               
                  Constantine cauſed to bee made a Tabernacle in forme of a Temple, which he commaunded to be carried when he went to the warres, wherein he held the aſſemblies of the Chriſtians. Sozom. Lib. 1. Chap. 8.
               Touching the Donation attributed vnto him:Donation of Conſtantine.
                   that is to ſay, that he gaue Rome, Italie, and other Weſterne Prouinces to Siluester, as the Romane Biſhops pretend, it is a matter inuented, or at leaſt doubtfull: and euen the Popes owne decrees are againſt it.
               The two laſt Chapters make no mention of other Prouinces, but onely of the Towne of Rome,
                  
                     96. Diſt. c. Cōſtantinus. c. Fundamenta. De. electio. Lib. 6 12. q. 1. c. Futuram. no nor in the auncient volumes of decrees, is there any mention, nor any thing found in any Author of that time, as Antonine ſaith in his Chronicles. See Naucler.
               
               
                  Of this matter ſee Laurencius Valla, and Iohn le Maire in his Treatiſe of the difference of Schiſmes and Councells of the Church.
               
               
                  Constantine determined to build a Towne of his name, and elected Bizantium for it, which he compaſſed with ditches, and the Towne builded in the middeſt he called Conſtantinople of his name, there eſtabliſhing the Emperial ſeat of his Empire.
               
                  Bizanzium was an auncient Towne,Bizantium Conſtantinople. which a litle before was deſtroyed by Gallien and Pertinax, but Constantine reſtored it, and adorned it with rich ornaments, brought from all the parts of the world: in ſo much the Hierome writeth that

                  Conſtantine ſtripped naked as it were all the Townes of the world to embelliſh this new Rome. For he tranſported from the Caſtle which was at Ilion, the chiefe Towne of Troy the Palladium, and from Troas the Image of Apollo, which was of Braſſe, and of a maruellous greatneſſe. From Rome a piller of Porphire called Coclis, which he enuironed with diuers mettalls, and placed it in the market place paued with ſtones.
               Before wee come to the ſucceſſors of Siluester, wee will briefly touch the eſtate of the Church at that time. And firſt;
            
            
               Of the Eccleſiaſticall degrees.
               
                  Biſhops Prieſts.There were of olde three Eccleſiaſticall degrees; namely, the Biſhop, the Prieſt, and the Deacon, with the Miniſters and company of the faithfull. Ambroſe in his booke of the Sacerdotall dignitie. Hierome to Nepotian ſaith, that Biſhops and Prieſts were all one, ſauing that the Biſhop was a name of dignitie, and Prieſt was a name of age: but in reſpect of ſchiſmes and neceſſities happening in the Church, there was made a diſtinction. Ambroſe in the aforeſaid booke witneſſeth, that the ordination is alike; for both are Prieſts: but the Biſhop is the chiefe Prieſt. Other names, as Subdeacons, Acolites, and Exorciſts, came after.
               
                  Cleargie.The name of Cleargie was receiued in this time, to ſignifie all Eccleſiaſticall offices and dignities. Euſeb. Lib. 10. Chap. 2. Hierome to Nepotian yeeldeth this reaſon of the name. Cleros ſaith he in Greeke, ſignifieth Lot in Latine; therefore are Clarkes named,Clarkes. becauſe they are of the lot and of the inheritance of the Lord; or for that the Lord is their Lot, that is to ſay, their part and heritage. Afterward men called Clarkes ſuch as euery Church nouriſhed at the owne charge, to ſerue after for the miniſterie of the Church.
               
                  Metropolitanes.Metropolitanes were ſo called by reaſon of the principall and chiefe Townes whereof they were Biſhops, and ſo Zozomen. Lib. 3. Cap. 16. He calleth Baſile Metropolitane of Cappadocea. And the ſame in Lib. 2. Chap. 8. ſaith the like of an Archbiſhops name.
               
                  Patriarke was named the Biſhop of all the Prouince, Socrates Lib. 5. Chap. 8.Patriarke.
               
               The office of a Biſhop was to teach the people,The office of a Biſhop. as alſo the Prieſts. But in the Church of Alexandria, after the poyſon of Arrius, the Biſhop alone had that charge. Socrates lib. 5. chap. 22.
               The ordination of Miniſters appertained to the Biſhop,Miniſters. which is all the right of preheminence that they had aboue Prieſts, as S. Ierome ſaith to Euagrius.
               
               Vicars of Biſhops are found in the Canons of the Councell of Ancyra, Neoceſaria and Antioch, Chorepiſcopi,
                  Vicars or Biſhops particulers. and Baſile vſeth that name in the Epiſtle fiftie and foure. Amongſt the generall Epiſtles, there is one found vnder the name of Damaſus to Prosper, wherein Damaſus beeing asked, anſwereth, that Vicars called Chorepiſcopi, were no more but Prieſts, and that they could not conſecrate Prieſts, Deacons, Subdeacons, nor Virgines, nor Aultars; neither dedicate Churches, or like things contained in the Epiſtle, whereof let each man iudge, conſidering that time wherein Damaſus was.
               To Prieſts or Lords it appertained alſo to take vp debates and controuerſies. It appeareth by Epiphanius, Lib. 2. Tom. 2. Hereſie 69. that they were alſo ſent Embaſſadors to Councells to accuſe Heretickes, The cuſtodie of Eccleſiaſticall goods belonged vnto them. Sozomen, Lib. 5. Chap. 8. ſaith, that Theodoretus a Prieſt of Antioche, was Gardian of the precious veſſells.
               Deacons adminiſtred onely, and executed Eccleſiaſticall charges. They were carried vnto publike diſputations to play the Notaries, and gather together the Actes. As appeareth in the example of Athanaſius, who came with his Biſhop Alexander then an olde man, to the Councell of Nice, and did greatly helpe and aide Alexander to diſcouer and confute the fallacies of heretickes. Rufin. lib. 1. chap. 14.
               The conſtitutions of Siluester (as is conteined in the 1. Tome of Councells, makes thoſe degrees.Deacons. New degrees A commaundement of Subdeacons to obey Deacons and Acolites, Subdeacons, Exorciſtes to obey Acolites: Lectors, Exorciſtes:

Porters, Lectors: and to Porters, the Abbot: and to the Abbot, the Monkes. Exorciſts after Epiphanius, were ſuch as interpreted one tongue by an other, either at Lectors, or at Colloquies.
               
               
                  Diaconeſſes.In the Code of Theodoſius there are certaine conſtitutions which make alſo mention of Diaconeſſes, which was a miniſtry of women, for the viſitation and inſpection of bodies.
               Each Towne had his Biſhop. Ruffin. lib. 1. cap. 6. ſaith, that in the 10. Canon of the Councell of Nice, it was forbidden that in any Cities ſhould be two Biſhops: to the end that the order of Eccleſiaſticall gouernment (as proceeding from one head) might be diſtributed into diuers actions to Prieſts and Deacōs, wherof the number was indifferent, although ordinarily it was of ſeuen, according to the 14. Canon of the Councell of Neoceſaria.
               
            
            
               The Ecccleſiaſticall adminiſtration.
               
                  Diuers ſorts of Auditors.
                  Baſile diuideth the Auditors of Gods word into two companies: the one, of ſuch as were rude: and the other, of ſuch as had made ſome progreſſe therin. Ambroſe diſtinguiſheth them into Lay-men & Clarkes, in his booke of the Sacerdotall dignitie. chap. 2. Hierome vpō the expoſitiō of the 7 chap of the 2. to the Cor. diuideth them into 3. that is, Catechumenes, faithfull, and penitent.
               
                  Prayers.Praiers were ordinarily made for all things neceſſary; for the proſperitie of the Empire, for the health of the Church, for publique tranquilitie, for enemies, and for ſuch as were not yet conuerted. See Socrates, lib. 2. cap. 37.
               
                  Confeſſion taken from the common people.
                  Nectarius firſt tooke away in the Church of Conſtantinople the ceremony ordained for penance and confeſſion; wherein a Prieſt particularly applied abſolution, & ordained that each one after the witnes of his conſcience, ſhould approach the cōmunion. The occaſion of this defence came of a woman of a noble houſe, who hauing confeſſed to a Prieſt that ſhee had had the company of a Deacon in the Church: the Prieſt reuealed this ſcandal to the ſaid Biſhop, and the ceremony of confeſſion was aboliſhed. Socrates lib. 5. chap. 9.
               
                  Ceremonies inuented.In the time of Conſtantine, many ceremonies vnneceſſary

and euill agreeing with the word of God, were brought in; as candles lighted in the day time; which this Coſtantine inſtituted in Temples, newly by him builded, and conſecrated worthy ornaments and other things altogether ſuperfluous and ſuperſtitious, which other Churches then tooke vp.
               Biſhops alſo at this time denounced to their people Feaſt-dayes. As Baſile rehearſeth of himſelfe,Feaſtes. that he denounced in a Sermon the feaſt-day of a Martyr Iulitta.
               
               One new thing not vſed in times paſt,The Immunitie of Clarkes beganne. was now brought in. The Emperour Constantine gaue power to Clarkes, to appeale from ciuill Magiſtrates to Biſhops: which thing was the firſt that gaue occaſion to Antichriſt to chaunge & transforme the kingdome of Ieſus Chriſt into a polliticke kingdome, & by litle & litle to lift himſelfe vp aboue Magiſtrates, & of Miniſters and Doctors, to become Dictators and Kings, leauing the charge of ſoules.
               A new thing alſo of this time,Building of Temples. the care to build Temples was committed to Biſhops. As Conſtantine cōmitted to Macarius Biſhop of Ieruſalem the building of a Temple, which he willed ſhould be builded in the place where the Sepulchre was, Sozomene in his 4. booke and 13. chap, rehearſeth, that Baſile builded the Tēple of the Towne of Ancyra in Gallatia.
               
               A new charge alſo was giuen to Biſhops of this time, to conſecrate Temples, to ſeeke out & tranſport frō place to place, reliques of Saints. As we may ſee in the 85. Epiſtle of S. Ambroſe.
               
               
                  Such graunts peruerted the true office of a Biſhop, which is to teach and feed the flocke with the pure word of God.
               
            
            
               Of the goods of the Church.
               The Church of this time began to be enriched by gifts, largitions & munificēces of Princes. Maximin feeling himſelf taken with a greeuous diſeaſe made an Edict for the Chriſtians,Edicts for the Chriſtians. that the houſes, lands & poſſeſſions takē away in times of perſecutiōs ſhould be reſtored to the true poſſeſſors, Euſeb. li. 9. ch 10.
               The Emperor Cōſtantin, not only cauſed that which had bin takē frō the Chriſtiās to be again reſtored, but alſo cauſed to be ſold for the cōmoditie of the poore of the Church, all the moſt precious

Images of the Heathens. Sozomene, lib. 2. chap. 5.Reuenewes aſſigned to the Church. Moreouer he withdrew from the Reuenewes of euery Towne a certain Impoſt, and ordained it for the profit of the Church and cleargie thereof, commaunding by Edict that that gift ſhould paſſe to them ſucceſſiuely for euer. The ſame Sozomene li. 1. chap. 3. & li. 5. chap. 5. He commaunded further, to bring to the treaſurie of the Church their goods who had bene martyred, which left no children nor kinsfolkes their heires. As Euſebius reciteth in the life of Conſtantine, li. 2. Hee willed alſo that men ſhould diſtribute Corne in common to the poore. Baſile in his Epiſtle 104. witneſſeth that many dedicated whole houſes to the profit of Churches: yea ſome of their owne motion all their ſubſtance vnto Churches, which not being permitted daring the raigne of other Emperours, was permitted and lawfull by the conſtitution of Conſtantine, contained in the lawe Ei eod. De ſacro. ſanct. Eccleſ.
               
               
                  The vſe of the goods of the Church.The vſe of the goods of the Church, was applied to ſuſtaine the poore pilgrimes. Yet Ambroſe in his firſt booke of Offices, chap. 56. excepteth ſuch as had any goods and reuenues of their owne to maintaine them. And Hierome in the Epiſtle to Damaſus, admoniſheth that amongſt Clarks there ſhould be none but ſuch as were nouriſhed at the charges of the Church, and that had no patrimony, or that had no other meanes to ſuſtaine themſelues.
               
                  Immunities.Beſides, the wages and oblations which Conſtantin gaue, he alſo granted in all places Immunities to Prieſts, which alſo the heires of Conſtantine ratified. See the Code, de epiſcho & cleris.
               
               
                  The poore.After Miniſters, the chiefe care was of the poore, whoſe Proctors the Deacons were. Cyrillus Biſhop of Ieruſalem, is praiſed, becauſe in a great dearth for the ſuccour and helpe of the poore, he cauſed the veſſells, vailes, and other precious things of the Temple to be ſolde, Sozomene lib. 4. cap. 25. And Hierome ad Ruſticum accuſeth Biſhops which vſurpe and make proper that which is common. If the liberalitie of Emperours failed, the Churches defrayed the charges of Biſhops and all others that went to Sinodes. Theodoret. lib. 2, cap. 16.
            
            
               
               Libraries.
               The bookes of the holy ſcripture, which for the moſt part were loſt during the perſecutions at this time by the benificence of the Emperour Conſtantine, were written in great dilidence, and with magnificence worthy of ſuch an Emperour. By the witnes of Athanaſius it is plain inough, that in the Chrians Temples there were Libraries,Libraries. and therein he accuſeth the impietie of the Arrians, which tooke out theſe bookes & burnt them. Hierome againſt Rufin makes mention of the Librarie at Ceſaria. It appeares by the Acts,Notaries at Rome. of a Romane Sinode held vnder Siluiſter, that the Romane Church mainteined certaine Notaries to write the acts of the Martirs.
            
            
               Schooles.
               There were alſo Schooles of two ſorts. Ethnicks or Philoſophicall, and Eccleſiaſticall. Nazianzenus in the death of his brother Ceſarius, makes mention of the Schooles of Palestine, wherein he learned Rhethoricke. Lactantius held that of Nicomedia. Ephiphanius a Sophiſter, kept that of Laodicea. That of Ceſaria in Cappadocia was renowned, bicauſe Conſtantius cauſed Gallus and Iulian his children to be taught there. But aboue al, that of Alexandria was moſt famous, for blind Didimus, who ruled there. Rufin. Lib. 2. Cap. 7. And Baſilius calleth it a goodly ſhape of all doctrine. In Europe that of Athens becauſe of letters, was of moſt acount: wherin Iulian had for condiſciples, Baſile and Gregorie Nazianzenus, as the ſaid Gregorie witneſſeth in his Inuectiue againſt Iulian. Ʋictorinus Affrican, taught at Rome Rhethorike.Reward of profeſſ. See Hierome in his Treatife of Illuſtrious men. The Salarie or reward was to profeſſors payde after the lawe of Constantine, conteined in the title de profeſſ. & med. in the Code.
               
               At this time there was a man called Arrius,
                  Arrius a profeſſor▪
                   a profeſſor in the ſchoole of Alexandria in Egipt, whoſe Hereſie did miſerably torment and diſtract the vnion of the Church. He was a man ſwelled with ambition and preſumption. One day hauing heard in the congregation of the faithfull, Alexander Biſhop of Alexandria, ſubtilly and learnedly diſputing of the diuine eſſence, after he had ſhewed that the vnitie thereof was in a

priuitie, Arrius Logician, rather then a Theologian, began to diſpute and vomit out the p
                     •
                  iſon he had long time gathered. Epip. Lib. 2. Tome 2. Neceſie. 69. rehearſeth, that Arrius was now found in an errour: that Melitius a Biſhop in Thebaide accuſed before Alexander his Biſhop, who after that, looked to him more narrowly, and tooke heed to his ſubtilties.
               
                  Such a care had Biſhops at this time one of an other, that no euill ſhould goe forward.
               
               
                  Arrius.
                  Arrius maintained the Sonne of God to be a creature, and the holy Ghoſt created of him. But with what arguments and babble of words he vſed to confirme his error, it ſhould be ſuperfluous to rehearſe. There are long Epiſtles of Arrius to Alexander, and of Alexander to all Churches, by which one may more at large know the ſpring of all this infection. Alexander at the beginning ſought to ſtop this euill by ſilence. But ſeeing that Euſebius Biſhop of Nicomedia tooke vpon him the cauſe of Arrius in hatred of the Church of Alexandria, Alexander not onely publiſhed the Apoſtaſie of Arrius, but alſo excommunicated him and his adherents as Heretickes and Schiſmatickes, which would maintaine that God was ſometimes without being Father, and that the Sonne was a creature and made, who knew not perfectly and exactly the Father.
               It is ſtraunge how ſo curſed an errour ſhould in ſo litle time ſubuert ſo many Biſhops, yea the moſt learned, not onely of the Eaſt Church, but of the Weſt alſo. Epiph. ſaith, that Arrius being chaſed away, went into Palestine. But Alexander haſted Letters euery where to the number of ſeuentie, to aduertiſe the Biſhops of Arrius his doings, who was receiued of his Protector Euſebius. Arrius in the meane time ſent Letters to Alexandria, naming him Pope and his Biſhop.
            
            
               The great Councell of Nice. Anno domini. 320.
               
               Theſe debates and contentions brought great dolour and care vnto the good Emperour Constantine, and incontinent to

giue order therefore, ſeeing this euill from day to day got the vpper hand, ſent Hoſius Biſhop of Corduba in Spaine to Alexander, a man of great pietie and authoritie, with his Letters Patents to the Church, to finde meanes to extinguiſh this fire whoſe flames were blowne all ouer. Euſebius reciteth the Tenure of Constantines Letters full of all pietie, in the life of the ſaid Emperour. Lib. 2.
               
                  Hoſius furniſhed with theſe Letters came into Egipt, and did all that he could to agree Alexander & Arrius, but in vaine. Whereof the Emperour being aduertiſed, was more grieued then before, at the requeſt of the Biſhops, and inſtance of Alexander, as witneſſeth Rufin. lib. 1. cap. 1. ordained at his owne charge an vniuerſal Sinode at Nice, a town of Bithinia, the yeare of Chriſt. 320. after ſome, and the yeare of his Empire 17. At which Sinode, from all the parts of the earth came Biſhops, and the number was 250. after Socrates. li. 1. ca. 8. beſides Prieſts, Deacons, A colites, & other multitudes. Theodoret. li. 1. ca. 7. ſaith 318. Biſhops; and this is about the number wherof the moſt part of the Elders agree, that haue written thereof.
               Some ſay, that the Emperour before he aſſembled this generall Sinode, had cauſed Arrius to come vnto him, and in the preſence of ſome Biſhops hauing enquired of his hereſie, Arrius with an oath anſwered that he bred no hereſies, then ſtraight the Emperour in the preſence of all ſaid: If thou haſt ſworne with a good conſcience, & that thy oath be made with a full faith, then departeſt thou an Innocent. But if falſly thou calleſt God to witneſſe, let him whom thou haſt offended take vengeance. So many ſpake for him which he before had gained. Notwithſtanding the Emperour writ large Letters that men ſhould take heede of Arrius that they builded not their Faithes vpon his hereſies. Theſe letters beganne with theſe words. Conſtantine the great Augustus, &c. The place for the Sinode was in the Emperours Pallace, wherein hee had placed ſeates couenable and conuenient for each ſtate and degree. The Emperours ſeate was in the firſt ranke, and it was couered with Golde, as Euſebius ſaieth in his life. Liber. 3. Hee himſelfe made the firſt exhortation

to enter into the matter, wherevnto by conſent of all, Eustachius Biſhop of Antioche had charge to anſwere. The Emperour the better to agree with them, propoſed the great crueltie and tirannie of the perſecutions paſſed: that now peace was open vnto them, and that it ſhould be a ſtraunge thing, the outward enemies being vanquiſhed, to ſtirre vp warres within. Theodoret. Lib. 1. Cap. 7.
               Amongſt the Biſhops which were there aſſembled againſt Arrius was Macarius Biſhop of Hieruſalem, Euſtachius Biſhop of Antioche,
                  Hiſt. Eccle. Li. 10. Chap. 4. 
                  Hoſius Biſhop of Corduba in Spaine, Pathuntius of Egipt, and Maximus, (theſe two had their eyes put out for the Faith) and many other perſons which had ſuffered perſecution vnder the aforeſaid Titants.Spiridian. There was alſo Spiridian, Biſhop of Tremythe in Cyprus, and Nicholas Biſhop of Mirme in Licia, a very graue man. Alſo Athanaſius then a Deacon of the Church of Alexandria, Theophilus Biſhop of the Gothes, and Alexander Biſhop of Alexandria, &c. Spiridian was he that in Lent preſented fleſh to a Pilgrim as he paſſed by, and did eate himſelfe, and cauſed him alſo to eate, ſaying that to pure Chriſtians all things are pure. Hiſt. tripart. lib. 1. Chap. 10.
               After that licenſe was graunted to the two parties, Euſebius Biſhop of Nichomedia, the Patrone of Arrius, preſented a Libell full of blaſphemies, conteining briefly that which hath bene before ſaid. That God who is for euer, was not alwaies the Father. And ſeeing all things were created of God, the ſonne alſo muſt be a worke made, and many other blaſpemies. This Libell was recited and read with great ſorrowe of moſt part of them which were there, becauſe of the blaſphemies conteined therein, and was torne in peeces, to the great confuſion of the Author. There followed a very ſharpe contention of both parts, which the Emperour harkened vnto with great patience. But finally Euſebius and his conſorts fearing to be baniſhed, made a countenance to renounce their errours, and to ſubſcribe to the determination of the Fathers, except Secundus and Theon, as Athanaſius reciteth in the decrees of the Sinode of Nice. But the Biſhops after they knew their fraude, and how they diſguiſed the truth with words, began to vſe the

word Eſſence and Homouſios, that is to ſay, of one ſame ſubſtance. Then the Euſebians abhorred theſe words, Homouſios and Eſſentiall, as ſtraunge & vnvſed in the holy ſcripture. The Fathers declared, that neceſſarily they were conſtrained to vſe theſe words, to ſignifie that the Sonne was engendered of the ſubſtance of the Father, according to which, bee was conſubſtantiall to the Father, that is to ſay, of one ſame ſubſtance and eſſence.
               A Philoſopher who by no Arguments could be ſurmounted, was finally conuerted by a ſimple Biſhop, who ſaid vnto him: Harken Philoſopher, there is one God which made all things in the power of his word, and by the ſanctification of his holy ſpirite confirmed them. This word which we call the Sonne of God, hath redeemed mankinde, which was in the bottomeleſſe pit of hell, by his death and reſurrection. Torment nor trouble thy ſelfe too much with thine owne arguments and demonſtrations in this matter which muſt be apprehended by faith, and that Ieſus Chriſt himſelfe and his Apoſtles hath taught vs. Anſwere mee, dooſt thou beleeue it is ſo? The Philoſopher aſtoniſhed ſaid vnto him, I beleeue, and confeſſe to be vanquiſhed, & after exhorted others of his profeſſion, with him to beleeue the doctrine.
               At the ſaid Councell, Constantine hauing receiued diffamatorie Libels, accuſations, debates, and particular quarells of Biſhops one againſt an other, cauſed them all to be caſt into the fire, that none might vnderſtand their debates or errours. God hath ordeined you Biſhops (ſaith he) and hath giuen you power to iudge of your ſelues, by meanes whereof we yeelde our ſelues to your iudgement. Men may not iudge you but God alone, vnto whom we referre the deciding and determination of your controuerſies.
               
                  This humilitie of Conſtantine, afterward brought great damage to his Succeſſors.
               
               The ſaid Councell would haue forbidden Prieſts and Deacons to dwell with their wiues:Pathuntius. but Pathuntius whome Conſtantine
                  
had in ſuch reuerence, that hee often cauſed him to come into his Pallace, and imbraced, yea kiſſed the place frō whence his eye was plucked out, riſing vp, confeſſed that marriage was honourable amongſt all men and the bed vndefiled: and ſaid that the company of the husband with the wife was chaſtitie, and perſwaded the Councell not to ſet out ſuch Lawes which might giue occaſion of fornicatiō both to them & their wiues. The Councell approued his opinion, and ſo dealt nothing vpō that matter, but left to euery one liberty to marry or not: according as to euery one ſhould ſeeme expedient: wherefore as before, ſo now alſo was it lawful for Prieſts to retain their wiues and to marry. But after Siritius & Gregorie the ſeuenth, forbad ſuch marriage, and commaunded continency: which notwithſtanding the Eaſterne Prieſts neuer receiued.
               
                  It is not then true which ſome write, that Calixus who was before this Councell, commanded continencie: For then there would haue bene ſome mention of him in the ſaid Councell and of his decree. Euſebius.
               
            
            
               Extract out of the Acts of the Councell of Nice.
               
               
                  Hiſt. Eccle. Lib. 10. cha. b.We beleeue in God the Father Almightie, Creator of all things, as well viſible as inuiſible, and in our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, the onely ſonne of God, borne & engendered of him, that is to ſay, of his proper ſubſtance, and therefore God of God, borne and not made, of the ſame ſubſtance of the Father: by which ſonne all things were made, as well in heauen as in earth: who alſo for the loue of vs men and for our ſaluatiō diſcended from heauen & tooke our humaine fleſh & was made man. He ſuffered death & paſſion, and after roſe again the third day, then he aſcended into heauen, and finally muſt come to iudge the quicke and the dead. We alſo beleeue in the holy Ghoſt.
               All ſuch as ſay that there was a time that the ſonne was not, and that before be was borne in the earth he was not, and that he was created of nothing, or of other ſubſtance then of the father, or that he is the ſonne of God, but cōuertible & mutable, the holy Catholicke and Apoſtolicke Church, excommunicateth and anematizeth them.
               
                  It was alſo amongſt other things ordeined in this Councell, that no Biſhop ought to receiue any of them which an other Biſhop hath excommunicated or thruſt frō his Church, were he Clarke or Laie man. But if we vniuſtly, for hatred or anger were excommunicated or chaſed away, It was ordained that in each Prouince the Prelates there ſhould aſſemble euery yeare twiſe, to holde their prouinciall Councell,Prouinciall Councels each yeare. to knowe and iudge of ſuch matters: to the end that if any man had done any thing vniuſtly it might be retracted by others, and that if he had done well, it might be approued.
               That in Alexandria and Rome, the auncient cuſtome ſhould be kept; namely that the Biſhoppe of Alexandria ſhould haue care of the Churches of Egipt, and that of Rome, of ſuch Churches as are about Rome.
               
               That if two or three Biſhops ſtriue or do not agree to conſecrate one elected for ſome diſſention: In this caſe they muſt hold themſelues to the determinatiō of others of the prouince, and eſpecially of the Metropolitane.
               That the prerogatiue which before times hath bene giuen to the Biſhop of Ieruſalem, ſhalbe kept for him, without preiudice notwithſtanding of the Metropolitans dignitie.
               That the Cathares heretikes called Nouatians, if they would repent themſelues & come again to the Church & confeſſe the faith according to the beliefe of the church, ſhould be receiued into the order thereof. And if their Biſhop come with ours let thē ſit with our Prieſts: And let the name of a Biſhop remaine only to thē which haue alwaies held the catholike faith & to no others.
               That in one Citie there be but one Biſhop.
               That if any of them which indiſcreetly haue bene ordained Biſhops, being accuſed of crime, do confeſſe it, or be by others conuicted, let them be depoſed; and likewiſe ſuch as haue erred in the faith, and by errour haue bin promoted, if after they be knowne.
               That ſuch as in time of perſecution haue receiued the faith, and with a good hart repent themſelues, do 5. yeares make their penance with the Catechumenes, (that is to ſay, ſuch as learn the faith) to cōmunicate with thē in praiers only: after which terme they may be receiued to ye
                   Sacraments of ye
                   Church.
               
                  That ſuch as for the Faith haue renounced the Campe, and after returne thither againe, doo there penance 13. yeare, and after to be receiued to the Sacraments if a true repentance might be ſeene in them. And notwithſtanding that it ſhould be in the faculty & power of the Biſhop to abridge the terme, if he ſee their penance to be fruitfull and hartie.
               That if that foreſaid penitents come to peril of death before their penance be ended, that then the Sacraments ſhould be adminiſtred vnto them: yet if they eſcaped, they ſhould be bound to ende their penance.
               
                  Catechumenes.That the Catechumenes which had likewiſe erred, ſhould be three yeares ſeperated from others, and do their penance apart, and after be receiued with them.
               That no Biſhop nor Clarke preſume to clime vp from a little Church to a greater.
               That the Clarke which ſhall leaue his Church without lawfull cauſe, going vagarant and running heere and there, be not receiued to other Churches to the Communion.
               That no Biſhop ordaine any who is not of his owne Dioces without leaue of his Dioceſan.
               
                  Vnlawfull gaine.That none take any vſury, nor gaine or aduantage, vpon Wine or Corne, as cuſtomably men do, giuing new for old, or taking the ſixt part of the gaine, or the tenth halfe, and if hee doo it, let him be driuen away as one that taketh vnlawfull gaine.
               That Deacons be not preferred before Prieſts, nor ſit in their ranke, nor in their preſence do diſtribute the Sacraments but only miniſter vnto them, and aſſiſt whē they do diſtribute: but when there are no Prieſts there, in that caſe they may depart them.
               That the Diaconeſſes becauſe they are not conſecrated, be accounted amongſt Laie-people.
               There were many Canons made and diſcerned in that Councell and formes of confeſſions of Faith touching the diuine eſſence really diſtinguiſhed, truly and eternally into three perſons, the Father, the ſonne, and the holy Ghoſt, which are one onely God, alone eternall, infinite, and all perfect in himſelfe.

Which perſons are coeſſentiall and coeternall, without confuſion of properties and relation, and without any inequalitie, &c. But heere it ſhould be too long to recite the ſaid confeſſions, which many good Biſhops preſented in this Councel. And for the moſt part they are found in the bookes they haue left vnto their poſteritie. The Fathers then vnited in the true doctrine touching the perſon of the ſonne of God, concluded this Article as is aboue ſaid. The Emperour Constantine alſo gaue out a decree and ordinance thereof: And euen as Porphirius an enemie to Chriſtian religion, in times paſt receiued the ſalarie and reward of confuſion for his impietie. So Arrius and his complices, true Porphirians, were to all an horrour, and abhomination. He added further, and denounced the paine of death to all ſuch as hid the writings of Arrius, without diſcrying them and burning them in the fire.
               As for the other occaſion and cauſe for which this Sinode was aſſembled: namely touching the celebration of Eaſter,Ordinances againſt Arrius.
                   the Emperour being grieued that the inequalitie of the obſeruation thereof troubled ſo many Churches, propoſed to the Fathers, that the deciſion thereof was made, that all men ſhould celebrate it on one ſame day. It ſeemed vnto him vnfit that ſo ſacred a feaſt as that ſhould be celebrated after the immitation of the Iewiſh nation, the enemies of Ieſus Chriſt. So hauing made theſe remōſtrāces vnto the Councell, he asked of Aceſius Biſhop, what he thought thereof: but Aceſius durſt not ſay cō
                  trary to him. This queſtion then was decided after they had ordained of things Eccleſiaſticall, and it was agreed therevpon that the celebration of Eaſter ſhould be obſerued on one ſame day throughout all the world.
               The difference alſo which was betwixt Miletius Biſhop of Licia, a Towne in Thebaide, and Peter Biſhop of Alexandria, was agreed. Epipha. ſaith: Lib. 2. Tom. 2. Hereſ. 68. that the aforeſaide Peter helde that they which in time of perſecution were fallen into renouncement, returning to the Church and confeſſing their fault, if they demaunded pardon, that they ought not to be ſuſpended from the communion. Miletius maintained that we may not receiue them vntil the perſecutiō
                  
ceaſe, leaſt others by too great facilitie of pardoning offenders, ſhould be offended, or elfe thereby might be prouoked or induced to fall into like infirmitie. Socrates ſaith, that for many other cauſes Meletius had bin depoſed by Peter of Alexandria, and that for this ignominy, he alwaies after bare euill will vnto Peter and his ſucceſſors, Achilles and Alexander: which Theodorus alſo reciteth. Lib. 1. Chap. 8.
               This is briefly that which may be ſaid in this hiſtory of the Councell of Nice, which although it was as a thunder-bolt to confound that wicked Arrian hereſie, yet was it not ſo deſtroyed, but after it lifted vp the head againe. And that more is, it was neuer more pernitious to all the Church, thē after the death of Conſtantine, when eſpecially it had gotten for the defence ſome of the Emperours which lifted vp her head; notwithſtanding that which Athanaſius in his Epiſtle to Epictetus, Biſhop of Corinth ſaith is true: The faith which the Fathers haue expounded by the holy ſcripture in that Sinode, is ſufficient to confound all impietie, &c.
               
                  Euſebius in his chap. 27. lib. 3. reciteth that the machinations & ambuſhes laid by the ſectaries of Arrius and Euſebius againſt Athanaſius, gaue occaſion to the Emperor to conuocate in his time many Councells and aſſemblies of Sinodes.
               There was a Prieſt who got fauour of Conſtantia, widow of the Tyrant Licinius and the ſiſter of Conſtantine: whom this Prieſt made beleeue that great wrong was done vnto Arrius at the Councell of Nice, and that his faith was not repugnant from that of the ſaid Councell. A litle after, the ſaid Conſtantia, taken with a mortall diſeaſe, ſent for her brother Constantine, and gaue witneſſe of the innocencie of Arrius, whereby this Prieſt hauing gotten acceſſe to the Emperour by the meanes of Conſtantia, hee himſelfe then perſwaded touching Arrius, namely, that hee thought no otherwiſe then the Councell did.
               
                  Conſtantine then ſent Letters to call againe Arrius, who came to Conſtantinople with Euzoius a Deacon,
                     Arrius giueth in his confeſſion. who alſo had bene depoſed by Alexander. They by the Emperours commaundement gaue in a diſguiſed and couert confeſſion, the beginning

whereof was.
               We beleeue in God the Father almightie, and in our Lord Ieſus Chriſte his ſonne, begotten of the Father before all worlds. God and Word, by which all things were created, as wel in heauen as in earth, who came downe and tooke humane fleſh, and ſuffered death, was raiſed againe and aſcended into heauen, & ſhould come againe to iudge the quick & the dead, &c. The reſt is in Sozomen. lib. 2. chap. 27.
               After Conſtantine had ſeene this confeſſion, he asked them if with a good hart they thought as they ſpake? Arrius affirmed yea: Conſtantine miſtruſting his owne iudgement, ſent Arrius with his adherents to an aſſembly of Biſhops which then was at Ieruſalem, commanding them diligently to examine the cō
                  feſſion of Arrius: that is, if he had reuoked his error, & if Alexander did him wrong or no.Sinode of Ieruſalem. The Sinode of Ieruſalem aduertiſed of the Emperors will, ſent Letters to the Biſhops of Egypt, Thebaid, and Libia, exhorting them, that according to the witneſſe of the Emperour, Arrius might be receiued into the Communion. The Arrians ſtrengthened with theſe witneſſes, came againe into Alexandria, and thruſting themſelues into company, Athanaſius who then hadde the charge of Alexandria, would not admit them. Arrius returned to Constantinople to make his complaints againſt Athanaſius: there likewiſe hee ſought to bring himſelfe by force into that Church: but Alexander who had the gouernment thereof oppoſed himſelf againſt him, ſaying: that the author of ſuch an hereſie,A tumult of the Arrians. and a perturber of ſo many Churches ought not to bee receiued. This came to a great contention, the Euſebians threatning they would cauſe Alexander to bee baniſhed.
               Certaine dayes following, the Arrians concluded to introduce Arrius by force into the Church. But Alexander placing his force in the Armour of pietie, entred ouer night into the Temple, accompanied with two of his houſehold, and with teares paſſed all the night in Oriſons and prayers to the Lord, that hee would not ſuffer that rauiſhing wolfe lately couered with a Lambes skinne, to thruſt into his flocke.
               
                  Some ſay that he added theſe words in his prayer: O Lord if it be thy will, and that by thy iuſt iudgement (which is inueſtigable) this wolfe be admitted into thy Church, deliuer mee thy poore ſeruant from this preſent life. The next morning of this determination, Arrius enuironed with a great multitude of Euſebians, was ledde to be brought into the Temple as in a triumph: but when they were come to the place called the Market place of Constantinople, Arrius was ſuddenly taken with a feare and an aſtoniſhment within him, which cauſed a paine in his belly, ſo that leauing the company, he was conſtrained to goe into a ſecret place to purge his belly: the company which ſhould accompany him to the Temple, attended him in the meane while: but ſeeing him tarry long, ſome went to the eaſing place and found Arrius dead vpon the ſiege, his entrails being come out at his fundament. This was the end of Arrius, which greatly feared his companions; who to couer ſo foule and infamous a death, ſaid he was ſuddenly ſuffocated and choked with a diſeaſe of the ſtomacke. Others, that he was poiſoned. Some ſaid, that too great ioy had ſtifled him; yet none could ſay, but this was a iuſt iudgment of God vpon him. Athanaſius, Lib. I. againſt the Arrians, and the Epiſt. to Serapion. Sedulius a Chriſtian Poet reciteth it in his Verſes.
               
                  The names of dayes.
                  Siluester called the dayes otherwiſe then before, for the day of the Sunne, le Dimanche: the other dayes, Feries, 2.3.4.5.6. and Samedi for the day of Saturne.
               
               
                  Antonie being in Egypt in the wilderneſſe, Conſtantine writ vnto him,Donatiſt. 3.
                   to pray to God for him, and for his children. Victorinus of Affrike an Orator, was alſo of this time, and Donatus, of whom came the Donatiſt heretickes, againſt which S. Auguſtine writeth.
               The conſtitutions attributed to Silueſter touching the conſecrattion and vſe of creame, to marke ſuch as were baptized, and annoynt ſuch as were nigh death, and ſuch other inuentions, are in the booke of Councels: whereof Luitprandus, Platina, and Sabellicus make mention in their bookes, and ſpeak of them after their owne iudgement.
            
            
               
               Councells in diuers places.
               After the Councell of Nice, Siluester at the commaundement of Conſtantine, made aſſemble a Sinode at Rome of 277. Biſhops: wherin there was condemned Arrius, Photinus, Sabellius, with one Calixtus, as the booke of Councels ſhewes. And againe by a Sinode following, the decrees of the Councell of Nice were confirmed, and the ſolemnitie of Eaſter eſtabliſhed to be obſerued on the Sunday from the 14. of the Moone, vntill the 21.
               The multitude of Councels and Sinodes, multiplied traditions vpon traditions, and brought in great errours, and the good and holy conſtitutions of Nice were ſoone after by ſuch meanes contradicted.
               1. At Neoceſaria in Pontus Polemoniake, betwixt Paphlagonia and Armenia, was inſtituted, that none ſhould be a prieſt before the age of 30. yeares.
               2. At Elebert in Spaine, Biſhops, Prieſts, Deacons, and Subdeacons, were commaunded to abſtaine from theyr wiues, and not to haue children, otherwiſe that they ſhould bee depoſed.
               That there ſhould be no Images in the Temples of Chriſtians. If any broke an Image and were murdered:Images chap. 60, becauſe it is not written in the Goſpell; neither is there read that it hath bene done by any of the Apoſtles, it pleaſed the Councell that ſuch a one be not admitted nor receiued into the number of Martyrs.
               3. At Rome it was ordained for Churchmen, that none ſhould accuſe them, nor draw them into lawe.
               4. At Arles the firſt, counſell was giuen to young people by no meanes to marry againe, if by chance for adulterie they bee ſeperated from their wiues.
               5. At Gangia in Paphalagonia, they excommunicated and  anathematized, ſuch as condemned them that eate fleſh, ſo that it were not offered vnto Idols, &c. Item, they excommunicated ſuch as iudged a married Prieſt ought not to excerciſe

his miniſterie becauſe of his marriage: and likewiſe ſuch as abſtained from their miniſterie.
               At this time vnder the ſhadowe of chaſtitie and virginitie, men began to deſpiſe marriage; as appeareth by the firſt, ninth, tenth, fourteenth, and fifteenth Chapter of the ſaid Councell: where all ſuch as blame marriage and leaue their children, or the wife her husband, or the husband his wife, to liue in continencie, are excommunicated.
               
                   6. At Arles the ſecond, was ordained the contrary, that none ſhould be admitted into the Eccleſiaſticall eſtate, vnleſſe he promiſed to renounce the bonds of marriage.
               The Iberians were conuerted to the faith (they are of Aſia, vnder the climate of Pontus) namely, the King, the Queene, the Nobilitie, and al the people, by the preaching of a woman, a captiue there.
               
                  Paul the Hermit the younger, hauing taken his wife in adultry, left her and went into the Deſart, and ſaid to the adulterer: keepe her for thy ſelfe. Hiſt. trip.
               
               
                  Silueſter died without martyrdome, hauing 7. times made orders, at which he created 25. Prieſts, 36. Deacons, and 45. Biſhops. He gouerned the Church 23. yeares: or after Marianus, 24. Others giue him but 19.
               
                  
                  Marcus ſucceeded him, & gouerned the Romane Church 2. yeares, or 8. moneths after Ierome: Damaſus ſaith he was a Romane. His father was called Priſcus.
               
               Some ſay he gaue to the Biſhop of Oſtia that priuiledge aboue all others to conſecrate the Biſhop of Rome, and the right of the Archipiſcopall pall, called Pallium. And would that the Creed which was made at the Councel of Nice, ſhould be ſung by the Cleargie and people, after the reading of the Goſpell. Platina, Bergomenſis, and Polidorus.
               
               If he builded Temples and adorned them with diuers gifts and preſents, let their faith be examined which haue written thereof.
            
            
               Sinodes for the cauſe of Athanaſius.
               
               The Emperour Conſtantine conſidering the number of

the accuſers of Athanaſius, and the crimes wherewith hee was charged, publiſhed a Sinode at Ceſaria in Palestine, whereat Athanaſius not appearing, there was doubted if was for feare of the Biſhop of that place, or of the Euſebians; and for that cauſe hee cauſed a Councell of the Nations to be aſſembled at Tyre, calling Athanaſius to it by Letters full of indignation. Socrat. li 1. chap. 28. Theodoret. lib. 1. chap. 27. Sozom. lib. 1. chap. 25. and Athanaſius himſelfe in his ſecond Apologie.
               At the ſaid Sinode were found 60. Biſhops, the moſt part Orientalls.
                     Athanaſius called to the Sinode. 
                  Athanaſius came thither accompanied with Timotheus a Prieſt. The Euſebians to begin their wicked part, brought in a woman of diſhoneſt life, whom they had ſuborned, who faining to haue vowed chaſtitie, maintained that Athanaſius in the night would haue rauiſhed her: beeing then preſſed to anſwer to that accuſation, he ſpake not a word. Timothius perceiuing why Athanaſius held his peace, turned himſelfe towards the woman and ſaid vnto her. Had I euer acquaintance with thee? Did I euer lodge nigh thee? The woman cried more then before. And poynting at the ſaid Timothius with her finger, ſhee ſaid. It was thou and no other which by force haſt violated mee. This calumniation beeing thus made knowne to the great confuſion of them that inuented it: notwithſtanding, the Iudges which gouerned and ſufficiently knew Timothius and Athanaſius, let the ſaid woman goe, ſauing the good right of Athanaſius, who maintained that at the leaſt ſhe ſhould haue named them of whom ſhe was hyred.
               An other impudent accuſation was againe attempted againſt him. The aduerſaries brought forth the hand of one who was named Arſenius, whom they maintained to haue beene murthered by Athanaſius. Hee demaunded if any amongſt them knew Arſenius: to which queſtion, many anſwered that they knewe him very well. Arſenius was then brought before theyr preſence. Beeing againe asked if it were that Arſenius whoſe hand was cut off, they confeſſed all that it was hee. Herevpon Athanaſius diſcouering

his cloake, ſhewed hee was whole of both hands which God had giuen him.
               This ſo liuely a refutation made the aduerſaries infamous: but their refuge was, to trouble the Sinode by tumult and ſedition. Theodoret. li. 1. cap. 29. One of the ſaid aduerſaries called Achab, or Iohn, got from the Iudiciall ſeate, and eſcaped in this tumult. Socrat. lib. 1. chap. 30.
               
                  Athanaſius ſeeing that the tumult fell to great ſedition, withdrew himſelfe. The Sinode in his abſence condemned him, and depoſed him from his Biſhopprick. Hee then got him to Constantinople, and ſhewed the Emperour the iniuries that this Sinode hadde done vnto him: And be ſought him that hee himſelfe would take the knowledge of the cauſe. The Emperour then by his Letters Patents called againe all the Biſhops of the Sinode of Tyre to Constantinople, that they might yeeld a reaſon of the ſentence giuen againſt Athanaſius. And as Sozomene. Lib. 2. Chap. 28. ſayth, that Euſebius. Theognes, and other heretickes arriuing at Conſtantinople, did aſſuredly affirme to the Emperour, all that they had deuiſed againſt Athanaſuis, and hyred witneſſes which depoſed that all that which was brought againſt Athanaſius was true.
               The Emperour mooued rather with a deſire to pacifie the Churches, thē with the accuſation of his aduerſaries, baniſhed Athanaſius into Gaul, into the Citie of Herers. But the Emperour by certaine Letters written to the people of the Catholique Church of Alexandria, witneſſeth himſelf to haue confined him thither only to the end his bloudy enemies ſhould not grieue nor touch the ſacred head of ſuch a perſon (theſe bee his words.) And in the meane while all things neceſſary were ſent to Athanaſius.
               
               
                  Iulius the firſt of that name was ordained Biſhop after Marc. the 25. yeare of Conſtantine. After the Chronicle of Hierome, hee gouerned the Church about 16. yeares. Hee was the ſon of one Rustike; who had great combats to maintaine the quarels of Athanaſius, and of other faithfull Doctors againſt the Arrians. The tripartite hiſtory ſaith, that the Councell of Nice
                  
was in the time of Iulius. And is it poſſible that he was there as being Biſhop of ſome other place? Howſoeuer it is, it is plaine inough that the laſt age of the Emperour Constantine, is reported by Ierome to be in the time of this Iulius.
               
               The ordinance is attributed vnto him, that a Prieſt ſhould plead no where but before a Iudge Eccleſiaſticall. That hee reprehended the Biſhops of the Eaſt, that they aſsēbled councels without his authoritie. There is an Epiſtle gratulatory of this Iulius, for the reſtitution of Athanaſius. Socrates reciteth it, Lib. 2. Chap. 23. & Sozo. lib. 3. cap. 20.
            
            
               The beginning of Pilgrimages.
               Vnder Conſtantine the land of Paleſtine being purged of Ethnicke Idolatries, began to be in deuotion for the memorie of the great and memorable things done in it. Conſtantine cauſed an Oratory to be builded in the place where the Sepulchre of the Lord had bin. Helena his mother went thither vpon deuotion to worſhip, and hauing found the Croſſe,Temples builed in Palestine.
                   cauſed to bee built two Temples, the one where the Lord was borne, the other where hee aſcended into Heauen. Ruffin. Lib. 1. Chap. 7. After that, Constantine cauſed to be builded in the place called (Cranium) a Temple, with ſolemnitie and authoritie of a Sinode aſſemble at Tyre, This gaue the firſt occaſion of Pilgrimages, and anuuerſatie ſolemnities. And it came to a ſuperſtition to haue ſeene the holy land and the holy places, as appeareth by the Epiſtle of Gregory Nyſſene, wherein he learnedly refuteth that ſuperſtition.
               The Romane and imperiall Eagle tooke the two heads, when Conſtantine after he had eſtabliſhed the Townne of Conſtantinople the new Rome, made it the ſeate of the Empire, and the chiefe of al people which acknowledged the Romane Empire, and inhabited the parts Orientall, Northerne and Southerne, and towards the Mediterranean ſea. Sozomene lib. 2. chap. 3. Nicepho. lib. 8. cap. 4. ſaith that the Towne was dedicated by him the yeare of his Empire 28. and as he had taken the Empire, diuided; and vnited it in his perſon: ſo he diuided it againe

as a paternall heritage,Conſtantin the ſecond. and made a partition thereof amongſt his children: whom whileſt he liued he created Ceſars, one after an other: that is to ſay, Constantine his eldeſt ſonne. Anno. 10. Conſtantius the ſecond, Anno. 20. and Conſtans the youngger, Anno. 30. Whoſe Empires were very turbulent, and endured but 24. yeares, 5. moneths, & 12. dayes: according to the Chronicle of Hierome.
                  The death of Constantine the great. 
                  Conſtantine the Father died at Nicomicha, after he had liued 66. yeares, and raigned 31. yeares. Pompon. Laet.
               
               
                  Licinius the ſonne of Conſtantia, ſiſter of Conſtantine the great, and Criſpus ſonne of the ſaid Conſtantine the great, with his ſaid ſon Conſtantine the eldeſt, were created Caeſars the yeare of the Lord, 316. But the wickednes of Fauſta, the wife of Conſtantine the great, cauſed the death of Licinius and Criſpus, and many other noble perſonages. See Aure. Ʋictor and Pompo. Laet. Criſpus was inſtructed by Lactantius.
               
               
                  Constantine the eldeſt ſonne of Constantine the great, was Emperour, with his two brethren, after the father the yeare of our Lord, 338. The Empire was thus parted, namely, that Conſtantine ſhould enioy Gaul, Spaine, and England. Constance ſhould haue Italie, with Slauonia and Greece. And Constantius ſhould holde Constantinople, with the Eaſt. This partition contented not Conſantine: hee raiſed warre againſt his brother Conſtance, being proud of his Army of Gaul, but warring more couetouſly then warily, was ouerthrowne by an ambuſh nigh to Aquilea: and being wounded in diuers places, dyed there, hauing raigned but three whole yeares, and liued 25. See Bapt. Egnat. and Pomp. Laet.
               
               
                  Conſtance after he had vanquiſhed his elder brother, paſſing the Alpes, came to make warre in Gaul, and in two yeares with great difficultie conquered the Countrey which his brother had in partition. He at the beginning gouerned well, but after gaue himſelfe to pleaſures, and at laſt became odious to all men. So that in the end they conſpired againſt him as he was at hunting, and was ſlaine by the deuice and treaſon of Magnentius who vſurped his Empire, yet he had ſaued this Magnentius his life. Conſtance liued thirtie yeares, and raigned fourteene.

See Pomp. Laet.
                  Conſtance. Cōſtantius.
               
               
                  Conſtantius had for his part the Empire of Conſtantinople, with the Eaſt. Hee vanquiſhed 
                     Ʋetranio who made himſelfe Emperour in Hungarie after the death of Cōstance. Moreouer, to reuenge the death of his ſaid brother Constance, hee made great warre againſt Magnentius. In the firſt battaile there were ſlaine of one part and the other, 53000. fighting men:53000. ſlaine. 
                  Magnentius had the worſt. And againe making head, was ouercome nigh Lions. Constantius was ſuſpected vpon enuie and ambition to haue made away Dalmatius his Couſin-germain, a vertuous man, who better reſembled Constantine the great, then his owne father; and who was appointed for a copartner with the ſaid Constantius, when he had his partition. But Conſtantius liued not long after. For as he was going the ſecond time againſt the Perſians, vnderſtanding that Iulian had made himſelfe Auguſtus, he tooke a Feuer and dyed, the yeare of his age 40. and of his Kingdome 24. See Eutrop. Aurel. Ʋict. Pompon. Laet. and Bapt. Egn.
               
               The Sinode of Sardis in her Sinodall Letters, calleth Iulius their friend and companion. Theodoret. lib. 2. chap. 8.
               
                  It followeth, that the Biſhop or Archbiſhop of Rome had not the pretended ſuperioritie.
               
               It ſeemeth that Iulius was dead, when Conſtantius hauing tamed the tyrannie of Magnentius and Syluanus, hee was in Italie to appeaſe the diſcordes of Athanaſius his cauſe.
               
                  Liberius borne in Rome, his father being called Augustus, ſucceeded Iulius the yeare of Chriſt after S. Hierome, 352. about  the 12. yeare of Conſtance Empire: his confeſſion was agreeing vnto the Catholique faith, and writ to Athanaſius very Chriſtianly of God the Father, God the Sonne, and God the holy Ghoſt, as may be ſeene in his Epiſtle, which is affixed to the workes of Athanaſius.
               
               
                  Athanaſius in the Epiſtle to them which leade ſolitary liues, rehearſeth how Liberius was ſubuerted.
               
                  The Emperour Conſtans ſent to Rome one named Euſebius an Eunuke with Letters, wherby he threatned him exile, and on the other ſide tempted him with preſents to induce him to cō
                  ſent with Arrius, and to ſubſcribe to the condemnation of Athanaſius. Liberius deſpiſed both his menaces and gifts as a ſacrifice of blaſphemie. Whereat the Emperour being exceedingly grieued, found meanes to get him out of Rome: and being come to him, threatned him with death. But Liberius manfully anſwered.The cōſtancy of Liberius. I am ready to endure all, rather then of Chriſtians we ſhould be accounted Arrians. Why what art thou ſaid the Emperour, that with one wicked man troubleſt all the world? The word of Faith (ſaid Liberius) dependeth not vpon multitude. He was then baniſhed by this Emperour Conſtans into Berrea, which is a Towne in Thrace. Where after hee had bene two yeares, he was called home (as ſaith Theodoret) his reſtitution after ſome, was accorded by the Emperour, at the requeſt of many Romanes, and of the Weſterne Biſhops. The ſame ſaith Athanaſius in the before alleadged Epiſtle. Alſo that Liberius after his two yeares exile feared with threatnings and apprehenſion of death, ſealed to the condemnation of Athanaſius. Ruffin ſaith the ſame: and Hierome (as Baleus ſaith) writeth that by ambition Liberius fell into the hereſie of Arrius, being once fallen from the integritie of faith.
               We finde ſome conſtitutions of Liberius, namely, not to make noiſes in faſting time, that times of faſting and Lent bee not polluted by the act of marriage: that in time of famine and peſtilence, men ſhould appeaſe the Lords anger by faſting, almes, and prayers.
            
            
               An aduertiſement.
               The principall felicitie and ornament of the Church of this time, was the multitude of excellent Doctors, which by their doctrine ſought ſo farre as in them lay, to conſerue & multiply the puritie of doctrine. But this felicitie was greatly obſcured, partly by the multitude of heretickes, and partly by the rage of ſeditious people, and ſchiſmatickes: In ſo much, that ſince the time of the Apoſtles, there was no Church that hath

endured more diſſentions, combats and diuiſions within it, then that of this world. Wherevpon by good right, Baſile the great in a certaine poeme, writing of the iudgement of God, complaineth, ſaying. I haue liued the age of a man, and I haue ſeene great concord amongſt the Arts and Sciences. But in the Church of God alone, for which Ieſus Chriſt dyed, I haue obſerued ſo many diſſentions that it is altogether diſſipated and waſted. And comming to the cauſe; As I ſearched ſaith he the cauſe, I remembred the place of the booke of Iudges, where it is written; That then euery one did whatſoeuer hee thought good in his owne eyes.
               
               Great perſecutions were vnder Conſtantius after the death of Conſtans, againſt the Catholike Doctors and Biſhops,Heretickes cruell. by the Arrians. Many were put to death euen within the Temples, others were exiled, others put in priſon, virgins impriſoned, and the houſes of Chriſtians pilled and ſacked.
               S. Hilarie was ſent into exile.
               
               At this time for the great perſecutions without, and hereſies within, many retired into the Deſarts.Monkes at this time. They write of two which were called Amon. The one was the Father and chiefe of three thouſand Monkes. The other Amon, with two hundreth and fiftie Clarkes and Monkes, was ſlaine by the Arrians. Euſebius.
               
               
                  Sarmatha and Amathas Diſciples of S. Anthonie, were ſlaine by the Painimes. Macarus the Aegyptian, an other Macarus of Alexandria, Hylarion the Diſciple of S. Paul, the Hermit Theodorus, Entichian, Pachomius, Moyſes, Beniamin, Helias.
               
               
                  Serapiō
                   was the father of 2000. Monkes, whom hee made worke for the neceſſitie of their liues, and to helpe the needes of other poore, Paemen & other infinit. Martin renounced his military eſtate. Hiſt. trip. lib. 8. chap. 1. Iohn Caſſian in the Collat of Fathers. Naucl,
               
               A coniuration was made by the Arrians after the Councel of Sardis, againſt two Catholike Biſhops, Eufrates and 
                     Ʋincentius. They cauſed an whoore in the night time to come into their chamber, and by Apoſtate people which ſuddenly went

after the ſaid ſtrumpet, and ſo profered to accuſe them to haue bene ſurpriſed in whoordome. But the harlot diſcloſed the coniuration.
               A Councell was held at Millaine in fauour of the Arrians againſt Athanaſius, the which reſiſted, Paulinus Biſhop of Treners, Denis Biſhop of Millaine, Euſebius Biſhop of 
                     Ʋerceil, and Rhodamus: wherevpon they were caſt out of the Church, and with them Liberius, Lucifer Metropolitane of the Iles of Sardine, and Oſius of Spaine ſent into exile, Anno Christi, 361.
               The ſaid Oſius in his age by many torments, beatings and wounds, was forced to cōſent to the expoſition of the Arrians, and thervnto to ſubſcribe in the firſt volume of Councels. Tritenius ſaith, that Oſius being rich, fearing either baniſhment or loſſe of his goods, conſented to the Arrians, and being about to depoſe a Catholique Biſhop called Gregory, he fell downe out of his Chaire, and ſo died.
               
                  Hereby are we aduertized, that it is nothing to begin wel, vnleſſe we perſeuer vnto the end.
               
               Vnder Conſtantius many Councels were held, namely in Tyre, Sardis, and Millaine, as is ſaid in Arimine, in Syrmion of Pannonie, in Nicea, which is in Tharſe, in Seleucia, which is in Iſauria, wherein the faith of the Fathers of Nice was condemned.
               
                  Felix borne at Rome, ſonne of one named Anastaſis, hauing bene the Deacon of Liberius, was thruſt into his place by the Arrians, hoping he would conſent with them in doctrine: but hee became a true Catholique in the confeſſion of the Councell of Nice, and gaue no place either to the heretickes, or to Conſtance himſelfe, declaring him an hereticke, and was rebaptized by Euſebius of Nicomedia. We finde in the booke of Councels, an Epiſtle of the Biſhoppes of Aegypt to Felix, and Felix his anſwere to them, with certaine conſtitutions: namely, that none might accuſe a Biſhoppe before a ciuill Magiſtrate. Item, to reſtore a Biſhoppe who is

caſt out by force. Item,Liberius. not to admit witneſſe of prophane people againſt religious perſons. Item, that Biſhoppes ſhould frequent Sinodes, or ſend thither if they could not goe.
               Som ſay, that Felix gouerned with Liberius a certaine time: But Theodoret ſaith that Felix withdrew himſelfe into an other Towne. Socrat. lib. 2. chap. 37. ſaith, that Felix was driuen away by the Romane people in a ſedition, and that the Emperour thereby was conſtrained to ſend for Liberius thither. Others ſay, that Felix was beheaded with many others, for that hee prooued the Emperour.
               
                  Hilary Biſhop of Poiters was reuoked from exile:Hilarie Biſhop of Poiters. and Paul
                   Biſhop of Treuers died in exile in the Countrey of Phrygia. Anno Christi. 363. Lucius Biſhop of Adrianople, dyed in priſon.
               
                  Paulus Biſhop of Conſtantinople ſent into exile, was ſtrangled by the way.
               
                  Nicomedia by an earthquake was wholly ſubuerted, and the Townes nigh were alſo afflicted.
               After the death of Constance, Conſtantius againe purſued Athanaſius, and then was the great perſecution againſt the faithfull.
               
                  Liberius returned from exile the yeare of Chriſt, 363.
               About this time three Sectes of Arrians roſe vp. That is to ſay, Macedonians, Eunomians, and newe Arrians.
               
               1. The Arrians held the Sonne to be like vnto the Father but by grace, not by nature.
               2. The Macedonians, that the Sonne is altogether like the Father, but not the holy Ghoſt.
               3. The Eunomians, that the Sonne is altogether vnlike the Father.
               
                  Euſebius Biſhop of 
                     Ʋerceil endured great torments of the Arrians,Euſebius Biſhop of Verceil. becauſe in councell at Millaine he tore in peeces a ſcedule, wherevnto the weſterne Biſhops had ſubſcribed to the Arrians in the Councell of Arimine.
               
               Some ſay hee was ſeuen dayes without bread and water in a Caue, and afterward was kept in a very ſtraight place.

But after the death of Conſtantius he was deliuered and returned to Verceil,
                  Iulian. into his Biſhopricke vnder Iouinian. Finally, after the death of the ſaid Iouinian, vnder 
                     Ʋalens, who was an Arrian, he was ſtoned by the Arrians the yeare of Chriſt, 388.
               
                  Note Reader, that at this time in each Towne there were both Catholike Dostors and Arrians. Temples for the one, and Temples for the other: ſo the Church was diuided.
               
               
                  Achatius Biſhop of Ceſaria in Paleſtine an Arrian, was in great reputation with Conſtantius.
               
               
                  Iulian borne at Conſtantinople, the ſonne of Conſtantius, brother of Conſtantine the great, he was faire of face, ſubtill and of good ſpirit, giuen both to Letters and Armes: he ſet Fraunce at libertie, which the Almaines had waſted: hee tooke the King an the firſt cōflict, beyond the hope of all. Colleine was taken of him when he was very young: of which prize hee got great renowne, and reioyced the hearts of the ſouldiers. In ſo much that they named him Emperour in Paris. Whereof his Couſin Conſtantius being aduertiſed, died in diſpite: about the age of 45. yeares,The death of Conſtantius.
                   as he prepared to make warre vpon him. Yet when he died, he made him his heire. Anno Domini 363.
               
                  Athanaſius returned into Alexandria. George who ruled in his abſence, was ſlaine, and his body burnt.
               
                  
                     A Sinode in Alexandria.A Sinode was in Alexandria of good & Catholique Biſhops, wherein they that fel into hereſie, were permitted not onely to returne into the vnion and communion of the Church, but euen into their offices and Biſhoppricks.
               There was alſo concluded and declared, that the holy Ghoſt is of one ſame ſubſtance with the Father and the Sonne, and that in the Trinitie there was nothing created or leſſe, or after an other.Eſſentiall. Item that God hath but one eſſentiall ſubſtance,Subſtance. but reall ſubſiſtence of three perſons. This word (Subſtance) differeth from the word (Subſiſtence) when we ſpeake of the perſons of the Trinitie. For ſubſtance cōcerneth the eſſentiall nature of a thing: after which, the three perſons of the Trinitie are but one alone, ſubſtance and nature. But this

word (Subſiſtence) ſheweth in one ſame diuine ſubſtance three perſons and different proprieties,Subſiſtence. not onely in name (as the Sabellians ſay) but really.
               
                  Iulian was inſtituted in his youth in pietie, vnder Euſebius Biſhop of Nicomedia, as Laetus ſaith: but after he had taſted the Schooles of Philoſophie and Rhethoricke, vnder Libanius the Sophiſter, and Maximus the Philoſopher, (whom Valentinien the Emperour after cauſed to be executed, for exerciſing Magicall Artes) all that godlineſſe which he had learned,
                     Iulian inſtituted in pietie. was chaunged into Ethnike ſuperſtition: yea, Eutropius ſaith, that Iulian in his youth was a Reader in the Church of Nicomedia. Moreouer, he was a man learned in humane Letters, and exerciſed in deeds of warre, ambitious and cruell: which he ſhewed, hauing bin cauſe of the death of his brother Gallus. Ierome in the Epiſtle to Nepotian ſaith, that Iulian denied Ieſus Chriſt in France.
               
               Beeing then altogether revolted from Religion,Humane Letters prohibited hee was ſurnamed the Apoſtate. Hee firſt forbad Chriſtians to keepe no ſchooles of humane Letters, nor bookes of Philoſophie or Poeſie. For he had often this word in his mouth. Theſe Galleleans (ſo called he Chriſtians) will make warre vpon vs with our owne writings, if they be once armed.
               He liked better to proceed againſt Chriſtians by long torments and inſupportable griefes, then by great effuſion of bloud. For he knew well inough, that the former perſecutions were the cauſe of the multiplication and glory of Chriſtians. Socrat. lib. 3. chap. 13. Theodoret. lib. 3. chap. 8. The chief perſecution that he could deuiſe, was to doo the ſame in the Temples of Painims, that the Chriſtians did in their Churches at their ordinary aſſemblies in Churches, Lectors, prayers releeuing of poore hoſpitalls, and ſuch like things which he oppoſed in the name of Painim Gods.
               
                  
                     Ʋalentinian entring one day into the Temple of Fortune with Iulian,
                  Holy water. being angry at the caſting of certain holy water vpon him, (ſaying that it rather defiled then clenſed him) ſtrooke him that caſt it: But Iulian would haue conſtrained him to ſacrifice vnto the Idolls: but he choſe rather to forſake all, then

to commit ſuch a villanie. Iulian then baniſhed him the Court, alleadging this for a ſhewe, that he had negligently gouerned his ſouldiers. For Iulian the moſt that he could, diſſembled that the crueltie he exerciſed was for the Chriſtian Religion.
               He tooke from Chriſtian Churches all their goods, Immunities, honours, and the prouiſion of reuenewes which Conſtantine had aſſigned thē. He deſtroyed their churches & tooke away their treaſures and veſſels, and cauſed the Temples of the Painims to be repaired, he ſuffred not them to dwell in townes but baniſhed them vnto the extreame and outward parts of the Empire, and gaue licence to vſe vnto them all contumelies and ſhames. Wherfore in Aſcolon and Gaza, townes in Paleſtine, great outrages were done vnto them. For Chriſtians there were beaten euen to death.Extreame cruelties. They of Gaza ſtoned many of the faithfull, opened women, and filled their bellies with barley, & then made them be eaten with ſwine. Theoret. li. 3. cha. 7. The ſacred virgins were expoſed naked, and after they had ſhewed vnto them all kinds of reproaches, they were cut in peeces, and then caſt to beaſts. In ſome places the Chriſtians were laid, & aliue ſacrificed vpon the Aultars of the Painims. It is recited by Nicephorus, li. 10. chap. 13. And when the Chriſtians by their embaſſadors would haue ſhewed theſe iniuries vnto Iulian, to take order therefore, they had no audience allowed. And if at any time he made a countenance that he would chaſtiſe them that did ſuch outrages, by countenance again, he rather incited then repreſſed them. Sozom, lib. 5. chap. 15. Yea he fell into ſuch impietie and malice to vexe the Chriſtians, that the fountaines in Antioche by his commaundements were dedicated vnto Idols in ſacrifices and oblations: thinking thereby to pollute the Chriſtians, and to make them to bee partakers of ſuch abhominations whenſoeuer they vſed theſe fountaine waters: yea the fleſh that came to the Butchers ſtall, bread, fruites, and other ſuch like things which were neceſſary for life, hee made them bee ſacrificed to Idolls by the Prieſts.
               The Chriſtians with great ſorrowe were conſtrained to ſee a deteſtable and abhominable prophanation: yea and to

vſe theſe fountaines and viands thus infected and polluted, beeing inſtructed by the doctrine of S. Paul to take with a good conſcience whatſoeuer came to the Butchery,1. Cord. 10. fol. 25. and that which is neceſſarie to the common life. Theſe were two excellent Captaines, Inuentius and Maximianus, who at a certaine banquet, deploring this prophanation of the goods of God, applyed the complaint of the captiue children in Babilon, to the time of Iulian.
               
               Lord thou haſt deliuered vs vnto a wicked King, and wee are made ſlaues vpon the earth, &c. Which thing beeing reuealed vnto the Emperour, he made them come before him. They there declared their iuſt complaint more at large then before, ſeeing they had the meane giuen them to ſpeake vnto him. The Emperour condemned them to grieuous torments, not as Chriſtians, but as iniurious and offering opprobry and ſhame to his Maieſtie:
                     Iulians enuy for the name of Martyr. for he greatly enuied that word and honor of Martyr. And this enuy made him aſſay all means to torment them before hee would come to execute them by iudgement.
               
                  Iulian burnt with deſire to goe againſt the Perſians who had cruelly afflicted the Eaſt, and affected the name of Partrike. But before he enterpriſed that Act which was his laſt, he promiſed his Gods, that at his returne from this expedition, he would yet commit more greeuous things againſt the Chriſtians then before. Ruffin. Lib. 1. Chap. 36. Doret. Lib. 3. Chap. 21.
               Of this euill will he ſhewed ſufficient witneſſe; for in the middeſt and as it were in the heate of this Perſian warre, hee tooke leiſure to vomit out ſeuen bookes againſt Ieſus Chriſt, although before he contented himſelf to write againſt Chriſtians, as Eutropius ſaith. And indeed being in this expedition, he prepared a Skaffolde in the Towne of Ieruſalem, at his returne to place there the Biſhops, Monkes, and the faithfull of theſe places, and to expoſe them vnto beaſts. Baſile and other good Doctors did all their duties to goe hither and thither to comfort & exhort Chriſtians, both publikely and particularly, nor did meddle nor pollute thēſelues with the abhominatiōs of

the Gentiles,Iouinian. but to deteſt them, yea the gifts and honours which the Emperour propoſed to ſuch as renounced Chriſtianitie.
               Here we muſt not forget the Prophetike anſwere which a Schoolemaiſter in Antioche made to Libanius a Sophiſter, when Iulian went againſt the Perſians. Libanius demaunded of him, mocking Chriſt; What thinkeſt thou doth the Carpenters ſonne at this time? The Schoolemaiſter anſwered: O Sophiſter, the Creator of al things whom thou calledſt the Carpenters ſon, makes a coffin to encloſe Iulian. Soone after newes came that Iulia was ſlaine.
               But behold what was the end of this curſed Apoſtate Iulian.
                  The horrible death of Iulian.
                   After he had paſſed the Sea Boſphore, he wintered in Antioche: As ſoone as the Spring came, paſſing by Hierapolis, hee went into Meſopotamia: and after he had paſſed the floud hee fought againſt the Perſians, and receiued a mortall wound; and caſting a full handfull of bloud into the ayre, hee vttered this blaſphemie againſt Ieſus Chriſt. Thou haſt ouercome ô Gallelean. In the end thou art vanquiſher: and as hee had loſt much bloud, being in a burning Feuer, hee called for water about midnight, and dranke it colde, and expired the yeare of his age 31. hauing gouerned the Empire the ſpace of a yeare and ſeuen moneths. Of the publike ioy they of Antioche made for his death, ſee the Tripartite hiſtorie. lib. 6. chap. 48.
               
                  Iouinian or Iuuian borne in Hungarie, was created Emperour with great ioy of the Armie, the next morning after the death of Iulian.
                  A Chriſtian Emperour. He was a Prince naturally liberall, and who vnder Iulian had ſhewed well, that he loued better to looſe all dignities then to obey one wicked commaundement, and againſt Chriſtian religion.
               Beeing importuned by the ſouldiers to accept the election, he ſaid hee was a Chriſtian, and that hee would not bee the Emperour of Ethnicks and Idollatrous people. Hee accepted not the Empire, vntill all with a common voyce had proteſted they would bee Chriſtians. Eutropius Lib. 10. Socrat. Lib. 3. Chap. 22.
               One called Lucius an Arrian, whom George Biſhop of

                  Alexandria had promoted, accuſing Athanaſius when he returned from exile. Iouinian would not heare him,Athanaſius came from exile. but knowing Athanaſius, commaunded ſilence to Lucius. Sozomen. li. 6. cap. 5. He cuſtomably ſaid to flatterers, that they rather worſhipped purple then God.
               The Church had reſt vnder him, and he reſtored whatſoeuer Iulian had taken away.
               There was a Councell held at Antioche vnder him,Councell at Antoiche. to eſtabliſh the faith of the Councell of Nice, Sozom. lib. 6. chap. 4.
               He made peace with the Perſians to his great diſhonour,Peace with the Perſians. and to their great aduantage: yeelding them fiue Prouinces beyond Tigris: alſo he promiſed to giue no ſuccours vnto the King Arſaces allied with the Romanes. He died ſoone after of an euill of the ſtomacke as he was in his chamber, wherein for cold he cauſed to be made a great fire of coles all the night. He liued 23. yeares, and raigned ſeuen moneths.
            
            
               The originall of Monkes and Monaſteries.
               The Monaſtike life began firſt in Aegypt, Antonius and Macarus were the firſt and moſt renowned Authors of this maner of life, which incontinent was diſperced into Paleſtine, Armenia, and Paphlagonia. Sozomen. li. 3. chap. 14. It is greatly to be maruelled at, how this world which in it had ſo many excellent Doctors, did ſtraight admit this manner of life, which was neuer inſtituted of God: and not onely allowed it, but euen themſelues inſtituted it, and ſo made a new ſeruice of God by their owne traditions.
               It ſeemeth at the beginning there were two kindes of Monkes, ſome in ſollititude, and others in Cities and companies:Two kindes of Monkes. 
                  Sozom. li. 3. ch. 16. Baſilius at large writeth the Oeconomie and lawes of this Monkiſh life: namely, that a Monke before all things ought to poſſeſſe nothing, to be peaceable: that hee ought to haue an honeſt habit, a moderate voice, words well diſpoſed, to take his refection peaceably, and with ſilence: and that his glorie ought to be patience in tribulation, humilitie and ſimplicitie of heart, watchings, teares in prayers, ſobrietie

in his ſpeech and eating.Valentiniā. 
                  Ambroſe in his 82. Epiſtle of his booke ſaith, that Monaſteries were ſhops of vertue, abſtinence, faſting, patience and labour. Out of which they drew Biſhops that were accuſtomed and trained in theſe vertues. Hierome ad Ruffinum Monachum ſaith that the Monaſteries of the Aegyptians receiued none without dooing ſome labour or worke. And this was their rule, and as it were their Simbole. Hee that trauelleth not, ought not to eate. The ſame in his Epiſtle ad Eutychium, ſpeaketh of three ſort of Monkes in Egypt.
                  Cenobites. The firſt were called Cenobites, Sanſos in that countrey language, as we might ſay, liuing in common. The ſecond Anacharites,
                  Anachirites. Remoboth. becauſe they dwelt alone in the Deſarts, far from mē. The third they called Remoboth: theſe dwelt two with two, or three with three at the moſt, and liued at their diſcretion and of that which they laboured for; they nouriſhed themſelues in common, but often had they debates amongſt them.
               Before the time of Hierome, it is not like there were any Monaſteries in Europe: but that Ambroſe (in whoſe time began perſecutions of virgins) makes often mention of companies of ſacred virgins:Europe had not yet receiued Monkes. otherwiſe there is no Latine Author of this time in whoſe writings the name of Monke is found. Certaine it is, that Sozomen. lib. 3. chap. 14. affirmeth them of Thrace, the Illirians and they of Europe had yet no Monaſtike aſſemblies.
               
                  Valentinian borne alſo in Hungarie, was made Emperour by the ſouldiers in the principall Towne of Bithinia, Anno. 366. Hee and Valens were the ſonnes of Gratian, borne in Hungarie, of a meane place: and in fauour of him, 
                     Ʋalentinian was choſen to the Empire, which hee refuſed, but after accepted and made his brother 
                     Ʋalens pertaker with him, who had the Countrey of the Eaſt, and made his ſonne Gratian Augustus. In their time Procopius who vſurped the Empire, was by them diſcomfited. After, Valentinian chaſed away the Gothes and other barbarous people of Thrace: The Saxons were brought to their dutie and obedience accuſtomed: Germanie beeing toſſed with continuall troubles, was ſet

at reſt and quietneſſe by the happie ſucceſſe of Theodoſius.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋalens then being choſen a conſort of the Empire, was at  firſt of like pietie and will with his brother as hee hadde alſo ſhewed vnder Iulian: but after hee was infected with the Arrian hereſie, at the perſwaſion of his wife, and of Eudoxius Biſhop of Conſtantinople, an Arrian, of whom he was baptiſed.
               During the life of Valentinian, the weſterne Church was peaceable, and agreeing to the decrees of the Councell of Nice: But Valens did what he could to aduāce the Arrianiſme, againſt ſuch as were called Homouſiastes: that is to ſay, the true Catholiques: and ſtirred great & horrible perſecutions, and aboue all, in Antioche and Laodicea, his brother Valentinian reprehended him, and admoniſhed him by Letters to deſiſt, as Zonoras writeth: but hereby was he ſtirred ſo much the more, and determined to chaſe away Baſilius Biſhop of Ceſaria, becauſe at his commaundement he would not communicate with Eudoxius: but the Lord ſent a diſeaſe to his onely ſonne (who knowing it be Gods vengeance) turned him from his euill will, and certaine dayes he was an auditor of Baſiles Sermons.
               
                  Athanaſius after he had procured the good of the Church 46. yeares, and ſuſtained many perſecutions in great conſtancie and patience, died about this time.
               After his death, perſecution in Egipt and Alexandria was mooued by 
                     Ʋalens, Hiſt. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 7.
               
                  Damaſus a Spaniard (ſome write him to bee of Rome) the ſonne of one called Antonius, ſucceeded Liberius: his election  was turbulent and bloudie, becauſe of a competitor hee had called Vrſin a Deacon of the Romane Church.
               
                  Hereby may you ſee a firſt fruite of the riches of the Church, and of the pretended donation of Conſtantine.
                  
               
               Of the writings of Damaſus, ſee Suidas and Hierome in his Epiſtle ad Euſtochium. Tome. 4. makes mention of Damaſus. Of Virginitie ſaith hee, read the bookes of that Pope Damaſus compoſed in verſe and proſe.
               
                  
                  Valens.He reuerenced the Sinode of Nice, and condemned Auxentius Biſhop of Millan an Arrian. Theodor. lib. 4. chap. 30. ſaith that with S. Ambroſe hee fought ſtrongly againſt the Arrian heretikes, expreſly condemning Sabellius, Arrius, Eunomius, the Macedonians, Photin, Marcellius, and the hereſie of Apollinaris. Hierome writeth vnto him often, and in his Apologie againſt Iouinian, he calleth Damaſus a ſingular man, well inſtructed in the ſcriptures, and Doctor of the Virgin Church. Athanaſius in his Epiſtle to the Biſhops of Affrike, calleth Damaſus his deare companion, prayſing his diligence, that hee aſſembled a Sinode at Rome againſt the Arrians. He was charged to haue committed whoordome: whereof beeing accuſed by two of his Deacons, namely Concordius and Calitxtus, hee defended his cauſe in a full aſſembly of Biſhoppes, and was abſolued, and his accuſers proſcripted. Sabelli. Enu. 7. Lib. 9.
               
                  Monkes.There were many vertuous Monkes in this time, as Paulus, Pior, Iſidorus, Apſius, Pierius, Enagrius, Ammonius, &c. Hiſt. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 10. One of the Monkes ſaid: that the Monke which laboured with his hands, was like a theefe.
               Some were cruelly ſlaine by Valens, becauſe they would not goe to warre.
               
                  A Prophetike Dreame.
                  Anthonie of the age of an hundreth and fiue yeares, died at this time. Hee ſawe in a Dreame as it were ſwine which deſtroyed and plucked downe Aultars with their feete: and when he awaked, hee ſaid that the Church ſhould bee once diſſipated and waſted by whoremongers, adulterers, and men diſguiſed.
               
                  
                     P. Melancton noteth this Propheſie againſt the whoordome and voluptuoſ life of Prieſts and Monkes.
               
               
                  Heretikes.Amongſt other heretickes at this time, there was Photinus, Hebionite, Ennomius an Arrian, and Priſcilian a Biſhop in Spaine, who cōfounded the perſons in the Trinitie. They which they called Donatists, ſaid that Chriſt is leſſe then the Father, and the holy Ghoſt leſſe then the Sonne, and rebaptized the Catholiques.

The Luciferians and Apollinaries ſaid that Chriſt receiued an humane body without a reaſonable ſoule. The diuinity ſupplying the place thereof.
               
                  Athalarike King of the Gothes, perſecuted greatly the Catholiques againſt his owne people.
               
               The Burgonions gathered themſelues together in number 80000. towards Rhene, which afterward receiued the faith. Paul. Diac.
               
               In the Towne of Arras in the Countie of Artois, the 4. yeare of 
                     Ʋalentinian, fell wooll from Heauen with the rayne. Hierome in his Chronicle. Paul. Diac. and Oroſius Lib. 7. Herman Gigas ſaith that it was in the third yeare of 
                     Ʋalentinian.
               
               For (Lana) ſome Hiſtoriographers haue ſet downe (Manna) wherefore yet at this day they of Arras vnluckily do worſhip it for the Manna of Heauen.Adolatrie at Arras.
               
               The Hungarians caſt themſelues vpon the Weſt Countrie  in great numbers.
               The Arrians made burne and drowne many faithfull and Catholique people. Hiſt. Trip. lib. 8. chap. 2.
               The Huns caſt themſelues vpon the weſterne parts, and draue away the Gothes which were cōſtrained to giue place and paſſe beyond Danubia, and came into Thrace, and from thence into Pannonie.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋulphilas a Biſhop of the Gothes in Sarmathia,
                  Vulphilas Hiſt. Trip. lib. 8. tranſlated the Bible into the Gothike tongue for the vſe of his people. As Ierome did into the Dalmatike for his people. And in Creatia, which is in the lower Pannonie, the Churches there and the Biſhops, vſed the ſcriptures tranſlated into their vulgar tongue.
               
                  Auxentius an Arrian Biſhop deceaſing at Milan, there fell a great ſedition betwixt the Arrians & the Catholiques, for the electiō of their Biſhop The Proconſul his deputie then, was Ambroſe a Citizen of Rome, who hearing ſuch a noiſe,The electiō of S. Ambroſe.
                   by reaſon of his office, went haſtily to the Church where the people were aſſembled, and after he had made many reaſons to reduce the people to concord, ſuddenly roſe there vp a common and an agreeing voyce, that Ambroſe muſt needs be baptized

(who was yet a Catechumene) and after be conſecrated Biſhop, whervnto he would not conſent, but by the commaundement of the Emperour 
                     Ʋalentinian who incited him therevnto, hee accepted the office. And then the Emperour gaue thankes to God that hee had called this perſon from the gouernment of the body, to the gouernment of ſoules.
            
            
               Councells held at this time.
               1. In Aquilege where S. Ambroſe aſſiſted againſt Palladius, and Secondianus, Arrians.
               2. In Valentia in Dalphine, wherein it was ordained that Bigami might not be conſecrated.
               3. In Laodicea, whereof is before ſpoken, &c.
               4. At Rome, againſt Apollinaris. Hiſt. Trip. lib. 9 chap. 16. 
                     Ʋalentinian, of the age of 55. yeares, died of a flux of bloud of a veyne breaking.
               He raigned 17. yeares, 6. with Gratian, and 11. after, his body was carried to be buried at Constantinople. S. Aurel. Vict. and Pomp. Before his death he againe declared his ſonne Graiian Emperour.
               
                  Procopius the Tyrant vanquiſhed by 
                     Ʋalens, was taken, and hauing his two feete bound vnto two trees and let goe, they tore him in peeces. Naucle.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋalens gaue a blowe vnto the Gouernour of the Towne of Edeſſe in Meſapotamia, becauſe hee had not chaſed away the Chriſtians which daily aſſembled in ths Temple of S. Thomas. It grieued him to put the Emperours commaundement in execution, and to cauſe ſuch a multitude to die: wherefore he ſecretly ſent thē word that they would aſſemble no more there. But leauing his counſell, and ſearing nothing the Emperours Edict, the next morning all aſſembled in the ſaid place, as they accuſtomed to doo. So then as the Prouoſt of the Towne, with a great company of ſouldiers, went to the ſaid Temple to put in execution Valens his commaund: hee encountred a woman who ranne with a litle childe of hers to the aſſembly of the faithfull; to whom he ſaid, Whether runneſt thou? Thither

ſaid ſhe whether all others haſte to goe. How ſaid hee?Gratian.
                  The conſtancie of the faithfull. haſt thou not heard that the Prouoſt goeth thither to ſley all he findes there? I vnderſtand it ſaid ſhe, and therfore do I make ſo much haſte to be with them. And whither leadeſt thou that litle childe? That he may alſo receiue the Crowne of Martyrdome quoth ſhe. When the ſaid Prouoſt vnderſtood theſe things, and the courage of the Chriſtians which ran thither, he returned towards the Emperor Valens, & ſhewed him this ſtorie, how they were ready to endure death for their faith; & that he thought it very vnreaſonable to ſley ſo great a multitude of people. Vpon theſe words 
                     Ʋalens moderated his anger. Socrat. lib. 1. cap. 18. Theo. lib. 4. cap. 17. Sozom. lib. 7. cap. 18.
               
                  Affrates a very olde Monke, departed from Antioch, being ſent into exile. 
                     Ʋalens ſeeing him from his Pallace ſaid to him; whither goeſt thou? I goe ſaid he, to pray for thine Empire. Thou ſhouldeſt haue done that in thy houſe ſaid Valens. Yea, anſwered Affrates if thou wouldeſt permit it, and ſo did I when Chriſts ſheepe were in peace.
               
                  
                     Ʋalens in the end fought vnluckily againſt the Gothes, Ʋiſcoths, Huns, and Scyths, who hauing paſſed Danubia, ran vpon Hungaria, Epire, and Theſſalia, endammaging much the countrey, and burning certaine Townes. He was ouercome, and flying, was wounded with a Dart, and ſo fell from his horſe, and was put in a litle ſtrawe-houſe to be healed. Alanus the Victor purſued him, & the houſe whereinto he went was burnt, none knowing he was retired thither. This was the reward of his tirannie and crueltie againſt the faithfull.The death of Valens.
                   And this came to him three yeares after the death of his brother, hauing raigned fourteene yeares.
               
                  This battaile was the beginning of great warre that the Romane Empire after ſustained.
               
               
                  Gratian ſonne of Valentinian, raigned eight yeares, with his  Vncle Valens three, and with Theodoſius 4. But his true Kingdome began after the death of Valens, the yeare of our Lord, 380. Hee reuoked from Exile the Catholique Biſhoppes,

and put backe the Arrians. He made Valentinian his litle brother on the fathers ſide, his companion of the Empire. Hauing called Theodoſius out of Spaine, hee gaue him part of the Eaſt Empire, eſtabliſhing him as a Ram-part againſt the Gothes and Huns, which occupied Thrace and Daceas as their hereditary countreys. Theodoſius handled them hardly. At his comming he obtained a great victorie againſt the Almaines. But as he cheriſhed too much ſome of thoſe barbarous Nations, which hee cauſed to come with him hyring them with Gold: his owne ſouldiers bare him euill will; inſomuch that Maximus was choſen Emperour in England, and paſſing into Fraunce with the Romane Army, ouercame Gratian at Paris, who fled to Lions, where he was taken and killed trayterouſly by Androgius. See Pomp. Laet. Aurel. Vict. Bapt. Egn. lib. 1. Paul. Diac. lib. 1. and Oroſ. lib. 7. chap. 33.
               
                  Theodoſius began his true Kingdome after the death of Gratian, the yeare 386. He was of the line of Traian, who was alſo ſent by the Emperor Nerua to help the Common-wealth, Theodoſius maintained and amplified the Empire: hee put to flight the Huns and Gothes in diuers battailes, which came very farre into the Empire: hee alſo graunted peace to the Perſians.
               
                  
                  Valentinian the ſecond of that name, the brother of the aforeſaid Gratian on his fathers ſide, being chaſed from Italie by Maximus, with Iustin his mother Arrian which had wrought great troubles to Ambroſe, fled into the Eaſt towards Theodoſius, who receiued him and gaue him part of the Empire: after hauing ſhewed him his fault, and that becauſe he rebelled againſt religion, and perſecuted the Catholiques, he fel into this perill.
               
                  Valentinian was ſtrangled ſeuen yeares at 
                     Ʋienna in Fraunce by his Chamberlaines, at the ſuggeſtion of Eugenius, and of Arbogaſtes: So that it ſeemed he had ſtrangled himſelfe. Theodoſius tarried not long before hee ouercame Maximus vſurper of the Gaulois, and Victor his ſonne, and Androgius their Coronell, which cauſed Gratian to die. Auenging the death of 
                     Ʋalentinian: he ouercame Eugenius the Tyrant, and Arbogastes
                  
his companion in a notable victorie:Damaſus. For the time, the windes, the ſnowe and hayle ranged themſelues on his ſide, who had fewe people in reſpect of the Armie of Eugenius. Claudians Latine verſes with exclamation witneſſe it ſaying: O welbeloued of God, who gaue thee a winter armed for thy ſucceſſors, and made come to thy wages the Tempeſts and the windes, &c.
               The ſaid Iustin hauing drawne into her errour 
                     Ʋalentinian her ſonne, ſought alſo to haue deceiued Ambroſe, but in vaine. One day ſhe ſent a ſort of ſouldiers to enuiron the Temple to make Ambroſe come out: who ſpake to them and ſaid: hee would not ſo eaſily forſake his place, and that to wolues hee would not expoſe the ſheepfolde, nor the Temple to blaſphemers. And that if they determined to ſley him, let them do it within the temple, and ſo ſhould death pleaſe him. Theodo. li. 5. chap. 13.
            
            
               Reliques.
               The beginning of adoration of Reliques, may be reduced to this time. Ruffin writeth of Theodoſius, before hee enterpriſed warre againſt Eugenius, the tyrant himſelfe went with the Prieſts viſiting the Churches, and before the Sepulchres of the Apoſtles made his Oriſons and Praiers.
               The contention betwixt Hierome and Vigilantius, preſt Biſhop of Bercolne in Spaine, doth ſufficiently ſhewe that ſuperſtition was then come forward. By the writings of Hierome (which are ſtuffed rather with iniuries & outrages then ſound reaſons out of the holy ſcriptures) we may know that 
                     Ʋigilantius had reaſon to oppoſe himſelfe to ſuch Idolatry, rather then veneration of the Martyrs. The words of Hierome writing to Riparius, are: Thou ſaiſt that 
                     Ʋigilantius openeth againe his ſtinking mouth, and ſpitteth his infection againſt the reliques of holy Martyrs, calling vs (which receiue them) Cendrier Idolaters, which do reuerence vnto dead mens bones. And in the booke which he perticularly writ againſt Vigilantius, ſaith: One Vigilantius is riſen vp, which with an vncleane ſpirit againſt the ſpirit of Chriſt, denieth that we muſt honour the Sepulchres

of Martyrs, condemneth Vigils, &c then addeth: And thou ſayeſt in thy booke, that as long as we liue we may pray one for an other: but after we be dead, that the prayers are not heard, and yet they pray for the vengeance of their bloud and cannot be heard.Apoc. 6 2.10.11. In which thou propoſeſt vnto me an Apogrypha Booke, which thou and the like readeſt vnder the name of Eſdras, where it is written, that after death none dare pray, &c. And thou dareſt out of the gulfe of thy breſt, vomit ſo filthy a mockery, as to ſay the ſoules of Martyrs then loue their owne aſhes, and flie about them: for being abſent they cannot heare a poore ſinner, who by chance reſorteth thither, &c. Briefly he alleadgeth for great meruailes whatſoeuer Vigilantius ſaid, but refuteth it not.
               Hee addeth alſo that 
                     Ʋigilantius heretike ſaide, that Alleluia ſhould not be ſung but at Eaſter. That continencie of ſingle life commaunded, is hereſie, and the ſeede of whoordome: It is alſo reported vnto me (ſaith hee) that againſt the authoritie of Paul (vnto whom Peter, Iohn, and Iames, gaue the right hands) who commaunds to remember the poore, thou forbiddeſt that any ſhould ſend any comfort of money to Ieruſalem for the vſe of the Saints, and maintaineſt that they doo better which vſe their owne, and which by litle and litle diſtribute fruites of their poſſeſſions, then they which hauing ſolde their poſſeſſions, giue all at once. He ſaith yet: Thou feareſt and turneſt away (viperous tongue) Monkes from their application and ſtudie, and ſayeſt by way of argument; If all men ſhould ſhut themſelues vp, or goe into ſolitude, who ſhould celebrate Churches, or who ſhould gaine and winne ſeculer men? &c.
               
                  Wee may know by this rehearſall, that Vigilantius and other good Doctors of this time, maintained that the adoration of Saints was drawne from the Ethnike ſuperſtition of the Gods, into the Church of the Lord.
               
               The abuſe came firſt from the too great praiſe of Saints. It encreaſed afterward by the falſe perſwaſion of the interceſſion,

confirmed by ſignes and lying miracles.Theodoſus
               
               The ſame ceremonies which were at the burial of bodies,Tranſlation & eleuation of the bodies of Saints. were alſo in this age obſerued in the tranſlation and eleuation of holy bodies. The Prieſts of Apollo heretofore made that Apoſtate Emperor Iulian (as he ſacrificed in Antioche nie the fountaine Daphne) beleeue that the ſepulchre of Babyla Martyr nigh vnto the ſaid place, was the cauſe that Apollo gaue no anſwere. Iulian then cōmaunded the Chriſtians which he called Gallileans to take away the ſaid ſepulchre: then all the Church came thither, young and olde, virgins and mothers, and with great ioy drew out and conducted the Coffer of the bones of Babila, ſinging as high as they could. Ruff. lib. 1. chap. 35. And Toch. lib. 3. cap. 18. Ambroſe in his 85. Epiſtle to his ſiſter, ſheweth how this manner of taking vp and tranſlating of the Martyrs bodies, was obſerued in the weſt Churches. The Reliques ſaith he of a Saint beeing found either aduiſedly or by chance, firſt they are ſhewed the people, and declared it is by ſome, of what Martyr thoſe reliques are: after, hauing laid them in order they are carried into ſome Temple,Vigils or watches of Saints. and there vigils & watches are made all night, then the next day a Sermon is made of the life of that Martir. See what Ambroſe ſaith, who alſo witneſſeth (if we must giue faith vnto him) that miracles were done there.
               
                  Behold how a new deuotion tranſporteth not onely the common people, but alſo the Paſtors and Biſhops.
               
            
            
               The doings of many Painims of this time.
               As for the Gentiles of this time and their ſuperſtitions, we will heere touch one word, as we paſſe by. Certaine it is that Idolatry drew after it all kinde of wickedneſſe. From the Gods they haue drawne out all that infection: of Iupiter, adulterers, rauiſhments, and ſtuprations of children: of Venus, the art of whoordome: of Rhea, all filthineſſe: of Mars, murders: and ſo of the other bodies. It is then no maruell if their manner of dooings bee ſo ſtraunge. In Phenicia women were proſtituted before Idolls. Athanaſius reciteth it the women

before marriage, being deliuered of proofe to their husbands. Sozo. li. 1. chap. 8. They alſo accuſtomed to chaſtice adultry with an other whoordome and publike conſtupration. Socrat. lib. 5. chap. 18. The Indians had many wiues. Hierom. lib. 1. contra Iouinianum.
               
               The ſchooles of Magitians had certaine prayers for the dead; whervnto they attributed ſo great efficacy, that the powers of the ayre by them appeaſed, let ſoules flye ſo into Heauen. Arnobius. Lib. 2.
               
                  From hence hath Antichriſt drawne the hunting of his indulgences to ſet vp his ſeate and inrich it.
               
               Some Grecians on the dayes they call (Pandemi) that is to ſay Populary, carried viands and wine to the Sepulchres of their dead. They burnt the meate, and preſented the wine, calling the dead by their names. Riſe vp (cried they) and eate, and drinke, and be merry. Epipha. in Ancorato.
               
               
                  And what other thing is this then the offertorie of the Maſſe for the quicke and the dead?
               
               Many Nations had no marriage nor lawfull coniunction, but rather brutall and common.
               
                  And what is that ſingle life which Antichriſt would bring in, but a burning fire breaking into all abhominable whoordomes?
               
               
                  Obſeruation of dayes.In thoſe dayes men ſuperſtitiouſly obſerued the dayes of the Moone, and enterpriſed nothing the firſt day thereof. Ambroſe Lib. 10. Epiſt. 83.
               
                  Obſeruation of Letters.When there was a queſtion to know who ſhould raigne after Valens, Ianulicus, and Libanius, Sophiſters and true ſupporters of Sathan, writ in duſt the 24. letters of the Greeke Alphabet, and laid vpon euery one of them a graine of wheate and barley. After they cauſed a Cocke to come, and after the

recitall of certaine charmes they let him goe, to know by the Letters whereon he tooke the graines, the name of the ſucceſſor. The Cocke tooke the graines vpon the Letters, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  . The Emperour 
                     Ʋalens after hee knew this, made many to be ſlaine whoſe names began with theſe Letters. Zonaras reciteth it.
               They vſed violence againſt Chriſtians,Three arguments againſt falſe religion. with calumniations and ſlaunders. The firſt defence of their ſuperſtition was, that it had bene of long time, and that their Elders had alwaies maintained it Arnol. lib. 8. againſt the Gentiles; and ſo did Simmachus argue againſt Prudentius.
               
               The ſecond, that it had alwaies bene profitable to the Romane Common-wealth, and that thereby the Empire of the world had bene conquered, and therefore it worſhipped all the Gods which were adored in the world: yea the vnknowne Gods, Arnob. Lib. 8. And ſo argueth Maximinus in Euſebi. Lib. 9. Chap. 7.
               The third, was of the diſcommodities that came by leauing the Religion of the Idolls. Maximinus the tyrant, in his Edicts impureth all publike calamities to the chaunging of ſacrifices. Euſeb. Lib. 9. Chap. 7.
               1. And contrary, they calumniated the Chriſtian Religion,Slaunders againſt true doctoctrine. that it was new, and that their predeceſſors were ignorant thereof. Sozom. Lib. 1. Chap. 18.
               2. That the Authors thereof were ſeditious and deſperate perſons. Arnob. lib. 1.
               3. That the Chriſtians were but heapes of poore Idiots, and women that vſed to ſlie the light, and onely loued night aſſemblies.
               4. That by ſecret and hidde markes they loued before they knew one an other, and that to couer their whoordomes, they commonly called one an other brothers and ſiſters.
               5. That they are without Aultars, without Temples, and without Sepulchres. In the ſaid booke, 8.
               
                  The Papiſts at this day, which ſhame not to change the truth with the ſame ſlaunders, what other thing doo they elſe but either borrow or renew the olde Ethnikes arguments.
               
               
                  The Ethnickes alſo ſay of the Chriſtian doctrine that which our mockers and Epicures ſay at this day, that it is contrary to all reaſon. For to ſay that God ſeeth and makes enquirie not onty of out affaires, but alſo of our moſt ſecret cogitations,Accōmodatiō
                   and that he is preſent euery where: this is not onely impertinent and euill becomming God: but alſo it is to grieue and trouble him, and to ſay he is curious and without reſt. The ſame Author.
               That to ſay, God loueth not them who willingly come vnto him, but his Elect onely. This ſay they, is to doo iniurie to God, and to accuſe him of iniuſtice.
               That Chriſtians agree not in their doctrine.
               
                  This ſame did the Philoſophers obiect in the Councell of Nice againſt the Fathers.
               
               That the ſcripture is full of contradiction, and therefore vncertaine. Porphirius and Iulian the Apoſtate vſed this ſlaunder. Socrat. 3. chap. 23.
               That all ſorts of calamities came vpon them, and that God puniſhed them becauſe they beleeued that man is God, and after he was crucified, to ſay hee liueth and raigneth. Arnob. Lib. 1.
               
                  Such Princes as oppoſed themſelues againſt Paganiſme.Many Princes and Magiſtrates of this time oppoſed themſelues againſt theſe Ethnike impieties. And after, Constantine the great and his ſonne Iouinian, cauſed to ſhut the Idoll Temples which Iulian had ſet open, and forbad ſacrifices. Socrat. lib. 3. chap. 24.
               
                  Valentinian in Europe tooke away the ſeruice of Idolls. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 20.
               He forbad that none ſhould learne the Magike Art by the law: Culpaſimilis. Cod. de maleficis & mathematicas. Finally the Lord ordained this Emperor Theodoſius as a ſecond Ioſias, wholly to roote vp all the Idols Temples. Thod. li. 5. ch. 20.
               On the other ſide, the Doctors of the Church were exceeding carefull to refute all this falſe religion of the Painims and Ethnikes. Arnob. Lactantius, Theodoret, and the moſt part of

them which writ in that time; vnto whoſe bookes we ſend them that will know more at large.
               
                  Damaſus builded certaine Temples, and adorned them with gifts: he gaue fields and poſſeſſions, and bathes to the Cleargie. He augmented certaine ſtraunge facions of ſeruing of God. He approued S. Hieromes tranſlation of the Bible.S. Hieromes Tranſlation.The hearts of the Archbiſhops of Rome, began to be taken with too much ambition. After this, Damaſus as hee could diligently calculate times, to the end that in time to come, in the Romane ſeate might bee placed Biſhoppes of renowme, hee drew briefly in writing the liues and ſtatutes attributed to his predeceſſors Biſhops of Rome, yet this was not without manifeſt lies.
               As for his faith and doctrine Theodoret giueth great witneſſe: he had a good opinion of the Trinitie, and by his Epiſtle to the Biſhops, aſſembled at a Sinode at Constantinople, exhorted them to maintaine the holy doctrine of the ſonne of God.
               But in his Epiſtles, although he call the Biſhops vnto whom he writ, his brothers; yet he ſheweth himſelfe too much giuen to eleuate the dignitie of the Romane ſeate. For he thus beginneth his aforeſaid Epiſtle to them of Constantinople. In the reuerence deare children which you owe to the Apoſtolike ſeate, you doo much for your ſelues, &c. Theod. Lib. 5. Chap. 9.
               He had many combats to maintaine the doctrine of the Councell of Nice; eſpecially againſt Auxentius of Millan. Hee condemned many heretikes, and amongſt others, the Apollinaries, at a Councell of many Biſhops at Rome.
               
               Hee had firme amitie with Hierome, who in his writings gaue great witneſſe of him. Virgin, Doctor of the Virgine Church, in his Preface vpon the foure Euangeliſts, calleth him great Prieſt. Athanaſius in his Epiſtle to the Biſhops of Affrike, calleth Damaſus his very deare companion in the Miniſterie, &c. Gregorie Nazianz▪
                   calleth Damaſus (happie) in his Epiſtle to Clidonius.
               
               
                  Damaſus dyed of the age of 80. yeares, in the raigne of

                  Theodoſius:
                  Syricius. witneſſes Hierome and Suidas, after hee had adminiſtred his Biſhopricke 18. yeares, the yeare of Chriſt after 
                  Naucle, 385. but after Proſper, the yeare 387.
            
            
               Aduertiſement.
               From the time of Silueſter the firſt and others after him, the Biſhops or Archbiſhops of Rome being inriched by gifts & munificences of many, began to liue at their eaſe, and to receiue vnvſed apparell, as Miters and other pontificall ornaments, to make themſelues to be accounted of, and to prepare the ſeate for the great Antichriſt by their traditions and canons: yet neither Silueſter nor his ſucceſſors till Boniface the 9. (who was about the yeare, 1390. were Lords of Rome, much leſſe did they holde the domination of the Weſt. For wee haue ſeene that Liberius was ſent into exile by Conſtantius:
                  The ſucceſſors of Silueſter had not the rule of Rome. that Iulius implored the aide of Conſtantius for Athanaſius againſt the furie of the Arrians: and that Damaſus by vertue of the Letters of Theodoſius, called the Eaſterne Biſhop vnto the Sinode of Rome.
               
               
                  The right of chooſing and crowning the Emperours.And as for the right to chooſe the Emperours to Crowne them, and put on their Imperiall purple and ſuch other ſolemnities requiſite, it was partly done by ordinary ſouldiers. And the Emperours Conſtantine the great, Iulian, Iouinian, Valentinian the firſt and ſecond, were created Emperours and Ceſars by the Campe of ſouldiers: Conſtantine ordained his three ſonnes. Valens was ordained by his brother. Theodoſius by Gratian. Arcadius, and Honorius by the Father. It is not read in any approued Author of this time, that any Romane Biſhop thruſt himſelfe in, to chooſe or crowne an Emperour. Theodo. lib. 5. chap. 6. ſaith, that Theodoſius in a dreame ſawe Meletius Biſhop of Antioche, who gaue vnto him the Mantle, and the Imperiall Crowne.
               
                  Syricius a Romane, the ſonne of one Tiburtius, ſucceeded Damaſus. There are attributed vnto him many ordinances. Hee put ſuch as were Bigami, that is, ſuch as were married twiſe, from the miſteries of the Maſſe, and was the firſt

that admitted Monkes to receiue Eccleſiaſticall orders, becauſe of their continencie: which before were not accounted, no not amongſt Clarkes.
            
            
               Fastings and abstinencies.
               The varieties and multiplications of Faſtings certaine dayes, at this time engendred great diſputations and contentions. Auguſtine in his Epiſtle to Caſulan, writeth that ſome men faſted on the Wedneſday, becauſe Ieſus Chriſt was ſolde that day. And on the Fryday, becauſe hee was then on the Croſſe. As for faſting on Satterdayes, there was great ſtrife. They of Millain and of the Eaſt, maintained that none ought to faſt on it, becauſe Ieſus Chriſt reſted that day in the Sepulchre. And contrary, the Romanes and Affricanes and others faſted it, becauſe Chriſt was caſt euen to the ignominie of the Sepulchre. P. Martir.
               
               
                  Monicha S. Auguſtines mother,Monicha S. Auguſtines mother.
                   comming from Affrike to Millan, ſeeing none faſt there on the Saterday, maruelled greatly. Augustine her ſonne beeing then not yet baptiſed, came to Ambroſe, and prayed him in the name of his mother to expound what were beſt to be done therein. Doo, anſwered Ambroſe, as I doo. Augustine by this anſwere thought he ſhould not faſt vpon Saterday, becauſe Ambroſe faſted not: but hee declared his meaning more plainely in theſe words. When I am at Rome, I faſt on the Saterday becauſe there they faſt: but when I am returned to Millan againe, I there faſt not.
               Men attribute to Melchiades Biſhop of Rome, aboue mētioned, the ordinance not to faſt on the Sunday nor Thurſday, becauſe Chriſtians faſtes ſhould bee farre from the faſtes of Ethnikes and heretikes. Epiphan: alſo bringing the reaſon wherefore wee ſhould faſt on the Wedneſday, ſaith:The Papiſt hold that it was vpon Thurſday. becauſe Chriſt that day aſcended into heauen. And that it is written, when the Spowſe ſhalbe taken away, that then the Apoſtles ſhall faſt, &c. and this hee affirmeth to bee a tradition of the Apoſtles.
               I leaue other Faſtes of Angaria, that is to ſay, of torment,Faſtes of Angaria.
                   when ſome calamitie comes and other differences and abſtinences

and meates which were after inuented,Arcadius Honorius. as theſe diſcourſes in their place ſhall ſhewe.
               
                  Superſtition hath peruerted the exerciſes of pietie: deſpight or negligence hath cauſed them to be forgottē in the Church, which are two extremities that all the faithfull muſt ſhunne.
               
               
                  Theodoſius after hee had eſtabliſhed peace in the Church, and cauſed many publike Sinodes to be aſſembled, died at Millain, of the age of 50. yeares, and raigned 17. that is to ſay, 6. with Gratian, and 11. after. The ſame yeare his body was carried to be buried in Conſtantinople. See Aurel. Vict. Pomp. Laet. Paul. Diac. lib. 12.
               
                  Ambroſe lamented his death, and made a funerall oration, wherein amongſt other things hee ſaid: I loued this Prince who when his ſoule was ready to depart from his body, had more care of the ſtate of the Church, then of the dolours of his death.
               
                  This care for Religion is a ſingular vertue, worthy of a Chriſtian Prince.
               
               
                  
                  Archadius and Honorius, the children of Theodoſius, and of Placille his wife a vertuous Ladie, raigned after their mother the yeare 397. Arcadius was Emperour of the Eaſt, and Honorius of the Weſt. Their father ordained them Tutors before hee died: to Arcadius, Rufin; and to Honorius, Stillico; and Gildo was alſo Inſtituted Gouernour of Affrike.
               
               
                  Honorius then ruled the Empire at Rome, his brother gouerning that of Constantinople. Three yeares after this, Gildo Gouernor of Affrike carried himſelfe as Maiſter and Lord, but afterward he was ouercome by Maſcezel his brother, whoſe children he had ſlaine.
               
                  Singing receiued into the Weſterne Church.The Weſterne Church about this time receiued the faſhion to ſing. Auguſtine in his Confeſſions, the 9. booke ſaith, it was by the meanes of Ambroſe. For in the time of the

Arrian fury, this holy perſon being conſtrained by the people to remaine in the Temple, yea euen in the night time, fearing it ſhould haue bene deliuered to the Arrians, accuſtomed the people to ſing Pſalmes and Hymnes, to put off griefes, and paſſe away the time. The Eaſt Church from the beginning receiued ſinging, as appeares by Plinie to the Emperour Traian, who was at the time that Iohn the Euangeliſt liued.
               But Auguſtine in the ſame booke confeſſeth he failed therein, in that hee gaue more attention to the Song then to the words that in it are paſſed, and accuſed that ſinne,Singing receiued in aſſembly from the time of the Apoſtles. for that the voyce and the Song are made for the word; but not the word for the Sōg. In that place likewiſe he reciteth the maner of the Church of Alexandria vnder Athanaſius. See alſo Hierome vpon the Epiſtle to the Epheſians.
               
               
                  Whenſoeuer you aſſemble as S. Paul ſaith; if each one ſing Pſalmes, or Doctrine, or Reuelation, or Language, or interpretation let all be done to aedification. 1. Cor. 14. f. 26.
                  
               
            
            
               The appellation of the Maſſe.
               The communion of the Euchariſt at this time to be called Miſſa. It is twiſe found in S. Auguſtine, namely, in his Sermon of Time, 237, wherein hauing exhorted men to pardon iniuries done to one another, ſaith: You muſt come to the Maſſe of the Catechumenes. There we pray: Pardon vs our offences, as wee pardon them which wee haue offended, &c. And in an other Sermon 91. he ſaith; In the hiſtorie which is read at Maſſes, &c. Many doubt whether theſe Sermons bee S. Auguſtines. But Peter Martir a Diuine of Zurike ſaith,In his Commentary vpon the Iudges. the ſtile and ſentences ſeeme to bee S. Augustines. I am of opinion ſaith he, that in that time of S. Auguſtine it beganne onely to bee vſurped. For if it had beene vſuall, S. Auguſtine would haue oftner made mention of it: ſeeing hee vſed to applye his Sermons after the common manner of ſpeech.
               
                  Iohn Caſſian liued in this time vnder the Emperour

                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
                     〈1 page duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  Honorius. The heretikes chaſed him from the Church of Ieruſalem: hee came to Marcellis and liued there a Monaſtike life.
               
                  Contenti ſomno qui a miſſa vigiliarū vſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ad lucem conceditur, ctc.The word Maſſe is found in his writings, Lib. 3. Chap. 7. and 8. but in an other ſignification then for the holy Communion; that is, for the accompliſhment and the ende of the congregation of the faithfull. For ſpeaking of the ſleepe of Monkes, he ſaith. Being contented with the time that is permitted to them to ſleepe: that is, from the Maſſe of the 
                     Ʋigiles vntill the light of the day, &c. vnderſtanding by theſe words, the time wherein they ended the Vigiles.
               
                  Remiſſa peecatorū, for remiſſion of ſinnes.As for the deriuation of the name, euen as the Latine Doctors which were before this age, vſed the word (Remiſſa) for remiſſion. Tertullian Lib. 4. againſt Martion in the leafe 24. and Ciprian in his booke of the good of patience, ſo it ſeeemeth afterward they ſaid Miſſa for Miſſio, or Demiſſio, that is, ſending away, when the Catechumenes went out of the Temple. For after the holy ſcripture was read in the aſſembly, and that the Sermon was done, the Deacon with a loude voyce pronounced Goe: or goe out Cathechumenes. After this,Euergumenes the Cathechumenes went out with the Euergumenes; that is to ſay, they which were handled with euil ſpirits: and thirdly ſuch as did penance.
               
                  Dioniſius in his Hierarchie makes mention of theſe orders, and ſo the Latine Church called the celebration of the Euchariſt Meſſe, becauſe it was done after the dimiſſion or ſending away of the Catechumenes and ſuch as were not capable to bee admitted therevnto. And in this ſignification, Ambroſe ſaith Miſſas facere,
                  Miſſas facere, to let goe. for ſending or letting goe. This is the opinion of Peter Martir in his Commentaries vpon the Iudges.
               Some haue ſaid that the word Miſſa was deriued of the Hebrew word Mas, becauſe the gifts which the faithfull offered, were ſaid to be preſents and ſent. And the occaſion hereof came of the oblations which the Iewes offered at their feaſt of Pentecoſt.
               
                  
                  If it were ſo, the Papiſts abuſed the word Maſſe: for they will not name it of the almes and gifts which are giuen there: but of the oblation they make of the body and bloud of Chriſt for the quick and dead. P. Martyr.
               
               
                  Catechumenes,
                  Catechumenes which were not yet baptiſed. Auditors Competitors. ſignified ſuch as were inſtructed in the faith and were not yet baptized. The word is deriued from the Greeke word which ſignifieth to teach, eſpecially by liuely voyce. Tertullian calleth them ſometimes Hearers or Auditors. Augustine calleth them Competitors. For before they were admitted to be baptiſed at Eaſter, they gaue vp their names 40. dayes before. During which time, the Paſtors not onely got information of their faith and doctrine, but alſo of theyr life. P. Martir.
               
               
                  The Papiſtes, Apes of antiquitie, had it in custome to ſend their children to ſchoole in Lent.
               
               
                  Rufin before named, French by Nation, tempted with pride, ſent preſents and ſiluer to Alarike King of Gothes, and ſtirred him to raiſe vp warre againſt Archadius, perſwading him that that young Prince affrighted would leaue him the Empire. His practiſe was dicouered, and Stilico purſued him. The ſouldiers cut off his head and his right hand, and after carried them into Conſtantinople for a ſhewe. See Pomp. Laet.
               
            
            
               Deuaſtation of the fourth Monarchie.
               The yeare of the Lord 405. the Gothes entred into Italie with a great and fearfull company. But becauſe there is often mention of them, we will briefly touch the hiſtory of their originall. The appellation of Gothes doth not only comprehend one people, but many; that is to ſay Gothes, Ʋandales, Rugians, Hunnes, &c: but the Gothes properly were they which from the Ile of Gothland occupied a great part of Lifſland. Procopius an Hiſtoriographer ſaith they were Cymmerians and Greekes. Being come into Thrace and Hungarie, the Romane Emperours ſought to driue them backe but could not. The firſt & greateſt

battaile of the Romanes againſt them, was vnder the Emperour Decius, wherein he was ſlain. But after the 
                     Ʋandales and Huns comming from Scithia, did driue away the Gothes, and placed their ſeates in Hungaria.
               
               The Gothes then entered into Italie by the diſloyaltie of Rufin (which as it is ſaid fell vpon his owne head by the iuſt iudgement of God.) Stillico a 
                     Ʋandall by Nation, hoping to lift vp Euchere his ſonne to bee an Emperour, raiſed vp the Sueuians, Vandales, and Alenems, and other people, to the number of 200000. conducted by theyr King Redegastus or Radagastus,
                  Radagaſtus. who afterward was diſcomfited in the ſtraite of Appenin.
               
               After Radagastus, a new Armie of Gothes came into Italie, hauing for their Captaine Alricus, or Alaricus, who was ſollicited by the Emperour Honorius to leaue the Countrey of Italie, and to diſcend into Fraunce, which then was ſo occupied with French Burgonians and other Nations, that Honorius diſpaired to hold it. But as Alaricus prepared his departure, Stillico thought to haue ſurpriſed him on the ſudden beeing vpon Eaſter day, there being a truce betwixt them not yet expired.
               
                  Alaricus the next morning came againſt Stillico, and to be reuenged beſieged the Towne of Rome, Honorius being at Rauenna.
               
               The treaſon of Stillico being diſcloſed, hee cauſed him to bee beheaded; ſo receiued hee the reward of his infidelitie. Then was there found no Captaine for the warre to leuie the ſiege before Rome, wherefore the Towne was taken by Alaricus after it had endured long time the ſiege.Rome taken by Alaricus. This was about the fifteenth yeare of the Empire of Honorius, and of the Lords Natiuitie, 412. and from the foundation of Rome, 1164. Alaricus neither burnt nor waſted Rome, but gaue commaundement that they ſhould be ſpared which fled vnto the Temples of the Chriſtians. He died ſoone after. Adolphus ſucceeded him and came to Rome, but by the meanes of Placidia the ſiſter of Honorius, he ſpared Rome, and tooke his way towards Gaul and Spaine, and ſo the Gothes left Italie and occupied

                  Spaine, (which Alaricus before had inuaded) and got the domination thererof.The Kings of Spaine diſcē
                     ded of the Gothes. In ſo much that the kings of Spaine that came after, diſcended of them.
            
            
               Diminution, or the Romane Empire.
               From henceforward the fourth Monarchie receiued ſuch calamities, that in place to rule, and haue ſtraunge people in ſubiection, it ſelfe was made a ſeruant vnto barbarous Nations. The Towne of Rome the ſeate of the ſaid Monarchie, in leſſe then 139. yeares, was foure times taken by the Gothes, Ʋandales, and other barbarous people. The firſt is that alreadie recited by Alaricus. The 2. by Genſericas the Vandall vnder Martinian, the yeare 456. The 3. by Totila King of the Gothes, which was the moſt grieuous oppreſſion that euer Rome endured. For it was taken and burnt the yeare 21. of Iuſtinian, and from the foundation of Rome 1300. and of Chriſt, 548. The 4. it was ſacked three yeares after the other, namely, the yeare of Chriſt 551. as ſhall be ſeene in this Hiſtorie.
               The Pope Siricius added the Anthems to the Pſalmes.Antiphonae Anhemes Orders.
                   He made a Lawe that orders (that is to ſay, the ceremonies and obſeruations which they vſe in the conſecration of their Church-people) ſhould be celebrated and giuen by certaine ſpaces of time betwixt one an other.
               
                  Ambroſe Biſhop of Millaine was his familiar, and writ vnto him ſome Epiſtles which are amongſt his workes. One in the number 49. and the other in the number 54. wherein hee calles him his Father. He died about the yeare 399. hauing occupied that ſeate 15. yeares, after Socrat. lib. 7. chap. 9. and Sozom. lib. 8. chap. 25.
               
                  Anaſtaſius the firſt of that name borne at Rome, ſucceeded  him, and gouerned about three yeares. Hee ordained that euery one ſhould heare the Goſpell ſtanding and not ſitting.
               Hee caſt out of the Miniſterie ſuch as wanted or were maimed in any of theyr members, or ſubiect to any diſeaſe.
               Hee ordained that none beyond the Seas ſhould bee

admitted to any Eccleſiaſticall eſtate, without hauing a Teſtimoniall ſealed with fiue Biſhops. This was becauſe of the Manechies which came from Affrike, to corrupt Churches.
               
                  Iohn Chryſoſtome.
                  Chryſoſtome borne at Antioch, diſciple of Libanius the Sophiſter, and an Auditor of Andragatius a Philoſopher, forſooke the eſtate of an Aduocate, and followed Euagrius, with two other his companiōs, Theodorus and Maximus, which after were Biſhops, after they had well profited in holy ſcriptures in the Monaſteries.Monaſteries. For then Monaſteries were publike Schooles, and Abbots, or Priors, which gouerned them, did publikely teach the holy ſcriptures.
               
                  
                  Innocent, the firſt of that name borne at Albe, preferred the ſeate at Rome before all others, and ordained that it ſhould not be ſubiect to any other. He commaunded the faithfull to faſt on the Saterday, to the ende that that day they might with Mary Magdalen mourne for Ieſus Chriſt being in his graue. He ordained that the Pax ſhould be giuen at Maſſe: and that a Temple which once had beene conſecrated, ſhould be ſo no more. Hee made certaine lawes concerning the Iewes, Painims, and Monkes, and made the Sacrament of Vnction of ſuch as were ſicke.
               
                  Chryſostome was often ſicke of a diſeaſe of the ſtomacke: therfore he abſtained from eating in company. He was hardie and liberall in reprehenſion, and aboue all in his publike Sermons, and therefore was he hated of the Cleargie. He reſiſted Gaiuas an Arrian, who begged of the Emperour a Temple in Conſtantinople for his people. See the Tripart. Hiſt. Chap. 6. Lib. 10.
               
                  Conſtantinople was diuinely aided againſt Gaiuas, who ſending ſouldiers in the night to burne the Emperours Pallace, a great multitude of armed men were ſeene come againſt them three nights; which made them deſiſt and leaue off their enterpriſe. Chryſostome was ſent in ambaſſage towards the ſaid Gaiuas, (who had waſted all the countrey of Thrace) who met the ſaid Chryſostome, and commaunded his owne children to kiſſe his knees, and he himſelfe kiſſed his hand.
               Certaine Monkes Egipt, Antropomorphites maintained

that God had a body whereabouts came many contentions amongſt the Biſhops: Inſomuch that the Arrians and Catholiques in the night ſlew one an other.
               There was an earthquake in Conſtantinople.
               
               The ſiluer Image of Eudoxia was placed nigh to the Temple of S. Saphie, and playes celebrated in her honour. Chryſoſtome crieth out againſt it, and in a Sermon vnder the name of Herodias, taxeth Eudoxia: whereof beeing angry, ſhe ſuborned people to ſley Chryſostome: but the people guarded him both day and night: he was afterward exiled into Pontus.
               
               The Church of Constantinople ſo increaſed by the Chryſoſtonites, that many of them were put to diuers torments. After his exile, there happened at Conſtantinople in September a great haile, and foure dayes after died Eudoxia. See the forealleadged booke. Chap. 15.16. &. 20.
            
            
               The Pernitious errour of Pelagius.
               
               In the time of Innocent Pope of Rome, there was in the Countrey of England one called Pelagius,
                  
                     Pelagius the heretike. who began to teach that we are not iuſtified by Gods mercie for Ieſus Chriſtes ſake without Merite, but that through our owne workes and naturall vertues, we acquire true and perfect righteouſneſſe before God. Againſt this Pelagius, many good Doctors of this time writ: but aboue all, Augustine hath ſhewed, that by faith onely we are Iuſtified, becauſe by it wee embrace him that iuſtifieth vs: that is to ſay, Chriſt our Lord, with whom it vniteth and ioyneth vs. In ſuch ſort, that we are made partakers of him and all the goods he hath; and that frō thence good workes ſhould come; that is from Ieſus who is within vs, by the force and free efficacie of whom we begin, to will that which is good,Iuſtification of faith. and to employ our ſelues therein.
               
                  Zozimus a Grecian by Nation: hee ordained that on the  Saterday before Eaſter waxe ſhould in euery Pariſh bee bleſſed. That Deacons ſhoule hide their windowes with a cloath. And that Clarkes ſhould not publikely drinke. He ruled about two yeares.
               The Pelagian hereſie was condemned of the Biſhops at the Councells of Epheſus, Carthage, and Mitiuitaine.
               
               
                  
                  Arcadius Henorius.Before Pelagius, England knewe not what ſuperſtitious Monkery meant, neither yet learned to preferre by vaine and friuolous allegories, the righteouſnes of workes before the merit of Ieſus Chriſt. But this Pelagius begun to broach this peſtilent hereſie vnder Maximus King of Englande, the yeare of Chriſt. 390.
               
                  The Doctors which were before this Pelagius, vſed in their writings this word Merite, in the ſignification to obtaine or attaine. Peter Martyr.
                  
               
            
            
               
                  The beginning of the Kings of France.
               THe French-men are ſaid to be iſſued of the Troians, and as Hiſtories ſay, came after the deſtruction of Troy, with the Duke Francion,
                  Francion. to the pooles of Meotides, which at this day is called the Golfe de la Tana, aboue and ſomething farre frō 
                  Conſtantinople, as men draw towards the North: neare there they builded a Towne which they inhabited vntil the time of Valentinian the Emperour, ſonne of Valentinian, and the brother of Gratian alſo Emperours.
               They were honoured by the ſaid Emperour, and made free of paying tribute for 10. yeares, in conſideratiō that they reduced the Almanes vnder the obedience of the Romanes. But afterward when the tribute came again to be laid vpon them, and they vnwilling to ſubiect themſelues, they forſooke the Country, and came with their Duke Marcomir into Franconia, which is betwixt Saxe and Almaine.
               
               
                  
                  Pharamond the ſonne of Marcomir, was choſen for their King, and began to raigne ouer them the yeare of the worlde 4383. and of Ieſus Chriſt 420. vnder whom firſt they vſed Lawes, and appointed foure Nobles which iudged of cauſes and differences betwixt men. Then was the Salike Lawe made which ſtood vpon many articles, amongſt which there was one which tooke frō daughters the right to ſucceed in the Crowne and Realme of Fraunce. Hee raigned 11. yeares. Paul. Emil. the firſt booke.
               
                  
                  Boniface the firſt of that name a Romane, ruled at Rome 4. yeares. His Father was a Prieſt called Iucundus.
                  
               
               The fourth ſchiſme was by a Prieſt called Enlalius,
                  The fourth ſchiſme. who was alſo ordeined: whereof came great diſſention and ſchiſme which endured 7. moneths, but finally Boniface was approued.
               The ſixt Councell of Carthage after ſome, & the ſeuenth.
               S. Hierome died of the age of 91. yeares.
               The Affricane Councell was now, which is a confirmation  and recapitulation of the Councels of Carthage. The titles of the Canons are in the number 105.
               
                  Boniface renewed certaine decrees attributed to his predeceſſors. Amongſt others, that none ſhould be ordeined a Prieſt before the age of 30. yeares, &c.
               Alſo that no woman or Nunne might touch or waſh the Prieſts ornaments which are holy.
               The Hunnes a cruell and barbarous people which came out of Scithia, did great hurt all ouer, and at their comming into Italie many fled towards the Adriatike ſea, and tooke place in thoſe litle Iles which were in great number, and liued as they could of fiſhing.
               After they beganne to make certaine buildings in theſe Iles, and principally in that which is called Miroalto,
                  The beginning of Venice. it being the chiefeſt of them.
               There was at this time many Churches in Italie. Sozom. reciteth them, lib. 4. cha. 24. where hee makes mention of the faithful which retired into the places where is now builded the Towne of Venice, in the Adriatike Sea. There is alſo heereof made mention in the Epiſtle of the Romane Sinode which was held vnder Constantine. Theodor. Liber 2. Chapter twentie and two.
               The Emperour Honorius being at Millan, and vnderſtanding the diſſention for the electiō of the Romane Biſhops, depoſed them both, and writ to Boniface that whē two were elected he would ordain that neither ſhould be allowed, notwithſtanding for this time he allowed the election of Boniface.
               
               
                  
                  Boniface by his Legate Fauſtin Biſhop, a fierce and proud man, and Philip and Eſellus Prieſts, propoſed to the ſixt Councell of Carthage, that it might be graunted that appellations of Biſhops might be ſent to Rome: and that no Councell ſhould be allowed vnleſſe he ſend thither his Legate to doo it; and alledged for his ſpeech the decree of Nice. The Biſhops cauſed the bookes to be ſearched, and the Regiſters of the Councell if it were ſo. Alſo they cauſed to come from Conſtantinople a Copie of the ſaid Councell: but finding it not to be ſo as the ſaid Boniface had alledged by his Legate, his requeſt was reiected. See the Epiſtle of the ſaid Councell of Affricke to Boniface, and to Celeſtine in the firſt volume of the Councells.
               
                  Note here by what meanes the Popes ſought to obtaine their primacie.
               
               
                  
                  The introitus of the Maſſe.
                  Celeſtine firſt of that name a Romane, or of Campaine after ſome. He ordeined that the Introitus of the Maſſe ſhould be of ſome Pſalme Dauid, yea and the Graduall which they call the Offertorie, and added vnto the thē Praiers with the ſong. Naucler.
               
               Alſo that the Prieſt ſhould ſay before the Introitum the 43. Pſalme. Indica me Deus. Supl. Chron.
               
               Item that they ſhould ſing three Sanctus. Abb. Vſp.
               
               This ſaid yeare 426. the Emperour Honorius died.
               The third generall Councell at Epheſus againſt Nestorius Biſhop of Conſtantinople, of 200. Biſhops: It was there concluded that Ieſus Chriſt is one alone perſon in two natures, and that the Virgine Marie by good right is called the mother of God. Cyrillus Biſhop of Alexandria aſſiſted there.
               
                  
                  Theodoſius the younger, alone obteined the Empire, and raigned 26. yeares.
               
                  Celeſtine gaue commaundement to all Eccleſiaſticall perſons to know and obſerue the Canons.
               He ſent Palladius a Greeke and Patricius, into Scotland and Ireland preach the faith.
               He ſent into England Saint Germaine Biſhop of Anxerce,
                  
againſt the Pelagian hereſie.Valentiniā
                  
               
               He ordeined that none ſhould attempt any thing in an others pariſh.
               Item that no Biſhop ſhould be ordeined againſt the wil of the people, but that the conſent of the Cleargie and of the people was requiſite.
               The Church in that time was greatly troubled, and eſpecially in Affrike: the Eccleſiaſticall people were caſt into exile, and martyred by Genſericus of the Vandales.
               
               
                  Palladius compoſed the life of S. Iohn Chriſoſtome.
               
               S. Augustine Biſhop of Hipone, of the age of ſeuentie ſixe yeares dyed, after he had gouerned the ſaid Church fortie ſixe yeares, the third moneth after his Towne was beſieged by the Vandales, euen when he writ againſt Iulian a Pelagian Biſhop.
               
                  Poſſidonius writ his life.
               
                  Sedulius, Poſſidonius, Sozomenus, Socrates, and Theodoriretus, were Authors of the Tripartite Hiſtorie, which afterward was brought into one by Caſſiodorus.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋalentinian was made Emperour with Theodoſius, and they  raigned together, the one in the Eaſt & the other in the Weſt.
               
                  Clodio a Painim, King of France, raigned 18 yeares. Hee recouered from the Romaines Torney and Cambray, where he was buried.
               Superſtition was now farre entred into the houſes of great men: In ſo much as Eudoxia the wife of Theodoſius the yonger went vnto Ieruſalem, and frō thence brought the chains wherewith S. Peter was bound by Herode, which were ioyned with them of Nero, wherevpon afterward was inſtituted the feaſt of S. Peter in bonds.
               Item the Relikes of S. Steuen.
               
               S. Hierome in his Epiſtle to Euſtochius counteth them otherwiſe.Abb. trip. Naucler.
               
               
                  Sixtus the third of that name a Romaine, gouerned the  ſtate of Rome, 8. yeares.
               Hee was accuſed by a Prieſt of great credit called Baſſus,
                  
to haue committed Inceſt, and to haue violated a religious woman named Chryſogonus, and ſo did Baſſus vnderſtand of a ſeruant of the ſaid Sixtus called Peter. But in a full Sinode of 55. Biſhops, by Valentinian Auguſtus, libertie was left to Sixtus to iudge himſelfe. For it is not lawfull ſaith he to iudge nor giue ſentence againſt the hie and great Biſhop. He then tooke his oath that he was innocent of the matter, and ſo was abſolued by the Sinode, and Baſſus baniſhed, and all his goods confiſcate and giuen to the Church.
            
            
               The beginning that the Pope ſhould not be iudged.
               
                  Sixtus then inſtituted the feaſt of S. Peter in bondes, the firſt day of Auguſt, in place of an other Feaſt which was before made, for the victorie of Auguſtus Caeſar which he obtained againſt Marcus Antonius and Cleopatra.
               
            
            
               Suſpition or Idolatrie chaunged but not aboliſhed.
               The Vandales which from the outward parts of Almaine vnder Gratian came into France, and after into Spaine, finally, vnder the conduction of Genſerich, came into Mauritania, and after ſell vpon Carthage, and there occupied Affricke more then 77. yeares.
               
                  Victor Biſhop of a Towne in Numidia which is in Affricke, called in Latine Cattena, made a booke againſt the Arrians, and preſented it to Genſeric King of the aforeſaid Vandales an Arrian.
               
               
                  Polychronius Biſhop of Ieruſalem is chaſed away. Hee in the time of a famine ſold all his goods and gaue it to the poore. For which chatitie and mercy he was after reſtored againe.
               
                  Sixtus ordeined that none ſhould bee promoted in the Cleargie into anothers Dioceſſe or Pariſh.
               He alſo before his death gaue all his goods to the poore.
               
                  Supp. Chro.
                  Hillarie Biſhop of Arles, left all his goods and went into an hermitage, where he compoſed the life of Saint Honorius. Abb. Tritem.
               
               
                  
                  He had done better if hee had preached conſtantly, and oppoſed himſelfe againſt the peoples vices.
               
               
                  Arcadius, Probus, Paſchaſius, and Eutichius, were in great eſtimation and honour with Genſericus, but ſeeing he could not draw them vnto Arrianiſme, after many euils, finally he martyred them with others: yea hee caſt certaine Biſhoppes out of their places, and bookes of Religion and the Chriſtian faith were burnt.
               The Councell of Epheſus the ſecond, was aſſembled by  
                  Theodoſius, wherein Eutiches the heretike was reſtored, and Flauianus a true Catholike condemned, by a falſe accuſation: For there was Dioſcorus Biſhop of Alexandria Preſident, who was of the ſect of the ſaid Eutiches.
               
               
                  This Councell was corrected by the Councell following which was aſſembled vnder Leo the Pope, firſt of that name, as followeth.
               
               The Towne of Rhemes was taken by Attila, and put to fire and ſword. Nicaſius Biſhop of the ſaide place a very auncient man was ſlaine, and his ſiſter Eutropia put to death.Blund. lib. 2.
                  
               
               
                  Leo a Tuſcan firſt of that name,Naucler. gouerned the Romaine  Church 21. yeares.
               He ordained, that whoſoeuer vnreuerently ſhould handle the Images of Saints, ſhould be ſeperated and depriued of the communion of the faithfull.
               He added to the Maſſe, Orate pro me fratres, &c.
               
               Alſo the Deo gratias is attributed vnto him.
               He added to the Canon, Sanctum ſacrificium, immaculatam hoſtiam. Item, hanc igitur oblationem, &c.
               
               
                  Attila ſacked all Italie.
               
               At the ſacking of Aquilia, one of the honourableſt women called Digna, caſt her ſelfe from an high Tower into the water, for feare to be rauiſhed by the Barbarians. For the faireſt women were reſerued from death, that they might be forced of thoſe barbarous people. Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Merouee the third King of France raigned ten yeares. He alſo was a Painim: and was not the ſonne of Clodio, but the maiſter of his horſe-men. Yet to him the king Clodio recommended the gouernment of his kingdome, of his wife, & of his three children, truſting vnto his loyaltie, which hee had ſworne and promiſed vnto him in the preſence of his Princes. But ſoone after the death of the ſaid Clodio, Merouee chaſed away his ſaid three children, and cauſed himſelfe to be choſen King. When the three children came to age, they made warre vpon him, and tooke from him all the Countrey of Auſtria, Lorraine, Brabant, Namure, and Hainault.
               
               
                  Sureties.
                  Leo ordeined that there ſhould be but one God-father or God mother at Baptiſme, and at confirmation.
               Some attribute vnto him the ordinance that Alleluya and Gloria in excelſis Deo ſhould not be ſung from Septuageſima vntill Eaſter.
               
                  Inuention of Letanies.
                  Letanies were firſt in Conſtantinople, and after in the Weſt by Lupus Biſhop of Troy receiued and approued. Item by Mamerus Biſhop of Vienna, for an Earthquake that happened and further to appeaſe it; was ſung the Sanctus Deus, Sanctus Fortis, Sanctus immortalis miſerere nobis.
               
               
                  From hence-forward thou ſhalt ſee infinit ſuperſtitions, traditions, and heapes of Councells and Relikes.
               
               He ordeined faſting the three Rogation dayes.
               
                  The ſea of hiſtories.
                  Attila Captaine of the Hunnes tooke Rome: before whom Leo came at the firſt and obtained of him to touch nothing at Rome. And Attila being asked wherefore ſo eaſily he agreed therevnto, anſwered that hee ſawe the Angell of God with a  ſword drawne, who threatned him, if hee graunted not his requeſt. Paul. Diaconus.
               
               The general Councel of Calcedon of 630. Biſhops againſt Eutiches Abbot of Conſtantinople, vnder Martian.
               
               In this Councell 16. Chap. this decree is ſet downe. If any Virgin vowe and dedicate her ſelfe to God, and likewiſe a Monke, it ſhall bee no more lawfull for them to marry:

but if they be found to marry,Valentiniā
                   then to remaine excommunicated, yet we ordaine that the Biſhop of the place, if he thinke good, may ſhew the ſame humanitie and fauour.
               The Narration or Fable of the 17. ſleepers, named Malchus, Maximianus, Martinianus, Dioniſius, Ioannes, Serapion, and Conſtantinus, raiſed again as it were 200. yeares after their death, and preaching the reſurrection of the bodie againſt certaine heretikes affirming the contrary, is forged about this time.
               Long & great perſecution was againſt the Chriſtians in the Country of Perſia: In ſo much that Theodoſius made peace with them that they would ceaſe the perſecution. Abb. Vsp.
               
               The Tripartite Hiſtorie, lib. 9. chap. 43. and others, make mention that S. Iohn Baptist reuealed his head to two Monkes which were hid nigh an houſe: and after that, the ſaid head was tranſported into Ediſſa, a Citie in Phinitia, where he was honoured.
               
                  Monkes beare witneſſe in their owne cauſe. But how came this head from thence vnto Amiens in Picardie where hee is adored? See Iohn Caluin in his booke of Relikes.
               
               
                  Leo made many Epiſtles, euen 66. in number.
               Saint Germaine Biſhop of Anxerre, Seuerus Biſhop of Treners, Lupus Biſhop of Troy
                  ▪ were againe ſent into England againſt the Pelagian hereſie.
               Many Councels were held at this time, after that of Chalcedone.
               
               The firſt at Auranges, a Towne in the Prouince of Narbone. The ſecond at Valens. The third Councell of Carpentras. The fourth at Arles. The fift at Venice. The ſixt at Tours.
               
               In the Councell of Tours the cenſure Eccleſiaſtical againſt Prieſts marriages was moderated,1. Volume of Councels. which was to be excommunicated and depriued of the Communion, which was permitted them only, vpon condition they ſhould not come to higher degree or dignitie, and that they ſhould abſtaine from celebrating and adminiſtring to the people.
               
                  Archephali heretikes in this time, which caſt off the Councell of Chalcedone.
               
               
                  
                  Martin.
                  Eucherius Biſhop of Lions, in this time ſent a booke conteining the praiſe of Hermits liues, to S. Hilarie Biſhop of Arles, who went into an Hermitage as is ſaid. Item an other booke De contemptu mundi.
               
               
                  In this time the wiſeſt gaue themſelues to write the praiſes of virginitie, and of a contemplatiue and monaſtike life.
               
               The bookes of the Manicheans were burnt in Rome.
               
               
                  Theodoſius dyed of the peſtilence at Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  Abb. trip. Naucler.Earthquakes, Comets, and other tokens were ſeene in heauen.
               
                  
                  Anian Biſhop of Orleans, Lupus Biſhop of Troy, Nicaſius Biſhop of Rhemes, were martyred.
               
                  Valentinian the Emperour, ſlaine at Rome of his people, by the fraud of Argobaſtus.
               
               
                  
                  Martian choſen Emperour, raigned 7. yeares, he made alliance with the 
                     Ʋandales.
               
               It was he which was wont to ſay that a Prince ought not to take armes as long as it is lawfull to liue in peace.
               
                  Rome was taken againe by Genſericke, towardes whom alſo went Leo, and entreated of him that the Towne might not be put to fire and ſword. Some ſay hee intreated nothing at this time.
               
                  The ſea of Hiſtories.
                  Orleans was beſieged by Attila about this time, after he had waſted Almaine and a great part of France: but before Orleans his people were diſcomfited by Merouee King of France, and there was ſlaine 180000. men.
               That which is ſaid of Geneuieſue virgin at Paris, is reported of this time.
               
                  This is now the great Diana of the Pariſians.
               
               
                  Martian the Emperour was ſlaine at Conſtanſtinople, by the conſpiracie of his owne men.
               
                  Childeric.
                  Childeric the fourth King of France, a Panim, raigned 26.  yeares, a man ſubiect to leachery, which to maintaine, hee laide great taxes vpon the people, wherevppon hee was reiected from the kingdome. A Gouernor of Soiſſon, and Meion of called Giles a Romane,Annualls of France.
                   ſucceeded in his place, and raigned eight yeares: but after Childeric was reſtored.
               
                  After Childeric was called againe,Leo, the firſt. hee gouernerned wiſely vertuoufly, and valiantly: hee put to flight his enemy Giles, and ſacked the Townes of Treuers and Coloigne, and hee retyred to Treuers. After alſo he conquered Orleans, and all the Countrey along the Riuer of Loire vntill Angiers, and then brought all the Countrey of Angiou vnder his ſubiection. He tooke alſo the Cittie of Trect, and all the Countrey along the Riuer of Rhene, and greatly encreaſed the Kingdome of France.
               
               He vſed great ingratitude towardes Baſin King of Lorraine called Thoringe, who had kindly entertained and maintained him, all the time hee was depriued of his kingdome. For hee receiued the wife of the ſaide Baſin, and tooke her for his owne wife.
               
                  Leo Emperour, firſt of that name a Grecian, left for his ſucceſſor Leo, who was of Ariadne his daughter and of Zenon. He ſent Baſalike a warriour againſt Genſericke King of the Vandales. Constantinople and a great part of Italie, was as it were in perpetuall trouble vnder this Emperour, who raigned about 17. yeares.
               
                  Hilarie borne at Sardes, Biſhop of Rome, ruled 7. yeares. His time was full of troubles. Theſe ordinances are attributed vnto him: That no Romane Biſhop ſhould chuſe him a ſucceſſour. And this conſtitution ſtretched to all Eccleſiaſticall dignitie. Naucler. and Suppl. Chronic.
               
               That a Clarke ſhould receiue no Inueſture of a Laie perſon.
               That none ſhould be admitted vnto orders if he were not learned, and hauing all his members.
               In a Sinode at Rome of fiftie Biſhoppes, it was ordained that the Decrees of the Apoſtolike ſeate ſhould be receiued and publiſhed vniuerſally.
               There alſo it was ordained that the Biſhop might correct that which his predeceſſor had euil ordeined.
               This Pope confirmed the domination and principalitie of the Apoſtolike ſeate.Suppl. Chro.
               
               He made three Epiſtles.
               He depriued a Biſhop of his dignitie called Ireneus, becauſe

by ambition he had left his Church to goe into an other,Leo. which was by Canons forbidden.
               
                  Remy Biſhop of Rhemes, and Patricius his brother, was Biſhop of Soiſſons.
               
               
                  
                  Simplicius Tiburtin ſucceeded Hilarie, and gouerned the Romane Church 15. yeares, and more after ſome.
               He declared (as his predeceſſor) that the Romane Church was the chiefe and principall.
               He builded many Temples and dedicated them.
               Hee inſtituted that in the Church of Peter and Paul there ſhould be ſeuen Prieſtes to heare the penitents and to Baptiſe them. In the firſt volume of Councells.
               
                  Leo the younger was left a childe, ſucceſſor of the Empire, by his Grand-father on the mothers ſide, and hauing gouerned a yeare, he was content that his Father Zeno ſhould raigne for him. In ſo much that with his owne hands he placed the Diademe vpon his Fathers head.
               That which is ſaid of king Arthur is of this time.
               
                  Zenon.
                  Zenon Iſaurike Emperour, raigned 16. or 17. yeares. He was  an Arrian, a cruell man. He was buried aliue being drunke, by his wife Arriadne.
               
               The Engliſh men came farre into France.
               
               The Arrians exerciſed great cruelties.
               
                  Honorius an Arrian king of Vandals, perſecuted greatly the Chriſtians in Affrike, & more then 4976. were exiled in diuers places, without ſparing ſexe or age, & afterward at diuers times and with diuers puniſhments were put to death. Some had their hands cut off, ſome their tongues. Certain times after, vnder the ſhadow of a Councell, hee made aſſemble all Biſhops, Doctors, and other Catholikes, to the number of 324. after Paulus Diaconus, but after others 444. he ſent into exile, & cauſed the Tē
                  ples to be ſhut vp againſt Catholikes, & gaue them to the Arrians. One Biſhop called Laetus was burnt, to the end to feare others. The Biſhop of Carthage Eugenius, with more thē 500. of the Cleargy were baniſhed. But 2. yeres after Honorius died miſerably of vermine. And Gonthamundus ſucceeded him. He reuoked Eugenius from exile. At the requeſt alſo of whom, all the others were called home and the Churches opened.
               
                  An horrible famine in Affrike. Naucler.
                  Zenon.
               
               It is a thing worthy of remembrance, the great conſtancie of a woman called Deniſe,
                  Deniſe. and the exhortation ſhe made to her ſonne called Maioricus. Remember ſaid ſhe my ſonne, that we were baptiſed in the name of the Trinitie: wherefore let vs not looſe the garments of our ſaluation. Alſo an other called 
                     Ʋictoria,
                  Victoria. who neither by the ſolicitation of her husband, nor the teares of her children could be perſwaded, &c. Naucler.
               
               
                  Epiphanius Biſhop of Pauie, a very graue man, brought into peace and concord the people of Liguria, and brought from Burgonie many Captiues, as well by his Siluer as his holie life, whereby he entreated the redemption of 6000. Captiues. Paul. Diaconus and Naucler. after him.
               
                  Seuerin an Abbot in Noric, was now of great renowne. Odoacer King of the Gothes, as he paſſed by Noric into Italie, went vnto him for his bleſſing.
               
                  Odoacer occupied Italie, and was made King thereof, and the Gothes raigned there by the ſpace of 70. yeares.
               The Weſt Empire takes here an end after Auguſtulus had depoſed himſelfe, the yeare of Chriſt. 472.
               
                  Sidonius Biſhop of Auuerne a famous Poet in this time.
               
                  Clouis the fift King of France, and the firſt Chriſtian King, raigned 30 yeares. That is, fifteene a Painim, and fifteene a Chriſtian: Hee reuenged himſelfe of them which caſt out his Father Childerike out of his kingdome. Going to Soiſons hee tooke it by force, and draue away Siagre the ſonne of Giles the Romaine, who occupied the kingdome againſt Childeric, as hath bene ſaid: And at his returne tooke Melum, and chaſed away the Romanes.
               He amplified the kingdome of France, hauing ſubiected to it all the Cities and Townes which the Romanes held betwixt the Riuers Rhene and Seine, alſo all ſuch as were betwixt Seine and Loire.
               
               The hiſtories of France ſay, that in a certaine battel againſt the Almaines, being at a ſtrait, he remembred the admonitions which Clotilde his wife had often giuen him, to imbrace the Chriſtian faith and religion: In ſuch ſort, that being preſſed he

lifted vp his eies to heauen and ſaid; Lord God deliuer me from this perill wherein I am thus enuironed with mine enemies: and I will beleeue in thy name, I & all my people. It came to paſſe not only that he was deliuered from perill, but alſo that he had victorie vpon his enemies; wherefore he was baptized by Remy Biſhop of Rhemes, his two ſiſters and more then 3000. of the nobleſt of his people beſides women and children.
               The inuention and fable of the holy Ampoule (as they call it) wherwith the kings of France are annointed, is reported of this time.
               
                  Churches began to become rich.
                  Clouis for recompence, gaue to the Church of Rhemes many great gifts, lands, ſignories and rents.
               S. Remy afterward had great authoritie, and was principall Councellour of king Clouis.
               
               Some ſay he builded the Church of Laon, and that hauing erected it a Biſhops place, gaue vnto it the land of Laon.
               
               
                  Patricius the brother of S. Remy, Earle of Soiſſons, was after Biſhop of Soiſſons, and alſo gaue to the ſaid Church the Earledome, which the Biſhop there holds at this day. For you muſt vnderſtand that S. Remy and his brother were children of the Duke of Laon and of Soiſſons, of a noble and auncient race.
               
                  Viſigots.The Annales of France make mention that Alaric King of Viſigots, then occupied a great part of Gaul, namely all the country along the Riuer of Loire, from Orleans euen to mount Pirenes, which do ſeperate France and Spaine. Item the countries of Berry, Auuerne, Limoſin, Quercy, Perignex, Angolmois, Agenois, Languedoc, Prouence, and other nigh places; againſt which Clouis willing to make warre as he paſſed nie Tours, he ſent to make his offerings to S. Martin, to haue his ſuccours againſt the ſaid Viſegoths, and that after the victory he himſelfe came to Tours, and offered great gifts to the Temple of S. Martin.
               
               If this be ſo for a firſt Chriſtian king, he was partly inſtructed in the Chriſtian faith, and felt yet his Paganiſme, becauſe in the place of his old Gods, he reclaimed & called now vpon Saints.
               The fault may be imputed to the Biſhops & Paſtors, which then were more ſuperſtitious then religious, and more fooliſhly deuout, then well and diuinely inſtructed in the word of God.

As S. Brice, Patrice, Fourcy, Medard, Gildard, Vaaſt, Remy, Severin, Germanie, Loupe, Nicaiſius, Aguien, and other Saints of like branne were canonized after their deaths.
               Vnder Zenon there happened ſuch a fire in Conſtantinople that the greateſt part of the Towne was brought into aſhes, and more then ſixe ſcore thouſand volumes were loſt and conſumed.
               
                  Clouis had in marriage Clotilde, the daughter of Chilperic, King of Burgonie, who was ſlaine by his owne brother called Gondobaldus, and his wife mother of the ſaid Clotilde was drowned.
               
                  Felix the third of that name borne at Rome, gouerned the  Church of Rome 8. or 9. yeares, his Father was a Prieſt called Felix.
               
               The conſecrations of Temples and their dedications,Dedication. yearly are attributed vnto him.
               
                  Germain Biſhop of Capua in this time.
               
                  Vaaſt, Biſhop of Arras, Vedaſtus in Latin.
               
               
                  Fulgence Biſhop of Rupe in Affrike.
               
               
                  Auitus Biſhop 
                     Ʋienne.
               
               
                  Solemus Biſhop of Chartres, preached Chriſt, and Fourcy that came new from Ireland.
               
               The Councell of Orleans the third at this time after Iohn le Maire. In the firſt Melanius was Preſident.In the firſt volume of Councells.
               
               In the ſaide Councell which was vnder Clouis, it was agreed that the goods of the Cleargie ſhould be imployed for the mainteining of Prieſts, for the reliefe of the poore, for the deliuerance of priſoners, and for the repairing of Churches.
               In the Councell of Tarraſcon in Spaine, Church-men were enioyned not to buye good cheape, with intent to ſell the ſame thing dearer, for then they ſhould be depoſed.
               
                  Meane cares occupied the aſſemblies of Biſhoppes.
               
               
                  Anaſtatius the Emperour called Dicorus,
                  Anaſtatius. for the chaunge of colours which appeared in his eye-browes ſucceeded Zeno,
                  
and raigned 27. yeares:Anaſtatius he commaunded ſtraightly to worſhip a quaternitie,Quaternitie. that is to ſay foure perſons in the Diuinitie: which pernitious hereſie was by him maintained.
               
                  Gelatius of Affricke gouerned the Romaine Church fiue yeares: his Father was a Biſhop named 
                     Ʋalericus. Naucler.
               
               The diſtinction of Autentike and Apocrypha bookes of the ſcripture are attributed vnto him.
               Hee declared many bookes Apocryphaes, as the booke called the Aſſumption of the Virgine Mary. Item the Canons of the Apoſtles, & ſuch like. In the 1 volume of the Councels.
               The Manicheans againe are condemned and exiled, and their bookes burnt.
               He ſhewed how Anaſtatius the Emperor might be excommunicated.
               
                  Naucler.Hee is numbred amongſt them which chiefly ordained the Canon, Te igitur clementiſſime, &c.
               
               Some attribute to him the ordinance of Bigamies, that is, of ſuch as haue bin twiſe married, that they ſhould not be promoted to orders, vnles it were by ordinance of the Apoſtolike ſea.
               That orders ſhould be made foure times a yeare, and on the Saterday only.
               He made Hymnes, Collects, Reſponds, Graduels, Prefaces of the Maſſe, and brought all into order.
               He added to the Maſſe Vere dignum & iuſtum eſt.
               
               
                  The Canons then was made at diuers times, & in diuers times; It is then no maruell if it be euil ſowed, and patched with rags and tatters, without any certaine Authour.
               
               He made 5. bookes againſt Neſtorius & Eutiches. Item two againſt the Arrians, and a Treatiſe of excommunicatiō.
               He reſtored Meſſenus Biſhop, after the knowledge of his penance.
               He excommunicated the Emperour Anaſtatius becauſe hee fauoured Acarius and other heretikes.
               He excōmunicated the king of Vandals, & all his people which thē in Affrike afflicted the true faithfull in fauour of the Arrias.
               
               He commanded Prieſts that they ſhould not communicate but in both kindes, and not vnder one alone.
               The Cleargie greatly loued, waxed rich in this time and increaſed.
               
                  
                  Gelatius in full Councell at Rome,
                  Gelaſius.
                  Bread and wine of the Supper. declared that in the Euchariſt, neither the ſubſtance of the bread and wine, nor their natures are chaunged, but that in them as in an Image, the fleſh and bloud of the Lord are repreſented: and that in the Sacrament both are exhibited to the faithfull. Hee alſo declared them to be excommunicated which gaue not nor tooke the Sacrament of the Eucharist whole. In the firſt volume of the Councels.
               
                  Gennaduis at this time was Biſhop of Marceil.
               
               
                  Anaſtatius a Romane, ſecond of that name Pope, gouerned the Church of Rome two yeares.
               This is the ſecond Pope noted of hereſie, whoſe beginning was reaſonably good, and excommunicated the Emperor Anaſtatitius, an Eutechian heretike: but afterward he himſelfe did all he could to reuoke Acetius from exile, and ſtucke vnto him. He prooued alſo very fauourable vnto the Neſtorians, and communicated with Photin, a Deacon of Theſſalonica; wherfore many Clarks, Prieſts, and Biſhops, refuſed to communicate with him. See the Chap. Anaſtatius. distinct. 9.
               In the moneth of September he created 12. Prieſts and 16. Biſhops.
               Hee died very miſerably (as it is ſaide) beeing vpon the priuie, where he voyded all his bowels, as did Arrius. Naucler.
               
               
                  Acatius Biſhop of Conſtantinople an heretike, was at this time murthered. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Simmachus borne in the Ile of Sardiue, ruled in Rome 16. yeares.
               The firſt ſchiſme in the Romane Church.
               
                  The election of Popes conſecrated with bloud.
               
               When Simmachus was choſen, an other likewiſe called Lawrence was ordained: Simmachus in the Temple of S. Iohn de Latran, and Lawrence in the Church of S. Mary the greater: for which election, there was great diuiſion in the Church: In ſo much, as the people and the Romane Senate were diuided. Wherefore a Councell was held at Rauenna, the King Theodoric
                  
being preſent,Simmachus wherin the election of Symmachus was confirmed, & Laurence was recompenced with the Biſhopricke of Nycerre by Symmachus: but by ſome of the Cleargie of Rome this ſame ſedition began againe about foure yeares after. In ſo much that Theodoric being grieued thereat, ſent to Rome one Peter Altin Biſhop of Rauenna to be Pope the other two reiected. But Symmachus aſſembled the Councell, and there in the preſence of all, 102. Biſhops, made his Oration, and therin ſo purged himſelfe of all vices and crimes laid againſt him, that he was againe elected and approoued of all, and Laurence and Peter Altin were reiected, yet the noiſe at Rome was greater, and the ſedition more enflamed then before. For at euery faction there was bloud-ſhead:Bloudſhead. As well Prieſts as Lay-men ſlew one an other in the ſtreetes. Finally, Faustin the Conſul appeaſed the ſedition, laying hand to Armes againſt ſuch as were chiefe Captaines of ſo many euils.
               
                  See the fruites of the riches of the Romane Church.
               
               
                  Symmachus ordained that on Sundayes and ſolemne daies of Martirs, they ſhould ſing Gloria in excelſis Deo, adding to the Cantic. the reſt, which are more then the words of the Angell.
               Item, that whileſt the Pope liueth, none ſhould holde talke of chuſing a new Pope, vpon paine of excommunication.
               
                  Hoſpitalls.He cauſed certaine houſes to be builded nigh the Church of S. Peter, for the eaſe of the poore, and prouided them of all things neceſſary for liuing.
               Vnder Traſimundus King of 
                     Ʋandals, many Biſhops of Affrike were put to exile and ſent into the Ile of Sardine: to the number of 202. Amongſt the which was Fulgentius: which this Symmachus helped with ſiluer, and redeemed many Captiues.
               
                  Olimpius Biſhop of Carthage an Arrian, beeing at the Bathes and blaſpheming the Trinitie, was ſuddenly burnt. Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  Boetius a Poet of this time,Hormiſda. whoſe wife was named Elphe; was ſent into exile by Theodorice King of the Ostrogothes, and after ſent to priſon, where he made his bookes, De Conſolatione Philoſophiae.
               
               In this time Abbies and Temples began to be founded in Fraunce, and to be dedicated to the honour of Saints, and called by their names.
                     Clouis founder of Temples. The King Clouis vowed to build a Church if he obtained victorie againſt Allaricus King of 
                     Ʋiſegothes.
               
               Hee cauſed to bee builded the Church of S. Geneurefue at Paris, then called Saint Peter and Pauls, where hee was buried.
               He founded the great Temple of Strasbourge.
               
               
                  Gerard Biſhop of Laon was married, and of his wife had a ſonne, who ſucceeded him in the Biſhoppricke.
               
                  Symmachus caſt out of Rome the Manecheans, and cauſed publikely their bookes to be burnt. And made a booke Intituled, The exceſſe of Clarkes.
               
               He created 92. Prieſts, and 107. Biſhops.
               Many Sinodes were held at Rome, and one Councell at 
                     Ʋalence in Spaine, whereby they ſought to force Eccleſiaſticall perſons to leaue their wiues.
               
                  Childebert, the ſixt King of France a cruell man, raigned  45. yeares.
               He founded the Abbay of S. Germain des prees, nigh Paris, where he was buried; and the Abbay Du Mont at S. Michaels; the Church of S. Germain del; Auxerrois at Paris. But the booke called Le mer des histoires, ſayth otherwiſe.
               
                  Hormiſda Pope, borne at Freſſelon, a Citie of Campania,
                   gouerned the Romane Church 9. yeares.
               Hee ordained that Prieſts ſhould addreſſe no Aultars without the licence of their Biſhop.
               That marriages ſhould be made publikely and ſolemnly. Suppl. Chron.
               
               That no Lay-man ſhould be choſen to be Biſhop.
               A Councell was at Rome againſt the Eutechians, wherein

it was ordained that he that had done his penance,Iuſtin the olde. and made an honourable amends, ſhould not be admitted into any Eccleſiaſticall eſtate. Supp. Chro.
               
               Many Monkes corrupted with the Neſtorian hereſie, not leauing it by the exhortations of Hormiſda, but rather ſowing diffametory ſpeeches againſt him, were baniſhed from Rome, againſt the hipocriſie alſo of which, he writ.
               He ſollicited by Letters and meſſengers, Iohn Biſhop of Conſtantinople, companion of Acarius, and euen the Emperour himſelfe to leaue the Eutechian hereſie: but not onely Anaſtatius deſpiſed his admonitions, but iniuried his foure Embaſſadors, ſaying that it belonged to an Emperour to command, and not to a Pope.
               
                  Paulus Diaconus addeth, that the Emperour Anaſtatius beſides all this, cauſed them to mount on the Sea to goe into Italy in a light and worne ſhip, forbidding them to take no land in Greece,
                  The death of Anaſtatius.
                   but quickly paſſe away without taking any Porte. Anastatius a litle after died with lightning: he was of the age of 88. yeares, the 25. yeare of his Empire.
               
                  Hormiſda.
                  Hormiſda was renowned for his great almes done to the poore, and for condemning the Manichean hereſie which ſproong againe, and for burning their bookes.
               
                  Boetius was put to death by the commaundement of Theodorike the Arrian.
               
                  
                     Iustine of a ſwine-heard became an Emperour.
                  Iustine the auncient Emperour raigned nine yeares. In his youth he kept ſwine, then he kept oxen; after he was a Carpenters man. About the age of 16. yeares he beganne to follow the warre, and by craft came to the Empire. For hauing receiued a great ſumme of ſiluer to buy the ſuffrages of Princes, Captaines and other, for an other, he ſubtilly bought them for himſelf, and ſo was choſen, but he cauſed all them to die for whom he had receiued the ſaid ſiluer.
               A Councell at Gerone in Spaine at this time.
               A Councell at Satragoſſe. In the 7. Chapter of the ſaid Councell, it is ſaid: Whoſoeuer receiueth the Eucharist and eateth it not, let him be excommunicated for euer. This is in the ſecond volume of Councells.
               
                  In the 16. Chapter. If any Clarke vpon preſumption of vanitie, or by diſſolution make himſelfe a Monke, let him bee excommunicated.
               
                  Brigide a virgin in Scotland, dyed the yeare 524. of whom, many fabulous things are inuented.
               
                  Iustin after his election ſent Embaſſadors vnto Hormiſda the Pope, to confirme the Apoſtolike authoritie, and to bring peace to all Churches. He caſt out of Conſtantinople all the Eutechian Heretikes and Arrians, and reuoked from exile all ſuch as Anastatius the Emperour before had baniſhed; and Temples were taken from the Arrians, and giuen to the Catholiques.
               
                  Theodorice much grieued that Iuſtin ſhould againe driue away the Arrians, in deſpight determined to torment the Town of Rome.
               
               
                  Iohn, Pope, the firſt of that name a Tuſcaine,
                  
                     Iohn, Pope, firſt of that name. gouerned the Church three yeares at Rome.
               
               Hee with the Biſhop of Rauenna,
                  In the firſt volume of the Councells. and certaine Senators and Councellors of Rome, were ſent to Constantinople by Theodorice King of Italy, to the end that the Emperour ſhould reſtore to the Arrian Biſhops and Prieſts their Churches, otherwiſe he would put Rome and Italie to fire and ſword. As this company approached neare the towne, the Emperour Iuſtin with all his Cleargie and all the people of the Towne met them, and the Emperour caſting himſelfe at the Popes feete, ſaluted him.
               
                  Iohn then being receiued in ſuch honour, expounded the cauſe of his comming, and ſeeing hee could not bring Iustin to Theodorics will, began to weep, and beſought him to helpe the ruine of Italie, and of the Catholiques. Then roſe there vp a great lamentation on the Ambaſſadors ſide, and of the Auditors, euery one ſeeing Religion to be in ſo great hazard if the Arrians were reſtored: and on the other ſide, the great diſſolation of Rome and Italie.
               
               Finally the requeſt of the Embaſſadors obtained,The faith put behinde. the opinion of which was, that for a time the cauſe of the faith might tarry behinde to procure the ſaluation of the Towne, and of

                  Italie.
                  Iuſtinian. The Emperour conſented to the reſtitution of the Arrians, ſuffering them to liue after their owne lawes and ſtatutes: but for all this, the Pope Iohn and his companions got nothing heereby. For the honourable entertainment which the Emperour gaue them was ſuſpected of Theodorice:
                  He that endures not what he ſhuld, muſt endure that he would not. wherefore hee put the Pope in priſon at Rauenna, where hee finally died in great miſerie, pouertie, and infection, and the other Embaſſadors were likewiſe with him.
               This was a notable iudgement of God, vppon ſuch as ſet behinde, the cauſe of Faith, for a temporall commoditie.
               Peace reſtored to the Catholiques in Affrike by Hilderic King of Vandales; who reuoked from exile, all ſuch as his father had baniſhed: notwithſtanding his father on his death-bed had charged him that he ſhould neuer giue helpe nor ſupport vnto Catholiques.
               
                  Affrike was afflicted vntill this time, namely, about 74. yeares.
               Some hiſtories ſay, that the Towne of Antioche was by an earthquake wholly deſtroyed.
               
                  Iustinian, the Emperor Iuſtins Nephew by his ſiſter, raigned 38. yeares.
               He ſet his ſtudie to repaire the eſtate of the Commmonwealth by Belliſarius.
               
               
                  
                  Felix the fourth Pope of that name, ruled foure yeares. Supp. Chron.
               
               He was great Grand-father of S. Gregories father.
               
                  Eztreame Vnction.There is attributed vnto him the ordinance of extreame Vnction, grounding his ordinance vpon the words of S. Iames, the 5. Chapter.
               He cauſed to be builded at Rome, the Temple of S. Coſme, and of S. Damian, and repaired the church of S. Saturnin, which was burnt.
               
                  Dedication.The Feaſt of the Dedication euery yeare ought to bee obſerued and celebrated.
               In this time Caſſiodorus compiled in one the Hiſtorie

which is called Tripartite.
               
               
                  Boniface ruled at Rome two yeares and more. There was  great contention and diſcention in his election. For ſome had choſen Diſcorus, but hee died about a moneth after, and ſo ceaſed the diuiſion: wherefore hauing prooued the feare thereof, hee ordained that three dayes after the Popes death if it were poſſible there ſhould bee an other elected to ſhun ſedition.
               This was hee which did ſeperate the people from the Cleargie as they were hearing the diuine Seruice as they called it.
               
                  Iohn, the ſecond of that name, called Mercurius, borne at Rome, gouerned the Church three yeares.
               The Vandales tooke ende in Affrike, 96. yeares after it was occupied by Genſericus the Tyrant, an Arrian. And Affrike was made tributary to the Romane Emperour by Belliſarius.
               
               
                  Iustinian ſent the confeſſion of his faith, with his owne hand and ſeale, to Iohn the ſecond. In the ſecond volume of Councels.
               Item he ſent vnto him a Cup of Gold, and two of Siluer, and certaine Challices.
               
                  Gregorie Biſhoppe of Langres, was married. Faſcicul, Temp.
               
               The Councell of Toledo the ſecond.
               
                  Agapetus a Romane, ruled one yeare. His father was a  Prieſt, called Gordian.
               
               
                  Iuſtinian was ſeduced by Athemius the Eutychian, Biſhop of Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  Agapetus was ſent to Constantinople by Theodatus King of the Ostrogothes in Italie, to appeaſe the Emperour,The treaſon of Theodatus.
                   and to haue pardon for the fault hee had committed in putting to death Queene Amalaſontha, the wife of Theodorice, by whom he was admitted into the Kingdome.
               
                  Agapetus comming to Constantinople, contention aroſe betweene him and the Emperour. And after many threatnings againſt Agapetus, Iuſtinian finally left his errour, was

quieted, and caſt Anthemius out of his Biſhopricke, and there appointed one Mennas in his place at the exhortation of Agapetus.
               
               Vnto Agapetus is attributed the ordinance of Proceſſions on Sundayes about the Temples.
               The Temple of S. Sophie was builded at Conſtantinople by Iuſtinian.
               
               
                  Germaine Biſhop of Paris, excommunicated the King of Fraunce Herebert, becauſe he left his wife Iugebergne. Abb. Ʋrſp.
               
               
                  Eleutherius Biſhop of Tornay. Medard Biſhop of Noion. Gildard Biſhop of Rouan in this time.
               
                  Iordain a Monke, after came to be a Biſhop of the Gothes, a Chronicler of the Ieaſtes of the Romanes, and of the Gothes. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  
                  Syluerius Pope, or Liberius, borne in Campania in Italie, the ſonne of Hormiſda Biſhop (who as is ſaid was Pope of Rome) gouerned the Romane Church a yeare, fiue moneth, and 12. dayes. Naucler.
               
               He was by force promoted to his dignitie by Theodatus King of Italie, who corrupted by ſiluer, conſtrained the Cleargie to chuſe Syluerius, without the conſent of the Emperour.
               
                  Theodora the wife of the Emperour Iustinian, at the inſtigation of Vigilius Deacon, required Syluerius to call again from exile Anthemius, and to reſtore him to the dignitie from which he had bene caſt and depriued for his hereſie, and ſo to put out Mennas. Syluerius would not do this.
               
                  Belliſarius had commiſſion to depriue him of the Popedome, and to appoint vnto it Vigilius, who ſubborned falſe witneſſes, which affirmed that Syluerius had intelligence with the Gothes, and that he would haue deliuered them the Towne of Rome. Wherefore Syluerius was conſtrained to giue place and goe into exile. In the ſecond volume of Councells.
               At this time Italie was greatly afflicted with an extreame famine.
               
                  Maurus a Romane, and Faustus an Italian, Diſciples of

Saint Benet, were ſent into France to teach the Monaſtike life,Iuſtinian. Vigilius. and at the requeſt of the French men,Monkes firſt in France. who ſent meſſengers to S. Benet, to the Mount Caſſim.
               
               
                  Amator a Biſhop, ſent ſome ſiluer to Siluerius to maintaine him in exile.
               
                  Syluerius gaue ſentence of excommunication againſt 
                     Ʋigilius.
               
               The Feaſt of Purification was at that time inſtituted in Constantinople, to appeaſe a great peſtilence. Abb. Ʋrsp.
               
               
                  This is Candlemas, which then was called Hypapanthy: that is to ſay, an encounter or meeting: For then Simeon founde Christ, whom hee hadde ſo long attended.
               
               
                  Liberius made fiue bookes of the Incarnation of out Lord and Sauiour Ieſus Chriſt, and a booke againſt the Biſhops of Affrike.
               
               
                  Iustinian compiled the Romane lawes: firſt the Code,
                  The ciuil Law of Iuſtinian.
                   containing 12. bookes.
               Secondly, the Digeſtes. Thirdly, the Inſtitutes. Fourthly, an Epitome of Lawes.
               The warre in Italie againſt the Ostrogothes by Belliſarius. Leonard Attelin.
               
               
                  Iustinian in his new Conſtitutions, ordained that all Biſhops and Prieſts ſhould celebrate the prayers of Baptiſme, and of the Lords Supper with an high voyce, and with words vnderſtood of all Chriſtians, to the end that the ſpirits of the Auditors might be lifted vp with greater deuotion to ſing praiſes vnto the Lord.
               
                  
                     Ʋigillius borne at Rome, gouerned the Romane Church  14. yeares, after Naucier. or 8. yeares 6. moneths, and 26. dayes, after others: hee entred wickedly into the papacie. It was hee alſo that ordained that the Maſſe ſhould be ſaid towards the Eaſt.
               
                  Rome was taken and burnt by Totila at this time.
               
                  The firſt vniuerſall Councell was now held at Conſtantinople, of 165. Biſhops, by the commaundement of Iuſtinian the Emperour, and at the requeſt of Vigilius, againſt Anthemius, Seuerus, Peter of Antioche, Zona, and other heretikes, who ſaid that the Virgin Marie brought forth Ieſus Chriſt onely Man, and not God and man. There againe it was agreed, that it is well ſaid, Marie the mother of God.
               The yeare of Chriſt, 551. Rome was taken the ſecond time of the Gothes, by Totila the ſcourge of God: before whom came Vigilius, or after Nauclerus, Pelagius.
               
               In this time beſides the warre and famine which was in Italie, there was alſo a ſore plague, in ſo much, that houſes were inhabited by ſauage beaſts.
               
                  Benet the younger was caſt into a burning furnace by the commaundement of Totila. Herculien Biſhop of Peruſe, had his head ſawne off, by the ſame.
               
                  2. Volume of Councels.In this time were held the Councels of Orleance, the ſecond and third: or fourth and fift after ſome. In the 10. Chapter of the ſecond Councell, it was ordained that a Chriſtian ſhould not take a Iewe to wife, nor that a Chriſtian woman ſhould marry a Iewe, and ſuch communication was vnlawfull, and if they were ioyned, they ought to bee ſeperated. In the third Councell wherein Honoratus Arch-biſhoppe was Preſident, Chapter 2. it was ordained that no Prieſt, Deacon, or Subdeacon, ſhould haue the company of his wife; otherwiſe, that he ſhould be depoſed from his office and remitted into the communion of Lay-people.
               In the 16. Chapter it was ordained that the Deacon before 25. and the Prieſt before 30 yeares ſhould not be ordained.
               
                  Priſcillian hereſie.Many in this time were infected with the Priſcillian hereſie, abſtaining from eating fleſh.
               A Councell held now at Auuerne.
               
               
                  Vigillius being come to the Popedome by the deceit and ſubtilties of the Empreſſe Theodora, ſhee commaunded him to come vnto Conſtantinople and to reſtore Athemius, as hee had promiſed: but hee refuſed to doo it: ſaying, that

iuſtly he was caſt out by Agapetus and Syluerius, and that therefore he was not bound to keepe his promiſe which hee made againſt all right and reaſon.
               
                  Theodora very angry hereat, ſent an Embaſſage to Rome to drawe 
                     Ʋigillius into Lawe for the iniurie done by him, in caſting Syluerius into exile. Item, for the plot by him laid for the death of a young man of the chiefe Nobilitie, called Aſterius, and of one which was his Secretarie.
               Vpon theſe matters the Embaſſador arriuing at Rome, was aided of the Romanes, and they tooke Vigilius and lead him to Conſtantinople, and as hee embarked, the people caſt ſtones at him, with theſe Imprecations. A famine bee with thee: a mortalitie be with thee: thou haſt done a thouſand miſchiefes to the Romanes: euill enough maieſt thou finde where thou goeſt. Doo (ſaid hee) what you will vnto mee, for I haue well deſerued it. And as he approached nigh vnto Constantinople, a great multitude of the Cleargie mette him and conducted him into the Towne. Theodora in the meane while ceaſed not to ſollicite 
                     Ʋigillius of his promiſe, and to reſtore Anthemius. To whom 
                     Ʋigilius ſaide, that hee would rather endure all things whatſoeuer, then doo it. He was grieuouſly afflicted, iniuried, and outraged, and drawne out of the Temple of S. Sophie, or Euphemie,
                  
                     Vigilius byeth the Popedome deare. whereinto hee was fledde for ſafetie and refuge. One put a rope or corde about his necke, and ledde him all ouer the Towne from morning till night. This done, hee was put in priſon, fed with bread and water, and finally ſent into exile with the Cleargie which accompanied him at his entrie. After the death of Theodora hee was called againe with all ſuch as went with him, at the requeſt of the Captaine Narſes: but in the way he fell ſick and died in Sicile, at the Citie of Siracuſa.
               
               
                  Denis Abbot, a Romane, made the great Paſcall Cicle in this time. Item, a booke of the reaſon of the Feaſt of Eaſter. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Arator a Subdeacon at Rome, wrote the Acts of the Apoſtles in Hexamiter Verſes.
               
                  Radegonde Queene of Fraunce, the wife of Clotharius,
                  
who was King of France,
                  Pelagius. after the death of his brother Hildebert.
               
               
                  
                  Pelagius a Romane, gouerned the ſeate 12. yeares: hee was accuſed to haue bene the principall cauſe of all 
                     Ʋigilius his euills: But in the preſence of the Cleargie and people, and in the preſence of Narſes, he mounted the Chaire, and publikely ſwore that he neuer did any euill vnto Vigilius, and ſo eſcaped and was abſolued
               
                  Puniſhment of heretikes.It is hee who ordained that heretikes and ſchiſmatikes ſhould be puniſhed with ſword, power, and temporall Iuſtice. And that none ſhould bee admitted to Eccleſiaſticall orders by ambition or gifts.
               
                  Canonicall houres.That Cleargie-men ſhould each day, ſay or ſing the ſeuen Canonike houres.
               
                  Vniuerſall.That no Patriarke ſhould vſe this word Vniuerſall, but onely the Biſhop of Rome.
               
               That none might ordaine an Abbot, vnleſſe he were firſt choſen Canonically.
               
                  Memorie of the dead.Hee added to the Maſſe, the Commemoration of the dead.
               In this time was the fourth Councell of Orleance held, where it was ordained,Lent. that Lent ſhould be vniuerſally kept through all Churches. In the ſecond volume.
               The ſecond Councell of Tours in this time.
               
                  Each Citie ſhould nouriſh his poore.In the ſaid Councell, Chap. 5. it was ordained that euery Citie ſhould nouriſh his poore and ſtraungers, euery one according to his power, that no poore might goe about from Towne to Towne.
               In the third Chapter. That the Biſhop ſhould holde his wife as his ſiſter, and that he ſhould gouerne as well his houſe and family as his Church, in ſuch ſort as there might bee no euill opinion of him.
               In the 20. Chapter, becauſe Prieſts were ſuſpected to communicate with their wiues, it was there ordained that whereſoeuer they went, they ſhould haue for adiacents ſome of the Cleargie who might lie in theyr Chambers to witneſſe their chaſtitie. In the twentie and ſeuen Chapter.

That Iudges and rich men which oppreſſe the poore,Iohn the 3
                  Oppreſſions of the poore. after they haue beene aduertiſed thereof by their Paſtors not to do it, that they ſhould be excommunicated if they amended not.
               The firſt Councell of Paris was held in this time.
               
                  Clotaire, the ſeuenth King of Fraunce, raigned fiue yeares; and beeing preſſed with neceſſitie, hee tooke the third part of the reuenew of the Church, againſt which, the Arch-biſhoppe of Tours and others oppoſed themſelues.
               Vppon a Friday called S. hee ſlewe one Gualter Diuitot a Knight, in the Temple: whoſe heire for ſatisfaction, was exempted from all ſeruice and homage, as free as the King. Annales of France.
               
               
                  Iohn, Pope, the third of that name a Romane, raigned 12. yeares. This Pope ended the building of the Church of S. Phillip and S. Iames, which Vigilius had begunne. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Iuſtinian the Emperour, after his falling into a phrenſie, finally died, and his Nephew ſucceeded him. Abb. Tri.
               
               
                  Iuſtine the younger Emperour, raigned 12. yeares.Iuſtine the younger. Hee  was infected with the Pelagian hereſie, auaritious, and a contemner of God & men, who vpon great luſt to haue more, became out of his wits, and ſo died. Sophie his wife gouerned long the Empire; but by her imprudencie, Italie came into the hands of the Lombardes. Vpon falſe reports ſhee began to hate the the Captaine Narſes, and ſaid ſhe would ſend that gelded marchant to ſpinne with her maides. But Narſes anſwered that he would ſpinne ſuch a webbe, as ſhe ſhould not vndoo all her life. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               A great plague in Italie.
               
               Here began the raigne of the Lombardes in Italie,
                  The kingdome of the Lombards. whereof Albionus was the firſt King.
               
                  Sophorachus Biſhop of Paris, was ſent into a Monaſterie by the authoritie of a Councell at Paris.
               
               
                  Cherebert, or Aribeet, the eight King of France, raigned 9. yeares, he was much giuen to women.
               
                  Armenia againe receiued the faith.
               
                  
                  Albinus King of the Lombards,
                  Iuſtin the younger. Benet 1. was ſlaine by his wife Roſimonde the daughter of Gondimanus King of Gepilles, for that he made her drinke in a diſh or maſor made of her fathers ſcalpe.
            
            
               The beginning of Exarches.
               
                  Longin a Grecian, the firſt Exarche in Italia, after all Italie as it were was occupied, raigned in Rauenna a 11. yeares, appointed by the Emperour Iuſtin.
                  Exarches in Italie.
                   This office of Exarchate endured in Italie 124. yeares, and was a ſoueraigne Magiſtrate, as a Liefe-tenant Generall for the Emperour.
               
                  Chilperic the ninth King of Fraunce, raigned foure yeares.
               Hee was ſlaine by his owne wife called Fredegonde, as he returned from hunting, becauſe hee had perceiued her whoredome.
               
                  Hee before had ſtrangled his wife Galfonde, the daughter of the King of Spaine, at the request of the ſaid Fredegonde. See the Annales of France.
                  
               
               
                  Benet Pope, the firſt of that name a Romane, ruled at Rome foure yeares.
               He helped the neceſſitie of many in the great famine aforeſaid, eſpecially at Rome, yea euen to bring victualls from Egipt for the poore.
               
                  Gregorie was ſent by him to preach to the Engliſh men. Abb. Vrsperg.
               
               
                   The Lombards tooke and occupied all Italie, at the inſtigation of Narſes, whom the Empreſſe Sophie had angred, as is ſaid, and they entred Millain.
               
               
                  Aman Biſhop of 
                     Ʋtrect, or of Liege, and Maglorius Biſhop of Dole, were in this time. Abb. Vrsp.
               
               
                  Fortunatus an Italian, after Biſhop of Poiters, made 77. Hymnes, and the miracles of S. Martin. Alſo hee made the life of S. Hilarie Biſhop of Poiters, and the life of S. Mauril Biſhop.
               
                  
                  When Biſhops are thus giuen to ſuperstition,Tiberius 2. what will the people bee?
               
               S. 
                     Ʋaast of Arras died in this time.
               
                  Tiberius, the ſecond Emperour of that name, ſurnamed  
                  Conſtantine, raigned 7. yeares. Hee was gentle and liberall towards the poore, euen to lay out largely the treaſures of the Empire for their vſe.
               
                  Engippius an Abbot, writ the life of S. Seuerin a Monke, and a rule for his Monkes. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Sigebert King of Lorraine, the brother of Chilperike King of France, was traiterouſly ſlaine at Tornay, at the ſollicitation of Fredegonde. The ſea of Hiſtories.
               
                  Pelagius Pope, ſecond of that name a Romane,Pelagius 2.
                   ruled at  
                  Rome 10. yeares.
               He was elected and ordained about the commaundement of the Emperour, at the time when the Lombards held the ſiege before Rome. But when the ſiege was leuied, Gregorie (a Deacon who after ſucceeded Pelagius) was ſent to Conſtantinople towards the Emperour Maurice to excuſe the Popes election: and the Emperour ſeeing the willingneſſe he had to come vnto him, contented himſelfe.
               This Pelagius ordained, that in all the Maſſes of the yeare there ſhould be but nine Prefaces, after the auncient order of the Romanes: that is to ſay, Eaſter, Chriſtmas, of the Kings,An heape of ſuperſtitions. Pentecoſt, of the Trinitie, of the Aſcention, of the Apoſtles, of S. Croſſe, and of Lent Faſt.
               
                  Yet this is nothing in respect of the abhominations which by ſucceſſion of time came into the Maſſe.
               
               In this time there was great Raines, in ſo much that men thought there would haue bene a ſecond deluge.
               Great ſtrifes and contentions aroſe for the Romane ſeate, againſt Iohn Biſhop of Constantinople.
               
               
                  Pelagius tranſported the Patriarkſhip of Aquilea vnto

                  Grad. and conſtituted it the Metrapolitane of all the Prouince of Venice,
                  Mauricius. which the Emperour Tiberius confirmed.
               
                  Mauricius Emperor, raigned 21. yeares. He was ſonne in lawe to Tiberius Cappidocian a magnanimous man; a good Catholique, and profitable to the Common-wealth.
               He made warre vpon the Armenians and Perſians, and ouercame them. The Huns alſo were brought vnder him. Supp. Chro.
               
               
                  
                  Clotaire, the ſecond of that name, the 6. King of France, raigned 44 yeares.
               At this time Antioche was founded and ſubuerted for the moſt part.
               The Councell of Siuille: and at Toledo the 3. time.
               In this Councell it was ordained in the 2. Chapter, that in Churches the Apoſtles Creed ſhould be recited euery Sunday with an high voyce, that the people might be better diſpoſed to the Cōmunion after they had made a confeſſion of their faith.
               
                  Viſegothes conuerted.The 
                     Ʋiſegothes conuerted to the Catholique faith, left the Arrian hereſie, by the means of their king Recaredus, or Richandus, and Leander Biſhop of Siuile. The confeſſion of their faith was ſent to the ſaid Councell of Toledo.
               
               The Councell of Maſcon, firſt and ſecond, wherein the oblations and offerings of bread and wine are commaunded for remiſſion of ſinnes.
               
                  This ordinance is wholly againſt the word of God, and the merite of Ieſus Christ, by whom alone comes remiſſion of ſinnes. And this is the beginning of the eſtabliſhment of merites.
               
               Great abundance of waters were in Italie, and principally at Rome, wherewith many were drowned, and of the corruption of the dead bodies, came a great peſtilence.
               
                  Pelagius died of the plague at Rome.
               
               
                  Pretextatus Biſhop of Rouan, was called from exile.
               
                  Fredegonde was ſlaine in the Church on Eaſter day, at the ſollicitation of whom, this Biſhop was exiled.
               
                  
                  Gregorie Pope, firſt of that name a Romane,Gregorie the first Maurice. ruled at Rome 14. yeares, or after ſome 13. yeares, tenne moneths and ſixe dayes.
               
               
                  This man was called one of the foure Doctors of the Church, with S. Auguſtine, S. Hierome, and S. Ambroſe.
               
               His Father was a Senator of Rome, and of the eſtate of Seneſhall or Captaine. The ſaid Gregorie was a Monke, after a Deacon, and finally the Romane Biſhop.
               In this time the Emperors cōfirmed the election of Popes and Churches.
               There aroſe in this time a great contention for the premacie of the Church.Combat for the premacie. For Iohn Biſhop of Conſtantinople, was in a full Sinode of the Grecians publiſhed and declared the vniuerſall Patriarke: and the Emperour Maurice commaunded the ſaid Gregorie to obey that Patriarke of Conſtantinople. But Gregorie could not endure that any Biſhoppe ſhould be vniuerſall ouer all others:Seruant of Seruants. whervpon it came that he called himſelfe Seruant of the Seruants of God. See Gregorie in the 32. Epiſtle to Maurice, and 38. to Iohn Patriarke. See Iohn Caluin in the Inſtitution of Chriſtian Religion.
               Note here Reader, that after the perſecutions before Silueſter, and the hereſies before Gregorie, now the Church lifteth it ſelf vp by ambition of preheminence, which engendred ſuch a combat betwixt the Eaſt Church and the Weſt, that ſince that time that ſchiſme is not yet ended.
               The Emperour Maurice was ſharply reprehended by Gregorie, for that he conſtrained Eccleſiaſtical perſons to go to the warres, the which Gregorie reſiſted greatly.
               
                  Gregorie ſent into England (after Naucler.) or Ireland, certaine great perſons, to preach the Faith, and amongſt others, one called Auguſtine: and Melitus and other Monkes, Inſtituted in the rule of S. Benet, to plant that order there: and their labour prooued ſo well, that from thence came great troupes of Monkes into France and Almaine.
                  Monkes. Of the number of theſe Iriſh Monkes was Colomban, and his Diſciple Gallus, who after preached in diuers places of Almaine: and finally, hee retyred

into a ſollitarie place which at this day is called S. Gaul in Suiſſe.
               
               
                  S. Gaul. The Monkes of S. Benet priuiledged.Great libertie and immunitie was graunted vnto Blacke Monkes by the Pope Gregorie, at the Councell of Lateran, by the conſent of the aſſembly.
               
                  Images.In this time raigned Seuerus Biſhop of Marſeil, who cauſed the Images of Saints and of Chriſt to be broken, ſeeing the people worſhipped them. Gregorie reprehended him for breaking them, but praiſed him that hee forbad the worſhipping of them. See the Regiſter or the booke of his Epiſtle the 10. part, Epiſtle 4. And Pollidorus Virgil. lib. 6. chap. 13.
            
            
               The building of the Maſſe.
               
                  The ceremonies of the Church.The greateſt part of the ceremonies thereof came from this Gregorie. For he brought the office of the Church (as they call it) into a forme. So that at this day it is called the Gregorian Office.S. Gregories Maſſe. He brought all the Maſſe into certaine lawes, and almoſt ſuch as it is at this day. And therefore many ſay he was the Authour thereof. And although he conſtrained none to follow the Romane forme, as hee teſtifieth to Auguſtine Biſhop of Canterbury, yet all Churches followed the manner to celebrate their Maſſes after the Romane Church: the Engliſh men by the ſaid Auguſtine, the Spaniards, France, and after Almaine, by Boniface Biſhop of Magunce, who was of great renowne.
               He made the Antiphones and Introite of the Maſſe, of ſome verſe of the Pſalmes. Item the Kyrieleiſon ſhould be ſung nine times, the Alleluia, in the end of the Offertorie of the Communion. At the beginnig of the Canonicall houres (Deus in adiutorium; and in the end of euery Pſalme, Gloria patri & filio, &c. Item that the Pater Noſter ſhould be ſung with an hie voyce ouer the conſecrate hoſte.
               He added to the Canon of the Maſſe, Dies
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      noſtros in tua pace diſponas, &c. And made the Supper with his people in the language of his Country, which was Latin, common and intelligible to all, as he witneſſeth in the preface vpon Ezechiel.
               
               In the Regiſter of his Epiſtles, in the 8. part and 7. Epiſtle

he ſaith, the Canon (that is to ſay the prayer which the Prieſt ſaith in ſecret ouer the Euchariſt) was made by one called Scolasticus. This word Maſſe was inuented in his time,The word Meſſe. although as aboue, the Supper of our Lord be called Meſſe of the writers, who called it with a common name of their time, as is ſaid.
               But you muſt heere note, that ſo oft and whereſoeuer the Church was aſſembled, the Biſhops preached to the people, and principally at Maſſe: And this cuſtome endured yet in Gregories time, but after it was omitted by ignorant Biſhops: a multitude of ceremonies were brought in, in the place of preaching. Henry Bullinger.
               
               He inſtituted it Rome the great Letanies on S. Markes day againſt the peſtilence which was then,The ſtations at Rome. with the Proceſſion of order. The firſt conteined all the Cleargie. The 2. the Abbots and Monkes. The 3. the Nunnes. The 4. the Children. The 5. Laie-men. The 6. Widowes. The 7. married women. And cauſed there to be carried the Image of the virgin Marie.
               
               The people died neezing, whereof comes yet at this day, that when one neezeth, they ſay God bleſſe you.
               He inſtituted a great part of the ſtations at Rome, & chiefly ſuch as are made to S. Peter.
               
               He ordeined for the great multitude of people which reſorted to Rome to the ſaid ſtations and patrons, certaine Prieſts to keepe the Sepulchres of the Apoſtles, and called Chamberlaines which afterward were deputed to keep the Popes Chamber. And Leo the tenth made a Colledge of them.
               Briefly this Pope Gregorie vpon deuotion (which was not  according to knowledge) brought into the church a great maſſe of ſuperſtition; which by little and little ſuffocated and choked the true Religion which remained. In his time in a certaine Sinode of twentie foure Biſhops aſſembled at Rome,
                  Councels. the foure generall Councells were approued to be obſerued as the Goſpell, which is a ſacriledge to compare humane ordinances with the eternall word of the liuing God.
               It was there alſo ordained that no Bigamus ſhould be ordained Prieſt: and that Prieſtes accuſed of the people ſhould haue this authoritie, & that by oath they might purge thēſelues,

and approue their innocencie.
               
                  By this meanes they would be all innocent.
               
               Monkes were forbidden to carry any to baptiſe, and women that they ſhould not enter into anye Monaſterie of Monkes.
               In Italie after a great drought there came an innumerable multitude of Graſhoppers which conſumed all the graine and fruite, whereof came a great famine in Italie, which endured two yeares. Chro. Euſeb.
               
               
                  Legends.The Legends of Saintes were forged at this time, of ſuch liues as theſe Fathers writ. Many Relikes were found out by the ſubtilties of Sathan: As Chriſtes Coate vppon which the ſouldiers caſt Lottes, is ſaid to be found in a Coffer of Marble, in the Towne of Zapha, and frō thence carried into the towne of Ieruſalem. Abb. Ʋrsperge, and Naucler.
               
               Such foule abſurdities merit no recitall, but that the greateſt of the world haue bene deceiued with theſe inuentions of Relikes: Argentuel nigh Paris, made a Banner of this Coat.
               
                  Agilulſphus king of the Lombards, was 2. yeares before Rome, and the Arrabian Sarraſins, entered into Sicilie, and by fire waſted it.
               
                  Mauricius otherwiſe a good Prince, who had many victories, eſpecially againſt the Perſians, in the end became odious to his ſouldiers, becauſe of his infinit couetouſneſſe, which is a very deteſtable vice in a Prince. He by his auarice diſſembled rapines and murthers, and payed not his ſouldiers: but not them eſpecially which ſerued vpon the Frontiers of Sarmatia. to reſiſt the fierceneſſe of the Scithians. They remained in barraine places enduring great neceſſities. For this cauſe the ſouldiers conſpired againſt him, and Phocas was deſigned Emperour.
                     Maurice puniſhed for his couetouſneſſe. Who cauſed his M. Maurice his head to be cut off in Chalcedone, the heads alſo of his wife & three Children, Theodorus, Tiberius, and Conſtantine: the rehearſall thereof is worthy memorie: that Maurice ſeeing his children murthered by Phocas, and that hee himſelfe ſtraightway muſt be put to

death, he often cryed in this voice which is in 145. Pſalme,Phocas. and verſe 12. Lord thou art iuſt, and thy iudgements are alſo. And ſo dyed of the age of 63. yeares, and the 20. yeare of his Empire.
               
                  We may learne by the example of the Emperour who was not of the worſt: in great & cruell temptations in ſuch ſort to bridle our thoughts, that the iuſtice of God may alwayes haue his praiſe, and be vnto vs a buckler againſt all temptations.
               
               
                  Colomban of Scotland, a very renowmed Biſhop, dyed the  yeare 598. Abb. Trit.
               
               The Lombards were conuerted to the Faith by S. Gregorie, who writ his Dialogues and preſented them to Theodelinde the wife of Agilulphus their King. Supplem. Chron.
               
               
                  Eutropius a Biſhop at this time. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Phocas 42. in number, and the 19. of the Grecian Emperours  of Conſtantinople, which ruled in the Eaſt from a Gouernour of Scythia, after he had wickedly ſlaine his maiſter, was choſen by the vnlucky Armie whereof he had charge: a verie ſlaue of couetouſneſſe, who handled ſecret matters with Courtiers after the manner of the Perſians, and ſolde the Offices of Magiſtrates & Iudgements, and dearly loued ſuch as tormented the people by rapine and extortion.
               This is hee who firſt ordeined that Rome ſhould firſt be the chiefe of all Churches: yea though it were Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  Gregorie the firſt, beſides ſo many ceremonies and ſuperſtitions, made certaine ordinances, and gaue permiſſions and lycences: Amongſt others, he ſuffered diuorces for the long diſeaſe of a woman, which cannot yeeld her dutie to her husband, if he cannot conteine: vpon condition notwithſtanding that he helpe and ſuccour his ſaid wife in her diſeaſe. This is in the ſecond Epiſtle to Auguſtine the Engliſh man. And in the ſecond volume of Councells.
               
                  But why then did he not rather vſe moderation towardes men and women which were caſt into Monaſteries, when they cannot conteine? wherefore conſtraine they them not to marry? See the ſame Epiſtle.
               
               
                  
                  Sauinian. Boniface 3.
                  Hee made many bookes: amongſt many others the Dialogues of the miracles of Saints in foure bookes, which are full of Fables, whereby he pretendeth to prooue that the ſoules of the dead returne againe, and that we muſt pray for them.
               
                  Theſe Fables inuented to pray for the dead, gaue great authoritie to Maſſes, which after came in great credit.
               
               
                  Sauinian, Pope, a Tuſcane, after Gregorie gouerned the Church of Rome two yeares.
               He is accounted the third Pope noted of abhominable infamie, an inſatiable man, and a ſworne enemie of his predeceſſor Gregorie, euen to cauſe his bookes to be burnt. He being once admoniſhed to follow the liberallitie of the ſaid Gregorie towards the poore, he anſwered that he diſſipated and waſted the goods of the Church to get a good report, and the fauour of the people.
               Hee paſſed not his Popedome without inuenting and ordaining ſomething, namely that there ſhould bee burning Lampes kept continually in the Temple,Lampes. Houres of the day diſtinguiſhed. and the houres of the day ſhould be diſtinguiſhed and rung in Churches. The ſea of Hiſtories.
               
                  Boniface Pope, the third of that name a Romane, after Naucler. ruled in the Church of Rome one yeare fiue moneths.
               
                  Election of the Pope.In a Sinode at Rome of 72. Biſhops, 30. Prieſts, and ſome Deacons, it was ordained vnder paine of excommunication, that none ſhould be elected Pope or Biſhop but three daies after the death of his predeceſſour, and by the conſent of the Prince, or of the Lord of the place.
               It was alſo ordained, that all ſuch as by gifts & fauour came to any Epiſcopall dignitie, ſhould be excommunicated.
               
                  Then it followeth that all their Biſhops at this day are excommunicated.
               
               This Pope ordained that the Aultar ſhould be couered with cleane cloathes.
               That the corporall of the Aultar ſhould be kept cleane.
               
                  This Phocas (as is ſaid) the murtherer of his M. the Emperour, ordeined Boniface Biſhop of Rome,
                  Phocas. Boniface 4.
                  
                  The Romane Biſhop made vniuerſall. the ſoueraigne Biſhop of all Chiſtianitie, and the Romane Church chiefe of all the Churches of the world. Abb. Vrsp.
               
               
                  The primacie then of the Romane Church was establiſhed by an homicide and a traytor, who died miſerably.
               
               
                  Coſroes King of the Perſian, vnderſtanding his Father in lawe Maurice was put to death by the ambuſhes of Phocas, deteſted ſo that treaſon that he rebelled againſt the Empire: In ſuch ſort that he waſted Siria and tooke Ieruſalem, where there were nintie thouſand men ſlaine. And the Chronicles adde that the wood of the holy Croſſe was then taken and carried into Perſia, and the Biſhop Zacharie was alſo priſoner.
            
            
               The Eaſt Empire beganne to decline.
               The Hans likewiſe reuolted againſt the Empire,Declination of the Empire and with their great multitude they ouerranne the Romane Prouinces.
               The Perſians occupied Meſopotamia and Aſſiria, and from Ieruſalem ranne euen to Cappadocia and Gallatia, and ſuccoured all the Country euen to Chalcedone.
               
               On the other ſide the Sarrazins waſted Egipt.
               
               
                  Boniface Pope, 4. of that name, borne of the Countrey of Marſes, in the Citie of Talleric, a Phiſitians ſonne, gouerned the Romane Church the ſpace of ſeuen yeares.
               At the requeſt of this Pope, the Emperour Phocas commaunded that the old Temple of Pantheon wherin were all the Goddes and Goddeſſes of the Painims, ſhould be conſecrated and dedicated to the honor of the virgin Mary, and of al Saints. And then was inſttiuted the Feaſt of All-Saints in the Moneth of May,The Feaſt of All-Saints. which after was brought to the firſt of Nouember.
               
                  See how thoſe Fathers rather chaunged then chaſed away ſuperſtitions.
               
               
                  Leontius Biſhop of Naples, in the Ile of Cyprus, made a booke of the life of S. Iohn the Almes giuer, Biſhop of Alexandria. Abb. Tris.
               
               
                  
                  Heraclius.After the death of Boniface the fourth, the ſeate was vacant 7. moneths, and 25. dayes, for the great diſcentions which were at Rome.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt 612. Phocas was miſerably ſlaine by the ſouldiers of his guard. Abb. Ʋrſperg. Others ſay that Heraclius and Priſcus ſlew him, cutting off his hands & feete. Others adde that his priuie member was cut off. Finally after his head was cut off, his body was burnt.
               
                  See the ende of this wicked Tyrant, who cauſed ſo many good people to die. All his brethren and parents had like ende, and his race was vtterly extinct. The Romane ſeate is worthie to haue had ſuch a monſter to authoriſe his primatie aboue all Churches.
               
               
                  Heraclius the ſonne of Heraclien, ſucceeded Phocas. When his Father a Captaine in Affrica marched from Affricke into Egipt and Aſia, with a great Army, the Perſians being out of feare of him aſſailed Affricke, and brought it into their ſubiection.
               
                  Corfrees King of the Perſians, would neuer receiue any conditions of peace, vnleſſe they renounced Chriſtian Religion.
               The Biſhop Didier of Vienna, was ſtoned at the commaund of Theodorus King of Soiſſons.
               
               
                  Deus dedit.
                  Deus of dedit, or Dorothea a Romane, Pope, ruled three or  foure yeares. His Father was a Subdeacon, after ſome.
               He ordeined that no Chriſtian ſhould take in mariage his Goſſip. Item, that the ſonne of a Goſſip or Suertie ſhould not take in marriage the daughter that his Father had held at the Font: And ordeined this ſo ſtraitly, that if the Father or Mother carried their childe to Baptiſme, that they ſhould be ſeperated: notwithſtanding that the wiſe might receiue her dowry, and that after a yeare ſhe might marry again in any other place.
               There happened a great Earthquake at this time in the moneth of Auguſt, and after a great mortalitie. The Councell of Auxerre in this time, wherein it was decreed that it was a thing vnlawfull, that the Eſtrenes ſhould be giuen the firſt day

of the yeare, calling them diuelliſh ceremonies,Boniface 5. Heraclius. becauſe of the obſeruation of the day.
               In the 12. Chapter there was forbidden to giue vnto dead bodies the Euchariſt or the Paxe to kiſſe.
               In the 21. Chapter, it is not lawfull for a Prieſt to lye with his wife, nor for Subdeacon, nor Deacon.
               In the 24. and 25. Chapter, it is not lawfull for Abbots nor Monkes to goe to marriages, nor to haue commothers, nor to preſent children to Baptiſme.
               In the 31. Chap. it was forbidden to take his couſin Germaine, or the iſſue of couſin Germaine in marriage.
               In this time were Loup Arch-biſhop of Sens, Amand, and Bauon in Flaunders. And Priſcian, after Abb. Trit, and Eloy Biſhop of Noyon, after the Sea of Hiſtories.
               
                  Coſroes King of the Perſians, was vanquiſhed by Heraclius: And Anaſtatius a Perſian Monke, was martyred for the faith, with 70. others. He was hanged three houres by one hand, and after be headed. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               
                  Boniface Pope, 5. of that name, borne at Naples, gouerned  the Church fiue yeares.
               This was hee who firſt ordeined that offenders which ſaued themſelues in Churches,Priuiledges of Churches. ſhould haue Immunities and priuiledges, and that from thence they ſhould not be deliuered by force; but that ſuch as committed Sacriledge in all places ſhould be excommunicated.
            
            
               The waine and decaie of the Romane Empire.
               The Romane Empire began to fall. For whileſt Chriſtians were at warres one with an other, the Sarraſins occupied Egipt and Affrike, and do yet holde them. And in the ſpace of an 120. yeares all Aſia was loſt from the Chriſtians.Aſia loſt. Alſo the beſt part of Europe was occupied becauſe of the couetouſneſſe, diſcention, and careleſneſſe of the Emperours and Popes, which muſed and ſtudied vpon leſſe matters, namely to forge naughtie inuentions, and ordinances vpon ordinances.
               
                  Cyrus Biſhop of Alexandria, ſeeing the Sarraſins came into Egipt, and that there was no ſuccours on the part of the Emperour Heraclius a careleſſe man, yeelded himſelfe tributarie to

the ſaid Sarraſins at a certaine annuall ſumme,Honorius. Heraclius. vpon which condition they returned back. He was after accuſed before the Emperour, as he who tranſported the riches of Egipt to ſtraungers. Wherefore he was depoſed, and Manuell of Armenia ordeined in his place: who would not pay the ſaid tribute; whervpon the Sarraſins came againe into Egipt and occupied it. Which the Emperour vnderſtanding repented himſelfe, and ſent Cyrus in Embaſſage towards the Sarraſins, to cauſe them to goe out of Egipt, and they ſhould haue their ſaid annuall tribute. But one of them anſwered in theſe words: Canſt thou Cyrus (ſaide he) plucke downe this piller? He anſwered no. As impoſſible (ſaid he) it is that we ſhould leaue Egipt.
               
               
                  By like pride many Countries haue bene loſt. Many commonwealths by tributes haue bene maintained in peace. Faith promiſed euen to enemies muſt be kept.
               
            
            
               The encreaſe of the kingdome of France.
               From the yeare of ſaluation 514. hitherto, the kingdome of France was diuided into certaine kingdomes, becauſe the kings of France had many heires. One kingdome was called Auſtraſia,
                  Auſtraſia. & comprehended Lorraine and Brabant: and that which is betweene Rhene and Menſe, from Culloine to the Countrie of Alſaſia. The other called Neutria,
                  Neutria. which comprehends the Regions which are betwixt Menſe and Loire: and Paris was the chiefe Towne thereof. The third was called the kingdome of the Soiſons.
                  Soiſons. In this diuiſion of Gaul, the kingdome of Arles tooke alſo his beginning, which had vnder it Sauoy, the Countrey of the Switzes, Zepingen, Haspurge, and Dauphine, but at this time thoſe particular kingdomes returned into a Monarchie. Car.
               
               
                  
                     Gaul beganne to be called France.
                  
                  Dagobert the 11. King of France, poſſeſſed firſt Auſtraſia, after he ioyned vnto it the kingdome of Burgoine, and finally was made Lord almoſt of all France: and the name of France was then vniuerſall for all thoſe kingdomes. When Dagobert dwelt in Auſtraſia, his Pallace was in Alſatze. And he builded a Caſtle at Rufach called Eiſenburge: he alſo builded many Monaſteries

of S. Benet, wherevnto he gaue great reuenewes, and chiefly to that of Wittenburge, within 8. leagues of Strasbourge
                   on the ſide of Rhene: An other at Surbourge, two leagues from Wittenburge. Item an other at Haſelach, hard by Strasburge in the Weſt mountain. He alſo brought the church of Strasburge to a Biſhoppricke, and enriched it with great reuenewes.
               
                  Heereby note that France was then augmented when the Romane Empire in the Eaſt diminiſhed: So the Lord giueth viciſſitude, courſes and chaunges to the things of this world.
               
               The Hiſtories of France ſay that the bodies of S. Denis, S. Rhut, and S. Pleutherius, were found at this time by the meanes of an Hart, hunted by Dagobert.
               
               
                  It is no great maruell if the Kings of France be giuen to ſuperſtitions, ſeeing ſauadge Beaſts teach them, where holie bodies are.
               
               
                  Honorius Pope, born in Campania, ruled in Rome 13. yeares. He cauſed the Tēple of S. Peter to be adorned withal precious things, & enriched it with goodly Tables, couering them richly. He ordeined proceſſions on the Saterday with Letanies.
               
                  Pyrrhus Patriarche of Conſtantinople, a Monothelite heretike, was ſent into exile into the Country of Affrike. The Emperour Heraclius was ſeduced by him:Heraclius ſeduced.
                   and ſo gaue himſelfe to beleeue diuinations and enchauntments: and tooke his Niece to wife, his brothers daughter, making a lawe that it ſhould be ſo lawfull for all perſons.
               Yet euen in this time was the Church greatly diuided by the Artian Sect:The Artians yet. In ſuch ſort that almoſt each Towne had two Biſhops, the one an Arrian, the other a Catholike: and during thoſe diſſipations came Mahomet in the Eaſterne parts.
               
                  Mahomet an Arrabian, of a Marchant became a falſe Prophet, and finally a Captaine of Theeues and Robbers: with a Monke called Sergius, who was an Arrian & Neſtorian, & with one Iohn of Antioch an hereticke, and a Necromantian Iewe, he

compiled the Alcoran, vnto which the Sarraſins and Turkes ſhewe obedience.
            
            
               The Sect of the Mahometiſts.
               In the ſaid Alcoran is conteined that they of his Sect ſhall bee circumciſed, that they ſhall abſtaine from Swines fleſh, that they ſhall drinke no wine, and that certaine whole months they ſhall faſt. They take as many wiues as they can maintaine, and if they keepe company with others they die for it. Friday is their Sunday. No woman goeth in publike, vnleſſe ſhe haue her face couered. They hold Chriſt for a true & great Prophet, and make Moſes and Mahomet Chriſts companions. Vadianus.
               
               
                  Their Paradice.The Alcoran promiſeth to his followers a Paradice, where there are ſweet waters and of all ſorts of fruites, and goodly and fine women, alſo flouds of wine and honey; yea briefly all that ſenſualitie can wiſh; and there they ſhall enioy all good things eternally. Azoara. 2. and Naucler.
               
               They confeſſe the Reſurrection of the dead.
               By Teſtament they leaue and do great Almes.
               The Alcoran forbiddeth to take ſiluer or victuals for aduocating or pleading in Iudgement. They like to take no wiues of an other Religion then their owne: neither to giue their daughters to men of diuers Religions, vnles they conuert vnto theirs. Azoara. 3. And although by their Alcoran they be commanded to roote out all ſuch as contradict their lawe, yet they conſtrain no man to renie his Religion. Women muſt nouriſh and giue ſucke to their owne children, and that by the ſpace of 2. yeares. They are alſo commaunded to defend their religion by Armes and ſtrong hand. Azoara. 5. chap. 5. And by force of Armes to force the Chriſtians and Iewes to agree. Azoara 18. Euery one may take & ſley him whom he knoweth to be incredulous and an heretike in their lawe. Azoara. 10.
               
                  Reproach to Chriſtians.They reproach Chriſtians becauſe they worſhip others then one onely God, as the virgin Mary. & Images of Saints. Azoara. 13. In the 18. cha. he bringeth in God ſpeaking to his prophet Mahomet, & promiſing him ye
                   20. of their mē ſhal reſiſt againſt 200. & ye
                   100. of theirs,Infamous ceremonies. ſhall ouerthrow a 1000. of others. They are alſo cōmanded to waſh thēſelues, yea the priuie places after

they haue done their naturall neceſſities, and after they haue lyen with their wiues: and this muſt they euer do before they pray vnto God.Pilgrimages. Vpon commaundement they goe on pilgrimage into certaine places. Azoa. 2. They haue Saintes vnto whome they commend themſelues and their beaſts. See their Alcoran which reciteth great miracles.Their Prieſts and Religious men. They haue Prieſts and Religious men. Some Recluſes and contemplatiues which do nothing but pray & meditate, and theſe are moſt eſteemed.
               According to their foure Sects, they haue alſo foure opinions touching the ſaluation of ſoules.Diuers opininions of ſaluation. 1. Their Prieſts are of opinion that none are ſaued but in the lawe of Mahomet. 2. Some of their Religious are of opinion that the lawe profiteth nothing: but that euery man ſhall be ſaued by the grace of God, which alone is ſufficient to ſaluation, without the lawe and merites. 3. The Spiritualls and Speculatiues are of opinion, that euery one ſhall be ſaued by his owne workes and merites, with grace and the lawe. 4. There are others amongſt them, which ſay that euery one ſhall be ſaued in his owne lawe.
               
                  Where Ieſus Chriſt is not knowne, all Religion is vaine & vncertaine.
               
               Touching Ieſus Chriſt they hold him to be the ſonne of a virgin.What they hold of Chriſt. In the 5. Chap. There they make mention of the virgin Marie, and of her parents. Of S. Iohn Baptiſt, and of his Father Zacharie. In the 3. chap. at the beginning God is brought in ſpeaking and calling Ieſus Chriſt, his ſoule conferring his force and vertue vpon him. In the 11. chap. he calleth him Sent of God, the Spirit of God, and the word diuinely ſent to Mary, &c. They faſt euery yeare one whole moneth,Faſting. and one weeke very ſtraitly without eating or drinking in the day time: but after the Sun ſet, they eate & drinke euen till the day following. On the Friday they aſſemble all together,Friday. and obſerue it as carefully as the Iewes do the Saterday, or others the Sunday: and in each Towne there is a principal Temple which they called (Meſchat) into which they come that day after noone, as well Kings & Princes as the common people, and attentiuely pray vnto God. They which come not to this Church, or pray not when they come, are condemned in a certaine

ſumme of ſiluer when they are accuſed by the Guardes which they commit for that buſineſſe. See the Alcoran.
               
               As they pray, they torment themſelues pitiouſly in the continuall agitation of their bodies, and cries without ceaſing.
            
            
               The Pope and Mahomet.
               
                  Two Hornes.
                  Antichriſt his two hornes are there ſet vp one after an other, namely that of the Pope & of Mahomet: It were eaſie to conferre one of them with an other, both in doctrine and domination.
               
                  Heraclius had victorie againſt the Perſians, and brought againe Zacharias Patriarke of Ieruſalem and the holie Croſſe, firſt to Ieruſalem, and then to Conſtantinople: wherevpon the feaſt of the exaltatiō of the croſſe was ordeined & celebrated.
               Councells were about this time at Siuil and Toledo. 4.5. and 6.
               At the Councell of Toledo. 4. it was ordeined that all the Churches of Spaine ſhould followe the forme of the Romane Church touching praier, the Sacraments, and Maſſe.
               
                  One manner of ſinging Maſſe all ouer after the manner of Rome.
                  See Bullenger of the ſpring of errours. Lib. 2. chap. 8.
                  
               
               In the 16. chap. of the ſaid Councell, it is ordeined that the Apocalips ſhould be accounted Canonicall.
               In the ſaid Councell Prieſts were reprehended, becauſe after the Lordes praier, they communicated and bleſſed the people:That Prieſts might not communicate apart. wherefore in the 17. Chap. they are forbidden to communicate alone, but with all the aſſembly, after the ordinance of Ieſus Chriſt. It was alſo ordeined that after the Lords praier the bleſſing ſhould follow. And then only they ſhould receiue the Sacrament of the bodie and blood of Chriſt in this order: that is, the Prieſts and the Deacons ſhould make the Communion before the Aultar, the Clarkes in the hearts, and the people out of the heart.
               
                  The Maſſe yet was not as is at this day, wherein Prieſts communicate alone.
               
               
                  In the Councell of Bracare 1. and 2. held in Spaine, it was ordeined that if any did not confeſſe the Father, the Sonne, and the holy Ghoſt, three perſons to be one ſame ſubſtance, vertue and power, as the Apoſtolike & Catholike Church teacheth, ſhould be excommunicated and accurſed.
               In the 19. chap. If any beleeue ſoules and bodies to be ſubiect to the Starres as the Painims ſay, and the Priſcillianiſts maintaine, let them be excommunicated and accurſed.
               In the 36. chap. that they ſhould bury no dead bodies in Churches, but without.Burialls.
               
               The Councell of Bracare, 2. in the 14. chap. All they are anathematized which abſtaine from eating fleſh vpon ſuperſtition.
               The ſame was ordeined in the Councell of Toledo. 13.
               
                  Note by this which is ſaid, that the Spaniards more then any other, reſiſted the forbidding of meates and of ſingle life.
               
               
                  Dagobert King of France, raigned 14. yeares, and during  his raigne he gaue great reuenewes to Churches, and cauſed to be builded the Abbey of S. Denis in France, and placed there the three aforeſaid bodies, of S. Denis, Eleutherius, and Ruſticus, in Tombes couered with fine gold, and enriched with precious ſtones. And it wold hardly be beleeued the great riches of gold, ſiluer, and precious ſtones, the Townes and other goods which he gaue to the ſaid Church and Abbey of S. Denis, which they yet poſſeſſe at this day.
               He founded alſo the Abbey of S. Amande, nigh Tournay, and endowed it with great reuenewes. All his ſtudy was to gather, and whereſoeuer hee went to take Relickes to enrich the Abbey of S. Denis. In ſo much that for that cauſe hee was called the Theefe of Relikes:Theefe of Relikes. And as Clouis the firſt of that name had his truſt in S. Martine of Tours, ſo this had in the bodie of S. Hilarie of Poitiers; In ſo much that hauing taken and raſed the ſaid Towne & deſtroyed the Temples, yea that of S. Hilarie, he cauſed to carry the Coffin with other Relickes to S. Denis in France. The cauſe of this ſacking & ſpoile was, becauſe the Poitiers had giuen ſuccours, of people and ſiluer to the Gaſcoignes which rebelled againſt him.
               
                  Moreouer Dagobert was a man ſo giuen to women, that he Inſtituted a Colledge,A Colledge of faire women. whither hee cauſed to reſort the faireſt women, and apparelled them like Queenes: for which thing being reprehended of S. Amand, he ſent him to exile. But Gaguin ſaith he was after reuoked.
               
                  
                  Seuerin Pope, ruled at Rome two yeares. His ſtudy was to repaire Churches, to endowe them with many ornaments, and encreaſe the reuenewes therof. Supp. Chron. & Faſc. Temp.
               
               His election was ratified by Iſacheus exarche. For thē the election of Popes was nothing, vnleſſe it were authoriſed by the Emperour or his Lieftenant. Naucler.
               
               The treaſures of the Church of S. Iohn de Lateran, were pilled by Maurice Gouernor of Rome, & Iſacheus exarche of Italie: one part of the bootie was ſent to Conſtantinople to Heraclius. This was the yeare that the ſaid Heraclius endured that great wound of the Sarraſins. Naucler.
               
               
                   In the time of this Pope dyed Mahumet, the yeare 637. and after began to be worſhipped of his followers. Mahumet ſignifieth Fury or Indignation.
               
                  Aman Biſhop of Traict baptized Sigebert, the ſonne of Dagobert King of France. Chron.
               
               
                  Iohn Pope 4.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, 4. of that name, borne in Dalmatia, ruled at Rome about two yeares. He ordeined that whoſoeuer ſhould  take away any Church goods ſhould be bound to reſtore fourfold. Naucler.
               
               
                  Firſt Lent in England.The yeare 640. Lent began to be kept in England. Chro. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Rotharis King of Lombards was an Arrian, and all his people after his example. In ſo much that there was almoſt no Citie nor Towne which had not two Biſhops, the one a Catholicke, and the other an Arrian. Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Theodorus.
                  Theodorus a Grecian, the ſonne of Theodorus Biſhop of 
                  Ieruſalem, gouerned the Romane Church 6. yeares, 5. months, and 18. dayes. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Dagobert gaue to the Abbey of S. Denis a Faire and Market,Le Lendy. called Le Lendy, betwixt Paris and S. Denis.
               
               
                  The Emperour Heraclius being aged,Theodorus. Conſtantin. gaue truſt to Diuinations, and Enchauntments of diuels. This is the firſt Emperour that ruled in the Eaſt ſince the Empire was transferred thither, who hath hadde that infamie to haue loſt the Empire of Aſia, and to haue bene of the hereſie of the Monothelites and Eutechians. After he had thus polluted himſelfe by theſe arts, hereſies, and inceſt of his niece,The ſtraunge death of Heraclius.
                   he died of a newe and ſtraunge diſeaſe; namely, that the purſes of his teſticles turned vpſide downe, with the priuie member alwaies ſtiffe. Inſomuch that whenſoeuer he vttered his vrine, it ſprinkled his face, if a table had not beene placed about his nauell to driue it backe. Egnatius and others recite the ſame.
               
                  Constantine his ſonne of his firſt wife Eudoxia, ſucceeded in  the Empire, but his mother in lawe Martine, cauſed him to be poiſoned before he had raigned a yeare, and ſo ſhe raigned with her ſonne Heracleonas about two yeares.
               
                  Nauclerus rehearſeth that the ſaid Martine committed that fact, by the Councell of Pirrhus Biſhop of Constantinople an heretike, who returned from his exile of Affrike, after the death of the ſaid Heraclius. The Senate of Constantinople made the tongue of the ſaid Empreſſe to be cut out, and the noſe of the ſaid Heraclionas, and caſt them both into exile. They alſo cauſed Pyrrhus to bee moſt ſhamefully put to death, whom Paul ſucceeded, as wicked an heretike as his former predeceſſor.
               The Pope Theodorus in the Church of S. Peter, the Cleargie and the Church being preſent, excommunicated and declared the aboue named Paul Patriarke of Constantinople, an heretike, and his adherents: and hauing mingled wine with Inke in a Challice, he writ with his owne hand the excommunication, to ſignifie that it was inuiolable, as if Ieſus Chriſt had writ it with his owne bloud.
               
                  Conſider here how much the Church then, although it was wholly giuen to ſuperstitions, did abhorre ſuch as confounded the two natures in Christ.
               
               
                  
                  Conſtance.
                  The Searge at Eaſter.This Theodorus inſtituted the bleſſing of the Sierge on Eaſter Saterday.
               
                  
                  Constance Emperour, ſonne of the ſaid Conſtantine and of Gregorie his wife, (called otherwiſe by ſome, Conſtantine the 3.) raigned 28. yeares. He was a tyrant and an heretike and perſecuted the Catholiques. He fauoured the hereſie of Paul, Biſhop of Conſtantinople, & tirannized ouer the faithful, by impriſonment, exile, and other torments. Naucl. Chron. Abb. Vrſp, and Faſcic. temp.
               
               At this time were Vincent Biſhop of Beanuais, and Fourſy the King of Ireland his ſonne, who came into France with two of his brethren. Aubert Biſhop of Cambray, Gertrude & others, all which after their deathes were called Saints.
               
                  
                  Reliques ſold to giue to the poore.
                  Clouis the 12. King of France, raigned 17. yeares. This King in a time of famine tooke all the gold and ſiluer wherwith his father Dagobert had adorned the Chappels of Martyrs, yea, and one of the Armes of S. Denis, to giue to the poore to relieue them.
               For that cauſe the Monkes deuiſed, that he became a foole, and out of his wittes in the ende of his dayes. Chron. de Regib. Fr.
               
               
                  
                  Martin Pope, firſt of that name, an Italian, ruled at Rome ſixe yeares and more. At the beginning of his Popedome he ſent Meſſengers to Conſtantinople to Paul the Patriarke, to reduce him from his hereſie: but ſo much wanted therein his amendment, that euen abuſing the authority of the Emperor (an heretike like himſelfe) hee cauſed the ſaide meſſengers to bee throwne out:A Councell againſt the Monothelite heretikes. whereat the Pope Martin being mooued, aſſembled a Councell at Rome, of 150. Biſhops, and condemned Paul the heretike, agreeing with the condemnation of Pyrrhus, Cyrus, Sergius, and others. Then the Emperour Conſtance ſent Olimpus Exarke into Italie, and commaunded him to make haſte, either to ſley Pope Martin, or to take him and bring him. Againe, Conſtance ſent to Rome Theodorus Calliopa, who by ſubtiltie tooke the Pope, and hauing bound him in chaines brought him to Conſtantinople, and from thence was hee baniſhed and ſent into a Citie of Pontus, where he finiſhed

his daies after many and great miſeries,Eugenius.
                  The death of Pope Martin. Collation of benifices. Profeſſion and habits for Nunnes inuented. and the ſeat was vacant three moneths. Supp. Chron.
               
               In this time were held the Councell of Toledo, 8.9. and 10. In the 10. there was an ordinance againſt Biſhops which gaue Monaſteries and benefices Eccleſiaſtical to their parents, which was now made of no valewe. In the 4. Chap. it was ordained that Nunnes ſhould make a profeſſion and vow of chaſtitie, and that they ſhould be apparelled in an other ſort from others, to be knowne.
               
                  Ieruſalem was taken by the Mahometiſts;
                  Ieruſalē taken Some (as Nauclerus) ſay that it was in the time of Agathon Pope, and of the Emperour Conſtantine the ſonne of this Conſtance.
               
               
                  Rhodes taken by the Sarraſins; The Iles Ciclades were waſted by them, and Sicile forraged. Naucl.
               
               At Rome there appeared great ſignes: fire fel from heauen, and great thunder, lightnings, and invndations of waters: whereof great peſtilence followed. Faſci. Temp. and Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Eugenius Pope, the firſt of that name, a Romane, ruled at  
                  Rome about three yeares. He ordained that Biſhops ſhould haue priſons to puniſh crimes and faults of Clarkes. That Prieſts houſes ſhould be ſcituate, and builded nigh Churches.Priſons Eccleſiaſticall. 
                  Supp. Chron. That none bee kept in Monaſteries againſt their wills.
               One named Peter ſucceeded Paul the heretike at Conſtantinople, and was of the ſame hereſie. His Letters were recited at Rome: and the Pope was hindered by the people from celebrating, vntil he had caſt them away: becauſe they denied two natures in Chriſt. Naucler.
               
               
                  Claudus Arch-biſhop of Beſancon,
                  
                     S. Claud. afterward Abbot of the Abbey of S. Eugenius, was renowmed about this time through Burgoine. Faſci. temp. And after his death, they made that abhominable Idoll which is at S. Claud. in the Countie of Burgoine.
               
               The children of Arikert King of the Lombards, whileſt they ſtroue one with an other, the one was ſlain, and the other a fugitiue: firſt into Bauiere, after into France. Naucl.
               
               
                  
                  Conſtantin. Vitalian.At the Councell of Calibone, in the Prouince of Narbone, held in this time. Theodoric Biſhop of Arles, was accuſed to haue done ſomewhat againſt the Eccleſiaſticall ſtatutes and Canons, and becauſe he appeared not, hee was ſuſpended out of his Biſhoppricke vntill the next Councell.
               
                  Vitalian Pope, an Italian, ruled at Rome 14. yeares, and more.
               It was he who firſt ordained ſinging in the Romane Church, and agreed it with Organes by the conſent of Rodoaldus, King of the Lombards,
                  The King of Hungarie ſlaine in adulterie. who beeing taken in adulterie with a wife of Lombardie, was ſlaine by her husband.
               It is not found that hitherto the Romane Church had full domination in the Towne of Rome, other goodly things it pretendeth ſince the death of Constantine the great, vnleſſe it were vnder certaine too ſoft Emperours,Rome hitherto was not in the rule of Popes. and yet then not much. But to this 
                     Ʋitalian, the Emperour by ſingular grace confirmed the priuiledges of the Church, which notwithſtanding he after brake, and made them of no force, Faſci. temp. and Naucler.
               
               
                  Constant the Emperor, cauſed to be aſſembled a Sinode, and abiured his hereſie, and after came to Rome with a great company with Cierges in their hands, and ſo entred into the Temple, but he ſhewed well it was not vpon deuotion, but to ſee where the Treaſures were, to take and carrie them away. Hee was there to viſit it fiue dayes. Afterward hee tooke away all that was delicate in his eyes. He tooke away more ornaments and riches, he alone in 7. dayes, then the Barbarians had done in 258. yeares. Naucl. and Supp. Chron.
               
               He was greatly hated at Constantinople for his cruelties, and for cauſing to die in exile Pope Martin in ſuch miſerie, and for cutting the tongue and hand from Maximin: Wherefore he ſought againe to bring the Emperiall ſeate to Rome, and kept his Court ſixe yeares in Sicilie, Abb. Ʋrsperg. where hee did many great euills, as is recited by Paulus Diaconus.
               
               He was ſlaine in Sicilie being in the Bathes, this yeare, 669. and of his Empire, 27.
               
                  
                  Mizizius otherwiſe called Mitius, or Miſſeſſius,
                  Conſtantin the fourth. Adeonatus. was conſtituted Emperour, and raigned about ſixe moneths.
               
                  Conſtantine the fourth ſonne of Constant,
                  Pogonatus. commonly called Le Barbu, the bearded, came againſt him and cauſed him to die, and all ſuch as had bene of the conſpiracie againſt his father. After theſe things were done, he raigned from the beginning with his brethren, Tiberius and Heraclius. Abb. Ʋrsp. But after, according to Naucler. alleadging Blundus and Pius his abbreuiator, he cauſed their noſes to be cut off, leaſt they ſhould after come to the Empire: ſo that his ſonne Iuſtinian might raigne.
               The Councell of Toledo, 11. in this time.
               
                  Dado Biſhop of Ruoan, writ three bookes of the life of S. Eloy Biſhop of Noyon. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Clotaire, the third of that name, and the 13 king of France,
                   raigned foure yeares.
               
                  Note Reader, touching the Kings of France which follow, that from this Clotaire vntill Pipin and Charlemaine, they did nothing worthy of any great memorie, but became vnprofitable and full of cowardiſe, ſo that they had not like authoritie, as either their predeceſſors or ſucceſſors.
               
               They had as it were nothing but the bare names and titles of Kings. For the Maiors or Prouoſtes of the Pallace, which then were as it were the Conſtables, or great Maiſters, had the adminiſtration of all matters of the Kingdome, as well thoſe of warre, as of peace; and all was done by their commaundement and ordinance.
               
                  Childeric ſecond of that name, the 14. King of France, raigned two yeares. Hee was by treaſon ſlaine for his crueltie;  and his wife bigge with childe, was alſo ſlaine. The Annalls of France.
               
               
                  Adeonatus or Deodatus Pope, borne at Rome, ruled there foure yeares and more. His father was a Monke called Iouian
                   or Iouinian. Hee amplified the Monaſterie of Saint Eraſmus, in the Mount Coelius, wherein he was a Monke. Hee inſtituted againſt Thunders and Tempeſts (which then happened)

many Supplications and Letanies.Conſtantin the fourth Agathon. 
                  Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Donus Pope, a Romane, ruled at Rome three yeares. After  ſome a yeare and fiue monethes. Hee cauſed S. Peters Court to be paued with Marble, and ſo dedicated the Church of the Apoſtles, and of S. Euphemia, and greatly augmented the honour and dignities of the Cleargie.
               The ſixt Councell of Conſtantinople, was called vnder this Pope, began vnder Agathon, and ended vnder Leon the ſecond.
               Here the Church of Rauenna agreed not with the Romane Church, beeing not ſubiect vnto her, but called chiefe of it ſelfe, did willingly ſubiect her ſelfe for the integritie of this Pope, and that with the conſent of Reparatus, then Biſhop of Rauenna.
                  Rauenna ſubiect to the Romane ſea by force. In the ſecond volume of Councels. But their ſucceſſors afterward would haue recouered this libertie and auncient freedome againe. Wherfore there was a great and long cōtention betwixt the ſaid Churches of Rome and Rauenna. Finally the Chuch of Rauenna was made ſubiect by violence. For Iuſtinian the ſecond, inducted and inuited by the Pope, beſieged the Towne, and their goods were pilled, many baniſhed, and their Biſhop which then was, called Felix, had his eyes put out with an hotte Iron, and was after ſent into exile into the Ile of Pontus. Some ſay this happened in Agathons time.
               
                  
                  Theodorike the fifteenth King of Fraunce, raigned fourteene yeares: hee was drawne out of the Monaſterie of Saint Denis, where hee had beene a Monke. Hee founded the Abbey of S. 
                     Ʋaast at Arras, and was buried there, as ſhall be ſaid.
               
                  Agathon Pope, a Sicilian, a Monke before, ruled at Rome two yeares and an halfe, or foure yeares after Naucler. It was he that ordained that the decree of the Romane ſea ſhould be ſerued as proceeding from the mouth of S. Peter, Diſt. 19. Chap. Sic omnes.
               
               
                  The beginning if leaden ſeales.In this time the Romane Church encreaſed much, and the Letters of that ſea were ſealed yet with waxe, but after with leade.
               
                  The ſixt generall Councell held at Conſtantinople,
                  Conſtantin the fourth Adeonatus. was of 289. Biſhops againſt the Monothelites, which denied two wills and natures in Chriſt.
               
                  Gregorie or George, Biſhop of Conſtantinople, left his hereſie▪ but Machirus Biſhop of Antioche, left it not. Wherefore hee was caſt out of his Biſhoppricke. The Pope Agathon ſent to the Councell, Iohn Biſhop Portuenſis, and Iohn Deacon. And the diſſention that then was betwixt the Eaſt church and the Weſt, was appeaſed. In this Councell,The approbation of the Maſſe in Latin Marriage permitted to ſome, and forbidden to others. 
                  Iohn Biſhop Portuenſis, celebrated the firſt Maſſe in Latine, and the vſe and order thereof was allowed of the ſaid Councell. There alſo the Prieſts of Greece were permitted to liue in marriage, and to haue lawfull wiues; but not the Prieſts of the Weſt Churches.
               The Author of the booke called Faſciculus temp. yeeldeth a reaſon therof; ſaying that willingly he had already vowed chaſtitie vnder Gregorie. But what ſhould they doo if they had not the gift of continencie? And moreouer, could they vowe for others that came after them? Laſtly, they vowed vppon conſtraint and authoritie of Councells, as appeares aboue.
               It was there alſo ordained,Who ought to carry children to Baptiſme. that none ſhould beare a child to be baptiſed, vnleſſe he knew the Lords prayer, and the beliefe of the faithfull.
               In the ſecond volume of Councells. Item, not to vowe not to marrie, and that Prieſts which ſeperate themſelues from their wiues becauſe of their ſacred orders, ſhould bee excluded from the Communion. Peter Ʋiret in the Dialogue to them of Orbe.
               
            
            
               A Briefe of the ſixe generall Councells.
               
               Hitherto there hath beene held ſixe generall Concells. The firſt at Nicene was of 318. Biſhoppes, againſt Arrius, vnder Silueſter and Constantine the great. The ſecond at Conſtantinople, of 150. Biſhops, vnder Gratian and Theodoſius
                  
Emperours,Conſtantin the fourth. Agathon. and Damaſus, againſt Macedonius Biſhop of Conſtantinople, and Eudoxius, who denied the ſpirit of God. The third was in Epheſus,
                  One perſon in Chriſt. of 200. Biſhops, vnder Celestine, Sixtus, and Theodoſius the great, againſt Nestorius Biſhop of Conſtantinople, who called the virgin Mary the mother of Chriſt, man, but not God. The fourth in Calcedon, of 360. Biſhops vnder Leo the Pope, and Martine the Emperour, againſt Eutiches Abbot of Conſtantinople, who denied two natures in Chriſt. The fift was vnder Iuſtinian the Emperour,Two natures in chriſt, diuine, and humane. The virgin Marie the mother of God. and Vigilius Pope, againſt Theodorus and other heretikes; who ſaid that the virgin Marie did onely bring forth a man, and not God and man. There it was ordained that iuſtly and truly the virgin Marie is called the mother of God. The ſixt Councell was at Conſtantinople againſt Gregorie or George, and Machairus, and Cirus, Sergius,
                  Two wills in Chriſt. 
                  Honorius, Pirrhus, Paulus, Petus, Biſhops which denied two willes, as it is ſaid, Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Theodorus Arch-biſhop of Rauenna, was a great Almesgiuer, and very deſirous to keepe the Cleargie in good order: for the which hee was hated. In ſo much, that on a Chriſtmas day as he was going to celebrate Maſſe, he was left of all, whereat beeing much grieued, hee went towards Agathon and willingly ſubiected his Church to the Romanes. Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Leger Biſhop of Anthun was in this time.
               
                  Perſecution in France.
                  Ebroine Prince of the Pallace of France vnder Theoderic, cauſed Legier his eyes to be plucked out, the ſoles of his feete taken away, and his tongue and lips cut off, and at laſt cut off his head, and his brother Guerin was ſtoned to death. This Ebroine caſt Lambert out of the Biſhoppricke of 
                     Ʋtrich. Ame Biſhop of Sens was baniſhed by Ebroine. Chron. 519. In this time there was a great peſtilence at Rome, whereof Agathon died, and the Sea was vacant a yeare, ſeuen moneths, and fiue dayes.
               
                  
                  Leo the 2.
                  
                  Leo Pope, the ſecond of that name a Sicilian, raigned two yeares, or thereabouts. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               After his death the Sea was vacant 11. monethes. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  This Pope was cunning in Greeke and Latine,Cōſtant. 4.
                   and made many Epiſtles and Homilies. He ordained that after the Agnus Dei of the Maſſe, they ſhould giue the Paxe to kiſſe vnto the Aſſiſtants. Supp. Chron. Faſci. Temp.
               
               Hee permitted to baptiſe at all times in caſe of neceſſitie.
               He ordained by the authoritie of the Emperour, that the election of the Biſhop of Rauenna ſhould not be good, if the Romane Pope did not approoue it: but that the Arch-biſhop ſhould pay nothing for his Inueſture;The vſe of the Mantle. for many miſchiefes came of this largition. Supp. Chron. and Faſci. Temp.
               
               The Councell of Toledo 12. and 13. in this time,Such as forbad eating of fleſh are excōmunicated. wherein ſuch were anathematized as forbad eating of fleſh. P. Ʋirel.
               
               
                  This is meant as it was ordained in the 14. Chapter of the Councell of Bracar. 2. See aboue.
               
               
                  Benet Pope, ſecond of that name, a Romane,Benet. 2.
                   ruled at Rome 10 moneths. He was humble and ſoft. Naucler.
                  
               
               He reſtored at his great charges, the Churches of S. Peter and S. Laurence: of S. 
                     Ʋalentin, and S. Marie: aux Martyrs. Supp. Chron. and gaue to the ſaid Churches, many Veſſels of Golde and Siluer, and many veſtments and ornaments.
            
            
               The election of the Pope taken from the Emperour.
               
               The Emperour Conſtantine mooued with the Popes ſanctetie,The election of the Pope. ordained that the election of the Pope from thence forward made of the Cleargie and Romane people, ſhould bee ſtable and ſure without any more attending the authoritie of the Emperour, or of his Lief-tenant Exarche of Italie; without whoſe authoritie before it was not ratified. Naucl. and Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Iohn Pope, fift of that name, of Antioche in Siria,
                  Iohn. 5. gouerned

the Romane Church a yeare: a man moderate, and ſubiect to diſeaſes.
               
                   He was conſecrated (as alſo was Leo the ſecond) by three Biſhops,An other ceremonie of conſecrating the Pope. of Ostia, Portenſis, and Veliterus. And this maner was alwaies after obſerued. The Biſhop of Oſtia as hee ſung Maſſe put the Crowne on his head.
               
                  Before hee was onely ledde to the Chaire of S. Peter, and beeing there ſet, he was holden the true Pope, without other ceremonie.
               
               The Emperour Conſtantine died at Conſtantinople, hauing raigned 17. yeares.
               
                  
                  Conon Pope, borne at Rome, gouerned the Church of Rome one yeare.Conon. 
                  Faſci. temp.
               
               After the death of Pope Iohn the fift, there was great contention about the Popes election: for the people (or the Cleargie) elected one called Peter, Archbiſhoppe. The Romane Gendarmie corrupted by ſiluer, did chuſe Theodorus a Prieſt, a pernitious man: After long ſtrife betwixt theſe two, Conon by all their agreements was confirmed.
               He fell ſicke incontinently after his election: wherevpon he died. Some ſaid he would neuer occupie himſelfe in ſecular matters.
               
                  Iuſtinian, or Iustin. 2.
                  
                  Iuſtinian, or Iuſtin, Emperour, ſecond of that name, ſonne of Conſtantine the fourth, began to raigne of the age of 16. yeares. Hee gouerned himſelfe ſo ill, that after tenne yeares of his raigne hee was baniſhed. See the Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  
                     A ſecond Herodias.
                  Quilian, an holy Scottiſhman, preached in Franconia. He conuerted Gosbertaine Duke of the ſame Countrey, who kept Ceilam, (Sillam or Gelana) his brothers wife. And for that he preached that he ought to leaue her, ſhe made him ſecretly be ſlaine. Faſci. temp. and Sigeb.
               
               
                  Beda the Venerable in this time, made many bookes, and wrote the liues of many Saints, Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  
                  Sergius Pope, a Sirian, ruled at Rome tenne yeares;Iuſtinian. after  
                  Chron. Euſeb. a noble reſtorer of Churches.
               There was a great contention and debate for the election of the Pope after the death of Conon.
                  Sergius Pope.
                   Some had choſen Theodorus, a very rich man. Others, Paſcall Arch-deacon, who had promiſed a great ſumme of money to Iohn Platina, Exarche, if hee were choſen. Each of them maintained his election ambitiouſly. But the Cleargie and Romane people ſeeing that this ſedition would cauſe effuſion of bloud, tooke counſell to remedie it. Wherefore they choſe Sergius, reiecting the two others.
               The ſaid Sergius was carried into the Church of Laterane, and hauing broken the gates, they caſt out the factious, and conſtrained Theodorus and Paſcall to ſalute Sergius Pope, and approoue his election. Paſcal accuſed and conuicted of Art Magicke, was ſent to a Monaſterie, and there died obſtinate Naucler.
               
               It is attributed vnto him, to haue founded a good part of the holy Croſſe, which euery yeare they worſhip at Rome. Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Beleeue this who liſt. For in the time of Heraclius the Emperour, it was carried to Conſtantinople.
                  
               
               The Church of Aquilea not wholly approouing the firſt, after Naucler. Chron. Segeb. Paul. Diac. or ſixt, after (Faſci. Temp.) Councell of Conſtantinople, was reduced by Sergius.
               
               In this time the Saxons, yet Painims,Saxons. receiued the Chriſtian Faith by the meanes of this Sergius. After Suppl. Chron.
               
               The yeare 688. Ebroine a French Tyrant was ſlaine in his bedde.
               
                  Theodoricke the King of Franc, was buried in the Abbey of S. Vaast of Arras, whereof hee was founded, with his wife, called in her Epitaph, Doda.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Clouis, third of that name, King of France, 16. raigned 14. yeares.
               
                  The Friſons conuerted to the faith.
                  Sergius ſent Vmbred to the Friſons to conuert them to the faith. Rabed their Duke would not accord thereunto: alleadging that it were more meete to followe many then fewe. But afterward beeing vanquiſhed in warre by Pippin Grandmaiſter of Fraunce, the Friſons receiued the Faith, beeing inſtructed by Willibrot Biſhoppe, or Clement after ſome.
               The Emperour Iustinian broke his faith giuen to the Sarraſins, and fought againſt them, wherein he was not happie. And after without neceſſitie brake the peace which his father hadde made with the Bulgarians, and entered  into the one and the other Miſia, where hee put all to fire and ſword:
                     Iustinian Diſloyall and cruell. but the Bulgarians ceazed vppon the paſſages and ſtraights, and ſhut them in ſo well, that they conſtrained them to doo what they would. Hee beeing returned to Conſtantinople, did ſo many euils to the Chriſtians that euerie one hated him, ſo that they conſpired againſt him, and chaſed him away.
               
                  
                  Leontius vſurped the Empire, tooke Iustinian, and cut his noſthrills,Leontius. and ſent him into exile into Pontus, and raigned three yeares. Some call him Leond ſecond. Emperour. 68.
               The Sarraſins ſeeing ſuch troubles among the Chriſtians, came into Affrica.
               
               
                  
                  Childebert, ſecond of that name, 17. King of France, raigned 18. yeares. Hee founded the Abbey of S. Albane in Angiers.
               
               
                  Lambert Biſhop of Liege, was reuoked from exile, but becauſe hee reprehended the adulterie of Pippin, hee was cruelly ſlaine by Dodon, brother of the Adultereſſe. The ſaide Dodon and his complices periſhed miſerably within a yeare. Hubert ſucceeded the Biſhop of Liege. The Hiſtories of France.
               
               
                  Abſimarus
                  Abſimarus, otherwiſe called Tiberius, borne at Constantinople, was choſen Emperour by the Souldiours

for the negligence which they ſawe in Leontius,
                  Iohn 6. that no aide was ſent vnto them for the guard of Affrike, which they had recouered of the Sarraſins. Abſimarus then came from Conſtantinople and tooke Leontius, and cut off his noſe, and impriſoned him in a Monaſterie. He raigned ſeuen yeares. Naucler. Abb. Ʋrsp.
               
               
                  Iohn Pope, ſixt of that name, a Grecian, ruled at Rome 3. yeares. After the maner of other Popes,The deuotion of Popes. he was very curious to repaire Churches, to adorne Aultars, and redeeme captiues with the papall treaſure. Some write him a Martyr, vnder the kings of Lombardie, for defending the rights of the church. Faſci. temp.
               
               The Venetians at this time beganne to haue a Duke to hinder quarells and diſorders of ſuch as gouerned,The firſt Duke of Venice. and the enuie which the Lombards bare to their libertie: but after, as it were repenting themſelues, they cauſed many of their firſt Dukes to die. Moreouer, the Dukes ornaments differed not from thoſe of a King, and all the Senates Letters, the publication of them were in the Dukes name: yet he had not the bridle looſe for a full authoritie.
               
                  Weſtfalia after ſome, was conuerted to the faith about this time.
               
                  Iohn Pope, 7. of that name, ruled at Rome two or three  yeares, diligent to adorne and repaire Churches.
               
                  This is from henceforth the chiefeſt ſtudio of Popes and Papiſts.
               
               
                  Iustinian hauing had ſuccours from Bulgaria and Turkey, came to Conſtantinople, and againe obtained the Empire and raigned ſixe yeares. He cauſed to be ſet out of priſon, Leontius and Tiberius beeing bound with chaines, which hee made to be tied to the tailes of horſes, and being ſo drawne through the ſtreetes, were brought againe and troden vnder feete, and finally cauſed them to be beheaded. All their partners were put to diuers torments, and great vengeance vſed towards them. He put out the eyes of Gallinicus Patriarke of Constantinople,
                  
and ſent him to Rome into exile,Iustinian. and in his place appointed Cyrus Abbot, who had aſſiſted him when he was in exile, and foretold him his reſtitution.
               
                  Sarraſins in Graneda.The Sarraſins vnderſtanding the debates betwixt the Emperours, occupied againe Affrike and Libbia, and a part of the kingdome of Spaine, and the kingdome of Graneda. Supp. Chrn. and Naucl.
               
               The faith began almoſt to bee cleane extinct in the Eaſt, becauſe of the Lawe of Mahomet.
               
               
                  Beda the Venerable, writ then to the Chriſtians Princes, to driue the Sarraſins out of Spaine, but he ſpake to the deafe.
               
                  
                  Siſinnius Pope, otherwiſe Soſinus a Sirian, ruled onely 20. dayes.Siſinnius. For being tormented with the Gout both in feete and hands, and not being able to eate, he died ſuddenly.
               
                  Schiſme the ſeuenth.The 7. ſchiſme was betwixt him and Dioſcorus, and a great combat for the Papacie. The ſaid ſchiſme continued long time by his ſucceſſors.
               A Famine at Rome by the ſpace of three yeares, ſharpe and rude.
               
                  
                  Conſtantine Pope, a Sirian, ruled at Rome ſeuen yeares, greatly beloued of euery one;Conſtantine. for he helped the people much during this famine.
               
                  
                     Iuſtinian. kiſſeth the Popes feete.
                  Iuſtinian commaunded him to come to him to Conſtantinople, which hee did, and being arriued the Emperour embraced him, and falling on the earth kiſſed his feete, and demaunded pardon of him for all his faults, and that he would pray to God for him: and after receiued the Eucharist of him, and then were renewed and confirmed the priuiledges of the the Romane Church. Supp. Chron. Abb. Ʋrsp.
               
               
                  Iuſtinian chaunged nothing his life paſſed, but that hee bare himſelfe otherwiſe towards the Romane Sea then he was wont to doo, and maintained it. For vnderſtanding that Felix Arch-biſhop of Rauenna, would not yeeld accuſtomed obedience to the Pope, that was, to ſend a certaine breuiat, wherein he ſhould acknowledge his obedience due, and a certaine ſumme of money: the Emperour ſent a Captaine to Rauenna called Theodorus, who reprehended Felix, and ſent him bound

to Conſtantinople; who was afterward ſent into exile into Pontus, and after, both his eyes were put out. Many Citizens alſo of Rauenna were exiled with him, and others put to death, and their goods confiſcate, and the Towne taken by force, as it is aboue ſaid. Naucl.
               
               
                  Conſtantine admoniſhed Iuſtinian to attempt nothing againſt Phillippicus who was exiled into Pontus; wherevnto notwithſtanding, after hee obeyed not, but ſent againſt him: but his people followed the part of Phillippicus, and they came to Conſtantinople, whom Iustinian met.
               
                  Phillippicus Bardanius, Captaine of the warre, had the victorie  of Iustinian,
                  Phillippicus. and cauſed his and his ſonnes head to be cut off, and raigned Emperour a yeare and fiue monethes. He was of the Sect of the Monothelites, and ſent Cyrus a Catholique Biſhop into exile into Pontus: or as Paul Diaconus ſaith, into his Abbey, and appointed Arch-biſhop in his place, one Iohn, a Monke of his Sect. Supp. Chron.
               
            
            
               The beginning of the contention for the Images of Saints.
               
                  Phillippicus made an Edict,Againſt Images. that all the Images of Saints ſhould be taken from Churches, and that by the conſent of Iohn, Patriarke of Conſtantinople; for which cauſe Conſtantine Pope excommunicated them, and declared them heretikes in a Sinode at Rome: hee likewiſe ordained that the Image of the ſaid Emperour ſhould not be receiued, nor ingrauen in Gold, Siluer, Braſſe, or Leade; no not his name nor his figure ſhould not be receiued, nor mention made of him in the praiers of their Maſſe. Abb. Ʋrſp.
               
               
                  Idolatrie findes the Pope his Defender. But it is no maruell: Seeing the ſecond Commaundement, Thou ſhalt make thee no grauen Image, &c. is omitted in the Commandements which the Romane Church approoueth, which is a ſacriledge againſt the word of God.
                  
                     
                     Anaſtatius Theodoſius the 3. Leo the 3.Note that from henceforward the Romaniſts condemne for heretikes ſuch as agree not to their opinions.
               
               
                   On the euen of Pentecoſt, the Emperour Phillipicus after he had dined, as he was about to repoſe himſelfe, was taken and bound, and his eyes put out. 
                     Ʋrsp.
               
               
                  Anaſtatius, or Arthemius, was choſen Emperour, and raigned three yeares.
               He hauing ſent an Armie into Egipt againſt the Sarraſins, the ſouldiers created an other Emperour called Theodoſius, who comming to the Empire, cauſed Anaſtatius to be made a Prieſt, to the end he might no more thinke of the Empire. Yet after, thinking to returne thither by the helpe of the Bulgarians, hee was drawne out.
               
                  
                  Dagobert, ſecond of that name, the 18. King of France, raigned 14. yeares.
               
                  
                  Gregorie Pope, ſecond of that name, a Romane, ruled 16. yeares and 8. moneths. Naucler.
               
               Hee ſent Boniface (otherwiſe called Wenefride) an Engliſh Monke, into Friſia to preach the faith, where hee was martyred, and where before one called Vuillibrordus hadde preached in the time of Pope Sergius. Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Tiber ouerflowing his bankes at Rome, deſtroyed the countrie. Gregorie ouer all the Towne made often ſupplications and proceſſions.
               
                  
                  Theodoſius, third of that name, borne at Constantinople, obtained victorie againſt Anaſtatius, and conſtrained him to leaue the Empire, and make himſelfe a Monke, and raigned one yeare. Paulus. Diacon.
               
               He cauſed againe Images to be reſtored vnto Temples, which Phillippicus had taken away, and therefore he was held for a good Catholique.
               
                  
                  Hee is the 37. Emperour.
                  Leon, an Iſaurian by Nation, third of that name, chiefe of the Army which was in the Eaſt againſt the Sarraſins, depriued

                  Theodoſius of his Empire, and raigned 24. yeares.Gregory. 2. Leo 3. He was called Iconomachus, that is to ſay, an Impugner of Images.
               
                  Conſtantinople was beſieged three yeares by the Sarraſins and Arabians, but they which beſieged them bare as much euil,The Sarraſins beſieged Conſtantinople. as the beſieged, becauſe of famine and peſtilence. There was alſo a great famine in the Towne: In ſo much that ſome write that there dyed 30000. perſons. After the ſiege was leuied,Images taken away. 
                  Leon went into Sicilia and Italie, and beganne to caſt Images out of their Churches. This was the 10. yeare of his Empire.
               The Emperour Leon made an Edict to take away & burne all the Images, Gregorie oppoſed himſelfe againſt it,Sedition at Rauenna for Images. and gaue commaundement to all Chriſtians not to obey the ſaid Edict: In ſo much that they of Rauenna and the 
                     Ʋenetians, rebelled, wherein the Exarche and his ſonne were ſlaine. Supp. Chro. Rome and as it were all Italie, withdrew their obedience from the Emperour, and would paie him no taxes nor tributes. Leo notwithſtanding cauſed to be publiſhed againe; That all Images and ſtatues of gold, ſiluer or braſſe, marble & wood, ſhould be brought into the Market place, and incontinently burnt, ordeining the paine of death to the gainſaiers. Hee depriued Germaine Patriarke of Conſtantinople of his dignitie.
               
                  Heere beginne Popes to lift vp their hornes againſt Emperours, and to oppoſe themſelues againſt them. For this Pope durſt excommunicate the Emperour Leo the third, in full Sinode, becauſe he deſired to aboliſh the adoration of Images.
               
               The office of Exerchate ceaſed then in Italie,
                  The end of the Patriarkeſhip in Italie. which had endured 164. yeares or thereabouts, and was occupied of the Lombards. Supp. Chron. and Naucler.
               
            
            
               Touching the Kings of France.
               
               Becauſe of the great troubles which at this time were in the kingdom of France, the greateſt part of the kings of France was created after the appetite of him who was maiſter of the

Pallace.Leo. 3. Gregory. 2.
                   The kings had but the title & their pleaſures to build Monaſteries and Temples as they thought good. This Maiſter of the Pallace had the Gendarmie in his power,The great Maiſter of the Pallace. as the Gardian and Protector of the dignitie royall. This endured vntill theſe  maner of kings were extinct; and that the adminiſtratiō Royall was deuolued into the family of Pippin le Court, which is the 22. king of France, the ſonne of Charles Marteil, Maiſter of the Pallace, baſtard ſonne of Pippin le Gros Duke of Auſtraſia, a valiant man, and an excellent warriour.
               
                  
                  Theodoricke Cala, the 20. king of France, had the title and dignitie of a king, and raigned 15. yeares.
               The Sarraſins of Spaine (which they had occupied) came into France, being called by Erido king of Aquitane, who felt himſelfe too weake to reſiſt Charles Martel: Theſe Sarrazins diſcended in number 400000. with their wiues, children, and ſeruants, as meaning to occupie all France: waſting & deſtroying all places where they came. Endo who was their hoſte to inuite them thither, ſeeing ſo great a multitude, made an agreement and retyred on the ſide of France: And Charles Martel met theſe Sarraſins in Tourrain, and made an incredible ſlaughter of them: So that their king Abdirama was there ſlaine: and on the ſide of France there were no more ſlaine but 1500.
               It ſhould be an incredible thing, if beſides the Hiſtoriographers of France, ſtraunge writers had not witneſſed the ſame, this ſo miraculous a deliuerance from ſo barbarous and horrible a multitude, beeing ſo autenticke and ſo generally knowne.
               The Eccleciaſtical people of France durſt make the world beleeue (with lye and all) that this Charles Martel was damned, becauſe hee exacted certaine tenths of the goods of the Church, to help the charges of this ſo daungerous a warre.
               
                  Can there any Ingratitude or Couetouſneſſe be greater then is in this Papall Prieſthood?
               
               
                  Eucherius Biſhop of Lion, of great authoritie, a little after the death of Charles Martel, namely the yeare 742. ſaith, hee

ſawe in a viſion Charles Martel in the paines of hell:Leo. 3. becauſe he had vſurped the goods of the Church, and had not reſtored them as he promiſed. Faſci. temp. And others recite it.
               
                  A lye which is for the profit of the Prieſts kitchin, Incontinently findes his witneſſes, yea by horrible abſurdities.
               
               
                  Iohn Damaſcene was in this time. Eutrop. and maintained the Popes quarrels touching Images.
               
                  Gregorie Pope, third of that name, a Sirian, gouerned at  
                  Rome 10. yeares and more.Gregory. 3.
               
               This Pope was cauſe that all Italie departed from the domination of the Empire, becauſe Leon the Empeour would that in Churches there ſhould be no Images of Saints. And therefore the Pope made a Councell at Rome to be held, where were aſſembled as many Biſhops as hee could get: And there it was decreed, that we may lawfully honour Images. And a generall ſentence was pronounced againſt all violators and gainſaiers of their Canonike concluſiō and they excommunicated the Emperour, and depriued him of his dignitie.
               
                  Emperours here may take a good example, that they ſuffer not themſelues to be led by Popes, leaſt finally they looſe their Empires.
               
               
                  Gregorie reſtored many Monaſteries, and builded new, adding great lands and reuenewes vnto them, for the Monkes liuing.
               He commaunded Prieſts to make a commemoration of the dead, and to pray for them:Praying and offering for the dead. and writ to Boniface Archbiſhop of Magunce, that Chriſtians might offer for their Parents which died faithfully. Naucler. Some attribute this to Gregorie. the 2. in the 2. volume of the Councells.
               He added to the ſeruice of the Maſſe (Quorum ſolemnitas hodie in conspectu tuae maieſtatis celebratur, &c. Domine Deus noſter in toto orbe terrarum. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               Some Monaſteries were richly founded in Almaigne,
                  
at Fulden,
                  Leo 3. Gregory 3. at Herfelden, and other places. Faſci. Temp.
               
               
                  Rome was beſieged by Luitprandus, King of Lombardes: 
                   wherefore Gregorie ſent to Charles Martel, King Pippins Father, the keyes of the holy Sepulchre, and S. Peters bands, with other goodly gifts, to the ende it would pleaſe him to deliuer and take the Romane Church from the ſeruitude of the Lombards. Charles Martel writ to Luitprandus, and intreated that which the Pope deſired, Naucler.
               
               Before when the Citie of Rome endured any violence by other Princes, ſhe vſed to demaund helpe of the Emperour of Conſtantinople; but Gregorie the third would not do this. So that the tutorſhip of the Romane Church was tranſported from the Emperour of Conſtantinople to other Princes; & by that meane came it to paſſe that Rome is retired and exempted from the obedience of the Emperour of Conſtantinople. Naucler.
               
            
            
               The Maſſe beganne to be ſung.
               
                  Paulus Diaconus, lib. 6. chap. 17. ſaith, that Luitprandus king of Lombards, was the firſt of thoſe kings which out of Singers did elect Prieſts and Clarkes to ſing Maſſe, which faſhion afterward was augmented in the time of Gregorie the fift, by the inuention of Robert Biſhop of Chartres, wherevpon the Song was called of the ſaid Gregorie, Gregoriall Song.
               
               
                  Note that Singing came into the Church by the Lombards, which Gregorie the firſt of that name had renounced. Hen. Bullenger.
                  
               
               
                  Lieuen an Engliſh Prieſt, preached in the Countrey of Weſt-falia. Faſci. temp.
               
               They of the Towne of Gaunt in Flaunders vſe great Idolatries vnto him.
            
            
               The Popes come now as into their chiefe force.
               
                  Childeric third of that name, 21. King of France, hauing

raigned nine yeares was chaſed away,Zacharie. and conſtrained to make himſelfe a Monke.
               So from Pharamond vnto Pippin we account 331. yeares: From Merouee 302. From Clouis the firſt, made a Chriſtian, 252.
               
                  Zacharie Pope, borne in Greece, ruled at Rome 10. or a 11. yeares, an Inuentor of Cappes and other ornaments tiſſued of Gold and ſtones.
               He aſſigned certaine rents and lands to Prieſts to liue on, and for Lampes in Churches.
               He forbad the Venetians vnder paine of excommunication,Chriſtians ſlaues. that they ſhould no more ſell Chriſtians as ſlaues to the Sarraſins, as they accuſtomed to do.
               
                  Pippin, ſurnamed le Court, of a Maiſter of the Pallace,The ambition of Pippin. became by ambition the 22. King of France, and beſought the Pope, that by his authoritie hee would confirme the kingdome vnto him.
               
                  Chilperic then King of France,
                  The King of France depoſed and made a Monke. after hee had raigned nine yeares became a Monke, by the aduice and authoritie of Pope Zacharie, and his wife, was put into a Monaſterie: and in his place the ſaid Pippin ſonne of Charles Martel, and Father of Charlemaigne was made King, and conſecrated at Soiſons by Boniface, Arch-biſhop of Magunce, by the election of all the Barons of France, and by the conſent and Councell of Pope Zacharie, being therevnto required: Who not only commanded and confirmed the ſaid election, but alſo abſolued Pippin of the oath which he had made to the King and to the Crowne of France. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               This Pope did as much with the King of Lombards called Lachis.
                  Lachis King of Lombards depoſed. For he found meanes that he left his kingdome & made himſelfe a Monke, and his children and wife, and his brother Aſtulfe, ſucceeded him. In the 2. volume of Councels.
               
                  Carloman, Pippins brother, was alſo ſhauen and made a Monke at Rome, by the perſwaſion of Zacharie, and remained in the Abbey of the mount S
                        •
                     rap in Lombardie, and after in the mount Caſſin.
                  
               
               
                  Conſtantine the fift of that name,Cōſtantine the fift. Emperour 74. ſonne of

                  Leon,
                  Cōſtantine the fift. raigned 35. yeares.
               This as he was baptized made water in the Font, and therfore was he called in Greeke Copronymos.
               
               
                  What neceſſitie was there to hold a naked Childe ouer the Font?
               
               This gaue a forewarning that hee ſhould be an euill Chriſtian. Naucler. And indeed many crimes were impoſed vpon him, becauſe hee conſtantly maintained his Fathers opinion againſt the Pope, touching Images: and from thence came alſo that they ſay he dyed deſperate, when he ſaid I am deliuered from the fire eternall. Faſc. temp. Chron. Sigeb. and others.
               
                  They which conſent not to the Popes Decrees are Iudged damned.
               
               
                  Sinode in France vnder Pippin.Vnder Pippin a Sinode was held in Fraunce, by Boniface Arch-biſhop of Magunce, Bucardus, Guntarius, and other Biſhops, which had not beene in 80. yeares before: In ſo much that men ſaid that Religion in France was diſſipated and laide vnder feete. Naucler.
               
               
                  Sinodes each yeare.It was then ordained that eache yeare there ſhould be a Sinode in France. That no Church-man ſhould beare Armes. That none of them ſhould vſe hunting, nor keepe Dogges nor Birds of pray.
               That euery Prieſt and Biſhop ſhould hold himſelfe in his Pariſh, and do their diligence to roote out auncient hereſies: that is to ſay,Paganiſme. Paganiſme, and errors of the ſacrifices of the dead: diuinations, enchauntments, and other Immolations which are yet done after the manner of Painims nigh Churches, vnder the name of Martyrs and Confeſſors. Naucler.
               
               
                  Paganiſme of the Gods, was perſecuted in France: but true Religion was not therefore eſtabliſhed.
               
               In this time the Hunnes called Hungarians, occupiped Pannonia.
                  
They were diuided into ſeuen bands: euery band builded a Caſtle, which yet at this day are called Septem Caſtra in Latin, which is a ſtrong place againſt the Turkes.Seuen Caſtles
               
               
                  Edward King of England, who otherwiſe was reputed an vpright man, left his wife, and entertained Nunnes, who was admoniſhed by Letters from Boniface, to leaue off that vice. Naucler.
               
               
                  Theſe be the fruites and enticements of that curſed ſingle life.
               
               
                  Pippin le Court dyed at Paris, after hee had raigned 17. or  18. yeares after ſome, leauing his two ſonnes, Charlemaigne in Soiſonnois, and Carloman at Noyon.
               
               
                  Stephen Pope, ſecond of that name a Romaine, ruled at  
                  Rome ſixe yeares.Stephen. 2. Hee was carried vpon mens ſhoulders vnto the Church of S. Lateran: and thereof it comes that at this day Popes cauſe themſelues to be carried.
               The Emperour Conſtantine, the 14. yeare of his Empire, aſſembled a Councell at Conſtantinople of 330. Biſhops,A Councell at Conſtantinople againſt Images. where it was commaunded that all Images of Saints ſhould be taken and burnt. Alſo he cauſed all his ſubiects to ſweare, no more to honour any Image of God, nor of Saintes, but condemned to die all ſuch as called to the Virgin Mary for helpe, and that had in their houſes any Relikes of Saints.
               They commaunded Monkes to Marry,To marry. and Nunnes to follow the eſtate of marriage. Sigeb.
               
               After this the Emperor ſent the defruition of this Councel to the Pope, commaunding him to caſt Images out of Churches.
               
                  Sabin King of Bulgaria, throughout his Kingdome cauſed all Images to be taken away, after the example of Conſtantine, whereby he came in grace with the Emperour. Naucler.
               
               
                  Stephen went into Fraunce towardes King Pippin, demaunding aide and ſuccours againſt Astulphus King of the Lombardes. This King Pippin went and met the Pope, and diſcended from his horſe, tooke the bridle of the Popes horſe in his hand, and ſo ledde him to the Pallace. Suppl. Chron.
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
                  
                  Stephen.
                  Stephen conſecrated him and his two ſonnes, Charlemaigne, and Carloman, in the Church of S. Denis in France, and confirmed them in ſuch manner as hee and his poſteritie ſhould holde the kingdome of France in heritage for euer, and excommunicated all ſuch which ſhould ſet themſelues againſt it. Faſci. temp.
               
               Alſo hee tranſported the Empire of Conſtantinople into France: which afterward Pope Leo approued, ratified, and put in execution. And therefore the Empire was parted into Eaſt and Weſt. Supp. Chron. Faſci. temp. & Naucler.
               
               
                  From whence came this authoritie to beſtowe kingdomes of the world, but from the diuel, who is called the prince therof?
               
               
                  Pippin went into Italie to the Popes ſuccours, and obteined victory againſt the Lombards. Aſtulphe was conſtrained to agree to the Popes will. Sigeb.
               
               
                  The Exarchate giuen to the Pope.The Exarchate which was occupied by the Lombards, and appertained to the Emperour, is giuen to the Pope by Pippin without any right. For the eſtate of ſuch as held that dignitie  and office, were aſſigned the Townes that follow: Rauenna, Imola, Boulonge, Mutina, Rhegin, Parma, Placentia, &c.
               
               At this time happened an horrible thing in the Abbey of S. Martin at Tours. For all the Monkes which were giuen to pleaſures and wickednes, dyed ſuffocated and choaked, except one. Faſci. temp.
               
               The Parliament Inſtituted in France.
               
               
                  Conſtantine the Emperour ſent gifts to Pippin, praying him to render vnto him the Exarchate. Pippin anſwered, that hee came not the ſecond time into Italie for any temporall profit, but in dutie to guard the Church againſt the Lombards, and to take from them Rauenna, and the Exarchate and other goods of Italie, to giue them vnto the Pope. Naucler. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               
                  Thaſſido Duke of Bauier, did homage to the King of France.
               
               
                  Paul.
                  Paul brother of the former Pope 94. gouerned 10. or a 11. yeares: In whoſe election there was great debate. For ſome had choſen one called Theophilactus.
               
               
                  
                  Buggandus Biſhop of Metes, at this time was very affectionate towards holie bodies and heaped vp Relikes. He tranſported from Rome into France the bodies of S. Gorgon, and Saint Nazare, and of many others.
               
                  Rome which before was the butchery of Martyrs, now ſelles bodies and bones.
               
                  Conſtantine ſeeing the fooliſh ſuperſtition of Chriſtians at the Sepulchres of Saintes,Saints bones taken out of their graues and caſt into the ſea. kiſſing and worſhipping their Relikes, cauſed their bones to be taken out of their graues and to be caſt into the Sea.
               At this time it was that Sigebert reciteth, that in Berithe a Citie of Siria, was found an Image of Ieſus Chriſt, wherevnto the Iewes did many outrages, pearcing his feete, hands, and ſide, from whence bloud came, wherwith many maladies were healed. This thing being declared to the Biſhop of the ſaid place, he made that blood to be preciouſly kept, and ſhewed it, and carried it hither and thither: And therevpon ordeined each yeare a feaſt, called the Paſſion of the Lordes Image, the eight of Nouember.
               Of this blood there was brought to Mantoua. Supp. Chron.
               
               Who ſees not that this Fable was inuented, to the end that vnder the ſhadow of miracles, the ſeruice of Saints and Images might be ſet forward againſt the Grecians & Emperours. Whē men haue no authoritie from the holie ſcripture, they cry, Miracle, Miracle.
               
                  Note hereby the refuge of Papiſts.
               
               There was a Sinode held in France againſt the Grecians touching Images, by the authoritie of King Pippin. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               In this time Saints liues were forged on all ſides.
               
                  
                     Ʋerus Biſhip of Siuil, wrote the life of S. Eutropius Biſhop. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Wibaldus compoſed the life of S. Boniface his maiſter, Biſhop of Magunce. Tritem.
               
               
                  Conſtantine Pope, ſecond of that name a Romane, gouerned  at Rome one yeare.Cōſtantin. 2.
                  
               
               By ambition and force hee occupied the Papacice. And

from the eſtate of a Laie-man being made Prieſt, hee was choſen Pope by ſtore of money and Armes, but after was taken and caſt into a Monaſterie, and his eyes put out.
               
                  Philippicus an Antepope.In this time likewiſe there was an Antepope called Phillippicus, or Phillip, who alſo was depoſed, and Stephen the third conſtituted.
               
                  Sergius Biſhop of Rauenna, and Chriſtopher, Authours of the former ſchiſme, had their eyes put out.
               
                  Stephen. 3.
                  
                  Stephen Pope, third of that name, Monke of Sicilie, ruled at Rome foure yeares.
               
                  One Pope condemneth an other.This Pope aſſembled a Councell at Rome, where all that was reuoked, which Conſtantine his predeceſſor had ordeined: euen in diſgrading them, which by him were conſecrated. In the ſaid Councell aſſiſted 12. Biſhops of France. Naucler.
               
               There was alſo ordeined, that no Laie-man ſhould be made Pope or Biſhop, but ſucceſſiuely by order and Eccleſiaſticall degrees.Gloria in excelſis. 
                  Naucler. Item, that euery Sunday the Gloria in excelſis ſhould be ſung at Maſſe.
               There was condemned the Councell of Conſtantinople. 7. wherein the Emperour Conſtantine the 2. and the Biſhops of Greece, had ordeined that Images ſhould be laid downe. This Councell was declared hereticall, and againe Images commanded, as worthie of honour and veneration. This thus agreed vpon, the next morning there was made a great proceſſion, where the Pope went on foote in great deuotion, and all others. Naucler, and Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  A great token of repentance for a Pope.
               
               
                  
                  Charlemaigne the ſonne of Pippin, 22. King of France, had this ſurname of great, for his proweſſes and vertues. Hee had maruellous warres.The warres of Chalemaine.
                  The firſt in Aquitane. The ſecond againſt the Lombards. And the third againſt the Saxons. He had alſo warre in Spaine, in Bauiere, and in Hungarie againſt the Hunois: which Hiſtoriographers declare in their order.
               
                  
                  Adrian Pope, a Romane,Cōſtant. 5. Adrian. gouerned the Romane Church 24. yeares.
               
               This Pope ſhewed himſelfe cruell againſt ſuch as impugned the ſeruice of Images, and made a booke Intituled, Of the worſhipping of Saints. Chron. Sigeb. and Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Dedier 22. and laſt king of Lombards, deſired the loue and friendſhip of this Pope, but he would not conſent therevnto: Saying that he would not accord with him which ſo often had broken his promiſe: wherewith Didier being moued,The ende of the kingdome of the Lombards. practiſed many euils againſt the Church of Rome, In ſo much that Adrian was conſtrained to demaund aide in Fraunce. Supplim. of Chron.
               
               
                  Charlemaigne came into Italie at the requeſt of Adrian, againſt Didier, and obtained victorie againſt him: after he had raigned 18. yeares hee ſent him priſoner into France, with his wife and children. And the kingdome of the Lombards finiſhed in Italie, which had endured 224. yeares, or 213.
               After hee had ouercome the Lombards, hee inſtituted the Vniuerſitie of Pauie, and adorned it with learned people.
               
                  Charlemaigne came to Rome and kiſſed the Popes feete.Kiſſing the Popes feete. 
                  Blundus and P. Emilius.
               
               He reſtored to the Romane Church his reuenewes & priuiledges, and ratified all that which his Father Pippin had giuen to the ſaid Church. Wherefore this Adrian cauſed a Councell to be held of 153. Prelates: by which was giuen to Charlemaigne the right of Inueſture, placing Biſhops in poſſeſſion of their ſeates, and to elect the Pope of Rome from hence forward. Diſtinct. 63. cap. Adrianus.
               
               
                  This priuiledge endured not long, and was but feined & hypocriticall. And the ſucceeding Popes obſerued it not: ſaying it was but curteſie and a perſonable priuiledge which could not exceed the perſon of the Emperour which then was.
               
               
                  Leon Emperour, fourth of that name, ſonne of Conſtantine Emperour, raigned fiue yeares, his wife was of Athens,
                  Leon. 4.
                   named Hirene (otherwiſe alſo Theodora) a faire woman, and of great ſpirit. Naucler.
               
               
                  He loued precious ſtones, and hauing ſeene a Crowne full of precious ſtones in the Treaſury of Saint Sophie, put it vpon his head: but by the coldneſſe thereof, he fell into a Feuer, whereof he dyed. Chron. Sigeb. Faſc. temp. Naucler. Supp. Chro. After his wife Hirene raigned.
               
                  Charlemaigne enterpriſed warre againſt the Saxons, Infidels, and Painims: and this endured 33. yeares. Naucler. For they often reuolted and feined themſelues to be Chriſtians, abuſing Charlemaigne. Abb. Vrsp. Finally they were made ſubiect.
               
                  Adrian builded certaine Towers and walles at Rome, and gaue great gates of Braſſe to the Church of S. Peter: and adorned the Aultar with a couering of Gold.
               Hee ordeined that an hundreth poore people ſhould be nouriſhed in the Court of Lateran. He reſtored S. Anaſtatius, and other ruinated Churches. He was puiſſant and noble of race, and none of his predeceſſours came to like temporal glory and riches. Supp. Chro. Faſci. temp.
               
               
                  Charlemaigne diſpleaſed at the diſcord of the Church Muſicke, betwixt the Romanes and the French, ſent two Clarkes to Rome to learne the Song of the Romane Church, which firſt inſtructed the Church of Metes in Lorraine, and after al France, in the ſame ſinging. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Conſtantine. the 6.
                  
                  Conſtantine 6. of that name, Emperour 76. of Leon the 4. raigned tenne yeares with his mother Hirene, but being come to age, he depriued her of the Empire, exhorting her rather to deale in domeſticall affaires, without medling with gouerning the Empire. Sigeb.
               
               
                  
                  Charlemaigne made warre in Spaine againſt the Sarraſins. Naucler. Where the Peers of France were betraied Ganelon.
               
               
                  Hirene had her deuotion towards the virgin Mary, and all other Saints: And at the requeſt of Pope Adrian, and of Theraſius Arch-biſhop of Conſtantinople, ſhe aſſembled after Sigeb. a Councell at Nice, called the ſeuenth, of 350, after ſome: or of 325. Biſhops, Naucler. Wherin it was decreed, that not only in Temples ſhould be Images: but alſo that they ſhould be worſhipped of right, & that al gainſaiers ſhould be excommunicated:

but this decree was after aboliſhed by Conſtantine. Chro. Euſeb.
                  Cōſtantine the 6.
               
               Here tooke the Vniuerſitie of Paris her beginning, by the  care of Alenin an Engliſh man, who was Charlemaignes maiſter.Erectiō of the Vniuerſitie of Paris.
               
               
                  Conſtantine the 11. yeare of his Empire, depriued his mother of the Imperiall gouernment, and cauſed all Images to be caſt downe in Temples, and raigned aboue 7. yeares.
               
               At this time a Sinode was held in Spaine,
                  Images prohibited. Images forbidden in Spaine. in a Towne cal-Eliboris or Granado, where were congregated nineteene Biſhops, and thirtie ſixe Prieſts. Felix Biſhop of Aquitaine, was Preſident there. Amongſt other points, there was principally concluded that there ſhould be no Images nor paintings in Churches.
               The yeare 793. an other Sinode was held at Francford, by  the Biſhops of Almaigne & Franconia. The Pope Adrian knowing this, ſent two Biſhops, Stephen and Theophilacte, to vrge the Decree made for Images at the Councell of Niece, by the meanes of Hirene. In ſo much that the Sinode held at Eliboris in Spaine, was at the ſaid Francford condemned. Abb. Ʋrſp.
               
               
                  Seeing now Ieſus Chriſt was left to be portraied by the preaching of his pure word, Images were admitted into the Temples of Chriſt: therefore no maruell if ſo many contentious follow.
               
               
                  Hirene greeued to be depriued of the Empire, by preſents, ſollicited certaine Captaines to kill her ſonne. They watched him and put out his eyes, vpon ſuch a day as he had put out the eyes of his Vncle (after Nicephorus) fiue yeares before, then put him in priſon, where he deceaſed fewe dayes after. Hirene then his mother, gouerned alone by the ſpace of three yeares.
               Shee alſo cauſed to be taken out of his graue the bodie of Conſtantine the fifth, Father of her dead husband, and made it publikely to be burnt, and the Aſhes thereof to be caſt into the Sea, becauſe in his life time he had broken Images. This did ſhe at the Inſtigation of Theodorus Biſhop, who fauoured the Pope touching Images. Henry Bullenger.
               
               
                  
                  Hirene. Adrian.
                  Alcuin, or otherwiſe Albin, Diſciple of Beda the Venerable, Monke, and after Abbot of S. Martin of Tours, Charlemaignes maiſter, made three bookes of the Trinitie, and many other bookes. Alſo the life of S. Vaaſt Biſhop of Arras. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Councells in the time of Charlemain.
                  
                  Charlemaine during his raigne, cauſed 6. or 7. Councels and Sinodes to be held: whereof fiue, that is to ſay, at Magunce, Wormes, Rhenes, Tours, & Arles, were aſſembled againſt the abuſes of Eccleſiaſticall perſons which then were very great, and did much diſpleaſe the Emperour Charlemaigne.
               
               
                  Anſegiſus Abbot of this time, made foure bookes of the Decrees of Charlemaigne, and of his ſonne Lewis. Amongſt other things, and aboue all, he wold that Biſhops ſhould preach to the people the true doctrine drawne out of the holy Scriptures, and not otherwiſe: Therevpon alleadging the ſaying of Gregorie. That the Prieſt which goeth without the care of preaching, lightly, lighteth againſt himſelfe the wrath of the hid Iudge.
               He alſo ordeined that no man ſhould make profeſſion of Monachiſme, without demaunding the Kings licence to ſhun many fraudes. He would fewe Feaſts ſhould be ordeined. He repreſſed the ſuperfluitie of Prieſts, and ordeined that they ſhould be noriſhed of the Eccleſiaſtical reuenews with ye poore.
               
                  This was S. Boniface then accounted the Apoſtle of Almaigne.
                  He one day ſharply reprehended the Archbiſhop of Magunce called Boniface, becauſe he had vſurped a Croſſe all couered with gold, and enriched with precious ſtones, as an Imperiall Scepter. For occaſion thereof being offered in a publike aſſembly, he ſaid to him in choller; Is it thus you make profeſſion of the Croſſe of Chriſt? Do you thus feed the flock, being rather in order of an Emperour then a ſhepheard? An other which on S. Martins euen was made Biſhop, and for ioy therof forgetting to come the next day to the Temple, was diſmiſſed by Charlemaigne, ſaying: What wil he do hereafter, when at firſt he is ſo forgetful of his office? Alſo one other hauing receiued a great benefice, for ioy, being vpon horſeback, caſt himſelf downe with great agilitie before the Emperour. To whom the Emperour ſaid: So farre as I ſee you are an able man, and a good

horſeman, I haue need of you: Leaue hardly this benefice to ſome weaker man. Auentinus the Hiſtoriographer in his bookes of the Annales of Bauaria.
               
               We may ſee by the recitall hereof, that Popes had not that ſoueraigne power which afterward their ſucceſſours vſurped. The Emperours called Sinodes, and propoſed ſtatutes and decrees, and conferred and beſtowed benefices.
               At Francfort whileſt Charlemain wintered there, a Councell was held, wherin the decree of the Councell of Niece held by Hirene touching Images (as is ſaide) was declared falſe, and altogether condemned. And although the Popes Factors, as Vrſpergenſis and others do paſſe and diſſemble it, yet ſo is the truth. And that the Pope Adrian ſent thither his Embaſſadors, Stephen and Theophilacte Biſhop. There alſo was condemned the hereſie of Felix and Eliphandus, which acknowledged their fault, and asking pardon were reſtored to their dignities.
               
                  Charlemaigne cauſed a booke to be publiſhed in his name, which agrreed with the Articles of the ſaid Councell. Yea and moreouer, he anſwered two bookes which were found written by Adrian, to Theraſius Patriarke, and to the Emperour of Conſtantinople. By this writing Charlemaigne taxeth, and couertly condemneth Adrian, without naming him Idolater.
               There was alſo a Councel held at Cauaillon, vnder Charlemaigne, wherein amongſt other ſuperſtitions which were there condemned, that of Pilgrimages in reſpect of Religion, was ſharply repreſſed in the 45. Canon. Alledging that ſaying of S. Hierome. Men ſhould not be praiſed becauſe they haue ſeene Ieruſalem, but becauſe they haue liued well.
               
               
                  Leo the third of that name, borne at Rome,
                  Leo. 3. after he had receiued the Papall dignitie, Incontinently ſent to Charlemaigne the Keyes of S. Peter, the Enſigne or Gonfanon (as they call it) of the Towne of Rome, with other preſents: requiring him that he would doo ſo much, that the people of Rome might yeeld themſelues ſubiect to the Pope in deliuering him their oath of fidelitie. For he feared the people one day would not ſtoope vnder his tyrannie.
               
                  But Charlemaigne willing to do a thing pleaſing Leo,
                  Conſtantine the 6. ſent a certaine Abbot called Agilbert, who by the Emperours commandement conſtrained the Romane people to ſweare fidelitie to the Pope.
               For this cauſe the people conceiued ſuch an hatred againſt the Pope, that hauing found ſome which ſtirred them more to execute their fury, and to ſerue them for guides & Captaines: as one day he went a proceſſion, hauing caſt him from his horſe they ſpoiled him of his pontificiall apparell, and beat him well. In which tumult none put out his eyes nor cut out his tongue (as the Papiſts affirme, teaching that ſtraightway he was diuinely healed, by ſo manifeſt lies to amplifie his authoritie): but indeed hee was only put in priſon in the Monaſterie of Saint Eraſmus, as Mantuan ſaith in his fourth booke, des Faſtes.
               
               
                  
                     Charlemain Emper. 801. the firſt name of treſchriſtian, the firſt of Emperours that were Crowned by the Popes.Finally, as Charlemaigne came to Rome, the people knowing how hee was affectioned towards the Pope, for the feare they had of him, changed the anger they had cōceiued againſt Leo into fauour, and durſt not enterpriſe to proue the crimes whereof they accuſed him. After then they had bene examined touching his life, they cryed all with one voice, That the Apoſtolike ſeate ought not to be iudged by a Laie perſon. By which anſwere Charlemaigne being appeaſed, after alſo that Leo had affirmed by an oath that he was not culpable, he declared him abſolued and innocent.
               The Pope for theſe benefites, willing to yeelde ſome pleaſure on Chriſtmas day, aſſoone as the King was come from the Church, he put the Crowne on his head, and pronounced Charlemaigne Emperour of the Romanes, without that, he had aſpired to receiue the Imperiall Crowne. And all the Romane people cryed ſaying; Life and victorie be to the thrice Chriſtian Charles, alwaies Auguſt, Crowned of God; great and peaceable Emperour. And whereas before they vſed to call him by the name of Patrician, he was called Emperour: the yeare of his raigned 23. and of our ſaluation eight hundreth and three.
               
                  
                  Hirene Empreſſe of Conſtantinople,
                  Charlemain.
                  Hirene. hearing what had beene done at Rome, ſent three Embaſſadors towards Charlemaigne to confirme the peace. Charlemaigne on his ſide alſo ſent his Embaſſadors towards the Empreſſe for a greater confirmation of peace, demaunding her in marriage; wherevnto ſhe had conſented, but for the hinderance by ambuſhes laid againſt it: as if ſhe would haue ſolde the Empire by her marriage to ſtrangers.
               
                  Nicephorus then was crowned Emperour,Nicephorus. and Hirene chaſed away; who paſſed the reſt of her life in exile. Nicephorus ſent his Embaſſadors to Charlemaine,
                  Diuiſion of the Empire. to renew the alliance vpon thoſe conditions; That both ſhould be called Auguſtes and bretheren together: the one of the Eaſt, and the other of the Weſt: That in Italie which is on the ſide beyond Naples,
                  Accord of diuiſion. and on the other ſide beyond Sipont: namely, all that which ſtretcheth towards the Sea, ſhould belong vnto the Greeke Emperour, and the reſt to the French Emperour.
               That 
                     Ʋenice ſhould be in the middeſt, and as the limitte and border betwixt thoſe two Empires, and acknowledge the Maieſtie of them both. That the Venetians ſhould be ſubiect neither to the one nor the other, but ſhould vſe their owne lawes, and be the friend of both, whether in peace or warre. Some ſay, that the Emperour after his Coronation ſaid, that if he had knowne the Popes enterpriſe, he would not that day haue entred into the Church.
            
            
               Aduertiſement.
               Although ſucceſſiuely there were alwaies Emperors of Conſtantinople, which kept the Romane Empire vntill the Towne was occupied by the Turkes: yet becauſe the true brightneſſe and Maieſtie of the name and of the tuition of the Empire, and of Italie, was in Charlemaine and his ſucceſſors, we leaue in Nicephorus the Greeke Emperours, becauſe they haue not bene like theſe. Therefore leauing the Eaſt, namely, that of Conſtantinople, we will ſet downe in order the Emperours of the Weſt; namely of Rome.
               
               
                  
                  Charlemain.
                  Charlemaigne then deliuered the Romane ſeate from all moleſtations of forraine Princes, and atchieued that for which principally hee came into Italie: that is to ſay, at the ſiege of Pauie, hauing conſtrained Didier the laſt King of the Lombards to yeeld himſelfe, hee got poſſeſſion of all Lombardie. And to the ende they ſhould no more moleſt Italie, hee droue them away as ſeditious perſons, and ſent Didier Captiue with his wife and children into the Towne of Liege. Paul. Diaconus, an Hiſtoriographer, and Secretarie to the ſaid Didier, was ledde with him; and from that time Charlemaigne made his the Kingdome of Lombardie, leauing all the Townes of Italie in theyr accuſtomed libertie, to the ende hee might giue no occaſion of trouble vnto the Greeke Emperour.
               
                  The alliance of Scotland with France.About this time, Acayus the 65. King of Scots, made the firſt alliance with King Charlemaigne, and with Fraunce, which hath endured euer ſince, and yet at this preſent is maintained betwixt theſe two Nations.
               
                  
                     Bauiere conquired.
                  Taſſilo Duke of Bauiere, moouing warre againſt Charlelemaigne, loſt his Countrey, and was put in a Monaſterie with his ſonne; and although hee was Charlemaignes kinſman, yet for his faith before violated, hee vſed this ſeueritie towardes him.
               
                  Nicephorus.
                  Nicephorus raigned at Conſtantinople eight or nine yeares, whom the Romanes would not acknowledge for Emperour: wherevpon there roſe great enuie and hatred betwixt them of the Eaſt, and of the Weſt.
            
            
               
                  A Schiſme betwixt them of the Eaſt, and of the West.
               Whatſoeuer agreement was made, there was ſtil enuie and enmitie betwixt the Eaſt and the Weſt Emperours, and they could not ſuffer one an other: yet this diſſention hapned not onely betwixt them, but alſo betwixt the Eaſt and the Weſt Churches; wherof altogether the Pope was cauſe, in intent to withdrawe and exempt himſelfe from the obedience of him of

whom he held all his good.
               
                  Charlemaigne inriched many Churches, Abbeys, and Biſhoppricks; eſpecially in Almaine, the Biſhoppricks of Magunce, Strasbourge, Colongne, and Treuers, giuing them great priuileges. Briefly, there were fewe renowmed Churches in Germanie, nor in all the two Frances, which hee endowed not with ſome goods and reuenewes.
               
                  Iohannes Scotus, a Monke of S. Benet, a Diſciple of Beda, and a companion of Albin or Alcuin, Charlemaignes maiſter, wrote vpon S. Mathewe three bookes, and other things. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Hinmarus Biſhop of Rhemes, before Monke of S. Deuis, wrote two bookes of the life of S. Remy Biſhop. Tritem.
               
               
                  Charlemaigne at the laſt got the vpper hand of the Hungarians, and tooke great riches from them: for it had bene two hundreth yeares that they did no other thing but pill and ſpoile all other Nations, without beeing pilled themſelues. After, he tamed the Bohemians, hauing ouercome their King called Lechon. And ſo in the ende Charlemaigne was peaceable of Italie, France, Almaine, Hungarie, and Bohemia.
               
               
                  So oftentimes the Lord ſends puiſſant Monarkes to repaire things confuſed,Wherefore God ſends great Monarks as alſo to repreſſe the inſolencie and diſordinate dealings of great perſons disperſed on the earth.
               
               
                  Charlemaigne of the age of 72. yeares, died at Aix in Almaine, of a Feauer and a Pluriſie, the yeare of his raigne, 46. of his Empire 14. and the yeare of Chriſt 814. hauing inſtituted the Vniuerſitie of Paris and Pauie.
               
               
                  Lewis, Charlemaignes ſonne, by his wife Hildegarde, ſurnamed  
                  Le Debonaire, becauſe he was of a ſoft and gracious ſpirit,
                     Lewis ſurnamed the Debonaire, Emperour Stephen. 4. A ſubtill Foxe. was after the death of his father, pronounced Emperour by the chiefs of the Kingdome.
               
                  Stephen, fourth of that name, a Romane, being ſubſtituted in the place of Leo, three monethes after went into Fraunce towards Lewis Debonaire the Emperours, to the ende to purge

himſelfe concerning his election:Lewis. for that againſt the decrees of Adrian and Leo his predeceſſors, hee had beene choſen and confirmed Pope by the Cleargie and the people of Rome, without the counſell and authoritie of the Emperour. Wherein we ſee that the Romane ſeate is ſo faithfull an obſeruer of her owne lawes and ordinances, that the firſt that ſucceeds him which made them, breakes and tranſgreſſeth them. But to the end that this flatterer vſing hipocriſie might the rather for a time abuſe Lewis, hee ſet on his head a faire Crowne (which hee brought with him) and an other on the head of the Queene Hirmingarde, calling her Auguste, or Empreſſe. But the ſubtil Foxe being recompenced by the Emperour, returning, and the Church of Reate in Italie, euen then falling vacant, he would not conſecrate the Biſhop who was choſen there, vnleſſe hee would firſt acknowledge that the Emperour ſhould approoue his election. But ſee what followed after. As ſoone as he was come to Rome, he beganne to thinke that the right and preheminence giuen to Charlemagine and his ſucceſſers, might bring with it many miſchiefes, therefore taking the greater hardineſſe, by the ſoftneſſe and benignitie of Lewis, thought it good to aboliſh ſuch a right: and there vpon pronounced that the Popes election ought to be in the power of the Cleargie, of the Senate, and of the Romane people; yet fearing to prouoke the Emperours anger againſt him, he added this Interpretation: namely, that it ſhould be very lawfull for them to elect the Biſhop of Rome without the authoritie of the Emperour, but that it ſhould not be lawfull to conſecrate him without the Emperours preſence, or his Embaſſadors. So by this meanes for a certaine time were the Emperours kept from the election of the Pope. Yet becauſe Stephen occupied not the ſeate paſt eight moneths, hee could do litle of that hee forethought to encreaſe his authoritie. But he died in his accuſtomed ſuperſtition. 
                  Anno domini. 817.
               
                  Paſcal firſt of that name, a Romane Monke, following the traine of Stephen his predeceſſor, was choſen Pope by the Cleargie and people of Rome, without the conſent of the Emperour. And as the Emperour complained of this election,

                  Paſcal ſubtilly purged himſelfe by his Embaſſadors ſent thither. By tract of time this ſubtill and malitious Pope ſeeing there was daunger if he longer deferred to augment his authoritie, ſo ſtraungely enchaunted the Emperour Lewis,
                  The right of chooſing and Inueſture of Biſhops, belonged to the Emperours. inſomuch as he bare great honour to the Romane Church, that he conſented to remit into the hands of the Cleargie and the people, the right of electing of the Pope, which had beene giuen before to Charlemaigne; and alſo that hee ſhould by his Letters confirme all Donations made by his predeceſſors, although they were made of things acquired by vniuſt & vnlawfull violence. This hee did as one ignorant of their cautelous and deceitfull dealings, and ſealed them with his ſeales. But after he had Crowned at Rome Lotharie his ſonne Emperour, (to the end that by that meanes he might more eaſily compaſſe that which he ſought) he did ſo much by treaſon and ſecretly, that Theodorus and Leon, officers of the Emperours houſe, which faithfully held their maiſters part, had their eyes put out, and after their heads cut off by the meanes of certaine mutinous and ſeditious people. And although he were accuſed to the Emperour, as well for the ſedition which had bene ſtirred,The Pope purgeth himſelfe by oath. as for the murder againſt their perſons committed: after he had aſſembled a Sinode of a certaine number of Biſhops, he purged himſelfe by oath. Notwithſtanding he accuſed of treaſon them which were ſlaine, and pronounced that by good right they had bene ſlaine: declaring them to be abſolued which murthered them.
               
                  Behold the holineſſe of theſe holy Fathers in their kingdome of perdition.
               
               
                  Paſcal honoured with a moſt magnificall Sepulchre in the Towne, two thouſand bodies (if he faile not in his account) of Saints before dead, which were buried in Church yardes. He builded all new the Temple of S. Praxides, and ſet in it the bodies of S. Cecilie, Tiburcius, Ʋalerian, Maximian, and other Martyrs: alſo of S. 
                     Ʋrbain and other Biſhops: He reedified ſome Churches which were like to fall with great age.
               
                  
                  Lewis vpon great deuotion he had to the Apoſtolike Sea, beſtowed vpon the people and Cleargie of Rome, the power to chooſe the Pope and the Biſhops, which authoritie belonged to the Emperours. But hee reſerued this prerogatiue; that the Pope beeing choſen, hee ſhould alwaies ſend to the Emperours to confirme amitie. Naucler.
               
               The Emperour alſo ratified the donation made to the Pope of Rome by his predeceſſors, and ſigned it with his owne hand, and his three children, tenne Biſhops, eight Abbots, and fifteene Earles.
               
                  The Copie of theſe Letters are in Volateran, in the third booke of his Geographie.
                  
               
               
                  Paſcal then tarried not long after to commaund vnder paine of excommunication that none ſhould preſume to receiue an Eccleſiaſticall Benefice of a Lay-man, whoſoeuer hee be. Supp. Chro.
               
               Great ſignes and maruells happened in this time.
               In Saxe a great Earthquake; ſo that many villages (as Vrſp. ſaith) periſhed by fire.
               In diuers places it raigned ſtones amongſt haile, which ſlew men and beaſts. Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  Eugenius Pope, ſecond of that name, borne at Rome, ruled three yeares.Eugenius. 2. Schiſme.
                  
               
               A Schiſme roſe vp in the Church, and there was great diſcord amongſt the Cardinalls, ſome chooſing Sozimus, but finally Eugenius obtained the Papacie, for he had in him great appearance of holineſſe.
               At this time a Peace was confirmed betwixt Leo Emperour of Conſtantinople, and Lewis the Romane Emperour. Naucler.
               
               The King of Denmarke, named Hariolus, caſt out of his Kingdome by the children of Godfrey, came for ſuccours to the Emperour Lewis, and obtained helpe to be reſtored into his Kingdome. Chron. Sigeb.
               
            
            
               
               Tranſlation of holy bodies.
               Now was tranſlation of the bodies of many Saints from Italie, into Almaine, France, and England. Faſcic. temp. This was all the Religion of this time.
               
                  Michael Emperour of Conſtantinople,
                  Michael, Emperour of Conſtantinople. ſent Embaſſadors towards Lewis Debonaire, to vnderſtand his opinion towching the Images of Saints; namely, whether they ſhould keepe them, or reiect them. Lewis ſent them to Pope Eugenius to heare his opinion. Bonif. Simoneta. This Emperour Michael, ſent to Lewis the bookes of the Hierarchie of S. Denis. Chro. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Lotharie King of Italie came to Rome, and was royally receiued of Pope Eugenius: hee reformed the eſtate of the Towne, and all Italie, and ceaſed all partialities,Rome then, was not yet the Popes. and appointed at Rome Magiſtrates to do right to the people. Naucler. Blond.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋalentine, ſecond of that name, Cardinall and Deacon, a  Romane, gouerned at Rome onely fortie dayes, an eloquent man. Bonif. Simoneta.
               
               Organes became firſt in vſe in France about this time, by a Prieſt called Gregorie, who learned his cunning therein in Greece. See the Hiſt. of France.
               
               
                  Gregorie Pope, fourth of that name, a Romane, ruled at  
                  Rome 16. yeares.Gregorie. 4.
                  
               
               This Pope would neuer accept the Popeſhip, vnleſſe firſt the Emperour would approoue his election, and therof he was certified by an Embaſſage which the Emperour ſent to Rome, to examine the ſaid election. Naucl. and Abb. Ʋrſp.
               
               The Sarraſins with the Souldan of Babilon, came into Rome,
                   and of the Church of S. Peter, made a ſtable for horſes,Rome. and waſted Pouille, Calabria, and Sicilie, and pilled and ſpoiled all where they went. Chron. Euſeb. and Naucler.
               
               
                  Naucler. ſaith, that in the Councell held at Aixle Chapele,
                  A Councell at Aix wherin the ſuperfluities of Biſhops were cut off. vnder this Pope, the yeare of Chriſt, 830. there was ordained a meane and rule for Monkes, Nunnes, Canons, and others to liue in.
               
                  There was alſo ordained that euery Church ſhould poſſeſſe rents and reuenewes, that ſo Prieſts might haue whereon to liue, and ſo to keepe them from applying themſelues to any prophane thing, or diſhoneſt gaine. Prebendes were ordained for Monkes, that for neceſſitie they might not be withdrawne from holy things. There was alſo graunted Franches and libertie to Monkes, Clarkes, and Prieſts, that they ſhould not be ſubiect vnto temporall Lords, &c.
               The body of S. Marke was tranſported from Alexandria to Venice. Naucl.
               
               
                   After this Councell, there were ambuſhes laid for the Emperor Lewis: euen his owne children, angry at the ſecond marriage of their father, with one called Iudith, an audatious woman. He ſent them farre from him; namely, Lotharie into Italie, Pippin into Aquitane, and Lewis into Bauiere. Notwithſtanding he was impriſoned in the Monaſterie of S. Modard at Soiſſons.
               
               
                  Iohn le Maire declareth this Hiſtorie as followeth. In the time of Gregorie the fourth (ſaith he) was held a Councell at Campaigne, which was deteſtable and pernitious, by the diſordinate Prelates of France, who grieued that at the former Councell the Emperour had corrected their pompes and diſordered ſuperfluities; hauing cauſed them to leaue their Rings, they conſpired againſt him, and cauſed the children to take Armes againſt their father, and to take him and hold him in ſtraight guard at Soiſſons; the Pope Gregorie aiding in this exploit. Moreouer, at the ſaid Councell (or rather conuenticle and monopole) the ſaid Biſhops and Prelates coniured, condemned their ſoueraigne Prince and Lord to lay away Armes and his militarie Girlde, and to diſpoile himſelfe of his Imperiall dignitie, and in the place therof, to take the Monkes Coole or Frocke. O falſe, wicked, and Pharaſaicall Prieſtly hypocriſie (ſaith he). This is not the firſt time that thou haſt conſpired in great diſdaine againſt ſuch as reprehend and correct thee. For thou beganneſt at the head, that is, at our Lord Ieſus Chriſt. But afterward this ſaid Emperour was againe eſtabliſhed into his Kingdome by an other better Councell of Biſhops and

Prelates of France, and by the conduct of certaine good Barrons and loyall Captaines of his kingdome, being nigh touched with his troubles and griefes. His ſonnes which had impriſoned him, demanded pardon for their fault and villainous enterpriſe, and obtained it. See Iohn le Maire. Ebdo Archbiſhop of Rhemes, and many other Prelates which had conſpired againſt the king, were depoſed from their dignities, condemned and baniſhed out of France, Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Gregorie the fourth inſtituted the Feaſt of All-ſaints, vpon  the firſt day of Nouember.
               
                  Rabanus firſt Monke of S. Benet, and Abbot of Fulden,
                  Rabanus. after Biſhop of Magunce, flouriſhed at this time. He expounded all the Bible, as well the olde as the new Teſtament, and made many other bookes.
               
                  Strabus a Monke of Fulden, a Diſciple of Rabanus,
                  
                     Strabus. The Ordinarie Cloſe. was the firſt which made the ordinarie Cloſe, which after was augmented. Tritem.
               
               
                  Bertramus Prieſt, a learned man, and well inſtructed in true pietie, made a booke of Predeſtination, and an other of the body and bloud of the Lord, wherein he ſpeaketh very properly of the Lords Supper.
               
                  He ſerued for a light to illuminate others in this darke time.
               
               
                  Turpin, Archbiſhop of Rhemes, wrote two bookes of the actes of Charlemaigne. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Lewis Debonaire died of the age of 64. yeares, hauing  raigned 26. and was buried at Mets in the Sepulchre of his mother Hildegarde. After his death, roſe vp a cruell time: for whilſt his children Lotharie, Charles, and Lewis, were in debates and warres, the Sarraſins on the other ſide lifted vp themſelues, as alſo the Saxons, with others. At a battle giuen at Fountenay, a Towne of Auxerrois, Lotharie fled to Aixle Chapelle, and and from thence to Vienne.
               
               
                  Lotharie or Lother obtained the Empire 15. yeares. The  felicitie of that Kingdome, acquired by Charlemaigne,
                  Lotharie. ſoone finiſhed in this man, whoſe Empire was diuided. He had ſuch

debates with his bretheren,Lotharie. that one day at an Eaſter Feaſt, almoſt all the Nobilitie of France periſhed at a combat, wherein Charles had the victorie. Finally, there was meanes found of agreement; namely, that Charles ſurnamed Le Chaune, ſhould be King of France, Lewis King of Germanie, and Lotharie who was then the eldeſt, ſhould haue Gaul, Belgique, Prouince, and that portion of the Countrey which of his owne name was called Lotharinge: that is to ſay, Lorraine. He already poſſeſſed Italie.
               
               
                  Lothaire left three ſonnes, Lewis, Lotharie, and Charles, vnto which he made a partition: to Lewis, the Empire, with Italie: to Lothaire, Auſtraſia and Lorraine: and to Charles the youngeſt, the Kingdome of Prouince. This partition was during his life, in the preſence of the greateſt of his Kingdome. After, he tooke him to a Monaſterie.
               
                  Sergius. 2.
                  
                  Sergius Pope, the ſecond of that name, a Romane, ruled  three yeares. His election was confirmed by Lewis, the Emperour Lothaires ſonne, who ſent to Rome for that purpoſe, and the ſaid Lewis was crowned King of Italie by Sergius. Nauclerus.
               
               This Sergius was before called Swines Snowte, and therefore chaunged his name, and ſo gaue firſt occaſion to his ſucceſſors to chaunge their names in their election.
               
                  He then, and they which followed, eſteemed more of the name which they receiue at their curſed vnction, then that they receiue at their baptiſme: wherein there is an apparant marke of Antichriſt.
               
               
                  A marke of the beaſt.Some there are, which by reaſon of certaine miſteries and ſecrets which were then reuealed, count the number of the Beaſt from this change of the name, vntill the 7. yeare of Iulius the ſecond of that name: who caſting S. Peters keyes into Tiber, tooke Saint Pauls Sword: whereof wee ſhall ſpeake in his place.
               
                  Benefices ſold to them which would giue moſt.This Pope had a brother called Benet, who outragiouſly vſurſped to himſelfe the Church goods: and there was ſo

great couetouſneſſe at Rome, by the careleſneſſe of Sergius, that Biſhopprickes were publikely ſolde to him that would giue moſt: and no man in authoritie ſought any remedie for ſuch an enormitie: which they ſaid came becauſe of the Sarraſins comming into Italie.
               
               Yet hee was very diligent to adorne and repaire Churches, and to place many holy bodies in them. Supp. Chron.
               
               He builded a Monaſterie nigh the Church of S. Siluester. Supp. Chron. He added to the priuate Maſſe, the breaking of bread into three peeces.
               
                  Leo, Pope, 4. of that name, a Romane, ruled 8. or 9. yeares.Leo. 4.
                   Hee was preſently choſen, euen before his predeceſſor was  buried.
               Hee repaired many Temples which the Sarraſins had deſtroyed.
               He ordained that no Lay-man ſhould preſume to enter into the Quier of the Church,The people ſeperated frō Prieſt in the Church. nor to come nigh the Prieſt when he ſung Maſſe, vnleſſe it were to the offering. For that place is ordained for them which doo diuine ſeruice. Chron. Euſeb. Hee alſo made many Collects and Oriſons: as Deus cuius dextra beatū Petrū ambulantem in fluctibus, &c. Item, Deus quibeato Petro collatis, &c. Item, Deus quiab ipſo huis mundi principio, &c. Item, Preſta quaeſumus, omnipotens & miſericors Deus, &c. againſt the aſſaultes of the Sarraſins and Earthquakes.
               He builded the Caſtle of S. Angelo at Rome,
                  The Caſtle of S. Angelo.
                   repaired the walles and gates, and builded fifteene Bul
                     •
                  arkes for the defence of the Towne. And he himſefle went to warre againſt the Sarraſins.
               It was hee which enriched the Croſſe with precious ſtones, the which the Deacons vſed to carrie before the Popes.
               The yeare of Chriſt 849. Leo Emperour of Conſtantinople was ſlaine in his Pallace, hee beeing in his Chappell, by a conſpiracie of his Nobles, and eſpecially of Count Michael, who after obtained the Empire nine yeares. Naucler. Chron Sigeb.
               
               
                  A Sinode at Rome of 64. or after ſome, 47. Biſhops, was aſſembled by Leo: wherein a great Cardinall was condemned and depoſed, becauſe he had left his Pariſh fiue yeares, and for other crimes. Notwithſtanding, after this, the ſame Pope ordained that a Biſhop ought not to be condemned vnleſſe hee were euicted by 72. witneſſes.
               A great mutation hapned in France by the Normanes, Friſons, Brittaines, and others: which waſted it.
               
                  Adulphus (after the Chronicle of Euſebius) or Ethelwolphus, or Alidulphus, or Adolphus after ſome, the firſt Chriſtian King of England,S. Peters pence in England. went to Rome on Pilgrimage with his ſonne Alfredus. Nauclerus. And graunted to the Pope Leo of each houſe in his Countrey a certaine peece of Siluer for tribute, payable to the Popes of Rome euerie yeare, in the honour of Saint Peter, which cuſtome was long time after kept.
               This Tribute was called S. Peters pence, or guilt, and ſo was all England made ſubiect to the Popes ſeate. Functius.
               
               The body of S. Helena, mother of Conſtantine the great, from Rome, was tranſpoted into France. Chron. Sig. and Faſc. Temp.
               
               In Almaine vpon the coaſt of Rhene, a great famine came, and after that, a great earth quake: whereby S. Albons Church at Magunce fell.
            
            
               An Aduertiſement.
               As for the Popes on the Romane ſeate, from Phocas the Emperour hitherto, they haue ſtill multiplyed, newe traditions, ceremonies, buildings, pleaſures, pompes, and warres, they haue deuiſed and practiſed murthers, alterations and chaunges of Kingdomes; in ſuch ſort, as finally the Church vnder their gouernmenment became altogether the whore whereof is ſpoken in the Apocalips: and the better to diſcouer the thing, the Lord hath manifeſted the truth thereof to all the world in this Pope that followeth, Iohn. the 8. who being

a woman, and an whore, hath ſhewed in her body the true portraict of the great ſpiritual whoredome of the Romane Popes, which after, ſtill more and more is manifeſted.
               
                  Iohn, 8. of that name,
                     Iohn. 8. The great whore. tooke the name of an Engliſh man, becauſe of a certaine Engliſh Moonke of the Abbey of Fulden, which he loued ſingularly: as for his office hee was a Pope: but for his Sexe hee was a woman. This woman, beeing an Almaine by Nation, borne at Magunce, and firſt called Gilberte, feigned her ſelfe to be a man; hauing taken on her mans apparell, went to Athens with her amorous Louer the Monke: In which place ſhe profited excellenty in all kinde of Sciences; and after the Monkes death came to Rome, ſtill diſſembling ſhee was a woman: But becauſe ſhe was of a very ſharpe ſpirit and had a notable grace, well and promptly to ſpeake in diſputations and publike Lectures, ſo that many maruelled at her knowledge, euerie one was ſo affectioned towards her, and ſo well ſhee gained the hearts of all, that after the death of Leo, ſhe was choſen Pope. Into which office being brought, ſhee beſtowed holy orders (as they call them) after the maner of other Popes: ſhee made Prieſts and Deacons: ſhe ordained Biſhops and Abbots: ſhe ſung Maſſes: ſhee conſecrated Temples and Aultars: ſhee adminiſtred the Sacraments: ſhee preſented her feete to kiſſe; and did all other things which the Popes of Rome vſed to do, and yet her Actes were then of verie litle or no valew.
               Whileſt this woman was thus in the Papall office, the Emperour Lotharie now olde, tooke the habit of a Monke, and Lewis the ſecond of that name beeing come to Rome,Lewis. 2.
                   tooke the Scepter and Imperiall Crowne at her hands, with S. Peters bleſſing. In dooing whereof, this whore of Babilon ſhewed her ſelfe to haue that power, that ſhe made Kings ſubiect vnto her. In her time Ethelwolphus king of England gaue cowardly the tenth part of his Kingdome to the Cleargie and Monkes (as Horeden ſaith) and his ſonne Ethelbaldus eſpouſed Iudith his mother in lawe, his fathers widow now dead. But whileſt this Pope was in his eſtate, ſhe was got with child by a Chaplaine of hers a Cardinal, who knew well of what Sexe ſhe

was. And as ſhe went on Proceſſion ſolemnly to the Church of Lateran, ſhe brought forth this child gotten in whoredome, betwixt the Colloſſe and the Church of S. Clement, in the middeſt of Rome in the publike ſtreete, in the preſence of all the people of Rome, and died in the ſame place, as ſhe deliuered her childe, the yeare of our Lord, 857. Becauſe of ſuch a fault, as to bring forth a childe in a common ſtreete, ſhee was depriued of all honor accuſtomably done to Popes, and buried without any Papall Pompe.
               
                  Heere thou mayeſt ſee (Reader) how the Romane Church cannot erre, after they haue cauſed a Maſſe of the holy Ghoſt to bee ſung. This Act alone certainly doth ſo euidently ſhewe that it is the ſeate of the great whore, and the mother of all whoredomes, that there is no Apelles whatſoeuer that can better paint her in her colours.
               
               But to the end that Popes and annointed Fathers may ſeeme to deteſt ſuch a ſinne, they turne from that ſtreete, as from a place which they much ſuſpect, becauſe of the euil luck. Functius makes no doubt ſo ſay that this was permitted of God, that this woman ſhould be created Pope: and withall, that ſhe ſhould be an harlot publikely prooued, becauſe in theſe times ſhe made kings ſubiects vnto her, (as Ethelwolphus and Alfredus were in England) that they might acknowledge Antichriſt for their king. For God in this Papeſſe harlot would manifeſt to the world this whore of Babilon, whereof the holy Ghoſt hath foretold, to the ende the faithfull I might take heed of her. But to the end thoſe good Fathers ſhould no more fall into ſuch an inconueniency, they haue ordained that a Deacon ſhould handle their priuie parts in an holied Chaire, to the ende hee may be knowne whether he be a man or no. But now whileſt they be Cardinals, and before they be choſen Popes, they engender ſo many baſtards, that none can doubt if they be males, neither is there any more need of ſo holy a ceremonie.
               
                  Lotharie now old, hauing diuided his kingdome to his children, and made himſelfe a Monke (as is ſaid) died the yeare 855.
               
                  
                  Lewis, ſecond of that name, the ſonne of Lotharie,Lewis. 2. (vnto  whom his father had aſſigned whileſt hee liued, the Kingdome of Italie and the Empire) was a kinde man, and one that feared God. Hee raigned nineteene yeares, and died the yeare, 874.
               
                  Benet Pope, third of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome about three yeares. This man when he was choſen Pope,Benet. 3.
                   receiued the office weeping, taking God to witneſſe that he was not meet for ſuch a charge. Hee was three dayes in faſting and prayer, deſiring the Lord to giue him grace wel to gouerne the Church. Sup. Chron. Naucler.
               
               The Emperours Embaſſadors came and confirmed his election.
               He viſited the diſeaſed, nouriſhed the poore, cōforted the deſolate, and defended Widowes and Orphanes. Supp. Chron.
               
               Hee ordained that the Pope by his corporall preſence, ſhould honour the obſequies of a Biſhop, Prieſt, and Deacon. Boniface Simoneta. And commaunded all the Cleargie to aſſiſt the Funeralls of a Pope. R. Barns.
               
               He was depoſed from his Papacie by the conſpiracie of certaine wicked perſons: and a Cardinall called Annaſtatius,
                  A Pope depoſed, and after reſtored. vſurped the ſeate: but after, he was reiected and ſent to priſon, and Benet was reſtored by the Emperours Embaſſadors. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               The Engliſh men came into France about this time, and waſted it. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  Nicholas Pope, the firſt of that name, a Romane,Nicholas. 1.
                   ruled at Rome about tenne yeares: or after Nauclerus ſeuen  yeares.
               
               He was eſteemed ſo holy, that after S. Gregorie the great, there was found none comparable to him.
               He was created Pope in his abſence, and placed in the Apoſtolike ſeate againſt his will. R. Barns.
               
               He builded the Temple or Church of the Virgin Marie, which men call Lanoue. The ſame.
               He made many decrees, & amongſt others, he ordained that that Emperours and ſecular Princes ſhould be reiected from

the Counells of the Church, vnleſſe there were ſome queſtion of Faith. Dist. 91. Cap. Ʋbinam. Item, that ſecular men ſhould not iudge the life of Clarkes. Diſt. 28. Cap. Conſulendum. Item, that it ſhould not bee lawfull for any to preiudice or contradict his iudgment, neither to reprehend his ſentence and opinion, nor to iudge of his iudgement. 9. q. 3. Patet. Item, that the Pope may not be bound nor vnbound by any ſecular power, becauſe he is called God. Diſt. 96. Cap. Satis euidenter. Item, that Biſhops ought not to goe on warrefare, but occupie themſelues in Prayers and Oriſons. 23. queſt. 8. Cap. Reprehenſible. Item, that hone ſhould aſſiſt at the Maſſe of a married Prieſt. Diſt. 32. Cap. Nullus. Item, hee commaunded to take the Sacraments euen of ſuch Prieſts as were of wicked life, if they be not reiected of Biſhops, or excommunicated for ſome notorious crime. 11. queſt. 8. Cap. Sciſcitantib. Item, hee would that the decrees of his predceſſors and their Epiſtles, ſhould obtaine euerie where vertue and authoritie.
               By his authoritie the Sequences were newly added and ſung at Maſſe, at the ſollicitation of Norgerus Abbot of S. Gall; who after was Biſhop of Liege. Abb.Trit.
               
               He writ a long and very rude Epiſtle vnto Michael Emperour of Conſtantinople, in mainteinance of his Apoſtolike Primacie.
               He ordained that no ſecular Prince ſhould preſume to vſurpe things belonging vnto Prieſts.
               
                  
                     Lotharie excommunicated.Hee excommunicated Lotharius, brother of the Emperour Lewis, becauſe hee kept two wiues, Theoberge and Galdrada, and ſent a writing againſt him to the Biſhoppes of Fraunce, Almaine, and Italie. 2. queſt. 1. Cap. Scelus. Item, to Charles le Chauue, Vncle of the ſaid Lotharie, 2. queſt. 1. cap. An non. Moreouer, hee excommunicated and depriued of their dignities, the Arch-biſhoppe of Treuens Theogaldus, and the Arch-biſhoppe of Coloigene Gontarius, becauſe that conſenting to the diuorce, they maintained and defended the ſaid Lotharie, 9. queſt. 3. cap. Precipue. cap. Thegaldum. Wherevppon Lotharie ſeeing himſelfe accuſed,

and alſo that they proceeded againſt him by excommunication, he tooke againe Theberge his wife, and reiected Galdrada: but ſtraight after hee againe forſooke his wife and called again Galdrada, and after could neuer be ſeperated from her for any correction. Naucler.
               
               
                  Iohn Arch-biſhop of Rauenna, meaning to maintaine the auncient libertie of Rauenna, which Conſtantine and Iuſtinian the two Emperors, and Leo the ſecond Pope, had taken from them, was cited to appeare at Rome, and becauſe hee appeared not, he was depriued of his dignitie. The ſaid Arch-biſhop went to the Emperour and beſought him to entreate the Popes licence to goe to Rome to defend his cauſe without daunger: which the Pope graunted at the Emperours requeſt. The Arch-biſhop admitted to pleade his cauſe before many Prelates, confeſſed himſelfe giltie of Treaſon towards the Pope, and therefore demaunded mercy and pardon of all them which were preſent. The Pope receiued him into grace vpon certaine conditions: namely that in full Sinode he ſhould purge himſelfe of hereſie. That each yeare he ſhould goe to Rome: That he ſhould ceaſe conſecrating of Biſhops although they were Canonically elected, vnleſſe it were by the authoritie of the Pope graunted by his Letters. That he ſhould chaunge nothing of Eccleſiaſticall goods without the Popes licence, vnder paine of excommunication.
               The Biſhop of Strasburge called Ratholdus, otherwiſe Radulphus, ſent to Rome a Prieſt of his Dioceſſe, conuicted to haue ſlaine his mother: vnto whom although there was enioyned hard penance, yet the Pope permitted him to keepe his wife with him, to auoyd the daunger of fornication. See 33. queſt. 2. chap. Latorem. and Renamus in the annotations vpon on Tertullian, in the ende.
               But this Pope Nicholas made great haſte to publiſh conſtitutions and decrees touching the ſinglenes and continencie of Clarkes, but he could obtaine nothing therein. A Biſhop alſo of Aſpurge in Almaigne, called Huldric, greatly reſiſted the ſaid decrees, and writ an Epiſtle to Pop: Nicholas, which is worthie wholy to be here inſerted, to confound the Popiſh errour

of the ſinglenes of Prieſts. I haue therefore tranſlated it word by word from his Latin originall, as followeth.
               
                  One Epiſtle of Huldric Biſhop, to Pope Nicholas.
                  Huldric Biſhop only in name, as a ſonne promiſeth and beareth loue, and as a ſeruant feare to Nicholas his Lord, Father and vigilant Paſtor of the holy Romane Church. Father and Lord, after I knew thy Decrees made vpon the ſinglenes of Prieſts, lately brought vnto mee, to be farre from diſcretion, a feare vexed me with a ſadneſſe. I ſay feare, becauſe it is commonly ſaid that the ſentence of the Paſtor, be it iuſt or vniuſt, is to be feared. I was alſo afraid that the weake Auditors of the ſcripture (which ſildome obey a iuſt ſentence, yea often caſt it off as if it were vniuſt) will not binde themſelues vpon commaundement vnto an errour, or an importable tranſgreſſion, for the pleaſure of his Paſtor.
               On the other ſide, heauineſſe and compaſſion moued me: For I ſee not by what meanes the members can be guarded, when the head is deteined with ſo greeuous a maladie. For what thing is more greeuous, or more worthie of compaſſion towardes all the Church, then when the Biſhop of the Seate (vnto whom appertaineth the examination of all the Church) withdraweth himſelfe, and ſtraieth, yea though neuer ſo little from holy diſcretion? Aſſuredly thou art not a little out of the way when thou wouldeſt that Clarkes (whom thou ſhouldeſt admoniſh to keepe chaſtitie of marriage) ſhould be compelled by violence and imperious force, to keepe themſelues continent.
               For is not this violence, yea euen after the common iudgement of all that haue knowledge, when any is conſtrained to keepe a particular Decree againſt the Inſtitution of the Goſpell and doctrine of the holy Ghoſt?
               And ſeeing there are many examples both of the olde and newe Teſtament, which teach (as thou knoweſt) an holy diſcretion, I beſeech it may not be greeuous to thy Fatherhood, if of many I bring ſome fewe in this my writing.
               The Lorde in the olde Teſtament hath conſtituted and ordeined marriage for Prieſts: and we neuer reade that after he forbad it.
               
                  He ſaith well in the Goſpell, That ſome are chaſte which make themſelues chaſte for the kingdome of heauen:
                  Math. 19. verſ. 11.
                   but hee addeth, that all men vnderſtand not this word. Hee that can comprehend it, let him comprehend it. And therefore the Apoſtle ſaith, As for virgins I haue no commandement of the Lorde:
                  1. Cor. 7. verſ. 25. 
                  but I only giue counſell. Which counſell yet all cannot (as thoa maiſt conſider) comprehend, after the ſentence of the Lord. Thou feeſt notwithſtanding many to whome this ſentence of the Goſpell is pleaſant, and flatter themſelues, being more willing to pleaſe men then God: and vnder a falſe appearance of chaſlitie, commit many great and enormious ſinnes; do ſubborne and corrupt other mens wiues: and which is more, do not abhorre to lye with Males, and with brute Beaſts. And to the end the eſtate of the Church ſhould not be ſo waſted and corrupted with ſuch a pollution, infection, and contagious a peſtilence, the Apoſtle S. Paul commandeth & faith: To auoyd fornication,
                  1. Cor. 7. verſ. 2. 
                  let each man haue his wiſe. But hypocrites corrupt this ſentence, and ſay falſly that it only appertaineth to Lay people. And yet they make no difficultie nor conſcience, in whatſoeuer holy order they be conſtituted, to abuſe other mens wiues. And all thoſe (which we cannot ſee without weeping) are abandoned to the aforeſaid ſinnes and enormities: ſurely they vnderſtand not the ſcripture. And becauſe they haue too rudely preſſed the breſt therof, in lieu of milk they haue drunk blood. For this ſentence of the Apoſtle, namely: Let each one haue his wife: excepteth no perſon but him that hath the gift of continency, or him who hath purpoſed to perſeuer in his virginity after the Lord. Wherfore (ô reuerend Father) it ſhalbe your part to ſee that whoſoeuer either with hand or mouth hath made a vow of continency, and afterward would forſake it, ſhould either be compelled to keep his vowe, or elſe by lawfull authoritie ſhould be depoſed from his order. An to bring this to paſſe, ye ſhal not only haue me, but all other of my order to be helpers vnto you. But ye you may vnderſtand that ſuch who know not what a vow mean, are not to be violently compelled thervnto, hear what the Apoſtle ſaith vnto Timothy. A Biſhop ſaith he, muſt be irreprehenſible, the husband of one wife. Which ſetence leaſt you ſhould turne and apply only to one onely Church, mark what he inferreth after.

He that knoweth not (ſaith he) how to rule his owne houſe and familie, how ſhould he rule the Church of God? And likewiſe the Deacons (ſaith hee) let them be the husbands of one wife, which haue knowledge to gouerne their owne houſe and children. And this wife how ſhee is wont to be bleſt of the Prieſt you vnderſtand ſufficiently I ſuppoſe by the decrees of holie Silueſter the Pope.This decree is contrarie to the Biſhops and Prelates in Queene Maries dayes. To theſe and ſuch other holy ſentences of the ſcripture, agreeth alſo he, that is the writer of the Rule of the Cleargie, writing after this maner. A Clarke muſt be chaſte and continent, or elſe let him be coupled in the bands of Matrimonie, hauing one wife. Whereby it is to be gathered, that the Biſhoppe and Deacon are noted infamous and reprehenſible, if they be diuided in moe women then one: Otherwiſe if they doo forſake one, vnder the pretence of Religion, both they together, as well the Biſhop as the Deacon, be there condemned by the Canonicall ſentence, which ſaith; Let no Biſhop or Prieſt forſake his owne wife, vnder the colour and pretence of Religion: If he do forſake her, let him be excommunicate: and if he ſo continue, let him be diſcharged. S. Auguſtine alſo a man of diſcreet holineſſe, ſaith in theſe words; There is no offence ſo great or greeuous, but it is to auoyd a greater euil. Furthermore we reade in the ſecond booke of the Tripartite Hiſtorie, that when the Councell of Nice going about to eſtabliſh the ſame decree, would needs enact, that Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons, after their conſecration, either ſhould abſtaine vtterly from their owne wiues, or elſe ſhould be depoſed: Then Pathuntius (one of the holy Martyrs of whome the Emperour Maximus had put out the right eye & hockt his legges) riſing vp amongſt them, withſtood their purpoſed decreement, cōfeſſing marriage to be honourable, and calling the bed of matrimony chaſtitie: and ſo perſwaded the Councell from making that lawe; declaring thereby what occaſion might come of it to themſelues, and their wiues, of fornication. And thus much did Pathuntius being vnmarried himſelfe, and the whole Councell commending his ſentence gaue place thereto, and left the matter free without compulſion, to the will of euery man, to do therein as he thought good. Notwithſtanding there be ſome

which gatte S. Gregorie for their defence in this matter, whoſe temeritie I laugh at, and ignorance I lament: For they know not being ignorantly deceiued, how daungerous the decree of this hereſie was, being made of S. Gregorie, who afterward well reuoked the ſame with condigne fruite of repentance. For vpon a certaine day as he ſent to his Fiſh-poole for Fiſh,More then 6000. heads of Infants found in the Popes Moate, through the wicked decree Of the ſingle life of Prieſts. and did ſee more then ſixe thouſand Infants heads which were brought vnto him out of the ſame Ponde or Moate, did greatly repent himſelfe of the Decree before made touching the ſingle life of Prieſts, which hee confeſſed to be the cauſe of that ſo lamentable a murther: And ſo purging the ſame with hartie repentance, altered againe the things hee had decreed before, commending that Councell of the Apoſtle which ſaith; That it is better to marrie then to burne. Adding moreouer himſelfe therevnto and ſaying; It is better to marrie then giue occaſion of death. Peraduenture if thoſe men had red with me this which ſo happened, I thinke they would not be ſo raſh in their dooing and iudging, fearing at the leaſt the Lords commaundement: Doo not iudge that ye be not iudged. And S. Paul ſaith; Who art thou that iudgeſt an other mans ſeruant? Either hee ſtandeth or falleth to his owne maiſter, but he ſhall ſtand, for the Lord is mightie and can make him ſtand. Therefore let your holineſſe ceaſe to compell and enforce thoſe whom only you ought to admoniſh, leaſt through your owne priuate commaundement (which God forbid) you be found contrary, as well to the old Teſtament as the new. For as S. Auguſtine ſaith to Donatus,
                  S. Auguſtine to Donatus. This is onely that we doo feare in your Iuſtice, leaſt (not for the conſideration of chriſtian lenitie, but for the greatnes and greeuouſnes of tranſgreſſions committed) you be thought to vſe violence in the executing puniſhment, which we only deſire you (by Chriſt) not to do. For tranſgreſſions are ſo to be puniſhed, that the tranſgreſſors may repent their liues. Alſo an other ſaying of S. Auguſtine we would haue you to remember, which is this. Nilfiat nocendi cupiditate, omnia autē charitate proficiendi, & nihil fiat, crudelitèr nihil inhumaniter. That is, let nothing be done through the charitie of profiting, neither let any thing be done cruelly, nor vngently. Item of the ſame Auguſtine it is written: In the

feare and name of Chriſt I exhort you, which of you ſo euer haue not the goods of this world, be not greedie to haue them. Such as haue them, preſume not too much vpon them: For I ſay to haue them is not damnation, but if you preſume vpon them, it is damnation. If for the hauing of them, ye ſhall ſeeme great in your owne ſight, or if you do forget the common condition of man through the excellencie of any thing you haue, vſe therein due diſcretiō therefore, tempered with moderation: which cup of diſcretion is drawne out of that fountaine of the Apoſtolicke preaching which ſaith: Art thou looſe from thy wife? do not ſeeke to thy wife: Art thou bound to thy wife? do not ſeeke to be looſed from her. Where alſo it followeth; Such as haue wiues, let them be as though they had them not. And they that vſe the world, let them be as not vſing it. Item, concerning the widow he ſaith; Let her marry to whom ſhe will, only the Lord.What it is to marry in the Lord. To marry in the Lord, is nothing elſe but to attempt nothing in contracting of Matrimony, which the Lord doth forbid. Ieremie ſaith alſo, Truſt not to the words of lies, ſtaine not the Temple of the Lord. The which ſaying of Ieremie, Hierome expounding ſaith thus. This may agree alſo and be applied to ſuch virgins as bragge and vaunt of their virginitie with an impudent face, pretending chaſtitie, when they haue an other thing in their conſcience. And knowe not how the Apoſtle defineth the virgin, that ſhe ſhould be holy in bodie, and alſo in ſpirit.What a virgin is after the Apoſtle. For what auaileth the chaſtitie of the bodie, if the minde inwardly be deflowred? Or if it haue not the other vertues, which the Propheticall Sermon doth deſcribe? The which vertues, for as much as we partly ſee to be in you, and becauſe we are not ignorant that this diſcretion (although neglected in this part) yet in the other actions of your life to be kept honeſtly of you) do not diſpaire, but you will alſo ſoone amend the litle lacke which is behinde. And therefore with as much grauitie as we can, we ceaſe not to call vpon you to correct and amend this your negligence. For although touching our common calling, a Biſhop is greater then a Prieſt, yet Augustine being leſſe then Ierome, (notwithſtanding the good correction proceeding from the leſſer to the greater) was not to be

refuſed or diſdained: eſpecially when he which was corrected, was found to ſtriue againſt the truth to pleaſe men.
               For as Saint Auguſtine ſaith writing to Boniface,
                  Auguſtine ad Bonifacium. The Diſputations of all men be they neuer ſo Catholicke or approoued perſons, ought not to be had in ſteed of the Canonicall ſcriptures. So that we may diſproue or refuſe (ſauing the honour and reuerence which is due vnto thē) any thing that is in their writings, if there be any thing found contrary to the truth. And what can be found more contrary to the truth then this? When as the truth it ſelfe, ſpeaking of continency, not of one onely, but of all men together (the number onely excepted of them which haue profeſſed continency) ſaith: Hee that can take, let him take, Which ſaying, theſe men do turne and ſay: Hee that cannot take, let him be accurſed. And what can be more fooliſh amongſt men, thē when any Biſhop or Archdeacon run themſelues headlong into all kinde of luſt, adultery and Inceſt, yet ſhame not to ſay, that the chaſt marriage of Prieſts do ſtink before them? And as void of all compaſſion of true righteouſnes, do not deſire or admoniſh their Clarkes or fellowe ſeruants to abſtain, but command and enforce them as ſeruants, violently to abſtain: vnto the which Imperious cōmandement or counſell of theirs, they adde alſo this filthy & fooliſh ſuggeſtion:The abſurd and filchy ſaying of Papiſts. ſaying that it is more honeſt, priuily to haue to do with many women, then openly in the preſence of many men, to be bound to one wife. Which truly they would not ſay, if they were either of him, or in him which ſaieth: Woe be to you Phariſies, who doo all things before men. And the Pſalmiſt, Becauſe they pleaſe men they are confounded: for the Lord hath deſpiſed them. Theſe be the men who ought rather to perſwade vs to be aſhamed to ſinne in his preſence, with whom all things are naked and diſcouered: rather thē to ſeeme pure and neate in the preſence of men. Theſe men therfore although through their ſinful wickednes deſerue no counſell of godlineſſe to be giuen them, yet we not forgetting our humanitie, ceaſe not to giue them counſell by the authoritie of Gods word, which ſeeketh all mens ſaluation, ſaying: Thou hipocrite, caſt firſt the beame out of thine owne eye: and then thou ſhalt ſee clearly to plucke the Mote out of thy brothers eye.
               
               
                  Moreouer this alſo we deſire thee to attend what the Lord ſaith of the adulterous woman: Which of you that is without ſinne, let him caſt the firſt ſtone againſt her. As though he would ſay; If Moſes bid you, I alſo bid you. But yet I require you that you be competent Miniſters and executors of the lawe: Take heed what you adde therevnto: take heed alſo I pray you what you are your ſelues. For if as the ſcripture ſaith thou well conſider thy ſelfe, thou wilt neuer defame nor detract from an other.
               
                  Gregorius.Moreouer, it is alſo ſignified vnto vs, that ſome there be of them which (when they ought like good ſhepheards to giue their liues for the Lordes flocke) yet are puffed vp with ſuch pride, that without all reaſon they ſeeme to rent and teare the Lords flocke with whippings and beatings. Whoſe vnreaſonable doings S. Gregorie bewailing thus. Quid fiat de onibus, quando paſtores Lupi fiunt?ſ That is, what ſhall become of the ſheep, when Paſtours themſelues be Wolues? But who is ouercome but he which exerciſeth crueltie? Or who ſhall iudge the perſecutor, but hee which gaue patiently his backe to ſtripes? And this is the fruite which commeth to the Church by ſuch perſecutors, alſo which commeth to the Cleargie by ſuch ſpitefull handling of the Biſhops, or rather Infidels. For why may you not call them Infidels of whom S. Paul thus ſpeaketh and writeth to Timothie;
                  
                     2. Timo. 3.
                   
                  That in the latter daies there ſhall certaine depart from the faith, giue heed to ſpirites of errour, and doctrine of diuels, of them which ſpeake falſe through hipocriſie, and hauing their conſciences marked with an hotte Iron, forbidding to marrie, and commaunding to abſtaine from meates. &c. And this is if it be well marked, the whole handfull of Darnel and Cockle, growing amongſt the Corne: yea this is the accompliſhment of all madneſſe, that whileſt they of the Cleargie be compelled to relinquiſh the company of their owne lawfull wiues, they become afterward fornicators and adulterers with other women, and wicked miniſters of other ſinfull filthineſſe. Theſe be they which bring vnto the Church of God this Hereſie (as blinde guides leading the blinde) that it might be fulfilled which the Pſalmiſt ſpeaketh of, as foreſeeing the errours of ſuch men, and accurſing them after this manner. Let their eyes be blinded that
                  
they ſee not, and bowe downe alwaies their back. For as much then (ô Apoſtolicall Sir) as no man which knoweth you, is ignorant, that if you through the light of your diſcretion had vnderſtood and ſeene, what poyſoned peſtilence might haue come vnto the Church through the ſentence of your decrees, they would neuer haue conſented to the ſuggeſtions of certaine wicked perſons. Wherefore we counſell you by the fidelitie of our due ſubiection, that with all diligence you would put away ſo great ſlaunder from the Church of God, and through your diſcreet diſcipline you would remooue the Pharaſicall doctrine from the Flocke of God: So that this only Sunamite of the Lordes (vſing no more adulterous husbands) doo not ſeperate the holie people and the kingly Prieſthood from her Spowſe Chriſt Ieſus, through an irreconciliable diuorcement: ſeeing that no man without chaſtitie (not only in the virgins ſtate, but alſo in the ſtate of Matrimonie) ſhall ſee our Lorde Ieſu, who with the Father and the holy Ghoſt liueth and raigneth for euer. Amen.
               
                  This Epiſtle, ſheweth vs as it were with a finger, that in all times the truth of the Lord hath found a paſſage through the middeſt of the Furies of this world, raiſing vp faithfull Miniſters to oppoſe themſelues againſt the horrible diſcipations of the aduerſaries.
               
               The Sarraſins came from Affricke into Italie, vnto the Territorie of Beneuent, before whome went the Emperour Lewis the ſecond, being ayded by his brother Lotharie, who dyed in the way at Plaiſans. Pal. Floren.
               
               The King of Bulgaria receiued the Faith, made himſelfe a Monke, and left the kingdome to his ſonne, who reiected the Faith: In ſo much as his Father came out of the Monaſterie, and went againſt him in battaile, and hauing obtained victorie put out his ſonnes eyes, and held him in priſon, giuing his kingdome to his younger ſonne, and after returned to his Monaſtery. Naucler. and Sigeb.
               
               
                  The body of Saint Innocent Pope, was tranſported from Rome into Saxonie, by the Duke of Saxe. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Michael Emperour of Conſtantinople, made a fellowe and companion of his Empire, one called Baſile, a Macedonian, a puiſſant man, by whom afterward hee was ſlaine. Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Lewis ſonne of Lewis de Bonaire, king of Germanie, Vncle of Lewis 2. Emperour, obtained a victorie againſt the Cleuois, and cauſed their Dukes eies called Raſtrix, to be put out, becauſe he had falſified his faith. Naucler.
               
               After the death of Nicholas Pope, the ſeate was emptie eight yeares, ſeuen moneths, and nine or ten daies, as ſome ſay. Abb. Vrsp.
               
               The Britons were vanquiſhed of the French, vnder Charles le Chauue, king of France. Naucler.
               
               The Normains being ouercome, receiued the faith. Naucl.
               
               The Countrey of Holland was erected into an Earledome or Countie, and Flaunders likewiſe, whereof Baudwin was the firſt Count.
               
                  Adrain. 2.
                  
                  Adrian Pope, ſecond of that name, the ſonne of Talarus 
                   Biſhop, ruled at Rome fiue yeares. The Emperour hauing ſent his Embaſſadors for the Popes election, the Cleargie and Romane people, attended not their comming, but vſurping the authoritie of chooſing, proceeded to the election. The Embaſſadors mal-contented, the ſubtil Romaniſts laid the fault vpon the common people, as hard to repreſſe and appeaſe, being ſtirred. They ſatisfied with this excuſe, ſaluted Adrian with the name of Pope. Platina. R. Barns.
               
               Soone after came Letters from the Emperour, ſignifying that the election pleaſed him, and becauſe ſtrangers could not know the qualitie of him which ſhould be elected, he graunted the election to the Citizens. Naucler. and Cor. Abb.
               
               
                  Adrian then ordained that no Lay-man ſhould thruſt himſelfe into the election of the Pope. Naucler. & 63. Dict. Cap. Nullus.
               
               He ſent three Legates to the Bulgarians, who were newly conuerted, namely, Siluester, Leopard, and Dominic, to ordaine

the affaires of that Church, after the Romane faſhion: but after perſwaded of the Grecians, they caſt off the Latine Prieſts,Diuiſion betwixt the Latine & Greeke Church. and receiued the Greekes: which afterward engendred great hatred betwixt the Latine and Greeke Church, and all the diuiſion of the aforeſaid Churches came onely for the Primacie, and for the diuerſitie of Ceremonies. Robert Barns, and Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Edmond the laſt King of the Eaſt Angles, was ſlaine by the Painims of Denmarke, Anno. 871. and was Canonized a Martyr.
               
                  Alfredus, or Aluredus, the 7. Engliſh king, was crowned by the Pope Adrian. Polydore. Lib. 5.
               The Greciās vſed bels by the benefit of the Venetiās. Sabell.
                  
               
               About this time a Councel was held at Conſtantinople, which was called the eight generall Councell. Adrian ſent thither his Legates, Donatus Biſhop of Oſtia, Stephen, Nepheſin, and Marinus, a Deacon of the Romane Church. R. Barns. Ignatius who vniuſtly was depriued of his Patriarchall dignitie, was reſtored: and Photin (ſome call him Phocas) was reiected and excommunicated. Sabellicus in his 9. booke. 1. cap. It was there ordained that they of Bulgaria ſhould be ſubiect to the Romane church, the Emperour Baſilius contradicting it.
               Here it was alſo ordained, that no Lay-man ſhould be admitted to the election of a Pope, an Archbiſhop, a Patriarke, or Biſhop, but that the Biſhop ſhould be choſen by the Cleargie, of the Chapter. R. Barns.
               
               
                  Adrian excommunicated Lotharius King of Lorraine, brother  vnto the Emperour Lewis, for his adulterie: but comming to Rome as he returned from the warre againſt the Sarraſins, (as ſome ſay Nauclerus alleadgeth) to excuſe himſelfe, receiued the Communion with his Princes: but they all died within the yeare. And the King Lotharius himſelfe died in the way in the Towne of Plaiſance. Faſcic. Temp. Chron. Vrſperg. and Sigeb.
               
               In Lombardie nigh Brize, it raigned bloud three dayes  and three nights, after Nauclerus, and the Chron. Sigeb. And in Fraunce there was a great multitude of Graffe-hoppers

with ſixe winges,Chales. 2.
                   fiue feete, and two teeth, which deſtroyed all graſſe, hearbes and Trees. They were driuen into the Engliſh Seas, by the force of exceeding great windes: and againe by an other winde they were returned vpon the Sea ſandes, vpon the putrifaction wherof came ſuch a peſtilence, that great multitudes of men dyed ſaith Sigeb. Naucler. ſaith that the third part of men died.
               
                  This is not Fryer Scotus.
                  Iohn Scotus, a learned man, was called from France into to England, by Alfredus, King there, who founded the Schoole at Oxenford, where the ſaid Scotus gouerned: but after making himſelfe a Monke, he was ſlaine by the Monkes of that couent as he was teaching: he was cunning in the Greeke tongue, and tranſlated into Latin the Hierarchie of S. Denis. Naucler.
               
               
                  Iohn 9.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, 9. of that name a Romane, ruled at Rome ten  yeares. Suppl. Chron. being a Cardinall Deacon, he wrote Saint Gregories life in foure volumes.
               
                  Lewis the Emperour being in Italie dyed, hauing raigned 19. yeares, and was buried at Milaine. His ſucceſſour was 
                  Charles the ſecond of that name, ſurnamed, le Chauue, the ſonne of Lewis le Debenaire, of his ſecond wife Iudith, & vncle of the dead Lewis the ſecond. After he was King 36. yeares, he heard ſay that the Emperour his Nephew was dead, and incontinent went to Rome to receiue the Crowne of the Empire, hauing ordeined Boſo his wiues brother, King of Prouince.
               
               Pope Iohn in a ſmall time crowned three Emperours, and after gaue occaſion of great contention and warre. Firſt hee crowned Charles le Chauue, who two yeares after he came into Italie to driue the Sarraſins out of the kingdome of Naples, was taken with a Feuer at Mantone, where hee dyed, being poyſoned by his Phyſitian a Iewe, called Zedechias, the yeare 878. hauing bene King 36. yeares, and Emperour two yeares, and was buried at 
                     Ʋerſeile: and after (as ſome ſay) was tranſported to S. Denis. The Pope vnderſtanding of his death, would that his ſonne Lewis le Begne ſhould be choſen Emperour. But the Romanes contradicted it, and would that Charles the third ſurnamed le Gros, ſonne of Lewis king of Germanie it ſhould be choſen.
               
                  The Pope remaining ſtill in his opinion was ſent to priſon:Lewis le Begne. but he eſcaped by the helpe of his friends, and fled into France, where he remained a yeare, firſt in Arles, and after at Lions: Finally, ſome ſay at Troy in Champaigne, where he aſſembled the Councell of the French Church, and there created and crowned Lewis le Begne Emperour, and ſaluted him Auguſtus.
               
               In the meane while Charles the third was at Rome & kept it. He ſent for the Pope, who returned to Rome,
                  Charles. 3.
                   and pronounced, that the ſaide Charles might dwell at Rome, and crowned him Emperour: And ſo they raigned together two yeares. Finally, Lewis was poyſoned, and Charles raigned alone 12. yeares. Plat. Florent. and Robert Barns.
               
               This Pope at the ſame Councell, gaue to the Flemings a Biſhop in Tornay.
               
               
                  Lewis le Begne, two yeares after he was crowned in France, 1. of that name, died at Champaigne, and left his wife great with childe, who after brought foorth Charles le ſimple. Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Charles called le Gros,
                  Charles le Gros. the ſonne of Lewis King of Germaine, being at Rome, occupied the Empire and raigned alone. And by him the Empire or the French men returned to the  Almaines. Naucler. and R. Barns. and came not at the wiſh of the French, nor according to the imaginations and ſubtill deuices of the Pope.
               This Pope Iohn, ordeined that ſuch as offended in Sacriledge  ſhould be excommunicated, & amerced at thirtie pound of ſiluer. 22. queſt. 4. Chap. Quiſquis.
               
               
                  Iohn le Maire ſaith that this Pope was a cruell man, and diſgraded Formoſus, Biſhop of Portenſis, which was an occaſion of many miſchiefes. Faſci. temp. Some Hiſtoriographers ſay, it was for that he was the cauſe that the ſaid Iohn Pope was impriſoned at Rome.
               
               Finally he was poiſoned, or as ſome ſay, ſlaine with the blow of a Mallet, vpon a conſpiracie made againſt him. Chron. Abb. Vrſp. R. Barns.
               
               
                  Paſcaſius about this time was Abbot in Saxonie; he writ a Booke of the Euchariſte, and moſt men followed his opinion,

which pleaſed the Schoole-men more then the opinion of Iohannes Scotus,
                  Charles le Groſſe. or of Bertramus, which were reiected, as ſhal be told in his place.
               
                  Martin. 2.
                  
                  Martin, ſecond of that name, a French man, by euil arts entered into the Popedome. Supple. Chron. and gouerned a yeare and fiue moneths, before he was called Marin.
               
               
                  Betwixt Martin Pope ſecond of that name, and Adrian 
                      the third. Sigebert and Viſperge, place Agapetus: but other Hiſtoriographers make no mention of them.
               
               
                  Adrian. 3.
                  
                  Adrian Pope, the third of that name, ruled at Rome a yeare and three moneths. Hee ordeined that from thenceforth the Emperours ſhould not meddle with the election of the Pope: And that his aurhoritie therein ſhould be no more any thing requiſite, but that the election of the Cleargie ſhould be free. Diſt. 62. chap. Nullus chap. Adrianus. Hee made this Lawe whilſt the Emperour was occupied in the warre againſt the Normains, which then endured not long. For Leo the eight, Pope, did ordaine cleane contrary, as ſhall bee ſaide afterward.
               
                  
                     The order of Clugny, Berno, and Odo.
                  Platina ſaith heere, that William Pyon Duke of Aquitane, and Counte Auerne, founded the firſt Monaſterie of the order of Clugny, vnder the rule of Saint Benet, and made Berno Abbot there, after whome Odo ſucceeded, who hauing bene a Muſitian at Tours, came to be a Monke at Clugny. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               The Emperour Charles became iealous of his wife for the great familiaritie ſhee had with Luitwaldus Biſhop of 
                     Ʋerſeil, who in a full aſſembly proteſted that hee neuer had her company. Shee notwithſtanding accepted the diuorce, and withdrew her ſelfe vnto the couent d'Aulaui, where ſhee made an end of her dayes. Sigeb. and P. Phrig. 9.
               At this time the Normains Northerne people did great hurt in France, after they had ſpoyled Artois, Cambray, Liege, Brabant, Gelders, and Treuers, &c.
               
               
                  
                  Charles being not able to reſiſt them, finally agreed with them, in giuing in marriage the daughter of Lotharie his couſin germain called Gille, to Geffrey or Rotfrid their King, and aſſigned for her dowrie the Countrey of Friſe, vpon condition he ſhould be baptiſed. Notwithſtanding thoſe Normains afterward afflicted France, and beſieged the Citie of Paris, as ſhall be ſaid.
               The ſubiects of Charles le Gros greeued at his cowardlineſſe, becauſe he let France be ſo outraged by the violence and crueltie of the Normains, and that alſo hee had forſaken his wife a good woman, they depoſed him as vnworthy and vnprofitable for the gouernment of the Empire, and gaue him a Curator named Arnulfe, or Arnould,
                  Curator. who was his brothers ſonne. Some ſay that Charles le Gros finiſhed his dayes in great pouertie, in the Abbey of the rich Angell, called in Alemand Richenna, nigh vnto Conſtans by the Lake,The end of the Emperour Charles.
                   without any great honour of Sepulchre. Others ſay he was ſtrangled by his owne people.
               
                  This is a glaſſe for great Princes of the world, and an excellent patterne of the humaine condition.
               
               
                  Arnulphus thē his Nephew by his brother Carloman Duke of  
                  France, Orientall (which then was called the Teutonique Kingdome, comprehending Bauier, Sorabe, Saxe, Turinge, Friſe, and Lorraine) was made Emperour. Hee was a valiant man, and repreſſed the Moranians and Slauonians, after hee made ſtrong warre vpon the Normains, nigh the Riuer of Menſe.
               
               
                  Stephen Pope, fift of that name,Stephen. 5.
                   ruled 6. yeares & ten moneths, in the Romane ſeate. It was in his time that the tale of S. 
                  Michael in the Mount Bargamus in Pouile is ſaid to bee true.The ſigne of the Croſſe. There was one of his Decretals to Hubert Arch-biſhop of Manyeance. 2. G. v. c. Conſuluiſti. ordeined the ſong of Croſſe, de
                   
                  conſecrat, 6. diſt. v.c. Nunquid.
               
               
                  Odo 31. King of France, raigned nine yeares. He was Tutor vnto Charles le Simple, and crowned King to reſiſt the Normains which then vaunted they would deſtroy all France.
               
               
                  
                  Arnulphus.We muſt not here forget that Odo brought vnto France 
                   the noble Armory of the field, of Flowers-delyce, without number, which endured vnto the time of Charles, the ſixt king of France.
               
               
                  Formoſus.
                  Formoſus Pope, before Biſhop Portuenſis was appointed Pope, and ruled fiue yeares and ſixe moneths, againſt the will of ſome Romanes, which pretended that Cardinall Sergius was choſen. But in the meane while Sergius conceiued a mortall hatred againſt Formoſus, and went into France. And therefore there was a great Schiſme, which was the ninth, cruell and ſcandalous,Schiſme. 9. and endured a long time, as ſhall be heereafter ſeene.
               This Formoſus bought the Papacie (as Iohn le Maire ſaith) during which time he did nothing of account, vnles ſome will ſay he whitened the Church of S. Peter. Suppl. Chron.
               
               He called Arnulfe to Rome, and conſecrated and crowned him Emperour, who afterward beheaded the chiefe enemies of Formoſus. Chron. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               In this time was held a Councell at Vienna in Dauphine, where two Cardinals of the Romane Sea, Paſchal and Iohn, preſidented: and yet was it lawfull for Prieſts to eſpouſe wiues if they were maides and not widowes, to ſhunne bigamy. Iohn le Maire in the ſecond and third part of Schiſmes and the Councels of the Church.
               
                  The Prieſts then had power to marry in France, almoſt nine hundreth yeares after the Apoſtles.
               
               
                  Arnulphe ſubiected Italie and Burgongne.
               
               
                  Benafice 6.
                  
                  Boniface 6. of that name, a Tuſcane borne, ruled at Rome 
                   fifteene dayes.
               There was a ſharpe and great famine in this time. Vrſperge.
               
               There fell a great debate for the bodie of S. Denis Ariopagite. The Almaines ſaid it was tranſported by the Emperour Arnulphe, into the Towne of Reinsbourge, and there was ſhewed a Bull of Pope Lewis the 10. approuing that tranſlation: but the Chronicles of France ſay the contrary, that it is in the Abbey of S. Denis in France.
               
               
                  
                  Note againe (Reader) the life of theſe Popes, from Formoſus or from Iohn the 9. which excommunicated the ſaid Formoſus, vntill Leo the 8. and conſider the ſanctitie of the Apoſtatike Sea, the contentions, aemulations, enuies, ambitions, and perſecutions. O vnluckie time ſaith Faſcic. Temp.
                  
               
               This Pope gaue three thouſand yeares of true pardons to all Prieſts,Meſſe denomine Ieſu. which deuoutly ſhould ſing the Meſſe of the name of Ieſus: that is, three thouſand yeares of true pardon for euery Maſſe which ſhould be ſung with three Sierges lighted. Miſſale Rom. witneſſeth it.
               
                  Stephen Pope, 6. of that name, a Romane,Stephen. 6.
                   ruled a yeare and 4. moneths. R. Barns.
                  
               
               This Pope did euill recompence his predeceſſor Formoſus,
                   who made him Biſhop of Anania. He by Councell cut off his ordinances. He cauſed his body to be drawne out of his Tombe, and put vpon it a Papall habit, and after tooke it off and put vpon it Lay-apparell: then finally he buried it in that habit. Platina. Naucler. and R. Barns.
               
               The Sarraſins of Affrike againe occupied Sicile. Palen. Florent.
               
               
                  Stephen Pope, at the laſt repented his faults, and became a Monke. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Romaine Pope, borne at Rome, raigned 3. or 4. moneths,Romaine. and 22. dayes, a ſeditious man, and contrarie to his predeceſſor  
                  Stephen, for he eſtabliſhed the Acts and Decrees of Formoſus, and ceaſed and annulled them of Stephen, Naucler.
               
               
                  The intention of theſe Popes (ſaith Suppl. Chron.) is to aboliſh the renowne one of an other.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 900. or there abouts, Arnulphus Emperour being too voluptuous and rebellious againſt the Cleargie men, the Author of Suppl. of Chron. ſaith hee was eaten with vermine. Sigibert ſaith, that after long ſickneſſe and languiſhment

he died. He was carried and buried at Ratisbone in a Monaſterie. Nauclerus. But Palmerius who added vnto the Chron. of Euſebius, ſaith hee died making warre vpon the Normanes. Others ſay he was poiſoned the 12. yeare of his Empire, leauing his ſonnes named Alnulphus, the wicked Duke of Bauiers, and Lewis of an other wife, who ſucceeded in the Empire
               After his death the Hungarians came into Germanie, vpon a people called Marauani, or Morauians, which Arnolphe had already conquered by the help of the Hungarians as is ſaid, and put all to fire and ſword.
               
                  Behold the fruite of calling the enemies of the Faith into Chriſtendome, ſaith Abb. Viſp.
                  
               
               
                  
                  Charles le Simple, ſonne of Lewis le Begne, 13. king of France, raigned 27. yeares. The Sea of Hist.
               
               In his time the Danes and Normanes returned in greater companies then euer they did, their Captaine was called Rolle, a cruel man, louing the effuſion of Chriſtian bloud. Hee burnt on a S. Iohns day the Church of Naules, & Martired S. Guiniard, Biſhop of the ſaid place, before the Aultar as he ſaid Maſſe, and after burnt the Citie of Angiers, of Tours, and many others. In Aquitaine they deſtroyed Charlemaignes Pallace, & ceaſed not to do infinite euils, vntill by a neare accord they had gotten a new habitation; that is to ſay, Neustria, which of their owne name they called Normandie, and Rolle was called Robert or Rubert, after he was baptiſed.
               
                  Lewis. 3.
                  
                  Lewis Emperour, third of that name, the ſonne of Arnolphe, 
                   obtained the Empire, and raigned 12. yeares. Naucler.
               
               The Hungarians made warre in Baeieaire, vnto which the the ſaid Emperour Lewis was made tributarie, and gaue a great ſumme of ſiluer to eſcape. Naucler. For in purſuing his enemies which feigned to flie, he was ſurpriſed by Ambuſhes. They to ſatisfie their rage, ranne all ouer Almaine. Chron. Abb. Vrsp.
               
               
                  Theodorus. 2.
                  
                  Theodorus Pope, ſecond of that name, a Romane, raigned at Rome 20. or 22. dayes, a ſeditious man, a very monſter in

nature, and wholy aduerſarie vnto Stephen.
                  Lewis. 3. He receiued all ſuch as before had bene ordained by Formoſus, and greatly eſteemed the fauourers of the ſaid Formoſus. Naucler.
               
               
                  Who would not maruell that eight Popes ſhould obtaine in ſo litle ſpace the Romane ſeate vnder the Emperour Lewis the third? that is in the ſpace of 12. yeares, ſaith Naucler.
                  
               
               
                  Iohn Pope, 10. of that name, ruled at Rome two yeares and more. This alſo was a very ſeditious monſter,Iohn. 10.
                   and reuiued contentions alreadie buried: whereby there was great ſedition and tumult amongſt the Romaine people, becauſe ſome maintained one ſide, ſome an other: wherefore for feare he fled to Rauenna. Where he aſſembled a Councell of 74. Biſhops in the Emperour Lewis his preſence, the King and Archbiſhops of France, to confirme the ordinances of Pope Formoſus, which before were reiected by Stephen. In the ſaid Councell was all that diſanulled which Pope Stephen had practiſed againſt Formoſus; yea the ordinances of Stephen were burned. R. Barns. and Sigeb.
               
               
                  Lewis the 3. was not crowned for the diſcention which then was in the Papacie: and withall, that the Popes would not crowne for Emperor ſuch as were choſen out of the countrey of Almain, but onely ſuch as came out of Lombardie. Palin. and Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Benet Pope, 4. of that name, a Romane, gouerned 3. yeares.Benet. 4.
                   
                  Supp. Chron. and 4. moneths. Naucler. In thoſe great troubles of his predeceſſors, he did nothing worthy of memory, ſaith Plat.
               
               At this time in Italie, Calabria, and Pouille, the Sarraſins did infinit miſchiefes.
               
                  Leo 5. of that name, gouerned 40. daies. Supp. Chron.
               
               A Cardinall Prieſt his familiar, called Chriſtopher,
                  Leo. 5.
                   impriſoned  him, and by violence obtained the Papacie. Leo died of griefe, ſeeing himſelfe thus handled of him vnto whom hee had done ſo much good.
               
                  In what authoritie is this Papall ſeate which is ſo eaſily vſurped by a priuate perſon, by force and faction in a moment? ſaith Naucler.
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                     Chriſtopher. To be a Monk the refuge of the miſerable.
                  Christopher Pope, ruled at Rome 7. moneths, as hee acquired the Papacie, ſo loſt he it. For he was depoſed and impriſoned. Some ſay he was conſtrained to make himſelf a Monke, which was the onely refuge of the miſerable. For at this time Church-men being inſolent and giuen to wickedneſſe, were not ſent to the Iles: but for their diſorders were deteined and encloſed in ſtrong Monaſteries. Naucler. and Chron. Abb.
               
               
                  
                  Sergius then, third of that name, was Pope, and ruled ſeuen yeares,Sergius. 3.
                   and three moneths: after ſome, eight yeares, and 15. or 16. dayes.
               This was he, who in the election of Formoſus was caſt off, and who returning into France, ſecretly returned into Rome and vſurped the Popedome: yet fearing that Chriſtopher ſhould worke ſome treaſon, he cauſed him to be drawne out of the Monaſterie, and put him in a common priſon, and yet putting him in a ſtraighter priſon, poorely and miſerably he finiſhed his dayes. Suppl. Chron.
               
            
            
               The Weſterne Empire diuided.
               The Occidentall Empire was at this time diuided. For there was one Emperor in Almaine, and an other in Lombardie. The firſt in Italie was Beringer, who made a great Armie againſt the Emperour Lewis the third, and gaue him battaile in the Plaine of Verone, and diſcomfited him; whoſe eyes afterward he cauſed to be put out, ſo the Lombards for a time had the Empire by force.
               
                  A Monſter repreſented the eſtate of that time.A Monſter was preſented to Lewis the third, which had a dogges head, and all the other members as a man. A figure of that time. For men were then without an head, and as dogges barked one againſt an other: yea both the Popedome and Empire were diuided. Faſci. temp.
               
               The Hungarians pilled and deſtroyed the Countries of Saxe and Turinge. Chro. Abb. Vrſp. And from thence entred into Italie vſing the like crueltie. Thē was there the Duke of Fornil, called Berēger, who vſurped the title of the Empire in Italie, and raigned 4. yeares: againſt whom, came the Emperour

                  Lewis the third. But he was betrayed by his people,Conrade. 1. who in the night time tooke Berenger into the Towne of Verone; In ſo much that he was taken and had his eyes put out, ſo he dyed ſoone after. Thus the Empire which had endured an hundreth and tenne yeares in France ſince Charlemaigne, was tranſported vnto the Lombards. Chron. Sigeb. and Naucler.
               
               
                  Conrade firſt of that name, Duke of Franconia, was made Emperour after Lewis the third, who deceaſed without a ſonne, ſo that this Conrade is eſteemed the laſt of the race of Charlemaigne, which had the gouernment of the Empire more then an hundreth yeares. All the Great men of Germanie did elect without conſent Otho Duke of Saxe: but Otho feeling himſelfe olde, excuſed himſelf, and appointed them this Conrade, a magnanimous man, ſonne of Conrade Earle of Franconia and Heſſet. And Arnold the wicked ſonne of the Emperour Arnulphe, was Duke in Bauiers. In the ſucceſſion of Arnulphe aforeſaid, there are amongſt the Hiſtoriographers, ſome vncertain things touching their genealogie.
               But we haue here ſet in order all ſuch as diſcended of Charlemaigne, to ſhewe the maruellous change in the greateſt things of this world. Who can read them without being rauiſhed in admiration, when we conſider the greateſt Kingdomes and dominations to flouriſh for a time, and in the end being mingled with turbulent deuotions, are in ſuch ſort debilitated and weakned, as they come to nothing. Wherein we muſt acknowledge the admirable prouidence of God.
               
                  
                  Charlemaigne the ſonne of Pippin, left his ſonne Lewis de Bonaire Emperour: who had

                     
                        
                           Lotharie Emperour: who had
                        
                           Lewis of Bauiers, King of Germanie, who brought vnder the Bohemians had
                        
                           Charles le Chauue Emperour.
                     
                     
                        
                           Lewis Emper. 1. of that name.
                        
                           Lewis the young king of Germanie, Franconia, and Turinge.
                        
                        
                           Lewis Emperour 3. of that name ſurnamed le Begue, which raigned but two yeares, had
                     
                     
                        
                           Lothairie King of Auſtraſia called Lorraine.
                        
                        
                           Charles le Groſſe, Emperour, who tooke the Empire frō 
                           Lewis le Begne.
                        
                        
                           Charles le Simple. 30. King of France.
                        
                     
                     
                        
                           Charles king of Prouence.
                        
                        
                           Carloman Duke of Bauiere, and of the kingdome thē called Teutonique, had
                        
                           Arnulphe Emperour, who was father of Lewis Emperor, 3. of that name; and of Conrade laſt Emperour of the race of Charlemaigne.
                        
                     
                  
               
               The Empire then of Germanie was tranſported frō the ligne of Charlemaigne to Conrade, Duke of Franconia: but the kingdome of France remained certaine yeares in the houſe of Charlemaigne, ſeeing there was yet ſome remaining of the race of Charles le Simple.
               
               
                  Anaſtaſius. 3.
                  
                  Anaſtaſius Pope, 3. of that name, gouerned at Rome two  yeares and two moneths. Supp. Chron.
               
               He bare himſelfe honeſtly without committing any act worthy of reprehenſion.
               
                  Laudo. 1.
                  
                  Laudo Pope, a Romane, ruled at Rome fiue or ſixe monethes.
               
               About this time the Venetians obtained a licence and priuiledge of the Emperour to beate money.
               
                  Hubert in Lorraine flouriſhed now, & was made a Saint.
               
                  The Sarraſins deſtroyed Calabria, Ponuille, Beneuent, and other Regions of the Romanes. The Sea of Hist.
               
               
                  Beringer, ſecond of that name, raigned in Italie 7. or 8. yeares.Beringer. 2.
                   Some ſay he was chaſed away the third yeare of his raigne by Rodolphe, king of Burgongne; and that the ſame Rodolphe hauing raigned three yeares, was after alſo driuen away by Hugues king of Arles.
               
               
                  Iohn Pope, 11. of that name,Iohn. 11.
                   before Archbiſhop of Rauenna, hauing bene depoſed by a popularie tumult, ruled after at  
                  Rome 13. yeares and two moneths. Naucler.
               
               He was Pope Sergius his ſonne, and prooued no better then his father, ſauing hee was a good ſouldier. For he chaſed the Sarraſins out of Calabria, with the helpe of one called Alberic, Marquis of Tuſcane. Finally, as the ſaide Iohn gloried in his victorie, attributing all by great inſolencie to his owne proweſſe, hee ſtirred againſt himſelfe the furie of his owne ſouldiers, who ſtiffled him to death. Iohn le Maire. Hee had caſt out of Rome the ſaid Marquis Albert, who to auenge himſelfe of the Pope, brought the Hungarians into Italie, which pilled and waſted all. Finally he was put to death by the Romanes.
               
                  Henry, firſt of that name, Duke to Saxe,
                  Henry. 1. ſurnamed the Faulconer, ſonne of Otho Duke of Saxe, who had refuſed the  Empire, was choſen Emperour by Conrade his predeceſſor, who being ſicke in his bedde, ſent his brother Eberard towards the ſaide Henry, with the Mantle royall, the ſword, the Lance, the Diademe, and other Imperiall ornaments, who found him at his paſtime with his Haukes, which was cauſe that hee was called the Faulconer. For there he was ſaluted Emperour. Nauclerus.
               
               He made warre againſt the Hungarians, Slauonians, and Bohemians.
               The combat of Tournois was inuented by him.
               
                  Hugues raigned in Italie tenne yeares, whom Lotharie his ſonne ſucceeded.
               King Charles the Simple was by treaſon taken of Hubert,
               
               Earle of 
                     Ʋermandois, and poyſoned in the Caſtle of Peronne,
                  
where he died,Henry. 1. and was buried in the Church of S. Fourſi. See the Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  
                  Rodolphe Bourgongne, 31. King of France, raigned two yeares.
               Before this time there were not ſo many degrees amongſt Gentlemen and Noblemen, nor ſo great diuerſitie as there are at this. Dukes, Marqueſſes, Counts, or Clarkes, ſimple Counts and Knights, were rather names of offices, then hereditarie Seigniories. For Dukes, Marqueſſes, & Earles, or Counts, were Gouernours of Countries and Lands: wherevpon they were committed by Emperours and Kings.
               
                  Duke.Duke was a ſoueraigne, chiefe, or head of ſouldiers, as may be ſeene by auncient Letters.
               
                  Coūt or Earle.Count or Earle, was a Iudge and Goueruernour ordained in a certaine Towne or Region; and ſo Germanie was full of Countes:Lantgraues. amongſt which, ſome were called Lantgraues, that is to ſay, Countes of Regions or Countries. Some Maruegraues,Marquſſes. Palatins. or Marquis: that is, Countes of certaine Marſhes or Countries. Some Countes de Palatin, which were Gouernors of ſome Kingdome ſubiugated or conquered. This may bee ſeene in the ſecond booke of the Lawes of the Lombards. Some were gouernors of Bourgages,Bourgraues. and ſo were named Bourgraues. The moſt auncienteſt name of dignitie after Kings and Princes,Baron. is the name of Baron, which ſignifieth Lord, whoſe ſonnes were called young Lords. And this ſay ſome was the eſtate of the Nobilitie before the Othons raigned. After their time all things chaunged. For then Counts were made hereditarie, and were lifted vp aboue Barons, Marqueſſes,  Lantgraues and Palatins: and that more is, Biſhops haue bene made Princes: yea many Counts Abbots, Abbeſſes haue obtained the title of Prince.
               
                  Lewis 4. of that name, ſurnamed Vltramarin, 32. King of France, the ſonne of Charles le Simple, after his fathers impriſonment got with his mother Ogine, towards his Vncle King of England: but as ſoone as he retutned, he was in ſtrife for the Kingdome with Rodulphe of Burgongne, who died about eight yeares after at Auxerre, Anno. 937. and ſo Lewis raigned alone.
               
                  
                  Leo Pope,Leo. 6.
                   ſixt of that name, ruled at Rome 7. moneths and 15. dayes.
               The Danes at this time were conuerted to the faith.
               
               
                  Stephen Pope, 7. of that name, a Romane,Stephen. 7.
                   ruled at Rome 2. yeares and 12. dayes. Supp. Chron.
               
               The Duke of Bohemia Spireneus, receiued the Chriſtian faith at the perſwaſion of the Emperour Henry. Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Iohn Pope, 12. of that name, a Romane,Iohn. 12.
                   ruled at Rome 4. yeares, 10. moneths, and 15. dayes. Supp. Chron.
                  
               
               He did nothing worthy of memorie, a coward, and is not numbred in the Catalogue of Popes: after ſome Hiſtoriographers.
               
                  Lotharie the ſonne of Hugues, raigned in Italie two yeares.
               The Sarraſins in Italie tooke the towne of Geans, and ſpoiled it. Naucler.
               
               
                  Berenger third, the Nephewe of Berenger the firſt,Berenger. 3.
                   raigned in Italie 11. yeares, with his ſonne Adelbert.
                  
               
               
                  In this place Histories are very confuſed.
               
               The Emperour Henry the firſt dyed of the Palſey, the yeare of his age 60. and of his Empire ſeuenteene: hauing ordained
               
                  Otho the great his ſonne, ſucceſſor of the Empire,Otho the great. by the conſent of all the great and Noble men, who after was conſecrated by the Arch-biſhop of Magunce, Hildebert. Hee  had three Competitors which would needs hinder him to bee Emperour: that is to ſay, Henry his elder brother, Giſelbert Duke of Lorraine his brother in lawe, and Eberhard Earle of Franconia: but he droue them all away, and reduced all vnder his obedience.
               
                  Wencelaus Prince of Bohemia,
                  Wencelaus. was ſlaine by his brother Boiſlans vppon ambition to raigne. But Otho reuenged the death of the ſaid Wencelaus, making warre vpon Boiſlans, which

endured fourteene yeares:Otho the great. and finally hauing vanquiſhed him, he brought the Countrey into his obedience. Chron. Sigeb. and Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Leo. 7.
                  
                  Leo Pope, 7. of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome three yeares, 6. monethes, and 10. dayes. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Anthropomorphites.The hereſie of Anthropomorphites (which ſay that God hath a corporall forme) was at this time renued. Rotherius Biſhop of Verone, writ againſt them.
               
                  Stephen. 8.
                  
                  Stephen Pope, eight of that name, an Almaine, or a  Romane, after ſome, ruled at Rome three yeares, foure moneths, and 12. dayes. R. Barns. Some ſay he was murthered by certaine Romanes in a ſedition: In ſo much as he was neuer publikely ſeene. Chron. Abb.
               
               
                  France was afflicted by an horrible peſtilence and by inward contentions. The faction and puiſſance of Hugues of Paris, troubled King Lewis exceedingly.
               
                  Martin. 3.
                  
                  Martin Pope, 3. of that name, a Romane, ruled 3. yeares,  6. moneths, and 14. dayes. He was peaceable, and gaue himſelf to repaire Temples and nouriſh the poore, ſaith Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Agapetus. 2.
                  
                  Agapetus Pope, ſecond of that name, a Romane, a magnanimous  man, ruled at Rome 9. yeares, 7. moneths, and 10. daies. Supp. Chron.
               
               He called againe the Emperour Otho to Rome, againſt Berenger.
               
               
                  Berenger. 4.
                  
                  Berenger 4. the 7. Emperour of the Lombards, raigned 13. yeares. The Sea of Histories.
               
               The Hungarians againe in Italie. Chron. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               
                  Iohn. 13.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, 13. of that name, a Romane, ruled 9. yeares and three monethes.
               His father called Alberic, ſeeing himſelfe one of the greateſt power at Rome, cauſed all the nobleſt and principalleſt rulers of the Citie of Rome, to promiſe and ſweare that after the death of Pope Agapetus, they ſhould elect his ſonne Octauian. Which promiſe was kept, and he was called Iohn.
               
               This Pope was ſo exceſſiuely giuen to lecherie, that he maintained a publike ſtewes: for the ſhame wherof, ſome Cardinals

writ to the Emperour Otho, that he would remedie the publike ſcandall and infamie which the Church then ſuffered:They were called Cardinalls, as chiefe of the Cleargie. and that it was needfull he ſhould in haſte come to Rome. As ſoone as the Pope heard of this newes, he cauſed the noſe of a Cardinall a Deacon called Iohn to be cut off, beeing the principall councellor herein: hee commaunded alſo that the hand of an other Cardinall a Subdeacon called alſo Iohn to be cut off, becauſe hee writ the Letters. When the Emperour vnderſtood that for no admonition the Pope would amend, he cauſed him to be depoſed, with note of infamie.
               
                  Otho was crowned by him, after he hauing ſworne that hee would exalt the Romane Church and the Pope, and that in nothing hee would hurt him: as more at large is contained. Diſt. 63.100. Tibi domino. Otho remained a certain time at Rome after his coronation, and admoniſhed this Pope to change and amend his wicked life, whereof hee was blamed. Otho departing, came againſt Berenger his enemie. Albert the ſonne of Berenger, who with his father retired at Otho his comming, ſeeing Otho departed, came to Rome, and with the Pope complotted againſt the Emperour. Two Cardinalls aduertiſed Otho of this conſpiracie, and of the Popes wickedneſſe. Otho then returned to Rome, and the Pope fled, after he had reuenged himſelfe of the two Cardinalls. Otho beeing at Rome, cauſed the Pope to be thrice called, commanding him to returne and feare nothing, and he ſhould be in ſuretie: but hee would not returne. Wherefore he cauſed a Councell to be held, wherein the Pope was condemned and depoſed for his euill life. And there was ſubſtituted in his place, Leo a Romane, 8 of that name,Leo. 8.
                   but ſoone after the Emperours departure, the ſeditious and inconſtant Romanes droue away Leo, and recalled the aforeſaid Iohn, receiuing him in great pompe. Leo got him to the Emperour, who fearing to moleſt the Church with a greater ſchiſme, permitted the ſaid Iohn to hold his ſeate. But finally beeing ſurpriſed in adulterie, hee was ſlaine by the womans husband. Robert Barns. Chron. Sigeb. Nauclerus. and Iohn Maire.
               
               
                  
                  Conferre (good Reader) theſe Popes with the firſt, and ſee the difference.
               
               
                   The yeare of Chriſt 958. there hapned at 
                     Ʋenice a memorable thing. The Duke of Venice, Peter of Candie, was beſieged in his Ducall Pallace, and the Venetians angrie againſt him, ſet fire on the Pallace: in ſo much that not onely the Pallace burnt, but alſo the Church of S. Marke nigh vnto it, and more then three hundreth houſes about it. And as the Duke thus preſſed retired into a ſecret place of the Pallace which was not yet touched with fire: the people altogether enraged hauing found him, holding yet his onely ſonne (a young Infant) betwixt his armes,Crueltie of the Venetians. and requiring vpon both his knees and in great pittie the mercie of the people: they were not content moſt cruelly to murther him with his innocent ſonne and wife, but after their deathes the bodies of the father and ſonne were carried vnto the butcherie and hewen in peeces, and after caſt vnto dogges. Iohn le Maire. and Sup. Chron.
               
               The cauſe of this maſſacre was, becauſe he had conſtrained his firſt wife to make her ſelfe a Nunne, to the ende hee might with colour eſpouſe the ſiſter of Hugo, Marquis of Hetruria, of whom he had alreadie had one ſonne. Wherefore hauing married her, the Allies and kinsfolkes of his ſaid wife, ſtirred the people vnto ſedition, and ſo they periſhed vnhappily. Supp. Chron.
               
               About this time flouriſhed Windichinne, a Monke of Corney in Saxonie.
               
               
                  Smaragdus Abbot of S. Michael, of the order of S. Benet, wrote the booke called Diadema monachorum, a right Monkiſh booke. Item vpon the rule of S. Benet, and vpon the Pſalter another: two vpon the Euangeliſts and Epiſtles. Item, one of diuers Sermons. Trit. Abb. Spauher.
               
               
                  Benet. 5.
                  
                  Benet Pope, fift of that name, a Romane, ruled (after Nauclerus)  6. monethes and 5. dayes, or 2. moneths and 5. dayes: after Supp. Chron. hee was choſen by the Romanes againſt the Emperours will, after Iohn was ſlaine in adulterie.
               
                  The Emperour vnderſtanding theſe newes,Otho. 1. returned to Rome, beſieged the Towne, and ſo afflicted it, that they were cōſtrained to preſent Benet vnto him at his pleaſure. The Emperour reſtored Leo to the ſeate, and Benet was depriued, not onely of the papall dignitie, but diſgraced alſo of his Sacerdotall, and after baniſhed and ſent into Almaine: where hee died in the Towne of Mamburge: others ſay he was put in priſon and there ſtrangled.
               
                  Leo then eight of that name, a Romane,Leo. 8.
                   was reſtored into the Popedome, and raigned a yeare and foure moneths. This  Pope minding to ſhunne the fury of the Romanes which proceeded to the Popes election by corruptions, menaces,The Emperours right to chuſe the Pope ſet vp againe. and ſubtill deuices, ordained in a full Sinode, that none ſhould be made Pope without the conſent of the Emperour, vnto whom aboue belonged the right of election from Charlemaine and others. Naucler. and 63. diſt. cap. in Sinodo.
               
               He reſtored alſo to Otho all the donations made to the Romane Church. And this was it which they ſay Conſtantine, Iuſtinian, Pippin, Charlemaigne, Lewis le Debonaire, and Arit part had giuen to the Church. All this he reuoked and accorded to Otho the firſt of that name and to his ſucceſſors: to the end to keepe Italie from oppreſſors. R. Barns.
               
               The Abbey of S. Quintin in Vermandois was in this time founded. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Richard Duke of Normandie founded and reſtored many Churches and Abbeys: amongſt others the Abbey of Feſanan, of S. Ouan at Roan, and the Abbey of S. Michael nigh the Sea.
            
            
               An Aduertiſement.
               Note heere Chriſtian by the paſſed and ſubſequent Hiſtories, how in this time Chriſtian Religion was ſo annihilated, that it was altogether ſet to gather dead bones, to build Churches and Monaſteries, to reare vp and tranſport dead bodyes, to honour reliques, to dreame miracles, to make themſelues Monkes and Nunnes, to dedicate and conſecrate Churches, to compoſe Hymnes, and praiſes of Saints, to ſing and pray

for the dead, and ſuch like ceremonies. About this time alſo began the fourth peſtilence of the Church: that is to ſay, the Schoole Diuinitie mingled with Aristotles Philoſophie,Scholaſticall diuinitie. which after engendred Tranſubſtantiation and other new doctrines by the Queſtionaries, as thou ſhalt vnderſtand by this diſcourſe.
               
                  Iohn. 14.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, 14. of that name, an Italian, a Biſhops ſonne  called Iohn, gouerned Rome ſixe yeares, eleuen monethes, and tenne dayes. Supp. Chron. Hee beeing apprehended by Peter Prouoſt of Rome, was put in priſon in the Caſtle of S. Angelo, where he remained a 11. monethes: but when they heard ſay the Emperour Otho came againſt them with a ſtrong hand, they tooke him out and eſtabliſhed him. Some ſay he was ſent into exile & baniſhed into Campania; frō whence he came again after 2. monethes. For the Emperor tooke vngeance on thē that perſecuted him; cauſing many of them to die by diuers kindes of death, ſuch as were found culpable of the fact, and baniſhed ſome into Saxe. As for Peter Prouoſt, he was deliuered to the Pope to doo with him at his pleaſure. Who gaue him into the tormenrers hands: ſo hee was vnapparelled, and his beard being cut off, he was ſet vpon an Aſſe, his face towards the taile, and his hands bound vnder the taile of the ſaid Aſſe, and ſo was ledde through the Towne and beaten with Roddes. After this he was againe brought to priſon, and finally ſent into exile in Almaine. Naucler.
               
               
                  Otho. 2.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, in recompence of the benefite receiued of Otho, called and declared Otho the ſecond, ſonne of Otho the firſt, Auguſtus. Palin.
               
               In the time of this Pope, Theodorike or Deodorike, Biſhop of Mets, cauſed infinit holy bodies to be tranſported from Italy into France, with a peece of S. Stephens Chaine, and a part of S. Lawrence Grate, which the Pope Iohn gaue him. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Theſe bee the Iewels of this darke time.
               
               The King of Denmarke and all his Countrey were conuerted to the faith by Popon Clarke. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  
                  Benet Pope, ſixt of that name a Romane ruled a yeare and ſixe moneths. He was put in the priſon S. Angelo,
                  Benet. 6.
                   wherein he was ſtrangled, by one called Cinthius, or Cincius: Others ſay he dyed of hunger: for which iniurie, he neuer did Iuſtice nor vengeance. Naucler.
               
               
                  Roger Biſhop of Liege, founded the Abbey of S. Iohn the Euangeliſt, in the Ile of Flaunders. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               The heroicall acts of this Emperour Otho the firſt, do ſufficiently ſhewe him to bee one of the number of ſuch excellent perſons as the Lord giueth to repaire and reſtore things throwne vnder feete. He I ſay redreſſed the Romane Empire, and pacified Europe. By his ſuccours, Italie and Germanie were guarded and warranted, hauing tamed the Hungarians and French. Briefly, during his life the Empire tooke again a brightneſſe and face of maieſtie. He founded the ſiluer Mines in Miſua, and exerciſed great munificence towards many Biſhoppes which held the chiefe place in the Religion which then was. Many Ciuile Lawes were made by him: Amongſt which, that of the ſucceſſion of Nephues in hereditarie goods in the place of their Fathers is greatly commended.
               After then in this ſort hee had delated the Empire, being made ſtoope with great age, finally he was ſurpriſed with a ſuddaine maladie, and dyed the yeare 973. and of his raigne thirtie ſeuen: of his Empire thirteene, and was buried at Magdeberge, in Saint Martins Church, which he had cauſed to be builded.
               
                  Otho 2. of that name, ſonne of Otho the great,Otho. 2.
                   and of Adetheide, Queene of Burgogne, during the life of his Father, was  declared at Aix le chappelle King of the Romanes,The Duke of Lorraine Vaſſal of the Empire. Lorraine made leſſe. he appeaſed the mutinies which were in Lorraine, and gaue the Duchy of Lorraine to Charles, brother of Lotharie King of France, and made him vaſſall of the Empire; but the limits were cut off: For one good part was adiudged on the one ſide to the Church of Colongne, and the other to the Church of Liege.
               
               Hee eſpowſed the ſiſter of the Emperour of Constantinople.
               
               
                  
                  Otho. 2.
                  Donus. 2.
                  
                  Donus Pope, ſecond of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome a yeare and fiue moneths. It was ſaid of him, that he was of great modeſtie and integritie, and that no iniurie was done him Supp. Chron.
               
               Many holy bodies as of Patroclus, Priauatus and Gregorie, With S. Peters Staffe, were tranſported from Rome to Colongne, by Bruno Biſhop of the ſaid place, and by the Biſhop of Canterburie, called Odo. Faſci. temp.
               
               
                  Aldebert of Bohemia, Biſhop of Prague, went into Pannonia to preach the faith, and baptiſed the King of Hungaria: From thence hee came into Bruſſe, where hee was Martyred.
               
                  Boniface. 7.
                  
                  Boniface Pope, 7. of that name, gouerned at Rome 7. moneths:  by vnlawfull meanes he entred the Popedome, and by the ſame meanes fell out thereof. The greateſt of Rome conſpired againſt him. But ſeeing himſelfe in daunger, he ſecretly pilled the moſt precious treaſures of the Church of S. Peter, and ſo fled vnto Conſtantinople, where when he had remained 8. monethes, he ſolde and turned all into ſiluer, and after returned vnto Rome. In his abſence they lifted vp one of Pauie called Iohn the 15. He ruled 8. moneths. Boniface then being returned, drew the Citizens vnto him, and with ſiluer corrupted the vileſt and wickedeſt perſons of Rome. This done, hee tooke the Pope Iohn, and hauing put out his eies, made him die with hunger in the Caſtle of S. Angelo. Againe then he occupied and vſurped the ſeate, but incontinently after he dyed of a ſudden death: his corpes was drawne with a corde by his feete through the ſtreetes, and pierced with pikes by the Romanes: but finally the Clarkes buried him. Naucler. Robert Barns. Cor. Abb.
               
               
                  Benet. 7.
                  
                  Benet Pope, 7. of that name, gouerned 8. yeares and ſixe  moneths. Suppl. Chron. or 10. yeares and 6. monethes, after Faſci. temp.
                  After ſome, 77.
                  
               
               This Pope at the Emperours deſire, impriſoned many ſeditious Romanes. The Sea of Hist.
               
               
                  
                  Otho the 2. enterpriſed a war againſt the Greekes which held Calabria and Pouille,
                  Otho. 2.
                   but he ſought to reduce them to the

Romane Empire, pretending a right by reaſon of a dowrie for Theophaine his wife, who was the Greeke Empreſſe: but his enterpriſe was vnluckie.Otho the 2. taken by Pyrates. For he was taken by Pirates and brought vnto Sicilia vnknowne. Afterward being ordeined by a Slauonian Marchant which knew him, he gathered together the reſt of his Armie, and returned againſt the Grecians and Sarraſins, and purſued them very vndiſcreetly: In ſo much that hee was ſtrooken with an inuenomed arrow, ſo returning vnto Rome he dyed, a litle after the tenth yeare of his Empire,The Dukes of Sauoy diſcended from Saxonie. leauing Otho the third, and other his children, and amongſt them Frederic and Valderic, Dukes of Saxonie, of whom after diſcended the Counteſſe and Princes of Sauoy.
               
               
                  Otho third of that name,Otho. 3. after the death of his Father was very young when he was deſigned the Emperour, but of ſuch  quickneſſe and moderation of ſpirite, that for his excellent gifts he was named, The Maruell of the world.
               
               
                  Lotharie King of France dyed at Rheimes, being impoyſoned  (as ſome ſay) by his adulterous wife, leauing his ſonne Lewis fift of that name King of France, laſt of the line of Charlemaigne, who raigned a yeare and litle more, and dyed alſo of poyſon, and was buried at Campaigne, leauing onely the memorie of his name.
            
            
               
                  A third ſort of Kings beganne to raigne in France.
               
               From Pharamond a Painim, vnto Hughe Capet, are accounted 587. yeares. From Clouis the firſt Christian, 487. From Pippin the Father of Charlemaigne, 237. yeares.
               
               
                  Hughe Capet, 35. in number, and the firſt King of France, raigned nine yeares, and began the third ſort of Kings which yet endureth in the kingdome of France. Dantes a Florentine Poet, in his Purgatorie ſaith, that Hughe Capets Grandfather was a Butcher. Of a Counte of Paris by the fauour of ſouldiers he was firſt ſaluted king in the Towne of Noion. Raigning then

newly in France,
                  Otho. 3. he cauſed a Councel of Prelates of the French Church to be aſſembled at Rheimes in Campaigne. And becauſe he feared the poſteritie of Charlemaigne (vpon which hee had vſurped the kingdome) he cauſed in the ſaid Councell to be depoſed, the Arch-biſhop of Rheimes called Arnulphe, or Arnoul, baſtard brother of the king Lotharie, & ſet in his place a Monk, a Philoſopher, and Magician called Gilbert, or Gerbert: vnto this depoſition conſented all the Prelates of France, except Sergius Arch-biſhop of Sens, who was ſent priſoner vnto Orleans with Arnulphe, but three yeares after they were deliuered. See Iohn le Maire in the 2. part, and others. Againſt the ſaid Councell, Pope Benet made an other be held in the ſame Cittie of Rheimes, wherein the ſaid Arnulphe was reſtored, and Sergius or Serinus, and Gerbert or Gilbert, was depoſed: who notwithſtanding was after Archbiſhop of Rauenna, & at laſt Pope of Rome by diuelliſh meanes, whoſe end was miſerable. Iohn le Maire.
               
               Many holy bodies S. Landoul. S. Adrian, S. Amand of Hasban, were tranſported into the Towne of Gaunt. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               The Abbey of S. Magloire at Paris was founded by ye
                   king.
               
                  Iohn. 16.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, 16. of that name, ruled at Rome 4. moneths: his  Father was called Leo a Prieſt. He diſtributed the goods of the Church, to his parents, friends, and Allies. Therefore he was hated of all the Cleargie and people: and was encloſed in the Caſtle S. Angelo, where he dyed of hunger. Supp. Chron. and R. Barns.
               
               
                  This cuſtome was afterward much vſed in the Romane Church.
               
               
                  Iohn. 17. Naucler. Supp. Chron. Platina.
                  Iohn Pope, 17. of that name, a Romane, ruled at Rome 9. or 10. yeares, 6. or 7. moneths, and 8. or 10. dayes, after the diuerſitie of writers.
               In this time Creſcentius Momentanus, a Conſull of Rome, had vſurped rule ouer the Towne of Rome, and perſwaded the Romanes & Italians to take againe the Empire. Hee ſo perſecuted this Pope Iohn, that hee was conſtrained to flie out of Rome, and to ſoiourne in Tuſcane and Lombardie. But when he heard that the ſaid Iohn, had now the third time ſent for ſuccors of the Emperor Otho, he ſent meſſengers towards the ſaid Pope

to recall him! At whoſe requeſt the Pope returning, Creſcentius demaunded pardon of him.
               
                  Otho deſiring to haue the Emperial crowne, hauing gathered together a great army, and before hee entred Rome hee made a peace betwixt the Duke of Beneuent and the Duke of Capuae: from thence hee came to Rome, and was crowned by
               
                  Gregorie 5. of that name, his cofin, before called Bruno,
                  Gregorie. 5.
                   ſon of Duke Otho of Saxonie, whō he made Pope in the place of Iohn, maugre the Romans, and by him was crowned Emperour. Certain time after Creſcentius Conful of Rome corrupted with auarice, procured yt
                   the Biſhop of Plaiſance,
                  Schiſme. who was a Grecian by nation, a very pernitious man, was conſtituted Pope,Iohn. 18.
                   & was called Iohn 18. and held the ſeate 10. months. Gregorie then retyred towards the Emperour, to bee reuenged of the iniurie was done him. The Emperour ſore mooued at that outrage, with great power returned to Rome. Creſcentius vnderſtanding of his cōming, not truſting in the Roman people, cauſed the Caſtle de S. Angelo to be fortified. And as theſe things were in doing, the Emperor beſieged the towns. The Romane people more meet for ſeditiō then to fight, deſired pardō of ye
                   Emperor, & opened the gates vnto the Almains.
               
               
                  Creſcentius & Pope Iohn being deſtitute of Councel, retired into the fort of the ſaid Caſtle. Some by treaſon promiſed them aſſurance if they would demand pardon of the Emperor.A true reward of ambition. They then came downe, & as they came were ſurpriſed. Pope Iohn after his eies were put out & his mēbers mutilated he was ſlain. Creſcentius was ſet vpō a Mare, his face towards the taile, & his noſe & eares being cut off, hee was led before the Towne, for a ſpectacle vnto all. Some ſay he was hanged without the towne, others ſay his head was cut off. R. Barns.
               
               Therfore Gregory being reſtored into his Biſhoprick, ſeeing the troubles yt
                   in time paſt had bin for the electiō of Emperors, and the variable iſſues therof, aſſembled a Councel, wherein the firſt ordinance & eſtabliſhment of Electors was decreed, to the end the dignitie Emperial ſhould no more remain in one houſe & family by ſucceſſiō of line.The beginning of Electors. This electiō then was giuē to the Germanike natiō, which yet holdeth it at this day. Sixe Princes

were eſtabliſhed: three Eccleſiaſticall, that is to ſay, the Archbiſhoppe of Magunce, of Treuers, and of Colongne: the three other ſecular, were the Marqueſſe of Brandeberge, the Duke of Saxonie, and the Counte of Palatine, vnto which was giuen the right and power for euer to elect the Emperour. With them was ioyned the Duke of Boheme, (Boheme then had not obteined the title of a kingdome) as the ſeuenth to accord them, if peraduenture they were euen in yeares.
               If it be demaunded wherfore ſo high a dignitie of election was not rather committed to other Princes, which then were puiſſant, namely he of Bauieres, Sueuia, and Franconia, Hiſtoriographers make no mention thereof. But if it be lawfull to ſet downe ſome appearance of cauſe, it is certaine that Boheme was a Country meete to maintaine the right of election, as a Countrey inuited by nature. Saxonie had that honour, becauſe the Emperour deſcended out of that houſe, as alſo for that it is a very large and puiſſant Country. The Country of Brandeberge held then alſo on the houſe of Saxonie, and it is likely the Emperour Otho deſired to aduaunce that which was of his owne houſe.
               The Counte Palatine ſued to haue that prerogatiue, by reaſon of the poſteritie of Charlemaigne. For the Countie of Palatine was then of the line of Charlemaigne.
               
               After that this election was thus eſtabliſhed, the Italians ſtirred many troubles againſt the Emperour: new matter of ſedition wanted not therevnto.
               
                  Iohn. 18. Inuention for the dead.Whileſt Iohn 18. ruled at Rome, and that Gregorie the fift was abſent and deiected (as is ſaid) one called Odillo a Monke, and afterward the Abbot of Clugni, inſtituted in his Monaſtery the day of All-ſoules, the next day after All-ſaints: which inſtitution was incontinently receiued and approoued by all the Church. The occaſion hereof was, that this ignorant Monke had vnderſtood of an Hermite returning from Sicilie, that great noyſes and lamentations were heard in the Mountaine Aetna, who hee thought were the ſoules of the dead which ſuffered paine in Purgatorie: therefore hee thought they might be helped by Oriſons and prayers. See Iuſtine in his booke, 3. Chron.

Sigeb. and Polyd. Ʋerg. lib. 6. cha. 9.
               The houſe of Sauoye iſſued from the Dukes of Saxonie, as is ſaid, is raiſed into a Counte.
               The Emperor Otho eſpouſed the daughter of the King of Arragon, a very intemperate woman, who maintained a young man in womans array, as one of her Chamber-maides: but the thing diſcouered the adulterer, who was burnt aliue, and by interceſſion of friends the Empreſſe was reconciled: but for all this ſhe deſiſted not from perſeuering in her incontinences, often requiring men, before ſhe were required. In the Towne called Modena in Italie, ſhe was imbraced with the loue of a Count very faire and of good grace, and ſought by all meanes to cauſe him to condiſcend to her luxutious deſire, which he would not, fearing the loſſe of his eſtate. She accuſed him to the Emperour, ſaying he ſolicited her of diſhonour. The Emperour angred hereat, in his furie cauſed him to be beheaded. But the truth afterward being knowne, ſhe was burnt aliue, and foure goodly places were giuen to the wife of the ſaide Counte in recompence.
               
                  Ammonius a Monke of Fleury, in this time wrote a booke of the myracles of S. Benet, and Herigerus Abbot of Lob, wrote an other of the diſſonance of the Church, & an other booke of the diuine office. Alſo of the bodie and blood of the Lord, and others, Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Robert 36. King of France, raigned 34. yeares, a learned  and very ſtudious man. He went to Rome vpon deuotion. The Sea of Histories.
               
               
                  Conſtance his wife founded the Abbey of Poiſſi, wherin ſhe was buried. The ſame.
               
               
                  Silueſter Pope, ſecond of that name,Silueſter. 2.
                   of the Countrey of Aquitane, called before Gilbert, or Gerbert, a Magician, & Nigromancer  (as hath bene ſaide) came to the ſaide ſeate by the art of the diuel, vnto whom he had done homage, that all his affaires might goe after his wiſh.
               In his youth he was a Monke of Fleury, in the Dioceſſe of Orleans: but for the ardent deſire hee had of learning, left his Abbey & got him to Siuile in Spaine, which then the Sarraſins

held, and gaue himſelfe to a Magitian Philoſopher, who had a booke none like it in the Art Magicke. Gerbert ſought often to ſteale it from him, but by reaſon his maiſter kept it very carefully, hee could not come by it. Yet hee perſwaded the Philoſophers daughter with whom hee had great familiaritie, to get the booke and lende it him to reade, which ſhee did. Hauing then the ſaide booke, hee retired, and fearing to be ſurprized with it, hee vowed himſelfe to the Diuell, vppon condition hee would bring him to Fraunce. Being returned, he kept a Schoole, and taught the liberall Arts with great admiration of his Auditors. After he was Maiſter vnto Otho the the fourth, of Robert, ſonne of Hugo Capet King of Fraunce, and of Lotharie, who afterward was Arch-biſhop of Sens: by whoſe helpe hee was aduaunced: Firſt to be Arch-biſhop of of Rheimes as is ſaide, and after of Rauenna, and finally Pope. During which time hee alwayes diſſembled his Art Magicke, and the communication hee had with the Diuell. Of whom once deſiring to knowe how long hee ſhould liue in the Popedome, the Diuell anſwered him that he ſhould liue til he ſaid Maſſe in Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Silueſter then giuing himſelfe altogether vnto his delights, hoping to liue long, and thinking of nothing leſſe then of going to Ieruſalem, It came to paſſe that one day in Lent as he celebrated in the Church of the holy Croſſe of Ieruſalem, he was ſuddenly taken with a great Feuer then did he remember yt
                   the ſaid place was called of ye
                   croſſe of Ieruſalem, & ſo had bin ſeduced by the ambiguity of the anſwer. Straight heard he great tumults of diuels in his preſence, & being ſurpriſed with feare began to lament. And although he was a very wicked man, yet fel he not into diſpair: but ſeeing he muſt needs die, called his Cardinals & told vnto them all his life: and the art Magicke which he had vſed to come vnto that dignitie, exhorting them to liue holily: and before all men cōfeſſed himſelf miſerable: & ordeined that his body ſhould be hewen & cut in peeces, but eſpecially ſuch of his members wherby he had worſhipped the diuel: and then that they all ſhould be put in a cart, and in what place ſoeuer the horſes which drew ye
                   cart ſhould ſtay, there he ſhould

be buried. And it came to paſſe that the horſes without any cō
                  duction of man, carried his body into the Church of Laterane; where he was laid in a Sepulchre. And at this day his Sepulchre is a pronoſticke token of a Popes death. R. Barnes. Suppl. Chron. and Nauler.
               
            
            
               An Aduertiſement.
               From the time of Iohn the 8. which was the whore, vntil the yeare after the Natiuitie of Chriſt, Antichriſt raigned at Rome a brazen faced harlot, which had deſpiſed and troden vnder her feet holy mariage. All the Popes which were within this time, which conteineth about an 150. yeares, were plunged in all voluptuouſnes, impudency, and carnal villanies: in arrogancy, kiſſing of feete, Sacriledges, horrible diſſentions, homicides, & vnbrideled impudencies, as may eaſily be perceiued by the diſcourſe of thoſe proceedings. In this time now following, after the thouſand yeare, the diuel is wholy vnchained: And rightly may this time be called The kingdome of the great Dragons.
                  Apoc. 20.2.
                  
               
               
                  Silueſter the ſecond by his Necromancies began to vnlooſe Sathan, hauing couenanted with him to haue the Popedome. Benet the 9. did homage to the diuel in woods & mountaines. In Hildebrand or Gregory the 7. and other Popes, thou ſhalt ſee what Arts they vſed.
               
                  Otho the 3. the 18. yeare of his Empire, was poyſoned by a Romane woman (which had bin the wife of Creſcentius) at the houre of his departing from Rome, by the gift of a paire of perſumed gloues being poyſoned. And this was in reuenge of her husbands death, as ſaith Crantius.
               
               
                  Henry ſecond of that name, Duke of Banier,
                  Henry. 2.
                   and Counte of Bamberge, ſurnamed the Lame, obteined the Empire by election, and raigned 22. yeares.After Abb. Vrſp.
               
               
                  Iohn Pope, 19. of that name,Iohn. 19. ſurnamed le Sec (as Iohn Blundus) by Nation an Italian, ſucceeded Silueſter the Magician, euen in the ſame art and ſtudies which he practiſed. Berno ſaith that there were great cōtentions amongſt the Necromancians, ſuch as were fauourers of Silueſter & this Iohn: but in the end he carried all away. Some ſay he was poyſoned, after he had gouerned 5. months. This Pope gaue himſelf altogether to idlenes & pleaſure, as witneſſeth Crantius. Hydromany was his ſtudie.
               
                  
                  Henry. 2.
                  He commanded the Feaſt of the Commemoration of the dead (newly inuented and inſtituted in the Abbey of Clugny, by Odillo as is ſaid) which was in the moneth of March, to be remitted vntill the ſecond day of Nouember, and then obſerued alſo through all Churches. R. Barns, and Supp. Chron.
               
            
            
               The name of a Cardinall appointed as a dignitie.
               
               The Hiſtoriographers ſay, that at this time the name and appellation of a Cardinall beganne to be in great account, as we ſee at this day. Baconthorpius Ro. Barns, and Carion.
               
               
                  
                     Iohn. 20.
                  Iohn, Pope 20. borne at Rome, called, Faſanus, was ſuſpected  to haue made away his predeceſſor. Theſe Popes from Silueſter vntill Hildebrand, gaue themſelues to nothing but diabolicall arts. This man after he had gouerned foure yeares & fiue moneths dyed. Naucl. not without ſome ſuſpition of poyſon.
               In this time there was an horrible peſtilence, yea almoſt through the whole world. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Fulbert Biſhop of Chartres, wrote theſe Reſpondes to the praiſe of the Virgin Marie. Stirps Ieſſe, &c. Et Chorus nouae Hieruſalem, &c. and other prayers.
               
                  Salue Regina.
                  Herman a Monke of S. Gall, wrote that Salue Regina & Alma redemptoris mater. Trit. Abb.
               
               
                  
                  Sergius 4.
                  
                  Sergius Pope, the fourth of that name a Romane, gouerned the Sea two yeares, and ſixe moneths. Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Burchardus, firſt a Monke of Lob, the Diſciple of Albert aboue mentioned, was Biſhop of Wormes: He compiled the auncient Canons, which afterward were abridged by Gratian: yea rather corrupted, which is eaſie to iudge in comparing them together. Rhenanus in his Annota. vpon Tertullian.
               
               
                  
                  Ieruſalem was taken, and the Lords Sepulchre deſtroyed by the Sarraſins and Mahumetiſts. Nancl. and Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Benet. 8.
                  
                  Benet Pope, 8. of that name, a Tuſculan, gouerned the Romane  Church 12. yeares, or thereabouts.
               He crowned the Emperour Henry at his comming to Rome, and ſaluted him Auguſtus.
               
               
                  
                  Henry the ſecond builded at Bamberge the Church of Saint George, and prayed Benet it might be a Cathedrall Church:Conrade. 2.
                   which the Pope agreed vnto, vppon condition that the ſaide Church ſhould paye to the Pope euery yeare an hundreth markes of ſiluer, and a white horſe with all his furniture. Platina, and R. Barnes.
               
               
                  Conrade 2. of that name, obteined the Empire, and raigned 15. yeares. Naucler. He was the ſonne of Herman Duke of Franconians, and was called Salicus, becauſe he came of the Sicambians, from whom came the Salicke lawe. And the French themſelues were called Salickes, which vſed that lawe, whereof we haue made mention in Pharamond.
               
               After the death of Henry the 2. Benet was deiected frō his dignitie by violence, and a popular ſedition of the Romans,Schiſme 14. and an other ordeined in his place: but after the Antipope was reiected, and Benet eſtabliſhed in his Popedome with great honour, who ſoone after dyed. Supp. Chron.
               
               The Hiſtoriographers doo heere alledge Peter Damianus a Cardinall of Hoſtia, who ſaide that this Pope Benet after his death appeared to a Biſhop his Familier, vpon a blacke horſe: and the Biſhop ſaid vnto him, Art not thou Pope Benet which art gone out of this world? Hee ſaid, I am that vnhappie Benet.
                  This was to get ſiluer, and to maintain Purgatory. Being againe asked how he did: he anſwered; I am greeuouſly tormented: but yet I may be helped with the mercy of God, by ſuffrages, Maſſes, and Almes deeds. Therefore ſaith he, goe to my ſucceſſor Pope Iohn, and tell him in ſuch a coffer he ſhall finde a great ſum of ſiluer, let him diſtribute it all to the poore. The ſaid Biſhop hearing theſe words accompliſhed them, and after diſpatched himſelfe of his Biſhoppricke, and entered into Religion. This is recited by Naucl. R. Barnes. Suppl. Chron. Faſcitemp. Iohn le Maire. Bonif. Simo. Et Cora. Abb.
               
               
                  Thus played Sathan with his Inſtruments, to eſtabliſh his kingdome by Infernall Idolatries, by Purgatories, Maſſes, and ſuch ſuggeſted things.
               
               
                  
                  Iohn. 21.
                  
                  Iohn, Pope, 21. of that name, a Romane, the ſonne of Gregorie, 
                   Biſhop of Port. Suppl. Chron. ruled 9. yeares, 7. moneths, or about 11. yeares after Naucler. And was choſen before hee was promoted to Eccleſiaſticall orders, againſt their rights.
               He had great troubles againſt the Romanes, but finally he was deliuered by the Emperour Conrade his helpe. Supp. Chron. whom alſo hee crowned vpon an Eaſter day: there being preſent, Rodolphe King of Burgongne, and the King of England. Naucler.
               
               
                  Henry 31. King of France, raigned thirtie yeares. He had great contentions with his brother Robert touching the kingdome: but they agreed. He founded the Pryorie of S. Martin in the fields nigh Paris, and put therein Regular Chanons. He raigned 27. yeares: ſome ſay 28. hauing cauſed his ſonne Philip to be crowned.
               At this time flouriſhed in Italie, Guido Aretin, a Monke of the order of S. Benet, an excellent Muſitian, who firſt inuented the Gamma to learne vpon the hand,The Gamma inuented. and the notes Vt, re, mi, fa, ſol, la. See The Sea of Hiſtories. He writ alſo againſt Berengarius. Trit. Abb.
               
               
                  Benet. 9.
                  
                  Benet, Pope, ninth of that name, a Tuſculan, before called Theophilact, the Nephewe of Benet the eight, ſurpaſſed in malice his vncle, and gouerned the Romane Church tenne yeares, foure moneths, and 9. dayes, after Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Conrade dyed at Trect, and was enterred at Spire.
               
               
                  Henry. 3.
                  
                  Henry the third of that name, ſurnamed the blacke ſonne  of Conrade the Emperour, and of Giſelle, was choſen King of Romanes by the Electors: he was a courteous Prince, merrie and liberall by nature. He appeaſed Hungarie, which was troubled with diuers ſeditions. He did as much at Rome to the three Popes which were there. His wife was Agnes, daughter of the Duke of Aquitaine, and the marriage was at Ingelheim, at which he did an act worthie of memorie. For he caſt off all pompes, and put away all Moris Players, Dauncers, and ſuch like: and in their places brought poore people.
               The Pope Benet was accuſed of many crimes by the Romanes, and therefore the third yeare hee was driuen from his

promotion,Henry. 3. and in his place was ordained the Biſhop of Saint Sabine, called Silueſter the third: who likewiſe was reiected after fortie nine dayes, becauſe he was vnprofitable. Benet recouered his dignitie, but hee was againe caſt off, and it was giuen to Iohn Arch-biſhoppe of Saint Iohn Port Latin: who was called Gregorie the ſixt.
               Others ſay that Benet after he was againe receiued into his Popedome, ſolde it for money. And ſo at one ſame time, the ſeuenth yeare of the Empire of Henry the third, there were at Rome three Popes: Benet the ninth, Silueſter the third: and Gregorie the ſixt. One held his ſeate at Laterane in the Pallace. An other at Saint Peters. And the third at Saint Maries.
               
               A Prieſt called Gratian, mooued with zeale, went vnto the Popes, and perſwaded them each one to take ſome good ſome of money & depoſe themſelues from the Papacie. Which they did. R. Barnes, and Naucl.
               
               Vpon theſe ſtirres, the Emperour Henry the third hauing heard of thoſe tumults and ſcandalles at Rome, to aboliſh them, was conſtrained to goe into Italie, with a great power.
               
                  Gratian Pope, met the Emperour, and gaue him a crowne of great price. The Emperour receiued the Pope honourably, and they came together vnto Rome. The Cleargie aſſembled, and ſhewed that Gratian was a Simoniacke: hauing with money cauſed others to yeeld vp their rightes, that he himſelfe by that meanes might come vnto the Popedome. R. Barnes, and Naucler. The Emperour then cauſed a Councell to be held, wherein all thoſe Schiſmatickes and Simoniacke Popes were depoſed, and new created.
               
                  See Reader, and note the honour hereof, as true enſignes of the ſeate of Antichriſt.
               
            
            
               The hereſie of Tranſubſtantiation commenced.
               
               At this time Lanfrancus an Italian borne, of Pauie, flouriſhed in France. He was one of the firſt inuentors and authors of

                  Tranſubſtantiation and hereticall doctrine, new and pernicious, before wholly vnknowne of the auncient Doctors, notwithſtanding receiued ſince the yeare of Chriſt 1053. at the Councell of 
                     Ʋerſeil as ſhall be ſaid.
               The new Doctors which haue written touching Tranſubſtantiation, were Iohn Scotus and Bertramus, both which guided with the ſpirit of truth, writ properly touching the body and bloud of Chriſt in the Supper.
               
                  
                     Abande of ſuch new Doctours as oppoſed themſelues againſt the true doctrine of the Supper.
                     1 Paſcaſius Abbot of the Abbey of Corbey in Saxonie, in the time of Charles le Gros, the yeare of Chriſt. 880.
                     2 Ratherius Monke of Lob, after Biſhop of Verone, vnder Henry the firſt.
                     3 Herigerus Abbot of Lob, of Saint Benet, vnder Otho the third.
                     4 Guido Monke, & Abbot of S. Benet, vnder Conrade the 2.
                     5 Adelmanus Biſhop of Brixe, vnder Henry the third.
                     6 Guimondus Monke, and after Archbiſhop vnder Henr. 3.
                     7 Algerus Monke of Corbey, vnder Henry the third.
                     8 Lanfrancus Archbiſhop of Canterbury in England, before Monke of S. Benet, vnder Henry the third.
                     9 Hildebert Biſhop of Mans, and after Archbiſhoppe of Tours, a Diſciple of Berengarius, but after a great perſecutor of the holy doctrine thereof, vnder Henry the fourth.
                     10 Honorius Prieſt, vnder Henry the fift and others, as Nolſus, Ancelmus, Lomberdus, Petrus Commeſtor, and Innocent the the third, which came after.
                  
               
               
                  Silueſter. 3.
                  
                  Silueſter Pope, third of that name a Romane, Biſhop of S. 
                  Sabine, before called Iohn, after Benet was driuen away as is ſaid, was choſen by gifts and corruption, and ruled 55. dayes, or two moneths.
               Behold the time of horrour and confuſion. He which then was moſt wicked, and would giue moſt, obteined the feate ſooneſt. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  
                  Gregorie Pope, ſixt of that name,Gregorie. 6.
                   ruled two yeares & ſixe moneths: in the time of the former Schiſme, hee had bene adiudged a Simoniacke and Homicide, yet he bought the Popedome of Benet. R. Barnes.
               
               There was great trouble in Hungarie vnder the King Andrewe, and after vnder his brother Vela, againſt ſuch as demaunded againe to returne vnto their Paganiſme and auncient ſuperſtition. Naucler.
               
               
                  Clement Pope, ſecond of that name,Clement. 2.
                   before called Werdigerus, or Singerus, or Sindegerus Biſhop of Bamberge, was  Canonically elected in full Councel, after that the foure others aboue named were depoſed. He crowned the Emperour Henry the third, and his wife Agnes, on a day of the Natiuitie of Chriſt. Naucler.
               
               
                  Henry before he departed from Rome, conſtrained the Romanes by oath to renounce their right of election without any more medling therein thereafter, to auoyd Schiſmes and ſcandales, which commonly riſe of ſuch election. Others ſay the poore gaue them that commaundement and defence. Naucler.
               
               The Romanes after the Emperours departure forgetting their oath, impoyſoned this Pope, after he had gouerned nine moneths. Some ſay that Stephen his ſucceſſour (who was called Damaſus) was authour thereof. Benno ſaith it was Gerard Brazure, a friend of Theophilact, and of Hildebrand, a man expert in poyſoning.
               In this time men forged Viſions and miracles,Sacraments of the Aultar. to eſtabliſh the Sacrament of the Maſſe, which then was called of the Aulter. Many durſt not ſpeake what they thought therein for feare of Popes.
               The wickedneſſe of Popes merited, that the power of election ſhould be taken from Eccleſiaſticall perſons by the iuſt iudgement of God, ſaith Nauclerus.
               
               This Pope was poyſoned ſoone after the Emperours departure.
               
                  Damaſus Pope, ſecond of that name,Damaſus. 2.
                   otherwiſe called S. Stephanus Baguiarius, borne in Bauiere, Biſhop of Brixe, ruled

by force the ſeate 23. dayes, as Hiſto, and Chron. ſay. For he occupied the Popedome without election, either ſuffrage of people, or Cleargie. R. Barnes.
               
               
                  Leo. 9.
                  
                  Leo Pope, 9. of that name an Almaine, of the Countrey  of Alſac, the Earles of Ausperge, and being Count or Earle of Etiſheim, called Bruno, Biſhop of Tulles, a man of good nature, was ſent to Rome by the Emperour, at the requeſt of the Romanes, and being choſen Pope, gouerned fiue yeares, two moneths, ſixe dayes, after Suppl. Chron. Some ſay, that as he came to Rome, Hugo Abbot of Clugny, and Hildebrand the Monke, encountred and met him in his pontificall attire: they perſwaded him to take off that habite, and to enter into Rome in his vſuall and priuate attire; vpon this reaſon, that the Emperour had not giuen him the right to chuſe the Pope, but only the people and Cleargie of Rome. Bruno agreeing to their ſpeech confeſſed his fault, and accuſed himſelfe, that he had rather obey the Emperour then God. At Hildebrandes perſwaſion the Cleargie elected him for this, that hee confeſſed that the election ought to appertaine to the Cleargie, and not to the Emperour. Leo then to recompence Hildebrand, created him Cardinall, and committed vnto him the Church of S. Paul.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt one thouſand fiftie one, Leo aſſembled a Councell at Verſeil: where was firſt handled the opinion of Tranſubſtantiation, (although that word was not inuented of long time after) and there was condemned the opinion of Iohn Scotus, of Bertramus, and Berengarius Doctor, borne at Tours, Arch-deacon of Angiers, who maintained the opinion of Scotus, and of Bertramus, touching the Euchariſt. In the ſaid Councell Berengarius appeared not, but ſent thither two Clarkes: and as they would haue excuſed Berengarius, and haue told the reaſon, they were laid hold on and put inpriſon. Behold how they diſputed, O Ecolampadius.
               
               
                  Theſe be the pooceedings of the aduerſaries of the truth, to ioyne tyrannie with ignorance.
               
               
                  
                  Berengarius had Lanfrancus for his aduerſary, who maintained the opinion of Paſcaſius, the firſt author of this doctrine againſt Scotus and Bertramus.
               
               
                  Hubert Cardinall, Rogerius & Guimondus maintained Lanfancus his part, which mingled ſubtilties with outrages againſt Berengarius, who ſhewed himſelfe litle conſtant. For although he had the truth on his ſide, yet had he a certaine hatred againſt Lanfrancus & Rogerius, mingled with glory & hope of victorie, which made him looſe the deſire he had to maintaine the puritie of the doctrine. For he mingled withal certain ſpeeches of marriage & the Baptiſme of litle children, and therfore they ſtifled amongſt ſome errours by his fault. So commeth it to paſſe, whē without the feare of the Lord we wil maintaine the cauſe of the Goſpell. O Ecolamp.
               
               At this time the Emperour cauſed a Sinode to be held of an hundreth and thirtie Biſhops at Magunce. Some write that Leo was there, and there it was ordeined that the Clarks ſhould nouriſh no dogges for hunting, nor hawkes.
               That Clarkes ſhould deale with no ſecular nor prophane affaires.
               That none ſhould be admitted or receiued into a Monaſterie for a Monke, vnleſſe hee were of a lawfull age, and that hee ſhould come in of his owne good will without conſtraint.
               Simony and marriage, was forbidden Prieſts.
               That the houſes of Clarkes ſhould be builded nigh vnto Temples and Churches, 12. queſt. 2. cha. Neceſſaria.
               
               
                  Henry the third gaue to Leo the Towne and Countrey of Beneuent, to redeeme the yearly rent of an hundred marks, paid (as is aboue ſaid) yearely out of the Cathedrall Church of Bamberge: and Leo confirmed the priuiledges graunted to the ſaid church, & accorded to the ſaid Archbiſhop the Mantle (which they call Palilium) to vſe three times in the yeare. At Eaſter, at the Feaſt af S. Peter, and S. Paul, and vpon S. George his day, the Patrone of that Church. Naucler.
               
               Vpon the aforeſaid Sinode, Nicholas a Monke of Constantinople, writ a Booke againſt the Latines, Intituled De nuptijs

Sacerdotum. Of the marriage of Prieſts: which was condemnemned by Hubert, the ſaid Popes Legate, and ſent to Conſtantinople. Trit. Abb.
               
               
                  For the Pope is ignorant of nothing.This Pope being at Ratisbone, the Legates of Paris being preſent, approued the Relickes of S. Denis, whereof there had bene a long doubt, whether they were Saint Denis his Relickes or no. Chron. Abb. Ʋrsp.
               
               Vnder Henry the third, the Hungarians returned vnto Paganiſme, and hauing reiected the Faith, put to death all their Biſhops and Cleargie. Naucler.
               
               Vpon a Chriſtmas day, Leo the ninth, and Henry the third, being at a great Maſſe, in the Towne of Wormes, after the Subdeacon had ſung the Epiſtle in the accuſtomed maner and Tune, the Pope preſently deiected & depriued him of his office: becauſe he ſung the Epiſtle in the Popes preſence, in an other Song and Tune then the Romane Church did.
               The Arch-biſhop of Wormes who ſaide Maſſe that day, greeued that his Subdeacon ſhould be ſo handled, after the Goſpell was ſung, retyred into his Epiſcopall ſeate, leauing his office vnperfected, ſaying he would make no ende if the Pope would not reſtore his Subdeacon to his former ſtate. The Pope becauſe hee would not hinder that the ſeruice ſhould not be ended, reſtored his Subdeacon. R. Barn. Albert. Crane lib. 4. Saxo. ca. 45.
               
                  Anne Queene of France, wife of Henry the firſt, founded in the Towne of Senlis a Church of S. 
                     Ʋincent, where are Regular Chanons, and an other in the ſuburbs where were Nunnes. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               After the death of Leo the third, the Romanes fearing the puiſſance of Henry the third, durſt not attempt a news thing againſt their oath, which they made in the time of Clement the ſecond: wherefore they ſent Hildebrand towardes the Emperour to chuſe a Pope: who vſing the authoritie of his Legation, deſigned Henry the fourth, the ſonne of Henry the third Emperour.Victor. 2.
                   And in the meane while 
                     Ʋictor was choſen Pope, ſecond of that name, not ſo voluntarily as to pleaſe the Emperour, in electing an Almane borne of Bauier, before

called Gebhard, who ruled two yeares and three moneths. Naucler.
               
               Hee aſſembled a Councell at Florence againſt Forncating and Simoniacke Prieſts:He calleth married Prieſt Fornicatiors. whereat hee depoſed many Biſhoppes, Prelates, and Prieſts, which hee called Fornicators, which had not left their wiues according to the Councell of Magunce. There were Clarkes threatened with great puniſhments if they did not obey the Decrees and Cannons of Popes.
               There was alſo confirmed the opinion of Paſchaſius, contrary to Scotus, Bertramus, and of Berengarius.
               
               
                  Hildebrand by authoritie of the ſaid Councell was ſent into France to Tours, to aſſemble a Sinode touching the matter of the Sacrament and of Tranſubſtantiation. There was Berengarius permitted to defend his opinion: But ſeeing all went by affection, and that hee could not maintaine his opinion without daunger, vppon puſillanimitie and cowardiſe, hee ſaide hee held the opinion of the Catholicke Church: by which wordes hee rather ſatisfied the Legates and the ſaid Councell, then kept the libertie worthie of a Chiſtian man. Oecol. lib. 3.
            
            
               Pluralitie of Benefices.
               Pluralitie of Benefices beganne about this time, and after  neuer ceaſed in the Church, Faſcic. temp.
               
               The yeare of our Lord 1056. Henry the third dyed the  tenth yeare of his Empire, and of his age 39. leauing 3. daughters and two ſonnes: that is to ſay, Henry which ſucceeded him, and Conrade Duke of Bauiers.
               
               
                  Henry Emperour, fourth of that name,Henry. 4.
                   obteined the Empire, and raigned fiftie yeares.
               
               
                  Stephen Pope, 9. of that name, borne of Lorraine,
                  Stephen. 9.
                   Abbot of Montcaſſin, called Fredericke, brother of the Duke of Lorraine, ruled at Rome ten moneths. Naucler. After others foure moneths.
               
                  
                  Henry. 4.He brought vnder the obedience of the Romane ſeate, Millane: which ſince the time of the Apoſtles hath neuer ſubiected, ſaith Platin. and R. Barns. Others, as Naucler. and Supp. Chron. ſay 200. yeares.
               
                  Stephen accuſed the Emperour Henry the fourth, of hereſie, becauſe he diminiſhed the authoritie of the Romane ſeate. Platina. And hauing heard that the Churches of Italie and Burgongne were corrupted with Symonie, he ſent Hildebrand to roote out that Cockle. Hildebrand and hauing made his commiſſion returned to Rome, and found the Pope very ſicke: who thinking to die, cauſed his Churchmen to come vnto him, and made them ſweare that they ſhould neuer ſuffer any to ſit in the Apoſtolike ſeate, vnleſſe he were choſen by the conſent of all: yet comming againe to his health, he came to Florence, and called a Councell: but he died there eight monethes after. Nauclerus.
               
               A Scottiſh Monke called Patermis, being in Almaine in a Towne called Paderbrune, fire was put in the Abbey wherin he was: yet though he might, he would not come out: chuſing rather to be burnt for the vow of his obedience, then to ſhunne the daunger by going out. Sigeb.
               
               
                  The opinion or obſtination of vowes is founded vpon ſuch examples.
               
               
                  
                  Benet Pope. 10. of that name, of Campania in Italie, was a Biſhop of Vileterne, before called Mincius, and ruled at Rome 9. monethes.Benet. 10.
                  
               
               The Romanes corrupted by ſiluer, elected him againſt the Canons, although the Cleagie were againſt it, but he was conſtrained to giue ouer the Popedome. For Hildebrand returning from Florence,
                  Schiſme. brought with him Gerard Biſhop of Florence, who after was choſen at Senes. And after his election was aſſigned a Councell in a Towne called Sutry, againſt Benet. And thither came Goafred Duke of Italie, the firſt husband of Matilde, and Guillebert great Gouernor. Item, the Biſhops of Lombardie and Hetruria, and others. Which thing Benet vnderſtanding,

fled, putting off his pontificall habit, and after led a priuate life.
               
                  Nicholas Pope, ſecond of that name, borne of Sauoy,
                  Nicholas. 2.
                   called Gerard, Biſhop of Florence, gouerned three yeares, and ſixe monethes.
               
               He was eleced at Senes, by the inſtance of Hildebrand, becauſe he thought it no ſure thing that the election ſhould bee at Rome, ſeeing Benet the tenth and his friends were there preſent.
               
                  Nicholas comming to Rome, aſſigned a Councell nigh Laterane, of an hundreth and fortie Biſhops. Wherin it was ordained that the election of the Pope ſhould be made by Cardinalls, Clarkes, and the Romane people: And that whoſoeuer ſhould attempt to come to the Popedome, by ſiluer, fauour, ambition, or other vnlawful meane, and not by Canonike election, that he ſhould be held for an Apoſtare, and an excommunicated perſon, deiected of euery one, without any aide or fauour. Diſt. 33. cap. In nomine Domini.
               
               
                  That ordinance endured not long: For afterwards Cardinalls alone without either Cleargie or people vſurped that election.
               
               In this Councell Berengarius Deacon thinking rather to ſaue his life then to maintaine the truth, denied it,The puſillanimitie of Berengarius.
                   ſubmitting himſelfe to the will of the Councell. His confeſſion (or rather recantation) is contained Deconſecrat: dist. 2. cap. Ego Berengarius
               
               It was at this Councell of Rome, that tranſubſtantiation was decreed; that is to ſay, that after the bread is conſecrated, we muſt beleeue the bony of Chriſt to be ſo in the Sacrament, that ſenſibly and really he is between the hands of the Prieſts: broken & bruiſed with the teeth. And the Pope Nicholas conſtrained Berengarius ſo to ſay & confeſſe: the ſaid Nicholas being ſo taught and perſwaded by Lanfrancus. Vadian.
               
               But the firſt opinion of Berengarius which he pronounced for temporall feare, was this that followeth, as Lanfrancus
                  
himſelfe reciteth in his booke of the Sacrament of the Euchariſt,The words of Berengarius touching the Sacrament. againſt Berengarius. The ſacrifice of the Church (ſaith Berengarius) is made of two things: that is to ſay, viſible and inuiſible, of the Sacrament, and of the thing of the Sacrament. Which thing yet (that is to ſay, the body of Chriſt) if it were before our eyes, if it were preſent, it ſhould be viſible, but beeing eleuated vnto heauen, and being ſet at the right hand of the Father, vntill the reſtoration of all things (as ſaith S. Peter the Apoſtle) it cannot be drawne from heauen: for the perſon of Chriſt conſiſteth of God and man. But the Sacrament of the Table of the Lord (that is to ſay) the bread and wine conſecrated, are not chaunged but remaine in their ſubſtances, hauing Similitude with the things whereof they are Sacraments, &c. He ſaid moreouer, that the bread and wine after the conſecration were onely the Sacrament, and not the true body nor the true bloud of the Lord: and that they could not ſenſibly, but ſacramentally be adminiſtred of the Prieſts, or broken and bruiſed with the teeth of the faithfull. In the ſame Chapter, Ego Berengarius.
               
               
                  Golfred, Count of Pouille and of Calabria died, leauing his ſonne Bagellard his heire: but Robert brother of the ſaid Golfred, and vncle of the ſaid Bagellard, hauing taken from him all that his father had left him, vſurped Beneuent, which belonged to the Romane ſeate. Wherefore the Pope excommunicated him. Robert then knowing that he had taken the aforeſaid Countries from his ſaid Nephew, did what he could to returne into the Popes fauour, and prayed him to come into Calabria for the good of peace. Being come, he abſolued Robert of the Bond of excommunication. After, he adiudged him Pouille and Calabria, vpon condition he would yeeld him Beneuent and Troy, Townes of Pouille, and all that which belonged vnto the Romane ſeate. Item, that he would giue him helpe in his neceſſities. Robert promiſed all this, and gaue him an Armie by which the Pope recouered many places about Rome, and made them ſubiect to the ſeate. As Preneſta, Tuſculum, Numentum, and beyond Tiber certaine Caſtles, euen vnto Sutri. Rob. Barns.
               
               
                  
                  The Pope is content to make his profit to the damage of Orphelius: he conſented vnto the Rapines of Robert, ſo that he might haue his helpe.
               
               
                  Ancelmus the diſciple of Lanfrancus, ſucceeded his maiſter in the Priorie of Bec, and Lanfrancus was made Archbiſhop of Canterburie in England. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Phillip the 38. King of France, ſonne of Henry,
                  Philip. raigned 49. yeares.
               
               
                  Alexander Pope, ſecond of that name, of Millaine,
                  Alexander. 2.
                   ruled at Rome a yeare and fiue monethes, whoſe Hiſtorie is this. After  the death of Pope Nicholas, one Ancelme Biſhop of Luques was choſen for the renowne of his vertues, without the Emperours knowledge, and was choſen being abſent from Rome. For he reſided in his Biſhoppricke of Luques. After the election, the Cardinalls went for him and conducted him to Rome, and was named Alexander. But ſome Biſhops of Lombardie (whom Alexander pleaſed not becauſe he was not of their band) ſtirred a ſchiſme, and vnder ſhadowe that they ſaid he entred by Simonie, they would needs haue an other, ſuch as they liked: and at the inſtigation of Gilbert Biſhop of Parme, a man mightie amongſt others, they drew towards the Emperour, to ſhewe that the election hath alwaies appertained vnto the Emperors. Briefly, they obtained of him to chuſe an other Pope at theyr pleaſure, ſeeing Nicholas the ſecond was choſen without his knowledge. As ſoone as they were returned into Lombardie, they aſſembled a Councell, and did chuſe one called Cadolus of Parme, a rich and maruellous puiſſant man, vnder whom all Italie bowed, except the Counteſſe Martilde, or Mehaut. Cadolus then beeing ſo choſen Antepope, drew towards Rome with a ſtrong band, and the power of the Lombards.
               The Pope Alexander met him,Homicide committed for the Popedome. accompanied with his Romanes, and the batraile was hard and ſharpe, nigh Neron vnder the golden Mountaine, where was a great ſlaughter: but finally the victorie turned on the part of Alexander. Yet Cadolus for one euill encounter loſt not courage, but before a

yeare was paſſed, by the meanes of certaine friends which held his part (which he had gained by force of ſiluer) entred into Rome. The Romanes yet ranne to Armes: but Cincius the Prouoſt, his ſonne of Rome, put Cadolus in the Forte of S. Angilo. The war betwixt thoſe two, endured the ſpace of 2. yeares. Finally, Cadolus was conſtrained to yeeld himſelfe, and redeeme his life with 600. Markes of ſiluer. After to content the Emperour who fauoured the ſaid Cadolus, a Councell was aſſembled at Mantua, where were the Emperor and the Pope Alexander,
                  A Councell At Mantua. & there in the preſence of all the Prelates, the Pope purged himſelfe both of Simony & Ambition & matters were agreed both of the one partie and the other. Iohn le Maire. 11.
               
                  The determinations of the Councell.1 In the ſaid Councell was ordained that none ſhould heare the Maſle of a Prieſt that had concubines. 17. diſt. c. Preterhoc.
               
               2. Whoſoeuer wittingly ſhould be promoted by a Simoniake, he ſhould be reiected and depoſed. 1. q. 2. c. De caetero.
               
               3. That Cloiſter Monkes ſhould not be admitted to the offices of Clarkes. 16. q. 2. c. iuxta calced. tenorem.
               
               4. That Clarkes ſhould take no Eccleſiaſticall Benefice of a ſecular perſon. 16. q. 1. c. Perlaicos.
               
               5. That men ſhould giue Benefices & Eccleſiaſticall orders to learned people, without ſelling or buying any of them with any contract. 1. q. 3. c. Exmultis.
               
               6. That he which ſhould be excommunicated, cannot excommunicate an other. 14. q. 1. c. Audiuimus.
               
               7. That Alleluia ſhould be baniſhed out of the Church from Septuageſima, vntill Eaſter.
               Whileſt this Councell was held at Mantua, Richard the Normane with his ſonne William, tooke and occupied certaine places of the Romane ſeate, as Capua, Beneuent, and others. Hildebrand was ſent againſt Richard, and conſtrained him to yeeld vp againe ſuch places as he had taken. The Pope attending Hildebrand at Piſe, they returned together from thence vnto Rome, R. Barns.
               
               This Pope Alexander gaue Lanfrancus Archbiſhop of Canterburie, for the victorie obtained againſt Berengarius, touching Tranſubſtantiation, two Archiepiſcopall Mantles, or Palls, the

one of honour, and the other of loue.
               Hiſtories recite at length how the Pope Alexander was handled by Hildebrand, who ſucceeded him, and how finally he detained him in great miſeries, after hee had beene beaten and outraged of him. And after this time Hildebrand retained to himſelfe all the reuenewes of the Church of Rome, & aſſembled great ſummes of ſiluer. After then that Alexander was dead, vnder the miſerable ſeruitude of Hildebrand, the yeare of our Lord, 1074. the ſame day at night he was Inthronized in the Papall ſeate by his ſouldiers, without the conſent of the Cleargie or people, leaſt if he had tarried too long, an other had preuented him. In his election none of the Cardinalls had ſubſcribed. Wherevnto when the Abbot of Clugny was come, Hildebrand ſaid vnto him: Thou haſt tarried too long brother. The Abbot anſwered. And thou Hildebrand haſt made too much haſte, that occupieſt the Apoſtolike ſeate againſt the Canons, before the Pope thy Lord be buried.
               But how Hildebrand was put in poſſeſſion, in what maner he liued, how he drew Cardinalls to him which ſhould be witneſſes of his life and doctrine, how miſerably hee tormented them, and with what hereſies he infected the world, what periuries, what great treaſons he committed, hardly can many deſcribe them. Yet the bloud of ſo many Chriſtians ſhead, whereof he was author and principall cauſe, cryeth yet higher then all that. Behold what Benno ſaith.
               
                  Hanno the ſecond Archbiſhop of Colongne, cauſed both the eyes to be put out of certaine Iudges which had condemned a poore woman: of which, one Iudge loſt but one eye, for that he brought the other vnto triall. In memory of this Iudgement, were erected Images without eyes. Naucler.
               
               
                  Nauclerus alſo and others do tell here of a rich and mightie  man, who was ſo perſecuted with Rats, that finally he was conſumed, yet no man touched that was with him.
               
                  Gregorie Pope, 7. of that name, before called Hildebrand,
                  Gregorie. 7.
                   borne at Siennes in Tuſcane, ruled at Rome 12. yeares, and one  moneth: rather a Monſter in nature then a man.
               Hauing abandoned the Monaſterie of Clugny, where hee

was a Monke, and being come to Rome, he inſinuated himſelfe into the familiaritie of Laurence an Archprieſt, of whom hee learned Magike Arts and Negromancie: which Arts the ſaid Laurence being yet young, had learned of that diuelliſh Monſter Sylueſter, Pope, ſecond of that name, with certaine others. There was a certaine particular intelligence betwixt this Laurence Thoaphilacte, Iohn Gratian, and Hildebrand, all Archprieſts or Cardinalls of the Sinagogue of Rome.
                  Archprieſts & Cardinalls. Wherfore Hildebrand did whatſoeuer he would with Theophilacte, whileſt hee was in the Popes office, vnder the name of Benet the ninth. But which is more, vntill he came to be Pope, nothing was done vnder the other Popes but at his pleaſure. When hee liſt (as Benno ſaith) he would ſhake his skirtes, and fire would come out like ſparkes: and by ſuch miracles he abuſed the eyes of ſimple people, as if it had bene ſome ſigne of ſanctetie. And therefore ſaith Benno, when the diuell could not perſecute publikely Ieſus Chriſt by the Painims, he diſpoſed himſelfe fraudulently to deſtroy his name by that falſe Monke, vnder the ſhewe and colour of religion.
               Authors rehearſe that this Hildebrand poyſoned ſeuen or eight Popes, by the ſeruice of Gerard Brazut, to the ende by that meanes he might the ſooner come vnto the Papacie. Yet during thoſe great troubles, he handled all things ſo ſubtilly, that none doubted he by any meanes aſpired to the ſeate. And although he was not Pope by name, yet in effect he was the Organe and onely Inſtrument of him that was ordained Pope, or of all his wicked inuentions: and by litle and litle, he practiſed vnder the other Popes, that which he executed in his owne Popedome. This notable Hypocrite vnder the colour of Canons, and a certaine pietie, hee did whatſoeuer hee would, although he was the moſt vniuſt and the wickeddeſt in the world. He accuſed Alexander the ſecond his Lord and Maiſter, becauſe he had ſought ſuccours and helpe of the Emperour againſt his aduerſaties: and ſaid it was not reaſonable (according to Canons) that he ſhould enioy the Papall dignitie, which had demaunded ſuccours of a prophane Prince. Hauing diſmiſſed the ſaid Alexander of his dignitie, he impriſoned

him, and cauſed him ſecretly to die, and incontinently vſurped the Papall ſeate, whileſt men prepared for the obſequies and funeralls of the dead. He communicated his ſiluer and counſell with Brazut, and certaine Iewes his familiars, by the meanes of which, he found many tongues at his hire, which cried with an high voyce (yea euen before Alexander was buried) S. Peter the Apoſtle hath choſen Hildebrand: and they placed him in the Papall Chaire vnder the name of Gregorie the 7.The 1000. yeare after the deſtructiō of Ieruſalem. And this was done the 1000, yeare after the deſtruction of Ieruſalem: In the which yeare the 6. Vicars of Sathan began to attribute vnto themſelues openly the name of God, and the office and vertue of Ieſus Chriſt, true God, and true man. For as ſoone as the ſaid Gregorie had bin declared and ordained Pope, the ſame was proclamed, that the true Vicar of Chriſt Ieſus was choſen. And alſo the ſame Gregorie appropriated vnto himſelfe that which is ſaid of Ieſus Chriſt in the ſecond Pſal. Hee ouerthrew the lawes of God in forbidding marriage to Prieſts, and caſting kings out of their ſeats.
                     Apoc. 20. c. 8. Croiſaides againſt the Turkes. It was he which ſhead out the firſt ſeeds of the warre of Gog & Magog, which were the moſt pernitious and bloudie that euer was, and which his familiar Vrbain 2. of that name, afterward purſued. Baleus Anglus.
               
            
            
               The beginning of the miſchiefes and extreame calamities of Croyſades againſt the Turkes, vnder a ſhewe of recouering Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Benno a Crdinall, rehearſeth the hiſtory folowing.The Hiſtorie of Hildebrand his Negromancie. One day (ſaith he) as Gregorie came frō 
                  Albe to Rome, he forgot to bring with him a booke of Negromancie which he held very deare, and without the which hee neuer went, or at leaſt very ſeldome. Whereof remembring himſelfe at the doore of Laterane, hee called haſtily two of his moſt familiars which accuſtomed to ſerue him in all his wickedneſſe and villanies: and commaunded them that they ſhould bring him the ſaid booke with all expedition, ſtraightly charging them that they ſhould not preſume ſo much as to open the booke by the way, and that vpon curioſitie they ſhould not enquire vppon the ſecrets thereof. But the more he commanded them, the more inflamed he their

curioſitie diligently to ſeeke the ſecrets thereof. As then returning, they had opened the booke, and had curiouſly read the diuelliſh commaundements of that Art, ſuddenly the Angells of Sathan preſented themſelues: the multitude of which, and the horror of them, brought thoſe two young men almoſt out of their wits, that with much adoo could they come to themſelues. And as they themſelues rehearſed it, thoſe euil ſpirits inſiſted ſtrongly, ſaying. Wherefore haue you called vs? wherefore haue you diſquietted vs? Commaund vs quickly what you will haue vs to doo, elſe we will fall vpon you if you keepe vs any longer here. One of the young men then anſwered; caſt vs downe theſe walles ſtraight. And ſaying ſo, hee ſhewed thē with the hand certaine high walles nigh the towne of Rome, which in a moment theſe euill ſpirits ouerthrew to the earth.
               They then thus terrified, trembling & almoſt out of breath, ſcantly could come to Rome vnto their maiſter. Behold what Benno ſaith, who was in that time.
               
                  Gregorie being come to the papall dignitie, began incontinently to ſollicite that the Canons which his predeceſſors had made by his cautelous Councell, touching Simonie and ſingleneſſe of life in Prieſts and Monkes, ſhould be obſerued: not to the end hee might wholy aboliſh the wicked and deteſtable marchandiſe which was made of Eccleſiaſticall Benefices: but that vnder ſome colour of honeſtie, hee might take from Princes the power to conferre and beſtow them, and to the end that by that meane all Biſhops might be reduced and brought vnder the power and authoritie of the Romane ſeate; which becauſe of the right of Inueſture, were obliged and beholding vnto Princes, more then vnto the Pope of Rome. And although that the Emperour Henry were the greateſt of all Princes, yet this arrogant and proud marchant iudged it beſt,A Councell at Rome. firſt to touch and deale with him tragically for the cauſe of Simonie. Hee aſſembled a Councell at Rome in the place of Laterane, touching theſe things: but the Emperour beeing hindered becauſe of his warres, could not intend to debate his right in the Sinode. The Pope notwithſtanding

had taken the matter ſo at heart, that for that cauſe he ceaſed not to vſe both treaſons and murders, and that more is, he ſtirred in many places inteſtine and inward warres, which engendred all maner of calamities. For firſt he laide ambuſhes for the Emperour, hee ſought by diuers meanes to cauſe him to die. In ſo much as hee ſought to haue ſlaine him euen in the Church as he ſhould be at his prayers.
               The Cardinall Benno rehearſeth thus the Hiſtorie. The Emperour (ſaith he) had a cuſtome often to goe make his prayers in the Church of S. Marke, in the Mount Auentine. As then, Hildebrand enquired diligently by certaine ſpies,What treaſon is there that Popes will not excogitate? of all that he did: hee gaue charge to marke the place wherein the Emperour prayed oftneſt either ſtanding or on his knees, and ſuborned one, promiſing him a great ſumme of money, to lay great ſtones on the beames or vpper lofts of the Church (ſee the holy councell of this Pope) and that he ſhould lay thē ſo wel, that when the Emperour ſhould make his prayers, he might let them fall on his head to daſh out his braines. But as he which had enterpriſed ſuch a villanie, was at hand to accompliſh it, and went about to handle and remoue a ſtone, the heauie for him, the ſtone by the waight deceiued him: and the ſcaffold which was on the beames being broken, the ſtone and the poore miſerable man, by a iuſt iudgement of God, fell vpon the pauement of the Temple, & was all burſt with the ſame ſtone. After the Romanes vnderſtood how all things was paſt, they bound the feet of that wicked villaine, and by the ſpace of 3. daies trailed him through the ſtreets of the towne. But vſing their accuſtomed humanitie, commaunded he ſhould be buried.
               The ſonne of Benno ſaith here yet further: that Iohn Biſhop of Port, who was Hildebrands Secretarie and great familiar, comming into the Pulpit which was in S. Peters Church, ſaid amongſt many other things, in the hearing of the people and Cleargie, Hildebrand hath done ſuch a thing, and we alſo as deſeruers, ſhould all bee burned aliue:The Hoſt caſt into the fire by Gregorie the ſeuenth. meaning to giue to vnderſtand that which hee had done of the Sacrament of the body of our Lord. Whereof Hildebrand demaunding Councell of a certaine thing (as of old the Painims did of their Idols)

caſt it into the fire, becauſe it gaue him do anſwere, although the Cardinalls which were then preſent ſpake againſt his deed.
               
                  This is a beginning of the fruite of that curſed decree of Tranſubſtantiation, applied vnto Charmes and Inchauntments.
               
               
                  The Emperor excommunicated.He excommunicated alſo the ſaid Emperour Henry, without lawfull accuſation, without Canonicall appellation, without forme of iuſtice: yea euen for that he was but too obedient vnto him. Hee diuided alſo from him the Princes of the Empire, and ſought by ſecret treaſons to deſtroy him, but God preſerued him. O ſtraunge treaſon proceeding from the ſanctuarie, or rather frō him who ſeemed to be the high Prieſt to gouerne the Church, to haue ſuperintendancie ouer Iudges and Elders. By menaces alſo he conſtrained Biſhops to ſweare that they ſhould not defend his cauſe, neither ſhould they fauour or helpe him in any thing, drawing violently the ſcripture to make them ſerue his falſe dealing. Notwithſtanding (ſaith Benno) ſo ſoone as hee aroſe vp from his ſeate to excommunicate the Emperour, the ſeate (which had lately bene made of new and ſtrong wood) by the will of God, of it ſelfe brake in many peeces in a terrible maner. In ſuch ſort as it gaue to know, that he that did ſit vpō it, would ſowe terrible ſchiſmes againſt the Church, by ſo arrogant and preſumptuous a maner of excommunication. This ſaith Benno.
               
               But when he ſawe that all his Ambuſhes could ſerue him for nothing, he beganne to vſe open force and emnities, and after he had excommunicated Henry, declaring all his ſubiects acquited of their oath of fidelitie, which they had deliuered him, he ſent the Crowne of the Empire vnto Rodolphe Sauoic, with this Latine verſe, ſuch as it is.
               Petra dedit Petro, Petrus diàdema Rodolpho.
               That is to ſay, the Rocke hath giuen the Diademe vnto

                  Peter, and Peter giueth it vnto Rodolphe. Henry then being for this cauſe ſore troubled, laid downe his royall apparell and came towards him into the Towne of Canuſe, with his wife and litle ſonne, in the time of a ſtrong and ſharpe winter, & through a very daungerous way. Being before the gate of the Citie (ſayth Benno) from morning till night, without hauing eyther meate or drinke, in apparell of cloath, and barefooted, beeing made a ſpectacle for Angels and men, hee required pardon in all humilitie. He endured three whole dayes in a very lamentable affliction; In ſo much that Hildebrand (who tooke his pleaſure the meane while with his whores and Monkes) mocked him. He deſired ſore that he might haue entry into the Citie, but it was refuſed him: And as with great inſtance he demaunded it by the ſpace of three dayes, he was anſwered that the Pope had no leiſure to ſpeake with him. Henry taking not in euill part that they would not ſuffer him to come into the Citie, remained in the ſuburbes not without great grieuance. For the winter was ſharper then of cuſtome. Yet to the end he would offend no perſon, he kept 3. whole dayes there without departing. Finally, the fourth day, at the requeſt of the Counteſſe Matilde (who as Hiſtories ſay, loued a litle too much the Pope) and of the Abbot of Clugny, and of the Earle of Sauoy, called Adelrans, he was permitted to enter of the Pope. But when he demaunded pardon of the Pope,Arrogance diabolicall. ſetting his Crowne betwixt his hands and in his power, he would neither pardon nor abſolue him of excommunication, vnleſſe firſt he promiſed to purge himſelfe in a ful Sinode of his fault, with other vnlawful and vnreaſonable conditions. All which things he promiſed and confirmed them by eſtate: yet would they not remit him into his Kingdome.
               
                  Can any body haue haue a more liuely portraite of the Image of Antichriſt?
               
               The Princes of Italy, after they knew this,
                     Sledan reciteth it in his 3. booke of the 4 Monarchies. were exceedingly offended that the Emperour had ſo made his agreement with Hildebrand, and that ſo diſhoneſtly and vilely he had ſubmitted himſelfe to him, who had inuaded the Papacie by wicked practiſes, and who had polluted and defiled all with murders and adulteries. &c.
               
                  After this, the Pope with his Cardinalls glorying that he had brought the Emperour into ſeruitude, durſt now aduenture to enterpriſe greater things. But the Emperour afterward tooke courage, and ſtraightway diſpatched all that, by taking Armes:Warres betweene the Emperor and Rodolphe.
                   And after many ſharp and hard warres he vanquiſhed Rodolphe in battaile. Who hauing his right hand cut off, made call all the Biſhops and Prieſts on his ſide. Which being come, after one had brought him his hand, he ſpake in this ſort. I confeſſe that this is worthily come vnto me, and wel beſtowed vpon me.
                     Rodolphe his repentance. Behold the hand wherewith I haue deliuered the oath of fidelitie to my Lord Henry: but at the ſollicitation of you, I haue ſo many times vnluckily fought againſt him, and alſo falſified my faith vnto him: and therefore I haue receiued a reward ſuch as my periurie meriteth. See if you haue guided mee in a right way. So then and now keepe to your Prince the fidelitie which you haue promiſed vnto him. As for me, I goe to my Fathers: and incontinently after, Rodolphe yeelded vp the ſpirit.
               After this man was dead, they elected an other by the commandement of the Pope: namely, Herman of Saxonie, Count, or Earle of Lucenbourg, who not without the Lords will, was ſlaine by a woman, who let fall a great ſtone vpon his head as he aſſailed a Caſtle in Almaine. And the malice of this cruel tirant could not be repreſſed, but it ſtirred vp a third Competitor to this good Prince:
                     Egbert of Miſue ſlaine namely one Egbert, Earle of Miſue, his parent: but being ſurpriſed by the Emperors people, he was miſerably put to death.
               What man would not bee mooued by ſuch iudgements of God, to obey his Magiſtrate, and abhorre all rebellion and ſedition: yet this Romane ſeate was neuer ſtirred therewith: but finally wrought the Emperours ſonne Henry to rebell againſt his father.
               The writings of Henry the 4. ſent to the King of France, by which he complaineth of his ſonnes iniuries, and of ſuch as drew him on to do them, do at large declare this tragedie, and at this day are to be ſeene.
               
                  Matilde Counteſſe, kept ordinarie company with the

Pope, and neuer departed from him, as his harlot,
                     Matilde the Popes harlot, named the daughter of S. Peter.
                   deſpiſing Aron her husband, Marqueſſe of Est. In ſo much that ſhee was commonly called S. Peter his daughter. Shee was diuorced by the Romane ſeate for ſome affinitie that was pretended to be betwixt them. From thence came it as Lambert Hirſueldenſis hath left in writing, that all people accuſed them, that there was a villainous and diſhoneſt loue betwixt them: and euerie one ſaid ſhe lay with the Pope, and had vnlawfull company of him which had taken frō Prieſts holy & honeſt marriage. The Abbot of 
                     Ʋrſperge, called Conrade de Lihtenaw, addeth this in his Chronicle. Certaine it is that Hildebrand was not choſen of God, but brought in of himſelfe by fraud and force of ſiluer, who ouerthrew the Eccleſiaſticall order, troubled the Kingdome of the Chriſtian Empire, procured the death of a peaceable King, maintained periuries, entertained noyſes and diſſentions, ſowed diſorders, ſtirred ſcandalles, made diuorces, and ſhooke and ouerthrewe all which ſeemed well ordained amongſt them which liued holily, &c. Firſt, he was a great hypocrite, who with force of excommunications, depriued Miniſters of the Church, of their wiues, and filled the world with an infinit number of buggeries. In ſuch ſort, that that great Citie which is ſpiritually called Sodome and Egipt: that is to ſay, the Romane Church, was made after this time, a true Sodome and Egipt, his buggeries and Idolatries.
               In the meane time he mooued maruellous tragedies in Italie, France, Almaine, and England,
                  Troubles on all ſides ſtirred by the Pope. which would be too long to rehearſe in this place; and ſuch dealing diſpleaſed many perſons and wiſe men which were in that time. For to ſpeake neither of England nor Italie, as well in Almaine as in France, there was 24. Biſhops and more, which together with their Cleargie were married, and defended, and conſtantly maintained their marriage.
               He commaunded Clarkes to vow ſinglenes, that is to ſay, not to marry: briefly, the moſt tiranically that could be, he forbad Prieſts marriages, commanding them to leaue theyr wiues; or otherwiſe to be depriued of their offices & prebēds. He willed that from henceforth none be admitted to Eccleſiaſticall

orders, vnleſſe he firſt promiſe and vowe chaſtitie.
               Alſo he ordained that none ſhould heare Maſſe of a Prieſt that had a concubine.
               He forbad Monkes to eate fleſh at any time. De conſec. diſt. 5. c. Carinum.
               
               He commanded that no Chriſtian ſhould eat fleſh on the Saterday. De conſec. diſt. 5. Carinum. 36.
               
                  Why doo not Monkes obſerue that commaundement as well as they pretend to obſerue their vow of chastitie? For they are for like power.
               
               He ordained the offering of the Maſſe.
               He Canonized one named Liberius an Arrian, and commaunded his Feaſt ſhould be celebrated, as Benno witneſſeth. He commanded tenthes ſhould be paid to Prieſts. And tooke from the King of Poloigne his Crowne, interdicting his Kingdome. Hee condemned the opinion of Berengarius touching the Sacrament, & was the firſt they ſay, that preached Tranſubſtantiation. He condemned as ſacriledge, a Lay-man poſſeſſing Tithes. Him that gaue Inueſtures of Benefices, as an heretike: and he that receiued them of a Lay-man, as an Idolater. So by this meanes made he the Popes leaden dagger ſo ſtrong as her power was able to driue backe the Iron force of the Empire.
               
                   The Emperour Henry oppoſed himſelfe againſt the force and enterpriſes of the ſaid Hildebrand, and the yeare of our Lord, 1083. in a Sinode that he cauſed to aſſemble at Breſſe, after all crimes were laid againſt him, before the aſſēbly by good right he was depoſed from his Papall ſeate, and ſo appointed in his place an other Pope,Clement. 3.
                   which they named Clement the third. He ſent ſtraight his Army to Rome, driue out Gregorie, and to bring in Clement. The towne was by him brought vnto ſuch pouertie, that the Inhabitants were conſtrained to purchaſe peace. But Hildebrand not thinking to be in preſence of the Emperor, & being abandoned & reiected of the Romanes, fled vnto Salerne, the yeare of the Lord, 1086. where hee finiſhed his life in exile, which had cauſed ſo many to die, by the ſworde,

by famine, by poyſons, and other ſorts of deaths.
               
                  Yet the Papiſts made a brute runne, that after his death he wrought many miracles: yea euen after, a Prieſt of Saxony, (as Sigebert witneſſeth) as he died, had ſeene him tormented in hell.
               
               
                  Antonine and Vincent rehearſe that this Hildebrand being at the article and point of death, readie to yeeld vp his ſoule, called to him a Cardinall his familiar, vnto whom hee confeſſed both to God and S. Peter, and to all the Church, that he had greeuouſly ſinned, and had not done his office and dutie in the Apoſtolicke ſtate, and that by the perſwaſion of the diuel, he ſtirred hatreds, enmities and warres amongſt many through the world. Hee commaunded the ſaid Cardinall to tranſport him towards the Emperour Henry the fourth, and to crie him mercy for the faults he had committed againſt him, and that he ſhould deliuer him from the excommunication, and likewiſe all his, as well aliue as dead. Anto. and R. Barnes.
               
            
            
               Multiplication of the orders of Munkerie.
               
               In this time the order of the Templers beganne,Templers. Rugular Chanons. Grandmont. and the order of Regular Chanons, in a difference from ſecular Chanons. Volateran.
               
               The order of the Monkes of Grandmont, of the rule of S. Benet, tooke his beginning of one named Stephen of Fraunce, which carried haire vpon his fleſh. 
                     Ʋolaterane.
               
               The order of Charterux began, Bruno borne at Coloigne,
                  Chartreux. a Schoolemaiſter, and after a Chanon of Rheimes, hauing heard the voyce of a Doctor renowmed in his life, when he made his obſequies ſaying, I am cōdemned by a iuſt iudgement of God, was afraid, and for ſuertie entered into an Hermitage with certaine Diſciples, and founded the Charter houſe in the Country of Dalphine, in the Dioceſſe of Grenople, by the meanes & help of Hugues Biſhop of Grenople, who alſo receiued the habite of

                  Chartreux. And ſo beganne the order, the yeare of Chriſt, 1084. Chron. Sigeb. and Emil. lib. 5. and Plati.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt 1089. in the time of Gregorie the ſeuenth, and of the Emperour Henry the fourth. The Abbey of S. Sauiour of Andim, of the order of S Benet, in the country of Hainault, in a litle Iland called in Latin commonly Aquacinctum, or Aquis cinctum, was beganne by two noble perſons, Sicherus, and Gualterus, which went vnto Ancelme of Ribemont, a noble man, and demaunded the ſaide Ile,The Abbey of Andim. Victor. 3. beeing part of his patrimony, where the Abbey was builded. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Victor 3. of that name, borne in Italie, called before Didier, 
                   Abbot of Montcaſſin, and Cardinall of the Court of Rome, was made Pope, not by election of Cardinalls, or of the Romane people, but was there inthronized by that harlot Matilde, and the Normaines of that faction, and gouerned a yeare and foure moneths.
               After he had receiued the Papall dignitie as Gregorie his ſucceſſour, he beganne luſtily to maintaine his part againſt the Emperour and the Pope Clement: and hee which was a Monke to defend his predeceſſor Monke, according as he had bene informed by the ſaid Matilde, the louer of Gregorie. But death kept him from ſhewing by effect, yea with ſome great publike calamitie, that poyſon which hee had hidde in his heart, and the inraged hatred which hee had conceiued againſt them. For the yeare of the Lorde 1088. hee finiſhed his life with his Papacie, and that ſooner then he looked for. Some Authors, as Herman. Contract. Carſulan, Peter de Premonſtre, and many others, recite that he died of poiſon which was put in the Challice by his Subdeacon as he ſung Maſſe. Yet 
                     Ʋincent is of an other opinion as Platina rehearſeth it, when he ſaith that he dyed of a Fluxe of the bodie, and that is not farre from a ſuſpition of an impoyſonment: For they which take poyſon doo ſometimes fall into a Fluxe of the belly, becauſe the guts and inward parts are waſted & corrupted. Some Hiſtoriographers, ſlaues of the Romane ſeate, haue maliciouſly ſaid that this was procured him by the Emperour Henry, others by the Pope Clement, although this wicked act was done by no other but by his

Chaplaine, doing his office of Subdeacon. Some haue left by writing, that in this time many prodigious & ſtraunge things againſt nature appeared. For domeſticall birds, as hennes, geeſe, pigeons, and peacocks, fled into the mountains & became wild, & that the greateſt part of fiſhes, as well of Riuers as of the Sea, died.
               
                  Philip King of France forſooke his wife Berthe, the daughter of Baudwin, Counte of Holland, of whom he had a ſonne and a daughter. Chronicles of the Kings of France.
               
               The Relickes of S. Nicholas, were tranſported from the citie of Mirrhe, into the Towne of Bar. Whereof came that famous Idoll which giueth the name of Saint Nicholas in Lorraine.
               
            
            
               Chaunges of many Dukes in the Country of Almaigne.
               Who can here expreſſe how many euils & calamities that Inteſtine and ciuil warre of Almaigne hath cauſed, being ſtirred by the Pope, not onely amongſt the greateſt Princes which were ſlaine therin, but alſo in change of ſiegnories? The Emperour Henry, after that his enemy Rodolphe was dead,The calamities of the ciuil warre of the Almaines. (about foure yeares after hee had bene placed in his Imperiall ſeate) gaue the Duchie of Sorabie to Fredericke de Stanfeu his ſonne in lawe.
               The race of Franconian Dukes in a ſmall time periſhed altogether. Egbert Marqueſſe of Miſue, vnto whom the Biſhops had giuen hope to haue the Empire, after the death of Rodolphe was alſo ſlaine in the battell of the Saxons, which the Emperour Henry gained. Alſo Gebbard Father of Lotharie, who after was Emperour, dyed in the warres. Briefly, the forces of Almaigne were wholy debilitated and chaunged in this vnluckie warre of the Popes.
               
                  
                  Vrbane. 2.
                  
                  Vrbane 2. of that name, borne of Tuſcane, called before 
                  Otho a Monke of Clugny, and vnder Hildebrand, Cardinall of Oftie, was inthronized in the Papacie againſt the wil of the Emperour, by ſuch as had inthronized Victor, namely by that harlot Matilde, and the Norans then Lordes of Pouille, and ruled 12. yeares 4. moneths, and 19. dayes.
               This is the Diſciple and houſhold ſeruant of Hildebrand, whom Benno calleth in deſpight Turban, a ſchiſmaticke, an hereticke, and companion of Liberius the Arrian, which Gregorie the ſeuenth canonized as hath bene ſaid. Who (ſaith hee) for feare that the poyſon of their errours might not be knowne, after the manner of Sorcerers mingled hony therewith: For ſubtilly and vnder an intent to deceiue, hee added holy ſcriptures to his lyes, and perſeuering in his errours with his Hildebrand, he was ſent into hell with the Apoſtate Angels.
               
                  
                     Ʋrbain (ſay ſome Authours of our time) perturber of the world, or rather whirle-winde of the tempeſts of Townes, the familiar of Hildebrand, watered, maintained, and cauſed to grow the pernicious ſeeds which his predeceſſors had before diſpearſed here and there. He excommunicated Guibert Arch-biſhop of Rauenna, which was named Clement the third, becauſe hee had bene choſen by the Emperour.
               At this time all things were in great trouble, as well in Almaigne as in other Nations, by the diſputations then happening betwixt the Cleargy and the people, but becauſe Vrbane would not abſolue any which had beene excommunicated by Hildebrand, fearing to fall in daunger of his life, went ſecretly out of  the Towne, and after this celebrated many Sinodes. The firſt at Melphe: the ſecond at Troy in Pouillie: the third at Plaiſance: the fourth at Cleremont, the yeare of the Lord, 1094. and the fift at Tours; in which he confirmed the acts of the monſter Hildebrand, and made new Eccleſiaſticall ordinances: to the ende the Papall authoritie might in nothing be diminiſhed in that which had bene acquired by violence and deceit.
               He ordeined that a Clarke might not receiue Inueſture of a benefice of a ſecular Prince whatſoeuer: hee be. Hee writ to Matilde, an auncient friend and louer of the Romane Church,

and armed all her ſinagogue againſt them of the Emperours ſide, whom he calleth heretickes.
               He gaue alſo to the Arch-biſhop of Millaine, the Pall Archiopiſchopall, and ſo confirmed the orders and Sects of Chartreux, and of the Monkes of Ciſteaux. Such as had wiues, after they were promoted vnto the order of Deacons, he depriued thē of their offices, taking alſo frō Prieſts, their ſons, their eſtates, and adminiſtrations. He made the Arch-biſhop of Toledo (who had made an oath vnto him) Primate of all Spaine, to the end by that meane the beaſt of Rome might make ſubiect all Spaine vnto him. He ſtirred Chriſtian Princes to take armes againſt the Saraſins, vnder colour to recouer the Towne of Hieruſalem. And for that purpoſe hee marked with the ſigne of the Croſſe three hundreth thouſand men; and in the meane while he guided all things for his own profit. For the yeare of Chriſt 1095. becauſe hee would not finde meanes to doo his buſineſſes as he would, for many tumults and ſeditions raiſed againſt him, he tooke occaſion to depart from Rome and come into France. He commanded to aſſemble an vniuerſal Councel of all the church in the Citie of Cleremont in Anuegue:
                  Councell at Cleremont.
                   and made an Oration of great efficacie. For ſtraight there croſſed themſelues to the combat at leaſt three hundreth thouſand men, all readie to goe vnto Ieruſalem, of the number of which, there were many valiant Princes, who to make mony, ſolde their owne landes and ſigneories, as Hughe the great, the King of Fraunce his brother. Robert brother of the Duke of Normandie. Robert or Rambert, Count of Flaunders. Raimond Count of S. Giles. Stephen Count of Blois. Brunamon or Bayamond, Prince of Pouille: and Godphrey de Bullon, who was the chiefe, with his two brethren, Euſtace and Baudwin. Alſo Anſele of Ribemont, and many others.
               He excommunicated the King of Galatia, becauſe he had put a Biſhop in priſon, and exacted this oath of ſuch as he would promote to orders. So God helpe me, and theſe holy Euangeliſts of God. Hee made alſo certaine their ſtatutes, namely Clarkes ſhould euery day ſay the houres of the Virgine Mary (a verie Idolatrous thing) and vnto her to dedicate the Saterday with a

Maſſe. He ordeined that no perſon ſhould come into Popiſh orders, vnles he were a virgin, that is to ſay vnmarried, whoremonger, or buggerer, as their acts ſhewed. As for Prieſts they muſt needs be without wiues, althogh they paſſed not for whordomes. He forbad that Biſhops ſhould be ordeined without titles, & that faith ſhuld be kept vnto ſuch as Popes had excommunicated. He held himſelfe cloſe for the ſpace of two yeares, in the houſe of one Peter Leon, for the feare he had of one Iohn Paien, a Romane Citizen, where alſo he died, the yeare of the Lord 1099. and his body was buried ſecretly beyond Tiber, for feare of enemies. The ſame yeare died alſo Guibert, which was called Clement the 3. after he had ſeene three Popes dead in his time. Theodorus Bibliander writeth in this ſort of that Hildebrand aforeſaid and this 
                     Ʋrbane, ſpeaking to the Princes of al eſtates. Hildebrand (ſaith he) in inciting the Emperour of Greece againſt the Turks,The euill which comes of Croiſadoes againſt the Turkes. ſowed the ſeed of the war of Gog and Magog, againſt which crieth the bloud of the Church, ſhead with a miſerable ruine and loſſe, by the ſword of his tongue. O how much blood hath beene ſhead at the ſollicitation of Vrbane the ſecond! to the end that vnder the colour of making warre to amplifie the Chriſtian religion, and recouer the ſepulchre of the Lord, he might be put againe in the Romane ſeate, after hauing oppreſſed ſuch as were of the faction of Guibert.
               
               
                  Fredericke Barbaroſſa did ſo the yeare of the Lord 1188. Frederic 1228. The King of France Lewis 9. who was a Saint after his death, did as much the yeare 1288. Sigiſmond did it twiſe. Anno. 1409. 
                     Ʋladiſlaus King of Hungarie, Anno. 1420. who dyed nigh Varne. And at this day what ſhall we iudge of ſuch as bring the Turke into Chriſtendome to auenge their particular iniuries?
               This Pope Vrbane by excommunications conſtrained Philip King of France to take againe Berthe his firſt wife, which he  cauſed to be detained priſoner in the Caſtle of Monſtrell, vpon the ſea: and to leaue his ſecond Bertrande, who was wife of the Count de Angiou.
               
               
                  Nice in Bithinie is taken, and after the Towne of Ieruſalem, by the Chriſtians, whereof Godfrey of Bulloine was conſtituted King. Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  Antioche was taken by Boemondus a Norman, ſonne of Robert Duke of Pouille. Supp. Chron.
               
               The reward that thoſe noble Combatants and fighters for Chriſtendome got, was the carrying away of Relickes. The Speare which pearced the ſide of Ieſus Chriſt, was found in the ſaid Towne, in the Church of Saint Andrewe. Supp. Chron. Robert Count of Flaunders, brought away the Arme of Saint George, which he ſent into the Abbey of Anchin. Sigeb. Godfrey was the firſt King of Ieruſalem. Baudwin his brother, is called the ſecond. Naucler.
               
               
                  Paſchall ſecond of that name, borne of Italie,
                  Paſchall. 2.
                   called before Rainer a Monke, and lately created Cardinall, of the title of S. Clement, by Hildebrand his maiſter, ſucceeded Vrbane the ſecond in the Papacie. When this proud Squire knew hee was choſen, he would not mount into the Papall ſeate, vntill firſt the people had cryed thrice, Saint Peter hath choſen Rainer.
               
               After this, beeing apparrelled in a Scarlet Roabe, and a Theatre or Crowne vppon his head, mounted vpon a white ſteed, hee was ledde to the place of Laterane, where the Papall Scepter was giuen him: and he was girt with a Baudrier or large Girdle, at which hung ſeuen kayes, and as many ſeales,New blaſphemies of the 7. kayes. as Enſignes or tokens of the Papall power (ſo much did this great Antichriſt and aduerſary of God magnifie himſelfe) by which things ſignified, that according to the graces of the holy Ghoſt, which they diſtinguiſhed into ſeuen) he had the power to open and ſhut Churches.
               
                  By this meanes this harlot mounted on horsbacke, being come vnto a perfect age, in ſuch ſort encreaſed, that ſhe got vpō the Beaſt with ten hornes: which ſhe had gouerned vntil our time in great pride & arrogancie, as had bin foretold. Apo. 13.17.
                  
               
               This ſoueraigne Vicar of Sathan on earth, imployed all his time in warres and ſeditions, whileſt Godfrey de Bulloine and other Chriſtian Princes fought againſt the Sarraſins in Siria. And to the end he might not be eſteemed leſſe thē 
                  Hildebrand,
                  
he ſought all the meanes that might ſerue to the greatnes of his Romane ſeate. Hee furiouſly depoſed from their dignities, all the Biſhops and Abbots which had bene ordeined by the Emperour. He ſent into exile one Albert Theodoricke, and Maginulphe, who aſpired vnto the Papacie. He aſſembled at Rome a Councell of the Biſhops of Italie and France, Anno. 1101. becauſe of an opinion of a Biſhop of Fluence touching Antichriſt alreadie borne, as Sabellicus rehearſeth. For ſeeing ſo many miſchiefes committed in the Church, he ſaid Antichriſt was alreadie manifeſted but he was repreſſed by many iniuries done vnto him.
               
                  Nicholaits after the Pope. See 10.6. q. 1. ca. Decimus.He againe prohibited Miniſters to marry, as all his Prelate predeceſſors had done, and called that marriage the hereſie of the Nicholaits. He pronounced that they were great hereſies, to make no account of yeelding obedience to the Roman church, and to deſpiſe cenſures, and alſo to receiue Inueſture of Benefices at the hand of a prophane man. He renewed the ſtatute of paying tenths to Prieſts that ſaid Maſſe, and would needes it ſhould be a ſinne againſt the holy Ghoſt to ſell tenths.
               In this Sinode he renewed the excommunication of Gregorie the ſeuenth, and of 
                     Ʋrbane the ſecond, againſt the Emperour Henry the fourth, and publiſhed it againe. And which is more, the rage of this cruell tyrant was ſo inflamed againſt him, that he ſtirred the ſonne of the ſaid Emperour, called Henry the fift, to take armes againſt his Father: an horrible thing to ſpeak.
               
                  There was neuer inhumanitie nor cruell act, if this were not.
               
               The Sonne, yea that onely Sonne, not angred or ſtirred vp by any publike or particular iniurie, deſpiſed not onely his Parent,The diſloyaltie of the Emperors ſonne, Henry. 5. neither only abandoned and deſtituted him of his ſuccours and helpe: but vnder colour of the Church and the publike good, aſſaulted him by armes, beſieged him, by circumvention tooke him traiterouſly, deſpoyled him of his Imperiall dignitie, and made him die a poore miſerable man, in great captiuitie and heauineſſe. And all this he did (ſaith Rodolphe Galterus)

not by the commaundement of any barbarous tyrant,Henry. 5.
                   not at the inſtigation of ſome Phalaris, but by the Councell of the holy Father of Rome. Reioyce (ſaith he) you Caligula & Nero, and you all which haue bene renowned for crueltie, for you haue now found one that ſhall take away the memorie of your name ſo cruell, becauſe he goes much before you: that is to ſay the Pope of Rome, who commaunds the ſonne to drawe his ſword againſt the Father.
               
                  Henry then the fourth, was diſpoyled of his Imperiall dignitie: and finally his ſonne Henry the fift by treaſon tooke him priſoner, the fiftie yeare of his Empire, as hee went vnto an aſſembly held at Magunce he died, after he had bene miſerably handled in the Citie of Liege, Anno. 1108. after the Chron. of Euſeb. or 1116. after others.
               But the enmitie of this Papall Monſter was not yet appeaſed by this death, for in an inraged manner hee did exerciſe his crueltie againſt him after his death, commaunding by Letters that his body ſhuld be vnburied, caſt out of the church, and tranſported from Liege to Spire, and to be depriued by the ſpace of fiue yeares of Sepulchre.
               
                  Behold how this proud Antichriſt obeyeth Magiſtrates ordeined of God!
               
               But ſee what God did in the meane time. At Spire blood ranne out of Loaues of bread, as 
                     Ʋrspergenſis faith in his Cronographie.
               
               The yeare of the Lorde,
                     1. Pet. 2. cha. Rom. 13.3.
                   1106. hee made an aſſembly of many Princes and Biſhops at Guardaſcall in Lombardie, with whom he handled matters appertaining to the Faith (that is to ſay, cōcerning the Popes kitchin) as of homages, of fealties, & of oaths that Biſhops had before made vnto Laie perſons. He deſpoiled alſo the Arch-biſhop of Rauenna of his lands, applying them vnto his owne profit. And this Pope not content with ſuch crueltie, cauſed the body of Guibert Archbiſhop of the ſaid place of Rauenna to be taken vp, who had bin choſen Pope by the Emperour Henry the 4. in the time of Gregore 7. ſixe yeares

after he was laide in the Sepulchre.Henry 4.
               
               Now as for Henry the 4. he was an excellent Emperor, meete for an Empire, of a noble race, and an incomparable ſpirit.
               
                  O that other Princes had poſſeſſed ſuch hearts, and had not attributed ſo much vnto that Romane harlot.
               
               He was affable and benigne towards all, liberall to wards the poore: It is ſaid that during his life hee fought with Enſigne diſplaied, threeſcore and two times. After many Hiſtories.
               
                  Henry. 5.
                  
                  Henry the fift of that name, ſonne of Henry the fourth, and  of Berthe, Marqueſſe of Italie; was choſen at Magunce, by the Gouernours and chiefe of the Empire, and raigned twentie yeares. Chron. Palm.
               
               
                  Lewis le Gros.
                  Lewis le Gros, otherwiſe called the good Lewis, 39. King of Fraunce, raigned 28. yeares, and was crowned at Orleance, 
                   and annointed by the Archbiſhop of Sens. It is ſaid of him, that he often diſguiſed himſelfe in the habit of a poore man, or of a woman, or ſeruant, the better to knowe the truth of ſome ſecret matters of his kingdome. He was founder of the Abbey of S. Victor in Paris.
               
               
                   The yeare of Chriſt, one thouſand, one hundreth, and eleuen, Henry the fift went to Rome, to appeaſe ſeditions ſtirred ſince Gregorie the ſeuenth, and continued in 
                     Ʋictor, Vrbane and Paſchal the ſecond. The Emperour and other Princes would vſe the authoritie, right & priuiledges of auncient Emperours. For Charlemaigne and others which had obteined the Empire ſince three hundreth yeares and more, vnder threeſcore and three Popes, beſtowed Biſhopprickes, Abbaies, and other Benefices. Againſt this authoritie and cuſtome, the Pope following by Sinodall decrees, mainteined that Eccleſiaſticall Benefices ought not to be giuen by Laie-perſons, and excommunicated as Simoniackes, as well ſuch as receiued them, as them that gaue them. This Emperour then being at Rome, after he had kiſſed the feete of the holy Father, prayed him to confirme and to like of ſuch as had ordeined Biſhops: But as

he refuſed to confirme them,Henry 5.
                   he was taken by the Emperour and impriſoned, and came not out vntill hee had confirmed them all, and yeelded him the right of Inueſture giuen vnto Charlemaigne, and therevpon making Letters and Seales, and alſo confirmed the ſaid Emperour. Yet after the Pope had ſaid Maſſe & was in his Chaire (ſaith Maſſeus) behold the ſouldiers came ſuddenly in, crying, Yeeld vnto Caeſar that which is Caeſars: and aſſailed as well him as all the Cleargie, carrying them all out from thence and ſpoyled them, without leauing them any thing, then put they them in priſon in the Mountaine of Soracte.
               
               Finally, after debates and diſcentions were appeaſed,The Inueſture of benefices yeelded vnto the Emperour. and the Emperour Henry crowned, Paſchal renewed the priuiledge of Inueſture of Biſhops, and pronounced before all the aſſembly, that whoſoeuer made of no force the ſaide priuiledge was excommunicated.
               There was alſo ſung Gloria in exelſis, becauſe the peace was made betwixt the Emperour and the Pope. But ſo ſoone as the Emperour was returned into Almaigne, this periured Traitor reuoked all hee had promiſed with ſolemne oathes: affirming that he accorded with the Emperour, not of his good wil, but by force and conſtraint.
               After this, hee condemned that priuiledge, and excommunicated the Emperour, and ſtirred maruellous Tragedies, which incontinently were publiſhed throughout all the wide world.
               Hee aſſembled a Councell at Troyes in Champaigne in Fraunce,
                  A Councell at Troyes in Campaigne.
                   wherein againe hee forbadde marriage vnto the Prieſtes of Fraunce, as Hildebrand had before forbidden the Prieſts of Almaigne, euen to the chaſing of ſome Prelates out of their Seates, becauſe they were marryed. Deſiring to encreaſe the Papall authoritie, hee renewed the quarrell of giuing Biſhopprickes, which had cauſed great calamities throughout the Regions of Europe. Ancelme an Arch-biſhop of Englande, and a Monke, augmented the Impudencies of this Pope, by ſuch Sophiſticke perſwaſions as he had

before done them of Vrbaine. For he was their Councellor at Rome, and their Vicar in England.
               
               
                  The King of England depriued of his right by an Archbiſhop. Luk. 22.25. Marriage of Prieſts condemned in England.This Ancelme tirannouſly depriued Henry the firſt of that name, King of England, of the right that Kings haue to prouide officers vſed by the Kings of Iſrael, Dauid, Salomon, Ioſaphat, Ezechias, Ioſias, & others; likewiſe againſt the ſaying of Ieſus Chriſt. The Kings of Nations haue rule ouer them, &c. But ſo it is not with you. He alſo perpetually condemned the lawfull marriage of Prieſts in England, as hath bene ſaid: againſt the holy lawes, as well of the olde, as of the new Teſtament, and the manifeſt examples of the Primitiue Church: to the and by the ſuggeſtion of Sathan, the Cleargie might ſerue there in all Sodomie to the Dragon called the diuell, and to Antichriſt his Vicar.
               
                  
                  Bertol Duke of Zeringuen and of Souabe, founded the Citie of Fribourg in Briſgoye. Naucler.
               
               
                  Paſchall aſſembled a Councell at Laterane, wherein hee reuoked the right of Inueſtures, accorded vnto Henry the fift, whereby aroſe a new ſchiſme. And the Popes Legates declared the ſaid Henry to be excommunicated; whereof roſe great euils. For the Emperour returned to Rome the ſecond time, and the Pope Paſchall was conſtrained to flie.
               
                   S. Barnard of the age of 22. yeares, accompanied with 30. perſons, entred into the Religion of the Ciſteaux, in the time Stephen liued, the third Abbot of that place.
               
                   It rayned bloud in the field Emilian and Flaminian, in the moneth of Iune, nigh Rauenna and Parma, without and within. Chron. Sigeb. and Palin.
               
               
                   The Monaſterie of Cleruaux was founded, whereof S. Barnard was the firſt Abbot, being of the age of 27. yeares, and was there, by the ſpace of 36. yeares. Naucler.
               
            
            
               The fruites of the warre of Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  
                     Foure orders came from Ieruſalem. Naucler.
                     
                     
                        Foure new orders of the croſſed.1. The order of Chanons of the Sepulchre of the Lord, and they had double redde croſſes.
                     
                        2 The order of the knights of S. Ihon, otherwiſe called the knights of Rhodes, and they weare blacke apparell, with a white Croſſe on their breſts.
                     3 The order of Templers, which haue the white habit and the redde Croſſe.
                     4 The order of Teutoniques or Almaignes, or otherwiſe the knights of the Virgin Mary, which had a white habit and a blacke Croſſe.
                  
               
               The Pope Paſchal ſent to the Biſhop of Palerme in Sicilie, the Archiepiſcopall Pall, yet with a condition, that by oath he ſhould binde himſelfe to the Pope of Rome. The ſaid Biſhop humbly ſent him word, that hee maruelled, and with him the Princes and Councellours of Sicilie, how the Pope demaunded an oath of a Biſhop: ſeeing Ieſus Chriſt in S. Mathew, cha. 5. had forbidden to ſweare: and that it was not found by any Councell that it was lawfull to exact ſuch an oath. The Pope ſharpely anſwered in theſe tearmes.The proud anſwere of a Pope. Thinkeſt thou (ſaieth hee) that any Councell can preſcribe a Lawe to the Romane Church? Knoweſt thou not that all Councels haue their perfection and vertue by the Romane Church? Martin Luther.
               
               In this time liued Hiltpert or Hildebert, Biſhop of Mons, a fauourer of Tranſubſtantiation as well as Ancelme.
               
               
                  Matilde or Mehaut Counteſſe,
                     Matilde giueth her goods to the Pope. of the age of 66. yeares died, and gaue her goods by Teſtament vnto the Romane Church. R. Barnes.
               
               The Emperour Henry was defrauded by the ſaid Teſtament, for he was couſin of the ſaid Counteſſe: which after gaue occaſion of great ſtirres and murthers. R. Barnes & Naucl.
               
               
                  Baudwin ſecond King of Ieruſalem, dyed: and Baudwin his Nephewe, ſurnamed Burgo, was created the third King of Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Gelaſius Pope, 2. of that name,Gelaſius. 2.
                   was a Monke of Mountcaſſin, Chauncellour of the Romane Church, named Iohn,
                   borne at Gayotte a Citie of Campaigne in Italie. Soone after his election, he was apprehended by Cincius, a mightie man, & impriſoned: but incōtinently he was deliuered by the people.

The Emperour ſent his Armie to Rome. Gelaſius fearing his comming, fledde to Gayette. The Emperour created an other Pope a Spaniard, called Maurice, otherwiſe Burdin, Archbiſhop of Bracare, which was called Gregorie the eight. This done the Emperour returned into Almaigne, and then beganne the eighteenth Schiſme.Schiſme. 18. 
                  Gelaſius condemned the Emperour and the Antepope, and ſent into Almaigne the Biſhop Preneſtin, to publiſh the excommunication againſt the ſaid Henry the fift. R. Barnes. Gelaſius ſecretly came to Rome, but he was knowne of his enemies, and with much adoo eſcaping, went for refuge into Fraunce. Suppl. Chron. He ordeined a Councell at Rheimes, whither came bare-footed, Robert of Lorraine, founder of the order and place of Premonſtre: and entreated of the Pope Gelaſius, licence to preach the word of God, and alſo authoritie and confirmation of his order. Naucl. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               This Pope had alreadie dedicated the great Church of Saint Laurence at Florence, and had there placed the Aſhes of S. Iohn Baptiſts bones, newly brought from Mirrhe, confirming them, and approuing them for the true Aſhes of S. Iohn. Supp. Chron.
               
               This Pope Gelaſius died of a pleuriſie at Clugny, where hee was alſo buried, hauing ruled at Rome a yeare & ſixe moneths.
               
                  Calixt. 2.
                  
                  Calixt 2. of that name ſucceeded him, & was 5. yeares Pope:  before called Guy, (or Guido) of Burgongne, after Faſc. temp. and the Sea of Hiſtories: or brother, after Supp. Chron. He was Doctor in the Ciuil Lawe, and in Theologie. Without contradiction he was choſen of the Cardinalls, and honourably receiued at Rome. When the Antepope Burdin heard thoſe newes, he met him, thinking to haue hindered him: but he profited nothing, for he was in full battell ouercome with the French helpe. And being taken by the Pope Calixt, and by the Cardinal of S. Griſogon, chiefe of his armie, he was ſet vpon a Camell, his face towards the taile: and in ſuch ſort hee made him goe at his entrie, & then impriſoned him. Iohn le Maire. Faſc. temp. Eghardus ſaith that the ſaid Antepope was powled & made a Monke: becauſe whē he reſided at Sutry, he was a partie of many robberies committed vpon ſuch as went and came to Rome. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  
                  Calixtus made continue the Councell at Rheimes in Champaigne, which Gelaſius had commenced, wherein he excommunicated the Emperor Henry the fift, as an enemy of the church.Reſignation of Inueſtures. Anno. 1122. This excommunication was about the cauſe of the quarrell of the Inueſtures of Biſhops. Iohn le Maire. Henry the fift fearing to be depoſed from his Empire as his Father was, accorded the right of Inueſtures in a full Councell it Rome, vnto Calixtus. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Calixtus ordeined that the Biſhop of Compoſtella ſhould be made an Arch-biſhop: for the reuerence of the bodie of Saint Iames who reſted there: And hee made a booke full of Fables of the miracles of the ſaid S. Abb. Trit.
               
               He appointed the foure times for taking orders (as they call them) for before they did take them only three times in the yeare.This decree is attributed vnto Calixtus the firſt.
               
               He excommunicated ſuch as tooke ſiluer for Baptiſme, and for burying. Chron. R. Franc.
               
               
                  By this Decree Popiſh Prieſts ſhould be excommunicated.
               
               He founded a Monaſterie of the order of Ciſteaux, called Boneuan. Faſc. temp.
               
               He ordeined it ſhould not be lawful for any Biſhop to turne from the Romane Church, neither to contrary it. For (ſaid he) euen as the Sonne is come to do the will of his Father: So it behoueth all Chriſtians to do the will of their Mother, (that is to ſay) the Romane Church. Diſt. 12. ca. Non decet.
               
               
                  See how this brazen faced harlot of Rome alleadgeth ſcripture: and is not aſhamed to call her ſelfe a Mother.
               
               He excommunicated all ſuch as moleſted Pilgrimes which went to Rome. 24 q. 3. chap. Si quis.
               
               
                  William Duke of Pouille, preparing himſelfe for the voiage of Conſtantinople, to take vnto wife the Emperor Alexis his daughter, recommēded his country to the Pope Calixt, doubting the ambitiō of Roger his coſin, who failed not incōtinently after the departure of the ſaid William, to ſeize vpon Calabria & Pouille:
                  
Inſomuch as William was depriued both of his wife, and of his Principalitie, and dyed without children. Naucler. and Corno. Abb. Calixtus prepared an Armie againſt Roger, but the Popes death came betwixt, and Innocent the ſecond purſued the enterpriſe.
               
                   One called Iohn, a Patriarke of the Indians, came vnto Rome, and rehearſed to the Pope and Cardinalls in a Councell, that by a myracle S. Thomas the Apoſtle came euery yeare to giue the Euchariſt vnto the good, and refuſed the wicked. Naucler.
               
               
                  Miracles and apparitions are on all ſides forged.
               
               The Emperour Henry the fift, bearing a long time an hatred vnto the King of France, aſſembled a great Armie to runne vpon him, taking occaſion that hee was at the Councell which the Pope Calixt held at Rheimes, wherein he was excommunicated: and vaunted that he would deſtroy the Citie of Rheims, where the ſaid Councell was held, but when he perceiued the Kings power which met him with the precious ſtandard called the Auriflame, he deſiſted from his enterpriſe, and returned into his Country. Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  Pomerania receiued the Chriſtian Faith. Nancler.
               
               
                  Honorius. 2.
                  
                  Honorius Pope, ſecond of that name, borne at Imola in Italie, 
                   a man of baſe condition, yet learned, gouerned the Romane Church 5. yeares & 2. moneths. Before he was called Lambert, Biſhop of Oſtia, and was promoted rather by the ambition of ſome, then by the conſent of the good. Supp. Chron.
               
               He inueſted Roger of the Duchy of Pouille, after the ſaid Roger had done vnto him homage: who alſo was King of Sicilie. The ſame.
               
               
                  Robert author of the order of Premonſtre, went to Rome vnto the Pope, & obteined what he deſired cōcerning ye order. Nauc.
               
               
                  Arnulphe ſlaine at Rome.
                  Arnulphe Arch-biſhop of Lion, had at this time a ſingular grace in preaching, who after he had preached in Fraunce and Italie, came vnto Rome. But becauſe in his Sermons he rebuked too ſharply the vices, the delights and pompes of Churchmen, he was ſlaine.
               
                  
                  Honorius feined to be grieued therat, yet he made no ſearch for the murderers. Plat. and Sabel. Bonifa. Simo. ſay that hee did this in fauour both of the Nobilitie and of the common people.
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1125. Henry the 5. died in the Citie of Vtreict, without heire male.
               
                  Lothaire, in the Almaine tongue Luder, the ſonne of Count Gebhard (who was ſlaine in the warre by Henry the fourth,Lothaire. as  hath bene ſaid) being created Duke of Saxonie, was choſen Emperour: a man of great induſtry and prudence, and perſecuted the race of the Emperour Henry, whereof aroſe many troubles: For Frederic and Conrade, Dukes of Souanbie, were a long time Rebels vnto him. Finally, S. Barnard Abbot of Cleruax reconciled theſe two brethren with Lothaire.
               
               
                  Hugo a Saxon by Nation, and ſurnamed of 
                     Ʋictor, a Theologian of Paris, was at this time in Paris. Amongſt his writings are found many complaints againſt the diſordinate life of Clarkes in this time. It is he whom ſome ſay, that at Maſſe as he lifted vp the body of our Lord, there appeared a litle childe, which ſaid vnto him: Eate me. And he abhorring it, ſaid hee could not eate him, vnleſſe he hid himſelfe againe vnder the bread: and ſtraight it came ſo to paſſe, and he eate him.
               
                  Who ſees not that this is a fable inuented to proue the new doctrine of Paſcaſius and Lanfrancus? And yet this is against their doctrine, and especially againſt that of Thomas Aquine, in the third part, queſtion. 76.
                  
               
               
                  Charles Count of Flaunders, Nephew of Lewis King of  
                  France, was traiterouſly murthered as hee was on his knees in the Church of S. Donatus in Brugis in Flaunders. The murtherers were certaine villaines of the Countrey, which were grieuouſly puniſhed in ſundry maners. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Baudwin the ſecond, who was the third King of Ieruſalem, died in a Monkes habit: whom Fulco ſucceeded. Naucl. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Innocent Pope. 2. of that name, a Roman, gouerned 14. yeares.Innocent. 2.
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                  Lothaire.After his coronation he attempted mortall warre againſt Roger the Norman. Who firſt named himſelfe King of Naples: but in the end Innocent was ouerthrowne in battaile, and ledde away priſoner. Whileſt he was in priſon the Romanes elected Peter Leon, the ſonne of a puiſſant Romane Citizen: But Innocent after he had agreed with the ſaid Roger, was conſtrained to goe into France for ſuccour towards King Lewis le Gros, of whom hee was honourably receiued. Being come into France, he held two Councells; one at Auerne, and an other at Rhemes in Campaigne. From France he retired towards the Countrey of Liege, where he found the Emperour Lothaire, who alſo promiſed all the aſſiſtance he could: by meanes of which, hee returned into Italie. Anacletus the Antepope ſtole away all the treaſures and Reliques of the Church to wage them which were of his band: he died with griefe, and his Cardinals craued pardon.
               In the Councell held at Rheimes, Subdeacons were commaunded to liue without marriage, vnder paine to looſe theyr Benefices.
               There became a contention betwixt the Pope & the king of France, becauſe that after the death of Alberic Archbiſhop of Bourges, the Pope ſent one called Peter, by him conſecrated Archbiſhop of the ſaid place, to reſide and rule there: but the King reiected him, neither was be receiued into the Towne, becauſe he was created without his knowledge. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Innocent agreed & ſet a peace betwixt the towne of Piſe, and the towne of Genues, and raiſed them vp vnto Archbiſhops.
               A Sinode at Rome at this time ordained, that no Lay-man ſhould preſume to lay hand vpon a Clarke, vnder paine of excommunication, from which none could abſolue him but the Pope, vnleſſe he were at the poynt of death: for then his Biſhop might abſolue him. 17. Queſt. 4. Chap. Si quis ſuadente diabolo.
               
               In this time was Richardus de ſancto victore, and Hugo a Monke of Corbie in Saxonie, who wrote the booke (de clanſtro animae.)
               
               
                  A new Pelagian.
                  Peter de Balard, an hereticke of this time, ſaid that the paſſion of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt was onely giuen vs for an example

of patience, of vertue, and of loue, he ſhewed vnto vs. Wherefore he was condemned with all his writings by the Pope Innocent. S. Barnard writ againſt him.
               Writers ſay, that one called Iohn of Time (if it be a thing  worthy the credite) liued 361. yeares: that is to ſay, from the time of Charlemaigne, whoſe Councellor he was, and died in this time. Naucler. and Suppl. Chron.
               
               The Emperour Lothaire went to Rome to reſtore Innocnt, according to his promiſe.
               
               The faction of the Guelphes for the Pope, and of the Gibellins for the Emperour, began in this time. Naucler.
               
               
                  Lothaire returning from Italie, the ſecond time after hee had deiected Roger of Pouille and Calabria, died of the peſtilence nigh Trent amongſt the Mountaines, in a poore lodging ſaith Naucler. But Palin, ſaith that he died at 
                     Ʋerona, the 13. yeare of his Kingdome, and the 7. of his Empire, leauing one daughter, called Gertrude.
               
               
                  Conrade 3. of that name, Duke of Souabe,
                  Conrade. 3.
                   ſonne of Frederike of Haulte Staufen, and of Agnes, daughter of Henry the fourth, obtained the Empire 15. yeares.
               
                  Lewis the young, 7. of that name, 40. King of France, raigned 43. yeares. He vpon ſuperſtition went into Spaine vpon pilgrimage vnto S. Iames.
               
               
                  Aſcalon was taken of the Chriſtians beyond the ſea. Suppl.
                   
                  Chron.
               
               
                  Edeſſa a Citie of Meſopotamia was taken of Alaps, a Prince of  
                  Turkie, the Chriſtians put to death,Beginning of euils. and women violated vpon the Aultar of S. Iohn Baptist, ſaith Naucler.
               
               
                  Fulco King of Ieruſalem, fell from his horſe as he ran at an  Hare, and died, Naucler. and Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  Baudwin 3. and 5. King of Ieruſalem, ſucceeded him.
               
                  Celeſtine Pope, 2. of that name, an Italian,Celeſtine. 2.
                   before called Guido, a Prieſt, Cardinall of S. Mark, hauing ruled 5. monethes  and 8. dayes, died of the peſtilence.
               
                  Lucius Pope, 2. of that name, borne at Boulongne,
                  Lucius. 2.
                   before a Prieſt, Card. of S. Croſſe, named Gerard, ruled about one yeare.
               This man willing by force to take away the dignitie of thePatrician.
                  
Patrician from the Romanes,Conrad. 3. was on the body wounded with the blowes of ſtones by the common people. R. Barns. And being oppreſſed with the Romanes, hee ſent vnto the Emperour, who beeing occupied otherwhere, could not ſuccour him.
               He did all he could to incite Chriſtians to warre beyond the ſea, becauſe he had receiued newes how the holy Land was in daunger to be loſt for the Chriſtians. Iohn le Maire. Some ſay he died in a ſedition. Others, that he died of the Peſtilence. Supp. Chron. and Faſcic. temp.
               
               
                  Eugenius. 3.
                  
                  Eugenius Pope, third of that name, borne at Piſe, a Monke  of Cleruaux, Diſciple of S. Bernard, Abbotte and Cardinall of S. Anastaſius at Rome, ruled eight yeares and foure monethes.
               He was conſtrained by the Romanes (whom hee had excommunicated with Iordan the Patrice) to flie from Rome, and ſhaking the duſt off his feete againſt his enemies, hee got him into France, not onely to ſhunne the feare of the ſaid Romanes, who with force of Armes chaſed him away, but alſo to encourage and drawe on the French King Lewis to the ſuccours of the holy Land. He celebrated then a Councell at Vezelay in Burgoigne: and there cauſed S. Barnard with his liuely voyce to vtter out all the miſchiefe like to fall vnto the holy Land. After which ſpeech of S. Barnard, the King vowed to giue ſuccours to the Chriſtian Princes beyond the Seas, and the Queen Helionor his wife promiſed to follow him: and with them, many Princes, Barons, and Noble men of France. Alſo the Emperour 
                  Conrade the third, Alphonſus King of Spaine, Henry, King of England, and many other Princes and Prelates: yet in this voyage they did nothing worthy of memorie, and this was the ſecond vniuerſall voyage, as Iohn le Maire ſaith, but the third expedition to goe into Ieruſalem. The firſt vnder Vrbain, and the ſecond vnder Paſchal. Anno. 1101.
               
                  
                  Eugenius alſo aſſembled a Councell at Rhemes, and called thither Cardinalls and other Prelates, of whom hee was conſecrated, as appertained. And there S. Barnard confuted by diſputation, and vanquiſhed Gilbert Poretaine, Biſhoppe of Poitiers, an excellent Clarke, who erred in touching the vnitie of the Trinitie.
               
                  There were made many decrees for Monkes: that they ſhould not leaue their Monaſteries, nor Baptiſe, nor carrie children vnto Baptiſme: that they might not enioyne penance, nor giue abſolution: that they might not viſit the diſeaſed, nor aſſiſt the funeralls of the dead. Briefly, that they might not apply themſelues vnto ſecular buſineſſes, but remaine ſollitarie in theyr Monaſteries. That the husband or wife ought not to enter into Religion, and the marriage ſhould not be broken, if one of the parties contradicted it: nor without the conſent of the Biſhop, if both parties accorded. There was alſo ordained for the maintenance of ſchooles, and for prouiſion of Doctors and Maſters.
               After thoſe things done in France, Eugenius returned vnto Rome, where hee was honourably receiued of the people, but ſoone after died at Tiber, where he went to recreate himſelfe. His body was brought to Rome, and buried in the Temple of S. Peter. Suppl. Chron.
               
               In this time raigned Gratian the Monke, who compiled the Decretall. Which Eugenius approoued and commanded to be read through all Vniuerſities. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Petrus Lumbardus Biſhop of Paris, compiled the bookes of Sentences.
               
                  Petrus Commestor wrote the Scholaſticke Hiſtorie.
               
                  Auicen and Auerrois liued in this time, excellent in Phiſicke.
               By the writings of Saint Barnard wee may knowe how in this time beeing ſo miſerably corrupted,Touching the doctrine of S. Barnard.
                   he ſtroue againſt the impietie of Popes, and the Eccleſiaſticall ſort. See his 67. Sermon, where he calleth them the Miniſters of Antichriſt. In the Sermon 57. In the booke vnto this Pope Eugenius, and in the 33. Sermon vpon the Cant. he often ſaith that Prelates are but pilates. He reprooueth Eugenius, that leauing the word of God, he aduanced humane traditions. Hugo Cardinall in his Poſtile vpon S. Iohn, alleadgeth that S. Barnard ſaid in a certaine place. It ſeemeth ô good Ieſu, that all the Vniuerſitie of Chriſtians haue conſpired againſt thee, and they are the chiefe of the coniuration which obtaine the Primacie of the church. At the end

of his dayes hee ſhewed well that hee perfectly knew the true doctrine of the Iuſtification by Ieſus Chriſt, on whom only was his refuge, reiecting all other ſanctities and righteouſneſſe. His writings yeeld a certaine witneſſe of him.
               The Emperour of Conſtantinople, Emanuel, ſent victuals to the Chriſtians beyond the Seas: but like a traitetous wicked man hee mingled chalke amongſt their floure, whereof infinite people died. He gaue alſo guides vnto the Emperour Conrade, which conducted him through ſolitary places; Inſomuch that he loſt all his ſouldiers. As much alſo almoſt came vnto the king of France, yet they both got into Ieruſalem. The Emperor Conrade, the King Lewis, and Baudwin King of Ieruſalem, being in Ieruſalem, determined to aſſaile Damas. Naucler.
               
               
                  Aluiſius Abbot of Auchen, and Biſhop of Arras, died in this iourney of the holy Land, in a towne called Philopolis, & Simon Biſhop of Noyon, at Selencia.
               
               
                  Biſhops, Abbots, and Monkes, trotted then in voyages beyond the Seas.
               
               
                  Norway receiued then the faith which was then.
               S. Barnard died of the age of 36. yeares. Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  Conrade the third, Emperor, returning from his voyage of Ieruſalem, died at Banberg. 1152.
               
                  Frederic. 1.
                  
                  Frederic, firſt of that name, ſurnamed barbarous ſonne of 
                  Frederic Duke of Souanbe, who was brother of the ſaid Conrade, was choſen Emperour.
               This was a Prince of a good ſpirit, hardie, of great ſtature, and faire of face, his haire and beard, was redde, affable, and gracious. After his election, hee ledde ſeuen times his Armie againſt the Italians which rebelled againſt him.
               
                  Anaſtaſius. 4.
                  
                  Anaſtaſius Pope, 4. of that name, a Romane, Abbot, ruled the  Romane Church, one yeare or two, 4. monethes, and 24. daies. They qualifie him a great Almes-giuer of many priuiledges vnto religious people, of Challices very ſumptuous, and of repairing Churches.
               
                  Adrian. 4.
                  
                  Adrian 4. of that name, borne in England, a man learned,  before called Nicholas-breakspeare, the ſonne of one named Robert, 
                   a Monke and Prieſt of the Temple of S. Albons, of a Regular

Chanon he was made Biſhop Cardinall, and after Pope, ruled at Rome fiue yeares and ſixe monethes.
               He was ſent vnto Norway by Eugenius the third, Pope, to preach the faith, and when he had inſtructed the people of the ſaid Countrey, he was choſen Pope. Beeing receiued,Excommunicatiō for temporall goods. the Romanes prayed him to leaue the adminiſtration of the towne free to Conſuls and Magiſtrates, after their auncient maner, which be refuſed: wherat the Romanes grieued, did many euils vnto a Cardinall. In ſo much that Adrian ſet all the Citie of Rome vnder an Interdict or excommunication.
               After his election he would by no meanes go to the Church of Laterane to be conſecrated,
                     Arnold Biſhop. vntill firſt Arnold biſhop of Brixe were caſt out of the Towne: who oppoſed himſelfe againſt the Adminiſtration of ciuill things, and of the temporall ſword which the Cleargie had vſurped. And therefore he called him an heretike, ſolliciting the Romane people to maintain their libertie, Magiſtracie, and other offices. R. Barns.
               
               Of this ſame time was Peter de Blois, who in his writings touched the wickedneſſe of the Cleargie-men. In a certaine Epiſtle which he writeth to a Biſhops Officiall, he admoniſheth him to come out of Babilon, deteſting the tirannie of Biſhops and their Officials, calling them infernall harpies which do but powle and ſheere the Church of Ieſus Chriſt. He often calleth the Cleargie, Siria, Edom, Calues of Bethel, Idols of Egipt, the fatte of Samaria, Prieſts of Baal, and Iudges which forge vniuſt lawes, and many ſuch like names he giueth them. This ſaith he of Rome. At Rome all is ſubuerted by gifts, Monkes may do all things by ſiluer, and redeeme by annuall pentions, all wickedneſſe of the fleſh.The Pope and his diſciples. There filthineſſe began to be ſung in the Tabernacle of Geth, & in the ſtreets of Aſcalon. So was he made the Prince of Sodome, and his Diſciples after him, are ſet in the chaire of peſtilence.
               
                  Such writing ſhould be noted for their excellencie and raritie.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1155. Frederic went into Italy, Adrian met him euen at Sutry, hoping by the Emperours meanes to reuenge himſelfe vpon his enemies. And as hee arriued at the Emperours lodging, the Emperour haſted to meete

him,Frederic. 1. and as he lighted he held the left ſtirrope of his horſe, and taking him by the hand ledde him into his Caſtle. The Pope greatly diſdaining, held as a mockery, that the Emperour at his lighting held his left ſtirrope, and not his right: Inſomuch that he departed from his Caſtle much offended & diſcontent. The next morning the Emperour diſſembling all, like a wiſe man, calling the Pope as hee met him againe, held his right ſtirrope at his lighting. For hee had not forgotten his leſſon of the day before.
               After they went to Rome, and there Frederic was crowned by Adrian at S. Peters, and returned into Almaigne. Ri. Barnes.
               
               
                  Iohn of Salisbury, Biſhop of Chartres, was in this time, who ſharply oppoſed himſelfe againſt the wickednes of Popes and Cleargie. He writ a booke, Intituled Obiurgatorium Cleri. In his booke Intituled Policraticus, he ſaith thus. In the Romane Church are ſet Scribes and Phariſies,Iohn de Salisburie a true Doctor.
                   loading mens ſhoulders with inſupportable burthens. The great Biſhop is heauy vnto all, yea importable. His Legates caſt themſelues ſo into the fields, as if Sathan were come from the Lorde to torment the Church. Iudgement amongſt them, is no other thing but a true marchandiſe. They eſteeme of gaine as of pietie it ſelfe. They iuſtifie the wicked by gold and ſiluer, and reioyce in wickednes. They eate the ſinnes of the people. They are apparelled & nouriſhed in all luxurie: whileſt the true worſhippers worſhip the Lord in ſpirit. He that ſticketh not vnto their doctrine, either is he iudged an hereticke, or a ſchiſmaticke, &c.
               Often were there ſuch Doctors in the Church, but they durſt not ſpeake nor write of all that was needfull. In a booke Intituled Speculum, that is to ſay, the Glaſſe. It is ſaid that that good Biſhop Iohn, amongſt other complaints, hath bene ſometimes heard ſay to the Pope Adrian the fourth (his very familiar friend) theſe words. The Pope indeed is truly the ſeruant of ſeruants,A word of cō
                     demnation commeth frō the Popes owne mouth. becauſe he ſerueth the Romanes, ſeruants of couetouſneſſe. The ſame Pope Adrian was heard ſay to the ſaid Biſhop Iohn, That there were many Popes which rather ſucceeded Romulus in murders & paracides, then S. Peter in feeding of ſheep.
               
                  
                  
                     Romulus, the firſt founder of the Citte of Rome, ſlewe his owne brother Remus, and ſo the walls were dedicated in that Parricide.
               
               
                  Adrian excommunicated William the ſonne of Rogier king of Sicily and Pouille, and abſolued his ſubiects of their oathes towards him: but ſeeing he profited nothing by that meanes, he incited Emanuel Emperour of Conſtantinople: Emanuel promiſed the Pope to depoſed the ſaid William. Onely he demanded three Maritime or Sea Townes if he came to his purpoſe. Theſe conuentions made, in the meane while the Grecians occupied Pouille, and waſted it. William vnderſtanding theſe practiſes, prayed the Pope to be reconciled vnto him, and that hee would onely graunt him the title of king of the two Sicilies, and he would reſtore him whatſoeuer he demanded; yea he would giue of his owne. The Pope was content, but the Cardinalls kept him from it. William then went into battaile againſt the Grecians and obtained the victorie, droue the Grecians out of Pouille, and recouered it. The Captaine priſoners were bound with chaines. Afterward he went againſt Beneuent and beſieged it. The Pope and his Cardinalls which by chance were there, are priſoners, and conſtrained to demaund peace, and to agree wiih him. The Pope firſt abſolueth him of his excommunication, and pronounceth and declareth him King, after hauing done him homage to hold his Land & Seignory of the holy Father. Adrian returned to Rome, and ſtraight fel vnto cōtention. For the Conſuls would maintaine their franchiſe & ancient libertie. Wherfore fearing (becauſe the Interdict endured yet) he got himſelfe Anagnia or Arignianum. R. Barns.
               
               
                  Frederic was not content that the Pope without his knowledge had graunted the title and right of Sicilia, becauſe he was thereby defrauded of the Inueſtures: alſo for that the Popes Legates pilled ſo the Countries ſubiect vnto his Empire. Becauſe the Pope began ſecretly through all the Empire to ſowe reaſons to retire his ſubiects from his ſubiection. Wherefore he demaunded homage of the Biſhops of the Germaine Nation, and oath of fidelitie: hee forbad that any ſhould appeale vnto

the Romane Sea. He commaunded the Popes Legates which appealed not to him, to get them out of his Countries. The Pope very much grieued at all thoſe things, as alſo that the Emperour ſet his owne name before the Popes in his Letters miſſiues which he ſent; writ Letters vnto him, rebuking him for thoſe foreſaid things,See the Tenor of the Popes Letters in the Popes liues, by R. Barns & Naucler.
                   admoniſhing him to amēd. The Emperor anſwered them frō point to point. Firſt, that iuſtly & by good right he ſet his name before his ſeeing the Pope oweth all humilitie to the Emperour as Chriſt hath taught. And if Popes haue any priuiledge, it comes of eſpeciall grace, and by the liberalitie of Kings and Princes.
               Alſo that Ieſus Chriſt hath taught vs to yeeld to euery one that which belongs vnto him, to Caeſar that which belongeth vnto him. Wherefore he iuſtly redemaundeth the inueſtures and homage of Biſhops. Touching Cardinals and Legates, that iuſtly he reiected thē out of his Country. For ſaid he, they come not to preach, but to pill and ſpoile: not to cōfirme peace, but to heape vp ſiluer. Wherefore he prayed the Pope and his, not to mooue ſo many ſchiſmes & ſcandalls, but that that they would ſtudie for peace and humilitie. Naucler & R. Barns.
               
               
                   The yeare 1158. Frederic tooke the Towne of Millaine, and made it ſubiect to the Empire. Sigeb.
               
               After this, the Pope ceaſed not to ſollicite the Italians to withdraw their alleageance from the Emperor, and therfore he ſent his Legates to Millaine, to perſwade them to reuolt. But the Millanois ſought no other thing but a quarell for that purpoſe; and that was, that the Emperour was excōmunicate. The Pope then wrought a cōſpiracie againſt the Emperor with the aide of William king of Sicilie, of them of Millaine, and other Nobles of Italie, which gaue a great ſum of ſiluer to the Pope to excommunicate the Emperour. The coniuration was confirmed by oath, vpon condition that none of thē ſhould euer returne into grace with the Emperour, vnleſſe all were conſenting therevnto. And if by fortune the Pope died, that they ſhould then elect a Cardinall of their owne faction and band.
               After the former defence of the Emperor that none ſhould appeale to Rome, the Biſhop of Laude going to Rome by appellation,

was encountred by certaine of the Emperours people; and after they had beate him, they put him in priſon. The Pope Adrian ſent towards the Emperour two Legates with very ſharpe Letters. In which amongſt other words, there were theſe. Although thou haſt not anſwered vs as thou oughteſt, yet do we not repent if thou hadſt receiued greater benefites at our hands then thou haſt receiued. Which words ſo angred the Emperor and all the Princes, that with much adoo did they abſtaine from violating the League. Of which one of them anſwering for the Pope, ſaid fooliſhly. If the Emperour (ſaith he) hold not his Empire of the Pope, of whom holdeth he it? By which words Otho Pallatin Wittiliſpach before the Emperour drew his ſword, and ran againſt the ſaid Legate, and hardly was retained from ſleying him. Naucler.
               
               For ſtore of ſiluer, then the Pope Adrian being at Anagnia, thundred forth the ſentence of excōmunicatiō againſt Frederic: But God (Iohn de Cremona ſaith) who by the mouth of the Prophet ſpeaketh. (They ſhal curſe you, and I will bleſſe you) ouerthrew their enterpriſe. For it fell out that the Pope after hee had denounced the excommunication, came out of Anagnia to take ayre, nigh a Fountaine of which he dranke: but ſoone after a Flie entred into his mouth, and kept ſo in his throate, that he left his breath and ſo died. Naucler. Vrsperg.
               
               The yeare 1160. Frederic laid ſiege before the Towne of  
                  Millaine, which was reuolted.
               
                  Pauie, Plaiſance, and as it were all Lombardie, yeelded themſelues ſubiect vnto him. Chron. Sigeb. Crema is pilled and ſpoiled.
               Behold what they gaine to beleeue the Pope, and rebell againſt their naturall Lord.
               The poore men of Lyons, otherwiſe called 
                     Ʋandrois,
                  The poore men of Lyons.
                   were in this time.
               After the death of Pope Adrian, yet ceaſed not the former conſpiration againſt Frederic, for the coniurators ſent a ſtrong man of body, who was a good Muſitian, but counterfeited a Ieaſter, to the end to take occaſion to ſley the Emperour: but he was ſurpriſed and put to death.
               
                  Againe they ſent him an Arrabian Ehchaunter, who carried Mearcery ware, and drugs impoiſoned. But the Emperour finding out his treaſon, cauſed the Enchaunter to be ſtrangled.
               The Duchie of Bohemia was erected to a Kingdome vnder Frederic. Naucler.
               
               The Prince of Auſtriche was made a Duke.
               The body of S. Bartholomew, and the body of Paulin Biſhop of Nole, were found in an old Church, ſaith Sigeb.
               
               
                   The bodies of the three kings (as they call thē) were found nigh Millaine, and carried into the ſaid Citie. Faſci. temp.
               
               
                  Helinandus rehearſeth that the Pope Adrian was wont to ſay; That there is nothing in the world more miſerable, nor condition or eſtate more vnluckie, then the Popedome. And that hee found ſuch tribulation in the Apoſtolike ſeate, that he wiſhed he had neuer departed from England. And that he was neuer ſo much at eaſe, as when he was but a ſimple Cloyſter-Monke.
               
                  Adolphe Count of Nole d' Albigeois, was ſlaine by the Slauons, Apoſtates of the faith: his death was reuenged by the Duke of Saxonie. Henry Leon.
               
               This Henry founded three Abbeyes, at Lubec, Racebourg, and Souerum. He viſited the ſepulchre, and builded the church of S. Bloiſe at Brunſwic.
               
               Amongſt many reliques, he gaue to the ſaid Church of the bloud of Ieſus Chriſt, which he brought from the holy Land, ſaith The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  Alexander. 3
                  
                  Alexander Pope, third of that name, of Sienne in Tuſcane, 
                   ruled 22. yeares or thereabouts. The Sea of Histories.
               
               He was before called Rowland, and was an enemie of the Empire, and therefore was he choſen by 22. Cardinalls.
               
                  A ſchiſme of 17. yeares.Some elected one called Octauian, a Romane Citizen, Prieſt, Cardinall of S. Clement, called after, 
                     Ʋictor the third: who came towards Frederic. So was there a great ſchiſme which continued 17. yeares.
               
                  Alexāder ſent his Legates towards Frederic, who thē beſieged Cremona, to the end by his authoritie to take away the ſchiſme. The Emperor commanded that the two elected Popes ſhould

come vnto him vnto Pauie, and there hee would aſſemble a Councel to take order for that ſchiſme. Alexander ſent him the olde anſwere: that the Pope might not be iudged of any liuing man, &c. and would not aſſiſt or appeare, but retired himſelfe vnto Anagnia.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋictor appeared, and was approoued Pope, and the Emperour ſent him into Almaine, and commanded that euery one ſhould obey him: whereat Alexander being greatly mooued, ſent ſentence of excommunication, againſt both the Emperour and the ſaid 
                     Ʋictor, at Cleremont in France.
               
               We haue ſeene that after Charlemaigne many pettie Kings roſe vp in Italie, whereof ſome were called Berengarij, which brought into ſubiection the kingdome of the Lombards. Otho the great got Lombardie out of their hands. But after Millaine as it encreaſed in riches, ſo the Citizens withdrew themſelues from the obedience of the Romane Empire. Frederic hauing raiſed a great Armie, conſtrained them with others to yeelde to the yoake. But the common people bearing euill will vnto the Emperour minding againe to reuoult, diſcouered their wicked intent with a maruellous inſolencie. The Empreſſe Frederic his wife, hauing a deſire to ſee the Towne, entered into it with effeminate aſſurance, without feare to ſuffer iniurie of ſuch as obeyed the Empire. But the common people forgetting all honour, being exceedingly inraged,A mockerie offered vnto the Emperor. ſet the ſaid Princeſſe vpon a ſhe Aſſe, cauſing her to turne her face towards the taile: the which they gaue her for a bridle in her hand, and in a mockerie ſent her out at one of their gates. The Emperour taking iuſt indignation againſt this iniury, beſieged them ſeuen yeares before they could enter: but at the laſt conſtraining them to yeeld, hee ruinated and ſacked the Towne with great effuſion of bloud. He receiued ſome to mercie, but it was vpon this cōditiō, that if they would ſaue their liues, they ſhuld draw out with their teeth a Figge from behind of the ſhe Aſſe. Many choſe rather to die then to ſuffer that ignominy. Others deſiring to liue, did whatſoeuer was commanded them. Frō hence comes a iuſt mockerie amongſt the Italians, to ſhewe the thumbe betwixt two fingers, and ſay; Ecco la fico,
                  Ecco la Fico. beholde the

Figge: Crantes reciteth this Story in his 6. booke of Saxonia.
               
               
                  Frederic ſent Embaſſadors vnto the King of France, to take away that ſchiſme from Rome, they agreed to meete in a certaine place very conuenient for France and Almaine, and that was at Dijon. Thither came Henry king of England, the king of Scotland, the king of Bohemia: Alexander would not bee there, ſaying he was not ordained by his authoritie. The King of France was not there in fauour of Alexander.
               
               
                  Frederic not well content that he and ſo many Princes had thus loſt their paines, commaunded Victor to drawe into Italie: but Victor died in the way at Luques: and in his place Guido Biſhop of Cremone, was choſen, who afterward was called Paſchall the third: vnto whom the Emperour Frederic, the Duke of Bauiere, the Count Palatin in Rhene, the Lantgraue of Turinge, the Biſhops of Magdeburg, of Breme, of Treuers, of Colongne, and of Banberge, promiſed him obedience. R. Barns.
               
               
                  The 6. king of Ieruſalem.
                  Amaricus the brother of Baudwin, was the ſixt King of Ieruſalem. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Alexander in the meane while held a Councell at Tours. But at Rome the Vicegerent of the Pope Alexander, the Biſhop of Preneſtine died, and in his place was ſubſtituted Iohn, Cardinall of the Church of S. Peter. He by ſiluer and other meanes drewe to Alexander the moſt part of the Romane Citizens: and did ſo much, as they created new Conſuls, ſuch as fauoured the ſaid Alexander. They recalled Alexander out of France, and he was well receiued at Rome, the Biſhop of Pauie was put out for that he held on the Emperours ſide.
               
                  
                  Frederic the third time went into Italie againſt certaine that rebelled, and came to Rome to knowe the cauſe of thoſe Popes. Alexander would not appeare, but drewe backe as before.
               The Townes of Italie rebelled againſt the Emperor at the perſwaſion of Alexander, and they conſpired together.
               The Millainois reedified their Towne in fauour of this Alexander, 
                   and called it Alexandria.
               
               
                  Frederic the fourth time returned into Italie with a great Armie againſt the rebells: but Henry Leon Duke of Saxonie,
                  
corrupted by ſiluer (as is thought) left the Emperour, and returned into Saxonie with his company.
               The Emperour required him not to faile him in that great need, but he loſt time: therefore was hee conſtrained to withdrawe from Italie, and returne into Almaine, in a ſeruants apparell, and that with great difficultie.
               
                  Behold how by Popes the world hath euer beene troubled.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1173. Saladin ſlew his Lord the  Calyphe, and raigned in his place. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1175. Frederic the fift time returned  into Italie: but at the perſwaſion of his Confeſſor, he conuerted his Armes againſt the Turkes: and paſſing through Hungarie, came vnto Conſtantinople, & occupied many Townes and places of the Turkes, as Philomenia and Iconium, after he came into Armenia the leſſe, finally euen to Ieruſalem. Whileſt Frederic was thus buſied with the Turke, the Pope Alexander with his confederates ceaſed not to thinke how they might deſtroy him. To the end then that hee ſhould not returne victorious, the Pope ſent to the Souldan the Image of the Emperour, which he cauſed to be drawne very liuely by an excellent Painter, with Letters by which he gaue aduertiſement vnto the Souldan, to ſley or deſtroy the ſaid Emperour by treaſon, if euer hee pretended to liue in peace.
               The Souldan hauing receiued the ſaid Popes Letters, with the Emperours figure, ſought by all meanes to come to his purpoſe; but occaſion fell not out ſo ſoone. But finally as the Emperour returned from the conqueſt of Ieraſalem being in Armenia, one day as it was very hotte, hee withdrew into a wood with a fewe of his people, and with his Chaplaine, and not thinking of any daunger, there made his people goe aſide, and hee and his Chaplaine lighted off their horſes, vnapparelled themſelues, and ſo refreſhed them in a running ſtreame of water. There was hee ſurpriſed by the ambuſhes which the Souldane had laid, and were carried through the wood vnto the Souldan. His people knowing nothing of his taking, ſought him all the next morning.
               
                  The brute came vnto the Campe, the Emperor was drowned, and by the ſpace of an whole moneth they ſought him in the floud where he waſhed. The Emperour being brought before the Souldane, feigned himſelfe to be the Emperors Chaplaine, but the Souldan knowing him by the Image the Pope ſent him, maintained that he was the Emperour of the Chriſtians, and indeed commanded that ſtraight ſome ſhould bring him the ſaid Image, and that the Popes Letters ſhould be read. The Emperour aſtoniſhed at this treaſon, confeſſed the truth and demaunded fauour. Certaine time after, the Souldan ſent him away, vnder certain couenants agreed betwixt them. The Emperour returning, aſſigned a day at Noremberg, and aſſembling his Court, declared the Pope Alexander his treaſon, ſhewing his Letters and the Image. Briefly, euery one promiſed him helpe to pay his ranſome, and to doo iuſtice of the ſaid Alexander.
               
               
                  In this time of darkneſſe and horrible tempests, after the Graſhoppers and vermine of begging Friers, which deuoured the title graine of the world: here gaue the Lord again a light, as it were the breake of day.
               
            
            
               The beginning of the Waldois.
               
                  Peter Waldo a Citizen of Lions, beganne by litle and litle in this time to cleare the thicke darkneſſe therof: and this was as a firſt and litle beginning of the Inſtauration of the Chriſtian doctrine and religion.
               The Hiſtorie is this. In the Towne of Lions, as many of the chief of the Towne in Sommer time to recreate themſelues and talke together, one amongſt them ſuddenly fell downe dead in the preſence of others; amongſt which was this Waldo, a rich man, who more then all other men was mooued and ſurpriſed with feare,Sudden death giueth occaſion to Waldo.
                   and an apprehenſion of the humane frailtie, and began to think (the ſpirit of God drawing him) more nearly to repencance, and to meditate true pietie more then euer hee had done before. He began then to giue much more almes, to open his houſe to all, and to ſpeake of penance and true pietie to ſuch as for any cauſe came vnto him.
               
                  
                  This feare was of God,Note here the diuerſitie of examples. the fruite and the ende ſheweth it in this perſon. But the feare that moued Bruno to ſeeke remedie and comfort to his fancie without the word of the Lord, was of the diuel, and proceeded of his illuſions.
               
               This liberalitie drew many poore and needfull people vnto him, that they came by troupes, and he alwaies expounded ſome place of holy ſcripture in the vulgar tongue: for hee was a man learned (as the writings of that time witneſſe, and the Catalogue of the witneſſes of the truth) the Biſhop of the place, and the Prelates which carried the keyes as they ſay, and would neither enter, nor let others enter, beganne to murmure that a Laie man, or ſecular man (as they call them) ſhould handle or declare in the vulgar tongue the ſcripture, and make aſſemblies in his houſe: admoniſhing to ceaſe to do ſo vnder the paine of excommunication. But for all this, the zeale that Waldo had to aduance the glory of God, and the deſire the little ones had to learne, was nothing diminiſhed: but contrary, the reſiſtance and tyrannie of the Prelates gaue occaſion to diſcouer the errours and ſuperſtitions of the Romane ſeate, which then were as it were hid in darkneſſe.
               
                  The like happened in our time: for whē the Pope & his Prieſts could not endure that Martin Luther ſhould reprehend their Indulgences, they were the cauſe that a further ſearch was made into their errours, and ſo diſcouered their abhominable blaſphemies.
               
               
                  Waldo now gathered in the vulgar tongue many places out of the auncient Fathers,
                     Waldo ſtrengtheneth himſelfe with places of the Doctors. to cōfirme and ſtrengthen ſuch as were of his ſide, not only by the authoritie of holy ſcriptures, but alſo by witneſſe of Doctors, againſt the aduerſaries. It is likely to be true, by Hiſtoriographers, yea euen by the writings of the aduerſaries, that this aſſembly endured certaine time (it may be foure or fiue yeares) that Waldo taught in the Towne of Lyons, before he was driuen to exile & baniſhment. For becauſe he was mightie and had friends, he was not ſo ſoone expoſed to daungers which afterward were laide for him. And thus came the

appellation of the Pope of Lions. Some called them Waldois, ſome Lyoniſts, and ſome Inſabbatati: that is, ſuch as obſerued neither Sabboth nor Feaſt, and many other like names to make them odious and deteſtable, as ſhall be ſhewed in the diſcourſe of this Hiſtorie.
               
                  
                  Alexander vnderſtanding the Emperor marched to come to Rome, perceiuing himſelfe culpable of the treaſon he had done him, the 7. yeare of his Popedome, fled from Rome in the habit of his Coole, & came vnto Venice, & remained in a Monaſterie: where finally being knowne, he was led by the Duke & the Senate with great ſolemnitie into S. Markes Church. The Emperor vnderſtanding yt Alexander was at Venice, ſent Embaſſadors to demaund Alexander. The Venetians maintained the Pope, which the Emperor ſeeing, ſent thither his ſon Otho with an Army, yet commanding him not to fight againſt the Venetians before his comming. But Otho led with youth gaue battell, loſt the victory & was priſoner. Which the Pope ſeeing, wold not agree with the Emperor, vnleſſe fiſt he came to Venice & receiued the meanes that he wold offer. Frederic to help his ſon came to Venice: the Pope would not abſolue him of ye
                   bond of excommunicatiō, vntill he preſented himſelfe at the doore of S. Mark his Church. Whē he was come thither, the Pope cōmanded him in the preſence of all the people, to caſt himſelf vpon the ground, and to demand pardon of him. The Emperor proſtrating himſelfe vpon the earth at the Popes feete: hee ſet his foote vpon the Emperors neck, & preſſing it downe ſaid; It is written, Super aſpidem & baſiliſcum ambulabis & conculcabis Leonem & draconem: that is to ſay; Thou ſhalt goe vpon the Aſpe & Baſilike, and tread vnder thy feet the Lyon & the Dragō. The Emperor taking in ill part the contumely, anſwered; This was not ſaid vnto thee, but vnto Peter. But the Pope ſtepping againe vpon his neck, anſwered; Both to me, & to Peter. The Emperour fearing the peril or an hid danger, held his peace, & ſo was abſolued: and an accord was made betwixt them, vpō condition that the Emperour ſhould hold Alexander for the true & legitimate Pope,  & that he ſhould reſtore to the Romane church all that he had vſurped & takē during the war. Theſe things ended, the Emperor & his ſon departed frō 
                  Venice, & ſo ceaſed ye
                   ſchiſme.
               
                  This Pope gaue many priuiledges to the order of Chartreux, and Canonized S. Barnard.
               
               The bodies of three Kings (as they call them) were tranſported from Millaine to Colongne, by the Biſhop of the ſaid place. Sabell. Eun. 9. lib. 5.
               The order of the Carmalites began in this time,Carmalits. Willelmin. and the order of Willelmins Hermirs. Faſc. Temp.
               
               About this time Henry the ſecond, King of England, ſeeing the power of Biſhops & Cleargie too great in England, and that they by oathes made to the Pope, did alienate themſelues, and the Forces of the Realme by ſuch means weakned, renewed the auncient rights, called the Dignities of the Kingdome. And aboue all that, which ſaith, That Biſhops and Prelates ſhal ſweare to be loyall and faithful vnto the king and the publike vtilitie of the kingdome. Thomas Becket Archbiſhop of Cā
                     terburie gaue that oath to the King; but after repented himſelfe thereof, as of an vnlawfull oath, and demanded therfore the Popes abſolution. The King grieued at ſuch periurie, baniſhed him; and about fiue yeares he was in France. The queſtiō was long debated at Rome, & coſt much mony vpō Embaſſadors going betweene the one partie & the other. Gratian cō
                  piler of the Decrees, was ſent on the Popes ſide, & Petrus Lombardus on Becket his ſide. The king fearing apparent daungers on the ſide of France, was glad to be quiet: but Becket being reſtored, and ſtil remaining contrary to the king, and vnwilling to abſolue ſuch as before he had excommunicated, he was ſlain by certaine Nobles of the Realme. The 48. yeare after his death, there was a diſputation in Paris amongſt the Doctors, whether he were damned or ſaued. There was one Roger a Normane, who maintained that he deſerued death, being a Rebell againſt the King, who is the Miniſter of God. Others contrary, maintained that by good right he ought to be held in the number of Martirs, becauſe he died for the Clergie, and ſo the Pope Alexander canonized him.
               This Hiſtorie ſheweth vs what difference there is betwixt the Popes Martyrs and them of Ieſus Chriſt.
               The puniſhment makes not the Martyr, but the cauſe.
               Many haue written againſt this Archbiſhop Becket, and

condemning him, haue maintained the Kings cauſe. Baleus rehearſeth it. So doth Iohn Eliot, and Iohn Biſhop of Poitiers.
               
               
                  Monaſteries founded.Our Ladies Church of Paris is now builded by the Biſhop there called Maurice, who alſo founded beſides three Monaſteries, that is Negranx, Hermeries and Yeres. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               About this time were there ſeene in the Weſt Countries three Sunnes in September, & the yeare after three Moones. Chro. Euſeb.
               
               
                  
                  Baudwin fourth of that name, the ſeuenth King of Ieruſalem, raigned ſixe yeares. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  
                  Berthold, Duke Zeringen, ſonne of Conrade the Emperour, founded two Freburgs, that is to ſay, free Bourgages or Francborgs: the one in Briſgoy, and the other in little Bourgogne, commonly called 
                     Ʋchland, againſt Sauoye. And 12. yeares after he founded the Towne of Berne,
                  Berne. which he ſurnamed becauſe of a Beare which he encountred in the place where the ſaid Towne was builded. For that word in their tongue ſignifieth Beare. Naucl.
               
               The ſcituation thereof is almoſt an Iland which the Riuer of Arre maketh.
               
                  
                  Phillip dieu done, 2. of that name, 41. king of France, ſonne of Lewis le ienne, conſtituted the Eſcheuins of Paris, and enuironed with walles a great part of the towne, and walled the wood of 
                     Ʋincennes nigh Paris. Naucler.
               
               At this time was a great multitude of Iewes in France, of which there went a report that euerie yeare they ſtole a Chriſtian childe, and ledde him vnto a place vnder the earth, and after they had tormented him, crucified him, and that day they call great or good Friday. King Phillip hearing this, cauſed the Iewes to be taken and tormented in diuers ſorts.The Iewes chaſed from France.
                   Hee burned 80. in one fire, and after the yeare 1186. he draue them all out of his kingdome, except ſuch as were conuerted to the Faith. After the King being ſcarce of mony through warres, demanded of the Iewes a great ſumme thereof, and hauing it graunted, he was content they ſhould again come into his kingdome: As alſo his ſucceſſour Lewis opened them all the kingdome of France.
               
               
                  
                  Lucius Pope, third of that name, of Luke,
                  Lucius. 3. ruled at Rome foure yeares, two moneths, and 18. dayes.
               He was before called Hinebaldus, or Vbaldus, Cardinall of Oſtia. This Pope would needs baniſh the Conſuls & Patricij at Rome: wherefore he was caſt out of Rome, and withdrew himſelfe to Verona. Such as tooke his part, ſome had their eyes put out, others were ſet vpon Aſſes, their faces towards the hinder part, and were ignominiouſly handled. After ſome.
               In this time was the fourth expedition made beyond the Sea, and there were croſſed vnto it the King of France Philip Auguſtus, and Henry King of England.
                  Saladins tenth.
                   And there was a tenth laide vpon all Benefices and reuenews of Church goods, to help the charges of the warre. And this Subſidie was called Saladins tenth. Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  
                     Ʋrbane Pope, third of that name, borne at Millane,
                  Vrbane. 3.
                   of the people of Cribelles, ruled a yeare and ſixe moneths, or as it were  eleuen. Suppl. Chron. Before he was called Imbert. Suppl. Chron. Sigeb.
               
               
                  Baudwin King of Ieruſalem, left the kingdome Guyon of Luſignan, his ſiſters husband, and the ſaide Guyon was the laſt King of Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Saladin, by auarice, ambition, and diſcord of Chriſtians, occupied Ieruſalem, which the Chriſtians had held from Godfrey de Bouillion, 88. yeares. He tooke alſo Aca, Beritus, Biblon, and all the reſt euen to Aſcalon, incluſiuely. Naucler.
               
               
                  Gregorie Pope, 8. of that name, borne in Beneuent,
                  Gregorie. 8.
                   ruled at Rome 57. dayes.
               
               Hee ſent meſſages vnto the Chriſtian Princes and their people, to goe againſt the enemies of the Faith, promiſing Indulgences and pardons vnto all; but he dyed vpon that enterpriſe, as he went vnto Piſe to ſollicite, that they of that Towne with the Geneuois together, might ſend into Aſia for the defence of Religion. Cor. Abb.
               
               
                  Lynonia, or Lyfland, a Northerne Land, was conuerted to the Faith.
               
                  Clement Pope, third of that name,Clement. 3.
                   the ſonne of a Romane Citizen, ruled at Rome 3. yeares and 6. moneths, and made a

Decretall againſt ſuch Prieſts as celebrated Maſſe in wodden veſſels,Frederic 1. and with common bread.
               The Emperour Frederic, Philip King of France, Richard King of England, and the Pope Clement, agreed together to ſend mony vnto the Chriſtians: they ſent alſo many ſhips, and after went themſelues in perſon, with many Princes and Prelates of Ieruſalem, but they could not accord: therefore ſoone after they returned. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                   The yeare of Chriſt 1190. Frederic being at Nice, a Citie of Bithinia, it being alſo very hotte, he deſcended into a floud to waſh: but the force of the water carried him away, ſo that he was drowned, in the preſence of his people, the 37. yeare of his Empire, leauing fiue children which hee had of his wife Beatrix, daughter of Regnand, Count of Beſanſon.
               
               The King of England was taken by a Duke of Auſtriche, called Leopold, as he returned paſſing through Almaigne, and was deliuered vnto the Emperour Henry the ſixt. For his raunſome, were ſolde the treaſures of the Church, the Chalices of Gold and Siluer, &c. and ſo returned into England. During this time, the King of France but a litle before alſo returned into France, and occupied certaine Townes appertaining vnto the King of England.
               
                  The treaſures of England ſolde for the Kings raunſome, came 200000 markes of ſiluer.
               
               
                  Celeſtine. 3.
                  
                  Celeſtine 3. of that name, a Romane, before called Iacinthus, very aged, (his Father was called Bubonis) was choſen Pope by the Cardinalls vpon Eaſter day.
               
                  Henry. 6.
                  The next morning he Crowned Henry Emperour, 6. of that name, ſonne of Fredericke, and at the exhortation of this Pope, he made an expedition to goe vnto Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  William king of Sicile dying without heires, it was thought that therefore the kingdome ſhould devolue vnto the Romane ſeate: but the greateſt of the kingdome elected Tancredus, the baſtard ſonne of the ſaid William.
                  A Nunne diſpenſed with to marry. The Pope ſtirred heereat, drew Conſtance the daughter of Roger, and ſiſter of William king of Sicilie, out of an Abbey of Nunnes in the Towne of Palerme, and diſpenſed with her marriage. Wherefore Henry ſonne of

the Emperour Fredericke, eſpouſed her,Henry. 6.
                  For the diuerſitie touching this hiſtorie, ſee Naucler.
                   and ſo came vnto the kingdome of Sicilie and occupied it. And Tancredus was ſlaine in battaile, ſo Henry abode in place. The ſaid Conſtance of the age of 55. yeares, conceaued and brought forth a ſonne called Fredericke the ſecond, who after was Emperour. Supp. Chron.
               
               The order of the Friars of the Hoſpitall of the Almaines, beganne at this time.
               Alſo the order of the Trinitie.
               
               The yeare 1191. the Towne of Aca was taken by the  Chriſtians. Naucler. ſaith here, that Saladine ſeeing the force of the Chriſtians, determined to haue yeelded them the towne of Ieruſalem: but the diſcord happening betwixt the King of Fraunce and the King of England, was cauſe of verie great troubles.
               In matter of diuorce, Celestine permitted the Catholike partie to remarry, if the other partie fell into hereſie. But contrary, the Pope Innocent forbad it. Poll. Ʋer. de diuor. cap. 5.
               
                  Arthois was erected into an Earledome, the yeare 1195. and  the firſt Count or Earle therof was Lewis, ſonne of king Philip.
               
               The kingdome of Cyprus came into the hands of the Chriſtians, and remained there 275. yeares.
               The Archbiſhop of Magunce with a multitude of Almains,
                   the King of Hungarie & the Queene, went into Paleſtine againſt the Saraſins. Sigeb. They tooke Berinthus and Ioppe. Naucl.
               
               
                  Innocent Pope, third of that name, borne in Campania,
                  Innocent. 3.
                   his father was Traſimondus, of Anagnia, a man of baſe eſtate, 
                  Suppl. Chron. ruled at Rome 18. yeares.
               This Pope, a very daungerous peſtilence,Tranſubſtantiatiō is made the 13. article of the Faith. added vnto the Articles of the Faith Tranſubstantiation, as a 13. Article. See the Decretalls, Tit. 1. De ſumma Trin. & ſide Catholica, ca. Firmiter credimus.
               
               This Decretall was made the yeare of Chriſt, 1215. & promulged in the Councell of Lateran. Where were the Patriarkes of Conſtantinople & Ieruſalem, 70. Archbiſhops, 400. Biſhops, 12. Abbots, 800. conuentuall Priors, and many Embaſſadors of kings & princes to ſtop the Saraſins.
                  A Croiſado. For there was a Croiſado publiſhed, therfore was there demanded the 4. peny of all rents.
               
                  
                  Innocent. 3
                  Confeſſion inſtituted.He commaunded that the Canon of the Maſſe ſhould be receiued as if it came from and were ordeined of the Apoſtles. See the Decretals, Dit. 46. De celebratione Miſſarū, ca. 6. cū.
               
               He commanded confeſſion in the Prieſts eare, that is, that he which came to be capable of deceit, ſhould confeſſe himſelfe at the leaſt once in the yeare to his owne Paſtor. See the Decretals Tit. 38. chap. Omnis vtriuſ
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      ſexus.
               
               
                  Canonizing of Saints, reſerued to the Pope.In the ſaid Councell of Lateran, it was ordeined, that the Canonization of Saints might not be done but by the Pope.
               There alſo was condemned the booke of Ioachim Abbat, againſt Peter Lombard.
               
               Now was the error of Almaric Biſhop of Chartres, (of whom we ſhall hereafter ſpeake) and of the Albigeois: againſt which Innocent made preach the Croiſado.
               
               There was alſo ordeined, that if Princes had offended one an other, the correctiō therof ſhuld appertain vnto ye
                   Pope. Nauc.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt 1199. the Emperour Henry dyed at Palerme. Being ſore heated in the purſuit of an Hart, he drunke ſo much of a Fountaine that he rankeled his bodie.
               
                  Philip brother of the ſaid Emperour Henry, Duke of Souabe, obtained the Empire, and raigned 8. yeares. He was crowned at Magunce.
               
               
                  Innocent hated Philip, and was againſt his election: The Biſhop of Colongne and other Princes, as well ſeculars, as of the Cleargie, ſeeing themſelues deſpiſed that they had not bene called to the electiō of the ſaid Philip, vpon an aſſembly at Aix, they choſe for Emperour Otho, the ſonne of Henry, ſurnamed Lyon, Duke of Saxonie and Bauiere, and was crowned by the Archbiſhop of Boulongne:
                  Diuiſion of the Empire by the Pope. ſo was there a diuiſion in the Empire whereof great miſchiefes came in Almaine, by Rapines, pillings, fires, warres, Robberies. Benefices Eccleſiaſticall became litigious, and much ſiluer did runne to Rome. Naucler. and Vrſperg.
               
               
                  Otho. 4.
                  
                  Otho then 4. of that name, Duke of Bauiere and Saxonie, a man proud and hardie, raigned three yeares, being a fauourite of Pope Innocent: who had ſaid that he would either take away Phillips Crowne, or he ſhould take away his. 
                     Ʋrsperg.
               
               
                  There happened then great diſcord in Almaine by the Popes treaſon, who procured Phillips death.Frederic. 2.
               
               
                  Otho of Wittiliſpach, Count Pallatin, entered into the Emperor  
                  Phillips chamber at Bamberge,
                  The death of the Emperour Phillip.
                   and ſlew him traiterouſly with a dagger, the ninth yeare of his raigne. His Eſquire ſeeing this, being greatly troubled, began to crie, and being wounded in the cheeke, fell downe. The traytor fled to the Biſhop of Bamberge, a companion of the conſpiration in the Popes fauour: who notwithſtanding was afterward ſlaine by the Emperours Marſhall nigh Ratisbone, being hid in a poore cottage. See Naucler.
               
               After the death of the ſaid Phillip, the Pope ſent vnto Otho, to come to Rome to be crowned, and ſo he was, the yeare 1209.
               
                  Adolphe Biſhop of Colongne, who ſometimes was on Phillips ſide, was depoſed by the Pope, and died in exile. Naucler. and likewiſe the Biſhop of Sutry, before the ſaid Phillip was Emperor, becauſe he had abſolued him frō an excommunication.
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1210. Otho whom the Pope ſo much  loued, in deſpite of Phillip the Emperour, is now become the Popes mortall enemie, yea euen to be excommunicated, and in full Councell declared to be depoſed from his Empire: with commaundement from the ſaid Innocent, that none ſhould hold him for Emperor, nor obey him, acquitting his ſubiects of the oath they ought him. Naucler.
               
               This done, he ſent Letters to the Archbiſhop of Magunce, that he ſhould declare the ſaid Otho through all his Cities to be excommunicated and depoſed frō his Empire, in full Councell held at Rome: which he did. Wherevpon the Princes of Almaine inuaded his Biſhoppricke, and put all to fire. The cauſe wherefore the Pope publiſhed the ſaid excommunication, was becauſe Otho occupied Romandiole, the patrimonie of the Romane Church.
               
                  Otho then fearing a new chaunge, left Italie and returned into Almaine: which hee found all troubled for the ſaid excommunication.
               The Abbey of S. Antoigne by Paris, a religion of women was founded about this time. The Sea of Hist.
               
               
                  The king Phillip gaue to the Church of S. Denis diuers precious reliques which the Emperour Baudwin had ſent him frō 
                  Conſtantinople: that is to ſay, the true Croſſe of a foote long; alſo the haires which Ieſus Chriſt had in his Infancie; one of the thornes of the Crowne; one ſide and foure teeth of S. Phillip; the cloathes wherein Ieſus Chriſt was wrapped in the maunger; and the purple garment which he had on at his paſſion. See the Sea of Hist.
               
               
                  Such as were great in this world, ſubmitted their greatneſſe vnto thoſe toyes and trifles, more then childiſh.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1212. Otho hauing aſſembled the Princes at Noremberg, ſhewed the Popes ſubtil deu
                     ••
                  s againſt him, and that vniuſtly he perſecuted him. From thence hee led his Armie into Turinge againſt his enemies which tooke the Popes part: After he came into Saxonie, where his marriage was celebrated with the daughter of king Phillip, who died foure daies after.
               
                  Iohn King of England, King Richard his brother, made his kingdome ſubiect to the Romane Pope. For a ſigne whereof, he promiſed to pay yearely fiue markes of gold. Suppl. Chron. or 1000. markes of ſliuer. See the Annales of France.
               
               
                  Frederic. 2.
                  After Otho had bene Emperour 4. yeares, Frederic 2. of  that name, ſonne of Henry 6. king of both Sicilies and of Ieruſalem ſucceeded: and after his election made in Almaine, hee was annointed and crowned at Aix: and Otho depriued of his Empire, died the yeare following of a fluxe of bloud. Naucler. and the ſaid Frederic raigned 44. yeares, or 33. after Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Innocent edified the Hoſpitall of the holy Ghoſt, and gaue vnto it great reuenewes. He repaired the Church of S. Sixtus. He gaue vnto all the Churches of Rome, the waight of a pound of ſiluer to make their Challices on, vpon condition that none ſhould ſell or alien them.
            
            
               The foure Sects of begging Friars.
               
                  Friars.S. Francis an Italian, of a Towne called Aſſiſium, was in this time.
               
                  S. Dominike a Spaniard of Caliroga,
                  Iacobins. in the Dioceſſe of Lexonia, in this time alſo. The ſaid Dominike went to Rome, and prayed the Pope Innocent in the ſaid Councell of Lateran, to confirme his order of Iacobins: but hee would not conſent therevnto.
               
                  Albert Patriarke of Ieruſalem, made the rule of Carmes,
                  Carmalits. the firſt Author of the ſaid order in Siria.
               
               The Pope approued the order of the Hermits of S. Auguſtin.
                  Auguſtins.
               
               The Emperour vſed all diligence to get fauour of the Pope, thinking to liue at reſt: yet was he excommunicated, becauſe he had not accompliſhed the vow he made to goe vnto Ieruſalem: then had he great troubles all ouer. But the Emperor haſted his voyage beyond the Seas to mittigate the Popes furie:The wicked diſloyaltie of the Pope. but whileſt he was abſent, the Pope got Pouille vnder his power. The Emperour Frederic vnderſtanding this fraud of that ſubtil Foxe, returned with a great Armie into Pouille, droue the Popes people away, and recouered that which was taken from him. Then the Pope againe excommunicated the Emperor becauſe hee had allied himſelfe with the Souldane, and writ Letters vnto the Souldane, by which hee prayed him, that he would not yeeld the holy Land vnto the Emperor, as he vnderſtood by a certaine vncertaine bruite that he would do. Alſo he ſent and commaunded the Princes of Almaine, that they ſhould elect none of the children of Frederic for King, nor any of his houſe.
               The Hiſtoriographers of France make heere mention of one called Almaricus of Chartres, a learned man, but an heretike,Almaricus of Chartres. who approued (ſay they) all whoredomes, vnder the vaile of charitie. Many of them both men and women, as well Eccleſiaſtical as Lay-people were taken, found guiltie, and condemned at Paris, and burnt without S. Vistors gate. They ſay further, that Almaric maintained that euery one was bound to beleeue that he is a member of Ieſus Chriſt, and that when Ieſus Chriſt ſuffered death and paſſion, we ſuffered with him.
               The ſaid Almaric after his death, was condemned and excommunicated at a Councell at Rome, and his bones caſt out of the Church-yard, and after burnt to aſhes.
               
                  
                  Eating of fleſh in Lent.
                  Nauclerus alſo reciteth, that there was in his time in the Countrey of Alſatee, many heretickes which maintained it to be lawfull to eate fleſh in Lent, and vpon Fridayes. And that they themſelues ſaid that it was no ſinne to haue the company of women: but a naturall thing. There was at Strasbourg about 80. burnt.
               
                  Such as are againſt the Popes doctrine, haue bene euer flaundered, and Hiſtories haue often followed their affections when there hath bene a queſtion of truth.
               
               The Albigeois or Albiois, a people which had receiued a beginning of the light of truth, oppoſed themſelues againſt the Idolatrie of Tranſubſtantiation: which firſt gaue them occaſion to withdrawe thmſelues from the Romane Church. They inhabited the Countrey about Tholouſe and d' Albi. S. Dominike Author of that new Sect of ſuch as named themſelues preachers,S. Dominike perſecuteth them. came from Spaine, and perſecuted them greatly both in deed and word.
               The Pope ſent alſo towards them his Legate Nicholas Biſhop of Tuſculan, who being there with 4. horſes & 2. Mules, returned in a litle time with 50. and with great pillage, hauing exerciſed great tirannie againſt theſe poore people, vppon whom they laid enormious crimes, to make them odious to all the world.
               This Pope cauſed to be publiſhed a Croiſado againſt them, and gaue full indulgences and remiſſion of ſinnes to ſuch as would make war vpon them. Simon Count of Mountfort, went againſt them, & ouercame a great number nigh vnto Tholouſe: 140. were burnt in the Dioceſſe of Narbone, and 400. in the Dioceſſe of Tholouſe, at diuers times. In this ouerthrowe of the Albigeois, Peter king of Tarracon, who had drawne them back, and bore them fauour and amitie, was ſlaine at the combats. Simon de Mountfort purſued his victorie. See Mathew de Paris, an Engliſh Hiſtoriographer, who was in this time.
               
                   In the time of Innocent was held a Councell in France, againſt king Phillip of France, after he was returned from beyond the Sea. The Popes Legate had laid an interdict vpon all the Kingdome of France, becauſe the King had put away

his wife Ingeberge, ſiſter of the King of Dalmatia (or Morauia, after ſome Chronicles) vnder the colour that ſhe was his kinſwoman, and had eſpowſed newly the daughter of the Duke of Boheme, called Mary. Againſt the ſentence of the ſaid Legate, the King armed himſelfe, with appellation to a future Councel, and in the meane while reuenged him of the Biſhops which had conſented vnto the ſaid ſentence. For he caſt them out of their Dioceſſes and Benefices, and cauſed to be held in ſtraight guard the ſaid Ingeberge, in the Caſtle of Estampes.
               
               The King tooke againe his firſt wife Ingeberge, wherevpon his ſecond dyed of griefe. The Children the King had by her were declared legitimate.
               The yeare 1216. Innocent dyed at Piſe, and there was buried: Hee came thither to appeaſe controuerſies betwixt the Townes of Piſe and Genes.
               
               
                  Honorius Pope, 3. of that name, ruled at Rome ten yeares,Honorius. 3.
                   7. or 8. moneths, & certaine daies, and was choſen at Peruſe.
               
               The firſt yeare of his Popedome hee confirmed the order of the Iacobins, which his predeceſſors had refuſed to do. Honorius being admoniſhed by a dreame confirmed it:A dreame the foundation of Iacobins.
                   For in a Viſion he thought that the Church fell, & that S. Dominike ſuſtained it with his ſhoulders: by reaſon hereof he ſent for him, and ſo was confirmed the third older of Mendicants or beggers. Yea Honorius would needs haue him to obtaine the firſt place.
               He commaunded that the Hoſt ſhould be kept in a place by it ſelfe, and well encloſed.The Hoſt ſhut vp.
               
               That when the Prieſt lifteth vp the Hoſt, the people ſhall  with all reuerence bowe, as alſo when it is carried vnto the ſicke.
               
                  Ieruſalem was raſed euen to the foundations, by Gordirius the ſonne of Saladin, whileſt the Chriſtians were before Dimiere. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Honorius went into Fraunce fearing Frederic, and held a Councel at Lyons, where he declared Frederic an enemy of the Church, and depoſed him of his Empire: deliuering all Princes from their oath of fidelitie that they had promiſed him. Naucl. All the cauſe was, becauſe he conferred Benefices.
               
                  
                  Honorius, then did ſo much with the Princes of Almaigne, that Iohn King of Cact
                        •
                     le (or Henry Lantgraue of Turinge) was elected Emperour: and after Rodolpe, or William Count of Holland, who raigned two yeares: which obteined not the Imperiall bleſſing, being preuented by death.
               Hiſtories in this place are confuſed.
               The yeare 1220. or 1223. Dominike the Emperour died.
               
                   The yeare 1223. Honorius confirmed the Religion of S. Francis, which was the fourth order of Mendicant Friars. All the foure orders of the ſaid Mendicants, were confirmed by Honorius Faſcic. Templ.
               
               
                  The fulneſſe of all Infection is come into the Church by theſe foure plagues of begging Monkes.
               
               
                  Frederic was reconciled with Honorius, by the meanes of Iohn King of Ieruſalem, who gaue his daughter in marriage to the ſaid Frederic.
               
               
                  Lewis. 8.
                  
                  Lewis 8. of that name, Father of S. Lewis, the 12. King of 
                  France, raigned three yeares. He made warre vpon the Engliſh men, when his Father Phillip did the like vpon Otho. He ſpake with the Emperour Frederic, and renewed the fraternitie betwixt the French and Almaignes. See Gaguin. li. 3.
               All Lombardie at the perſwaſion of Pope Honorius rebelled againſt the Emperour Frederic. Naucler.
               
               
                  Honorius dyed, and was buried in the Church of S. Mary the greater.
               
                  Stigmates of S. Frances.The ſaid yeare (or as others ſay 1224.) was inuented the Fable of the Stigmates, and wounds of S. Francis.
               
               S. Claire was in this time, a Diſciple of S. Frances, Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Gregorie. 9.
                  
                  Gregorie Pope, 9. of that name, before Biſhop of Ostia, 
                   called Hugolin, or Anagnia, of the parentage of Innocent: and as Platina ſaith, Honorius his Nephewe, ruled at Rome 14. yeares and three moneths.
               
                  Decretals gathered together.This Pope heaped vp Decretalls by one of his Chaplaines called Raymond, and commaunded all Doctors and Maiſters to hold the ſaid Decretalls, and to vſe them through all Chriſtendome in Schooles and Iudgements.
               
                  The Pope Canonized S. Dominicke and S. Francis, alſo S. Elizabeth, daughter of the King of Hungarie.
               
               Hee ordeined that the Salue Regina ſhould be ſung at the tolling of a bell. Paralip. Vrsperge.
               
               
                  Gregorie took this boldneſſe to admoniſh Frederic, vnder  paine of excōmunication, to goe into Aſia to recouer the Citie of Ieruſalem. At the ſecond time he denounced him excommunicated: In ſo much that Frederic was conſtrained to goe into Syria, by the aduice of his friends, but after ſending to Rome to be abſolued, the Pope refuſed it: & withal ſent vnto ye
                   knights, Templars, & Hoſpitaliers which were there, in any wiſe not to fauour the Emperor, but as a publike enemy: & moreouer procured that his ſubiects of Pouille reuolted. To bring this to paſſe he ſent Iohn king of Ieruſalem with a great band. Which thing being vnderſtood, Frederic withdrew haſtily from Syria, leauing his Marſhall with his Armie.
               S. Lewis 43. King of France, raigned 44. yeares.
               
                  Blanch his mother, who was ordeined Regent by Teſtament, gained the hearts of the Princes & Lords, part by force, part by loue, which practiſed euil againſt her ſonne.
               The yeare 1237. the Genenois elected a Duke, after the maner of the Venetians.
               
               About the yeare 1238. a ſolemne diſputation was held at  
                  Paris by the Doctors in Theologie, againſt the pluralitie of Benefices. See Chron. Reg. Fran.
               
               
                  Peter de Vigne, or Vinea,
                  Petrus de Vinea. Chauncellour vnto the Emperour Fredericke 2. writ at this time many Letters in the Emperours name, whereof there are yet ſome extant imprinted, whereby he complained that all the world cannot fil the inſatiabilitie of the Pope. That the Turpitudes of the Cleargie are ſo great and enormious, as ſhame forbiddeth to ſpeake thereof.
               He alſo manifeſtly maintained, that the Pope neither by diuine or humane right, hath any power of the ſword. He was alſo excommunicated of the Pope.
                     William the Goldſmith. 
                  William the Goldſmith was alſo at this time, who ſheweth that he Pope is Antichriſt, Rome Babilon, and the Prelates, members of Antichriſt. Caeſarius 10. diſt. 3. of his Dialogues.
               
                  
                  The fruite of the doctrine which the Waldois at that time dispearſed abroad, was ſeene in the perſons of many which oppoſed themſelues againſt the fraudes and errours of Popes ſeates.
               
               
                  
                  Frederic went into Italie againſt Millain and other Citties which rebelled. The Pope ioyned with the Venetians againſt the Emperor: and the third time excommunicated him. There contentions were publiſhed by Letters, wherein are conteined the reproches that one offer vnto an an other. Gregorie in great impudencie calleth the Emperor the forerunner of Antichriſt, and an heretike, becauſe he ſaid the Pope had no power to excommunicate. Gregorie publiſhed in a Sermon the Croiſado againſt the Emperour, and ſhewed S. Pauls head, the rather to moue the Romanes againſt the Emperour, promiſing reward of glory and of eternal life, to all ſuch as croſſed & armed themſelues againſt Gods & the Churches enemie. Great miſchiefes happened at Rome and thereabouts. Such as Emperor caught were cauterized and marked in the forehead with an hot Iron.
               
                  The faction of Guelphes & Gibellins, ſhewed it ſelfe in this time.
               
               Cōtentions were ſharp all ouer, and diuided into two Factions, that is,Guelphes. Gibellines. into Guelphes and Gibellins. Some ſay that this Emperour when he was thus tormented of the Pope, called in the Almane tongue ſuch as fauored him, Gibellins, becauſe he leaned himſelf vpon thē, as an houſe vpō 2. ſtrong walles. And he called ſuch as were contrary & followed the Popes part, Guelphes: that is to ſay Wolues. But the pronuntiatiō hath bin corrupted. From this diuiſion proceeded infinit miſchiefes, and deſtruction of Townes and people: ſo that the miſerable calamitie of theſe Factions cannot be expreſſed. There was no towne but it was diuided. But at Millain were thoſe Factions, the Vicounts held on one ſide, & the Turrians the other, which were two great and noble Families in the Towne: about the diſſention whereof, all the Towne was turned into ſedition.
               
                  Gregorie willing to aſſemble a Councel at Rome to depoſe the Emperor (the king of France conſenting thervnto at the Popes requeſt). The Emperour cauſed watch to bee laide both by land and ſea. Fortie Gallies which the Cardinalls, Biſhops and Abbots had made, were taken by them of Piſe.
               
               
                  
                  Gregorie vnderſtanding thoſe newes, excommunicated them. Finally, the yeare of Chriſt, 1241. Gregorie afflicted with ſo many miſchiefs fell ſicke, and dyed with ſorrow and griefe.
               
                  Accurſius Florentine, an expounder of the Pandects, was in  this time.
               
                  Margarite daughter of S. Lewis Duches of Brabant,
                  Celeſtine 4.
                   founded the Monaſterie of S. Marcel nigh Paris, for religious women, in which place the ſaid Margarite liued the reſidue of her dayes after her Fathers deceaſe.
               
                  Celeſtine Pope, 4. of that name, borne at Millaine, ruled at Rome 18. dayes onely: before called Ieffrey, Biſhop of Saint Sabin, a very auncient man. He often vſed this ſentence. It is harder to be moderate in proſperitie then in aduerſitie. Suppl. Chron.
               
               After his death the ſeate was vacant about two yeares, for the horrible diſſentions that then were amongſt the Cleargie.
               
                  Bolloigne taken by Frederic, the Vniuerſitie and ſtudie was remoued from thence to Padua. Naucler.
               
               S. Lewis founded in the Biſhoppricke of Benuais, the Abbey of Loy anmont, where are Monkes of the order of Siſteaux: the Couent of the order of Siſters Minors, nigh Paris, otherwiſe called the humilitie of our Lady. The Hoſtel Dieu of Paris, of Pontoiſe, of Compienne, of Vernon: the Abbey of Beaulieu: the Abbey of S. Mathew at Roan. He founded alſo in the towne of Paris the Quinze Vingts, the Church of S. Croſſe, the Chartreux, the Fillis Dieu, the houſe of Saint Augustine, and the white Mantels.
               
                  Innocent Pope, 4. of that name, before called Senebaldus,
                  Innocent. 4.
                   borne at Senes, ruled Rome 11. yeares, 6. moneths, and ſixe  dayes. He Canonized many Saints, and loued much the foure orders of begging Friars, (as it were ſupporters of his ſeate) and gaue them many priuiledges.
               He added vnto the Feaſts ordeined.Multiplication of Feaſts. See the Decret. De conſec. diſt. 3. cap. pronuntiandum.
               
               He came for refuge into Fraunce, fearing the Emperour, and held a Councell at Lyons, whereat the degree and eſtate of Cardinals was exalted againſt heretickes, and commaunded by

Edict,Frederic. 1. that from thenceforth they ſhould goe on horsback, and a redde attire on their head, and a ſcarlet gowne, for a ſigne and witneſſe that they ought to be alwaies ready to ſuffer & to preſent themſelues vnto all perils and dangers, for the defence of Chriſtian Religion, euen to ſhead their bloud. C. Maſſeus.
               
               
                  O craft and childiſh mockerie.
               
               He cited the Emperor perſonally to appeare. And becauſe he appeared not, he excommunicated him, and depriued him of his Empire, although he ſent thither his Embaſſadors.
               
                  Immunities of Monkes.
               
               He gaue great Immunities and priuiledges to Monkes, not onely to Mendicants, but to all others, and made likewiſe the rule of the ſiſters of S. Claire.
               
               After this Councell, he ſent to the Electors, to proceed to a new election. Frederic on his ſide writ Letters to the King of France, by which he ſhewed the wrong that the Pope did him. See Naucler.
               
               The Electors at the Popes commandement elected Henry Lantgraue of Turinge, who hauing laid ſiege before 
                     Ʋlme, was ſtrooken with an Arrowe, and ſoone after died of a Flux of the belley. Naucler.
               
               
                  O deiection of Chriſtian Princes, that will ſuffer themſelues to be ſo fondly carried away by a fooliſh feare of excommunication.
               
               
                  The fruites of the faction of Guelphes & Gibellins.
                  This Pope hauing not onely abſolued from the oath of fidelitie the Emperors ſubiects, but alſo excommunicated all Lords and Princes which fauoured and obeyed him: ſo mooued and angred the Emperour, that he depriued 40. Biſhops of their dignities, ſacked the houſes which appertained vnto the Popes parents, and cauſed to be put to death vpon a Gibbet many notable perſons which had conſented to the Popes conſpiration.
               
                  Note how many troubles and miſchiefes comes in the world by Popes.
               
               After the death of Henry, Guilliam Count of Holland was choſen, but ſoone after was ſlaine of the Friſons.
               In the ſaid Councell of Lyon, was the Croiſado publiſhed;

whereof S. Lewis was made chiefe.Frederic. 2. But yet the holy Land was not recouered: For things went alwaies from euill to worſe. S. Lewis in that voyage beyond the Sea was priſoner.
               
                  Frederic gaue to Manfroy his baſtard ſonne, the Kingdome  of Sicilie: but the Pope Vrbaine tooke it from him by reaſon he was contrary vnto him, and gaue it to the brother of S. Lewis, Charles Count of Aniou.
               
               In this time raigned Odo Chauncelor of Paris, Hugo Cardinalis Iacopin, Ʋincent the Hiſtoriographer, Alexander de Hales an Engliſh man, Alexander de Villa dei, a Frier, who made the doctrine.
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1250. Frederic founded a Towne in  
                  Italie, and called it 
                     Ʋictoria. It was after taken by the Popes ſouldiers and by his Legate, and raced vnto the foundations. Then Frederic returned into Pouille,
                  The death of Frederic the ſecond. where ſoone after he died of ſickneſſe, of the age of 57. yeares. Some ſay he was traiterouſly ſlaine by his ſonne Manfroy.
               
               
                  Conrade King of Germanie, was crowned in his father Frederic his time: vnderſtanding then of his death, he went into Italie, and from thence into Pouille, where hee became ſicke. His baſtard brother Manfroy to raigne peaceably, gaue the Phiſitian a ſumme of ſiluer to poyſon his medicines, whereof he died but firſt he made his Teſtament, and inſtituted Corradin his ſonne, heire of his kingdomes and countries, and was honourably buried.
               The Pope aſſembled ſouldiers to goe againſt Manfroy, and thinking ſhortly to obtaine his kingdome, died at Naples ſooner then he thought, and was buried in the Church of Saint Laurence. Naucler.
               
               S. Lewis returned from beyond the Sea.
               
               The Colledge of Sarbone was now inſtituted and founded at Paris, by Robert brother of S. Lewis.
                  
                     Sarbone inſtituted.
               
               
                  Alexander Pope, 4. of that name, of Campaigne,
                  Alexand. 4.
                   ruled at Rome 7. yeares.
               
               The Pope canonized S. Claire.
               
               The Hermittes of the order of Saint Auguſtine,
                  Augustine Hermits.
                   were by this Pope drawne from their Hermitages in woods, vnto

good Townes,The Empire vacant commaunding them to preach and heare Confeſſions, and gaue vnto the ſaid order, priuiledges, exemptions, and indulgences.
               He excommunicated Manfroy the baſtard, and after made warre vpon him; but the Pope was ouercome, and his Legate impriſoned at Naples.
               
               The Archbiſhop of Rauenna was created Legate Apoſtolike: hee preached the Croiſado againſt Ecclinus, promiſing eternall life to ſuch as would goe to warre againſt the Popes enemies.
               
                  So did Gregorie the 9. againſt Frederic the 2.
                  
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1256. William Count of Holland, fell into a poole, and his horſe not being able to get vp, was ſlaine by the Friſons.
               After the death of Henry Lantgraue of Heſſe, and of William Count of Holland, the Electors diſagreed. Some elected Alphonſus King of Caſtile. Others, Richard Count of Cornwall, the King of England his brother, and that by the Popes Inſtigation. Naucler.
               
               There was a ſchiſme in the Empire 23. yeares, after Naucler. or 28. after others: and all by the occaſion of Popes; and this ſchiſme endured from the yeare, 1245. vntill the yeare 1273. which was the firſt yeare of the Empire of Rodolphe.
               
            
            
               The firſt League of the Switzes.
               The alliance of Leagues and Cantons in the Countrey of Switze, beganne now. They droue out of their Country many Noble men which were tirants, and committed vniuſt actions vpon them. So did they defend the poore, the Orphanes and widowes, whereby they became renowmed through all the world, ſaith Faſci. temp.
               
               
                  Ordinances of King Lewis.
                  In this time, S. Lewis king of France as ſoone as he was returned, made many goodly Lawes and ordinances to hold his people in iuſtice: Bayliffes, Prouoſts, and Sargeants, in theyr duties, that they might not be raueners or eaters of the people, vnder the paine to be put from their offices.
               He droue from his Court Morriſdauncers and Ieaſters, forbidding Officers to take gaine, or to take Benefices for theyr

children. Hee ordained that the blaſphemers ſhould haue the hotte Iron ſet in their browes. He went into Affrike, tooke Carthage, and beſieged Tunes. The plague fell in his Campe, where he died of a Fluxe of the belley, hauing raigned 44. yeares. His body was carried to bee buried at S. Denis. See Emil. Lib. 7.
               
                  An oppoſition againſt the Sects of Mendicants or begging Friars.
               
               
                  Guilliam de S. Amour, Doctor of Paris, Chanon of Benuais, flouriſhed in this time. In his Sermons (as himſelfe witneſſeth) he eſpecially enuied againſt the hipocriſie of Prelates: ſaying that that vice was of all moſt dangerous, wherewith all the Church was infected. He oppoſed himſelfe againſt Monkes, and aboue all againſt Mendicants, accuſing them that they troubled Churches, and brought out the witneſſes of the ſcriptures, which make mention of Antichriſt and his ſupporters. And applying them to the time preſent, proued by 39. ſignes, that begging Friars were falſe Prophets. He expounded that place of the Goſpell: If thou wilt be perfect, goe and ſell all that thou poſſeſſeſt, &c. Vpon which place the Mendicants founded their order: And he gaue to know in full diſputation, that the place was not meant of actuall pollicie (as Sophiſters ſpeake) but of habituall pouertie: that is to ſay, that Ieſus Chriſt demaundeth of vs, not that we ſhould forſake and caſt off that which we haue, but that we be readie (when the confeſſion of the name of God, and the glory of Ieſus Chriſt requireth it) to abandon and forſake, not onely that which we poſſeſſe, but euen our owne ſoules: and not onely (as is ſaid in an other place) to leaue their father and mother, but alſo to hate them,
                     Luk. 14.16. yea our owne liues. Briefly, Ieſus Chriſt would that we ſhould be readie to forſake all, when the confeſſion of his truth requireth it.
               There are learned people of our age, which ſay they haue ſeene foure bookes which he writ, Intituled, a Collection of the Catholike and Canonicke ſcripture. He writ alſo a booke Intituled the fiftie markes and ſignes of falſe Prophes. Hee writ againſt Bonauenture, who then was the chiefe Buckler of the begging Friars.
               
                  
                  Matheus Paris an Engliſh Hiſtoriographer, writes that in this ſame time there was in the ſchoole of Paris great diſputations againſt Monkes, which by multitude would needs oppreſſe and oppugne all the ſchoole, hauing forged a new booke full of errors and blaſphemies, which they then reiected and intituled (Euangelium eternum) that is, the euerlaſting Goſpell; which they would needs bring into light. But to appeaſe this tumult, there were ſixe delegates of all the ſchoole, which were of the greateſt eſtimation in all the Vniuerſitie, amongſt which was Guilliam de S. Amour, to ſend them to Rome vnto the Pope, and ſhewe the inſolencies and blaſphemies of thoſe Monkes. The Monkes alſo ſent thither on their part: and after great contention, their errors were condemned touching their eternall Goſpell. But the Pope with certaine Cardinals, Monkes, repreſſed nothing the tirannie of the begging Friars, thinking it was needfull that ſuch his black gard ſhould become mightie ouer all. Theſe be the words of Matheus Paris, who was in this time.
               Wee alſo finde a booke written in this time, intriuled (de periculis mundi) of the daungers of the world, which the Papiſts attributed vnto Guilliam de S. Amour, making him alone of that opinion: but it ſeemeth to haue bin written by many, and conteineth complaines againſt thoſe new riſing Monkes, with an aduertiſement vnto the Church, that by them great miſchiefes would follow.
               This S. Amour was condemned an heretike, wherevpon great ſtirres fell out amongſt the ſchooles at Paris: but to obey the Popes commaundement, Guilliam S. Amour was baniſhed from France.
               
               We heare that ſome of his bookes are yet at this day in the librarie at Sorbone: and many other Doctors haue ſince written the like, as in our diſcourſe ſhalbe ſaid.
               
                  Truth is alwaies baniſhed, yet ſtill getteth the vpper hand of all.
               
               
                  Alexander being come to Viterbe, to make peace betwixt the 
                     Ʋenetians and Geneuois, died there, and the ſeate was vacant foure moneths.
               
                  
                  Albert the great, and other ſtudious people were at this time at Paris.
               
            
            
               An Aduertiſement.
               From Silueſter the 2. that diuelliſh Magician, vntil this time 1260. Popes haue raigned as Incarnate diuels in all trumperies, deceites, oppreſſions of the good, and manifeſt tirannies. Their Cardinalls, Legates and Biſhops, haue come out from them as Sathans to trouble the world. The greateſt Monarkes haue bene tormented by their infernall furies. Examples for all, are the two Emperours, Henry the fourth and fift, the two Fredericks, firſt and ſecond, and other Princes of the earth. From henceforward, from Innocent the fourth, and Alexander the fourth, the Popes by a new forged Armie,The Popes new ſouldiers. eſtabliſhed and priuiledged by them, they waſted and deſtroyed all: that is to ſay, by foure Sects of Mendicant Monkes, (which like true Locuſts) deuoured and conſumed by their Sophiſtike doctrine, whatſoeuer was greene of the word of God. From which (like theeues which enter into the ſheepfolde by breaches and mines) nothing can bee looked for henceforth, but thefts, robberies, perſecutions, and murthers of the true faithfull, which God gaue and raiſed vp to maintaine the eternall veritie.
               
                  
                     Ʋrbain Pope, 4. of that name,Vrbain. 4.
                   French borne at Troy in Campagne, a Monke, of the order of Cyſteaux, Patriarke of Ieruſalem,
                   ruled at Rome three yeares, one moneth, and foure dayes.
               The Greekes recouered Constantinople, which the French had held 55. yeares. Chron. of the Kings of France, and the Sea of Hist.
               
               
                  Vrbain inſtituted the Feaſt of the Sacrament,
                     The Feaſt of Tranſubſtantiation. and the Octaues, with Indulgences (whereof he was free) to ſuch as obſerued the ſaid Feaſt. Martin fift, Pope, doubled them, and added yet others to ſuch as faſted the eue, and as went to the Preceſſion and Communion that day.
               S. Thomas d' Aquin Iacopin, made the office of the ſaid feaſt, with the Proſe and the Hymne, and ſent it to the Pope; who for a recompence of ſuch an inuention, ſent him a Doue of ſiluer, &c. Naucler.
               
               
                  The yeare of Chriſt, 1263. Vrbaine ſent to S. Lewis King of France, that he would ſend him his brother Charles Count Angiou, and Count de Prouence, with a good Armie, then hee would crowne him King of Sicilie, and giue him Pouille & Calabria. Hee ſaid that the ſaid Kingdome was held of the Romane Church, and that the king of Sicilie was the Popes man. 
                     Ʋrbain cauſed the Croiſado to be preached in France againſt Manfroy, who occupied the ſaid Sicilia. The ſaid Charles came and marched in battaile againſt Manfroy, and after againſt Conradin, and ouercame them both, and ſo obtained the Lands: but the end was miſerable. For the Sicilians after, in the yeare 1282. rebelled againſt him, maintaining the quarell of the king of Arragon, whom they would needs haue for their king. And they marked the doores and gates of whatſoeuer houſes the French men lay in, in the Countrey, then at an euening ſlew them all indifferently, and opened which they knew to be great with childe with the French men, and caſt away their fruite, that there might remaine none of that generatiō in that Countrey.The Euenſong of Sicilie. This occaſion was afterward ordinarily called, The Euenſong of Sicilie.
               In this time, Bonauenture Generall of the Friers, wrote two bookes againſt M. Guilliam de S. Amour.
               
               The one of the pouertie of Chriſt, and the other an Apologie of the poore. The Biſhoppricke of Ratisbone was offered vnto him: but he refuſed it, louing better to follow his ſtudies: and died of the age of 80. yeares. Chron. Abb.
               
               
                  Chaplet inuented.Vnder this Pope, the Idolatrie of Chaplets was inuented at Amiens in Picardie, called Peter the Hermit. See Peter Viret of the ſpring of Chapelets.
               
               The Souldane made a great Armie in Siria.
               
               A Comet ſeene 3. monethes together.
               This Pope died at Peruſe, and for troubles the ſeate was vacant 10. monethes.
               
                  Clement. 4.
                  
                  Clement Pope, fourth of that name, borne at Narbone, ruled  at Rome 3. yeares, 9. monethes, and 21. dayes: before hee was called Hugo Falcodius, hee had bene an aduocate, and was after the king of France his Councellor. After the death of

his wife, he was Biſhop of Puy, and after, Archbiſhop of Narbone; laſtly. Cardinall and Biſhop of Sabine. Finally,A Legate. by the Pope 
                     Ʋrbane hee was ſent into England for the reformation of peace, and being in that Legation, was choſen Pope at Peruſe, after the death of 
                     Ʋrbain.
               
               He cauſed to come info Italie, Charles brother of the king of France, and made him Senator of Rome, and ſent two Cardinalls into the Church of Laterane, and there crowned him King of Ieruſalem and Sicilie: vpon condition notwithſtanding, to ſweare to pay vnto the Romane Church yearely 40000, peeces of gold, and that he ſhould not receiue the Empire at the hands of the Almaines, no not though they would thruſt it vpon him.
               The Sarraſins came into Spaine and committed a great  maſſacre there.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1267. Conradin,
                  This was the laſt Duke of Sanabe.
                   the true and Legitimate King of Sicilie, ſonne of Conrade who was ſonne of Frederic the ſecond, vanquiſed in warre by Charles Count d'Angiou, and was finally taken and diſcloſed by a Marriner, vnto whom he gaue his Ring in pawne for his paſſage to Piſe, but hee was brought vnto the Count d' Angiou and put in priſon: afterward by the Popes Councell he was beheaded, the yeare 1268. Naples with Frederic Duke of Auſtriche and many others.
               There is great diuerſitie in Hiſtories touching the taking of the ſaid Conradin. See the Chro. of the Emperors in the 2. Tome. Iohn Naucler. in the Generation 34. in the 2. volu.
               
               See heerevpon Martin Luther, in the booke againſt the Romane Popedome, inuented by the diuell.
               This Pope Clement demaunded a certaine Tenth in Almaine, Iohn ſurnamed Teutonicus, Gloſſator of the Decree,Almaine. and Prouoſt of S. Stephen d'Alberſtat, oppoſed himſelfe againſt it, and appealed to the next Councell, for which appellation, the ſaid Prouoſt was excommunicated by the Pope, and depriued of his office. The Sea of Hiſt.
               
               
                  Clement hauing a Nephew which held 3. Benefices Eccleſiaſticall, conſtrained him to forſake two of them. Naucler.
               
               
                  The ſaid Clement died at Viterbe: and the ſeate was vacant two yeares.
               
                  Gregorie. 10.
                  
                  Gregorie Pope, tenth of that name, borne at Plaiſance in Lombardie, ruled at Rome foure yeares. Before hee was called Thiband, Archdeacon of Lande, and was then in the parts beyond the Sea in the Citie of Acre, when hee was choſen at 
                     Ʋiterbe. The Cardinalls being in the Conclaue for the election, Iohn Biſhop of Port mocking him, ſaid. Come let vs vncouer this houſe; for the holy Ghoſt cannot diſcend & paſſe through ſo many couerings.
               After his election he ſought to pacifie the Venetians and the Geneuois.
               
                  
                  Phillip 3. of that name, ſurnamed le Hardie, ſonne of S. Lewis 44. King of France, raigned 15. yeares.
               
                   The yeare of Chriſt 1272. Gregorie made aſſemble a Councell at Lyons, of all the Barons and Prelates of France, wherein he ruled: and king Phillip met him & gaue him a guard of ſouldiers, and three ſtrong places about Lions for the ſuretie of his perſon. Iohn le Maire.
               
               In the ſaid Councell was ordained, that the Pope ſhould be choſen of the Cardinalls incontinent after the others death: and that they ſhould put the Cardinalls in ſure priſon, wherein they ſhould giue them neither to eate nor drinke vntill they were agreed. This ordinance was then made becauſe the ſeate had bene vacant almoſt three yeares before they could agree vpon the election.
               In the ſaid Councell was alſo accorded the tenth part of the Church goods to be giuen for ſixe yeares to maintaine the warre for the conqueſt of the Land beyond the ſea.
               
                  Certaine Monkeries defaced.At the ſaid Councell ſome ſorts of Monkeries which liued of Almes were defaced, namely the bretheren des Sacs, the bretheren des pres, the bretheren des blancs manteaux, and many others.
               
                  Michael Paleologus then the Emperour of Conſtantinople, came thither for the vnion of the Greeke and Latine Church, which was ratified by the ſaid Emperour. And this was the third time that the Greeke Church was revnited with the Latin:

but it was alwaie broken, as yet this third vnion was.
               During the time of the ſaid Councell, certaine Princes of Tartaria, which had followed the ſaid Emperour Paleologus, receiued baptiſme.
               Moreouer there was great diſputation about the voyage vnto the holy Land (which was the old practiſe of Popes) but nothing was concluded therein.
               S. Thomas d' Aquin going to the ſaid Councell of Lions, whervnto he was called, died in the way, of the age of 50. yeares. Bonauenture was created Cardinall by the Pope, but ſoone after he died.
               
                  Gregorie 10. returning from France to Rome, and paſſing by Florence, was required to take away the Interdict (hee had forbidden them all right of warring) but he did nothing therin: And from thence came to Aretinum, where he died.
               After the Empire had bene long vacant, and that many Ciuill warres had therevpon followed.
               
                  Rodolphe Count of Habspurge in Sueſia,
                  Rodolphe Emperor.
                   was choſen king of the Romanes by the Electors, a man of mean age, and who had valiantly carried himſelf in the charge he had vnder Frederic 2. He had alſo bene great Maiſter in the Court of Ottocarus king of Bohemia, who ſought to hinder the election, becauſe he alſo aſpired vnto the Empire.
               Whileſt they were chuſing Rodolphe, he held the ſeate before Baſte. For there were then two factions in the towne. Such as fauoured the Biſhop bore a Perroquet. Such as fauoured the Count Rodolphe, carried the Starre. Rodolphe ſought to place in the Towne them of the faction of the Starre, which were chaſed out. Munſter. After he was crowned at Aix, he held certaine aſſemblies or Imperiall Iourneyes, where the king of Bohemia was declared a Rebell, who (during the vacancie of the Empire) vſurped Auſtrich, Siria, Carinthia, and Carniota. Rodolphe then with the power of the Princes occupied Auſtrich, and droue out Ottocaire King of Bohemia, and after conſtrained him to yeeld himſelfe a vaſſall, and to do homage. Ottocairus according therevnto, required that one thing might bee graunted him, namely that he might not do his homage publikely. For hee

was very proud,Rodolphe. and ſhamed to bow the knees before him that before had ſerued him as his great Maiſter. The Emperour agreed that it ſhould be vnder a Pauillion.Pride mocked. But this Pauillion was made with ſuch induſtrie, that in drawing it would diuide in foure parts. Beeing then vpon his knees and receiuing the ſtanderd at the Emperours hand according to the cuſtome, one broke the coard of the Pauillion, ſo that it opened on all parts, in ſuch ſort that Ottocairus was ſeene of all dooing homage on his knees. This being come vnto the knowledge of Kunegunde his wife (which he had eſpowſed during the life of his other wife Margaret) as ſoone as her husband returned, mocked him that he had bowed his necke being adorned ſo pompeouſly, before him that once had bene his ſeruant, and ſo incited him to reuenge himſelfe of that deſpight. The king being thus pricked forward, made warre vpon the Emperour againſt the oath he had taken, & againſt the aduiſe of the Princes of his Countrey. The Emperor met him, put him to flight, and finally a Gentleman of Styria wounded him, and being diſpoiled of all that hee had, was carried dead to the Towne of Auſtriche, Anno 1279. and 14. thouſand of his people were ſlaine beſides priſoners. After this, Rodolphe entred into the Countrey of Bohemia and waſted it.
               
                  Pride intermedled with ſhame and diſloyaltie, falleth into confuſion and ruine.
               
               The Biſhop of Olmunce made the peace, and brought things to this paſſe that Wencelaus ſon of Ottocaire ſhould take to wife Gertrude the Emperors daughter: & on the other ſide, Rodolphe the Emperour his ſonne, ſhould eſpowſe Agnes the daughter of Ottocaire, Auſtrich alſo came vnto the Emperours ſonne Albert.
               
            
            
               The Tartarians.
               Till this time the Tartarians were vnknowne in Europe. Now they ſhewed themſelues, and finally entred into Hungarie with fiue hundreth thouſand men, from thence into Polonia Schleſia, Morauia. See Monſtre. lib. 4.
               
                  Caliphe of Babilon.Some recite that in this time, Haalon King of the Tartarians ouercame the Countries of Perſia, and tooke Babilon, then called Baldaca, with the great Caliphe: who in the Mahumetist
                  
lawe is to bee compared vnto the Pope of Rome, in authoritie and treaſure.
               This Haalon hauing the Caalipho priſoner (as is ſaid) inuented and ordained in a great mockerie his death in this ſort.
               It is conuenient (ſaith hee) that that man (ſpeake of the Caliphe) which loued ſo much gaine,Inſatiable cupiditie puniſhed. ſhould be nouriſhed with precious viands, go then and place him in the middeſt of heaps of gold and precious ſtones, and let him vſe ſuch meates. As then he had certaine time bene kept in great affluence of gold and ſiluer, and in the middeſt of theſe riches, he died with hunger. See Paralip. Ʋrsp.
               
               
                  Innocent Pope, fift of that name, borne at Burgongne,
                  Innocent. 5.
                   after Supp. Chron. and Cor. Abb. Or in Lombardie, after Faſci Temp.
                  
before called Peter de Tarentaiſe, Prior Prouinciall of the Iacobins in France, Maiſter and Doctor in Theologie, Archbiſhop of Lyons, Cardinall d' Ostia, and great Penitenciary of the Pope.
               
                  See how theſe Graſhoppers Mendicants, enter alreadie into power to appoint ouer them the King Abadon, as is ſpoken, Apocalips. 19.
                  
               
               Whileſt this man was Biſhop of Oſtia and Cardinall (whoſe office it is to conſecrate the Pope) Bonauenture Friar was alſo Cardinall and Biſhop of Albe. This Peter or Innocent,
                  Diſorders that were in Italie. beeing choſen Pope, came ſoone after to Rome. Where hauing bene crowned in the Church of S. Peter, that hee might reſt at his pleaſure, he ſent Embaſſadors, men of great authoritie which commaund them of Tuſcane, (which had conſpired to deſtroy the Piſans) and the Geneuois and 
                     Ʋenetians, beeing at deadly foode to lay downe their Armes vpon paine of excommunication. The Embaſſadors of Charles King of Sicilie were alſo there preſent; by meanes of whoſe authoritie, hee hoped things ſhould more eaſily haue ſuch iſſue as they deſired▪ The Tuſcanes ſtraight did what was commaunded them. And aboue all, the Florentines: which alſo for that cauſe he declared and abſolued of the Interdict which Gregorie his predeceſſor had publiſhed againſt them. But the Geneuois & 
                     Ʋenetian (whoſe hearts had of long time beene inueterated) conſumed

one an other by loſſes and mutuall victories: which notwithſtanding Innocent would haue made conſent vnto that he pretended, if he had longer liued, he tooke the matter ſo much to heart. But he dyed ſixe moneths and two daies after he was choſen Pope, the ſame yeare of his predeceſſour Gregorie, and was buried in the Church of Laterane. This ſaith Carſulanus, although he had determined to do many things, yet did nothing worthie of memorie, becauſe he was preuented by death. This Pope (as Platina ſaith) diſpleaſed much the ſecular Prieſts:Law for the buriall of Clement the fourth. becauſe that being at Viterbe after he had heard the proceſſe that was betwixt them and the Iacobins touching the ſepulcure of Clement the fourth, hee ordeined by ſentence that his bodie ſhould be buried by the ſaid Iacobins, Rodolphe.
               
               
                  Adrian Pope, fift of that name, borne at Genes, of the houſe of Toliſques, before called Othobonus, was created Pope at Rome, in the Pallace of Lateran, after the death of Innocent his vncle, hauing bene ordeined by him Cardinall, Deacon of Saint Adrian, and ſent into England with large power to leuie a great ſumme of money. But as hee ſought to appeaſe certaine diſcordes betwixt the King and his Barons, that hee might diſpatche his buſineſſe the more eaſilie, hee was clapt vp in priſon by the Londiners, but finally deliuered againe.
               The yeare of our Lorde, 1266. hee helde a Sinode in Northumberland, and an other at London, whether reſorted a great number of Biſhoppes and Prieſts. There after they had brought to ſuch eſtate as he thought good the things appertaining to the Popedome, hee publiſhed certaine lawes, which in time to come England ſhould vſe in ſuch things as concerned Popery. He declared wicked all ſuch Biſhops as had raſhly followed the Princes part againſt King Henry the third: which yet were abſolued by him, partly by gifts & preſents, and partly becauſe he was conſtrained vnto a quicke tranſportation to the Pope of Rome.
               
               Being then created Pope of Rome, he tooke incontinently his way towardes 
                     Ʋiterbe, and ſought to bring into Italie the Emperor Rodolphe, to diminiſh the power of Charles King

of Sicilie, (this was hee which a little before they had lifted vp into that roome againſt all iuſtice and equitie) who at that time did his pleaſure and as he would at Rome. But Rodolphe being wrapped in warre againſt the Bohemians, could not ſatisfie Adrians requeſt. As for Charles meaning to flie the enuie againſt him, tranſported into Achaia all his forces which he had prepapared to make warre: to the end by that meane to make a way to be Emperour of Conſtantinople.
               
               
                  Adrian had a will (ſaith Platina) to cauſe that all Seignories belonging vnto the Church ſhould come into great aſſurance againſt ſuch as oppreſſed them: and to reduce into an other forme the conſtitution of his predeceſſour Gregorie,
                  The ordinance touching the ſhutting vp of Cardinalls. touching the ſhutting vp of Cardinalls at the Popes election: But death hindered his enterpriſes, and oppoſed it ſelfe againſt the greatnes of his courage. What could he do (ſaith Wicelius Apoſtate of the truth) that was a Pope but of fortie dayes? For be deceaſed at Viterbe, the yeare 1276. before he could be conſecrated, and was enterred in the Couent of Friars the fourth day of his Popedome, and the ſeat was vacant about 28. dayes.
               Many debates and contentions happened amongſt the Biſhops and Paſtors againſt the Mendicant Monkes which troubled Churches; becauſe whether Biſhops & Prieſts would or no, they would aſcend into Pulpits to preach. Amongſt ſuch as complained of them beſides Guilliam d'Amour (of whom we ſpake before) there was Bernard the Gloſſator of the Decretalls, Godfrey des Fountaines, Henry de Gaud, and many others.
               
                  Laurent an Engliſh man, Doctour of Paris, in this time maintained the opinion of Guilliam de Saint Amour, and writ againſt the Monkes a Booke conteining an admonition againſt falſe Prophets, and an other by which he defendeth the ſaid de Saint Amour. The Booke that the bogging Friars ſet out Of the eternall and ſpirituall Gospell, to e
                     ••••
                  ct the true Goſpell of our Lord, was publikely burnt: and to couer their filthineſſe and impudencie, they ſaide that a certaine Monke (which long time before was dead) had made it.
               
                  
                  Iohn. 22.
                  
                  Iohn, 22. of that name of Portugal, borne in the Towne of 
                  Lisbone, making profeſſion of Phiſicke, called before Peter of Portugall,
                  
                     He was called Petrus Hiſpanus. of a Cardinall and Biſhop of Tuſoule, was created Pope.
               This Pope although he was accounted a very learned man, yet becauſe he had not ſuch knowledge of things that hee had to gouerne, as was requiſite: and alſo becauſe he was of inconſtant and mutable maners, as Platina ſaith, hee brought much more domage vnto the Popedome, then honour or profit. For he did many things, wherein he ſhewed himſelfe aſtoniſhed and light. There was one onely point wherein he was worthy praiſe; that is, that willingly hee helped many young people which had deſire to profit in good Letters, in giuing them ſiluer and Eccleſiaſtical Benifices, and aboue all, ſuch as were preſſed with pouertie.
               
                  The Venetians moleſt thē of the Marqueſdome of Ancone.
                  The Venetians then did greatly moleſt them of the Marqueſdome of Ancone, becauſe they made traffique of Marchandiſe into Dalmatia, without paying any portage to the Venetian: the Pope defended them not as he ought, they beeing the Churches ſubiects: for hee was readie inough in words, but when it came to lay hand to worke, he had neither courage nor hardineſſe.
               They of Ancone ſeeing themſelues deſtitute of the Popes ſuccours, taking courage, made a ſallie vpon the Venetians which had beſieged their Towne, and droue them away after hauing greatly indomaged them.
               In all things this Pope accuſtomed not to vſe any other Councell but of Iohn de Gauiette, by the will and direction of whom all things were gouerned: for that by his meanes hee was choſen Pope. He ſent Embaſſadors as well towards Michael Paleologne, as to Weſterne Kings, exhorting them in his name that they would make Peace one with another, and take Armes againſt the Sarraſins and other enemies of Chriſtian religion: which thing if Paleologne would not do, and if he kept not the vnion that he had accorded vnto, Iohn would giue his Empire vnto Charles king of Sicilie.
               
               This Pope promiſed himſelfe long life, yea he foretold it

by the Starres, and affirmed before euerie one that he ſhould liue long. But as he affirmed ſuch a folly, in the preſence of his people, a new Vault (Valerius calls it a playing Hall: Stella, a rich and precious Chamber) which he had builded in his Pallace at Viterbe, fell ſuddenly the fourth day following, the yeare 1277. And the ſeuenth day after the ſaid ruine, being found miſerably ſlaine betwixt the ſtone and the wood, was enterred in the great Church, the 8. moneth of his Popedome.
               
                  He knew by experience how great was the vanitie of his Diuination.
               
               The Sea was vacant by the ſpace of ſixe monethes by the meanes of debate amongſt the Cardinalls. Hee writ certaine Problems, following therein Ariſtotle, the Canons and rules of Phiſicke. The treaſure of the poore, and certaine Epiſtles.
            
            
               The doctrine of the Waldois.
               After that Waldo and his company were driuen from Lyons, one company drew towards Lombardie, where they multiplied greatly: In ſo much that their doctrine began to be diſpearced through Italie, and came euen to Sicilie: As the Patents of Frederic the ſecond giuen againſt them when he raigned, witneſſeth.
               By the recitall of ſuch as writ againſt them, and likewiſe by one Reinerius, who liued and and writ a litle after this time, it may be gathered that this was their doctrine. That we muſt beleeue the ſcriptures onely in that which concerneth ſaluation: and that no other thing ought to bee receiued but that which God commaundeth vs. That there is but one onely Mediator, and therefore we muſt not inuocate Saints. That there is no purgatorie; but that all men iuſtified by Chriſt, goe to eternall life; and ſuch as do not beleeue, goe to eternall death. And that there is neither third nor fourth place.
               They receiue and allowe two Sacraments. Baptiſme, and Communion.
               They ſaid that all Maſſes, and chiefly ſuch as were inuented for the dead, were abhominable and damned, and therefore ought to be aboliſhed.
               All humane traditions ought to be reiected without holding.

them for neceſſarie to ſaluation. That ſinging, and recitall of the officiall, and faſtings tyed to certaine dayes, ſuperfluous feaſts, the difference of meates, as well of degrees and orders of Prieſts, Monkes, and Nuns; as bleſſings and conſecrations of creatures, vowes, pilgrimages, and all the confuſion and great heap of ceremonies before inuēted ought to be abolſhed.
               They denied the Popes ſupremacie, & aboue all the power he had vſurped vpon pollicies. And they admitted no degrees but Biſhops, Prieſts, and Deacons.
               That the Romane ſeate is very Babilon, and that the Pope is the fountaine of all euils at this day.
               That the marriage of Prieſts is good and neceſſarie in the Church.
               That ſuch as heare the word of God and haue a right knowledge thereof, are the true Church: to which Ieſus Chriſt hath giuen the keyes to cauſe Sheepe to enter, and driue away Wolues.
               See briefly the doctrine of the Waldois, which the enemies haue impugned, and for which (by their owne witneſſe) they were perſecuted in this time.
               
                  Mathias Illiricus in the Catalogue which he gathered of the witneſſes of the truth, ſaith that he hath by him the conſultations of certaine Aduocates of Auignon. Alſo of three Archbiſhops, of Narbone, of Arles, and of Aix, and likewiſe of the Biſhop of Alban to roote out the Waldois, written paſt 300. yeares: by which it appeareth that then and before there were a great number of the faithfull heere and there diſpearced throughout all France. It may alſo be collected by the conſultations of the ſaid Archbiſhops, that as the number was very great, the perſecution was very cruell. For in the end of them, there is thus found written. Who is ſo new in France that is ignorant of the condemnation of theſe Heretikes Waldois made of long time ſo iuſtly? A thing ſo famous, ſo publike as hath coſt ſo great expences, ſweats, and trauells for the Catholique, and hath bene ſealed with ſo many condemnations and deathes of thoſe wicked Infidells, can it be called into doubt?
               
                  
                  It appeareth then what a butcherie in this time was made of the faithfull, and what crueltie the ſupporters of the Romane Antechriſt exerciſe againſt the good.
               
               
                  Nicholas 3. borne at Rome, of the houſe of Vrſins,
                  Nicholas. 3.
                   called before Iohn de Gauette, (the election being deferred vntill the ſixt moneth, not wthout great debate and contentions amongſt the Cardinalls) occupied the papall ſeate.
               
                  Charles king of Sicilie, as Senator of Rome,
                  The charge of the Conclaue. had the charge of the Conclaue, who inſiſted much that ſome of the French Nation might be choſen. After then that Nicholas had taken poſſeſſion of the Popedome, meaning to diminiſh the credit and power of Charles, tooke from him the Vicariatſhip of Tuſcane, and filled all Italie with vprores and tumults of warre: and to the end he might prouide well for his buſineſſes,The kingdom of Sicilie redemanded by the Pope. he perſwaded Peter King of Arragon (theſe be old Popiſh trickes) to redemaund the Kingdome of Sicilie, ſhewing him that by right of heritage it belonged vnto him, becauſe of Conſtance his wife. Which counſell pleaſed Peter well. But what fruite wrought the counſell of this S. Peter? Peter hauing gotten into his power a puiſſant Armie for the ſea, came vnto Sardeigne, and there attended till there was ſome ſtirre in Sicilie.
                  The treaſon of the Siciliās. For the Sicilians hauing coniured againſt Charles, and the French had aſſigned a day to ſley them all, yea without hauing reſpect vnto Sexe, or condition of any perſon, ſo ſoone as the ſound of Bell ſhould bee heard at euening, as ſhall bee ſaid heereafter. But this cruell and horrible acte was not executed in the time of Nicholas, but vnder Martin the fourth of that name, his ſucceſſor.
               
                  Nicholas tranſported to himſelfe the dignitie of the Senator of Rome, which Clement the fourth had giuen vnto e foreſaid King Charles,
                  The Exarchat of Rauenna brought vnder the Pope. and ordained for a perpetuall Edict that from thence forth no King or Prince ſhould dare to demaund ſuch an eſtate, or to take ſuch a charge vpon him. By the diſloyaltie of this Pope it came to paſſe that all Flammina with the towne, of Bolongne it ſelfe, and the Exarchate of Rauenna, (which things had long time bene in the Seignorie and domination of the Emperors) were reduced vnder the puiſſance of the Romiſh Sinagogue.

And beſides, hee alone tooke vpon him the charge (as Stella ſaith) of the office of Senator: which the Church had accuſtomed to giue vnto Kings and Princes.
               
                  The Popes pleaſures.He inriched the Towne of Rome with new edifice; and amongſt others, he builded an houſe very commodious for S. Peter: and a Parke for Hares or Conneys, which hee enuironed with high walles. Wherein he himſelfe often hunted. He reedified the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul, which fell with age. Hee atchieued and ended a certaine houſe in Laterane, which had long time before bene commenced. Hee builded from the bottome to the top the Church called Sancta Sanctorum, and ſet there the Apoſtles keyes in ſiluer chaines. When this Hypocrite ſung Maſſe, the teares fell from his eyes. Hee carried ſuch fauour vnto the Friars, that hee declared certaine doubtes which were in the rule of the Sect, by a Decretall Epiſtle. He made many ordinances for the profit and vtilitie of the Cleargie, (not of Chriſtian people) and made many Cardinalls of the order of begging Friars. He droue from him certaine Notaires, commaunding vnder paine of Excommunication, that in what place ſouer, Magiſtrates ſhould bee but Annalls for a yeare. Many reprooued him for that hee had made his Nephew called Berthand,
                  The Pope inriched his Nephew. Count or Earle of Romagnole, and had ſent Latin Cardinall Iacobin his other Nephew, or rather Baſtard, Legate into Tuſcane. For Platina, Stella, & others ſay, that he loued his owne too much. In ſo much that whatſoeuer hee got from others, hee gaue it without reaſon or meaſure. For he tooke by force from certaine Romane Gentlemen, their Caſtles, and gaue them to his friends, and amongſt others, one called Surien.
               
               
                  Papal ſubtilty.After he had euery where ſet vp the Gibellins, (a ſort of mutinous and rebellious people) into their firſt eſtate, to the end they might maintaine his tirannies, he placed in Florence as in other places, Magiſtrates at his pleaſure, and many other domages he did vnto them.
               This Pope had alſo determined to haue made two Kings of the houſe of 
                     Ʋrſini, and to haue placed one in Tuſcane, and an other in Lombardie. But as he purpoſed to put all theſe

things in effect being in the Towne called Sutry,
                  The Popes death the cauſe of great good. he was taken with an Apoplexie of which he died ſuddenly and without ſpeaking, the yeare of our Lord, 1291. And after ſome, the 4. of his Popedome, although by his good complection it ſeemed he would haue liued much longer.
               Some ſay his death was foretold by one which ſawe a great Invndation or ouerflowing of the Riuer of Tiber. Som ſay alſo he engendred vpon a Concubine of his a baſtard,A monſtrous Popes baſtard whoſe haire and nailes were like a Beares. See what Iohn de Noyan ſaith in his Illuſtrations of Beda.
               
               
                  William Durand a ſubtill man, made at this time his booke Intituled Rationale diuinorum officiorum.
               
               
                  Albert the great, Biſhop of Ratisbone, died in this time.
               
                  Martin the 4. of that name,Martin. 4.
                   borne in France in the Towne of Tours, named before Simon, and Cardinal Prieſt of S. Cecile,
                   ruled 2. yeares and 8 monethes.
               Being choſen by the French Cardinalls which then were in greateſt number, would not be crowned at Viterbe, becauſe he tooke that Towne to be interdicted for a rowte they made againſt the Cardinalls. For they of 
                     Ʋiterbe following one called Richard Hanniball, Captaine of all ſuch as tooke part with the Italians, entered into the Conclaue, tooke the Cardinalls and put them in priſon, after hauing not onely diſpiſed, but alſo giuen the chaſe to all them of the houſe of Vrſins.
               
               This Pope Martin then being come into the old towne, which commonly is called Oruieto, vſed all the ſolemnities and created 8. Cardinalls that ſame day,
                     Charles S. Lewis his brother who was made Ki. of Sicilie by Clement. 4. that he might be ſtrongeſt when he came vnto combat. But hee not onely receiued very courteouſly the King Charles comming towards him, but alſo yeelded him the dignitie of Senator, whereof he was depriued by Nicholas. This euery man found not good, for that it ſeemed it ſhould ſtirre vp great ſeditions in the Towne, ſeeing the Vrſins were alreadie returned, and ſuch as were of Hanniballs faction chaſed away. For Charles was a great aduerſarie of the 
                     Ʋrſins, for the hatred he conceiued againſt Nicholas. Yet Martin ſubtillly caſting his affaires, had in great eſtimation Mathew d'Aquaſporta, of the order of his bretheren Friars, Cardinall

and Biſhop of Port, of the houſe of Vrſins.
               
               This Pope Martin publiſhed ſentence of excommunication againſt Peter King of Arragon, who ordeined an Army by Sea to come into Sicilie againſt Charles, and expoſed his Kingdome for a pray to the firſt that could get it, declaring his ſubiects abſolued of the oath of fidelitie which they had promiſed him, naming him an vſurper of Eccleſiaſticall goods, and leuied an armie againſt him, of ſuch as had taken the Croiſado.
               
               
                  All the paſtime of Popes and their ſupporters, is to ſtirre vp warre and diſſention amongst the Princes of this world.
               
               
                  Peter de Arragon excōmunicated.
                  Yet Peter making no account of all this, obtained the kingdome of Sicilie with the helpe of Paleologus Emperour of Conſtantinople: who was alſo excommunicated, as making no account of that he had promiſed at the Councell of Lions aboue.
               
                  The French ſlaine all in an houre in Sicilie.
                  Moreouer, the Sicilians not being able longer to beare the pride and whoredomes of the French: at the perſwaſion of Iohn Prochita, coniured againſt Charles, and ſlew them all at the ſound of a Bell, without hauing any regard to Sexe, and from thence came the Prouerbe, when one wiſheth the death of many, that they may ſay, The Euenſong of Sicilie, as hath beene touched a litle before.
               Beſides, this Martin amongſt other acts worthy of a Pope, graunted to the Romanes that they might chuſe two Senators of the Nobilitie, and excommunicated Paleologus Emperour of Greece. He made warre againſt them of Forley, and graunted many priuiledges vnto Begging Friars, which hee knew to be like horſes prepared vnto the battle, and all this was ſtill to munite and fortifie the more his tirannie. But as once he  was taking his ordinarie refection with his Captaines, (as Caſulanus reciteth it) the yeare of our Lord, 1285. he was taken with a ſecret malladie of which hee died, after hauing ſaid hee endured much griefe: although the Phiſitians founde not in him any ſigne of death, and was buried at Peruſe.
               
               Some Authors, which Thomas Cooper one very learned followeth in his abridgement of Chronicles, haue left in writing, that the firſt yeare of his Popedome, hee tooke as the

Prouerbe is, to bread and to potte,
                     Martin ſucceeded in the concubine of his predecoſſor. the concubine of his Predeceſſor Nicholas. But for feare ſuch an accident ſhould happen vnto him as did vnto the other, namely, that if he had a childe, it ſhould be like vnto a Beare, he commanded that all the Beares which had bene painted in the Pallace by a Pope of the houſe of Vrſins, ſhould be defaced and cleane taken away: becauſe he knew well that the figure of things vpon which women think when they conceiue their children, oftentimes is certaine imprinted in them.
               
                  It appeares well that this Pope was herein very expert, but he tooke no heed that ſuch a monſter ſhewed to the world, what ſanctetie there is in Popes ſingleneſſe.
               
               
                  Giles of Rome, Biſhop of Bourges,
                  Egidius de Roma. diſciple of S. Thomas d'Aquin, liued in this time.
               
                  Phillip le Bell 45. King of France, and of Nauarre,
                  The Pallace of Paris. raigned after his father Phillip the third, the yeare 1225. The Pallace was ſumptuouſly builded in the Ile which Sene maketh. Euguerrant de Marigni, the Kings Councellor, and Preſident des Finances, had the charge thereof. In this Pallace the Court of Parliament had his ſeate diſtributed into chambers. The king dwelt there.
               The Colledge of Nauarre was builded by the Queene Ioane, at the entry of the raigne of this king.
               
                  Honorius, 4. of that name, borne at Rome,
                  Honorius. 4.
                   of the houſe of Sabellius, which is a noble race, called before Iames, and beeing Cardinall Deacon, after he had bene choſen by the Cardinals, tooke poſſeſſion of the Popedome, and ruled 2. yeares. Naucl.
               
               He had a brother called Pandulphe,
                  Pandulphe Senator of Rome. which was then Senator of Rome, who greatly puniſhed theeues, homicides, and other ſuch like.
               This Pope dwelt in Mount Auentine, where he builded a new houſe, and incited many others to do the like.
               He excommunicated Peter King of Arragon,
                  Peter of Arragon excōmunicated.
                   who then occupied the Kingdome of Sicilie againſt Charles, and confirmed the Interdict publiſhed againſt him by his predeceſſor Martin, becauſe hee would not permit that the Popes ſeate ſhould enioy that Region.
               
                  The Florentines and they of Luke obtained by ſiluer of Rodolphe the Emperour, libertie for their Common-wealthes. The Florentines gaue 6000. skutes, and the Luquets 12000. skutes.
               
                  
                     Venice Ducats.The Venetians alſo obtained licence to forge Ducats of Gold at Venice.
               
               The Geneuois got themſelues franchis and libertie. Chro. of the Emp. Tom. 2.
               This Emperor was noted of couetouſneſſe.
               
                   A childe called Rodolphe, was martired at Berne by the Iewes, whereby they of Berne put the Iewes to death. And therefore the Emperour Rodolphe aſſembled thirtie thouſand ſouldiers and beſieged Berne, but profited nothing, as is aboue ſaid.
               The Colledge of Collets at Paris, was founded by Iohn Collet Prieſt, Cardinall of S. Cecilie, Legate in France, borne in Beauoiſin, ſaith the Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               He mooued a maruellous warre againſt Guy Feltron, who occupied the Townes of Flaminia, and ouercomming him, hee annexed vnto the ſeignorie of Rome all that Countrey.
               This Pope confirmed the Sect of the Auguſtines, which was not yet receiued at Paris, but was by many impugned, becauſe it was not well allowed by the Councell of Lateran, and graunted them many priuiledges. And beſides hee would that the Carmes leauing their coloured apparell with barres, ſhould take the white habit,The Carmes called the bretheren of the Virgin Marie.
                   and ordained they ſhould be named the bretheren of the Virgin Marie. After which goodly deeds, he liued not long: but being dead, the yeare 1288. hee was carried from the Church of S. Sabine in the Mount Auentine, into the Church of S. Peter, where hee was buried with great pompe.
               After the death of Honorius, the ſeate was vacant tenne moneths. For the Cardinalls beeing in the Conclaue, died vpon ſudden malladies, euen when great earthquakes terrified them, and ſo the election was deferred vntill an other time.
               
                  Nicholas. 4.
                  
                  Nicholas Pope, 4. of that name, Miniſter generall of the Friars, called Ierome, borne at Marke d'Ancone, ruled at Rome
                  
foure yeares and one moneth, Naucler. or 6. yeares, 8. moneths, and 16. dayes, after ſome. He ſucceeded the foreſaid Honorius 10. moneths after his death: yet the Cardinalls were not all of one opinion.
               This Pope ſuperſtitiouſly deuout dwelt nigh vnto the Church called S. Marie the greater,
                     Apoc. 8.9.10. or ad praeſepe becauſe they forged that lie, that the Crib where the Virgin Marie laid Ieſus Chriſt after hee was borne into the world is there, and adorned it with edifices and rich paintings. Hee created Cardinalls of all ſorts of Monkes, for the profit of the Kingdome of Abaddon: to the end they might be light-horſes, prepared to the battaile, and might haue teeth like Lyons, & tailes like Scorpions, wherewith they might hurt men. For as Platina ſayeth, he loued all alike, and thought not himſelfe any thing more bound to his parents and kinsfolke, then vnto others.
               Hee cauſed the Croiſado to be preached, and ſent at his owne charges many ſouldiers into Aſia to keepe the Towne of Ptolemais. Supp. Chron.
               
               There hapned in his time many ciuill warres, murders, diſſentions, and brawles at Rome, vppon his occaſion, giuing more countenance to the one part then to the other. And this contention endured the ſpace of two yeares and an halfe. Faſci. temp.
               
               Many Hauens of the ſea were loſt, the Chriſtians were rooted out of Ieruſalem and Siria,
                  The occaſion of the diſcord betwixt the Venetians, Geneuois and Piſans. by a long and great diſſention of the Venetians, Geneuois, & Piſans, which then were (for Communalties) the mightieſt by Sea. It is ſaid their contention was for an Abbey, which each of them ſaid to be theirs: and this quarrell endured thirtie yeares. In ſo much that the Popes, Alexander the fourth, 
                     Ʋrbain the fourth, Clement the fourth, and the Kings of Fraunce and Sicilie, were greatly buſied to agree them, and yet did no good. In the meane while the Empire of Constantinople was vſurped by others, and the French and Italians caſt out of Greece. The Ports of Tyre and Ptolemais were alſo taken from the aforeſaid Contendants.
               
                  The laſt yeare of the Empire of Rodolphe, Charles Prince of Salerne, and ſonne of Charles King of Sililie, was deliuered from the priſons of the King of Arragon: and after came to Rome, and on the day of Pentecoſt was crowned King of Sicilie 
                   by the Pope Nicholas, and abſolued from the oathe hee had made to the King of Arragon. See the Hiſtorie of France.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt 1291. three thouſande Chriſtians were ſlaine by the Sarrazens in the Countrey of Syria: the reſt for feare retired. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  Acha, according to Naucl. was taken by the Souldan, with fifteene other Townes, twelue Caſtles, and a great number of Chriſtians ſlaine: and this happened by the diſſention of the Chriſtians, and raſhneſſe of ſuch as were Croſſed ſaith Faſcic. tempo.
               
               There was mortall warre betwixt the Geneuois and they of Piſe, for the Ile of Corſike: but finally the Piſans were vanquiſhed vpon the ſea, and more then twelue or ſixteene thouſand men ſlaine, with a loſſe of fortie eight Gallies. Faſci. Temp. And other ſhips beſides them were ſunke and drowned. Suppl. Chron.
               
               The Tartarians got hold of the kingdome of Conſtantinople and a great part of that Empire. The ſame.
               
               
                  
                  Nicholas Pope, dyed of griefe that all things happened not after his wiſh, ſeeing ſo manifold calamities all ouer, and eſpecially at Rome. The Cardinals after his death retired to Peruſe, that their election might be more ſure: but in two yeares and three moneths they could not accord. Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Rodolphe the Emperour dyed alſo the yeare of his age 73. of our ſaluation 1291. & of his Empire 18. He had for his wife Anne Counteſſe of Hohemberg: which was buried at Baſle, with her ſonne Herman, who was drowned in Rhene.
               
               
                  
                     Adolphe Emperor. 
                  Adolphe Count of Naſſau, was choſen Emperour by certaine of the Electors, and Albert Duke of Aſtriſhe by other: yet Adolphe was crowned at Aix the Chappell. His brother who was Archbiſhop of Magunce helped him much. He raigned ſixe yeares, and after was depoſed by the Electors; For beſides that

he was not puiſſaunt enough in domeſtical faculties to ſuſtaine that Imperiall dignitie,Adolphe. he alſo deſpiſed the Princes of the Empire, and dignified diuer without merite. He committed adulterers, violated Virgines, Nunnes and Widowes: he enterpriſed warre againſt Fraunce, becauſe of the kingdome of Arles: but he executed no memorable thing, ſauing that he ledde an Armie into Thuringe and Miſne, to pacifie contentions betwixt Albert Lantgraue of Thuringe, and his ſonne Dietere and others.
               Celeſtine fift of that name,Celeſtine. 5.
                   an Eſermen by Nation (which is a place nigh the Towne of Sulme) by profeſſion an Heremite, and before called Peter Moron: after that briberies of the Cardinalls which had endured the ſpace of two yeares, had taken ende, by the fauour of Charles the ſecond of that name King of Naples, and of the Cardinall Latin, was declared Pope.
               Incontinently after his election he went to Aigle, and cauſed to come before him all the Cardinalls, and created new, to the number of twelue, amongſt which there were two Hermites. Ptolomie and Laques haue written, that at his inſtalling were two hundreth thouſand men.
               In the firſt Conſiſtory he held (ſaith Chriſtian Maſſeus) as he went about to reforme the Romane church,
                     Rome can abide no reformation. to the ende the Cleargy therof might ſerue for an example to others, he incurred ſo the maleuolence & indignation of many, that grinding their teeth againſt him, they called him ſot, and dotard. One of theſe companions called Benet, ſuborned an other, who making a crany or hole in his Chamber, many nights cried as it had bin an Angel from heauen. Celeſtine, Celeſtine, renounce thy Papacie: For that charge exceedeth thy Forces. Some alſo in the day time counſelled him to giue ouer his Popedome, and prouide for his ſaluation.
               The king Charles was aduertiſed of theſe things,He was too ſimple for a Pope. & getting their Pope to come to him, he praied him as much as was poſſible, that he would not reiect ſuch a dignity which was giue him from heauen: wherevnto he anſwered: I wil do what God will.
               As hee returned from Naples, it may bee hauing no reſt in his conſcience, on the Vigile of Saint Luce, he diſmiſſed

himſelfe of that charge,Adolphus. and haſted to returne into his Hermitage.An ordinance to giue ouer the Popedome. All this rehearſeth Maſſeus: yet firſt he made a conſtitution by the conſent of all▪ that it ſhould be lawfull for a Pope to giue ouer ſuch a charge. Which conſtitution Boniface 8. his ſucceſſor, a man ſubtill and malicious, confirmed and placed if in the 6, booke of his Decretalls. Moreouer the ſaid Boniface his ſucceſſor fearing that the people deſpiſing him would cleaue vnto Celeſtine, he cauſed him to be put in cloſe priſon, where he kept him euen till his death. He died then in priſon, the yeare of our Lord, 1295. the 10. day of May, two yeares and fiue moneths after he had bene choſen Pope.
               
                  The order of Celestines.
                  The Sect of Monkes called Celeſtines, had their name and originall of him.
               
                  Arlot general of the order of Friars, who made the Concordances vpon the Bible, liued in this time. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Boniface. 8.
                  
                  Boniface, 8. of that name, borne in Campania in the Towne of Anagnia, called before Benet de Gauete, one of the chiefe Councellors of Celeſtine his predeceſſor, beeing at Naples, was thruſt into his place by a maruellous treaſon. Being Cardinall, Prieſt of S. Martin in the Mountaines, he deſired ſo to come vnto the Papall dignitie, that he left nothing behind, either of ambition or fraud, that he thought might bring his purpoſe to paſſe. Againe, hee was ſo arrogant, that he deſpiſed almoſt all men in reſpect of himſelfe.
               
                  Intrauit vt vulpes regnauit vt Leo mortuus eſt vt Canis.This is he of whom it is commonly ſpoken; That he entred as a Foxe, raigned as a Lyon, and died as a dogge. For it was he that ſollicited Celeſtine to depoſe himſelfe, and ſo hee entered like a Foxe; he gouerned like a Lyon, in ſo much that hee was ſo arrogant and cruell to the end: ſo that he called himſelfe Lord of all the world: but he died like a dogge. For his end was miſerable, and all his deeds were reprooued, as may be ſeene by his Hiſtorie.
               He ſaid (as Marius witneſſeth) that he ſhut Celestine in priſon not for any enmitie towards him, but for feare the authors of ſedition by his conduction ſhould do him and the Romane Church any domage.
               
                  
                  But who will not ſay that this Boniface was an horrible monſter, and an ignorant perſon, hauing circumuented,Albert. deſpoiled, and finally murdred in priſon a ſimple man, which was his father?
               
               After that the Princes of Almaine had choſen Albert Duke of Auſtrich, Adolphe hauing on his ſide Otho Duke of Bauiers Raoul Count Palatin, and certaine Imperiall Cities, gaue battaile againſt Albert nigh Spire, which was ſharpe and cruell, wherein Adolphus was ſlaine, the yeare of his Empire, 6. or 8. after ſome.
               
                  Albert Duke of Auſtrich, ſonne of Rodolphe the Emperor,Albert. was againe choſen by the Electors, and crowned at Aix the  Chapple, the yeare, 1298. Hee gaue the gouernment of the Duchie of Auſtrich to his ſonne Rodolphe, and gaue him in marriage Blanch the ſiſter of Phillip king of France.
               
               He made many warres. That againſt the Biſhop of Salisburie, was for certaine Salt-wells. For this Biſhop being prouoked by Albert, cauſed to be deſtroyed the place where the Salt was made. The Emperor who could not be ouercome, was impoyſoned: but the Phiſitians gaue him ſuch remedies, that the venome came out at his mouth and noſthrills. The force thereof was ſo great that it waſted one of his eyes, and hee was called Borgne. Hee was a magnanimous and valiant Prince.
               He demaunded of Boniface to be crowned, but he refuſed him, ſaying hee was vnworthy of the Empire, becauſe hee had ſlaine his naturall Lord in battaile. And the ſaid Boniface holding a Crowne vpon his head, and a Sworde at his ſide, anſwered: I am Caeſar.
               
               The yeare 1298. Boniface publiſhed the ſixt booke of Decretalls, and ſent them to the Students of Bolongne, and to other Vniuerſities, commanding them to vſe them in all iudgements and ſchooles.
               This proud and arrogant Pope,The ſixt of Decretalls. ordained that all king of the earth which would not hold their Kingdomes of his ſanctetie or rather tirannie, ſhould bee excommunicated and depoſed.

He excommunicated Phillip king of France,
                  
                     Phillip king of France, excommunicated. becauſe he would not ſuffer his money to be carried out of his kingdome, and curſed both him and all his, euen to the fourth generation, yea with his reliques and croſſes.
               He would not confirme the Emperour Albert, whom hee had alreadie reiected twiſe or thriſe, but vpon this condition, that he would occupie the kingdome of France, and depoſe Phillip.
               
               
                  Alphonſus of Arragon. The Friars Vado in pace.He declared Alphonſus king of Arragon abſolued, and gaue him the kingdome of Sardeigne, vnder certaine conditions.
               
                  Iohn Duns, ſurnamed the Scot, a Frier, called the ſubtil Doctor, was in this time. He died of an Apoplexie. Some ſay hee was buried aliue. Supp. Chron.
               
               
                  Dinus the Legiſt, Petrus de bella pertica, Iacobus de arena, Iohannes de ſancto, Geminiano Iacobin, Ihones Andrea, and Dantes Aliger Florentin, were in this time.
               
                  
                  The firſt Iubile.The yeare of Chriſt, 1300. this Pope inſtituted a Iubile: giuing full remiſſion of all ſinnes to ſuch as from an hundreth to an hundreth yeares would viſit by vow of Pilgrimage, the Churches of S. Peter and S. Paul in the Citie of Rome. He then celebrated the firſt Iubile, and opened the Faire for indulgences, and made them ſerue euen for ſuch as were in purgatorie. Agrip. de vanita. ſcien.
               
               
                  Fratricelli.Such as they called in Italie Fratricelli, are condemned and perſecuted. Hiſtoriographers ſay, that they vſed carnall pleaſure, contrarie to the honeſtie of marriage: and this they did in the night time after they had celebrated their miſteries. Supp. Chron.
               
               One called Aerman, chiefe amongſt them, was vnburied 20. yeares after his death at Ferrare, (although before hee was accounted as a Saint) and his bones were burnt. A woman called Guillaume. which was very renowned, and her husband Andre, were alſo vnburied, and their bones burnt.
               The Chroniclers rehearſe how thoſe of this Sect were diſcloſed, namely, by a Marchant of Millain called Conrad, whoſe wife in the night time haunted theſe aſſemblies, and that the candles being put out, they abuſed one an other brutally, and

ſuch or like, which haue rather an appearance of affable then of a true narration.
               This Pope nouriſhed diſcords & the diſſentions which were amongſt the factions of Italie, and ſought alwaies to maintaine them. He prohibited that the Cleargie ſhould pay no tribute to Princes, without his leaue & licence. He gloried in his pride to be the key-keeper of heauen; and publiſhed that hee ought not to be iudged of any perſon, no not though he led an infinit number of ſoules into hell with him: becauſe it is lawfull for him to do all things.
               
                  O Infernall Decree, and execrable blaſphemie.
               
               He eleuated his parents into dignities: two of his Nephewes very young he made Cardinalls: alſo his Vncle, Hee made ſome, Counts or Earles, and left them great treaſures, by meanes of which, after they would auenge his death. Naucler.
               
               He depriued two Cardinalls Colonnois, Peter and Iames,
                  He raigned as a Lyon. of their Benefices, yea and of their fathers goods: becauſe that during Celeſtins life they had written that he was no lawful Pope, but that Celeſtine was he. He imputed alſo vnto them, that they had pilled the treaſure of the former Popes.
               In a full Councell he excommunicated Sarra the ſaid Cardinalls Vncle, and honourable Prince, with all the Collonois. Supp. Chron.
               
               He exerciſed ſuch enmitie againſt the Gibellins, that vnderſtanding that ſome of them were retired to Genes, he himſelf went thither alſo; to the end to ouerthrowe them altogether. And as one day vpon an Aſhwedneſday hee gaue Aſhes vnto the people, according to the cuſtome, Porchat Archbiſhop of the town, preſented himſelfe before him (but he vnderſtood of many that he was of the faction of the Gibellins) falling on his knees, with his head vncouered: which when Boniface marked, without hauing any regard to the day, or to the place, or to the people preſent, or to religion, became angry againſt the Archbiſhop, & caſting a great ſort of Aſhes in his eies, ſaid, Remember that thou art a Gibellin, and that with the Gibellins thou ſhalt bee brought to aſhes; and ſtraight depriued the Archbiſhop of his dignitie: although afterwards he remitted him into his former eſtate. Plat. & Cor. Abb.
               
               
                  But being ingratefull for the good (ſaith Iohn Marie) that his predeceſſors had receiued of France,
                  Note a deuelliſh arrogancy he roſe vp in ſuch pride againſt the King Phillip, that it were an hard thing to beleeue. He ſent to ſignifie vnto the king, in maner of a commaundement by the Biſhop of Appaine his Legate, that incontinently and without delay he ſhould prepare himſelfe to go beyond the ſea. Vnto which thing then the King could not well harken, for the great warres hee had againſt the Flemmings. The Legate ſeeing that he could not obtaine an anſwere according to his appetite, he began to vſe great menaces, ſaying that if he did not obey the Pope, he would depriue him of his kingdome: by which two rigorous words, the King beeing much grieued, cauſed the ſaid Legate to be detained a priſoner. But when theſe things came to the notice of the proud Pope, hee diſpatched the Archdeacon of Narbone, with Letters of commaund, forbidding the King, that in no caſe he ſhould entermeddle to take any ſubſidie vpon the lands and reuenewes of the Church, (which thing King Phillip le bel had bene conſtrained to doo, becauſe of great warres that he ſuſtained for the good and defence of the Kingdome) and moreouer that for the Kings contumacie, and for that he had detained priſoner his Embaſſador againſt the common right of all Nations, the kingdome of France was deuolued & fallen to the Romane church: And if he did not obey the commaundements and defences of the Pope, he ſhould bee held in the number of heretikes, with all his fauourers and adherents. This Archdeacon cyted many Biſhops, Abbots, Theologians, and Decretiſts, at a certaine day named to be before the Pope at Rome, and annihilated all the indulgences and priuiledges giuen to the French men by the Pope of Rome his predeceſſors. This rigour perceiued, the king in the preſence of his Barons and of all his Councell, commaunded vpon good deliberation of the Aſſembly, that the firſt Legate who had outraged the King, ſhould bee deliuered, and that they both without delay ſhould voyd his kingdome. Soone after he cauſed to aſſemble a Councell of all the Prelates and Barrons of France in the Citie of Paris. In the ſaide Councell, the King did ſit, and reciting the outrages

and iniuries which he had receiued of the Pope Boniface, he vttered how ambitiouſly and wickedly he came to be Pope. He demaunded of the Eccleſiaſticall Lords vpon whom they had the foundations and reuenewes of their Churches and Benefices. After he turned him towards the Princes, Barons, and Knights, and ſaid vnto them. And you Nobles and Vaſſalls, what hold you for your King? All they which were there anſwered with one voyce, that they held their lands and their goods vnder the kings hand. Then the king replied and ſaid: Yet you ſee what force and tirannie Boniface practiſeth, as if you and all the Realme of France were ſubiect vnto the Romane Church; as now he vſurpeth the title of the Emperour of Almaine: and hauing three times the ſaid Duke Albert of Auſtrich, ſaith himſelfe is Emperour and Lord of all the world, and in token thereof, hee hath newly giuen the Empire to the Duke Albert, yea euen the title of the Crowne of France.
               
               Theſe things thus propoſed and brought to deliberation, the king interiected an appellation from the Pope to the generall Councell, and ordained by publike Edict vpon great pains that none ſhould bee ſo hardie to drawe or tranſport any gold or ſiluer out of his kingdome for the affaires of the Romane Court: and cauſed to guard all the Bridges, Portes, and paſſages. On the other ſide, Boniface the eight ſought by Eccleſiaſticall cenſors, enmitie betwixt the Emperour and the King. Yet notwithſtanding they accorded, meeting together in the plaines of 
                     Ʋuancoulers. But the end was this, that to tame the arrogancie and malice of this Pope, the king ſecretly diſpatched two hundreth men of Armes vnder the conduction of one named Sarra Colonnois, a Romane, and of an other Captain called Nogaret: which ſecretly paſſed from Marceille, and by night tooke the Pope in his houſe, which was in Anagnia, in the kingdome of Naples,
                  He died as a dogge. and carried him priſoner with the aide of the Gibelins to Rome, where he died 24. dayes after, or 35. dayes, after Chron. Abb. of griefe and age: and all his goods and treaſures went to pillage, Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  Iohn the Monke Cardinall, the founder of the Colledge  of Picars at Paris, came into France at the Popes commandement. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  The memorable battaile of Courtray in Flaunders which the French loſt, and wherin a great part of the Nobilitie of France periſhed. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  
                  Benet 11. of that name, a Lombard by Nation, borne at Treuis,
                  Benet. 11.
                   called before Nicholas, of the order of Iacobius, borne of parents of baſe condition, his father was a ſheepheard: after he was made Cardinall of Oſtia, he was choſen Pope: a man of a cautellous and ſubtill ſpirit, and therefore pleaſed Boniface exceedingly.
               Incontinently after he was come vnto the Papaltie, hee ſought to pacifie Italie, and therefore went to Peruſe, but hee fell ſicke there and deceaſed, and was buried in the Iacobins. A certaine Abbeſſe preſented vnto him poyſoned figges whereof he died. This was after prooued. And Leander affirmeth that he died of poyſon.
               The ſeate was emptie about a yeare.
               
                   The yeare of Chriſt, 1304. Phillip le bel King of France, founded in the honour of S. Lewis, the Abbey of Poiſy, where hee placed Nunnes of the order of the Friars preachers, and after his death his heart was carried thither and buried. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
            
            
               The firſt Emperor of the Turkes.
               The wickedneſſe of men being come to the fulneſſe of all impietie, Ottomanus a Turk began to raigne about this time, and raigned 28. yeares. He began by litle and litle to vſurpe vpon Europe. The occaſion was, for that the Emperours of Greece demanded helpe of the ſaid Turkes againſt the Bulgarians. But they ſeeing the Countrey fit for them, vſurped vpon the Emperour, firſt in Thrace, and after in Miſia, ſuperiour and inferiour, Macedonia, Achaia, Peloponeſus, Epirus, Dalmacia, and a great part of Illyria and Pannonia; and finally into Hungaria.
               
               
                   The yeare of Chriſt, 1306. the firſt League of Swiſſers was made of three Cantons, namely Suits, Vry, and 
                     Ʋnderuald. Naucler.
               
               
                  Peter Caſiodore an Italian, a Noble man, and well inſtructed in pietie, was in this time. Hee writ vnto the Enghſh men

not to carrie the importable yoake of the Romane Antechriſt, ſhewing the extortions and extreame ſeruitude of England which the Popes of that time had multiplied. The Epiſtle beginneth Cui comparabo te, &c. which I haue here inſerted, tranſcribed, and tranſlated out of an old booke found in the church of S. Albans in England.
               To the noble Church of England, which ſerueth in bondage, Peter the ſonne of Caſſiodore, a Catholique ſouldier and deuout Champion of Ieſus Chriſt, deſireth ſaluation and deliuerance from the yoake of captiuitie, and to receiue the price and reward of libertie.
               The Scribes and Phariſies placed themſelues in Moyſes Chaire, &c. It followeth after: To whom ſhal I compare thee?Mat. 23. a. 2.
                   or to whom ſhal I ſay thou art like thou daughter of Ieruſalem? to whom ſhall I equall thee thou virgin daughter of Sion? For thy ruine is great as the Sea: thou art become ſollitarie, and without any ſollace, being all the day ouerwhelmed wilh heauineſſe. Thou art deliuered into the hands of him from whence thou canſt not relieue thy ſelfe, without the aide of ſome one which will lift theee vp. For the Scribes and Phariſies beeing ſet vpon Moyſes Chaire, that is to ſay,The Chaire of Moyſes.
                   the Romane Princes being thy enemies, are vpon thy head, and enlarging their Philacteries, and deſiring to inrich themſelues with the marrowe of thy bones, impoſe heauie and inſupportable burthens vpon the ſhoulders of thee and thy Miniſters, and bring thee vnmeaſurably vnder the charge of paying tribure, thou which euer haſt bene free.
               Let all occaſion and matter of maruelling ceaſe: For thy mother which had rule ouer the people, hauing eſpowſed her ſubiect, hath appointed thee for a Father, and before all others hath eleuated thee Biſhop of Rome, who in no paternall act ſheweth himſelfe to be ſuch an one. Very true is is that hee ſpreadeth out his skirtes, and ſheweth by experience that he is thy mothers husband. For often he bringeth to memorie in his heart this ſentence of the Prophet. Take thee a great volume and write therein as with a touchſtone, after the maner of men. Haſt
                        •
                      thee to the ſpoile, diſpatch thee of pilling and ſpoiling.
               
               
                  When the Apoſtle ſaid, Euery high Prieſt beeing taken of men, is conſtituted for men in things which are concerning God. Doth not this ſhewe that men muſt not occupie themſelues with ſpoiles and rapines, to impoſe cenſors, and annuall rents, nor to deſtroy men; but to the end he might offer gifts and ſacrifices for ſinnes? and that he might haue compaſſion of the ignorant and ſinners? And alſo we read of Peter who was a Fiſher (whoſe ſucceſſor he ſaith he is) that after the reſurrection of Ieſus Chriſt,Iohn. 21.2.
                   he returned to his fiſhing againe with the other Apoſtles: who when he could take nothing on the left ſide of the ſhip, by the commaundement of Ieſus Chriſt he turned himſelfe towards the right hand, and drew the Nets to ground full of fiſh. Profitable then it is to exerciſe the Miniſterie of the Church in the right part, by which miſterie the diuell is vanquiſhed, and a great number of ſoules is brought to Ieſus Chriſt:The right ſide and left of his kingdome. but ſurely it is not ſo of the labour which is taken on the left hand of the ſhip: for therein faith ſtaggereth, and heuineſſe ruleth when men finde not that which they ſeeke. For who will beleeue that one man can ſerue God and Mammon both together and pleaſe his will, ſticke to reuelations of the fleſh and of bloud, and offer to Chriſt gifts and preſents, ſuch as appertaine vnto him?Good ſheepheards taken form the ſheepfold. Pſal. 81.7. And without doubt the ſheepheard which watcheth not for the edifying of the Flocke, prepareth an other way a roaring Lyon, which ſeeketh euery way whom he may deuour.
               Behold ſay I, the ſtraunge and before vnheard deedes of him which is called thy father;The office of Prieſts ouerthrowne. who taketh from the ſheepfoldes the good ſheepheards, and in their places ſetteth his Nephewes and parents, and others ignorant of Letters, dumbe and deafe, which vnderſtand not the bleating of the ſheepe, neither care for the byting of the wolues, which like hirelings carrie away the fleeces, reape others harueſts, the hands of whom alſo ſerue to the pottes, and their backes turne away from burthens.
               Hereby it plainely appeareth the Prieſts office was left, the ſeruice due vnto God was ſubtracted, and the cuſtome to giue Almes aboliſhed: by which things the holy deuotion of Kings,

Princes, & Chriſtans are aboliſhed. This then is a thing which ought to be found very ſtrange in the iudgement of euery one,The Pope oppoſed againſt Ieſus Chriſt. that whereas Ieſus Chriſt commaunded to pay tribute vnto Kings for himſelfe & for Peter this man againſt his will (whoſe Vicar he ſaith he is) who hath caſt backe from himsſelfe the kingdomes and iudgements of the world, ſeekes to ſubiect vnder his domination, Kings and Princes, vnder the title of his ſtile: becauſe all that he hath ſet downe in writing to be his, he attributeth vnto himſelfe.
               Nay what doth he more with thee ô daughter? Behold he draweth from thee whatſoeuer he thinketh good: and yet hee holdeth not himſelfe contented to take of thee the tenth part of thy grounds, but euen the firſt fruites of the Benefices of thy Miniſters: to the end that as well for himſelfe, as for ſuch as are of his bloud, he might conſtitute a new patrimonie of good and holy wills of the founders.
               Moreouer,
                     The wages of the Popes Curriers.
                     A compariſon of the Pope to Nabuchodonozer.
                     
                   he alreadie impoſeth other execrable things for the wages of his Curriers which he ſendeth into England, which carrie away not onely the victualls of thee and thine, but alſo rent of their skinnes and their fleſh like dogges. Meriteth he not to be compared to Nabuchodonozor, who deſtroyed the Temple, and ſpoiled it of the veſſells of Gold? For that which he did, this doth he alſo. He ſpoiled the Miniſters of the houſe of God, and depriued them of that which was neceſſarie for his ſeruice. And this here doth as much. And ſurely the condition of them which are ſlaine by the ſword, is better then the condition of ſuch, as be any thing bitten with hunger. For the firſt are ſtraight dead, but the other is conſumed by the ſtirrilitie of the earth.
               Let all ſuch as paſſe by thy way (ô daughter) haue compaſſion on thee: for no ſorrowe is like to thine.Ier. Chap. 1. of the ſame, 12. For alreadie becauſe of thy great dolour and teares which thou haſt ſhead, thy face is blacker then coales: in ſo much as thou art no more knowne in the ſtreetes. Thy father hath ſet thee in clowdie and darke places, he hath made thee drunke with wormewood and gall. Lord ſee the affliction of thy people,A true deſcription of the Pope. harken vnto their ſobbings and come downe. For the heart of this man is

harder then the heart of Phaua
                        •
                     , who would not ſuffer that thy people ſhould goe a
                     •
                   libertie, but onely in the force of thy hand. But this afflicted and plagueth not onely vpon earth, but alſo after death. For after death he deuoureth the goods of all Chriſtians, vnder colour that they died without making teſtaments.
               The Church of England doth ſufficienly know, that the French men caſting the eyes of their concupiſcence vpon that kingdome, ſought in time paſt to haue reduced it vnder theyr power▪ but it is to be feared that, that which they could not hitherto bring to paſſe, is now ſupplied by the coniuration of that man, as of a new enemie. For if the treaſures of the Kingdome faile, and that the Prieſthood be ouerthrowne, verily it ſhall he made leſſe puiſſant againſt the enemies.
               
                  Exhortation to the Kingdome of England.To the end that thou ô daughter, and thy Prieſt, ſhould not fall into a miſerie of any longer endurance, it is expedient for the ſaluation and ſafetie of thee and thine, that thou ô Chriſtian King, and the great Lords of thy kingdome, (which haue adorned thee with great and excellent Benefices, and which in ſuch a caſe ought to maintaine and defend both thee and thoſe Benefices) ſhould reſiſt the coniurations and conſpirations of that man: who not hauing regard to God, but for the aforeſaid things, and to enrich his parents, and for his owne neſt, lifting himſelfe vp as an Eagle, by the aforeſaid things, and other Impoſtes by him impoſed, he hath collected all the ſiluer of England by a new domination.
               
                  The ſimplicitie of the world.Let not then thy diſſembling ſimplicitie in this caſe cauſe the ruine of thy kingdome and thy ſelfe, and take heed thy remedie come not too late. The Lord God take the vaile frō off the heart of this man, and giue him a contrite and humble hart, and make him knowe the traces of the true God, whereby hee may be drawne frō darkneſſe, and conſtrained to forſake thoſe wicked labours wherof we haue ſpoken, & that the vine which the right hand of God hath planted, may be filled with good grapes. For take heed vnto the Lords words, & to the Propheſie of Ieremie, to put back ſuch enterpriſes: who ſaith thus. Thou ſheepheard which haſt disperſed my people,
                  
                     Ier. 22.30. 
                  & put thē out of their habitations,

behold I will viſit vpon thee the malice of thy into priſes, and no man of thy ſeed ſhall ſit vpon the ſeat of Dauid, nor haue more power in Iuda. Let thy neaſt be made barran, and ruinated as So-Some and Gomorrhe.
               But if it ſo fall out that being nothing feared by theſe words he ceaſe not his enterpriſes, nor make reſtitution of that which he hath taken: then let thē ſing for him that ſhall be ſo wickedly hardned, the 108. Pſalme. As for vs, we will each day openly ſing praiſes through Ieſus Chriſt, to him vnto whom all things ſerue.
               
                  Thus the light by litle and litle came forward, and ouercame the mightie darkneſſe.
               
               
                  Clement, 5. ruled in Auignon 8. yeares and 10. monethes.Clement. 5.
                  
               
               This Pope was a Gaſcoin, ſonne of Bernand, a warrior and a Gentleman, borne in Burdeaux, before called Bextrand Goth, Biſhop of Coſeran, and Archbiſhop of Burdeaux, he being abſent in France, was choſen at Peruſe, by the Cardinalls there reſident. Iohn le Maire ſaith it was at the inſtance of Phillip le Bell.
               
               After he was aduertiſed of his election, he departed from Burdeaux and came to Lyons, and ſent word that all the Cardinalls then in Italie, ſhould appeare there, wherevnto they all obeyed without delay or contradiction, and the coronation of the ſaid Pope was made publike and ſolemne in the Church of S. Iuſt. But this ioy and pompe was troubled.The Popes corronation hanſelled with dead men. For as an innumerable people were mounted vpon an old wall of S. Iuſt to ſee this great pompe and noblenes, the ſaid wall fell, and flew duke Iohn of Britaine: the King was there wounded, and the Pope throwne ouer his horſe and rudely troden vnder feete, in ſo much that he loſt a rich Carbuncle out of his triple crowne, eſteemed at 6000. Florents of Gold: and more then 12. other notable perſons were there wounded and died.
               After the Pope Clement was crowned the king tooke leaue of him, and went to marrie his ſonne Lays Hutin to the daughter of the Duke of Burgongne, called Margarite. The Pope on the other ſide left Lion, and made his reſidencie in Auignon. This was the firſt of the Popes, that kept there his Romane

Court, where it abode the ſpace of 73. yeares before it returned to Rome. Iohn le Maire.
               
               After the end of this ſolemne pompe, and that all things were appeaſed, he created many French Cardinalls. But hee made not one Italian: onely he reſtored that dignitie of a Cardinall to Iohn and Iames of the houſe of Colomnois. Moreouer he ſent to Rome three Cardinalls, with the power of Senators, by whoſe direction the Towne and all Italie was gouerned. He gaue to Frederic king of Sicilie the Ile of Sardeigne, which was occupied by the Sarraſins, vpon this condition, that in chaſing them away he might incontinently recouer it.
               
                   The yeare 1306. the Iewes were pilled and reiected Fraunce.
               
               
                  
                  Albert the Emperour, riding in the fieldes about noone, was ſlaine by his Nephewe and other Princes of Austrich, his companions. Munſter.
               
               
                  An example of Gods puniſhment.This iudgement might bee, becauſe in warre he had perſecuted the Emperour Adolphe, who although he was his inferiour vnto him in power, yet was he ordained of God and ought him obedience. But ſuch murthers remaine not vnpuniſhed.
               
                  Hiero. Marius adding to the words of Platina, ſayth thus. Clement the fift becauſe he deſired not to ſerue others as Ieſus Chriſt commaunded his diſciples, but rather to be ſerued euen of Emperors, ordained that Emperours choſen in Almaine, although they tooke the name of King of the Romanes, yet they ſhould receiue of the Pope the rights and name of the Emperour, Moreouer that when the Emperour ſhould bee dead, whileſt the Empire was vacant, the gouernment of the townes of Italie ſubiect to the Emperor, ſhould be in the Popes power.
               
                  The Romane Court tranſported into France, where it remained 74. yeares.
               
               
                  
                     Auignon the Papall ſeate.This Clemens who was a publike whoremonger, and a great maintainer of harlots, Chron. Herm. and Paralip. Vrsp. placed the papall ſeate in Auignon, to the end the better to enioy his delights and pleaſures.
               
                  He celebrated the generall Councell of 
                     Ʋienne,
                  Generall Councell of Vienne.
                   the yeare of our Lord. 1311. wherein he cruelly aboliſhed the order of the Templers, to the end to confiſcate their goods, & with their ſpoiles raiſed vp the Hoſpitaliers into dignities, called the knights of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, which had conquered the Ile of Rhodes vpon the Sarraſins.
               The Knights of the Rhodes ſucceeded in the goods of the Templers.
               The Pope excommunicated the Venetians becauſe they had vſurped Ferrare, which was of the Churches patrimonie,Ferrare. and cauſed the Croiſado to be publiſhed againſt them in Italie, till they were conſtrained to yeeld the ſaid ſeignorie of Ferrare, which they had vſurped of a Lord called Friſius Eſtenſis, who had ſlaine his father to gouerne at Ferrare, being notwithſtanding aided by the Venetians to doo that wicked act. Item he excommunicated the Florentines and them of Luques.
               
               
                  Henry the 7. would needes make himſelfe to be crowned at Rome, but it was not without great contradiction and effuſion of bloud. Robert King of Sicilie, ſonne of Charles the ſecond, King of Pouille, was condemned of the ſaid Henry to bee beheaded.
               
                  Clement graunted to all ſuch as coiced themſelues againſt the Turke, that at their pleaſures and will, foure ſoules ſhould be deliuered from purgatorie: But the Theologians of Paris deteſted this, and reprooued it, ſaith Agrip. de vanit.
               
               This Pope perſecuted ſuch as they named Fratricelli, and one called Dulcinus of Navarre; and publiſhed againſt thē the Croiſado, for that purpoſe ſeruing themſelues with the Iacobins.
               
               The Dulcins were named of that Dulcinus, who was executed with his wife Margarite. Naucler. He had bene taught of one called Gerard. They which deteſted them and haue written their maner of doings, ſay that they wore white Mantles, & long haires: ſometimes walking barefooted, ſometimes ſhod. Item, that they named themſelues the order of the Apoſtles, and they preached ſaying. Repent, for the kingdome of heauē is at hand. Moreouer, they ſaid that the authoritie which Chriſt gaue vnto his Church was expired for the malice of the

Prelates.Henry. 7.
                   And that the Romane Church was reprooued becauſe it was an whore. Alſo that they were the Church & followed the rule of the Apoſtles. That all the Popes ſince Silueſter were Preuaricators and vſurpers becauſe they liued not in true humilitie, and that therefore men ought not to giue them Tythes.
               Many of Dulcius adherents were taken, to the number of 114. perſons, dwelling in the Mountains of Verſeil in Piemont.
               
               
                  Rhodes in this time wes reconquered of the knights of the Rhodes, which before were driuen away.
               
                  Henry. 7.
                  
                  Henry 7. of that name, ſonne of Henry Count of Luxembourg, and of Beatrix his wife, was choſen Emperour. He was not rich of goods that his father had left him, but he was the excellenteſt Prince of his time, as well in prudence as in the glory of praiſe-worthy deeds.
               From the death of Frederic the 2. vntill the yeare 1308. wherein this man was elected, the Kings of the Romanes had not entred into Italie, namely Rodolphe, Adolphe, and Albert, and therefore almoſt all the townes of Italie ſubiect to the Empire, were reuolted.
               After Henry was crowned at Aix, he determined to enter Italie to be ſacred of the Pope, but it was not without great danger, for great Ambuſhes which were laid for a him at Millaine by Guido Turrian. See the Chronicles of the Emperours.
               
               
                  Templers burnt.Many Templers of the kingdome of France, by the commaundement of the Pope and King, for certaine accuſations were condemned and burnt without Paris. Twelue or nine Articles contrary to the faith, were impoſed vpon them: which notwithſtanding Iohn Bocace a Florentine excuſeth in his 21. Chapter of his 2. booke, of the caſes of vnfortunate Nobles. Their order endured 184. yeares: all their goods were confiſcated and giuen to the knights of the Rhodes. Others ſay that the beſt part of their goods was giuen to the king by the Popes conſent. Chron. of the French Kings.
               
               
                  Hermanus ſaith, that the Pope Clement in fauour of the king, noted them of hereſie and infamie, wrongfully and vpon enuie. Paral. Vrsper.
               
               
                  Some thinke that the kings of France, of England and of Spaine, conſpired againſt them for the poſſeſſions and Caſtles which they had in their kingdomes.
               The yeare 1309. the Sarabits (Monkes which came out of Egipt) began in England. Their garments were of Oxe and Swines skinnes, and they were tyed with cordes. Iohn Clyn Hybernus.
               
               The order of Paulins entred into England, and placed thē
                  ſelues at Gloceſter, the yeare 1310. Chron. Caletenſe.
               
               This Pope Clement in a well leaded Bull (which is yet at this day kept by Copie at Vienna, at Limoge, and at Poiters,
                  The Pope cō
                     mandeth the Angels. in the Coffers of priuiledges) commanded the Angels of Heauen to carrie into the Ioyes of Paradice, and draw out of Purgatorie the ſoule of him, whoſoeuer ſhould die in the way, going in Pilgrimage to Rome. Moreouer (ſaith he) we will that the paines of hell ſhal no way be inflicted vpon them. Agrip. de vanit. ſciēt.
               
               
                  Iean wife of Lewis king of Fraunce, after the death of her husband, went to Rome, and reſigned the kingdome of Naples, deliuering it into Pope Clements hand, who after made a gift of it to Lewis duke of Angiou, brother of Charles the fift king of France, ſauing the profits to the vſe of the ſaid Iean for her life. But he enioyed it not: for he died with fiue thouſand men in conquering it againſt Charles Nephew of the ſaid Lewis King of Hungaria, who occupied the kingdome, and held it foure yeares, and left a ſonne called Ladiſlaus, who raigned 29. yeares at Naples by the helpe of Pope Vrbain the 6.
               This Pope condemned the Beghards or Begnins,
                  Beghards or Begnins. which would not worſhip the Bread of the Euchariſt.
               
               He commaunded that the great Maiſter of the Templers ſhould be burned at Paris, with one of his cōpanions, in the preſence of Cardinals, & made certain ordinances againſt the inſolencies of the Iewes, after hauing confiſcated their goods.
               He ordained that oathes deliuered by Princes,Oathes of Princes. were not oathes of ſubiection, but of fidelitie: and commanded that the goods of the Church ſhould not be alienated.
               Hee ordained that Clarkes which occupied temporall traffiques, and wore precious garments, ſhould be puniſhed; and

forbad Monkes all kinde of huntings, as well of beaſtes as birdes.
               He confirmed the Feaſt inſtituted in the honour of the bread of the Euchariſt, which the Papiſts commonly called, La feſte dieu. God his Feaſt.
               
                  Clementius.He gathered in his volume the Conſtitutions called Clementius, and pronounced that the reliques of Saints ought to be greatly honoured.
               He gouerned the affaires of Italie by Neapolion and Pelagura Cardinalls, his Legates: and added Celeſtine the fift to the number of Popiſh Confeſſors. He ſet in order the conſtitutions of Monkes, and againe declared the rule of Friars.
               Finally this Clement being tormented one while with a flux of the belley, and an other with a paine of the ſtomack & ſides, deceaſed in a Caſtle called Rocquemaure, vpon Roſue, the yeare of the Lord, 1314. his body was carried into Gaſcoin, and the Papall ſeate was emptie euen till the third yeare.
               This yeare it ſelfe that he died, as Henry of Lucembourg Emperor determined to draw to him by force of Armes the kingdome of Sicilie, vnto which he was called, hee was traiterouſly brought to death by a wicked Monke, called Bernard du Mont, Polician of Domcaſtre: who was of the conſpiration of the Guelphes, and yet made a countenance that he was the Emperours friend. He gaue a poyſoned hoſt to this good Prince: who as ſoone as he felt the miſchiefe,The kindneſſe of the Emperour. aduertiſed this traitor Monke to flie away, ſaying vnto him; Away, away, for if the Almanes perceiue any thing, and ſuch as doo affect mee, you ſhall die. So this wicked Iudas withdrawing himſelfe to Sienes, receiued the ſiluer that had bene promiſed him, for the reward of his treaſon; but hereby hee deliuered not his bretheren Iacobins. For many of them periſhed by fire and ſword with their houſes, as wel in Tuſcane as in Lombardie, and many other places.
               
                  Vniuerſitie of Orleance.The Vniuerſitie of Orleance was inſtituted in this time. Chron. of the Kings of France.
               
               The yeare at Criſt, 1313. the King of Fraunce Phillip le bel became a Leper, and therefore he cauſed all the Leapers

of France and Flaunders, as well men as women, to bee burnt. For he vnderſtood that they had infected the waters. And the Chroniclers of Almaine ſay that the ſaid king became a Leper, becauſe he made the Templers die.
               
                  Arnold de Villa Noua, an excellent Phiſitian,
                     Arnold de Villa Noua a true & faithfull man. and Mathematician, (ſome ſay of Chalon, others of Narbone) was iudged an heretike, becauſe he ſaid that Sathan had made all Chriſtian people ſtray from the truth. Item, that the faith of Chriſtians of his time, was no other then ſuch as diuels haue. Item, that ſuch as are in Cloiſters are out of Charitie, and condemne themſelues in falſifying the doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, & leading Chriſtians into hell. Item, that the Theologians haue maliciouſly mingled the Dreames of Philoſophers with the holy ſcripture. Item, that in the ſacrifice of the Aultar the Prieſt offereth nothing to God, and that Maſſes profiteth neither quick nor dead. He prooued by Daniel and by Sibilla Erithra, that Antichriſt in a full tirannie ſhould perſecute the faithfull after the yeare, 1300.
               Beſides his Phiſicke bookes, he writ againſt the Iacobins,
                  The bookes of Doctor Arnold.
                   that it was lawfull to eate fleſh: The cutting ſword againſt the Thomiſtes: The admonition of Ieſus Chriſt to Chriſtians: Of the ſubtilties of falſe Prophets: Of the miſterie of the Churches Cymballs: Of the conſummation of the world, and other bookes. He was iudged an heretike by the Iacobins at Tarraeon. Finally being ſent to the Pope by Frederic king of Sicilie, he died in the way, and was buried at Genés, a true champion of the Lord.
               
                  Margarite Queene of Nauarre,
                  The Sea of Hiſtories. daughter of the Duke of Burbon, Iean daughter of the Count of Bourgongne, and wife of the Count of Poiters, Blanche ſecond daughter of the ſaid Count of Bourgongne, wife of the Count de la Marſhe, were taken by the kings commaundement and condemned to continuall priſon, for their fornications and adulteries againſt them manifeſtly prooued. Yet afterward Iean Counteſſe of Poiters, returned with her husband. For it was knowne that ſhe was not culpable of all that which was impoſed on her.Adulterie puniſhed. The Adulterers, that is, Phillip d'Annoy which kept the Queene, and his

brother.Schiſme in the Empire. 
                  Gualter de Annoy which kept the ſaid Blanch knights, were ſcorched, there genitories cut off, and they drawne and hanged.
            
            
               Schiſme in the Empire.
               There was a diuiſion amongſt the Electors: ſome did chuſe Lois the fourth of that name, Duke of Bauiere: others, Frederic Duke of Auſtrich, and the one had warre againſt the other eight yeares. In the end Lewis obtained alone the Empire, and raigned 24 yeares, after the Chron. of Euſeb. which make 32. yeares, The Sea of Hiſt.
               
               
                  Loys Hutin, ſonne of Phillip le bel, ſucceeded in the Kingdome: and is the 46. He had before ſucceeded Iean his mother in the kingdome of Nauarre.
               
               
                  Enguerrand de Marigni, Count de Longueuille, great Generall of the Kings reuenewes, being accuſed to haue robbed the King, was hanged: and his Image throwne downe the Pallace ſtayres.
               This king raigned almoſt two yeares, and died in the wood of Vincennes, and was buried at S. Denis.
               
               
                  Iohn. 23.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, 23. of that name, French by Nation, ſonne of 
                  Arnold d'Oſſa, before called Iames de Cahors, Cardinall, Biſhop du Port, after the ſpace of two yeares (during which time as hath bene touched, the ſeate was emptie for the difference happening amongſt the 23. Cardinalls) was declared Pope at Lions: departing therfore frō thence with his Court, and comming to Auignon, he created 8. Cardinals, of the number of which, were Cahors the younger, his Nephew and ſiſters ſonne, and Iohn de Gayete, of the houſe of 
                     Ʋrſins.
               
               He deliuered into the hands of the Iudge, Hugh Gerard Biſhop of Cahors, after hauing taken from him his Pontificall ornaments, hee was diſgraced and giuen to the tormentors, who put him to death moſt cruelly. Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  
                  Phillip le Long, 47. King of France and of Nauarre, brother of Lewis Hutin the former King, ſucceeded in the Kingdome, the yeare 1316. This was by meanes of the lawe Salike. He was called Long, becauſe he was tall & ſlender. During his raigne, he could neuer get either of the Church or of the people, tributes, Impoſtes, or borrowe that which he damaunded.
               
                  Some ſay, that during his raigne the Leapers poyſoned the water pits, at the ſuggeſtion and perſwaſion of the Iewes,Poyſoning of pits. whereof followed a great peſtilence: but the Iewes and Leapers were greatly puniſhed.
               The King determined to make that in all his kingdome there ſhould be but one maner of waight, meaſure, and money: but he could not bring to effect that which was his will, for he died ſoone after.
               He raigned fiue yeares without hauing any warre, and was buried at S. Denis. See Emil. lib. 8. and Gogin. lib. 7.
               This Pope Iohn cauſed to be publiſhed the conſtitutions of the Councell of Vienne, called Clementius, and ſent them into the Vniuerſitie of Boulogne, vnder a faire leaded Bull, commanding they ſhould bee vſed in all Schooles, Vniuerſities, and iudgements, from thence forward. The Sea of Hiſt.
               
               
                  Birger king of Denmarke hauing inuited his two bretheren to dinner with him, tooke them, and with Irons laid them in priſon, where they died. The ſame.
               
               A Prouoſt of Paris called Henry Carpenel,
                  The Prouoſt of Paris. for a falſe iudgement that he had giuen, was hanged on a gibet.
               This Pope Iohn condemned the conſtitution of Pope Nicholas, which was of the order of the Friars Minors, and began Exijt qui ſeminat, and forbad vpon paine of excommunication, that none ſhould gloſſe or diſpute vpon it.
               
                  See the Decree 6. in the title 12. de verborum ſignifi.
               
               
                  Charles le Bel, brother of Phillip le Long, and ſonne of Phille Bel king of France and Nauarre, 48. raigned 7. yeares.
               
                  Iohn 23. made a Conſtitution which beginneth, Ad conditorem Canonum, againſt the Friars Minors.
               
                  See the Extrauagants of this Iohn, 23. in the title. 4. de verborum ſignifi
               
               This Pope Iohn canonized S. Thomas Biſhop of Erford, and S. Thomas d' Acquine. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  Loys Duke of Bauiere, and Frederic Duke of Auſtrich, with  his brother, gaue battaile the one againſt the other; where were ſlain as wel on the one part as of the other; foure thouſand horſe men. Lewis obtained the victorie, & Frederic was priſoner with

his brother Henry. Naucler. Leopold his other brother came late to the ſuccours.Lewis 
                  See the Chron. of the Emperorus.
               
               This Pope receiued into the ſafegard and protection of S. Peter the Carmes, exempting them from all ſubiection of ordinary Iudges to the end they might be ſubiect onely to S. Peter as his well beloued children, and mooued many of them to Epiſcopall dignitie. As Guy de Parpinan, Iohn Claran. both of Catalogue, and ſome other Nations.
               
                  A diuelliſh illuſion.For before he was Pope he had a maruellous viſion, or rather diuelliſh illuſion, as he witneſſeth in his Bull: namely, that as the Cardinalls were in a great debate, the Virgin Marie deliuered them and made him Pope, yet vpon this condition, that he ſhould exempt from the paines of purgatorie his good bretheren.
               
                  An hereſie held by the Pope.This Iohn here taught certaine errors, and amongſt others, that ſoules ſo ſoone as they were diſpoiled of the body, ſhould not ſee God before the laſt iudgement. For as Maſſeus witneſſeth, his father had ſo taught him, being ſeduced and abuſed by the viſions of a certaine Iriſh man, called Tundalus.
               
               He ſent to Paris two Monkes, the one a Iacobin, and the other a Friar, who preached the ſame hereſie: but Thomas Walleis a Iacobin, an Engliſh man, reſiſted the Pope; but he thruſt him into priſon. Thus alſo did Durand de S. Porcin, William Caleth, and others.
               
                  Colledges of Scribes.He corrected at his pleaſure the orders of Churches, and changed them, and diſtributed into a certain number the Colledges of the Scribes: which for certaine prices writ ſuch Letters as by him would be diſpatched. He made many conſtitutions which were called Ioanninies, & condemned Iohn de Pouilly a Theologian, becauſe he taught that men muſt not cōfeſſe thē
                  ſelues to begging Friars: yet he conſtrained the Monkeſſes or Nuns called Beguines, to marry, and to deteſt painting. He held alſo for certain articles of the faith, that Ieſus Chriſt gaue not to his Apoſtles any other rule to liue wel, but that he gaue to other Chriſtians. That the Apoſtles neuer vowed the vow of pouertie, and that vowes ſerue for nothing to perfection.
               This Pope writ to the Grecians at large, that there was

but one Church alone, whereof he was chiefe, and the Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt. The Grecians anſwered him in fewe words.An anſwere of the Greeks to the Pope. We beleeue ſurely that thy power is very great ouer thy ſubiects. We cannot endure thy extreame pride, nor ſatisfie thy couetouſneſſe. The diuell be with thee, for God is with vs. By which breuitie of words, they ſhewed what was the Popes maner of life and eſtate. Iohn de Mandeuile rehearſeth it in his 6. booke.
               This Pope declared Lewis de Bauiere to the Church a rebell, ſchiſmatike, and heretike: becauſe that after he was choſen by the Princes, he tooke the gouernment of the Empire without any oath to the Pope of ſubiection. Hiero. Marius ſaith thus. Iohn purſued with a ſharpe hatred Lewis de Bauiere: partly becauſe being choſen king of the Romanes by the Princes, hee diſdained the name and title of Emperour at the Popes hands, as Clement the 5. had ordained it: partly alſo becauſe he maintained and defended againſt him certaine Monkes, which hee had condemned as heretikes, and therefore Iohn held the ſaid Lewis for an heretike.
               
                  Lewis comming into Italie,
                  Vicegerents of the Empire placed in all the Imperiall Townes Vicegerents, (as reaſon required) and after came to Millaine, and becauſe he deſired to appeaſe the Popes rage, hee ſent Embaſſadors vnto him euen to Auignon, where he reſided; who demaunded that according to the cuſtome of his predeceſſors he would graunt him kindely and with a good and free will the ornaments of the Empire.
               The Pope not onely refuſed to doo it,The Emperor demandeth the Imperiall ornaments. but puſhed backe his Embaſſadors with great ſhame and ignominie, & cyted the ſaid Emperour peremptorily (as they ſpeake) that he ſhould come vnto Auignon and ſubmit himſelfe to the ordinances of the Church.
               The Emperour knowing the tirannie that raigned in the Church, knowing alſo that he had receiued of God the Imperiall maieſtie, ſought on his ſide nothing wherein he might violate it. And therefore to Popes hee would not ſubiect himſelfe, as if he were their ſeruant; by meanes whereof he refuſed to come into Auignon: yet becauſe ſtill hee greatly deſired

to nouriſh peace, he ſent againe meſſengers to make the ſame requeſt.
               The Pope perſiſted in his opinion, and in token of the hatred he bore to the Emperour, he excommunicated the Vicountes, vnto whome then the Emperour had giuen the gouernment of the ſeignorie of Millane.
               
               The Emperour ſeeing the Popes heart obdurate, calling to him many Princes and Lords of Italie, came to Rome, where he was honorably receiued of all the people, and required that according to cuſtome ſome would deliuer him the ornaments of the Empire.
               
                  The Romains beſeech the Pope for the Emperour.The greateſt Lords of Rome, together with all the people, ſent Embaſſadors into Fraunce to the Pope, beſeeching him that he would viſit the Towne, and graunt to the King of Romanes the Imperiall ornaments, which if he refuſed to do, they proteſted to obſerue the auncient lawe, and to vſe the rights of the Romane people.
               
                  Iohn after he had heard the Embaſſadors, draue them back from him ſhameleſly with rude words and threats, which the Romane people ſeeing, determined to graunt to Lewis that which he demaunded; and ſo by the commaundement of all the Cleargie and people, he was crowned with his wife, by Stephen and Nicholas Senators, in the preſence of all the Nobles, which cryed Lewis Augustus, Emperour of the Romanes.
               But what did Lewis hitherto, wich was not the part of a good Emperour? yet Iohn vnderſtanding this, accuſed him as one guiltie of diuine treaſon and an heretike, and publiſhed againſt him certaine very rigorous proces, and deiected him out of the dignitie of the Empire, and put him out of his kingdome as an heretike & rebel againſt the Romane Church, thundring out againſt him a very cruell pronunciation.
               
                  Theologians and Lawiers of this time.In this time were certaine Theologians and Lawyers which ſaid that Chriſt and the Apoſtles had nothing proper, and that the Emperour was no way ſubiect to the Pope in that which concerneth the temporaltie. Of this number were Michael Oecenus and William; Ockam Friars; Marcille of Padoue, and Iohn de Landum, Lawyers, with certaine others. The Emperour

                  Lewis was ſo fortified by this,
                     Lewis fortified. that he hardly oppoſed himſelfe againſt all the Popes enterpriſes, publiſhing in all parts of the Empire an appellation, ſuch as followeth.
               We Lewis King of the Romaines,The Emperours appellation againſt the Pope. propoſe againſt Iohn which ſaith he is Pope, that he dooth ill execute the teſtament of Ieſus Chriſt touching peace, which he diſturbeth in all Chriſtendome, and remembers not that all the honor he now hath, was graunted by S. Conſtantine to Silueſter when hee was yet hid. He is vnthankfull towards the Romane Empire,Donation of Conſtantine.
                   whereof he hath receiued all that great magnificence, which he now abuſeth, &c.
               As then Lewis & the greateſt Lords of Rome knew well the vniuſt deeds of Iohn, as alſo the people, frō the leaſt to the greateſt, who tooke in ill part that their Embaſſadors which they ſent was ſo ill handled, and all with one accord agreed to bring into the Church the auncient cuſtome obſerued in electing the Pope: namely, that being choſen by the people hee ſhould be confirmed of the Emperour. And therefore one called Peter Carbaria or Corberia a Friar, was created Pope,Nicholas 5.
                   and named Nicholas the fift, and as for Iohn he was declared an hereticke and a tyrant of the Church, and not a Paſtor but a perturber of the peace of Chriſtians. All which things the Emperour and the Princes Aſſiſtant at the Councell held at Rome, ſubmitted to the iudgement of the Catholicke Church. This ſaith Marius.
               
               This done the Emperour returned into Almaigne, and the  Pope Nicholas remained in Italie: but finally Boniface Counte of Piſe deliuered him into Pope Iohns hands, and hee dyed being ſtraightly detained and in great miſerie. See the Suppl. Chron.
               
               
                  Iohn de Liſle (ſome Iordain) a renowmed man in Fraunce, was hanged at Montfaucon at Paris, for pilleries & rauiſhments. Emilius denieth that hee was Father in lawe vnto Iohn Pope as ſome ſay.
               King Charles le Bel was the firſt that permitted the Pope to leuie Tenths in France,
                  Tenthes leuied in Fraunce.
                   and he did it to haue part with him. But the Pope did it to warre vppon the Emperour Lewis,
                  
whom he had declared an enemie of the Church. Chron. Reg. Fran.
               
               
                  Ambition of the VenetiansThe Venetians by their Captaine and Duke called Franciſcus Dandalus, tooke from the Patriarke of Aquilia their neighbour, two Cities, that is, Polle and 
                     Ʋalentia, which are in Gorice.
               
               
                  Benet. 12.
                  
                  Benet Pope, 12. of that name, ruled in Auignon 7. yeares, three moneths, after Naucler. Iames de Furnerio borne at Tholouſe, of poore parents, a Monke of the order of Ciſteaux, Prieſt, Cardinall, and Doctor in Theologie.
               This Pope ſaith Marius, was no more modeſt or louing to the Emperour Lewis, then Iohn his predeceſſor had beene. For he renewed the excommunications, and diſpoyled him of all royall honor, and of the Duchie of Baniere by his ſentence.
               This good Prince Lewis aſſembled at Francford all the Electors, Dukes, Biſhops, Counts, and all ſuch as were thought cunning, as well in humane ſciences as diuine, and in the preſence of all, by publike and ſolemne proclamation, hee gaue new authoritie to the auncient Lawes,King of Romanes, and Emperor. Names diuers, but of the ſame ſubſtance. and confirmed them: and freely ſhewed that it onely appertained to the Electors of the Empire, and not vnto others, to chuſe the King of the Romanes. So that he which hath the greateſt number of Princes voyces, he is truly reputed choſen, be hee King or Emperour. (For in ſubſtance they be one ſame thing, although their names be diuers) which Emperour may exerciſe and adminiſter the affaires of the Empire without any confirmation of the Romane ſeate. Who alſo ought to be ſacred by the Pope, after it ſhall bee ſignified by the Princes that hee is Legitimately choſen.
               But if the Pope refuſe, hee may he proclaimed Emperour Auguſtus by any Catholicke Biſhop whatſoeuer,Vnctions are ceremonies inuented by the Pope. as hath bene long time vſed; ſeeing eſpecially all ſuch vnctions are onely certaine ceremonies inuented by Popes, which giue onely the name and not the thing, in token of the vnion which ought to be betwixt the Church and the Romane Empire. For the Emperour makes not an oath of fidelitie to Popes, but for the defence of the faith. And ſeeing it is ſo, how can ſuch an oath

giue him any ſuperioritie in things which concerne the Temporaltie.
               Moreouer, the Emperor alſo ſhewed that it is a falſe thing to ſay, that whileſt the Empire is vacant the right of the Emperour is deuolued vnto the Pope, and that this is againſt the libertie of the holy Empire, againſt the dignitie, rights,The adminiſtration of the Empire being vacant, belongeth to the Count Palatin.
                   and maieſtie thereof: but that by a cuſtome approoued and vſed of long time, and obſerued by his aunceſtors, without that euer was done to the contrarie, during the vacation of the Empire; it appertaineth vnto the Count Palatin of Rhene, to haue the managing of the affaires of the Empire, to conferre Feaſtes and Impoſts, and ordering of other buſineſſes.
               After all this to excuſe himſelfe,The Emperor yeeldeth a confeſſion of his faith. he yeelded in the preſence of all, clearely and holily a reaſon of his faith▪ and confeſſed openly he was a Chriſtian, beleeuing wholy the Articles of the Faith, as they were taught by the Catholique Church: and purged himſelfe very well of all things that were obiected againſt him by Iohn the 23. and Benet. 12.
               
                  Who would not admire the pietie of Lewis thus vexed and tormented by Popes? what would this haue come vnto if he had tried it by Armes againſt them?
               
               The integritie of this Lewis,
                  
                     Benet ouercome with the integritie of the Emperor. finally was acknowledged by Pope Benet. And the peace was ſoone after made betweene the Emperour and the Pope. Who ſtraight bore the Emperor ſuch an amitie, that he defended and maintained him hardily in his innocencie againſt the Embaſſadors of the king of France, which vſed alwaies rude & defamitorie words againſt the ſaid Emperour: in ſo much that the Pope was called by the ſaid Embaſſadors, the Protector of an heretike.
               And although Benet for a certaine time was not without great feare, becauſe of their words,The Emperor Lewis abſolued. (for they threatned him with great warres if hee abſolued the Emperour) yet hee commaunded by a publike decree (which was proclaimed through all Almaine) that all proceſſes which had bene attempted by Iohn againſt the Emperor ſhould be nothing and of no valew: and that it appertained not to Iohn to attempt ſuch things againſt him, ſeeing the Emperors and the Popes iuriſdiction are diſtinct and ſeperate.
               
                  Hee further declared openly that Lewis in all things had borne himſelfe like a good & valiant Emperour. Yet you muſt vnderſtand that the Pope did nothing herein, freely & of good courage: but cautelouſly to acquire the fauour of Lewis. For becauſe he ſawe the king of France (in the kingdome & ſeignory of whom hee remained) had taken ſome ill conceit againſt him, hee feared that if alſo hee had the Emperour his enemie, there were no perſon where he might haue ſuccours, if the king of France practiſed any miſchiefe againſt him.The Pope doth all for his profit. Therefore Benet iudged that it ſhould be for his profit if he got the beneuolence of the Emperour: hoping by that meanes that the other durſt attempt nothing againſt him.
               
                  Theſe be the practiſes and meanes wherewith Popes haue nouriſhed and do yet nouriſh their tyrannie in the Church of the Lord.
               
               
                  Benet being menaced by the king of France chaunged his opiniō, and left the ſentences giuen by his predeceſſors againſt Lewis. He placed Vicars in the Imperiall Townes of Italie, and drew vnto the Romane ſeate the charge and office of a Senator,The Penetentiers. withdrawing it frō the Emperour. He inuented all that was needful for the Apoſtolike penetētiary, declaring in order the taxes of Letters, and ſo aſſembled great riches frō all nations.
               
                  Collations of benefices.This Pope firſt vſurped collations of all Prelatures, Biſhopprikes, & other benefices, as wel for himſelfe as for his ſucceſſours: and depriued ſuch as were vnlearned and ignorant from their benefices: And ordained that all his Chaplaines ſhould ſing by note their Canonicall houres. That thay ſhould lie in one Dortoire,
                     Canonicall houres ſung by note.
                     The ſiſter of Francis Petrarke, bought by Benet.
                     
                   and that they ſhould haue no other reuenewes, but that was neceſſary for their life and apparell.
               He builded in Auignon a very faire houſe, with Towers and goodly Orchards: And this olde Adulterer bought deare the ſiſter of Francis Petrarke which was very faire, of her brother called Gerard, to abuſe her.
               He ordeined 6. Cardinals being abſent frō 
                  Rome, & repaired with great charge & coſt the roofe of S. Peters church, & publiſhed certaine acts againſt the Iacobins,
                  Ockam. Dantes. as Leander witneſſeth.
               
                  Ockam & Dantes held for heretikes, bicauſe they maintained

by liuely reaſons out of the ſcriptures that the Romane Empire depended not vpon the Pope, but of God onely. Naucler.
               
               
                  Such as ſpeake againſt the Pope are heretikes.
               
               
                  Benet made many Extrauagants and Benedictines for the Monkes of the order of S. Benet, wherein is made mention in the ſixt and ſeuenth Chapter, how Abbots ought to ſend their young Monkes, ſuch as are fitteſt to their ſtudie vnto the Vniuerſities, and offer them pentions to do it.
               He made a Decretall which beginneth Benedictus Deus in donis ſuis: to the ende benefices ſhould not be giuen to ſuch as were vnworthy of them. Wherein is confuted and condemned as hereticall, the doctrine which his predeceſſor Iohn had publikely preached touching the happie ſoules: and it was determined & declared yt the ſoules which had nothing to purge, incōtinent as they are departed frō the body do ſee ye
                   face of God.
               He was ſaid to haue bene ſo rigorous that hee would ſcant know ſuch as were of his blood: and ſaid that the Pope had no parents. Faſcic. temp.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt 1339. the Caſtle of Loppen was beſieged by certaine Gentlemen, with 30000. footemen, and fifteene thouſand horſemen: but they were valiantly driuen back and chaſed away by the Swiſſes, which with the number of two or three thouſand ſlew 4000. of the ſaid combatants & three  Counts. Faſc. temp. and others.
               The Sarraſins in Spaine were diſcomfited, where there were  1000. ſlaine, & as many priſoners. Chro. Euſeb. The ſea of Hiſto.
               
               
                  Benet dyed in Auignon, to the great ioy of many, for his great rigor, and therefore ſome write of him.
               
                  
                     Hic ſitus eſt Nero, laicis mors, vipera clero:
                  
                  
                     Deuius a vero, cuppa repleta mero, that is,
                  Here lyeth death to Laie-men, a viper to the Cleargie,
                  A ſtraier from the veritie, a cup full of Wine.
               
               He left great ſummes of gold and ſiluer, whereof he gaue nothing to his parents and friends, but to the Church.
               
                  Francis Petrarke flouriſhed in this time, and Gregorie de Aremino the Auguſtine and generall of his order.
               
                  Orchanes ſecond Emperour of the Turkes, ſonne of

                  Ottoman, who raigned 22. yeares.
               
                  Clement. 6.
                  
                  Clement Pope, ſixt of that name, Limoſin ruled in Auignon 11. yeares: before called Peter Roger, borne of Limoges. Firſt hee was Prior of S. Babille, which is a Priorie of the order of S. Benet, after Abbot of Feſcan, after Biſhop of Arras, then Archbiſhop of Roane, and after by Pope Benet 12. was made Cardinal, and finally after his death was made Pope, although hee was the youngeſt of all the Cardinalls.
               
                  H. Marius in his booke Intituled Euſebius Captiue, in this maner deſcribeth the Pope. Clement 6. ſaith he, a man very deſirous of women, of honour and power, being incited with a diabolicall furie, fixed Letters vpō the gates & doores of Temples, by which he threatned the Emperour vpon grieuous puniſhments, that within 3. daies he ſhould renounce the rights of his Empire.
               The crueltie of this Emperour was maruellous. This Emperour came to Francford, and being readie with all his power to do that which was enioyned him, required by his Embaſſadors, that he would receiue him into grace.
               This Pope anſwered the Embaſſadors, that he would neuer pardon Lewis, vnleſſe firſt he confeſſed all his errors and hereſies, and diſmiſſed himſelfe of the Imperial dignitie, & put into his hands, himſelfe, his children, and all his goods, and that he would promiſe to take nothing of all thoſe things, but by his conſent. And he gaue a Formularie vnto the Embaſſadors, and commaunded them to preſent it vnto Lewis.
               
               
                  What forme or faſhion is there here, I will not ſay of a Paſtor, but of a man onely?
               
               
                  Lewis ſhewed this Formularie to the Princes, to the Electors, and to the Embaſſadors of the Imperiall Townes. The Princes deteſted ſome of the Articles, for that they were laid by the Pope to the ruine and deſtruction of the Empire: and they promiſed the Emperour ſuccours if hee would defend the rights of the Empire, as hee had done before: yet they prayed Clement by their Embaſſadors, that he would leaue off ſuch Articles inuented to the detriment of the Empire; but the Embaſſadors returned without doing any thing.
               
                  
                  Clement laying the cauſe of all thoſe things vpon Lewis, ſought the ruine of him and his children. Wherfore the Thurſday before Eaſter, he excommunicated him very cruelly, and renewed all the rigorous proceſſes made by Pope Iohn, and declared him an heretike and a ſchiſmatike: he alſo ſollicited the Electors to chuſe an other Emperour. He depriued the Archbiſhop of Magunce of his dignitie, and of the priuiledge & authoritie to chuſe: becauſe that knowing the Emperors innocencie, he would not violate his maieſtie. As for the other Electors, the new of Magunce, he of Treuers and Colongne being corrupted by force of gifts and preſents by the king of Bohemia, declared Emperour Charles the fourth, ſonne of Iohn King of Bohemia, who was ſonne of Henry ſeuenth of that name, who was crowned at Bohemia during the Empire of Lewis: but hee was not reputed a lawful Emperour, no not after the death of Lewis, as may be ſeene.
               
                  Who can here rehearſe the horrible warres which proceeded of the wickedneſſe of this Clement againſt the Empire?
               
               Twentie thouſand French men were ouerthrowne by Edward King of England: who diſcended into Normandie,
                  The Iourney of Creſſy.
                   and came euen to Paris, deſtroying all the Countrey. It was called the battaile of Creſſy; where there was great effuſion of French bloud. Chron. Euſeb. Callais was yeelded to the king of England, after it had endured extreame famine.
               A great famine was in all Italie, accompanied with a peſtilence and mortalitie, which was almoſt vniuerſall. It continued till the yeare, 1350. See the Hiſtories of Almaine & France.
               
               
                  Lewis the fourth was poyſoned (as is ſaid) hauing drunke  of the Cup of Iane Dutcheſſe of Auſtrich,
                  See the Chro. of the Emperours in the 2. Tome. which came to ſee him; and feeling himſelfe grieued he would needs goe on hunting, and beeing in the wood, hee fell from his horſe, as if hee had bene ſtricken with a Palſey, whereof he died ſoone after. At the article and point of death hee cryed: O my God bee merciful vnto me a poore ſinner. Munſter and others.
               After his death, there was yet more trouble then before.
                     Edward choſen Emperour. Frederic.
                   The Electors were ſollicited to elect Edward king of England▪ but he refuſed the election as a thing too troubleſome. After,

they choſe Frederic Count of Miſne:
                  Charles. 4. but hee loued better to maintaine peace with the Bohemians, then to charge himſelfe with the titles of the Empire.
               At Francford one part of the Electors choſe Gunther of Scwartymbourge: who accepted the Election as being ſufficiently munited and puiſſant to hold good againſt the Emperor Charles, who then remained at Magunce. But Gunther a litle after was poiſoned and died at Francford, ſo Charles raigned alone.
               
                  Let all people know hereby the deteſtable tirannie that Popes haue exerciſed through all the world, ſpreading the ſeedes of ſeditions and warres.
               
               
                  The publike reuenewe of the Empire engaged.The Empire was brought into great calamitie: for Charles to the end to leaue his ſonne ſucceſſor, did ſo corrupt the Electors with ſtore of gifts and promiſes, that hee gaged vnto them the publike reuenew of the Empire, which they yet detaine at this day: and therefore the Romane Empire could not relieue it ſelfe. For then did the Electors conſtraine Charles to ſweare that he would neuer reuoke that he had engaged.
               
                  The Empire being ouerthrowne, the Turke aſſailed the Church of Ieſus Chriſt, and ruinated many of them in Europe, putting all to fire and ſword, and laying vpon them that miſerable yoake of Mahomet.
                  
                  But how can Chriſtian Princes driue backe Ottoman and his ſucceſſors out of the Church of Chriſt, if they firſt repreſſe not the Turkiſh Pope an houſhold enemie?
               
               
                  The Iubile remitted to 50. yeares.This Pope Clement reduced to the fiftieth yeare the Iubile, wherof hath bene ſpoken, to the end by that meanes to gather more gold: and being abſent from Rome, hee made it be celebrated  the yeare of the Lord, 1350. All the length of the ſaid yeare there were at Rome euery day to the number of fiue thouſand Pilgrimes, entring and going out, as eaſily might be counted. Thus ſaith Peter Premonſtre.
               
               
                  The bringing in the obſeruation of the ceremonie of Iubile, is a renowncing of Ieſus Chriſt, who hath brought vs the agreeable time, and the yeare and day of ſaluation and perpetuall pardon. 2. Cor. 6.2.
                  
               
               
                  In this time a company of people of diuers Nations were aſſembled, making a Sect,Lewis.
                  Whippers or beaters. which did beate and whip themſelues, going from Towne to Towne, from Borough to Borough, and from Village to Village: There came one time 200. from Souabe, and amongſt them was one Prince and two Gouernours, whom they obeyed. One day being before the Monaſterie of Spire, in the day about one of the Clock, they made a round and ſtripped themſelues naked, except that they had ſhirtes like hoſe, from the thighes to the heeles, and ſo fell proſtrate vpon the earth one after an other in forme of a Croſſe,A new Sect. Robes. and whipped themſelues, ſinging and Inuocating God: they alſo laid their faces towards the earth, praying for themſelues and for all ſuch as did them good, likewiſe for them that did euill vnto them. They had certaine Prieſts amongſt them, and ſome Lettered people: there were alſo Gentlemen and Handicraftſmen, women and children. If any man Inuited them to dinner, they durſt not go, nor take any almes without the leaue of their Gouernours. But they whipped themſelues twiſe a day, and each one once in the night ſecretly. They ſpake not to any woman. They all carried Croſſes both before and behinde, in their apparell, hattes, or Caps. Their whips were tied to their robes, and they remained no more then one night in a Pariſh.
               From the Towne of Spire, there were more then an hundreth which raunged themſelues in their company.Error incontinently findeth her adherents Yet none was receiued of their band, vnleſſe they promiſed to keepe all the aforeſaid things. And if any had not inough each day to ſpend eight pence: and if he promiſed not to be confeſſed, and to haue good contrition, and to forgiue all iniuries his enemies had done vnto him Moreouer, his wife muſt conſent vnto him. Finally the Emperour forced them to leaue off theſe toyes and bables: and the Pope forbad them vpon paine of excōmunication from thenceforth not to whip themſelues. Yet in repentant maner they might whip themſelues ſecretly.
               
                  Imbert Daulphin of 
                     Ʋienne, renouncing the glory of the world (as they ſpeake) tooke the habit of a Iacobin in the Couent of Lyons vppon Rhoſne: ſolde the Countrey

of Dolphine to the king of France,
                  Charles. 4. vnder conditiō that the kings of France ſhould not aliene it, and that their eldeſt children ſhould beare the title thereof. And this did he in deſpight of ſuch as ſhould haue bin his heires, which had done a thing contrary to his will. See the French Hiſtories.
               
               
                  Bartholus the Legiſt or Lawyer was in this time, and Petrus Bercorij, who tranſlated Titus Liutus into French, at the King Iohn his commaundement, and made the Breuiarie vpon the Bible, and the Morall Reportorie.
               
               
                  Phillip de Valois 49. king of France, the Coozin-germain of the three former kings, hauing raigned 22. yeares, died at Noogent le Roy, of the age of 57. yeares.
               
                  Iohn his ſonne Duke of Normandie, was crowned at Reims, the fiftieth king of France, and raigned 14. yeares.
               The brotherhood of the order of the ſtarre, began in the houſe of S. Oyon nigh Paris, at the inſtance of King Iohn. The knights of this order carried a ſtarre in theyr hattes or on their coates.
               
                   About this time the Iewes were ſent out of Almaine, becauſe they had infected and poyſoned the Fountaines and Pits of water. Faſci. Temp.
               
               
                  Clement the ſixt died ſuddenly, being ſtroken with an Apoſteme, the yeare 1353.
               
                  Innocent. 6.
                  
                  Innocent Pope, ſixt of that name ſucceeded, borne of Limoges, 
                   firſt called Stephen Aubert, hee was an aduocate Doctor in the Lawes and the Decrees: after he was Biſhop of Cleremont and Cardinall of Oſtia.
               
               After he had taken poſſeſſion of the Popedome, looking prudently for his profit in time to come,Reſeruation of Benefices. he ſuſpended certaine reſeruations made by Clement his predeceſſor: and ſtraight ordained that all Prelates and beneficed men ſhould retire vnto their Churches: not to the end to preach the Goſpell, but to magnifie and maintaine all abuſes and Papiſh rights. And that they might gather the fruites thereof to liue in all Idleneſſe and diſſolution.
               He ſaid well that Sheepe ought to be kept by their owne Sheepheard, and not by an hireling.
               
                  This Pope would needs gather a tenthe of all the rents and reuenewes of the Cleargie, but the Prelates of France would not conſent therevnto, therefore it was not leuied, yet hee did what he could in Almaine, in the Dioces of Spice. See Nauclerus.
               
               The dearenes of victualls was extreame in France, for the warres of the Engliſhmen, the quarter of good wheat was at eighteene pounds at Paris.
               
               He diminiſhed his ordinarie expences (which was great) in reducing his familie to a certaine number, yet not very honeſt, as may be ſeene in Petrarke.
               
               He would haue no perſon in his houſe but ſuch as ſhould ſerue either his profit or affections, and he very ſtraightly by Edict enioyned all his Cardinalls that they ſhould do the like.Betwixt ſaying and doing is a long way. And ſaid that his life and that of all Eccleſiaſticall perſons ought to ſerue for an example to others, ſo that all Chriſtian people may take heed to follow our examples. Moreouer hee ordained a certaine ſallary or ſtipend for the Auditors of his Pallace, to the end they ſhould ſteale nothing.
               He was ſparing in his diet and liuing (ſay ſome authors) but in expences of warre very large.
               The Vniuerſitie of Prage in Bohemia,
                  The Vniuerſitie of Prage. is inſtituted and endowed with priuiledges by Innocent, at the requeſt of the Emperour Charles the 4. Naucler.
                  
               
               
                  Charles the 4. going to Rome to be crowned,Outrage done to the Empreſſe. his wife was taken at Piſe, and carried with her Damzels into a Stewes to deſpite the Emperour, but ſhee eſcaped from thence in great danger: and then appeared the vertue of the Almaines. Nauclerus.
               
               The yeare 1355. Charles the 4. was crowned at Millaine, and after at Rome on Eaſter day, vpon condition ſtraight to depart out of Italie. Naucler.
               
               
                  What pride was this to commaund the Romane Emperour to retire out of his owne countrey? Franc. Petrarke.
                  
               
               The Iourney of Poitiers was to the great dammage and confuſion  of all France, and victorie of the Engliſh.The battaile of Poitiers. There were ſlaine the Duke of Bourbon, and the Conſtable of Fraunce,
                  
the Marſhall and others, to the number of eight hundreth knights. The King of France was a priſoner, Phillip his fourth ſonne and others, as well Counts as knights and men of armes, at leaſt 17. hundreth. See the Hiſtories of France.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1359. was held an Imperiall Iourney at Magunce, whether the Pope Innocent ſent his Legate for the ſubſidies of the Apoſtolike Chamber: and the ſaid Legate had power to diſpence with all Eccleſiaſticall perſons touching Benefices which they had obtained otherwiſe then the holy Canons permitted. In this aſſembly were the Archbiſhop of Magunce, Treuers, and of Colongne, the Dukes of Saxe, Bauiere and others. The Emperor then called the Legate vnto him & ſaid: The Pope hath ſent you into Almaine to exact a great ſumme of ſiluer, without reforming the Cleargie. After hee ſaid to a Canon of Magunce; deliuer mee your hatte, and gaue him his which was much worſe. Then ſaid he to the Princes which were there; Locke not I with this hatte more like a warriour then a man of the Church? Then turned hee againe to the Archbiſhop of Magunce, and ſaid. Wee commaund that you reforme your Cleargie, and take away the ſuperfluitie in their garments, ſhooes, hattes, and other things. The Popes Legate hearing this, went away all confounded, and as it were flying, tooke a boate and got him to Cologne. Naucler.
               
               
                  Iohn de Roquetaillaide martired.
                  This Pope, a true Tyrant of Babilon, commaunded that Iohn de Roquetaillaid ſhould be burnt in Auignon, becauſe he ſaid ſomething againſt the Cleargie. This man (ſaith Peter de Premonſtre) prophecied many things ſhould come to paſſe touching Antichriſt and the Popes, and therefore was he held ſuſpected of hereſie. For he began to prophecie the yeare of our Lord, 1345. in the time of Clement the ſixt, and many things were ſeene come to paſſe of that he had foretold.
               
                  The Feaſt of the ſpeare and nailes.This Pope ordained the Feaſt of Ieſus Chriſts Launce and nailes: to the end thoſe dead Idolls might bee adored by the Chriſtians. Hee Inuironed Auignon with walles and ditches, and without the towne founded the Monaſterie of Chartreux.
               
               
                  Wonders.Before this Popes death, there was a great Ecclips of the Sunne, ſuch as was neuer ſeene the like; to ſhewe that that

very time was ſo full of darkneſſe, that ſcant was there any remainder of the light of truth in the Church.
               There was alſo ſeene in his time a a flame after the ſunne-ſetting (as Maſſeus witneſſeth) which endured a long time, and ſhewed what a great fire ſhould after come. Moreouer there was great numbers of Graſhoppers, which after they had deſtroyed the corne, euen all trees were burned.
               As the ſaid Pope was preparing an Armie by ſea againſt the Turkes,The death of Innocent.
                   becauſe the Romanes were in troubles and ſeditions, he was ſo vexed in his minde, that he died with griefe, the yeare 1362. and was buried in the ſaid Monaſterie of Chartreux
                   without the Towne of Auignon.
               
               
                  Vrbain fift of Limoſin,
                  Vrbain. 5.
                   called before Grinnald Griſant the ſonne of an Engliſh Phiſitian called William, Monke of S. Benet, firſt Abbot of Auxerre, and after of S. Victor, nigh to Marſeillis, being abſent in a certaine Embaſſage, was created Pope.
               He was a great Doctor of the Canon Lawe, and an exceeding arrogant Maiſter. He ſtraight applied himſelfe to defend the libertie of the Papall Church by couetouſneſſe, diſſolutions and pompes, and chiefly ſerued himſelfe therein with ſuch as affectioned him moſt in ſuch affaires. But aboue all, he ſent one called Gilles a Spaniard, Cardinall of S. Sabin as a Legate into Italie with full power: Who as a true Executor of all his bloudie commaundements, rode through all Italie, and ſo repreſſed the Vicounts and other gouernours of Townes, bringing vppon them great loſſes and hurts if they would not ſubmit themſelues vnder the obedience of the Romane Church.
               
                  Yues a Brittaine Prieſt,Yues. ſolde his goods and gaue them to the poore, and was Canonized after his death. Sabell.
               
               
                  Armacan (ſome call him Richard and qualifie him an Archbiſhop) a learned man, publiſhed concluſions againſt Friars,Armacan. teaching that it was a villainous thing for a Chriſtian to begge without conſtraint. 
                     Ʋolater.
               
               
                  Baldus a Lawyer of Peruſe, was renowned in this time.
               Baldus.
               
                  Ieſuites.The Monaſticke order of Ieſuites began by Iohn Colomban and Francis Ʋincent of Bourgongne. Ʋolat. and Sabell.
                  
They were afterward by the Popes priuiledge, called the Apoſtolike Clarkes.
               
                  Brigide Princeſſe of Sauabe, had foure ſonnes and foure daughters: a litle before Pope Vrbain died, ſhe went to Rome to erect the order which after ſhe inſtituted. Valat. lib. 21.
               She then to accompliſh her vow, procured that the order of Monkes (named with her name) as well men as women might be confirmed.
               
                  A golden Bull.The Emperour Charles merited great praiſe by the Bull of gold, wherein he gathered many things very neceſſarie to maintaine publike peace.
               
                  Iohn king of France went into England for the deliuerance of his brother Duke of Orleance, and of his ſonne Iohn Duke of Berry, and of many others which he left in hoſtage; and being there, died in London, & after was carried to S. Denis in France. See Emili. lib. 8. & 9.
               
                  
                  Charles fift of that name, 51. king of France, was ſurnamed le Sage. Hee cauſed many Latin bookes to be tranſlated into French, yea bookes of holy ſcripture.
               
                  Amurathes the third Emperour of the Turkes, raigned 23. yeares, and was the firſt that entred into Europe: For hee aided the Emperour of Conſtantinople, and ſent him 12. thouſand men, which paſſed into Greece. This was after, cauſe of the taking of the Couuntrey of Aſia, the yeare of Chriſt, 1363.
               
                  Wickliffe beganne as a breake of day, the preaching of the Goſpell.
               
               
                  Iohn Wickliffe an Engliſh man, a man of great ſpirit, flouriſhed in this time, and began as from a deepe night to draw out the truth of the doctrine of the ſonne of God. He ſtudied in the Vniuerſitie of Oxford, and came to ſuch degree of erudition, that hee was thought the moſt excellenreſt amongſt the Theologians. In his readings with the puritie of the doctrine which hee taught, hee alſo liuely touched the abuſes of the Popedome: In ſo much that the Locuſts, that is to ſay the begging Monkes, lifted themſelues vp againſt him. But the Lord gaue him for a Protector, the King Edward, during whoſe raigne, he had great libertie in his profeſſion.
               
                  
                  Richard the ſaid Edwards ſucceſſour, perſecuted and baniſhed him: but as a true Champion of the Lord he remained alwaies conſtant euen to his death. His concluſions, his bookes and his doctrine, ſhew ſufficiently the gifts and graces which God had beſtowed vpon him. Whoſoeuer will more largely know thoſe things, let him looke in the booke of Martyrs brought by vs into light ſince the ſaid Wickliffe.
               
               
                  Vrbane went to Rome to pacifie Italie, where hee builded  many things at Viterbe, and at Montlacon, minding to returne into Italie. And as he returned into France in hope to bring againe the Court to Rome, he deceaſed at Marcellis, not without great ſuſpition of poyſoning. Sabel.
               
               An Vniuerſitie founded at Vienna in Auſtriche, by Albert Duke of Auſtriche.
               
               
                  Planudes a Greeke Monke liued in this time: hee tranſlated Cato and other bookes out of Greeke into Latin.
               
                  Charles King of France often held his ſeate of Iuſtice, and was altogether a man of peace, neither was euer Armed. Only walking nigh Paris, he made his warres and other his affaires of importance by his brothers and other Committees, by whom he recouered as it were all that which the Engliſh men had taken from his Father. To helpe the charges of the warre,A Taxe vpon Wine. he laid a Taxe vpon Salt & Wine that men ſold. He had fiue Armies at once againſt the Engliſh men.
               
                  Gregorie Pope, 11. of that name, of Limoſin,
                  Gregory. 11.
                   ruled in Auignon 7. yeares & 5. moneths, before he was called Rogier, ſonne  of the Earle of Benfort, and Nephew of Pope Clement the ſixt: hee was the Diſciple of Baldus the Legiſt, who then read at Peruſe.
               
            
            
               Returne of the Papaltie to Rome.
               Moſt of the Townes of Italie withdrawing themſelues from his obedience (as 
                     Ʋolateranus ſaith) at the perſwaſion of Caterine de Siene, a Nunne of the order of Iacobins, & of Baldus his late maiſter, parting frō 
                  France with 12. Gallies, with 3. ranks of Ores returned to Rome, the yeare of the Lord 1376.
               He pronounced ſentence of Interdict againſt the Florentines, which were the firſt authors of the reuolt, and had ſeized

all the Popes Townes which were about them. Vpon whom finally he made ſtrong and ſharpe warre, becauſe they made no account of the thunder of his excommunications: which the Legiſts ſaid were of no validitie, becauſe they proceeded of hatred and enmitie. Naucler.
               
               Some ſet downe certaine cauſes of his returne into Italie. A woman called Brigide (ſaith Maſſeus) returning from Ieruſalem, writ to Gregorie that the Lord would that the Romane Court ſhould be turned into her houſe. Cranzius addeth, that as he reprehended a Biſhop, that he left his Church and followed the Court, he anſwered him. And thou ſaith he which art Pope of Rome, and which ought to giue example to others, why goeſt not thou to thy Biſhoppricke? Then tranſported he his ſeate to Rome at the perſwaſion of two women and of a Biſhop, the ſeuenth yeare after he was departed.
               
                   This Pope demaunded a tenth of all Church goods in Almaigne, & to gather it ſent his Legate. But many reſiſted & formed appellations againſt the Pope, ſaying that they could not pay it. Others that they would not pay it: and ſo was there a ſchiſme in the Churches of Almaigne. Naucler.
               
               
                  Petrarke dyed about this time. So did Boccace, of the age of 62. yeares, Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  Simon de Caſſia was in this time, and S. Bonauenture whom Gregorie 2. made Cardinall and Biſhop of Albe. Abb. Trit.
               
               
                  
                  Amurathes was ſlaine with the blowe of a Dagger, by the ſeruant of a Chriſtian called Seruianus: For that the ſaid Amurathes had ſlaine his maiſter.
               
                  A new Sect of dauncers.
                  Peter de Premonſtre hath left by writing, that in this Popes time there was a kinde or new Sect of diuelliſh people, as well men as women, which without any ſhame daunced hardely. And he ſaid that in the yeare of the Lord 1375. they came frō 
                  Aix in Almain into Henaut, and from thence into France. Some ſaid this ſignified the returne of Pope Gregorie & his Cardinals to Rome. Theſe thought they daunced in a flood of blood, although ſuch as were preſent with them ſaw no ſuch thing. The common people iudged that theſe people were ill baptized by Prieſts which keep whores and harlots: and therefore they determined

to haue riſen vp againſt the Cleargy to ſlay them and pill their goods,Wencelaus. but that God remedied it by the meanes of certaine coniurations, & that which followeth in the ſaid author.
               The yeare of Chriſt 1375. the Engliſh men and Brytons,
                  The Engliſh fall vpon the the Swiſſes. with other people to the number of fortie thouſand and more, fell vpon the Countries of Alſarce and Sangania, and tooke Cities and Caſtles and raced them to the ground, violated virgins and wiues, burned Churches and Monaſteries, and after many other tyrannies they attempted alſo vpon the Bernois: but a great multitude of them and their Duke were ſlaine and diſcomfited by the ſaid Bernois at Frowenbrun, the reſt were aſſailed by other Swiſſes, and were ouerthrowne, and ſo they all periſhed miſerably. Faſcic. temp.
               
               The Emperour Charles ſought to ſtretch out the limits of his kingdome of Boheme, partly by ſiluer, and partly by warres and other meanes: which was cauſe that he gaue to Iohn Henry his brother, the Countrey of Morauia,
                  The Country of Morauia.
                   to the end he might renounce the right he had in the kingdome of Boheme. Long time after he alſo cauſed the Princes Electors to elect Wencelaus his ſonne King of the Romanes. Finally, after many requeſts hee obtained that he demaunded, the yeare of grace 1376. and gained the Princes which elected Wencelaus King of Romanes,Wencelaus. being but 15. yeares of age. After his coronation he eſpouſed Ihehanne or Iane daughter of Albert, Counte of Holland, and Duke of Bauiere. But the yeare following Charles dyed, which was the yeare of grace 1378. and of his Empire 33. Hee was an Emperour worthie of praiſe, ſauing that he regarded more his kingdome of Boheme, then the publike weale of his Empire. For knowing his Sonne ſhould ſucceede him in the Empire, hee corrupted the Electors by great and faire promiſes, the which being not able to accompliſh, hee gaged vnto them the publike taxes and tributes, and brought the Romane Empire into that calamitie wherein it is at this day. For the Electors retaine that vnto themſelues which ſhould be the Emperours.
               A great number of the poore of Lyon were burnt at Paris, in the place de Greue. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  The Colledge of Benuais was founded at Paris, the yeare 1372. otherwiſe called the Colledge des Dormans, becauſe it was founded by three brethren called Dormans, the one was Biſhop of Beauuais, the other Archbiſhop of Angiers, and the other Chauncellour of France.
               
               
                  
                  Wencelaus ſonne of Charles fourth of that name, was choſen king of the Romans, beeing but 15. yeares of age, at the purſuite of his Father, and crowned at Aix la Chappelle, with his wife the daughter of Albert Duke of Bauiere, and Counte of Holland. But this Wencelaus was euil made of bodie and ſpirit, his bodie crooked and of an effeminate courage. He was borne at Nuremberge, and his mother dyed at his byrth. Aſſoone as hee was made king of Boheme and of the Romanes, incontinently he gaue himſelfe to all Idlenes and diſſolution, following his pleaſures, caring for nothing but to make good cheare. And becauſe he vſed great tyrannie, in the end the Barons of the kingdom tooke him & kept him in priſon the ſpace of 4. moneths,The Emperour impriſoned. til he was brought forth by his brother the Marqueſſe called Iohn: but he became no better. His ſubiects then ſeeing that all the Country was infected with his orders, tyrannies, whoredomes & diſſolutions, they complained to his brother Sigiſmond king of Hungarie, and he was againe taken and impriſoned in Auſtriche, but eſcaping out of priſon, he returned into his kingdome, and returned to his firſt manners. The Electors of the Empire often admoniſhed him, but hee cared not, therefore he was depriued of his Empire at Bopard.
               
               
                  Baiazet fourth King or Emperour of the Turks, the ſonne of Amurathes, after the death of his Father, ſlewe his brother Soliman traiterouſly, and ſo alone enioyed the Empire of the Turkes, the yeare of the world 5335. after Chriſtes Natiuitie, 1373. To reuenge the death of his father, he made war againſt Marke Lord of Bulgaria,
                  Marke Lorde of Bulgaria. ouercame and ſlewe him, and ſo ſubiected a great part of his Country. A little after he ouerranne Hungarie, Albania and Walachie, and did great hurt, tooke many Chriſtians and led them into Thracia priſoners. In his enterpriſes and affaires he was ſo hotte and ſo ſuddaine, that he was called Baiazet Hildrin, that is to ſay, thunder from heauen. He

brought vnder as it were all Greece, being aided with the goods and graces of nature, both in body and ſpirit. He beſieged Conſtantinople by the ſpace of eight yeares. Wherevpon the Emperour ſailed into France requiring ſuccours, which was graunted him: yet got Baiazet victorie of the French, Hungarians, Almaines, Syrians and Miſians, in one aſſembly againſt him: after hee returned to Conſtantinople, and there was no other meane to conſerue the Empire of Conſtantinople, but that Tamberlan, who was Lord of a certaine Countrie of Eaſt Scythia towards Parthia, hauing (as it were) an infinit number of people, put to the ſworde in one onely battaile on the Mount Stella (where Pompey fought with Mithridates) 2. hundreth thouſand Turkes, and ouercame Baiazet, and bound him with chaines of Gold and put him into a Cage of Iron, and ſo ledde him through all the Countreys of Aſia and Syria: In the which miſerable eſtate the ſaid Baiazet died. He raigned twentie and ſixe yeares.
               
                  Edward King of England who had ſo many victories in France, died of the age of 74. yeares, the yeare 52. of his raigne.
               
                  Charles the 4. and Wencelaus his ſonne, came into France to accord the French and the Engliſh: but they returned without doing any thing, becauſe of the death of the Queene, and her daughter Iſabel.
               
               The Pope Gregorie after he had done all that belonged to a good Pope, (as Platina ſaith) being tormented with an intollerable paine of the blather, deceaſed the yeare of the Lord 1378. Some ſay that at the houre that he yeelded the ſpirit, the fire flamed in the pallace of Auignon, which could not be put out vntill the greateſt part of it was burnt. And after that, followed a ſchiſme in the Popedome, the greateſt of all the others. Then ſaith Maſſeus, the people and Cleargie of Rome aſſembled towards the Cardinalls, and prayed them to chuſe ſome Italian, and no French man.
               
                  Vrbain ſixt of that name, a Nepolitain by Nation,Vrbain. 6.
                   called before Bartholemewe, Archbiſhop of Bar, being not yet of the order of Cardinalls, and abſent at the great purſuite of the Romanes, was created Pope.
               
                  He was (ſaith Crantzius) a cruell man, of whom by prayers nothing could be obtained. Being come to the Popedome he would not procure that peace might be amongſt Chriſtians as his dutie was: but ſought to reuenge himſelf of iniuries done him by Cardinals, and by Iane Queene of Sicilie.
               
               
                  
                     Clement. 7. This is not numbred in the Catalogue of the Popes.
                  Clement Pope, 7. of that name, was alſo choſen, and ruled in Auignon 15. yeares.
               And thus began the 22. Schiſme, the cruelleſt and horribleſt, which endured long.
               This came to paſſe for that after the death of Gregorie 11. the Cardinals parted themſelues into two bandes, the Italian Cardinals by conſtraint of the Romanes did chuſe the ſaid Bartholemewe Archbiſhop of Bar, and called him 
                     Ʋrbane the 6. but becauſe he reprooued and reprehended the Cardinals for their lightneſſe, they all departed from him, and went into the Cittie of Tendes, where vpon enuie with the Frenche Cardinals they choſe one called Robert, borne at Geneua, Cardinall of the title of the twelue Apoſtles, and called him Clement the ſeuenth, who came to dwell in Auignon, becauſe of the ſchiſme.
               
                  Nauclere ſaith that this Clement was borne at Catalongne, and was choſen 3. moneths after the promotion of Vrbain 6. For the French Cardinals, for the heate of the time demaunded lycence of the Pope to goe into Anagnia, and from thence were tranſported into Pouille, where they elected the ſaid Clement.
               
               When Vrbane ſawe himſelfe thus left of his Cardinalls, he created thirtie new vpon one day.
               
                  A ſchiſme of fortie yeares.This ſchiſme endured fortie yeares vntill the Councell of Conſtance: whervpō came great diſorder. The King of France and all his kingdome: Item Spaine and England held the part of Clement the 7. The other Countries, that is to ſay, Italie, Almaigne, Hungarie, &c. followed Vrbane the 6. and on both ſides there was great contradiction.
               The kingdome of France endured great euils about this ſchiſme. For Clement had good 35. Cardinals maintained & liuing chiefly of the ſaid kingdome, and all held the beſt Prelateſhips, benefices and dignities.
               
                  The kingdome there alſo was ſore greeued, with Impoſitions, Annuities, Tenths,Inuentions to drawe ſiluer. expectiue graces and other inuentions: Inſomuch that the poore Clarkes & Students of the Vniuerſitie of Paris could get no Benefices, but all were occupied for Cardinals and other Courtiers of Auignon, who had euer hired people to enquire of the value of Benefices.
               
                  Vrbane was cautelous, ſeditious, and vncurteous,
                     Ʋrbane. memoratiue and reuengefull of iniuries, and one that tooke pleaſure to ſowe diſſentions amōgſt Chriſtian Princes, rather thē appeaſe them. Neither could he liue in peace with the king of Hungary and of Naples. He would haue depriued Charles king of Sicilie of his kingdom, Inſomuch that Charles came againſt him, and cōſtrained him to flie to Genues by ſea, and as he paſſed on, the Pope cauſed 5. or 6. Cardinalls to be drowned, becauſe he thought they fauoured Clement the 7. who was at Auignon.
               
               Two other Cardinalls fled towards the ſaid Clement, and were welcommed: but Vrbain excommunicated them, & Clement abſolued them, and the two Popes one excommunicated an other, and their adherents. Naucler.
               
               
                  Vrbain abſolued the Florentines of an excommunication to acquire their grace and fauour.
               To ſhewe himſelfe deuout, he inſtituted the Feaſt of the viſitation of the Virgin Mary in the Mountaines.
               He went to Naples to put Ladiſlaus ſonne of Charles king of Naples, and Iane his ſiſter from their heritage: but it was in vaine. Therefore he returned to Rome, wherein he was poyſoned and died.
               The ſaid Charles at the ſollicitation of Pope Vrbain the 6. came from Hungarie to Naples, where being,Acts worthy of the Papall ſeate. he ſlew the Queen Iane to pleaſe the Popes apppetite.
               All the Archbiſhops, Biſhops, Abbots, and Prieſts, which adheared vnto the ſaid Iane, were depriued of their Benefices by the Pope, and in their places other were inſtituted. See Naucler.
               
               So Charles remained king of Naples fiue yeares, afterward he returned into Hungarie, but by the ſubtiltie of the Queene he was poyſoned, and died the yeare, 1385. So wickedly

as hee had cauſed Queene Iane of Sicilie to be ſlaine: So the Queene of Hungarie ſlew him.Note the trobles yt come of the Pope. But the cauſe why Vrbane ſent for Charles to Naples was in deſpight of Queene Iane, who had receiued his Cardinalls into her kingdome, wherfore he depriued her thereof, and was crowned King of Sicilie by the Pope, the yeare 1381. vnder conditiō that he ſhould leaue to his Nephew certaine Duches & Counts in Sicilia. But becauſe the ſaid Charles was poore, the Pope ſold the Churches goods, yea and the goods of certaine Monaſteries, euen amounting to 8000. Florence: he aliened alſo and ſold certaine ornaments of Gold and Siluer, Croſſes and Images, with which helpe he obtained the kingdome of Naples as is ſaid.
               
                  The three Flower deluces of France.
                  Charles the ſixt, ſonne of Charles the fift, was ſacred King of France very yong. He would beare but three Fower deluces in the French Armes. His Father left him 1800000. Scutes. (Gaguin ſaieth 18. Millions) and yet at the beginning of his raigne he had no mony: For it was diſſipated and diſpearſed by diuers Tutors and Gouernours.
               
                   The aforeſaid Clement 7. crowned Lewis King of Naples, who by armes occupied the Prouince, going into Italie againſt the ſaid Charles and Vrbane, hauing in his Campe 30. thouſand fighters: but hee dyed two yeares after hee was in Italie. The Fountaines and waters were impoyſoned, wherof he dyed and all his Nobilitie. Naucler.
               
               The ſaid Iane Queene of Sicilie & Counteſſe of Prouence, the wife of Charles Duke of Calabria, ſonne of Robert King of Sicilie and Nauarre, and the ſiſter of the King of France Philip, had made the ſaid Lewis, Duke of Aniou, her heire. (For ſhe had now raigned 30. yeares without hauing any line. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  Lewis Archbiſhop of Magdebourge, as hee daunced in the Towne of Caluin with Ladies and Damozels vntill night, ſell vpon the ground and brake his necke, and beat out his braines, with one of the Ladies which he led. The ſame hiſt.
               
               The yeare 1381. Hugo Aubriot, born at Bourgongne, who before had bene great Gouernour de Finances of France, by the meanes of the Duke of Bourgongne was made Prouoſt of Paris,
                  
and during his gouernment, the policie of Paris was well adminiſtred. Many buildings were made, as the bridge of S. Michael, the walles towards the Baſtile, S. Antonie, and the length of the Riuer of Seine: the litle Bridge, the litle Caſtle, and many other places. Hee was accuſed of many crimes, and aboue all, for that hee derided Churchmen, and principally them of the Vniuerſitie of Paris; which conceiued great enmitie againſt him: but eſpecially becauſe hee cauſed to bee builded the Towre of the litle Caſtle vpon the litle Bridge to repreſſe the Inſolencies of Schollers, and to ſtay their night courſes. Wherefore at their purſuite many ſecret Inqueſtes were made againſt him, and hee was charged to haue had the company of Iewiſh women.Aubriot. That hee beleeued not in the Sacrament of the Aultar, but mocked at it, and would neuer bee confeſſed. Beeing charged with theſe informations, hee was impriſoned in the Chaſtelet, and from thence yeelded to the Biſhop of Paris his priſon, and was declared an heretike worthy to bee burned. At the Princes requeſt the ſentence was moderated, and he was publikely placed on a Scaffold in our Ladies Court at Paris, as an heretike and contemner of Sacraments, and as ſuch an one, condemned to perpetuall priſon with bread and water.
               Hee was afterward deliuered from the ſaide priſon of Paris by a popularie tumult, which would haue made him theyr Captaine, but hee withdrewe himſelfe to Dijon where he was borne.
               The ninth of Iuly, Ludolphe or Lupolde Duke of Auſtriche, with a great company of people of warre deceiued by the counſell of the Nobles,The Swiſſers proſper. fell vppon the Swiſſers nigh Sempac, which were in number of a thouſand ſixe hundreth, which draue away all that multitude, and ſlewe the Duke of Auſtrich with eighteene other Princes. Two yeares after the Gentlemen which eſcaped, returned with ſixe thouſand combatants: but two hundreth men of Glaronne put them to flight, and ouercame 2400. Faſc.
               
               About the yeare 1387 fell there a ſchiſme betwixt the Vniuerſitie of Paris, and the Friar Iacobins. One Doctor of the

Friars Preachers called Iohn de Montelon,
                  The diſputation of the conception of the Virgin Marie.
                   preached and maintained publikely that the Virgin Marie was borne in originall ſinne.
               
                  Such queſtions come of pride and ambition, they are not ſuch as the Lord requireth.
               
               
                  The name of Huet.
                  At Rouen an other Doctor of the ſame order preached publikely, that if he prooued not that the Virgin Marie was conceiued in originall ſinne, let them call him Huet, that is Owle. Herevpon in deſpite and deriſion of them, when men ſawe any of the ſaid order, they called them Huets. The Sea of Hiſt.
               
               
                  Charles 6. king of France, viſited the Pope Clement 6. in Auignon.
               
               
                  Antichriſt makes warre vpon himſelfe.
                  Clement died the yeare of our Lord Ieſus 1392. and was buried in Auignon, as they ſay. Theſe two Popes ſent terrible Bulles into diuers parts of the world, and ſowed diffamitorie bookes, wherein they named one an other Antichriſts, Schiſmatikes, heretikes, tyrants, traitors, theeues, vniuſt, ſowers of tares, and children of Belial. Iohn de Ligni Doctor of both lawes, publiſhed a Treatiſe in fauour of 
                     Ʋrbaine: and the Abbot of S. Vaſt the kings Councellor of France, an other in fauour of Clement.
               
               
                  The ſeate of Rome could neuer be better approoued of Antichriſt, then by the acts of theſe Popes, and the witneſſe of their partakers and complices.
               
               
                  Boniface. 9.
                  
                  Boniface Pope, ninth of that name, ruled at Rome 15. yeares;  hee was a Neapolitain, & elected of the age of 30. yeares, before called Peter Thomocel. He was the likelieſt amongſt the Cardinalls which Vrbain had created.
               He confirmed the feaſt of the viſitation of the Virgin Marie, inſtituted by Vrbain his predeceſſor.
               Hee fortified the Caſtle of S. Angelo againſt the Romane people.
               He made a lawe whereby he obtained the ſeignorie of all the world: that is to ſay; That it ſhould not be lawfull for any perſon to enioy any Benefice wherevnto he ſhould be promoted, before he had paid to the Fiske or Apoſtolike chamber all the reuenewe of the firſt yeare.
               
                  He aboliſhed Tribuns, which was a noble Magiſtracie in the Towne of Rome: and conſtrained the Romanes by a cruel Edict to call a ſtranger to be Senator, namely, one Maleteſte of Piſcane.
               
               
                  Boniface canonized S. Brigide, as is aboue ſaid, in the life of 
                     Ʋrbain the 5.
               He made great merchandiſe of Indulgences, and ſold them for money.
               The yeare of Chriſt, 1394 Clement the ſeuenth dyed in Auignon.
               
               
                  Benet Pope, 13. of that name,Benet. 13.
                   otherwiſe called Peter de la Lune, borne at Catalongne, father to the king of Arragon, gouerned  in Auignon 21. yeares, and after went into Arragon, in the time of the Councell of Conſtance.
               
               Before he was Pope being a Cardinall, he made a voyage to Paris to cauſe the ſchiſme to ceaſe. And then in the Vniuerſitie of Paris, were M. Peter d' Aliaco, Cardinall,De Aliace. Gerſon. Doctor in Theologie: and M. Iohn Gerſon, who after the ſaid Aliaco, was Chancellor of Paris.
               
               The yeare 1395. the Chriſtian Princes, Sigiſmond king of  
                  Hungarie and Boheme, brother of the Emperor Wencelaus, Phillip d' Artois, Iohn Count de Neuers, and many other Chriſtian Princes, were diſcomfited nigh Nicopolis, going againſt Baiazet the Turke, to giue ſuccours to the Emperour of Conſtantinople: the pride and diſſolution of the French was cauſe thereof.
            
            
               The beginning of the Dukes of Millaine.
               
               Wee haue ſaide that in the time of Henry the ſeuenth there was at Millaine two factions, that is,Two factions at Millaine.
                   of the Gibellins and of the Guelphes. The Vicounts ſtucke to the one, the yeare 1250. and were the ſtrongeſt in their families. In ſo much that in the end Mathew Vicount caſt out of the Towne of Millaine the great familie of Turrians; Galeace ſucceeded Mathew in the adminiſtration of the Common-wealth. After Galeace, came Actio his ſonne, out of whoſe helme fell the Serpent. And becauſe this man dyed without iſſue, his Vncles Iohn Biſhop of Millaine and Luchin, tooke the gouernment of the Duchy, and had great warres againſt the Cities of Parme,

Lande, Cremone, Bergame, Genes, and others, & ſubiected them. The Biſhop being dead, and Luchin alſo, the adminiſtration came to Barnabas, who with the aide of his brethren, had many warres againſt the Pope of Rome, but principally he a long time moleſted Bolongne, vntill the Citizens redeemed themſelues with money. See Munſter.
               
               
                  Battaile againſt the Turke.The vnluckie battaile for the Chriſtians in Hungaria againſt the Turke, where 20000. Chriſtians were ſlaine, and infinite others taken and put to death. The Count of Neuers was there taken priſoner, but his life was ſaued with 22. others, Gentlemen. His raunſome was 200000. ſcutes. Naucler. & the Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               
                  Benet the 13. graunted to the Vniuerſities, Rolles to haue prouiſion of Benefices.
               
                  Mary daughter of king Charles made her ſelfe a Nunne at Poiſſy.
                  A Nationall Councell in France.
                   The yeare of Chriſt 1398. was aſſembled a Councell by the Prelates of France, wherin it was ſaid, that becauſe Pope Benet would not accord to that way of ceſſion, they would obey him no more in any thing. That Ordinaries ſhould make collation of Benefices. That vnto electiue dignities men ſhould proceed by election, without any more reſorting to the Pope Benet.
               
               The Engliſh men impriſoned, and after vngently murthered their king Richard: becauſe he had made peace and accord with the king of France, without conſent of the people.
               
                   The yeare 1399. certaine Monkes of the order of S. Bernard, brought a S. Snairy, & placed it in an Abbey of theyr order called Cadoyn, in the Dioceſſe of Cahors. Annales of France.
               
               
                  How then ſay they it is at Chambery?
                  
               
               
                  White Mantles.The Sect of white Mantles in Italie was deſtroyed. For Boniface the 9. made take ther Rector, and cauſed him to die. Some ſay he was burnt. See Naucler.
               
               The Trinetois otherwiſe called the Bretheren of the redemption of Captiues, which was alſo called the order of Inham, multiplied greatly.
               
                  Turelupins.The Turelupins are perſecuted, they were otherwiſe called the poore of Lyons: many were burnt in Frāce with their babes.
            
            
               
               Iohn Hus.
               The light brought in by the writings of Wickliffe, greatly profited ſuch as came after him, and aboue all to Iohn Hus, who alſo cleanſed the fountaines of the Goſpell, which were filled not onely with infectious clay and mire, but alſo euen with mortall poyſon, which the begging Monkes and prophane Schoole-philoſophie had tempered. And although the vertue that God had giuen to this perſon, meriteth a longer recitall of his beginning, yet we will ſend the Readers to the booke of Martirs, ſince Wickliffe and Hus. As for vs, we haue chiefly to render thankes vnto God, that through him and other true faithfull, he hath ſent vs the light of his Goſpell.
               The Pope Benet gaue to Charles the ſixt, king of France,
                  An admonition to giue thankes vnto God. the tenth part of all Eccleſiaſticall goods: partly that the king ſhould maintaine and defend him, and partly to the end hee himſelfe might bee partaker of the bootie. And as hee made his reſidencie in his Countrie of Catalongne, in a ſtrong Caſtle called Pauiſcole, maintaining himſelfe to be the true Vicar of Ieſus Chriſt; he was condemned many waies by the authoritie of the ſaid Councell.
               He aſſembled a Councell at Parpignan, and created many Cardinalls. Finally, dying at Pauiſcole the yeare of our Lord, 1424. he commaunded his Cardinall, that ſtraight they ſhould chuſe an other in his place, and they elected one called Giles Munios, Chanon of Bercelone,
                  The Councell of Conſtance condemned this Pope Clement. 8. and named him Clement the 8. He incontinently at the Inſtigation of the king Alphonſus created Cardinalls, and did all that which Popes are accuſtomed to do. But after that Pope Martin the firſt had agreed with the king Alphonſus, Giles by his commaundement, renounced all the rights which he pretended in the Popedome, and was declared Biſhop of Maiorque, and the Cardinalls created by him, willingly renounced their dignities of Cardinalls.
               The witneſſe of Mathias Flactius of Eſclauonia, a diligent Author, extracted and taken out of Theodoric of Nyem, ſhall not bee heere impertinent: who made a Chronicle of that ſchiſme, compriſed in three bookes. Theodoric of Nyem ſaith

he, who was a very familiar Secretarie to a certaine Pope, and a good and a wiſe man, hath faithfully deſcribed the hiſtorie of this ſchiſme, which hath bene amongſt Popes by the ſpace of 39. yeares before the Councell of Conſtance. Good God what ſubtilties, what fraudes, what wickedneſſe, and what ſtraunge acts rehearſeth he of thoſe Popes and good ſpirituall Fathers in that Hiſtorie: whereby they mocke God, all Religion, and the Church of Ieſus Chriſt, yea moleſt and do ſubiect it to their tirannie? And ſurely I cōfeſſe that although before I had read, heard, and ſeene many of their villainies, and that therefore I had conceiued in my ſelfe an euil opiniō of the malice of that Antichriſt and of his children, yet after I had read this booke, I perceiued that they were ten times more wicked then euer I could haue thought before. In the ſame booke alſo he ſaith, that ſuch are not worthy of the title of Emperour, which make a countenance not to ſee, yea diſſemble the execrable wickedneſſe of Popes tirannies.
               
                  Chryſoloras.
                  Chryſoloras of Conſtantinople, taught Greeke Letters in Italy, which 700. yeares before had not bene in vſe: whoſe daughter eſpowſed at Conſtantinople, Francis Philelphe.
               
               
                  Gunnes.
                  Bertholde Schwartz Monke and Alchemiſt was the firſt of Gunnes and Artillerie about this time.
               
                  Scotland conuerted to the Faith.
               
                  Wencelaus Emperour for his cowardiſe and couetouſneſſe was depoſed from the Empire, and his Nephewe elected.
               
                  Ioſſe.
                  Ioſſe ſonne of Iohn Henry, Marquis of Morauia, who was  the brother of Charles the fourth of that name, Marquis of Brandebourge, an vnprofitable man, was choſen king of the Romanes by ſome, before Robert (as ſome ſay) being now old, becauſe he was the vncle of Wencelaus, yet he was neuer crowned: For there paſſed not ſixe monethes after his Election.
               
                  Robert.
                  Robert or Rupert, Duke of Bauiere, and Count Palatin of Rhene, was choſen after Frederic Duke of Brunſwic and of Lunebourge. This Frederic was a valiant Prince, wiſe and exerciſed in Armes, and truly worthy to gouerne the Empire, but there was long time enmitie betwixt him and the Archprieſt of Magunce. For before he was crowned, the Count of Waldec
                  
hauing charge of this gentle Archbiſhop,Robert. hee ſlew him villainouſly, which was cauſe of great hurly burly and tumult throughout all Almaine, vntill the Princes Electors aſſembled in the Towne of Bopert: where they Elected Robert Count Palatin, a man well exerciſed in deeds of warre, and a great louer of Iuſtice, but of a ſmall ſtature: But willing to enter into Aix la Chapelle to be crowned, the Citizens were againſt it: ſaying that in that caſe they could not fauour Robert, becauſe as yet they were not abſolued of the oath they had giuen to Wencelaus: But that the election might not be vnprofitable, the Biſhop of Colongne,
                  Robert crowned at Colongne. crowned Robert in the Towne of Colongne. After this, Robert made preparation to goe to Rome, the yeare 1402. to receiue the Imperiall Crowne, but hee was hindred by the Venetians and Millanois, and ſo could not execute that which he had enterpriſed.The death of Robert.
                   Hee dyed at Oppenhem the tenth yeare of his Empire, and was buried in the Towne of Heidelbourge.
               
               
                  Innocent the ſeuenth, borne at Sulmo, before called Coſmar de Peruſe, Prieſt, Cardinall of the title of Saint Croſſe: all Italie beeing in great trouble, was created Pope after Boniface the ninth.
               This Pope (as Platina ſaieth) beeing yet a Cardinall, vſed cuſtomably to reprehend the negligence and pucillanimitie of Popes: ſaying that with their careleſneſſe the ſchiſme and trouble which was thē ſo great, as well in the Romane Church as in the common-wealth, tooke yet no end. But being mounted into the Papall ſeate, and in ſome things following the faſhions of 
                     Ʋrbain and Boniface, his predeceſſors which he reprehended, being a priuate perſon, not onely he did the things which he condemned ſo ſore before, but he could not ſo much as beare, that one ſhould ſpeake to him thereof.
               He gouerned the affaires in ſuch confuſiō, that once the Citizens of Rome beeing come towards him to require him that they might haue their old libertie, & be put in poſſeſſion of the Capitoll, of the bridge Miluins, and of the Fortreſſe of Adrian:
                  The Romanes requeſt to the Pope. And that that pernitious ſchiſme which was in the Church might be takē away: wars & ſeditions baniſhed: remonſtrating

that to do the ſame, the king of France promiſed to deliuer his hand, and that Leter de Luna would not refuſe to enter into the way of agreement. But in place to graunt their requeſt, hee ſent them towards his Nephewe Loys, who remained at the hoſpitall of the holy ſpirit as were towards an hangman prepared for them, who tooke eleuen of his Citizens which came to conſult with him touching the affaires of their Common-wealth, which was in periſhing by the Popes negligence, and put them all to death, he after caſt them out of the windowes to the ground, ſaying that ſchiſmes and ſeditions could not be otherwiſe taken away.
               With this crueltie the Romane people being mooued, hauing called to their aide Ladiſlaus (or Lancelot) king of Pouille, tooke Armes for the puniſhment of that cut-throate Lewis; but the Pope to ſhunne the furie of the people, fled to Viterbe, with Lewis his Nephewe.
               
                  Riſing of the Romane people.The people ſeeing they could not take vengeance of him that had committed ſuch wickedneſſe, fel vpon the Curtezans, whoſe goods were almoſt all pilled: yet ſome ſaued themſelues in the Cardinals houſes: which being ayded with their people, receiued ſuch as came vnto them, although very hardly.
               After the Romanes hauing taken the Capitoll, and being ſeized of the Mount Miluins, they aſſailed the Fortreſſe of Aebrian: but it was loſt labour, although Iohn Colomne the Count of Troy, and other valiant Captaines aſſiſted them vnder the conduction of the King Ladiſlaus. In the end this ſtirre being appeaſed, the Pope came againe to Rome, where he created many Cardinalls: amongſt which was Angelius Corrairus a Venetian, Petrus Philargus of Creete, and Otho Colomnus a Romane Gentleman.The Marquiſate of Piſe. Hauing by this meanes ſtrengthned & eſtabliſhed his Popedome, he created Lewis his Nephwewe, Marquis of Piſe, and after appointed him for the principalitie of Firman.
               
               This Pope demaunded as well in France as in England, the halfe of all Eccleſiaſticall reuenewes (as Gaguin ſaith) but it was not graunted him. After which things he liued not long: for the yeare 1407. he died at Rome.
               
            
            
               
               Diuiſions in Religion in the Country of Boheme.
               
               We haue aboueſaid that the Emperour Charles the fourth inſtituted the Vniuerſitie of Prage, and prouided it of learned men: and as a Prince giuen to Letters, adorned often with his preſence the diſputations made in Schooles. But becauſe the Teutonians in that Vniuerſitie ſeemed to carry away the priſe and honour there in diſputations aboue the Bohemians,
                  Teutonians or Almaines. they were greatly aſhamed that ſtraungers ſhould ſurmount them: It came to paſſe that one of the Bohemians hauing recouered the bookes of Wickliffe, communicated them to his companions, and they drewe out of them great arguments, which the Teutonians could not reſiſt, wherevpon many diſſentions fell amongſt them, euen to batteries and murthers. The Teutonians ſeeing this, forſooke the place; Inſomuch that more then 2000. Schollers on one day went out of Prage, the yeare 1048. and came to Lipſe, where they begun an Vniuerſitie after leaue obtained.
               
                  Iohn Hus then had the greateſt renowne,Iohn Hus. a man that came out of a village called Hus, which ſignifieth an Hen, whereof he tooke his name. He was of a great and quicke ſpirit, and well ſpoken, beginning to recommend the doctrine of Wicliffe to the people. The Bohemians inſtructed with this doctrine, began firſt to ſet againſt the Pope, eſteeming him no more honourable nor greater then other Biſhops or Prieſts. And therevpon reformed the doctrine by the concluſions and Articles following.
               
                  Articles of the doctrine of the Bohemiās.
                  
                     1 That the dignitie makes not the Prieſt or Biſhop honorable, but ſanctitie of life and good doctrine.
                     2 That ſoules ſeperate from bodies, goe right vnto eternall paines, or ſtraigth obtaine happie life.
                     3 That there is no witneſſe in all the ſcripture wherby can be proued that there is Purgatory after this life.
                     4 To make oblations and ſacrifices for the dead, is an inuention of the couetouſnes of Prieſts.
                     5 Images of God or of Saints: benedictions of waters and ſuch like things, are forged of men againſt the word of God.
                     6 That the orders of begging Friars were inuented by diuels.
                     
                         7 That Baptiſme ought to be adminiſtred with water, without creame, oyle, ſpittle, and ſuch pollutions.
                     8 That the Temple of God, is the world▪ That ſuch as build Churches, Monaſteries, and Oratories, therein to encloſe him, do encloſe Maieſtie which is incomprehenſible.
                     9 That the ornaments of Prieſts, Chaſubles, Corporals, Chalices, Plates, Veſtments and Aultars, are all but vanitie.
                     
                        10 That in vaine we implore the helpe of Saints, and that it is time loſt to ſing the Canonicke houres.
                        That faſtings merit nothing.
                     
                     11 That the Euchariſt ought to be adminiſtred vnder both kindes.
                     12 They reiected the Maſſe, and receiued onely the Communion of the ſupper, the word and prayer, and many other Articles drawne from the holy ſcripture.
                  
               
               
                  Gregorie. 12.
                  
                  Gregorie 12. of that name, borne at Venice, called before 
                  Angelus Corrarius, Patriarke of Conſtantinople, and Cardinall, Prieſt of the order of S. Marke, was choſen at Rome after the death of Innocent: but vpon this condition, that if the profit and vtilitie of the Church required it, he ſhould giue ouer his Papall dignitie, becauſe of Benet 13. named Peter de la Lune, who ſucceeded Clement 7. in Auignon.
               
               The Venetians tooke of one named Franciſcus Curiario Vicar of the Empire, two Imperiall Cities, Verone and Padua, after, the ſaid Francis was ſent priſoner to Venice, where finally he was ſlaine in priſon. So after they vſurped traiterouſly the Towne of Rauenna, which was the Romane Churches Patrimonie. They ſent to ſummon with great magnificence the Gouernour Hoſtaſius Polentan, his wife and his ſonne, and prayed them that they would come and take their paſtime at Venice at a certaine great Feaſt and ſolemnitie which was made there. But whileſt he was at 
                     Ʋenice, they tooke Rauenna by treaſon, and ſent the ſaid Lord, his wife, and his child, into perpetuall exile into the Ile of Candie, where they died poorely. Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  
                  Lewis Duke of Orleance, comming from the Queenes houſe about eight of the Clocke at night, was murdred at Paris by

Apoſtate people, which firſt threw him off his Mule, & when he was fallen on the earth, an Almaine his Squire fell vpon him thinking to ſaue him, who was alſo put to death with his Maiſter. Iohn Duke of Burgongne cauſed him to be ſlaine: who after the caſe was knowne, fled incontinently from Paris and came to Arras, riding 42. Leagues that day. See the Annales of France by M. Nichol. Gille.
               
               This Pope Gregorie approoued the Sects of the Monkes of Mount Oliuet and Hieronymites,
                  Monkes of Mount Oliuet. with the congregation of them of Venice, which were named of S. George de Alga.
               
               
                  Benet the 13. beeing in Auignon, the king Charles the ſixt ſent in Embaſſage towards him, the Dukes of Bourgongne, of Berry & of Orleance: to the end to perſwade him to giue place to his right for the good and vnion of the Church: and that on the other part Gregorie the 12. would do the like. Wherevnto the ſaid Benet gaue no anſwere, but left the ſaid Princes without bidding them farewell,
                     Benet in the Caſtle of Paniſole or Peninſole. and retired into Spaine for feare he ſhould be compelled to renounce the Popedome, and held a Councell at Parpignan, and after went to remaine in the Caſtle of Paniſole, to be there more aſſured.
               In this time was a Councell held at Piſe,
                  A Councell at Piſe. to revnite the Vniuerſall Church, wherevnto Gregorie and Benet were cited, but they had no care to appeare, but derided it. And ſo thinking to do well, they made a double ſchiſme and diuiſion. Before there was two Popes, and now three. For at the ſaid Councell Gregorie and Benet were depoſed, and one called Alexander was inſtituted. During the ſaid Councell of Piſe, Gregorie the 12. fled alſo into Auſtrich: but fearing not to be there in ſuretie, he returned into Italie, and dwelt in the Citie of Arinunum, vnder the protection of a Baron called Malateſte. To the ſaid depoſition of the two Popes, as it were all Chriſtian Nations conſented, except a part of Spaine, and the Count Arnimake, and the kingdome of Scotland, which fauoured the ſaid Benet the 11.
               
                  What ſhall we ſay of this ſchiſme of three Popes, but that it is a token that that ſeate of Babilon ſhall bee diuided in three parts: as it is ſaid in the Apocalips, and that from thence ſhall come the ruine of Antichriſt and his end?
               
               
                  
                  Alexāder 5.
                   The yeare of Chriſt, 1409. Chriſebeles or Calephin, the firſt, the fift Emperour of the Turkes, obtained victorie againſt Sigiſmond. This Calephin raigned ſixe yeares, & left two ſonnes, Orchanes and Mahomet: but Orchanes was ſlaine by his Vncle Moyſes, who was after ſlaine by Mahomet the firſt of that name.
               
                  Alexander Pope, fift of that name, was elected at the Councell of Piſe, borne in the Ile of Candie, of the order of Friars, called before Peter Philarge, or of Candie: Firſt Biſhop of Nauarre, after Archbiſhop of Millaine; and conſequently Cardinall, Prieſt of the title of the Church of the 12. Apoſtles, and ſucceeded Gregorie in the Popedome.
               
                  Two Popes depoſed.After that the two old Popes Gregorie and Benet were depoſed at the Councell of Piſe as is ſaid, this was choſen by the conſent of all the Cardinalls, vnto which degree and dignitie he being come (as Platina ſaith) it was with good right that they called him Alexander: Seeing he that before was but a poore begging Friar might be compared to any Prince whatſoeuer, in matter of prodigall and ſuperfluous expences, and in greatneſſe of courage.
               
                  Herehence it comes that that Graſpopper in times paſt of ſmall and baſe condition, did obtaine in the Kingdome of Abaddon, a face like a mans, and teeth like to them of a Lyon.
               
               This Pope alſo vſed commonly to ſay as hee played, that hee had bene a rich Biſhop, a poore Cardinall, and a begging Pope.
               
                  
                     Ladiſlaus depriued of his kingdome.This Alexander was of ſo great boldneſſe, that in the Councell of Piſe with the conſent of the Prieſts that were there preſent, he tirannouſly depriued of the right of his father the kingdome Ladiſlaus then king of Naples and of Pouille: who occupied certaine ſeignories which the Church had ill gotten: And vniuſtly adiudged it to Lewis Duke d' Aniou.
               
               After that this Councell of Piſe was finiſhed, this Pope went to Bolongne: of which Towne a wicked Sodomite called Balthaſar Coſſe, Cardinall of S. Euſtache, had the gouernment: whom Alexander confirmed in his election, becauſe through his ſubtill deuiſes that Councell had bene aſſembled: And

alſo for that hee was a man meete encounter at any time with ſuch as would ſeiſe vpon any goods of the Church.Robert.
               
               There was in this man (as Platina ſaith) more fierceneſſe, boldneſſe and ſecularitie (if I may ſay ſo) then his eſtate required. His life was eſteemed like a man of warres, giuen altogether vnto crueltie. In ſuch ſort that in this holy ſingleneſſe of life, he thought that many things were lawfull vnto him, which ought not ſo much as to be named. See what Platina ſaith.
               
               Amongſt other acts worthy of a Pope,A Bull of the Stigmates of S. Francis.
                   this Alexander publiſhed certain Bulles touching the Stigmates or markes and wounds of S. Francis his Idoll, that they might be placed in the ranke of the Articles of the Chriſtian faith: and ordained them a ſolemne Feaſt that they might be honoured of the faithfull.
               As this good Pope began to be ſicke of a poyſoned drinke which was giuen him by Marcillus of Parma, a Phiſitian whom Balthaſar had hired to do it for a great ſumme of money (as Panetius reciteth it in his 56. Sermon) And knowing that his death was nigh, he exhorted the Cardinalls as they came towards him to mutuall concord, and to maintaine the libertie of the Church.
               
                  That is to ſay, to make peace amongst the wicked, and to maintain the Papall pompe and ſeate, that Ieſus Chriſt may be troden vnder foote.
               
               
                  Iohn Bauiers Biſhop of Liege, the Duke of Bauiers his brother, Lord of Holland, and Count of Hainaut, being chaſed from the Towne, demanded helpe againſt the Liegeior of the Duke of Burgongne that married his ſiſter:16000. after the Chron. of France, and 36000. after the Chron. of Almaine. who fighting againſt them of Liege, hee ſlew more then fortie thouſand of them, burnt their Citie, Churches and Monaſteries. The Prieſts ſlew and put to death their women and children. Faſcic. Temp.
               
               The Vniuerſitie of Lipſe or Lypizen, was ſet vp by the Maiſters of the Vniuerſitie of Prage, by the aide of Frederic Marquis of Miſne, and after Duke of Saxonie.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond ſonne of Charles the fourth,Sigiſmond. King of Hungarie and of Boheme, brother of Wencelaus, after the death of Albert was choſen Emperour of Rome by the conſent of all. He performing

the dutie of a true Emperour,Sigiſmond. was very renowned in wiſedome, knowledge, and bountie: Hee loued vertuous people and ſuch as were learned, and raiſed them vp vnto honour and dignitie: yet he was vanquiſhed by Amurathes Emperour of the Turkes, and loſt a great battaile, and his Tents & Pauilions. He went by the ſpace of three yeares through Europe, to ſet order, and to roote out the great ſchiſme ſo damageable to all Chriſtendome. Therfore hauing reiected three Popes, ſchiſmatikes and vnlegitimate, and which held the ſeate at Barione, Oddo Columnius was made Pope by the conſent of all.
               
                  Iohn. 24.
                  
                  Iohn Pope, 24. of that name, ſucceeded Alexander, and ruled at Bolongne fiue yeares or thereabouts: hee was before called Balthaſar Coſſe, or Ihea de Coza, after the Sea of Hiſtories, Cardinall of Euſtache.
               
               Some there are, euen of ſuch as approoue the Popiſh tyrannie, which affirme that he came vnto the Popedome rather by force and violence, then by free and Canonicke election. For (as Stella ſaith) being at Bolongne rather as a Lord and Maiſter then as a Legate, when the Fathers were there aſſembled to chuſe a new Pope, he exceedingly threatned them if they elected not ſuch an one as pleaſed him. Therefore many were preſented whereof hee would not approoue one. Then ſaid the Cardinalls vnto him; Name him of whom you can like. And he anſwered; Giue me S. Peters Mantle and Pontificall habit, and I will giue them vnto him whom I would to bee Pope. When hee had the habit hee put it vpon himſelfe, and ſaide, it is I that am Pope. But although it diſpleaſed the others which were there preſent, yet they muſt needs diſſemble it, ſo furious, terrible, and enuironed with ſouldiers was hee.
               
                  A Sinode at Rome.After his election he remained a certaine time at Bolongne, then went he to Rome, it beeing the chiefe of his enterpriſe. There he aſſembled a Sinode, to the end to giue the Imperiall Crowne to Sigiſmond.
               
               
                  Hiſtorie of the Owle.In the firſt Seſſion of this Sinode, as the aforeſaid Iohn was ſitting on an high ſeate, after the Maſſe of the holy Ghoſt was ſung, there came an Owle, who placing her ſelf vpon one of the

balkes of the Temple, and looking directly vpon the Pope, ſaluted him in a ſtraunge maner with his fearefull ſong. Such as were there preſent began to wonder, looking one at an other: and alſo caſting their view vpon the Pope, they could ſcant keepe themſelues from laughing. As for Iohn hee began to bee much aſhamed, to ſweate, and to bee ſore anguiſhed and tormented in himſelfe. Finally finding no other meane whereby hee might remedie his ſo great confuſion, after hee had giuen leaue to ſuch as were there aſſembled, he roſe vp and retired. There was an other Seſſion after this, wherein came the like. For this Owle could not bee chaſed away neyther for any cryes, no nor yet for ſtones and ſtaues which were caſt at him.
               There were then many which by this ſpectacle were induced to beleeue that ſuch ſpirituall pillers haue long time gouerned the Church of Rome. Nicholas Clemengis Archdeacon of Baieux, reciteth this Hiſtorie in his Epiſtles.
            
            
               A Councell aſſembled at Conſtance.
               
               To put end to the aforeſaid diſcords and ſlaunders, they were forced to aſſemble a general Councel, for which, the place was aſſigned at Conſtance. This was againſt the Pope Iohns wil, who deſired it might be held in ſuch a place wherein hee had more powre then the Emperour. See Naucler. & Leonard Aretin, who were in this time.
               In the ſaid Councell finally appeared Pope Iohn the 24. of that name, and arriued at Conſtance vpon S. Simon and Iudes euen. Anno. 1414.
               Likewiſe the Emperour Sigiſmond came thither on Chriſtmas euen after midnight, with the Empreſſe his wife, and many other Princes, Counts, Barons and Nobles, which were in number about 30940. perſons Courtiers, ſaith the Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               With the Pope Iohn arriued foure Patriarkes, twentie and nine Cardinalls, 47. Archbiſhops, and 160. Biſhops. See Naucler.
               
               On Chriſtmas day the Pope ſung three Maſſes, one at

midnight, one in the morning, and one at noone: and Sigiſmond attired Deacon like, ſung the Goſpell, Exijt edictum a Ceſare, &c. Naucler.
               
               This Councell endured three yeares and ſeuen weekes after ſome, or about foure yeares after Naucler. and there was 46. Seſſions. See the 2. volume of Councells.
               
               
                  Champaine beſieged.
                  The yeare 1414. the king of France laid ſiege before Champaine, and it was taken by compoſition. Hee tooke Soiſſons, and after laid ſiege before Arras: but a peace was made by the Ducheſſe of Holland, ſiſter of the Duke of Burgongne. The Sea of Hiſt.
               
               The Friday after Candlemas day, (as they call it) there arriued at the Councell ſixe Cardinalls of Pope Gregories the 12. which approoued the Councell by the authoritie of the ſaid Gregorie. Naucler.
               
               
                  The Iourney of Blangy.
                  The yeare 1415. was the battaile of Blangy, betwixt the Engliſh and French, wherein the chiefe bloud of Fraunce was ſhead: and it was commonly called La male Iournee. The Sea of Histo.
               
               In this time Wencelaus king of Boheme, was required by the Councell to ſend Iohn Hus, who went thither with the Emperours ſafe conduct.Iohn Hus and Ierome of Prage. There went with him alſo Ierome of Prage, with one onely Clarke. They were admoniſhed and greatly ſollicited to deſiſt from their opinions, but they were conſtant. They maintained that they were true in their propoſitions and reaſons, being founded on the truth of the holy Goſpell. And contrary, that the Romane Church had withdrawne it ſelfe from the truth and the Apoſtles doctrine, &c.
               
                  See a more ample declaration of this Hiſtorie, in the firſt part of the booke of Martyrs.
               
               
                  
                     The death of Iohn Hus & Ierome of Prage.They were both condemned to be burned. Iohn Hus was firſt executed about the fourth day of the moneth of Iuly, the yeare 1415. and a good while after, Ierome of Prage was alſo burnt in the moneth of September. They endured death conſtantly, and merily went to the fire glorifying the Lord, euen in the middeſt of the flame. Their Aſhes were caſt into the Lake of Conſtance.
               
               
                  The Bohemians vnderſtanding what was done at Conſtance againſt their Doctors, ſacked and ſpoiled all the Couents and Monaſteries of the Countrey, and fired them: and from that time withdrew themſelues from the ſubiection of the Romane Pope, as is ſaid.
               In the ſaid Councell Iohn Wickliffe an Engliſh man,
                     Wickliffe burnt after his death. was condemned an heretike: and although dead, yet his bones were condemned to be vnburied.
               Alſo Lay-people were inhibited to communicate the Sacrament vnder both kindes.
               There was alſo a Decree that the Councell was aboue the Pope, and not contrarie.
               That the Councell hath full power to correct, iudge, and depoſe the Pope, yea to ordaine of all things, and not the Pope to Iudge, correct, or chaunge Decrees and Statutes of the Councell.
               
                  Iohn 24. Pope, ſeeing that in the ſaid Councell many crimes were obiected againſt him,Iohn 24.
                   fled away in a diſguiſed habit, by the helpe of the Duke of Austrich, Frederic, and by the  Councell of the Archbiſhop of Magunce: although the Emperour did all he could to hinder it. Naucler. He fledde firſt to Shaffufe, and from thence to Luſemberge, and after to Fribourge, to take his way towards the Duke of Bourgongne if hee could get thither. Naucler.
               
               The Duke Frederic was cyted in full Councell by the Emperour and that many times: And for that hee appeared not, the Emperour abſolued his ſubiects of the oath of diſobedience which they ought vnto the Duke. Alſo hee depriued him of all his riches and goods; and gaue his goods to ſuch as could take and occupie them. This gaue many occaſion to aſſaile his perſon and his goods, whereof yet at this day the Cantons and the Valeſans hold many places, as Bade, Melingen, Prenigarten, Wallestat, Dioſſenhoſen, which they got by force of Armes. Others occupied other Townes and places. See Naucler.
               
               
                  Iohn was taken and brought to Conſtance, and there deteined priſoner at Richman.
               
               
                  After they prooued againſt him 40. criminall Articles. He was depoſed by all the Councell, the Wedneſday of Trinitie, 14. and 15. and hee himſelfe approoued his depoſition. In the ſecond Volume of Councels there is mention made that more then 54. Articles were propoſed and proued againſt him, to euery of which he anſwering cryed; Ah I haue yet committed a greater crime; namely, I haue paſſed the Alpes, and am come into Almaine. After his condemnation hee was giuen vnto the Count Palatin, who kept him three yeares in Menhen: he was not ſuffered to haue any Italian with him, no not his Chamberlaine: his Gard were all Almaines, and he ſpake vnto them by ſignes onely. Naucler.
               
               After the depoſition of Pope Iohn, they proceeded alſo againſt Pope Gregorie the 12. who was cyted to appeare in perſon, but he would not come there: yet either by faire meanes or force, hee ſent Malateſte, Lord of Armenia, with an ample procuration and power to reſigne the ſaid right hee had in the the Papall dignitie into the hands of the ſaid Councell. The which was done, and the ſaid Gregorie 12. was created Legate in the Marqueſdome of Ancone, where he died ſoone after with mourning in the Towne of Racany, which is a Port of the Adriatike Sea. Iohn le Maeire.
               
               There remaineth yet the third Antipope, Peter de la Lune. Of him it was that Gerſon often ſaid: We muſt needs take away this man of the Moone (called Benet the 13.) who would not obey the Councell, but died obſtinately in the Kingdome of Arragon: and commaunded his Cardinalls on his death-bed, that as ſoone ar he was dead they ſhould elect an other, which they did, and elected Clement the 8. borne at Barſelone, wherein they profited litle. For the Pope Martin (as ſhall bee ſaide) had the Popedome whole, and had the obedience of all the Princes in Chriſtendome: yet the ſaide Clement the eight was after made Biſhop of Maiorque. See Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                   That Pope Benet troubled much the Emperour Sigiſmond, For ſeeing hee would not conſent to any agreement, the ſaid Emperour was conſtrained in perſon firſt to goe into

                  France vnto the King, then to the King of England, to make an attonement betwixt thoſe two Kings. Item, towards the King of Arragon in Spaine, with certaine Embaſſadors deputies of the ſaide Councell, to exhort them to hold the hand to the vnion of the Church, and to perſwade the ſaid Pope to doo as others did, which hee would neuer be brought vnto. Then the Princes of Spaine, the Arragonians, the Cathelains, Armignaes, and the Kings of Fraunce and England ſeeing his obſtinacie, followed the opinion of the Councell, and withdrew themſelues from the obedience of Pope Benet the thirteenth, which Sigiſmond ſignified to the ſaid Councell. Naucler.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond returned after to Conſtance about Candlemas, and the Councell with burning Candles excommunicated and depriued the ſaid Benet of his Popedome, & after declared him an heretike & a ſchiſmatike, the 18. day of March. 1417. Naucl.
               
               This Pope Iohn whileſt he was placed in the Romane ſeate, amongſt other Ieaſts of a Pope, he did that which followeth in diuers Authors. He had ſtirred maruellous warres againſt the king Ladiſlaus, and aſſembled a Councell at Rome to find means to driue him from his kingdome. He alſo commanded to make a proceſſion with the head of S. Iohn Baptiſt, for that ſubtilly and cautelouſly he had determined to ſell it to the Florentins.
               He approoued the Sect of ſuch as named themſelues De la Chemiſe, or Friſonniers,
                  
                     The Friſoniers, or de la Chemiſe. which lifted themſelues vp in the territorie of Luques: and admitted the congregation of that new reformation in the Monaſterie of S. Iuſtine, commenced at Padoue by Lewis Barbe.
               
               As Pope Martin the fift was at Florence, this Pope beeing deliuered from priſon (contrarie to the opinion of all, ſo that all that were preſent maruelled thereat) came thither towards him, and after he had kiſſed his feete, acknowledged him as his Pope, the ſucceſſor of S. Peter, & ſaluted him as if he had bin ſome earthly God. Martin mooued with affection, certain daies after receiued him into the number of Cardinals, and hee made him Biſhop of Tuſculū: but after certain moneths he finiſhed his life ſad and grieuous, the yeare of the Lord, 1419.

in the ſame Towne of Florence: where he was honourably buried with great pompe in the Temple of S. Iohn Baptiſt by Coſme de Medicis, who euer bore him great loue.
               
                  Cleues Sauoy.In the ſaid Councell the Counts of Cleues and Sauoy were erected to Duchez by the Emperour Sigiſmond.
               
               Things being effected as is ſaid, the Emperours will was that there ſhould now be an handling to correct the maners of Eccleſiaſticall perſons, and to reforme the Church: but it was ſaid that this could not well bee done during the vacation of the Apoſtolike ſeate: wherefore it was concluded to proceed to a new election of a Pope. Naucler.
               
               
                  Martin. 5.
                  
                  Martin Pope, fift of that name, called Otho, a Romane  Cardinal Deacon of the houſe of Colonnois, of one ſame accord and will, by the conſent of all was choſen of 33. Cardinalls, at the Councell of Conſtance: and was called Martin, becauſe hee was conſecrated on S. Martins day, hee gouerned fourteene yeares.
               The Emperour Sigiſmond very ioyfull that the Cardinalls had choſen ſuch a Pope and ſo neceſſarie to the Chriſtian common-wealth, entred into the Conclaue, where without regarding his dignitie, falling on his knees before the Pope, in great reuerence hee kiſſed his feete. On the other part the Emperour receiued him beningly, and heartily thanked him for the diligence and paines which he had taken to eſtabliſh the vnion of the Church. Naucler.
               
               After that the Emperour had long time trauelled to aſſemble this Councell of Conſtance, deſiring to ſee the particular reformation of the Church, excuſed it that Rome had bene long without an head, and the time would not permit to begin a reformation, for the Councell had long endured. Wherefore an other Councell ſhould bee aſſigned at Baſil where that ſhould be done, and ſo the Emperour was fruſtrate of his purpoſe and hope for ſeeing a reformation in the Church-people.
               In the ſaid Councell was diſpatched Letters and Bulls to Lewis Duke d' Aniou, to goe take poſſeſſion of the kingdome of Pouille for him and his. Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  Martin Pope returning from Conſtance to Rome, remained two yeares at Florence, and for recompence of his entertainement, he ordained that the Biſhop of that place ſhould bee a Metropolitane, and ſubiected there vnto the Church of 
                     Ʋolaterre, Piſtorie and Feſides.
               
               The Huſſites came vp at this time,The Huſſites which reiected all humane traditions, more purely preaching the doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt, which engendred many contentions betwixt Lay-men and Clarkes.
               A peſtilence was at Florence, where died more then 16. thouſand men. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  Mahomet Emperour of the Turkes, died after he had raigned  14. yeares.
               
                  Wencelaus died taken with feare, becauſe of a tumult raiſed  at Prage: hee fell into an Apoplexie, and from that euill into a palſie, which within 18. daies tooke away his life, the yeare of his raigne 20.
               
                  Charles 7. of that name, king of France, the onely ſonne of Charles the 6. ſucceeded his father. Hee was aſſailed by the Engliſh and Bourgonions, and hauing loſt as it were all the Countrey of the Frontiers, tooke his recourſe into Bourges, and there remained a certaine time, and therefore the enemies in mockerie called him king of Bourges. Henry ſonne of Charles his ſiſter, called himſelf in his titles, king of England & of France: and at Paris was crowned king of France.
               
               A pucell or maide plaide the part of a man at Armes,Iane the Pucelle. and gaue ſuccours to Orleance which was beſieged, conſtrained the enemies to leaue the ſiege: conducted the king Charles to bee crowned at Rheims, paſſing through the places which the enemies held. The Engliſh after were driuen from Paris.
               
               The Taberlites, Adamites, Orebites, heretikes in Boheme were in this time. See Naucler.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond with the Pope and Almaine, banded themſelues together to make war againſt the Bohemian Huſſites, but they got nothing, but were faine to leaue them. Naucler.
               
               
                  Iohn Gerſon maintained in this time that wee muſt rather beleeue the ſentence and opinion of one Doctor approoued

and confirmed by the Canonicke Scripture, then the Popes declaration. Item that wee ought rather to beleeue a Doctor well learned in the holy ſcriptures and alleadging a Catholick authoritie, then a generall Councell.
               A Councell began at Pauie, but the peſtilence became ſo  great there, that they were conſtrained the place and time, and was ordained at Piſe the yeare 1424. and from thence remitted to Baſill ſeuen yeares after in the yeare of Chriſt, 1430.
               
                   The Venetians corrupted with ſtore of ſiluer, the Captaine generall of the Duke of Millaine called Carmagnolle, a valiant man, but a Traitor: who ſtole from the ſaid Duke the ſtrong Towne of Brixe,
                  Ambition of the Venetians and the yeare following the Towne of Pergamum and their appendances: which places, King Lewis the 12. recouered, the yeare 1509. after that the Venetians againſt all right and reaſon had avowed themſelues to be right poſſeſſors thereof the ſpace of 80. years. Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  The Pucelle of Orleans.The Pucelle or Maide aboue mentioned, called of Orleance, borne in Lorraine, called Iane, did things incredible in warlike affaires for the King of France his ſuccour. Finally hauing found meanes by force and ſubtiltie to enter into the Towne of Campaigne, (which was beſieged) making ſallies vpon the enemies, was taken by Iohn de Luxembourge, and from thence ſent to Roane to the Duke of Sommer ſet where hauing beene kept certaine time, ſhe was burnt. She was accuſed to be an Enchauntreſſe. See the Annales of France.
               
               
                   The Pope Martin of the age of 63. yeares, died at Rome of an Apoplexie. He commanded before his death to aſſemble the Councell of Baſill: For in the Councell of Conſtance, it was concluded that from 10. yeares to 10. yeares, there ſhould be held an Vniuerſall Councell of the Church; which was not obſerued.
               
                  Eugenius. 4.
                  
                  Eugenius 4. of that name, borne at Venice, of the order of Celeſtines, called before Gabriel Condelmer, the ſonne of one called Angelus, being Cardinall, Prieſt of the title of S. Clement, obtained the Papall dignitie in the place called Minerua, (as Platina ſaith) by this meanes. When Gregorie the 12. who was of the houſe of Corrariens, and Venetians by Nation, was

choſen Pope, being before Canon of the Celeſtines of the congregation of S. George in the place of Alga, he carried with him this Gabriel, who was of his profeſſion,
               
                  Henry King of England of the age of 12. yeares was crowned in the great Temple of Paris as King, by the Cardinall of Wincheſter.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond went to Rome and was Crowned Emperour by the Pope Eugenius, after he had raigned 23. yeares. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               At the inſtance of certaine reporters and flatrerers which ſaid that Martin his predeceſſor had bene very curious to gather great treaſures: ſome brought this man into ſuch a rage, that he cauſed his Vice-chauncellor, with all his familiars and Nephewes to be taken and diſpoiled of their goods.
               After this, the Romanes applying themſelues to recouer their auntient libertie, crying let vs goe to Armes, and hauing driuen away all Eugenius his officers, and taken Francis Condelmer, his Nephewe or baſtard, and his Chamberlaine, they created new Magiſtrates, which they called Gouernours, and had power of death and life ouer all.
               
                  Eugenius amongſt ſo many troubles being vncertain what to doo, began to thinke to flie away:
                     Eugenius flieth away. hauing then chaunged his habit and taking a Monkes frocke onely with a Monke called Arſennius, put himſelfe in a fiſhers boate; and without that they which kept him perceiued he retired to Oſtia by the Riuer Tiber, Then when certaine of the Romanes knew that he was fled, they aſſailed him as well as they could with ſtones and ſhot. From thence he went vnto Piſe, and after vnto Florence in certaine Gallies which purpoſely had beene prepared for that purpoſe. Where making his reſidence certaine yeares hee made ſixteene Cardinalls, amongſt which there were were two Grecians, namely, Beſſaron, who was a cunning man in Philoſophie, borne at Nice, and Iſidorus of Ruſſia, and Guillam de Stouteuile, Archbiſhop of Rouan.
               
            
            
               The Coucell of Baſill.
               After the Councell of Conſtance, there was an other held

at Baſill, which Cardinall Iulian began by the Popes commandement: beeing forced ſo to doo by the Emperour Sigiſmond: And becauſe then Sigiſmond was gone into Italie (as is ſaid) to receiue the Imperiall Crowne, the Italians ſought to perſwade the Pope to breake the Councell of Baſill and bring it vnto them, that the Townes of Italie might bee inriched with the great ſummes of money that ſhould be brought thither: and that the Countrey ſhould not bee ſubiected vnto ſtraungers: alleadging for a ſhewe, that Sigiſmond came for no other cauſe but to make himſelfe Lord ouer Italie.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond after his Coronation returned vnto Baſill.
               
               This Councell endured tenne yeares, and there the Cardinall Iulian called of S. Angelo, was Preſident.
               The Bohemians being called vnto the ſaid Councell with ſure acceſſe and ſafe conduct, propoſed 4. Articles wherin they differed from the Romane Church.
               
                  Articles propoſed by the Bohemians.
                  
                     1 The Communion giuen to the people vnder both kinds.
                     2 That ciuill dominion is forbidden by diuine right to the people of the Church.
                     3 The preaching of the people ought to be free.
                     4 That publike ſinnes ought not to be borne, if it were but to ſhunne a greater miſchiefe.
                  
               
               In the ſaid Councell the Bohemians were permitted to communicate vnder both kindes, as a thing lawfull by the authoritie of Chriſt, and profitable and healthfull to all ſuch as duly receiued it. 
                     Ʋadian & Naucler.
               
               In the time of this Councell of Baſill was Papiſtrie ſet vp in Bohemia by the great meanes and induſtrie of Sigiſmond: but incontinently after they came to that they did before. Naucler.
               
               About the yeare of Chriſt, 1436. (as ſaith Naucler,) or 1438. after others, Eugenius would needs tranſport the Councell of Baſill to Ferrara,
                  A Councell at Ferrara.
                   for his commoditie; and after vnto Florence: his excuſes were becauſe the Greeke Church would rather agree there with the Romane Church then at Baſill: notwithſtanding the Councell proceeded againſt him, and he was cyted three times, but would not appeare. There was againſt

him propoſed that he was a fauourer and a louer of warres, a perſecutor of Church men, and a man of bloud, and ſcandalous. Naucler.
               
               In the Counccell of Ferrara were preſented the Pope Eugenius, the Patriarke of Conſtantinople, and the Emperour of the ſame place, Iohn Paleologus, with his brother and fiue hundreth men: ſo was the ſaid Church of Greece revnited with the Romane Church. The ſaid Councell was tranſported from Ferrara to Florence, the yeare 1439. The Grecians accorded the holy Ghoſt to proceed as well from the Sonne as the Father. They agreed alſo to Purgatorie: and the Romane Pope to be the primate of the Catholicke Church: which they had neuer done before now, but euer were of contrarie opinions. But as ſoone as they were come to their Countrey againe, at the perſwaſion of Marcus Biſhop of Epheſus, they againe denied the two laſt Articles, Plat. Vola. and Naucler.
               
               
                  It is ſtraunge that the Grecians which haue beene ſo ſlowe to acknowledge and confeſſe ſo true a doctrine of the holy Ghoſt, are now ſo quick and light to accord ſo friuolous and falſe a thing: that is, to receiue and beleeue againſt all holy ſcripture that there is a Purgatorie, and Romane Pope to be Primate of the Catholicke and Vniuerſall Church: wherevnto the firſt generall Councell had openly reſiſted in the time of Conſtantine the great.
               
               In the ſaid Councell of Florence, the Armenians and Indians were alſo brought into the vnion of the Romane Church, and promiſed to keepe and maintaine the Sacrament of Confirmation. Naucler.
               
               This Pope Eugenius confirmed Annates vpon all Benefices.Annates.
               
               Hee Canonized S. Nicholas Tolentin, of the order of the Hermits of S. Auguſtine.
               
               
                  Beſſarion Cardinall flouriſhed, and his houſe at Rome was open to euery man of knowledge like a Colledge. Vadian.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond of the age of 70, yeares died, and was buried in Hungarie, in the citie called Albe. His wife Barbara was without all religion and without God, inſatiable in all paliardize and whoredome. Shee mocked her damzels becauſe they faſted

and prayed,Albert. 5. ſaying; they muſt liue iocondly and merily, and take all their pleaſures during this life: for after death the ſoule periſheth with the bodie.
               The Councell of Baſill continued ſtill, and proceeded againſt Eugenius the fourth: who after many times cyting and not appearing, was publikely depoſed by the authoritie of the Councell, the tenth of Iuly. Eugenius mooued herewith, incited the Dolphin of France,
                  The end of 
                        •
                     he Councell of Baſill. (who after was called king Lewis the 11.) to lead a great Armie in to the Countrey of Ferrara and Alſarce, and to come to Baſill. Wherefore the ſaid Councell brake vp, and herevpon came many miſchiefes. See Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  Albert the fift of that name, Duke of Auſtrich, and ſecond king of the Romanes of that name, ſonne of Albert the fourth, Duke of Auſtrich, was ſcant 10. yeares olde when his father died of poyſon, fighting againſt Ioſſe Marqueſſe of Morauia: but being yer vnder Tutors which were his vncles, there was great ſtrife betwixt them for his tutelage. Therefore Vienna and all the Countrey of Austrich endured great calamities till Albert came to age and was diſpatched of his tutelage and planted a peace in Auſtrich, which was before full of theeues and of Inteſtine warres. After the yeare 1422. he eſpowſed Elizabeth the doughter of Sigiſmond, and had with her in marriage the noble Townes of Maruia.
                  
                     Hungarie & Boheme came both to one. But after the death of Sigiſmond▪
                   he was choſen king of Hungaria by the conſent of all the principall of the Countrey, and Crowned the yeare of grace 1438. After this he was alſo made king of Bohemia: and that came, becauſe there was a great alliance betwixt the Kings of Boheme and the Dukes of Auſtrich: whereby they had ordained betwixt them, that whenſoeuer one of the houſes remained without heire-male of the other, they ſhould create a king. He was alſo choſen king of the Romanes by the common accord of all the Princes Electors.
               The yeare 1459. the 17. day of Nouember, in the Councell of Baſill, after the depoſition of Eupenius, the Cardinalls elected Amedeus of Ayme,
                  23 Schiſme Ayme Duke of Sauoy.
                   Duke of Sauoy, and called him Felix the fift: ſo came into the Church the 23. ſchiſme and diuiſion, which endured the ſpace of ſixteene yeares.
               
                  Some followed Eugenius, others Felix: ſome ſaid they were newters, and ſo obeyed neither one nor the other. The Kings of France, England, Spaine, & Scotland, obeyed the Pope Eugenius: For although he was depoſed, yet held he good during his life.
               
                  This Councell of Baſill aſſembled with great authoritie, was notwithſtanding diſſipated and broken by one onely Pope. That of Conſtance depoſed three, and ordained the fourth. This could not bring about to depoſe one. Faſci. Temp.
               
               In the Councell of Baſill it was forbidden that ſecular Princes, Councellors, and Communalties vpon paine of excommunication, ſhould not bee ſo hardie to greete and ſubmit the Churchmen with tallies and common collection. Faſci. temp.
               
               
                  Auguſtine of Rome was condemned an heretike in the ſaid Councell:The conception of the Virgin Marie.
                   and there was confirmed the Conception of the Virgin Marie to bee kept as a ſolemne Feaſt: But to the contrarie ſee Epiphanius in his 3 Booke, and 12. Tome, 68. and 69. hereſie. See alſo S. Bernard in the Epiſt. 154. to the Canons of Lions.
               
               The ſaid Councell then confirmed that the Virgin Marie was conceiued without originall ſinne: it alſo confirmed her viſitation.
               In this time was a Councell held of the French Church at Bourges in Berry,
                  The Pragmatike ſanction. and there was publiſhed the pragmatike ſanction (which is all the marrow and ſubſtance of the Canons of the Councell of Baſill) to bee expreſly obſerued for euer. Iohn le Maire.
               
               The Duke Aime of Sauoy after the death of his wife Margarite of Bourgongne, had left his Ducall eſtate and withdrew himſelfe into an hermitage pleaſant and delightfull, called Ripaille,, vpon the Lake of Lanſanne, which he had cauſed to bee ſumptuouſly builded, and ſo left the gouernment of his ſigniories to his eldeſt ſonne Lewis, father of Duke Phillebert of Sauoy. Beeing then in his ſaid place of Ripaille, the ſaid Duke Anne with tenne knights all hermits, wearing great beardes and ſimple cloathing, and writhen ſtaues full of knottes,

in great renowne of ſanctetie of life,Albert. was by the ſaid Councell elected to be Pope, (as is ſaid) the 17. of Nouember, the yeare 1439. and the 17. day of December the election was denounced vnto him, and he went vnto Baſill, and was there ſolemnly crowned in the preſence of two of his eldeſt ſonnes. Before this ceremonie his Beard was taken from him, and in a ſmall time he learned the Romane office. He created ſome Cardinalls of great eſtimation and vertue. Iohn le Maire.
               
               The Emperour being called to goe into Hungarie, ſound himſelfe greatly tormented in the moneth of Auguſt with an intollerable heate, which hee thought to haue taken away by colde viands, which brought to him a fluxe of the belley, euen to bloud,The death of Albert.
                   whereof he died, the yeare 1439. nigh Strigoma, after hee had beene Emperour almoſt two yeares, Hee left two daughters, and his wife with childe, who ſoone after brought forth Ladiſlaus.
               
               
                  Frederic Emp.
                  
                  Frederic Duke of Austrich, after Albert, was Emperour of Rome. He loued peace and reſt, reſtrained and brideled eaſily them of Auſtrich which ſtirred ſtrifes and commotions. So extinguiſhed he the warre alreadie commenced by Matthias king of Hungarie by agreement with him.
               Likewiſe this Frederic making warre againſt the Flemmings to haue his ſonne Maximilian (whom they detained priſoner) appeaſed and contented them by the puniſhment of ſome, and ſo taking and receiuing his ſonne Maximilian, he gently buried all occaſion of warre commenced. Hee was crowned at Rome, & his wife Helenor, which he eſpouſed at Naples, in king Alphonſus his Court. At his departure from Rome, he went to Naples vnto the ſaid king Alphonſus, his wiues nigh kinſman: of whom, and after of the Venetians, he was entertained with great honour and prouiſion: and ſo euer after hee loued the Venetians.
               He would often ſay to his wife (vnto whom her Phiſitian counſelled to drinke wine to auoyd barrenneſſe) that he could better loue a ſober barren woman, then one fruitfull giuen to wine. Naucler. Chron. of the Emper.
               
            
            
               
               Printing inuented.Frederic. 3.
               
               The noble Art of printing with Letters made in Braſſe,Printing Inuented, in what time & by whom. was found out in this time: a verie diuine inuention, worthy of memorie and admiration: yet were it more admirable if it were not ſo much prophaned. The inuention was Germanike, and very ſtraunge at the beginning, and of great profit: Iohn Gutemberge Knight, was the firſt Author of this goodly inuention. The thing was firſt aſſayed at Magunce 16. yeares before it was divulged in Italie. One ſaith that Iohn Faustins, called Gutman, inuented it, with Peter Sheffer. Eun. 10.
               
                  Dionyſius Charthuſianus in this time writ vpon Daniel.
               
               The Pope Engenius retiring from Florence, came and dwelt at Rome, where he was welcomed becauſe hee diminiſhed their tallies and ſubſidies. Naucler.
               
               The Swiſſes (except Berne and Soleure) made warre againſt ſome of their Allies called in Latin Duricenſes, becauſe contrarie to their alliances, they ioyned with the Dukes of Austrich: and the ſaid Swiſſes obtained victorie againſt their ſaid Allies. Naucler.
               
               Foure thouſand Swiſſes were put to death againſt the Armie of the aforeſaid Dolphin, which was of 25. or 30. thouſand horſemen, beſides footemen, and was ouerthrowne nigh the Hoſpitall of S. Iames by Baſill.
               
               The ſaid Dolphin hauing waſted the Countrey of Alſarce, returned with great loſſe of his Campe.
               The yeare of Chriſt 1444. on S. Martins euen the Turke Amurathes gaue battaile againſt the King of Polone, Ʋladiſlaus and the Cardinall Iulian, who was preſident in the Councell of Baſill.
               
               The ſaid Iulian, the Apoſtolike Legatein Hungarie, fled after the battaile was loſt: but as he let his horſe drinke he was perceiued and knowne of the Hungarians, who ſlew him, thinking he had had much money about him: and hauing diſpoyled him, they left him naked. See Naucler.
               
               This Legate vppon the exhortation of Pope Eugenius, councelled the King 
                     Ʋladiſlaus to breake his faith with the

Turke and to aſſaile him in his Countrey:Note how many euils faith-breaking bringeth. the which hee did with 30000. combatants; all which vnluckily periſhed in that warre: whereof roſe infinite miſchiefes, and carnall and mortall warres throughout all Chriſtendome. The King fell from his horſe, & had his head cut off, which was carried on a Launce throughout all the Countrey. The bloud of many Princes and Prelates was ſhead. Two Biſhops were cauſe that the Chrſtians loſt the victorie. For beeing willing to purſue the Turke, they kept not the places which they had in charge. In ſo much as the Turkes as it were vanquiſhed, returned againe into battaile, and entred into the Chriſtians Armie.
               
                  Iohn Huniades fled from the battaile with a great number of people, to the number of tenne thouſand Hungarians, Francis Caldemonio a Cardinall of Venice, Nephewe vnto Pope Eugenius the fourth, being Legate and chiefe of the Armie by ſea, ordained to keepe the ſtraight of the Arme S. George, that the Turkes ſhould not paſſe that way to goe to the ſuccours of their people: and although he had a great and puiſſant Armie of the Chriſtians, yet vpon treaſon and cowardiſe hee let paſſe through that ſtraight an hundreth thouſand Turkes, with Amurathes their Prince: and which is worſe, hee vſed not diligence to aduertiſe the Chriſtian Armie. A Carack of Genoua ledde their way: whoſe patron was of the houſe Grimald, and made the ſaid paſſage vpon a couenant with the ſaid Turkes; namely to haue a Ducat for euery head. The ſaid Grimald of Genoua Patron, went from thence into Flaunders to employ his hundreth and 60. thouſand Ducats which hee had gotten: but he was conſumed before he came there with a Sea-tempeſt.
               
                  
                  Constantine Paleologue, the brother of Iohn Paleologue, was the laſt Chriſtian Emperour of Constantinople, and raigned eight yeares.
               
                  Eugenius the 4. died the 20. day of the moneth of Aprill of the age of 64. yeares: hee did many good things to the Towne of Rome, and in diuers places cauſed it to be repaired and paued.
               
                  Amurathes the ſecond of that name being Victor, did not

purſue the Chriſtians after the diſcomfiture, nor ſhewed himſelfe merrie as his cuſtome was: being demaunded why he was ſo ſad, not reioycing at his victorie, Hee anſwered; I would not alwaies thus ouercome.
                     Amurathes maketh himſelfe a Monke. Soone after hee diſmiſſed himſelfe of his dominion and principalitie, and left the gouernment to his ſonne Mahomet, he after made himſelfe a Monke of the ſtraighteſt religion that was amongſt them. See Nauclerus.
               
               
                  Nicholas Pope, fift of that name, borne at Genes,
                  Nicholas. 5.
                   ruled at Rome eight yeares: before hee was called Thomas de Sirſone,
                   or Sarreſane, in the ſigniorie of Lucan: Cardinall of Bolongne, ſonne of a Phiſitian. Suppl. Chron.
               
               This Pope in leſſe then a yeare was made Biſhop of Bolongne, Cardinall and Pope of Rome: hee was elected the ſixt of March, and crowned the ninteenth of the ſaid moneth, the yeare 1447. yet ceaſed not the ſchiſme of the Church. For ſtill liued Felix the fift, of Sauoy, who accounted himſelfe Pope.
               
                  Nicholas was eſteemed a great Theologian.
               In this time writ Laurentius Ʋalla, Blundus the Hiſtoriographer: Trapezontius the Rhetoritian, and Theodorus Gaza.
               
               The King of Fraunce recouered Normandie which the Engliſh men held. And recouered the yeare after the Countrey of Aquitaine. The Sea of Hiſt.
               
               The yeare of Chriſt 1448. after ſome 1449. Felix the 5. renounced his Popedome and ſent to ſalute Nicholas the true ſucceſſor of S. Peter: ſo was obedience giuen vnto Nicholas, and by that meanes ceaſed the 23. ſchiſme. Then brake off the Councell of Baſill, which for that purpoſe was aſſembled. This treatie and compoſition of that Seſſion was made as Lauſanna by many Princes of France, Almaine, England, and Sauoy, for the vnion of the Church. And this was at the ſollicitation of the Emperor Frederic, and the requeſt of Pope Nicholas.
               
               The King Charles the 7. to bring a peace in Chriſtendome, cauſed a Councell to be aſſembled of the French Nation at Lyons to appeaſe all. Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  This yeare brought the firſt inuention of the Francarchers in France.
               
               
                  Nicholas Pope, ſent the Cardinalls Hatte to the ſaid Felix, appointed him Legat a Latere, in Saouy, in France, and in Almaine.
               
               This Felix, or Ayme de Saouy, was of litle ſtature, a deuout man, founder of the Monaſterie of Rapaille, vnder the rule of S. Augustine: wherein hee was ſumptuouſly buried. Faſci. Temp.
               
               Whatſoeuer hee ſaid Felix had done and decreed during his Papaltie, was ratified and held for good. Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  
                  A Iubile.The yeare of Chriſt 1450. the Pope Nicholas held a Iubile at Rome, wherat there was ſuch a multitude of people, that many were ſtifled as they entred and came out of Churches: There periſhed more then 200. perſons beſides an infinit number which fell into the floud as they paſſed ouer the Bridge of S. Angelo.
               
               
                  This is the reward that ſuch deſerue that leauing the truth, follow the inuention of Antichriſt.
               
               
                  Amurathes Turke ſecond of that name died, after he had raigned 31. yeares, whom Mahomet the ſecond ſucceeded. This Amurathes tooke the Lord of Seruia, and Meſia, and occupied Sophia, &c. Alſo he tooke captiues three of his children: whereof two were males, and put out their eyes with an hotte Iron, and the third a maide, hee tooke to wife. He made warre vpon the Venetians and occupied Theſſalonica, which at this day is called Salonike.
               
               
                   The yeare 1453. the 28. day of May, after Naucler. or of March after ſome, Mahomet the ſecond, ſurnamed the great, ſonne of Amurathes, by the cowardiſe of Iohn Iuſtinian of Genoua, tooke Conſtantinople, hauing with him 300000. fighters. The ſiege endured 60. dayes. Michael Paleologus a Grecian, tooke it of the French by the helpe of the Geneuois. The ſaid Ionh Iuſtinian was made king by the ſpace of three daies, as the Turke had promiſed him: but the fourth day he was be headed ſaith Faſci. Temp. The Patriarke and all the Chriſtians were ſlaine without any mercie. They had ſent to demaund helpe

of the Pope and the Chriſtians, but no helpe came.
               It is impoſſible to recyte the horrible crueltie which was there exerciſed. Conſtantine the laſt Emperour of the laſt Greekes, as he fled was encountred and murthered nigh the gates. His head was ſtucke on the top of a Launce and carried about the Towne. Mahomet alſo cauſed to be erected an Image of a Crucifixe, and did write vpon it; This is the God of the Chriſtians: and commaunded to caſt dung and other filth againſt the ſaid Image. The Emperours wife, with her daughters and the moſt nobleſt Damzels there, were brought before Mahomet, and after he had done them all the ſhame he could, yea the greateſt villanies of the world, he cauſed theyr bodies to be cut in peeces.
               
                  Such examples of ſo extreame crueltie ought to induce vs to abhorre ſo barbarous an enemie: and to deteſt the Papists Idolatrie, which by the adoration of Images are the cauſe wherefore the paſſion of Ieſus Chriſt is thus ſlaundered.
               
               The King of France recouered all the Townes which the Engliſh held in France, except the Towne of Callais. The Sea of Hiſtories.
               
               In this time flouriſhed Nicholas Perotus, Ioannes de turre oremata, a Iacobin, Doctor in Theologie, Biſhop and Cardinall.
               
                  Nicholas Canonized S. Bernardine of Senes, a Friar. Chron. Euſeb,
               
               He was a louer of Letters and learned people, & greatly loued ſuch: Bookes were alſo preſented and dedicated vnto him on all ſides. For hee ſtirred ſuch as were learned to tranſlate Greeke Authors into Latin. Naucler.
               
               He couered with lead S. Marie the round, auntiently called the Pantheon: he repaired the Church of S. Stephen: he alſo builded the Church of S. Theodore, repaired the bridge Miluius, paued many ſtreetes: hee gaue to many Churches veſſels of gold and ſiluer, and many Croſſes adorned with precious ſtones.
               The yeare 1455. the 25. of March, Nicholas the 5. died of a

Feauer, hauing bene ſore troubled with the taking of Conſtantinople. Naucler. The Sea of Hiſt. ſaith he was poiſoned; as was found by effect when he was opened.
               
                  Scanderbeg ſo called of the Turkes when he was circumciſed, (for before he was called George Castriot) was giuen in Hoſtage by his father king of Epire and Albania, of old called Macedonia, to Amurathes the 7. Emperour of the Turkes, who after he had in many deedes of Armes experimented his proweſſe, made him chiefe of the Armie againſt the Hungarians: vnto whom he yeelded himſelfe, and moreouer conſtrained Baſſa the Turkes Secretarie to write Letters to the Gouernours of the Towne and Countrey of Croya: whereby was ſent in the name of Amurathes, that the ſaid Towne ſhould be deliuered into his gouernment. So ſubtilly recouered he his Countrey about this time. But Amurathes fell vpon Egipt with a  great power: after hauing in vaine beſieged Croya many monethes, he died of griefe.
               
                  Calixtus. 3.
                  
                  Calixtus or Calistus, the third of that name, a Spaniard, called  before Alphonſus Borgia, being alreadie of a great age, by the conſent of the Cardinalls ſucceeded Nicholas: a man onely learned in the Lawe or right Canon.
               Some ſay he was firſt, Secretarie to Alphonſus King of Arragon, and was made Biſhop of 
                     Ʋalence by Martine the fift, and vnder Eugenius was made Cardinall of the title of foure Crownes, as commonly they ſay at Rome (de Sant quatre) As ſoone as hee had receiued the Papall dignitie, hee publiſhed warre againſt the Turkes, according to a vow hee had made.
               
                  
                     
                        Rom. 12.18.But by the dutie of his office hee ought rather to haue ſought peace with all men: Painims ſhould be taught and not aſſailed by warre.
               
               The Turke Mahomet went into Hungarie againſt Alba and was vanquiſhed, and more then fortie thouſand of his people periſhed. Naucler.
               
               
                  Iohn Huniades a vertuous Captaine at the iournie of Albe, died ſhortly after the ſaid victorie.
               But the Pope the better to execute ſo couragious an enterpriſe,

ſent preachers like himſelfe in capacitie and couetouſneſſe, with Bulles and Indulgences: That is,Apoc. 9.3.
                   certaine begging Friars garniſhed with power like the Scorpions of the earth. The principall of them all were Iohn Capiſtran and Robert de la lice, of the order of Friars and hypocrites: which euery man receiued with great admiration. Theſe men knowing the Popes ſubtiltie, and hauing no certaine hope that they could gather much money out of the Iubile, did all their buſineſſe and trafficked by the the meanes of feigned prayers full of hypocriſie, of Letanies, of Images, of croſſes, of ſongs, of ringing of Bells, and of their paſtie God: to the end they might fill all the purſes, budgets, and ſacks of their maiſter.
               
                  Calixtus ceaſed not by his Embaſſadors to exhort other Chriſtian Princes to enterpriſe that warre as a thing very neceſſarie and holy. Therefore ſent he to all Prieſts that as they ſung Maſſe they ſhould pronounce certaine Prayers or Collects againſt Painimes and Turkes.
               He alſo commanded that at noonetime a Bell ſhould toll as there was done at night to ſalute the Virgin Marie:
                  Wherefore a Bell was knolled at noone. to the end that (as Stella the good Popiſh Theologian ſaith) they which ordinarily fight againſt the Turkes, might be helped by that prayer. This is alſo the reaſon ſaith he wherefore hee ordained the Feaſt and ſeruice of the transfiguration of Ieſus Chriſt: and commaunded it ſhould bee celebrated with like pardons and Indulgences, as that of the Feaſt of the body of Ieſus Chriſt. This was for the victorie which the Chriſtians had againſt the Turkes the ſixt day of Auguſt before Albe in Hungarie.
               
               Hee ſent alſo towards the Armenians and Perſians to ſollicite them to doo the like againſt the Turkes, and cauſed certaine peaſants to be hanged and ſtrangled which mocked and derided theſe toyes and follies.
               He placed in the Kalender of Saints one 
                     Ʋincent borne at Valence, of the Iacobin order, Albert of Dropan Carmelite, and Edmond of Canterburie Engliſh. He ordained alſo that no perſon ſhould appeale from the Pope to the Councell, and yet had done more if he had liued longer.
               
                  He gaue too much licence to his followers, and made one Roderic Borgia his Vice-chauncellor, who after was Pope, called Alexander the ſixt. He publiſhed (ſaith Valerius) Letters of pardons which he ſolde then for fiue Ducats a peece, but now they are better cheape) by the meanes whereof he left vnto his ſucceſſor an hundreth and 15. thouſand Ducates.
               
                  Iohn Capiſtran Robert de la Lice.
                  Iohn Capistran and Robert de la Lice, aboue named (as is ſaid) were ſent by the Pope into diuers Countries to preach the yeelding of obedience to the Romane Church, to giue ſome colour and appearance to their filthy fooleries, prohibited paſtimes, and other ciuill exerciſes, as bankets, daunces, and other like things. Briefly they acquired ſuch great brute and fame by their hypocriſie, that afterward they were adored as Saints of many, although they knew not what the doctrine of Ieſus Chriſt meant.
               
                  The world meriteth to haue ſuch Doctors ſince they make ſo ſmall account of the truth.
               
               
                   This Pope Calixtus died in Iuly the yeare 1458. beeing very olde, and left great riches.
               
                  Frauncis Foſcarius was Duke of the Venetians about 36. yeares, who hauing conquered (or rather vſurped) many lands and dominions in Italie vnto the profit of the Seignorie of Venice, in the end of his dayes for a repentance the Venetians depoſed him of his Ducall dignitie, without alleadging any other reaſon but his age and impotencie:Ingratitude of the Venetians. And conſtrained him to leaue his Ducall Pallace, to ſee a new ſucceſſor enter into it, whereof incontinently after he died. After his death his ſonne was baniſhed, and after called againe and cruelly tortured, and againe ſent into perpetuall exile: although they found nothing in him of that which they laide to his charge. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  Pius. 2.
                  
                  Pius the ſecond of that name, a Tuſcan by Nation, borne in the Towne of Sienes: whoſe father was Siluius, and his mother 
                     Ʋictoria, before called Eneas Picolominius: although long time he had bene ſpotted with the vice of ambition, yet finally he came vnto the Popedome.
               
                  This poore young boy became ſo great (as all Hiſtoriographers ſay which haue written of the Popes liues) that hee was held one of the learnedſt Popes and much eſteemed, for that he had written many things worthily.
               In the Councell of Baſill he was the Popes Secretarie, and by Oraſons and Epiſtles he purged the authoritie of Eugenius, a litle after that, he was crowned a Poet Laureate, by the Emperour Frederic the third of that name, and being called from his Court, he came vnto greater eſtates, and was both his Secretarie and Counceller.
               He was ſent Embaſſador hither and thither vnto many Princes, and after ordained Biſhop of Trieste by Nicholas the fift, and conſequently Biſhop of Siennes, and after placed in the number of Cardinalls by Calixt.
               
               Finally comming vnto the Papaltie, following the examples of his predeceſſors, hee publiſhed a voyage againſt the Turkes: but being preuented by death he could not put it in execution.
               Some there are (as ſaith Iohn Functius) which haue left in writing, that he ſought to draw to himſelfe a great ſumme of ſiluer from the Almaines, vnder a colour to make warre vpon the Turkes, becauſe he knew well the riches of the Almaines as he that had long conuerſed with them, and that to the end he might diſpend them in pompes and papall diſſolutions, and to inrich his parents and friends.
               
                  Vnder the ſhadow of warring againſt the Turkes, Popes get ſtore of ſiluer.
               
               
                  Lewis 11. ſonne of Charles the 7. the 54. king of France,
                   being in Bourgongne, and hearing newes of his fathers death, came ſtraight into France and was crowned.
               The aforeſaid Pope though before he was Pope, hee had with ſingular diligence written two bookes of the acts of the the Councell of Baſill, yet as ſoone as he was made Pope, hee ſought to ſuppreſſe it. For as he was very ambitious in all hee did when he was Pope, ſo he trauelled in nothing to leſſen the Maieſtie or rather Papall tyrannie, but rather to encreaſe it what he could. Which to maintaine (ſaith Stella the Venetian)

it is found that hee ſpared neither Kings nor Princes, people nor tyrants: hee I ſay which was more cruell then any tyrant.
               He was a great enemie of Lewis king of France, the eleuenth of that name: becauſe he would not conſent to the abolition of the pragmatike ſanction in his kingdome, becauſe it derogated from the libertie of the Cleargie. Hee was angry againſt Borge de Est Duke de Mutine, and made warre vpon him becauſe hee fauoured Sigiſmond Malateste, and the French men againſt Ferdinand. For vpon his owne authoritie and by force of Armes hee put in poſſeſſion of the Kingdome of Naples, Alphonſus Baſtard of the King Ferdinand, to the great diſaduantage of Iohn de Aniou ſonne of King Rene.
               
               He purſued with cruell and ſharpe perſecutions Sigiſmond Duke of Austrich, becauſe hee had chaſtiſed Nicholas de Cuſe a Cardinall, for his rapacitie and couetouſneſſe full of arrogancie.
               He ſhead out alſo the venome of his malediction againſt Gregorie de Hambourge, a man very learned in the Ciuill lawe, as it had bene a chaſed viper (as Wolfgang de Winſebourge, a Diuine of Baſill ſaith) and ſo ſharply purſued him with the Letters of his thundring excommunications, that he was conſtrained to remooue into Boheme.
               
               He furiouſly caſt out of his feat Diether d' Eiſenbourge, Archbiſhop of Magunce becauſe (as he ſaid) he had an euil opinion of the Romane Church, and placed an other in his place. Beſides, he depriued the Archbiſhop of Beneuent of his Archbiſhoppricke: becauſe againſt his will he tooke in hand new enterpriſes.
               He cauſed a day to be giuen to George king of Boheme, becauſe he fauoured ſuch as held the doctrine of Iohn Hus, & that vpon the paine to looſe his kingdome.
               He for his particular profit depoſed many Biſhoppes, and added 12. newe Cardinalls to ſuch as were alredie before.
               He celebrated a Councell at Mantua, and abbrogated in

                  France the pragmatike ſanction,The pragmatike ſanction abbrogated. Abbreuiators created. as a pernitious practiſe againſt the Romane Church.
               Hee was the firſt that created the Abbreuiators of the Chauncelerie, and reducted them into their order. He brought vnder his gouernment many Townes of Campania, called at this day Terra de lauoro: the Land of Labour, and maruellouſly encreaſed the Churches reuenewes and rents.
               He neuer graunted any thing eyther to kings or to people for any feare hee had (as his fierce and arrogant Papiſts ſay) but he ſharply perſecuted the enemies of the Cleargie, as if they had beene publike enemies. As for his friends, hee ſhewed himſelfe very gentle towards them, and greatly helped them.
               At the ſollicitation of Soreth,
                  Katherine de Sienes Canonized.
                   he Canonized one called Angelus, borne at Ieruſalem: and placed in the number of Virgins Katherine de Sienes, a Iacobin.
               Becauſe he was a very curious builder (as the Papiſts giue him that praiſe) he repaired the Courts of Vatican: and had ſooner atchieued a Caſtle in the Towne of Tiuoli then was thought he had begunne. At Sienes where hee was borne, hee builded a goodly Porch of wrought ſtone. At a place called Corfinium he founded a Citie, and named it Pientia of his owne name, and builded there a vaulted Temple very ſumptuous, and a pleaſant houſe: and beſides this, a Sepulchre of Marble for his father and mothers bones. See what Platina ſayth thereof.
            
            
               The Kingdome of Boſne.
               The kingdome of Boſne ſtretched euen vnto Macedonia: It was made tributary vnto the kingdome of Hungarie, the yeare 1415. After it reuoulted from the kings obedience and made alliance with the Turke. Sigiſmond King of Hungarie ſought to chaſe away ſuch as occupied it: but the Turke was the ſtronger, and reteined the Countrey of Boſne. After the Hungarians got together a great Armie, came into Boſne, and ſlew the king Itrarch who was a Turke, and ſubiected to their power all that Region, and conſtituted a king there: namely the firſt Chriſtian which had yet bene.
               
                  There was a Prince in Ruſcia called George Deſpot, who had giuen his daughter in marriage to the Turke. Hee had three ſonnes, Stephen, George, and Lazarus. Lazarus ſucceeded his father and had but one daughter, who eſpowſed Stephen king of Boſne: who ſoone after his enioying the principalitie of Ruſcia, gouerned with a Turkiſh ſpirit, full of great impietie and wicked religion. But it hapned that about the yeare of ſaluation 1463. as hee had a great land in the higher Miſia, Mahomet 
                   the Turke by flatteries drew him out of the Caſtle where hee was, and calling him to him to talke vnder the ſhadow of amitie, laid hold on him, and cauſed him to be ſcorched aliue: ſo loſt he both his life and kingdome which he had by his father. By this mans temeritie and wickedneſſe together, Ruſcia and Boſne with the greateſt part of Seruia, fell into the Turkes obedience.
               As the Pope Pius was at Ancone, vpon his departing to goe to warre, he was ſurpriſed with a ſlowe feauer, the yeare of  the Lord 1464. whereof hee died. From thence he was carried to Rome, and buried in the Church of S Peter. One vice of Ambition ſaith Volaterane, contaminated and defiled all the vertues of this perſon: as he that alwaies greatly deſired great eſtates and honours. And for that cauſe endured hee great trauells, and alwaies maintained himſelfe in the fauour of Princes.
               The warre called The publike Weale, was begunne the yeare 1464. by the conſpiration of the Princes of France, meaning to reforme the kings affaires: who tooke offices and dignities from ſuch as had long time faithfully exerciſed them: He greatly alſo vexed the Nobles and puiſſant of the Kingdome by demaunds. The Duke of Britaine and the Count de Chaelois, the Duke of Bourgongnes ſonne, perſwaded Charles Duke of Berry to bee the chiefe Captaine and Prince of that warre and conſpiration: which Phillip de Commines handleth at large and truly: therefore ſee his hiſtorie.
               The aforeſaid Pope Pius, as Platina and Sabellicus recyte, amongſt other ſentences which he vſed commonly, left this in writing. With great reaſon was marriage taken from Prieſts:

but yet there is a farre greater reaſon wherefore it ought to haue bene yeelded them againe.A ſentence of Pope PIus againſt ſinglenes of Prieſts. He inſerted alſo this ſentence in his ſecond booke of Councells. It may be (ſaith hee) that it were not the worſe if a many Prieſts were married: For many being married Prieſts ſhould be ſaued, which in their barren ſingleneſſe are damned. He himſelfe would needs aboliſh certaine Monaſteries of S. Brigide and S. Claire: commaunding them out that they might burne no more, and vnder the habit of religion they ſhould not hide whoredome, ſaith Caelius Secundus.
               
               About this time there was no ſmall debate in Italie betwixt the Friars Minors and ſuch as they called Bulliſts, which of thoſe ſhould guard and gouerne the Nunnes there: As for the diſcords which were betwixt the Obſeruantins and the Non Obſeruantins, Baptista Mantuanus accordeth them in his Bucoliques,, in the tenth Eglogue.
               
                  Paul the ſecond of that name, borne at 
                     Ʋenice,
                  Paul. 2.
                   the ſonne of Nicholas and of Polixene, called before Peter Barbe or Balbe,
                   and Nephewe of Eugenius the fourth, on his ſiſters ſide, beeing Cardinall of the title of S. Marke, was choſen in the place of Pius, and occupied the ſeate of Antichriſt.
               Before he was made Bope, he meant to traffique as a Marchant: but hearing that his Vncle Gabriel was choſen Pope, he gaue his minde vnto Letters: and comming to Rome, he was firſt created Archdeacon of Bolongne after that Biſhop of Ceruio, conſequently Cardinall, and as hath bene ſaid,Ambition. finally Pope and Romane Antichriſt. It was he who firſt vaunted that hee held encloſed in his breaſt all Lawes both diuine and humane.
               He was a goodly man and of faire repreſentation, but of a proud ſpirit and very couetous to gather riches, and yet more to diſtribute Eccleſiaſticall Benefices for his owne gaine and profit.
               As for his Popiſh apparell (ſaith Platina) you neede not doubt but he ſurpaſſed all his predeceſſors, and eſpecially in his Mitre, which he maruellouſly inriched, buying from all Countries, Diamonds, Saphyrs, Emeraudes, Chryſolites, Iaſpers, Pearles, and other precious ſtones of great price. Thus adorned

and ſhining he would come publikely abroad with an exceeding magnificall apparence.A ſumptuous Mitre. Then would he be ſeene and adored of each one: & for that cauſe would he often ſtay Pilgrims in the towne, deferring the accuſtomed day to ſhew the Snaire, that at once he might be ſeene of more people.
               And that hee alone might not differ from others in habits and garments, he commanded by publike Edict vpon greeuous paines that none ſhould weare redde Bonnets but Cardinalls:Red hats. vnto which alſo the firſt yeare of his Popedome he gaue them a cloath of the ſame colour for footcloathes for their Horſes and Mules when they rode. Platina.
               
               He fought to encreaſe his maieſtie as well by authoritie as by force of Armes.
                     Ariminum waſted by the Pope. All the time of his raigne he ſtirred great warres in Italie by his deuices and practiſes. Hee aſſailed the Towne of Ariminum and others, and miſerably deſtroyed and waſted not onely the ſuburbes, but euen the Townes themſelues with Gun-ſhot.
               He greatly hated the decrees and acts of Pius his predeceſſor: and depriued alſo of their goods and authorities ſuch as (for their knowledge and doctrine) hee ſhould haue ſought through the world and haue drawne them vnto him by gifts and promiſes.
               He declared ſuch to be heretikes as from thenceforth ſhould but onely name an Academie or Vniuerſitie, eyther in ſport or earneſt. He was of an heauie and groſſe ſpirit, and therefore loued neither Letters nor vertues.The Pope an enemie of Letters. As one that was giuen altogether vnto ambition, diſſolution, and voluptuouſneſſe. He employed all the day either in gourmandizing or waighing peeces of Gold, or in regarding and contemplating the auncient money, precious ſtones, or Images and Portraitures.
               
                   In the Romane conſiſtorie, Gregorie King of Boheme was condemned an heretike & depriued of his kingdome: and after the Pope by his Legate ſollicited the Princes of Almaine and the king of Pannonia to inuade the kingdome of Boheme, which they did: and the ſaid George was caſt out of one part thereof. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               
                  In the moneth of September a Legate arriued in France to breake the pragmatike Sanction: vnto whom Iohn de S. Romain the Kings Proctor generall would not conſent for any menaces of the ſaid Legate: but ſaid hee would rather looſe both his office and goods before hee would yeeld to doo any thing ſo greatly to the preiudice of the Realme and Common-wealth.
               The Towne of Liege was put to fire and ſword by the Duke of Bourgongne becauſe they had put their Biſhop in priſon, who was his Nephewe by his ſiſter, as is reported by the Chronicle of Euſebius. Others ſay he was his brother by his wife, the Duke of Bourbon his daughter.
               
                  Frederic the third vpon deuotion went to Rome in winter. 
                  Chron. Euſeb.
               
               Pope Paul hauing made alliance with the Turkes, ioyned in league alſo with the Venetians. Chron. Euſeb.
               
               The Pope Paul held Platina the Hiſtoriographer in priſon wrongfully: but his ſucceſſor deliuered him.
               He deſtroyed the Abbreuiataires in hatred of his predeceſſor, who had reduced the ſaid eſtate into order. At that time it was a Colledge of learned and ſtudious people in Diuine and Ciuill Lawes, Poets, Orators, Hiſtoriographers, &c. See Naucler.
               
               He ſet the Iubile from 25. yeares to 25. yeares, not for the ſaluation of ſoules: but rather to drawe new money vnto him, ſaith Faſci. Temp.
               
               There is found in the booke of Staniſlaus Ruthen, a thing worthy to bee noted. That is, that this Paul hauing read certaine Poeſies that were made againſt him and his daughter, began to weepe, and amongſt his friends began to accuſe the rigour of the lawe of his former predeceſſours which forbadde Prieſtes to marrie: for as much as hee which ought not onely to bee the head of the Church, but alſo of continencie, ſawe that each one had talke of his daughter to his great diſhonour, and had theyr eyes continually vpon her. And although ſhee were moſt excellent in beautie, yet did it grieue him that men ſhould thinke that hee

had engendred her in whoredome: Seeing hee knew well that there was a lawe ordained of God, whereby ſhee might haue bene borne in wedlocke, had it not bene for that ſingleneſſe (that is the defence for Prieſts to marrie) which hindred it. Therefore he had determined to haue ſet vp againe the marriage of Prieſts, but he could not execute it, becauſe death preuented him. For as he perſwaded himſelfe that hee ſhould liue long, he was ſuddenly taken with an Apoplexie, and died ſuddenly, hauing well ſupped the night before.
               
                  The Popedome fell.After this time the Popedome fell and decayed more and more.
            
            
               
                   The Kingdom of Cyprus.
               The Venetians got the kingdome of Cyprus: Firſt the yeare 1470. they had eſtabliſhed in the kingdome one Iames, baſtard of Cyprus, againſt Lewis ſonne of the Duke of Sauoy, and the Queene Charlotte his wife, daughter of Iohn king of Cyprus, the true heire of that kingdome. But for the better vnderſtanding of the matter, you muſt know that the ſaid Venetians gaue to the ſaid baſtard in marriage, Katherine the daughter of Marke Corrario, a Gentleman of Venice: who vpon their commaundement had ayded the ſaid baſtard in all his affaires againſt the ſaid Lewis of Sauoy, and the Queene Charlotte his wife, euen to caſt them out of Cyprus: This Katherine was ſolemnly adopted a daughter by the Signiorie of 
                     Ʋenice: but it was not but for to adopt alſo the kingdome therewith. But the ſaid king baſtard with his Venetian wife eſpowſed the cauſe of their death: for as ſoone as ſhe was eſpied to bee with childe the Venetians poyſoned the ſaid king, & cauſed a fame to runne, that he died of a Fluxe of the belley, and that hee had left his wife and the childe ſhe was with, his heire, recommending them vnto the Seignorie of 
                     Ʋenice. When then ſhee was brought to reſt, they did with the chide as they had done with the father. And they tooke the ſaid Katherine which they called Queene, and brought her to 
                     Ʋenice, and from that time they ceaſed and tooke poſſeſſion of the ſaid Kingdome, which they haue held ſince the yeare 1470. vntill this day, ſaith Iohn le Maire. Of this Iames baſtard and of the oath he made vnto the Souldan, ſee Naucler.
               
               
                  
                  Sixtus or Sistus, fourth of that name,Sixtus. 4.
                   a Geneuois by Nation, borne in the Towne of Sauonne, called before Francis de Ruere, generall of the order of Friars, and Cardinall of S. Sixtus, after the death of Paul, ſucceeded in the execrable Chaire.
               As the ſolemnitie of his Coronation was done, whileſt they carried him in his Litter to the Church of Laterane, hee was in great daunger of his life in a mutenie which aroſe ſuddenly: in ſuch ſort that he was aſſailed euen with ſtones, and forſaken almoſt of all that accompanied his Litter. This Pope was very liberall towards his, and bore them ſuch an affection, that in fauour of them, he did and agreed vnto many things againſt all right and reaſon.
               He promoted vnto the dignitie of a Cardinall before all others, one called Peter de Ruere, one of the ſame order and Nation, and had bene nouriſhed from his Infancie with a brother of his called Hierome: although it ſeemed this man was borne fooliſhly to ſpend money. For in two yeares that he liued after, he conſumed in all diſſolution and violence, the ſumme of 200000. Skutes, beſides many debts he left.
               
                  Iohn Textor in his Officine makes mention of this Cardinall, and ſaith, that in two yeares he ſpent in diſſolutions, vanities, and incredible luxurie, 300000. skutes.
               The yeare 1475. a Citizen of Trent, loſt in the weeke before Eaſter, commonly called the paſſion weeke, a childe of two yeares olde. And hauing ſought him through all ſtreetes in the Towne, and not finding him, he ſuſpected he was carried away by the Iewes which inhabited there. Wherefore he got him towards the Magiſtrate, making great ſorrow and deliuering his ſuſpitions. The Sunday following the Iewes told the Biſhop that they had found a childe betwixt the floud called Ruſch and the houſe of Samuel, a Iew which the force of the water had caſt vp there. Certaine men were appointed to viſit the childe which was found in the houſe of the ſaid Samuel with his garments all wette: his body was marked with diuers prickes. Being asked how this childe came there, they anſwered they knew not, but that the fierceneſſe of the water had driuen him thither. But as ſoone as they were put to the Racke

they confeſſed and rehearſed the caſe in order: that is to ſay, how they had conſulted and choſen amongſt them one Tobias to ſteale a Chriſtian childe and to crucifie him at Eaſter, and that this Tobias did take vp the ſaid childe for that purpoſe, called Simon, and hauing offered him in the full aſſemblie of the Iewes in the houſe of the ſaide Samuel, they claſped his necke with pinſons to keepe him from crying: then ſtretched his armes on a Croſſe, cut off his priuities, after his right eyelid, then each one pricked him with ſharpe Inſtruments euen to death, and laſtly caſt him into the floud. After information made of this execrable murder, all they were executed which were attainted about this deed doing in the ſaid Towne of Trent.
               
            
            
               The Common-wealth of Florence.
               
                  Coſme.Although in the time of the Emperor Henry the ſeuenth, the Florentines receiued Robert King of Naples to bee their Protector to reſiſt the Gibellins or Imperialistes, (ſo much hated they the Emperours of Almaine) yet about this time Coſme by ſurname Medices, flouriſhed in that Towne in great preheminence, prudence, and authoritie: and was held as a Prince and chiefe of the Towne.
               He led the Senate at his pleaſure, inriched the poore Citizens, builded many places, for more and more to maintaine his authoritie.
               
                  Peter, Lawrence, Iulian.But after that Coſme was dead in the yeare 1464. hee left a ſonne called Peter, who alſo was mightie in the Towne. Vnto whom ſucceeded in the adminiſtration of the Commonwealth Lawrence de Medices his ſon: who with his brother Iulian augmented the Seignorie of Florence. And becauſe this greatly diſpleaſed certaine Biſhops, Cardinalls, and other Lords, they made a conſpiracie together, and came to Florence the yeare 1478. which with one of the nobleſt of the Towne called Franciſquinus de pactis, diſſembling their hatred entred into the Tmple: and as they lifted vp the Hoſt they ſlewe Iulian, and wounded Lawrence, who eſcaped their hands. But the Malefactors thought they had done an act greatly pleaſing to the Citizens to recouer libertie, but they were deceiued:

for they were all taken, and neither Prieſt nor Biſhop pardoned.
               
                  Frodeſque Saluiat Archbiſhop of Piſe, who ſaid the Maſſe, was giuen to the ſlaughter-man and hanged at an high window in his habit: for hee had ſung Maſſe in his coate of Male. The Pope being grieued at theſe dooings, excommunicated Lawrence de Medices, and ſtird vp Ferdinand king of Sicilie, Alphonſus Duke of Calabria, and Frederic Duke of 
                     Ʋrbin, againſt the Florentines to be reuenged of them. But Lawrence ſeeing he was not puiſſant enough to ſuſtaine ſuch enemies, by the conſent of the Citizens got him to a ſhippe, and ſecretly came into Sicilie to the King Ferdinand himſelfe, and promiſed him tribute if he and his would leaue that enterpriſe begunne at the Popes inſtance. Which was done, & the towne with all the countrie by that meanes was deliuered from the deſtruction of the enemies.
               The Pope heereat was more inflamed then before: but the Venetians gaue aide vnto the Florentines againſt the Pope, after they had made peace with the Turke: who during theſe ſtirres beſieged Rhodes and got it, the yeare 5488.
               In this time began the ſuperſtition to toll a Bell at noone as a pardon, called the (Aue Maria pacis) which the King had entreated of the Pope.
               The yeare of Chriſt 1475. the great Iubile alreadie ordained  and commaunded by Paul the ſecond, was confirmed by Sixtus, and obſerued at Rome this yeare.
               
                  Charles the ſonne of Phillip Duke of Bourgongne, agrreed with King Lewis the 11. Frederic the Emperour refuſed to erect Bourgongne for a Kingdome, whereat Charles was mooued, therefore he beſieged Niſſe, (which is a Towne placed in the territories of Colongne) and held it during a yeare beſieged. Hee did it to gaine vpon the Empire the Dioceſſe of Colongne: but the Emperour prepared a great power to meete him and to leuie the ſiege. In the ende they accorded: ſo that Maximilian the ſonne of Frederic ſhould take in marriage Marie the onely daughter of the ſaide Duke of Bourgongne.
               
               
                  After theſe things the ſaid Charles fought twiſe againſt the Swiſſes vnluckily enough for this cauſe.
               About the years 1460. Sigiſmond Duke of Austrich engaged to Charles Duke of Bourgongne his lands which he had, as well on this ſide as beyond Rhene: namely Sungaw Briſgaw, the blacke Forreſt, and the Townes ſcituate vpon Rhene, for 7000. Florents. Great miſchiefes came herevpon. For the Duke of Bourgongne appointed ouer thoſe Lands as Gouernor general, Peter de Hagenbach, who exceedingly tormented them of Mulhuſe and Swiſſes.
               
               About this time Charles Duke of Lorraine died of the peſtilence at Nancy, which gaue occaſion to Charles Duke of Bourgogne, to ſee if hee could conquer Lorraine by force, taking the cauſe againſt Rhene the ſucceſſor of Lorraine, that Charles his predeceſſor was bound vnto him in a certaine ſum of money: and by the ſame meanes though alſo to vſurpe the royall title of Sicilie and Ieruſalem. Peter de Hagenbach Count of Thierſteine, greatly moleſted the ſubiects of Sigiſmond, Duke of Austrich, who had lately after long warres made peace with the Swiſſes. Wherevnto they of Strasbourge Sicistad, Colmar, and Baſill had ſealed. And the money due vnto the Duke of Bourgongne, was committed into the hands of a Changer or Banquer of Baſill, and the paiment ſignified to the Duke of Bourgongne by an Herauld. After they proceeded againſt Peter de Hagembach, who being taken priſoner was ſolemnly diſgraded of his order of knighthood, and publikely beheaded after he had gouerned the ſaid lands engaged three yeares and an halfe. The Duke of Bourgongne hearing hereof, determined to reuenge the death of his Gouernour, and aſſembled an Armie, being alſo aided of the Duke of Millaine and the Ducheſſe of Sauoy, and tooke Lanſanua a confederate of the Swiſſes: From thence hee beſieged the Towne and Caſtle of Granſon, ſolliciting them to yeeld: when they had yeelded, the Duke cauſed to hang 80. and to drowne in a lake nigh the Towne 200. Such an act greatly ſtirred the Swiſſes, and not only them, but alſo whole high Germanie: which with the Armie of the Duke of Auſtrich, (of which the conducter was Herman d'

Extingen) chaſed from Granſon the Duke and ſlew one part of his Armie, loſt his Artillerie and his furniture for warre,The Dukes firſt ouerthrowe at Granſon. which was very magnificall. After they tooke downe their companions which the Duke had hung vp, and hanged in their places as many Bourguignons.
               
               
                  Gelatius Maria Duke of Millaine, on S. Stephens day, in  the Church of S. Stephen being at Maſſe, was ſlaine by a Citizen of Millaine called Andrew de Lupagnano, who making a ſhewe to ſpeake vnto him ſtabbed him in the ſtomacke. He ſaid the cauſe was for that the Duke deteined from him vniuſtly certaine poſſeſſions, that he kept his wife, and further, hindred that iuſtice could not be done him touching an Abbey: for which he had paid at Rome during vacation, and the Duke would haue had an other to haue had it.
               
                  Sixtus caſt the Manfrois Lords of the Towne of Imola, namely the father and the ſonne out of the Seignorie, and gaue it to one of his houſhold.
               Likewiſe he deiected the Gouernours of Forliue, and conſtituted there a familiar friend of his.
               
                  Charles Duke of Bourgongne returned the ſecond time againſt the Swiſſes: Before, he had taken from the Duke Rene of Lorraine Nancy:
                  The ſecond ouerthrow of the Duke of Bourgongne nigh Morat. wherefore the Duke of Lorraine ioyned with the Swiſſes. And when the Duke of Bourgongne was before Morat, they of the Towne came out and altogether inuaded the the Armie of the Bourguignons, and put them vnto flight. In ſo much that 17. thouſand Bourguignons or 20000. after Faſci. Temp. or 22000. after the Sea of Hiſt, were there ſlaine. The ſpoile was there left to the Duke of Lorraine for recompence, who alſo after recouered Nancy. See Nauclerus.
               
               The third time the Duke of Bourgongne being greeued to haue beene vanquiſhed by ſo weake a Prince as the Duke of Lorraine was, returned and againe beſieged Nancy.
                  The third ouerthrow of the Duke Charles.
                   Hee had 14000 combattants, and ſtill looked for other Bands of ſouldiers. Vpon this the Duke of Lorraine and the Swiſſes came vpon them, parted in two Bandes. The Bourguignons were diſcomfited and put to flight: ſome ſlaine in the woods, and

others drowned. There was alſo ſlaine the Duke of Bourgongne, hauing receiued three mortall woundes, one on the head, an other in the thigh, and the laſt in the fundament. See Naucler.
               
               The Bourguignons would not beleeue he was ſlaine, but that being eſcaped hee retired into Almaine, and hee had vowed to make his penance there ſeuen yeares, There were amongſt the Bourguignons which ſolde precious ſtones, horſes, and other ſuch like things, to be paid at his returne. Yea euen in Bruchel in the Dioceſſe of Spine, there was an olde man which men thought to bee the Duke of Bourgongne, making there his penance, whom euery one deſired to ſee, and therby got he good almes. Nauclerus ſaith hee ſawe the ſaid poore man in the ſaid place.
               The king of France vnderſtanding of the death of the Duke of Bourgongne, tooke Monididier, Roy, Peronne, Abbenille, Monſtraeul, Arras, an Heſdin. See the Hist. of France.
               
               
                  Maximilian ſonne of the Emperour Frederic the third, affianced Mary the onely daughter of Charles Duke of Bourgongne, with whom he had Bourgongne, Brabant, Flaunders, Luxembourge, Hainaut, Zeland, Artois, Guelders, with other Sergnories and lands.
               The ſaid Maximilian had of his ſaid wife one ſonne called Phillip; and a daughter called Margarite. They had two other children Francis and George, which died in their youth.
               
                  Phillip eſpowſed Iane Queene of Chastile, of whom hee had Charles the fift Emperour, and Ferdinand, and foure daughters, Leonor, Iſabeal, Mary, and Katherine.
               
               
                  Iacobins againſt the Carmes.The Iacobins Inquiſitors, deputed againſt heretikes (as they call them in diuers ſorts) moleſted certaine Theologians of the order of Carmes, in certaine cauſes of the faith. Amongſt which they ſaid one was called Iulian de Breſſe, an excellent Preacher of the word of God, and an other Peter de Neuolaite, for whom Mantuan writ an Apologie conteining three bookes.
               But all this was pacified by the Pope Sixtus at the purſuite of Chriſtopher Martignon, which Sextus (as tutor and defender

of Monkes (as Stella witneſſeth in the Popes liues) that he might take away all occaſion of enuie and riots amongſt them,Mendicants made equall. ordained that all Mendicant and begging Friars ſhould bee equall in ſuch priuiledges, as all Popes had graunted vnto them.
               The Vniuerſitie of Tubinge in the Dioceſſe of Conſtance, by Apoſtolicke authoritie was inſtituted at the inſtance of the Count of Wittemberge. Naucler.
               
               The Swiſſes beganne now to receiue wages of the king of  
                  Fraunce, Lewis the 11. caſheering the French Archers,The Swiſſes receiue the Kings wages. becauſe they pilled and ſpoyled, and did many other miſchiefes. Naucler.
               
               
                  Platina compoſed the Popes liues in Latin, and dedicated them vnto Sixtus the 4.
               
                  Weſſalus of Friſe, in this time writ againſt the Pope, his doctrine and traditions.
               
                  Mahomet the ſecond died of poiſon as was ſuſpected. Naucler. or elſe of a Collicke paſſion, of the age of 50. yeares, & after Naucler. of 53. Baiazetes his ſon ſucceeded him. Paul. Iou.
               
               
                  Margarite the daughter of Maximilian was brought into France and eſpowſed vnto the Dolphin Charles the 8. in the moneth of Iuly at Ambroiſe, who afterward was ſent backe againe. Naucler.
               
               
                  Mary Ducheſſe of Bourgongne, Maximilians wife, Madam Margarites mother, being on hunting fell from her horſe and died. Chron. Euſeb. and Naucler.
               
               The Pope Sixtus Canonized S. Bonauenture.
               
               The laſt of Auguſt died Lewis King of France,
                  The death of king Lewis the 11. a very ſuperſtitious man. He pilled the people to inrich Churches. Hee worſhipped and kiſſed bones and relickes of Saints, to obtaine health. For hee maruellouſly feared death: In ſo much that in the end of his dayes hee gaue exceſſiue gifts to his Phiſitian each moneth, if at the leaſt they might but prolong his life.
               
                  Sixtus made many warres wrongfully againſt Ferdinand King of Pouille, becauſe hee gaue ayde vnwillingly to his ſonne in lawe Hercules d'st Duke of Ferrara,
                  
which was beſieged of the Venetians, againſt the Venetians, which he excommunicated. Alſo againſt the Florentines (as is ſaid): although that the matter better vnderſtood hee abſolued them and reſtored them to their honour, and Lawrence de Medices likewiſe.
               
                  Sixtus being deteined ſicke in his bed of a Feauer, vnderſtanding that a peace was made betwixt the Venetians and other Potentates, ſuddenly yeelded the ſpirit. Naucler.
               
               
                  Innocent. 8.
                  
                  Innocent 8. of that name, borne at Genes, the ſonne of one  called Aaron, called before Iohn Baptiſt Cibo, of a Cardinall, Prieſt of the title of S. Cicilie, was created Pope of Prieſts and Monkes, after of Sixtus. Ʋolaterane ſaith he was once a poore childe, yet faire, and was nouriſhed amongſt the ſeruants of Ferdinand king of Sicilie, where he learned all the faſhions of the Court life.
               Comming from thence to Rome, he remained long time in the houſe of Phillip, Cardinall of Boulongne. After this he was made Biſhop of Sauonne, and thirdly of Melphe by the Pope Xistus and alſo Dataire, finally Cardinall, & after Pope as hath bin ſaid. He was of a great ſtature, a white man, and of faire repreſentation: but of an heauie and dull ſpirit, and far from all ſtudie of good Letters: In ſo much that ſometimes when he was Idle from publike affaires hee ſeemed as though he ſlept. Almoſt frō the beginning of his Popedome he conſpired againſt Ferdinand king of Sicilie, with the Princes of the kingdome.
               
                  See how Popes vſe to recompence the amitie of ſuch as nouriſh and educate them.
               
               Hee called one named Robert d' S. Seuerin to be chiefe and Captaine of the Armie which he ſent againſt Ferdinand. This holy man ſaid that for the Churches dignitie and the defence of Saints, it was lawful to take Armes, that peace might follow of it. Yet ſeeing himſelf deceiued, he was forced to make peace vpon this condition, that his yearely tribute ſhould be paid him, and that ſuch as rebelled ſhould not be in daunger. But the king Ferdinand kept neither the one nor the other condition: although hee ſent one named Peter de Ʋincence an hardie and bold man, who was Auditor of the Chamber with his Secretarie to ſollicite his cauſes.
               
                  After theſe things Innocent wearie of warring, delighted in nothing but a daſtardly idleneſſe, ful of ſloath: which brought with it nothing but diuers concupiſcences, fraudes, pleaſures, pompes, gourmandizes, diſſolutions, pailliardizes, and Idolatries. He erected a new Colledge of Secretaries, for his owne profit, augmenting, the number of them which were there before. He builded a new Pallace and an houſe of pleaſure,Townes giuē to the Popes baſtards. of a new faſhion. He was the firſt of all the Popes which in an invſuall maner aduanced his baſtards vnto honour and riches. For hee gaue certaine Townes nigh Rome vnto his baſtard Francis, and greatly inriched his daughter called Theodorine, which he married vnto a very rich man of Genoa.
               
               
                  Charles eight of that name King of France, ſucceeded his father Lewis the 11. being of the age of 14. yeares. The three Eſtates were ſolemnly aſſembled at Tours for the Kings perſon.
               Hee was very conſcionable, yeelding vnto the King of Spaine the Countes of Rouſſillon and Parpignant. Hee conquered the kingdome of Naples: and the Princes and Gentlemen went thither of their owne charge. At Rome the Pope declared him Emperour of Constantinople. The King Alphonſus and his ſonne Ferdinand for feare retired into Sicilie, and Charles entred triumphantly into Naples. Then the Lords and Townes in Italie banded themſelues againſt the King to encloſe him at his returne, yet he got through with a great victorie ouer them at Fonnone, (for he had fewe people againſt many) and as vanquiſher returned into France.
                  
                     Naples revolted. But at the end of the yeare Naples reuolted vnto the ſaid Ferdinand.
               
               King Lewis the 11. would not that his ſonne Charles ſhould learne any part of the Italian tongue, but onely this Prouerbe (Qui neſſit diſſimulare, neſcit regnare) that is, hee that cannot faigne and diſſemble knowes not how to raigne.
               
                  A poore leſſon, better beſeeming a Tyrant then a King.
               
               M. Iohn an Engliſh man, a Prieſt in this time,
                     Iohn the Engliſh man burnt at Paris Corpus Christi.
                   was burnt at Paris, in the place called the Swine Market: becauſe in the morning of the day then called Corpus Christi, in the great Church of our Lady, in the Chappel dedicated vnto S. Criſpin
                  
and Criſpinian, he tooke from a Prieſt that ſung Maſſe his Hoſt, and caſt it on the ground.
               The Pope Innocent abſolued the Venetians which had bene excommunicated by Sixtus for acts before recited: and ſolde pardons and Indulgences as well for the liuing as for the dead. He inriched with great preſents many Temples through Italie. He gaue vnto the Auguſtins of Bergoine, a Church of ſiluer of an exquiſite and maruelous worke.
               He by his Bulles permitted to them of Norway that they ought to ſing Maſſe without wine. Moreouer ſeeing that Pardons, nor the Iubile, nor the warre againſt the Turkes ſerued him any thing to gather ſiluer: hee inuented a new maner of gathering ſiluer. For he found incloſed in an old wall, the title which was ſet vpon the Croſſe of Ieſus Chriſt, written in three languages, Ieſus of Nazareth, &c. with the Iron of the Launce wherwith Chriſt his ſide was pearſed. Being hindred by a long diſeaſe he could not accompliſh that which he purpoſed in his courage. But the yeare of our Lord 1492. he deceaſed out of this world. There was a Poet called Marcellus, who made an Epitaph in Latin Verſes,An Epitaphe of Innocent. whoſe ſence is this. What needeſt thou ſeeke witneſſes to know whether Cibe be male or female? Behold onely the great troupe of his children, they will yeeld a certaine teſtimonie thereof. He begot eight ſonnes, and as many daughters. It is not without cauſe that Rome calls him Father, &c.
               The Towne of Arras was againe taken by the Flemmings in the nigh time. The keyes of one of the Towne gates was counterfeited and giuen to foure of the conſpiracie, poore Mechanikes: the one of which was called Griſard, who had an ordinarie garde of the gate, and vſed cuſtomably vpon the wall to ſing with an high voyce. What houre is it? It is not time. What houre is it? It is not day. This was to aduertiſe the enemies when they ſhould approach. And when they were nigh hee ſung an other Song. Marchez la duron duraine, marchez la duron durean. So the Towne of Arras was by him deliuered into the Emperours hand without any effuſion of bloud.
            
            
               
               Horrible things of Roderic Borgia.
               To ſhewe the horrour of that abhominable ſeat of Rome it ſhal not be impertinent to declare how and by what meanes a Spaniard came thither.
               In the time of Innocent the 8. after that Borgia was placed in the number of the Cardinalls and Fathers of the Romane Church, his affection was inceſſantly ſet to mount higher, and to that ende hee inuented each day all the meanes hee thought good and meete to enioy the accompliſhment of his deſires. Finally he gaue himſelfe to the diuelliſh Art of Necromancie: to the end that by the helpe of diuells and euill ſpirits he might enter into the way whch he ſawe ſhut to him, as well by the riches as the great credit and prerogatiue of his companions. After hee had certaine time employed his ſtudie and diligently watched about the curſed and dammable Art of Necromancie,Conuention betwixt Sathā & Borgia.
                   he began to inquire of his diuels, (wherewith he prooued very familiar) if they would not ſauour him ſo much as in the purſuite of the Papall dignitie, they would giue him ſupport and helpe. Wherevnto they readily agreed, but yet vnder this eſpeciall reſcription and couenant, that by certaine words he ſhould deliuer an oath to ſhewe himſelfe in all things a faithfull protector of Sathan. To which this Cardinall of a wicked minde conſented: onely he required that when hee ſhould come to do his homage and take his oath, the diuell would not appeare vnto him in any hideous and fearefull forme, but rather vnder ſome humane forme, namely vnder the perſon of a Protonotaire: which hauing graunted him, at the time aſſigned and eſtabliſhed, on a Sommers day the Cardinall beeing retired into a place called Montcauallus, being alone in a chamber, the ſaide Protonotaire preſented himſelfe vnto him, like a man of meane age, honourably apparelled, who after certaine talke helde betwixt them, hee aſſured the Cardinall that hee ſhould bee Pope. Then Roderic Borgia beeing very ioyous, began to inquire of him how long hee ſhould raigne. This Protonotaire deliuered him a very ambiguous anſwere, (namely that hee ſhould raigne the ſpace of eleuen and eight)

the Cardinall fooliſhly promiſed himſelf the time of 19. yeares in his Papall dignitie, although Sathans meaning was but 11. yeares and 8. monethes.
               After Pope Innocent was dead, by pluralitie of voyces hee was eſtabliſhed Pope. And becauſe there ſhould be no want at the ſolemnities, he named himſelfe Alexander the ſixt, before named Roderic Borgia,
                  Alexand. 6.
                   borne at Valence in Spaine, the Nephewe of Calixtus late Pope, third of that name; As one that long time had had the handling of the office of Vice-chauncellor, hee knew all the eſtate of the Court of Rome, and knew all the councels and enterpriſes of the Princes and Communalties of Italie.
               
               Being then placed where he deſired, he ſubiugated almoſt them all by the meanes of his baſtard called Valentin: which of a Cardinall he made a Duke, and ſurnamed him.
                     Ceſar Borgia the Popes baſtard. Beſides this, hee exterminated all the mightieſt houſes that were in the Towne, ſo that after he feared them no more. In which combat (as Valerius reciteth) being munited and ſtrengthened with the ſuccours of the French and Swiſſes, he ſhead much humane bloud.
               
                   The Emperour Frederic the third, died at Vienna the 26. of Auguſt, vpon the eating (as is ſaid) a great quantitie of Pompions as hee meant to refreſh himſelfe, and was buried in the Church of S. Stephen.
               
               The malladie of Naples, called the French diſeaſe, or the poxe, began about this time.
               
                  Maximilian
                  Maximilian the Emperour Fredericks ſonne, third of that name, held the Empire alone after his father, and was a fautor and louer of learned people.
               The Almaines made a great diſcomfiture againſt the French men, nigh Salnis in Bourgongne.
               
               The Religion and Couent of the obſeruation of Lyons vpon Roſne, was founded in the ſuburbes of the ſaid Towne, in the place of two Louers. The founder was king Charles the eight, and Anne of Britaine Queene of France, and the ſaid Couent was named Nostre dame des Anges. That is, our Lady of Angells. If they had ſaid of Aſſes, they had ſaid better.
               
               
                  The laſt day of December the King of France, Charles the eight, arriued at Rome, and made a magnificke entry thereinto.
               The kingdome of Granado was recouered by Ferdinand King of Spaine, which had about 80. yeares before beene taken from the Chriſtians.
               
                  Batazetes came into Hungarie, where were ſlaine 7000. of them that met him.
               
                  Alphonſus King of Portugall fell from his horſe and died, and in his place ſucceeded Emanuel his brother.
               The order and Religion des filles Repenties began at Paris,
                  Repenties. by Friar Iohn Triſſeran, Religions of the obſeruation of Lyons, borne at Bourge in Breſſe.
               
               
                  Maximilian by an Embaſſage affianced the Ducheſſe of Britaine, which thing greatly diſpleaſed Charles the 8. king of France. Wherefore he made warre againſt the Britaines and had a great victorie vpon them: and incontinently after, hauing repudiated Margarite of Flanders (whom he had affianced (as is ſaid) during his fathers life) tooke Anne the eldeſt daughter of Francis Duke of Britaine: ſo was the peace made with the Britaines. She had by him many children, all which died before their father.
               
                  Maximilian afterward (that is, the 16. of March) eſpowſed  in the Towne of Inſprulz Blache, Marie, an honourable virgin, daughter of Galeatius Duke of Millaine.
               
               
                  Alexander celebrated a Iubile, Anno 1500. whereat he deliuered this grace and fauour by his Bulles to ſuch as had made no account to come thither, or ſuch as could not come, that they might gaine and obtaine the Iubile by ſending thither. He ſought by all meanes to heape vp ſiluer as much as he could to ſatisfie his luſts. Wherefore hee ſet vs a new Colledge of Abbreuiators, to the number of 80. of which each place was folde at 750. Ducates. He inuited all Princes vnto his Iubile by his Bulls, and ordained that in euery Towne men might haue Stations.
               He created in his time 36. Cardinalls, amongſt which were 18. Spaniards, and of his kinſmen three: that is to ſay, Iohn

Borgia,Maximilian. Valentin Borgia, and Francis Borgia. Hee receiued the oath of fidelitie of Alphonſus king of Naples, which he tooke betwixt the hands of the ſaid Iohn Borgia, touching the keeping of loyaltie to the ſeate of Rome, and to pay him his annuall tribute.
               He fortified at his great charge the Caſtle S. Angels, repaired and beautified the Temple of S. Mary Maior.
               
               That which followeth is extracted by Iohn Functius out of the workes of Volateranus. The Cardinalls which elected him (he ſpeaketh of Pope Alexander) were the firſt that felt his ingratitude. For he oppreſſed them all by diuers calamities, baniſhing ſome, and impriſoning others.
               He made warre vpon the Vrſins, which he vanquiſhed and tooke priſoners by the meanes of his ſonnes.
               
                  
                     Alexander ſetteth vp his baſtards.After this hee deſired nothing ſo much as to life vp vnto honours his baſtards, as Innocent had done: yea this, farre more. For now this began to be held a thing much honourable, and worthy of great praiſe amongſt the venerable Fathers. He made the youngeſt of his ſonnes a Prince in Sicilie. The ſecond called Caeſar Valentin, he made Cardinall. And the eldeſt he made a Duke in Spaine: who not long after was ſlaine at Rome & caſt into Tiber. As for the Cardinall Caeſar, reiecting the order of Prieſthood, after his brothers death came into the kingdome of France with a great ſumme of ſiluer, where he eſpowſed one of king Lewis his kinſwomen of the houſe of Albert,
                  The Duke of Valentinois.
                   and there was giuen him the Duchie of Valentinois in Daulphine. After this by the kings helpe and the alliance which was made with him, he acquired many Seignories in Italie: vnto whom alſo his father gaue the hand, who deſired nothing ſo much in the world, as to ſee his ſonne ſo great a Lord.
               
                  
                     Lucrece the daughter, wife & daughter in lawe of the Pope.His daughter Lucrece whoſe carnall company himſelfe had (which was an horrible and deteſtable thing) was married vnto three Princes ſucceſſiuely. Firſt vnto Iohn Sforza Duke of Piſance. After being repudiated by him, to Lewis the baſtard ſonne of Alphonſus king of Arragon. Finally after hee was ſlaine, ſhee eſpowſed Alphonſus d'Est, Duke of Ferrara, Men may eaſily knowe (by her Epitaphe made by Iohn Iouian Poutanus,
                  
in very elegant Latin, Verſes) what was the chaſtitie, ſanctitie, and religion as well of the father as of the daughter and ſonne. For ſhee was renowmed to haue companie of them both. This alſo which followeth is drawne out of the booke of Hierome Marius, in his booke called Euſebius Captiue. What need we to recite the infamous and diſhoneſt deeds of Alexander the ſixt, ſeeing hee made alliance with diuells, gaue himſelfe altogether vnto them, and ſubiected himſelfe vnto them.
               
                  Hermolaus Barbarus a very learned man,The crueltie and ingratitude of the Venetians. died of griefe in exile at Rome, depriued of his Church and Patriarkſhip of Aquilea, by the ingratitude of the Venetians, whom he had ſerued as an Orator and Embaſſador vnto diuers Princes of Chriſtendome. The cauſe wherefore he was thus handled of the Venetians, was becauſe hee had receiued the Patriarkſhip of the Pope without theyr priuitie. Therefore not content, they baniſhed alſo his parents, and confiſcated their goods. See Iohn le Maire.
               
               
                  Iohn Picus Prince de Randole, a mirrour of true Nobilitie, in the flower of his youth died at Florence.
               
               Wee finde many things written of this Pope by notable Authors of his time: as certaine excellent Latin Verſes well worthy to be noted, which recite the praiſes of this holy Father. Whereof this is the ſence following. Alexander ſells Croſſes, and Aultars, yea Ieſus Chriſt himſelf. He firſt bought them, and may well ſell them. Rome paſſeth from vice to vice, and from flame to fire vnder the gouernment of this Spaniard. Tarquinus was the ſixt king of Rome, Nero the ſixt Emperour, and this Pope the ſixt of his name: alwaies Rome hath bin deſtroyed by the ſixths.
               This was he who for the ſumme of 200000. Ducats which he receiued of the Turke called Baiazet,
                  This act brought great damage to Italie. poyſoned Gemen his brother who fled to Rome. This is he (ſay I) who being willing to maintaine his tirannie, called to his helpe Baiazet Emperour of the Turkes, againſt the king of France Charles the eight: and ſought to make the Kingdome of Naples, yea the very Citie of Rome, the Frontiers of the Turkes Empire.
               
                  
                  Lewis the 12. as the nigheſt, ſucceeded to the Crowne of France after Charles the 8. He ſent his Armie into Lombardie vnder the conduct of Iohn Iaques Trivulſe, and of Sieur Aubigny, which tooke Alexandria and Pauie: ſo that then Lewis Sforza abandoned Millaine for feare and retired into Almaine. The King vpon theſe newes paſſed into Italie,
                  Lewis Sforza. and made his triumphant entrie into Millaine: from whence hee departed hauing diminiſhed the charges of the people and left the ſaid Trivulſe as Gouernour.
               
                  Lewis Sforza returned within a yeare after, and againe tooke Millaine, and from thence being againe chaſed by a new Armie from France, hee tooke his flight towards Nauarre: after his comming from whence, being purſued by the French, hee was taken and led a priſoner into France.
               
               This king ordained in France that (O ſalutaris hostia) ſhould be ſung in the eleuation of the Hoſt.
               Friar Hierome Sauanarola of Ferrara, of the order of Dominicains, preached at Florence. He was burnt at the inſtance and by the commaundement of that monſter Alexander Pope the ſixt, becauſe hee preached againſt him, and his more then notorious wickedneſſe.
               He compoſed certaine meditations vpon the 50. Pſalme and certaine others. See the Booke of Martyrs.
               
               
                  Mancinellus.The Pope cauſed to bee cut out the tongue and both the hands of Anthonius Mancinellus a learned man: becauſe he had written a very elegant Oration againſt the wicked maners and villainous and diſhoneſt life of him.
               The warre of Maximilian againſt the Swiſſers is renowned in this time.
               
                  
                  Batazetes the Turke, tooke by force a Towne in Macedonia called Dyrrachium: and the yeare after in Morea hee tooke Methone which belonged vnto the Venetians: as alſo certain time before he had vſurped Naupactus in Epire. He alſo beheaded the Biſhop of the ſaid Towne of Methone.
               
               
                  Italie was greatly afflicted by the Turkes: as ſoone as warre againſt the Venetians was on a flame.
               
                  
                  Charles after Emperour, ſonne of Phillip Arch-Duke of

                  Auſtrich, and of Iane daughter of the king of Castile was borne at Gaunt on the Biſſext day, the 25 of Februarie, on S. Matthias day.
               The Marrhans (theſe were Iewes which made themſelues Chriſtians fearing to leeſe theyr goods,Marrhans. ſuch are commonly in Spaine, and ſecretly obſerue the Iewiſh ceremonies) are reconciled with the Pope, hauing with great ſummes of money acquired his good grace. Naucler.
               
               The Towne of Baſill, the ninth day of Iune made alliance  with the Cantons of Swiſſe, in the Towne of Lucerne:
                  Baſil Schaffuſen. And the tenth of Auguſt, they of Schaffuſen made alſo a perpetuall alliance with the Cantons of the Swiſſes, in the ſaid Towne of Lucerne.
               
               They of Noremberge were diſcomfited by Caſſimere Marqueſſe  of Brandebourge, with great effuſion of bloud nigh their Towne.
               King Lewis the 11. tooke the kingdome of Naples vnder the conduction of Sieur d'Augbini, Frederic,
                  The Venetians vanquiſhed. his wife and his ſonnes priſoners, were carried into France. He recouered Bolongue, vſurped by Bentiuoli, and yeelded it vnto the Pope: After in proper perſon going againſt the Venetians, which vſurped many Lands of the Duchie of Millaine, valiantly vanquiſhed them nigh Agnadel: tooke Bartholomew Balnian, the conducter of that Armie, and carried him priſoner into France. Hee tooke againe the ſaid vſurped Townes and many others, yeelding vnto the Pope ſuch Townes as the Venetians had taken from him.
               The iſſue of the Pope Alexander was fearefull, and with manifeſt token of the iuſt iudgement of God, and therefore would diligently be noted. As on a certaine day he had made readie an exceeding great banket for certaine rich Senators and Cardinalls, and had recommended to his ſonne Valentin, that he ſhould giue wine to drinke vnto one of the ſaid Cardinalls wherein there was poyſon put: It came to paſſe that hee that had the charge to deliuer the wine, vnwittingly gaue to the Pope of that flaggon wherin the poiſon was: who being of great age, was taken with a languiſhment and grieuou
                     •
                   paine.
               
                  He had by the ſpace of eleuen yeares and certaine monethes exceſſiuely oppreſſed Italie, and troubled the world. Being then deteined in his bed (as Iohn Baleus ſaith) hee commaunded one of his men called Madena (which amongſt all them of his Court and houſe was his moſt faithfull and familiar) to goe into his gardrobe or wardrope, and to bring him a certaine litle booke enriched with gold and precious ſtones: which was in an Armorie which he ſpecified. But this litle booke conteined all maners and kindes of Illuſions and Enchauntments of Negromancie: whereby the old man thought to enforme himſelfe, to be certified of the cloſure and ende of his life.
               
                  An horrible illuſion of Sathan.The ſeruant obeing the commaundement of the Pope his maiſter, and going vnto the place ſpecified: as (after hee had opened the doore) he was readie to haue entred into the chamber, he ſawe a certaine perſon ſit in the Popes Chaire there, who was altogether like vnto his maiſter: At the ſight whereof beeing ſurpriſed with an horrible feare & aſtoniſhment, and and as it were halfe dead, without taking the booke, ranne backe againe towards Alexander, vnto whom he rehearſed what hee had ſeene: namely that in his Wardrope hee found ſuch a Pope as himſelfe ſet in a Chaire.
               
                  Alexander after he had vnderſtood the thing, and ſeeing his ſeruant to be exceedingly affraide, ſuffered him to reſt a while: After hee did ſo much perſwade him, that he returned into the ſaid Wardrope to ſee if againe hee could finde the ſaid Pope. The ſeruant then being entred, found in the ſaid chamber him whom before he had ſeene: and that more is, being asked by him that ſate there what cauſe brought him into that place, and what buſineſſe hee had there, Hee being taken with a ſore trembling, and as it were out of breath,The diuell ſaith he is Pope. aunſwered, hee came to take a certaine garment for the Pope. At which words, the diuell beeing then in the Chaire, making an horrible noiſe ſiad, what Pope? I am the Pope.
               But after that thoſe things were reported vnto Alexander, his euill began to encreaſe, and death approached.
               
                  A ſhort day after, a man apparelled like a Carrier or Lackey, came and fiercely knocked at the chamber doore wherein the Pope was deteined ſicke, ſaying hee muſt needes ſpeake with him. The doore being opened and hee admitted parley with the Pope, all others drew aſide, and the Pope and hee ſpake together, as two vſe to doo in ſecret cauſes, yet men might ſee a great and maruellous ſtrife and debate betwixt them two, and that the Pope was not content.A ſtrife betwixt the Pope and diuell. For hee ſaid vnto him. How goes this? my terme is not yet accompliſhed. Thou knoweſt that thy promiſe was nineteene yeares, whereof I haue liued but eleuen and eight moneths. Vnto which words the Lackey hardily anſwered: you vnderſtood not well the ſpeech, but are greatly abuſed. For I ſaid not nineteene yeares as you imagined: but I ſaid you ſhould remaine Pope eleuen yeares and eight moneths, the which are come and paſſed, and therefore you muſt needes die.
               But although the Pope was very actiue to require and to pray inſtantly that he would haue regard to his life,
                     Alexander prayeth that his terme may be longer. and to the terme that hee had graunted him in his Popedome, yet it was as to ſpeake to a deafe man, and to pleade in vaine. For all his alligations, remonſtrations, exceptions, and requeſts profited nothing: ſo that they which were in the chamber and heard this maruellous debate and difference, might iudge that Sathan was more expert in the Art of Arithmetike then the Pope was, and they might eaſily conclude that Alexander erred in his account.
               Finally to cloſe vp the matter, euen as Sathan went and departed from the place, in like manner alſo with great cries, ſighes, and fearfull ſobbes, the Popes ſoule (as it were following his ſteppes) diſlodged and miſerably departed from his body.
               Thus miſerably and vngodly died this Pope Alexander, leauing to his ſonne his Seignory, altogether waſted and ruinous, and to the Italians, their Comonwealth all confuſed, peruerted & waſted: to the end he might be a publike example to

all ages, how things euill gotten melt away, and are wickedly and vnluckily ſpent.
               This Pope had with his ſaid ſonne a daughter called Lucrece, with whom both he and his ſonne lay, as Pontanus and Samazarius haue left written.
               
                  Phillip Archduke of Auſtrich, the ſon of Maximilian and of Mary, the onely daughter of Charles Duke of Bourgoine, tooke to wife Iane the onely daughter of the king of Arragon, and by reaſon of her right, going into Spaine, paſſed through France in the yeare, 1501. After returning into Flaunders, to appeeaſe certaine ſtirres of warre betwixt them of Gilders and Brabant, he tooke many Townes of Gelders, with the Duke of Suffolke a young Gentleman, which he nouriſhed in his Court with his children. The ſaid Phillip yeelded homage vnto king Lewis the 12. for the Counties of Flaunders and Artois, before Guy de Rochefort, grand-Chauncellor of France, and Lewis de Luxembourge Count de Ligni, Embaſſadors ſent for the purpoſe vnto Arras.
               
               
                  Pius. 3.
                  
                  Pius third of that name, a Tuſcan by Nation, borne at Sienna, Nephew of Pope Pius the ſecond, on his ſiſters ſide Laodamie, before called Francis Picolhomineus, that is, a litle man, ſucceeded the ſaid Alexander, being elected by the Cardinalls after great ſtrifes and debates.
               
                  
                     Ʋalentin Borgia hauing ſeized vpon all the treaſures of his father Alexander, after his death with twelue thouſand ſouldiers occupied Vatican where the Pope ſhould be elected, tending to this end, to conſtraine the Cardinalls to chooſe ſuch an one for Pope as ſhould like him.
               
                  Sackagemēt of Borgia.
                  The Cardinalls to ſhun this danger, withdrew themſelues firſt incontinently into the Temple of Minerua, where ſtraight they were beſieged by him. But as a bruite went through the Towne that the Cardinalls were taken, and that he committed many murders and ſackagements through the towne, they were all taken with a great feare. After this, the ſhops were ſhut, and each one ranne to Armes. The iſſues and endes of ſtreets were ſtopped with bankes, peeces of wood, and chaines of Iron: no more nor no leſſe then if the enemie had againe

bene nigh the walles. Borgia then ſeeing that he had enterpriſed a thing ſo hard to execute: and alſo being required by the Cardinalls to ceaſe frō ſuch doings, promiſed that, which a litle after he obeyed.
               After Pius was choſen, Borgia hauing paſſed his choller, thanked the Cardinalls that they had choſen ſuch an one, as he had greatly wiſhed. Hee then incontinently as he was made Pope, made a cōſpiracie againſt the French which had occupied a part of Italie; For he tooke in very euill part that their king had brought Pouille & a great part of Italie vnder his ſubiectiō. This Pope hoped that a day would come, when he ſhould doo ſome great damage vnto the French, after he had drawne them into Ambuſhes that he had laid for them; and with the helpe of ſuch as had conſpired with him, he hoped to driue thē cleane out of theſe Lands. But whileſt he went about this, he died, the 27. day after his election, they yeare 1503. of an vlcer, which he had in his thigh, wherwith he had long time bene troubled, without doing any thing at al of that which he had enterpriſed. For beſide the war he purpoſed againſt the Frēch, he determined to haue reformed the Church to haue celebrated a Councel, and haue gotten an Armie againſt the Turkes, after the example of his Vncle.
            
            
               Aduertiſement.
               Note Reader for a concluſion of the precedent Popes, that ſuch as were ſince Siluester the ſecond, vntill Innnocent the fourth, had the key of the bottomeleſſe pit giuen them: to the end that by the horrible ſmoake thereof they might ſend out the Locuſts or Graſhoppers to deuoure all,Deuouring Graſhoppers or Locuſts. through all Chriſtian Regions, and that they might worke the ſecret of their Iniquitie. As for the laſt which were after Innocent the fourth, vntill Iulius the ſecond of that name, they haue bene permitted to nouriſh and maintaine it, to obſcure all truth: that by their falſe doctrines, and lying myracles they might ſeduce and deceiue euen the elect of God (if it were poſſible). For that great Dragon, which is Sathan (that is the Angell of the bottomeleſſe pit, and the king of theſe Locuſts, that is to ſay of Mendicant Friars, and of the Maſſing Prieſthood) called

                  Abaddon, which ſignified as much as deſtroyer, ſaccager, and exterminator, or rooter out. For theſe by their infernall doctrine of Popes decrees of Lombardike ſentences, of ordinarie queſtions, determinations, quodlibets, ſummes, monaſticall predications, and other ſuch bables, haue drawne into hell an infinite number of people ſince the ſaid Innocent the fourth,Apoc. 9. li. 8.
                   by the ſpace of 260. yeares. So that thoſe Popes and Doctors are ſignified by the pale horſe vpon which ſat death as well of the body as ſoule, after whom followed hell. Moreouer theſe Popes and all other wicked perſons vſing the inſatiable tirannie, leeſe and deſtroy euery day the bodies of the true Martyrs of the truth of God, by fire, ſword, water, halters, and all maner of puniſhments, becauſe they would not renounce Ieſus Chriſt, to obey theyr Prince Abaddon.
               
               
                  The waining of the Popedome.But from hence forward, that is, ſince the yeare of our Lord 1503. vnder Iulius the ſecond and his ſucceſſors, vntill the laſt iudgement, the Papacie dooth and is like to decay. For the power that the diuell hath to deceiue by his Antichriſt is diminiſhed, and from day to day ſhall decay: but not the power that hee hath to exerciſe his crueltie againſt the elect of God.
               
                  Tokens of the Popes fall.There haue bene many ſignes of the ruine and fall of the Popiſh kingdome before the time of Iulius.
               
               
                  Iohn the 24. was maruellouſly troubled and moleſted by an Owle, as is afore ſaid: And as he was in the way to Constance, he fell from his Charriot. He was there ignominiouſly depoſed, and there was it concluded that the generall Councell had power ouer the Pope. And therefore from his time, and alſo from Paul the ſecond, the affaires of the Papacie haue gone ill, and haue alwaies paſt from worſe to worſe.
               Vnder the gouernment of Alexander the ſixt, the Angell which was placed in the dungeon of the Caſtle S. Angelo, was ſtricken downe by a fearfull thunder, and fell into Tiber.
               
               
                  Apoc. 19. d. 20
                  There is hardly any perſon which knoweth not the miſchiefes which haue hapned ſince Iulius the ſecond, vntill this preſent. But according to the ſentence of S. Paul, Ieſus Chriſt ſhal ſhortly deſtroy that wicked Antichriſt by the brightneſſe

of his comming. He ſhall be put aliue (ſaith the Angell ſpeaking to S. Iohn) into a poole of burning fire & brimſtone, where he ſhall be tormented for euer. So be it. So be it.
               
                  Iulius the ſecond of that name, borne at Genes, Nephew of Sixtus the fourth, who had bene named before Iulian Reuerins, of the title of S. Peter ad Vincula, was choſen Pope. Hee was a man of a quicke ſpirit, and very ſubtill, and as it were chiefly borne for warre.
               
                  Phillip, willing againe to paſſe into Spaine, by Sea-tempeſt was caſt vpon England, and well receiued of king Henry the ſeuenth: yet he payed for his welcome, and redeemed his departure by deliuering to the ſaid King, the Duke of Southfolke, who was of the houſe of the white Roſe, and thought the nigheſt heiremale of the Crowne of England: who by the ſaid Phillip had bene taken in Guelders, whither he was fled for feare of king Henry.
               
               This Iulius plucked away by force, and by excommunications many things from certaine Chriſtian Princes. And in the ſpace of ſeuen yeares he was cauſe of the death of infinite perſons: yea this tyrant becauſe of the victories which he had obtained, (wherein hee reioyced that hee had ſhead ſo much humane bloud) gaue vnto the Swiſſes the title of defenders of the Eccleſiaſticall libertie,The Swiſſes honoured by the Pope. and with a certaine number of Enſignes of warre, and priuiledges, cōfirmed by his Bulls, a golden ſword and an hatte.
               He very ſtraightly beſieged Rauenna,
                  Rauenna occupied by the Pope. which the Venetians had occupied: and in the end hauing taken it, he reduced it into his obedience. With a litle brauerie he plucked into his hands from certaine Princes, Setina, Imola, Faience, Boulongne, and other Townes, which was not done without great effuſion of bloud.
               
                  Philibert the eight Duke of Sauoy, ſucceeded his father Phillip in the yeare 1495. He was a magnanimous and vertuous Prince, and full of great beautie, in ſo much that he was called Philibert the faire. He was amiable alſo, and courteous to euery one.
               He eſpowſed Margarite the Emperor Maximilians daughter.

But after hee had done many things worthy of memorie he died, without leauing any heire iſſuing of him: wherfore Charles his brother ſucceeded him in the ſaid Duchie. Margarite for a witneſſe of the loue ſhe bare him, would neuer manie againe: but alwaies remained a widow.
               
                  Phillip returned into Spaine, and died in the yeare 1506. of his age, the 28.
               The king Lewis had ſent Phillip de Rauestone as Gouernor  of Genes. The Towne reuolted the yeare 1507. but incontinently it was taken againe by the French.
               
                  The Iacobins and Friars of Berne.The yeare 1509. there was a great contention betwixt two orders of begging Friars: that is to ſay, the Friars, and the Iacobins. And this was becauſe of the conception of the Virgin Mary. The Cordeliers or Friars ſaid that ſhe was preuented of the grace of the holy ſpirit, ſo that ſhe was nothing ſpotted with originall ſinne, and the Iacobins affirmed the contrary, that ſhe was conceiued after the manner of the other children of Adam, and that priuiledge to be conceiued without ſinne, was onely reſerued to Ieſus Chriſt: yet they ſaide that the holy Virgin which was the mother of the ſonne of God, was ſanctified in his mothers wombe, & purged from all originall ſpot, as S. Iohn Baptist, Ieremie, and certaine others were: which by eſpeciall priuiledge were ſanctified, before they came out of their mothers wombes. The ſaid Iacobins made themſelues ſtrong to prooue that opinion, by reaſons of the holy ſcripture: as alſo they had enterpriſed to make publike diſputations at Heidelberge, touching the conception of the Virgin Mary, but nothing was executed. Afterward the ſaid Iacobins began to prooue that opinion, euen before the people, by certaine falſe myracles and viſions, which they themſelues had inuented. But theſe bad people were deceiued, and their lies turned on their owne heads. For there was a Lay Friar, ſimple and an Ideot, which they had enterpriſed to ſeduce and deceiue by their Inchauntments, who in the ende reuealed all their knauery. There were foure bretheren of that order taken at Berne, vnto whō the torture was deliuered: which after they had confeſſed the matter, were diſgraded, and finally burnt for

their fraudulent and diabolicall machinations which they had forged to maintaine their opinion. For they had Inchaunted with ſuperſtitious charmes, a poore Nouice. It was at the great inſtance of the Bernois, that Haimo Biſhop of Lanſanna, (in which Dioceſſe Berne is) tooke knowledge of their cauſe, and after inquiſition made therof, brought it to this point, that they were diſgraded, and deliuered vnto the ſecular arme, and burnt the laſt day of May in the Meade nigh the Riuer ſide of Ar. There were other culpable of this deed, but they eſcaped from the hands of the Bernois.
               
               The King Frederic of Naples, and the Cardinall de Amboſe died.
               In this time happened a great malladie and ſickneſſe in France, which they called the Coqueluehe. The Pope Iulius excommunicated the king of France and Iohn d' Alebret king of Nauarre, and gaue their kingdomes to whomſoeuer could firſt occupie them.
               Maſſeus in the 20. Chapter of his Chronicles, reciteth that the king of France perceiuing that the Pope Iulius with the Venetians went about ſomething againſt him, aſſembled a Councell in the Towne of Tours in the moneth of September:If it be lawfull for Popes to make warre. where he propoſed the queſtions following, namely; Whether it were lawfull for the Pope to make warre againſt any Prince without cauſe or reaſon: And if ſuch a Prince defending himſelfe may not aſſaile the ſaid Pope and withdraw from his obedience? It was anſwered that it was not lawfull for the Pope ſo to do: but that it was lawfull for the Prince to do that whereof he had enquired.
               Moreouer it was agreed that the pragmatike ſanctiō ſhould be kept through the Realme of France,
                  The pragmatike ſanction. and if hee thundred his excommunicatiōs, that they ſhould make no account of them becauſe they ſhould be vniuſt.
               After theſe things the King ſent to Iulius the anſwere of  his Councell, requiring him, either to agree to peace, or in ſome place to appoint a generall Councell to diſpute the ſaid queſtions more at large.
               The Councell of Laterance was begunne by Iulius thisThe Councel of Laterane.
                  
                  
yeare 1512. Leo his ſucceſſor continued the ſaid Councell, the ende whereof was the 16. of March, 1517.
               This horrible monſter died the yeare following after he had begun the ſaid Councell, that is, the yeare 1513. hauing committed an infinit number of murders and wickedneſſes vnheard of before, he died the yeare 1513. the 21 of Februarie, before the Councell which he had aſſembled at Rome was ended. See Functius in his Commentaries. There was an Almaine called Conrade Garbelius, who made of him Tetrastike in Latine verſes, whereof the ſence was this. Hee that hath for his father a Genoua, for his mother a Grecian, and that is borne in the Sea, it is impoſſible he ſhould be good. The Genouaes are deceiuers; the Grecians are lyars, and there is no ſecuritie nor faithfulneſſe in the Sea. Thou Iulius haſt in thee all theſe things. We read a certaine Commētarie of the Doctors of Paris againſt the Lutherans, being drawne on by a diuelliſh rage, had by force the carnall company of two young children of a noble houſe which the Queene Anne of France had ſent to Roberte Cardinall of Nantes, to teach.
               
                  Melancton amongſt others hath written certaine Latine Verſes: how that Iulius meaning to go to warre, caſt S. Peters keyes into Tiber, and tooke the ſword of S. Paul, ſaying. Seeing the keyes of S. Peter ſerue vs to no purpoſe, it may be S. Pauls ſword will do ſomething.
               
                  Gaſton de Fouex the Kings Nephewe, was ſent into Italie, and tooke Bolongne and Breſſe by force. The Swiſſes alreadie practiſed by the Pope, paſſed into Italie.
               
               On Eaſter day, the yeare 1512. the French got a battaile at Rauenna, and tooke the Towne againſt the Pope, the Spaniards, and the Venetians. Gaston died there, aduauncing himſelfe with too ſmall a company vpon his enemies. Iulius practiſed with the Emperour and the King of England, to aſſaile the King of Fraunce in diuers places of his Kingdome.
               
                  Ferdinand king of Spaine, tooke and occupied againſt all right vnder colour of excommunication, the Arrathame of Iulius, the kingdome of Nauarre.
               
               
                  The King of England beeing aſſured of ſuccours from Flaunders, diſcended to Calais: but the king of Scotland Iames the fourth, and the king of France his Allie, entered into his Countrey, but loſt a great battaile, and was himſelfe ſlaine. They did litle in Guien or Normandie, whether they ſent two Armies.
               Afterward the French and they fought vpon the Sea. Two faire Ships well furniſhed, that is, the Regent of England, and the Cordelier of France, grapled one with the other: And the moſt part of ſuch as were within, were either burnt or drowned.
               A peace was publiſhed betwixt the King and the Venetians.
               
               The Engliſh men beſieged Terwine. At the Iourney of Sporrs the French fared ill. The Townes of Terwine and Tornay were taken by the Engliſh.
               
                  Anne de Britaine the wife of king Lewis the 12. and before the widowe of Charles the eight, dyed at this time leauing two daughters: Claudia which afterward eſpowſed Francis de Ʋalois and Renee, at this preſent widowe of the Duke of Ferrara.
               
               
                  Leo the tenth of that name, borne at Florence,
                  Leo. 10.
                   of the houſe of Medices, before called Iohn de Medices, being Cardinall of the title of S. Mary (in Dominica) beyond all mens expectation was elected Pope, and ſucceeded Iulius: Hee had beene very diligently inſtructed in good Letters in his firſt youth, and had had learned ſchoolemaiſters: Amongſt others, Angelus Politian, a man very learned as well in the Greeke as Latin tongue, & this was the cauſe he loued ſo much men of learning and knowledge.
               Being of the age of thirteene yeares hee was choſen Cardinall by Innocent the 8. and in the 30. of his age he was choſen Pope of Rome.
               
               This Leo of his owne nature was debonaire, gentle, and peaceable, but he was too much gouerned by ſuch as were enemies of reſt, and cruell: after whoſe wills many things were done very diſloyally.
               
                  
                   The King Lewis died the firſt day Ianuarie 1514. hauing raigned 17. yeares. He was called the Father of the people, a title which fewe kings had after him.
               The greateſt pleaſure that Pope Leo had, was delicately to nouriſh himſelfe in all things pleaſant to the fleſh, and ſuch delights as would ſooneſt drawe men into all wicked concupiſcences. He tooke great pleaſures in Singers and Muſitians to recreate his ſpirit at Table, as hee dranke and made good cheare. Hee bare an irreconciliable hatred vnto the Goſpell of the kingdome of God: which he perſecured in the perſon of Luther and many others. For as one day the Cardinall Bembo vttered before him a certaine thing drawne from the Goſpell,O execrable blaſphemie. he anſwered him mocking. It hath euer ſufficiently bene knowne what profit that Fable of Ieſus hath brought vs and our company.
               
                  This marchant gaue hereby ſufficiently to be knowne that he was that Antichriſt which S. Paul called the man of ſinne, and the ſonne of perdition.
               
               
                  Indulgences.He ſpread abroad through the world certaine pardons and Indulgences full of all impietie, yea and ridiculous: to the end to heape vp ſiluer to maintaine his pleaſures, to nouriſh his whores, and enrich his baſtards. And heerein he ſerued himſelfe with Mendicant beggers, which in infinit number traced and ranne ouer all Chriſtian kingdomes.
               
                  Sampſon of Millaine a Friar.
                  One called Sampſon of Millaine a Friar, heaped vp by that meane ſo great a ſumme of ſiluer in diuers Countries, that the world was aſtoniſhed thereat as a thing contrarie to nature. For he one day offered the ſumme of an hundreth and twentie thouſand Ducats for the Papacie.
               This Pope Leo created in one day one and thirtie Cardinalls, and by that meanes purſed vp a great ſum of ſiluer: And that ſame day were ſeene very horrible ſignes and wonders, the yeare 1521. at which time Soliman Emperor of the Turkes tooke Rhodes.
                  Rhodes takē.
                   On the day of Chriſts Natiuitie as Leo went out of his chamber to goe ſing Maſſe at the breake of the day (after their maner, a marble couer well couched and laid, fell ſuddenly downe, ſo that many of his company were there ſlaine,

and amongſt others the Captaine of the Swiſſes gard.
               
                  By ſuch a preſage God ſhewed that the Popedome ſhould ſhortly periſh, becauſe of the enormeous and deteſtable wickedneſſe committed therein.
               
               He greatly inriched at other expences his baſtards, and erected and lifted them vp to principalities and dignities, as well Secular as Eccleſiaſtice. Hee created Duke of Mutine, Iulian, whom ſome ſaid was his Nephewe, his ſiſters ſonne: and Laurence Duke of 
                     Ʋrbin, and married the one, that is to ſay Iulian, with the Duke of Sauoyes ſiſter, and the other with the the daughter of the Counteſſe of Bolongne. But hee had depriued the true Duke of 
                     Ʋrbin of the poſſeſſion of the Duchy, to the ende hee might eſtabliſh one of them in his place, hee ſought alſo to doo the like to the Duke of Ferrara, but it was in vaine. As for his Nephewe Iulius, hee made him a Cardinall.
               The yeare 1421. and the firſt of December, vnderſtanding that the French had bene vanquiſhed at Millaine by the Emperours people, and chaſed out of all Italie: which alſo was not done without his meanes, drinking & making good cheare, hee maruellouſly reioyced at this newes, and herein ſuddenly died as they ſay. Hee which neuer beleeued there was either hell or heauen after this preſent life. There was a Poet called Sannazarius which made a Diſtiche, that is, two Latin Verſes of the death of the ſaid Leo, which becauſe they ſeeme to be wel made, are ſet downe.
               
                  Sacra ſub extrema, ſi forte requiritis hora.
                  Cur Leo non poterat ſumere: vendiderat.
               
               The ſence of theſe Verſes is: If you aske wherefore Leo could not take the Sacraments beeing ſo nigh his death: the reaſon is, he had ſold them before. That which is aboue ſpoken of the taking of Rhodes and of the wonders ſeene the ſame day, that agreement was made to yeeld the Towne into the Turkes hands, cannot accord with that which is ſpoken of the death of Leo. For it is a certaine that Rhodes was taken by Pope Adrian his ſucceſſor, and was yeelded to the Turkes. Anno 1522.
            
            
               
                  
                  An Aduertiſement touching a certaine coniecture of the ſupputation of time.
               
               It would bee noted in this place, that the yeare after the Incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt, 161. Paulus Samoſatenus beeing Biſhop of Antioche, began to diſgorge his blaſphemies againſt Ieſus Chriſt, denying that he was the true and eternall ſonne of God. Which moſt daungerous and pernitious hereſie of all others, was afterward augmented by Arrius and Mahomet, and is yet at this day by that Antichriſt the Pope. Moreouer, the Monkes which began as it were the ſame yeare vnder Paul the firſt, here vnto haue nouriſhed and maintained the ſame hereſie in theyr diuers maners of life, and theyr wicked doctrines whileſt Antichriſt raigned in the Temple of God,Apoc. 11. a. 2.
                   and dealt with preaching and teaching publikely in the Church, namely, by the ſpace of 42. moneths, or of 1260. dayes, which is all one, which dayes if wee take them for yeares as they ought, adding thervnto the firſt number of 261. yeares, they will come to the yeare 1521. after the Natiuitie of Ieſus Chriſt.
               
                  
                     2. Theſſ. 2. a. 4.
                  But that you may vnderſtand this ſecret; That yeare was diſcouered that great aduerſarie of God, who lifted himſelfe aboue all that ws called God, or worſhipped as God. This yeare then, that error which ſo long time had beene mainteined vnder the tyrant of Antichriſt, began to bee ſhaken and to fall, becauſe the truth and righteouſneſſe of Faith through the ſpirit of Ieſus Chriſt were reuealed by the meanes of certaine learned perſons.
               For in the ſaid yeare 1521. Martin Luther beeing well fortified by the ſpirit of God, in the preſence of all the Eſtates of the Empire aſſembled at Wormes, confeſſed and maintained conſtantly and hardily the true doctrine of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, which the aforeſaid heretikes denied. And ſince this confeſſion, the true Church of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt hath againe begun to renew it ſelfe, and his kingdome to take and gather more greater forces: And the kingdome

of Antichriſt hath begun to diminiſh and approacheth his ruine. This which followeth is extracted out of the book of Chriſtien Maſſeus.
               
               The yeare of the Lord 1515. Frances King of Fraunce receiued of Leo a Iubile, (that is to ſay, pardons to ſell) to be publiſhed through all France: which was alſo ſpread through all Chriſtendome.
               This was a bottomeleſſe depth of all euills; for vnder the ſhadowe of fighting againſt the Turkes, they heaped vp ineſtimable treaſures. They which had this charge and commiſſion, perſwaded the ſimple people, that whoſoeuer would giue tenne French ſoules, ſhould deliuer the ſoule for whom hee gaue them from the paines of Purgatorie. For they held this for a certaine rule, that God would doo whatſoeuer they would, according to that which is ſaid. All that you doo on earth, &c. So that if there had wanted but one farthing leſſe then the ſaid tenne ſoules, they ſaid all could profit nothing. Such like marchandiſe diſpleaſed many good men, and they began to debate this queſtion touching the Popes power: whereof the old Biſhops neuer heard ſpeake.
               
                  Martin Luther was then in Almaine, who then began to cry very ſharply againſt Indulgences, againſt whom one called Iohn Bekins oppoſed himſelfe, and they two entered into great diſputations and contentions touching this matter.
               Pope Leo the tenth thundred a great proceſſe againſt Martin Luther, and condemned him as an heretike, and reiected him from the communion of the faithfull. He ſtraight appealed vnto the Councell to come. After this, Leo commaunded that his bookes ſhould be burnt at Rome, and on the other ſide Luther burnt at Wittemberge, his Canons and Popiſh Decretalls, ſaying: As they haue done to me ſo haue I done to them. Thus farre Maſſeus, The reſt of this hiſtorie you may ſee in Sleidon. Baptista Mantuanus had before exhorted the ſaid Leo to doo his office, thus ſpeaking vnto him in the fourth booke de fastis. Yet there remaineth many things for thee to doo of great importance holy Father.

If they be great and waightie, thou muſt enterpriſe them with great courage. But there are there amongſt others which are moſt worthy wherin thou ſhouldeſt employ thy ſelfe and trauell therein. The firſt is warre wherewith Italie alreadie tyred, and the fields thereof bedeawed with humane bloud. An other is; That the Romane Court is infected with a daungerous poiſon which ſpreadeth it ſelfe ouer all Nations. Laſtly, there is a Faith which is oppreſſed, and on all ſides offered a pillage, vnto all cruell and barbarous Nations. All theſe things cry after thee, and demaund ſuccours of thee: helpe them, for the Commonwealth of Chriſt ſtaggereth, and Faith is ſick and alreadie nigh her death.
               
                  Leo hauing gathered a great ſumme of ſiluer for pardons which he ſold, inriched his parents bankers, and liſted them vp into great dignities.
               
                  Martin Luther a great Theologian, began to preach the true and pure doctrine againſt the hypocriſie of Papiſts, and from thence forward the Popedome ceaſed not by litle and litle to fall into ruine.
               
                  
                  Francis de Ʋalois Duke de Angouleſme as the nigheſt and meeteſt to ſucceed in the Crowne, was King 57. yeares after the death of Lewis the 12. whoſe eldeſt daughter called Claudia, he married.
               
                  Selim hauing driuen away and after poyſoned his olde father becauſe he liued too long, was Emperor of the Turkes in the yeare 1510. Vnto this wickedneſſe he added the murdering of his bretheren and the ſtrangling of his Nephewes. He vanquiſhed and droue the Sophie away: and in many battailes ouercame the two Souldans, Campſon, & Tonombeus, with the Mammelus and Arabians: hee added to his Empire, Egipt and Arabia,
                  The death of Selms the yeare, 1518. and tooke the great Caire. Afterward returning the into his Countrie an Vlcer engendred in his loynes, which ſtill encreaſing as a Canker, killed him the 7. yeare of his raigne. See hereof Munſter in his Coſmographie, Paulus Iouius, and Ritche the firſt booke.
               
               
                  Soliman the onely ſonne of Selim aforeſaid, ſucceeded him in the Empire of the Turkes, Anno 1518. Soliman three yeares

after tooke Belgarde in Hungarie, which was the Fortreſſe and defence of the Chriſtians, and from thence about other three yeares he tooke Rhodes by compoſition, hauing in his Armie 200000. Turkes, and 400. Gallies: and two yeares after that he deſtroyed the Country of Hungarie with fire & ſword, vanquiſhed the King of the Country, and tooke Bude. But the 14. of his kingdome comming to beſiege 
                     Ʋienna in Hungarie with a great puiſſance, he was put backe by God his grace, and the force of the Almaines. By nature he was hautie and glorious, hauing ſo great dominions and victories. Hee pretended that the Empire of Rome and of the Weſt appertained vnto him: For he ſaid he was the true ſucceſſour of Conſtantine, who tranſported the Empire from Rome and vnto Conſtantinople. His ordinary reuenew is of ſixe millions of skutes (ſome ſay ſeuen) for each yeare: and whenſoeuer it pleaſeth him to make warre, he gaineth more thereby then he leeſeth, becauſe of the great ſtore of ſiluer he taketh of his ſubiects. He hath more treaſure and precious ſtones then all other kings together, as Paulus Iouius ſaith: who alſo attributeth the loſſe of Rhodes to the careleſnes and negligence of the Pope.
               
                  Maximilian deceaſed in Auſtriche the 12. Ianuary, after the obteining of the Empire 27. yeares.
               
                  Charles 5. the ſonne of Phillip Archduke of Auſtrich,
                  Charles. 5.
                   of the age of 19. yeares was choſen Emperor of Rome the 25. Iune, and ſucceeded his graundfather Maximilian▪
                   The Pope would haue hindered his election, becauſe he was king of Naples, and that the kings of Naples were bound to the Pope to denounce that Empire, whileſt they ſhould be kings of Naples: but it was in vaine.
               
                  Zuinglius is called from Glarone to Zurich, to read & teach Theologie.
               
               The bookes of Luther are burnt the Popes partakers  in Almaine: Luther alſo for his part publikely burnt at Wittemberge the Popes Canon lawe, as alſo a new decree whereby hee was condemned: and after yeelded a reaſon of his ſo doing.
               The Emperour at the inſtance of Frederic of Saxonie, ſent  the 6. of March to Luther, that vnder his faith and ſafegard he

ſhould come to a Iourney held Wormes,
                  Charles. 5. whither hee came againſt the aduiſe of his friends: and entering there the 16. of of Aprill, he came out againe the 26. of the ſaid moneth.
               
                  Ferdinand the Emperours yonger brother Prince of Auſtrich, tooke to wife Anne, the onely daughter of 
                     Ʋladiſlaus King of Hungarie and of Boheme, the ſiſter of Lewis, the laſt King of the line of Hungarie.
               
               
                  Luther appoſed by Eckins the Lawyer at the Iourney at Wormes, conſtantly maintained the truth. The Emperour writ Letters to Princes,
                     Luther excommunicated and aſſailed on al ſides. wherby he declared his aduiſe that Luther ſhould be abandoned to whoſoeuer would ſley him. He is excōmunicated & anathematized by Pope Leo. The Sorboniſts of Paris aſſailed him: ſo did Henry the 8. King of England by his owne writing. Wherevpon the Pope gaue him the title of Defendor of the Church.
               A Decree at Wormes publiſhed by the Emperours Letters Patters againſt Luther and his fauorites.
               
                  Adrian. 6.
                  
                  Adrian Pope ſixt of that name, borne at 
                     Ʋtrict, in the country  of Holland, come from a poore houſe, paſſed his youth in ſtudie at Louaine, noriſhed and brought vp amongſt the poore of the Colledge called du Pourcean. From a Doctor in Diuinitie and Doyen of S. Peter de Louaine, he was called to be a Pedagoge and Schoolemaiſter of Charles the fift, after Emperor. Eraſmus hauing bene caſt off as a ſuſpected perſon, becauſe of the doctrine, which after Luther publiſhed; afterward being ſent Embaſſador towards Ferdinand King of Spaine, he obteined the Biſhoppricke of Derthuſe.
               
               The Emperour paſſing into England to goe into Spaine, made alliance at Windſore with Henry the 8. to eſpowſe Marie his daughter (then of the age of ſeuen yeares) when ſhe ſhould be of full age.
               
                  Iohn Rouchlin, reſtorer of the Hebrew tongue in Almaine, this yeare died.
               
                  The taking of Rhodes.
                  
                  Rhodes beſieged in the moneth of Iune by Soliman Emperour of the Turkes, the ſeuenth moneth following is taken by compoſition, to the great damage and diſhonour of the Chriſtians.
               
                  
                  Chriſtierne King of Danemarch; Noruege and Snede,
                  Maximilian. for feare  that for his great tyrannie, and ill gouernment, he might fall into ſome daughter of his perſon, this yeare fled into Zeland, with his children and his wife Iſabel the Emperours ſiſter, brought vnto great neceſſitie.
               
                  We may learne by ſuch examples to feare God his iudgements, when hee chastiſeth both Countries and Kings for our inſtruction.
               
               
                  Charles Duke of Bourbon, Conſtable of France, willingly departed, partly drawne by the Emperors faire promiſes, & turned himſelfe againſt the French King, to the great misfortune both of his owne perſon and of France.
               
               The bookes of a Phiſitian & Magician were burnt at Rome, ſome of which were brought vnto Adrian, whereof hee made great account: and they were after his death founde amongſt his ſecret papers. And ſome thought he came to his Popedome by an euil art. Paralip. Chron. Abb. Vrſp.
               
               The Pope Adrian after like others, he had perſecuted the truth of the Goſpell in the perſon of Luther and Oecolampadius, died of a death ſuſpected of poiſon in September, the ſecond yeare of his Popedome.
               
                  Clement Pope, ſeueth of that name, a Florentine,Clement. 7.
                   of the Sect of Knights of S. Iohn of Ieruſalem, Prior des Cappes, ſucceeded Adrian. He before was called Iulius, but admoniſhed by his familiar Cardinalls, he tooke the name of Clement, Functius. Some write him the Nephew, others the ſonne of Leo, others his baſtard brother, of the houſe of Medices.
               
               At Zuric there was a diſputation three dayes whether the Maſſe and Idolls ſhould be aboliſhed.
               The 20. of Ianuarie following, the Iourney of the Swiſſes
                   was held at Lucerne,
                  Zuric is hated of all the Swiſſes. where they wholy cōfirmed the Popes doctrine, and condemned that of the Goſpell. The Swiſſes in common complained of them of Zuric.
               
               
                  Bourbon beſieged Marceill in vaine, from whence hee retired into Italie, where he was purſued of the French King, who tooke Millaine, and in winter beſieged Pauie vppon Teſin.
               
               
                  
                  Charles. 5.
                  Anthonie Duke of Lorraine ſharpely perſecuted ſuch as bare any fauour to Luthers doctrine.
               About the ende of this yeare, certaine Countrey-men or peaſants of Snabe beganne to riſe and rebell againſt the Count de Loupae their Lord, and after their example their neighbours did the like, vnder the colour of certaine charges, wherewith they complained to be burdened.
               
                  This ſtirre was after verie pernitious, and brought great troubles and effuſion of blood.
               
               
                  
                  The Iourney of Pauie.A battaile giuen at Pauie betwixt Charles de Lauoy, a Gentlemen of the Country of Hainaut, the Emperours Lieutenant, and the French King, wherein the ſaid King was taken in the combat, and from thence carried by ſea into Spaine.
               
               
                  Diuiſion betwixt Luther and Zuinglius.
                  Zuinglius agreed not with Luther in an Article of the Supper. He ſaid that in the words of Ieſus Chriſt there is a figure, ſuch as there is found in infinit places of the ſcripture the like.
               
                  Luther denieth it, and ſaith that the bodie of Ieſus Chriſt is within the bread & wine, and that it entreth into the mouth. The Saxons follow Luther, and Swiſſes, Zuinglius.
               
               
                  Of long time hath Sathan with his darke cloudes obſcured the doctrine of the Supper: and now by contentions and debates hee alſo ſeeketh to take away from men the true taſte thereof.
               
               The ſedition of peaſants remained not only in Almaine, but ſpred it ſelfe alſo in Lorraine, nigh to Sauernes. Duke Anthonie accompanied with his brother Claude de Guiſe, and of ſome of the French troupe which were at the Iourney at Pauie, fought with them and ſlew a great number, keeping not his promiſed faith vnto them.
               The Sorboniſt Doctors of Paris whileſt their king was in, draue out of France Iames Faber d'eſtaples, partly vpon enuie, and partly vpon ſuſpition of Religion.
               The King aduertiſed hereof, made the cauſe to be ſtaied vntill his returne.
               
                  Frederic Duke of Saxonie dyed, and Iohn his brother was his ſucceſſor.
               
                  Caroloſtadius writ againſt Luther, vnto whom hee anſwered at large.
               
                  The Pope Clement whileſt the King was a priſoner writ Letters vnto the Parliament of Paris, greeuouſly to perſecute the Lutherans.
               
               Touching the ſeditions of the peaſants multiplied in diuers places. See the Hiſtorie of Sleidan.
               
               
                  Luther taketh a Nunne to wife, whereby he receiueth many reproaches at his aduerſaries hands.
               In Ianuary a peace was made at Madril in Spaine, betwixt  the King and the Emperour, vpon condition, aboue all to bandie himſelfe againſt the Turke, and the hereſie of Luther. The King after he had ſeene his two children as hoſtages, returned into France.
               
               The Emperour eſpowſed in Spaine Iſabel the daughter of Emanuel, and ſiſter to Iohn, king of Portugall.
               
               The Turke departed from Belgrade, and hauing paſſed from Danubie and Sauo, hee drew ſtrait into Hungarie, and bad battaile vnto king Lewis, who died in the fight, and his wife Mary the Emperours ſiſter, ſaued her ſelfe with ſwift running.
               
                  Iohn Sepuſe, Vaiuoda de Tranſiluania,
                  
                     Wartes betweene Vaivoda & Ferdinand. after being allyed with the Turke againſt Ferdinand, was appointed king of Hungaria, as his vaſſall and Tenant. Whileſt they debated their rights by dint of the ſword, there fell out a very damageable warre both for them and their neighbours.
               
                  Francis king of Fraunce returned from Spaine, allyed himſelfe with the Pope & the Venetians to defend Italie by ſea and land, againſt the Emperour, and to recouer the kingdome of Naples: and publiſhed a writing, whereby he ſhewed his reaſons. And the Emperour cauſed to be publiſhed an other to the contrary.
               
                  Swiſſe infected with Anabaptiſts. At Saint Gaull, one  of that Sect, before his Father and Mother, and others his Parents, cut off his brothers head, ſaying hee had beene ſo commaunded of God by reuelation, Ioachim Ʋadian a learned man, Conſull of the ſaid Towne, with other Iuſtices, incontinently cauſed the head of the ſaid paracide Anabaptiſt to be cut off.
               They of Berne made knowne to their next Biſhops their

diſputations, touching the reformation of Religion: and publiſh Articles.
               
                  The taking of Rome.
                  
                  Bourbon willing to paſſe for the Emperour into the kingdome of Naples, tooke his way towards Rome, which he got by aſſault, Bourbon was there ſtrooken with a Bullet as he ſcaled the wall, and there left his life. The Towne was pilled the ſixt day of May. Clement was beſieged a long time with his Cardinalls in the Caſtle of Saint Angelo. And finally the ſeuenth moneth after, hee was deliuered by his raunſome of 40000. ducats, after ſome.
               The birth of Phillip, the Emperours ſonne; was this yeare 1527.
               The King of France hauing made a league with the King of England, ſent into Italie the Lord de Landrece, to ſuccor the Pope: he tooke Alexandria, and after Pauie.
               
               The ſeuenth of Ianuary, they of Berne held diſputation, wherein Zuinglius, Oecolampartius, Bucer, Capito, Blanrer had by the holy ſcriptures ſurmounted and vanquiſhed ſuch as were of the aduerſe partie. Finally, they confirmed by the authoritie of the Magiſtrate through all theyr lands, the ſaid Articles, aboliſhed the Maſſe, and threw downe Images and Aultars.
               The Kings of England in France demaunded of the Emperour many things by their Heraulds: The King of Fraunce his children, offering ſiluer for them. He of England firſt three hundred thouſand skutes for the borrowing of fiue hundred thouſand of intereſt, becauſe the accords made betwixt them, in the yeare 1522. had by him bene violated and broken. Finally three yeares penſion, which by paction betwixt them the Emperour was bound to pay him: that is to ſay, 133000. skutes by yeare. If hee refuſed, their Heraulds were to denounce warre.
               At Strasbourge, by the Popes aduiſe euery man aſſembled in his Tribe. The Maſſe was laide downe, vntill the Papiſts ſhould ſhew by the holy ſcripture, that it is a ſeruice agreeable vnto God.
               
                  
                  It may then lie downe long enough. For contrary it is wholy oppoſite vnto the Supper of Ieſus Chriſt.
               
               Sedition at Baſil, betwixt the Burgeſſes and certaine of the Senators for the cauſe of Religion. The Burgeſſes hauing taken Armes, caſt downe the Images in Temples: which was the cauſe that the Senate agreed to what they demaunded: yea and that twelue Senators which fauoured Papiſtrie ſhould be deiected out of the Senate: And that from thenceforth, when any queſtion fell out to ordain any thing, concerning the common wealth, that a Councell of 200. ſhould be called therevnto to haue their aduiſe therin. The Maſſe then was aboliſhed through all their Seignorie, and Images publikely burned as the Inſtruments of Idolatry.
               
                  Vpon a Wedneſday which the Papiſt call Aſhwedneſday, the Idolls were burnt at Baſil.
               
               
                  Lantrec being dead, and Andrew Danre of Genoua reuolted, the French King began to hearken vnto peace.
               
                  Margarite the Emperours Aunt, and Loyſe the Kings mother, aſſembled at Cambray,
                  A peace at Cambray.
                   and dealt for a peace in the moneth of Auguſt in this ſort. The Emperour left to the King, Bourgongne, if he engendred any male childe of his ſiſter. The King gaue for the deliuerance of his children to the Emperour, twentie hundred thouſand Skutes, the debt of England being comprehended therein.
               The Article againe is added to extirpate the Lutherans.
               
               The Emperor returning from Genes, and arriuing at Auſbourge, denounced vnto the Proteſtants that they ſhould let their preaching ceaſe, and goe to Maſſe with him. They refuſed both he one and the other: ſhewing there was no reaſon to conſtraine them to do it, vnleſſe the cauſe were debated.
               The 24. of February after he had ſworne,The Emperours Coronation. namely that he ſhould all his life defend the honour & dignitie of the Romane ſeate, he is with great pompe & magnificence crowned Emperour at Boulogne.
               
               
                  Ellenor the Emperours ſiſter and the Kings ſpowſe, came from Spaine into France with the Kings two children, Frauncis,
                  
and Henry, after they had bene foure yeares in hoſtage in their Fathers place.
               The Pope Clement and the Emperor beſieged the Florentines, becauſe they ſet out of their Towne ſuch as were of the houſe of Medices. In the ende Ferrand de Gonzague brought them to compoſition, and they receiued for their Prince, Alexander de Medices: vnto whom the Emperour promiſed his baſtard daughter Margarite.
               
               In this time Tiber at Rome ouerflowed his bankes, and the winde ſo beat back the ſurges and waues therof, that the whole Towne was greatly terrified therewith.
               
                  A deluge of waters.The like and more greeuous tempeſt, came alſo in Holland & the Countries adioyning, the ſea hauing burſt her banks and leuies, and tooke away all it met withall, the length of the flat Country.
               
                  
                  Ferdinand the Emperours yonger brother, the fift of Ianuary, at Cullen is proclaimed king of the Romanes: And the eleuenth of Aprill following crowned at Aix, notwithſtanding the Duke of Saxonie proteſted by his ſonne that he would not agree there vnto.
               The Turke returned the ſecond time againſt the Towne of Vienna in Auſtrich: but the Emperour and Ferdinand went againſt him in battaile, and forced him to retire.
               The eleuenth of October, Zuinglius of the age of fortie foure yeares, younger then Luther by foure yeares, was ſlaine at a battaile of the petit Cantons, againſt them of Zuric: and about the ende of Nouember Oecolampadius of the age of 49. yeares, paſſed alſo from this life into an other, in the Towne of Baſil.
               
               
                  Mary, the widowe of Lewis King of Hungarie, is appointed by the Emperour her brother in the gouernment of the lowe Country, in the place Margarite his Aunte, lately deceaſed.
               A Comete appeared almoſt through the whole moneth of Auguſt.
               
                  Loyſe mother of the king of Fraunce, and ſiſter to Charles Duke of Sauoy, dyed this yeare.
               
                  A warre recommenced betwixt the Swiſſes, namely they of Zuric and fiue Cantons, but in the end a peace was concluded.
               The Towne of Munſter receiue the Goſpell.
               
                  Christierne King of Denmarke now baniſhed from his Countrey by the ſpace of tenne yeares:The King of Denmarke impriſoned. hoping to recouer his kingdome was taken by ſea, and laid in priſon.
               His ſonne which the Emperour his vncle entertained, dyed of the age, able to be imployed in warlike affaires.
               
                  Soliman Emperour of the Turkes came with a great Armie to Belgrade: and from thence drawing on the left hand, he beſieged the Towne and Caſtle of Giunte: but Nicholas Iurixe being then within made him leaue his ſiege.
               
                  Iohn de Leiden a Cutler an Hollander, ſecretly, and Harman  Staprede Miniſter, Rotmans companion, publikely beganne to diſpearſe about the Towne of Munſter, the ſeede of Anabaptiſme. Rotman after he had reſiſted him in the beginning, and cauſed them by the Senate to be driuen out of the Towne, declared himſelfe to be an Anabaptiſt, in a diſputation appointed in the Towne houſe. See the Hiſtorie of Anabap. of Munſter.
               
               
                  Who would not tremble at ſuch a iudgement of God, to ſee ſuch as lately profeſſed the Gospell of the Lord, to fall into ſo great wickednes?
               
               
                  George Prince of Saxonie,
                  Crueltie of George Duke of Saxonie. for the Goſpell baniſhed three ſcore and ten Bourgeſſes of the Towne of Lipſic, becauſe they would not communicate in the Sacrament of the Supper, vnleſſe it were vnder both kindes, of bread and wine.
               The Pope Clement ſignified the Councell vnto the Duke of Saxonie, that it ſhould be at Plaiſance, or elſe at Boulongne, or at Mantua, Imperiall Townes: The Duke ſent his Embaſſadors towards the Proteſtants about the laſt of Iune: who anſwered by writing, that they woulde haue a Councell free and wel ordeined in Almaine, where the difference in Religiō might be decided by newter and equall Iudges, yea and that by the bookes of holy ſcriptures.
               In fauour alſo of the French King hee made foure French Cardinalls: Odes de Chastillion, Phillip de Bologne, Claude de

Gnyuri, and Iohn the hunter.
               In the moneth of March the Emperour of Italie ſailed into Spaine.
               
               There was a marriage at Marceille delt in, betwixt Henry the King of France his ſonne, a Prince of the age of fifteene yeares, and Katherine de Mecides Pope Clements Neece, by the King of Fraunce his meanes, and the ſaide Clements.
               
               During the Emperours abſence the Lantgraue paſſed into Fraunce, and in the name of 
                     Ʋlrich Prince of Wirtemberge engaged and pawned vnto the King (borrowing of him readie Siluer) the Earledome of Montbeliard, to the ende to reſtore the ſaide Prince his couſin into his Seignories and Countries: vpon this condition, that if within three yeares it were not redeemed, it ſhould remaine hereditarie vnto the Kingdome of France.
               
               
                  
                  Henry King of England, hauing put away the daughter of Ferdinand king of Spaine, the ſaid Henry his brothers wife, tooke Anne Bullen: wherevpon the Pope commaunded him to take againe the ſaid Katherine. See Sleidan.
               
               The Pope Clement by the counſell of Curtius his Phiſitian,The death of Pope Clemēt. hauing chaunged the Regiment and maner of his liuing, in his age, dyed in the ende of September of a diſeaſe of the ſtomacke.
               
                  Iohn Baptist Folengius in his Commentarie vpon the 105. Pſalme, ſpeaking of Pope Clement his death ſaith thus. Some ſay that in our time Clement the ſeuenth Pope of Rome, dyed of ſo diſhoneſt a death as he was eaten with Lice. Others thinke he was but poyſoned.
               In the moneth of Nouember, at Paris, were many Placarts fixed vnto poſtes in diuers places againſt the Maſſe and other Articles of the Popiſh Religion: Wherevpon was exerciſed great crueltie and horrible butchery againſt ſuch as they called Lutherans.
               
               
                  Paul. 3.
                  
                  Paul Pope, third of that name, an auncient man, was choſen the 11. of October, and created Pope of Rome, and crowned the third of Nouember. He raigned 15. yeares, whereof

we will handle hereafter.
               In the moneth of Ianuary the King of France came to  
                  Paris,
                  A bloodie proceſſion. ordeined there a generall proceſſion where the Idoll Saint Geneuiefue was carried about in great pompe: there alſo made hee an Oration to the people againſt the Lutherans (as they called them). And for a ſolemne Sacrifice to appeaſe Gods anger, hee cauſed ſixe poore Chriſtians to be burned, which confeſſed the name of God in ſundrie places of the Towne. For this cauſe was hee ill beloued in Almaine.
               
               In the moneth of Aprill the Emperour embarking at Barcelonne went into Affricke, where he tooke the Towne of Thunis, and the Fort of Golete:
                  Thunis and Golete. hee after made tributarie the king Muleaſſe.
               
               
                  Barbaroſſe the Turkes Lieutenant, who occupied that kingdoms eſcaped, and aſſembled a certaine number of veſſels in Argell: And the Emperour retired into Sicilie.
               
               In the moneth of Iuly, the King of England beheaded Iohn Fiſher Biſhop of Rocheſter, and Thomas Moore his Chauncellor, becauſe they would not agree to the Edict and ſtatute made for the aboliſhment of the Popes authoritie, who challenged to be head of the Engliſh Church. Fiſher whileſt he was priſoner was choſen Cardinall, which nothing amended his cauſe with the King,
               About the ende of the moneth of October, Francis Sforce Prince of Millaine, deceaſed without any heires.
               The ſixt of December the Proteſtants aſſembled at Smalcalde. Guillaume de Bellay, Lord de Langeny Embaſſador for the king of Fraunce came thither: who the 19. of December excuſed the king for the executions hee had made of the Lutherans: ſaying they were ſeditious people, and held a farre other Religion then that of the Proteſtants.
               Moreouer if they thought good of it, hee had a great deſire to ſend Theologians and learned men into Amaigne: or elſe if they woulde they might ſende theyr learned Diuines into Fraunce to communicate together of certaine points

of Religion.
               The Senate of Auſpurge receiued the doctrine of the Goſpell.
               
                   The 24. of Iuly the Town of Munster is beſieged and by might taken by the Count d'Obersten, Captaine of the Armie, and by their Biſhop.
               About the end of the moneth of Ianuary, Iohn de Leiden Head of the Anabaptiſts, Coipperdolin and Chrechring his companions, being tyed to poſtes were ſlaine at Munster: the Head alone confeſſing his fault and ſomething repenting.
               
                  Henry King of England had by his wife Anne Bullen, a faire daughter called Elizabeth.
               
               The Emperour entred into Prouence with his Armie, but wanting victualls for his Campe, he was conſtrained to retyre to Gene. A great number of his ſouldiers dyed, and amongſt others, his Lieutenant Anthonie de Leue.
               
               
                  Francis the King of France his eldeſt ſonne, dyed at Tournon vpon Roſne, of the age of 18. yeares. Sebaſtian de Moncucul, an Italian was drawne with 4. horſes: For giuing him poyſon (as it is ſaid).
               
                  Perone beſieged by Henry Count de Naſſau, and by Adrian d'erouy, Count de Reux.
               
               There aroſe a great ſedition in England againſt the King: For that bee had plucked downe and baniſhed the Popes authoritie.
               
                   The Emperour by Sea returned from Genes ouer into Spaine.
               
               
                  Alexander de Medices Duke of Florence, is ſlaine by Lawrence his kinſman, promiſing him the enioying of a Ladie his neighbour of excellent beautie.
               
                  Iames the fift, King of Scotland, eſpowſed Magdaline king Francis his eldeſt daughter.
               The Emperours Armie in Artois vnder the conduction of Florent de Bure tooke by force S. Paul, beſieged Terouanne, but could not winne it.
               The eleuenth of October was borne Edwarde, King

                  Henry his ſonne of England, of Iane Semer, which he tooke to wife after Anne Bullen.
               
               
                  Anne de Mont-mourancy is created Conſtabled France,
                   which is a ſoueraigne degree of honour, which office had bene vacant 15. yeares ſince the reuolt of Charles de Bourbon.
               
               The Emperour and the king Francis aſſembled Nice, where the Pope was to make a peace betwixt them: and although they accorded not in the principall, yet they concluded a truce betwixt them for tenne yearers.
               
                  Margarite the Emperors baſtard-daughter, after the death of the aforeſaid Alexander, is married vnto Octauian the Popes ſonne in lawe.
               
                  Henry of England cauſed the Relickes of S. Thomas of Canterburie to be taken out of his Schrine, and made them publikely to be burnt.
               The Emperour and king Francis met at Aignes mortes in Languedoc, and entertained one an other.
               
                  Charles d' Egmond Duke de Gueldres, deceaſed very olde, and William Duke of Cleues poſſeſſed his Countrey as well by the dead mans will, as by the Nobilitie of the Countrey.
               
                  Castelubro a Towne of Illyrica, in the gulfe of Ambracia, is taken from the Turke by the Emperour and the Venetians, allied together.
               Touching this Pope Paul, amongſt a great number of his acts I will recite but this litle following; that the world may know how great their ſanctitie is, which the Papiſts maintaine with an his voyce to be Peters ſuccors, and the Vicars of Ieſus Chriſt.
               This Paul was an Aſtrologian, a Magician, and Diuine, and amongſt his moſt familiars, had one called Denis Seuila a Magician, whom therefore afterward hee made a Cardinall, with one named Gaurice of Portugall, Cecius and Marcell Negromancians and wicked villaines: Of theſe did hee enquire the fortune of himſelfe and his baſtards. He got his red hatte in this maner. Hee had a ſiſter called Iulia Farneſe, which hee deliuered to Pope Alexander, that hee might be a Cardinall and Biſhop of Hostia, and to finde meanes to pay his debts.

For thoſe good Popes commonly are ſo inflamed with whoredome, that they make no difficultie to promiſe redde hats and Biſhopprickes to ſuch as will bring them their ſiſters, or elſe that which is more horrible, their young bretheren, to violate. Many by ſuch practiſes obtaine great riches, & fatte Benifices. And (as Agrippa ſaith) there is no ſhorter way then that to come therevnto.
               This murderer poyſoned his mother and a Nephewe, to this end that all the ſucceſſion of the Farneſes, might fall vpon him. Moreouer ſeeing the other of his ſiſters (whoſe carnall company he had ſometime had) followed too openly the maners and conditions of them of the houſe of Farneſe, and that ſhee loued more the company of others, then his, hee poyſoned her alſo.
               Beeing a Legate in Marke d'Ancone, in the time of Iulius the ſecond, hee moſt wickedly abuſed a maide, iſſued of a noble houſe of that Towne. For hee counterfeited and diſguiſed himſelfe, feigning to bee one of the Gentlemen of the Legates houſe, ſo vnder the colour of a promiſe to marrie her, deflowred her: Who after ſhee knew the truth what hee was, and that ſhee was not his legitimate wife, but his whore (at the leaſt by the Canon lawe) ſhee became almoſt out of her wittes. And of this marriage came that great Porteenſeigne and Captaine of all Buggerers and Sodomites. Peter Lewis.
               
               As one Nicholas de Cheſme found him one day adulterouſly abuſing his wife, Laurea Farneſe, (who was the ſaide Pauls Neece,) hee wounded him ſo well with his dagger, that hee carried the marke thereof all his life. Hee ſlewe with poyſon Boſuis Sforza, the husband of his daughter Constance, (whom before hee had often vſed as his whore) to the ende hee might more at his eaſe, and with greater libertie enioy her.
               This Dotard very tyrannouſly oppreſſed them of Peruſe, and droue from the Seignorie Aſcanius Columne, a very iuſt Prince. This deteſtable Robber and Rouer tooke and vſurped for himſelfe the Towne of Camer, after hee had driuen

away the Lady thereof: which was a woman endowed with a rare and ſingular religion and prudence, and did ſo much with his practiſes with Cardinalls, that hee exchaunged the ſaid Citie of Camer (which was not his owne) with the townes of Parme and Plaiſance, to the end to make his ſonne Lewis, Lord & maiſter of them. Which act afterward by a iuſt iudgement of God was cauſe of the death of the ſaid Peter Lewis. He often conſulted with his Cardinalls how hee might hinder a Nationall Councell in Almaine: and commaunded his Embaſſadors that they ſhould enflame the hearts all Princes againſt the King of England.
               
                  Anne de Cleues, ſiſter of William Duke of Cleues, is accorded in marriage to the king of England.
               In the moneth of Maya Comete appeared in the ayre,
                  A Comete. and almoſt the ſame day deceaſed Elizabeth the Emperours wife.
               In Auguſt Caſtelnouo in Illirica is taken againe vpon the Emperor by Barbaroſſe the great Turkes Lieftenant,Caſtelnouo. & almoſt all the garriſon of the Spaniards ſlaine.
               The Citizens of Gaunt roſe vp againſt Mary, Regent in the  lowe Contries for the Emperour: for which cauſe it was need-full for him to haſte into Flaunders. He paſſed then through France from Spaine, with great receiuing and entertainment of the king and his ſubiects.
               The Emperor and the King ſent their Embaſſadors to the Venetians, to ioyne with them for making warre vpon the Turke: but without any thing beeing mooued with that Embaſſage, they incontinently ſent towards the Turke to make peace with him. Some ſay they were behinde counſelled herevnto by the French Embaſſador.
               They of Gaunt are puniſhed by the Emperour: many are beheaded and otherwiſe puniſhed, and after he had taken their liberties from them, he cauſed a ſtrong Forte to be there builded, to bridle them.
               The French king ſeeing himſelfe out of hope to recouer Millaine, he began to contract with the Duke of Cleues, cōcerning a marriage betwixt him and the Princeſſe of Nauarre.
               
               
                  
                  Vaiuoda.
                  Iohn de Ʋainoda king of Hungarie died, leauing a little child called Stephen, borne of Elizabeth, daughter of Sigiſmond king of Polonia.
               
               
                  Chabot.
                  Phillip Chabot Admirall of France, is condemned at Melnue 
                   vpon treaſon, and in ſeuen hundreth thouſand Scutes as a fine, and after baniſhed into the wood of Vincenne: but a litle after hee was againe reſtored vnto all his goods and eſtates.
               
                  The Iouney of RemsbourgThe diſputation of Remsbourge, began in Aprill betwixt the Proteſtants, and them which they called Catholickes. Phillip Melancton, Bucer, Piſtorius, & other Theologians were there on the Proteſtants ſide, againſt Eccius, Iulles Pffug, and Iohn Gropper.
               
               
                  The ſeed of warre.
                  Caeſar Fregoſa and Antonie Rincon (which the French king ſent Embaſſadors to the Turke) as they paſſed the Pan to drawe towards Venice, they were taken by the Imperialiſts and put to death.
               The Marqueſſe Alphonſus Daual the Emperours Lieftenant in Lombardie, is accuſed of that murder by the Lord de Langeay. The King diſpatcheth his Embaſſadors to the Iourney at Reiusbourge, to complaine of that wicked act: After, hee ſtayed at Lyons George d'Auſtriche, baſtard ſonne of the Emperour Maximilian, Archbiſhop 
                     Ʋalence, as he paſſed through Fraunce from Spaine vnto the Emperour, who was in the lowe Countries.
               
                  Francis, ſonne of Anthonie Duke of Lorraine, eſpowſed Christierne, widowe, the daughter of Christierne king of Denmarke, which diſpleaſed the king of France.
               
               
                  Ferdinand beſieged Bude, a Towne in Hungarie, where the Queene Dowairie was ſhut vp with her litle ſonne:Bude falles to the Turke. but the Turkes comming downe in great numbers in the moneth of Iuly, he was glad to leaue his ſiege. The Turkes arriuing a litle while after, tooke the Towne of Pest, and diſcomfited a great part of Ferdinands people. After, whether the ſaid Dowairie would or no, he forced her to appropriate Bude vnto him: vnder the colour that ſhee could not defend it againſt Ferdinand. So the litle King and his mother were baniſhed into Tranſiluania.
               
               
                  The Emperour came to Lupues to ſpeake with the Pope:The Iourney Argiere. And to hinder the Turke of an other ſide, & to withdraw him from Hungarie, hee embarked himſelfe with his Armie in the Porte of de Venere, and paſſing by the Iles of Corſeigne, Maior
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , and Minor
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                     , he made ſaile to Argiere, where he tooke land the third of October: but there aroſe a great and horrible tempeſt of the ſea, which ſcattered and diſpearſed a great number of his ſayles: ſo that hauing loſt a good part of his Artillery, and almoſt all his furniture of warre, he was conſtrained to retire into Spaine.
               
               The French after they vnderſtood of this loſſe, tooke occaſion to mooue warre.
               The principall Lords of Auſtriche, euen to the number of 24. and with them, tenne Cities, preſented a requeſt vnto the King Ferdinand the third of December at Prague: to this end, that according to the decree of the laſt Iourney at Reiusbourge, they might reforme their Churches. Ferdinand anſwered, that that that Decree onely appertained vnto the Proteſtants: therfore he commaunded them to attend the iſſue of a generall or Nationall Councell of Almaine, promiſed by the Emperour at the ſaid Reiusbourge.
               
            
            
               The beginning of the Councell of the Trent.
               
               
                  Paul Pope, publiſhed the Councell at Trent the firſt day of  Nouember.
               Edicts of extreame rigour were publiſhed at Paris againſt ſuch as they called Lutherans: namely,Perſecution againſt the faithfull. to bring vnto certaine deputed Theologians, all ſuch as were any thing ſpotted therewith. And that all Stationers and Booke-binders ſhould bring in within a certaine time all ſuſpected bookes. Prieſts alſo had ſet downe a certaine forme of Interrogating ſuch as came to confeſſion, if they knew any Lutherans. A generall Proceſſion on is made, and Geneuiefue, the Pariſians Goddeſſe, trotted through the ſtreetes in great pompe.
               The French king ſent the Lord de Longueuil to the Duke of Cleues, there with Martin de Roſſem to leauie people, and to attend occaſion to begin their enterpriſe. After in the moneth of Iuly following, warre is denounced to the Emperour.

                  Longueuil & Roſſem pilled & ſpoiled in Brabant all the Countrey: but they wanted powder and furniture for Artillery.
               
                  Rochell.They of Rochel in Xantoinge mutined againſt the king, for a Garriſon placed there againſt the cuſtome, and for extreame tollages. Gernac is ſent thither by the king.
               Whileſt the king goeth vnto Parpignan, Guillame Poyet Chauncellor of Fraunce, is by iuſtice apprehended in the night time in his bed, and lead to priſon: who foreſeeing this tempeſt, made himſelfe a Prieſt a litle before, to ſhun the puniſhments which he knew to be due for his deſerts.
               
                  The Papall Prieſthood ſerueth for a good cloake to couer all maner of infection.
               
               The Scots about the beginning of December fought very vnluckily againſt the Engliſh. The cauſe of the warre was, becauſe the king of Scotland came to Yorke as he had promiſed, to end a controuerſie which they had together about the limits of their Countries.
               
                   The Emperour made Crowne his ſonne Phillip king of Spaine, and gaue him in marriage Marie the daughter of Iohn king of Pontugall.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond the ſonne of Sigiſmond king of Pologne, tooke in marriage Elizabeth, the daughter of Ferdinand king of the Romanes.
               
                  Clement Marot retiring to Geneua, ſet out in French verſes, 20. Pſalmes of Dauid. He had before publiſhed 30. at Paris, wherevpon he was perſecuted by the Sorboniſts.
               
                  Landrecy.The Emperor and Henry of England, ioyned themſelues to make warre vpon the French king, who tooke Landrecy and fortified it.Nice.
               
               The Hauen and Towne of Nice taken, and the Caſtle beſieged by the Prince d' Anguien, after that Barbaroſſa (conducted by the Captaine Poidin) had taken land with his Armie by Sea at Tolon.
               
               The Duke of Cleues chaſtiſed by the Emperor, forſooke the alliance of France. The Princeſſe of Nauarre, in the way againſt her will with the Cardinall de Ballay for her conduction vnto Cleues, was ſtopped with great ioy of the marriage broken.
               
                  Trouble in Scotland, by ſuch as demanded that their young Queene might be accorded vnto Edward ſonne of king Henry. The king of France did ſo much, that he pacified the Nobilitie to drawe vnto himſelfe that alliance.
               The 
                     Ʋauldois, a people in Prouence, are put to the ſpoyle  for the Goſpell:Vauldois. wherefore the Hiſtorie is faithfully deſcribed, and at large in the booke of Martyrs which I haue ſet forth.
               At the Iourney of Carignan in Piemont, nigh Ciriſolles,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                      of Ca
                           ••
                        g
                           ••
                        n.
                   the Emperialiſts vnder the conduction of Alphonſus Dauall, are diſcomfited by the Prince d' Anguien.
               
               The Emperour taketh againe Luxembourge by compoſition, he taketh Ligni and the Caſtle: after S. Dedier,
                  S. Dedier. where Rene Prince of Aurange was ſtricken with a bullet and died, to the great griefe of the Emperour.
               
                  Anthonie Duke of Lorraine, died not ſo much of age,Lorraine. as of griefe to ſee the warre ſo nigh him, yea euen as it were in his Countrey. Francis his ſonne ſucceeded him, who married the Emperours Neece.
               The King of England laid ſiege before Bologne,
                  Bologne. and in the end tooke it by compoſition.
               The Emperor being incamped vpon the Riuer of Marne, the Count Guillam de Furstemberge was taken by certaine French horſmen as he ſounded the Watch.
               The Emperor being at Soiſſon made peace with the king of France, the 24. of September.
               In the moneth of March Lewis Palatin Elector deceaſed, and had Frederic his brother his ſucceſſor.
               
                  Henry de Brunſwic, a ſworne enemie of all vertue, making no account of Marie the ſiſter of 
                     Ʋlrich Prince of Wittemberge his wife, but giuing himſelfe to an whore, one of his wiues Damzells, by whome hee had ſeuen children, was accuſed by the Proteſtants in a full Audience of Eſtates the fift of Aprill, and to the end the thing ſhould be more ſecret, they cauſed to be made an Image like to an whore, by certane Apoſtate women; when this was done, they cauſed her to bee buried with great pompe and magnificences, after they

had made all the Prieſts thereabouts ſay Maſſes, Vigills, and all the Seruice accuſtomed to be done by the Papiſts at the buriall of their dead. To this he had nothing to anſwere, but remained confounded.
               
                   The King of France cauſed a Fort to be built vpon the ſea banke nigh Bullen, to hinder the victualling of the Towne, holding his Armie thereabouts.
               
                  Charles Duke of Orleance, the king of France his ſonne, who ſhould haue bene ſonne in lawe or in other alliance of the Emperour, the ninth day of September beeing of the age of 23. yeares, was taken away by a malladie which held him but fewe dayes.
               
                  Guillam de Fuſtemberge priſoner at Paris, after he had payed 30000. Skutes for his raunſome, was ſet at libertie in the lowe Countrie with the Emperour, who honourably and amiably receiued him.
               The Sorbonists of Paris were aſſembled at Mèlun by the Kings commaundement, to determine of Articles to propoſe at the Councell.
               After long diſputation they thought it beſt wholy to followe them, which they had lately cauſed to be diſputed on at Paris.
               
               The Theologians at Louaine, writ 32. Articles of the ſame ſubiect that they of Paris.
               
               
                  Peter Bridly, miniſter in the Church of the Straungers at Strasbourge, was ſecretly called vnto Tornay by ſuch as were there deſirous of the Goſpell: after hee had ſome litle while caught there, the 19. of Februarie he was cruelly burnt with a litle fire. See the booke of Martyrs.
               
               
                  Francis Duke of Lorraine died leauing a ſonne, a litle child. The Biſhop of Mets his Vncle, and his mother, were appointed his Tutors.
               The daughter of Ferdinand married to the ſonne of the king of Poland, dyeth alſo.
               This Pope Paul had aſſigned the Councell of Trent (as is ſaid) not to remedie the euills of Chriſtianitie for the tranquilitie of conſciences, or to place Religion in a good ſeate and

eſtate, to the honor and glory of God: but to tread vnder feet his truth, and to oppreſſe the Miniſters of his word. In which place, ſeeing that he did not all he would, the yeare 1546. vnder colour that the ayre was there corrupted, he tranſported himſelf vnto Boulongne, to the end by that meane hee might the better take away all libertie from Chriſtians to ſay their opinions, and to hinder the reformation of the Church. This Antichriſt raiſed horrible and ſtraunge warres againſt the ſeruants of God, purſuing them by fire, ſword, impriſonments, and all other ſorts of puniſhments. Yea he ſpared not his Cardinalls, namely, Fulger and Contarien, after they had taſted the ſauour of the word of God: nor the Biſhop of Pontus, Iohn Baptiſt: nor his brother Paulus Vergerius, Biſhop of Iuſtinopoli.
               
               The chiefe amongſt the tormentors were his Nephewes, the Cardinall Farneſe, and Octaua Duke of Parma his brother: which beyond all meaſure glorying therein, the yeare of our Lord Ieſus Chriſt, 1546. as they were vpon their departure frō 
                  Italie into Almaine to make warre vpon the Proteſtants, they vaunted brauely and fiercely that they would make ſuch an effuſion of the Lutherans bloud, that their horſes ſhould ſwim therin. And the meane while that good holy Father Paul tooke his pleaſure with his daughter Constance, after the old maner. They ſay alſo that that old man ſtinking as a Goate, ſollicited to whoredome an other his Niece, who was a very honeſt maide, and no leſſe laudable for her honeſtie and chaſtitie, then for her excellent beautie.
               This Pope as Baleus ſaith,A number of whores. had in his Tables the number of 45000. whores, whereof he exacted euery moneth tribute: to the end they might haue libertie to exerciſe their whoredome: and as ſaith the booke intituled Euſebius Captiue, they are greatly eſteemed, they kiſſe the Popes feete, they talke very familiarly with him, they frequent day and night with him: But ſuch as truſt onely in Ieſus Chriſt and embrace the true doctrine, are held by the Pope for heretickes, and of him are baniſhed, ſet in priſons and ſtockes, and puniſhed by fire, ſword, and Gallies.
               The Elector Palatin reformed in his Countrey the doctrine

and Popiſh ceremonies, and receiued the Goſpell.
               The Conference of Reiusbourge is held. See Sleidan.
               
               The 7. of Ianuary the Councell began at Trent.
               
               
                  Alliance againſt the Goſpell.Alliance betwixt the Pope and the Emperour, concluded the 26. of Iune, to reduce the Almaines vnto the obedience of the Pantople: The Pope binding himſelfe to deliuer 200000. Ducats into the hands of the Venetians: Moreouer to furniſh ten thouſand footemen Italians, and fiue hundreth lighthorſemen, waged for ſixe moneths. Moreouer permitting the Emperour to ſell of the reuenew of the Monaſteries of Spaine, to the valew of 100000.Crownes. Crownes, and to take the moitie of all Eccleſiaſticall liuings.
               In the end a peace was made betwixt the kings of France and England, vpon conditiō that Bologne ſhould remaine Engliſh, vntil the king had payed the ſiluer by him promiſed.
               On Satterday the 7. of Auguſt, of this yeare, 1546. the Towne of Maligues was in ſuch ſort handled with Thunder and Lightning, that of long time there had not bene ſeene the like. The Thunderbolt fell vpon a Tower called Saderpoort, that is to ſay, the gate of Canon powder: where there was more then 800. Barels of Gunpowder, which being on a flame augmented the tempeſt, and firſt laid on the earth that which was about it: after, it ſo embraced the Towne, that without abundance of raine mingled with the thunder, it was thought all ſhould haue bene conſumed by fire.
               The next morning, which was Sunday, there was found ſo many dead bodies ſtinking, that in all haſt of neceſſitie a great ditch was made to burie them by Cartfulls. Of wounded, there were found more then an hundreth and fiftie. A woman great with child was found ſtiffled, who being opened, the childe receiued baptiſme. A damzel caſting her ſelfe out of a bed to open a windowe in the ſtreete, called Blochſtranſſem, the tempeſt ſo cut off her necke, that the head hung at the remaining skinne, a very ſad and horrible ſpectacle. In a corner of a ſtreet where is the Pallace Bernard, a Tauerner called Croes, beeing diſcended into a Seller to drawe Beere for his ghueſts, (of which, one company were playing at Cardes) the houſe

in a moment was throwne on the earth, and the gameſters ouerwhelmed wth their Cardes in their hands: none of that houſe remained ſafe but the Hoſt, by meanes of the vaulted Caue or Seller into which he was diſcended.
               Three or foure dayes after this accident, there were many found in Caues and Sellers which were dead of hunger, others ſtiffled, others lay in traunſes and ſwounds, with feare and incredible ſtench of the thunder. There was a man and a woman found, that were carried away and hanged betwixt the braunches of a Tree.
               The Towne which before was adorned with exquiſite buildings, was now altogether diſfigured, and as it were rent in peeces. The Suburbes of Neckerfpful was almoſt all ruinated. The Pallace of Bergues, and that of Madame Margarite, and the Emperours, were cleane ouerthrowne.
               The houſe of Lombards (they are they which lend ſiluer to vſurie) from top to bottome was ruinated.
               The Hoſterie of the Poſtmaiſter was deſtroyed, and the ſtable with the horſes, were all carried away. One part of the Monaſterie of the Auguſtines and of the Temples and Churches of the Towne were brooſed and broken downe: And if the ſtorme had not broken his forces in the ouerthrowe of the houſe of the Count d'Hostrat, there had beene no likelihood that any houſe in the Towne, or thereabouts, had remained whole.
               There were found many hewen ſtones, throwne by the Tempeſt ſixe hundreth paces off, to the great damage of the places where they fell. The glaſſe windowes through all the ſtreetes were broken. The fall of Tyles, and the cry of perſons, was horrible and fearefull.
               
                  Thus the Lord ſometimes makes men feele his terrible and fearfull power.
               
               In Iune, the Emperour ſent the Cardinall of Trent to Rome,
                  The warre in Almaine.
                   to conclude that cōfederacie with the Pope, who had now deliuered ſiluer to the Captaines of warre, for the warre in Almaine.
               
               On the other ſide, the Duke of Saxe and the Lantgraue,

leuied people in all haſte. The Emperor being demanded the cauſes of the warre, he anſwered, it was onely meant againſt rebells culpable of treaſon. He ſent Embaſſadors to the Swiſſes, praying them to remaine ſtil in their auncient amity. And that hee onely determined to chaſtice certaine mutinous people. The Proteſtants purpoſed in Auguſt to beſiege Seiusbourge, ſo meaning to fight againſt the Emperor: but as they paſſed leiſurely, ten thouſand footmē of Italie came to the Emperors ſuccours the laſt of Auguſt, and 500. horſmen, whoſe Captaine was Octauius Farneſe, the Popes ſonne in lawe.
               The Count de Bure, who had leuied people in the lowe Countries, paſſed Phine in the moneth of Auguſt nigh Mets, and in September ioyned himſelfe to the Emperour.
               Great troupes of the Popes friends of all eſtates ranne vnto the Councell of Trent: In the number of which, amongſt others were two notable Archbiſhops, the one of Vſpale in the Countrey of the Gothes, called Olaus the great, and the other of Armacane in Ireland: They were poore Archbiſhops which had litle but winde and ſmoake of Archbiſhops, and were entertained of the Pope at fifteene crownes a moneth, and therefore thought hee good they ſhould be at this Councell vnder thoſe titles, and to take place amongſt others, that the world might beleeue that there were yet found in farre Countries, as Gothia and Ireland, people which reuerence his name, and ſubmit themſelues to his obedience.
               
                  
                  Herman Archbiſhop of Colongne, by the counſell and aduice of his Eſtates, and of his meer will, ſurrendred and gaue ouer his eſtate of a Prince, and his Electorſhip: and withall remitted vnto the people, the oath of fidelitie, wherby they were bound vnto him. Adolp Schauembourge is choſen in his place, who ſtraight chaunged Religion through all the Countrey of Colongne.
               
               At Genes a ſedition roſe vp: The Count Fliſcan was Captaine of them, who fell into the ſea and was drowned, whereby the furie of the ſeditious was much leſſened. Yet the Lord Ioanuin d' Aure was there cut in peeces.
               The Emperour laid the cauſe vpon the Farneſes, and

amongſt others, vpon Peter Lewis, Duke of Plaiſance.
               
               
                  Henry king of England, dyed about the end of Ianuarie,The death of Henry the 8. hauing inſtituted Edward his ſonne, of the age of nine yeares: and after him, he ſubſtituted Mary his daughter by his firſt wife, and after her, Elizabeth by his ſecond wife.
               Vnder this young King Edward, the doctrine of the Pope was driuen out of England, and the Goſpell put in the place by the authoritie of the Duke of Sommerſet his Tutor, and Vncle by the mothers ſide, and of Thomas Cranmer Archbiſhop of Canterburie.
               
               The Councell of Trent diuided, ſome of the venerable Fathers retired to Bolongne, becauſe a Phiſitian (who was in the Popes wages) told them that the aire of Trent was not wholeſome. The other Biſhops which were vnder the Emperors obedience, remained at Trent.
               
               A ſedition at Naples of the Bourgeſſes againſt the Spaniards, becauſe that Peter de Tolledo Viceroy, ſought to bring in the Spaniſh Inquiſition concerning Religion.
               The laſt of March, Francis king of France, after hee had raigned 32. yeares, died at Ramboillet.
               
               
                  Henry 2. of that name, his ſon, ſucceeded him in this yeare, and the ſame day he was borne, that is to ſay, the laſt of March.
               
                  Anne de Montmourancie, now hauing bene abſent from the Court ſixe yearers, was againe called.Conſtable. Such as before were in honour and credit, ſome were laid in priſon, others were depoſed, or loſt their credit and honour.
               
                  Peter Martir a Florentine, profeſſor of Theologie, is called from Strasbourge into England, and Bernardin Ochinus,
                  P. Martir. a man renowmed in Ilalie for his eloquence.
               
                  Anne the onely daughter of Vladiſlaus, the laſt king of Hungarie and Boheme, the wife of Ferdinand king of the Romanes, a fertile mother for children, died about this time.
               The 24. of Aprill,The taking of the Duke of Saxonie. the Emperor vſing extreame diligence and ſubtiltie, paſſed the Riuer of Abis, and ſuddenly tooke the Duke of Saxonie: who hauing but a weake Armie was diſcomfited: and be himſelfe after he had fought all the day, wounded in the left cheeke, was taken and carried away priſoner.
               
                  
                  His condemnation.The ſeuenth of May the Emperor condemned him to be beheaded: yet at the earneſt interceſſion of the Elector of Brandebourge, he yeelded him his life: and in the place thereof, impoſed vpon him lawes of extreame rigour: Amongſt others, that hee ſhould ſubiect himſelfe to that which the Pope would ordaine vpon him, touching Religion. The Duke wiſhed rather to die; whereat the Emperor maruelling, remitted that condition: but yet he tooke from him all his goods ſauing 50000. Crownes which the Duke Maurice (vnto whom that ſpoyle came) ſhould giue him yearely. The 21. of May, Wittemberge yeelded it ſelfe by that Dukes commaundement: after hee had acquited to his ſonne and his ſubiects, the oath of fidelitie they ought him: and Maurice tooke ſeaſon thereof.
               
                  An example of magnanimitie and conſtancie, more then Heroicke, that is, Chriſtiā, which God giueth to his in the middeſt of the greateſt afflictions of this world.
               
               
                  The Iourney of Vlme.The eſtates of the Empire aſſembled at Vlme. There the Emperours Embaſſadors purpoſed to make a league frō thenceforward to appeaſe all troubles, if any ſuch ariſe like this laſt: But the peſtilence diſſipated this conſpiration againſt the Goſpell, and the eſtates retired to Ausbourge.
               
               The Lantgraue of Heſſe, to obey the conditions of peace propoſed vnto him, came vnto the Emperour at Hale: and after ſupper as he would haue departed, he was ſtayed. He complained that hee was betrayed, and promiſes not performed vnto him.
               The Emperour before the eſtates at Ausbourge, declared the cauſe wherefore he ſet him not at libertie to be this: That hee exhibited not the Letters and ſecrets of the League of Smalcalde. And taketh witneſſe vnto Maurice and Brandebourge, that he neuer meant him leſſe then a perpetuall priſoner.
               
                  The doctrine of the Papists diſpenſeth herein; namly, that vnto Heretickes men ſhould keepe no faith.
               
               
                  Peter Lewis, the Popes ſonne, was ſhine at Plaiſance in his Caſtle, by a Band of 36. which had cōſpired againſt him. They hanged his body in a chaine, on the toppe of the Caſtle walls, a

thing much pleaſing the people. He was ſlaine the 10. of September, on the ſame day wherevpon his Father Pope Paul being cunning in Negromancie, had warned him to take heed.
               
                  The end of tyrants are miſerable and horrible, and ſhould put vs in mind of Gods iudgement.
               
               Certaine time after he had beene caſt into the graues, the Plaiſantines themſelues maſſacred him with the ſtabs of Daggers. After, Dom Ferdinand de Gonſague ſtrengthned the towne with a Garriſon.
               The Maſſe was aboliſhed in England by a decree & iudgement  of the publike Councell of all the Realme.
               The Venetians after the Emperours faſhion, made a very rigorous Edict againſt ſuch as are called Lutherans. One called Francis Spiera, of the Citadelle (a Towne of the Territories of Venice) for that in the ſaid Venice before Iohn Cuſe, the Popes Legate, he had renounced the truth of the Goſpell which hee knew, fell into diſpaire: and of a vehement and great apprehenſion thereof, got a great malladie and ſickneſſe, wherein hee could no way be comforted: and whatſoeuer any alleadged of Gods promiſes of his mercie, he would ſtill anſwere that they nothing appertained vnto him, becauſe he ſaid, hee had ſinned againſt the holy Ghoſt. And in that diſpaire finiſhed he pitiouſly his dayes.
               
                  This is a great good example, worthy to be earneſtly thought on.
               
               
                  Maximilian the eldeſt ſonne of Ferdinand, from Trent arriued in Spaine, and in great magnificence eſpowſed Mary the Emperours eldeſt daughter, his Couſin-germaine.
               
                  Iane the onely daughter of the king of Nauarre, who before was promiſed vnto the Duke of Cleues, was giuen in marriage vnto the Duke of Vendoſme.
               
               The Emperour giueth charge to certaine traytors of the truth, namely, Iulles Pflug, Michael Sidonius, and Iohn Iſlebe Agricula, with a Secretarie of Grauiele, to build a booke of Religion, and called it Interim. This booke ſhooke Almaine more then all the grieuous perſecutions that had bin before. It was called the Emperours booke.
               
                  
                  Ellenor the dead king Francis widowe, left France and retired into her brothers lowe Countries.
               The Bourdelois in Guienne mutined againſt the King becauſe of a ſubſidie or taxation, and ſlew the kings Lieftenant there, whereof they were by the Conſtable chaſtiſed. He conſtrained themſelues to make the fire, and to burne all their priuiledges. He cauſed a great number of the chiefe of the towne to be put to death. They were conſtrained to follow the Funeralls of the ſaid Lieftenant ſlaine, in the habit of Criminalls, carrying Torches in their hands, and demaunding mercie.
               
                  Ambroſe Blaurer, Miniſter of Constance, and with him a great number of the Bourgeſſes, left the Towne becauſe of Religion.
               The Princes and Townes of Almain are ſollicited and forced by the Emperour to giue anſwere vnto the approbation of his booke.
               The Emperor alſo cauſed to be ſet out a forme of Eccleſiaſticall reformation for an outward ſhew, which after they had heard recited, they approoued and promiſed to cauſe them to be obſerued in their Churches, with the Popes good pleaſure.
               The Duke of Wirtemberge at the alone commandement of the Emperour, ſtraightway cauſed the booke to be read vnto the people, forbidding them to do any thing to the contrary.
               The Duke of Saxonie being priſoner, was much ſollicited to receiue the Emperours booke of reformation, but he ſtill remained conſtant without bowing or yeelding either by threatnings or promiſes, which was cauſe that his gardes began to handle him more roughly and rudely. The Preacher, which he alwaies till then had with him, fearing danger, found meanes to eſcape.
               
                  A great diuerſitie of courage betwixt the two Dukes.
               
               The Duke Maurice returning into his Countrey, propoſed the Emperours decree, & cauſed the Diuines of Leipſic and of Wirtemberge, to aſſemble and determine therevpon. Which after they had two or three times aſſembled, they ordained of things indifferent,Adiaphores. commonly called Adiaphores.
               
               
                  In the end they ſet out in writing at Leipſic, a forme of Religion, which all Duke Maurice ſubiects ſhould follow.
               The Biſhop of Strasbourge, ſummoned the Miniſters and  Regents of the ſchoole which held the Colledge of S. Thomas, to receiue the Emperours decree.
               
                  Bucer and Phagius with the Senates leaue, departed the firſt day of April, to goe into England, whither they were called by Thomas Cranmer Archbiſhop of Canterbury.
               
               
                  Thus the Lord prouideth for his: After he hath taken his truth from one place, he ſendeth them into an other, to doe his worke there.
               
               The King of Feſſe in Affricke,
                  Feſſe in Affricke. being chaſed by a certaine Zepziphe king his neighbour, who from low eſtate was growne vnto that greatneſſe, implored helpe of the Emperour at Auſpourge.
               
               Whilſt Religion was thus troubled in Almaine, the Pope thought it good to make his profit thereof. Therefore he ſent their Legates into Almaine with an Indult: by which power was giuen vnto them, to receiue all ſuch as they would into the boſome of the Church: and to permit by the Popes authoritie to communicate the Supper of the Lord vnder both kinds, and to eate all kinde of meates at all times. The Miniſters of the Lantgraues Country refuſed the Indult.
               
               
                  Phillip of Auſtrich made his entry into Bruxelles where his Father was, and is receiued in great magnificence and pompe, the firſt day of Aprill.
               They of Magdebourge oppoſed themſelues with might and maine againſt them of Wirtemberge and Leipſic, and taxed and reprooued them greatly, for that concerning indifferent things, they had made a way and entry for the Popes doctrine.
               The 10. of Iune the Queene of France was crowned at Saint Dennis. In the ſaid moneth of Iune, Henry king of France made his entry into Paris, commaunded a generall proceſſion, and dedicated it with the blood of certaine poore Chriſtians, which hee made to be burned for Religion. See the booke of Martyrs.
               
               
                  Le ſieur de Ʋeruin, for yeelding Bullen to the Engliſh men,

was beheaded at Paris, and le ſieur de Biex his Father in lawe, was condemned to perpetuall priſon.
               The Cantons of Baſil & Schaffuſe in Swiſſia, made alliance with the King of France, whereof euery one greatly maruelled, becauſe he perſecuted their Religion with fire and blood: Zurie and Berne refuſed that alliance.
               Sedition in England, partly for the chaunge of Religion, and partly for common grounds occupied by Gentlemen for their priuate vſe: there was great bloodſhead: In the meane time the King of Fraunce tooke certaine holdes about Bologne, whereby he put the Engliſh in great diſtreſſe. The fault of all this was laid vpon the Duke of Somerſet, and therefore he was impriſoned at London.
               This Pope Paul of the age of 82. yeares, dyed the 10. of Nouember. On all ſides Cardinalls ranne to Rome to elect a new Pope.
               
                  Iulius. 3.
                  
                  Iulius the third of that name borne at Aretio, called before Iohn Maria de Monte, who was Preſident in the Councell of Trent and Bolongne, was choſen Pope the 10. of February, after that the Cardinalls, which were in great number had long time debated in the cōclaue. Some ſay that this Pope promiſed by oath vnto the Ferneſes to leaue Parme to Octauius Berneſe.
               
               Whileſt the Cardinalls were in the Conclaue to chuſe the Pope Iulius, certaine Letters came into the handes of ſome of them, which were written the 26. of Ianuary by an houſhold ſeruant of the Cardinall of Mantoue, called Cornelius Oliue, to a friend of his called Hanniball Contin: and with them certaine verſes made in the vulgar Italian language, wherein ſpeaking of his good affection towards him, & the deſire he had to ſee him, he vſeth ſo infamous and diſhoneſt words, that hardly can any recite them without ſhame & bluſhing. Hereof came the taunt of ſuch as ſaid it ſignified that ſome infamous & diſhoneſt Pope ſhould come out of that Conclaue, from whence ſuch proceeded. They which read theſe Letters ſaide as well in Italie as in Almaine, they neuer read any more villanous & deteſtable.
               
                  Hereby (Reader) maiſt thou iudge what the ſpirit is, which the Papiſts vaunt ſo much to haue in their Maſſes & in the election of their Popes.
               
               
                  The 22. of Frebury, Iulius is crowned Pope by the Cardinall Cibo, two daies after he had opened the gilded gate with a golden key: and celebrated the yeare of Iubile, which his predeceſſor Paul the third had ſo much deſire to ſee.
               And becauſe of an auncient cuſtome,The Popes litle Cardinall. the new Pope might giue his red hat to whom he thought good, he made Cardinall a young boy called Innocent, whom he had ſometimes abuſed whē he was Legate at Bologne, notwithſtanding the other Cardinalls approoued it not, yea reſiſted it. Moreouer hee receiued him into his houſe, & into the number of his Domeſtickes and familiars. A brute went through the towne of Rome, yea it was divulged by certaine diffamitorie Libells, that Ganymedes was entertained by Iupiter, although he was not faire. This Pope himſelfe diſſembled it not: but cuſtomably in a maner of paſtime, would account his follies therein. Paulus Vergerius hath left in writing this Hiſtorie. Pope Iulius (ſaith hee) determined to make a young youth called Innocent a Cardinal, who not only came frō a father and mother of baſe condition: but that was of a moſt wicked and diſhoneſt conuerſation. Wherfore as on a certain day he had made this motiō in the preſence of the Cardinalls, & that there was no man which reſiſted it not: but that more is, as certaine Cardinalls ſaid freely. I pray you what finde you in this young man who deſerueth that we ſhould doo him that honour? Iulius anſwered. And I pray you what found you in mee to doo mee that honour, as to make mee Pope without any deſert? aduance this young man, and hee will merit it.
               The Maſſe which had bin baniſhed Strasbourge the ſpace of 21. yeares, was ſet vp againe in three Churches the firſt of February. A great number of children ran thither to ſee ſo ſtraunge and new a thing. The Prieſts were affraied at it, and complained vnto the Emperour.
               The Emperor and the King of France, one after the other, made publiſh each in their Countries very cruel Edicts againſt the Lutherans, as they called them.
               About the ende of May, the Emperour with Phillip his ſonne, departed from Bruxelles,
                  The Iourney at Ausbourge to come to the Iourney at

                  Auſpourge, and brought with them the Duke of Baxe captiue, leauing the Lantgraue in priſon at Malignes.
               
               In the time of this Pope, was Iohn de Caſe a Florentine, Archbiſhop of Beneuent, and Legate of the ſeate in the territorie of Venice. This man who made ſo magnificall a profeſſion of Popiſh ſingleneſſe, was not aſhamed to make a Booke in Italian Rime, wherein he praiſeth and exalteth that horrible and deteſtable ſinne of Sodomitry, yea euen to name it a diuine worke: and affirmeth that he tooke great pleaſure therein, and that he knew no other kind of palidiarzing or whoredome. The booke was Imprinted at Venice, by one Traian Naun.
               
               
                  Behold notable Archbiſhops of the Papall ſeate: with ſuch Iudges doo the Pope and his maiſter the diuel ſerue themſelues in their Conſiſtories, to condemne as heretikes ſuch as teach and write the truth with puritie.
               
               In a Catalogue of bookes prohibited which he made whileſt he was Legate, he comprehendeth no other therein, but ſuch as make profeſſion of the pure Euangelike doctrine.
               
                  Francis Spiera as is aboueſaid, fearing the tyrannie of tormentors, renied the veritie of Ieſus Chriſt, and dyed in extreame diſpaire. Sleidan alſo makes mention of the Sodomitike booke aboue ſpoken of.
               It would be here too long to rehearſe the geſts and deeds of Iulius the third, concerning the Iubile which was in his time: the Councell of Trent, the confirmation of that Idol de Laureto: the debate which he had with the Biſhop of Aremin his Steward for a Peacock, and many ſuch like things. Amongſt other viands hee greatly delighted to eate the fleſh of Swine & Peacocks. But his Phiſitian had aduertiſed him that hee ſhould take heed that he eate no ſwines fleſh, becauſe it was contrary vnto the Gowt, wherewith hee was often tormented, but yet hee would not abſtaine therefrom. The Phiſitian ſecretly aduertiſed the Clarke of his kitchin that no porke fleſh ſhould be ſerued. As then there was none ſerued, the Pope perceiuing it, demaunded of his Steward where his diſh of porke was: who anſwered that his Phiſitian appointed that none ſhould be ſerued. Then cryed he in this manner: Bring me my porke fleſh,

                  Al di ſpetto di Dio, that is to ſay, in deſpight of God. This now is a common ieaſt, and ordinarie amongſt rakehells and raſcalls, ruffians and bawdes, through Italie, as Alſo many other ſpeeches as infamous and diſhoneſt.
            
            
               Blasphemies vſed in Italie, authoriſed by the Popes word.
               Hauing one day ſeene a Peacocke at his dinner which he had not touched, keepe ſaid he, this cold Peacocke for my ſupper, & ſpread the table in the Garden, for I will then haue company. As then he ſat ſupper, he ſaw other hot Peacockes ſerued vpon the table, and not ſeeing his colde Peacocke which hee commaunded to be kept, being exceedingly vexed, he diſgorged an execrable blaſphemie againſt God. At which, certaine Cardinals that ſate with him at the table, ſaid. Let not your holines be ſo chollericke for ſo ſmall a matter. Wherevnto Iulius anſwered. If God would bee ſo angry for an Apple, as to caſt our firſt Father Adam out of Paradice; wherefore ſhould it not bee lawfull for mee that am his Vicar, to be angry for a Peacocke, ſeeing a Peacocke is of much more valewe then an Apple?
               As hee was about to create Cardinall Peter Betan Biſhop of Fano, of the order of the Iacobins, certaine of the Cardinalls reſiſted him, and amongſt other things, alleadged that he was infected with the hereſie of the Lutherans. Vnto whom Iulius anſwered: Although it be ſo, ſhould it not be wiſely done by putting a redde hat on his head to purge him of that euill, and ſo retaine him one of ours with ſuch a bond, then to ſuffer him to flie from vs and ioyne with our enemies that we haue in Almaine, as 
                     Ʋergerius did?
               The 10. of September, Affrike a Towne of Affrike,
                  Affrike taken.
                   was taken by the Emperours Armie, vnder the conduction of the Viceroy of Sicilie. Dracut Lord of the Towne, withdrew towards the Turke his maiſter, and the warre began againe more ſharpe betwixt the Emperour and the Turke.
               A ſedition in Ausbourge, becauſe of certain Spaniards which in the moneth of Auguſt made mockes in the Church, at the Sermon.
               
                  A woman alſo of the ſaid Towne mocked a Prieſt which in his Surplice, walked through the Towne with his hoſte. The Emperour had put the ſaid woman to death, had it not bene that Mary the Gouernour of the lowe Country, entreated for her and ſaued her.
               
                  Maurice and Albert his coſin the Elector of Brandebourg, and Henry of Brunſwic, tooke Armes againſt them of Magdebourge.
               
               
                  Nicholas Pernot, ſieur de Granuelle, dyed at Ausbourg, about the end of Auguſt, to the Emperours great griefe. Anthony Pernot his ſonne, Biſhop of Arras, ſucceeded in his eſtate.
               About the beginning of Nouember Virich Prince of Wittemberge deceaſed from this world, and his ſonne Chriſtopher was his ſucceſſour.
               
                  
                  Stephen Biſhop of Wincheſter was diſpoſſeſſed of his Biſhopprick in England, and put in priſon, becauſe he would not ſubmit himſelfe vnto the Kings Edicts and lawes touching Religion.
               
                  Bucer.The laſt of February, Bucer dyed at Canterbury, and was very honourably buried, with a great number of Epitaphes, made by learned men lamenting his death.
               The Councell of Trent was deferred by the Pope from the firſt of May vntill the firſt of September.
               
                  Wonders.In Saxonie diuers prodigious things were ſeene, as three Sunnes, and three Moones, now pale and bleake, or blew, now red as blood.
               The king of France cauſed to be publiſhed a very cruell Edict againſt the Lutherans, confirming, yea paſſing all his former Edicts, and left nothing behinde that appertained to extreame crueltie.
               On all ſides the Papiſts aſſembled at Trent on the Councell day: likewiſe from Almaine reſorted the Electors Eccleſiaſticall.
               The Cardinall of Creſſentia was Preſident in the Popes place. The Emperour and the King Ferdinand ſent thither alſo their Embaſſadors. But the King of France by his Embaſſadour diſavowed the Councell for generall: reputing it but a particular

congregation to the profit of ſome. His proteſtation was held for none, without vouchſafing to record it.
               
                  Le ſieur, d' Briſac, tooke in Piedmont and about Turin, a certaine number of Townes, and amongſt others, Cheri, and Saint Damian.
               
               The Turks Army after hauing aſſayed the Fort of Malta, and ruſhed vpon Tripoly in Affrické and tooke it. The Emperour accuſed the King of Fraunce to bee the Authour of this loſſe.
               An Edict publiſhed by the King of Paris, whereby it was forbidden to tranſport any ſiluer out of the kingdome to Rome, becauſe of the warre betwixt the King and the Pope. There came a writing from the Emperors Court, whereby was declared the cauſe and originall of the warre of Parma,
                  The warre of Parma.
                   and wherefore hee receiued Plaiſance into his protection. The fact of Duke Octauius is condemned and deteſted. The French to the contrary, ſhewe alſo by writing the daunger wherein Octauius was at Parma, the iuſt cauſe that the King had to ſuccour it, and that wrongfully the Emperour had taken the Towne of Plaiſance.
               
               The Duke of Somerſet is againe impriſoned in October, by the meanes of the Duke of Northumberland: vnto whome came the gouernment of the Realme after him.
               The eleuenth Seſſion of the Councell of Trent was in October: where was confirmed the locall preſence, tranſubſtantiation, and all that euer was inuented for the Deification of that faire morſell of bread.
               
                  George de Martinuſe, of Dalmatia,
                  The Monke of Tranſiluania
                   commonly called the Monke, a man of great authoritie in Hungarie, was made Cardinal, who was after ſlaine the 18. of December in his own houſe by certaine Italians, vnder colour that he dealt with the Turke ſuſpitiouſly: although before he had ſo wrought with the wife of the deceaſed Vaiuoda, that ſhe gaue ouer the gouernment of Tranſiluania to the King Ferdinand.
               
               In Nouember the Duke Maurice agreed altogether with them of Magdebourge.
               
               The ende of her euils and calamities, was the entry of a

great warre, yea of all ill luck vnto the Emperour. For Maurice hauing practiſed with Kings and Princes ſtraungers, determined with himſelfe by force to deliuer the Lantgraue his Father in lawe: which notwithſtanding hee deferred a certaine time, becauſe firſt he thought it good to prooue all by loue.
               
                   The Duke of Somerſet the vncle of King Edward, was beheaded at London: at the inſtance of the Duke of Northumberland.
               
               
                  Complaints of Almaine.
                  
                  Maurice by a writing dedicated vnto the ſtates of the Empire, greatly complaineth of the diſcord of Religion amongſt them. Item of the captiuitie of Lantgraue, a priſoner by treaſon, to the great diſhonour of the Emperour.
               
                  Albert of Brandebourge, complaineth alſo of the miſerable ſeruitude of Almaine: and hauing expreſſed the cauſes thereof, he declareth that he and his companions do iudge the Eccleſiaſticall people to be the chiefe authours of all the aboueſaid euils: And Maurice and Albert allyed and ioyned themſelues together at Rotebourge.
               
               
                  Ausbourge beſieged by them, is taken.
               The Fathers of the Councel at Trent being at diſcord, the Imperialists againſt the Romaniſts: after they vnderſtood that the Princes marched right to the Alpes to gaine the ſtraights, incontinently left all and tooke them to their feete.
               
                  Take counſell and it ſhall be diſſipated: ſpeake the word and it ſhall not be eſtabliſhed ſaith the Lord. Eſay. 8.
                  
               
               
                  Martin de Roſſem conductor of the Emperours Armie in the lowe Countries, pilleth and burneth Picardie & Campagne, and tooke Aſtenay.
               
               The King Henry of France publiſhed in writing the cauſes of the ſaid voyage, and of the warre that he enterpriſed in Almaine: namely to withdraw the Princes out of priſon, to bridle the Emperours ambition, and to remit that Countrey into his firſt libertie.The king himſelfe Protector of Almaine.
                   He ſendeth to them of Mets in Lorraine, to prouide victualls for his armie, which if they did, he promiſed them fauour & amitie: but after he had takē 
                  Toul & Verdun, Townes of the Empire, hee drew right into Lorraine, and the third of May came to Sauernes, Strasbourge ſent him victualls.
               
                  The Prince of Salerne, about ſome diſſention betweene him and the Viceroy of Naples, withdrewe himſelfe from the Emperours ſeruice, and turned directly vnto the King of France.
               
               King Henry his Armie entred Lorraine, they conducted into France the Prince of the Country. The 10 of Aprill the Conſtable entred Metz, vnder the colour of amitie, and ſo laid hold of the Towne. The King arriued there certaine time after, and conſtrained that people to take of him an oath.
               The King comming againe into France in May, burnt the Country of Luxembourge, tooke againe Aſtenay, got alſo Iouy and Danuil
                        •
                     iers.
               
               The Sennois chaſed away the Garriſon of the Spaniards, and by the helpe of the King of France, deſtroyed the Caſtle which the Emperour built there, and ſet themſelues at libertie.
               
                  Metz beſieged by the Emperour the 2. of October.
               
                  Albert not agreeing with the king of France for his eſtate, nor for his companies pay, turned on the Emperours ſide.
               The Duke d' Aumaile beeing come into Lorraine with a great company of people, aſſayling the Marqueſſe Albert, was vanquiſhed, wounded, and taken priſoner, by the ſaid Marqueſſe.
               In December the Emperor was conſtrained by euill weather to remoue his Campe from Metz, and to withdraw himſelfe into the lowe Country, where the third part of his Armie dyed.
               In this time the great Turke Sultan Solyman committed a  cruell act on the perſon of Soltan Mustapha his eldeſt ſonne,
                     Solyman ſtrangleth Mustapha his eldeſt ſon. which he had of a Slaue: This man hauing bene ſent with his mother from his firſt youth into the Prouince of Amaſia, which had bene giuen him, was ſo well and carefully nouriſhed, that he acquired and got with his yeares great eſtimation, not only in the ſaid Countrey, but through all other his Fathers Regions. This his mother beeing abſent, Solyman called to him an other Slaue named Roze, which was endowed with admirable beautie, accompanied with all delicacies and entiſements poſſibly to be in a woman. He had of her foure other ſonnes,

                  Mahomet, Baiazeth, Solim, Grangier with the Wenne, and one daughter which was married vnto Baſſa Rostan. The ſaid Roze could ſo well play her part with Soliman, that hee was exceedingly rauiſhed with her that with helpe of Muchly, that is the high Prieſt of Mahomets lawe, and vnder ſhadowe of Religion, ſhee was not onely made of free condition, but the legitimate and eſpowſed wife of Soliman, vnto which no other euer came. Beeing lifted vp into ſuch honour, and ſeeing herſelfe entierly beloued and fauoured, ſhee had no greater care then to drawe the Empire vnto one of her children after their Fathers deceaſe. For ſhee knowing that the ſingular vertues of Mustapha were ſo contrary vnto her, and that as long as hee liued ſhee ſhould neuer haue reſt (for that hee had obtained the loue of the people of warre, and that all mens eyes were vppon him, for the great hope they had of his excellent courage and ſingular dexteritie) therefore ſought ſhee to make him odious vnto Soliman. Wherevnto her ſonne in lawe greatly aided her, becauſe he gouerned all affaires. Her reaſon was, that Mustapha truſted ſo much in the loue and fauour which he had obtained of all men, by a great liberalitie, hardineſſe and valiancie, that he burnt with ſuch luſt and deſire to raigne: that euery one feared that in affecting the Empire, hee would aduance the dayes of Soliman: as Selim had before done to his Father. Therefore ſhee incited Soliman, and beſought him with teares and lamentations, to take order and prouide for his ſafetie. And although that from the beginning ſhe had profited little, and that Muſtapha had diſcouered her impoiſonments and ambuſhes which ſhe laid for him ordinarily: yet left ſhe not to continue it, with the helpe of a Iew, a renowmed Enchantreſſe: who hauing giuen her certaine drugges, ſhee cauſed the loue of Soliman towards Roze to redouble: Inſomuch that ſhe aſſured her ſelfe to end her purpoſes, though it were long firſt.
               Finally, after many practiſes, ſhe found meanes to ſuborne Mustapha his gouernor, and cauſed him to write (though falſly) vnto Soliman, that his ſaid ſonne would marry the daughter of the King of Perſia. This old man ſtirred, yea tyred with the continuall complaints of Roze and Roſtan, eaſily beleeued

theſe newes and aduertiſements. Wherfore in the yeare 1552. after hee had ſpred a brute & fame of the diſſent and comming downe of the Perſians into Siria, he ſent thither Roſtan with a puiſſant Armie, for (vnder the ſhadow to goe meet his enemies) to ſeaze vpon Muſtapha, and to bring him priſoner to Conſtantinople: with expreſſe commaundement to ſley him if hee could not take him otherwiſe. But Mustapha who was aduertiſed of all, and knewe alſo that the Perſians were not at all in the fielde, met him with ſeuen thouſand of his moſt experienced Souldiers, which made Rostan returne without dooing any thing.
               
                  Soliman being more angred, the yeare following made ſuch an other brute of the Perſians, and hauing leuied a great Army as if he would haue gone againſt thē, beeing arriued in Siria, he ſent to his ſon, to will him come to his Camp. Mustapha, knowing certainly that it was he alone they would haue, although he was praied and ſollicited to withdrawe ſome other where, and to ſhunne the furie of his Father: yet hee truſting in his innocencie, and thinking it a thing more commendable and worthie of his greatneſſe, to dye in obeying his Father, then liuing to incurre the note of infamie and Treaſon, yea though hee might haue had the Empire of the whole worlde: thinking alſo that without hauing made any refuſall, by his preſence hee might haue appeaſed his Fathers wrath, he aduentured to goe thither to him: and beeing arriued in Solimans Campe, hee was ſuddenly taken and ſtrangled in his preſence. And at the ſame inſtant, the head of Baſſa of the Prouince of Amaſia, was taken from his bodie.
               This crueltie aſſoone as it came to the eares of Grangier, one of the foure brethren, hee manfully reiected the gift and ſpoyle that his Father gaue him, and greatly lamented the death of his brother; ſaying. A cruell Traytor,The complaint of Grangier with the wen, ouer Muſtapha.
                   I ſay not Father. Take to thy ſelfe now the treaſures, the Tapiſtries, and the Prouince of Mustapha, and gouerne it at thy pleaſure. Is it poſſible I ſhould fall into thy ſpirit infamous man, without all humanitie, againſt all right to put to death ſo valiant a perſon, as neuer was nor ſhalbe the like in the houſe of Ottomās.
                  
Ha, ha, I will take good order that thou ſhalt not impudenly vaunt & glory that thou haſt done the like to me. And ſtraight drew his dagger and ſtrooke it ſo farre into his owne bodie, that he fell downe dead vpon the earth. Which ſo ſoone as his Father knew, he made a maruellous mourning, and yet left not to ſeize vpon all his goods, which cauſed a tumult in the Campe of Muſtapha: but it was nothing in regard of that they did after they knew of his death. In ſuch ſort that Solyman to the great danger of his life was conſtrained to chaſe away Rostan, and to diſpoile him of all his honours and dignities.
                     Roſtan ſpoiled of all his honours.
               
               This death came wel for the Chriſtians: whoſe great enemy Muſtapha was, who tooke great delight in ſheading their blood. It brought alſo ſuch great diſpleaſure vnto the Turkes, that therevpon followed amongſt them this prouerbe. Gietti Soltan Muſtaphat. That is, all we thought on is ended in Muſthapha. For they thought that he would haue enlarged their Empire, which they looked for at no other hand.
               The French tooke Verceil in the Countrey of Turin, but ſeeing they could not keepe it, they ſpoyled, pilled it, and retyred.
               
                  Edward. 6.
                  
                  Edward King of England, being in his mortall bed in the moneth of May, Northumberland cauſed one of his ſonnes to eſpowſe Iane Suffolke, the Kings couſin.
               This King of the age of 16. yeares, dyed the 6. of Iuly, to the great damage of Chriſtian Religion.
               
                  Marie.So ſoone as Mary was peacibly Queene of Englande, at her arriuall at London, ſhe cauſed to be tooke out of priſon the Duke of Norfolke, and the Biſhop of Wincheſter, a pernicious man, and made him Chauncellor.
               The Emperours Hoaſt after it had raced Terouane, marched into Artois, and there in the moneth of Iuly forced Heſden, which the king of France had a litle before taken. There was ſlaine Horace Ferneſe, the husband of the kings baſtard daughter, and a great number of Gentlemen priſoners.
               A battaile in Saxonie vppon the Riuer of 
                     Ʋiſurge, betwixt the Duke Maurice and the Marqueſſe Albert: wherein Albert was vanquiſhed, and Maurice victorious, ſtrooken

with a bullet, whereof he dyed two dayes after.
            
            
               A deare victorie bought with death.
               
                  Michael Seruet de Ville-neuiſue, a Spaniard,Seruetus burnt.
                   a pernicious hereticke, hauing of long time written execrable things againſt the Trinitie, & proudly maintained them at Geneua: after long detention & the participation of the Councell of the Churches and faithfull Common-wealths of Suecia, finally in the ende of October was condemned by the Lordes of the ſaid Towne to be burned aliue. The hardneſſe of his heart was ſuch that being vpon the wood hee would neuer confeſſe Ieſus Chriſt the eternall ſonne of God: but only the ſonne of Dauid, and the ſonne of the eternall God.
               In England by the decree of all the Biſhops of the kingdome then aſſembled,The Goſpell driuen out of England. the Edicts and ſtatutes of the deceaſed King Edward concerning Religion, were defaced and made voide, and the Popiſh doctrine approued and allowed.
               
                  Albert agreed with Augustus, the brother of Maurice, by meanes of the King of Denmarke, and of the Elector of Brandebourge.
               
               
                  Iane Suffolke Queene of England, as is ſaid by King Edwards teſtament, and the three ſonnes of the Duke of Northumberland, were declared culpaple and condemned of Treaſon.
               
                  Iohn Alaſco, a Polonian Gentleman,Alaſco. with a great number of the French and Flemiſh Churches, flying from England,Diſperſion of the faithfull. did  wander and ſtray a certaine ſpace of time into Denmarke and Saxonie, ſeeking a place to dwel in: But they were euery where refuſed, not only of a place of habitation, but alſo they were commaunded to get them out, yea in winter time, not ſuffering them to remaine in their hauens. The cauſe of this inhumanitie and inhoſpitalitie was their difference for the doctrine of the Supper of the Lorde: whereof we haue before touched.
               Finally, a place was allowed them in Eaſt Friſeland,
                  Emden. in the Towne Emden, where a Church was open for them, and granted by the Counteſſe of the ſaid Emden, a true Chriſtian Princes.
               
                  
                  Ferdinand being at Vienna reiected the ſupplication of the  Eſtates of his Countrey, which demaunded to permit the adminiſtration of the Supper of Ieſus Chriſt whole vnder both kindes.
               
                  Iohn Fredericke Duke of Saxonie, after his deliuerance from captiuitie, agreed with the Duke Augustus, and he acquited to him and his heire Males the Electorſhip, the Country of Miſne, and the Townes where the Mines be, yet he held vnto himſelfe the name and Armes of the Elector.
               The 20. of February, Sibille of Cleues, wife of the ſaid Iohn Frederic, dyed at Vinaine. Eleuen dayes after the ſaid Frederic alſo deceaſed happily in his Country, amongſt his children and other friends, and the ſame day that he dyed was borne vnto the Elector Auguſtus, a ſonne named Alexander.
               
               
                  Conſpiracie againſt the Queene of England.
                  Thomas Wiat an Engliſhman, conſpired and roſe vp againſt the Queene of England: becauſe of the ſtraunge marriage ſhe enterpriſed with Phillip the Emperours ſonne. On an other part of the kingdome, Henry of Suffolke gathered people againſt her: The one and the other were declared enemies of the Commonwealth, taken, and at diuers times beheaded.
               
                  Ladie Iane beheaded.The 12. of February Iane Suffolke, King Edwards couſin germaine & inſtituted heire of the kingdome, by his teſtament was with her husband beheaded. After them was made a great butchery of heads at London and Weſtminſter, where the Queene then was: Elizabeth alſo her ſiſter was impriſoned, vpon her ſuſpition.
               
                  Sienna.
                  Sienna was beſieged by the Pope and the Duke of Florence. Peter Stoſze which defended it, made a ſallie vpon them, and ouercame a great number of their people.
               
                  Charles of Sauoy.
                  Charles Duke of Sauoy ſpoyled of the greateſt & beſt part of his Countrey, dyed, leauing Emanuell Philebert his ſonne heire.
               
                  Renty.King Henry about the end of Iune tooke Bouuines, Dinan, Marienbourge, Bius, and waſted all the Country: beſieged Renty vpon the Marches of Artois: but the Emperour comming and skirmiſhing together, the king departed in the moneth of Auguſt, remouing his ſiege from thence.
               
                  The Kings Armie in Tuſcane which Stroſze conducted, was ſurpriſed by the Imperialiſts, and for the moſt part ouerthrowne.
               
                  Phillip the Emperours ſonne arruied the 19. of Iuly in England,
                  K. Phillip his marriage. the 24. following, the marriage was made betweene him and the Queene at Wincheſter.
               
               The Marquis Albert chaſed from his Country, withdrew into Lorraine, and after to the king of France.
               
               The Emperour cauſed a Fort to be builded nigh the place where Heſden was.
               Cardinall Poole in a full aſſembly of all the Eſtates of the kingdome of England, commenced the 12. of Nouember,Cardinall Paule.
                   was reſtored into his dignities, goods and honours, of which he was depriued by King Henry the eight.
            
            
               The Hiſtorie of the reuoult of England.
               To the ende the Lord may be knowne in his iudgements which daily happen, and that he which is to day aloft may take heed hee fall not, let vs harken vnto that infamous revoult of England, and ſee how they returne to their firſt vomite.
               The Wedneſday the 28. of Nouember of this yeare, the Parliament of England was aſſembled: and in the preſence of King Phillip and Queene Marie, the Cardinall Poole expounpounded his Legation, and exhorted them to the holy ſeate of the Pope: ſhewing them how greatly bound they were to God who now enlarged vpon them his diuine grace, prouiding for them ſuch Princes as they had. After he declared vnto them how the holy Father the Pope vſed towards them his benignitie and clemency by him his Legate,
                     Subtilties of the Romane Court.
                     Deceits of the Roman court.
                   greatly thanking them that they had receiued him and placed him in his Country and Nobilitie, whereof he had bene long depriued: and that therefore he held himſelfe more bound to procure, they might be reſtored into the Eccleſiaſticall Court, as his deſire was.
               
                  This vile Apoſtate of the truth, calleth that ſtinking Court of Rome, the celeſtiall Court.
               
               After he had thus ſpoken be withdrew himſelfe, to the end to giue reſpet vnto the Lords of the Parliamēt to reſolue thervpon what to doo. The Chauncellour of England ſtraight

tooke the Cardinalls wordes: and ſhewed how they had cauſe to thanke God, who had raiſed them vp ſuch a Prophet out of their owne ſeed to procure their ſaluation, as the reuerend Legate did. Inſomuch that all with a common accord concluded to cōſent vnto the vnion & obedience of the Romane church.
               
                  Notable miſteries.The Thurſday following they ordained to agree vnto that which the Cardinall had ſaide: ſo that vpon a common accord they preſented a ſupplication: wherein they prayed the King and Queenes maieſties as heads of the kingdome, that they would pray the Popes Legate that they might haue abſolute remiſſion of their ſinnes and errours: promiſing to make voide all ſuch lawes, as they had before eſtabliſhed againſt the authoritie of the Romane ſeate: whervnto they would ſweare neuer to contradict.
               The King ſent the ſaid ſupplication to the Legate, and the day after aſſembled the Parlament in the place where the king and the Queene, with the Cardinall Legate were ſet. And the Chancelor roſe vp, & with great reuerence & an high voice vttered the reſolutiō made by the Lords of the Parliament, praying in the name of all, that they wold accept the ſupplicatō written in Latin tongue, ſhut & ſealed by the ſaid Chancellor.
               The ſupplication being opened by the Legate, was deliuered vnto the Chancellor to publiſh: hee red it with an high voice: and that done, demaunded of all them of the Parlament if their wills were according to the tenor thereof: and they all anſwered yea. Vpon this the King & Queene roſe vp and preſented the ſaid ſupplicatiō to the Legate, who red it: then preſented he the Bulles of his Legation,O true Bulls. which were red alſo, to make appeare vnto them the authoritie hee had from the holie Father to abſolute them.
               
                  That is to ſay, to plunge them into the deepe pit of hell.
               
               That done (the Reuerend) made them an Oration in their own language: ſhewing penance which pleaſed God, and that the Angell of Paradice reioyce more at a ſinner repenting his ſinnes, then of ninetie nine iuſt perſons, and vpon that brought for his examples, cōtrarily drawne to furniſh out his impudencie, falſly abuſing the word of God.
               
                  After he had ended he roſe vp,That is of Sathan. and the King and Queene fell vpon their knees before him, calling vpon God and the holy Saints, that hee would pardon the penitent people of England, the authoritie of whoſe perſon he repreſenteth. Then the Legate pronounced a generall abſolution: which done, they all departed, with the King, the Queene, and the Legate, towards their Chappell, where was ſung (Te Deum) and after the ſaide Legate had made his triumphant entries, hee yeelded all power and authoritie to the Biſhops, the firſt Sunday of Aduent, (as they call it) on which day, the Biſhoppe of Wincheſter, (an other Apoſtate of the truth) made a Sermon after a ſolemne Maſſe, taking for his Theame (Nunc tēpus adest de ſomne ſurgere) that is; It is now time to awake. As if before in the time of the Goſpell, vnder the raigne of king Edward of England, they had ſtill ſlept. But that awaking ſhall be deare ſold vnto all ſuch Organes and Inſtruments of Sathan, which haue cauſed ſo many murders and bloudſhead of Gods children ſince that time in the Realme of England. See the booke of Martyrs.
               
               
                  A more horrible vengeance of God cannot come to a Countrey, then when God withdrawes his light therefrom.
               
               
                  Ferdinand ſent out of their Countrey, 200. Miniſters of the  faithfull, in the kingdome of Boheme.
               
               Touching the true Martyrs of the Lord, executed this yeare in England vnder the tyranous raigne of Queene Mary, and the diſputations held betwixt the Popiſh Doctors, and them of the true Religion. See the fourth part of the bookes of Martyrs.
               
               A Iourney of the Empire was held at Ausbourge, and although fewe Princes came thither, Ferdinand made a long Oration the fift of Februarie, of two principall poynts. The firſt of Religion, by reaſon whereof he ſaid, all the diſorder and deſtruction of Almaine happened, and that it might be remedied by diſputations and communications of Theologians, as once had beene begun. The ſecond was to helpe and ſuccour the afflicted eſtate of the warre paſt, and puniſh ſuch as made the troubles.
               
                  
                  Melancton and other learned people by their Letters comforted the Miniſters of the Churches of Boheme, which were diſperſed ouer Miſnia.
               
               
                  Caſal, a Towne nigh vnto Po, was taken by the French, vnder the conduct of Briſac, the 3. of March.
               
                  Marcel. 2.
                  
                  Marcel, ſecond of that name, a Tuſcan by Nation, called before Marcel Ceruin, ſucceeded, and was borne in a place called the Monte Pelicien, in the territories of Florence: Of a Cardinall of the title of the holy Croſſe in Ieruſalem, was created Pope, by the common conſent of all the Cardinalls which were in the Conclaue, the 9. day of Aprill, 1555. The day following, he receiued the Pontificall ornaments in the Church of Laterane, but he would not change the name that he receiued at his baptiſme.
               
                  The Popes Character is to be an enemie vnto the truth.Being come vnto the Papacie, he was an enemie vnto the Goſpell, as before he was Pope, you may ſee he was euer. In his youth he had ſome litle profited in humane Letters, and ſo kept the ſchooles. Afterward, as Paul the third had created Cardinall Alexander Farneſius, the ſonne of Peter Lewis his baſtard ſonne, hee gaue his, this Marcel for a Schoolemaiſter.
               Certaine time after, the Cardinall Alexander leauing there the ſtudie of Letters, applyed himſelf altogether to handle the affaires: wherein as well he, as alſo Paul his grandfather, ſerued themſelues with Marcel, who was their Secretary. The Biſhoppricke of Nichastre being vacant, hee was made Biſhop of that Church: yet he alwaies liued in the Court of Rome, and neuer went to his Church. Pope Paul ſent for Legate the aforeſaid Cardinall Farneſe, towards the Emperour and his brother the king Ferdinand, who were then in Flaunders. But becauſe he was yet young, he gaue him Marcel for his conduction and gouernor in all the affaires of his legation. Amongſt all other things, there was a queſtion for ſetting out an Army againſt the Turke; which the Emperor and his brother required very inſtantly. But Marcel Ceruin puliſhed a writing (which is yet to be ſeene) wherein he ſaith it is much better to make war vpon the Lutherans, & that they are much worſe thē the Turkes.
               
                  The Pope Paul made him Cardinal being abſent,
                     Marcel Inquiſitor generall. & a while after cauſed him to come againe into the Towne, and vſed his counſell in all things of great importance. He gaue him the tytle of the holy Croſſe of Ieruſalem, and created him generall Inquiſitor againſt all heretikes, therein making him a companion vnto Cardinall Theatin and Cardinall de Bourgues: which were the rudeſt and cruelleſt that euer were. When a Legation was to be ſent vnto the Councell of Trent, the Pope Paul made him Legate, with the Cardinalls Pol and de Monte. Hee created Cardinall de Monte chiefe Legate of the Councel, becauſe he had knowledge in the Ciuil lawe. Pol or Poole, the ſecond, as he that ſeemed to deſire that the Church might be reformed (although it after appeared that he neuer ſtirred it in earneſt) and Ceruin for the third, as hee in whom the Pope had moſt truſt. And therefore the Pope had giuen him expreſſe charge that he ſhuld ſuffer nothing to be done in the Councell which tended to the detriment of the Romane ſeat. But that he ſhould driue out all ſuch as enterpriſed any ſuch like thing.
               Therfore as one in the ſaid Councel called Iames Nachiantes, Biſhop of a place called Foſſa Clodia, ſaid that he could not allow the Decree, where it was written that traditions ought to be receiued and obſerued with like reuerence as the Goſpell: Ceruin cauſed him to be throwne out of the Councell. As alſo a certaine Iacobin called Guillam de Ʋenice, ſaid that the Councell of Conſtance was aboue the Pope, Ceruin calling him, reprehended him ſharply. And after that the Monke had anſwered that the thing it ſelfe yeelded witneſſe thereof, becauſe that Councell depoſed the Pope, therefore it was aboue him; It is not ſo ſaid Ceruin, but that more is, the Pope gaue place willingly: the which I can well prooue by a Bull ſealed with leade: and ſtraight commaunded this man to goe out of the Councell.
               About this time Peter Paul Vergerius, was come from Mantua to Trent, who had many times beene an Embaſſador in Almaine for the Popes affaires: but becauſe men held him ſuſpected in ſome things to accord with the Almaines: although the two other Legates, namely, Pol and de Monte,
                  
liked well to conſent that he ſhould be one at the Councel. Alſo the Cardinall Paciccus and the Cardinall of Trent; yet Ceruin neuer ceaſed till he ſaw him deiected.
               Many Biſhops vnderſtanding this of Vergerius, determined to haue written vnto the Pope, to admoniſh him not to ſuffer this: becauſe then many would ſay that that Councel was not free,Ierome Vida Cremona. from which Biſhops were put backe. Hierome Vida de Cremona, Biſhop of Alba, & an excellēt Poet, had alreadie indighted Letters, as well in his owne name as others. Which being come vnto the knowledge of Marcel Ceruin, hee very ſeuerely aduertiſed Vida, wholy to abſtaine from ſending Letters vnto the Pope: for it was a thing of euill example, that Biſhops aſſembled at a Councel, ſhould write ſuch Letters vnto the Pope, as though they would impoſe a lawe vpon him. Which hee ſaid was ſo great a fault, as a man had need take heed, he fall not into any ſuſpition thereof. Vida being vanquiſhed by his teaſons, changed his purpoſe of ſending Letters vnto the Pope. Vergerius being then willing to withdrawe himſelfe from the Councell,The cauſe wherefore Vergerius was put from the Councel. came towards Ceruin, and demaunded of him what the Articles were for which he was deiected from the Councell and company of other Biſhops. Ceruin anſwered, becauſe I vnderſtand thou denieſt that the Legends of S. George and of Chriſtopher are true. Is it true ſaid 
                     Ʋergerius? I haue, and doo yet denie it: And my opinion is founded vpon Pope Paul the third. For he hath cōmanded that both thoſe Legends ſhould be taken out of the Breuiarie: And in the Preface at the beginning of the booke, he ſaith that he hath commaunded that all ſuch ſhould be taken out, which were not true. Ceruin ſeeing himſelfe ſurpriſed, could anſwere nothing; but that men ought not to hold ſuch for good men, as in any maner whatſoeuer, ſeemed to agree with the Lutherans, and therefore wee withdrawe thee from our Councell.
               I thought it good to recite this, to the ende it might bee knowne, that there are alwaies ſome euill affected towards the true doctrine, ignorant of holy Letters, and ſtubborne to maintaine and defend all ſuperſtitions.
               Yet as he was a man of ſingular modeſtie, and of a life

and conuerſation reaſonable honeſt, & likewiſe endowed with good prudence, ſo was he in great eſtimation: In ſo much that it was verily looked for at his hands, that if euer hee came vnto the Popedome, he would correct many things in the Romane Court; and before all things, that he would ſhunne all diſſolutions and ſuperfluities: but it fell not out ſo. For after the death of Iulius the third, hauing bene choſen Pope, as alreadie before he was diſeaſed with the Iaundies, it increasſed ſo vpon him, that he died the 22. day after his election, the night before the firſt of May. A brute ranne that he was poiſoned, but it was not ſo. A feawe dayes before his death, he would needs be crowned, but with ſmall charge, very modeſtly. The Cardinall Farneſe with them of his part, had giuen him his voyce, although before there had bene great enmities betwixt them: but hee did it becauſe he hoped there was none would be more diligent to bring that to an end, which Paul the third had determined to doo. Namely, that he ſhould do his beſt to maintaine the houſe of Farneſes, to the end they might not bee depriued of the Duchie of Parma and Plaiſance. For alſo the Cardinall Farneſe ſo practiſed with Iulius the third, that he made him that promiſe before hee would fauour him for his comming vnto the Popedome. Some ſaid hee did willingly elect the ſaid Ceruin, becauſe they ſawe him already to be ſore worne and weakened with diſeaſes, ſo that there was no hope that hee could liue long.
               
                  The custome is willingly to chooſe Popes, ſuch as they hope will not liue long.
               
               
                  Hercules de Ferrare, and Vbalde Duke of Vrbin, arriued at Rome to ſalute Pope Marcel, and to Court him after theyr manner.
               
                  Paul 4. of that name, a Neapolitane,Paul. 4.
                   called before Iohn Peter Caraphe, was choſen Pope the ſame yeare, namely, 1555. the 23. day of May, by the conſent of all the Cardinalls.
               This man being in 
                     Ʋenice, in his hypocriſie inuented a new Sect of Monkes, called Ieſuites: as if our Sauiour Ieſus had ingendred ſuch Popiſh Idolaters. After this, beeing made Cardinall, as he departed from Venice to Rome, he ſaid vnto his

Monkes which asked him whither he went. Whither I go, you cannot come now.
               
                  Abuſing the ſcripture and prophaning the Lords words, hee meant hereby, that he left them ſhut vp in a Cloiſter in pouertie and miſerie, & that he went vnto Rome, to come vnto an high and mightie eſtate and dignitie, wherevnto they could not come.
               
               
                  
                     Theatin before hee was Pope confeſſed the truth.He writ a booke ſometimes vnto Paul the third, touching reformation of the Church: but being become Pope, he cared neither for Ieſus Chriſt nor his Church. In that booke he confirmeth almoſt all the poynts that we vſe to reprehend in the Papiſts: namely, that the Church is ſo ruinated in Poperie, that it is no more the Church of Ieſus Chriſt, but of the diuell: For ſaith he, Popes heape vp Doctors after their owne fancies and deſires. That Cardinalls and Biſhops are cauſe that the name of Chriſt is blaſphemed amongſt people, which vnder the colour of keyes, gather great ſummes of money. That wicked people are prouided for. That Symoniacke Marchandices are greatly practiſed. That Prelates burne with ambition and couetouſneſſe. That horrible ſinnes and iniquities are committed in Monaſteries. That the Towne of Rome is full of whoredomes and many ſuch like.
               
                  More enormious and wicked things are committed at Rome, then that which Theatin rehearſeth in that booke: for hee there only toucheth the vices & abuſes that are found in their common maner of liuing, without making any mention of the contempt of the doctrine there vſed.
               
               
                  A tumult at Geneua.
                  On Thurſday the 16. day of May of this yeare, there hapned a tumult at Geneua, about 10. of the clocke in the night,  by the conſpiracie of ſome which had for their ſtirrers & Captaines, certaine of the petit Councell of the Towne: which not being able to beare ſo happie a proſperitie of the Goſpell, determined to chaſe away ſuch as into that Towne had come from France, to ſhun perſecutions: And as in the night time they ranne too and fro, they cryed as for a falſe enſigne and token, that the French were in Armes, and the Towne betrayed: but the French men ſtirred not out of their houſes. The

commotion was bridled and ſtayed by certaine Lords of the Towne. As for the ſeditious people, ſome amongſt them were executed, others ſaued themſelues by flight. But the cauſe wherefore they would haue driuen away the French amongſt others was, becauſe lately there were many of them receiued for Burgeſſes, by meanes whereof their faction was weakened, and the other part ſtrengthned, by the number of the new Burgeſſes which had bene added therevnto.
               The French at this time raced many Caſtles by the Count Montferrat, that they might haue victuals in greater aſſurance: For if the enemie had occupied them,
                     Vlpian victualled. 
                  Caſal had bene brought into great neceſſitie. In theſe parts was there a Towne called Vlpian, which is of great importance. The Spaniards held it then: and it was revictualled at the comming of the Duke of Albe, who had gathered together a great number of people.Mariēbourg 
                  Mariembourge alſo, which the yeare before had beene taken in the lowe Countries from the Emperour, was at the ſame time againe victualled by the French.
               In the Countrie of Griſons there is a Towne nigh Italie called Lucarne,
                  The Lucarnois demanded the Goſpell. which appertaineth vnto the whole communaltie of the Swiſſes. The Citizens thereof required that they might be permitted to liue according vnto the reformation of the Goſpell. But becauſe their Superiours and they, were not of one Religion, there was vpon deliberation, diuers opinions. Some agreed vnto their demaund: others ſought to hinder it. So that there appeared towards ſome inteſtine and ciuill diſſention: yet in the end they of the Towne preuailed, which wiſhed that they ſhould remaine in the Religion of their Aunceſtors: and that they amongſt them which accorded not therevnto, might goe dwell otherwhere. So were there found a great number which forſooke their naturall Countrey, and withdrew vnto Zurich: where they were receiued ioyfully, and much relieued in their pouertie.
               A great number of Veſſels laden with all kindes of Marchandize, came by Sea from Spaine towards Flaunders: but vpon the coaſt of Normandie they were aſſailed with all force by the French, which had eſpied them.
               
                  The combat amongſt them was horrible: many ſhips both of the one part and of the other were burnt, and many ſunke: many a valiant man died there, as wel by the ſword, as by burning and drowning. The French in the end carried away ſome number of ſhips which they tooke, into Diepe Hauen, from whence they departed. This happened in the moneth of Auguſt: in the end of which moneth, Phillip of Auſtrich repaſſed from England into Flaunders, accompanied with a great number of Engliſh Gentlemen, to finde the Emperour his father at Bruxels.
               
               In September, George Count de Montbellard, the Duke of Wittemberge his Vncle, tooke to wife Barbe, the Lantgraues daughter.
               
                  Diſſention of the Supper renewed by thē of Breme & Hambourge.
                  The diſſention of the Lords Supper, and the preſence of Chriſts body, which had continued the ſpace of thirtie whole yeares amongſt the learned, renewed againe in this time: and there were publiſhed by certaine Miniſters of Hambourge and Breme, certaine litle bookes, namely, againſt Caluin and Iohn Alaſco. Caluin after anſwered them in earneſt: ſo did alſo Bullinger and Alaſco: who dedicating his booke to the King of Polongne, greatly complained that without knowledge of the cauſe, that without any diſputation or amiable talke, but onely vpon a certaine preiudice, their doctrine was condemned after the maner of the Papiſts: who in lieu of arguments from holy ſcripture proceed not, but by force and commaundement.
               The Marqueſſe of Marignan dying at Millaine, the Cardinall of Trent was ſent into Lombardie by the Emperour and King Phillip, to bee there Gouernour. At Naples the Duke of Albe was conſtituted.
               About Chriſtmas day, the Pope according to his cuſtome created new Cardinalls, and amongſt others, Iohn Gropper, the Archbiſhop of Cologne his Councellor. Then alſo, the Cardinall Poole being made Deacon, Cardinall preſt (as they ſay) began to ſay Maſſe. For by the Popes lawe, Deacons haue not yet that power.
               
                   In the beginning of Ianuarie happened great ſtormes and tempeſts in Saxonie, Miſne, and Boheme, Thunders and Lightnings,

which endaungered many places, eſpecially Churches.
               In the ſame moneth at 
                     Ʋitodur in Suetia, a litle Towne within two leagues of Zurich, appeared in the night in one of the towers of the Church there, a ſparkling fire, making ſuch a noiſe, as the Burgeſſes on all ſides ran to put it out: being come thither, they found no flame: yet it twiſe appeared: that is to ſay, the 4. & 14. of the ſaid moneth. After this, certaine of the Cantons of Suetia ſollicited by the Pope, got them to Rome, whereas many maruelled.
               King Phillip after he had receiued of his father the gouernment of Flaunders, the 18. of Ianuary he made a ſolemne entry into Antwerpe.
               
               In the moneth of February, Henry Duke of Brunſwic eſpowſed the ſiſter of Sigiſmond, king of Pologne.
               
               The 26. of the ſame moneth died at Aitſem,
                  
                     The death of Frederick Palatin. 
                  Frederick Count Palatin Elector now very old, and there ſucceeded him Otto, Henry his brothers ſonne, who long time before had receiued the Goſpell, and for that cauſe was in daunger to haue loſt all his goods. Shortly after he had receiued his peoples oath of fidelitie, he made an Edict that no perſon ſhuld ſing any Maſſe, or exerciſe any other ceremonies any where in his countries.
               
                  Mary Queen of Englād, did what ſhe could that church goods and lands might be reſtored: becauſe Pope greatly vrged her thervnto: But many Princes & great Lords held them, & therfore it could not be done. During this Parliament, many Innectiue and biting bookes were diſperſed in London, amongſt which, ſome were ſufficient to haue ſtirred the common people to ſedition againſt the Spaniards, and to haue with drawne the Queenes loue frō King Phillip. Search was made for the authors of theſe libels, but it was not poſſible to finde them out. Before the Aſſembly was departed, & affaires diſpatched, the Biſhop of Wincheſter the Chauncelor, died of a dropſie. Thomas Heth Archbiſhop of Yorke, who had ſometimes bene in Almaine with him, before of Canterbury, and once had knowledge of the true Religion, was come into his place.
               About the fift of Nouember died the wife of Duke Iohn Frederic of Saxonie, the Lantgraues daughter.
               
                  The Duke of Venice, Franciſco Venerio, was depoſed from his eſtate, for ill dealing in the charge of victualls, and hauing much more regard vnto his particular profit, then to the publike weale.
               
                  A wonder in the Country of Aouſte.About the end of February of this yeare, the Mo
                     •
                  r
                     •
                  a
                     ••
                  e called Dupetit S. Bernard on the valley ſide of Aouſte, which is in the ſubiection of the Duke of Sauoy, was ſeene couered with red ſnowe: and certaine white ſnowe fell, but the whiteneſſe vaniſhed away, and the redneſſe remained. This was notoriouſly knowne and ſeene, and the red ſnowe touched by many inhabitants of the ſaid Countrey.
               
                  Theſe prodiges and maruels, admoniſh vs to beſeech the Lord to turne away the tribulations and calamities, which the poore world ceaſeth not to draw vpon it ſelfe by his rebellion.
               
               A froſt of three weekes was ſo ſharp in December, that Seine was frozen, wherevpon followed great miſchiefes.
               
                  Oziander with his new doctrine of Iuſtification, had long time ſtirred trobles in Pruſe: but after, as it were, al learned people had condemned him by their writings, the Duke of Pruſe, Albert,
                  Pruſe receiueth the confeſſion of Ausbourge. declared by a publike writing, that therein hee would follow the doctrine of the confeſſion of Ausbourge, and ſo enioyned the Miniſters of the Churches to teach accordingly, and gaue them full licence. And to the end the thing might be ſo fully and ſurely accorded, that the wound might no more renew and be worſe, Iohn Albert, Duke de Megelbourge, the Duke of Pruſe his ſonne in lawe (a Prince very well inſtructed in Letters) went into the ſaid Countrey of Pruſia, and by the meanes of certaine learned people whoſe labour he vſed, hee did ſo much with Iohn Functius,
                  Iohn Functius. (which was hee that chiefly maintained the opinion of Ozeander) that publikely he confeſſed his fault, and withall, proteſted that he would neuer teach but according to the tenor of the confeſſion of Ausbourge. Others did the like. So the Theologians were receiued into fauour and the eſtate of the Church pacified.
               
                  Comete.The 4. day of March began to appeare a Comet, which was ſeene by the ſpace of 12 dayes.
               There is a litle Towne in Aulſ
                        •
                     i
                        •
                     , three leagues from

                  Strasbourge, called Oberene,
                  Parracide of three childrē. in that Towne a certaine Gardiner the tenth of Aprill, in the abſence of his wife was the murderer of his owne children, of a girle of the age of 7. yeares. of a boy of the age of 4. yeares, and of an other yet in the cradle, not paſt ſixe moneths old.
               The 10. of may the Duke d' Arſcot who was a priſoner in the wood de Ʋincennes nigh Paris, eſcape and came ſafe into his Countrey.
               The Bauarois ſollicited their Prince Albert to haue libertie of their religion, as well as they of Austrich, and almoſt at one time, the Prince ſeeing that Ferdinand his father in law had permitted to his people the ſame thing was content to doo the like. And becauſe there was then ſome queſtion for ſiluer, he ſuffered his ſubiects for a time to receiue the Lords Supper whole, and to eate fleſh on dayes prohibited, when neceſſitie driues them therevnto. Yet he made great proteſtations that he would not diuide himſelfe from the religion of his Aunceſtors: and that this ſhould onely be, till by publike authoritie it were otherwiſe ordained.
               About this time certaine great Lords of Tranſiluania reuolted from Ferdinand.
               
               There became alſo great mutinies in England, where diuers Nobles were impriſoned, others beheaded, and ſome ſaued themſelues in other Countries: As for ſuch as died for the truth of the Goſpell, we haue amply deducted their eſtate, and extracted their confeſſions in our bookes of Martyrs.
               
                  Albert de Bauieres began the Imperiall iourney at Ratiſbone in the name of king Ferdinand who then was buſied in holding the eſtates in Boheme
                        •
                     
                   and Auſtrich.
                  Iourney at Ratisbone.
               
               The Emperor hauing attend 
                     〈…〉
                   of Septembe
                     •
                   and from 
                     〈◊〉
                   Countries accompanied 
                     〈…〉
                   
                  ▪
                  The returne of Charles the fift into Spaine. 
                  
                     
                        •••
                     ior Dowary of France, and Mary Que
                     •••
                   of Hungary, 
                  
                     〈…〉
                   cauing al the rule of the lowe Countries to king Phillip his ſonne, and the adminiſtration of Almaine vnto his brother King Ferdinand.
               
               
                  Dauid George (who after called himſelfe Iohn de Bruck)

borne at Delphes in Holland,
                  
                     The death of Dauid George. a very pernitious ſeducer, author and Prince of the vileſt Sect that euer was, making himſelfe king and immortall Chriſt, died this yeare, 1556. the 24. day of Auguſt, his wife being dead a litle before. He retired with his family which was very great into Baſill, the yeare 1544. making himſelfe a fugitiue from his owne countrey for the cauſe of the Goſpell. He bought houſes in the Towne, and a Caſtle nigh the Towne called Binningen, with poſſeſſions of a great reuenew: It was eaſie for this man being very cautelous and ſubtill, and hauing his eyes looking on all ſides, to gaine the hearts of many, and to procure outward reputation: who was greatly ſuſtained and augmented, by that he had great ſummes of money and very pretious moueables daily brought him, from baſe Almaine and Flaunders. There hapned certaine prodigious ſignes before his death. One of his houſes (he had two in Baſill) was burned with fire of lightning: and the other which he had ſumptuouſly builded in the Medowes, was alſo conſumed by fire, and all his pretious moueables which were therin: & ſoone after, the chamber floores of his houſe where he made his reſidence, fell downe ſuddenly: yet they ſay, nothing hapned vnto him more intollerable to beare before his death then this, that one of authoritie in baſe Almaine, came to the Towne of Baſill, and Dauid George knew well, that by litle and litle hee ſhould be diſcouered.
               His Secretaries and diſciples were maruellouſly aſtoniſhed at his death, becauſe they were of opinion he ſhould neuer haue died: Although their hope was ſomething maintained, by that he had ſaid (as after was reported) he would againe take life, by the ſpace of three yeares, and bring to paſſe excellent things. Hee held in his houſe a ſtate almoſt royall. And for the gouernment of his houſe and Caſtle, it was well ruled, euery one had his eſtate and office in that family, and the labours were ſo diſtributed, that he had no need in any thing to employ others then his owne.
               In the gouernment of their common good, they very ſtrictly obſerued three things, to the end they might more and more conceale their ſo pernitious a Sect.
               
                  Firſt, that none amongſt them ſhould publiſh the name of Dauid George. Secondly, that none ſhould reueale of what ſtate and condition hee had bene: wherevpon many thought hee came of ſome great nobilitie: others, that he was ſome great Marchant, hauing many factors both by ſea and land. Thirdly, that they ſhould not diſcouer any one article of their doctrine to any of Baſill, no not to any Switzer, neither ſhould they ſeeke to drawe any to their doctrine.
               The ſumme of his accurſed doctrine was: That whatſoeuer had hitherto bene giuen of God by Moyſes, by the Prophets, by Ieſuſ Chirſt himſelfe, by his Apoſtles and Diſciples, is imperfect, and vnprofitable to make vs obtaine the true and perfect felicitie: and was onely giuen to this vſe, that hitherto their doctrine might repreſſe men, and keepe them vnder as young men and children, and ſo containe them in their offices. But the Religion of Dauid George is perfect, and hath in it ſufficient efficacie and ſtrength, to make happie him that receiueth it, he being the true Chriſt and Meſſias, the we beloued of the Father, in whom the Father taketh great pleaſure: borne not of the fleſh, but of the holy ſpirit, & of the ſpirit of Ieſus Chriſt: hauing hitherto beene kept in an vnknowne place, for all his Saints: to reſtore in ſpirit the houſe of Iſrael, not by the Croſſe or tribulations, or death as the other Chriſt, but for the loue and grace of the holy ſpirit of Chriſt.
               
                  O execrable monſter, or horrible efficacie of error & deception, or plaſphemies drawne out of the deepe pit of hell!
               
               In the yeare 1557. many good men mooued with affection  to amplifie the kingdome of the Lord, through many trauels and perills hauing paſſed the torride Zone, and long time ſoiourned in the way, they fell to inhabit in a Region on the South coaſt, vnknowne vnto our fore elders, full of Braſill: which before in the yeare 1500. had bene diſcouered by the Portugales, and it was called America, of the name of their Captaine and cōducter Americ Vespucius. The Inhabitants the eare very ſauage and wilde, without any forme of Religion or ciuilitie. There it pleaſed the Lord in this time to erect a Church of certaine French men, which one 
                     Ʋillegagnon had ſollicited

and gathered together: He receiued thē alſo at the beginning with good countenance and outward ioy, ſeeing his enterpriſe commended by many notable perſons. But in the yeare 1557. and 1558. the ſaid Villegagnon gaue ſufficiently to know, that he was neuer touched with any true zeale or feare of God. For after he had perſecuted both the Miniſters and poore flocke of that Church, by many tyrannies and impudent writings; with ſeditious practiſes, he hindred as much as in him lay, the aduancement of the Lords glory: who after raiſed vp the Portugales to take the Fortreſſe which he had builded in the Ile, by him called Collignyen Ʋalois: finding no reſiſtance within, becauſe the ſaid Villegagnon being retired into France (taken with an apprehenſiō that the ſauage people would eate him) had ordained no ſuch company of people as were neceſſary for the defence of ſuch a place.
               And although in that number there were ſome valiant and wel experimented in Armes: yet for as much as they were accompanied with ſuch as had no knowledge therein, and were ill maintained, yea pined away with famine and diſeaſes; before they would abide the enemies furie, they withdrew themſelues with the ſauage people. Therefore was it eaſie for the enemies to enioy that Caſtle which had beene builded at the charges of the king of France, and with the ſweat and trauel of many good people: and the Artillery marked with the Armes of France, with certaine munitions of warre tranſported to Liſbone, the principall Towne of Portugall, in a trophee and triumph of the victorie. The French retiring to land, receiued the cruel yoake of that ſauage people, liuing without any forme of Religion: a ſad and lamentable thing to rehearſe.
               
                  By all Histories, aſ well auncient as moderne, we my be inſtructed that. Hypocrites and Apoſtates, haue in all times hindred the courſe of the Goſpell.
               
               
                  
                  Charles the 5. Emperour, after he had reſigned by expreſſe Embaſſage, into the hāds of the Princes Electors, the Romane Empire, hauing held it about 37. yeares, died in his Country of Spaine, the 21. of Septēber, 1558. in a Monaſtery of S. Iuſt, of the order of the Hieronymies, nigh to Plaſcencia, a Towne ſcituated

betwixt the kingdomes of Caſtile and Andalonſia.
                  Ferdinād. 1.
                  
               
               
                  Ferdinand, 1. of that name, ſucceeded him, & was cōſecrated Emperor in the towne of Francfort vpon Mein, by the Electors and Princes of Almiane, with the accuſtomed ſolemnities.
               After great and continuall warres by the ſpace of 9. yeares, at the inſtigation and by the practiſes and meanes of Popes, Iohn Maria de Monte, ſurnamed Iulius the third, and his ſucceſſors and adherents, as well in Italie, Piemont, Almaine, and France, as in the lowe Countries of Flaunders, Artois, and Lorraine, by the Spaniards and French. Finally, there happening great victories and priſes one vpon an other, to the ouerthrow and totall oppreſſion of people and ſubects, the third of Aprill, 1559. after Eaſter, at a Caſtle in Cambreſis, there was a peace concluded betwixt Henry the ſecond of that name, King of  
                  France, and Phillip King of Spaine: wherein they promiſed, to yeeld one to an other, the landes that were lately conquered. They alſo compounded and agreed of all other controuerſies and differances in regard of the Kingdomes of Naples and Sicilie, and of the Duchie of Millaine: vpon condition of the marriage of the ſaid Phillip, with the eldeſt daughter of Henry: which lands ſhould appertaine to the children comming of that marriage.
               By the ſame treatie of peace, there was yeelded vnto Emanuel Philibert, Duchie of Sauoy, and the principalitie of Piemont, which the French had held from his father & him, more then 24. yeares, by the meanes of a marriage betwixt him and Dame Margarite, daughter of king Francis, the firſt of that name, and the alone ſiſter of Henry: reſeruing certaine ſtrong places in the ſaid Piemont for a certaine time.
               The yeare 1559. the fift of March, the ſonnes, the ſonnes in lawe, and all the family of the dead Dauid George, (of whom we haue ſpoken before) ſome alſo which were not of his family, but adherent vnto his Sect, were adioyned before the Senate of Baſill: after information taken of the pernitions Sect which the ſaid Dauid George had alwaies held whileſt he liued. The Advower declared vnto them, that the Seigniorie was dulye enformed, that they withdrewe themſelues into

the Caſtle of Binningen, not as they which were perſecuted for the Goſpell, (as they falſly ſaid): but for the Sect of Dauid, wherewith they were alreadie ſpotted Eleuen were appointed priſoners, out of them to draw the truth. The moſt part examined by the ſtraighteſt Inquiſition, confeſſed the truth of the matter: which finally obtained pardon.
               The firſt of May the Miniſters Rector, profeſſors and Maiſters of the Vniuerſitie of Baſill, hauing all with one voyce condemned the poynts of doctrine profeſſed by Dauid George: the Senate beeing fully informed of all, proceeded the 13. of May, to the indyting and condemning of Dauid George: that is, that all his writings, as full of impietie and mortall poyſon, alſo his body or his bones, and all that which remained in his graue, ſhould be burnt, with his Image which was found in his houſe, liuely repreſenting him: and that generally all the goods of ſo wicked a man, in what place ſoeuer they were found, ſhould be confiſcated and adiudged vnto the Seignorie. This ſentence was proclaimed according to the cuſtome of the place: and all the forme of lawe, and of the ordinances of the Towne, was obſerued in the execution thereof.
               
                  The life, maners, and death of ſuch pernicious men, admoniſh vs to watch diligently, leaſt being deceiued with any beautifull appearance, we allow not euill for good, and contrary: and ſo fall into the ſnares of the diuell.
               
               A peace (as hath bene ſaid) being concluded betwixt Henry King of France, and Phillip King of Ppaine enemies of the Goſpell tooke their opportunitie to perſecute ſuch as they called Lutherans. Commiſſions were diſpatched to go through all the Prouinces of France, to attend while the conditions of peace were accompliſhed.
               King Henry by his Letters Patents on the ſecond of Iune, ſent to all Bailiffes and Stewards, to aide the ſaid Commiſſioners: with power to aſſemble (as they call them) ban and arrierban: that is as I take it we vſe to ſay, tag & rag: and the Prouoſt Marſhals and their Archers, ſtraightly forbidding the ſparing of any, either vſing any diſſimulation or winking at any: otherwiſe that they themſelues ſhould be firſt puniſhed.
               
                  The Cardinall of Lorraine charged a great number of the Councellours of the Parliament of Paris to be fauourers of heretickes: And this was vpon the occaſion of a deliuerance they made of certaine priſoners for the Goſpell, by a ſimple baniſhment out of the kingdome. And did ſo much that the Mercuriall was held at the inſtance of the kings Proctor general, wherin a great part of the Councellours were of aduiſe, that by an holy and free Councell all matters of Religion ſhould be remedied, rather then by perſecutions.
               The King Henry being at this Parlament, and hauing heard Anne de Bourge Councellour reaſoning, cauſed him to be ſtaied priſoner, with other Councellors: And the 19. of Iune a Coniunction was directed to certaine Iudges to make theis proces.
               During the marriage Feaſtes of the daughter of Fraunce, and the laſt of Iune King Henry imploied himſelfe all that morning in the examinations of, as well Preſidents as Councellors of the ſaid Parliament, and other priſoners and their companions which were charged with the like doctrine. When he had dined, becauſe he was one of the ſuſtenants at the ſolemn Turney which was made in the ſtreete of Saint Anthonie, he entered into the Liſtes: And after hee had broken good ſtore of ſtaues as brauely as was poſſible (as he was cunning, and a valiant man at Armes) running againſt Montgommery, the ſonne of Captaine Lorges, a ſtrong Souldier, they encountred ſo rudely, that burſting ther Launces, the King was attained with a counter blowe, ſo right in the vizard, that the ſhiuers entred into his head: and the blowe was as ſuddaine as violent, ſo that his braines were wholly aſtoniſhed, without finding either ſuccour or comfort: And whatſoeuer any could doo with ſending Phiſitions and Surgions on all ſides, yea from Brabant by King Phillip, nothing profited: Inſomuch that eleuen dayes after, namely the 10. of Iuly, 1559. he expired and finiſhed his dayes in great dolour, hauing raigned 12. yeares, three moneths, and ten dayes.
            
            
               To the Christian Readers.
               Hauing gathered from diuers Hiſtories of our time, a ſort

of the moſt memorable things happening about religious matters, and the ſtate of this world, ſince the yeare 1559. vntill this preſent yeare 1581: and perceiuing that this volume handling the Churches affaires was deliuered vnto the Printer: I haue alſo giuen theſe my remembrances following to the ſame Imprinter to ioine thē vnto the former: that you may haue a whole briefe and ſummary from that time of Chriſt, vntil now. There remaineth: that conſidering the wonders of God, eſpecially in the conduction & gouernment of his Church, we ſhould pray that it would pleaſe him to cauſe vs to ſee more & more the effect of that promiſe ſo precious: that he wil be with his vntil the conſummation of the world, and that we may remaine firme in the profeſſion of his truth vntil the laſt ſigh, maugre all the forces of Sathan, of Antichriſt, and of their complices. So be it.
               
               
                  Francis the 2. of that name, of the age of 15. yeares & fiue moneths, ſucceeded his Father Henry.
               
               In the beginning of his kingdom the Churches of his realme floriſhed vnder the croſſe, hauing the fauour of certain Princes and great Lords: yet in ſuch ſort as the faithfull endured much in ſundry places that ſame yeare 1559. The Church of Paris was one of the chiefe: but it was exceedingly moleſted by ſlanders and ſubornations of certaine Iudges, and eſpecially of an Inquiſitor called Demochares, they were charged, & the Thurſday before Eaſter they procured a great aſſembly of men, women & mayds about midnight, where after they had preached, eaten a cochon in lieu of the paſchall Lamb, & the lamp which gaue them light put out, euery one committed wickednes with other. Chals Cardinall of Lorraine gouernour of the king (who had eſpowſed Mary Steward Queene of Scotland, the ſaid Cardinals Niece) impaired & made things worſe, by imputing vnto them of the religiō, all the pollutions of the auncient heretikes; Inſomuch that during the raigne of Francis, there was nothing but impriſonments, robbing of houſes, proclimatiōs for baniſhments, & executions of them of the religiō, with cruel tormēts: notwithſtanding amongſt ſuch tempeſts, they diſcōtinued not their preachings & other exerciſes of Religion, although alſo many were burned at Paris, & executed in other places. Amōgſt

which are not to be forgotten, Nicholas Guerin, Marin Marie, Margarite le Riche, called the Lady de la Caille, a yong Carpēter, Adrian Panſſi, Marin Rouſſean, Giles le Gourt, Phillip Parmentier, Peter Millet, Iohn Befferoy, Peter Arondeau, M. Anne du Bourge, a man of great pietie, very learned, & a Councellor in the Parliament of Paris. The death of this laſt man, was eſpecially amōgſt others noted, becauſe of the qualitie of his perſon: his conſtancy aſtoniſhed alſo many of his enemies: who notwithſtanding left not to cōtinue as wel in Paris, as in other Parliaments of France, in that remainder of the yeare 1559, & in al the yeare following, during which the French Church, before being hid becauſe of perſecutions, began to ſhew it ſelf: Inſomuch that in all Prouinces thoughout the kingdom, they of the religion had Sermons openly: the zeale of ſome, ſurmounting the crueltie of others.
               In this ſame yeare 1559. in the moneth of May, the Lord triumphed ouer Antichriſt, in the cōſtancy & patience of many Chriſtians,Of the Spaniſh Inquiſition. executed to death for the witneſſe of his truth in the kingdome of Spaine, by the practiſes of the officers of the Inquiſition, wherof it ſhal not be impertinent briefly to touch.
               About an 100. yeares ago, that Ferdinand and Iſabelle, kings of Caſtile, eſtabliſhed that Inquiſition againſt the Iewes, which after baptiſme kept their cerimonies. Certaine yeares after, the Monkes aſſailed by the doctrine of the Goſpell, did ſo much, that it was cōuerted & practiſed, eſpecially againſt ſuch as they could diſcouer to be neuer ſo litle aduerſaries of the Romiſh traditions. For the better eſtabliſhing of this tyrannie, and to lift it vp aboue the King and the Councell of Spaine, the Spaniſh Theologians made thē belieue that the holy Inquiſitiō could not erre: and for the exerciſe thereof they had Iudges & officers in the moſt part of the Townes of the realme, which alwaies had a watchful eye to bridle all the world. But ordinarily they eſpied the richeſt, the learneſt, & ſuch as of little began to become great: for they deſired bootie of ſome, they feared ye
                   knowledge of others, and the laſt are odious, leaſt they ſhould make head againſt the Inquiſitiō. They eſpied & marked very nigh theſe 3. ſort of people, that if there came any word out of their mouthes it ſhuld be noted: & thogh they ſpake no word, yet would the Inquiſitors

finde meanes enough againſt ſuch as worſhipped them not ſufficiently: for after they had ſhut them in priſon, they would keep them there a long time without ſpeaking vnto them, and at leiſure inuent Rymes againſt them: In the meane while no man durſt ſollicite nor ſpeake for the priſoners. If the Father ſhewed to haue any care of his childe, hee was ſtraight impriſoned as a fauourer of hereſie. No perſon could haue acceſſe to any priſoner which was in any dungeon or other obſcure place: neither might hee write: but beſides the miſery and horror of the priſon, the priſoners endured a thouſand outrages and menaces, and after blowes with whips, and diuers other the greateſt iniuries that can be imagined. Sometimes they are ſuffered to eſcape by infamy, and from ſome high place they are ſhewed vnto the people. During their impriſonment, their proceſſes and their Inditements goe not forward in courſe of lawe: (and for ordinarily a priſoner ſhall be ſo kept vp & tormented, two, three, or foure yeares) and if there be any thing done therein, there are none but the Inquiſitors, their officers and executioners, that know any newes of them. After one hath tortured and beaten them the ſpace of many moneths, he that will haue his life, he muſt diuine and geſſe at his accuſor. If then the accuſed can diuine the name of his accuſors, and what is the accuſation, in firmely and ſtrongly denying that which is impoſed and laid to his charge, and after great proteſtations, to be an hartie and a very affectioned ſeruant and ſubiect of the Popedome, his life being ſo ſaued: yet he is not thereby ſet at libertie, but after hauing endured infinit pouerties & miſerie (which they call their penance) they are let goe, but yet in ſuch ſort as they make him weare a kinde of coate of yealow colour, called Sambenito, which is a publike infamy vnto him and all his race. But if contrary the priſoner be an ill diuiner, after diuers tortures he is condemned and cruelly burnt. They that conſtantly maintaine the truth of the Goſpell, are ſo vngently tormented and cruelly handled, that the puniſhments of the greateſt Tyrants which were in the time of the Primitiue Church, were nothing in compariſon vnto theſe. But then aſſoone as many perſons of high and baſe condition in ſundry places of Spaine
                  
beganne to ſee the light of the word of God, the Antichriſt his ſubiects ſtraight diſcouered certaine aſſemblies, inſomuch that the Inquiſitors impriſoned a great number of them, whereof ſome were put to death the 21. of May, in the preſence of the kings ſiſter their gouerneſſe in her brothers abſence, of Dom Charles Prince of Spaine, and of many great Lords which deliuered their oaths vnto the Inquiſition, namely the Gouerneſſe, and the Prince, to maintaine againſt all. This done with great ſolemnities, the faithfull remaining conſtant were burnt aliue,Martyrs of Spaine.
                   namely Auguſtine Cacalla late the Emperour Charles the fifts Preacher, Francis de Biuero Prieſt of Valledolid, the brother of Auguſtine, Blanche and Cōſtance de Biuero their ſiſter, Alphonſus Peres Prieſt of Valence, Christopher del Campo, Christopher de Padille, Antonio de Huezvelo, Catherine Romaine, Francis Errem, Catherine Ortegne, Iſabella de Strade, and Iann Ʋelaſque. Many other men and women were then condemned to diuers honourable amends (as they call them) and to remaine priſoners a certaine time.
               In the moneth of September following, the Inquiſitors of Siuil cauſed to be burnt Iohn Ponceus de Leon,
                  Other Marties of Spaine.
                   ſonne of the Count de Bailen a Gentleman, amongſt all Spaniards commendable, becauſe of his great pietie, conſtancie and doctrine, Iohn Gonſolue Theologian of Siuile, Iſabelle de Ʋacine, Mary de Viroes, Cornelie, Mary and Iane de Bohorques, Ferdinand de Saint Iohn, Iulian Fernand, and others in great number. For three yeares before a goodly Church was raiſed and ſet vp at Siuile, which being diſcouered by the ſpies of the Inquiſition, very nigh eight hundred perſons were impriſoned, inſomuch that after that the tormentors did no other thing, but hang, ſtrangle and burne men and women: yet notwithſtanding many verie liuely taſted the doctrine of the Goſpell, and forſooke Spaine, the more freely to ſerue God, ſome flying into England, others into Almaine & to Geneua: Likewiſe all the Monks of the Couent of Saint Iſodore nigh Siuile, forſooke their habit and their Country, and ſaued themſelues at Francford; two of which, namely Iohn Leon, & Iohn Fernand, were taken in a Port of Zeland, brought againe into Spaine, and put to death.
               
                  In this ſame yeare the Eſtates of the Empire were aſſembled at Ausbourge, to handle affaires of Religion: and it was agreed that things ſhould remaine peaceable: and the funerall of obſequies of the Emperor Charles the fift were then made. The Embaſſador of Othon Henry chiefe Elector aſſiſted at that ſeruice but he refuſed to kiſſe the diſh or pax, offered by the Cardinall of Ausbourge, who ſung the Maſſe: whereat the Cardinall was ſo deſpited, that he ſaid vnto him: If thou wilt haue no bleſſing, receiue a curſe euerlaſting. Other deputies of the Townes, and Princes of the confeſſion of Ausbourge, entered not into the Church.
               Certaine time after, Othon Henry Elector Palatin, left his dignitie and eſtates to Frederick, who reformed his Countrey after the pure doctrine, whereof he ſhewed himſelfe a conſtant and faithfull protector, with an admirable wiſedome and moderation.Diethmarſois brought vnder the yoke. The Diethmarſois yeelded themſelues vnto Frederick the 2. of that name, king of Denmarke, about the end of the moneth of Iune, after they had couragiouſly maintained the war, and receiued diuers battailes: before they gouerned themſelues without yeelding any ſubiection vnto any perſon. But now they yeelded to gouernment about 35. yeares after the death of Henry de Supphon miniſter of the word of God, whom they had cruelly put to death in the Towne of Meldorf: where the truth of the Goſpell encreaſed greatly by the preachings of that man. The firſt day of Ianuary, that Chriſtian king of Denmarke, of the age of 56. yeares died, and about three weekes after, died alſo Chriſtierne his Coſin and predeceſſor, who for his vniuſt & wicked dealings, was driuen away of his ſubiects, ſtraying out of his own kingdome the ſpace of 10. yeares, & thinking to come thither again was taken vpon theſe, and after locked in priſon, where he reamined 17. years vntil his death, being vs the age of 78. Laurence Priarli Duke of Venice. & Heroides Duke of Ferrare, died the ſame year, ye one in
                     •••
                  , the other in Octo.
               
                  The death of Paul the 4.
                  Paul. 4. hauing bin Pope 4. yeares, 2. moneths & 27. daies, died the 18 day of Auguſt, 1559. of the age of 85. yeares▪ Scant had he yeelded vp his ſpirit, but the Romane people which wiſhed death vnto him, becauſe of his warres, exactions▪
                  
and 
                     〈◊〉
                  , brake the priſons of the Inquiſition, deliuered the priſoners, fired the whole building, threw downe the Popes Image cutting off the head and right hand 
                     〈…〉
                   which were drawne three dayes 
                     〈◊〉
                  : 
                     〈…〉
                   caſt 
                     〈…〉
                   And it was 
                     〈◊〉
                   that the Armes of the family of 
                     
                        ••
                     r
                        •
                     ffes ſhould be plucked downe from all places of the towne and burſt in peeces, which was 
                     〈◊〉
                   the ſame day: His body was in daunger to haue bene handled as his Images, and ſo had bene, but that they kept certaine dayes 
                     〈◊〉
                   a
                     •••
                  d and ſtrong hand from the people. He was alſo very violent in his Popedome, not only toward his enemies, many of which were yet in priſon, but alſo towards his ſeruants and friends.
               The 26. day of the ſaid moneth of Auguſt, Phillip d' Auſtrich king of Spaine, hauing ſet in order his affaires in Flaunders and the lowe Countries, made ſaile from the Hauen of Fluſhing into Spaine, pretending to ſet vpō the Turke, ſeeing he was agreed with the king of France, Elizabeth the eldeſt daughter of the dead king Henry, being accorded vnto him for wife, and committed vnto the king of Nauarre & other, to conuoy her euen vnto the frontiers of Spaine, But being embarked with a great number of ſhips, and all the riches which his father had heaped vp out of Almain & Italy, with a great quantitie of the rich Tapiſtry of Flaunders, as he approached the port of S. Iames in Galicie, ſo great a tempeſt aroſe, that of all that magnificall furniture and riches gotten together with ſo long time and ſo great trauell, nothing arriued in ſafetie, but the ſea was made heire of thoſe riches, euen in the ſight of the Spaniards. As for him, that tempeſt ſpared him ſo litle, that ſcant could he ſet foote in any 
                     〈◊〉
                   but the veſſel wherein he was, was ready to ſinke into the bottome of the ſea. This loſſe chafed him ſo much the more againſt them of the Religon, eſpecially of the lowe countries: which were there perſecuted with fire and ſword before, & after his depart
                     •••
                  . In England the Churche got vp vnder the pe
                     •
                  c
                     ••
                  ble gouernment of Elizabeth. As for Scotland, many came vnto the Goſpell and they ſo multiplied, that ſoone after they remained maiſters.
               The Papall ſeate being vacant the ſpace of foure 
                  
moneths, by the aduiſe of the Cardinalls, Iohn Angelus de Medicis, Cardinall, was choſen Pope about the end of December, and was crowned the ſixt day of Ianuary, 1560. naming himſelfe Pius the fourth:
                     Pius the 4. elected Pope. he liued in the throne of error fiue yeares, eleuen moneths, and fifteene dayes. He confirmed the election of the Emperour Ferdinand, which his predeceſſour would not approue, hee alſo iuſtified and ſet at libertie out of priſon, certiane Cardinalls and Biſhops.
               
                  The marriage of Phillip King of Spaine, with Elizabeth of France. The ſtate of France, An. 1560. vnder Francis the 2. which died in the moneth of December.At the beginning of this ſaid moneth, Elizabeth of France was brought to the limits of Spaine, & deliuered into the hands of the Cardinall de Burges, of the Duke d'el Infantaſque, King Phillip his deputies, vnto whom they brought her: and there was great triumphs in the celebration of the marriage, which they called the firme bond to holde vnited the kingdomes of France and Spaine. Charles Prince of Spaine, receiued the homages of many Townes, inſomuch that for a time there was nothing but reioycings, Iuſts, Feaſts and Bankets, through all King Phillips Countries: but this mirth endured no long time, as ſhall be ſeene hereafter.
               For the eſtate of France, the Churches had many troubles this yeare. For the violent and illegitimate domination of the houſe of Guiſe, which ruled the king and the kingdome at their pleaſure: the recoyling of Princes and great Lords, the deſpiſing of the ſtates, and other cōfuſions brought in by theſe new gouernours, ſtirred a great part of the Nobilitie to ioyne themſelues together to get the King out of the hands of ſuch people, and to procure by good order that things might return into their auncient eſtate: And becauſe this could not be executed but by armes, they aſſembled certaine troupes vnder the conduct of Godfroy de Barry ſeur de la Renaudie, and other valiant Captains to come vnto Amboiſe to ſeaze the Duke of Guiſe and the Cardinall of Lorraine, to make an account of their adminiſtration. But hauing bene diſcouered and betrayed long time before, they came into the field: this enterpriſe did but 
                     ••
                  uenome & make more cruell the Lords of Guiſe: Inſomuch that they put to death a great number of Lordes, Captaines, Gentlemen, and ſouldiers, at Amboiſe. And becauſe the moſt

part of them profeſſed the true religion then in France, called Lutheriſme: the Cardinall charged the Churches that they had made this enterpriſe: yea they dealt with ye
                   princes of the blood royall, namely with Anthonie de Burbon king of Nauarre, and his brother Lewis de Burbon prince of Conde, after with the houſes of Montmorencie, & of Chaſtillon, determining to roote vp churches & houſes all at once: to effect which, the Lordes of Guiſe made infinit preparatiues all this yeare, both within & without the realme, they alſo found meanes to draw the king of Nauarre and the Prince vnto the court, after ſtared them priſoners, and handled the prince very rigorouſly. On the other ſide their forces aſſembled on all ſides to ouerrun the realme. The king of Spain ſhould enter into Bearne to ruinate & deſtroy the queen of Nauarre, and to ſolemniſe the entry of the Eſtates, the prince ſhould haue bene publikely beheaded: afterward ſtraigt vpon the concluſion of the Eſtates, the Armies marched to ſacke and ſpoyle ſuch as were ſuſpected, and the people were ſuffered and countenanced to runne vpon all ſuch as were religious, to diſpatch them with out other Inquiſition. And to the end to leaue none aliue, the King ſhould cauſe all the Princes, Lords, and Knights of the order, to ſweare and ſeale all the articles of Sorbone, ſending to the fire without longer proces, all ſuch as denied it. The Chancelor did the like with ſuch as were of the order d'la longe robe about the court: The Parliaments & Prelates had charge to do the like with ſuch as belonged to Iuſtice and to the Cleargie. Likewiſe Ladies & honorable womē were not forgotten. This being done, the Inquiſition of Spain entred into France, to begin new tragidies: But as all things were vpon the point to be executed, God cut the ſtrings thereof, ſtriking the king Francis, with an Apoſtume in his eare, wherewith after he had languiſhed certain dayes he was finally ſtifled, and dyed the fift day of December, 1560. hauing only raigned 17. moneths. This death ouerthrew the diſſeines and purpoſes of the Duke of Guiſe, and conſtrained the aduerſaries of the reformed Church to yeeld ſome reliefe vnto the faithfull, who had that yeare giuen them in mockery the Huguenots, (becauſe of their night aſſemblies) to muſe & deuiſe new ſubtilties and perſecutions:

whereof we will (God willing) ſpeake briefly in the years following: but yet the Churches in that yeare proſpered in all Prouinces, with infinite witneſſes of God his fauour towards his, and of his iudgements vpon his enemies of all eſtates. Some of the Religion were publikely executed in diuers places: but for one which died, there came a thouſand to the doctrine of the Goſpell: In ſo much that it was incredible the great number of perſons which this yeare and that following, forſooke the Romane Religion, to come vnto the Chriſtian.
               
                  The eſtate of Scotland.This yeare Scotland was troubled with a ciuill war, by the practiſes of ſome which would needs commaund all ouer, vnder the colour of maintaining the Romane Religion: but they fruſtrated of their hope, and the reformed religion began then to ſet foote in that kingdome by the fauour and aſſiſtance of Elizabeth Queene of England. The Queene, widowe of Iames the fift, died in the moneth of Iune.
               
                  Martin Bucer and Paul Phagius, whoſe bodies had bene buried and burned foure yeares before in England, by the ſollicitations of Cardinal Poole, were eſtabliſhed in their firſt honor, and their memorie publikely celebrated the 30. of Iuly.
               
                  The death of Melancton.
                  The 10. day of Aprill before, died that very learned and modeſt perſon Phillip Melancton, an excellent ornament of all Almaine: after whoſe deceaſe, many wicked ſpirits troubled the Almain Churches, which during his life they durſt not haue enterpriſed: Ioachim Camerarius a man very learned and his great friend, hath deſcribed his life. The moneth of Ianuary before, tooke alſo from this world Iohn Alaſco, a Gentleman of Polonia, one very affectionate to the aduancement of the kingdome of Chiſt, whoſe memory is precious in all Churches.
               
                  Warre in Piemont.About the end of the ſame yeare, Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, warred vpon them of the vale of Angrogne, and their neighbours, profeſſing the doctrine of the Goſpell: which after aſſaying all meanes of peace to conſerue it, offering their Prince all that good ſubiects ſhould do, defended themſelues (though fewe in number) ſo couragiouſly, and were aſſiſted of God, that after many combats they were left in peace, which at

this preſent they enioy: the fauour of Margarite of France, Ducheſſe of Sauoy (amongſt other humane meanes, ſeruing them greatly both then and afterwards.
               In the ſame Countrey of Piemont, were ſeene many prodigious wonders: the like in France, Auſtrich, Pologne & Almain.
               
               At the begginning, and vntill the end of this yeare, 1561. the French Churches encreaſed & openly ſhewed themſelues.The begining of troubles in France. 
                  Katherine de Medices Queene mother, hauing all affaires in her hand, was counſelled by the Princes of the houſe of Bourbon, by the Admirall and other great Lords of the Religion: by meanes whereof, the greateſt of the Romane Religion entred into league with them, and ſo made priuie preparation for great troubles and vexations after hapning.
               In the moneth of Ianuary the Princes and great Lords being aſſembled at S. Germaine in Laye, an Edict was made the ſeuenteenth of the ſaid moneth: which on the one ſide gaue ſome releaſe and libertie vnto them of the Religion, and on an other ſide curbed and brideled them. After the Councell aſſigned, on the ninth day of September following, was a conference and diſputation at Poiſſy betwixt the Doctors of the Romane and reformed Churches.
               In that ſame moneth the Electors and Princes of Almaine being aſſembled at Neubourge in Turinge, to take Councell for maintaining the confeſſion of Ausbourge, by them preſented vnto the Emperour Charles the 5. Anno, 1530. gaue audience about the beginning of February the Popes Embaſſadors, which commaunded them to ſend their Embaſſadors vnto the Councel aſſigned at Trent; to effect which, they offred for the Pope their M. ſuch ſafe conduct as was poſſible to deſire. The 7. of February the Electors and Princes made anſwer, that they found it ſtrange, that the Pope, being the cauſe of all the cōfuſions then in the Church, ſhould go about to aſſemble a Councel, & to aſſigne it vnto them, whom he had nothing to doo to command, that they did not, neither euer would acknowledge any ſoueraigntie to belong vnto the Romane ſeate: yea they were aſſured that it appertained not vnto the Pope to conuocate or call a Councell. And after they had ſhewed the orders

and filthineſſe of the Romane Church, and that it were good to regard and looke vnto the meanes to procure a generall and free Councel, they ſent away their Embaſſadors, and after they writ vnto the Emperour Ferdinand, that they all with a commō aduiſe agreed vnto the confeſſiō of Ausbourge: afterward they publiſhed in an Imprinted writing their cauſes of reculation againſt the Councell of Trent. Theſe Embaſſadors went into diuers other places to the ſame effect, but they receiued no good anſwere o any King, Prince, or great Lord, making profeſſion of the Goſpell, but eſpecially the Queene of England would not giue leaue to the Abbot Martinengue, who was ſent by the Pope vnto her, to paſſe the ſea to come into England.
               
                  Notable executions at Rome.
                  The 5. day of March the Pope cauſed to bee ſtrangled in the night time in the S. Angelo, the Cardinall Charles Caraffe: he beheaded alſo in an other priſon, the Counte of Palliane, and certaine other Cardinalls: the next day ſhewing all their bodies vnto the people.
               
                  King Charls the ninth ſacred.The 18. day of May Charles the ninth of that name, ſonne of Henry de Ʋalois, and of Catherine de Medicis, was ſacred king at Reimes in Campagne, and ſoone after crowned at S. Denis in France. The Churches of his kingdome to the eye-ſight flouriſhed, to the preiudice whereof was made an Edict, called of Iuly: notwithſtanding which, they maintained themſelues with great teſtimonies of the bleſſings of God. In the meane while the king of Nauarre the firſt Prince of the bloud next vnto the kings brethren, ſent for Peter Martyr and Theodore de Beza, to be at the diſputation of Poiſſy, which were ſent thither by the Lords of Zurich and Geneua.
               
               
                  Reconciliation of the Prince of Conde and Duke of Guiſe.
                  The 24. of Auguſt the Prince of Conde was recōciled by the King and his Councell, with the Duke of Guiſe: who vpon the Princes words, which he ſpake on high. I hold him and them for villaines which haue cauſed my impriſonment: anſwered I beleeue ſo, it nothing toucheth me. Soone after the gouernmēt of the kingdome during the kings minoritie who was then but ten yeares old & an halfe, was cōfirmed to the queene mother.
               In the meane while the deputies of the Churches and certaine other Miniſtries with ſafe conduit arriued at Poiſsy, preſented

vnto the king a requeſt for the order of the diſputation, and alſo the confeſſion of their faith:A conference at Poiſſy, about matters of religion. who with good countenance receiued thē, promiſing to communicate their requeſts vnto his Councell, & make them an anſwere by his Chancelor.
               In the beginning of September many requeſts were preſented to ſet forward that which was begun: and finally the 9. of the ſaid moneth, in the preſence of the King, Prince, Lords, and notable perſons of the kingdome of France, as wel of ye one, as the other religion, Theodore de Beza in the name of all the French Churches, after publike inuocatiō of the name of God, made long oration, cōprehending a ſummary of all the Chriſtian doctrine, held & preached by the Miniſters of the reformed Churches: and his oration finiſhed, he preſented their cō
                  feſſion of faith: which was receiued & deliuered into the hands of the prelates, to prepare themſelues to anſwer it. But they oppoſed themſelues only againſt two Articles of that oratiō: The one of the Supper, and the other of the Church: and pronounced their anſwere by Charles Cardinal of Lorraine, who had for his maiſter Claude Deſpence, a Doctor of Sorbone, who once ſhewed ſome ſeed of religion. This anſwere hauing bene made certain daies after the oration, the Miniſters prayed that they might reply ſtraight way: but it was deferred to an other day: and audience was giuen them, but not ſo notable as the firſt: thē fel there out a ſharp diſputation, which began an other time after a third oration. Then entred into conference fiue of the Romane Churches ſide, with fiue of the reformed Churches: who after a long, diſputation vpon the matter of the Supper, retired without according any thing aſſuredly. Frō the end of this moneth vntil the end of this yeare, diuers leagues & factions were made againſt the Churches, & ſeditiōs were ſtirred at Paris and in other places, againſt the Chriſtians aſſembling to heare the word of God: the kings councel being occupied to prouide by ſome Edict, againſt the miſchief to come, & to procure reſt for the kingdome. About this yeare died Shuvenckfeld,
                  
                     The death of Shuvenckfeld. a very pernitious heretike, who by his wicked doctrine greatly endamaged the Churches of Almaine. The ſumme of his principall errours, was to reuiue and renew againe the hereſie of Eutiches.
                  
For hee maintained that the humaine nature of Ieſus Chriſt ought no more to be called a creature: but we muſt think that it is at this day ſwallowed vp by the diuine nature: by that meanes cōfounding the two natures. Vpon this foundation ſo badly placed, he eſtabliſhed other mōſtrous opinions: the fault was in not wel cōſidering the vniō of the two natures in Chriſt, and the communicatiō of the properties. But theſe opinions are not dead with him: but contrary haue bene renued & promoted by ſuch who will needes at this day haue the the humaine nature of Chriſt infinit.
               
                  
                  The ſtate of France.
                  In the moneth of Ianuary which was then 1591. becauſe they then began the yeare at Eaſter, (and at this preſent we begin it the firſt of Ianuary) an aſſembly was made of the moſt notable perſons of all the Parliaments, and other renowmed people beſides the priuie Councellors, which decreed and ſet foorth that notable Edict, named of Ianuary, which permitted free exerciſe to them of the Religō through all the kingdome of France, prouiding good ſecuritie for all people, and reſt for the Common-wealth. Many thought that hereby the Churches ſhould haue reſt, when ſoone after newes arriued of the maſſacre of Vaſſi,
                  Frances. committed by Francis the Duke of Guiſe, who in his owne preſence cauſed 42. perſons of the Religion to be ſlaine, and a great number others to be wounded, being all aſſembled to heare the word of God. This was the beginning of the ciuil warres of France. For the Duke of Guiſe and his partakers tooke Armes on the one ſide: The Prince of Conde, the Admirall and others, meaning to maintaine the Royall authoauthoritie, the Edict of Ianuary, and the Churches that were vnder the protection and defence thereof, oppoſed themſelues againſt them by Armes alſo, and the war began through all the kingdome, where infinit cruelties were exerciſed in diuers places againſt them of the Religion: as the hiſtory of our time maketh mention. Many Townes & Fortreſſes were beſieged, carried away by aſſaults, ſacked & ſpoiled more cruelly, thē by the moſt barbarous people in the world: diuers encounters & bloodie battailes, namely that of Dreux: wherein the two chiefe Captaines of both partes remained priſoners, many of the

Nobilitie and ſouldiers, as well Straungers as French, were ſlaine: Churches diſſipated and diſperſed in moſt part of the Prouinces, and a maruellous deſolation in infinite Families.
               
                  Maximilian the Emperour Ferdinands ſonne,
                     Maximilian crowned king of the Romans and of Boheme. was declared king of the Romanes the 14. day of Nouember, and ſixe daies after he was crowned: two moneths before he was crowned king of Boheme.
               
               
                  Peter Martyr, borne at Florence, an excellent Theologian,The death of Peter Martyr.
                   and profeſſor of Theologie at Zurich, where he writ bookes full of great and ſound doctrine, died the 12. day of Nouember, being then of the age of 63. yeares.
               The ciuill warre continued in France, notwithſtanding the  taking of the Prince of Conde, and the Conſtable.The Duke of Guiſe ſlaine, and peace made. The Duke of Guiſe hauing laid ſiege before the Towne of Orleance, being kept by them of the Religion, was wounded in the ſhoulder with a Piſtoll ſhot, the 18. day of February, and died certaine dayes after in great torments. By this meanes Orleance was deliuered, & a peace concluded the moneth following, the Edict of Ianuary aboliſhed in the moſt part of the Articles, to the great diſaduantage of them of the Religion: which notwithſtanding tooke hart, and in the quarters maintained themſelues in their accuſtomed order.
               In the moneth of Iuly, the Engliſh men gaue ouer Hance de grace, or New Hauen, vnto the French king.
               The ſame time they of Lubec, and the king of Denmarke,
                  The eſtate of Almaine. made warre vpon the king of Snede.
               
               
                  Henry de Brunſwic made many courſes into Almaine, into the lands of the Biſhop of Munſter.
               
               The eight day of September Maximilian king of the Romanes, was crowned king of Hungary.
               
               The 24. of September, Charles the ninth, king of France,
                  The Kings Maioritie. cauſed his Maioritie to be publiſhed, declaring to the Parliament of Paris, that he would take vpon himſelfe the managing of the affaires of the kingdome.
               The 28. was publiſhed and affixed at Rome on the part of the Cardinals Inquiſitors,A citation frō Rome againſt the Queene of Nauarre. a monitorie & perſonal adiournament againſt Iane d' Albret, Queene of Nauarre: who becauſe

of the profeſſion of the Goſpell, was cited to Rome, to anſwere in the Popes conſiſtory therefore, and for want of appearance, within ſixe moneths, her Countrey to be giuen vnto the firſt conquerer thereof, and her vaſſalls and ſubiects abſolued from their oath of fidelitie. This was but a ſubtill deuice tending to an other end: and the king of France tooke into his hand the cauſe of this Princeſſe: ſo that for that time the Popes thunderclaps turned into ſmoake.
               
                  The Biſhop of Wirtzbourge ſlaine.The ſecond day. of October the Biſhop of Wirtzbourge was ſlaine, his Towne occupied and raunſomed, wherevpon followed great troubles in Almaine: and at that time of Automne, the peſtilence was vehement in the quarters about Francfort, Nuremberge, and in the coaſtes about the Balthique Sea, which carried away nigh three hundreth thouſand perſons.
               
                  Battaile betweene the Danes.The ninth day of Nouember the Armies of Denmarke and Snede encountred together and had a bloudie battaile, wherein were ſlaine 3000. Snedes, with great loſſe of their Artillery and baggage.
               
                  The end of the Councel of Trent.The fourth day of December was ended the Councell of Trent: Betwixt the firſt and laſt ſeſſion whereof, were eightteene yeares. In it all the Articles of the Popiſh doctrine were confirmed. There was a great ſtrife betwixt the Embaſſadors of France and of Spaine, for the primer ſeat, but he of Spaine got it at that time.
               
                  The death of Muſculus.
                  In the ſame yeare, and the 13. day of Auguſt, died Wolfangus Muſculus, Doctor in Theologie at Berne, a man who by his writings greatly ſerued, and yet doth the Churches of God. He was then of the age of 66. yeares.
               
                   The 26. of Ianuary, 1564. the Lithuaniens got a great victorie vpon the Muſcouites, which loſt nine thouſand men vpon the field with their baggage, and many flying, periſhed in pooles and Iſy Mariſhes.
               
                  The death of Hiperius.
                  The firſt day of February died at Marpurge, a Towne of Heſſe, Andrew Hiperius, a very learned Theologian amongſt thē of our time, who left many profitable bookes to the edification of the Churches of God. He was then of the age of 53. yeares.
               
                  In the moneth of April, Frederick Elector, & Count Palatin, came with Chriſtopher Duke of Wirtemberge, into the Abbey of Malbrun nigh to Spire, where by the ſpace of 7. daies their Diuines diſputed, ſome againſt others, of two Articles in the doctrine of the holy Supper; that is to ſay, of the vbiquitie or preſence of the body of Chriſt Ieſus in all places, and the interpretation of the words of the holy Supper; This is my body. After long conteſtations and ſtrifes, they departed without according any thing: and after that, their debate waxed hotter, to the ruine of Churches, and to the great contentment of the Pope and his adherents.
               The 27. of May, about eight of the clocke at night,The death of Caluin.
                   dyed Iohn Caluin, a profeſſor in Theologie, & a Miniſter of the word of God in Geneua a perſon of ſingular pietie, memorie, viuacitie of iudgement, and admirable diligence, of a ſolide doctrine, wherin he hath comprehended the pure Theologie: as his writings read without preiudice or ſiniſter affection, do apparantly ſhewe. He was moreouer endowed with incredible zeale and prudencie in all the courſe of his Miniſtery, hauing ſerued to the aduancement of the doctrine of the Goſpel, and to the edification of the Churches, amongſt all the excellent perſons raiſed vp in our time, to ruinate the tyrannie of Antichriſt, and to eſtabliſh the throne of the celeſtial veritie He was of the age of 55. yeares, ſaue one moneth and 13. daies: he was buried without pompe, hauing left many bookes very profitable for ſuch as would ſeeke to aduance and goe forward earneſtly in the intelligence of the holy ſcripture, and an honorable memorie vnto all reformed Churches.
               About this time the Maritimal and Sea Armies of the kings of Denmarke and Snede,
                  A battaile betwixt ye Danes and Snedes. encountred vpon Balthique Sea in battaile, wherein the Snedes remained victors, and carried away three great ſhips of warre, with a number of priſoners, which the king of Snede cauſed afterward to be cruelly handled. But about the end of Iune, they of Denmarke and Lubec had their reuenge, and ouercame the Snedes vpon the Sea, conquering one ſhip, though inexpugnable vntill then, after hauing ſunke many moe.
               
                  
                  Maximilian.
                  The death of Ferdinand.
                  The Emperour Ferdinand, a gentle and peaceable Prince, died the 25. day Iuly at 
                     Ʋienna in Auſtrich, hauing liued 61. yeares, foure moneths, and an halfe, leauing for ſucceſſor to the Empire, his ſonne Maximilian, who ſoone after was elected and crowned.
               
                   The beginning of his yeare, 1565. was very ſharpe and colde in many Countries of Europe, and there fel an extraordinary quantitie of ſnowe, which beeing frozen, and after melted, in the ſpting time there followed great Invndations.
               The Churches of France maintained themſelues in ſome eſtate, whileſt the young King, guided by his Councell, made his voyage of Bayonne.
               
               A warre in Hungary againſt the Turkes, with loſſes and ruines on both parts.
               
                  The eſtate of the Flemiſh Churches.The Churches in the lowe Countries began alſo to lift vp their heads, eſpecially vnder Charles the fift. The encreaſe of the French Churches encouraged them: they alſo publiſhed their confeſſion of faith. The Eccleſiaſticke Romanes that which afterward came to paſs;e, amongſt other practiſes, ſought to eſtabliſh the Spaniſh Inquiſition, and certaine yeares before made new Biſhops, to the end more eaſily to maintaine the Popes authoritie. After this erection, by the ſpace of foure or fiue yeares, whileſt Margarite Dutches of Parma, gouerned the lowe Countries for her brother the king of Spaine, ſome ceaſed not to cōtend againſt others, by remonſtrances, bookes, and diuers practiſes, ſome to aboliſh, others to giue entry and authoritie vnto the Inquiſition.
               
                  War at Malte.The Ile and Towne of Malte, was furiouſly aſſailed by the Turkes in the moneth of May, but they were Iuſtained and puſhed backe by the knights of Malta, being aſſiſted with the ſuccors which were ſent from many places.
               
                  Deluges.In the monethes of Iune and Iuly, were great deluges and ouerflowings of waters in diuers quarters of Almaine, eſpecially in Thuringe.
               
               
                  Warre in Hungary.A very ſharpe warre was in Hungarie betwixt the Turkes and the Almaines, with diuers accidents that befell on both ſides.
               
                  The eight of December, the Pope Pius the fourth,The death of Pope Pius. 4. died of the age of 66. yeares, and 8. moneths, hauing bene Pope about ſix moneth.
               
                  Conrad Geſner of Zurich a Phiſitian,The death of Conrad Geſner.
                   learned in the tongues and humane ſciences, laborious and painfull amongſt others, and who very diligently writ a perfect and full hiſtorie of all beaſtes, foules, fiſhes, and creeping things, died alſo in the moneth of December, leauing infinite other writings in all ſorts of litterature, alreadie Imprinted, and others to Imprint.
               About the end of this yeare,An Edict againſt the Religion in the lowe Countries. the King Phillip ſent from Spaine into the lowe Countries, an Edict, wherby he ordained that the auncient and new placarts againſt them of the Religion ſhould be executed: that the Inquiſition ſhuld be throughly eſtabliſhed, and the Inquiſitors fauoured in the exerciſe of their charge: that the decrees of the Councell of Trent ſhould be receiued and obſerued from point to point. Theſe Letters Patents were the cauſe of all the troubles following, and not yet ended.
               The 7. day of Ianuary, 1566. Michael Gillier a Monke  of Lombardie, being come from one degree to an other,Pius. 5.
                   till he was Cardinall, finally was choſen Pope, and called himſelfe Pius the fift.
               The 21. day of the ſaid moneth, the Emperour Maximilian ſecond of that name, held his firſt Imperiall Iourney at Ausbourge, where the affaires of Religion was handled. Frederick Count Palatin de Rhene, and chiefe Elector of the Empire, a Chriſtian and magnanimous Prince, conſtantly maintained the pure doctrine and the true reformation eſtabliſhed in his Countrey: by meanes whereof, he made himſelfe redoughted of all ſuch is reſiſted him, either openly or ſecretly, and was well beloued of the Emperour, and of the greateſt in Almaine. He was then accompanied with the Prince Caſſimere his ſonne, who kept him good company, and a great company of the Nobilitie.
               In the moneth of March, and in the other following,The violent death of the king of Scotland. hapned great troubles in Scotland, and finally the King himſelfe was ſtrangled in the night, and the chamber wherein hee was,

ouerthrowne with Cannon powder. An Earle of that Realme eſpowſed his widow, but being ouerthrowne in battaile by the Nobilitie, he fled out of the Realme. The Queene thingking to ſaue her ſelfe in France, was ſtayed priſoner in England. Iames the ſixt, the ſonne of her, and her ſlaine husband, at this preſent King of Scotland, of the age of fifteene or ſixteene yeares, is a Prince of great hope.
               In the ſame moneth of March, at the Imperiall Iourney at Ausbourge, the Emperour there aſſiſting it, was decreed that the affaires of Religion ſhould remaine in their preſent eſtate, but for the affaires of the Empire they prouided, eſpecially for the warre againſt the Turkes.
               
                  A league in Flaunders againſt the Inquiſition.In the beginning of Aprill certaine great Lords and Gentlemen of the low Countries, leagued themſelues in good number againſt the Inquiſition: pretending the ſame to be contrary to the liberties of the lowe Countrie. The people banded themſelues, and the Aſſemblies of them of the Religion began to encreaſe. In ſo much that the fourth of May there was publike preaching at Antwerpe without the Towne, & fiue weekes after within the ſaid Towne. At the ſame time, ſuch as were leagued againſt the Inquiſition, were ſurnamed les Gueux. The cauſe hereof was, for that ſome of the principalls going to preſent a requeſt to the Councell of the eſtate, the Sieur de Barlaimont their aduerſary, ſaid to an other Councellor that ſate nigh him: 
                     Ʋoici mes Gueux.
               
               Great and litle after that, tooke a deuiſe, wearing apparell of gray cloath, and peeces of money about their necke, hauing on the one ſide the kings Image, and on the other ſide a beggers diſh, with this Inſcription; Faithfull to the king, euen to the begers diſh.
               
               
                  War in Hungary.In the moneth of Iune, Iuly, and the other following, fell a ſharpe warre in Hungary againſt the Turkes, but the end was not very good, for the Hungarians and Almaines loſt many men in diuers encounters, alſo many ſtrong holdes, eſpecially at Zigeth, which was beſieged by Soliman himſelfe, who dyed a fewe dayes before the taking thereof.
               
                  
                  Selim the ſecond of that name,Selim ſucceeded Soliman. ſucceeded his father Soliman, was acknowledged and crowned Emperour of the Turkes in the moneth of September, and ſoone after tranſported himſelf into Hungarie, to prouide for the affaires of that warre, and then ſtraight departed towards Constantinople, leauing one of his B
                        •
                     ſſ
                        •
                     es called Pertaw, to continew, who with a puiſſant Armie of Turkes and Tartarians, forraged Hungarie and Tranſyluania, committing very ſtraunge ſaccagements and cruelties.
               The 
                     Ʋainoda of Tranſyluania, called this Baſſa to his ſuccours, to recouer certaine places occupied by the Hungarians, but perceiuing ſuch ſuccours did wholly ruinate & ouerthrow himſelf, he ſound means to ſurprize the Tartarians, cut them all in peeces, and ſo diſſipated all that Turkiſh Armie: firſt himſelfe beeing well chaſtifed for drawing ſuch people into his Countrey.
               
                  Iohn Functius a learned Chronographer amongſt all them of our time. Matthias Horſt, and Iohn Shnell,
                  
                     Iohn Functius & others beheaded. Miniſters of the Goſpell at Conigsprucke in Pruſe, were beheaded the 28. of October, for the crime of conſpiracie againſt the Prince Albert, who had eſtabliſhed the Oſiandriſme, that is to ſay, the dreames and errors of one Andrew Oſiander, concerning Chriſtian righteouſneſſe, and other points of Diuinitie: which errour theſe three maintained, and would haue reuenged themſelues of Albert, who had purged his Countrey of that infection.
               The death of Soliman, the great whip of Chriſtendome, gaue ſome releaſe vnto Almaine.
               
               
                  Selim preparing himſelfe to make warre vpon Venetians:War againſt Iohn Frederick of Saxonie.
                   but the Emperour decreed a new warre within Almaine it ſelfe, againſt Frederick of Saxonie, ſonne of the dead Elector, taken in battaile by Charles the fift. The cauſe heereof was, that Iohn Frederick ſupported and gaue refuge vnto William Grembach and other Gentlemen which were baniſhed out of the Empire, becauſe of the murder of Melchior Zobel, Biſhop of Wirthbourge.
               
               
                  Auguſtus Elector, & Duke of Saxony, the Coſin-germaine of

                  Iohn Frederick, had the charge of this warre, whervnto he prepared himſelfe in the moneths of October and Nouember, and about the end of the yeare he laid ſiege before the Towne of Goth, where there was a Citadell or Caſtle, one of the ſtrangeſt in Almaine. Iohn Frederick, Grombach and others, were there, which ſuſtained the ſiege certaine moneths.
               
                  Images burſt in the lowe Countries.They of the Religion encreaſed maruellouſly in Flaunders, Brabant, and in many other Prouinces of the lowe Countries, and their affaires got ſo forward, that the 20. day of Auguſt the Images in the Churches of Antwerpe, were broken in peeces. The Images of other Townes were vſed incontinently after the like handling, euen with an incredible ſwiftneſſe by the ſimple people: with ſuch an aſtoniſhment of euery one, that none of the Magiſtrates oppoſed themſelues againſt them. William de Naſſau, Prince of Orange, Gouernour of Antwerpe, hauing done what he could to hold things in an euenneſſe, and conſidering that it ſhould be impoſſible for him to withſtand the tempeſt which he ſawe comming, gaue place to the time, and reſolued to retire himſelfe into Almaine, admoniſhing other Lords to do the like, ſeeing men made account to think vpon meanes to conſerue the priuiledges of the Countrey, but rather to yeeld themſelues vnto the yoake of the Inquiſition.
               
                   In the moneth of Ianuary, the ſubiects of Iohn Frederick were abſolued by the Imperiall authoritie, of their oath fidelitie due to their Lord, and were cōſtrained to promiſe their obedience vnto Iohn William, brother of the ſaid Frederick. This done, the ſiege of Gothe continued.
               
                  Troubles in the lowe Countries.About the ende of the moneth troubles began to ariſe in the lowe Countrey; Valencienne was beſieged, beaten, taken, and rudely handled by the Sieur de Moircarmes becauſe of Religion. The Miniſters of the word of God, and certaine of the chiefe of the Towne were impriſoned, and after put to death.
               
                  Continuation of troubles, & beginning of warre in the lowe Countries.The 25. of Feebruary Henry de Bredenrode a Lord of great authoritie in the lowe Countries, and very affectionate vnto Religion, ſeeing the peoples heartie deſires to haue publike

exerciſe thereof, preſented a requeſt vnto the Gouerneſſe in the name of him and his Aſſociates, that ſhe might quickly puruey for the affaires as they preſented themſelues. She made ſuch anſwere, as they might perceiue well, that things tooke a way vnto troubles and confuſions. Indeed after certaine goings and commings, from words they fell vnto Armes: In ſo much, that in the moneth of March there hapned encounters and combats betwixt them, of the one and the other party. The Towne of Antwerpe ſawe it ſelfe in a maruellous diuiſion, and vpon the point of her ruine, but by the prudence of the Prince of Orange, who yet was not departed the affaires, it remained peaceable for certaine monethes. In the meane while the king of Spaine aduertiſed of thoſe chaunges, gaue commiſſion to the Duke of Al
                        •
                     a, an olde and ſubtill Captaine, to tame the Flemmings, and chaſtice their heads and principall rulers: that therby he might bridle the lowe Countries, appointing for him a ſtrong Army of Spaniards, which about this time departed by ſea, and ſo came into Italy, obtaining there a further ſtrength of people which attended them with a good minde to gather booties in the lowe Contries.
               The laſt day of March, Phillip Lantgraue of Heſſe, a Chriſtian Prince, ſage, valiant, and endowed with all the goodly parts required in a great Lord, hauing in his life time executed many valiant and memorable exployts, and eſpecially for Religion, died at Caſſel, of the age about 63. yeares, leauing foure ſonnes, William, Lewis, Phillip, and George, and foure daughters, Agnes firſt married to Maurice. Elector and Duke of Saxonie, after in her ſecond marriage, to Iohn Frederick, Anne married to Wolfgang, Count Palatin de Rhene. Barbara to George Count de Montheliard: and Chriſtine to Adolpe Duke of Holſac.
               
               Two daies after, Erneſt Duke of Brunſwick,
                  The death of the Duke of Brunſwick
                   a Prince fearing God, wiſe, couragious, and conſtant, and who bore himſelfe well in the Proteſtants warre, dyed in his Caſtle of Hertaberge.
               
               The fourth of Aprill they of Gothe beeing beſieged by the Elector of Saxonie, laid hold of the proſcripts baniſhed men, and the 13. of the ſaid moneth, yeelded the towne & the

Citadell: Iohn Frederick was deliuered priſoner vnto the Emperours deputies, which hapned the ſame day, and 20. yeares after that, his father Elector of the Empire, was taken priſoner in battaile nigh Mulberge, by the Emperour Charles the fift. The Citadell of Gothe was deſtroyed, Grombach and certaine of his complices executed to death, and the Elect or Auguſtus being deliuered from great trouble, cauſed to coine Dollers of ſiluer, with this inſcription on the one ſide: Tandem bona cauſa triumphat.
               
               At the beginning of May, the Duke of Alua arriuing from Barcelone at Genes, to goe into Flaunders, began to giue order for the paſſage of his Army.
               
                  Certaine Bayliwickes yeelded to the Duke of Sauoy.About the ſame time, Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, the Bernois, to yeeld him certaine lands by them conquered vpon the dead Duke Charles his father, after certaine conferences betwixt them, they yeelded him three Bailiwickes, namely, Gez, Ternier, and Chablais, which enuiron Geneua, with certaine conditions; whereof the chiefe was, that the ſaid Bailiwicke▪ ſhould remain in the ſtate they then were in namely with profeſſion and publike exerciſe of the only Religion, reformed certaine moneths after the Duke was put in reall poſſeſſion of the ſaid Bailiwickes.
               
                  The Duke of Alua commeth into the lowe Country, and his firſt exployts.About the beginning of Iuly the Duke of Alua departed Italy with a good armie of foote men, Spaniards & Piemontois: Being entred Sauoy, he made a countenance to ſtay before Geneua: but fearing to receiue ſome ſhame, he entred into le Franche Comte: where he ioyned himſelfe with certain new troupes conducted by the Court de Lodron, and ſtraight marched right vnto Bruxelles in Brabant. At his arriual, he publiſhed the Edict of the Inquiſition, eſtabliſhed the bloodie Councell, cut off-infinit heads, confiſcated the goods of all ſorts of people, about the end of the moneth of Auguſt: And in September he ſent priſoners into the Caſtle of Gaunt, the Countes of Aigremont, and of Horne: and to found his bloudie executiōs, that requeſt preſented by the principall of the Country to the Ducheſſe of Parma, was declared to be but a coniuration againſt the Kings maieſtie. The Prince of Orange, the Count Ludouic, le Countes

                  de Berge, de Hochſtrate, de Culembourge, le fieur de Brede
                        ••••
                     
                     ▪
                   many other Lordes, Gentlemen, gueſts and marchants, which had ſigned or aſſiſted the preachings, or carried armes, were adiourned to appeare in perſon before the Duke of Alua, within ſixe weeks, and their goods noted. The moneth of September following they were improied in taking priſoners, the beſt they could lay handes on: And then began confuſion on all ſides in the lowe Country. About the end of October he begunne the Citadell of Antwerpe.
               
               In the ſaid time,The ſecond ciuil warre in France.
                   the ſecond ciuil warre for matters of Religion lighted in France, and a battaile was giuen betwixt Paris and S. Denis the tenth day of Nouember, wherein the Conſtable was wounded to death, and deceaſed ſoone after. Many Lords, Gentlemen, and valiant ſouldiers remained in the field. The armie of the Religion drew into Lorraine, to gather the ſuccours which the Duke Caſſimere led.
               A great deluges of waters was at Verone the two laſt dayes of October, where there were 200 perſons drowned,Great deluges in Italie.
                   and infinite goods waſted and deſtroyed. Likewiſe certaine other places of Italie were in like maner ſo deſtroyed.
               About the end of the yeare,
                     Caſſimere bringeth ſuccours to them of the Religion. the Duke Caſſimere with his Armie of 7500. horſes, and 3000. footemen, ioyned himſelfe vnto the troupes of the Prince of Conde at Pontamonſſon in Lorraine: and there was ſome conference about a peace, which ſucceeded not.
               In the month of Ianuary the Duke Caſſimere made many  remonſtrances in writing to the King and his Councell,Reiſters in France.
                   for the pacifications of troubles in the kingdome of France. This ſeruing for nothing, his army ſet forward: whileſt the warre waxed hotte in diuers prouinces. On the other ſide Iohn Guillaume Duke of Saxonie, brought 4000. Reiſters to the ſuccors of the Catholicke Romanes in France.
               
               The 18. day of the ſaid moneth, Phillip king of Spaine cauſed the Prince Charles his only ſonne, to be kept in a Chamber as priſoner. The Flemings in a certaine requeſt preſented vnto the Emperour and the ſtates of Almaine aſſembled at Spire, declared that that impriſonment was practiſed by the Inquiſitors

of Spaine, becauſe the Prince condemned the dealings of the Duke of Alua, and the rigor of the Inquiſition, and bore great amitie vnto them of the low Countries, againſt which they proceeded with a ſtraunge violence, which cōtinued more & more.
               
                  Siluer ſtayed.In the month of February the Elector Palatin, ſtayed in his hands a great ſum of money deſcried in the country of the Empire, which was going vnto the Duke of Alua into Flaunders, by reaſon whereof there was great notice & threatnings, but in the end the marchants were faine to pacifie and content him.
               The ſixt day of March the Prince of Conde & Caſſimere beſieged and aſſaulted the town of Chartres, ſo that their troupes made ready to goe to the breach, the king ſent to offer a peace, which was incontinently accepted, and the ſecond Edict of pacification publiſhed in the Campe the 30. day of the ſame moneth, of the ſame tenor as the firſt. But this accord endured not, for ſo ſoone as the Duke Caſſimere was retired, they of the Religiō were aſſailed as they went homeward, and in their houſes: and people were diſpatched on all ſides to ſeaze and take dead or a liue, the Prince of Conde, the Admirall, the Lords, Gentlemen, and Captaines, profeſſing the Religion: ſo that in a moment appeared the third ciuill warre on all ſides, what remonſtrances ſoeuer the Prince could make to cauſe the contentions againſt the Edict to ceaſe.
               
                  The death of the Duke of Pruſe.The 20. day of March, died Albert Marqueſſe of Brandebourge, Duke of Pruſe, of the age of 78. yeares: a Prince right noble, vertuous, learned, wiſe, and fearing God. He repurged his Countrey of the errors of Andrew Oſiander. Anne Mary of Brouſwic, his wife by his ſecond marriage, deceaſed the ſame day, and left a ſonne called Albert Frederick, then of the age of 15. yeares.
               
                  The Prince of Orange, and the Count of Hochſtrate iuſtifie themſelues.The 25. day of Aprill, William de Naſſau, Prince of Orange, and Anthony de Ludain, Count Hochſtrate, publiſhed their defences and iuſtification, againſt the perſonall adiornament decreed vpon them by the Duke of Alua, at the inſtance of the Proctor generall, and ſhewed in their writings, vnto whom the cauſe of all the troubles of the lowe Countries ought to be imputed, and that they were nothing culpable of theſe ſtirres.
               
                  In the moneth of May,Open warres in the lowe Countries. certaine people being chaſed from diuers Prouinces, gathered themſelues together, attending the Count de Hochſtrate, and other Captaines: but they were ouerthrowne, and the moſt part cut in peeces, by the troupes of the Duke of Alua. In the ſame time, the Count Lodowick tooke Armes, and ſeazed vpon many places in Friſe. The Duke of Alua ſent incontinently an Army of Spaniards, vnder the conduct of the Count d' Aremberge. They encountred the 24. of May, where the Spaniards were ouerthrowne, their Captaine ſlaine in the field: the Count Adolphe, Lodowicks brother, was alſo ſlaine as hee purſued the victorie. But becauſe the Prince of Orange and others that were adiourned, appeared not at the day aſſigned, they were declared criminalls of treaſon. The firſt of Iune,The Counts d' Aigmont, and d' Horne beheaded. the Duke of Alua greatly ſtirred with the death of the Count d' Aremberge, cauſed to bee beheaded at Bruxells, many Gentlemen, amongſt others, the two Barons of Battembourge: and foure daies after, the Counts d' Aigment and de Horne, which had done great ſeruice vnto the Emperor Charles and King Phillip. The ſame day, the houſe of the Count de Curembourge, where the Lords of the League aſſembled when they made their requeſt, was ſacked and deſtroyed, and a piller placed in the middeſt thereof, with a writing, that it was raced for the execrable coniuration made therein againſt the Catholicke Romane Religion, the Kings maieſtie, nor the eſtate of the Countrey. At the ſame time the Count de Bure, the onely ſonne of the firſt marriage of the Prince of Orange, a Student at Louaine. was taken, & carried into Spaine, againſt the priuiledges o
                     •
                   
                  Brabant, and of the Vniuerſitie of Louaine. After, there was an Edict publiſhed, forbidding 
                     ••
                  pon con
                     •••••
                  cie 
                     〈…〉
                   any way,The Count Lodowick ouerthrowne. or 
                     〈◊〉
                   doe with 
                     〈…〉
                   the Count Lodowick was alwaies in the field the Duke of 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     ••
                  nt an Army to ouerthro
                     •••
                   him, who attended 
                     〈◊〉
                   reſolutely. But at the ioyning his ſouldiers refuſed to fight, ſo that hee was conſtrained to ſaue himſelfe by ſwimming ou
                     ••
                   a Riuer nigh vnto that place, had leauing many of his people there, the 21. day of Iuly.
               
                  
                  The Prince of Orange taketh Armes.The Prince of Orange ſeeing that the Duke of Alua continued in his ſtrange and bloudie actions, after diuers ſorrowful cōplaints vnto the king of Spaine, wherof there was no account made, publiſhed his iuſtifications, and tooke Armes, and conducted his Army with ſuch ſpeed, that quickly he paſſed Meuſe, reſolued to giue battaile to his enemie: But vpon the point to fight, his ſouldiers demaunded ſiluer, which the Prince not able to do, ledde a part of his troupes through Brabant and Hainaut, and entred France, where the Princes and Lords of the Religion called him to their ſuccours.
               
                  The miſerable eſtate of the Churches.Then the Churches of France and the lowe Countries were very deſolate. As for the lowe Countries, the Duke of Alua and the bloudie Councell ſought by all meanes to roote out Religion, to plant the Inquiſition, and to ruinate all the Countrey, killing publikely, and ſecretly, an infinit number of innocent perſons. The affaires of France were in no better caſe: For from the peace made, vntill the ende of Auguſt, there were ſlaine in diuers fortes, more people of the Religion, in Townes and the fieldes, without any diſtinction of Sexe, age, or eſtates, then there died in all the ſecond warre.
               
                  The death of the Prince of Spaine.The 23. of Iuly, died in priſon Charles Prince of Spaine, hauing attained the age of 23. yeares. Certaine daies after deceaſed Elizabeth Queene of Spaine.
               
               
                  The king of Snede.The 28. of the ſame moneth, Iohn Duke of Einland, was choſen king of Snede, in the place of his brother Henry, who for his demerites was depoſed.
               
                  Three Moones at one inſtant.Three Moones were ſeene at one inſtant in heauen, in egall and ſufficient diſtance one from an other eſpecially in 
                     〈◊〉
                  , the ninth day of Auguſt.
               
                  Treuers beſieged.The Towne of Treuers long 
                     〈◊〉
                   before beſieged, 
                     〈◊〉
                   Archbiſhop thereof 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  
                     •••
                  bg
                     •
                  t to 
                     〈…〉
                   by the mediation of the Emperour and 
                     〈…〉
                  .
               
                  Exerciſe of Religion in Auſtrich.In the ſame m
                     •••
                  th, the Emp
                     •••••
                   
                  
                     〈…〉
                   many times bene deſired, at laſt permitted the Lords 
                     〈◊〉
                   Gentlemen of Auſtrich, profeſſ
                     •••
                   the Goſpell to 
                     〈…〉
                   in their Caſtles, 
                     〈◊〉
                  , and ho
                     •
                  ſ
                     •
                  s 
                     〈…〉
                   doctrine contained in the confeſſion of Ausbourge.
               
               
                  The 23. of the ſaid moneth,The third ciuill warre in France. the Prince of Conde being vpon the point to fall into the power of his enemies, ſaued himſelfe with his wife and children, and departing from Noyers in Bourgongne, accompanied with the Admirall of Sieur d' Andelot, and of their traine, paſſed the Riuer of Loire at a Forde, and were conſtrained to ſaue themſelues at Rochell. Then began the third ciuill warre in France, wherevnto both parties prepared themſelues. Iane d' Albert Queene of Nauarre, an excellent Princeſſe, came thither to find her brother in lawe, the Prince of Conde, & brought with her, her ſon Henry, then very young. From that time, that campe of the Religion, was called the Army of the Princeſſe. They preſented and publiſhed many Remonſtrances which ſerued for nothing, and Churches were diſſipated and diſperſed in the moſt part of Prouinces, and very rigorous Edicts publiſhed againſt them of the Religion. Henry Duke of Aniou, and brother of King Charles the ninth, being then chiefe of the Army of the Catholicke Romanes. The Chauncelor d'l'Hospitall, perſwading to peace, was ſent to his houſe and his Seales giuen to an other. The Almaines and other Straungers were ſollicited on both ſides to come to their ſuccours. The Emperour behaued himſelfe very wiſely in this behalfe.
               The 21. day of October,A conference at Aldebourg. ſixe Theologians of the part of Augustus Elector of Saxonie, and as many on the ſide of Iohn William Duke of Saxonie, were aſſembled at Aldenbourge, to agree the controuerſies hapning amongſt theſe Theologians vpon certaine points of Chriſtian doctrine. The Duke Iohn William aſſiſted there perſonally, & that conference and diſputation continued vntill the beginning of March in the yeare following, and there was at large diſputed vpon Iuſtification, and many Articles depending thereon. As the acts of the diſputation do ſhewe.
               The 25. of this moneth, Paul de Ridnend ſieur de Mouuans, a braue and valiant ſouldier amongſt the French Captaines, & much affectioned towards Religiō, was ouerthrowne, with his footmen of Prouence and Daulphine, by the companies of horſemen of the Duke Montpenſier, of the Count de Briſſa
                        •
                     ,
                  
and other Catholicke Romanes, were ſlaine in the field, with a great number of ſouldiers, and loſſe of many Enſigne. Such as eſcaped, ioyned themſelues to the Princes Army. The 12. of Nouember, the Captaine la Coche, a Gentleman of Dauphine, was ouerthrowne with his troupes, by the Duke d' Aumale, betwixt Metz and Sauerne. He was taken, and after put to death. About the ende of Nouember, the Prince of Orange not beeing able to take order in the affaires of the lowe Countries, withdrew into Almaine, with certaine warriours, attending the departure of the Duke de Deux Ponts, who prepared to giue ſuccours to the Princes. In the meane while, the French Armies beſieged and tooke diuers places, remaining in the field notwithſtanding the rigour of winter, which killed a great number of ſouldiers.
               
                  Chriſtopher, Duke of Wittemberge, and Count de Montbelliard, died the 28. of December.
               
                  Reiſters in France.About the ſame time, 5500. Reiſters, conducted by Philibert, Marqueſſe de Bade, and other great Lords of Almain, paſſed Rhene and ſoone after they entred.
               
                  
                  The Queene of England tooke three Spaniſh ſhips.The Queene of England about the 23. of Nouember, tooke three Spaniſh ſhips, laden with great riches. The ſixt of Ianuary ſhe made a reaſon of her action, in an Imprinted writing. Wherein ſhe ſhewed how litle the Duke of Alua his menaces aſtoniſhed her.
               
                  The Duke de Deux Ponts leadeth an Armie into France.During the moneths of Ianuary and February, the next Countrie to Strasbourge was ſeene full of people of warre, Almaines, readie to enter France. The Prince of Orange was in great diſtreſſe, about pleaſing of the Reiſtres: but in the end he appeaſed them, and ioyned himſelfe to the Duke de Deux Ponts, who before he departed, wrote largely vnto the King, the reaſons that mooued him to ſuccour the Princes, and them of the Religion: and the next morning mounted on horsback, and the 12. of March he muſtered, where there were found ſeuen thouſand and ſixe hundreth Reiſtres well mounted, beſides the troupes of the Prince of Orange, and of certaine French Lords and Gentlemen, and certaine Lanſquenets footemen.
               
                  The laſt day of February, the Duke of Alua adiourned by publike Edict, all fugitiues of the lowe Countries,Confiſcations in the lowe Countries. to appeare in perſon within ſix weekes after, vpon paine of confiſcation of their goods. They doubting his crueltie, thought it better to looſe the ſleeue, then the arme: In ſo much that no perſon returned: therfore the Duke fatted himſelfe with confiſcations, and continued alſo to feede himſelfe with the bloud of ſuch faithfull as he could catch.
               The thirteenth day of March, Lewis de Bourbon,
                  The Prince of Conde ſlaine. Prince of Conde, fighting valerouſly in the battaile fought nigh to Coignac in Poictu, amongſt the troupes and Army of the Catholickes, was ouerthrowne from his horſe to the ground, taken priſoner vpon his faith, and againſt all right, diuine, and humane, ſlaine with a Piſtoll behinde on his head, by one called Monteſquian.
               
               The Catholicke Romanes made great reioycings at that death, thinking to haue gained as much, as if they of the Religion had now no helpe at all. There were alſo great triumphes made at Rome. Many Gentlemen and valiant Captaines were ſlaine with the Prince. The Admirall de Chastillon hauing gathered together his troupes vnder the authoritie of Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Nauarre, and of Henry de Bourbon, Prince of Conde, ſonne and ſucceſſor of Lewis, both of them as yet very young, hartned ſo euery one, that the Catholicke Romanes willing to purſue their victory, with an inconſiderate boldneſſe, were beaten downe before Coignac, & had other notable great loſſes after that. The Princes, the Admirall, the Lords, & Gentlemen, Captaines and ſouldiers of the Army, renewed their former oath to do their duties in oppoſing themſelues againſt the violence of the enemies, to procure a good peace to the glory of God, to the reſt of the churches, & of al the kingdome. The Queene of Nauarre brought the Prince her ſonne into the Armie: and after hauing made many good remonſtrances and reaſons to encourage and ſtirre him to the performance of his dutie towards God and his Country, ſhe retired into Rochell. Then waxed the warre hotter then before, with diuers exploits and chaunces on both ſides.
               
                  
                  An Imperiall Iourney.The eſtates of the Empire were aſſembled at Francford the 14. day of Aprill, to prouide for the affaires of Almaine.
               
               
                  The Popes preſent to the Duke of Alua.In the ſame moneth the Pope ſent vnto the Duke of Alua as a recompence of ſo great paines as he had taken to maintaine the Popedome, an helme, and a paire of gloues, bleſſed with great ceremonies on Chriſtmas day. Paul the third ſent the like preſent vnto the Emperour Charles the fift, after he ouercame the Proteſtant Princes.
               
                  The death of the Sieur de Andelot.
                  The ſeuenth day of May, Francis de Colligni, Sieur d' Andelot, Colonell of the French footemen, very affectionate towards the maintaining of the true Religion, a Knight without all feare, and greatly dreaded of the Goſpells enemies, died of poiſon in the Towne of Saintes. Many other great Lords and Gentlemen of the Religion, died in the ſame manner before and after, by the cunning art of certaine poyſoners ſent through Fraunce, and better recompenced for ſuch execrable acts, then the wiſeſt, valianteſt, and faithfulleſt ſeruants of the Crowne.
               The Duke de dreux Ponts being entred into France maugre the hinderance of Claude d'Lorraine, Duke d' Aumale, beſieged and tooke Charite, a Towne placed vpō the Riuer of Loire, and paſſing forward to ioyne himſelfe to the Princes Army, arriued vpon the marches of Limoſin, where an hotte feauer tooke him, and carried him out of the world, the 11. day of Iune, leauing for Commander of his troupes, Wolrad Count de Maſfeld, who brought his Army nigh to the Princes foure daies after this accident, and performed greatly his due, with the other Lords that accompanied him in all the reſt of this warre: hereof is a witneſſe that which happened in the encounter which was the 25. of that moneth: at what time, if a great ruine had not come, the Army of the Catholicke Romanes had bene ouerthrowne: yet they loft a great number of their auantgard, and afterward the Princes got many places in Poictou: Although the Princes were ſtrong, yet they neuer ceaſed to demaund peace: but their Herauld was not ſuffred to carrie their requeſt vnto the king: ſo warre was continued, and the Princes beſieged Poiters, where they loſt time and many people, by

diſeaſes happening in their Campe.
               Whileſt things were thus confuſed in Fraunce and Flaunders, the Emperour Maximilian, the 18. day of Auguſt,Exerciſe of Religion in Auſtriche. ſuffered the Lords and Gentlemen of the Archduche of Auſtrich, to enioy a free exerciſe of Religion, in their Townes, Villages, and Caſtles, after the doctrine of the confeſſion of Ausbourge.
               
               The 27. of the ſame moneth,Great Duke of Thuſcane. 
                  Coſme de Medices Duke of Florence, was created, and after ſolemnly proclaimed at Rome, great Duke of Thuſcane, by the declaration of the Pope Pius the fift.
               The Parliament of Paris condemned the Admirall as guiltie of treaſon,An arreſt againſt the Admirall. who notwithſtanding was of great authoritie in the Princes Army, couragiouſly acquiting himſelfe of the charge he carried, without any apprehenſion of the daungers wherevnto he was ſtill ſubiect, by murderers and poiſoners, which were daily ſent to ſley him. One of which (who had once bene his chamberlaine) was put to death for the like attempt, by the ſentence of the Princes, Lords, and Captains of the Army, the 21. of September.
               After the one Army had long time ſought the other,The battle of Montcōtour
                   finally they encountred in the plaine of Montcontour the third of October, and there was a generall battaile, wherein after great loſſe of both ſides, but more of the Princes, eſpecially of their Lanſquenets, and a part of their French footemen, the field remained vnto the Catholicke Romanes: which made great triumphes thereof through Europe. But in lieu of following their victory, they ſtayed vpon the ſiege of the Towne of S. Iohn d' Angeli, which was yeelded to them by compoſition at the end of certaine weekes: during which time, the beſieged occupied themſelues ſo well, that the Catholickes loſt many thouſands of men, and that of the moſt reſolute of their troupes, by meanes whereof, the Princes had meanes to reaſſure theyr people, to gather in their forces, and to prouide for the affaires of warre, ſo that the Catholickes found themſelues againe to begin.
               The ſixteenth of Nouember,Pardon of the Duke of Alua. the Duke of Alua cauſed to bee publiſhed in the lowe Countries certaine Letters of

abſolution and pardon of the king of Spaine, for ſuch as were abſent and would returne into their houſes but this deceit ſerued for nothing but to bring in birdes too much alreadie tamed with the too much violence of ſo bloudie a Fowler.
               
                  A coniuration in England.The 24. there was diſcouered in England, a coniuration or rebellion of certaine Earles, which would haue planted Poperie in that Kingdome: But the Queene prouided there ſo well for all things, that their forces remained wholy vnprofitable.
               
                  A continuation of warre in France.The third of December, S. Iohn d' Angeli was yeelded by compoſition. Sanſac & other Catholick Romanes, were ſhamefully chaſed from before the Towne of Vezelay in Bourgongne, after great loſſe of his braueſt ſouldiers, to the number of 150. The reſt of the yeare paſſed in diuers exployts of warre, heere and there, to the great hurt of both parts, and to the ruine of the kingdome.
               
                   In the beginning of the yeare, 1570. the Princes and Lords of the Religiō of the kingdome of France, deſiring peace, had diuers negotiations about it: but at that time nothing was concluded, but warre continued, the Churches then being very deſolate.
               
                  Troubles for matters of Religion in Almaine.The Theologians of the Countrey of Saxony being then in great contention for the intelligence of certaine Articles of Chriſtian doctrine namely of Iuſtification of free will, of good workes, of things indifferent, and of the preſence of the body and bloud of Ieſus Chriſt in the Supper. By occaſion whereof, they aſſembled themſelues in a Towne of the Duchie d' Aumale, called Zerueſt: where by the ſtepping in of a certaine Doctor of Tubingue, called Iames Andrew (a man then very renowmed in all Almaine: through the Prouinces whereof hee had not ceaſed certain yeares to runne to cauſe that monſtrous opinion of the vbiquitie of Chriſts body to be receiued: by the meanes whereof, the errors of Nestorius and of Eutiches auntient heretikes, and their complices, are againe renewed) there was made a certaine agreement, which after was reiected and controwled by diuers Theologians. Heerevpon afterward happened greater troubles, which euen at this day

doo endure, by the practiſes and ſlaunders of that vbiquitarie Doctor.
               Whileſt the Chriſtians contended with their voyces, with their writings, and blowes of ſworde in diuers places of Europe, and that the Weſterne Antichriſt ſought by all meanes to maintaine his tyrannie, the Antichriſt of the Eaſt did what hee could by meanes of Selim Soliman his ſucceſſor, the Turke, to encreaſe his domination. For Selim ſent his Embaſſador,The Turkes denounce war to the Venetians. who arriued the 27. of March at Venice, and denounced warre againſt the Venetians, if they refuſed to yeeld him the Ile of Cyprus. Which they refuſing, there was preparation for warre on both ſides.
               The 4. of Aprill the Miniſters of the Churches of Lithuania and Sathogitia, comprehended in the kingdome of Polongne,
                  A Sinode in Polongne. held a Sinode in the Towne of Sendomire: where they agreed vpon certaine Articles touching the Mediatorſhip of Ieſus Chriſt, and the holy Supper, to the end they might all agree in one concordance of doctrine.
               During this time, the troubles of France continued.Exhortation vnto pacification. The Electors Palatin and of Saxonie, aſſembled at Heidelberge, with certaine Princes and great Lords of Almaine, for to honour the marriage of Duke Caſſimere, who eſpowſed Elizabeth daughter of the Duke of Saxonie, ſent large Letters to the king, to exhort and induce him to enter into a pacification.
               About the end of Iune, the king of Polongne and the Muſcouite, made a truce for three yeares.A truce. The Muſcouite was then ſore troubled with extreame famine.
               In the moneth of Iuly,An Imperiall Iourney. the eſtates of the Empire were aſſembled at Spire, to prouide for the affaires & quietneſſe of Almaine. The Emperor was there in perſon, with his two daughters, Marie, and Elizabeth, which were affianced vnto the kings of Spaine and France, vnto which they were ſent.
               In the moneth of Auguſt the Duke of Alua put to death in the Towne of Antwerpe a great number of ſouldiers of the garriſon of Valenciennes,
                  Executions to death. for a mutinie againſt the Count de Lodron theyr Captaine. After by the ſpace of certaine moneths, hee remained peaceable in his gouernment of the

lowe Countries, which he forraged at his pleaſure, heaping vp a maruellous bootie to himſelfe.
               
                  The 3. Edict of pacificatiō.The third ciuill warre tooke an end in France, and the Edict of pacification was publiſhed in the Parliament of Paris, the 11. day of Auguſt.
               
                  The death of Iohn Brencius the father of vbiquitie.
                  Iohn Brencius, a Miniſter in the Duchie of Witemberge, of the age of 69. yeares, and who had begun to preach & write after the firſt Doctors of our time, died the 11. day of September. Certaine yeares before his death, he had publiſhed by diuers Imprinted bookes, a new opinion to maintaine the carnall preſence of Ieſus Chriſt in his holy Supper. The ſumme of this opinion (willing to attribute to the fleſh of Ieſus Chriſt a preſence in all places, as well as to his diuine nature) was, that the humane and diuine nature being inſeperably vnited in one alone perſon, the humane is in each place, as well as the diuine. But in the explication of this myſterie, he maintained that the perſonall vnion of theſe two natures in Ieſus Chriſt, doo onely ſignifie that they are together, & not otherwiſe in Ieſus Chriſt, then in S. Peter and other ſeruants of God, according to the eſſence: But as to the efficacie, that all the properties of the diuine nature, are really, and indeed diſperſed and communicated to the humane nature, ſo that thereby hauing egall maieſtie and power with the diuine, the ſaid diuine nature worketh and doth nothing without it. Although the authoritie of this perſon ſerued to the increaſe of this dangerous errour, yet there wanted not for many learned men which oppoſed themſelues betimes againſt this errour, and prooued euen to Brencius himſelfe (without that either he or any of his Diſciples could anſwer pertinently therevnto) that if ſuch an opinion of the vbiquitie of the fleſh of Ieſus Chriſt, and of the perſonall vnion of the two natures, according to the definition of Brencius, were true, the two natures of Ieſus Chriſt ſhould be ſeperated euen according to the eſſence, as well in Ieſus Chriſt, as in S. Peter, and other the faithfull: and Chriſt ſhould be God after the fleſh. Behold a blaſphemie which eſtabliſheth the hereſie of Nestorius, ſeperating the two natures of Chriſt, and which on the other ſide confoundeth the properties of thoſe two

natures, as did the heretike Eutiches. Notwithſtanding that they diſcouered to Brencius, the abſurdities and blaſphemies riſing vpon his opinion: yet left not he to maintaine it, hauing a Diſciple called Iames Andreas, who with certaine other that after roſe vp, added errors vnto errors. And which is worſe, Brencius in the end of his life, in the place to humble himſelfe before God, for ſo moleſting the Churches, in the making of his teſtament, thundred againſt the Churches which approoued not his vbiquitie, being ſo farre audacious, euen he alone, who could not vnto the purpoſe reply to the arguments of certaine Doctors which liuely refuted him, as to condemne all the Churches of France, England, Scotland, Suetia, and others. This teſtament was maintained by his Diſciples, and from that time, till this inſtant, hath cauſed great euils, and kindled a fire which cannot be extinguiſhed, if God ſet not too his hand in ſome eſpeciall maner.
               The laſt day of October, Eaſt and Weſt, Friſeland, Holland,
                  Deluges in Friſeland, France, and other Countries. 
                  Zeland, Brabant, and other places thereabouts, were ſore tormented and beaten with a ſtraunge tempeſt of windes: and two dayes after, the Sea ſwelled, and hauing broken and ouerthrowne her dikes and leuies, drowned many Countries and infinite people and cattaile, with ſuch an aſtoniſhment of all, that it was feared all the lowe Countries would haue bene ſwallowed vp. There happened as much in the Balthike ſea, eſpecially at Hambourge. There was alſo great ouerflowings of waters in France, about the end of this yeare.
               About this time the Turke made quicke warre vpon the Venetians in the Ile of Cyprus with a puiſſant Army,Nicoſia taken which by aſſault tooke Nicoſia, one of the greateſt Townes thereof, wherein there was made a cruell and bloudie butcherie of the beſieged in the moneth of September.
               The fourteenth day of Nouember,Marriage of the King of Spaine 
                  Phillip King of Spaine eſpowſed his Nieco Mario, the daughter of the Emperor Maximilian.
               
               The 17. of Nouember,Earthquakes. a great Earthquake hapned at Venice, Ferrara, and other places of Italy, whervpon followed maruellous tuines and deſolations eſpecially at Ferrara.
               
               
                  
                  Marriage of the King of France. Deluges in France.The 26. and others following, Charles King of Fraunce, eſpowſed at Mezieres, Elizabeth the daughter of the Emperor Maximilian.
               
               The 16. of December, the Riuer of Rhene ſo ouerflowed, that in 80. yeares had not beene ſeene the like: wherevpon many diſcourſes publiſhed, remembring the miſeries paſſed, and the wonders happening, teach vs euery one to feare and preuent the euils to come.
               
                  An Imperiall Iourney.The 11. of the ſame moneth, the Emperor aſſembled the eſtates at Spire, to prouide for the affaires of Almaine, and to giue audience vnto ſtraunge Embaſſadors.
               
                  Peace betwixt Denmarke and Snede.The Kings of Denmarke and Snede, made peace together the 13. of the ſame moneth, hauing bene at warre together 10. yeares, or there abouts.
               The 20. of that moneth, the Embaſſadors of the Proteſtant Princes, made a long oration to the King of France, beeing then at 
                     Ʋillers, to exhort him aboue all things to keepe his Edict of pacification: which he promiſed to doo. The French Churches lifted vp their heads after many ſtormes.
               
                  
                  Ieachim, Elector of Brandebourge, died the ſecond day of Ianuary, and 11. dayes after, deceaſed alſo his brother Iohn, Marqueſſe of Brandebourge.
               
               
                  Vaiuoda of Tranſiluania.The 13. day of March, Iohn Vaiuoda of Tranſiluania, ſuffering himſelfe to be gouerned by a pernitious heretike, called Blandrata, one that counterfeited himſelf a Phiſitian, was ſlaine by the drugges of the ſaid Blandrata, and died without heires, by meanes whereof, Stephen Bathory was choſen 
                     Ʋaiuoda in his roome.
               
                  A diſputation againſt the Anabaptiſts.The 28. day of May, began a diſputation betwixt Peter Datherius, Miniſter of the Goſpell, and 15. Preachers, Anabaptiſts, in the preſence of Frederick Elector Palatin, who had giuen them ſafe conduct. The Articles in the diſputation, to the number of 13. touched that which is in chiefe debate at this day, betwixt them and the reformed Churches: namely of the authoritie of Canonicke bookes of the old and new Teſtament, of the vnitie of the diuine eſſence, and of the deſtination of the three perſons ſubſiſting therein: of the one fleſh and

humane nature of Ieſus Chriſt, borne of the Virgin Mary: of the Iſraelitike and Chriſtian Church: of originall ſinne of little children: of iuſtification: of the reſurrection of the fleſh: of excommunication and diuorce: of the proprietie and poſſeſſion of goods: of the Magiſtrate, and of criminall iuſtice: of an oath: of the Baptiſme of litle children: and of the communion of the body and bloud of Ieſus Chriſt in the Supper. This diſputation was ſet downe in writing, and continued from the 28. of May, vntil the 19. of Iune, without any fruite, becauſe of the obſtinacie of the Anabaptiſts, which the Elector ſent away ſafe, forbidding them to maintain opiniōs, or teach in his countries.
               The 25. of May, the Pope, the King of Spaine,
                  A league againſt the Turke. Raining of corne. and the Venetians, made a league againſt the Turke.
               The fourth day of Iune, it rayned great abundance of Turnep-rootes, Peas, and other kinde of corne, at Goldtberge, Lemberge, and Lauben, in Soleſia: whereof the peiſants and poore Countrey people made bread, and were nouriſhed in a great famine which afflicted the Countrey. On the other ſide in baſe Saxonie, in a litle Towne called Leubourge, nie to Lunebourge and Hambourge, two Vſurers and ſellers of corne were deſtroyed through a maruellous iudgement of God. The one fell dead ſuddenly as he opened his barne doore, the corne whereof alſo was eaten and carried away with vermine: And the other Corne-ſeller, as he was going to drowne himſelf, was taken and carried to priſon, where he hanged himſelfe the night following.
               About the ſame time,Rodes of the Muſcouites. the Muſcouites made courſes and ſtrange forragings vppon the frontiers of the Kingdome of Snede, and meaning to enter further, they were conſtrained to retire to goe to defend their owne countrie, which the Tartarians put to fire and ſword.
               The firſt day of Auguſt,Famagoſte yeelded. 
                  Famagoſte a capitall Towne in the Ile of Cyprus, hauing ſuſtained a long ſiege, and diuers furious aſſaults, was yeelded by compoſition, to Mahomet Baſſa, who in the place to keepe his promiſe, cauſed to be ſlaine all the Chriſtian Captains and ſouldiers which came towards him, and certaine daies after, cauſed one Mark Anthony Bragandin, a Venetian Gentleman, Gouernour of Famagoſte, to bee

ſcorched and broyled aliue, and ſo got all the whole Ile for Selim, whoſe ſucceſſors are at this day peaceable poſſeſſors thereof.
               
                  A ſtrange Sun.The 29. of September, almoſt through all Almaine the Sun was ſeene of the colour of bloud. The ſame day the Towne of Reuel, the chiefe Towne of Liuonia, was ſucked and ſpoyled by the Muſcouites.
               
               
                  A Nauall battaile at Lepante.The ſeuenth of October, the memorable Nauall battaille in the gulfe of Lepante, in the Mediterrane Sea, betwixt the Army of the League, and that of the Turkes: Selim loſt there 15. thouſand men, and the moſt part of his Veſſels. The Chriſtians tooke a great number of priſoners. This victorie greatly abated the pride of the Turkes: yet the Venetians certain time after, perceiuing the eſtate of their affaires required peace, they ſought, and obtained it of Selim.
               
               
                  A conference at Dreſde.The tenth day of October, the Theologians and Miniſters of the Electorſhip of Saxonie, aſſembled at Dreſde to prouide for troubles alreadie come, for matters of Religion, and they agreed to publiſh a confeſſion of the perſon and incarnation of Ieſus Chriſt, of his maieſtie, aſcention, and ſitting on the right hand of God: alſo of the Supper of the Lord. The other Theologians of Saxonie, oppoſed themſelues by writings Imprinted, againſt the ſaid confeſſion: wherevpon many debates followed.
               
                  The Duke of Nothfolke beheaded.A coniuration againſt the Queene of England, was miraculouſly diſcouered, and the Duke of Northfolke Captaine of that coniuration, arreſted and condemned vpon Letters, and after executed to death.
               
                  Almaine was greatly afflicted in many places with daungerous diſeaſes, and with extreame famine in Snabie, and in Bauiere.
               
               The Churches of France were a good quietneſſe, becauſe of the good countenance that the King ſhewed vnto them of the Religion.
               
                   The ſixt day of Ianuary, The Riuer of 
                     Ʋistule paſſing in the Duchie of Pruſe,
                  Strange wonders in Pruſe. nigh vnto Thorne, was conuerted into bloud the ſpace of three dayes, to the great feare of all the

people: hauing againe taken his ordinary colour, about nine of the clocke at night, there was a ſtraunge Earth-quake, two cloudes rent and let fal their waters, with ſo great a force, that fortie houſes were carried away by the furie of the Riuer, ſixe Arches of Thornebridge ouerthrowne, and 300. perſons drowned. There fell alſo from heauen, ſtones of ten pound waight, wherewith many people were ſlaine. The 22. of the ſame moneth, the Towne of Inspruck was troubled with ſo terrible an Earthquake, which endured three dayes, that the moſt part of the houſes, the Pallace of the Arch-duke of Auſtriche, the Church and the Printing-houſe went downe: by meanes wherof, the Arch-duke was conſtrained to retire into a great Parke, where were nouriſhed diuers ſorts of ſauage and wilde beaſtes, euery man iudging the world ſhould haue ended. Munchen in Bauiere and Ausbourge, had their part of this feare.
               The Caſtle of Wirtzbourge was burnt the 29. of that moneth, ſo ſuddenly,Fire in Wirtzbourge. that the Biſhop had no leiſure to carrie any thing away but his ſhert. He loſt by that fire, all his Regiſters, titles, and papers.
               The winter hauing bene very ſharpe,A ſharp winter this moneth continued all Ianuarie and Februarie exceeding ſharpe, and extraordinarie.
               In the moneth of February the Duke of Alua thinking to haue come to the vpper hand of all his purpoſes,Exactions of the Duke of Alua, and reſolutions in Flaunders. laid vpon the Flemmings great exactions: and amongſt other, the tenth penney perpetual. And notwithſtanding remonſtrances vnto him of the impoſſibilitie thereof: and that without the aduiſe of the Eſtates of the country he could not charge nor taxe them, yet reſolued he to put it in execution. But the people, eſpecially of Bruxelles, ſought all means to exempt themſelues from it. Such as were abſent, beholding this ouerture thus made, gathered in companies here and there to buſie the Spaniard: as they did ſoone after. For the firſt day of Aprill the Count de la Marche, ſieur de Lumey, arriuing ſecretly frō England, ſurpriſed the Ile & the Towne of Brielle in Holland, & ſtraight Flusſhing, a notable hauen of Zeland and Emchuſe, forſooke the Duke of Alua his part, who to remedie it, ſent the Count de Boſſu with

an Army of Spaniards into Holland, who the ninth of the ſame moneth ſacked Roterdam, and ſlew a great number of the Burgeſſes. The Count Lodowick, the Prince of Orange his brother, hauing obtained a new Army in France, with certain Lords of the Religion, by the Kings conſent ſupriſed Monts in Hainaut, the 24. of May, where ſhortly after hee was encloſed by the Duke of Alua his troupes, houering thereabouts and ſtopping the paſſages. Valenciennes was alſo take, but ſtraight againe recouered by the Spaniards.Appearance of reſt in France. Then alſo it ſeemed that France ſhould haue bin peaceable for a long time, & that the reformed Churches ſhould no more be diſquieted in time to come: namely, in regard of a marriage concluded of Henry Prince of Nauarre, with Margarite the kings ſiſter, as alſo that then the Admirall ſeemed in great credit in the Court, by means wherof the moſt part of men, eſpecially they of the Religion, imagined already a Goſpell without the Croſſe, and a worldly Chriſt.
               
                  The death of Pope Pius the 5. and election of Gregory, 13.Pope Pius the fift died the firſt day of May, and the 13. after his obſequies ended, the Cardinalls elected for Pope, a Boulognois, Doctor of the Canon lawe, called Iaques Boncompagne, againſt the purpoſe of diuers competitors. He called himſelfe Gregorie 13. and for his entry gaue order for warre againſt the Turkes, confirmed the decrees of the Councell of Trent, made great a ſonne and two nephewes of his, ratified the promiſes of marriage of the Prince of Nauarre, with Margarite of France, whereof his predeceſſor made difficultie, and carefully and readily prouided for the good aſſurance of his temporall greatneſſe.
               
                  The death of the Queene of Nauarre.The ninth day of Iune, Iane d' Albert, Queene of Nauarre, an excellent Princeſſe amongſt all them of her time, daughter of Henry d' Albert, and of Margarite d' Valois, ſiſter of king Francis the firſt, going to Paris to giue order for diuers things requiſit for the honor of the Prince her ſonnes marriage, fell ſuddenly ſicke and died, to the great griefe of them of the Religion, and of all perſons that loued the reſt of France, which this Princeſſe had procured by all meanes.The ouerthrow of the Duke de Medina Coeli.
                  
               
               The 12. of Iune, the Duke de Medina Coeli, being ſent from Spaine into Flaunders, to gouerne in the Duke of Alua his

place, was ſhamefully ouerthrowne by them of Fluſhing, loſt 12. hundreth Spaniards, 16. ſhips, and foure of them were burnt in his preſence, hee ſauing himſelfe by flight. The bootie was very great, and almoſt ineſtimable.
               On the 15. day, an alliance was confirmed at Paris betwixt the King of France, and the Queene of England,Alliance. who ſent thither the Lord Clinton her Admirall.
               The 16. the Prince of Orange publiſhed the cauſes wherefore hee againe tooke Armes againſt the Spaniards and their adherents, in the lowe Countries.
               The 25. certaine Gentlemen of Friſe, with good troupes, holding the Prince of Orange his part, ſeized vpō 
                  Dordrec and other places of Holland, which ioyned themſelues on that ſide. The exerciſe of Religion was again ſet vp, to the great deſpite of the Duke of Alua and the Spaniards.
               Three dayes after,The Prince of Orange iuſtified himſelfe to the Emperour. the Prince of Orange writ at large vnto the Emperor, ſhewing him the cauſes of that warre. In the mean while, certain Almain Lords leuied Reiters to ſuccour the Duke of Alua.
               
               
                  Sigiſmond Auguſt, king of Polongne,
                  The death of the King of Polongne. died the firſt of Iuly without heire-males, which gaue occaſion vnto Katherine de Medices, Queene mother and Regent in France, to ſend Embaſſadors into Polongne, to the end to obtaine the Crowne for Henry Duke d' Antou, her ſecond ſonne then liuing.
               The 19. of Iuly,War in ye lowe Countrie. the Emperour put the Prince of Orange to baniſhment from the Empire, and pronounced him acquited from all priuiledges and rights, and all his goods confiſcated, if he continued with ſtrong hand to enter into the lowe Countries. This notwithſtanding, the Prince purſued that which he had begun. But in this moneth of Iuly, 7. or 8. thouſand French men marching to the ſuccours of the beſieged at Monts in Hainaut, before they came there, were defeated, their chieftaines taken, and they of Monts ſtraighter kept in. The Prince paſſed Rhene & tooke Ruremond, the 4. of Auguſt. Louaine yeelded. Maligues, and certain other Townes were ſurpriſed. After he drew towards Monts to ſuccor his brother. But the news of the pitious eſtate of Frāce, brought ſuch a change,

that the Prince was conſtrained to cut off his way, to enter his troupes, and retier himſelfe into Holland, whether he was called by the eſtates of the Countrey, being accompanied with a ſmall number of people. This retrait ſo encouraged the Duke of Alua, hauing now nothing to hinder him, that the 21. of September, he made himſelfe maiſter of Monts by compoſition, and kept promiſe with the Count Lodowick, cauſing him ſafely to be conducted vnto the lands of the Empire. After this, Maligues was abandoned by them, which the Prince left there, and all other places before taken, were taken againe into the hands of the Spaniards. From Monts the Duke went towards Malines the firſt day of October. Certaine Burgeſſes and all the Cleargie met him with Croſſes and Banners, but it ſerued for nothing, for as much as they had receiued the Prince into their Towne, he gaue the pillage and ſpoile of the Towne to the ſouldiers, which tooke their pleaſure there three daies, ſlew many men, and violated many women and maidens.
               
                  Horrible murders in Frāce.Whileſt the lowe Countrie Churches ſobbed thus vnder ſuch tempeſts, they of France which were thought ſhould haue enioyed ſome long reſt, were rudely beaten, and as it were, flatly ouerthrowne by a maruellous ſtraunge accident. Wee haue before ſpoken of the death of the Queene of Nauarre, as ſhe came to Paris, about the marriage of the Prince her ſon. This Prince, afterward called the King of Nauarre, Henry de Bourbon his Couſin Prince of Conde, Gaspar de Coligni, great Admiral of France, le Count de la Rochefoucand, the Marqueſſe de Reinel, many Lords, Gentlemen and Captaines, which had alwaies borne Armes againſt the Catholike Romanes, came to the Court about that marriage, at the kings requeſt. This marriage hauing bin ſolemnized vpon Monday, the 18. of Auguſt, the Friday following the Admirall was grieuouſly wounded with the blowe of an Hargabuſh, ſhot out of a certaine window, by a man then not ſufficiently knowne, called Maureuel, a waged murderer, yea one of the moſt execrableſt manquellers of the world: who afterward by the iuſt iudgement of God, loſt the ſame arme with which he gaue that deteſtable blowe. The Sunday following, the Admirall was moſt traitorouſly

ſlaine in his chamber, and caſt dead out of the windowes vpon the pauement: where he was knowne of Henry Duke of Guiſe. After, they ruſhed vpon the other Lords, Gentlemen & Captaines, which were ſlaine alſo: ſome within the Caſtle de Louuine, others without. This was done betimes in the morning. All that day and morning was employed by ſuch as they call Catholicke Romanes, in ſleying men and women of the Religion, many, not ſparing women bigge with childe, no nor litle children. They continued this the dayes following, but not in ſo great number, becauſe the murderers found not any more to ſley. The day of the wounding, and the Sunday, the King diſpatched Letters expreſly vnto the Gouernours of the Prouinces, whereby he aduertiſed them, that that diſorder hapned beſides his knowledge, and to his great griefe, by the practiſes and enmities of the houſe of Guiſe, and that he determined to take good order therefore; in the meane time, hee would that his Edict of pacification ſhould in each point be maintained: Briefly, he imputed the Admiralls wounding and death (whom in the ſaid Letters he called his Couſin) to the particular quarels of the houſes of Chastillon, and Guiſe. But meer contrary, on thurſday the 28. hee declared and cauſed to be publiſhed, that that maſſacre and horrible murder had beene done by his expreſſe commaundement, and to preuent a conſpiration of the Admirall and his partakers: wherof notwithſtanding neither he nor his Councellors made it appeare, nor could produce any profit, although it was much prooued and deſired of many. Whileſt great and litle were thus hungring and thirſting after innocent bloud, the ſame Sunday the 24. of Auguſt, certain Prieſts by Art made a great Thorn-tree in the church-yard of S. Innocent, flouriſh at noone time of the day, and cryed, a myracle, a myracle. This encreated the rage of the people againſt them of the Religion. And although the Prieſts in the meane while filled well their powches by ſuch an inuention, making the people beleeue that the Catholicke Romane Religion began now to flouriſh againe in Fraunce: yet their deuiſe was ſoone after diſcouered, and the tree remained deſtroyed: but euen then when it flouriſhed, ſome ſaid that God had

ſhewed to all mens eyes the innocencie of ſuch as were ſlaine, and that by ſuch a token hee aſſured his Church that it ſhould not periſh as the perſecutors pretended, but that it ſhould floriſh vnder the croſſe againſt all hope of men, as that Tree floriſhed extraordinarily. Moreouer certain weekes after le Sieurs de Briquemald & de Caragues, excellent men, & which had done great ſeruices to the Crowne, the one by Armes, and the other in affaires of iuſtice, were (in hatred of the Admirall and of Religion) hanged & ſtrangled within Paris, in the preſence of the king himſelf, his mother & his brethren. They maintained euen to the laſt ſigh the innocency of the dead Admiral, and of them of the religiō, ſhewing a ſingular cōſtancy in their deaths. Certaine yeares after they were iuſtified by the Edict of Henry the third the next king, and their names declared honorable: as alſo the before mentioned maſſacre was cōdemned & diſavowed. But men cōtented not themſelues thus to haue imbrued the towne of Paris with blood, but in like ſort were all of the Religion handled at Meaux in Brie, at Troys in Champagne, at Rouen, at Orleans, at le Charite, at Burges, at Lyons, at Romains in Dauphine, at Thoulouſe, at Bourdeaux, with ſo barbarous diſloyalties and cruelties that ſcarce our poſteritie will beleeue it. In few dayes with them of Paris were ſlain more then thirty thouſand perſons, olde and yong, of all quallities, men, women and children, as bookes in Print do ſhewe euery day. The King of Nauarre and the Prince of Conde, were conſtrained to abiure Religion. The Parliament of Paris publiſhed a diffamatorie arreſt and iudgement againſt the Admirall, whoſe bodie was taken from the gibet, and ſo ſecretly buried that his enemies could not finde it out. Many perſons forſooke Religion, ſome vpon infirmitie, others vpon deſpight: ſo that ſo hard a proofe diſcerned the falſe from the true Chriſtians. Rochell, Sancerre, Niſmes in Languedoc, Montaubon in Querci, and a fewe other Townes in the kingdome, after diuers conſultations maintained themſelues and kept the exerciſe of Religion, which put the authors of the murthers and confuſions into a new paine, as ſhall be touched hereafter.
               Amongſt ſo many troubles & commencements of greater

ſorrowes,A new ſtarre. a new Starre appeared in heauen as great as the day Starre, nigh the Starre Caſſiopec, of the figure of a Lozenge. This beganne the ninth day of Nouember at night. It ſtirred not from the place the ſpace of three weekes. It was thought to be like the Starre which appeared to the wiſe men which came from the Eaſt, to worſhip Ieſus Chriſt in Bethlehem, ſtraight after his birth. This Starre appeared in ſeuen, the ſpace of nine moneths or thereabouts. Hereof were many diſcourſes made by diuers learned men.
               Concerning the lowe Countries▪ after the Princes retrait aboue mentioned,Exploits of warre in Holland and Zeland. the waight of the warre fell vpon Holland and Zeland, whither the Duke of Alua ſent the Captaine Montdragon with twentie Enſignes of Wallons, which to the great aſtoniſhment of euery one got the Ile of Suitbeuerland, and conſtrained the Princes troupes to leuie the ſiege before a Towne called Tergoes. In the meane while the Duke marched with his Armie, and the 21. of Nouember tooke and ſpoyled Zutphen, a Towne in Holland. And to feare others and drawe them to yeeld the ſooner, without delay all manner of cruelties were executed by the Spaniards and Wallons in that Towne.
               
                  Frideric de Toledo the Dukes ſonne and Lieutenant, marched from Zutphen to Narden, which is an other litle Towne, wherof the Inhabitants at the yeelding of themſelues the 30. day of Nouember, were ſo cruelly handled againſt the rights of reddition and of war, amongſt people of any humanitie, that men might iudge that this ſacking and ſpoyle with that of Roterdam, were the onely motiue and cauſe of the riſing of other Townes which then were vpon the point to returne vnder the yoake. After the taking of this Towne the Army drew ſtraight to Harlem, the Inhabitants whereof determined to defend it, rather then ſubmit it ſelfe vnto the mercy of people without mercy. Indeed they bore themſelues valiantly, and ſuſtained diuerſ aſſaultes with the aide of certaine ſouldiers which were ſent them by the Prince, and kept good defence vntill the 13. of Iuly the yeare following.
               In the yeare 1573. the Townes of Rochel & Sancerre were 
                  
cruelly handled,Sieges of Rochel and Sancerre. aſſailed and bearen by the Catholick Romans, but with a diuerſe iſſue. As for Rochel being well garded and defended, the newes alſo of the report that the Duke of Anion ſhould be king of Polongne, were cauſe that Rochel was deliuered, and obtained peace: yea and remained with her priuiledges. They of Sancerre hauing beene troubled with an horrible and grieuous famine the ſpace of certaine moneths, receiued ſome fauourable dealing by the comming of the Polonian Embaſſadors, which then came into Fraunce to conduct away their new king. Theſe things ended in the moneth of Iuly, to the confuſion of the Catholicke Romanes, which loſt more then twentie thouſand men before Rochel. Some Churches then began to reſpire, and many tooke againe good courage to redreſſe ſome portion of ſo many ruines.
               
                  The ſiege and loſſe of Harlē.Warre was alſo kindled in Holland, eſpecially at the ſiege of Harlem, where the beſieged men and women, executed maruellouſly their duties: but not being able to be ſuccoured, oppreſſed alſo with famine: finally they yeelded themſelues the 13. of Iuly at the diſcretion of Frederick de Toledo, who drowned, hanged, & beheaded, more then two thouſand ſouldiers. The Burgeſſes eſcaped death by the payment of a great ſumme of money, which they ſtraight disburſed.
               In the moneth of April before, they of Fluſhing obtained a memorable victory ouer the Army of the Duke of Alua, and caſt into the ſea a great number of Spaniards. After the taking of Harlem, Frederic beſieged Alemar, a Towne nigh therevnto, reſoluing with himſelfe to make a goodly butchery of the Burgeſſes, if they could obtaine it. But he was conſtrained to leaue his ſiege after great loſſe. The Prince on the other ſide found meanes to obtaine the ſtrong Caſtle of Rameken, and the Towne of S. Gertrudenberghe. They of Linchuſe ouercame the Nauall Army of the Count de Boſſu, and tooke him priſoner the 12. day of October, whileſt Leiden was beſieged of the Spaniards.
               The ſecond day of September, the Duke of Alua forſooke the lowe Countries, making his iourney through the Franche Counte, Sauoy and Piemont, to embarke himſelfe at Genes, and

ſo to ſaile into Spaine, carrying with him an infinit bootie from the lowe Countries, which he left in great heate of warre betwixt the hands of Lewis Requeſcens, great commaunder of Caſtile, a man in appearance of ſoft condition, but no leſſe fellonious and cruell, then his predeceſſor in that gouernment.
               
                  Iohn de Auſtriche made warre in Barbarie about the ende of this yeare, and got Tunes,
                  Warre in Barbary. builded a ſtrong Citadell betwixt Tunes and the Goulette, to reſiſt the Turkes: after hee withdrew into Sicilie.
               
               The great Commander meaning to driue away the Prince  of Orange, incamped before Middelbourge in Zeland,
                  
                     Requeſcens ouerthrowne, and Middlebourg yeelded armed a puiſſant Fleete, about 80. veſſels, and the 24. of Ianuary, 1574. made ſaile towards Zeland, but his Army encountred the Princes Army: In ſo much that after a long combat, where that Commaunder commaunded not, but looking ouer the Dikes, to iudge of the blowes with more aſſurance, he ſawe the Spaniards ouerthrown with his Wallons, wherof ſome were drowned, others carried away priſoners, and almoſt all their veſſels loſt. They of Middelbourg wayed with the ſiege, and all hope which they had of ſuccours, turned into diſpaire: they yeelded themſelues a moneth after.
               In the beginning of February, the warre waxed hotte in Barbary, betwixt the Spaniards, Moores, and Turkes.
               The 18. of the ſame moneth, Henry Duke of Aniou,
                  
                     Henry de Valois king of Polongne. arriuing from France in Polongne, made his entrie into Cracouia, and was crowned three dayes after, with accuſtomed ſolemnities.
               About this time, the Venetians beeing tyred with warre,Peace betwixt the Venetians & the Turke. entred an accord with Selym, whereat the Pope and the King of Spaine were not content.
               
                  Fraunce entred into new troubles.Troubles in France. They tooke them to Arms in Normandie and Poictou. The king in great haſt retired himſelfe from S. Germaines to Paris. From that time followed great chaunges in France, there then ſeeming to be no more any queſtion of Religion, but of the eſtate: a thing notwithſtanding of longer diſcourſe then I need now ſet down, ſeeing it i
                     •
                   handled in particular bookes depending vpon the hiſtory of this time.
               
                  
                  The ouerthrow of the Duke Christopher, and of the Count Lodowick.
                  The warre continued in Holland, and the Spaniards encamped before Leyden: but they were conſtrained to leaue their ſiege the 23. day of March to goe meete the Duke Chriſtopher, ſon of the Elector Palatin, & the Counties Lodowick and Henry de Naſſan brethren, which came downe in the ſtrength of winter towards Maſtriche, with a good number of footmen and horſemen. Theſe Lords being aduertiſed that the Spaniards came to finde them, aduanced themſelues, and encountred in a field of thornes called Morkerheide, where the Lanſquenets crying after ſiluer, refuſed the combat: inſomuch that the Lords were vanquiſhed and ſlaine all three, vpon the fourth day of April.
               
                  The death of Camerarius.
                  
                  Ioachim Camerarius, a learned man amongſt all the Almaine, an inward and familiar friend of Phillip Melancton, dyed at Leipſic, beeing of the age of 74. yeares, the 17. day of Aprill.
               
                  The death of Coſme de Medices.
                  The 21. day, died Coſme de Medices Duke of Florence, and great Duke of Thuſcane, leauing a ſonne, vnto whom the ſtate and tytle of great Duke, was confirmed by the Pope.
               
                  Antwerpe pilled by the Spaniards.The great Commaunder thinking to haue gained all, by the ouerthrowe of the Count Lodowick, cauſed a generall pardon to bee publiſhed in the Towne of Antwerpe, the 23 of Aprill, but none came for it, ſo that the war continued. Yet three daies after this publication, the Spaniſh ſouldiers kindling a mutinie for want of their pay, entred into the Towne of Antwerpe by the fauour of the Caſtle, conſtraining the Burgeſſes to furniſh them the ſumme of foure thouſand Florents: to bring this to paſſe, they vſed great inſolencies. They conſtrained alſo the Gouernor and the Wallon ſouldiers to auoyd the towne, with intent to gorge themſelues the more at their eaſe. They alſo ſet farther off, the ſhips which had the guard of the Hauen. The Princes Nauie hauing diſcouered theſe Ships, got quickly hold of them, and carried them away in the Commaunders view, whileſt he and his ſouldiers tooke their paſtime in ſacking of Antwerpe.
               
               
                  The ſecond beſieging of Leiden.The Spaniards prceiuing that during their abſence Leiden was not againe victualled, returned to beſiege it the ſecond day

of May, and held it cloſer then before, for in diuers places they made Forts, to the number of 22. vpon large and deep dikes, the moſt part invnited and ſtrengthned with 2. or 3. Canons.
               A fire at Venice & Bruxelles.
               The eleuen day of May a great part of S. Markes Pallace at Venice was burned, and two daies after a great number of houſes at Venice with a notable loſſe for many Marchants. There happened as much at Bruxels in Brabant, the 24. of the ſame month, and the fire tooke hold of certaine Gunpowder which was in a Tower, which by the ruine thereof greatly endamaged all the Towne, and ſlew 15. perſons.
               A great warre was then in France, eſpecially in Poictou,
                  The taking and death of Montgommery.
                   and in Normandie. Gabriel Counte de Montgommeri, hauing with a fewe men ſuſtained the ſiege and diuers aſſaultes in the Caſtle of Danfronc, yeelded it by compoſition: but he was reſerued and carried priſoner vnto Paris, where not long after by decree of the Parliament his head was cut off. In the meane while the Duke of Alencon the kings yongeſt brother, and the king of Nauarre, were as priſoners in the Court: and the Churches languiſhed vnder ſo many confuſions.
               The laſt day of May, Charles the ninth King of France,
                  The death of Charles 9. dyed of the age of 34. yeares, in the wood of 
                     Ʋincennes, leauing his kingdome much indebted, and maruellouſly full of broyles.
               
                  Henry of 
                     Ʋalois, the third ſonne of Henry the ſecond, born in the yeare 1551. the 21. of September, beeing in Pologne when his brother Charles dyed, and vnderſtanding the newes of his death, departed ſecretly that kingdome, and tooke poſſeſſion of that his mother had kept for him. He paſſed through 
                     Ʋenice, ſo into Piedmont, where he viſited Margarite the Ducheſſe, his Aunt, who dyed ſoone after, and arriuing at Lyons in the beginning of September, hee cauſed certaine Edicts to be publiſhed againſt them of the Religion, who ſtood vpon their gard, ſeeing their new Prince threatned them ſo openly. A litle before his comming, Henry Montmorency Marſhal de Danuile, and gouernor of Languedoc, entred in cōference with the principals of the Religion, leaſt that prouince & other nigh therevnto might come to ruine and deſtruction by ciuill warres, and to procure ſome reſt for France.
                  
The Prince of Conde retired into Almaine. The king deſcended into Languedoc, hauing failed to take Liuron, a ſmal Towne of Dauphine. About the end of this yeare, died Charles Cardinall of Lorraine, one of the chiefe inſtruments of the troubles and confuſions of France.
               
               
                  Leyden deliuered.To come vnto the affaires of the low Countries. The ſiege of Leiden hauing continued all the Sommer, with appearance of extreame confuſion for the beſieged, the third day of October following, it was refreſhed and victualled by the proweſſe of a fewe ſouldiers, conducted by Boiſot Admirall of Holland, beeing helped with the Sea-floud, which the Prince, by the meanes of pearcing of certaine Dikes, and ſluces opening, had cauſed it to come farre, euen nigh vnto the Towne. The Spaniards after they had fought a litle, ſeeing the water began to encloſe them, abandoned their Forts, left their ſiege, and retired away ſhamefully.
               
                  The death of Selym.
                  
                  Selym Emperour of the Turkes, dyed about the 15. of December, after hee had ended the warre againſt the Walaques: wherin he loſt an infinit number of men, and tooke peace with the Venetians. His ſonne and ſucceſſor Amurath, at his comming in, cauſed fiue of his bretheren to be put to death, and two wiues of Selym, the one of which, who was great with childe, ſeeing the death of her children, threw her ſelfe to the ground out of an high windowe. Hauing thus prouided for his eſtate, hee prepared to make warre vpon the Polonians, ſome of which, called Koſaques, had ſuccoured the Vayuoda of Watachia.
               
               
                  
                  The aftaires of France.The 12. of Ianuary, 1575. they of the Religion found meanes to get Argueſmortes, a ſtrong Towne, and of great importance in Languedoc, eſpecially for Salt that comes from thence, and greatly furniſheth the Prouinces. The ſame day the Marſhall d' Danuile made a league with them of the Religion, and a publike and large declaration, containing the cauſes of his doings. The Duke de Montpenſier tooke Fontenay in Poictou, and Luſignen yeelded vpon compoſition. This notwithſtanding the Churches of that Prouince, and other nigh vnto it, in ſome ſort maintained themſelues euen in the

middeſt of Armes. The Duke d' Ʋzes, ſometimes affectioned vnto Religion, tooke Armes againſt it, but hee proſpered not much therein. The Churches of Languedoc and Dauphine redreſſed themſelues after the King was retyred from Auignon: but their vnion with the Politikes or Malcontents, deſtroyed them within by the wicked liues of many of thoſe Politikes badly aduiſed. King Henry the third was ſacred at Reimes the fifteenth day of February, and eſpowſed ſoone after Louyſe, the daughter of Nicholas Count de Ʋandemont in Lorraine: So that then and after, there was nothing in the Court of France but paſtimes, ſuch, as there is leſſe euil to conceale, then profit to deſcribe. In the mean while warre continued in Languedoc, well for the aduantage of them of the Religiō, being aſſiſted of the Marſhall de Danuille their confederate, vnto which part many enclined and ioyned themſelues daily. In the moneth of April a negotiation and parley was made at Paris, betwixt the Kings Councell and the Deputies of Churches & the Politikes, without any concluſion. But contrary the warre waxed hot in Dauphine & Languedoc with loſſe on both ſides: but they of the religion were the ſtronger. And ſince we are vpon that point, we will ſet downe in this preſent Article that which was done in France during this yeare 1575. worthy of note, in few words. About the end of April the Duke d'Vzes beſieged Bais, a litle Towne vpon Rhoſne, and got the Towne: but they of the Religion which held the two Caſtles, conſtrained him to forſake it after he had loſt many of his people. To reuenge himſelfe he burnt a part of the Towne, and continued after ſuch ſackings and deſtructions, that he became very odious. In the month of May ſell a tumult at Marſeillis, and in certaine other places of Prouince, againſt gatherers & Farmers of the kings demeaſnes which were chaſed away. And therevpon aroſe a band of Politike malcontents, which they called les Raiſes, ſhauen: becauſe they cauſed their beards to be ſhauen, or ſome part of them, to be knowne by that ſigne: and in Prouence they of the Religion held certaine places, as Riez, Lourmarin, Siena, and others, ſome of which ſoone after were taken out of their hands. The 17. day of Iune le Sieur de Monbrun, a Daulphenois Gentleman, a wife

and valiant Captaine of warre, ouerthrew le Sieur de Gordes Gouernour of Daulphine, who ſaued himſelfe by flight within Gap, and left 22. companies of Swiſſes in the field, which were broken, and nine hundred cut in peeces ſtraight with Frenlich their Colonell, and ſixteen Captaines, with 18. Enſignes carried away by Monbrun and his people, which had a great bootie of Armes eſpecially, and loſt on their part but ſixe men. Le Sieur de Gordes after that, gathered great Forces, and againe meeting in the field he ouerthrew Monbrun, who meaning to leape a ditch to obtaine a meet paſſage for his retrait, his horſe fell, and he vnder him, whereby his thigh was broken, and ſo remained priſoner, hauing only loſt twentie two men, and thirtie eight were taken priſoners. This happened the ninth of Iuly, and ſoone after by decree of a Parliament at Grenople, Monbrun had his head cut off. On the other ſide, the Duke of 
                     Ʋzes, deſtroyed and burnt all the flat Countrey of Languedoc, with the loſſe of infinite Corne. Le ſieur de Lodignieres ordained Chieftain of the troupes of Dauphine, in the place of Monbrun, gaue order for the affaires at the beginning of Auguſt, and tooke many places.
               Vpon theſe actions, and the ſixteenth day of September, Francis Duke d' Alencon, and brother vnto the King, conueyed himſelfe ſecretly in the night from the Court then at Paris, wherevpon came brutes and diſcourſes maruellous ſtraunge and diuers. Two dayes after his retraite, hee publiſhed by writing the cauſes thereof, declaring that hee meant to procure a good peace and reformation in France. Hee writ vnto the Princes and Lordes of the Religion, to the Churches, to the Marſhall Danuile, and to the Politikes, vnto the ſame end; Inſomuch that each one aſſured himſelfe ſoone to ſee goodly things, and there remained but verie fewe which feared any hid euill, as diſcourſes after publiſhed doo ſhewe. In the meane time the Prince of Conde tooke order Almaine to leuie an Army to enter into Fraunce, and by Armes to obtaine ſome reſt for them of the Religion, and for the whole eſtate: hee dealt fully with Duke Caſſimere, of all things requiſite for ſuch a good.
               
                  The King, the Queene mother, and their Councell, were greatly troubled, as if all had beene loſt by the retrait of the Duke d' Alenſon, writing to all places, calling as (they ſay, tag and rag) they made leuies and brought troupes into the field, and yet without any exployt of warre. They made flie a report of ſouldiers from Almaine and Sueuia, yet none entred France during that fourth warre to do ſeruice vnto the King, who in the meane while demaunded ſiluer of his Townes, and for the reſt hee bore himſelfe, as if there had beene no appearance of warre. His mother in the meane time got her towards the Duke d' Alenſon, (as ſome ſaid) to make peace betwixt the two brethren, and for the quiet of the kingdome. In the meane while the King forbad all the nobilitie to come nigh the Duke of Alenſon; hee ſent alſo certaine troupes, to hinder not onely that, but the comming of certaine Almaines which le Sieurs de Thore and de Cleruant ledde, which were ouerthrowne by the Duke of Guiſe, and Cleruant was taken priſoner, with certaine others, the tenth of October. Soone after was there a truce made betwixt the Queene mother and the Duke of Alenſon, for ſixe moneths, wherewith each one was miſcontented, but the King accorded them: whileſt the Prince of Conde leuied people in Suifferland, and the Armie of Almaine whereof was the Captaine the Duke Caſſimere, marched, compoſed of ten thouſand horſemen, ſixe thouſand Suiſſers, two thouſande Lanſquenets, three thouſand French men and Wallons, ſixe great battering peeces, and ſixteene field peeces. The 22. of December the Prince of Conde publiſhed in writing the cauſes wherefore hee brought that Armie into France, in diuers places whereof in the meane while were courſes and taking of Townes, with notable happes and chaunges, reſerued vnto the generall Hiſtorie of our time. To be briefe, the confuſion was extreame throughout all the kingdome, and ſo much the more as almoſt all were blinded, the Churches became very deſolate, and ſuch as feared God and were of ſome iudgement did foreſee nothing but new calamities. Thus in fewe words was the eſtate of France this yeare 1575.
               
                  
                  The eſtate of the lowe Countries.The eſtate alſo of the low Countries was as followeth. In the moneth of February by the aduiſe of the King of Spaine, the Emperour ſent into Brabant towards the Commaunder, and from thence towards the Prince of Orange and the Eſtates of Holland, the Count Schuartembourg, to cōſider of the meanes for peace. The ſaid Count tooke ſo much paines therein, that hoſtages were ſent to the Prince for ſuerties of the Hollanders, becauſe aſſembly was made at Brede in Brabant, where the Counte remained. But becauſe the Prince and the Hollanders perſiſted in their exerciſe of Religion, the Commaunder vnwilling to conſent therevnto, the ſaid negotiation came to no effect. Incontinently that Towne and Caſtle de Bure appertaining to the Princes ſonne, being beſieged by the Spaniards, was yeelded by the cowardiſe of the Gouernour. In the moneth of Auguſt following, the Towne of Onde Water was beſieged by the Spaniards, by meanes wherof the Prince tranſported himſelf to Gonde, to cauſe the dikes to be cut out, wherof the Spaniards aduertiſed, furiouſly beat the Towne, and after a breach made gaue two aſſaults, but receiued liuely repulſes, ſo that they returned the third time, and then becomming maiſters thereof, they ſlew all the ſouldiers and Burgeſſes, and burnt the moſt part of the Towne. Amongſt thoſe ſouldiers there were two companies of Scots, which not beeing able any more to ſtand vpon the breach becauſe of the Canon and the violence of the aſſailants, retyred into the Towne nigh the great Church, where they fought the ſpace of certaine houres very couragiouſly, and they all dyed their weapons in their hands, and neuer would yeeld themſelues. Foure dayes after the Spaniards beſieged an other Towne called Schoonhouē. The Prince quickly ſent thither le Sieur de la Garde, Colonell of the French companies in Holland, who ſo wiſely behaued himſelfe that by capitulation he was licenced to go out with all his, and their Armes and Iewels ſaued. In the meane while the Commander practiſed ſo with certain Hollanders that he drew ſome to his part, ſo, that to the great aſtoniſhment of all he paſſed his Army through the ſtraites of the Iles of S. Anne. Phillip Lanat and Bunenlant, got by aſſault the Fortreſſe of Bommene,
                  
the twentie eight of September, after incontinently beſieged Ziriczeo, one of the principalleſt Townes in Zeland.
               
               The King of France was ſommoned and required by the Eſtates of Poland, to appeare in the Towne of Stecziſe,
                  The king of Poland loſt his kingdome. the 12. day of May: which he not performing, they cauſed to be publiſhed that he was falne from his kingdome, and from that time was there adiudged an interreigne, as in the caſe of death, which was publiſhed the 15. day of Iuly following at Cracouia, and after in the principal Townes of the kingdome, and an other day appointed for the Eſtates to prouide for a new election.
               
                  Henry Bullenger, Miniſter in the Church of Zurich,
                  The death of Bullenger.
                   a learned Theologian of our time, who with his writings hath greatly ſerued the Church of God, hauing attained the age of 76. yeares, dyed the 17. of September.
               
                  Rodolphe the eldeſt ſoone of the Emperour Maximilian,
                  
                     Rodolphe crowned king of Hungarie, Boheme, and of the Romans hauing beene a yeare before crowned King of Hungarie, was crowned King of Boheme, in the great Church of Prage, the 22. of September. By the conſent alſo of the Princes of the Empire he was elected King of Romanes, and crowned at Ratisbone, the firſt day of Nouember, being then of the age of 24. yeares.
               The eſtate of France in the yeare 1576. was ſuch as followeth.
                  The eſtate of France.
                   The 9. day of Ianuary the Duke of Alenſon wrote vnto the Parliament of Paris the cauſes wherefore an army of Almanes for him entered into France, and by them mightily threatned his enemies. They ment to aſtoniſh the Pariſians, to the ende more eaſily to emptie their purſes. In the meane time there was ſent meſſages vppon meſſages to the Prince of Conde and the Duke Caſſimere, to keep them from further entrance with their troupes, but they aduanced into the kingdom, & tooke certain litle things of ſmall importance. The K. of Nuarre withdrew from the Court the 8. of February, which the more augmented the hope of many touching the repoſe of the affaires of France. But all things was ſo confuſed & mingled together, as it was no maruell if yet at this preſent things ſo wrinckled and knottedtogether, bee impoſſible (in regard of men) to bee vntied and looſed. The men of Warre were greatly outrayed. Therefore they of 
                     Ʋuerettes by a common accorde

leagued themſelues notwithſtāding the diuerſitie of their religion, to hold their Prouince in peace, againſt all ſuch as would enter with Armes. The Duke of Alenſon ſeeing nigh him the Almaine Armie, demaunded ſiluer of the Churches in Languedoc, but they were ſucked by other horſleaches, ſo that hee obtained nothing there, nor other where: but that he was aided by the King his brother. Vpon theſe ſtirres the deputies of the Churches aſſembled at Paris, vnder ſafe conduct, to aduiſe vpon meanes of pacification: And on the other ſide the Duke of Alenſon ioyned himſelfe vnto the Armie that Caſſimere & the Prince put in his hands the thirteenth day of March. Incontinently a peace was a making to cauſe to vaniſh in the aire all the ſtrengths of them of the Religion, and after many goings and commings it was accorded, and ſo was made the fift Edict of pacification, in the beginning of May, agreeing vpō many things to the aduantage of them of the Religiō: but they gained nothing therby, but rather found themſelues new to begin again. The Almain Army retired without any memorable exployt. The Duke of Alenſon obteined much for himſelf. Others were contented with promiſes, and the Reiſters in ſome ſort were ſatisfied. One of the principall articles of the Edict concerned the aſſembly of the States of the kingdome, to take order for all affaires. But it came otherwiſe to paſſe. For that was the meanes which the enemies of the publike ſtate vſed to make their leagues, to breake the Edict for a newe commencement of warres, and ſo to leaue the kingdome in more confuſion then euer it was, as appeared by the yeare following. Yet notwithſtanding the Churches were redreſſed and encreaſed in diuers places, maugre the rage & deuices of Sathan, whileſt the king called the Eſtates to Blois, where he made his entry the 18. day of Nouember, and all the remainder of the yeare after was imployed vpon diuers conferences amongſt the Deputies.
               
                  The eſtate of low Country.The affaires of the lowe Country bore themſelues as followeth. In the moneth of February 1576. the Prince of Orange obtained a Fortreſſe of great importance, called Crimpen in Holland, whereby hee warranted Suindree, and all other

places thereabouts. During the ſiege of Ziriczee, the Commander died of the peſtilence at Bruxelles, the 5. day of March. Then the gouernment of the lowe Countries was by the king remitted into the hands of the Councell of the Eſtate. In the moneth of May following, Ziriczee being not able to hold out any lōger was yeelded to the Spaniards, who ſtraight after began to mutenie, vnder colour of paiments due vnto them, and determined to haue ſurpriſed Bruxelles, & ſo to pay themſelues. The Inhabitants hereof aduertiſed, prouided ſo well for theyr aſſurance, that the Spaniards found the gates ſhut: wherat they were ſo deſpited, that without any reſiſtance about the ende of Iuly entring Aloſt, a Towne ſituate betwixt Gaunt, Malines, and Bruxelles, they vſed there the inhabitants as in a place takē by aſſault. And bicauſe they continued their diſorders by the winking of certaine of the Councell of eſtate, In the beginning of September the Captaine of Bruxelles well accompanied entred into the Pallace, and in the name of the Eſtates of Brabant, cō
                  ſtituted priſoners, amongſt others the Counties of Mansfield, and de Barlaiment, Aſſonuile Councellor, Barti, & Scharemberg, Secretaries. Soone after the Spaniards were declared Rebels, enemies to the King & his country, by an Edict of the Councell of Eſtate, publiſhed the 22. of September. For all this the Spaniards left not running hither and thither, putting to flight all ſuch as in the field made head againſt them, and by the intelligence they had with the Lanſquenets they entered into the towne of Maſtricht, which they pilled. This done they ioyned themſelues together & marched towards Antwerpe, & arriuing there they got in at the Citadel or Caſtle, the 4. of Nouember, and ſodenly aſſailed the companies of ſouldiers, and all the inhabitants of the Towne, with a maruellous fiercenes & reſolution, during many daies, pilling, ſacking, & ſpoyling the towne, one of richeſt & fulleſt of marchandiſe in all Europe, they maſſacred & ſlew many thouſands of perſons, of all ages, ſexes, Eſtates, and of diuers Countries, burnt one of the richeſt quarters of the Towne, with the magnificall and moſt ſumptuous houſe thereof: briefly they committed there all maner of wickednes. The Eſtates of the fifteene Prouinces which till then had bene

Spaniſh, hauing learned to their coſt, that they which thus handled them, looked for nothing ſo much as wholly to ruinat and deſtroy them, made a peace with the Princes & the States of Holland & Zeland, the 8. day of Nouember, in the Towne of Gaunt. During all thoſe tempeſts God conſerued the reformed Church of Antwerpe, and certaine others alſo, as ſometimes in Babilon he conſerued the companions of Daniel in the middeſt of the burning Fornace, and Daniel himſelfe in the Lyons den. Incontinently after the ſpoyling of Antwerpe, the Almaines would needs remooue their goods to 
                     Ʋalenciennes, but they were preuented by the Inhabitants, and driuen away out of the Towne the 10. day of Nouember. They of Groninghe in Friſeland maintained themſelues in the like ſort, and arreſted priſoner their Gouernour, who meant to haue ſpoyled theyr Towne. And at this time all the lowe countries were in armes, readie to runne vpon the Spaniards, extreamly hated of them all.
               
                  The death of Sinder.
                  
                  Ioſias Sinder, an execellent Theologian & profeſſor of holy letters at Zurich, dyed the ſecond day of Iuly, in his age of 45. yeares. He left ſome bookes which were full of ſolide doctrine, and eſpecially exceellently refuting the Antitrinitaries and Vbiquitaries.
               
                  A new king of Poland.
                  
                  Stephen Bathori, Vaiuoda of Tranſiluania, hauing beene crowned King of Polonia the firſt day of May, tooke order for the affaires of his kingdome, and prepared himſelfe for the war againſt the Moſcouite. He left the churches of Poland in peaceable eſtate.
               
                  The death of Maximilian.
                  The Emperour Maximilian hauing held his laſt Imperiall Iourney at Ratisbone, dyed the 12. day of October, beeing about the age of 55. yeares.
               
                  Rodolph. 2.
                  
                  Rodolphus his eldeſt ſonne King of the Romanes, of Hungarie, and of Boheme, ſucceeded his Father Maximilian in the Imperiall dignitie, being the ſecond of that name. Aſſoone as he was proclaimed Emperor, he cauſed the Embaſſadors of Poland, to be releaſed and ſent to Amurath, to demaund truce, which was without any difficultie graunted, becauſe that the Turke hauing had aduertiſement of the warre, which the king

of Perſia prepared againſt him,Rodolph. 2.
                   could not any way aſſure himſelf, to make reſiſtance in ſo many places; his Empire elſewhere, being ſorely weakened, by the iuſt puniſhment of God, with plague and famine. Ieronimo Coneſtagio.
               
               
                  Frederic, Elector Palatine of Rhene, a Prince fearing God,
                     The death of Fr. Palatine of Khene. greatly affectionating true Religion, the ornament & true Ioſias of all Almaine, died the 22. of October, being 26. years of age. His eldeſt ſonne Lewes ſucceeded him, in the dignity of princely Electorſhip, who chaunged the doctrine & diſcipline which his father had happily eſtabliſhed in the Countie Palatine.
               
               In the moneth of Ianuary, February, and March,The eſtate of France.
                   the Eſtates  of France were at Blois, where the laſt Edict of pacification on was reuoked after infinit practiſes, and the Duke Alenſon forſooke the part of Polititians and of them of Religion. From thence followed in ſommer next a new warre againſt them of the Religion, which loſt the Townes de la Charite vpon Loire, Iſſoire in Auuerne, Melle, and Brouage in Guien, with great deſolations, eſpecially at Iſſoire. The Marſhall alſo Danuile forſooke his confederates, and did the worſt he could vnto the Churches of Languedoc; finally a ſixt Edict of pacification was treated of at Bergerac, and agreed on at Poitiers, in the moneth of September, by the meanes whereof the former was aboliſhed, and the Churches more troubled then euer they were; inſomuch, that after that they had nothing aſſured; yet notwithſtanding God maintained them in many places, againſt the opinion of great and title.
               In old Saxonie which we now call Weſtphalia,
                  Salentinus. 
                  Salentinus Biſhop of Padeborne, and Archbiſhop of Coloine, being the laſt of the honourable houſe of Eiſenberge, voluntarily reſigned both his Biſhopprickes, and tooke to wife Antouia, Witelma, the daughter of Iohn Counte of Arenberge, and ſiſter to Charles Arenberge. Whom in the Dioceſſe of Padeborne, Henry Duke of Saxonie Archbiſhop of Breme ſucceeded, and in the Electoriſhip Gebardus Trucheſſes, the ſonne of William Lord of Walnogh. Dauid Chytreus.
               
               
                  Iohn de Auſtrich,
                  
                     Iohn de Auſtrich.
                   the baſtard ſonne of the Emperor Charles the fift, was ſent as Gouernor into the lowe Countries. He before

hee entered into Brabant, confirmed the pacification of Gaunt, and made an accord with the Eſtates the 12. day of February. The next morning the Spaniards forſooke the Caſtle of 
                     Ʋtrich, according to the accord, and the 20 of March folowing, they which were in the Townes and Citadell of Antwerpe came out with their bootie. The Almaines remained in the towne vnder the Colonels Foncquer and Fronſperge, attending paiment: the 2. of April, the Spaniards came out of Maſtricht. Iohn de Auſtria made his entry into Bruxells by the 1. of May, and tooke his oath according to the ſtatutes of the Countries; the eleuenth of Iune, hee went to Malignes, where hauing performed that he came for, hee retyred vnto Namur, and laide hold of the Caſtle the 24. of Iuly: the Eſtates hauing diſcouered the drifts and practiſes of Iohn de Austria, ſtood vpon their guardes, and diſcouering what hee went about againſt them, got the Caſtle of Antwerpe, and conſtrained the Almaines quickly to diſlodge, ſeazing diuers places, and diſmanteling the Citadell or Caſtle of Antwerpe, ioyned it to the Citie of Antwerpe the 28. of Auguſt, and in the moneth following, cauſed their iuſtification to be publiſhed, taking armes for theyr defence, calling the Prince of Orange to their ſuccours. Who arriued in Antwerpe the eighteenth day of September, and fiue dayes after at Bruxells, being of all receiued with great ioy: hee was after the 22. of October choſen Gouernour of Brabant. About the ſame time was there trouble at Gaunt and Groine, which after was appeaſed. Genebrardus.
               
               
                  Mathias Archduke of Auſtria.
                  Mathias Archduke of Auſtria, the Emperours brother, being called to be Gouernour of the lowe Countries, made his entry into the Towne of Antwerpe the 21. of Nouember, and the 17. of December, he accepted the gouerment of the countries, vpon the conditions propoſed vnto him by the Deputies of the Eſtates.
               The Churches of Holland and Zeland floriſh, they of other Prouinces of the low countries begin to hope well.
               
                  Stephen Bathori King of Poland this yeare made warre vpon the Dantzick, but after certaine encounters a peace was accorded vpon conditions.
               
                  
                  Sebastian King of Portugall, ſent Peter d'Alaſcoua,
                  Sebastian King of Portugall. Embaſſador to Phillip King of Spaine, with commaundement to treat of three point, that is, for aide in the action of Affricke, for the marriage of his daughter, and for enterview. The Embaſſador obtained all three, the promiſe of marriage, with one of his daughters, when ſhe ſhould come to yeares, that the Catholick king ſhould goe to Gradalupa to meet with K. Sebaſtian: and as for ſuccours, he ſhould furniſh men & gallies to vndertake the enterpriſe of Alarache, the which was ſpoken very coldly. Philip confirmed the ſuccors of men & gallies, ſo as the Turke ſhould ſend no mē into Italy, and that they ſhould vntertake Alarache in this yeare, the whole being referred vnto their enterview at Gradalupa.
               
               In the Parliament held at Blois,
                  The Parliament at Blois.
                   
                  Pierre d' Epinac Archbiſhop of Lyons roſe vp, and before them all, declared his reaſons touching the Cleargie, the Lord of Senſcey ſpake for the nobilitie, and Verſoris for the common. The two firſt by a multitude of reaſons & wonderfull ſpeeches, concluded that it was moſt fit and conuenient, that there ſhould be but one Religion in the realme. The third ſhewed, that the people wholly deſired the revnion thereof, ſo it might be done by peaceable and quiet meanes without warres. But the Cleargie and Nobilitie after many difficulties, cauſed the Parliament to breake vp, ſo that vnder the aſhes of the laſt warres, which as yet were hot, there might be found the ſparkes of a great fire. For after many meſſages (although in vaine) ſent by the King to the Proteſtant Princes, the warre began again, for the Prince of Conde roſe vp in arms, and ſwore not to leaue them (vnder whoſe proteſtation was placed, Deo & victricibus armis) vntil he had brought the realme into her former ſplendor & dignity. But the reaſons that perſwaded peace to the King, got the vpper hand of thoſe that deſired warre, and therevpon an Edict of peace was made at Poitiers, with great contentment on both parts, and the Prince of Conde the ſame night he receiued it, cauſed it to be publiſhed by torch-light, although with leſſe aduantage on his ſide then the firſt, for it reſtored the exerciſe of the Catholicke religion in the places, where it had beene prohibited, it ſuffered

mens conſciences to be free, yet without publike exerciſe, but onely in the Townes and places, whereas then it was openly preached, and to Gentlemen of qualitie and degree, in their owne houſes: yet there was ſome difficultie in the execution and obſeruation of this peace, which the conference at Nerae betweene the Queene mother and the King of Nauarre ſoone auoyded; but the wound not well healed, did ſtill bleede, by means of the furious diſorders of thoſe that were his chiefe doers: but the yeare one thouſand fiue hundred eightie one, it was wholly ioyned and drawne into a ſcarre. See the Hiſtorie of France.
               
               
                  
                     Syr Martin Forbiſher.Syr Martyn Forbiſher tooke his voyage by ſea about the the end of May, towards the North and Weſt, diſcouering vnknowne Countries, and came againe rich laden into England, about the end of September following.
               The Pope foraſmuch as this intended warre by Sebastian was attempted againſt Infidels, opened his ſpirituall treaſures, graunting the Bull of the Croiſada,
                  Croiſada. which till that time was not brought into the Realme.
               
                  A Comet.The ninth of Nouember there appeared in the Zodiaque, in the ſigne of Libra, neare vnto the ſtation of Mars, the goodlieſt and greateſt Comet, that hath bene ſeene in many ages, the which hapning in the progreſſe of this warre, amazed many, who looking to examples paſt, ſaid it was a ſigne of vnhappie ſucceſſe, and that comming frō a corrupt aire, it did endamage the delicate bodies of Princes. And for as much as the auncient Captaines with their diuines, did interpret it to good, not for that they beleeued it, but to incourage the ſouldiers: the Portugall likewiſe taking it for a fauour, ſaid, that this Comet ſpake vnto the King, ſaying, Accometa: which is to ſay in the Portugall tongue; Let him aſſayle them, not hauing any ſuch beliefe, but for flattery, fearing more the Kings choler, by reaſon of his rough inclination, then the heauens. Ieronimo Coneſtaggio.
               
               
                   After the ſixt Edict of pacification in France, the King hauing publiſhed certaine ordinances in regard of policie, ſollicited much the Prouinces of his Country to get mony of them,

wherevpon followed great diſcontentment. In the meane while the ſouldiers being diſperſed in many places, and yet hauing weapons in their hands, gaue them of the Religion to thinke they could not long continue in quietneſſe; yet the Churches maintained themſelues in diuers places.
               About the end of March the Towne of Geneua had great alarums, many troupes appearing in diuers places, to haue ſurpriſed it: but their comming being diſcouered, and the towne holding her ſelfe vpon her guards, there followed no exployts of warre.
               The Queene mother made diuers progreſſes through the Realme of France, to maintaine (ſaid ſhe) the publike repoſe: and ſo all that yeare paſſed in doubtfulneſſe, in regard of the Churches and the eſtate of France.
               
               Warre began in Flaunders in Brabant,
                  Warre and other acccidēts in the lowe Countries. betwixt Iohn de Auſtria, and the Eſtates: he gained a battaile the laſt day of Ianuary, and after he got Giblon, Louaine, Arcſcod, Tiltmond, Dieſt, and Sichem, and in this laſt, handled moſt diſcourteouſly the officers of the place. The 8. of February, the Towne of Amſterdem by capitulation, with the Prince & the eſtates of Holland, revnited themſelues with the other Townes of the Countrie vnder the Princes gouernment. The eſtates at the ſame time ſent their Embaſſador to the Imperiall iourney, where they ſhewed the iuſtice of their cauſe, and demaunded ſuccours.
               The Duke Caſſimire prepared himſelfe with an Army, the Queene of England alſo promiſed to furniſh them with men and money.
               
                  Caſſamire (by the counſell of Imbyſa,
                  Caſſamire. Conſull of Gaunt and Borhutus, was requeſted by thoſe of Flaunders to take the Earldome vpon him) came to Gaunt, where he found Petrus Dathenus and others, the chiefe of the congregation: by whom the Citizens being ſtirred vp, thruſt out all the Maſſe Prieſts and Monkes out of the Citie, and put their goods into their treaſurie, to ſerue afterwards for the neceſſary vſe of the Commonwealth: and by a booke ſet forth by them, they drew others to the free libertie, not onely ciuill, but alſo to a libertie of conſcience and religion. From thence Caſſamire in the beginning of

the next yeare, came to the Queene of England for money to pay his ſouldiers.
               
                  The Prince of Parma created Duke.
                  Alexander Farneſe Prince of Parma, the ſonne of Octauius, the Nephewe of Peter and Pope Paulus the 3. his Nephewes ſonne, was created Duke of Parma by the King of Spaine, D. Chytraeus.
               
               The Ieſuites and certaine Friars were thruſt out of Antwerpe in the moneth of May, & as then, Phillits a Towne, yeelded it ſelfe by compoſition to the Spaniard. Kempens was beſieged & taken by the eſtates. A noble encounter hapned betwixt thē and Iohn de Auſtria, who had the worſt, the firſt of Auguſt.
               
                  Free exerciſe of the reformed religion.In the moneth of Auguſt, a free exerciſe of the reformed Religion was permitted in Antwerpe by Mathias Arch-duke, chiefe Generall and Lieftenant of the Prince of Orange, and the authoritie of the eſtates. So the libertie of Religion was proclaimed, vpon theſe conditions, that the reformed ſhould not hinder or trouble, either by themſelues or others, the rights and exerciſes of the olde Religion, nor ſhould offer any iniurie, reproach, or violence to any one, for the diuerſitie in Religion, that they ſhould obey the political Magiſtrates, & beare the like taxes & impoſitiōs with other Citizens, that they ſhuld haue no Sermons▪ but in ſuch places as the Magiſtrates appointed, that the Miniſters ſhould ſwear to preach nothing ſcandalous or ſeditious in their Sermons: that no man ſhuld ſpoile any holy place, or breake any Images, nor ſhould ſell any ballads or libels reproachful to the other religiō, &c. Theſe the Gouernor, the Deputie of Brabant, the Praetor, & Senate of Antwerpe, promiſed to receiue into their charge and patronage. This libertie of religion, they of Gaunt with the Hollanders and Zelanders, embraced. To the which a litle after, the States of Geldria condiſcended. But the Hannonians & Arteſians taking in very ill part that the Catholick Roman religion (which they profeſſed at Bruxelles, they would conſtantly retaine, before the Emperror, the King of Spaine, and other Princes) ſhould now be left and aboliſhed of thē of Gaunt; in whoſe Citie their proteſtation was made; ſeperated themſelues frō the other eſtates, who had changed their religion, & by bookes publiſhed, accuſed them of

their inconſtancie and periurie. And therein proteſt that they wil be faithful maintainers & defenders of the Catholick Romane faith, and true liegemen to the king, if he would conſerue their priuiledges. Theſe were preſently called Malcontents,
                  Malcontents who forthwith made war vpon them of Gaunt, deadly hating them for this change.
               They of the reformed religion at Antwerpe,
                  The reformed Church at Antwerpe.
                   deſired to haue their religious exerciſe, which they obtained with fewe Churches; namely, the Chappell of the Caſtle, the Temple of the Ieſuits, of the Iacobins, S. Andrewes, and halfe of the Friars. Certain daies after, the Proteſtants of Ausbourge obtained alſo certain tēples. The Emperor & the King of France, ſought to make ſome agreement betwixt the parties, but it came to nothing. On the other ſide, Caſſimere hauing ſoiourned in the Countrey of Zutphen certaine time for the muſter of his people, being in number 4000. footmen, & 6000. horſmen, came into Brabant, and ioyned with the Eſtates the 26. of Auguſt. Iohn de Auſtria died of the peſtilence in his campe nigh Nance, the 21. of Octob.
               
                  Alexander Prince of Parma, ſucceeded him in his charge.Prince of Parma.
                   The Malcontents, made war vpō the Gauntois, vnder the conduct of Sieur de Montignie, the Cardinall of Granuell his brother. This league did after maruellouſly hinder the proceedings of States affaires, and vnder that ouerture, the Spaniards who could not long haue ſtood, do hitherto maintaine themſelues.
               The 20. of Nouember, the Towne of Deuentry yeelded it ſelfe by compoſition vnto the Eſtates.
               
                  Mathew Hamond, by his trade a ploughwright,An heretike burnt at Norwiche.
                   three miles frō 
                  Norwich, was conuented before the Biſhop therof, for that he denied Chriſt to be our Sauiour. For this and many other hereſies he was condemned in the Conſiſtorie, and burned in the Caſtle ditch of Norwiche.
               
               About the end of the yeare, they of Alenſon forſooke the Eſtates, to draw into France.
               
               The Prince of Orange appeaſed the troubles which hapned at Gaunt.
               
               
                  Almaine was then in quiet, in regard of ciuill affaires:The eſtate of Almaine.
                   but greatly troubled by the practiſes and factions of certaine

Diſciples of Brencius, the father of the Vbiquitaries, whereof, after followed many diſputations, without any concluſion of the mater. They which deſired a truce of peace in the Church, attended no other thing by the ſollicitation of ſo many wandering ſpirits, but ſome great troubles in both the politicke and Eccleſiaſticall eſtates, if God be times remedie not the ſame by the wiſedome of the Princes and States of the Empire.
               
                  Iriſh rebellionAt this time, the Iriſh men rebelled in diuers parts of that kingdome, pretending the libertie of Religion, and complained to the Pope, taking for their leader the Earle of Deſmond, Onrake, and ſome other of the ſauage Iriſh, affirming that if they were aided, they would eaſily drawe the whole Countrey from the Queenes obedience. The Pope did communicate this with the Catholicke King, exhorting him to vndertake this action, as moſt godly, and to ſuccour this people, the which they reſolued to do. But for as much as the Queene of England did ſeeme in words friend vnto the King, and did as the Spaniards ſuppoſed, couertly vnderhand aſſiſt the Prince of Orange in Flaunders againſt him,Thomas Stukely. the King would likewiſe walke in the ſame path, and make a couert warre againſt her. They concluded to aſſiſt this people in the Popes name, but ſecretly at the Kings charge. To this effect they leuied certaine footemen in the Territories of the Church; whereof, ſixe hundred were vnder the conduct of Thomas Stukely, an Engliſh man, who fled out of England for treaſon: (who a litle before had obtained the title of a Marqueſſe from the Pope) were embarked at Ciuitauechia, in a ſhip of Genua, to be tranſported into Ireland, the which arriued at Lisbone, in the time that they made preparation for the warre of Affrike. The King hearing of their arriuall, and that for want of money he could haue no Italians out of Tuſcane, deſired to ſee them, with intent to retaine them, and vſe them in the warre of Affricke, and hauing cauſed them to diſimbarke, and to lodge at Oeicas, neare to the mouth of Tagus, hee went one day to view them, and hauing had ſome conference with Stukely, hee perſwaded him to promiſe to goe with him into Affrike. The Catholicke king, becauſe

he would not ſhewe himſelfe a partie, would not contradict it. The Pope was ſo farre of, that before the newes could come vnto him, he gaue them impreſſe, and they remained for his ſeruice.
               The 24. of Iune, beeing Midſommer day,The 2. voyage of Sebaſtian with his Army into Affrike.
                   
                  Sebastian hauing a proſperous winde, the whole Army ſet ſaile, to his great pleaſure and contentment, who young and vnskilfull, guided by ſome ſiniſter ſtarre, or by that diuine permiſſion, which would puniſh this people, went into Affricke, to a dangerous (although a glorious) enterpriſe, leaning the Realme emptied of money, naked of Nobilitie, without heires, and in the hands of ill affected gouernours.
               In this moſt fierce and bloudie battaile between the Portugalls and the Moores, three kings died.The death of Sebaſtian.
                   The king Sebaſtian the 4. of Auguſt, when both the battailes were ioyned, fought ſo valiantly, that thoſe which ſaw his valour wondred at it: for although they ſlew three horſes vnder him, without any whit daunting him, yet was he neuer wearie to change, ſtrike, & ſuccour all parts of the Army, where was greateſt daunger: Many of his Nobilitie which remained yet on horsback, ſeeing the Army in rout, ſought the King in all parts to ſaue him: but the Standard which was carried before him as a marke to knowe him, was now taken, and the bearer ſlaine; and being deceiued with an other ſome what like vnto that, which Edward de Moneſes carried, they followed the one inſtead of the other; ſo as the king remained as a mā loſt, with ſome of his moſt truſtie ſeruants about him, and one Renegado, who laboured to ſaue him: hauing in vaine ſought to flie, being aduiſed to yeeled with his Armes, he would by no means agree vnto it. One amongſt thē, holding vpon the point of his foote a white Napkin in ſigne of peace, went towards the Moores, as an Embaſſador for the reſt to yeeld: but they either barbarous or wilfull, tooke the meſſenger priſoner, and charged the reſt, who being fewe in number, wearied, and without courage, they were all ſlaine. Some ſay there grew a controuerſie amongſt them about the Kings owne perſon, and for that occaſion they ſlew him.
               They ſent afterward to ſeeke his body, and by a notable

example of the inconſtancie of this world, they carried it naked vpon a ſaddle pomell, into the royall Tent of Moluc, where letting it fall to the ground, it was carefully viewed by the Nobilitie who were there preſent, and a publike certificate that it was he, keeping it after at Alcazar-Quiuer. Ieronimo Conestaggio.
               
               
                  Mulei Moluc ſeeing his men at the firſt to flie, (although he were ſicke vnto the death) mounted to horſe in choller, going towards them that ranne away, to ſtay them and encourage them: the ſhot of the Chriſtians drawing neare, he made ſhewe to match himſelfe foremoſt: but his fauourites came about him, entreating him not to hazard himſelfe. But he perſiſting his reſolution, and they to ſtay him, he grew in choller, laying hold on his ſword to diſperſe them, at what time being ſeazed with a deadly fit of an Apoplexie, he ſwowned, and fell from his horſe: but being taken downe by them about him, hee was laid in his Litter,Molucs death.
                   where putting his finger into his mouth in ſigne of ſilence, ſuddenly, or (as ſome report) before he was laid downe, gaue vp the ghoſt.
               
                  Mulei Mahamet drowned
                  
                  Mulei Mahamet eſcaped his enemies hands, but his too great haſte to paſſe Mucazez, and to recouer Azzill, was the cauſe he was drowned in his paſſage, Thoſe whom Idleneſſe had made curious, did note the diuerſitie of theſe Princes deaths, for being all loſt in one battaile, within the ſpace of ſixe houres, the one died of his naturall death, the ſecond by the ſword, the third was drowned.
               
                  
                     Hamet proclaimed king.
                  Hamet was proclaimed King of the Moores. Hee cauſed the body of Mulei Mahamet to be found out, and cauſing it to be fleied, filled the skinne with ſtraw, and carried it in triumph, to the end to take from the Moores all the hope they had conceiued in him.
               
                  Monſieurs voyage into Flaunders.
                  Monſieurs the king of France his brother, after the example of the Arch-duke Mathias, went into Flaunders, there to make worke for the king of Spaine, where he made a goodly  entrie, but an euill retreit.
               
                  Inſtitution of the order of ye holy Ghoſt.
                  Henry the third, this yeare by the example of Lois the eleuenth, to vnite great perſons in concord and inuiolable amitie,

both for the benefite of the eſtate and countrie: he inſtituted the order of the holy Ghoſt. D. Chytraeus.
               
               Of him this Anagrame was made. Henricus Tertius: In te verè Chriſtus.
               
               In this yeare and the next, the eſtate of France and of the lowe Countries, and of Almaine, remained as before. In France the Prince of Conde retiring vnto Fere, a Towne vnder his gouernment of Picardie, warre flamed, which continued in diuers places by the taking holds on either part, but more ſlowly then in former yeares.
               The ſtrongeſt was in Dauphine and in Guienne, Fere, Mouire, and other places, hauing bene yeelded by compoſition. Theſe tempeſts ended by a negotiation of peace.
               In the Auguſtine Friars at Paris, this alſo was done in remembrance of his birth day, and the two Kingdomes of Poland and Fraunce, falling to him as vpon that day, expecting as then the third Crowne in heauen, of which this Symbole was made: Manet vltima coelo. He made 26. Knights of the order before ſpoken of, and gaue them yearely penſions out of Abbies, and Eccleſiaſticall liuings, in deſpight of the Pope.
               This yeare, Iohn Fox, William Wickney, and Robert More, Engliſh men, hauing bene priſoners in Turkie about the ſpace of 13. or 14. yeares, with more then two hundred and ſixtie other Chriſtians of diuers Nations, by killing their keeper, maruellouſly eſcaped, and returned to their natiue Countries. I. Stowe.
               
               The Towne of Maiſtricht was taken by force of the Spaniards, the 29. of Iune,Maiſtricht taken.
                   where they ſlew a great number of people. After the eſtates ſought a protector, and addreſſed themſelues in the yeare, 1580. to the Duke of Alenſon, who dealt with them.
               The Turkes leauing Europe in quietneſſe,The Turkes. after peace made with the Venetians, waged warre againſt the Perſians, and after many battailes loſt, eſpecially for the Turkes, they fell to a peace about the end of this yeare.
               The Cardinall Don Henry, brother of King Don Iohn the  third, grandfather of Don Sebastian, was by a generall conſent

of the Nobles and Gouernours, choſen and ſworne king of Portugall, who like an other Anius, was made king of a preiſt, of whom Virgill ſaith in the 3. of his Aeneiads, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phaebi
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      Sacerdos. Of this Cardinal ſay the Portugalls that he was borne in the Eclips of the Moone, and in the Eclips of the Moone he died. M. Cyprian. Val.
               
               
                  Almaine.
                  Almaine was troubled by the cries and factions of the Vbiquitaries, againſt whom, certain Princes, common-weales, and learned mē, oppoſed thēſelues, both with liuely voice & writing
               The faith and obedience of the king of France his ſubiects began to decline.
               
                  The death of Henry King of Protugall.
                  Vpon the 31. of Ianuary, Henry Cardinall King of Portugall, departed this life: he began to die in the Eclips of the Moone, and died with the end thereof, as if that the celeſtiall ſigne had wrought that effect in him (being a man of a weake body) which it doth not in ſtrength, or at the leaſt not ſo ſuddenly, as Aſtrologians do write: neither is the houre to bee neglected, being the ſame wherein he was borne, 68. yeares before. This was the laſt King of Portugall, in whom ended the right Maſculine line. And as the firſt Lord of Portugall, although vnder the title of an Earle, was called Henry, ſo doth it ſeeme the laſt ſhould be ſo termed. He was Biſhop, Gouernour of the Realme, Inquiſitor, Maior, Legate Apoſtolicke, and King.
               
                  An Earthquake.On the ſixt of Aprill, being wedneſday in Eaſter weeke, about ſixe of the clocke towards euening, a certain Earthquake happening in London, and almoſt generally throughout England, ſo amazed the people as was wonderfull, for the time. This Earthquake endured in or about London, not paſſing one minute of an houre, but in Kent, and on the Sea coaſts it was felt three times, as at Sandwich at ſixe of the clocke, at Douer at the ſame houre. Theſe and many other places in Eaſt Kent, the ſame Earthquake was felt three times to mooue, at ſixe, at nine, and eleuen. Hollenſhead.
               
               The firſt of May, after 12 of the clocke in the night, was an other Earthquake felt in diuers places in Eaſt Kent, namely at Aſhford, and great Chard.
               
               
                  King Phillip performed the funerall obſequies of Sebaſtian, in the Church of S. Ierome at Madrill, although it was ſecretly muttered, that the Duke of Alua ſhould ſay, the King ſhould haue performed it in Potugall, in our Ladies Church of Belem, where the other kings are accuſtomed to be interred, inferring it may bee, that Phillippe was ſucceſſor vnto Sebastian, or at the leaſt ſhould aſſure himſelfe by force, of the ſucceſſion after Henry, cauſing himſelfe to be ſworne Prince. Ieronimo Conestaggio.
               
               In the beginning of Iune, the Friſlanders paſſing Rhene, returned into their Countrie, and meeting the Count Hollocke with 22. Auncients, and two thouſand horſmen, gaue him an ouerthrow, in which were ſlaine of the Counts part, one thouſand and fiftie, and on their owne ſide, but fiftie and fiue, by this encounter the ſiege was raiſed at the Groine, and many Townes, Hauens, and holdes of Friſeland were redeemed. Genebrard.
               
               After K. Henries death, whē 
                  Katherine Ducheſſe of Brabant,
                  K. Phillip. 
                  Anthony the baſtard ſonne of King Lewis, and others had promiſed themſelues the next ſucceſſion, at the laſt Phillip king of Spaine, (who was for that named of the dying Cardinall) was inueſted by the conſent of the Lords, ſpirituall and temporall. Others, chiefly they of Lisbone, did ſweare to Don Antonio, but Phillip with a great power both by ſea and land (of the which he made the Duke of Alua Generall) came to Lisbone and expulſed Don Antonio, and recouered the Citie. Who beeing hotly purſued by Sanches d' Auila, was conſtrained to flie into France and England for ſuccour. Chytreus.
               
               In the moneth of Iuly, Stephen king of Poland comming out of Luchem in Moſchouie, tooke by force two Fortreſſes, 
                     Ʋualiſium, and 
                     Ʋſuum, and after that Vuielukim: but hauing loſt many of his men, at the end of the yeare hee returned. Genebrard.
               
               On the nineteenth day of Auguſt, the king of Spaines preſcription was publiſhed againſt the Prince of Orange at Namours.
               
               In theſe monethes of Iuly and Auguſt, Fera a Citie in

                  Picardie, was deliuered to the Huguenots.
               
                  The death of the Duke of Sauoy.
                  
                  Emanuel Philebert Duke of Sauoy, died this moneth, a Prince moſt famous for his courage, wiſedome, and religion, leauing his ſonne and heire, and ſuceſſor Charles.
               
               The firſt day of September of this preſent yeare, the Grecians and Muſchouites began to recken the yeare from the worlds creation, 7089.
               Certain Spaniards and Italians confederate with the Earle of Deſmond, and ſome of the Cleargie of Ireland landed there, and tooke certaine holds and Caſtles, but they were ſoone diſcomfited and chaſed away.
               
                  The tyrannie of the Duke Alua.
                  
                  Ferdinand Duke of Alua, began to exerciſe his tyrannie at Aquiſgrane, a chiefe Citie of the Empire, vpon certaine Citizens and others that came from Antwerpe and the lowe Countries, ſuch as were of the reformed religion: by whoſe conference and conuerſation, very many of Aquiſgrane when they had embraced their profeſſion, deſired of the Senate that they might vſe a publike exerciſe of their Religion: which when it was denied, neuertheleſſe they met openly at Sermons and the celebration of the Sacramens. Which beeing ſhewed vnto the Emperour, certaine Commiſſioners were appointed, to roote out the religious, and onely to eſtabliſh the doctrine and rites of the Pope.
               The Emperour himſelfe wrote alſo vnto the Senate, that they ſhould baniſh thoſe Preachers forth with, and that they ſhould iuſtly keepe the old lawe, which was, that none ſhould be admitted of the Senate vnleſſe they were altogether Catholicke. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  A blazing StarThe eight day of October, immediately after the new Moone there appeared a blazing Starre in the South, buſhing towards the Eaſt, which was nightly ſeene the aire being cleare, more then two moneths.
               In this yeare there was great abundance of corne, wine, and all maner of fruite, and in Autumne in many places Roſes did bud againe. A great ſickneſſe did followe, ſpreading it ſelfe throughout all Europe.
               
               
                   This is the yeare which the Grecians holde for the

ſeuen thouſand yeare from the beginning of the world. Genebrardus.
               
               
                  Iohannes Martianus, a Millanois, Embaſſador for Spaine to the Turke, hauing obtained a truce for three yeares, returned from Constantinople into Spaine, but ſo, as neither deſired others friendſhip; but that the Turke moleſted by the Souldan, feared the Chriſtians, and the Spaniard hauing enough to do at home, was conſtrained by warre to ſeeke repoſſeſſion of his owne. Idem.
               
               In Ianuary,A Proclamation againſt Ieſuites. Proclamation was publiſhed at London for the reuocation of ſundry the Queenes Maieſties ſubiects remaining beyond the Seas, vnder colour of ſtudie, and yet liuing contrary vnto the lawes of God, and of the Realme. And alſo againſt retaining of Ieſuites and Maſſing Prieſts, ſowers of ſedition, and other treaſonable attempts. I. S.
               
               Queene Anne, the wife of King Phillip,
                  The death of Q. Anne.
                   fell ſicke of a feauer, the which in fewe dayes brought her to an other life, wherwith the King was much grieued, beeing a Lady wholy conformable to his humour, and endued with ſingular beautie.
               This was the yeare, where in the ſhips from the Indies, Brazill, S. Thomas Cape, Ʋerde, and all other new found lands were expected, the which ſtaied ſomewhat long, & put then in ſome feare, being looked for with greater deſire then euer any were: they were wiſhed, both for the riches they carried, as to vnderſtand by them, how the people of thoſe parts were addicted to the obedience of the Catholicke king, whereof many doubted.
               Certain Ieſuits being walled vp within their Monaſterie at the Terceras,
                  Ieſuites. (to whom me at was giuen but once a weeke) grieuing to be thus wrongfully impriſoned, vpon a certaine day they opened the doores of the Church, & hauig placed ye Sacrament in the midſt, they would try by this means, if they might remain free. The miniſters of iuſtice went vnto the couent to demand the reaſon of this innouation, to whom it was propounded by the Fathers, that if their offences ſo required, they ſhuld puniſh thē, but holding them as ſuſpect, they ſhuld ſuffer thē to depart into Portugall. The reſolutō was (after ſome ſpeeches vſed beyond modeſtie) that the Fathers ſhould be walled vp again, & a

certaine perſon, who ſaid that in iuſtice they ſhould burne theſe Prieſts, with their monaſterie, the which they had for the affection they bare vnto the Caſtillians. Hee ſtayed not long to acknowledge his error, for departing from thence, hee fell ſicke vnto the death, and God would haue him confeſſe (as he ſaid) that this griefe happened vnto him for that occaſion. Ieronimo Coneſtaggio.
               
               
                  
                     D. of Aniou.
                  Francis Duke of Aniou, the French Kings brother, and other Nobles of France, the firſt of Nouember (hauing lately arriued in Kent, came to London, where he was honorably receiued. The 7. of February he departed out of England, where at his ſhipping, a Poſt brought him word, that the States of the lowe Countries were reuolted, and namely the Citie of Antwerpe, whither he preſently ſailed with 15. ſhips, and was there entertained by the Prince of Orange.
               
               In the time of this Pope Gregorie the 13. a very ſtraunge thing happened in Valladolid. There dwelled in 
                     Ʋalladolid a knight well qualified, who in the Inquiſitiō had two daughters which conſtantly perſeuering in that religion that they had learned of the good D. Cacalla, and other Martyrs of Ieſus Chriſt, were cōdemned to be burned. The father being a moſt ranke Papiſt, beſought the Inquiſitors to permit them for their better inſtruction, to be carried to his houſe: which things the Inquiſitors in regard of the great credit they repoſed in him, graunted. And brought thus to his houſe, the father endeuoured to diuert them from their conſtant reſolution: but ſeeing he could not conuince them, hee cauſed Prieſts & Friars to diſpute with them: but it was in vaine. For the Lord (as in Luk. 21.15. he had promiſed) gaue them vtterance and wiſdome, which the new Phariſies, Prieſts, and Friars, were not able to reſiſt or gaineſay. The father ſeeing then, that all his endeuour not auailed,The crueltie of a father. went himſelfe to his Groue, cut downe wood, and cauſed it to be drawne to Valladolid, hee himſelfe kindled the fire▪ and ſo they were both burned. M. Cyprian. Val.
               
               
                  
                     Richard Atkins burned for religion.In the moneth of Iuly, one Richard Atkins borne in Hartfordſhire, an Engliſh man, came to Rome to the Engliſh Colledge there, whom they kindly welcomed, willing him to go to

the Hoſpitall, and there to receuie his meate and lodging, according as was appointed: wherevnto hee anſwered, I came not (my countrey men) to any ſuch intent as you iudge, but I come louingly to rebuke the great miſorder of your liues, and to let your proud Antichriſt vnderſtand, that hee dooth robbe God of his honour, and poiſoneth the whole world with his moſt abhominable blaſphemies. When they heard this, a Student in the Colledge cauſed him to bee put in the Inquiſition, but after certaine dayes, hee was ſet at libertie againe. And one day as he was going in the ſtreete, hee met a Prieſt carrying the Sacrament, which offending his conſcience, to ſee the people ſo crouch and bowe downe to it, hee caught at it to haue throwne it downe, but miſſing it, hee was iudged by the people that he catched at the holineſſe which (as they ſay commeth from the Sacrament) & ſo vpon meer deuotion hee was let paſſe. Certaine dayes after he came to S. Peters Church, where many were hearing Maſſe of the Prieſt at the eleuation, (hee vſing no reuerence) ſtepped to the Aultar, and threw downe the Chalice with the wine, ſtriuing likewiſe to pull the Cake out of the Prieſts hands: for which cauſe diuers of the people roſe vp and beate him, and after carried him to priſon: where hee was examined wherefore hee did it, who ſaid, that hee came purpoſely to rebuke the Popes wickedneſſe, and their Idolatrie. Vpon this hee was condemned to bee burned: but before that, hee was ſet vpon an Aſſe, without any ſaddle, hee being from the middle vpward naked: all the way as hee went, there were foure that did nothing elſe but thruſt at his body with burning Torches, whereat hee neuer mooued, and when hee came before S. Peters Church where the place of execution was, there was hee burned. I. Fox.
               
               
                  Katherine de Medices, mother to the French Queene,The Queene of France diſcontented with king Phillip.
                   was diſcontented with the Catholicke King, for diuers reſpects, but that ſhe made moſt ſhewe of, was that he had taken the Realme of Portugall by force, refuſing to ſubmit himſelfe to iuſtice, ſaying that ſhee had more intereſt then hee. Wherevpon it was ſuppoſed, that (mooued with this diſdaine) ſhee ſhould

labour to make warre againſt Portugall, with whom agreed Frances duke of Alanſon, her ſonne, no leſſe enemie to the Catholicke king, then the mother, mooued therevnto, for that hauing demanded one of the daughters of the ſaid king in marriage, he was refuſed, for that he required with her a portion fit for her qualitie. Hee was followed by the whole Nobilitie of France, whom he might eaſily haue ledde where hee pleaſed, although it were againſt the Kings liking, the which grew, for that remaining the third ſonne to Henry the 2. with ſmall hope neuer to aſpire vnto the Crowne, hauing two brothers, Charles and Henry, his elders, hauing a great mind and ſtirring, he gaue care to all ſuch as were diſcontented with the king, or deſirous of innouation (whereof there are numbers in France) laboured to alter the quiet eſtate of Chriſtendome, with whom hee had often reſolued to conquer himſelfe ſome new eſtate out of France. Ieronimo Coneſtaggio.
               
               
                   The Duke Alanſon againe returned into England, beeing alreadie agreed with the Prince of Orange,
                  
                     D. Alanſon. who was the inſtrument of all theſe practiſes, he paſſed from thence to Antwerpe, where the peoples humours being before diſpoſed by the ſaid Prince, hee was receiued with great ioy, and on the eleuenth day of February, 1582. they did ſweare him Duke of Brabant.
               
               
                  
                     Ouids tombeIn Cyonia, a Citie of Muſchouie, within a pleaſant valley, the tombe of P. Ouidius Naſo was found, with this Epitaphe.
               
                  Hic ſitus eſt vates quem viui Caeſaris ira
                  Auguſti, Latio cedere iuſſit humo:
                  Saepe miſer voluit patrijs ſuccumbere tectis
                  Sed fruſtra; hunc illi fatadedere locum.
                  Genebrardus.
               
               
                  The Prince of Orange ſhotThe 18. day of March the Prince of Orange being in Antwerpe quiet, and in the greateſt fortune that hee was euer, was ſhot in his houſe as he was riſing from the table, in the middeſt of all his ſeruants, with a Piſtoll, by one Iohn Scarigni; a Biſcaine, mooued therevnto by zeale of Religion as hee pretended, the bullet hitting him vnder his right Iawe, paſſed

forth through the windowe, and although hee was ſuppoſed dead, yet was he cured and liued, and the offender was preſently ſlaine by his guard, and all ſuch as were found acceſſary, were executed.
               Cardinall Albert Arch-duke of Auſtria,
                  Cardinall Albert.
                   was made gouernour of Portugall. Ieronimo Coneſtaggio.
               
               
                  Don Antonio departed for France from the Terceres, leauing Emanuel de Sylua in his place, with 500. Frenchmen, vnder the charge of Baptiſt Florentine, and Charles a French man, their Captaine.
               In the moneth of Auguſt, the Forces of Don Antonio king of Portugall, skirmiſhing with Phillip king of Spaine, in a battaile at Sea at S. Michaels Mount, were diſcomfited. Heere Stroſſius the Generall of the Forces of France, with the loſſe almoſt of all his Army, was in the ende diſcomfited. Genebrardus.
               
               There was one thing worthy of obſeruation in the fight at Sea. Within the Gallion of S. Mathew,
                  A Prieſt died for feare. a Prieſt called Iohn de Iaem, Chaplaine vnto the Marſhall of the field, a man which had ſeene the warres during the fight, being vnder loweſt deck of the Gallion, when hee ſawe ſo much wilde fier caſt by the French, heauing their ſhot, and ſeeing the hurt which the Cannon did, he died onely of feare and amazement, hauing receiued no wound.
               
                  Phillip after the death of Diego his eldeſt ſonne, who was ſworne Prince of Portugall at Tomar, hee would likewiſe that the ſame oath ſhould bee made in the perſon of Phillip, his ſecond ſonne, being then ſicke; and for the ſwearing of him, hee aſſembled the eſtates at Lisbone, reſolute to accompliſh this ceremonie before his departure.
               At that time the Duke of Alua (conſumed with a continuall feauer) died in the Pallace at Lisbone,
                  The death of the Duke of Alua.
                   in the Kings owne quarter, being of the age of three ſcore and fourteen yeares. During his ſickneſſe hee was greatly fauoured of the king, who did viſit him a litle before his death: but after it, the next day the Portugalls obſerued that he went publikely to Maſſe without any ſhewe of diſcontentment in him, contrary to the cuſtome

of their Kings, who vpon the death of one of leſſe qualitie (hauing done many notable ſeruices to the Crowne) relied themſelues for a time, the which ſeemed the more ſtraunge, for that King Emanuel vpon the death of a noble Pilot, withdrew himſelfe three dayes. Ieronimo Conestaggio.
               
               He arrogating too much to himſelfe, cauſed a ſtatue of braſſe to be erected for him in the Citadell of Antwerpe, which the king willed afterwards to be beaten downe.
               
                  Charles Borgia.
                  Charles Borgia Duke of Candia, a man of greater vertue then experience, ſucceeded in his place.
               Vpon the 28. of Iune, Peregrin Bartu Lord Willougbie, was ſent Embaſſador to Frederick the ſecond, with the Garter.
               The Prince of Orange hauing recouered his hurt, came abroad. His wife Carola, lineally diſcended from the right noble houſe of Montpenſier, with ouermuch ioy of his recouerie, within three daies after died of a pluriſie. D. Chytreus.
               
               
                  The new Calender ſet forth by the Pope.In this yeare of our Lord, 1582. this Pope by anticipating tenne daies in the yeare, gaue himſelfe to correct the Calender, and to eternize his name; this Calender he called Gregorianum: and by his decree, all Chriſtian Princes obeying the Romiſh Sea, gaue commandement to cut of tenne daies in the moneth of October, ſo as for the fift day, they ſhould generally write fifteene: the which was done to fitte the meanes, and principall aſpects, wherein the heauens were, when as our Redeemer Ieſus Chriſt ſuffered, that they might celebrate Eaſter, and the other Feaſts vpon their proper dayes. The which they had not formerly done, for that the true courſe of the Sunne which makes the yeare, being certaine minutes of an houre leſſe the time, which they vntill then had taken for a yeare. It ſeemed that in the courſe of ſo many yeares, ſo ſmall a difference had mounted vnto tenne dayes, ſo as by this equallitie, it was made cōformable to the time paſt. Ieron. Con. D. Chytreus.
               
               
                  Phillip cauſed the bones of Sebastian, late king of Portugall, to be brought out of Affricke, the which with king Henries that were at Almerin, he would before his departure ſee ſolemnly interred in the Church of Belem, neare to the other Kings of Portugall.
               
               
                  At this time were revnited all the kingdomes of Spaine, which from the entrance of the Moores into Spaine, 860. and ſo many yeares fithence, haue bene diuided. M. Cyprian. Valera.
               
               
                  D. Saunders the Popes Nuntio and Legate,D. Saunders who came from Rome with Iames Fitzmoris in Iuly, in the yeare 1599. to beare Armes in Ireland againſt her maieſtie, after that hee had wandred vp & downe three yeares together with the Earle of Deſmond, and Syr Iohn his brother, hee fell ſicke of an Iriſh Ague, and a Flixe, and lay in the wood Clennetiſſe, which wood is full of withies, bryers & thornes, and through which is no paſſage, where partly through his ſickneſſe, but chiefly through famine and want, dyed. Hollenſhed.
               
               The Earle of Deſmond was taken by one Kollie an Iriſhman, in an old houſe alone, and there ſlain, whoſe head was ſent into England, and ſet vpon London bridge.
               
                  Amias D. of Leneux,
                  Amia. baniſhed Scotland. ſo created in the yeare 1579. was now in this yeare vpon diſpleaſure baniſhed Scotland, and enforced to returne into France: in whoſe exile was performed an olde prophecie, That a man of fiue ſhillings ſhould buy all the Dukes of England & Scotland: For when this Duke was out of the Scottiſh kingdome, there was neither Duke in that Countrey nor in England. Idem.
               
               
                  Henry King of Nauarre, when hee vnderſtood that the  Archbiſhop of Cullen was in great diſtreſſe,The King of Nauarre.
                   and the many traiterous practiſes of the Pope againſt him, hee ſent his Embaſſador to the Electors & Princes of Germanie, who profeſſed the true doctrine of the Goſpell; Firſt for the eſtabliſhing of a generall concord, by a generall Synode of the Churches in Germanie, France, England, and other Countries imbracing the true Religion. Then that theſe Princes of the reformed Church, ſhould by oath, all ioyne their powers againſt the Pope & his adherents: which that hee might the better perſwade, hee ſet downe in his Letters the imminent daungers ouer the principall kingdomes in Europe, which profeſſed the true Faith. As many as in Spaine or Italie were ſuſpected for the truth, were put into the Inquiſition, and ſo martyred. In France the promulgation

of the Councell of Trent, and the conſtitution of the Inquiſition was vrged by the Popes Legate, againſt the interceſſion of the Senate, and the liberties of the Church of France. That in England by the treacherous practiſes of the Ieſuites, the hearts of her maieſties ſubiects were drawne from their alleagiance. As for the Scots ſuch matters were ſet abroach euen in the Court, that thoſe of the better ſort, and ſuch as ſtudied for the common good and peace of the realme, by the diſſention of ſome Nobles and the Kings youth, were baniſhed, which vnleſſe it were preſently remoued, it would hazard the eſtate of their Church, and raiſe warre betweene England and Scotland. The miſeries of Belgia, it being ſo ouerpreſſed by the Spaniſh powers, and they euery day encreaſing, promiſe no good ſucceſſe to their Church. In Heluetia, by the Popes contributions, ſubtilties, and the moſt turbulent preachings of the Ieſuites theſe two yeares, haue bene ciuil warres: Inſomuch that the Bernates, imbracers of the reformed Religion, ſhould be oppreſſed by the power of the D. of Sauoy. The Churches of Suecia ſtand wauering, whileſt the Popiſh ceremonies are there kept, and Ieſuites frequent the Court, and feare leaſt their perſwaſions ſhould alienate their King. And for Germanie, in the which by the care & ſinceritie of the moſt mightie Princes, the ſureſt and ſafeſt harbours are giuen to the Churches, the Pope doth what in him lyeth to confound and ouerthrow. In Coloine he hath ſtirred vp ſuch tragedies againſt that Princely Elector, the ende whereof, vnleſſe it be brought vpon his owne head, he hopeth wil be the confuſion of all Germanie. This Embaſſage although it was beningly receiued of all the Princes to whom it came: yet new diſputations & troubles ariſing in France about the death of Alanſon, the dangers encreaſed. D. Chytreus.
               
               
                  Georgius Ernestus, the laſt Prince of Henneberge, died this preſent yeare. Idem.
               
               
                  Elias Thacker was hanged at S. Edmonds-Bury in Suffolke, and Iohn Copping for ſpreading certain bookes, ſeditiouſly penned by one Robert Browne, againſt the booke of commō praier, eſtabliſhed by the lawes of the realme; their bookes as many a could be found were burnt before them. I. S.
               
               
                  
                  Iohn Lewis, who named himſelfe Abdiot, an obſtinate heretike, denying the Godhead of Chriſt, and holding diuers other deteſtable hereſies (much like to his predeceſſor Mathew Hamond) was burned at Norwich.
               
               
                  Albertus Alaſco, free Baron of Laſco, Ʋaiuode,
                  Albertus Alaſoo. or Palatine of Syradia in Poland, arriued at Harwiche in Eſſex, and on the laſt of April, came by water to Wincheſter houſe in Southwarke, where he remained for the moſt part of his abode.
               
                  Frances of 
                     Ʋalois Duke of Alanſon,
                  The death of Fr. D. of Alanſon.
                   attempted diuers exployts  in the lowe Countries, the iſſue whereof fell out to his misfortune, wherefore feeling himſelfe ſicke, he retyred from Dunkerke towards Fraunce, where hee fell into ſo ſtraunge a iudgement, that euen the Phiſitians beganne to doubt him: for a flixe of blood iſſued ſo continually out of his noſe, and mouth, that they were ſtill forced to hold him a Baſen whereinto hee voyded the cleare and pure blood, whereof he dyed. Some ſay this happend either by his riotouſneſſe in the lowe Countries, or for griefe of the hard ſucceſſe of his affaires there, or by Salcedas meanes that was executed. His death weakened the moſt drowſie heads, it brake all the bonds that ſtaied the proceedings of the League, and cauſed it preſently to waine, at Chalouns, Rhemes, Troy, Dyon and Mezeiuel. Hiſtorie of France.
               
               The tenth of Iuly, William Naſſau Prince of Orange;
                  The Prince of Orange is ſlaine. in the one and fiftie yeare of his age, was ſlaine with a Bullet, by Balthazar Gerardus, otherwiſe called Serach. See Genebrardus.
               
               This villaine beeing taken aliue, confeſſed that hee was neither ſet on by the French nor Spaniſh, but did it of his owne minde, thinking that thereby hee did God good ſeruice, foorthwith hee was puniſhed with ſuch a death as the qualitie of ſo hainous a fact deſerued. Yet a certaine writer of Coloine ſetteth him downe for a Martyr. See Dauid Chytraeus.
               
               
                  H. Earle of Darbie by the Queenes maieſtie was ſent Embaſſador to Henry the third the French King, the 30. of Ianuary, to inueſt him with the order of the Garter.
               
                  
                  Hyperas the eight day of April, and Briges, which next to Gaunt is the chiefe Citie of Flaunders, a little before the Prince of Orange his death, in the moneth of May, was recouered by the Prince of Parma, all former offences forgotten, ſo that they would reſtore the Catholicke religion of Rome, and performe true allegiance to the king of Spaine.
               
               Aſſoone as the League perceiued that diuers Townes had made great fiers for ioy of her byrth, it was preſented to the Pope, that he might giue it his bleſſing, auouch it for his, and declare it to be for the Catholicke, Apoſtolicke and Romiſh Church. But Gregorie the 13. deſiring to ſhewe himſelfe the Father of all Chriſtians, and a Paſtor, and not, a diſpearſer of his flocke, conſidering that the raiſing of Armes againſt a moſt Chriſtian & Catholicke king, was wholy contrary to the doctrine of the Goſpell, the examples of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and the lawes of policie and ſtate; certified the Leagues Deputies, that he could not approue their inuentions: and to conclude, ſent them back againe without an anſwer. And not long before he dyed, hee ſaid to the Cardinall Eſt, that the League ſhould neuer haue Bull, Letter, nor Commiſſion from him, for hee knew not what they meant: and that hee would not ſerue for a fire-brand to kindle a warre, which he could by no means quench.
               In the prime of this yeare the firſt of April, S. Walter Raleigh tooke his voyage for the diſcouery of that land, which lieth between Norembega and Florida in the Weſt Indies, and returned in Auguſt following, preparing afterwards for a ſecond voiage.
               
                  Syr H. Gilbert.
                  S. H. Gilbert attempted to diſcouer with intention this country of Norembega, to ſettle an Engliſh Colonie there, in the yeare 1578. accompanied with a company of Gentlemen of good calling, and ten ſailes of all ſorts of ſhipping; but the iourney tooke no ſucceſſe, for all their ſhips inforced by ſome occaſion, or miſchance, made their preſent returne, that only excepted, where his brother S. W. R. was Captaine, who tooke his courſe to the Weſt Indies, but for want of vittailes & other neceſſaries, when he had ſailed as farre as the Ilands of Cape de Ʋerde, vpō the coaſt of Affrica, he was cōſtrained to ſet ſaile and

returne for England. But S. H. G. enterpriſed the voyage the ſecond time, and ſet to ſea with three ſhippes and pinnaſes this yeare 1584. in which iourney he loſt his life.
               This yeare alſo S. W.R. encouraged by the reports of his men of the goodnes of the ſoile,S.W. Raleigh. and the fertillitie of the country, which they had diſcouered the laſt yeare paſt, and now by her maieſtie called Virginia, furniſhed with 8. ſailes of all ſorts, ſet them to the ſea,S.R. Greenfeeld. appointing S. Richard Greenfeeld his Lieutenant, enioyning him either to tarry himſelfe, or to leaue ſome Gentlemen of good worth with a competent number of ſouldiers in the Country of Virginia, there to begin an Engliſh Colonie. After they had ſailed a certain number of leagues on the ſea, by force and violence of fowle weather, they were ſeperated one from the other; ſo that S.R.G. being ſingled from his fleete, all alone arriued in the Iland of Hispaniola in the Weſt Indies, about the midſt of Iune following.
               In the moneth of May,
                     Bruges recouered. the Prince of Parma recouered the Towne of Bruges, which next to Gaunt is the chiefeſt Citie in all Flaunders, all matters forepaſſed forgotten, vpon condition they would reſtore the Catholicke Romane religion, and become true leigemen to the king of Spaine. They of Gaunt likewiſe, all their Townes about them being taken by the Spaniards, and all their paſſage for prouiſiō ſtopped vp, as alſo conſtrained through famine, entered into counſell either of deliuering their towne, or elſe of ſome reconciliatiō: and the Prince of Parma offered them the ſame cōditions which they of Bruges had, all which, the Senators addicted to the Romane religion, and the Citizens thought good to imbrace. And Imbyſa who being Conſull ſixe yeares before, was the cauſe that their pacification was broken, and the expelling of the Popes Agents, neceſſitie thus conſtraining, yeelded therevnto.
               The Pope daily vrged by his Embaſſador the Emperour, Rodolphe,
                  The refuſall of the new Calender. that his Calender might be receiued & vſed throughout all Germanie. But although the Emperour commaunded it to be kept and obſerued in the kingdome of Bohemia, Auſtria, and other his hereditary poſſeſſions; yet the Princes of Saxonie and others, conſtantly refuſed ſo to do, following the counſell

of Augusta. But the Biſhoppes for the moſt part, and amongſt thoſe, Ernestus of Coloine, Elector, and the Biſhop of Monaſterie, began to allow of it in their Dioceſſes. The Senate of Augusta ſaid, that in allowing of this Calender, they intended nothing againſt the quiet of Religion, but for policie ſake, that they might exerciſe their vſuall marchandiſe with the ſubiects of thoſe neighbour Princes and Biſhops which had receiued it; and that all manner of confuſion in iudgements, markets, and other publike places in the Citie, riſen by the difference of the Calenders, might be auoyded: the which decree was obtained. Which when it was publiſhed at Augusta, the Miniſters of the Goſpel wrote to the Senators, that they would obey the decree in all politicall affaires, but in their Churches and celebration of their Feaſts & exerciſes of their religion, they would by no meanes obey the Pope. Therefore the 24. day of May, they denounced to their auditorie the Feaſt of the Aſcentiō of Chriſt, the next day the 28. of May to be celebrated, which the Biſhops had finiſhed one moneth before. The Senate taking this in ill part, cauſed the Superintendent to be carryed out of the Citie, but the Citizens knowing thereof, ran firſt vnarmed, then with weapons, and at the gate of the Citie tooke their Paſtor out of the Cart; but the tumult increaſing, the Miniſters of the Goſpell at the intreatie of the Senate diſſwaded the Citizens from ſedition, and appeaſed them. When ſome ſhould be choſen out of the Senate, Patricians, Marchants, and the Commons, which ſhould determine this controuerſie. To theſe the D. of Wittenberge and the Senate of 
                     Ʋlme ioyned their Embaſſadors, who the 4. day of Iune, which according to the Gregorian Calender was the 14. doo ſo arbitrate the matter, that al faults remitted, they after that throghout the whole Citie, ſhould follow the new Calender, which ſhould be kept in policies, and both the Churches of Religion. Notwithſtanding the peace and quietneſſe of it ſhould remain conſtant and firme. And that it ſhould be lawfull for the Miniſters of the Goſpell to proteſt vnto their Auditors, that they had chaunged nothing, nor would chaunge any thing in that doctrine which they had hitherto preached vnto them, nor

that they did obey the Pope, but the Imperiall maieſtie and politicall magiſtrates, in obſeruing & keeping the new Calender with the reſt in the Citie. D. Chytraeus.
               
               About the middle of Iune, Syr I. Perrot Knight, was ſent ouer to be Lord Deputie in Ireland.
               
               This Deputie by the aduiſe of the Councell of Ireland, thought it beſt to bring the whole land into ſhyre grounds, whereby the lawes of England, might haue a thorough courſe, and paſſage. And what S. H. Sidney had done in fewe Countries, that be performed in the whole realme, and to euery new County he appointed & aſſigned ſeuerall Sheriffes. Hollen.
               
               Vpon the K. of Frances deuiſe when he was K. of Poland, Manet vltima caelo: the Leaguers made this Diſtiche.
               
                  Qui dedit ante duas vnam abſtulit, altera nutat,
                  Tertia tonſoris nùnc facienda manu.
               
               
                  Ericus Duke of Brunſwicke, the ſonne of Ericus,
                  The death of the Duke of Brunſwicke.
                   who ſpent the better part of his life in Belgia, Italie, Spaine, and gaue himſelfe more to the Romiſh religion then the true doctrine of the Goſpell, imbraced of his Nobles and ſubiects, in the fiftie ſixe yeare of his age departed this life at Papia in Italie, vpon whom this was written.
               
                  Papa tibi, Papiaque fuit, non patria cura,
                  Hinc procul a patria te tegit vrbs Papia.
               
               Whom Iulius, founder of the Vniuerſitie of Iulia, ſucceeded in the kingdome. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  Iohannes Baſilides, the great Duke of Mochouia,
                  Iohannes Baſilides. or Emperour of Ruſſia, who for 25 whole yeares had afflicted & ſcourged Linouia with warre, this yeare ended his tyrannie with his life. Who after the manner of Ruſſia is reported to haue bene verie godlie. Beeing readie to die, hee called his ſonne Faedor (ſo they call Theodore) and the chiefe of his Nobilitie to him, in whoſe preſence, with a godly exhortation he committed the whole Empire, and ioyned to him foure of his

wiſeſt Counſellors, who ſhould haue care of him and the Empire, whom hee perſwaded, that being warned by him they would abſtaine from making warre, and make peace with their neighbour Kings and Princes. He commaunded alſo that for ten yeares ſpace they ſhould remit his ſubiects (ſore waſted and brought to pouertie by his waries) all his tributes, taxes, and Subſidies, that in this ſpace they might recouer themſelues, and to all his Captaines he gaue free leaue either to ſtay or depart: after this done, he was ſhauen, and betooke himſelfe to a Monaſticall life, and ſo dyed. Idem.
               
               
                  The Chriſtian Churches at Conſtantinople.
                  The ſame time that Amurathes ioyned the North part of Tauricus Cherroneſus to the Turkiſh Prouinces, all the Chriſtian Churches at Conſtantinople (of which I vnderſtand there are about 30 in Monaſteries and otherwiſe remaining) had almoſt bene conuerted into denne
                     •
                   and holes of the religion of Mahomet, by the earneſt motion of the high Biſhop of the Turkiſh Prieſts (whom they call Mufti) And when the Grecians, Armenians, and other Chriſtian nations moſt humbly pleaded and alledged the priuiledges granted by Mahomet the ſecond, and other ſucceding Emperours to the Chriſtians, for a free exerciſe of their religion; the anſwere was, that they were tollerated by reaſon of the deſolatiō of the Citie, and the ſmal number of Muſulmans Now ſince ſuch multitudes profeſſe the religion of Mahomet, that they need more Churches, it is meete that the Chriſtians ſhould yeeld to them. After this the Spaniſh Liedger at 
                     Ʋenice, wrote, that Amurathes had ſpoyled all the Chriſtian Temples, and made them his owne: and had commaunded to be done ſo with them at Ieruſalem: his anger was ſo great towards the Patriarke, that hee cauſed him to be bound in chaines & to be ſhamefully carried through the Citie, and from thence ſent him to Rhodes. One cauſe of his anger towards him was, that he vnderſtood, that he had receiued the Popes new Calender into Greece & other Chriſtian churches of the Eaſt, to the great offence of many. An other, for that he pronounced a ſentence of diuorcement againſt a mightie man in Greece, who the better to be reuenged vpon the Patriarke, renounced his faith & turned Turke, liuing afterwards

in Amurathes Court, and continually incyting him againſt the Patriarke.
               Finally when in a Synode,The Patriark of Conſtantinople.
                   it was decreed (as the Turke willed) that a company of the Grecians ſhouuld be carried into the Deſarts, and there erect a Colonie, and the Patriark had ſaid it was very hard & iniuſt: Theophilus Hieroneonaclus & Perachonnius, told the Turke hereof: who abdicated the Patriark, and put Pachonnius in his place; who being a rude and vnlearned man, after hee had beene in the place one yeare, was remooued, and Theoſeptus ſucceeded, who was inaugurated the yeare, 1585.
               
                  William Carter of London, at a Seſſions in the Old-bayly, was there indighted, arraigned, and condemned of high treaſon, for printing a ſeditious and traiterous booke in Engliſh: Intituled, A Treatiſe of ſchiſme: and was for the ſame (according to ſentence pronounced againſt him) drawne, hanged, and quartered. I. St.
               
               Two and thirtie Seminaries, Maſſing Prieſts,Seminaries baniſhed. and other late priſoners in the Tower of London, Marſhall-ſea, Kings bench, and other places, were embarked in the Mary Marlin of Colcheſter, to bee tranſported ouer into the coaſts of Normandie, to bee baniſhed this Realme for euer, by the vertue of a Commiſſion from her Maieſtie, before ſpecified.
               In the beginning of this yeare, at Riga in Liuonia,
                  An inſurrection about the new Calender a great hurly burly happened amongſt the Citizens about the Popes new Calender, which preſently burſt out into open ſedition. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  Henry Archbiſhop of Breme, Oſuaborge, Padeborne, Duke of Saxonie, the ſonne of Frances the elder, a Prince endued with vertue, wiſedome, clemencie, and learning, in the flower of his youth, being of the age of 35. yeares, was called out of this World. Idem.
               
               Pope Gregorie, the thirteenth of that name, a Bolonist,
                  The Popes death. called before Hugo Boncompagno, beeing of the age of eightie yeares, dyed at Rome the eleuenth day of Aprill, when he had ruled in the Sea the ſpace of thirteene yeares and a litle more.
               
                  This Pope renewed the hatred of his predeceſſor Pius the fift, againſt the Queene of England: and ſo practiſed by all manner of meanes, one while by force, (as it appeareth by the great Armada ſent into Ireland, and had a miſerable ende) an other while by craft and deceit (as was ſeene in the great traytor Parry, and others by him ſent) who had alſo miſerable end.
               It was the common voyce and fame in Rome, that this Gregorie before hee was Pope, and alſo beeing Pope, had his concubine, of whom hee had alſo title ſonnes, which ſaid vnto him ſuch Graces as made him to laugh: and beeing Pope, ſuch was the grace that Phillippicus his ſonne ſaid, that the Pope his father gaue him 5000. crownes a yeare. M. Cyp. Val.
               
               
                  Sixtus. 5.
                  
                  Felix Pereto, called Sixtus 5. was borne in a Village called Montalto, neare to the Citie of Firmo, which is in the Marches of Ancona: he was of the order of the Franciſcans, & Cardinall of Montalto.
               
               In this Pope the common ſaying of Spaine was fulfilled: Rex por natura, y papa por ventura. A King by name, a Pope by aduenture: for ſo poore was his father, that hee was a Swine-heard. Felix in his childhood was very poorely brought vp, but ſhewing ſome ſparkes of wit, a gentlewoman for Gods ſake cloathed him with the habit of S. Frances, and entreated the Warden to receiue him into his couent, where hee ſtudied the liberall ſciences and ſchoole diuinitie, and in thoſe ſciences hee much profited. In the end, being now of age, he was made Inquiſitor. In which office ſuch was his carriages, as feawe could abide his crueltie: and ſo it hapned, that he called before him a Magnifico of 
                     Ʋenice, (who being come) hee intreated diſcourteouſly & inhumanely. This gentleman vnaccuſtomed to h
                     ••
                  re ſuch iniuries and diſgraces (as by that which after he did for reuenge to the L. Inquiſitor appeareth) ſtomacked the matter. A feawe daies after, this Gentleman encountred the Inquiſitor; and when he ſawe him, he commanded his ſeruant with a good cudgell which he carried, to abate the fierceneſſe of the vnhappie Pereto. Felix being thus cudgelled returned to Rome, and recounted his miſchance to Pope Pius 4. The Pope hereat diſdaining,

ſent him backe to 
                     Ʋenice with much more authoritie and power then before.A notable act of the Seignory of Venice.
                   When hee was returned to 
                     Ʋenice. hee preſented his commiſſion to the Seignorie. The Seignory beeing wiſe, and knowing the quarrelous humour of this man, and well perceiuing that hee came with a deſire to bee reuenged, commaunded a Waxe candle to bee lighted, and Felix, if hee were wiſe, preciſely to depart theyr dominion and iuriſdiction, before that candle were conſumed.
               This Felix vnable to doo otherwiſe, returned eftſoones to Rome, and complained to the Pope. The Pope ſeeing this man meete for his ſeruice, made him Maiſter of his Pallace.
               After this, when the Spaniſh Inquiſition (of all men how high ſo euer feared, and liked of none) held the Archbiſhoppe of Tolledo for ſuſpected of hereſie; the Pope ſent Felix into Spaine to heare this cauſe. The Generall of the Franciſcans, the chiefe dignitie among them, now happened to die. This dignitie gaue the Pope, whom a feawe yeares after, the ſame Pope made Cardinall. In the concluſion, when Gregorie was dead, Felix by the meanes of his good friends in Spaine was made Pope, and called himſelfe Sixtus the fift.
               This name he tooke in memorie of Sixtus 4. who was as he, a Franciſcan Friar. M. Cyp. Val.
               
               This Pope talking one day of his baſe birth and parentage, ſaide that hee came from a moſt illuſtrious houſe: for (ſaid hee) the vpper part of the roofe thereof beeing alwaies torne and vncouered, the Sunne daily made it moſt glorious with his beames. Anthonius Ciracella, de vitis pontificum
               
               The Princes of the Empire, with the K. of Denmarke,
                  The Prince of Saxonie priſoner. ſent their Embaſſadors in the moneth of March to the Emperor at Prage, to entreat for the enlargement of Iohn Frederick Prince of Saxonie, whom hee held in priſon the ſpace of 18. yeares: which although the Emperor condiſcended to in word only, yet he bound the captiue Prince with ſuch hard conditions that he

had rather haue bene a continual priſoner, then to be deliuered after ſuch maner. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  The League.Two things gaue an alarum to he League: one, the aſſembly at Mountauban: the other the voyage of the D. d'Espernon to the K. of Nauarre, which it tooke as brands to kindle her fire, and began to ſend out Commiſſions in all places in the kings name, who diſauouched them, & prohibited the raiſing of ſouldiers.The K. Edict 18. of March, 1585. againſt raiſing of men The firſt point of their diſliking, ſhewed the reaſon which mooued the Cardinall of Bourbon, the Princes, Lords, Townes and Commons, beeing Catholickes, to oppoſe themſelues againſt the heretikes. Secondly, becauſe they were offended that the Parliament which they would haue had to be holden concerning warres, to be made againſt the Huguenots, had beene reuoked. Thirdly, to breake the Edict of pacification. Fourthly, becauſe they ſtood in feare, that if the King ſhould die without children, there would riſe great trouble for the ſucceſſion of the Crowne: whereof the King of Nauarre had great hope ſince the death of Monſieur the kings brother, by the practice of his friends, and fauourers of the king. Fiftly, becauſe of the great preparations of warre, made both within and without the Realme, that ſhould be readie by the 15. of Aprill then next enſuing, to execute that which they ſaid had beene concluded in an aſſembly at Magdebourge the 15. of December, 1584. againſt ye religion, the king, and his ſubiects: by the which it was agreed, that the Queen of England ſhould furniſh 5000. Rutters, 4000. Switzers, 12000. Engliſh Count Palatine, Prince Caſſamire, and the D. Pomeranie, each of them 4000, Rutters. The Lantgraue of Heſſe, two thouſand & 500. The Duke of Wittemberge 2000. The Lords of their League beſides the Queene of Englands Forces 5000. Switzers. The Kings Protector and Conſull of Scotland, 2000. Scots. The King of Nauarre, the Prince of Conde, & their Aſſociats, twentie and fiue thouſand Harquebuſiers, and 4000. horſe, that had ſworne neuer to make peace with the King of France, but with all their conſents to maintaine the Prince of Orange in the lowe Countries againſt the King of Spaine, and to helpe the Emperour to get the Domaines of the

Empire, withholden by the Pope, and to ſend their deputies from all places in the moneth of March, to Baſill and Switzerland, there to determine the differences of the Lords Supper. Sixtly, becauſe thoſe of the religion would not yeeld vp the Townes by them held for the aſſurance of the execution of the Edict of peace. Seuenthly, becauſe of the vniuerſall abuſe ſuffered in placing of Officers, in leauying of monies, and by inuention of exceſſiue oppreſſions laid vpon the people: And laſtly, againſt ſuch as at abuſing the Kings fauour and authoritie, had in a manner ſeazed vpon his perſon, impeached the ordinary acceſſe of honeſt men vnto him, conſumed the Kings treaſures, braued the Nobilitie out of the libertie of iuſtice, ſpoiled the Cleargie of their Tithes, and perſwaded the King that it was neceſſary for his ſeruice, to weaken and diminiſh the authoritie of the Catholicke Princes and Lords. Vpon theſe iuſt occaſions, they ſaid they were forced to meete in armes. H. of Fr.
               
               The League made warre againſt the Huguenots, ſeazing vpon the beſt Townes of the Catholickes in all the Realme. Religion was preached in Guyenne, and they went to driue it out of Picardie: the Huguenots were Rochell, and the Leagues Army marched ſtraight to Paris, they were at Mountpellier, and the League ſet vpon Marſaille: which by meanes of the ſecond Conſull of the Towne they tooke, who afterward was hanged.
               
                  Antwerpe, a Citie Brabant,
                  
                     Antwerpe yeeldeth to the king of Spaine.
                   the moſt famous Towne of all Belgia and Europe, after Alexander Farneſe Duke of Parma had ſtopped their paſſage by the Riuer by the ſpace almoſt of an whole yeare: conſtrained by famine and the daily tumult of the common people, who deſired peace, returned to the obedience of the king of Spaine, & yeelded to the Duke vpon very meane conditions.
               On the 26. of Iune, arriued at London, Deputies for the Eſtates of the Netherlands or lowe Countries; and on the 29. of the ſame, they came to Greenwich, where by vertue of their commiſſion from the vnited Countries, they preſented to her Maieſtie the ſoueraigntie of thoſe Countries, to wit, of

                  Brabant (but the commiſſion for the ſiege of Antwerpe not fully authoriſed) of Gelder, of Flaunders, Holland, Friſeland, Zeland, and 
                     Ʋtrick. I. Hooker.
               
               The Queene of England, of her moſt gracious compaſſion and mercie, tooke into her protection and defence, the eſtate of Poland and Zeland.
               
               
                  S.F. Drake.
                  Syr Frances Drake, Generall of the Engliſh Nauie, tooke his voyage to the coaſts of Spaine and America, that thereby hee might weaken the power of king Phillip: hee tooke the greene Promontory, where the ſhips that are to goe to America lie at Roade. Then came he to Hispaniola, an Iland of S. Domingo, in the beginning of Ianuary, where he ſtirred vp the ſlaues of Affrica and Aethiopia (who had there their Colonies, and were ſo cruelly handled, that many times in diſpaire they offered violence to themſelues) to fight for their libertie, who being armed by thē, killed the Spaniards, and deliuered vp the Ile. He tooke all their gold which was ready ſhipped for Spaine: 254. peeces of Ordinance, and returned richly laden with gold into England, before Autumne, with 23. ſhips. D. Chytraeus.
               
               At this time was the conſpiracie of Anth. Babington, Salisbury, Tytchbourne, Abington, &c. againſt our moſt gracious Soueraigne, incited thereto by Mary Q. of Scots: who for this traiterous attempt, were arraigned, conuicted, condemned & executed, according to the law made for traitors.
               A great victory hapned to the Queen in Ireland, againſt the E. of Arrane and L. Feruhurſt, who were baniſhed out of Scotland. Theſe practiſed with the Guiſe & the Spaniards, & brought with thē 3000. Scots into Ireland, and at Conocke they were put to the ſword by S. Ri. Bingā, gouernor of that prouince. Chytraeus.
               
               Vpon the 8. day of September, Robert E. of Leicester, accompanied with diuers honorable perſonages, Captaines, and ſouldiers, with a traine to the number of 50. ſailes of ſhips and hoyes, ſet forward toward Fluſhing, where he was princely entertained by Graue Maurice, ſecond ſon to the deceaſed Prince of Orange. I. Hooper.
               
               The Pope excommunicated the King of Nauarre & the Prince of Conde, declaring him incapable to the ſucceſſion of

the Crowne of France:
                  The Pope excommunicated the king of Nauarre and ye Prince of Conde.
                   abandoning his perſon and his Countries, for a pray to ſuch as could obtaine it: but they ſleigthly regarding it, oppoſed themſelues againſt it. The K. of Nauarre complained himſelfe to all the eſtates of France, in that they had cauſed the ſucceſſion of a king being yet aliue, to be decided in the Court of Rome, made the title of a Prince of the bloud, to be iudged by the Pope: and ſuffered the Conſiſtorie to giue that which belonged not vnto them: he ſent his Letters to the Cleargie, the Nobilitie, and the Commons.
               The Princes of Germanie, that ſought to aide ſuch as were of their religion, perceiuing France to be a body wounded to death, ſent their Embaſſadors to the K. deſiring him to open his eyes to the teares, & his eares to the complaints of his poore ſubiects, to heare the requeſts of his neighbours for his owne good, the quietnes and honor of his faith, his name, and reputation. The K. anſwered, that he knew what was neceſſary for himſelfe and his ſubiects, & that according to the cauſe, and for their good and tranquillitie, he had made and changed his ordinances, as all Princes in Chriſtendome vſe to do: and that for his part, hauing the feare of God, & the loue of his ſubiects liuely ingrauen in his heart, hee would do nothing againſt the honour of his conſcience, nor the fatherly care he had of his people. With which anſwere they returned not well pleaſed.
               This yeare, Auguſtus Duke of Saxonie, one of the Princes Electors, new come from hunting ſuddenly died,The death of Augustus.
                   being of the age of 60. yeares, and was buried at Friberge. Genebrardus.
               
               There died likewiſe at the ſame time, Margarite of Auſtria, the baſe daughter of Charles the fift, and mother of Alexander Duke of Parma, and Gouernour of Belgia.
               
               
                  Charles Count Palatine married Dorithie the daughter of William Duke of Brunſwick, at Cella. D. Chytraeus.
               
               On the fourth day of Iune, L. Edward, Earle of Rutland, went Embaſſador into Scotland, for a ratificatiō of a firme bond of peace betweene Elizabeth Queene of England, & Iames the ſixt, K. of Scots, vpon certain cauſes neceſſary and important, which was confirmed at Barwicke the 19. of Iune, where the Embaſſadors of Scotland were likewiſe preſent. I. Vowell.
               
               
                  The 16. of Iuly, not farre from Barwick, the borderers of both the Nations of England and Scotland aſſembled to determine for recompence of all ſuch iniuries, as each people offered to other, at what time the Lord of Fernhurst. Warden of the Scottiſh borders, Iames Steward, Earle of Arrane, then Chauncelor, and Syr 
                     〈◊〉
                   
                  Ruſſell Knight, Lord Ruſſell, and Syr I. Forſter Knight, Warden of their middle Marſhes. came with their company. When the Wardens were ſet vpon the bench, there did ſuddenly ariſe amongſt the people a contention, whereby followed at the firſt, ſome ſmall fray, which beeing perceiued by the Lord Ruſſell,
                  The death of the L. Ruſſel.
                   hee aroſe from the bench, and called for his horſe, who meaning to appeaſe the matter, went amongſt the preaſe, at what time a certaine number of ſhot comming on him, he was ſuddenly (but moſt vniuſtly) ſlaine with a peece amongſt the reſt, diſcharged againſt him by a Scot, borne about that place (ſuſpected by the moſt, to be the Lord of Fernhursts brother) The loſſe of which noble Gentleman, being of ſo great a hope, was much lamented, and that eſpecially for his vntimely death, ſo iniuriouſly by the Earle of Arrane (as the common report went) procured and ſo ſuddenly performed, hee in the 35. yeare of his age, did bereaue the Realme of England of a goodly young perſon, well ſtayed in gouernment, bountiful, wiſe, and vertuous, whoſe death happened the day before that his honourable father the Earle of Bedford, departed this world. I. Hooker.
               
               
                  Heluetians.Fourteene thouſand Heluetians who were Catholickes, and commaunded to appeare by the King of Nauarre, went to the aide of the holy League: but before they tooke their iourney, they all receiued the Sacrament, and ſwore that they did beare Armes onely for the defence of the Catholicke faith: but if the king ſhuld be found to do any fauour to the Heluetians, they promiſed to lay downe their weapons and returne. Anth. Cicarella.
               
               A Parliament was held in Nouember, both for the continuing of the defence of the lowe Countries againſt the King of Spaine: and as for the determining of the treacherous practiſes of the Queene of Scot, ſhee was forthwith conueyed

to Foderinghay Caſtle, in Northampton Shire,The death of the Queene of Scots. which ſometimes belonged to the Dukes of Lancaster; where being tried by the Nobles of the Realme, ſhee was found guiltie, and afterward beheaded.
               She was crowned Queene of Scots when ſhe was but 18. moneths old, and after in the ſixt yeare of her raigne called into France, where at 15. yeares ſhe was married to Frances the ſecond: then the Dolphin of France being 14. yeares of age, with whom ſhe liued three yeares. After whoſe deceaſe, ſhe returned into Scotland, and was married to Henry Arlye, at the age of 22. by whom ſhe had one onely ſonne, Ieames the ſixt, now king. This husband dead, ſhe was married the third time to the Earle of Bothuell, who died in priſon; after this, ſhe liued 18. yeares in England. Genebrardus.
               
               
                  Gulielmus Gonzaga, Duke of Mantua, departed this life, whom his onely ſonne 
                     Ʋincentius ſucceeded, being of the age of 25. yeares. Idem.
               
               Syr F. Drake returned out of America, came into Zeland, the other fleete went towards India, who tooke two ſhips out of S. Thomas Ile, and the Gouernour thereof. The one of them periſhed, the other was brought home a rich prize.
               This yeare at Zutphen in Gilderland. S. Phillip Sidney,
                  The Death of S. Ph. Sidney
                   
                  Englands Mars and Muſe, was ſhot in the thigh with a Musket, whereof he died. His body was conueyed into England, and honourably buried in Powles. I. Vowell.
               
               
                  Frederick king of Denmarke, ſollicited by the king of Nauarre for aide againſt Guiſe, ſent his Embaſſadors to Henry king of France, who ſhould entreate that the peace of the reformed Religion, graunted before by the king, and confirmed by oath, might bee kept with the king of Nauarre and his followers D. Chytraeus.
               
               At Auguſta, after the ſuperintendent was caſt out,Auguſta. the eſtate of the Miniſters of the Church, waxed euery day worſe. For after that, the Gregorian Calendar was receiued of them, the pontificall Magiſtrate aſſured to himſelfe authoritie and right of chooſing and calling the Miniſters of the Church, which priuiledge the Elders and Gouernours of the Church had before,

with the Miniſtery, & held it by the authority of the Emperor, who ſent Commiſſioners to that end into the Citie. But when the Miniſters of the Church would not agree to them, they were all commanded to depart the Citie before Sunne ſet, and others of the ſame confeſſion were called from Noriberga and other places, and ſubſtituted in their places. Whom when the people could not heare, nor vſe their ſeruice, the pontificall Magiſtrate beſides the garriſon that was alreadie in the towne, brought more ſouldiers, thereby to terrifie them, and bring them to obedience. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  Iulius Biſhop of Wurtzeburg began to vſe great crueltie towards them of the confeſſion of Augusta, in his Dioceſſes, baniſhing many of them, and conſtraining them to ſell their goods in ſo ſhort a ſpace that they left the third part to him. William Lantſgraue of Heſſe his neighbour, diſſwaded him from this crueltie; but following the example of Balthaſar Abbot of Fulden, who greatly perſecuted his ſubiects vnder the praetext of Religion: hee not only incurred the hatred of all men, but was depriued of all titles and dignities. Idem.
               
               
                  Bathorus dieth.
                  This yeare vpon the 27. of September, Stephen Bathorus King of Poland, Prince of Tranſiluania, died when he had raigned 10. yeares.
               Him followed in this way of all fleſh, Mahomet (the ſeruant of God) King of Perſia, who all his raigne held warre with the Turke with equall fortunes. And in Saxonie Fredericke Duke of Saxonie.
               
               
                  
                     Iames K. of Scots, beſieged and taken.The 20. of October, Iames the King of Scots was beſieged by his ſubiects, and taken in the Caſtle of Saint Damian. Thoſe Dukedomes and Seignories which many yeares before Iohn Baſilides Prince of Moſchouites had taken from the Polanders, the aforeſaid Stephen recouered again, and annexed them to the crowne, he ſhewed himſelfe of a dauntleſſe ſpirit againſt the Turke, for when according to the auncient cuſtome, he demaunded certain Forces to maintaine his warres againſt the Sophy of Perſia, hee denied him, ſaying that the white Eagle of Poland which before was vnfeathered, and of no force, was now become young againe, full fledged, and had whet and ſharpened

her bill and talents. Anch. Cicar.
               
               This yeare Maiſter Thomas Cauendiſh began his voyage about the world, vpon the twentie one of Iuly,
                     M. Cauēdiſh voyage about the world. entering in at the ſtraight of Magellan, and returning by the Cape bona Speranza; Which voyage hee finiſhed to the ſpace of two yeares, and leſſe then two moneths, arriuing at Plimmouth the ninth of September. 1588. Maiſter Richard Haklnit.
               
               In the beginning of this yeare, Syr William Standley traitorouſly yeelded vp thoſe Townes of the which he was made Gouernour by the Earle of Leiceſter.
               After the death of Stephen King of Poland,
                  Contention about the election of the king of Poland the Polanders were carefull for the election of a new. Some thought it beſt to offer it to the Emperour, who had ſucceeded without any other election his Father Maximilian, the choſen King of Poland, If hee had come to the poſſeſſion thereof. Some propoſed the Duke of Parma, becauſe hee was a wiſe and valiant ſouldier, and for that he was the Nephew of Cardinal Farneſe, who when he was Protector of this Realme, was verie kinde and liberall to the people. Many had liking to the Prince of Tranſiluania, and to Cardinall Bathoraeus, and the Duke of Ferrrara. Nobles likewiſe were deſirous of it, amongſt whom Samoſcius the high Chauncellour (whom Stephen had preferred to ſuch height of honor that nothing was thought wanting in him for the perfection thereof but the title of a King) was thought moſt fit. But all theſe were excluded, and there were yet two other competitors, Sigiſmond Prince of Suecia, and Maximilian Archduke of Austria, and brother to the Emperour.
               
                  Maximilian is choſen of the one part;Maximilian. Sigiſmond. Others proclaimed med Sigiſmond, a young Prince of twentie yeares of age, or there-about.
               Theſe two were both called to the poſſeſsion of a kingdome, who hearing thereof made ſpeedie haſte thereto. Maximilian firſt came with his Armie, conſiſting of ſixteen thouſand horſe and foote, and pitched his Tents in a field neare the Citie of Craconia, and ſent to the Citizens that he might be crowned.

The Cracouians would by no meanes admit him, but ſent Letters to the Prince of Suetia, that hee would come, who with great ioy was receiued and crowned. Now the Polanders thought themſelues ſtrong enough for the Muſchouites, whoſe Duke they called the Dragon of the North, and againſt whom they beare an innated hatred. Chytraeus. And. Cicarell. Gen.
               
               
                  
                     D. of Guiſe.The Duke of Guiſe perceiuing the Army of Rutters to be a body diſpearced, hauing nothing but the legs and Armes, executed vpon them that, which he had determined from the firſt day of their entrie, which was vpon the Generalls lodging, and ſo by ſtriking the ſhepheard, diuided the flocke, as Caeſar did at the battaile of Pharſalia.
               
               The Pope, the King of Spaine, and the Duke of Sauoy, made fiers of ioy, and pronounced the praiſes of the Duke of Guiſe. The Pope ſent him a ſword engrauen with burning flames. The Duke of Parma had ſent him his Armes, ſaying: that among all the Princes of Europe, it belonged only to Henry of Lorraine to beare Armes, and to be a commaunder in the warres.
               
                  
                     Max. taken priſoner.After many broiles betweene theſe two elected Kings of Poland, Max▪
                   was conſtrained to leaue Poland, but hee was purſued by Samoſcius the Chauncelor, and at Pitſcha he beſieged him and tooke him priſoner.
               
                  Maria de la Viſitatione.In this yeare, 1588. Maria de la Viſitatione, Prioreſſe of the Monaſterie de Annūciada in Lisbone, was held for wonderful holy: whoſe hypocriſie and falſe myracles were diſcouered, and publikely condemned. Her the fond people called the holy Nunne. Another Franciſcan (I ſhould haue ſaid a Dominican) a feawe yeares ſince, roſe vp in Lisbone, who they ſaid had the fiue wounds of Chriſt, as had S. Francess: and many other things they ſay of her. One Stephen de Luſignan, a Dominican Friar, who collecting all he could get to extoll her, compiled a booke in French, and dedicated the ſame to the Queene of Fraunce, Imprinted at Paris by Iohn Beſſant 1586. In the beginning of the booke, ſhee is pictured like a Dominican Nunne, with a blacke mantle, and a white rolle, a coate, and

white looſe habit vpon the Mantle, and on her head a crowne of thornes: the Crucifix on high ſet ouer her, and falling towards her, with rayes from the wounds which reach to the feet and hands of the Nunne, that out of the ſame commeth a heart, which ſhe holdeth betwixt the fingers of her right hand: a Dragon ſhe hath vnder her feete, a Dominican Friar before her kneeling, and a ſecular man and woman: and at her left ſide, a paire of Beads hanging. The title of the booke is this. The great miracles, and the moſt holy wounds, which this preſent yeare haue happened to the right reuerend mother, now Prioreſſe of the Monaſterie de la Anunciada, in the Citie of Lisbon, in the Kingdome of Portugall, of the order of preaching Friars, approoued by the reuerend Father, Friar Lewis de Granada, and by other perſons of credit M. Cyp. Val.
               
               So famous was the holineſſe of this Nunne, that Cardinall Albertus of Austria, ſent information to Pope Sixtus the fift. To whom the Pope wrote this Letter. With great ioy haue wee read that thou haſt procured to bee written, the vertues of the Prioreſſe of the Monaſterie Anunciada, of the moſt holy Virgin. And of the great benefites which God hath ſhewed her, we pray thy diuine goodneſſe from day to day, to make her more worthy of his grace, and to inrich her with his heauenly gifts, for the glory of his name, and ioy of his faithfull. Giuen in S. Maries at Rome, with the litle Ring of the fiſh.
               
                  Fredericke the ſecond, king of Denmarke, the 30. yeare of his raigne, and 54. of his age, departed this life at Arderfoa in Zeland: whom Christian the fourth, of eleuen yeares of age ſucceeded.
               In the moneth of Aprill,
                     K. Phillip asketh counſel of Maria de la Viſitatione 1588. Phillip the ſecond of that name, King of Spaine, pretending to ſend his inuincible Fleete for the conqueſt of England, made choyce by the aduice of the Prioreſſe of the Monaſterie of the Anunciada, whoſe name was Mary of the viſitation, as moſt worthy for her holineſſe, to bleſſe his Standard royall, the which ſhee did, with vſing diuers other ceremonies, and in the deliuerie thereof to the Duke of Medina Sidonia,
                  
who was appointed the chiefe Generall, ſhee did pronounce openly good ſucceſſe and victorie to the Duke, in ſaying hee ſhould returne a victorious Prince. This ſtandard was carried in proceſſion by Dan Franciſco de Gordoua, who was a Spaniard, and the talleſt Gentleman that could bee founde, hee beeing on horſe-backe, to the ende it might bee better ſeene. At the ſolemnizing whereof, there was ſuch a number of people aſſembled, that diuers of them periſhed in the thrōg. There was preſent the Arch-duke Albertus, Cardinall and Gouernour of the kingdome of Portugall, the Popes Nuncio the Arch-biſhop, who was head Inquiſitor, with diuers other Nobles, Prelates, and Gentlemen. This ſolemnization dured ſo long that Albertus fainted with faſting, and his holie Nunne to comfort him, cauſed a meſſe of the broath which was for her owne diet to bee brought, who preſented it to him, which hee accepted moſt willingly, comming from the hand of ſo holy a Nunne: but the next yeare all her holineſſe falſe myracles, and great diſſimulations was then found out, and ſhee condemned and puniſhed for the ſame. M. Cyp. Val.
               
               
                  The Spaniſh Nauie.The Nauie of the King of Spaine three whole yeares in furniſhing, was 125. great ſhippes, with 20000. choyſe ſouldiers out of Spaine and Italie, 10000. ſouldiers, 2000. peeces of Ordinance, with all manner of furniture and prouiſion for ſixe moneths, at the ende of May ſet out from the hauen of Tagus, and ſlowly proceeding to the Weſterne coaſt of Spaine, the 30. of Iune it came to Coronis, a Port of Spaine, towards the fartheſt North in the bounds of Gallicia and Aſturia, which Ptoloney calleth the hauen of the Artabrians. The chiefe Generall of the Nauie was Alphonſus Pereſius, Duke of Medina Sidonia.
               
               The Admirall by ſea was Iohannes Marſinus Recaldeus of Cantabria. But when hey had hoiſted their ſailes, ſcarce out of the ſight of the Spaniſh coaſt,A tempeſt diuideth them. a tempeſt ſuddenly riſing, they were diuided and ſcattered, and with contrary windes driuen into the ſame and the neighbouring hauens of Aſturia and Biſcay.
               
               
                  The King when hee vnderſtood that the whole Nauy met together at Coronis, commaunded that forthwith it ſhould goe for England, ioyning with the Duke of Parmaes ſhippes in Belgia, and to ſet the ſouldiers vpon the continent.
               S. F. Drake Vice-admirall, followed them cloſe,
                     S. F. Drake. and tooke the hindermoſt that ſlowly ſailed after, and in her, Petrus Ʋaldeſius. The Nauy of the Duke of Parma partly by aduerſe windes hindered, and partly by a Nauy of Zeland, that lay before Dunkerke, in vaine any longer expected of the Spaniards, the Duke of Sidonia caſt Anchor neare vnto Callaice.
               
               Syr Frances Drake the next night filled eight old ſhips with pitch, brimſtone, and other matter for fire,A ſtrategem. a great winde blowing on their backes, draue them vpon the Spaniſh Nauie. Who fearing leaſt their ſhips likewiſe had beene burnt, cut their Anchors and departed. Whom S. Frances by this ſtratagem ſo diſperſed and put to flight, purſued with his balls of fire, and by reaſon of the greatneſſe and height of the Spaniſh ſhips, feawe of them miſſed. Of this great Fleete 32. were ſunke and taken by the Engliſh, and in them, 10000. ſouldiers, the reſt of the Nauie were thus ſcattered: two were driuen to Fliſſingam all to beaten and wrackt: the other after long ſayling, returned into Spaine. The D. of Parma diſmiſſed his fleet, caſhiered his Marriners, and ſent ſome of the ſouldiers to the ſiege of Bergam Vpſome. D. Chytraeus. M. Gall. Anth. Ciccarella
               
               This yeare the Duke of Bullen died at Geneua of the age of 25. yeares.
               The moſt Chriſtian Prince of Conde,
                  The Prince of Conde poiſoned. whom Sixtus the fift excommunicated and curſed, died of poiſon.
               In the ſame yeare, H. of Lotharing, D. of Guiſe, by the commaundement of the K. of France, was ſlaine at Blois,
                  The Duke of Guiſe ſlaine. where the Parliament was held: and the day after the Cardinal his brother. The Duke was 42. yeares of age, and was ſlaine in his Clymactetic yeare.
               If Plutarch had liued in theſe times, hee would haue

compared him to C. Iulius Caeſar. Genebrardus.
               
               This is that wonderfull yeare of the which Iohannes Rhegiomontanus the great Mathematician wrote a Prognoſtication or Prophecie, almoſt after that of Sibilla. Poſt mille expletos. Idem.
               
               
                  The generall troubles and tumults in this yeare.The like Iohannes Stofflaus a famous Aſtrologian, and in our time that noble Gentleman Iohannes Rantzoutus, foretold in his booke of Climacterike yeares, and the fall of Empires. Whoſe Prophecies haue ſorted to trie euents, which we haue ſeene this yeare.
               
                  Poland.Firſt the kingdom of Poland was moſt miſerably troubled by ciuil & inteſtine warres, by reaſon of foure Kings they had at once in this yeare. Sigiſmond of Suecia, Maximilian of Auſtrich, Henry Valois, and Stephen Bathor, as then vnburied. So likewiſe Suecia was vexed by ſundry tumults; Fredericke the ſecond being dead, foure Protectors gouerned the kingdom during his ſonnes minoritie.
                     Q of Scots. England. Turkes. The Queene of Scots was beheaded. England obteined a wonderful victorie at ſea ouer the Spaniards. The Sophie of Perſia dyed. The Turke had ill ſucceſſe in Hungarie againſt the Chriſtians. The Hungarians likewiſe ſuffered great loſſes.Italie. 
                  Maximilian taken captiue by the Polanders was committed to priſon. Italie was ſore moleſted by the Bandetti. Fraunce was incombred with ciuil broyles. Germanie brought to ſleep by her old religion, imbraceth now that face of religion. And to be briefe, from the riſing of the Sunne, to the ſetting thereof, there was no place in the which ſomewhat happened that was not worthie to be wondred at. See Genebrardus.
               
               
                  Guiſe.The death of the Duke of Guiſe and of his brother, cauſed many, and the moſt principall Cities of France, as Paris, Roan, Lyons, Tholous, and others, to rebell againſt the King. M. Cyprian. Ʋal.
               
               After that the King of France had commanded the D. of Guiſe to be ſlaine,The Pope angrie with Henry the 3. and his brother Cardinall to be ſtrangled, he committed likewiſe to priſon Charles Cardinall Burbon, Legate Apoſtolike, Peter Arch-biſhop of Lions, and heire of the Duke of Guiſe, which when the Pope vnderſtood, he tooke it greeuouſly,

and in the higheſt Conſiſtory, made an oration thereof to his Cardinalls. About this matter, not long after hee ſent an Embaſſador to H. of France, to intreat for the deliuery of the Cardinall of Bourbon, and the Archbiſhop of Lyons: to whom was anſwered, that for the Cardinall, he might by no meanes be deliuered, for that his enlargement would ſtirre ſedition: and as touching the Archbiſhop, that it was not in him to doo, whē that Guastius, who had charge of the Caſtle of Ambois, and the priſoners, now being treated Lord therof, no priſoner could be diſmiſſed without paying his raunſome, Whē the Pope had often in vaine ſollicited the K. and was denied, he thus decreed,He threatneth excommunication. that if at a certaine time the King did not deliuer them, and thirtie daies after their enlargement, certifie it to the Apoſtolicke Sea by his Letters, vnder his owne hand and ſeale, that forthwith he was excommunicated, and did incurre all Eccleſiaſticall cenſures, which are read in the holy Canons, in the generall and particular conſtitutions, and in the Bull of the Supper of the Lord. This alſo was determined againſt all thoſe which were of his counſell or aide, or any way had aſſiſted him in the premiſſes. Beſides, he cited the King himſelfe, that within the ſpace of 60. dayes, which ſhould begin from the day of the notice to the king: that hee in his owne proper perſon, or ſome one eſpecially in his place, ſhould come to Rome, there to yeeld reaſon wherefore he cauſed the Duke of Guiſe to bee ſlaine, and held in priſon the Cardinall and Archbiſhop: and that the reſt that were ſommoned, ſhould come themſelues without deputies: to this alſo hee added, that none of them, nor the king himſelfe, no not in caſe of conſcience, the houre and dayes of death excepted, and not then to bee abſolued, vnleſſe hee obeyed, and ſatisfied the Church in all things which hee was enioyned to doo. Without this promiſe hee might not be abſolued, not in the full Iubily, or the holy marke of the Croſſe, any indulgence, power, or priviledge whatſoeuer, to him or his predeceſſors before granted notwithſtanding. Anth. Cicarella.
               
               The Huguenots in their writings publiſhed at that time,Huguenots. acknowledged not that action of the thirteenth of December,

as a clap of thunder, that maketh more noiſe then it doth hurt, nor as a diſgrace of fortune, wherevnto the greateſt perſonages are moſt ſubiect▪ but as a worke of God, and as one of the moſt notable workes that he had wrought for them, thereby beginning to worke their reuenge, for the maſſacre of S. Bartholomewes day, and to relieue them out of the miſerable ſtate wherin they ſtood.
               
                   In the moneth of Ianuary the Embaſſadors of the Emperour Rodolphe, treated with the Polanders about the deliuerie of Max. Arch-duke of Auſtria, in the territories of Sileſia & Polonia at Beutena. Where vpon certaine conditions to bee by him performed, he was enlarged without ranſome. D. Chytreus.
               
               
                  The death of the Queene of France.
                  Vpon Twelfe eue, Katherine de Medices, the daughter of Laurentius de Medices, D. of Vrbin, and Magdelen the daughter of the E. of Bononie and Auerina, the wife of H. the 2. King of France, and mother of the French K. H. 3. in the 70. yeare of her age, and fift day of her ſickneſſe, died at Blois. Genebrardus.
               
               This yeare, 1589. the holy Nun before ſpoken of, was found to be a counterfeit. Wherfore the Lords pronounced ſentence againſt her, in the Monaſtery of the mother of God, of the order of S. Francis, in the Citie of Lisbone. And for that ſhe had not dealt with, nor inuocated the diuell, they adiudged her to perpetuall impriſonment. M. Cyp. Val.
               
               
                  The king of France excōmunicated.The Pope Sixtus 5. excommunicateth the K. of France. The K. came vpon Paris, and beſieged it ſtraightly. The Pariſians. ſeeing themſelues in that eſtate, reſolued of no other remedie for deliuerance of their preſent miſerie, but to kill the king. To him that would kill him, they did promiſe great rewards. Amongſt all theſe, was a Iacobine Friar, called Iaques Clement, borne in a Village called Sorbone, neare Seins, hauing paſſed through the hands of certain Confeſſors, and conferred with ſome Ieſuites and others, was for a kind of dexteritie in him obſerued, found meete to ſtrike ſo great a ſtroake. He was vrged and put forward therein; and in the end the D. Demaine, the ſiſter of Montpenſier, & other, had conference with him in diuers places, they requeſted him to perſeuer in this good determination,

which they knew to riſe in him by extraordinarie inſpirations to performe ſo renowned a ſeruice to the holy vnion, the Catholick Church and his Countrie. They cauſed the zealous Sorboniſts and Ieſuits to preach, that the people ſhould yet haue patience for 7. or 8. daies, and they ſhould ſee ſome wonderfull matter come to paſſe, that ſhuld make wel with the vnion. The Preachers of Roan, Orleance, and Amiens, preached the like at the ſame time, and in ſemblable tearmes. The Friar hauing taken order for his complot, departed frō 
                  Paris, & went toward S. Clouis. He being preſented to ſpeake to the K. the 1. of Auguſt, ſaid that he had Letters from the Preſident of Harlay, and credence on hs part: the K. cauſed him to be called into his chamber, where there was no other but the L. of Belle-good, and the procurer Generall,The K is ſlain by a Iacobin Friar. whom he procured to retire a part. The Friar perceiuing himſelfe alone, and opportunitie put into his hand, confirming his countenance more & more, drew out of one ſleeue a paper, which he preſented to the K. and out of the other, poiſoned knife, with which, violētly he ſheathed a thruſt within the kings ſmall ribbes: who feeling himſelfe wounded, plucked the knife out of the wound, wherewith hee ſtrooke the Friar aboue the eye, & thervpon ſome gentlemen ruſhing in, could not containe, but murdered the murderer, although the king commanded the contrary. This Friar after, for his bloudie deed was canonized a Saint.
               In the annagranſme of his name, Friar Iaques Clement,
                  The Death of the king of France, H. the 3. were found theſe words in ſo many letters: C'eſt l'enfer quim'a creè: which ſignifieth: It is hell that created or brought me forth. The K. died ye
                   next morning following: but before his departure, he named the K. of Nauarre his brother, lawfull ſucceſſor to the Crowne, exhorted his ſubiects to obey him, to remaine vnited, and to refer the difference of religion, to the conuocation of the eſtates generall of the Realme, who would thinke vpon conuenient remedies for the ſame, to haue a care of religion and pietie, and pray to God for him: vpon theſe words he gaue vp the ghoſt. Hiſt. of France. D. Chytraeus.
               
               He liued 37 yeares, 10 moneths, and 11. daies, he raigned 15. yeares and two moneths, in this Prince failed the Kings of the

race of 
                     Ʋalois, which had raigned in France from the yeare, 1515. to the yeare, 1589. vnder their dominions, almoſt all the wonders of former ages had bene renewed. Whom H. the 4. of the race of Bourbon, ſucceeded. Genebrardus.
               
               This is worthy of ſpeciall note. In the moneth of May, 4. moneths before he was ſlaine, a certaine learned man beeing asked by his friends what he hoped of this H. the third K. Per ſortes Virgilianas inquirens, The booke of Virgill being opened, and the 7. verſe, which number he choſe in his mind▪ he found,

                     Olli dura quies oculis, & ferreus vrget
                     Soninus, in aeternam clauduntur lumina noctem.
                  
               
               
                  The victory of Harens.
                  After his death, warres began a freſh, betwixt the confederate Catholickes, and the king of Nauarre, many hotte skirmiges were, at the length, on the tenth of March, a battaile was fought at Harens, where the king had the victory, but not without the loſſe of many of his Nobles. The D. Demaine preſently repaired his Hoſte, but the K. conuerted all his Forces againſt Paris,
                  The ſiege at Paris.
                   and beſieged it, where was ſo great a famine, that a buſhel of wheate was ſold for one hundred & fiftie crownes, a mutton for 26. pounds. This ſiege was raiſed by the Duke of Parma: in all this ſpace the Pope ſent no ſuccour to the confederates. Anth. Cicarrella.
               
               
                  
                     Phillip diſpleaſed with the Pope.
                  Phillip K. of Spaine, was much diſpleaſed with the Pope, for that he would not aide the confederates, nor excommunicate thoſe Princes and Prelates which followed the K. of Nauarre. The K. therfore vrged that there might be a proteſtatiō made therof againſt the Pope. But the Pope iuſtified his cauſe before the Cardinals, ſhewing that hee alwaies behaued himſelfe vprightly in the French affaires wherfore certain Cardinals were appointed, who ſhould vnderſtand both the cauſes of ye
                   Popes, and the kings, ſo that no proteſtation might be made. A litle before, ſome difference hapned between the Pope and Count Oliuer, the kings Embaſſador: for that cauſe the K. ſent the D. of Soiſſon for the French buſineſſes, but what time this Legate came, he was fallen very ſicke, ſo that no conference was had about ſo waightie a cauſe. Anth. Cicarr.
               
               
                  This Sixtus was very couetous, for he ſold many offices which before were giuen gratis.
               
               When newes came to him Rome of the King of France his death, he made a ſolemne oration in the Conſiſtory of Cardinals the 11. of September, 1589. where he not onely compared the treaſon of this curſed Iacobine Friar, with the act of Eleazar and of Iudith, but ſaid alſo that it ſurpaſſed thē. Of Eleazar is made mention 1. Machab. 6. who ſeeing an Elephant more mightie then the reſt, armed with the Armes of the king, ſuppoſing that King Antiochus was vpon him, to deliuer his people, and purchaſe eternall glory, he aduentured himſelfe, and ranne couragiouſly to the Elephant, through the midſt of the ſquadron, killing on the right hand and on the left, and all ſides throwing downe, vntill he came vnder the Elephant, and placing himſelfe vnder him, ſlew him: the Elephant fell to the ground vpon him, and there he died, Iudith cut off the head of Holophernes. The warre that Antiochus and Holophernes made againſt the people of God, was moſt vniuſt: the war which H. the 3. made againſt the League which had cōſpired againſt him, to kill him, was moſt iuſt, ſo that herein was he no tyrant.
               This Pope likewiſe not thus ſatisfied, forbad that any obſequies & honors accuſtomed to be made for the dead, ſhould be made for him; and commaunded alſo, that they ſhould nor pray for him. M. Cyp. Valerian.
               
               This yeare in the moneth of Aprill,A Fleete for Lisbone.
                   the Queene of England commiſerating the wrong of D. Antonio, the exiled King of Portugall, ſent a well appointed Nauie to Vlisbone, vnder the conduct of Syr F. Drake, and Syr I. Norris. Where they tooke many Spaniſh ſhips, richly laden with all manner of Marchandize. Thē landing their ſouldiers, they tooke Caſcais, a neighbouring Towne to Lisbone, and a Suburbe. But the plague encreaſing in their ſhips, they went no further, but returned for England: and by the way forbidden the coaſts of Germanie, by reaſon of their contagious ſickneſſe, many of them died miſerably.
               This Pope through the deuotion & requeſt of the moſt Catholicke K. of Spaine,
                  
                     Friar Lewis de Baltram. ordained to bee made the proceſſe of

the miracles of Friar Lewis de Beltram in Aragon, one of the order of the Friars of S. Dominicke, to put him in the number and Catalogue of the Saints. M. Cyp. Val.
               
               
                  Prieſts recanted.
                  William Tedder and Anthony Tirrill, Seminary Prieſts, recanted their erronious opinions at Pauls Croſſe.
               This yeare in Italy fell ſuch ſtore of raine, as neuer was remembred the like before. And at Rome was a great aboundance of waters, that Tybris could not be held within his bounds, but twiſe breaking forth, ſo ouerflowed the Citie, that they went vp and downe the ſtreetes in boates. At Venice (which containeth in circuite 8. Italian miles, 25. Ilands, Pariſhes 62. Monaſteries 41. and 400. common bridges, which euery yeare receiueth onely out of cuſtome and toll, twentie hundred thouſand Ducats, which is a Citie in the midſt of the Sea, built vpon piles, without walles, & moſt famous throughout al the world) the Adriatique Sea did ſo ariſe, that the chanels of the citie with the abundance of the water fallen, did ſo rage and ſwell, that they had no other thought but the whole Citie would haue bin drowned. Genebr. After this, followed a great dearth. Cicar.
               
               
                  Anne, the ſiſter of Chriſtiā
                   the 4. K. of Denmarke, daughter of Frederick the 2. is married to Iames the 6. K. of Scots. D. Chytr.
               
               In the higher Germanie, Iohannes Starmius Rector of the Vniuerſitie of Strasbourge, a very learned and ſtudious man, departed this life the 92. yeare of his age. Idem.
               
               
                  The Popes great treaſurePope Sixtus, the firſt yeare of his Popedome, laid vp in the Caſtle of S. Angelo, tenne hundred thouſand Ducats, with this decree, that no part of this treaſure might be expended, or errogated, vnleſſe it were in the recouery of the holy Land, or a generall expedition againſt the Turke; and not then, till the Armies were ouer the Sea, and vpon the Turkiſh ſhore. Or that there were ſuch an exceeding dearth & ſcarcitie, or peſtilence, or ſome Chriſtian Prouince were in diſtreſſe, or like to fall into the hands of the Infidels, and enemies of the Church, which cannot be recouered without money. Anth. Cicarrella.
               
               
                  An heretike burned.
                  Frances Ket, M. of Art, of Wimondham in Norfolke, was conuented before Edmund Biſhop of Norwiche, for holding diuers deteſtable opinions againſt Chriſt our Sauiour, and was therefore burned nigh the Citie.
               
                  This yeare died Iohannes Sturmius in high Germanie, being of the age of foure ſcore and two yeares: hee was Rector of the Vniuerſitie of Argentine, a very learned and religious man.
               In the ſame yeare, and for the ſame vſe, the Pope laid vp tenne thouſand Ducats more, for the recouerie of ſome kingdome in the poſſeſſion of the enemies of the Church of Rome: to theſe two treaſures he added thirtie hundred thouſand more, ſo that after his death were left about fiue Millions, 1.500000. Crownes. Anth. Cicarrella.
               
               In the moneth of Ianuary,The marriage of the King of Scots. the marriage of the king of Scots  to Anne the daughter of Fred. the 2. was ſolemnized with great and royall pompe at Crouebourge. Genebrardus.
               
               All Saxonie this yeare was in quiet.
               In the beginning of March, the Duke de Maine with all his troupes came to the Riuer of Seine, therby to paſſe ouer the bridge of Mante, whereof the king being aduertiſed,The battaile at Yurie.
                   prouided for his affaires, and the 12. of the ſame moneth, he ſet forward to meet his enemies: and at Yurie he did many notable exploits, and had the victorie. Of the horſmen there were about fifteene hundred ſlaine and drowned, and about 400. taken priſoners. Amongſt the dead was knowne to be ſlaine, the E. of Egmont, who was Colonell of the troupes, ſent by the Duke of Parma: one of the Dukes of Brunſwicke, Chaſtegueray with others. More then 20. Coronells of horſmē was at this time wonne by the K. among the which was the white Cornet, the chief ſtandard belonging to the Spaniſh Generall, and to the Flemings: the Cornet of the Rutters, and more then 60. Enſignes of footmen, beſides the 24. Enſignes of the Switzers, which were yeelded preſently after the ſlaughter. In this battaile of Yurie, all the footmen of the Leaguers were ouerthrowne.
               The King loſt the Lords of Cleremount, d' Antragues, Captain of his Guards, the Lord Scliomberge, de Bongualuay, de Crenay, Feſquieres, and 15. or 20. other Gentlemen, a fewe ſouldiers, and a fewe hurt. D. Chytraeus.
               
               The 10. of May, Charls Cardinal Bourbon,
                  The death of Carls Bourbon.
                   proclaimed K. by the cōfederates of the League, by the name of Charls 10. died at

                  Fountnay, being in priſon. The ſame learned man that propheſied of H. the 3. his death, being asked likewiſe by a friend, whether this Charles ſhould be K. of France or no, hee opened his 
                     Ʋirgill againe, and pronounced this verſe which was next at hand. Cedat ius proprium regi, patriae
                        
                           
                        
                        que
                      remittat. This was done the 19. of Auguſt, 1589. Genebrardus.
               
               
                  The death of Sixtus. 5.The 27. of Auguſt, whileſt the Pariſians did ſtriue with famine and death, Pope Sixtus the 5. died at Rome.
               
               This Pope made a Decree that there ſhould not be aboue 70. Cardinalls at once, and amongſt them, 4. Doctors of Diuinitie, who ſhuld be choſen out of the Regulars Mendicant, and that the Cardinal ſhuld be created in the moneth of Decemb. For frō 
                  Clemēt 6. this cuſtom began in December, & cōtinued in the church aboue 600. yeares after Chriſt. This Pope notwithſtanding brake this decree whē he created Cardinals, Allen and Moroſine, who he made out of this time. Beſides, he decreed that the number of 70. ſhuld neuer be ful, but there ſhould alwaies be ſome voyd places. Hee made many new holy daies in the Church, as the preſentation of the glorious virgin Mary, of S. Frances, of Paula, S. Nicholas, of Tollentius, S. Anthonius, of Padua, S. Placid, & his fellowe Martyrs, Eutichius, Victorinus, brothers of thoſe Cardinals, and his ſiſter Flauia, whom hee commanded to be put in the Romane Calender. Anth. Ciccarella.
               
               A diſſention happened between the Legate of Spaine and France, about the Popes canonizing of Didaco in the Church of S. Peter. Idem.
               
               Whilſt the Sea was voyd, by reaſon of ſome who would haue pulled downe a ſtatue, which was erected to this Pope in the Capitoll; the Romanes decreed that no Pope afterward ſhould haue any ſtatue ſet vp during his life.
               
                  Vrban. 7.
                  
                  Vrban Pope, the 7. before called Iohn Baptist, borne at Rome, of the houſe of Caſtagnea, which was one of the nobleſt houſes in Genoa, Sixtus alwaies loued this houſe well, & greatly approued his iudgement, which he vſed in all his ſerious affaires. A litle before he died, when Peares were ſet vpon the table, he tooke one of them & cut in the midſt, and found it rotten, likewiſe an other, and found it ſo too, then hee ſaid, theſe Peares

are loathſome, let them be chaunged for Cheſt-nuts; by the Peares ſignifying himſelfe, for that he iſſued from the ſtock of the Piretts, and in his Armes did beare Peares: by the Cheſt-nuts he meant the Cardinall, who deſcended from the houſe of Caſtagnea or Castanea, and bare in his Scutcheon a Cheſtnut in cheefe. This Pope would be called Vrbanus, either for that he much affected the precedent Popes of this name, or that he might ſignifie, that hee was borne at Rome, for Vrbs with the Romanes per Automaſiam, ſignifieth Rome. Or for that he had determined to vſe all ſorts of men gently. Anth. Cicce. Genebrardus. D. Chytraeus.
               
               Vpon the day of his election, there happened a wonderfull Earthquake at Vienna in Austria, and in many Townes of Morauia and Bohemia.
               
               This yeare dyed Iacobus Andrens, Chauncelor of the Vniuerſitie of Tubing, who reformed many Churches of the Princes and Cities in Germanie. And Hieronimus Mencetius a reuerend old man, whē he had gouerned the churches of the Countie of Mansfeeld thirtie yeares. Likewiſe Paulus Mathias Biſhop of Roſcilda in Denmarke, a moſt learned man and religious. And Iohannes Areuarius, who ſet forth the Hebrew Lexicon.
               
               The next day after his election he fell ſicke, wherefore he determined in the euening to remoue his Court to the hill of Quirinus, as to a better aire; many Cardinalls therfore, Prelates and Lordes, came to attend vpon him, but when hee was tolde, that it was againſt cuſtome to goe abroad before he was crowned, hee would not goe.The death of Pope Vrban.
                   But his diſeaſe increaſing ſo violently vpon him, that the 17. of Auguſt hee departed this life, hauing continued in the place 12. dayes, and in the 70. yeare of his age: and was buried in S. Peters Church. Anth. Ciccer.
               
               The ſame day that 
                     Ʋrbanus was choſen Pope, there was a great Earthquake in 
                     Ʋienna, Morauia, and Bohemia, Prage. D. Chytraeus.
               
               A truce was taken for 10. yeares betweene the Emperour of the Turkes Amurathes, and the King of Perſia.
                  Magus Bragadinus.
               
               
                  Marcus Bragadinus a Grecian borne, firſt a Franciſcane,

then a Capuchine a notable coſoner, was executed at Monaca in Bauaria. This fellow profeſſed at 
                     Ʋenice the art of making gold, neither did his art or cunning deceiue him, for he made ſo much gold that hee gaue away whole wedges to his friends, making no more account of gold then of braſſe or Iron. Hee liued princelike, and kept a great traine, and by his excellencie in the art Magicke, drew the hearts of many of the greateſt Nobles in Italie to him, ſo that he was called an other Paracelſus. When his name was thus ſpred far & neare, at the length he came to Monaca, the D. of Bauaria his court. Who ſoone finding out his deceits and diuelliſh arts, caſt him into priſon, and when the D. commanded that he ſhould be examined vpō the rack, he deſired that he might not be tortured, ſaying that he would confeſſe all he had done voluntarily; with requeſt that it might not be publiſhed. He likewiſe ſaid that he had deſerued death, but deſired that his concubine Signora Caura & her family might be conueyed ſafe & harmleſſe into Italie. This ſentence then was pronounced vpon him: Firſt that a couple of dogges whom hee had abuſed in his diabolicall art, ſhould be ſhot, and himſelfe to be hanged. The next day a new gibbet was ſet vp couered all ouer with copper, and in the midſt of it an halter, likewiſe wrapped with copper, by which ſigne his coſoning in making Golde might be ſignified. Neare the gallowes a high ſcaffold was ſet vp and couered with blacke cloth, vpon it a chaire where Marcus Bragadinus was placed, and after a ſpeech made he was executed. M. G. Belgicus.
               
               
                  D. de MaineThe Duke de Maine being in the D. of Parmaes court, writ diuers Letters to the borderers of Picardie, that ſhortly they ſhould ſee a puiſſant army for the deliuerance of Paris. Afterward the D. de Nemours being the Popes Legat, the Embaſſador of Spaine, the Biſhop of Paris, the Archbiſhop of Lyons, the Biſhop of Plaiſance, thoſe of Remes, Senlis, and others, Bellarmin and Tyceus, Ieſuites, with many more of the Romane Cleargie, cauſed ſolemne proceſſions to be made, double faſtings, brotherhoods, viſitations of Temples, vowes & ſupplications, and all to entertain & hold the people in a vain hope of deliuerāce; but all this while famine made warre againſt the Pariſians.
               
                  
                  Gregorie 14. before called Nicholas, was borne at Millaine,
                  Gregorie 14
                   his fathers name was Frances Sfondrate, of an auncient & wealthy family. He was elected Pope in the place of Vrbane.
               
               The 8. day of Ianuary he inſtituted a Iubily, and commaunded  it to be publiſhed. Anth. Cicca.
                  A Iubily.
               
               After this he made Gcnerall of the Churches army, Count Sfondrate his nephew, and ſent him with an army into France, to the maintenance of which warre, he contributed fiue hundred thouſand ducats, beſides other 40000. poundes of his owne. He created his nephew Duke of Mount Marian, the which ſtate, for that the great D. of Florence for his conſpiracies and rebelliō againſt the church was put to death, was now void by confiſcation, and therfore the Pope ſaid he might beſtow it where he thought good.
               A great & dangerous tumult hapned at Cracouia,
                  A tumult at Cracouia about religion. (the king himſelf being there) vnder the name of religion, chiefly by certaine ſchollers, who egged on by their maiſters the Ieſuites, aſſaulted violently ſuch houſes where the exerciſe of religion different from the Popes were celebrated. This was ſoone appeaſed by the magiſtrates, but the third night when they thought all had beene quiet, they gathered their companies together and ſet fire on the houſe. D. Chytraeus.
               
               The Princes & Romane Catholicke Lords which were the Kings partakers, perſwaded with him to frame himſelfe to the exterior profeſſion of the religiō, and by the D. of Luxembourg, who had before made a voyage vnto Rome in their name, they practiſed with the Pope to that end. On the contrary ſide the Proteſtant Lords, beſeeched the king to haue them in remembrance, who were ſo faithfully imployed for him. Other of his Councel preſſed vpō him, to prouide for his peaceable ſubiects, as wel of the one as of the other religiō. Alſo that he wold preuent the new attempts of the Pope and his adhaerents againſt France. And theſe ſollicitations begat an Edict for the vpholding of the two religions in his kingdome. D. Chytraeus.
               
               An act was made by the high Court of Parliament at Chalouns and at Tours, againſt the Popes Bulls, his Nuntio,An act againſt the Popes buls and his Legate in France. This likewiſe was proclaimed; We

haue proclaimed, and do proclaime Pope Gregorie the 14. of that name, an enemy to the common peace, to the vnion of the Romane Catholike Church, to the King, and to his roial ſtate, adhearent to the conſpiracie of Spaine, a fauourer of rebels, guiltie of the moſt cruell, moſt inhumane, and moſt deteſtable parracide, traiterouſly committed on the perſon of Henry the 3. of moſt famous, moſt Chriſtian, and moſt Catholike memorie.
               
                  Christian Duke of Saxonie, Prince Elector, died of the age 31. yeares. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  The death of Gregory 14.
                  Gregorie the 14. fell now ſicke of a quotidian Feuer, hee was alſo troubled with a continuall flix and the ſtone, whereof he dyed, and was buried in the Chappell of the Gregories in S. Peters Church. Hee ſate in the ſeate ten moneths, and as many dayes, and it was vacant 15. dayes. Anth. Cicca.
               
               
                  A Dearth.In this time there was a great dearth through the moſt part of Italie, and other Chriſtian Prouinces: after which followed a great plague. There dyed in Rome from Auguſt 1590. vnto the end of Auguſt the yeare following 1591. threeſcore thouſand. Idem.
               
               
                  Innocent 9.
                  
                  Innocent the 9. before called Antonius Fachiuertus, Cardinall of the 4. holy Crownes. He was borne at Bononia, and before hee was Cardinall, by Pope Gregorie made Patriarke of Ieruſalem.
               
               
                  Fredericus Wilelmus Duke of Saxonie, and Iohannes Georgius Elector and Marqueſſe of Brandebourge, had the Protectorſhip of Chriſtians ſonne: theſe no further vrged his mandates concerning Religion, and recalled home many Miniſters of the Church and Superindents who had not obeyed them, and therefore baniſhed by him, a litle before his death. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  The eſcape of the Duke of Guiſe.
                  The Duke of Guiſe by a cord which was giuen him, wherwith ſliding downe out of a window, eſcaped out of priſon, and fled to the Lord de la Chaſtre.
               
               The great Chancelor of Poland Zamoſcius, rebelled againſt his leige Lord, with an Armie of 30000. men.
               
                  The death of Innocent. 9.Pope Innocent the 9. being 70. yeares of age, and hauing ruled two moneths & odde dayes, dyed. So that in the ſpace of

fourteene moneths 4. Popes dyed: Sixtus, Vrban, Gregorie and Innocent; and it is to be thought, the moſt, or all of them dyed of poyſon. For Brazuto is not dead that giueth them poyſon. This Brazuto killed 6. Popes with poyſon, (as it is to be read in the life of Damaſus). The ſeate was vacant one moneth, and a day.
               
                  Edmond Coppinger and H. Arthington, conferring with one of their ſect called William Hacket, they offered to annoint him king; but Hacket taking Coppinger by the hand, ſaid: You ſhall not need to annoint me, for I haue bene already annoynted in heauen by the holy Ghoſt himſelfe: then Coppinger asked him what his pleaſure was to be done: Goe your way both ſaid he, and tell them in the Citie, that Chriſt Ieſus is come with his Fanne in his hand to iudge the earth. Which they did in diuers ſtreets, crying alſo, repent England, repent: and in Cheapeſide got vp into a Cart, and preached how this Hacket repreſented Chriſt, that they were two Prophets, the one of mercy, the other of iudgement, ſent, and extraordinarily called by God, to aſſiſt him in this great worke, and were witneſſes of theſe things. For theſe miſdemeanors and ſpreading of falſe prophecies, as alſo for his traiterous words againſt the Queenes Maieſtie, Hacket was hanged. But Coppinger dyed in Bridewell, and Arthington long after was reſerued in the Counter in Woodſtreete, in hope of repentance. I. Stowe.
               
               
                  Hippolitus Aldobrandinus Cardinall, was elected Pope by  the name of Clement the eight.Clement 8.
                  
               
               When Sebastian King of Portugall went with his Armie into Affrica, hee requeſted hoſtage of Muhameth, to whom hee deliuered his ſonne Mulei Xeques; him, Sebaſtian ſent Magaza;
                  
                     Xeques Mulei his ſonne becommeth a Chriſtian. but they both being ſlaine in the battaile of Alcazar, 1578. Xeques was ſent into Spaine, and brought vp vnder King Phillip. At the laſt this yeare (hauing before by degrees perſwaded to become a Chriſtian) was baptiſed with his kinſman & other of his Nobles, in the moſt famous Monaſtery of S. Laurence, and vowed euer after to continue true Chriſtians. Genebrardus.
               
               The 16. of Ianuary Caſſimere Duke Palatine, to the great

ſorrow and diſcomfort of the Church of Geneua, departed this life.
               
                  Ladiſlaus King of Hungarie and Boheme, died of the age of 18 yeares.
               This yeare Amurathes Emperour of the Turkes prepared for warre againſt the Chriſtians. The cauſe was this. The truce taken was yet kept betweene the Emperour and the Turke, to the great quietneſſe of both their ſubiects. But in the meane ſeaſon a peace was concluded betweene the Turke & the Perſian. Wherefore many of the Turkiſh Baſſ
                        •
                     es perſwaded their Emperour to make war vpon the Chriſtian, and ſo forthwith he diſpatched a puiſſant Army into the confines of Hungary.
               
               The Emperour Rodolphe, although hee had this opinion that Amurath would deny that the truce was broken by him, notwithſtanding knowing that it is the Turkes cuſtome not to reſtore thoſe Cities which they had once taken, maketh all the power he can to reſiſt his Forces. M. G Belg.
               
               
                  William, Lantgraue of Heſſe, a moſt wiſe vertuous & learned Prince, being 70. yeares of age departed this world.
               
                  William Duke of Brunſwicke, the ſonne of Ernestus, a Prince of moſt ſincere Religion, dyed likewiſe, leauing behind him ſeuen ſonnes, whom he had by Dorithie the daughter of Chriſtian, the third King of Denmarke. D. Chytraeus.
               
               At this time deceaſed likewiſe Iohan 3. King of Suetia, the Father of Sigiſmond, the 3. King of Poland.
               
               As the Leaguers were promiſed great things, by the Eſtates of Paris and the partakers of Spaine; held it for a moſt certaine troth, that the Duke of Parma would returne yet the third time with puiſſant Forces to doo ſome notable exployt, thereby to couer the ſhame of his two former voyages, and ſo to aſſure the K. of France to King Phillip, or to the Princeſſe his daughter.The death of the Duke of Parma.
                   But death cut off the thred of his life, together with his enterpriſes: the 2. of December, 1592. His bodie was carried to Parma, and buried without any great ſolemnitie in the litle Chappell of the Cappuchins, with this Epitaphe. Alexandr Farneſius Belgis diuictis, Francis obſidione leuatis, vt humili hoc loco cadauer eius reponeretur manaauit 3. nonas Decem. 1592.

                  Et vt ſecum Mariae eius coniugis optimae oſſa iungerentur. Genebr.
               
               The Senate and the people of Rome cauſed his ſtatue to be made and ſet vp in the Capitoll. M. G. Belg.
               
               After much conference, commings & goings, Letters and anſwers frō the deputie on each ſide, the ſupplications of thoſe which deſired, in ſuch ſort, that the king who ſince he withdrew himſelfe from the Court of France, for 15. yeares before, had made open profeſſion of the reformed religion, cōtrary to the aduice of his Miniſters, went to ſee & heare Maſſe ſung in the Cathedrall Church of S. Denis, the 25. Sunday of Iuly, where he was receiued of the Archbiſhop of Bourges, and other Prelates, with certaine peculiar ceremonies, peculiar receiuing, which was incontinently publiſhed throughout the Realme, with diuers cenſures as well of the Catholicke nobilitie, as alſo of thoſe of the religiō, wherof not one followed this example. The Preachers belonging to the League, publike & priuately, before & after the truce, their diſcourſes at Paris & other places were, that the Maſſe which they ſung before the king, was but a deceit. That the Pope ſhould not recatholize him: that it was lawfull for the people to riſe againſt him & his officers: that it appertained to the Sorboniſts, to iudge whether the Pope ought to receiue him as King. And if peraduenture hee ſhould doo it, neuertheleſſe hee might be held for an hereticke, and one excommunicate: that it was lawfull for any particular man to kill him that ſhould ſay, he was vnited to the Catholicke Romane Church. D. Chytraeus.
               
               The Pariſians, and other Townes, that held for the League, deſired that the King of Spaines daughter might be marryed to the Duke of Guiſe, and ſo be crowned King and Queene of France.
               
               
                  Erneſtus Duke of Pomerian a Prince endued with ſingular vertues, moſt bountiful to the Churches & Vniuerſities departed this life, leauing his ſucceſſor Philippus Iulius, of the age of ſeuen yeares, who was committed to the cuſtody and protection of Bogiſlaus. Chytraeus.
               
               In Poland the marriage of Sigiſmond the 3. king thereof,The end of the yeare 1592. and Anne of Auſtrich, the daughter of Charles the Archduke, was ſolemnized. Idem.
               
               
                  In Belgia Maurice Count Naſſau the ſonne of William Prince of Orange, and Gouernour of Holland, tooke the Mount Gertrude, a Towne well fortified, bordering on the confines of Brabant and Holland; when for three moneths he had beſieged it, and they by force and famine were conſtrained to yeeld: although Petrus Ernestus Count Mansfeeld, (to whom after the death of the Duke of Parma the king of Spaine committed the gouernment of the lowe Countries) labours in vaine by his forces to raiſe the ſiege.
               
                  Diſſention in Religion.At Aquiſgrane the diſſention in Religion raiſed great tumults: but they of the reformed Religion had the worſt.
               The Turke ſpoyled and deliuered many Townes in Hungarie and Croalia; but comming with his Forces to Gomorra, he was moſt valiantly reſiſted.
               He not only preſecuted at this time the Chriſtians, but the Perſians alſo, (vpon ſome cauſe vnkowne the truce being broken) and inuaded them with two hundred thouſand men, where he made great hauocke ſparing none.
               
                  The Turkes ouerthrowne.After this the Chriſtians had a notable victorie ouer the Turkes in Hungarie, and did kill in fight & put to flight more then fiue thouſand of the Turkes.
               
                  D. of Guiſe.
                  Charles Guiſe, & Duke de Maine, vnder the colour of reſtoring the Catholick religiō in France, were confederate with the Pope and the King of Spaine, againſt Henry the 4. K. of France and Nauarre, therefore out of euery Prouince of the kingdome elected certaine Embaſſadors to holde a Parliament at Paris, there to determine and ſet downe for a Catholike king. Pope Clement the eight, ſent Phillip Cardinall of Plaiſans. And the King of Spaine his Embaſſadors. At this time the King of France was againe excommunicated. Afterward the Duke of Guiſe, the ſonne of him that was ſlaine by Henry the 3. being of the age of 25. yeares, was nominated and elected King by certaine of the confederates, but the Senat & Parliament of Paris not admitting that any one ſhould be King, vnleſſe he were of the blood royall, he was not proclaimed, neither would the Guiſe beare the citie thereof. D. Chytraeus.
               
               Vpon this the King of France as before is declared, barefooted,

with a candle in his hand, went to the Temple of Saint Denis, and being confeſſed to the Archbiſhop of Bourges,
                  The King of Fraunce conuerted. and abſolued of his hereſie, had ſolemne Maſſe, and remoued the Preachers of his late profeſſed Religion out of his Court.
               At Riga in Liuonia, the Kings Commiſſaries,A motion for recalling of the Ieſuites into Riga.
                   amongſt their affaires of the Eſtate, vrged them for the reſtoring of the religiō to the ſame eſtate it was, determined with king Stephen and the Churches likewiſe, that the Ieſuites ſhould be againe admitted into the Temple of S. Iames, and Mary Magdalen, whom the yeare before the incenſed Citizens had expulſed: So by theſe meanes that the Senate and people of Riga ſhould hold all the other Churches within the Citie and the ſuburbes, with all the goods, profits, and reuenewes belonging to them. But the Senate and Citizens refuſing to entertaine the Ieſuites as being moſt vnquiet & turbulent ſpirits, and the very brands of diſcord and ſedition; as alſo the better part of them deſirous to keepe and continue in their Citie one onely religion of the confeſſion of Augusta: Or if they ſhould altogether obey the Kings authoritie, and the preſent neceſſitie of the time and fate; thinking it better the ſecular authoritie as King Stephen had ſet it downe, to be admitted againe into the Cittie then the Ieſuits: the matter as then was left in ſuſpence & put ouer to the K. & the Parliament of the realme. But the Ieſuits being importunate vpon the king, the K. the yeare following ſent one Iohannes Oſtrouius into the Citie, who inſtructed by the kings commandement, demaunded that all thoſe that were ſpoyled and eiected of the ſeditious communaltie, might be put into poſſeſſion of their Churches, whoſe Oration was forthwith anſwered in the name of the Citie and the Senate, by Dauid Hilcheuius theyr aduocate.
               The 26. of Auguſt, Peter Barrier, alias Bar,
                  Peter Barrier. borne at Orleans, was priſoner at Melena, where he confeſſed that he was ſeduced by a Capuchin Friar at Lyons, by the Curat & Vicar of a certaine pariſh in Paris, and alſo by a Ieſuite, cloſely to follow the king, and to murder him with a two edged knife, the which was found about him: he further confeſſed, that two Prieſts by him nominated, were alſo come frō 
                  Lyons for the ſame intent:

and that he ſet himſelfe the forwardeſt in the execution therof, to the ende hee might get the greateſt honour thereby. For the which hee was executed. At this time was the Duke of Nemours within Lyons, from whence he would not ſtirre, to goe to the Eſtates of the League, although the Pope had giuen him commaundement: the other chiefe Captaines thought it meet, and his friends & ſeruants deſired him to goe, he vouchſafed not ſo much as to ſend vnto them, knowing that the Leaguers caſt their eyes altogether vpon the D of Guiſe, and that the D. de Maine his brother by the mothers ſide, croſt all his purpoſes, and would worke all meanes for his death.
               A certaine bold Friar of Lyons, perceiuing well that this young Prince pretended to bring ſome new matter to paſſe within the League, whereby he might at leaſt haue ſome great hand in the gouernment, by the aduice of two or three Councellors, who were of his complices, he compaſſed Lyons, with many Fortreſſes, which held on his ſide at Toiſſai, Vienne, Montbriſon, Chaſtillon, de Dombres, and other places.
               
                  Quilian forſaking him, he bought it with a great ſumme of mony, at the hands of the Lord of S. Iulian, who was Gouernour thereof. This done, Lyon was incloſed, as well by water as by land. The Lyonnois did not withſtand neither his prodigallities, nor his Councellors, nor his men of warre, which forraged the plaine country, receiuing the guerdon of their reuolt from the kings obedience. In the end acknowledging themſelues, they roſe vp againſt the D. of Nemours, aſſiſted by the preſēce and counſell of the Archbiſhop, ſent by the D. de Maine: and the 18. of Decemb. they tooke hold of Nemours, who was ſeene three times at deaths doore, committing him to cloſe priſon, where hee continued certain moneths, and at laſt eſcaping by cunning meanes, ſpoyled of his ſuccours, chaſed from his Fortreſſes,The death of Nemours.
                   he went & dyed farre from France, in a litle Towne called Aueci ſcituate in Sauoy, in the Country of Geneuois.
               
               After the ſolemne funeralls of Henry the 3. late King of France were performed in the Cathedrall Church of S. Denis, Henry the 4. King of Nauarre, was publikely proclaimed king. In the meane ſeaſon the Popes Legat with the Embaſſador of

                  Spaine, vrged the election of the D. of Guiſe at Paris, and curſed the K. of Nauarre, for that he ſ oft had fallen, and thoſe Biſhops, with the Archbiſhop of Bourges, by whom he had bin reconciled to the Church, and abſolued. Likewiſe at Rome, the Agents and Miniſters of the K. of Spaine, ſollicited the Pope, that he would confirne the excommunication pronounced by his Legate at Paris: nor would admit any Embaſſadors from the hypocriticall king: If he did, they vowed as his Embaſſadors came in at one gate, they would goe out at the other.
               The 26. of Nouember, the Duke of Neuers came to Rome, ſent by the K. of France for his abſolution, whom the Pope entertained with all kindneſſe: but a litle while after, hee diſmiſſed him, not denying ſimply abſolution to the K. but deferring it vntill he ſawe more manifeſt ſignes of penitence. D. Chytaeus.
               
               The K. of France deliberated to aſſemble at Mante, certaine of the chiefe Nobles of the Realme, to take counſell of diuers matters at that time needfull. The deputies of the reformed Churches were there preſent about the ende of Nouember, whom the king cauſed to be called together the 12. day of the moneth following: and hauing giuen them audience, and heard the great ſorrowe which they made vpon the infinite cōtradictions of his decrees, and the complaints of the wrongs done vnto them through all his Prouinces▪ hee anſwered, that the change of religiō had not any way changed his affection frō them; that he would redreſſe their griefes, and make peace and concord among his ſubiects. Hee receiued their Bills of complaints, to haue them pervſed. But theſe affaires were driuen to ſuch length, that the diſtance of many yeares hath buried all. And the Captaines of the League hauing plunged the Realme into new miſeries, thoſe of the religion almoſt in all parts of the kingdome, continued as grieuous vnder the croſſe as before.
               
                  Sigiſmond K. of Poland, was perſwaded to embrace that religion  and ſeruice of God, comprehended in his word,Sigiſ. K. of Poland. & the confeſſiō of Auguſta, as it had flouriſhed in ye
                   later time of Goſtauus, and the former daies of Iohn the 3. king of Poland: and as it was

receiued by the States of the land, in the Councell of Vpſalem, the yeare, 1593. by a ſolemne teſtification, for the confirmation and defence of the ſame religion, hee voluntarily offered his oath, which remaineth vpon record. Chytraeus.
               
               The ſame day that Sigiſmond K. of Poland and Vpſalem, was inueſted with the crowne of Suetia, Iames the 6. K. of Scots, had a ſonne by Anne his wife, the ſiſter of Chriſtian the 4. K. of Denmarke: to whoſe chriſtening, the K. of France, the Q. of England, the K. of Denmarke, Count Maurice, H. D. Brunſwic, Vtricus Duke of Magapolis, were inuited.
               The 9. of April, Ferdinādo E. of Darbie, deceaſed at Latham.
               
               
                  
                     H. crowned K. of France
                  
                  Henry the 4. king of France and Nauarre, was with great ſolemnitie crowned king at Chartres. When the laſt yeare he ſent to the Pope, the D. of Neuers, for abſolution: Pope Clement the eight then anſwered, that hee ſtood in need of three fold benefite from the Apoſtolicke Sea: firſt of abſolution in Court of Conſcience: ſecondly in a lower Court of Conſcience, from publike excommunication: thirdly, in the Court of Rehabilitation (as they ſay) to the kingdome, for the which before, by reaſon of his hereſies hee was held vnfit. Paetrus Mathaeus.
               
               
                  
                     Mathias Arch-duke of Auſtria.
                  
                  Mathias Arch-duke of Auſtria, was by the Emperour his brother, choſen Generall of the Forces againſt the Turke, and went to Vienna. Idem. The ſame time, the Pope promiſed to ſend to the Emperour 5000. footemen, and 500. horſemen; for the leuying of which, ſixe Tents were gathered of the Cleargie throughout all Italie: which amounted to 600000. crownes. Paetrus Mathaeus.
               
               
                  An expedition againſt the Turke.The Princes likewiſe of Italy, ſent their aide to Caeſar, euery one as they were able: the great D. of Hetruria 70000. Genoua 40000. the Duke of Ferrara 50000. Luca 20000. Parma 25000. crownes: the Dukes of Mantua and 
                     Ʋrbin, offered their owne perſons and forces, againſt the mightie enemie of Chriſtendome, the Emperour of Constantinople. Ionſonius.
               
               
                  Note.At what time many vncertaine rumours were ſpread abroad throughout ye Turkiſh kingdomes of the happie ſucceſſe

the Chriſtians were like to haue in theſe warres; Beglerbegus of Greece, whether to know the euent, or that hee deſired to traine the Turkiſh youth in martiall affaires, he gathered together 600 of them, ſome of eleuen, ſome twelue and vpwards of age, theſe hee armed with little ſtaues, and brought them into an open fielde, where hee diuided them into two Battailes, of the which hee commaunded one to be called the Chriſtians, the other the Turkes: The one in their fight, to crie Ieſus, the other, Hala, Hala. Hee willed them both to fight couragiouſly, and promiſed rewardes to the hardieſt. The ſignall giuen, both Armies ranne together, and fought ſo eagerly, that many on both ſides were ſo beaten, that they were carried away halfe dead. But they, that called on the name of Ieſus, got the victorie, and put their enemies to flight, driuing them into the Citie before them. Beglerbegus tooke this as a very euill ſigne, and as many as were with him, and greatly feared that the Chriſtians after this would bee victors.
               
                  Henry King of France, hauing newly recouered Camerake a Towne in Picardie, hee entered into it with great pompe: whom Balignius the Gouernour of the ſame entertained with the Senators & Citizens all armed, on their knees: and to him they deliuered the keyes of the Citie; Firſt the Cleargie men did ſweare, then the Senators, Nobles, and Citizens, that they would euer become faithfull and obedient to God, the King, and the Chriſtian Catholicke Church.
               
                  Erneſtus Archduke of Auſtria, offered a peace to the Eſtates of Holland and the vnited Prouinces, by his Letters and Embaſſadors, proteſting therein his loue to Belgia, and his deſire for the common tranquillitie thereof. But when a litle before a certaine priuie murderer an Elder of Nemours, that was ſuborned by Count Barlymount, by commandement from the Court (as he ſaid) to kill the Count Maurice of Naſſau, was priſoner with the Count of Hage; the States of Holland and other confedarates, thinking they were not well dealt withall, ſet downe in writing at large, certaine conferences and dealings of the Spaniards with them concerning peace of late yeares, but

all tending to a fraudulent and deceitfull ende; beſides they complained that the Spaniards did no way ſeeke the quietnes of the ſubiects in Belgia and other Chriſtians, but that they might be Lordes, and tyrannize ouer all as they liſt. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  D. Lopes.Doctor Lopes a Spaniard & a Phiſitian, practiſed in England towards the Queene, by the inſtigation of the Earle of Fuentes his country-man, and the promiſe of 50000. Crownes, to haue poyſoned her maieſtie: but (God be thanked) in the attempting thereof he was apprehended, with his companions and aſſociates in the treaſon; who were Emanuel Lois, and Stephen de Ferera, for which they were hanged, drawne, and quartered. The aforeſaid Earle dealt with one Emanuel Andrad, to kill the King of Fraunce, with the odious ſmell of a poyſoned Roſe.
               This is worthie to be noted. The Eſtates of Holland and the vnited prouinces, this ſommer ſet forth 4. ſhippes well appointed for munition and victuall, with skilfull Generalls and Captaines, towards the North and the Eaſt, that leauing vpon the right hand Norwege, Moſchouia, and Tartaria, that ſo they might paſſe to Sinae, or the kingdome of China; the Indians, and the Iles of Moloccus. They hauing paſt beyonde Condora and Obdora, Regions of the continent to the new Iland, Sembla and Wigatz, and paſſing through the ſtraites of a narrow ſea (which was 5000. miles lōg, & but one in breadth, they came to Oby, which is a Frontier of Tartaria. That narrow ſea they called the ſea of Naſſau: to one of the Ilands they gaue the name Holland, to an other of Euchuſa, and to the reſt other names. And being commaunded to returne this ſommer, they did ſo, but the next yeare determined to goe the ſame voyage & better appointed, for they hoped to turne the traffique of Spices and other Eaſterne marchandiſe, by the which the Spaniard is ſo enriched, an other way, by the Northerne ſea into the lowe Countries, and other Prouinces of Europe. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  The Turkes ouerthrowne.This ſommer the Turkes had a notable ouerthrow by the Chriſtians.
               
                  The Spaniards being deſirous to continue the fire of diſſention in France, inſtantly ſollicited the Duke de Mercaeur, one of the chiefe of the League, and an vſurper of a part of the Duchy of Britaine, alwayes to continue warre. His ſiſter Loyſe d' Ʋandemont, King Henry the thirds widow, did all ſhe might to make his peace.
               Certaine troubles happening in the meane time, brake all that was done. The Spaniards who were maiſters of Blauet, a Fortreſſe almoſt inuincible, had builded during the ſommer of the yeare 1594. a ſtrong Fort neare vnto Croyſil, to ſtop the entrance to the Port of Brest: which would haue bin better for them, if they had made an other right againſt it, and on the other ſide of the Hauen. To hinder them came the Marſhall of Aument, and Syr Iohn Norris, Generall of the Engliſh men, to whom was ſent a ſupply by ſea, vnder the conduct of Captaine Furbuſher, they ſoone became maiſters of Quinpercouincin, and of the Towne and Caſtle of Morley. Soone after they aſſailed the Spaniards new Fort, and ſlew foure hundred ſouldiers that kept it, not without loſſe of their owne men, among other, Captaine Frobiſher. The King on the other ſide, deliberating to make warre out of his owne Realme againſt the Spaniards, agreed with the ſtates of Holland and their confederates, to begin in the Duchie of Luxenbourge, where the Marſhall of Bouillon, who married one of the daughters of the deceaſed Prince of Orange, and E. Philip of Naſſau, aſſaied to enter in the moneth of October, where they found all the paſſages ſhut vp, and Earle Charles of Mansfeeld making head againſt them, eſpecially on the troupes of Holland. The King on the other ſide, ſought to ouerrunne the Frontiers of Picardie, and gaue the Eſtates of Artois and Hainaut to vnderſtand, that if they fauoured him ſo little, to ſuffer the Spaniſh Forces to moleſt Cambray and Countries adioyning, that hee ſhould make warre vpon them incontinent. P. Math.
               
               The 27. day of December, as the King was returning from Picardie to Paris readie booted and ſpurd within a chamber at Louure, hauing about him his couſins, the Prince of

                  Conde, the Earle of Soiſſans, the Earle of S. Paul, and 30 or 40. other Lord and Gentlemen of his Court. There came alſo in, the Lords of Ragne & Mountigni, who had not as yet takē their leaue of his maieſtie.The King of Fraunce wounded. And euen as he was receiuing them for his farwell a yong ſtripling named Iohn Caſtil, of 18. yeares of age, a Drapers ſonne of Paris, who was got into the Chamber amongſt the preace, drew neare vnto the King, before he was almoſt perceiued of any bodie, and ſuddenly would haue ſtabd him into the bodie with a knife, but by reaſon that his maieſtie was very readie to take vp the Lordes, which were on theyr knees before him, in his ſtooping hee ſtrooke him on the face, on the vpper iaw on the right ſide, therewithall cutting out one of his teeth. Wherevpon hee was apprehended by the Captaine of the Garde, to whom the King commanded, after hee had throwne his knife to the ground, to let him goe: ſaying that he freely forgaue him. But afterwards vnderſtanding that he was a Scholler to the Ieſuites, hee ſayd, and muſt it needs be, that the Ieſuites ſhould be confounded by my mouth?
               This villaine being brought vnto the Biſhops priſon, freely declared the circumſtance of his trayterous intent, and that he was perſwaded thereto by his maiſter a Ieſuite: who ſaid that it was lawfull to kill him, that hee was excommunicate of the Church, that hee was not to be obeyed, nor to be taken for the King, vntill ſuch time as he was allowed by the Pope. For this he was executed, and the Ieſuites of Claremount with whom this fellow was brought vp, and all other throughout the whole Realme of France, were commaunded within three dayes to depart their Colledges, and after 15. dayes to leaue the realme. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  
                  The death of Amurath.
                  In the beginning of this yeare, Amurathes the third Emperour of the Turkes, the ſonne of Selim, in the 48. yeare of his age, ended his life and Empire with much blaſphemie, and impatience. Whom Mahomet the third beeing thirtie yeares of age ſucceeded: who before hee performed his Father; Funeralls, hee cauſed eighteene of his brethren borne of diuers Concubines, to bee ſtrangeled and moſt

honourably to be buried with his father in the ſame monument. He ſuffered his 27. ſiſters to liue in Teragliuun. And that no more might bee borne, hee comaunded tenne of his fathers wiues to be throwne into the Sea, and hauing richly furniſhed his owne mother, he ſent her to dwell in a farre Countrie. Genebrardus.
               
               This Mahomet is the thirteenth Emperour from Othoman.
                  Mahomet.
               
               
                  Ferdinand Arch-duke of Auſtria, the ſonne of Ferdinand the Emperor, and brother of Maximilian the ſecond, departed this life. The one and twentieth of February likewiſe dyed Ernestus his brothers ſonne, Archduke of Austria, Gouernor of the Prouinces in the lowe Countries, being 42. yeares of age. Idem.
               
               Some of the Deputies of the Court which were ſent to ſearch Cleremount Colledge, which belonged to the Ieſuites, hauing ſeized vpon many papers, found among them certain written bookes made by a Ieſuite Prieſt, named Iohn Guiguard, ſince the generall pardon giuen by the king at Paris: there was written in theſe bookes many vile matters, as well againſt H. the 3. as againſt H. the 4. now liuing, containing nothing but traitorous practiſes: for the which the Ieſuite being ſent for, auouched, by meanes whereof he was found guiltie, and therefore executed.
               The K. of France proclaimed open warres againſt Spaine,
                  Wars proclaimed againſt Spaine.
                   and the Spaniſh Army is ouerthrowne by the Marſhall of Bouillon, in the Duchie of Luxembourge.
               
               The King after two yeares ſuppliant intreaties to the Pope,The king of France is abſolued by the Pope. at the length was abſolued by the Pope at Rome, and receiued into the lappe of the mother Church, and declared the moſt Chriſtian king of France.
               
               The conditions propounded were theſe. That the king ſhould receiue the Councell of Trent, and giue commaundement that it ſhould be kept throughout all his Realme: but and if in ſome of his Prouinces he could not do it without danger of new ſeditions, he ſhould aske leaue of the Pope. That hee ſhould within the compaſſe of one yeare, remooue the

young Prince of Conde, being 9. yeares of age, from the company of heretikes, and to bring him vp in the Catholicke Apoſtolicke Romane religion. That he ſhould reſtore all the reuenewes and goods which he had taken from his Biſhops and Abbies. Laſtly, that he ſhould by his Letters certifie all Catholicke Princes, of his conuerſion and deteſtation of all hereſies. After this, the Church of S. Peter which before was ſhut, was now opened. Then the Pope ſaid to the Orators of France, that as hee now opened againe to their King, the doore of the Church Militant vppon earth, ſo ſhould his Maieſtie endeuour likewiſe by a liuely faith and good workes, to make his way into the triumphant Church of heauen. D. Chytraeus.
               
               Vpon the Church doore were placed the armes of the K. of France, with this inſcription: Henricus 4. Galliae, & Nauarrae Rex Chriſtianiſſimus.
               
               
                  
                     Arbertus the Cardinall, made generallWhilſt Camerac is beſieged by the Spaniards, Phillip king of Spaine, created Albertus Arch-duke of Auſtria, and Cardinall of Toledo, Generall of all his Forces in Belgia: Hee was the ſonne of Max. 2. Emperour, and Mary the ſiſter of Phillip King of Spaine, the fift in order after Rodolphus the Emperour that now is, borne in Nouember, the yeare, 1559. Genebrardus.
               
               
                  The D. de Maine reſtored to fauour.The D. de Maine ſeeing the Spaniards take other courſe then was accuſtomed, his Forces ſlaine, his credit crackt, & his deſtruction at the doore, though late, yet at laſt he ſought by mediators the kings fauour, which he obtained: vpon this receiued grace, the D. wrought the yeelding vp of Soiſſon, Pierfont, and other places, to the King.
               
                  The Duke of Aumale.
                  The Duke of Aumale, who onely remained among all the chiefe Leaguers, lawe being proſecuted againſt him in the Parliament of Paris, he was found guiltie of treaſon in the higheſt degree; ſo that his Image of likenes being made, it was drawne in peeces with foure horſes, and his goods and lands confiſcate to the King.
               The moſt famous Poet and Orator of all Italy, Torguatus Taſſus, died this yeare at Rome.
               
               
                  The Garriſons of Peronne, Amiens, and other places that he held for the king, began againe in Ianuary their former courſes againſt the enemies Countrie, ſtill killing and ſleying certaine Spaniards and Wallons.
               
                  Marſeill is brought to the kings ſubiection.
               
                  George, Lantgraue of Heſſe, the ſonne of Phillip, a vertuous, wiſe, and religious Prince, departed out of this world, leauing his ſonne Lodowicke to ſucceed him.
               
                  Albert Arch-duke of Auſtria,
                  Arch-duke of Auſtria.
                   and Gouernour of the lowe Countries, entered Bruxelles with great pompe, accompanied with the Dukes of Fere and Aumale, and Philippus Wilihelmus, the Prince of Orange his ſonne. Before his comming, there was great hope of peace, but after his arriuall he made no mention of peace, for that he foreſawe there would be none graunted. D. Chytreus.
               
               In the beginning of March, the Cardinal gaue ſuch order, that the beſieged within the Towne of Fere, were ſuccoured with ſome munition, and for his firſt exployt againſt France, in the beginning of Aprill, did ſo diſpoſe of his Armie (at that time moſt mightie) ſo pollitikely and ſecretly,He winneth Callais.
                   that in fewe dayes hee beſieged, aſſailed, and with plaine force, wonne the Towne and Caſtle of Calais, in ſpight of all the Kings Forces, and the reſiſtance of the beſieged. There dyed in the taking heereof, a great number of the Nobilitie of France.
               
               The Cardinall following this new wonne victorie,
                     Fere yeeldeth beſieged the ſtrong Towne of Ardres in the beginning of May, and became maiſter thereof the 23. of the ſame moneth, ſeuen daies before Fere was yeelded to the King vpon compoſition. Chytraeus.
               
               The Emperour appointed Alphonſus, Duke of Ferrara, Generall againſt the Turkes: who thirtie yeares before in the time of Maximilian the ſecond, the father of Rodolphus, had waged warre againſt them at his owne charges. But hee beeing the laſt Duke that was of his houſe, and hauing had no iſſue by his three wiues, was very deſirous to leaue a certaine ſucceſſor before hee departed, and

therefore he deſired the Pope that Cardinall Est might be his heire, and to that end offered him a great ſumme of gold, but the Pope ſtifly denying to do it, the expedition for Hungary was intermitted by the Duke of Ferrara. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  Christian, the fourthking of Denmarke, the ſonne of Fredericke the ſecond, of the age of twentie yeares was crowned King.
               
                  An Engliſh Nauie for Spaine.
                  In the moneth of Iune the Queene of England ſent a Fleete of 16. ſailes, well appointed with munition and vittaile, vnder the conduct of Robert Earle of Eſſex, into Spaine, who with a proſperous gale hauing paſſed the bound, of France and Portugall, the 20. of Iune arriued neare Gades, and lighted vpon the 12. Apoſtles of the king of Spaine (of the which S. Phillip carried 900. ſouldiers, and 62. peeces of Ordinance) and 57. Marchants ſhips, bound for the Eaſterne Indies. But when in theſe ſtraits they had fought with them valiantly, and happily, and had ſet S. Phillip on fire, the reſt conueying themſelues into the deepe, the Earle came on land with part of his company, and when he came neare the Citie, the gouernours and knights of the Citie, to the number of 400. came out, who ſeeing the Engliſh ſo well appointed, drew backe into the Citie: but ſuch was the courage of our men, that following, ſome of them got into the Citie with them: ſome at the aſſult got vpon the walles, and recouered the Market place, although they were much troubled by the Citizens from out of theyr houſes and houſe tops. The ſame euening the greateſt part of them got into a Caſtle, the lower part of the Citie was ſpoiled, the vpper part was ranſomed for 12000. Ducats.The Fleet for India burned. And for the Indian fleet they offered great ſtore of gold. But the Duke Medine would not let it be redeemed, and therefore ſet it all on fire. The loſſe of which, was 12. Millions of crownes. The Engliſh Nauie in Auguſt following, returned to England. D. Chytraeus.
               
               
                  The Spaniards ſeeke reuenge and are croſſed.The Spaniards greatly incenſed with this daring enterpriſe of the Engliſh, of their owne free will gaue a great ſumme of money to their king, whereby to make new ſhips, and leuie new forces againſt them, and in the moneth of October,

the Fleete looſed out of the mouth of Tagus, into Corouis, a Hauen in Spaine, towards the fartheſt North, in the territories of Gallicia, which Ptolomey calleth the harbour of the Artabry, a people by the Promontory Artabrum, which is in Portugall. But when the Nauie came neare the coaſts of Gallicia, by night it ranne vpon the Rockes, where 30. of the Spaniſh ſhips periſhed, the reſt went forward to Corouis, and attempted nothing elſe this winter.
               The Emperour appointed Arnold Baron of Echwartzenberge in Belgia, Marſhall of the field in Hungarie againſt the Turke, in the place of the D. of Ferrara, whom the Pope Clement the 8. would not graunt, that his adopted heire ſhould ſucceed him.
               
                  Anne, Q. of Poland, the widow of Stephen, the ſiſter of Sigiſmond Augustus, died this yeare, being 70. yeares of age:The death of Anne Q. of Poland.
                   leauing great ſtore of treaſure behind her, which ſhee gaue to her ſiſters Catherines children, Q. of Suetia, Sigiſmond the 3. king, and Anne his ſiſter.
               The laſt of Aprill, deceaſed Syr Iohn Puckering Knight, Lord Keeper of the great Seale: he died of a dead Palſie, and was buried at Weſtminſter.
               In Pruſſia, a Prouince in the kingdome of Poland, the chiefeſt Biſhops, armed with the kings decrees againſt the true Churches of the Goſpell, remooued many Preachers out of their Pariſhes into the Countrie, and vpon S. Iohn Baptiſts day, tooke poſſeſſion of the chiefe Church in the Citie of Turon: the like was done at Meua and Stargardia: beſides,The Church troubled. they earneſtly deſired that the Church of S. Maries which was neare the Market place, might be deliuered to them, with the Monaſteries of S. Briget, and that therein their religion might bee freely exerciſed, and all their cauſes belonging to the Conſiſtorie to be referred to their Officialls in the Citie, and to be iudged by them.
               
                  Iacobus Fabritius Gouernor of the Colledge,Iacobus Fatricius. was peremptorily cited to Subcouia, for that he allowed, preached, & maintained publikely, the doctrine of Caluin, and as they inferred againſt the expreſſe priuiledges of the Citie, the conſtitutions

of the Commiſſaries, and the decrees of the Senate, concerning religion. But the Senate excuſing him, ſaid that the Citizens were not bound to appeare out of their Citie: the Biſhops ſent their Commiſſaries into the Citie, who with their Officialls ſhould there proceed againſt him. The King himſelfe likewiſe commanded that the Senate ſhould deliuer vp the Church to the Biſhop of Subcouia within certaine daies, or ſhould agree with him. But Agria, a neare neighbour to Poland, being newly taken by the Turkes, and the Court was buſied in counſell how to auoyd new dangers: the Dantiſcanes were quiet till Eaſter, the yeare following.
               The eſtate of the vnited Prouinces of Belgia, Geldria, Zutphen, Holland, and Westfrizeland, Zeland, Ʋtricht, Friſeland, the Groine, &c. with the Q. of England, and the K. of France, entered a league of defence for themſelues, and offence of their enemie, the K. of Spaine. None of theſe could make peace with him without the conſent of all. Which was alſo agreed betweene the king of France and the vnited States of Belgia, that the kings of Scotland and Denmarke, ſhould be vnited to the ſocietie of this league.
               The 22. of Iuly, the right honourable H. Cary, Baron of Hunſdon, and Lord Chamberlaine to the Queene, deceaſed at Sommerſet houſe in Strandſtreet, and was honourably buried at Weſtminſter.
               The ſecond of Iune, the Emperour Rodolphe, cauſed all the Princes Electors, and others of his dominion, with the Embaſſadors of thoſe that were abſent, to come before him in the Pallace of the Biſhop of Ratisbone: who all appeared the next morning and accompanied him to the Church, and from thence, to the Court; where when euery one according to their calling had taken his place, Philippus Ludouicus ſtood vp, and made an Oration in the name of the Emperour Rodolphus Caeſar: wherein he ſhewed how the Emperour of the Turkes Sultan Amurathes had broken the truce, which was made in the yeare, 1591. by Haly Baſſa in Boſua, who had forraged diuers of their frontiers, and had ſpoiled and waſted Crotia, and the fertile Region Tyropolia, leading away many Chriſtians

captiues, and that this Baſſa beeing thereof explained to the Turke, he was therefore bountifully rewarded, and ſet in greater place and authoritie then he had before: but at the ſiege of the Caſtle Ziſekna, he was driuen to flie, and there receiued by death a iuſt reward for his trecherie.
               This making the Turke more incenſed, hee made warre vpon the Chriſtians, and ſent Beglerbegus of Creece, who beſieged the aforeſaid Caſtle Ziſeckna, and forced them to yeeld it. At this time alſo he ſent diuers of his choiſeſt Baſſaes to inuade Hungarie, and tooke there two Cities, 
                     Ʋesprian and Palotta. Beſides, hee impriſoned the Emperours Embaſſadour and Orator at Conſtantinople. Caeſars requeſt therefore was, that greater defence might be made againſt the Turkiſh powers, and that all the Chriſtian Princes of his Empire would conioyne to the reſiſting of this great enemie of Chriſt and Chriſtendome. Which forthwith was agreed vnto.
               But in this Seſſion a great diſſention aroſe amongſt the Proteſtant Princes: the reaſon was, for that the Elector Palatine did not ſo ſtrictly and preciſely keepe the confeſſion of Augusta, as the reſt of them did: that is to ſay, Duke William Fredericke, Adminiſtrator of the Electorſhip of Saxonie, who in the adminiſtration of the charge of the Electors in their minoritie, recalled and brought in the opinions of Flaccus Illiricus, and Iacobus Andreas (approoued of the aforeſaid Electors) and all thoſe that withſtood them, or oppoſed themſelues againſt either, in Vniuerſities, Schooles, or any place whatſoeuer, hee cruelly perſecuted and baniſhed them, as Caluinists and Zuinglians: ſo that at Lipſia and other places, vnder the pretext and colour of his execution againſt the Caluinists, much ſpoile and hurt was done. Many of theſe beeing let out of priſon, were receiued by the Elector Palatine: and for this cauſe the Proteſtants of Saxonie would ſeperate themſelues in this Seſſion, in the common petitions and propoſitions from them that held of the Count Palatine: but the greater part of them deſirous of peace, did not conſent thereto. But when it was obiected to the Prince Palatine, that hee was of a contrary religion to his father, hee before them all made an

orderly and modeſt confeſſion of his faith and religion, in this maner.
               I haue not anyway digreſſed from the religion which my worthy father profeſſed. He whileſt he liued, beleeued not in S. Martin or S. Iames, but in Chriſt. The ſame beliefe, the ſame grounds and principles of faith I do conſtantly hold, and euer intend to do. My father condemned the errours of Arrius, Nestorius, Eutychius, and the Anabaptiſts, and ſo do I his ſonne; not onely condemne them, but with my ſoule deteſt and abhorre them. The errours in the Sacraments (which are two fold; ſome of them who make Idolls of Sacraments, and worſhip and reuerence the ſignes for the thing ſigned, not obſeruing nor conſidering the ſignification of the Sacraments: other ſome that vnderſtand them for naked and ſimple ſignes) my father deteſted, and ſo do I his ſonne. I come nearer: My father reiected Caluaniſme and Zuinglaniſme, and ſo do I his ſonne. If ſo be it be true, that the Vbiquitaries and Flactians do faine, that is to ſay, if truth, or omnipotencie, or the whole preſence of Chriſt ſhould bee denied vpon the earth. But in this errour I am happier then my father, in that I know the true and right religion vnder the name of Caluine, to bee defiled and ſcandalled, by certaine ſeditious and ambitious perſons in Germanie: which my father had knowne if he had liued longer, as now the two mightie Electors of Saxonie, Augustus his ſonne, and Chriſtian do vnderſtand.
               In this Seſſion great conſultation was had, for compoſition for peace in the lowe Countries.
               This yeare the Italians made great tumults in Brabant: the reaſon was, for that they were not ſo much eſteemed of ſince the Duke of Parmaes death, and that the Spaniards were preferred before them: that they had pay daily, and the Italians not regarded. For this cauſe they left the Kings Campe, and tooke the Towne of Sidien in Brabant, and fortified it. In this ſpace no pay was ſent, wherfore they made great hauocke throughout all Brabant, euen to the gates of Bruxelles. Complaints were made hereof to the Gouernour the Arch-duke of Erneſtus, that hee was faine to ſend certaine companies of

the Spaniards who had authoritie to bring them into order, and make them obedient, or driue them out of the Countrey. This more incenſed the Italians, but the Spaniards draue them out of certaine of their holds: And Graue Maurice fearing leaſt they of enemies, ſhould become friends, went to the Italians, and politikely praiſed them and their dauntleſſe ſpirits, extolled their worthy acts, and great victories that they got vnder their famous leader the Duke of Parma, that the Spaniard, had offered them ſuch an iniurie and diſgrace as the like was not to bee borne, and therefore it behoued them to looke to their ſafetie, and that there was no better way but to ſerue vnder the King of Fraunce, as long as they might bee well payed.
               The Italians mooued by his perſwaſion, the laſt of Nouember wrote to the King of Fraunce, humbly deſiring him, that he would receiue them into his charge and defence, beeing in number 1023. footemen, and 200. hoſemen. But the King commended the determining of theſe buſineſſe to the States of Holland.
               
               The Arch-duke Ernestus died at Bruxells, as ſome ſay, of a melancholy, for that hee might not marrie the Infant of Spaine, and that the names of his houſe of Auſtriche againſt the Turkes, and his owne againſt the confederates, had no better ſucceſſe, that he was not onely deſpiſed of the enemie, but of the Spaniards, and that hee had receiued no Letters a long time from the king, amongſt whoſe Councell hee had many enemies: hee died of the age of 42. a very modeſt and ſober Prince, who was ſeldome ſeene to laugh.
               This winter dyed Amurathe the 3. the 14. Emperour of the houſe of Othoman, and the very beſt thereof,The death of Amurath. 3. beeing not ſo cruell as the other: hee was much giuen to pleaſure. His eldeſt ſonne ſucceeded him in the Empire, beeing of the age of 29. yeares.
               The Caſtle and Citie of Strigon by Ister, after it had bene three and fiftie yeares vnder the tyrannie of the Turkiſh Emperour, by the valour and induſtrie of Count Charles Manſfield, was deliuered to the Chriſtians: which victorie hee ſawe

not, for he died at the ſiege thereof, of a lingring diſeaſe.
               This Prince was from his childhood brought vp in martiall affaires, and ſhewed himſelfe a good ſubiect to the King of Spaine his maiſter.
               The King of Fraunce hauing got abſolution from the Pope, ſent by his Embaſſadors, Letters and thankes to him, and in them, promiſed all obedience to the Apoſtolicke Sea of Rome.
               
               
                  Chriſtopher Mountdragon a Spaniard, Gouernour of the Caſtle of Antwerpe, and Captaine of the Garriſons, dyed at Antwerpe.
               
               The Eſtates of Holland and the vnited Prouinces, that they might more eſtabliſh and make ſtrong the Common-wealth, which they had already inſtituted and begun,An Edict againſt Ieſuits. publiſhed a new Edict, againſt thoſe that raſhly go into the Prouinces and Cities, of the aduerſe faction, or ſhould come out of them into theirs: alſo againſt the Ieſuites, againſt ſuch as were in the Vniuerſities, ſubiect to the king of Spaine, and againſt thoſe who were preferred to promotions vnder the oath of the mainteinance of the Romane religion.
               Further, it was decreed that all the fauourers and adherents of the pernitious and bloudie ſect of the Ieſuites, ſhould be excluded out of all the confederate Prouinces, and that by no meanes they ſhould be againe remitted.
               It was likewiſe enacted that none of the ſame Sect, whether borne in the ſame Prouinces, or a Stranger, do at any time come into theſe vnited Prouinces either by Sea or land, vpon paine to bee taken for an enemie, and ſo to be preſently executed, although in this caſe he come with teſtimoniall by Letters. Furthermore, that within the ſpace of two moneths they depart out of theſe Prouinces, nor returne againe into them during the preſent warres, vnleſſe in that ſpace they go to the Gouernour and Magiſtrate, and ſatisfie them in euery point, and renounce their oath and fealtie to the K. of Spaine. Beſides, that all his ſubiects beware that after the publiſhing of this Edict, they doo not frequent any ſchoole of the Ieſuites in Belgia. Of the Academies, they determined, that none inhabiting the

Prouinces, ſhould ſtudie in any of the Vniuerſities which are ſubiect to the king of Spaine: willing alſo that within ſixe moneths after this Edict publiſhed, they ſhould depart from thoſe Vniuerſities.
               Againſt thoſe that haue ſworne to maintaine and vphold the Romiſh religion, and to otherſome that were promoted to dignities, this puniſhment was ſet downe, that heereafter they ſhould haue no dignities, officies, or publike miniſteries in the confederate Prouinces. Whoſoeuer after ſixe moneths next comming, ſhall be preferred vnder the oath of the defending the Romiſh errors and ſuperſtitions; and that they haue alreadie got this promotion, or in ſixe moneths after ſhall get it, and are now admitted to offices, or ſhalbe hereafter admitted, ſhall firſt deſire that they may be abſolued from this oath, and in that ſtead ſhall ſweare alleagiance to their Countrey, and ſhall vtterly renounce and abiure the gouernment of the K. of Spaine. And this abſolution of oath, and exaction of the new, to bee made before a Iudge, to whom full power thereof and authoritie is giuen. If they doo not appeare and ſatisfie this Edict, they ſhall not execute their offices. Thoſe that doo not obey, they ſhall preſently depart the Countries: which if they doo not the firſt moneth, they ſhall bee fined at diſcretion, the ſecond time the penaltie ſhall bee doubled: but if at the ende of three moneths they ſhall bee found to ſtay within the confederate Prouinces, they ſhall bee baniſhed for euer.
               The 24. day of Auguſt the Cardinall came to Antwerpe, where hee was receiued with great pompe. And the next moneth following, the Engliſh Nauie and certaine ſhippes of the Hollanders and Zelanders, returned out of Spaine richly laden.
               In Hungarie the Chriſtians recouered againſt the Turke, the Citie of Hattawan, where except ſome fewe, they put all to the ſword.
               On the 20. day of September, the Turkes laid ſiege to Agria, by which the way lieth open into Tranſiluania, Bohemia, Morauia, and Sileſia, and with faire words and promiſes, deſired

them to yeeld: but the gouernours of the Citie, for that by reaſon of the continuall battailes, they could not poſſibly any longer hold out, ſet fire on the Citie, and got them to the Caſtle. The Turkes then entered, and through couetouſneſſe of the ſpoyle, ſaued moſt of the houſes. Then did the Emperour of the Turkes requeſt them to yeeld, but they denyed it, and brauely reſiſted the fierce aſſault made againſt the Caſtle. In the end, beeing ſo farre ouermatched, they were conſtrained to their great griefe and loſſe, to yeeld vp the Caſtle, where the Gouernours and diuers Captaines were in moſt cruell maner put to the ſword, for the ſlaughter which they made of the Turkes at Hattawan.
               
               
                  Maximilian commeth to Agria.
                  Maximilian leauing off this, came downe with an Army conſiſting of 60000. horſe and foote. The Chriſtians then marched towards Agria, where the Emperour of the Turkes was. The firſt encounter was with light skirmiges, but when the maine battaile was ioyned, the Chriſtians got the better part, and hauing ſlaine certaine thouſands of the Turkes, they put the reſt to flight, and were maiſters of their Tents. But whileſt they too greedily entended the ſpoile, the enemie recouered his ſcattered troupes, and vpon the ſudden killed a number of the Chriſtians in their Tents, the reſt beeing daunted with this vnexpected ouerthrowe, betooke themſelues to flight. This ſo amazed the Chriſtian Hoſte, that they were all diſpearſed: and Maximilian himſelfe accompanied with a ſmall number, came to Caſchoccia. Thus the victory that was thought happy in the beginning, ſorted to this vnluckie end.
               King Phillip determined to marry his daughter to Cardinall Albert, and for her dowry giueth the Prouinces of the lowe Countries.
               On Sonday the 8. of Auguſt, great triumph was made at London for the good ſucceſſe of the two Generalls and companies in Spaine, the winning, ſacking, & burning of the famous Towne of Cadiz, the ouerthrow and burning of the Spaniſh Nauie, and other accidents.
               The 29. day of Auguſt the Duke of Boloine arriued

in England, and came to the Court at Greenwich, and there by her Maieſties oath, confirmed the league of amitie and peace betwixt the two Realmes of England and France, and ſhortly after, ſouldiers were ſent ouer to aide the French in their wars againſt the Spaniards.
               Preſently vpon the departure of the Duke of Bulloine, the right honourable Gilbert Earle of Shrewſburie, was ſent Embaſſador into France, to take the oath of Henry the fourth, the French King, for the confirmation of the ſaid league, as alſo to inueſt the King with the order of the Garter. I. Stowe.
               
               This Sommer arriued heere an Orator from the King of Polonia, and had audience at the Court then at Greenwich, whoſe Oration was in Latin; the which was preſently moſt learnedly & eloquently anſwered by her Maieſtie, in the ſame language.
               In the Parliament at Roane, the reformed Churches deſired  free exerciſe of their religion throughout the whole kingdome of France, wherefore concerning the controuerſie of the two Religions in the Parliament at Paris, theſe Articles following were ſet downe.
               
                  
                     1 Firſt, that an heretike fallen, and by name excommunicated by the holy Sea, ſhall not looſe the right of the crowne.
                     2 That he is a lawfull king, ſent and appointed of God.
                     3 That the Church cannot depriue him of this right, nor generally any Princes of their dignities, or ſucceſſion of their kingdomes, for any hereſie whatſoeuer.
                     4 Nor releaſe their ſubiects of their alleagiance to theyr Princes.
                     5 To withſtand theſe ſentences, and that they do not bind the conſcience.
                     6 That they muſt looke into the actions of the Prince or his conſcience.
                     7 That by the Chriſtian religion, no order may bee appointed to the Salique lawe, that the king be conſtrained to be a Catholicke.
                     8 That an herelike by diuine grace is a Chriſtian.
                     9 That it is not lawfull to reſiſt a Prince that is an heretike.
                     
                         10 That a Catholicke king may permit and ſuffer two religions in his kingdome.
                     11 Not to puniſh heretikes, nor to compell any to be Catholickes.
                     12 To pray for thoſe that are excommunicated, as well the liuing as the dead, and that publikely in Churches: and to performe this, the Cleargie to be bound vpon paine of departing the Realme.
                     13. That Confeſſions may be reuealed for iuſtice ſake.
                  
               
               This yeare Arnald Whitfeeld, Chauncelor of the Realme in Denmarke, came Embaſſator into England, and Christian Barnice his aſſiſtant: they had audience at the Court then at Tiballs.
               
               
                  Turnbaut is deliuered vp to Graue Maurice. And this yeare Belgia was in reaſonable guietneſſe.
               The States of the vnited Prouinces entered a mutuall league with the Queene of England and the King of France, defenſiue and offenſiue againſt Phillip the King of Spaine, their common enemie. The king of France with often excurſions and aſſailes, had troubled and vexed the confines of Arteſia and Hamonia.
               
               The Cardinall Albertus being at Bruxells, and thinking of repairing his Army, found great difficulties for want of money; for king Phillip refuſed to pay the Italian Merchants, and thoſe of other Nations their money, who tooke monſtrous vſurie of him, ſo that he complained that by this meanes his kingly patrimonie, his annuall reuenewes, and extraordinary ſubſidies, were conſumed. Yet that he might keepe his word, and ſhewe himſelfe to be of a good conſcience, he turned the controuerſie into religion, and appointed two of his, and his ſonnes Confeſſors, to diſſwade theſe Merchants from taking this vnreaſonable vſurie, and to tell them what daunger their ſoules were in, if they did not remit it: in the meane ſeaſon, certaine of the creditors became bankerupt, the reſt by their example were afterward afraid to lend the King any money. D. Chytraeus.
               
               The Emperour Rodolphus promiſed Sigiſmond Duke of

                  Tranſiluania, new ſupplies of ſouldiers and money, and with great ſolemnitie receiued him into the fellowſhip of the golden Fleece.
               
                  Maximilian againe was made Generall by the Emperour. The Pope by his Embaſſador Iohannes Franciſcus Aldobrandinus, promiſed to ſend ten thouſand Italians into Hungary at his owne coſts and charges, and made the D. of Mantua their Generall. The higher Saxonie ſent a thouſand horſemen, and the lower Saxonie as many. Francouia, Bauania, Suenia, and the other Countries, Bohemia and Austria, ſent in their aide likewiſe. Theſe all marched towards Pappa, the which after eight day ſiege they tooke: from thence to Raba, which yeeded without any aſſault: but hearing that Mahomet Baſſa was comming towards them, and finding themſelues too weake to bold out that place againſt them, they went backe ouer Danubie, into Scythia, towards Gomorrha. The Turkes eight dayes after beſieged the Caſtle of Totes, whileſt the Chriſtians Armie lay Idle: which went downe to Watſia, and there hearing that the Turkes came towards them, they went to Strigonia.
               
               
                  Alphonſus Duke of Ferrara, whom the yeare before gone,The death of Alphonſus.
                   the Emperour Rodolphus determined to make Generall of the Turkiſh expedition, departed this life: whoſe Dukedome Caeſar Est baſtard (being in his life time appointed his heire and ceſſor) preſently poſſeſſed.
               The Pope was much diſcontented with this, and forthwith ſtrooke Caeſar with the thunderbold of excommunication, and made warre vpon him.
               
                  Chriſtian the 4. king of Denmarke, was married to Anne the daughter of Ioachimus Fredericus, Marqueſſe of Brandebourghe, by the Archbiſhop of Magdebourghe.
               
               This yeare dyed in the higher Germanie, Iohannes Poſtius an excellent Poet, and the chiefe Phiſitian to the Count Palatine.
               
               
                  Graue Maurice made a bridge vpon Rhene. Berke was beſieged of him, and yeelded within twelue dayes: which hee fortified.
               
                  Syr Robert Cecill principall Secretary, Maiſter Harbert Maiſter of the Requeſts, Sir George Carewe Lieftenant for the Ordinance, and others, prepared for their Embaſſage into France, and ſet ſayle from Douer the ninteenth of February. Syr Robert Cecill returned the fift of May out of France.
               
               
                   In the beginning of this yeare many Princes died. Iohannes Georgius Marqueſſe of Bradenbourghe, of 37. yeares died, leauing behind him, ſixe ſonnes and foure daughters.
               The ſame moneth of Ianuary, died Richard Count Palatine of Rhene at Sinouerne, where he kept his Court. Him followed Theodorus the great Duke of Muſchouia. In the lower Saxonie died Henry Duke of Brunſwicke and Luzemburge, the ſonne of Ernestus: and Clare the wife of Bogiſlaus, Duke of Pomerian.
               
               The laſt of Ianuary, Anne Queene of Poland, the daughter of Charles Arch-duke of Auſtria, departed this life.
               This moneth the Pope Clement the 8. made warre vpon Caeſar Est Duke of Ferrara, for the Dukedome, but the matter was taken vp: and the Duke yeelded vp Ferrara vnto him: but all the other Cities and Townes he enioyed, and by the Emperour Rodolphus, was created Duke of Mulina.
               
               The Pope annexed this to the Popedome.
               
                  Sigiſmond Prince of Tranſiluania, who hitherto had held out with an inuincible courage againſt the Turkes, in the beginning of this yeare chaunged the courſe of his life, and ſurrendred the Prouince of Tranſiluania, to the Emperour Rodolphe and his heires, leaſt it ſhould fall into the hands of the Turkes.
               A peace was concluded betweene the Kings of France and Spaine, in the lowe Countries at 
                     Ʋeruini, in the beginning of May: Pledges ſent into France from the Spaniard, were Philippus de Croy, Franciſcus de Mendoza, the Admiral of the kingdome of Arragon, Charles Prince and Countie Aremberge, Ludouicus de Velaſco; the Popes Embaſſadors that made the peace, were Alexāder Cardinal de Medicis, and Generall of the order of the Franciſcanes, Bonauentura a Sicilian. The King of Spaines deputies, were Iohannes Richardotus Preſident of the

Councell, Iohannes Baptista, and Ludouicus Ʋerreiken the K. his Secretary in the lowe Countries. Amongſt the conditions of peace, this was the chiefe: That former iniuries and vnkindneſſes forgotten, theſe Articles of peace that were ſet downe in the yeare 1559 at Camerac, betweene Henry the ſecond, king of France, and Phillip the 2. king of Spaine, might be kept. The whole pacification was comprehended in 35. Articles, and printed at Paris and Poloine.
               
               
                  Calice, Capella, Ardea, and other Cities of Picardie, were reſtored to Henry the 4. K. of France, by the Spaniard.
               The Queene of England perſwaded the Hollanders to peace, who notwithſtanding preferred warre before a trecherous peace with the Spaniards. Therefore Albertus Arch-duke, going into Spaine to be married, Franciſcus Mendoza Admirall of Arragon, chiefe Generall of the Spaniſh Forces, hauing brought his Army to Rhene, prepareth it againſt the Hollanders and the vnited Prouinces.
               They of Aquiſgrane two yeares before condemned by the ſentence of Caeſar were now expoſed to the ſpoiles & ſlaughter of all.
               
                  Sigiſmond Prince of Tranſiluania, repented him of his change of life, and that he had giuen vp his gouernment, wherfore he came out of Sileſia through Poland, into Tranſiluania, and deſired of his ſubiects that their oath of alleageance to him might be renewed, and perſwaded Maximilian Arch-duke, (whom the Emperour had made Gouernour of Tranſiluania) that hee would lead his forces againſt the Turkes towards the recouerie of Agnia, then againſt Tranſiluania.
               
               Vpon the fourth of Auguſt, Syr William Cecill knight of the Order, Lord Burghley, Maiſter of the Wards and Liueries, high Treaſurer of England, a famous Counſellor to ye Queenes Maieſtie all her raigne, and likewiſe had bene to Edward the ſixt; who for his ſingular wiſedome, was renowned throughout all Europe, departed this mortall life at his houſe by the Strand, his body was conueyed to Weſtminſter with ſolemne Funerall, and from thence ſecretly to Stamford in Lincolnſhyre, and there buried. I. Stowe.
               
               
                  The ſecond of October, George Earle of Comberland, returned from the Seas, hauing made ſpoile of the ſtrong Towne and Caſtle of S. Iohn de Portanoico in Spaine.
               
               This yeare died Phillip the 2. king of Spaine, being of the age of 72. yeares.
               
                   Pope Clement the 8. created 13. Cardinals, amongſt whom was Robert Bellarmine, Ieſuite.
               
                  Phillip the 3. the ſonne of Phillip the 2. ſucceeded his father in the kingdome of Spaine. Hee tooke to wife Margarite of Auſtria. And Albert Arch-duke of Auſtria, married the Infant of Spaine, the kings ſiſter. Both theſe marrriages were celebrated by the Pope Clement the 8. at Ferrara.
               
               The 7. of February, the right honourable Charles Blunt. Lord Mountioy, hauing taken his leaue at the Court, departed towards Ireland, as Lieftenant there. Souldiers out of diuers Shyres were ſent before him, and alſo after him, in this moneth of February.
               
                   This yeare, Richard Lord Biſhow of London, with two other Commiſſioners, to wit, Doctor Perkins, & Doctor Swale, were ſent in Embaſſage to Emden, there to treat with the Commiſſaries from the King of Denmarke, and returned the eight of Iuly following.
               On Tueſday the 5. of Auguſt, Charles Iames king of Scots, in Scotland eſcaped a ſtraunge and ſtrong conſpiracie, practiſed by the Earle Gowrye and his brother.
               
                  Embaſſadors from Marocco.
                  About the 8. of Auguſt, arriued at Doner certaine Embaſſadors and aſſiſtants, 16. in number, ſent from the king of Marocco in Barbaria. I. Stowe.
               
               
                  Embaſſadors from Moſchouie.
                  The 18. of September, certaine Embaſſadors came from Moſchouie or Ruſſia, and the 14. of October, the ſaid Embaſſadors rode to the Court, and had audience before her Maieſtie.
               FINIS.
            
         
         
            
            A briefe Diſcourſe of the Churches eſtate from the death of Ieſus Christ, vntill this preſent.
            
            
               ALl which hath bene ſuccinctly ſaid in this booke touching the eſtate of the Church,Three times of the Chriſtian Church. ſhould remember the Reader of three diuers times in the conſideration of the gouernment of the houſe of God, the better to marke things as they came, and to haue thereof a certaine abridgement in his memorie.
            We take the firſt time of the Chriſtian Church,The firſt from the preaching of the Apoſtles vntill Phocas, diſtinguiſhed into three periodes. from the beginning of the Apoſtles preaching vntil the Empire of Phocas: which is ordinarily diſtinguiſhed into three periodes. 1. The firſt of about 70. yeares from the Lords Aſcention, vntill the death of the Apoſtles, and of their firſt Diſciples. 2. The ſecond began at the Empire of Traian, and ſtretched by the ſpace of 200. yeares vntill Conſtantine: which time alſo was honoured with the preſence of certain of the Apoſtles Diſciples, & other excellent Paſtors of the Church, and faithfull Martyrs of Ieſus Chriſt. 3. The third frō 
               Cōſtantine vntil Phocas, which is the laſt periode of the firſt time of the Church, about 300. years: during which, the Church had many great Doctors, Greeks & Latins.
            As for the firſt periode of the firſt time,Of the firſt periode of the firſt time of ye Church. it is very certaine that neuer Chriſtian Church was more happie thē during that time, whether we conſider the doctrine taught by the Apoſtles and their firſt ſucceſſors, or wee contemplate all the parts of the Miniſterie, and of the Eccleſiaſticall diſcipline.
            
               Now for the doctrine we haue by a ſingular grace of God, the Apoſtles Epiſtles whereby it is eaſie to gather a body and ſummary of all that which euery Chriſtiā ought to know touching his ſaluation. And that which is more, if they which came after the Apoſtles had continued to build vpon the foundation which they had laid, the Church had remained in his firſt ſpirituall ſplendor and brightneſſe: the ſimplicitie then being ſuch and ſo great in doctrine, in the maner of teaching, and in ceremonies, that the ſheepheards and ſheepe, were altogether eliuated vnto the heauenly Father through Ieſus Chriſt; liuing moreouer in ſuch charitie & concord, as truly this world might be well called the golden world. For although that in the Apoſtles time and their next ſucceſſors, there roſe vp certaine mutinous perſons to trouble the happie reſt of the Church, this hurt not much, the maieſtie of the ſpirit of God diſcouering it ſelfe in ſuch ſort in the preaching of the Goſpell, that all the world was conſtrained to acknowledge in this infirmitie of the ſeruants of God, an admirable efficacie, to biing all wiſedome and humane power captiue vnder the obedience of Ieſus Chriſt. True it is, that alreadie Sathan thought vpō his affaires, and brought forth his practiſes with greater force then euer before, building his Sinagogue nigh vnto the Church. For euen when the Apoſtles themſelues liued, certaine Iewes and Gentiles making the ſame profeſſion of Chriſtianiſme, fought againſt Ieſus Chriſt in diuers maners, as S. Paul his Epiſtles doo witneſſe. And what diligence ſoeuer the ſeruants of God vſed to eradicate and root out the tares which the enemie did ſowe: yet remained there the ſeedes thereof in the boſome of the Church during the periodes following: God meaning to humble his, and to ſhewe them that truly they had and would alwaies haue cauſe to fight in this life, but that the triumph therof was reſerued for the other world. For as for the ſtrength of the perſecutors ſince the Apoſtles time, it hath alwaies ſhewed it true, that the bloud of the Martyrs is the ſeede of the Church.
            But let this be ſaid in a word, onely to awake the Reader and to prepare him to a diligent meditation of the Eccleſiaſticall

hiſtorie. Now ſomething is to be ſaid of the ſecond periode of the firſt time. The Apoſtolike men,Of the ſecond periode of the firſt time of the Church. armed with the vertue and power of ye Lord, maintained conſtantly the truth, amongſt all the tempeſts and ſtormes of perſecution, and in deſpite of Gentiliſme, & of diuers hereſies which boldly began to left vp their heads. In ſo much, that great maruel it was, that ſo ſoone after ſo great light, men ſhould ſee the Eaſt in many places couered with ſo deep darknes, many goodly Churches ruinated, and the doctrine of ſaluatiō tranſported otherwhere. Yet the greateſt euil was in the bowels of the Church it ſelfe; many Paſtors wherof, not being ſo attentiue as of reaſon they ſhuld haue bin to conſerue and keepe the puritie of the Euangelicall doctrine, but ſuffering to take roote (I know not how) that which taſted of carnall wiſedome: in ſo much that in the place of the true end & marke which the Goſpell propoſeth vnto vs, men began to eſtabliſh vnto vs, all the perfection of Chriſtianitie in ſufferings and afflictions for the Goſpell, and in arreſting & abiding a litle too ſubtilly, vpon the ſtay of certaine fantaſtike perſons, ſpringing from the ſchoole of Philoſophers, ſo fell by litle and litle, to that vnhappineſſe, as to transforme the holy ſcripture into allegorike interpretations, a maruellous baite for the curioſitie of humane vnderſtanding, and a fountaine of infinite miſchiefes in the Church. True it is that the firſt inuentors of ſuch things, thought nothing leſſe then that which came after. So much then did the Lord humble his people. But about the end of this periode, euil was ſeene to aduance, and ceremonies encreaſe in ſuch ſort, that men enclined vnto Indaiſme and Paganiſme, the loue of ſolitude and Munkery, the abſtinence from marriage, and from certaine viands and meates on particular dayes, many Feaſts and other ſeeds of ſuperſtition after ſucceeding, tooke a maruellous roote. So the commencement of praiers for the dead, and of the ſacrifice of the Maſſe, did then diſcouer themſelues: not that the intent of ſuch as made mention of the dead, to encourage the liuing conſtantly to ſerue God, and which brought of their goods into the company of the faithfull, for the comfort of the poore after the celebration of the Supper, was to bring in the execrable Idolatrie which long

time after ſprung vp. There were alſo introducted and brought into Baptiſme, certaine ceremonies, yet not ſuch as the ridiculous ſuperſtitions which ſince haue bin forged. Finally the good intent began to ſhewe it ſelfe, and from thenceforth to lift vp the head, vntill at the laſt vpon the ende of the ſecond time of the Church, it roſe vp aboue the word of God.
            
               Of the third periode of the firſt time of the Church.As for the third periode of the firſt time, heerein it was happie, in that God during that time, raiſed vp diuers learned perſons, Greekes and Latines, to oppoſe themſelues with liuely voyce at Sinodes, as alſo by their bookes, whereof wee haue ſome number at this day, againſt the impietie of infinite heretikes.
            Amongſt other, S. Augustine was an excellent Doctor of the Church: who notwithſtanding is not alwaies ſo cleare as is to be deſired. Amongſt the Latines this time alſo brought forth other great perſons, yet men alſo, which yet is more ſeene in the Greeke Doctors, leſſe pure then the Latines, eſpecially in the right knowledge of the merite of Ieſus Chriſt, and all was the want of a pure and natiue intelligence of the Lords language in the Prophetike and Apoſtolike bookes. Their allegorike interpretations had as it were gotten the vpper hand, ceremonies maruellouſly encreaſed, Monkeries began to take footing, the true meanes to diuide the Church, and to forge a new ſeruice of God: afterward, the veneration of the Martyrs Sepulchres, paintings, and after Images gliſtered in Churches. The pure doctrine of the Lords Supper began to bee falſified for want of right vnderſtanding the manner of Sacramentall ſpeeches, and the vertue of the alone ſacrifice of Ieſus Chriſt. Biſhops, eſpecially that of Rome, thruſt into the world, and the miſterie of iniquitie formed it ſelfe as it afterward ſhould come into the light. For Arrianiſme hauing ſerued for a ſeed to Mahumatiſme, and the diſpiſing of the celeſtall veritie, with corruption of manners maintaining the audacitie and boldneſſe of the Biſhops of Rome
               ▪ this periode finiſhing, gaue entry vnto ſtraunge euils, wherewith the Church was ouerthrowne a litle ſpace after.
            Let vs now ſay ſomething of the ſecond time of the

Church, which we diuide into two periodes. The firſt,The ſecond time of the Church frō 
                  Phocas vntil Charls. 5. The firſt periode. from Phocas about the yeare 600. vntill Charlamaine by the ſpace of 300. yeares. The ſecond from Charlamaine vnto Charles the fift of that name, Emperour, about 700. yeares.
            In the firſt periode of this ſecond time of the Church, as the Antichriſt of the Eaſt thruſt himſelfe well forward, that of the Weſt eſtabliſhed his Throne, and then was the doore open to all errours: which notwithſtanding entred not at once, but came by litle and litle into the Church. Aboue all, the opinion of purgatorie, fire, and of the ſacrifice for the dead, were the foundation of the Papaltie and of all that vermine of their Cleargie and infinite Sects of Monkes, which like Graſhoppers from the deepe pit, came to ſpread themſelues through Europe. But it was in the ſecond periode of the ſecond time,The ſecond periode. that Idolatrie and ſuperſtitions obtained the vpper hand. Inſomuch that the poore Church as it were buried, had no more any ſpring, neither appeared there any token wherevpon to caſt her eye, but onely the inuocation of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the holy Ghoſt in Baptiſme. And although from time to time, the Lord made ſhine ſome flames and torches in the bowells of that darkeneſſe, to redargue and weaken ſuch as rotted in ſo heauie and palpable ignorance: yet was their blindneſſ ſo lamentable, and their ſleepe ſo deepe, that for one which lifted vp the head, and to whom Antichriſt gaue no releaſe nor leaue to approach, witneſſe all ſuch as during this periode oppoſed themſelues neuer ſo litle againſt his tyrannie, an infinite remained liueleſſe and altogether dead. The Lord making himſelfe admirable in the mercie which he ſhewed vpon ſome, and renowned in horrible and iuſt puniſhment of their ingratitude, which loued better lyes then truth. Who can heere recyte the ſuperſtitions & Idolatries of Antichriſt, & his crafts and ſubtilties, to eſtabliſh his kingdome and tirannie vpon bodies and ſoule? He had his ſeruants and inſtruments of all ſorts, to leane, faſten, encreaſe, and multiply his Throne in the Temple of GOD, carrying in his browe the name of miſerie, ſitting in the Temple of God, calling himſelfe God,

yet vnknown of ſuch as called themſelues Chriſtians, which he put off vntill the end of the world, and to I know not what fancie and dreame of an Antichriſt which ſhould be borne but a litle before the ſecond comming of the ſonne of God. Briefly, the great ſpiritual Babilon, the murdreſſe of ſoules, had her kingdome during this period, tyrannizing the Iſraell of God, hid and diſpearced in a litle number and by her impoſtures, blaſphemies and impieties, mocked the true God, & Father of Ieſus Chriſt, whoſe name auowed with the mouth, ſhee trode vnder her feet, by her abhominable errour.
            
               The third time of the Church from Charles the fift, til this preſent time.But the Lord willing to make his worke admirable, which was to ruinate Babilon, to deſtroy the man of ſin by the breath of his mouth, and by the brightneſſe of his comming, preſented himſelfe in the third time, and by the miniſterie of people, feeble and of ſmall appearance, yet driuen and drawne on with the zeale of his glory, firſt brought in ye
                knowledge of tongues, then the celeſtial truth, maugre all the ſtrengthes of the world, and in ſixtie yeares hath made vs againe ſee all the maruells of the worlds paſſed in the gouernment of his Church, as well in the efficacie of his word, as in the vertue thereof, to maintaine it, to fortifie his ſeruants, againſt all ſorts of enemies, within and without, and to repreſſe tyrants, Apoſtates, heretikes and hipocrites: which we hope he will purſue more and more, and we pray him to do it for the loue of Ieſus Chriſt his ſonne, vntill that great Sauiour appeare in the cloudes, to iudge the qucke and the dead. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
      
      
         
            
            A Table of the principall things contained in this booke.
            
               A.
               ABbey of S. Denis in France, builded by Dagobert. 190
               
               Abſimarus Emperor. 206
               
               Abbreuiataries 

                     created 465.
                     
                     deſtroyed 487
                     
                  
               
               Acarius an heretike, murdred. 69
               
               Acephali heretikes. 82
               
               Acolites. 91
               
               Achaia and other Countries brought into Prouinces. 73
               
               Acchio D. of Millain from whoſe helme fell the ſerpent. 114
               
               Adamites heretikes in Bohemia. 81
               
               Adiaphores. 130
               
               Adrian the Emperour chaunged the name of Ieruſalem. 34
               
               Adrian the 4. angry becauſe the Emp. held his right ſtirrop 130
               
               Angry becauſe hee placed his name before the Popes. 136
               
               He is choaked with a flie. 140
               
               Albertus Alaſco. 145
               
               Aluaes tyrannie. 636
               
               His death. 641
               
               Amais baniſhed Scotland. 643
               
               A Prieſt dieth for feare. 641
               
               A notable act of the Seignory of Venice. 653
               
               Antwerpe yeeldeth. 655
               
               Auguſta. 659
               
               Auguſtus D. of Sax. dieth. 657
               
               A Fleet for Lisbon. 671
               
               A Iubiley. 677
               
               An act againſt the P. Bulls. 677
               
               Albertus made Generall. 692
               
               He winneth Callais. 693
               
               Articles concerning controuerſies in religion. 703
               
               Aemilian Emp. 65
               
               Ayme D. of Sauoy, became an hermit. 89
               
               Albarit Marqueſſe of Toſcane, chaſeth away the Sarraſins. 55
               
               Alban martyred. 49
               
               Appellation of the Maſſe. 141
               
               Albert firſt author of the Carmes. 106
               
               Adrian Pope a buggerer, yet worſhipped as God. 36
               
               His death. Ibid.
               Aeli
                     •
                  s Pertinax. 45
               
               Alexander Seuerus Emp. 53
               
               Albigeois, or Albiois, oppoſing themſelues againſt Tranſubſtantiation are ouercome. 112
               
               Albinus firſt K. of Lombard is ſlaine. 67
               
               Alcoran of the Mahomatists. 190
               
               Alcibiades Martyr, of a ſcrupulous life. 42
               
               Almaine followed the faſhion of the Romane Maſſe. 94
               
               
                  Almaine changed by ciuil war. 91
               
               Alexander Biſhop. 13
               
               Alexander ordaineth new ceremonies. 36
               
               Alexander martyred. 42
               
               Alex. Biſhop of Ieruſalem. 58
               
               Alex. 3. ſent vnto the Souldā, the Image of the Emp. Barbaroſſa. 103
               
               He fled in his cookes attire. 109
               
               Hee treadeth vpon the necke of Fredericke Barbaroſſa. 117
               
               Alexander 5. poyſoned. 122
               
               Alexander 6. poyſoned. 129
               
               Ambroſe beeing ſicke, receiueth the Euchariſt. 73
               
               Anacletus 28. Martyr. 29
               
               Auicetus Pope. 28. Martired. Ibid
               Antonius Pius Emp. 37
               
               Amurathes Emp. of the Turkes. 452
               
               Anaſtatius commandeth to worſhip a quaternitie. 145
               
               Anaſtatius the Emp. dieth with lightning 99
               
               Annates impoſed vpō Frāce. 451
               
               Confirmed. 460
               
               Antichriſt in his ful tiranny perſecuteth the faithfull after the yeare, 130. according to Sybilla Erithred, and makes warre vpon himſelfe. 153
               
               Anthonius & his cohaeritikes. 96
               
               Anthonius Biſhop of Nicomedia Martyred. 73
               
               Anthropomorphits. 268
               
               Antinous. 36
               
               Antioche ſhaketh & trēbleth. 91
               
               Sinketh in an Earthquake. 100
               
               Taken by Boemundus the Norman. 111
               
               Antiphones and the Introite of the Maſſe. 145
               
               Apollonius beheaded. 44
               
               Apoſtles gouerne Churches. 11
               
               Falſe Apoſtles. Ibid.
               Apoſtles & their charge. 9
               
               A fabulous apparition of S. Michaell. 61
               
               Arabici heretikes. 19
               
               Arcadius and other martired by Genſeric. 83
               
               Archilaus Herods ſucceſſor. 31
               
               Archprieſts and Cardinalls. 54
               
               Arrius & his adherents excommunicated. 103 Could not bee revnited with Alexander. 105 Purgeth himſelfe by oathes. 
               Armacan publiſheth concluſions againſt the Friars. 116
               
               Armenia againe receiueth the faith. 70
               
               Arnoldus de noua villa, a true and faithfull man. 399
               
               Arnold Brira oppoſeth himſelfe againſt the Cleargie, vſurping the temporall ſword. 329
               
               Arnulphus Biſhop of Lyons ſlain. 322
               
               Arrius Antonius perſecuteth the Chriſtians. 33
               
               Articles of the doctrine of the Valdois. 339. Of the Bohe. Ibid.
               
                  Artois erected vnto an Earldome or Countie 227
               
               Aſia looſeth 13. Townes by earthquake. 6
               
               Aſia the leſſe, hath flouriſhing Churches, 8. Perſecuted. 49
               
               Attyla ſpoyſeth Aquileia and all Italy. 153. Taketh Rome. 224 Beſiegeth Orleance. 227. Is diſcomfited by Meronee. 244
               
               Aug. S. dieth. 151
               
               Athanaſius. 109
               
               Aubriot accuſed of hereſie, is cō
                  demned to perpetual priſon with bread and water. 128
               
               Augustines drawne from their Hermitages to preach in good Townes. 367
               
               Auignō the ſeat for the Romane Court. 394
               
               Auriflame the French ſtanderd. 343
               
               Ausbourge deliuered from the Barbarians. 72
               
               Auguſtus Caeſar. 1
               
               Aurelian Emp 64. His death. 70
               
            
            
               B
               BAbilon hath a Church. 10
               
               Battaile of Lepante. 602
               
               Baiazeth 4 Emp. of the Turkes, ſlew his brother Soliman. 486
               
               Baia. is put in an Iron cage. 447
               
               Baiazeth giueth 200000. Ducats to Pope Alexander the 6. to poiſon Gemē his brother. 451
               
               Baſilides heretikes. 26
               
               Bauier conquered 223
               
               Beda the Venerable 118
               
               Belliſarius makes Affrica tributary 123
               
               Beneuent giuen to the Pope 326
               
               Bennet the yonger caſt into a fornace 190
               
               Berēgarius ſmothered the truth vnder certaine errours 294
               
               He ſpeakes againſt himſelfe. Ibid.
               Benet 1. Pope 176
               
               Beginning of leaden ſeales 200
               
               Baron 366
               
               Berillus heretike 33
               
               Barnard Monke poiſoned H. the 7. 223
               
               Biſhop and Prieſt all one. 14
               
               Biſhops married. 68
               
               Biſhop of Rome made vniuerſall 92
               
               Biſhoppe ought to bee conuinced by 12. witneſſes before hee be condemned. 129
               
               Biſhops make of a Councel a conuenticle and a monopoly 248
               
               Blaſphemy new of the Popes keies 313
               
               Blondus the Historiographer. 300
               
               Boheme tamed by Charlemaine. 156
               
               Is erected into a kingdome. 302
               
               Brought into the obedience of Otho 307
               
               Bohemians communicate vnder both kindes 315
               
               Make no account of the Pope. 
                     
                        •
                     19
               
               
                  Withdraw from ſubiection. 334
               
               They propound 4. articles in the Councell of Baſill. 351
               
               Boniface Pope. 116
               
               Boniface an Engliſh man, preacheth in Friſe and is there Martyred. 221
               
               Burgraues. 366
               
               Bruno the firſt Chartreux, with Hugh Biſhoppe of Grenoble. 307
               
               Bulgaria made ſubiect to the Romane Church. 221
               
               Bull of gold. 249
               
               Bull of the Stigmates of S. Frances. 110
               
               Bulliſt and Friars minors doo ſtriue for the gouernment of the Nuns. 226
               
               Burchardus compileth the auntient Canons. 121
               
               Bells in vſe. 30
               
               Bell tolls at noone-tide. 461
               
            
            
               C
               CAligula afflicteth the Iewes. 6
               
               Calyphe the great, comparable to the Pope. 366
               
               Hee dieth of famine in the midst of his great riches. 371
               
               Caluin. 579
               
               Charlemaine firſt called Treſchristian. 226
               
               Canons obſerued by the commandement of Caelestine. 153
               
               Canonization of Saints. 346
               
               Cardinalls name now in vſe. 282
               
               Cardinalls alone to weare redde hats. 468
               
               Cardinalls named as principalls of the Cleargie. 54
               
               Cardinalls exalted againſt heretikes. 58
               
               Carmes called the bretheren of the Virgin Mary. 378
               
               Carpocrates heretike. 35
               
               Carus Emperor died being ſtricken with lightning. 62
               
               Cataphryges heretikes. 35
               
               Catechumenes. 101.43
               
               Cathares heretikes, called Nouatians. 101
               
               Chapplers inuented. 362
               
               Caſſimere. 627
               
               Carmelites. 341
               
               Conrade Emp. 263
               
               Celſus heretike. 35
               
               Caeleſtinus Pope. 150
               
               Cerdon a ſtoicke heretike. 38
               
               Ceremonies inuented. 52.180
               
               Cerinthus heretike. 40
               
               Caeſar Valentine, Alex. the 6. his baſtard. 482
               
               Chaldeans afflict the Iewes. 76
               
               Chanons regular or irregular inſtituted. 307
               
               Calixtus Biſhop of Rome. 52
               
               Carus Emp. 74
               
               Caius Emp. of Rome. 75
               
               Caracalla Emp. 51. ſlaine. 161
               
               Charles K. of Naples, ſleyeth his ſiſter Iane at the Popes inſtigation. 397
               
               Chartreux order founded. 370
               
               
                  Caſtle of S. Angeto builded. 
               Chiliaſtes renued. 67
               
               Chorepiſcopi particular Biſhops. 91
               
               Chriſtian libertie. 19
               
               Church of Antioche in great fame. 16
               
               Church in Babylon. 10
               
               In Affrike troubled by Genſericus. 78
               
               Romaine declared principall. 111
               
               Church called Sancta Sanctorū builded. 63
               
               Churches flouriſhing in Aſia the leſſe, gouerned by the Apoſtles. 8
               
               Churches orientall communicated but once a yeare. 227
               
               Churches orientall and occidentall appeaſed. 244
               
               Church of Aquilegia reduced. 89
               
               Christians perſecuted the first time by Nero. 19
               
               The ſecond vnder Domitian. 27
               
               The third vnder Traian. 28
               
               The 4. vnder M. Aurelius. 40
               
               The 5. vnder Seuerus. 41
               
               The 6. vnder Iulius Max. 55
               
               The 7. vnder Decius. 58
               
               The 8. vnder Galius. 60
               
               The 9. vnder Aurelian. 70
               
               The 10. and moſt cruell, vnder Diocleſian. 76
               
               Chriſt exerciſeth his miniſterie, ſuffereth his paſſion. 6
               
               Cleargie, Clarkes, and their ſignification. 90
               
               The Cleargie augmented. 112
               
               Cleargie Romane vſurpeth the election of the Pope. 149
               
               The temporall ſword. 201
               
               They wil haue no reformatiō 
                  232
               
               Except from common collectors. 241
               
               Clarkes enioy immunities. 39
               
               That they ought to meddle with ſecular affaires. 160
               
               Clouis baptiſed and his Nobles. 108
               
               Collation of Benefices. 209
               
               Colledge of faire women. 194
               
               Comet ſeene three moneths together. 397
               
               Commodus ſtrangled. 45
               
               Cōmunicants take the wine and bread in their hands. 238
               
               Councell at Ieruſalem. 192
               
               Councells touching Eaſter. 162
               
               Clerus Biſhop. 26
               
               Clement the firſt. 27
               
               Claudius Emp. 69
               
               Councells of Philadelphia. 56
               
               At Antioche. 68
               
               At Nice. 96
               
               Councels prouinciall euery yeare. 98
               
               Councell Affrican. 107
               
               Councell of Carthage. 109
               
               Epheſus. 112
               
               Of Chalcedon. 120
               
               Of Orleance 132
               
               At Tara in Spaine. 136
               
               
                  Tolledo 141
               
               Conſtantinople 155
               
               Councell at Auuergne 161
               
               At Orleance 171
               
               At Lyons 177
               
               Paris 197
               
               Ciuill 200
               
               Tolledo 222
               
               Councells the foure generall to be kept as the Goſpell 223
               
               Councell at Rome 128
               
               Councels cannot preſcribe lawes to the Romane Church, but from thence hath her vertues and perfections 243
               
               Cornelius B. of Rome 60
               
               Councell at Reius 335
               
               At Tours. 33. Lateran 349
               
               Councell in France, againſt the K. thereof. 359
               
               Councell generall at Vienna. 371
               
               Councel National in Fracē. 430
               
               Councel general at Vienna. 444
               
               At Parpignan 445
               
               At Piſe 459
               
               At Conſtance 460
               
               Cardinall Albert. 641
               
               Chriſtian Churches of Conſtantinople. 650
               
               Charles Borgia. 642
               
               Clement 8. Pope 679
               
               He maketh warre vpon Caeſar Est 760
               
               Confeſſion taken away by Nectarius 92
               
               Confeſſion annicular inſtituted. 346
               
               
                  Conon Pope 88
               
               Conrade 1. of that name Emperour 250
               
               Conrade the ſecond 261
               
               Conrade the third 272
               
               Conrade a Merchant of Milain, diſpoſeth the Sect of the Fratriceilli 384
               
               Conrade the lawfull K. of Sicilia, beheaded by the Popes councell 409
               
               Conſecration of water mingled with wine 98
               
               Conſtance ſister of William King of Sicily a Nun, was diſpended with for marrying 335
               
               Conſtātius Emp. an heretike. 226
               
               Conſtance pilleth Rome 161
               
               Conſtance Emp. abiureth his hereſie. Ibid.
               Conſtance ſlaine at the Bathe, 20
               
               Comodus Emp. 44. His death. 45
               
               Count or Earle. 366
               
               Conſtantine the great, Emperor, deſired to be baptiſed in Iordan. 83
               
               Hee cauſed a Tabernacle to bee carried in warre 87. He burneth the libell of the Biſhops. 92 By his humillitie he raiſeth vp the pride of the Popes againſt his ſucceſſors 31
               
               Conſtant. the 4. Emp. 198
               
               Conſtant the 5 Emp. 215. He commanded Images to be cast out of Churches. 
               Conſtant 6. Emp. 222
               
               
                  Conſtant. Pope, 2. of that name, hath his eyes put out 220
               
               Conſtant. Paleologne the laſt Emperor of Conſtantinople. 421. murdered at the taking therof. 
               Coſtātinople builded in the midſt of Byzantium 89 Is fired. 112. Is beſieged 3. yeares of the Sarazins and Arabiās, recouered by the Grecians, 211. Beſieged of Baiazeth. 222. is taken. 
               Coſroes K. of Perſia deſtroyeth Syria. 185. He would aboliſh Chriſtianitie. Ibid. He is ouercome by Heraclius. 
               Coronation of Clement the fift troubled with the deathes of many. 2018
               
               Creſſelius puniſhed for his ambition 334
               
               Croiſades take their beginning. 299
               
               Crueltie of Pope Pius the fourth. 300
               
               Cyrus reedifieth the Temple. 4
               
               Cuſtome vpon wine and ſalte in France. 112
               
               Cyprian S. his death. 64
               
            
            
               D
               DAgobert inſtituted a Colledge of faire women. 194
               
               Damaſus 2. of that name Pope. 2
                        •
                     5
               
               Denmarke with his K. conuerted to the faith 121
               
               Danes and Normans do returne into France. 156
               
               Darfoſa martyred. 89
               
               Darius Histaspes endeth the Temple 12
               
               Dauphin ſold to the K. of Fr. 129
               
               Decadence and fall of the Pope. 259
               
               Decretalls frō whence forged. 60
               
               Decretalls examined 61
               
               Decretalls gathered together by Raymond the Monke. 352
               
               Decretalls attributed to Lucius. 71
               
               Degrees Eccleſiaſticall 59
               
               Denis Biſhop of Alexandria, & his death 119
               
               Denis B. of Rome and his Decretalls 68
               
               Denis a Romane Abbot, made the great paſchall Cicle. 173
               
               Denis the woman of great Conſtantine, martyred 116
               
               Deus Dedit or Dorithe Pope. 186
               
               Deacon and his ſignification. 14
               
               Didier last K. of Lombards. 221
               
               Dydius Iulius Emp. 45
               
               Dydinus a blind man, a famous Regent in the Schoole of Alexandria 244
               
               Digna a noble matron in Aquilea, caſt her ſelfe headlong into the water 153
               
               Diocleſian cauſed his feet to bee kiſſed. 76
               
               Diocleſia. & Max. depoſe themſelues of the Empire. 78
               
               
                  D. Saunders. 642
               
               Duke Alanſon. 640
               
               His death. 645
               
               Duke of Guiſe ſlaine. 666
               
               Death of the L. Ruſſell. 658
               
               Death of the Q. of Scots. 659
               
               Diſſention in religion. 682
               
               Duke of Parma dieth. 680
               
               Death of Sixtus the 5. 674
               
               D. de Maine. 676
               
               Death of Ch. Burbon. 673
               
               D. of Neuers. 685
               
               Diſſention amongst the Proteſtant Princes. 627
               
               Death of Amurathe. 690
               
               D. Lopez executed. 688
               
               Diocleſian dyeth in a rage. 79
               
               Diuiſion of the kingdome of Iudea. 3
               
               Diuorce permitted for the long ſickneſſe of a woman. 257
               
               Doctrine Euangelicall receiued at Ʋalence in Dauphine. 177
               
               Domitian Emperour. 26
               
               Domitian ſlaine. 37
               
               Domitius Nero. 28
               
               Donation of Conſtantine. 89.405
               
               Death of the Duke of Guiſe. 577
               
               Decius Emperour. 58
               
               His death. 59
               
               Diaconeſſes. 92
               
               Deodatus Pope. 199
               
            
            
               E
               EAster ordained on the Sonday. 39
               
               To be celebrated in one day in all places. Ibid.
               Ebion an heretike. 18
               
               Edmond the laſt King of the Eaſterne Engliſh men, ſlaine by the Danes. 271
               
               Edward the 3. King of England elected Emperour. 411
               
               Election of the Pope giuen to Charlemaine. 253
               
               Giuen to the people and Cleargy of Rome. 256
               
               Vſurped by them the Ro. people. 271
               
               To the Popes Elders. 5
               
               Election of the Emperours giuen to the Germaine Nation. 277
               
               Emperour kiſſeth the Popes feet. 219
               
               Empire Weſterne endeth. 153
               
               Empire Romane decayeth. 141.187
               
               Empire of Conſtantinople tranſferred into France. 218
               
               Empire diuided betwixt two Emperours. 79
               
               Empire of the Weſt diuided. 262
               
               Empire in diſcord. 303
               
               England firſt keepeth the Lent faſt. 194
               
               Euenſong of Sicily. 362
               
               Eſtate of France. 619.623
               
               Estates of the lowe Countries. 620
               
               Estates of Almaine. 692
               
               Euangeliſts which. 14
               
               Euaristus martyred. 74
               
               
                  Euchariſt called oblation 37
               
               Giuen into the hand of the receiuer. 91. carried to ſuch as were nigh dead. 80. A booke touching the Euchariſt generally receiued 245
               
               Elutherius Biſhop of Lyons, and his dreames 78
               
               Eugenia daughter of Phillip king of Alexandria martyred 76
               
               Eutalius Prieſt, cauſe of the 4. Schiſme 137
               
               Euariſtus B. 30. Martyred. Ibid.
               Elutherius Pope 43
               
               Eutichian K. of Rome. 71
               
               Eutychians and Arrians reiected from Conſtantinople 79
               
               Exarches in Italy 176
               
               Exarches ceaſe in Italy. 211. Is giuen to the Pope 218. & aſked againe by Conſtantine. 
               Excommunication conuerted into abuſe 257
               
               Excommunication written with Inke mingled with wine in the Challice. 239. For temporall goods 329
               
               Exorciſts 91
               
               Euſebius Biſh. of R. 18
               
               Euerguacenes 143
               
            
            
               F
               FAbian Biſhop and his election miraculous 56 Martyred with his wife Darfoſa Ibid.
               Fable of the Stigmates of S. Frances. 389
               
               Fauſta maintaineth her husband Coſtantine in ſuperſtition. 100
               
               Faelix Biſhop and his Decretalls and martyrdome 82
               
               Faelix Biſhop of Rauenna hath his eyes put out 202
               
               Faelix and Elephandus condemned for hereſie, which they repent 226
               
               Faelix 5. renounceth the Popedome 480
               
               Ferrara vſurped by the Ʋenetians 110
               
               Feaſts denounced to the people. 93
               
               Feaſts of all Saints inſtituted. 112
               
               Feaſts of the Sacrament called Feste Dieu 121. Confirmed. 149
               
               Faſtings 139
               
               Feaſt of the ſpeare and nailes. 
               Feast of the tranſingration. 
               Feaſt of dedication 716
               
               Feſtus gouerneth Iudea 19
               
               Flagellers or whippers 117
               
               Flaunders made a Countie. 290
               
               Flower-delyce of France. 426
               
               Forbidding to eate fleſh annathenized 235
               
               Florentines buy their libertie. 
               Florentines interdicted 440
               
               Abſolued by Vrban the 6. 446
               
               Florian brother of Tacitus. 70
                  
                     
                        Ʋſurped the Empire, and is ſlaine Ibid.
                  
               
               Florus mooued the Iewes to war. 18
               
               Fraunce followeth the faſhion of the Romane Maſſe 207
               
               
                  France diuided into certain kingdomes 197
               
               France agreeth in their Eccleſiaſticall ſinging with the Romanes 256
               
               Frances Dandalus D. of Ʋenice 425
               
               Frances Curiario Ʋicar of the Empire, taken of the Venetians and ſlaine in priſon 452
               
               S. Frances canonized 383
               
               Frances Petrarke 420
               
               Fratricelli condemned and perſecuted 384
               
               Fredegunda ſleyeth Chriſperic. 203
               
               Fredegunda flaine in the Church Ibid.
               Frederic Barbaroſſa goeth into Italy 329
               
               Hee is excommunicated of Alexander the third. 344
               
               Felix Biſhop of Rome 71
               
               Formoſus Pope 258
               
               Ferdinand. 1. 554
               
               Frederic Barbaroſſa is ſurpriſed by the Souldan, and ſet at libertie 273
               
               Troden vnder foote by Alexander the third 348
               
               Frederick the 2. declared an enemie to the Church 389
               
               He is conſtrained to lead an Armie into Siria 390
               
               Frederick the 2. excommunicated and depriued of his Empire by Innocent the 4. 393
               
               Frederick 2. being angred at the Pope, made many notable perſons die 363
               
               Frederick D. of Auſtrich beheaded at Naples, with others. 399
               
               Frederick Count of Miſne, elected Emperour 441
               
               Frederick D. of Brunſwic elected Emp. ſlaine by the Count de Waldec 317
               
               Friſons receiue the faith 266
               
               Frodeſque Saluiat Archbiſhop of Piſe, hanged 479
               
               Fulco ſucceeded Baudwin in the Kingdome of Hieruſalem. 363
               
               Fuſcus ouercome by Derpains. 300
               
               Fulbert Biſhop of Chartres, made Stirps Ieſſe 322
               
            
            
               G
               GAmma inuented 284
               
               Galeaze Duke of Millaine 456
               
               Galerius Max. eaten with wormes 80
               
               Gallien Emperour 72
               
               Gallus Emp. he and Vclutian are ſlaine Ibid.
               
               Ganclon betrayeth the Peeres of France 257
               
               Gantier Diuelot ſlaine in the Church 78
               
               Gautlier d' Annoy an adulterer, ſcorched and hanged 430
               
               Geneua and Orleance founded by Aurelian, 
               
                  Geneua ordaines a Duke 80
               
               Geneuiefue the Pariſians Diana. 179
               
               Gregorian Calender 642
               
               Refuſed 647
               
               Gregory 13. Pope dieth 651
               
               Gregory the 14. 677
               
               Gerard Brazut Hildebrands inſtruments to kill Popes 537
               
               Gibelins ſet vp 357
               
               Gnoſtiques 35
               
               Godfrey of Bullen king of Ierulem 353
               
               Gratian perſwades 3. Popes. 19. to depoſe themſelues. 306
               
               Greekes graunt Purgatory, and the Pope to be primate of the Church 427
               
               Gregory one of the foure Doctors of the Church 206
               
               Gregory calleth himſelfe the ſeruant of ſeruants 79. And will not iudge an vniuerſall Biſhop Ibid.
               
               Gregory celebrateth the Supper in the vulgar tongue Ibid.
               
               Gregory the 2. Pope, oppoſeth himſelfe againſt the ordinance to burne Images 190
               
               Gregory the fourth accepted not the Popedome vnleſſe the Emperour allowed the election. 221
               
               Gregory Alias Hildedrand defended Symonie and ſingle life. 345
               
               Gregory the ſeuēth caſt the Hoſt into the fire Ibid.
               
               Gregory the 7. a liuely picture of Antichriſt 
               Gregory the 7. after his death tormented in hell, doth great myracles 340
               
               Guelphes the Popes fautors, and Gibelins the Emperours. 390
               
               Guilbert Archbiſhop of Rauenna taken vp againe 16. yeares after buriall 256
               
               Guido Aretine the firſt inuentor of the Gamma & the notes 284
               
               Guillaine Pion Duke of Aquitaine, founder of the firſt Monaſterie of the order of Auguſtine Friars 219
               
               Guillian Orſeure ſhewed that the Pope is Antichriſt 227
               
               Guillaine Count de Holland choſen Emperour againſt Frederick the ſecond. 257. Is ſlaine. Ibid.
               Guiniard Biſhop of Nantes martyred 294
               
               Guiſards audition 300
               
               Guy de Luſingam laſt king of Ieruſalem. 357
               
               Gaule began to be called France. 188
               
               Gordian Emperour 56
               
               Graſhoppers out of the bottomeleſſe pit 461
               
               Guns inuented. 432
               
            
            
            
               H
               HAalon K. of the Tartarians, ouercommeth the Perſians 177
               
               Helcheſites heretikes 25
               
               Henry the 8. Emperour, inuented the combat of tournies. 65
               
               H. the 3. vpon his marriage day draue away all Morris-players, and ſuch like 284
               
               H. the 4. Emperour, ſheweth a deiection of heart vnworthy an Emperour 130
               
               H. 4 poyſoned by his ſonne, vnburied by the ſpace of 5. years. 315
               
               H. the 5. reſigneth the inueſtitures to the Pope 334
               
               H. Lātgraue of Thuring, elected Emperour, dieth 361
               
               H. the 6. will needs bee crowned at Rome 349
               
               H. the 7 poyſoned in an Host. 357
               
               H. the 1. K. of England, depriued of his right by an Archbiſhop 223
               
               Henry Carperell Prouoſt of Paris, a falſe Iudge, condemned. 422
               
               Heliogabalus Emp. 51
               
               Hilary 1. Pope 157
               
               Herculian Biſhop of Peruſe hath his head ſawne. 
               Hereſie of Ebion. 29. Nicholaits. 29. Menander. 29. Baſilides. 35. Saturnine. 35. Cerinthus. 40. Valentine. 35 Marcian and Montanus. 35 Carpocrates Gnaſtici. 35. Cerdin. 38. Cataphryges. 42. Apalles. 42. Talianus. 142. Fratricelli. 420. Seuerians. 43 Theodorus. 57. Proclus and Berillus. 62. Noetus and Sabellius. 64. Of the Manichees. 71. Arrius. 95. Pelagius. 82. Acephales. 84. A quaternitie 47. Of many Monkes. 22. Of Iohn Biſhop of Conſtantinople. 302. Athenians and others. 89. Prifallian. 30.12. Monothelites. 214. Of Conſtantius. 363. Of Paul the ſucceſſor of Pyrrhus. 249. Of Peter the ſucceſſor of Patriarch. 223. Conſtant. by him abiured. 229. Of Machoris Biſhop of Antioche, Monothelite. 215
               
               Hereſie of a Councell 309
               
               Hereſie pernitious of Tranſubſtantiation 359
               
               Herman of Saxe elected Emperour 257
               
               Herod ſtirreth perſecutiō. 2. And dieth by a horrible iudgement Ibid.
               Herod Antipas beheaded Iohn. 4
               
               Herod Tetrarch baniſhed to Lyons 6
               
               Herodes Agrippa beheaded

Iames. 9. His death 15
               
               Herodias wife of Phillip Herodes 4
               
               Houres Canonicall ſung by note. 357
               
               Hildebrand cauſeth eight Popes to die 427
               
               Hildericke king of the Vandales, restoreth the Catholickes. 461
               
               Hirene aſſembleth a Councell at Nice. 222. Cauſeth her ſonnes eyes to be put out 223
               
               Holland erected into a Countie. 259
               
               Homouſis and Eſſence 99
               
               Hungarie and Boheme become one kindome 371
               
               Honorius King of the Ʋandales perſecuteth the Chriſtians, and dieth of vermine 472
               
               Hoſpitalls 164
               
               Hoſpitall of the holy Ghoſt builded at Rome. 474
               
               Hoſpitaliers called the knights of S. Iohn of Porſale 321
               
               H. K. of Nauarre. 643
               
               Heluetians 658
               
               Huguenots 667
               
               H. the 3. K. of France 669
               
               H. 4. King of France crowned. 686
               
               He is abſolued of the Pope. 691
               
               Huſſites do reiect all humane traditions. 221. Are aſſaulted by Sigiſmond Emperour and the Pope. 691
               
               Hypona beſieged by the Vandales 346
               
            
            
               I
               IAcobius founded vpon Pope Honorius his dreame. 351
               
               Iacobius of Berne. 494
               
               Idolatrie finds the Pope a defender thereof 209
               
               Idolatry of them of Gaunt. 228
               
               Idolatrie of Chaplets 362
               
               Iohn Baptiſt preacheth 4
               
               Iohn Apoſtle and Euangeliſt dyeth 27
               
               Iohn of Antioche heretike and a Iew, compiled the Alicoran. 190
               
               Iohn king of England ſubiected his Crowne to the Pope. 227
               
               Ignatius caſt to beaſts 31
               
               Innocent the firſt 146
               
               Iohn the 1. Pope. 167.2.169
               
               Iohn ſurnamed Teutonicus, oppoſeth himſelf againſt the Popes demaunding of tenthes in Almaine. 421
               
               Iohn Duke of Britaine ſlain with a wall 262
               
               Iohn 22. an heretike 392
               
               Iohn de Roquetaillade martyred. 421
               
               Iohn Colunban and Frances Vincent the firſt Ieſuites 417
               
               Iohn Wickliffe 443
               
               Iohn Gerſon 443
               
               Iohn Hus commendeth the doctrine of Wickliffe to the people. 426
               
               
                  Iohn Hus and Hierome of Prage go to the Councel and are burned. 442. Their death. Ibid.
               Iohn 24. ſaluted of an Owle, is much troubled. 440. Hee flyeth from the Councell of Conſtance. 
               Iohn Paleoleauge Emp. of Conſtantinople 400
               
               Iohn Guttenberge inuentor of Printing 455
               
               Iohn Puſters Called Gurman, and Peter Sheffert ſell their printing Ibid.
               Iohn Huniades eſcapes from the battaile. 372. Dyeth. Ibid.
               Iohn Iuſtinian of Geneua beheaded 391
               
               Iohn an Engliſh man burnt. 479
               
               Iohn Fiſſers author of the repentants order 364
               
               Iohn Picus Prince of Miradula. 297
               
               Iohan of Orleance a maide, burnt 448
               
               Ierome died 149
               
               Ierome Sauanaroll burned. 229
               
               Iulius Max. Emperor ſlaine. 54
               
               Iust. of faith 147
               
               Iulius Philipp. Emperour. 57
               
               Ieruſalem diuided into 2. Sects. 4 Is in ſedition. 6. Left of the Chriſtians, is beſieged. 22. Horrible famine 23
               
               Ieruſalem taken 23
               
               Ieruſalem changeth the name. 34
               
               Ieruſalem taken by Coſroes king of the Perſians 121
               
               Ieruſalem taken by the Mahometiſts 282
               
               Ieruſalem taken by the Christians 299
               
               Ieruſalem raced euē to the foundations 92
               
               Images broken. 57. Taken out of Churches. 29. Reſtored Ibid. Taken away and burnt, forbidden to honor them vpon paine of death. 54. Throwne downe by Sabin K. of Bulgaria. Ibid.
               Images and paintings aboliſhed in Churches 223
               
               Images ſet vp by Hyren. 223. Impugned by Charlemaine. Ibid.
               Imbert Dauphin of Viēna, makes himſelfe a Iacobin 426
               
               Indians brought to the Romane Church, promiſe to keepe the Sacrament of confirmatiō. 439
               
               Indulgences do penetrate euen to ſuch as are in purgatory. 498
               
               Inuention to pray for the dead. 122
               
               Inueſtatures agreed to Henry, reuoked 239
               
               Inueſtatures reſigned to Pope Calixtus 25
               
               Ionathes high Prieſt, ſlaine by Ioſeph 49
               
               Ioſeph the Hiſtoriographer. 26
               
               Iouinian a Chriſtian Emper. 122
               
               Ieſuites originall 417
               
               Ireneus is ſlaine 50
               
               
                  Iſaach Exarch ratifieth the election of Stephen 123
               
               Italy and Burgoine ſubiected to Arnulphe 100
               
               Italy the ſea of ſeditions. 224
               
               Italy in great factions 427
               
               Italy gouerned by three Cardinalls, hauing the power of Senators 361
               
               Italy afflicted by the Turkes. 373
               
               Iubile firſt 299
               
               Iubile remitted to fiftie yeares. 412
               
               Celebrated at Rome Ibid.
               Iubile of 25. yeares, to 25 yeares. 
               Iubile celebrated by Alexander the 6. 371
               
               Iohn de Auſtria 623
               
               Iohannes Baſilides 649
               
               Iames king of Scots beſieged and taken 660
               
               Innocent. 9. 678
               
               His death Ibid.
               Iriſh rebellion 630
               
               Iewes and Leonards puniſhed for poyſoning waters 406
               
               Iewes crucifie a Chriſtian chude. 466
               
               Iulian Medices ſlaine in hearing Maſſe 396
               
               Iustin Emperour 166
               
               Iuſtin the Pelagian dieth out of his wits 225
               
               Iuſtinian ſeduced by Antſenius to depart from his error. Ibid.
               Iuſtinian compileth the Romane lawes. 171 Dieth of phrenzie 
               Iuſtinian Emperor breaketh his faith giuen to the Saraſins. 222 Sent inta exile. Ibid. Kiſſeth the Popes feet. 230. His head is cut off. 
               Iul.an Emp. 100. His death. 122
               
            
            
               K
               KIngdome 
  
                     of Cyprus. 473.
                     
                     Of Aragon made a pray by the Pope. 
                  
               
               King of Bulgaria dooth receiue the faith 251
               
               King of the Romans Emp. diuers names, but of one ſubſtance. 460
               
               King. Phillip. 2. 635
               
               King of Nauarre excommunicated 657
               
               King Phillip diſpleaſed with the Pope▪ 
                  670 He dieth. 708
               
               King of Er
                     •
                   excōmunicated. 668
               
               King of France conuerted. 683
               
            
            
               L
               LAntgraues 366
               
               Lambert Biſhop of Liege rebuketh Pepin for adultery 274
               
               Lewis 184
               
               Laudo Pope 264
               
               Lanſrancus the firſt author of Tranſubſtantiation 285
               
               Laurence Deacon of Rome ſuffereth Martyrdome. 68
               
               Laurentius Ʋalla 245
               
               Laurence de Medices excommunicated 333
               
               Legends of Saints forged 182
               
               Leger Biſhop martyred. 320
               
               
                  Leo Emperour burneth Images. 257
               
               Leo Emp. of Conſtantinople ſlain in his Pallace 343
               
               Leontius and Tiberius Emperors beheaded 376
               
               Letanies the great inſtituted. 154
               
               Leuites 5
               
               Libertie to preach the Gospell in France 215
               
               Liberius the Arrian canonized. 256
               
               Lombards raigned in Italy. 262
               
               Lombards haue the Empire conuerted to the faith. 279
               
               They occupie the Exarchate. Linus. 20. His death. 25
               
               Libraries 95
               
               Licinius Emperour 81
               
               Longin Gracian the firſt Exarch in Italy 176
               
               Lotharius dieth a Monke. 277
               
               Lewis Debonaire giueth power to the Romane Cleargie to elect the Pope 345
               
               Lewis ſonne of king Phillip firſt, came to Artois 301
               
               Lewis S. marketh blaſphemers with an hotte Iron 299
               
               Lewis Emperour declared heretike by the Pope 297
               
               Crowned by 2. Senators of Rome Ibid.
               Giueth a reaſon of his faith. 390
               
               Lewis Archbiſhop brake his neck in a daunce 154
               
               Lewis Duke of Orleance murdered at Paris 453
               
               Leo the 10. Pope 153
               
               Lucian the Apoſtate 30
               
               Lucius king of England receiued the faith 44
               
               Lucius B. of Rome martired. 564
               
               Lucrece daughter, wife & daughter in law to the Pope 484
               
               Luitprandus king of Lombards, beſiegeth Rome 297
               
               Leopold D. of Auſtriche takes the King of England priſoner. 322
               
               Lupus Biſhop of Troy approueth Letanies 167
               
               Luquois entreateth the libertie of their common-wealth. 312
               
               Liuonia or Liſland conuerted to the faith 362
               
               Lēt attributed to Teleſephorus. 35
               
               Firſt Lent in England 194
               
               Lotharius Emperour 233
               
               Liberius Emperour 113
               
               Luther. 106. Excommunicated 504
               
               Lewis Beltram Friar 671
               
            
            
               M
               MAhomet an Arabian a falſe Prophet. 189. Adored after his death. 221
               
               Mahomets Alcaron 190
               
               His Paradiſe lawes and ceremonies Ibid.
               
               Mahomet and the Pope conferred together 192
               
               Mahometists take Ieruſalem. 282
               
               
                  Maiſter of the Synagogue. 52
               
               Mancinellus 486
               
               Manes heretike, broiled aliue. 99
               
               Manichees books burnt at Ro. 27
               
               Manicheus againe condemned, are caſt out of Rome 151
               
               Mantell epiſcopall 253
               
               Marke preacheth in Egypt. 15
               
               Marke the Euangeliſt dyeth. 19
               
               Marcelline offereth a graine of incenſe to Idolls 203
               
               Marcian heretike 40
               
               Marcion heretike 38
               
               Margarite Queene of Nauarre condemned to perpetual priſon for fornication 375
               
               Marriage publike 30
               
               Mariage forbidden to Prieſts. 91
               
               Mary the mother of our Lord dyeth 15
               
               Martian Emperor ſlaine. 149
               
               Martine Empreſſe, hath her tongue cut out 216
               
               Marcell Biſhop of Rome 78
               
               Maſſacre in France 606
               
               Marcus Biſhop of Rome 108
               
               Martirs ſuffer diuers tormēts. 58
               
               Martir the word when vſed. 89
               
               Martirs of the Pope differ from them of the Church 315
               
               Martyrain builded in Ieruſalem 89
               
               Maxentius drowned in Tyber 82
               
               Maximian chooſeth his owne death 83
               
               Maximilla and Priſca Propheteſſ
                     ••
                   
                  219
               
               Maximin hath his hand and tongue cut off 200
               
               Matild the harlot of Gregory the 7. is called S. Peters daughter. 305. Shee giueth all her goods to the Pope 319
               
               Marqueſſe 366
               
               Maurus the Romane, and Fauſtus the Italian, teach the Monaſticall life. 175
               
               Malcontents 629
               
               Maximilian dyeth 622
               
               Moluchs death. 632
               
               Mulei Mahamet drowned. 632
               
               Monſieurs voyage into Flaunders 632
               
               Mariade lauiſitatione 666
               
               Max. taken priſoner 666
               
               M. Cauendiſh voyage 661
               
               Marcus Bragadinus 675
               
               Mauricius beheaded with his wife and children 182
               
               Macrin Emperour 56
               
               Menāder Diſciple of Symō Magus 14
               
               Max. Emperour 483
               
               Mendicant Friars 384
               
               Meſſe the word, how it was vſed. 87. His Introite. 150. Augmented. 163. Called the Gregorian office. 167. Inuention of the word. 181. Song after the Romane manner. 112. Celebrated in Latin. Ibid. Augmented with Gloria in excelſis. 220
               
               Metropolitanes and Archbiſhops 90
               
               
                  Michael Emperour of Constantinople 213
               
               Millaine taken, made ſubiect to the Empire, reuoulteth. 35. After a ſiege of 7. years, is ſacked. 564. Reedified and called Alexandria 365
               
               Miniſters 14
               
               Myracles lying 200
               
               Myracles & apparitians forged. 322
               
               Mytre of the Pope 468
               
               Monkery planted 192
               
               Monkes heretikes, baniſhed from Rome 181
               
               Monkes blacke priuiledged 185
               
               Monkes of three ſorts 124
               
               Monkes may not carry to baptize 182
               
               Monkes may not bee kept in Monaſteries againſt their wills. 218
               
               Monkes rents 226
               
               Monkes voluptuous. 242. Commaunded to marry. 
               Monkes of England haue by gift the 10. part of the kingdōe. 265
               
               Monkes priuiledges 143
               
               Monkes, Venetians, and of the Mount Oliue 437
               
               Monaſteries founded 146
               
               Montanus and his hereſie. 17
               
               Moſes brother of Calapine. 451
               
               Marcus Aurelius 40
               
               Meldriades king of R. 84
               
            
            
               N
               NAples conquered by Charls the 8. 443
               
               The diſeaſe of Naples 436
               
               Nero perſecuteth the Christians and killeth himſelfe 21
               
               Nicaſius Biſhop of Rhemes ſlaine 178
               
               Nicholaites 314
               
               Nichomedia the ſeat for the Eaſterne Emperours 287
               
               Names of dignities 252
               
               Nunnes and inuention of theyr habits 337
               
               Nunnes diſpenſed with to marry. 344
               
               Normanes receiue the faith. 290
               
               Norway receiueth the faith. Ibid
               Hath a priuiledge to ſing Maſſe without wine Ibid.
               
               Notaries and Protonotaries. 54
               
               Nerua Emperour 27
               
               Nicholas 1. Pope 241
               
            
            
               O
               OBſeruation of daies. 154. Of betters Ibid.
               Ocham and Dantes held for heretikes 428
               
               Office of a king 83
               
               Office of a ſubiect Ibid.
               Office of a Biſhop 91
               
               Office of Prieſts 93
               
               Office of Deacons 95
               
               Olympus Biſhoppe of Carthage, ſuddenly burnt 89
               
               Order of the holy Ghoſt 632
               
               Ouids Tombe 
               Orange receiueth the Gospell. 125
               
               Orange ſacked 227
               
               
                  Orchanes 2. Emperour of the Turkes 409
               
               Ordinance of Bigamies 166
               
               Of orders 167
               
               Of extreame vnction 174
               
               Of protections 185
               
               To ſay Maſſe toward the East. 187
               
               To celebrate prayers of Baptiſme and the Supper with an high voyce. 188. Of the feaſt of Candlemas. Ibid. Of puniſhing heretikes. 20. Of the 7. Canonical houres. Ibid. Commemoratiō of the dead at Maſſe. Ibi.
               Of Lent not vniuerſall. 213. To ſing the Creed on high. 205. Of offering bread and wine. Ibid. Of lamps burning in Churches. 184. Aultar coucred with cleane cloathes. Ibid. That the Corporall ſhould be kept clean. Ibid. That a Bigant ſhould not be made Prieſt. 290. Of the exaltatiō of the holy Croſſe. 287. Of the ſigne of the Croſſe. Ibid. Of burial out of Churches. 223. Of Organs. 231. Of ſupplications againſt thunder. Ibid. Of bearing children to baptiſme. 274. To kiſſe the Pix or Maſſe. 275. That Popes ſhould bee made with conſent of the Emper. 28 That Clarkes ſhould bring vp no dogges nor haukes. That a lay man ſhould not lay hands vpon a Clarke 292
               
               Ordinances humane made equall with the word of God. 3018.
               
               Ordinance of Pope Vrban 2. 331
               
               Ordinances execrable 318
               
               The order of Clugny 256
               
               Of the Carmes. 399. Of William Hermit. Ibid Of the Trinitie. 362 Off the bretheren of the hoſpitall. Ibid. Of the Iacobins confirmed. 372. Of the Caeleſtines. 391. Of the Pawlines in England 400
               
               Order of the Ieſuites 406
               
               Foure new orders of ſuch as were croſſed. 318
               
               Orobite heretikes in Bohe. 463
               
               Organs firſt in vſe in France. 221
               
               Origines. 54. His fall, his end. 64
               
               Oſtragoths made warre with Belizarius. 185
               
               Otho the firſt 267
               
               Otho the ſecond 274
               
               Otho the third. 300. He cauſeth his wife and the Adulterer to be burned. 318. He is poyſoned 321
               
               Otho the 4. excommunicated of the Pope 365
               
               Othoman the firſt, Emperour of the Turkes, by litle and litle vſurpeth vpon Europe. 388.
               
            
            
               P
               PAganiſme 216
               
               Pallace of Auignon burnt. 209
               
               Paleologue Emperour. 399. He is excommunicated. Ibid.
               
               
                  Palladium carried to Conſtantinople 103
               
               Pantheon builded 27
               
               Pantheon burnt 26
               
               Pantheon dedicated to the Virgin Mary, and to all Saints. 459
               
               The Papaltie returneth to Rome 437
               
               It decayeth. 444. It was voyd 2. yeares 447
               
               Pope ratified by the Exarche. 224 He is elected without the Emrours authoritie. 235. Conſecrated with a new ceremonie. Ibid.
               Pope defender of Idolatrie. 232
               
               The King of France holdeth his bridle 224
               
               Pope authorized of the diuel, beſtoweth the kingdomes of the world 224
               
               Pope condemned by a Pope. 220 Goeth on Proceſſion on foot. 212 Abuſeth the Emperour. 226. Cauſe of ſchiſme, in the Empire. 233. Tranſgreſſeth his owne lawes. Is called God. 236 Depoſed and againe reſtored. 266. Entereth by diuelliſh Art. 221. Slaine in adulterie. 300 Diſgraded and after baniſhed. 310. He ſtudieth Necromancie. 399. Appeared after his death. 301. A Symoniake. 312 Choſen by corruption. 317. Is an Apoſtate Ibid.
               Pope elected at Rome, an other at Senes. 319. Recouereth S. Peters Patrimonie by Armes. Ibid Called Prince of Sodome, ſeruant of the ſeruants of God 179. He is ſhewed to be Antichriſt. 138. He will be iudged of no man. 290. Hee may bee depoſed by the Councell. 293
               
               Popes imitators of Doicleſian. 296
               
               Excommunicated. 298. Riſe againſt Emperours. 301. Doo crowne Emperours, ſell publike benefices. 317. Chaunge their names: prooued by the ſhame faſt parts 277
               
               Popes ſchiſmatikes ane Simoniniakes 326
               
               Three Popes at once. Ibid. Make warre with one another. Excommunicate one an other. 327
               
               Papiſts runne to falſe myracles. 243
               
               Papinianus ſlaine 57
               
               Paternus Monke, burnt in his Cloyſter for the vow of obedience. 323
               
               Poulian Pope 54
               
               Probus Emperour 70
               
               Paſchal 1. Pope 250.
               
               Patricke Biſhop of Soiſſons. 302
               
               Giueth the Countrey thereof to the Church of Rome Ibid.
               Patrician 226
               
               Paul his parents, and place of his birth 8
               
               Paul conuerted. 9. Led to Felix.

                  18. Sent to Rome Ibid.
               Paul Samoſatenian. 68. Condemned by the Councell of Antioche Ibid.
               
               Paul heretike 98
               
               Paul Patriarhe condemned. 114
               
               Parma created Duke 628
               
               Prince of Orange ſhot. 640
               
               Hee is ſlaine 645
               
               Poland troubled 666
               
               Patriarch of Conſtantinople. 65
               
               Prince of Sax. priſoner. 653
               
               Prince of Conde poyſoned. 665
               
               Prieſts reconciled 672
               
               Peter Barrier 683
               
               Peace betweene Fr. and Spaine. 
               Phillip the 3 king of Spaine. 708
               
               Pentecoſt 83
               
               Palatines 386
               
               Perſecution vnder Herod. 2
               
               Perſecution in Flaunders 371
               
               Perſecutions at Paris. 457
               
               Petrarke 420
               
               Peterpence 238
               
               Peter Lombard 327
               
               Petrus Comeſtor 327
               
               Petrus Bercoris Ibid.
               Phillip preacheth in Samaria 89
               
               Phillip Biſhop of Alexandria martyred with his daughter. 66
               
               Peter whether he were at Rome. 14
               
               Peter in bonds paſt thereof. 9
               
               Peter de Bailard heretike Pelagian 79
               
               Peter de Ruere ſpent in 2. yeares 200000. Skutes 
               Pilate cyted to Rome 10
               
               Peregrin a Philoſopher, cast himſelfe into the fire. 42
               
               Pilgrimages began 111
               
               Printing 455
               
               Pelagius. 147
               
               Phillip de Anioy, the Queene of Nauarres adulterer, broyled aliue 34
               
               Phillip Emperour a Monothelite 357
               
               Pientia builded by Pius ſecond. 200
               
               Platina writeth the Popes liues. 141
               
               He is impriſoned Ibid.
               Pluralitie of benefices began. 291
               
               Polycarpus 40
               
               Polycarpus burnt 41
               
               Pomeriana receiueth the faith. 322
               
               Porphyrius 53
               
               Pragmatike ſanction. 453. Abrogated 495
               
               Prieſt and his ſignification. 14
               
               Prieſts communicate vnder both kindes 231
               
               Prieſts cannot communicate alone 243
               
               Prieſts of Greece might marry. 195
               
               Prieſts rents 217
               
               Prieſts married in France about 900. yeares after the Apoſtles. 219
               
               Prieſts married in England, are condemned. 271
               
               
                  Prayers of the Church 92
               
               Prayers for the dead 213
               
               Primacie of the Church eſtabliſhed by an homicide & a traytor 185
               
               Pius the firſt 39
               
               Priuiledge of the Temple. 17
               
               Priuiledge of the Roman Church 124
               
               Probus bringeth Germanie into a Prouince 121
               
               Prophets and their interpretation 14
               
               Purgatory inuented 239
               
               Pyrrhus Patriarke, dieth ſhamefully 
               Penitentiaries. 408
               
            
            
               Q
               QVadratus gouernour of Syria. 201
               
               Quadratus Biſhop of Athence Ibid.
               Quatorrian heretikes 47
               
               S. Quintin in Vermendois founded 245
               
               Quintilianus 21
               
               Quintilius brother of Claudius the Emperour 69
               
            
            
               R
               RAbbi Maiſters 14
               
               Rastrix D. of Cleue, hath his eyes put out 290
               
               Reliquaries ſold and giuen to the poore 227
               
               Red hattes 468
               
               Relickes inuented by Sathan. 131
               
               Repertory morall 433
               
               Reſeruation of benefices 414
               
               Rodolph. 2. Emperour 622
               
               Reformed Church of Antwerpe. 629
               
               Riga 683
               
               Rodoaldus K. of Lombardie ſlain in adulterie 198
               
               Rome ſet on fire by Nero. 19. Giuen to Sylueſter by Conſtantine. 82. Taken againe by Genſeric. 144. Taken of the Hunes. 161. Of the Gothes the ſecond time 172
               
               Rome and Italy returne from the obedience of the Emperour Leo 191
               
               Rodolphus a child, martyred by the Iewes 209
               
               Reconciliation. 45
               
            
            
               S
               SAcrament of the Aultar. 287
               
               Saints liues are forged. 182
               
               Saladin killeth the Caliph. 203
               
               Occupieth Ieruſalem Ibid.
               Salike law 283
               
               Saladins 343
               
               Salue Regina 282
               
               Singing receiued into the Church 140
               
               Sapor king of the Perſians 56
               
               Silueſter Biſhop of Rome 88
               
               Scanderbeg, Seuerus Pertinax. 46
               
               The houſe of Sauoy made a Coū
                  tie 100
               
               Schiſme for the Feaſt of Eaſter 223
               
               
                  Schiſme in the Papaltie. 208 232
               
               Schiſme in the Empire. 400
               
               Serena Empreſſe Martyr. 77
               
               Sergius Pope 205
               
               Seruians killeth Amurathes. 
               Sigiſmond Emperour 439
               
               Simon Magus. 14. Simoniakes. 13
               
               Scotland receiueth the Goſpell. 163
               
               Scotland allied with France. 252
               
               Schoole of Caeſaria 121. Ethnike of Laodicea 130
               
               Schooles of two ſorts 95
               
               Seuertiſts 154
               
               Stephen ſtoned. 8
               
               Spaine followeth the manner of the Romane Maſſe 301
               
               Stephen K. of Boſne roſted aliue. 
               Smyrna deſtroyed by an Earthquake 385
               
               Swiſſes called defenders of the Romane libertie 416
               
               Sinagogue hath his maiſter. 73
               
               Sebaſtian King of Portugall. 625. His death 631
               
               
                  S. Martin Frobiſher 626
               
               
                  S. W. Raleigh 647
               
               
                  S. R. Greenfield Ibid.
               
                  S. H. Gilbert 646
               
               Seueniaries baniſhed 651
               
               Spaniſp Nauie 664
               
               
                  S. F. Drake 665
               
               Sixtus the fift 652
               
               
                  S. Ph. Sidneys death. 619
               
               Sigiſmond King of Poland. 685
               
               Sinode twiſe in the yeare 29
               
               Of Biſhops at Rome. 440
               
               Touching Images, Soter Pope. 41
               
               Stephen king of Rome 61
               
            
            
               T
               TAcitus Emperour 70
               
               Taborites heretikes. 
               Tancredus 123
               
               Tartars 94
               
               Talianus heretike 99
               
               Titus 25
               
               Temple of Ieruſalem ended. 2
               
               Burned. 4. Templers beganne. 307
               
               Templers aboliſhed 396
               
               Tertullian reuoulteth 47
               
               Theodorus Pope 260
               
               Theodocius Emperour 130
               
               Theologie ſcholaſticall 201
               
               Theophilus 41
               
               Tymothe Martyr 22
               
               Thomas Stukeley 630
               
               Tumult at Cracouia 677
               
               Treaſure of the Popes 672
               
               The Church troubled 695
               
               Turkes ouerthrowne. 682. 688
               
               Tranſubſtantiation inuented. 275 Is forged 285. Decreed.  Practiſed by Gregory the ſeuenth, and is made the 10 Article of the faith. 345. Honoured with a feaſt 361
               
               Tyber ouerfloweth 309
               
               Tyrannie of the Duke of Guiſe.
               Tyberius 3
               
               Traian Emperour 28
               
               Teleſephorus Biſhop of Rome. 35.
               
            
            
            
               V
               VAlentine heretike 438
               
               
                  Ʋalerian taken, and his miſerie 63
               
               Venice is builded 149
               
               
                  Ʋenetians haue a Duke 297
               
               
                  Ʋictorinus a Rhetorician. 109
               
               Vrban 7.674. His death. 675
               
               Valence Emperour 125
               
               Valentinian Emperour 124
               
               
                  Ʋigills obſerued 86. 133
               
               
                  Ʋincent the Hiſtorian 127
               
               Vlpianus Ibid.
               Vniuerſitie erected at Paris. 223 At Pauie. 292. At Prage 415 At Ʋienna. 420. At Lipſia. 423. At Thuring 500
               
               Vnction forged by Popes. 48.816 406
               
               Victorian martyred 159
               
               Vandales take end in Affrike. 152. Come into Mauritania. 169. Are excōmunicated.
               Veſpaſian 20
               
               Vicegothes conuerted 170
               
               
                  Ʋrban Biſhop of Rome 53
               
               
                  Ʋictor Biſhop of Rome 45
               
               Virgin what 248
               
               Victor. 2. 290
               
               Vigillius Pope 171
               
               
                  Ʋitalian Pope 198
               
            
            
               W
               WArres proclaimed againſt Spain 691
               
               Waldois 339
               
               Wencelaus Emperour 42
               
               Willielmes hermites 341
               
               White Mantles 450
               
            
            
               X
               XIxtus Biſhop of Rome. 67
               
               Xeques Mulei his ſonne, turned Chriſtian. 679
               
            
            
               Z
               ZAcharie Pope 215
               
               Zenon Iſaurike Emp. 158
               
               Zephirim B. of Rome. 50
               
               Zimglius 56
               
               Zuric. 505.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   