
      
         
            
            
            A SERMON
PREACHED AT
White-hall, on Easter day
the 16. of April.
1620.
            By the Bishop of Winchester.
            LONDON,
Printed by ROBERT BARKER,
and IOHN BILL, Printers to the
Kings most Excellent Maiestie.
M.DC.XX.
         
      
      
         
            
            
               IOHN. CHAP. XX.
               
                  Maria autem stabat iuxta monumentum,
&c.
                  
                     Ver. II. But Marie, stood by the Sepulchre, weeping,
and as she wept she stouped, and looked into the Sepulchre,
                  12. And saw two angels, in white, sitting, the one at
the head, the other at the feete, where the body of
Iesus had Iyen.
                  13. And they said to her, Woman, why weepest thou?
She said to them, They have taken away my Lord,
and I know not where they haue laid Him.
                  14. When she had thus said, she turned herselfe about,
and saw Iesus standing, and knew not that it was
Iesus.
                  15. Iesus saith to her, Woman, why weepest thou? whom
seekest thou? She (supposing He had beene the gardiner)
said to him, Sir if thou have borne Him hence,
tell mee where thou hast laid Him, and I will take
Him thence.
                  16. Iesus saith to her, Marie: She turned herselfe, and
said to Him, Rabboni; that is to say, Master.
                  17. Iesus saith to her, Touch me not, for I am not yet
ascended to my Father, But, goe to my brethren, and
say to them, I ascend to my Father and to your Father,
and to my God and your God.
               
            
            
               This last verse was not touched.
            
            
            
               IT is Eastr day abroad:
And it is so in the text.
We keepe Salomons rule,1. Reg. 8. 59.
               Verbum diei in die suo:
For, all this (I haue
read) is nothing else,
but a report of CHRISTS rising, and of
His appearing this Easter day morning,
His very first appearing of all. S.Mar. 16. 9. 
               Marke
is expresse for it, that Christ was no sooner
risen this day, but He appeared first of
all to Mary Magdalene: which first appearing
of His, is here by S. Iohn extended,
and set downe at large.
            The summe of it is, 1. The seeking
Christ dead; 2. The finding Him aliue.
            The Maner of it is, That Mary Magdalene
staying still by the Sepulchre, first she
saw a vision of Angels: and after, she saw
Christ himselfe. Saw Him, and was herselfe

made an Angel by Him, a good Angel,
to cary the Euangel, the first good
and ioyfull tidings of His rising againe
from the dead. And this was a great honour
(all considered) to serue in an Angels
place. To doe that at His Resurrection
(His second birth) that,Acts 13. 33. at His first
birth an Angel did. An Angel first published
that; Mary Magdalen brought first
notice of this. As hee, to the Shepherds;
so shee, to the Apostles, the Pastours of
Christs flock, by them to be spred abroad
to the ends of the world.
            To looke a little into it.
            1. Mary is the name of a woman:
            2. Mary Magdalen, of a sinfull woman.
            
                That, to a woman first; it agreeth well,
to make euen with Eue; that, as by a woman
came the first newes of death; So, by
a woman also might come the first notice
of the Resurrection from the dead. And
the place fits well: for, in a garden, they
came, both.
            
                That, to a sinfull woman first; that
also agrees well. To her first that most

needed it: most needed it, and so first
sought it. And it agrees well; He be first
found of her, that first sought Him: Euen
in that respect she was to be respected.
            In which two, there is opened vnto vs
a gate of hope,
               Hos. 2. 15. two great leaues (as it were)
one that no infirmity of sex (for a woman
we see: (the other, that no enormitie of sin,
(for a sinfull woman, one that had the blemish,
that shee went vnder the common
name of peccatrix,
               Luke. 7. 37. as notorious and famous
in that kinde:) That, neither of
these, shall debarre any to haue their part
in Christ, and in His Resurrection; any,
that shall seeke Him in such sort, as shee
did. For, either of these non obstante, nay
notwithstanding both these, she had the
happinesse; To see His Angels (and that
was no small fauour:) To see Christ himselfe:
And that, first of all, before all others,
to see and salute Him: And, to receiue
a commission from Him of Vade &
dic, to goe and tell, (that is, as it were) to
be an Apostle, and that to the Apostles
themselues, to bring them the first good

newes of Christs rising againe.
            THere are three Parties that take vp the
whole Text: and if I should diuide it, I
would make those three Parties the three
parts; 1 
               Mary Magdalene, 
               2 the Angels,
               3 and Christ our Sauiour.
            
               
               Mary Magdalen begins her part in the first
verse, but she goes along through them all.
            
                Then the Angels part in the two verses
next. 1 Their appearing, 
               2 and their speech
to her: Appearing, in the twelfth, Speech,
in the thirteenth.
            
                And last, Christs part in all the rest. 1 
               His
appearing, 
               2 and Speech, likewise. Appearing,
first, vnknowen, in the fourteenth,
and His speech then, in the fifteenth.
            After, His appearing, and speech againe,
being knowen, in the sixteenth and seuenteenth.
1 Forbidding her, Mane & tange,
to stay, and to touch, 
               2 and bidding her,
Vade & dic, together quickly to His brethren,
and tell them, His resurrection was
past, for (ascendo) Hee was taking thought
for His ascension, and preparing for that.
Thus lieth the order, and the parts.
            
               The vse will be, that we, in our seeking,
cary our selues as she did: and so may we
haue the happinesse, that she had, to finde
Christ, as Hee is now to be found in the
vertue of His Resurrection.
            
            
               VER. 11.
               
                  But Mary, stood by the sepulchre, weeping,
and as shee wept, shee stouped, and looked
into the sepulchre.
               
               
                  OF the fauours vouchsafed this same
faelix peccatrix, (as the Fathers
terme her) this day, 1 To see but
Christs Angels, 2 To see Christ at all, 3 To
see Him first of all, 4 But, more then all
these, to be employed by Him in so heauenly
an errand; reason wee can render
none that helped her to these, but that,
which in a place Christ himselfe renders,
Quia dilexit muliùm,
                  Luke 7. 47. Because shee loued
much.
               She loued much: we cannot say, Shee

beleeued much. For, by her sustulerunt
thrise repeated, at the second, thirteenth,
fifteenth verses, it seemes, shee beleeued
no more, then iust as much as the High
Priests would haue had the world beleeue,Matt. 28. 13.
that He was taken away by night.
               
               
                  Defectus fideinon est negandus, affectus amoris
nō est vituper and us: It is Origen. we cannot
commend her faith; her loue, we cannot
but commend; And so doe: Commend
it in her, commend it to you. Much
it was, and much good proofe gaue she of
it. Before, to Him liuing: now, to Him
dead. To Him dead, there are diuers: 1 She
was last at His Crosse, & first at His graue:
2 Stayed longest there, was soonest heere:
3 Could not rest, till shee were vp to seeke
Him: 
                  4 Sought Him, while it was yet
darke, before shee had light to seeke
Him by.
               But, to take her as wee finde her in the
Text, and to looke no whither else. There
are, in the Text, no lesse then ten, all arguments
of her great loue, all, as it were,
a commentarie vpon dilexit multùm. And

euen in this first verse, there are fiue of
them.
               The first, in these words; stabat inxta monumentum,
that she stood by the graue. A
place, where faint loue loues not to stand.
Bring Him to the graue, and lay Him in the
graue, and there leaue him: but come no
more at it, nor stand not long by it. Stand
by Him, while He is aliue, So did many,
stand, and goe, and sit by Him. But, stans
iuxta monumentum, Stand by Him dead, Marie
Magdalen, she did it, and she onely did it,
and none but she. Amor stans iuxta monumentum.
               
               The next is in these, Maria autem stabat.
But Marie stood. In the autem, the but (that,
helpes vs to another.) But Mary stood (that
is asmuch to say, as) others did not, But,
she did.ver. 8. 
                  Peter and Iohn were there but euen
now. Thither they came, but not finding
Him, away they went. They went:
But Marie went not, she stood still. Their
going away commends her staying behinde.
To the graue she came before them, From
the graue she went to tell them, To the

graue she returnes with them, At the graue
she stayes behind them. Fortior eam figebat
affectus, saith Augustine, a stronger affection
fixed her, so fixed her, that she had not
the power to remoue thence. Goe, who
would, she would not, but stay, still. To
stay while others doe so, while company
stayes, that is the worlds loue: But Peter is
gone, and Iohn too: all are gone, and we
left alone; then to stay, is loue, and constant
loue. Amor manens, alijs recedentibus,
Loue, that when others shrinke and giue
ouer, holds out still.
               
                   The third in these, she stood, and she wept;
And, not a teare or two: but she wept a
good (as we say;) That the Angels, That
Christ himselfe pitie her, and both of them,
the first thing they doe, they aske her, Why
she wept so? Both of them begin with that
question. And, in this, is loue. For, if,
when Christ stood at Lazarus graues side and
wept,
                  Ioh. 11. 36. the Iewes said, See how be loued him:
may not we say the very same, when Mary
stood at Christs graue and wept, See, how she loued
him? Whose presence she wished for,

                  His misse she wept for; whom she dearely
loued, while she had Him, she bitterly bewailed,
when she lost Him. Amor amare
flens, Loue running downe the cheekes.
               The fourth in these, And as she wept, shee 
stouped, and looked in, euer and anon. That
is, she did so weepe, as, she did seeke withall.
Weeping without seeking, is but to small
purpose. But, her weeping hindered not
her seeking; Her sorrow dulled not her diligence.
And, diligence is a character of
loue, comes from the same root, dilectio &
diligentia from diligo, both. Amor diligentiam diligens.
               
               To seeke, is one thing: not to giue ouer 
                  seeking, is another. For, I aske, why should
she now looke in? Peter and Iohn had looked
there before, nay had beene in the
graue, (they.)Ver. 8. It makes no matter: Shee
wil not trust Peters eyes, nor Iohns, neither.
But, she her selfe had before this, looked in,
(too.) No force, she will not trust her selfe,
she will suspect her owne eyes, she will rather
thinke, she looked not well before, then
leaue off her looking. It is not enough for

loue, to looke in once. Thus we vse, this
is our manner when we seeke a thing seriously,
where we haue sought already, there
to seeke againe, thinking wee did it not
well, but, if wenow looke againe, better,
we shall surely find it, then. Amor quaerens
vbi quaesiuit. Loue, that neuer thinkes,
it hath looked enough. These fiue.
               And, by these fiue, we may take measure
of our loue, and of the true multum of it.
Vt profit nobis ejus stare, ejus plorare, & quaerere
(faith Origen) that her standing, her
weeping, and seeking, wee may take some
good by them.
               I doubt, ours will fall short. Stay by
Him aliue, that we can, juxtamensam: but
juxta monumentum, who takes vp his standing
there? And our loue, it is dry eyed,
it cannot weepe; it is stiffe-ioynted, it cannot
stoupe to secke. If it doe, and wee hit
not on Him at first, away wee goe, with
Peter and Iohn; wee stay it not out with
Mary Magdalen. A signe, our loue is little,
and light, and our seeking sutable, and so,
it is without successe. We find not Christ,
                  
no meruaile: but seeke Him as shee sought
Him, and we shall speed, as she sped.
            
            
               VER. 12.
               
                  And saw two Angels, in white, sitting, the
one at the head, the other at the feet, where
the body of Iesus had lien.
               
               For what came of this? Thus staying by
it, and thus looking in, againe and againe,
though she saw not Christ at first, shee sees
his Angels. For so it pleased Christ to come
by degrees: His Angels, before Him. And,
it is no vulgar honour, this, to see but an
Angel, what would one of vs giue to see
but the like sight?
               We are now at the Angels part. Their
appearing, in this verse. There are foure
points in it. 1 Their place, 
                  2 Their habit,
                  3 Their site, 
                  4 and their order. 
                  1 
                  Place, in
the graue, 2 
                  Habit, in white; 3 
                  site, they
were sitting; 4 and their order in sitting,
one at the head, the other at the feet.
               The Place, In the graue shee saw them:
and Angels in a graue, is a strange sight, a
fight neuer seene before, not till Christs
                  
body had beene there, neuer, till this day;
this the first newes of Angels in that place.
For, a graue, is no place for Angels (one
would thinke) for wormes, rather: Blessed
Angels, not but in a blessed place. But,
since Christ lay there, that place is blessed.
There was a voice heard from heauen,
Blessed be the dead,
                  Reu. 14. 13. 
                  Precious the death, Glorious
the memorie now,
                  Psal. 116. 15. 
                  of them that die in the
Lord. And, even this, that the Angels disdained
not now to come thither, and to sit
there, is an auspicium of a great change to
ensue in the state of that place. Quid gloriosius
Angelo? quid vilius vermiculo? saith
Augustine. Qui fuit vermiculorum locus, est
& Angelorum. That which was the place
for wormes, is become a place for Angels.
               
                   Their Habit, In white. So were there diuers
of them, diuers times, this day, seene,
in white, all, in that colour. It seemes to be
their Easter day colour; for at this Feast,
they all doe their seruice in it. Their Easter
day colour, for it is the colour of the
Resurrection. The state whereof when
Christ would represent vpon the Mount.

                  His raiment was all white, no Fuller in earth
could come neere it. And, our colour it shall
be,Reu. 7. 9. when rising againe, wee shall walke in
white robes, and follow the Lambe whither soeuer
He goeth.
               
               Heauen mourned on Good-Friday; the
Eclipse made all then in blacke. Easter day,
it reioyceth, Heauen and Angels all in white.
Salomon tells vs, it is the colour of ioy. And,Eccles. 9. 8.
that is the state of ioy, and this the day of
the first ioyfull tidings of it, with ioy euer
celebrated, euen in albis, eight dayes together,
by them that found Christ.
               
               
                  In white, and sitting: As the colour, of 
ioy: so, the situation, of rest. So wee say,
Sit downe, and rest. And so, is the graue
made by this mornings worke, a place of
rest. Rest, not from our labours onely, so
doe the beasts rest when they die: But, as
it is in 16.Psal. 16. 9. Psalme (a Psalme of the resurrection)
a rest in hope; hope, of rising againe,
the members in the vertue of their head,
who this day is risen. So, to enter into the
rest, which yet remaineth for the people of
God,
                  Heb. 4. 9. euen the Sabbath eternall.
               
                  
                   Sitting, and in this order sitting, at the
head, one; at the feet, another, where His body
had lyen.
               1 Which order may well referre to
Christ himselfe, whose body was the true
Arke indeed,Col. 2. 9. 
                  In which it pleased the Godhead
to dwell bodily; and is therefore heere betweene
two Angels, as was the Arke (the
type of it) betweene the two Cherubims.
                  Exod. 25. 19.
               
               2 May also referre to Mary Magdalen.
                  Mat. 26. 7.
She had annointed his head,
                  Ioh. 11. 3. she had annointed
his feete: at these two places, sit the two Angels,
as it were to acknowledge so much
for her sake.
               3 In mysterie they referre it thus.
Because caput Christi Deus,
                  1 Cor. 11. 3. the Godhead is
the head of Christ,Gen. 3. 15. and His feet (which the
Serpent did bruise) His manhood; that either
of these hath his Angell. That, to
Christ man, no lesse then to Christ God, the
Angels doe now their seruice. In principio
erat verbum, His Godhead, there an Angell:
Verbum caro factum, His manhood; there,
another. And let all the Angels of God worship
Him in both.Heb. 1. 6. Euen in His manhood,

at His cradle (the head of it) a queere of
Angels; At His graue (the feete of it) Angels
likewise.Luk. 2. 13.
               
               4 And lastly, for our comfort (thus.)
That, henceforth euen such shall all our
graues be, if we be so happy as to haue our
parts in the first resurrection,
                  Reu. 20. 6. which is of the
soule from sinne. We shal go to our graues
in white (in the comfort, and colour of
hope) lye betweene two Angels, there: they
guard our bodies, dead, and present them
aliue againe at the resurrection.
               1 Yet before we leaue them, to learne
somewhat of the Angels: specially, of the
Angell that sate at the feete. That, betweene
them there was no striuing for places. He
that sate at the feet, as well content with
his place, as he that at the head. We, to be
so, by their example. For, with vs, both
the Angels would haue beene at the head,
neuer a one at the feete: with vs, none
would be at the feet by his good will, Headangels
all.
               2 Againe, from them both. That, inasmuch,
as the head euer stands for the beginning,

and the feete for the end; that we
be carefull, that our beginnings onely bee
not glorious (O an Angel at the head in
any wise) but that we looke to the feete,
there be another there, too. Ne turpiter atrum
Definat, that it end not in a blacke
Angel, that began in a white. And this
for the Angels appearing.
               
            
            
               VER. 13.
               
                  And they said to her, Woman, why weepest
thou? She said to them, They have taken
away my Lord, and I know not where
they haue laid Him.
               
               NOw to their speech.
                  Their question. It was not a dumb
shew, this, a bare apparition, and so
vanished away. It was visio & vox, a vocall
vision. Heere is a dialogue, too: The
Angels speake to her.
               
               And they aske her, Quid ploras? Why
she wept? what cause shee had to weepe.
They meane, she had none (as indeed no
more she had.) All was in error, piae lachrymae,
sed caecae,
                  Gregorie. teares of griefe, but false
griefe, imagining that to be, that was not,

                  Him to be dead that was aliue. She weepes,
because shee found the graue emptie,
which God forbid she should haue found
full, for then Christ must haue beene dead
still, and so, no Resurrection.
               And this case of Marie Magdalen is our
case oftentimes. In the error of our cōceit,
to weepe where we haue no cause; to ioy,
where we haue as little. Where we should,
where wee haue cause to ioy, we weepe:
and, where to weepe, we ioy. Our ploras
hath neuer a quid. False ioyes, and false sorrowes,
false hopes, and false feares this life
of ours is full of, God helpe vs.
               Now because she erred, they aske her
the cause, that she alledging it, they may
take it away, and shew it to bee no cause.
As the elen
                        •
                     h, à non causà pro causà makes
foule rule among vs, beguiles vs, all our
life long.
               Will ye heare her answere to,Her answer. 
                  Why weepe
you? Why? sustulerunt, that was the cause,
Her Lord was gone, was taken away.
               
               And a good cause it had beene if it had 
beene true. Any haue cause to grieue, that

haue lost, lost a good Lord, so good and
gracious a Lord, as He had beene to her.
               
                   But that is not all: a worse matter, a greater
griefe then that. When one dieth, we
reckon him taken away; that is one kind of
taking away. But his dead body is left; so,
all is not taken from vs; That, was not her
case. For, in saying (her Lord) she meanes
not, Her Lord aliue, that is not it; shee
meanes not, they had slaine Him, they had
taken away his life (she had wept her fill for
that, already.) But, her Lord, that is, his
dead body. For, though His life was gone,
yet His body was left. And, that was all,
she now had left of Him (that, shee cals
Her Lord) and, that, they had taken away
from her, too. A poore one it was, yet
some comfort it was to her, to haue euen
that left her, to visite, to annoint, to doe
other offices of loue, euen to that. Etiam
viso cadauere recalescit amor, at the sight,Ambros. euen
of that, will loue reuiue, it will fetch
life of loue againe. But now, heere is her
case; that, is gone, and all, and nothing,
but an empty graue, now left to stand by.

That S. Augustine saith well, sublatus de monumento,
grieued her more, then occisus in
ligno, for, then something yet was left;
now, nothing at all. Right sustulerunt, taken
away quite and cleane.
               And thirdly, her nescio vbi. For though 
                  He be taken away, it is some comfort yet, if
we know where to fetch Him againe. But
here, He is gone, without all hope of recouery,
or getting againe. For they (but shee
knew not who) had caried Him (she knew
not whither) laide Him (shee knew not
where) there to do to Him (she knew not
what.) So that now she knew not, whither
to go, to find any cōfort. It was nescio vbi,
with her, right. Put all these together, His
life taken away, His body taken away, & caried
no man knowes whither; and, doe they aske,
why she wept? or, can any blame her for it?
               The trueth is,Her errour. none had taken away Her
Lord, for all this: for, all this while Her
Lord was well, was, as shee would haue
had Him, aliue and safe. He went away of
himselfe, none caried him thence. What of
that? Non credens suscitatum,Augustine. credidit sublatum,
                  
for want of beliefe He was risen, shee
beleeued, He was caried away. Shee erred in
so beleeuing, there was errour in her loue,
but there was loue in her errour too.
               And,Yet, her loue. giue me leaue to lay out three
more arguments of her loue, out of this
verse (to make vp eight, towards the making
vp of her multùm.)
               1. The very title shee giues Him of Dominum
meum, is one, My Lord, that she giues
Him that terme. For, it shewes her loue
and respect was no whit abated, by the
scandall of His death. It was a most opprobrious,
ignominious, shamefull death
Hee suffered, such, as in the eyes of the
world, any would haue been ashamed to
own Him, (or say of Him, Meum:) But, any
would haue beene afraid to honour Him
with that title, to style Him, Dominum.
Shee was neither. Meum, for hers, Dominum
meum, for her Lord, shee acknowledgeth
Him, is neither ashamed, nor afraid
to continue that title still. Amor scandalo
non scandalizatus.
               
               
                   Another (which I take to be farre beyond

this) That, shee hauing looked into
the graue a little before, and seene neuer
an Angel there; and of a sudden looking in
now, and seeing two, (a sight, able to haue
amazed any; any, but her) It mooues not
her at all. The suddennesse, the strangenesse,
the gloriousnesse of the sight, yea
euen of Angels, mooue her not at all. Shee
seemes to haue no sense of it, and so to be
in a kinde of extasie all the while. Domine,
propter te est extra se, saith Bernard. Amor
extasin patiens.
               
               And thirdly, as that strange sight affected 
her not a whit: so neither did their
comfortable speech worke with her at all.
Comfortable, I call it, for they that aske
the cause, why, (why weepe you?) shew,
they would remooue it, if it lay in them:
Neither of these did, or could mooue her,
or make her once leaue her weeping: she
wept on, still (Christ will aske her, quid ploras?
by and by againe.) If shee finde an
Angel, if she finde not her Lord, it will not
serue. She had rather finde his dead body,
then them in all their glory. No man in

earth, no Angel in heauen can comfort
her, none but He that is taken away, Christ,
and none but Christ; and, till she find Him
againe, her soule refuseth all maner comfort:
yea, euen from heauen, euen from
the Angels themselues: These three. Amor
super amissum renuens consolari.
               
               Thus shee, in her loue, for her supposed
losse, or taking away. And what shal become
of vs, in ours then? That lose Him
                  1 not once, but oft, 2 And not in suppose,
as she did, but in very deed, 3 And that, by
sinne (the worst losse of all,) 4 And that,
not by any others taking away, but by our
owne acte, & wilfull default; and are not
grieued, nay not moued a whit, break none
of our wonted sports for it, as if we reckoned
Him, as good lost as found. Yea, when
Christ, and the holy Ghost, and the fauour of
God, and all is gone, how soon, how easily
are we comforted againe for all this? that,
none shall need to say, quid ploras? to vs, rather,
quid non ploras? aske vs, why we weepe
not, hauing so good cause to doe it, as wee
then haue? This for the Angels part.
            
            
               
               VER. 14.
               
                  When she had thus said, she turned her selfe
about, and saw Iesus standing, and knew
not that it was Iesus.
               
               Alwayes the Angels (wee see) touched
the right string, and shee tells them the
wrong cause, but yet the right, if it had
beene right.
               Now, to this answere of hers, they
would haue replied, and taken away her
errour touching her Lords taking away;
that, if she knew all, shee would haue left
her seeking, and fit her downe by them:
and left her weeping, and beene in white, as
well as they.
               But, here is a supersedeas to them: The
Lord himselfe comes in place. (Now come
wee from the seeking Him dead, to the finding
Him aliue.) For, when Hee saw, no
Angels, no sight, no speech of theirs would
serue, none but her Lord could giue her
any comfort; Her Lord comes. Christus
adest.
               
               
                  Adest Christus, nec ab eis vnquam abest, à

quibus quaeritur, saith Augustine. Christ is
found, found by her; And this case of
hers, shall be the case of all that seriously
seeke Him. This woman heere, for one,
shee sought Him (we see.) They that went
to Emmaus to day, they but talked of Him
sadly, and they both found Him. Why, He
is found of them that seeke Him not. Esa 65. 1.
but, of them that seeke Him, neuer but
found. For, thou Lord neuer failest them
that seeke Thee. Psal. 9. 10. God is not vnrighteous,
to forget the worke and labour of their
loue that seeke Him. Heb. 6. 10.
               So, finde Him they shall, but happily
not all so fully at first, no more then shee
did. For, first (to try her yet a little further)
He comes vnknowen, stands by her,
and she little thought it had beene Hee.
               
               A case that likewise falls out full oft.
Doubtlesse He is not farre from euery one of vs,
                  Acts 17. 27.
saith the Apostle to the Athenians. But He
is neerer vs many times then we thinke;Iob. 9. 11. even
hard by vs, and we not aware of it, saith Iob.
And,Luke 19. 42. 
                  O si cognouisses & tu, O if wee did
know (and it standeth vs in hand to pray

that we may know) when He is so, for,
that is the time of our visitation.
                  Luk. 19. 44.
               
               Saint Iohn saith here, the Angels were sitting:
Saint Luke saith, they stood. Luk. 24. 4.
They are thus reconciled. That, Christ
comming in presence, the Angels which
before were sitting, stood vp. Their standing
vp, made Marie Magdalen turne her
to see who it was they rose to. And so,
Christ she saw, but, knew Him not.
               Not onely not knew Him, but misknew
Him, tooke Him for the Gardiner. Teares, wil
dim the sight, and it was yet scarse day,
and shee, seeing one, and not knowing
what any one should make in the ground
so early, but he that dressed it, she might
well mistake. But it was more then so:
Her eyes were not holden onely,Luk. 24. 16. 
                  that shee did
not know Him, but ouer and beside,Mar. 16. 12. 
                  He did
appeare 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   in some such shape as might
resemble the Gardiner, whom shee tooke
Him for.
               Proper enough it was, it fitted well the
time and place (this person.) The time,
It was the Spring: The place, It was a

garden (that place is most in request at that
time) for that place and time, a Gardiner
doth well.
               Of which her so taking Him, Saint Gregorie
saith well, Profectò errando non errauit.
She did not mistake in taking Him for a
Gardiner: though she might seeme to erre,
in some sense, yet in some other she was in
the right. For, in a sense, and a good sense,
CHRIST may well be said to be a Gardiner,
and indeed is one. For, our rule is, Christ,
as He appeares, so He is, euer: No false
semblant in Him.
               
               1 A Gardiner He is then. The first, the
fairest garden that euer was (Paradise) He
was the Gardiner, it was of His planting.
So, a Gardiner.
               
               2 And euer since it is He that (as God)
makes all our gardens greene, sends vs
yearely the Spring, and all the hearbs and
flowers we then gather; and neither Paul
with his planting, nor Apollo with his watering,
could doe any good without him.
So a Gardiner in that sense.
               3 But not in that alone; But He it is

that gardens our soules too, and makes
them, as the Prophet saith,Iere. 31. 21. 
                  Like a well watered
garden, weedes out of them whatsoeuer
is noysome or vnsauoury, sowes and
plants them with true rootes and seedes of
righteousnesse, waters them with the dew
of His grace, and makes them bring forth
fruit to eternall life.
               But it is none of all these, but besides all
these, nay ouer and aboue all these, this
day (if euer) most properly He was a Gardiner.
Was one, and so after a more peculiar
manner, might take this likenesse on
Him. Christ rising was indeed a Gardiner,
and that a strange one, who made such an
hearbe grow out of the ground this day,
as the like was neuer seene before, a dead
body, to shoote foorth aliue out of the
graue.
               I aske, was He so this day alone? No,
but this profession of His, this day begun,
He will follow to the end. For, He it is,
that by vertue of this mornings act, shall
garden our bodies, too: turne all our
graues into garden plots: Yea, shall one

day turne land and Sea and all into a great
garden, and so husband them, as they shal
in due time bring forth liue bodies, euen
all our bodies aliue againe.
               Long before did Esai see this and sing
of it, in his song Esa. 26. 19. resembling the
Resurrection to a Spring garden. Awake
and sing (saith he) ye that dwell for a time are
as it were sowen in the dust, for His dew shall
be as the dew of hearbs, and the earth shall shoot
forth her dead. So then: He appeared no other,
then He was: A Gardiner He was,
not in shew alone, but opere & veritate,
and so came in His owne likeness. This
for Christs appearing. Now to His speech
(but, as vnknowen still.)
            
            
               VERS. 15.
               
                  Iesus saith to her, Woman, why weepest thou?
whom seekest thou? She (supposing he had
beene the Gardiner) said to Him, Sir, if
thou haue borne Him hence, tell me where
thou hast laid Him, and I will take Him
thence.
               
               STill she wept:
                  Christs questiō vnknown. So Hee begins with quid
ploras? askes the same question the Angels
                  
had before; onely quickens it a little
with Quem quaeris, Whom seeke you? So,
quem quaeris, quaerit à te quem quaeris, whom
she sought, He asks her whom she sought?
Si quaeris,
                  Augustine, 
                  cur non cognoscis? si cognoscis, cur
quaeris? saith Augustine. If she seeke Him,
why knowes she Him not? If shee know
Him, why seekes she Him still? A common
thing with vs (this also.) To seeke a
thing, and when we haue found it, not to
know, wee haue so; but euen Christum à
Christo quaerere, to aske Christ for Christ.
Which howeuer it fall in other matters,
in this seeking of Christ, it is safe. Euen
when we seeke Christ, to pray to Christ, to
helpe vs to finde Christ; we shall doe it full
euill without Him.
               This quid ploras, it comes now twise.
The Angels asked it, wee stood not on it,
then. Now, seeing Christ askes it againe,
the second time, wee will thinke there is
something in it, and stay a little at it. The
rather, for that it is the very opening of
His mouth, the very first words that euer
came from Him, that He spake first of all,

after His rising againe from death. There
is sure some more then ordinary matter in
this quid ploras, if it be, but euen for that.
               Thus say the Fathers; 1 
                  That Marie Magdalen
standing by the graue side, and there
weeping, is thus brought in, to represent
vnto vs, the state of all mankind before
this day, the day of Christs rising againe,
weeping over the dead, as doe the heathen that
haue no hope:
                  1. Thess. 4. 13. comes Christ with His quid ploras,
Why doe you weepe? As much to say, as
ne plores, Weepe not; why should you weepe?
There is no cause of weeping now. Henceforth
none shall need to stand by the graue
to weepe there any more. A question very
proper for Easter-day, for the day of the
Resurrection. For, if there be a rising again,
quid ploras, is right, why should shee, why
should any weepe, then?
               So that this quid ploras of Christs, wipes
away teares from all eyes, and as we sing
in the 30 Psalme (whose title is, the Psalme
of the Resurrection) puts off our sackcloth,
that is, our mourning weeds, girds vs with
gladnesse, puts vs all in white with the Angels.

Ploras then: leaue that for Good-Friday,
for His Passion: Weepe then, and spare not.
But, quid ploras, for Easter-day, is in kinde
(the Feast of the Resurrection) why should
there be any weeping vpon it? Is not Christ
risen? Shall not He raise vs with Him? Is
He not a Gardiner, to make our bodies
sowen, to grow againe? Ploras, leaue that
to the heathen, that are without all hope; but
to the Christian man, quid ploras? Why should
he weepe? he hath hope: the Head is already
risen, the members shall in their due time
follow Him.
               I observe, that foure times this day, at
foure seuerall appearings, 1 at the first (at
this heere) He askes her, quid ploras? Why
she wept? 
                  2 Of them that went to Emaus,
quid tristes estis?Luke 24. 17. Why are ye sad? 
                  3 Within a
verse following this Text (the 19.) Hee
saith to the Eleuen, Pax vobis, Peace be to
them: 
                  4 And to the women that met Him
on the way,Matt. 28. 9. 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   that is, Reioyce, bee glad.
So, no weeping, no being sad, now; nothing
this day, but peace and ioy: they doe properly
belong to this feast.
               
                  And, this I note the more willingly, now,
this yeere; because the last Easter we could
not so well haue noted it. Some wept then;
all were sad, little joy there was, and there
was a quid, a good cause for it. But blessed
be God that hath now sent vs a more kindly
Easter, of this, by taking away the cause
of our sorrow then, that we may preach of
Quid ploras, & be far frō it. So much for quid
ploras, Christs question. Now to her answer.
               She is still where she was;Her answer. at sustulerunt
before, at sustulisti, now: situ sustulisti: we
shall neuer get that word from her.
               But, to Christ shee seemes somewhat
more harsh, then to the Angels. To them
she complaines of others, They haue taken.
Christ she seemes to charge, at least to suspect
of the fact, as if He looked like one
that had beene a breaker vp of graues,
a carrier away of corses out of their place
of rest. Her (if) implies as much. But
pardon loue: as it feares where it needs
not, so it suspects oft where it hath no
cause. He, or any that comes in our way,
hath done it, hath taken Him away, when

loue is at a losse. But Bernard speakes to
Christ for her; Domine, amor quem 
                        •
                     abebat
in Te, & dolor quem babebat de Te, excuset
eam apud Te, si fortè errauit circa Te: That
the loue she bare to Him, the sorrow shee
had for Him, may excuse her with Him,
if she were in any error concerning Him,
in her saying, Si tu sustulisti.
               
               And yet,Origen. see how God shall direct the
tongue. In thus charging Him, Prophetat
& nescit, She sayes truer then shee was aware.
For indeed, if any tooke Him away, it
was He did it. So, she was not much amisse.
Her situ, was true, though not in
her sense. For, quod de ipso factum est, ipse
fecit. All that was done to Him, He did it
Himselfe. His taking away,
                  Chrysologus. 
                  virtus fuit, non
facinus, was by His owne power, not by
the act of any other: Et gloria, non iniuria,
No other mans iniurie it was, but His
owne glorie, that shee found Him not
there. This was true, but this was no part
of her meaning.
               I cannot here passe ouer two more Characters
of her loue, that so you may haue

the full ten I promised.
               
                   One, in si tu sustulisti eum, in her eum, in
her [Him.] Him? which Him? Her affection
seemes so to transport her, as shee sayes
no man knowes what. To one, a meere
stranger to her, and shee to him, shee
talks of one thrise vnder the terme of Him,
If thou hast taken Him, tel me where thou hast
laid Him, and I will fetch Him; Him, Him, &
Him, & neuer names Him, or tels who He
is. This is Soloecismus amoris, an irregular
speech, but loues owne Dialect. Him is enough
with love, who knowes not who
that is? It supposes euery body, all the
world bound to take notice of Him whō
we looke for, onely by saying, Him,
though wee neuer tell his name, nor say a
word more. Amor, quem ipse cogitat, neminem
putans ignorare.
               
               
                   The other is in her ego tollam; If hee
would tell her where hee had laide Him,
she would go fetch Him (that she would.)
Alas poore woman, shee was not able to
lift Him. There are more then one, or
two either, allowed to the carrying of a

corps. As for His, it had more then an
hundred pound weight of myrrhe and other odours
vpon it,Ioh. 19. 39. beside the poise of a dead
body. She could not doe it. Well, yet she
would doe it, though. O mulier, non mulier
(saith Origen) for ego tollam seemes rather
the speech of a Porter, or of some lustie
strong fellow at least, then of a silly
weake woman. But loue makes women
more then women, at least it makes them
have 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , the courage aboue the
strength, farre. Neuer measures her owne
forces, no burden too heauie, no assay too
hard for loue, & nihil erubescit nisi nomen
difficultatis; And is not ashamed of any
thing, but that any thing should be too
hard or too heauie for it. Affectus sine mensurâ
virium propriarum. Both these argue
dilexit multùm. And so now you haue the
full number often.
            
            
               VER. 16.
               
                  Iesus saith to her, Mary: She turned her selfe, &
said to Him, Rabboni; that is to say, Master.
               
               NOw magnes amoris amor.
                  Christs second speech. Nothing so allures,
so drawes loue to it, as doth loue

it selfe. In Christ specially, and in such in
whom the same minde is. For, when her
Lord saw, there was no taking away His
taking away from her, all was in vaine,
neither men nor Angels, nor Himselfe (so
long as Hee kept Himselfe gardiner) could
get any thing of her, but her Lord was
gone, He was taken away; and that for the
want of Iesus, nothing but Iesus could
yeeld her any comfort; Hee is no longer
able to containe, but euen discloses Himselfe;
And discloses Himselfe by His voice.
               For, it should seeme, before, with His
shape, Hee had changed that also. But
now, Hee speakes to her in His knowen
voice, in the wonted accent of it, does but
name her name, Mary, no more, and that
was enough. That was as much to say,
Recognosce à quo recognosceris,Augustine.
                   she would at
least take notice of Him, that shewed He
was no stranger by calling her by her
name. For, whom we call by their names,
we take particular notice of. So God sayes
to Moses,
                  Exod. 33. 17. 
                  Te autem cognoui de nomine, Thou
hast found grace in my sight, and I know thee

by thy name. As God, Moses; So Christ,
Mary Magdalen.
               
               And this indeede is the right way to
know Christ; to be knowen of Him first.
Gal. 4. 9. the Apostle saith, Now wee haue
knowen God (and then correcteth himselfe)
or rather haue beene knowen of God. For, till
Hee know vs, wee shall neuer know Him
aright.
               And now, loe, Christ is found, found
aliue that was sought dead. A cloude
may be so thick, we shal not see the Sunne
through it. The Sunne must scatter that
cloud, and then wee may. Here is an example
of it. It is strange, a thicke cloude
of heauinesse had so couered her, as, see
Him shee could not, through it; this one
word, these two syllables [Mary] from His
mouth, scatters it, all. No sooner had His
voice sounded in her eares, but it driues
away all the mist, dries vp her teares,
lightens her eyes, that shee knew Him
straight, and answeres Him with her wonted
salutation,Her answere. 
                  Rabboni. If it had lien in
her power to haue raised Him from the

dead, shee would not haue failed, but
done it (I dare say.) Now it is done to her
hands.
               And with this, all is turned out and
in. A new world, now. Away with sustulerunt;
His taking away, is taken away quite.
For, if His taking away were her sorrow;
Contrariorum contraria consequentia.
                  Augustine. 
                  Si de sublato
plorauit, de suscitato exultauit, we may
be sure; If sad for His death, For His taking
away; then glad for his rising, for His restoring
againe. Surely, if she would haue
bene glad but to haue found but His dead
body; now she findes it, and Him, aliue,
what was her ioy, how great, may wee
thinke? So that, by this she saw Quid ploras
was not asked her for nought, that it
was no impertinent question, as it fell out.
Well now, He that was thought lost, is
found againe, and found, not, as He was
sought for, not a dead body, but a liuing
soule, nay, a quickening Spirit, then.1. Cor. 15. 45. And
that might Marie Magdalen well say. Hee
shewed it, for He quickened her and her
Spirits, that were as good as dead. You

thought you should haue come to Christs
Resurrection to day, and so you doe. But,
not to His alone, but euen to Marie Magdalens
resurrection, too. For, in very deed,
a kind of resurrection it was, was wrought
in her, reuiued, as it were, and raised from
a dead & drowping, to a liuely and cheerfull
estate. The Gardiner had done his
part, made her all greene, on the suddaine.
               And all this, by a word of His mouth.
Such power is there in euery word of His,
so easily are they called, whom Christ will
but speake to.
               But, by this we see, when He would be
made knowen to her after his rising, Hee
did choose to be made knowen by the eare
rather then by the eye. By hearing rather
then by appearing. Opens her eares first,
and her eyes after. Her eyes were holden,
                  Luc. 24. 16. till
her eares were opened;Psal. 40. 6. comes aures autem
aperuistimihi, and that opens them.
               With the Philosophers, hearing is the
sense of wisedome. With vs, in diuinitie,
it is the sense of faith. So most meet. Christ
                  
is the Word; hearing then (that sense) is
Christs sense; voce quàm visu, more proper
to the Word. So,Pasl. 48. 8. 
                  sicut audiuimus goes before,
and then, sic vidimus comes after. In
matters of faith the eare goes first, euer,
and is of more vse, and to bee trusted before
the eye. For, in many cases faith holdeth,
where sightfaileth.
               This then is a good way to come to the
knowledge of Christ, by Hodie si vocem,
                  Psal. 95. 7. to
heare His voice. Howbeit, it is not the onely
way. There is another way to take notice
of Him by besides, and we to take notice
of it. On this very day we haue them
both.
               For, twise this day came Christ, vnknowen
first, and then knowen, after. To
Marie Magdalen, here: and to them at Emmaus.
Luc. c. 24. To Marie Magdalen, vnknowen,
in the shape of a Gardiner. To those
that went to Emaus, vnknowen, in the likenesse
of a Trauailer by the way side. Came
to be knowen to her by His voice, by the
word of His mouth. Not so to them. For,
many words He spake to them, and they

felt them warme at their hearts, but,Luk. 24. 32. 35. knew
Him not for all that. But, He was knowen
to them in the breaking of the bread. Her eyes
opened by speaking a word: Their eyes opened
by the breaking of bread. There is
the one and the other way, and so now you
haue both. And now you haue them, I
pray you make vse of them. (I see I shall
not be able to goe further then this verse.)
               It were a folly to fall to comparisons,
Committere inter se, to set them at oddes togither,
these two waies: as the fond fashion
now adaies is, whether is better, Prayer
or Preaching: The Word, or the Sacraments.
What needs this? Seeing we haue
both, both are ready for vs; the one now,
the other by and by. VVee may end this
question, soone. And this is the best and
surest way to end it, to esteeme of them
both, to thanke Him for both, to make
vse of both, hauing now done with one,
to make triall of the other. It may be (who
knowes) if the one will not worke, the other
may. And if by the one or by the other,
by either, or by both, it be wrought,

what harme haue we? In case it bee not;
yet haue we offered to God our serice in
both, and committed the successe of both
to Him. He will see they shall haue successe,
and in His good time (as shalbe expedient
for vs) vouchsafe euery one of vs as
Hee did Marie Magdalen in the Text, to
know Him and the vertue of His Resurrection;
                  Philip. 3. 10.
and make vs partakers of both, by
both the meanes before remembred, by
His blessed Word, by His holy mysteries;
the meanes to raise our soules heere, the
pledges of the raising vp of our bodies
hereafter. Of both which He make vs
partakers, who is the Author of
both, IESVS CHRIST
the Righteous, &c.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            LONDON,
Printed by ROBERT BARKER, and
IOHN BILL, Printers to the Kings
most Excellent Maiestie,
            
               
                  M.DC.XX.
               
            
            
         
      
   