
      
         
            
            
            An Aunſwer to ſixe Reaſons, that
Thomas Pownde, Gentleman, and
Priſoner in the Marſhalſey. at the commaundement
of her Maiesties Commiſſioners, for cauſes Eccleſiasticall:
required to be aunſwered. Becauſe theſe Reaſons
doo moue him to think, that controuerſies and doubts in
Religion, may not be Iudged by the Scriptures,
but that the Scriptures muſt be Iudged
by the Catholique Church.
            
            
               1. The firſt is, for that the Scriptures are mute and dum.
               2. The ſecond, for that they be full of harde and deepe
myſteries.
               3. The thirde, for that S. Peter ſayth: No Scripture is to
be taken after any priuate interpretation.
               
               4. The fourth, for that to appeale to the Scriptures,
dooth ſeeme to denie all vnwritten verities.
               5. The fyft is, for that it were a great abſurditie, not to
haue a certaine Iudge of abſolute Authoritie, in the
interpreting of Scriptures. &c.
               6. The ſixt is, for that in refuſing the Authoritie of the
Churches abſolute Iudgement herein: we ſeeme to
denie the holie ghoſt, to be the ſpirite of trueth.
            
            Written by Robert Crovvley.
            
            ¶Imprinted at London by John
Charlewood. 1581.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To all the Pope his Catholiques,
in England or elſe where.
            
               IN September laſt,
I with others, was by ſufficient
Authoritie, appointed to
cōfer, with ſuch of your ſort,
as at that tyme, were in her
Maieſties priſons, of the Marſhalſey
& the white Lion, in
Sowthwark, reſtrained of lybertie,
for refuſing to conforme
themſelues to that order of Religiō, which is now
publique in this Realme of England. And according to
our duety in that behalfe: Maiſter Henrie Tryp, and I, did
(as we were required) make our ſpedy repaire, firſt to the
one priſon, and then to the other. And after ſome conference
had with certain that were cloſe priſoners: we came
to confer with one Maiſter Thomas Povvnde Gentleman,
in the lodging where he then laye. And finding him altogeather
vnwylling to enter into any conference by
ſpeaches, becauſe (as he ſayd) he feared to fall into daunger
of Lawe therby: I aunſwered, that he ought to haue a
better opinion of her Maieſtie, (by whoſe appointment,
we were come to offer cōference) then to thinke that ſhe
would ſend vs, to entrap him, or any other her ſubiects.
For ſhe needeth not to ſeeke more aduantage againſt any
of them, then that which already by their diſloyall
behauiour they haue giuē her. So that if ſhe would proceede
againſt them in rigour of lawe, and not in mercie:
ſhe might cut their heads from their ſhoulders, and make
no more to doo with them. But being deſirous, by ſome
meanes to bring to paſſe, that they might become as obedient
ſubiects to her, as ſhe both hath and dooth ſhew
her ſelfe a louing Prince to them: ſhe would not abridge

them of lybertie (which for good and iuſt, yea neceſſary
cauſes, ſhee is now enforced to doo) but that ſhee would
withal prouide, that by cōferēce with ſuch as be learned,
they might either be drawn from their errours: or els be
found to be obſtinate and wilfully blinde. But none of
theſe ſpeaches could mooue maiſter Pownd to like of any
conference by ſpeaches. Yet notwithſtanding, he ſayd he
was ready to confer by wryting, and offered ſo to doo.
Whereunto I aunſwered, that we had no commiſsion to
deale that way: but yet if he would write, I promiſed to
aunſwer him in writing. Vpon this he pulled a Pāphlet
out of his boſome (the copie wherof I haue cauſed to be
ſet before mine aunſwer) & called in ſuch as he thought
meete to heare it read. And after he had read it: he deliuered
it to me to be aunſwered. And this was done the. 7.
day of September. The ninth of the ſame month, I began
to ſhape him an aunſwer: and finiſhed the ſame with as
much conuenient ſpeed as I could, being letted with buſines,
beſides that buſines, enough to occupy ſom mā thorowly.
But by Gods helpe, the time was not long before
the aunſwer was finiſhed. But in this meane whyle (I
know not by what occaſion) Maiſter Povvnd, was remoued
to another priſō, further of: ſo that I could not come
to delyuer mine aunſwer to him, neyther did I thinke it
meete to be ſent to him immediatly from me, becauſe I
vnderſtoode, that the right Reuerend Father the Lorde
Biſhop of London, had commaunded him to be remooued
thence. I did therefore reade, in the hearing of as
many of your ſorte, as I then found in the Marſhalſey,
bothe the Reaſons contayned in Maiſter Povvnd his
Pamphlet: and alſo mine aunſwers to the ſame. Promiſing,
that with as much ſpeede as I might, I would ſend
bothe to my ſayd Lord the Biſhop, with my Letters, beſeeching
him, at his diſcretion, eyther to ſend mine aunſwer
to Maiſter Pownd: or els to cauſe him to be brought
back againe to the Marſhalſey, whether I might repaire,

to proceede in conference with him by writing. But my
ſayde Lorde, being oppreſſed with other affaires more
waightie: and thereby enforced to commit this buſines
to ſome other, that were not ſo carefull for the diſpatch
thereof, as I would they had. And I my ſelfe alſo (not altogether
vnoccupied otherwiſe) did not, (as in dutie I
ought) call vpon my ſayd Lord, but ſuppoſing that mine
aunſwer had beene ſhortly conuayed to Maiſter Povvnd,
(becauſe I heard not of his returne to the Marſhalſey) I
reſted, looking to haue receyued ſome replie from him:
tyll at the laſt (euen in the Moneth of December laſt)
I heard that the Copies of his Pamphlet were made common
to many of your ſorte, with great brags, that the
reaſons therein contayned are vnaunſwerable. Yea, and
ſome of our ſide, were required to aunſwer them, euen as
Maiſter Povvnd had required me. Whereupon, repayring
to my ſayd Lorde the Bishop: I receaued my ſayde aunſwer
againe the 4. of this Ianuarie, with his allowance to
publish it in Printe, together with the Copies of Maiſter
Povvnd his Pamphlet, and the breefe aunſwer that Maiſter
Trippe wrote, after I had finished mine, as by the ſame
may appeare. And this was thought needefull to be don,
becauſe the Copie of Maiſter Povvnd his Pamphlet is already
made ſo common: our annſwers being as yet, made
knowne but to fewe. And that you may haue that firſte
in ſight that you like beſt: I haue cauſed the Printer to
place the Copy of Maiſter Povvnd his Pamphlet, immediatly
after this short Epiſtle. Reade theſe Reaſons for
your pleaſure, and our aunſwers for your profite. And if
you miſlike with our aunſwers, replie, if you can. You
shall finde them of our ſide, that will deale with you,
faithfully and freendely too. Be not obſtinately, and
wilfully blinde: leaſt you doo thereby prouoke (yea and
enforce) our mercifull Prince, contrary to her naturall
inclination, to deale with you in Iuſtice without mercie.

Though we haue great cauſe to thinke that you (all the
ſorte of you) doo hate both: our Prince and vs, for that
Religion which bothe ſhe and we do profeſſe: yet I dare
aſſure you, that bothe ſhe, and all the Honorable & learned
of her Realme, yea and all, of all eſtates, that doo vnfainedly
profeſſe that Religion that you hate, doo vnfainedly
looue you, and pray for the opening of the eyes of
your vnderſtanding, that you may ſee and feele, and embrace
your ſaluation in Chriſte, and that being Engliſhmen,
or inhabiting within the Engliſh dominions, you
may know and acknowledge her Maieſtie, for your ſupreme
Gouernor in all cauſes, next and immediatly vnder
Chriſte, our onely vniuerſall head. Fare you well.
From my houſe at S. Gyles without Creplegate
of London, the. 6. of Ianuarie. 1580. After
the accoumpt of the Church of Englande,
and in the. 23. yeere of her
Maieſties Reigne.
            (⸪)
            
               Yours, when you ſhall ſhew
your ſelues to be true Chriſtians, and
Engliſh men: Robert Crovvley, Clerk.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               7. September. 1580.
¶Sixe Reaſons ſet downe to ſhew,
that it is no orderly way in cōtrouerſies of faith,
to appeale to be tryed only by Scriptures (as the
abſurde opinion of all the Sectaries is) but the
ſentence & definition of the Catholike Church,
by whome, as by the Spowſe of Chriſt, alwayes
inſpired with the holy ghoſt, the holy Scripture
is to be iudged.
            
               FIrſt conſider well theſe words of our Sauiour
in ſending vs to the Scriptures,
ſaying: Searche the Scriptures, for you
thinke to haue eternall life in them. And
theſe are they that beare witneſſe of me.
Marke well theſe wordes,Iohn. 
                     •
                  . I ſay: that the Scripture is
but witneſſe bearer to the trueth, and not the Iudge to
diſcerne of trueth: for iudgement giuing belongeth not
to the witneſſe bearer, although he be as a rule to leade
and direct the Iudge in true iudgement. But what if
this witneſſe ſhould be currupted, as no man will deny
but it may, yet this Iudge to whome the holy Ghoſt is
promiſed, will finde it, and reforme it. Vnderſtād therfore
my Reaſons, why of neceſſitie the Church muſt be
Iudge of the Scriptures, and take your Pen and confute
them I pray you if you can.
            1. The firſt is,The firſt Reaſon. becauſe the written Text is mute and
dumbe, vttering nothing to vs from the Booke but only
the wordes, and not the ſenſe, wherein the lyfe as it
were of the Scripture conſiſteth: And what definitiue
ſentence can ſuch a Iudge giue, to ouer rule the conceyted
minde of an opinatiue man: which hath no euident

meanes to pronounce any iudgement againſt him, but
onely to ſhewe him a dumbe ſigne in writing, which a
wrangler may conſter ſtyll to his owne vnderſtanding
againſt all the worlde.
            2 The ſecond Reaſon is, becauſe the holy Scripture
(as S. Auguſtine ſayth)The ſecōd Reaſon. is very full of harde and déepe
anyſteries, in ſo much that when Honoratus ſayd to him
(as many vnlearned men ſay now a dayes) that he vnderſtood
it well enough without helpe of any inſtructor.
Say you ſo (ſayth he) you would not take vpon you to
vnderſtand ſuch a Poet as Terence is, well, without a
Maiſter? and dare you ruſhe into the holy Scriptures
which are ſo full of Diuine myſteries, without a
Maiſter? and dare you ruſhe into the holy Scriptures
which are ſo full of Diuine myſteries, without a guide?
All Hereſies (ſayth he) come of nothing elſe, Niſi dum
ſcripturae bonae intelliguntur non bene: But whyle the good
Scriptures are not well vnderſtoode: Héerto alſo S.
Peter in his ſecond Epiſtle Cap. 3. beareth witneſſe ſaying:
That many miſunder ſtood S. Paule in many harde
places peruerſly to their owne perdition: But then you
will ſay, the harde places may eaſely he vnderſtoode by
conference of other Scriptures. Well, admit a chyldiſh
reaſon for a worde or two, That becauſe they might ſo
be among the humble minded, therfore they muſt néeds
be ſo, though men be neuer ſo peruerſe: Yet giue mée
leaue to poſe you then one Queſtion farther to ye quick.
Howe is it poſſible to knowe by any conference of the
Scriptures, which is Canonicall Scripture and which
is not? certainely, if any Infidell would deny the olde
Teſtament (as ſome Heretikes in time paſt haue done)
and I praye God there be not many▪ Atheiſtes at this
day in England, which be farther gone yet then they:
Yea, if ſuch a one ſhould deny all the newe Teſtament
alſo, we haue no ſure Anckor holde againſt him but the
Reuelation of God, by tradition to his Church, which
is the pyllor and ſure ſtay of trueth, which S. Auguſtine
well ſéeing, thought he might be bolde to ſay, with due

reuerence to God, and holie Scripture bothe: I ſhould
not beleue the Goſpell except the authoritie of ye Church
did moue me thereunto, meanyng that the tradition of
the vniuerſall Churche, and the teſtimonie of all the people
of God, in whom the holie Ghoſte dwelleth, muſt iuſtly
moue vs to credite that, whiche their authoritie doth
commaunde vs to giue credite vnto. Therefore let any
man beware of fliyng from the Churches Iudgement,
to the Scripture onely, leaſt the Scripture it ſelf ſhould
vtterly bee denied, as by ſome Atheiſtes in Englande (as
I heare ſaie is alreadie: And then might ſuche Infidels
laugh all Heretickes to ſcorne, for robbyng them ſelues
of their owne defence: But now to returne to my purpoſe,
if conference of one Scripture with an other, might
giue light enough to all men: How happeneth it that all
Sects, vſing that conference, yet thei can neuer agrre in
their opinions, but diuers men, and all vſing ſuche conference,
doe yet conſtrue it diuerſly? The vttermoſte ſhifte
thei haue is this, (ſuche a weake one as it is,) that the
Reader muſt giue hymſelf to prayer, for the truthe to be
reuealed vnto hym. Wherein marke I praie you the iutollerable
pride of arrogant Hypocrites: that thei will
firſt miſtruſt Gods reuelation of the truthe to his Vniaerſall
Churche, for the whiche Chriſte himſelf hath prayed,
and promiſed to teache them all tr
                  〈…〉
               
moſte preſumptuouſly to come and 
                  〈…〉
               pt God, to haue
that truthe reuealed onely to them ſelues, whiche beyng
reuealed many hundreth yeares agone, and defined in
generall Counſell, by all the holie Fathers: where the
holie Ghoſte is alwaies preſent, or at leaſte by the holie
Doctors in their writynges ſet doune, yet thei will not
beleeue it, nor harken vnto it: yet this is their courſe, and
ſo as thei ſaie forſoothe, thei praie very hartely, though
fewe of them can wring out any teares in their praiers,
but yet with ſuche a faithe in the Lorde (as their owne
terme is) that they dooe all verely beleeue the truthe is

reuealed vnto them. And yet perdie, thei muſt needes be
all deceiued, as long as thei dwell in diſſention, and are
not in errors onely, but one contrarie to an other: who
now muſt be the Iudge to trie the ſpirites whether they
be of God or no, but onely the Churche? Or els ſhall thei
not bee tried at all, but continuall permiſſion for infinite
Legions of liyng ſpirites, to be ſtill vndetected that thei
maie ſeduce more and more.
            3 The third Reaſon is,The third Reaſon. 2. Pet. 1. d. becauſe S. Peter ſaieth plainly,
that no Scripture is to bee taken after any miuate interpretatiō,
for it was not vttered after the will and fantaſie
of man, but as holie men of God ſpake it, inſpired by the
holy Ghoſt: yet moſt contrary to this expreſſe rule, euery
priuate mā ſhall haue libertie to interprete it to his owne
peruers will▪ after a priuate interpretation, otherwiſe
then at firſt it was inſpired to the holy men. If euer man
maie appeale from the Eccleſiaſticall ſence of the vniuerſall
Churche to the Text it ſelf, as he vnderſtandeth it.
            4 The fourth Reaſon is,The fourth Reaſon. becauſé by appealyng onely
to the Scripture, you ſéeme to giue men libertie to denie
all vnwritten verities, which wee haue receiued of the
Churche, either by expreſſe definition in generall Counſaile,
or but by tradition. And I beleeue at my firſte na
               
                  〈…〉
               
of unwritten verities: Maiſter Crowley and his

                  〈…〉
                ſtraight waie, as though all ſuche
were 
                  〈…〉
                to temper their follie (I will not
ſaie their pride) a 
                  〈…〉
                that point. I aſke them all this
queſtion. How thei proue the Trinitie of perſones in the
Vnitie of the ſubſtaunce in Godheade by the expreſſe
Scriptures? Or the two diſtinct natures in Chriſte and
but one perſon? Or God the Father to be Ingenitus? Or
the proceedyng of the holy Ghoſte, both from the Father
and from the Sonne, as from one Fountaine: or the deſcendyng
of Chriſt into Hell, by plaine wordes of Scripture?
(beyng therefore of many now a daies flatly deuyed,)
Or the cuſtome of Baptiſing of Infants, ſeeyng the

Scripture, ſoundeth rather, as though thei ſhould bee
taught firſt their faith, before their were Baptized, ſaiyng:
Goe and teathe all Nations Baptizyng them. &c. Or
why we ſhould kéepe the Sondaie now at all, and not the
Saterdaie rather whiche was the Iewes Sabothe daie,
that the Scripture ſpeaketh of to be ſanctified? Although
your Puritanes which goe to plough vpon all the Churches
Holydaies, ſeeme not yet to know the Sondaie, for
any of their makyng: or why we ſhould not abſtaine now
ſtill like Iewes from ſtrangled meates, as the Apoſtels
once decreed in the Acts, and by no expreſſe Scripture againe
abrogated? Yea then why maie not any Hereticke
denie al our thrée Créedes: both the Apoſtles Créede, the
Nicen Creede as it is called, & the Creede of Athanaſius,
ſeing neuer a one of theſe is written in Scripture expreſly,
but all lefte vs by tradition onely vpon credite of the
Churche. Marke you not how theſe Bedlem Scripture
men would ſhake all the foundations of our Chriſtian
faith, by binding vs to beleue nothing but Scripture? Do
not theſe blinde guides thinke you, leade us a trim daunce
towarde infidelitie? Thus muche of the fourth Reaſon.
            5 The fift is becauſe that without a certaine Iudge
for interpretatiō of Scripture abſolutely,The fift Reaſon. this abſurditie
would followe yt God which is the Author of al perfectiō,
and diſpoſeth euery thing in ſwete & decent order, had left
his vniuerſall Church in yearth in this confuſion: yt when
ſoeuer any doubtfull queſtion ſhould ariſe, vpō conſtruction
of his holy will, there were no prouiſion at all ordained
by God for deciding of ſuch ſtrifes, and preſeruation
of concord among his people, and then certainly the kingdome
of Gods Churche, were not ſo well prouided for in
their gouernment: as euery ciuill kindome is by pollicie
of carnall men, amōgſt whom, none almoſt are ſo barbarous,
but that thei haue Counſellers for gouernment of
their ſtate, & Iudges for expounding, & executing of their
lawes, aſwell as lawes written, or els it were ridiculus:
would not he be counted a very wiſe man (thinke you,)

in one of our Parliamentes, whiche ſhould ſteppe vp like
a graue Burgeſſe, and perſwade all his fellowes that for
aſmuche as thei had a noble and an auncient Lawe written
vnto them, the Realme ſhould haue no longer neede
henceforthe of any Prince, nor any Rulers, nor Peeres,
nor Iudges, nor Iuſtices, nor ciuill Magiſtrates, but
euery man (vppon his worde for the warrant) would bee
content to gouerne hym ſelf orderly by the lawe written,
whiche (as his wiſedome) thinkes is plaine enough. And
truely no wiſer be thei but muche more to bee laughed to
ſcorne whiche will haue the Scripture to bee the onely
Iudge for euery man to appeale vnto, and refuſe all authoritie
of the Churche in expoundyng thereof: for who
knoweth not that the Arrian Heretickes, brought fortie
places of Scripture for their horrible Hereſie, more then
the Catholikes had againſt theim, but all falſely vnderſtoode,
whiche when it is ſo miſunderſtoode and miſapplied,
then S. Auguſtine calleth it the Heretickes howe,
wherewith they ſhoote out their owne venemous arrowes.
And Vincent Lir. ſaieth, it is then the Sheepes
cloathyng, whiche the Wolfe doeth ſhroude hym ſelf in,
becauſe that when a ſimple bodie, feeleth the ſoftneſſe as
it were of his fliece, he ſhould not miſtruſt the Tyrannie
of his teethe: That is to ſaie, of his falſe conſtruction of
Scripture, wherwith he would deuour his ſaule: So did
the Deuill hymſelf alleadge Scripture vnto Chriſt, and
as oft as any Heretikes aleadge Scripture to vs againſt
the Catholike faith: So oft ſaieth Vincentius, we maie
be out of doubt the Deuill doeth ſpeake vnto vs by their
mouthes, and ſaieth vnto vs euen as he ſaied vnto Chriſt
Si filius deies, mitte te deorſum, as much to ſaie, If thou
wile bee the ſonne of God, and profeſſor of his holy Goſpell,
caſt thy ſelf doune, from the high authoritie and tradition
of this Catholike Churche, whom if wee aſke againe
why we ſhould ſo doe, then ſaieth Vincentius, he
commeth out with Scriptum eſt enim: becauſe it is written

ſaieth he, in the holie booke, & from thence thou muſt
learne a newe leſſon of me, how to be a right Chriſtian
man. To whom we muſt ſaie then: Vade Satan non tentabis.
&c. Auaunt Sathan, &c. and that with greate feruencie
of faith: for more perillous is the temption of ſuch
a flatteryng Serpent (ſaieth S. Auguſtine) then the roaryng
of an angrie Lyon, becauſe the one wee flee from
with feare, but the other with entiſing, maie come the nerer
to ſting vs.
            6 The ſixt reaſon moſt waightie of all is this: becauſe
if you will refuſe the authoritie of the Churches abſolute
iudgement,The ſixt Reaſon. vppon the Scriptures true cenſe, you ſhall
ſeeme plainly to denie the holy Ghoſte to be the Spirite
of truthe, whiche vppon the Apoſtles and all the faithfull
was ſent doune with viſible ſignes, and with his Church
is promiſed to remaine vnto the worldes ende: by these
wordes of our Sauiour, I will aske my Father, and he
ſhall ſend you an other comforter, to tarie with you for
euer, the ſpirite of truth: And a little after thus. The holy
Ghoſte the comforter, whom my Father will ſende in
my name, ſhall teache you all truthe: Loe the Church is
the ſureſt Iudge, and none ſhure but the Churche, for all
men in doubtes of Scripture, becauſe it hath a promiſe
that it ſhall neuer erre in iudgement, whiche is notably
confirmed by the Prophet Eſay, ſaiyng. This is my couenaunt
with them ſaieth our Lorde, my ſpirite whiche is
in thee, and my worde which I haue put in thy mouth
ſhal not depart out of thy mouth, nor out of the mouth
of thy ſeede, nor of thy ſeedes ſeede, now, nor euer to
the worldes ende. O moſt comfortable promiſe, that the
Spirite of truth ſhall neuer departe out of the Churches
mouth. O fit Iudge appointed to be Iudge of Scripture
for our profites, without preſumption. Remember then
I praie you, what a ſottiſhe opinion this is which is held
to the contrarie, that euery priuate man, whom belike
you wil imagine to be one of the Church, ſhall haue good

beleue to be his own Iudge in vnderſtandyng of Scriptures,
as your Craftes men are: and yet that the authoritie
of the whole vniuerſall Churche, ſhall not preſume
to 
                  •
               ake any iudgement vpon them. Grauntyng this, as
you muſt needes, that the Church, whiche is our Mother
(as the Scripture ſaieth) muſt needes teach all her children,
at firſt to beleeue in God (ſeyng faithe muſt come
by hearing) and alſo to know the Scripture, and yet that
the ſame Church being the piller and ſure ſtaie of touch,
ſhall not be abſolute Iudge & imperial Scholemiſtreſſe,
to teache vs all how to beleue in God, and how to vnderſtande
the Scripture. For the blindneſſe of your hartes,
I maie ſaie as iuſtly to you, as Sainct Paule ſaied to
the Galathians. O Inſenſati &c. O ye fooliſhe fellowes,
who hath bewitched you, not to obeye vnto the truthe?
Which euen of Infantes and ſuckyng babes (as it were)
is diſcerued as cleare as the Sunne? So that you muſt
not diſdaine Maiſter Trippe to be tripped in this matter,
for a ſilie ſeducer, to maintaine (as ye doe all) ſo groſe all
opinion, beyng the forreſt in deeds, for al ſuche Foxes, to
litter their whelps in. Therefor
                  〈…〉
                to conclude this Aſſertion:
acquite your ſelues as well as you can, why you
maie not all bee iuſtly ſuſpected, to denie the deſcendyng
of the holie Ghoſte vnto the Churche, for as muche
as you refuſe the Churches ſentence in iudgement,
with whom the holie Ghoſte is
promiſed alwaies to remaine, and
in truthe to directe them.
            
               Haec eſt fides mea quia eſt Catholica.
               This is my faith, becauſe it is the Catholique faith.
            
            
               Thomas Pownde.
            
         
         
            
            The Aunſwere to Pownde,
His ſixt Reaſons.
            
               
                  TO the ſix Reaſons that you ſet doune,
to proue, that to prouoke to be tryed by
the holy Scriptures onely, in the controuerſies
that maie ariſe aboute Religion,
is no orderly waie: I might in
fewe wordes aunſwere, thus, The firſt
Reaſon is fonde, the ſecond is falſe, the thirde is fooliſhe,
the fowerth is fantaſticall, the fift is fradulent, and the
ſixt is fanaticall.
            Thus might your Pamphlet bee aunſwered in ſixe
wordes: as (before you did reade it, before ſo many witneſſes
as it pleaſed you to call to the hearyng of it) I told
you that I thought it might.
            But leaſt you ſhould triumphe, after your manner,
and ſaie, that not beyng able to aunſwere your Reaſons
at large, I ſhifte you of with ſhorte ſentences: I will beſtowe
ſome more tyme (whiche I could beſtowe muche
better) in aunſweryng your rude Reaſones: I hope ſo,
that neither you, nor any of your ſide, ſhall be able reaſonably
to replie.
            
               The firſt Reaſon.
               FIrſt you ſaie, that ſuche controuerſies, maie not bée
tried by the holie Scriptures, becauſe thei be mute
and dumbe, vttering to vs, from the booke, nothing
but onely the wordes, and not the ſenſe, wherein the life
(as it were) of the Scripture, doeth conſiſt.
               Howe fonde this Reaſon is. I thynke your ſelf
ſhould ſee. For what ſence can there bee in woordes,
that can not bee vttered by woordes? Or what wordes
can any manne vſe in openyng the ſenſe of woordes
written, but that the ſame beeyng ſette downe in

writyng, maie as well open the cenſe: as thei might beeyng
ſpoken and not written? you ſeeme to imagine, that
we would haue the holy Scriptures (as thei bee written
in bookes, & encloſed in coueringes) to be Iudge of ſuche
matters, as you ſpeake of: for otherwiſe, how can you call
them mute and dumbe?
               The Prophet Ieremie was commaunded to write all
the wordes of the Lorde againſt Iuda and Iſraell, and all
other Nations, in a booke, and to cauſe the ſame to bee
reade in the hearyng of all the people, and ſo he did, as appeareth
in the .26. of his Propheſies, that euery manne
might bee turned awaie, from their owne moſte wicked
waies, and ſo the Lorde might be mercifull to them. After
this manner would we haue controuerſies iudged by
the Scriptures. Not as thei bee written and kepte ſecret
in hookes: but beeyng reuereudly read, wayed, and
conſidered, with the circumſtaunces of perſon, tyme and
place, with all other neceſſarie circumſtaunces: ſo that
the Readers, beyng willyng to haue their controuerſies
ended, dooe ſubmit them ſelues to that iudgement, that
thei ſhall finde in the Scriptures, ſo read, waied and conſidered.
               As for your Opinatiue man and wrangler, that you
ſpeake of: if he will ſtande ſtill in his opinion (as you your
ſelf doe (notwithſtandyng that it is made manifeſt, by
the holy Scriptures, that his opiniō is not right: he muſt
bee taken for an Hereticke, and after one or twoo warnynges,
reiected, beyng ſubuerted, as one that ſynneth
euen condempned by his owne conſcience.Titu. 3.
               
            
            
               The ſeconde Reaſon.
               Your ſecond Reaſon I doe call falſe, for that you doe
falſely reporte, that the holie Scriptures are full of harde
and deepe miſteries. And for that you do falſely affirme,
that S. Auſten did ſharpely reboke Honoratus▪
                   for ruſhyng
ſo boldely into the holie Scriptures, where as he
would not be ſo bolde, as to take vpon him to vnderſtand

ſuche a Poet as Terence was without a Maiſter.
               
                  Firſte, I would wiſhe you to weigh well the wordes
of S. Paule, written to Timothie. Doe thou (ſaieth S.
Paule to Timothie)2. Tim. 3. continue in thoſe thynges whiche
thou haſt learned, and are committed vnto thee, knowyng
of whom thou haſt learned them, and that thou
haſt known (euen from thine Infancie) the holy Scriptures,
which are ſufficient to inſtructe thee to ſaluation,
through that faithe whiche is in Chriſte Ieſus. Euery
Scripture that was written by diuine inſpiratiō, is profitable
to teache, to correct, to reproue, and to inſtructe in
righteouſneſſe, that the man of God maie be perfectly inſtructed
to euery good worke.
               
               If all Scriptures, bee ſo full of harde and deepe miſteries
(as you haue ſaied) then can not any Scripture
bee ſo profitable to teache &c. As Sainct Paule telleth
Timothie: That all Scriptures be, neither can the man of
GOD bee thereby perfectly inſtructed to euery good
worke.
               
               We reade,Luk. 24. that our Sauiour Chriſte, did ſharply reprehende
his two Diſciples, as he walked with them towardes
Emaus, for that thei were ſo dull and harde to beleeue,
that whiche the Prophetes had ſo plainly ſpoken.
Ought not Chriſte (ꝙ he) to ſufter theſe thinges, and ſo
to enter into his glorie? As though he ſhould haue ſaied:
are you ſo doltiſhe and blockiſhe, that you vnderſtande
not ſo plaine ſpeeches as the Prophets haue vſed concernyng
the ſufferyng es of Chriſte?
               And appearyng to them afterwardes, as thei were
altogether in Ieruſalem: He telleth them, that of neceſſitie,
all muſte bee fulfilled, that had beene written concernyng
him, either in the lawe of Moyſes, in the Prophets,
or in the Pſalmes. And that thei might vnderſtande the
Scriptures, he did then open their vnderſtandynges:
Whereby it appeareth, that it was not the hardneſſe and
deepeneſſe of the miſteries (wherewith, as you ſaie the

Scripture is full) that helde them from the vnderſtandyng
thereof: but the dulneſſe of their owne vnderſtandyng,
becauſe thei were as yet but carnall: and therefore
coulde not perceiue thynges belongyng to the ſpirite of
God, as Sainct Paule hath written.1. Cor. 2. The naturall man,
doeth not perceiue theſe thynges that doe belong to the
ſpirite of God. Not that we bee of our ſelues, as of our
ſelues,2. Cor. 3. ſufficient to thinke any thyng, but our ſufficiencie
is of God. &c.
               Now, for that whiche you haue cited, out of Austine,
concernyng the reprehendyng of Honoratus: I would
gladly knowe of you, what Honoratus it was that you
ſpeake of. One there was of that name, to whom Sainct
Austine wrote his .120. Epiſtle. But that Honoratus
was not like to vſe any ſuche ſpeeche to S. Austine.
Neither doeth Sainct Austine in that Epiſtle, vſe any
ſuche ſpeeche to hym, as you ſaie he did. But in the laſte
ende of the Epiſtle, Saint Austine ſheweth hym ſelf to
be of an other mynde, then (by your reporte) your Austine
ſeemed to be. For he ſaieth thus.
               
                  Habes librum, & ſi prolixum, tamen, quantum exiſtimo
non ſuperfluum. &c. Thou haſte here a Booke
(ſaieth Sainct Austine) whiche though it be long: yet,
as I thinke, it is not ſuperfluous. But doe thou loue the
Eccleſiaſticall writinges alſo, and thou ſhalte not finde
many thynges, which thou ſhouldeſt neede to ſeeke for at
my handes. But by reading and ruminating or cuddyng
(if thou doe alſo purely praie vnto the Lorde, that is the
giuer of all good thinges) thou ſhalt learne throughly, all
thoſe thynges, or vndoubtedly very many of thoſe thinges,
that are worth the knowyng, rather by his inſpiration,
then by any mannes admonition: Although, euen in
the ſame thyng wherein wee doe with right iudgement
allowe that man that doth outwardly admoniſh vs well:
what other thing doe we, then teſtifie that we haue an inwarde
light that doeth teache vs, and is our Maiſter?

Thus farre Austine. Lette your freendes iudge, whether
it be likely, that this Austine, and this Honoratus,
would vſe ſuche ſpeeches the one to the other, as you reporte
yours to haue doen.
               One other Honoratus there was, to whom our S.
Austine wrote his .161. Epiſtle. This man helde with
Donatus: and in that Epiſtle Saint Austine doeth exhorte
hym, to render a reaſon quietly in writing, wherefore
the name of the Church ſhould at that time remaine
onely among the Donatiſts.
               
               There was alſo a thirde, Honoratus, to whom our
S. Austine wrote his .179. Epiſtle. This man Saint
Austine calleth brother and fellowe Biſhop, and doeth
inſtruct hym at large in the libertie of fliyng perſecution:
wherein he vſeth not one worde, that maie bee wreſted to
that meanyng that you haue reported.
               But you will ſaie, there is yet one other, to whome
Saint Austine wrote his Booke, De vtilitate credendi.
               
               Suche an Honoratus there was in deede. But when
you ſhall reade that Booke with more indifferent iudgement:
you ſhall not finde, that Austine to bee of your
mynde. Not muche before that place that you take holde
of, writing of the truth of the Scripture, and noting that
we ought to loue the Scripture before wee learne it: he
writeth thus. Quicquid eſt (mihi crede) in Scripturis
illis, altum & diuinum eſt. &c. Beleeue me (ſaieth Saint
Austine) whatſoeuer thyng is in the Scriptures, the
ſame is deepe and diuine: truthe is in it altogether, and a
diſcipline that is moſte meete for the refreſhyng and reſtoryng
of myndes: and vndoubtedly, ſo moderated, that
euery manne maie drawe therehence, enough to ſatiffie
him ſelf, if ſo be that he come to drawe after a deuout and
Godly ſorte, as true Religion requireth. And immediatly
before the place that you ſeeme to take holde of: he

                     〈1 page missing〉
                  
               
               
                  
By that interpretation that you make of the wordes
that are written in the ſixteene of Mathew: ye maintaine
the groſſe errour, of buildyng Chriſt his Churche vpon
Peter the man,Aug. de verbis. Domini. ſer. 13. and not vpon Chriſt the Rocke: not withſtandyng,
that the beſt of the Catholique Doctors haue
written to the contrarie. Yea, and herehence come all
your Indulgencies and Pardones, with abſolute power
for your Pope to doe what he will▪ without checke or controulement.
               I might here take iuſt occaſion, to rehearſe all thoſe
errors, that haue bene, and are holden by your ſorte, and
aſcribe them all, to that whiche S. Austine ſpeaketh of
in the wordes that you cite: that is. That by your ſort, the
good Scriptures, are not well vnderſtanded. But ſtudiyng
to be breefe, I paſſe them ouer.
               To proceede in mine Aunſwere: you eatche holde of
S. Peter. And he muſt needes helpe you to face out your
lye.2. Pet. 3. If S. Peter will haue your fauour, he muſt needes
beare you recorde, that the Scriptures are full of harde
and deepe miſteries, as you haue taught S. Austine to
ſaie. But when the place that you cite ſhalbe weighed,
with indifferent iudgement: it will be founde that S. Peters
meanyng, was not as you take is to be.
               Sainct Peter hath written thus. But wee looke for
newe heauens, and a newe earth, accordyng to his promiſe,
wherein dwelleth righteouſneſſe. Wherefore beloued,
ſeeyng that ye looke for ſuche thinges thee dilligent,
that ye maie be founde of hym in peace, without ſpot, and
blameleſſe. And ſuppoſe, that the long ſufferyng of our
Lorde, is ſaluation: euen as our beloued brother Paule
(accordyng to the wiſedome giuen vnto hym) wrote to
you, as one that in al his Epiſtles, ſpeaketh of thoſe thinges,
amongſte whiche, ſome thynges are harde to be vnderſtanded,
whiche thei that bee vnlearned and vnſtable
doe peruerte, as thei doe alſo other Scriptures to their
owne deſtruction.
               
                  
If you reade theſe wordes of S. Peter in the Greeke
tongue (wherein the Apoſtle wrote them) you ſhall finde
that the Relatiue 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , is of the newter gender, and cannot
by the rules of Grammer, agree with 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , whiche
is of the feminine gender. Wherefore, it muſt be Engliſhed,
thus. In, or amongſt which thinges or matters that
Paule wrote of, and not, in thoſe Epiſtles that he wrote:
as in your application of Peters woordes, you ſeeme to
vnderſtande him to meane. But peraduenture, you haue
no good likyng of the Greeke Text, neither of our Latine
tranſlations. I will therefore ſet doune the wordes
of S. Peter, euen as I finde them in the tranſlation, that
is allowed in the Counſell of Trent: and as thei be writtē
in an old written Bible that I haue in Parchment, written,
I knowe not how many hundred yeares paſt. Thus
are thei written in the Bible. Propter quod chariſſimi,
haec expectantes, ſatagite, immaculati & inuiolati ei inueniri
in pace: & domini noſtri longanimitatem, ſalutem
arbitremini, ſicut & chariſſimus frater noſter Paulus,
ſecundum datam ſibi ſapientiam, ſcripſit vobis, ſicut
& in omnibus epiſtolis, loquens in eis de hijs, in quibus
ſunt quaedam difficilia intellectu, quae indocti & inſtabiles
deprauant, ſicut & caeteras ſcripturas, ad ſuam ipſorum
perditionem. And I thinke, that you your ſelfe
would tranſlate them into Engliſhe, thus. Wherefore,
dearely beloued, waityng for theſe thinges, giue your endeuour
to be founde vnto hym in peace, beeyng without
ſpot, and vndefiled: and thinke that the long ſufferyng of
our Lorde, is ſaluation, euen as our moſte deare brother
Paule (according to the wiſedom that is giuen vnto him)
hath written to you, euen as in euery Epiſtle, ſpeakyng
in them of thoſe thinges, amongſt whiche are ſome thinges,
that are harde to be vnderſtanded, whiche vnlearned
and vnſtable menne, doe depraue, euen as thei doe other
Scriptures, to their owne deſtruction.
               I truſt you doe ſee now, that we neede not that reaſon,

whiche you doe call childiſhe, and is not indeepe ſo
childiſhe, but that it hath in all ages been (and is ſtill) allowed
amongſt the learned, for the beſte rule in vnderſtandyng
of places of the Scripture, wherein is any difficultie.
               But now you doe begge (or rather take) leaue, to poſe
vs one queſtion furder, to the quicke. And thus you ſaie.
How is it poſſible, to knowe by any conference of the
Scriptures, which is Canonicall Scripture, and which
is not? &c.
               You ſeeme to bee perſwaded that this queſtion toucheth
to the quicke in deede. For you affirme plainly, that
if any Infidell, Hereticke, or Arbeiſt, ſhall denie any
parte of the olde or newe Teſtament, or the whole olde
and new Teſtament (as in tymes paſt ſome haue doen.)
&c. We haue no Ankor holde againſt ſuch, but onely the
Reuelation of God to the Churche, by Tradition, which
Churche is the piller, and ſure ſtaie of truth. &c.
               I confeſſe, that the Church is the Piller and ſure ſtaie
of truthe, as Sainct Paule writeth.1. Tim. 3. But that this truth
is reuealed to the Churche by Tradition (as you write)
that I denie. For God hath taught, (and doth ſtill teach)
the truthe to his Churche, by the worde of truth, and not
by Reuelation or Tradition. And that worde of truthe is
ſufficient, and needeth not that any thyng ſhould bee added
to it: either by Reuelation, or by Tradition. Yea▪
there is an horrible curſſe pronounced againſt all ſuch as
ſhall adde any thyng to in.
               The true Catholique Churche, is in deede the Piller
and ſure ſtaie, whereon, that truthe that is taught by the
worde of truthe, doeth ſtaie. For that worde of truthe, is
the voyce of her Sheepeheard, and ſhe delighteth in hearyng
that voyce: but the voyce of a ſtraunger ſhe can not
abyde to heare. The truthe taught by the voyce of her
Sheepehearde, ſhe laieth vp in her harte: and all her delight
is to lette men ſee it, in her life and conuerſation,

that ſéeing her good lyfe, they may be occaſioned therby,
to glorifie her ſpouſe Chriſte, and his and her heauenly
Father.
               This is that authoritie, that S. Austine ſayth, moued
him to beléeue the Goſpell. And this authoritie cauſed
him to write thus, againſt that Epiſtle of Manichaeus,
which the Maniches called theyr foundation.Tom. 6. 
                  Ego veró
Euangelio non crederem, niſi me Catholicae Eccleſiae
commoueret authoritas. Surely, I would not beléeue
the Goſpell, except the authoritie of the Church dyd
mooue me thereto.
               Not many lines before thoſe words, S. Austine ſayth
thus to the Maniches. Apud vos, vbi nihil horum eſt,
quod me inuitet ac teneat. &c. That is: Amongſt you,
where no part of that thing is, which might allure and
holde me, there ſoūdeth only a promiſing of the trueth:
which vndoubtedly, if it be ſhewed foorth ſo manifeſtly,
that it may not be doubted of: it is to be preferred before
all thoſe thinges that doo holde me in the Church.
               I pray you (Maiſter Pownde) ponder well theſe
wordes of Austine: and be not afrayde with Austine to
yéelde, to the manifeſt trueth, (when it ſhall be manifeſted
to you) onely becauſe it lacketh the conſent of
Peoples, and Nations, the authoritie of Myracles, the
nouriſhment of hope, the increaſe of looue, the eſtabliſhment
of Antiquitie, the holde from Peters ſeate, the ſucceſſion
of Prieſts, and the name of Catholique. For S.
Augustine ſayth: That the manifeſt trueth muſt be preferred
before all theſe.
               But if you wyll marke it well, you ſhall finde that
the trueth which we holde and teach, and would wiſhe
you and all your ſort to embrace, dooth not lacke the
chéefeſt of thoſe thinges that mooued S. Austine firſt to
embrace it. For it is the ſame, that firſt gotte credite, by
thoſe Myracles that were wrought by Chriſte and his
Apoſtles.Mark. 16. It was, and is ſtyll nouriſhed by hope: It

was, and is ſtyll increaſed by looue, it is alſo confirmed
by that ſeate which you call Peters, and hath the ſucceſſion
of Prieſts, although not in ſuch ſort as you allowe
of. And laſt of all, it hath the right name of Catholique.
               Thus, I hope, you doo now ſée, that you haue not
rightly applied, eyther the words of Paule, or of Austine:
mynding thereby to prooue, that the Church of Roome,
(being ſuch a Church, as nowe it ſheweth it ſelfe to be)
is the Piller of trueth, and that Catholique Church,
whereunto all Chriſtians ſhould and muſt of neceſſitie
cleaue, if they wyll be ſaued by Chriſte.
               Your concluſion, wherein you aduiſe all men to beware
of fléeing from the Church, to the iudgement of
the Scriptures onely. &c. Was not ſo aduiſedly made,
as were ſéemely to be made, by one that were ſo well
ſéen in the writings of ye Fathers, as you would ſéeme
to be. For (as I thinke, yea, I am perſwaded, that I
may ſafely affirme,) there is not one of the auncient
Fathers, of your minde in that poynt.
               Saint Auſtine, in his Epiſtle fortie and eight, written
to Vincentius, ſayth thus. Noli ergò frater, contra
diuina tam multa, tam clara, tam indubitata teſtimonia.
&c. Doo not therefore (Brother) ſhewe thy ſelfe
wylling, to gather out of the wrytinges of Biſhoppes,
reproches againſt ſo heauenly, ſo many, ſo cleare, and
ſo vndoubted teſtimonies: whether the ſame Biſhops
be on our ſide, as Hillarius, or of the vnitie it ſelfe, before
the faction of Donatus was ſeparated from it, as
Cyprian, and Agripinus: Firſt for that, that kinde of
writing muſt be diſtinguiſhed, from the authoritie of
the Canon, for they are not ſo read, that teſtimonie
ſhould be taken out of them, that it might not be lawfull
for any man, to be of a minde contrarie thereto,
if perhappes they ſhall in any place be of other minde
then the trueth requireth. For we are of that number

that may not diſdayne, to take euen vnto our ſelfe,
this ſaying of the Apoſtle. And if ye be of an other
minde in any thing,Phil. 3. God wyll reueale the ſame to you
alſo.
               Thus you may ſée, that S Auſtine dooth not allowe
the ſentence of any man, no nor the ſentence of the vnitie
it ſelfe (which I vnderſtand to be a generall Councell)
againſt the Canonicall Scripture.
               The ſame Saint Austine, wryting to Saint Ierome
in his fifteene Epiſtle,Epiſt. 15. ſayth thus. Ego enim fateor
charitati tuae. &c. I confeſſe (ſayth S. Austine)
I haue learned to giue this reuerende feare and honor,
onely to thoſe Bookes of the Scriptures, which nowe
are called Canonicall: that I doe firmely beléeue, that
none of the Authors of them, haue in wryting erred any
thing at all.
               By this ſaying of Saint Austine, it may appeare, that
he was of this minde, that there may be errour, euen in
the decrées of your generall Councels.
               Againe,De Bapt. Libr. 2. Cap. 2. againſt the Donatiſtes, Saint Austine wryteth
thus. Quis autem neſciat Scripturam canonicam.
&c. Who can be ignoraunt (ſayth Saint Austine)
that the holy Scripture, as well of the olde as of
the newe Teſtament, is conteyned within her owne
boundes or lymittes: and that the ſame is ſo preferred
before all the latter wrytings of Biſhops, that concerning
it, there may be no doubt or controuerſie at
all, whether any thing that is certainly knowne to
be written in it, be true or right. And the writinges
of Byſhoppes, which haue bene, or be written, after
the confirmation of the Canon, may be found faulte
with (if it happen that any thing therein doo ſwarue
from the trueth) eyther by more wyſe ſpéeche of any
other, that is more expert in that matter: or by
the more graue Authoritie of other Biſhoppes,
or the wiſedome of menne better learned, or by

Councels, yea, and that the Councels them ſelues,
which are holden in particular Regions, or Prouinces,
muſt without any doubting, giue place, to the authoritie
of full Councels, which are made of the vniuerſall
Chriſtian world. Yea, & that the full or generall Councels
that are firſt holden, may be amended by them that
are holden afterwardes, when by any experience of
thinges, that thing that before was ſhut, is made open,
and that thing which lay hyd, is made knowne. And
this may be done, without any hautineſſe of ſacrilegious
pride, without any ſwelling throte of arrogancie,
without any contencion of ſpightfull enuie, with holie
humilitie, with Catholique peace, and with Chriſtian
Charitie. Thus farre Austine.
               
               Nowe I thinke you wyll confeſſe, that your Catholique
Church may erre: or elſe that S. Auſtine, one of
the Doctors of that Church dyd erre. For he ſayth, that
the latter generall Councels, may amend the former.
He ſayth alſo, that there may be no doubt or controuerſie
about the trueth of any thing, that is knowne to be
written in the Canonicall Scriptures. Therefore,
blame vs not, though we flée from the iudgement of
the Church to the ſcriptures, which can neuer deceaue
vs.
               And as touching that inconuenience that you doo put
vs in minde of, which is the denying of the Scriptures
by Atheiſts: I pray you let me propone one queſtion to
you, and ſo poſe you as night to the quicke as you haue
poſed vs. What if your Church ſhould vtterly be denied
to be the Church of Chriſte? Or what if thoſe Atheiſts
that be in Englande, or elſe where, ſhould denie
that Chriſte hath any Church at all: or that there is, or
hath been, any ſuch Chriſte as we beléeue in? Might not
thoſe Infidels (thinke you) laugh you to ſcorne, for robbing
your ſelues of your owne defence,Ephe. 6. which is the
worde of God, which Saint Paule calleth the ſworde

of the Spirite?
               But now you wyll returne to your purpoſe. If conference
of one Scripture with an other, might giue
lyght enough to all men: Howe happeneth it, that all
ſectes vſing that conference, the ſectaries can neuer agrée
in theyr opinions. &c. To this, not I, but S. Paule
ſhall giue you aunſwer.1. Cor. 11. 
                  Oportet haereſes eſſe, vt hij qui
probati ſunt, manifeſti ſint in vobis. It can not be auoyded,
but that there muſt be hereſies, or ſectes, that they
which be tryed, may be made knowne amongſt you.
Let S. Paule defend his owne aſſertion, as he can. I
wyll betake me to that vttermoſt ſhift that you ſay we
haue, notwithſtanding, that you call it a weake one.
               Saint Austine ſayth, that the Scriptures muſt be
read, by ſuch as doo vndoubtedly beléeue, that they are
moſt true witneſſes. And theſe are his wordes. Agant
orando,
                  De Trini. Libr. 15. 
                  & quaerendo, & bene viuēdo vt intelligant. &c.
That is: They muſt labour by prayer, and by ſéeking,
and by lyuing well: that they may vnderſtand, that is,
that they may ſée in minde, (as much as may be ſéene)
that which they doo holde by faith.Iam. 1. And S▪ 
                  Iames ſayth.
If any man lacke wiſedome, let him aſke it of God. &c.
               Thus may you ſée, that both S. Iames, and S. Austine
doo allowe of this ſhift, which you doo accoumpt to be ſo
weake, and ſuch intollerable pride. Yea, S. Austine addeth
theſe wordes. Quis hoc prohibeat? imó veró, ad hoc
quis non hortetur? Who can forbid this? Yea rather,
who wyll not exhort héerunto? doo you therfore accoūpt
of it as you luſte: we wyll ſtyll vſe it, as the ready
way to attayne to that knowledge, that is neceſſarie
for vs.
               As for the reuealing of the trueth to the vniuerſall
Church, for which Chriſte him ſelfe dyd praye: we confeſſe
that according to his promiſe, Chriſte hath reuealed
to them altogether, and to euery perticular member
amongſt them, as much as he knewe to be méete to be

reuealed to them. And ſo be the wordes of his promiſe.
Ille vos docebit omnia, & ſuggeret vobis omnia, quae cū
                     que
dixero vobis. He ſhall teach you all thinges, and he
ſhall put you in minde of all thoſe thinges, that I ſhall
ſpeake vnto you.
               The pleaſaunt paſtime that you make, with the
courſe that we take, in the ſearche and ſtudie of the
Scriptures, I paſſe ouer: for I knowe, that he onely to
whome we pray, dooth know how faithfully we pray,
and whether with teares or without. To him we ſhall
ſtande, or fall▪ Iudge not you an other mans Seruaunt.
               But you ſay, we muſt néedes be all deceyued, ſo long
as we dwell in diſſention, and are not in errours only,
but alſo, one of vs contrarie to an other. And who now
muſt be Iudge, to trie the Spirites, whether they be of
God, or no? Onely the Church, (ſay you) or elſe they
ſhall not be tryed at all. &c.
               For the firſt, Saint Paule hath tolde you, that of neceſſitie,
ſectes muſt be amongſt men,1. Cor. 11. and euen amongſt
ſuch as be of the Church of Chriſte: And that becauſe,
ſuch as be allowed or tryed, can not otherwiſe be knowen.
And as touching the other poynt, Saint Austine
ſayth thus. Contra inſidioſos errores, Deus voluit ponere
firmamentum in ſcripturis,
                  In. 1. Iohn Epiſt. Cap. 2. 
                  contra quas, nullus audet
loqui▪ qui quoquo modo ſe vult videri Chriſtianum. It
was the pleaſure of God, to ſet in the ſcriptures, a ſure
Bulwarke againſt deceytfull errours: againſt which
Scriptures, no man, that is any way wylling to ſéeme
to be a Chriſtian, dare be bolde to ſpeake.
               As golde by the toutch ſtone, ſo are the ſpirites tryed
by the Scripture. And euerie one that is ſkilfull in the
ſcriptures, that is, that can by conferring of one ſcripture
with an other. finde out the meaning of the holy
ghoſt in the ſcriptures: may be as bolde to vſe the ſcripture
in the tryall of ſpirites, as the Goldſmith may be,

to vſe the toutch ſtone, in the tryall of mettalles. And
if ye thinke that the conference of one Scripture with
an other, be not the ſureſt way to attaine to the true
meaning of the Scriptures, looke Saint Austine, De
Doctrina Chriſtiana. Lib. 3. Cap. 26. And thus much for
aunſwer to your ſecond Reaſon, which I haue called
Falſe.
            
            
               The third Reaſon.
               THe thirde Reaſon that mooueth you to thinke, that
the Scriptures are to be iudged by the Church: is,
for that S. Peter hath written,2. Pet. 1. 
                  That no Scripture is to
be taken after any priuate interpretation. &c.
               
               This Reaſon I haue called Fooliſhe, for that fooliſhly
you doo ruſhe into the Epiſtle of Saint Peter, and report
his wordes otherwiſe then he wrote them: and
then you your ſelfe doo make a priuate interpretation
of them, contrarie to the decrée made in the Councell
of Trent: whereof you would ſéeme to make greateſt
accoumpt.
               The words of Saint Peter, as they doo ſtande in that
tranſlation that the Coūcell of Trent hath allowed, are
theſe. Hoc primùm intelligentes, quód omnis prophaetia
ſcripturae, propria interpretatione non fit. Vnderſtanding
this thing firſt: that no propheſie of the ſcripture,
is made by priuate interpretation. I meruayle
howe you (being ſuch a Catholique as you profeſſe to
be) durſt ſet downe Peters wordes, otherwiſe then you
finde them in that tranſlation. For I am ſure, you are
not ignoraunt of the penaltie that the Councell hathSeſsio. 4.
appointed for ſuch doinges.
               But this is not all your miſdemeanour in this
behalfe. For you make a priuate Interpretation,

contrarie, bothe to the decrée, and alſo to this thyrde
Reaſon of yours. For, to make a priuate interpretation,
is to make ſuch a one as differeth from the auncient
wryters, and is not allowed of the Church. But where
can you ſhewe me any auncient writer, that hath interpreted
thoſe wordes of Peter, as you doo?
               Saint Austine medleth not with them. No more
dooth S. Ierome, S. Ambroſe, S. Gregorie, nor Chryſostome,
nor any other of that tyme, that I haue ſéene, or can
heare of.
               
                  Nicholaus Lyranus, writing vpon theſe wordes of S.
Peter, ſayth that the meaning of S. Peter, was to teach:
that no propheticall Scripture hath begynning in, or
dooth ſpring out of humane ſenſe, or mannes meaning.
For thus he wryteth. Propria interpretatione non fit, id
eſt,
                  Lyranus in. 2. Epi. Peter. 
                  non fit ſenſu humano: ideo ſubditur. Non enim voluntate
humana allata eſt aliquando prophetia, ſed ſpiritu
ſancto inſpirati. &c. It is not made (ſayth he) by any
mans owne interpretatiō (that is to ſay) it is not made
by humane ſenſe: and therefore, this ſaying is ſet immediatly
after. Prophecie hath not at any tyme been
brought in, by mans wyll: but men inſpired with the
holy Ghoſt. &c.
               I thinke your Fathers of the Councell of Trent, will
allowe Lyranus for a Catholique wryter: wherefore,
I thinke alſo that they wyll not diſpenſe with you, for
diſſenting from him, in the interpreting of S. Peters
wordes.
               But nowe, if ye wyll giue me leaue, I wyll tell you
what I thinke to be the meaning of S. Peter in theſe
words. Firſt I thinke, that you doo know, that S. Peter
wrote in Greeke. And then you muſt knowe, that the
wordes which in the allowed tranſlation, are Priuata
interpretatione: are in the Greeke, 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  .
And they that haue any ſkyll in the Greeke tongue, will
tell you that 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   dooth ſignifie Impulſus, as well

as Interpretatio. And may we not tranſlate the wordes
of S. Peter thus? Omnis prophetica ſcriptura, non fit
proprij impulſus. Euerie propheticall Scripture, is not
made of, or by priuate, or proper impulſion. Or to tranſlate
it more Engliſh lyke: No propheticall Scripture
is made of, or by priuate or proper impulſion.
               It ſéemeth to me, that bothe the wordes that goe before,
and alſo the wordes that followe, doo enforce this
to be the meaning of Saint Peter. For he ſayth thus.
We haue a firme and ſure propheticall ſpéeche: and you
doo well in that you doo giue good héede thereto, as vnto
a Candle that appeareth in a darke place, vntyl the day
may waxe cleare, and the day ſtarre may aryſe in your
heartes. But yet ſo, that you doo firſt knowe, that no
propheticall Scripture, is made by priuate or proper
impulſion. For propheſie hath not at any tyme bene
brought vnto vs by the wyll of men, but the holy men
of God haue ſpoken, as by the ſpirite of God, they haue
bene driuen, or vehementlie mooued to ſpeake.
               Let your fréendes conſider of this, and tell you whether
this may be allowed for Catholique or not. I do
                     •
                  
not write this, as one that doo not thinke that ſaying
of yours (No Scripture is to be taken after any priuate
interpretation) to be true: or as one that dooth allowe
the raſhneſſe of ſuch as wyll ruſhe into the Scriptures,
without ſuch reuerance as is ſéemely, and take vppon
them to make interpretations after their owne fantaſies.
I know that all that we can doo, and all the helpes
that we can haue, are lyttle enough, and therefore I
thinke it méete, for all men, to follow the rules that S.
Austine preſcribeth, writing, De Doctrina Chriſtiana.
And thus much may ſuffiſe to be ſayde, to your thirde
Reaſon, which by good Reaſon, and for iuſt cauſe (as I
thinke) I haue called Fooliſhe.
            
            
               
               The fowrth Reaſon.
               YOur fowrth Reaſon is, for that by appealing to the
Scripture, we ſeeme (as you ſay) to giue men lybertie
to denie all vnwritten verities, which we haue receyued
of the Church, eyther by expreſſe definition, in
generall Councell, or but by tradition. &c. And firſt,
you delyght your ſelfe with a frumpe at Crowley and
his fellowes, that wil laugh (as you ſay) ſo ſoone as they
heare of vnwritten verities. And it ſéemeth that you
perſwade your ſelfe that you haue done it verie finely.
And therfore I haue named this Reaſon of yours Fā
                  taſticall.
               But yet a little to temper our follie (you will not ſay
our pride) you will aſke vs how we prooue the Trinity
of perſons, and the vnitie of ſubſtaunce in the Godhead,
by expreſſe Scriptures. &c.
               Nine verities we muſt prooue by Scriptures, which
are not (as you ſay) written in the Canonicall Scriptures.
Well, to ſtaie your wiſdome, I wyll (by Gods
mercifull aſſiſtance) doo what may be done in this matter.
And I hope to prooue as many of them, as be neceſſary
to be knowne to ſaluation: euen by plaine ſcriptures.
And the reſt. I hope I ſhall be able to prooue,
in ſuch ſort as the Fathers haue prooued them, againſt
ſuch as haue at any tyme denied them. And firſt, I muſt
prooue, that in the Godhead, there be thrée diſtinct perſons,
and but one ſubſtaunce. This and the ſecond, that
is, that in Chriſte there be two diſtinct Natures, and
but one perſon: I thinke I ſhall eaſily prooue.
               The Prophet Dauid, hath written thus. Pſal. 110.
The Lord hath ſayde to my Lord,Pſal. 110. ſyt thou at my right
hande, tyll I make thine enimies thy foote ſtoole. The
Lord ſhall ſend out of Sion, the Scepter of thy power,

beare thou rule in the myddes amongſt his enimies.
Thus much in the two firſt verſes. And in the fift verſe
he ſayth thus. The Lord at thy right hand, hath wounded
euen Kinges in the day of his wrath.
               That the Prophet Dauid, dyd in theſe verſes of this
Pſalme, ſpeake of the diuine Maieſtie, and of the ſecond
perſon Chriſt: it is manifeſted by that which S. Mathew
writeth in his twenty and two Chapt. Vos quid dicitis
de Chriſto? cuius filius eſt? What doo you ſay of Chriſte?
whoſe ſonne is he? &c.
               The Lord. That is God the Father. Sayde to my
Lord. That is to God the Sonne. &c. Héere haue we
two diſtincted perſons, the Father, and the Sonne. And
in the ſeconde verſe, he ſayth: The Lorde ſhall ſend
out of Sion, the Scepter of thy power, which is, the
worde of the Goſpell. And this Scepter was ſent out
of Sion by the holy Ghoſte, in the feaſt of Pentecoſte:
when he reſted vppon the Apoſtles, in the ſhape of 
                     〈…〉
                  rie
tongues deuided. So that héere we haue the thyrde
perſon, and ſo conſequently thrée diſtinct perſons. The
Father ſayth to the ſonne, ſit thou at my right hand. &c.
And the holy Ghoſt ſendeth the word, which is the ſcepter
of the power of the Sonne out of Sion. And in the
fift verſe he ſayth. The Lorde at thy right hand, ſhall
wounde euen Kinges in the day of his wrath. Thus
ſpeaketh the diuine Maieſtie: God the Father, God the
Sonne, God the holy Ghoſte, one diuine Maieſtie: to
the Church of Chriſte hée re milytaunt vppon earth.
So haue we the vnitie, of the thrée diſtinct perſons in
the deitie. And Chriſte him ſelfe, expounding the firſt
verſe of this Pſalme to be ſpoken of him ſelfe, dooth a
warrant vs, that he béeing Dauids ſonne after the fleſh,
is neuertheleſſe Dauids Lorde, and therefore God.
And ſo bothe God and man, and yet but one Chriſte.
For be ſayth: What ſay you of Chriſte?Math. 22. Whoſe ſonne
is hée?
               
                  
This might ſuffiſe to ſhewe, that theſe two verities
are not vnwritten, as you do terme them. But to ſatiſfie
you to the full: looke what S. Mathew hath written,
in the laſt Chapter, & laſt words of his Goſpell: reporting
the wordes of our Sauiour, who ſayth thus there.
All power bothe in heauen and earth, is giuen vnto me.
Goe your way therfore, and teach all Nations, baptizing
them in the name of the Father, of the Sonne, and of the
holy Ghoſt: teaching them to obſerue all thoſe thinges
that I haue commaunded you. And behold, I am with
you euerie day, euen to the ende of the world.
               
               Héere the man Chriſte, receyueth from the diuine
Maieſtie, all power, bothe in heauen and in earth: and
by that power he giueth commiſſion to his Apoſtles to
goe and teache all Nations, and to Baptize them in the
name of the Father, of the Sonne, & of the holy Ghoſt.
So that héere againe we haue thrée diſtinct perſonnes:
and their vnitie, in giuing to Chriſte all power in heauen
and in earth: and the two natures, in one perſon
Chriſte, in that he receyueth all power in heauen and
in earth, and giueth commiſſion to his Apoſtles to teach
and baptize.
               If this will not ſatiſfie you: I refer you to that which
S. Austine hath written in his booke,Tom. 3. 
                  De Trinit. There
ſhall you finde proofe vpon proofe, that theſe verities are
not vnwritten.
               The thirde veritie that you ſay is vnwritten, is that
God the Father was neuer begotten. It ſéemeth that
you haue not read S. Peaules Epiſtle to the Epheſians:
for if you had, you muſt néedes haue ſéene, that this is
no vnwritten veritie. Saint Paule writeth thus. Huius
rei gratia flecto genua mea, ad patrem Domini noſtri Ieſu
Chriſti, ex quo omnis paternitas in coelo & in terra
nominatur.
                  Ephe. 3. For this cauſe (ſayth S. Paule) doo I bowe
my knées, to the Father of our Lorde Ieſus Chriſte, of
whome all Fatherhoode, bothe in heauen and in earth

dooth take name. I trow you will not now ſay that this
veritie is vnwritten.
               The fowrth veritie, that you ſay is not written, is
that the holy Ghoſt procéedeth bothe from the Father
and the Sonne, as from one fountayne. If you would
reade that which S. Iohn hath written: I thinke you
would not ſay that this veritie is vnwritten.Iohn. 15. &. 20. 
                  Cum venerit
paracletus, quem ego mittam vobis a patre, spiritū
veritatis, qui a patre procedit: ille teſtimonium perhibebit
de me. &c. When the Comforter ſhall come, whome
I wyll ſende vnto you from the Father, euen the ſpirit
of trueth, that procéedeth from the Father: he ſhall teſtifie
of me. &c. And in the twentie Chapter he ſayth.
Haec cum dixiſſet, inſufflauit, & dixit eis: Accipite ſpiritum
ſanctum. When he had ſpoken theſe wordes, he
breathed vpon them, and he ſayde vnto them: Receyue
ye the holy Ghoſt. &c. If breath may be ſayde, to procéede
from the perſon that breatheth: then may we ſay,
that it is written, that the holy Ghoſt procéedeth from
Chriſte, the ſonne of God, euen as it is written, that he
procéedeth from God the Father.
               I wyll be bolde therefore, without any more a doo, to
conclude, that theſe fowre verities, are not vnwritten,
but written in déede in the Canonicall Scriptures.
               The fift vnwritten verity, is the deſcending of Chriſt
into hell: this you muſt haue prooued by plaine wordes
of Scripture, the lacke whereof (as you ſay) hath cauſed
many, nowe a dayes to deny it flatly. I am none of
them that doo ſo deny it. But that he deſcended in ſuch
manner, as your Catholiques haue taught, and as it
hath bene ſet foorth in their Stage Playes, and in their
payntinges in glaſſe windowes, & elſe where, I thinke
would be as harde a thing for you to prooue, any way,
as for vs to prooue by plaine wordes of Scripture, that
he dyd in déede deſcende into hell.
               I thinke you wyll graunt that the ſpéeche vſed in the

Créede, concerning Chriſtes deſcending into hell, is
figuratiue, vſed by the figure Synecdoche: wherein the
whole is vnderſtanded in the parte. For you wyll
not (I thinke) ſay, that Chriſtes body went into hell:
For that was buried and reſted in the graue, tyll the
tyme that it was reſtored to lyfe againe. Well. Then
it was his ſpirite, that deſcended into hell
                     •
                   and not his
body and ſpirite bothe. This being graūted (as I think,
you wyll not deny to doo) we ſhall eaſily prooue, euen by
plaine wordes of the Scripture, that Chriſte deſcended
into hell.
               Saint Peter, in the thirde Chapter of his firſt Epiſtle,1. Pet. 3.
ſayth thus. Quia et Chriſtus ſemel pro peccatis mortuus
eſt, iuſtus pro iniuſtis: vt nos offeret Deo, mortificatus
quidem carne, viuificatus autem ſpiritu. In quo & his
qui in carcere erant ſpiritibus veniens, praedicauit. &c.
For euen Chriſte (ſayth Saint Peter) dyd once dye for
ſinnes, the iuſte for the vniuſte, that he might offer
vs vnto God: mortified in the fleſhe indéede, but quickened
in the ſpirite, in which ſpirite, comming to thoſe
ſpirites that were in priſon: he dyd preach vnto them.
Nowe, I thinke you wyll ſay, that I haue prooued by
plaine words of Scripture, that Chriſte deſcended into
hell.
               But howe great a matter were it, If this might
not be prooued by any playne Scripture: ſéeing the
Nicene Créede (vſed in your Maſſe) maketh no mencion
of it.
               And Damaſus, that was Biſhop of Rome. 360. yéeres
alter Chriſtes aſcencion, when Iulianus the Apoſtata
was Emperour, hath in his Créede no worde of it.
And yet he concludeth his Creede with theſe wordes.
Haec lege,
                  Ieroni. Tom. 4. 
                  haec crede, haec retine, huic fidei animam tuam
ſubiuga: & vitam conſequeris & premium a Chriſto.
That is: Reade theſe wordes, beléeue them, holde
them faſte, yoake thy ſoule to this Faith: and thou ſhalt

obtayne of Chriſte, bothe life and reward.
               I note this, becauſe I ſée that you ſhoote at this
marke. To binde vs, eyther to prooue all your vnwritten
verities by Scripture: or elſe, for lacke of
ſuch proofe, to beleeue (as true) whatſoeuer your Catholique
Church ſhall allowe for trueth, although the
ſame be neuer ſo vnneceſſarie to be prooued, or receyued
for trueth.
               Your ſixt vnwritten veritie, is the cuſtome of
Baptizinge Infauntes. For this, I néede not to
wryte much.Mark. 10. Our Sauiour Chriſte hath ſayde: Suffer
little Chyldren to come to me, and forbidde them
not: For to ſuch dooth the kingdome of God belong.
And Saint Paule ſayth: That the Children of beléeuing
Parents, are holy.1. Cor. 7. Therefore they are not to be
holden from Baptiſme: more then the Iewes children
from Circumciſion.
               Your other thrée whyes are ſcarce worthy the aunſwering.
Why ſhould we kéepe the Sunday now at all▪
and not the Saturday? Why ſhould we not abſtaine
now ſtyll, like Iewes, from ſtrangled meates, as the Apoſtles
decreed? And why may not any Heretike, deny
all the thrée Créedes. &c.
               The firſt of theſe whyes, ſhall be aunſwered with
an other why.Mark. a. As why may not the Church of Chriſtians,
being Lordes of the Sabaoth, chuſe for
their Sabaoth, one daye in ſeuen, euen that daye,
the obſeruing whereof, they ſhall ſée to ſerue beſt for
theyr owne edification? And why did the Apoſtles
(as it maye be gathered, by that which Saint Iohn
hath written in his Reuelation)Apoc. 1. chuſe the firſt daye
of the wéeke to be theyr Sabaoth, and not the laſte?
And why doo you not remember that Saint Paule dooth
number the Sabaoth amongſt ſuch indifferent things,
as are Meates and Drinckes,Collo. 2. Feſtiuall dayes, and

new Moones: which were but ſhadowes of thinges to
come? &c.
               And to your ſecond why, I ſay that the Apoſtles ſaw,
that it was neceſſarie for the tyme, to forbydde thoſe
Chriſtians, that then lately had bene Heathen men: to
ſéede vpō ſtrangled or blood. And néeded not to abrogate
it afterwarde,Acts. 15. when they were further inſtructed, and
knew how to vſe the Chriſtiā lybertie without offence.
A man might meruayle, why any wiſe man, would
mooue ſuch a why as this.
               Your thirde, & laſt why, may be fully aunſwered with
theſe wordes. Becauſe there is no thing in thoſe thrée
Créedes: that may not eaſily be prooued by the Scriptures.
And thus are all your whyes aunſwered.
               But, doo you not marke, howe theſe bedlem Catholiques,
would ſhake the foundation of our Chriſtian
fayth: by bynding vs to beléeue, that Chriſtes Catholique
Church hath ſet foorth (as infallibly true) and to
be beléeued vnder paine of dampnation) three Créedes,
the Articles whereof, they are not able to prooue by
the Scriptures? doo not theſe blinde guides (thinke
you) leade vs a trym daunce, towardes ſhameles error
and ignorauuce? And thus much to your fowrth Reaſon,
which for good cauſe I haue called, Fantaſticall.
Bothe, for that it ſéemeth that you perſwade your 
                     •
                  elwfe,
that you handle your ſelfe verie finely, in all that you
write therein: and alſo, for that you haue vttered nothing
therein, that may not well ſéeme to ſpring out of
a fantaſticall head.
            
            
               The fift Reaſon.
               YOur fift Reaſon, I haue called Fradulent, becauſe
you doo therein compare the lawes and Scriptures
of God, to the lawes of men, made for ciuill pollicie

and gouernment. And the Iudges & gouernors in ciuill
pollicie, to the Eccleſiaſtical miniſters, & gouernours of
the Church of Chriſt, in matters of faith. This is fraudulently,
to bring y• holy Scriptures (which of right are
the toutchſtone, for all mennes iudgements to be tryed
by) to be vnder the iudgement of ſome one man, as your
Pope▪ (who challengeth authoritie, aboue the generall
Councels) or of that number of men that ſhalbe gathered
together in a generall Coūcell (which doo challenge
authoritie aboue the Pope.) But God that is Author
of all perfection, and dooth diſpoſe euery thing in a ſwéet
and decent order: hath prouided much better for his Catholique
Church, héere millitaunt on earth, then that it
ſhould be driuen to ſéeke for reſolution of doubts, at the
bandes of ſuch Iudges as may erre, as your Pope and
generall Councels haue and may doo.
               The Father of lyghts, the giuer of all good gyftes, in
whome there is no chaunge or ſhewe of variableneſſe.
The Spirite of trueth, that can neyther deceyue, nor be
deceyued: is ready at hand with euery one, that in humilitie
of minde craueth wiſedome, and wyll not ſuffer
any ſuch, lōg to be in doubt of any thing, the knowledge
whereof is neceſſarie to ſaluation. If you (ſayth our ſauiour)
which be naught, doo know how to giue good gifts
to your children. How much more ſhall your heauenly
Father,Luk. 11. giue the holy ſpirit, to them that aſke it of him?
Gods chyldren may be bolde (in ſuch caſes as I haue
ſpoken of) to craue Gods ſpirite, and aſſure themſelues▪
to receyue it at his handes.1. Pet. 5. But the proude and hauty
minded, ſhalbe as ſure to finde God theyr enimie.
               This Iudge is alwayes ready in the ſcriptures, to open
the vnderſtādings of as many as doo reſort thether
(with humilitie of minde) ſéeking there to be reſolued of
theyr neceſſarie doubts.
               That both your Popes, & generall Coūcels haue erred
(& therfore may erre) I wil by Gods help plainly proue.
               
                  
Firſt, if it were poſſible to perſwade you, that to make
a decrée directly, contrarie to the expreſſe commaundement
of God, is an error: then it ſhould be an eaſie matter
to cauſe you to confeſſe, that bothe a Pope, and a generall
Councell haue erred.
               For, the ſixt generall Councell, holden at Conſtantinople,
where .289. Biſhops were gathered together: it
was amongſt other thinges decréede, that holy Images
ſhould be had in Churches, and that the ſame ſhould be
with great reuerence worſhipped.Tom. 1. And this Councell
was holden when the firſt Agatho was Pope, and this
decrée was allowed by him.Diſti. 16. And afterward by Adrian
the firſt Pope of that name.
               So that one generall Councell, and two Popes, haue
erred in one decrée, made againſt, and directly contrary
to Gods commaundement. Thou ſhall not make to thy
ſ
                     •
                  l
                     •
                  e any grauen Image. &c.
               
                  Iohn ths.An. 956. Vorat. Plat. 12. of that name, behaued him ſelfe ſo well in
his nine yéeres gouernment: that one Hiſtorian calleth
him, Sceleratum virum. A man giuen ouer to all wickedneſſe.
And an other calleth him. Monſtrum hominis.
A Monſter amongſt men. And at the laſt he was ſlaine,
being taken in adulterie.
               But peraduenture you wyll ſay: theſe faults procéede
of humane infirmitie. But what wyll you then ſay to
Sylueſter the ſeconde,Plat. Volat. that gaue him ſelfe to the Diuell,
that he might obtaine ye Popedome, which he obtayned
in déede, and dyd enioy it fowre yéeres.
               
                  Benedictus the ninthe, lyued ſo wickedly, governing
the Church fiftéene yéeres: that one Hiſtorian ſayth, he
was,Volat. 
                  Vir plane probroſus & infamis, that is: A man
altogether worthy of reproches, or euyll reportes, and
infamous: And an other ſayth: that after his death,
hée was ſéene in an horrible ſhape,Plat. and that be ſayde
thus. Iuſto Dei iudicio damnatus sum, quia fine
Lege vixi. I am dampned, euen by the iuſte

iudgement of GOD: becauſe I lyued without
lawe.
               If all this wyll not ſuffiſe you, conſider I pray you▪
the Councell of Baſill: holden in the yere .1431. And
Pope Eugenius, that in thoſe dayes ruled the Church .16
yéeres. This Engenius dyd once allowe the decrées of
that Coūcell: And afterward he did diſallow the ſame.
Whereby, it is manifeſt that he erred, either in the firſt
or in the laſt. And if the Popes authorite be aboue the
Councell: then that Councell dyd erre in depoſing that
Pope. And if the Councell be aboue the Pope: then did
that Pope erre in excomunicating that Councell.
               If you wyll take paines in reading the Hiſtories; you
ſhall finde amongſt the Popes, the Saduces errour, the
Arrians errour, the Pellagians errour mainteyned. Yea
you ſhall finde, and we doo ſée manifeſtly, that at this
day, your whole Church dooth mainteyne the hereſie of
the Anthropomorphits. For you haue in all your Churches,
the Image of God the Father: reſembling an olde
man with gray haires, as though tyme had now made
him olde, as it dooth all creatures.
               But when your Church had thrée Popes at one time,
Iohn the .23. Gregorie the .12. and Benedict the .13. To
which of theſe would you haue ſent vs, for reſolution of
our doubtes▪ Yea, and when your Church was two
yéeres together, without eyther Pope or generall Coū
                  cell:
whether would you haue wiſhed vs, to leaue the
Iudgement in matters of Church cōtrouerſies, at that
tyme? I hope you wyll no longer wiſhe vs to leaue the
Scripture that neuer did, nor ſhall fayle vs, and depend
vpon ſuch Iudges as theſe, that haue ſo often failed,
and as yet, were neuer full agréed.
               As for your compariſon that you make betwixt the
Churches and worldly kingdomes: it is not woorth a
Walnut. And your ſimilitude of a wyſe Burgeſſe in
Parliament: we weigh not. We knowe, and confeſſe,

that mens lawes are not, neither can be made ſo plaine
or perfect, but that it is neceſſary, that there be Iudges
that may haue authoritie to diſcide thoſe cōtrouerſies yt
may ariſe by occaſiō of ſiniſter conſtruing of ye meaning
of the words of the lawe, or by occaſion of the darkneſſe
of the ſame. But where finde you any ſuch darkneſſe,
or imperfection,Pſal. 119. in the Scriptures of God? Dooth not
Dauid ſay: Lucerna pedibus meis verbum tuum, & lumē
ſemitis meis. Thy worde (ſayth Dauid) is a Lanterne to
my féete, and a lyght to my pathes.
               Take héede that you be not one of them that Eſay
ſpeaketh of.Eſai. 5. That doe call lyght darkneſſe, and darkneſſe
lyght. &c.
               I doo graunt, that there may ſome queſtion ariſe amongſt
men, about the vnderſtāding of ſome places of
Scripture: but this ryſeth not of the darkneſſe that is
in the ſcriptures, but of that darkneſſe that is in mans
vnderſtanding. Which till it be opened by the mercifull
goodneſſe of God:1. Cor. 2. cannot perceyue thoſe thinges that doo
belong to the ſpirite of God.
               And we doo thinke it neceſſarie, that there be good, and
learned men choſen, & put in authoritie in the Church,
ſuch as may (when néede is) call together ye moſt graue,
wyſe, and godlie learned perſons, in the feare of God, to
delyberate for the good gouernment of the Church, and
to take order, that all thinges in the Church, may be
done to the edification of the ſame, according to the rule
of S. Paule.
                  1. Cor. 14. And if any proude or froward perſon, or any
ſimple or ignoraunt perſon, doo mooue any queſtion:
or his, or theyr miſdemeanour, doo cauſe any queſtiō to
be mooued, or any doubt to aryſe, about the true meaning
of any part of the Scripture: We thinke it méete,
that in theſe caſes, thoſe places of Scripture be reuerendly
weighed, by thoſe, wyſe, learned, graue, & godlie
men, ſo called together in the feare of God. And that
the perſons ſo in doubt, be by them certified, of the true

meaning of thoſe places. And that (if they will not yéeld
to that interpretation that ſhall be made by thoſe men,
and prooued by due circumſtances, & conference of thoſe
places with other, to be the verie meaning of the holie
Ghoſt in thoſe places) then we holde thoſe men for Heretiques,
and doo iudge them worthy to be excommunicated.
               Thus (if you wyll) you may ſée, that we are ſome
thing wiſer then your Burgeſſe in Parliament: and
not ſo worthy to be laughed to ſcorne as he: Although
we doo not make theſe men Iudges of the ſcripture: but
we doo put them in truſt to ſearch the Scriptures, that
both they and we may ſubmit our ſelues, to that iudgement,
which they, by theyr reuerende ſearching, ſhall
finde in the Scriptures. As for the fortie places of
Scripture that the Arrians brought, for the defence of
theyr horrible Hereſie: we are able enough (by the help
of God) to ſet foorth plainly in theyr true meaning, and
to withſtand the Arrians (without the helpe of our Catholique
Church.) Notwithſtanding the fortie places of
Scripture, that they bring more then we can bring for
the trueth.
               And we ſay, as S. Austine ſayth: that the Scriptures
to myſſe vnderſtanded, and myſſe applied, are the Heretiques
bowe, to ſhoote out theyr owne venemous arrowes.
And as Vincentius ſayth: They are the ſhéepes
cloathing, which the Woolfe dooth ſhrowde her ſelfe
in in &c.
               Yea, and we confeſſe, that the Diuell him ſelfe, dyd
alleadge ſcripture againſt our ſauiour Chriſte, and dyd
applie it as rightlie as Bonifacius the eight did, when after
he had one day ſhewed him ſelf in his Pontificalibus,
that is,Luke. 22. his Popely attyre, and the next day in the robes
of an Emperour: he ſayd thus. Ecce duo gladij hic. Beholde,
heere are two ſwordes.
               Another of your Popes, ſetting his foote vppon the

necke of Fredericus, the Emperour, ſayd Super Aſpidem
& Baſiliſcum ambulabis,
                  Pſal. 91. Alexan. 3. An. 1174. 
                  & conculcabis Leonem & Draconem.
Upon the Aſpe and Baſiliſke, ſhalt thou walke,
and vpon the Lyon and Dragon ſhalt thou treade. And
ſurely, as often as theſe wreſters of the Scriptures, doo
ſpeake vnto vs, the Diuell dooth (as Vincentius ſayth)
ſpeake by theyr mouthes. &c.
               But héere I leaue your Vincentius and you together,
tyll at ſome more leyſure. I may reade him ouer. I can
not thinke that hée dooth handle that place of Mathewe,
ſo groſely,Math. 4. as you would make vs beléeue that he dooth.
But though he doo, the matter is not great. For there
is none that hath any ſence or féeling, in the vnderſtanding
of the Scriptures: but the ſame may eaſily ſée, that
when our ſauiour Chriſte ſayde. Non tentabis Dominū
Deum tuum: Thou ſhalt not tempt the Lord thy God:
He had a farre other meaning, then that which you
woulde make vs beléeue that Vincentius dooth gather of
theſe wordes. Yea, Athens I dyd firſt write this aunſwer,
I haue read ouer Vincentius, and haue founde that
you doo belye him.
               But as one miſtruſting the authoritie of your Vincentius:
you clap in the necke of it, one ſentence of S.
Austine: but you tell vs not where we ſhall finde it.
But if thoſe wordes be Austines (as it may be that they
are) they wyll, and doo ſerue much better againſt you
and your ſort: then they can againſt vs.
               And thus much to your fift Reaſon: which I haue called
Fraudulent, for the cauſe afore mencioned.
            
            
               ¶The 
                     •
                  ixt Reaſon.
               YOur ſixt and laſt Reaſon, moſt weyghtie of all, is
this: Becauſe, if we wyll refuſe the authoritie, of
the Churches abſolute iudgement vppon the ſcriptures

true ſence: We ſhall ſéeme plainely to deny the holy
Ghoſt to be the ſpirite of trueth. &c. This Reaſon I
haue called Fanaticall. For that in making ſo great an
accoumpt of this Reaſon: you ſéeme not to be in your
right wittes. What bedlem would abuſe the wordes
written in the fowretéene of Iohn as you doo: to prooue,
that becauſe our Sauiour Chriſte dyd praye for, and obtayne,
and dyd giue the holy Ghoſt, the ſpirite of trueth,
to his holy Apoſtles, and dyd promiſe that the ſame
ſhould remayne with them for euer, and inſtruct them
in all trueth: therfore the ſame holy Ghoſt muſt néedes
be, and remayne ſtyll in that Church, which agréeeth
with the Church of the Apoſtles onely in name, and is
no more lyke the Apoſtles Church in doctrine and manners,
then blacke is lyke to whyte, and God is lyke the
Diuell.
               The Wiſe man ſayth,Sap. 4. that Wiſedome wyll not enter
into a malicious ſoule: neyther wyll ſhe dwell in a
body that is ſubiect to ſinnes. For the holy ſpirite of
Wiſedome, flyeth from deceite. &c. And ſhall we thinke
that the holy Spirite of trueth hath bene, and wyll be
ſtyll amongſt ſuch a rabble of Popes, Cardinalles,
and other Catholiques, as your owne Hiſtories make
mencion of, that haue (beſides theyr beaſtly lyfe) made
decrées directlie, contrarie to Gods commaundements?
Yea, ſhall we thinke that the Spirite of Chriſte, dwelleth
amongſt thoſe Catholiques, that at this day doo in
the twentie and fiue Seſſion of the Councell of Trent,
pronounce all ſuch accurſſed,Tom. 4. as doo ſhewe them ſelues,
eyther by doctrine or otherwiſe, to miſlyke with the
hauing of Images in Churches: ſeeing the ſame is dyrectly
contrarie to the ſecond commaundement of God?
Shall we thinke that the holy ſpirite of God, dyd guide
thoſe your Catholique Fathers, when they dyd in the
ſame Seſſion, blanche the counterfeyting of Gods Maieſtie
by an Image?
               
                  
And thinke you that Eſay the Prophet, if he were now
lyuing,Eſai. 59. would allowe your applying of his wordes to
ſuch Catholiques, and to theyr doinges: ſéeing the ſame
Prophete dooth ſo earneſtly ſpeake againſt the making
of Images,Eſai. 44. ſcorning bothe them and theyr makers, and
plainly affyrming that they be good for nothing.
               The Scribes, the Phariſies, the high Prieſtes, and
Doctors of the lawe: might as well haue mainteyned,
theyr corrupt Doctrine and Traditions againſt Chriſt
and his Apoſtles (euen by thoſe words of Eſay, that you
applie for your purpoſe) as you may now by the ſame,
mayntaine all the corrupt Doctrines and Traditions
of your Catholiques. For they dyd then perſwade them
ſelues (as you doo now) that the promiſe was made to
them, & could not but be perfourmed to them. And that
therfore Chriſte and his fauters, were Sciſmatiks and
méete to be excommunicated, as by them they were, in
déede, and as by you, we be now.
               But to our great and vnſpeakable comfort: our ſauiour
Chriſte hath foretolde vs of this, ſaying. Theſe
wordes haue I ſpoken vnto you, that you ſhould not be
offended.Iohn. 16. They wyll excommunicate you, and the time
will come, wherin whoſoeuer ſhall hyll you, will think
that he dooth God good ſeruice.
               And that promiſe alſo, that you would ſ
                     •
                  me to reioyce
ſo much in
                     •
                  ia in déede as cōfortable to vs, as you would
haue men thinke that it is to you.
               We knowe that the Spirite of trueth departeth not
from Chriſte in his members the Church, the true and
vnfeyned Catholique Church. Neyther doo the wordes
that the heauenly Father put into the mouth of Chriſt,
his onely begotten Sonne, depart out of his mouth, the
true Catholique Church: and yet dare not we make
that Church▪ Iudge of that worde. For they were not
put into her mouth to that ende, that ſhée ſhould iudge
them: but that ſhée ſhould in all her doinges, be iudged

tryed, and directed by them.
               As ſottiſhe as you ſay, our opinion is: we are ſo farre
from holding, that euerie priuate man, may haue leaue
to be his owne Iudge in vnderſtanding the Scripture:
that we doo not graunt it to the beſt learned, but doo
leaue it to him, that béeing (with humilitie of minde)
ſought in the Scriptures, wyll be found there, yea, euen
by Crafts men, ſuch as was Peter, and his fellow fiſher
men. For he reſpecteth not mens perſons, nor Occupations.
And vnto them that ſo ſéeke him there (whether
they be many or fewe) he wyll open the ſence of vnderſtading,
that they may vnderſtand, as much as he knoweth
to be méete for them to vnderſtand. And ſuch as
haue that humble ſpirit, wyll not ſearch for, nor ſhewe
them ſelues deſtrous to knowe, any more.
               Well, now you conclude, vpon that which you ſay we
muſt néedes graunt, that is, that the Church is our mother,
as Scripture ſayth. Well, I am glad that you are
now become a Scripture man. But I pray you, where
is that Scripture written, that ſayth, that your Catholique
Church is our mother? It wyll be harde for you
to finde it.
               I wryte not this, as one that would deny the Church
that is the Spowſe of Chriſte, to be the mother of Chriſtians,
in that ſence that ſhe is the Spowſe of Chriſte:
But I write thus, to let you ſée, that I lyke not with
your manner of concluding vpon this, being once graū
                  ted.
That this mother of ours, that muſt néedes teach
all her chyldren, fyrſt to beléeue in God (for that faith
commeth by hearing) and alſo to know the Scriptures,
and is the pyller and ſure ſtay of trueth: muſt néedes be
the abſolute Iudge, and imperiall Schoolemiſtreſſe, to
teach vs all, how to beléeue in God, and to vnderſtande
the Scriptures.
               This geare hangeth together lyke Iermans lyps (as
the prouerbe is:) If you had ſayde thus.
               
                  
The Church (being the ſpowſe of Chriſte) is our mother,
and hath receyued commiſſion, from her huſband,
and our father Chriſt, to teach vs all thoſe things that
he hath taught and commaūded her to doo, & to teach vs
his children to doo: wherfore, if we ſhall not hearken to
her, as to our chéefe Schoole miſtreſſe, vnder her huſbād
and our father, ſo long as ſhe teacheth nothing, but that
which our father hath commaunded her to teach vs: we
ſhall diſpiſe him, becauſe we deſpiſe her, as it is written.
Qui vos ſpernit,
                  Luke. 10. 
                  me ſpernit: He that deſpiſeth you,
deſpiſeth me.
               If you had written thus: a man might haue made
ſome ſence of your wordes. But as you haue written,
you ſéeme to make the gray Mare the better Horſe. And
to ſpoyle our Father Chriſte of all his power: that
our Mother, his Wife, may not be found with out abſolute
power.
               I ſée not therfore, why I may not for this blindneſſe
of your heartes, ſay as iuſtly to you, as S. Paule dooth to
the Galathians. O inſenſati. &c.
                   Oh you fooliſh fellowes,
who hath bewitched you, not to obey vnto the trueth?
which euen of Infants and ſucking Babes (as it were)
is diſcerned, as cléere as the Sunne. So that you muſt
not diſdayne, though Maiſter Trippe, doo tryppe you in
your owne turne, as a ſéely ſeducer, to maintaine (as
you doo all) ſo groſſe an opinion, béeing the forreſt in
déede, for all ſuch Foxes to litter theyr whelpes in. And
héere you ſéeme to haue had one fling at Maiſter Foxe
alſo: becauſe you vnderſtoode that he is one allowed
in the Kéepers warrant, to haue conference with
you.
               I meruayle, howe Maiſter Turnebull eſcaped your
frumpping pen. But to conclude this aſſercion. Acquite
your ſelfe as well as you can, why you ſhould not all be
ſuſpected to be Antichriſtians, for as much as you doo
ſo ſtowtly mayntayne that man of ſinne, that ſetteth

vp himſelfe aboue all that is called God, and ſitteth in
the Temple of God, and boaſteth himſelfe, as though
he were God. Whome the Lord ſhall deſtroy, euen
with the breath of his mouthe. And that worde, that
you woulde haue to be iudged by your Antichriſtian
Churche: ſhall iudge bothe Antichriſte and his Church.
And that holy Ghoſt that came downe from Heauen,
vpon our Chriſtes Apoſtles, hath remayned, and dooth
ſtill remaine, and to the ende of the world ſhall remaine
with his Catholique Church. That is, with
that Church, which beléeueth, holdeth, and proteſteth,
that Catholique Faith, that Ieſus Chriſte, commaunded
his Apoſtles, to teach Catholiquely, to all Nations
and ſortes of peoples, in all parts of the world. Promiſing
that the holy Ghoſt ſhould alwayes remaine with
the faithfull, to direct them in all trueth, and godlineſſe
of lyuing.
               Thus, hauing firſt conſidered, the wordes of our
Sauiour, in ſending vs to the Scriptures, ſaying:
Searche the Scriptures. &c. I haue founde that the
concluſion that you make vppon the manner of ſpeach,
that our Sauiour vſeth in that place of Saint Iohn his
Goſpell, is not. Secundum vnanimen conſenſum Patrum:
(that is) According to the agréeable conſent
of the Fathers: and therefore condempned by your
Fathers, in the Councell of Trent, in the fowrth
Seſſion.
               Saint Austine, dooth accoumpt acurſſed, whatſoeuer
is taught, other then out of the Scriptures, of the
Lawe and the Goſpell. Lib. 3. Chap. 6. Againſt the Letters
of Petilian. And in his booke of Chriſtian doctrine,
and the .37. Chap. He ſaith: that without the authoritie
of Scripture: our Faith dooth but ſtacker or ſtumble.
And againe, in his .166. Epiſtle, he ſayth: That bothe
Chriſte and his Church, are learned to be knowne in
the Scriptures.
               
                  
                  Baſill ſayth,In Aſceticis. that whatſoeuer is taught without the
holy Scripture, is ſinne.
               
                  Chryſostome, in his ſecond expoſition vppon Mathew,
ſayth: that the true Church cānot other wiſe be known
then by the holy Scriptures. Homilia. 49.
               Yea, Saint Auſtine, in his firſt booke that he wrote, againſt
the Epiſtle of Parmenianus, and the ſecond Chap:
dooth accoumpt it to be raſhneſſe, to giue credite, to any,
that dooth not prooue by Scripture, that which he
affyrmeth.
               I dare not therefore, giue credite to that which you
haue written, tyll you prooue it by Scripture.
               As for your ſixe Reaſons that you ſtay vpon, I haue
conceyued, and doo vnderſtand what they be. And as
in the beginning of your Pamphlet, you deſire: ſo haue
I taken Pen in hande, and haue done what I can to
confute them. And as I thinke, haue doone it ſufficiently.
If you can replie, doo you take pen in hande
againe, and doo what you are able. I wyll
not refuſe to trie the trueth of theſe
matters, with you, or with the
beſt on your ſide.
               Haec eſt fides mea: quia vera, Chriſtiana,
Catholica, & Apoſtolica.
               This is my Faith: becauſe it is the true,
Catholique, and Apoſtolique Faith.
               
                  Robertus Crowleus.
Subſcripſit Henricus Trippe,
Hijs quae à Domino R. C.
reſponſa ſunt.
            
         
         
            
            ¶A breefe Aunſwer to Maiſter Pownds ſix Reaſons▪
Written by Maiſter Henrie Trippe.
            
               
                  MAiſter Pownd: hauing peruſed the aunſwer of
Maiſter Crowly to your ſixe Reaſons, and finding
them ſufficiently aunſwered, by that godly Father,
(whome you thinke not to be worthy naming, as
you write to me:) I thought good rather to ſubſcribe to his aunſwer,
then to frame an other: How be it, to take from you the
aduauntage of glorying, which I thinke you will eaſily take againſt
me, as not being able to anſwere you: I wil breefly vrge
you in ſome pointes, wherein I ſée he hath ſpared you.
            And firſt I muſt néedes ſhew you, that all your Reaſons are
ſet one a tottering foundation: becauſe ye Iudge her ſelfe is not
cleared of ſuſpition, for you take it as a thing graūted, that the
Churche of Rome is the ſpowſe of Chriſt, which thing is in cō
               trouerſie,
betwene vs. It had bene therfore an orderly procéeding,
to haue dealt firſt with that matter, and to haue put it
out of doubt, that your Reaſons in appealing to her iudgement,
might haue bene the ſtronger▪ 
               Pighius one of your owne
men confeſſeth, that the queſtion of the Church ought firſt to
be diſcidid. Thus you builde vpon a falſe principle, and ouerthrowe
the force of your owne Reaſons, if happily they had
any force.
            Secondly, that which you bring out of ye fift of S. Iohns Goſpell,
to prooue the ſcripture to be but witnes bearer to ye truth
and not the Iudge, though it haue ſome ſhew of reaſon, yet being
well wayed, it well vaniſhe: for you imagine, becauſe you
finde the worde witneſſe, which is, Verbum forence: That by &
by you muſt haue a pitched Court, & a iudgement ſeate, where
ſhall be preſented many perſons, in ſeuerall places, one to be
witneſſe, an other to be Iudge, and perhaps ſome to be iuſtified,
and ſome to be condempned. But if you had wayed other
places of ſcripture, you ſhoulde haue ſéene that the holy Ghoſte
admitteth no ſuch ſtraight collctions: but framing his writing
to our capacitie: Uſeth ſome time one phraſe, and ſometime
an other. And you might haue found where the worde is
called a Iudge, as in the twelfth Chapter of the ſame Euangeliſt

               If any man heare my wordes, and beleeue them not, I iudge
him not. &c. He that refuſeth me, and receyueth not my words
hath one that iudgeth him. The word that I haue ſpoken, ſhall
iudge him in the laſt day. For I haue not ſpoken of my ſelfe. &c.
Now iudge you how ſoundly you haue gathered: it is witneſſe
therefore not Iudge, or not rather bothe a witneſſe & a Iudge.
So might you reaſon of the diuerſe Metaphors giuen to the
word, which is called, Bread, Wine, Oile, Milke, Hony, Water,
Raine, Light, Fyre, Golde, Siluer, Pearle, and Iron rod,
Scepter. Sword, & the breath of the Lords mouth. Now were
it not a fonde Reaſon to gather, becauſe it is the breath of the
Lordes mouth: therfore it is no Sword, becauſe it is a ſword
or Iron rod: therfore it is not Gold. &c. Or becauſe it is Gold,
therfore it is no bread, when as the holy Ghoſt hath ſet downe
thoſe ſundrie Metaphors, to expreſſe the power, dignitie, and
commoditie of the worde. But this is none of your ſix Reaſons
and therfore the weight of your cauſe lyeth not vpon it:
yet in pronouncing your Treatiſe before witneſſe, you gaue it
a greate force.
            
               ¶Now to your Reaſons.
               YOur firſt Reaſon is groūded vpon a falſe principle: for you
imagine our church to be without a Miniſterie, to teach
and open the Scriptures, which is not ſo, yea rather your
Préeſtes are mute, and not onely that, but ye cloſe vp the booke
of God, & will not let it be read, to make the Scriptures wholy
mute, leaſt they might bewray your corruptions. But God be
thanked, God hath opened the mouthes of many by the Scriptures,
to witnes agaynſt your errors, and ſo iudge you by the
ſame wordes, if you amend not.
               Your ſecond Reaſon pretendeth that the Scripture is verie
full of hard & déepe myſteries: ſurely I confeſſe that the Scripture
hath his harde Miſteries and hard places, but hath it not
alſo his eaſie familyar doctrines? Is there not meate for all
Eſtates, Milke for babes, and ſtrong meate for good ſtomacks.

But I dare be bolde to auouch, that it was Sathans policie,
to robbe the people of the whole vſe of the Scriptures, vnder
pretence of ambiguitie, as though the whole Scriptures were
nothing elſe, but Rydles. As for the tryall of harde places, the
learned haue ſet downe two excellent rules, which I meruaile
you can reiect: the one is conference of Scripture with Scripture,
the other is begging of wiſedome of God, who giueth it
to the Babes & lyttle ones, and hydeth it from the wiſe in their
owne conceyte, who ſtumble at playne places, not being dyrected
by Gods ſpirite. But howſoeuer they labour to trie the
ſpirites, or whatſoeuer knowledge they doo attaine, they leaue
the ſuueraigntie of the iudgement to the word.
               Your thyrde Reaſon, grounded on Saint Peters teſtimony▪
2. Peter. 1. Erreth, in not conſidering what the Apoſtle meaneth,
by priuate or not priuate, you ſéeme to place it in the
multytude of perſonnes, that giue the interpretation: but the
Apoſtle placeth it in the authoritie of the Author of the word.
Therefore, one Prophete ſpeaking in the Lordes name, being
truely ſent from the Lorde, is more to be beléeued, then
the whole packe of Préeſtes, reſiſting of mallice, or ignorance,
and they being many, are priuate, and one Prophete, being
but one, is not priuate.
               Secondly, you pretende that euerie man may interprete the
Scriptures as he lyſteth, which is a falſe charge. But we
deſyre them, and allowe them to reade the Scriptures, and to
ſée whether thoſe thinges which we teache them, be ſo or no,
according to the example of the faithfull. Acts. 17. And as they
are commaunded by Chriſte, and the Apoſtle. 1. Iohn. 4.
               In your fowrth Reaſon, whyle you went about to temper
our pride, as you ſay, it ſéemeth you diſtēpered your own wits,
in putting downe, ſo many things in ye name of vnwritten verities,
which notwithſtāding are written: you aſke of the matter
when I ſuppoſe ye meane ye termes, brought in by the Fathers
to expreſſe the doctrine more plainlie. As the word Trinity,
perſon, and other, to make plaine the doctrine againſt the

                  Arrians. Héere you were foully ouerſéen. And you would make
as beléeue, that the Church hath authoritie to poynt vs new
                     •
                  
Articles of faith, without warrant of ſcripture: ſhe was wont
to challenge ſome liberty in Ceremonies, & indifferent things,
but you giue her power in Articles of faith.
               Your fift Reaſon ſtumbleth on the falſe principle, whereon
you grounded your firſt Reaſon, where you iudge no gouernment
to be in our Church, becauſe we giue the higheſt rule to
the worde, & gouerne thereby, as by a moſt perfect lawe: after
which no newe Parliament néede to be called, to adde or diminiſhe
from it, but all men of all eſtates ought to put to theyr
hands to ſée it executed and kept: for the which cauſe (if they at
any tyme aſſemble) the worde written is theyr direction.
               Againſt your ſixt Reaſon, I auouch that he that appealeth to
the iudgement of the written worde, dooth yéelde a moſt
waighty Reaſon, to ratifie the ſending of the holy Ghoſt to his
Church, and that it is the ſpirite of trueth. For 
                     〈◊〉
                   the Apoſtles
were ſo mightely endewed with the ſpirite, that they bothe
taught, and left in writing, the whole Coūcels of God, enough
to make the man of God perfect. &c: Then the Church that
challengeth the promiſe of that ſpirite, wherewith they were
endewed, muſt ſubſcribe to that trueth which they haue lefte
written: for whatſoeuer is not agreeabl
                     •
                   thereto, commeth
from an other ſpirit, oppoſing it ſelfe againſt the ſpirit of God,
which is neuer contrarie to it ſelfe.
               Thus I haue bréeflie layde down 
                     〈…〉
                   which I could
haue done more at large: but Ma
                     •
                  ſter Crowley hath giuen
you matter enough, and yet more then eyther he or I can
wryte, is ſet downe by Chemnicius and others, whoſe
Treatiſes you might doo well, eyther to reade for
your learning, or to impugne if you be able.
               
                  ¶Your well wyller. H. T.
               
               FINIS.
               
               
               
            
         
      
   