
      
         
            
            
            A ſhort declaration of the ende of Traytors, and falſe Conſpirators againſt the ſtate, & of the duetie of Subiectes to theyr ſoueraigne Gouernour: and wythall, howe neceſſarie, Lawes and execution of Iuſtice are, for the preſeruation of the Prince and Common wealth.
Wherein are alſo breefely touched, ſundry offences of the S. Queene, cōmitted againſt the crowne of this Land, & the manner of the honorable proceding for her conuiction thereof, and alſo the reaſons & cauſes alledged & allowed in Parliament, why it was thought dangerous to the ſtate, if ſhe ſhould haue liued.
            
               Published by Richard Crompton, an Apprentice of the common Lawes.
            
            
               Séene and allowed.
            
            
               ECCLESIA. 10.
            
            Wiſh no euill to the King in thy thought, nor ſpeake anie hurte of him in thy priuie Chamber: for a byrde of the ayre ſhall betray thy voyce, and with her fethers ſhee ſhall bewray thy wordes.
            AT LONDON, Printed by I. Charlewood, for Thomas Gubbins, and Thomas Newman. 1587.
         
         
            
            
            To the moſt reuerende Father in God, Iohn by the diuine prouidence, Archbyſhoppe of Canterbury, Metrapolytane of England, hys Grace, and one of her Maieſties moſt honourable priuie Counſell: Rychard Crompton wyſheth euerlaſting felicitie. (⸫)
            
               FOraſmuch (moſt reuerend Father) as theſe dayes are very dangerous, and full of perill, in which wickednes hath ſo deepely entred into the hartes of manye, who not hauing the feare of GOD before theyr eyes, nor regarde to the faith and loyaltie, which euery Subiecte ought to beare to his ſoueraigne Gouernour, nor reſpect to the zeale and loue that euery good manne naturally ought to carie to his natiue ſoyle and Country, haue in theſe dayes ſo often entred into ſuch wycked treaſons and conſpiracies as well againſt her Maieſties ſacred perſonne, as alſo this moſt happy gouernement, as the like hath not beene hearde of in the

raigne of any her noble Progenitors, Princes of thys Lande, ſithence the Conqueſt thereof vnto this day. And for that the ſame hath beene pretended to bee for matters touching Religion, I haue therefore ſet down in this ſmal Treatiſe, the myſerable end & confuſion of dyuers, which within our memory among vs moſt iuſtly haue ſuffered, for ſuch their wicked conſpiracies and treaſons, and withall, the duties of Subiects to theyr Prince and ſoueraigne Gouernour, both which, at the generall Seſsions of the Peace, in the Countie of Staff: among other thinges pertayning to that ſeruice, I lately publiſhed, as a matter which I thought then much neceſſary for this preſent time, to the ende, that the one, might be a terror to all men to offende in the like, and the other, an inſtruction in the duetie & obedience, which euery good Subiect ought to embrace. And becauſe ſome of that audience ſeemed (as they ſayd) to like wel therof, & thought it in theyr opinions conuenient to bee made common to all men, I haue at theyr requeſt thought good to publiſh the ſame. And foraſmuch as no Kingdome nor Common wealth can ſtand, where good Lawes are not eſtabliſhed, and Iuſtice executed, I haue therefore alſo heerein ſette downe in parte, the commodities and profittes which grow to the ſame thereby. And becauſe the Lawes of themſelues are dombe thinges, remayning in Recordes, Bookes and Cuſtomes, and muſt therefore be publiſhed and put in execution by officers thervnto

appointed, I haue ſhewed what perſonnes they ought to bee, which ſhoulde bee called to ſitte in place of Iuſtice, and to whom the truſt and confidence of the execution of Lawes ought to bee committed, and what great care they ought to haue to performe the ſame: and withall haue touched the duties of Iurors, and what regarde they ought to haue of theyr oathes, verdytts and preſentments, ſith that without them, iuſtice cannot be doone vppon offenders, & tranſgreſſors of Law cannot be puniſhed. And am bolde vnder your Graces fauour, to preſent theſe fewe leaues to the ſame, as to one, who I am aſſured wyſheth well to this whole ſtate, and daylie prayeth for the preſertation of her Maieſtie, whom God of his mercie long preſerue and continue vnto vs. From the Myddle Temple, the xij. of Februarie. 1587. (⸫)
            
               
                  At the commaundement of your Grace moſt humbly.
R. C.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  ❧ A Declaration of the ende of Traytors, and falſe Conſpirators agaynſt the ſtate, and of the duties of Subiects to theyr Prynce and ſoueraigne Gouernour. &c.
            
               IF euer Kingdome were bleſſed, if euer Nation enioyed happy dayes, if euer people liued in a golden age, The happines of this ſtate. ſurelie this is that Kingdome, we are that Nation, and we are that people. Firſt, in that it hath pleaſed God to Firſt for the light of the goſpell. gyue vs the light of his Goſpel, wherby manie errors, and much ſuperſtition (which hath crept into the Church of God) are reformed. Then in that it hath pleaſed him, to giue vs ſo gracious a Soueraigne For ſo gracious a Queene. Ladie and Quéene, not a forreyner, not a ſtranger borne, but one of our owne Nation (which is obſerued as a great bleſſing of God in the ſacred Scriptures,) Deut. 15. 17 and of the right lyne and dyſſent of the Noble Kinges, and Princes of this Realme. One by, and vnder For this cōmō peace ſo long continued. whom, we haue enioyed ſuch common peace & quietnes within this lande theſe xxviij. yeres and more, as the like hath not béene hearde of, neyther is to be found in Recorde or Chronicle ſince the Conqueſt of England For thys her Maieſties mercifull and gracious gouernmēt to this day, for the like time of gouernment. One deſirous

to raigne with mercy, with loue, with pittie, with clemencie and fender compaſſion, and not by effuſton of bloode, not by tyrannie, not by oppreſſion of her Subiects, neither alwayes by inflicting the extremitie of her Lawes, vpon ſuch as iuſtly haue deſerued the execution For that her maieſty is aſſiſted with graue ſage, moſt wyſe, and honourable Coūſellers of the ſame. In that alſo it hath pleaſed him to aſſiſt her, with ſuch graue, ſage, and honourable Counſellers, men of ſuch great wiſedome, of ſuch déepe conſideration, of ſuch pollicie, forecaſt, and experience, as to ſpeake it plainely and ſimply, no Prince vnder yeſunne is furniſhed with the like, or at the leaſt with a better. By whoſe great wiſedomes, trauelles, and indeuoures, Fruites of their trauel to the commō wealth this common peace and quietnes, hath béene the rather preſerued and maintained. If any thing hath béene purpoſed or meant, which might any way tende to the daunger of her Maieſties perſon, or to the trouble or perill of this ſtate, that hath béene by them quickly eſpied, déepelie looked into, and with great wiſedome and pollicie in time preuented and auoyded, to their immortall fames, glories, and renownes for euer. Whereby There is a moſt happy ſtate wher wyſemen rule. Eccle. 10. the ſaying of the wiſe Salomon is founde to bee true. Happy is that kingdome, where there are many that can giue good counſell. And Ieſus the ſonne of Syrack ſaith: Where they that are in authoritie are men of vnderſtanding, there the citty doth proſper. And again Salomon ſayth: Where no counſell is, there the people decay. 
               Prouer. 11. 
               But where many are that giue good counſel, there is wealth. If you well conſider, and looke into the ciuill warres and diſcention, into the horrible murders of Myſerable ſtate of other Coū
                  tries. great perſonages, into the pittifull ſlaughter of menne, women, and children, by fire and ſword, into the lamentable rauiſhments, & deflowringes of Maydes, Wiues, and Widdowes, into the ranſacking and ſpoyling of Citties and Townes, with a number of other miſeries

and calamities, which haue happened of late yéeres in other Countries, not farre hence, you ſhall finde that this Realme of England aboue all Nations vnder the Sunne at this day, hath moſte cauſe to thinke it ſelfe bounde to the goodnes of almighty God. In that hee hath not ſuffered vs to be afflicted or viſited with the like. And now, what ſhall I ſay of them to whom this her Maieſties moſt gracious gouernment, theſe Enemies to this gouernment. happy daies, theſe bleſſed yéeres, haue béene thought tedious, and too long to haue continued, and therefore haue moſt vnnaturally, moſt wickedly, yea, and moſte trayterouſlie ſought the vntimely death and deſtruction of her, vnder whom (by Gods great mercy and fauour towardes vs) we haue enioyed all theſe good thinges. Shall I ſay they were vnkinde people? Shall I ſay they were vnnaturall Subiects? Nay I will rather ſay that they were, and ſuch as they, are more méete to They are not worthy to liue vnder ſo gracious a Prince. liue vnder an Infidell, vnder a Turke, vnder a Iewe, vnder a blooddy Prince, or Tyrant, rather then vnder ſo gracious and ſo mercifull a ſoueraigne Ladye and Quéene, as ſhe hath ſhewed herſelfe to be to all ſortes of her Subiects, euen from the beginning of her bleſſed raigne to this day, whereof we are all witneſſes.
            What good Subiect will not hartilie lament to thinke what ſorrow her Maieſtie dooth make, what inwarde gréefe ſhée hath conceiued, what déepe ſighes procéede Her Maieſties greefe for her kindenes to be ſo vnkindly recompenced by falſe traytors & conſpirators. from her noble hart, what teares diſtill from her tender eyes (as we may imagine and ſuppoſe) when ſhe calleth vnto her gracious remembraunce, the greate loue which ſhe doth, and alwayes hath born to her good Subiects, the dailie care ſhe hath of their proſperitie and well dooing, her continuall deſire, that they may liue in peace and reſt vnder her. To haue this her loue ſo vnkindlie requited, her care ſo vngentlie recompenced,

her deſire ſo vngratefullie rewarded, as to haue her death ſo often conſpyred, her deſtruction ſo many waies intended, and this her moſt happie gouernment, many times trayterouſtie deuiſed to bee ſuppreſſed, where it is the part and duetie of euerie good Subiect, to be true, faithfull obedient, and loyall to his Prince and ſoueraigne Gouernour, whom God hath appointed to raigne ouer him, though her Maieſtie by theſe her manifold kindneſſes had not (as ſhe hath) merited and deſerued the ſame.
            But moſt gracious ſoueraigne Lady, let not theſe theyr wicked and trayterous conſpiracies diſmay you, let them not diſcourage you, but be of good comfort, and doubt not, but as almighty GOD hath hetherto moſt Cauſes of comfort to her Maieſty not withſtanding theſe often conſpiracies. graciouſlie ſaued and defended you, from the moſt wicked purpoſes of ſuch, as haue ſo often moſt trayterouſly practiſed, and pretended your vntimelie death and deſtruction: ſo he will protect you from the like her eafter, doubt not but he will ſende his holie Angell, who ſhall pitch his Tentes rounde about you, that theyr damnable deuiſes and determinations, ſhall neuer take effect. Doubt not but that he will be your ſtrength & Buckler, for he is, and euer will be the ſure defence of his annointed, as the Prophet Dauid witneſſeth. Comfort your ſelfe alſo in this, that there are within your Realme of England, euen thouſand of thouſands, which according to their bounden dueties, doo dayly moſt hartilie pray to God for the preſeruation of your ſacred perſonne, that will ſhedde their bloodes, ſpend their lands and goods in your defence, before ſuch wicked Traytors or their adherents ſhall euer haue their purpoſes. Comfort your ſelfe alſo in this, that you haue ſo graue and faythfull a Counſell, that is moſt ſtudious and carefull of the ſafetie of your noble perſon and this ſtate, that can ſo politiquelie ſpie out theſe wicked Conſpirators, and trys

out their moſt deuilliſh deuiſes, tending to your Maieſties vntimelie death, and to the vtter ſubuerſion and ruine of this your moſt happie gouernment, that can ſo in time preuent the manifolde perilles and daungers, which otherwiſe might by ſuch treaſons haue enſued vnto the ſame.
            Comfort your ſelfe alſo in this, that they (euen they I ſay) which haue thus conſpired to take your Maieſty from vs, when they haue come into your preſence, meaning then to haue accompliſhed theyr moſt trayterous purpoſe, haue béene ſo diſwayed vpon the ſight of your princely perſon, and in beholding your moſt gracious countenaunce, that they hadde no power to performe the thing, which they had before determined vppon. A moſt certaine token of the great mercie and fauour of God towardes your Maieſtie, and to vs all. If Not lawfull for the ſubiect to enter into the examinacien of matters appertaining to the Prince. it were lawfull for the Subiect, to enter into the examinations of cauſes or matters appertayning to ye Prince and ſoueraigne Gouernour, as it is not, what coulde theſe ſortes of men (I pray you) obiect, or what coulde they ſay, why they thus moſt wickedly, thus moſt vnnaturallie, and thus moſt trayterouſly, ſhoulde ſéeke the death and deſtruction, of ſo gracious a Soueraigne Ladie and Quéene.
            It is trowe you, becauſe they thought that her Maieſtie What good things doo proceed frō her Maieſtie. is not ſtudious, to ſette forth the honour and glorie of God? Compare the time preſent, with the great abuſes, which haue entred into the Church of olde time, and thereby you ſhall plainely perceiue, howe Her highnes is moſt ſtudious to ſet forth the honor of God. She dooth ordaine good lawes carefull ſhée is, and from time to time hath béene: to aduaunce the true worſhipping of God, to the vttermoſt of her power. Is it trowe you, becauſe they thought that ſhe hath not made and publiſhed wholſome and neceſſary Lawes, for the preſeruation and mayntenaunce

of the ſtate of thys Common wealth? Looke into the moſt gracious Acts of Parliament made in her time, and you ſhall finde as good, as neceſſary, and beneficiall Lawes publiſhed by her moſt high Courtes of Parliament, as better or more neceſſarye haue not béene giuen by the like authoritie, in any Princes time héeretofore. Is it becauſe they thought that her Maieſtie is not deſirous, that right and iuſtice ſhoulde bee miniſtred vnto all ſortes of her Subiects without reſpect She is deſirous that Iuſtice ſhoulde bee equally miniſtred. of perſonne? Looke into the procéedinges of her moſt honourable Counſell in her high Court of Starre Chamber, and there you ſhall ſée the cauſes of her people (iudiciallie brought before them) ſo indifferentlie examined, ſo déepely looked into, and with ſuch greate wyſedome and equitie, ordered and decreed, that euerye man hath iuſt cauſe therewith to content himſelfe. Againe, looke into the procéedings of her graue and ſage Iuſtices of her Lawes? And you ſhall finde the cauſes of her Subiects brought before them, ſo learnedly debated, ſo vprightly handled, and with ſuch equitie adiudged, and determined according to the Lawe, that no man can therewith iuſtlie finde fault.
            Is it trowe you, becauſe they thought that her Maieſtie is not mercifull to ſuch as are tranſgreſſors and Shee is merciful to offenders. offenders of her Lawes? Looke into the Recordes of her high Court of Chauncery, and there you ſhall finde a great number of her moſt gracious and mercifull pardons, as well touching lyfe and member, as other great and déepe offences, that for greater things, none hath béene graunted by any Prince of thys Realme, ſithence the Conqueſt of England to this day, for the like time of gouernment. Is it becauſe they thought that ſhee Shee is liberall to wel deſeruers. is not bountifull, and liberall to ſuch as deſerue well of her Maieſtie and theyr Country, looke into her Maieſties

moſt gracious Letters Pattents, remayning alſo of Record in her ſaid Courte of Chauncerie, and there you ſhall find ſuch a number of graunts of Caſtles, manours, landes, tenements, rents, annuities, pentions, portions, fées, offices, and whatſoeuer other thing a Prince may conuenientlie graunt, ſo bountifull, ſo liberall, ſo honourable, and ſo princelie, as of greater thinges, none hath béene graunted by any Prince of this Realme, ſithence the Conqueſt therof vnto thys day, for the like time of gouernment.
            Is it trowe you, becauſe they thought that her Careful to defend her Countries from forraign inuaſions. Maieſtie is not carefull to defend the borders and frontures of her Realmes and Countries againſt forraine inuaſions. Looke into the common peace and quietnes before remembred, and thereby you ſhall ſée that her Maieſtie hath alwayes béene moſt ſtudious and carefull to defende the ſame, and to that ende and purpoſe hath expended her princelie treaſure. Is it trow you becauſe they thought that her Maieſtie hath laide vppon her No newe impoſitions layde on her ſubiects. Subiects, anie taxe, tallages, or impoſitions, the like whereof hath not béene heard of afore her raigne. Looke into the raignes of her moſt noble Father, Henry the eight, her moſt déere Brother, Edward the ſixt, and her Siſter Quéene Marie touching ſuch matters, and you ſhall finde that ſhe hath not required of her people anie other then ſuch, as haue ſundrie times béene willinglie yéelded and payd afore her dayes, yea, and greater alſo. Theſe are the good thinges which procéede from a gracious Prince, and which her highnes from time to tyme hath moſt honourablie performed and accompliſhed in eche reſpect, to her great and immortall ſame and renowne.
            What is there then that ſhoulde mooue theſe ſortes of men, thus moſt wickedlie, and thus moſt trayterouſlie

to conſpire the death and deſtruction of ſo gracious a ſoueraigne Ladie and Queene. Is it trow you, becauſe they would haue alteration of this moſt godly Religion Deſire of alteration of religion is cauſe of theſe conſpiracies. eſtabliſhed amongſt vs, and of this peaceable and gracious gouernment: ſurely that ſhoulde ſéeme to bee the onelie cauſe of theſe conſpiracies, and treaſons, and it doth the rather appeare to be ſo, for that they who haue alwaies beene parties to the ſame, haue béene ſuch as from time to time, haue miſliked of her Maieſties proceedinges therein. Certaine it is, that no man can pleaſe God without faith, as the Scripture ſayth.
            But what then, is it therefore lawfull for the Subiect Not lawfull to rebel for religion whatſoeuer it be. in defence of his faith or Religion, whatſoeuer it be or to aduaunce the ſame, to conſpire the deſtruction of his ſoueraigne, or to rebell and take armes againſt her, (wherein alwayes the perill of the Princes perſonne is imployed) God forbid. We reade in the 18. Chapter of S. Iohns Goſpell, that when Malchus, with other of Iohn. 18. the high Prieſtes ſeruaunts came to take Chriſt. Peter the Apoſtle cut of Malcus eare with his ſword: when Chriſt did ſée it, he ſayd to Peter, put vp thy ſworde into Math. 26. 52 thy ſheath, for all that take the ſword, ſhall perriſh with the ſword, thinkeſt thou that I cannot pray to my Father, and he ſhall giue me more then twelue legions of Angels, but how ſhould then the Scriptures be performed.
            The famous Clerke Eraſmus, in his Paraphraſe vppon Fraſmus. this place of Scripture, ſpeaketh theſe wordes to Peter, as it were in the perſonne of Chriſt, ſaying. Put thy ſword into thy ſheath, matters of the Goſpell, are Nota. not in ſuch manner to be defended, if thou wilt ſuccéede me as my Uicar, thou muſt fight with no other ſworde then of Gods worde, which cutteth away ſinne and ſaueth men. When Chriſt was brought before the high

Prieſt, for that he was accuſed to them for teaching of newe learning, (as they termed it) he did not reſiſt, but did acknowledge that they had their authority from aboue, although in reſpect of his diuine power, he was able to haue withſtoode them all, and deliuered himſelfe, and could haue ſette foorth his doctrine mawger theyr heades, but he would not ſo doo, but rather ſubmitted himſelfe to the ſentence of death, which they moſt vniuſtlie pronounced againſt him, heereby giuing to vs an example of obedience to authoritie, though the cauſe bée neuer ſo iuſt.
            If a Prince ſhould ſette forth a Lawe, touching the worſhipping of God, or matter of conſcience againſt the word of God, and limit a paine to the infringers therof, though the Subiect be not indéede bounde in conſcience to obſerue the ſame law, yet he may not reſiſt or oppoſe himſelfe againſt his Soueraigne, but muſt rather ſubmitte himſelfe to the puniſhment of Lawe, as S. Peter ſayth: Submitt your ſelfe vnto euery ordenaunce of 
               1. Peter. 2. 
               man for the Lordes ſake, whether it be vnto the king 
               Subiects muſt ſubmit themſelues to euery ordinaunce of the prince, yea though againſt the word of God they be made. 
               as to the cheefe, or to them that are in authority vnder him. Then if he muſt ſubmitte himſelfe vnto euerye ordenaunce of man, it followeth that hee may not withſtand the ſame in any caſe. Nowe let vs ſée by ſome examples, what hath happened within our memory amongſt vs, to ſuch as haue conſpired the death of theyr ſoueraigne Gouernour, or forciblie oppoſed themſelues againſt her: whether it hath béene for Religion or any other cauſe whatſoeuer, & what ſucceſſe they haue had, Examples of ſuch as haue ſuffered for conſpiring againſt the ſtate vnder collour of Religion. and thereby ſhall you ſée whether theyr inuentions and purpoſes, haue béene pleaſing or acceptable to almightie God or not?
            I find in the twentie eyght yéere of King Henry the eyght, when he went about to ſuppreſſe certaine houſes

of Religion, that there aſſembled in Lincolneſhyre, Rebellion in Lincolneſhyre. 28, 
                     •
                  . 8. about twenty thouſand men, whoſe pretence was to to haue withſtoode him in that action, becauſe they thought that therby the Religion then profeſſed, ſhould haue béene ſubuerted. But what happened to Doctor Makerell and others, of the chiefe of that rebellicus companie, Doctor Makerell were not they iuſtly hanged, drawne and quartered as Traytors to their Countrie. Looke into Graftons abridgment of Chronicles, and there you ſhall ſée it. Then come to the third yéere of the raigne of King Folio. 140. 
               Edward the ſixt, when a great number rebelled in the weſt partes of this Realme, whoſe pretence in parte, was to haue had the Religion then (which is alſo nowe Rebellion in the Weſt parts. profeſſed) to haue béene ſuppreſſed. But what chaunced to Sir Humfrey Arundell knight, and others of the Syr H. Arundell. principaleſt of that faction, were not they rewarded by Iuſtice in like ſort. Looke into the ſaide abridgment, and there it appeareth. Let me tell you of the rebellion Ibidē. 155. of Wiat and others, in the firſt yéere of the raigne of Wyatt. Quéene Mary, which was to the ende to haue withſtoode her marriage with the Spaniſh King, and that the Religion nowe profeſſed (which was alſo profeſſed, when ſhe came to her Crowne) ſhoulde haue béene continued, which notwithſtanding was ſuppreſſed by her. Was not the ſaide VViat and dyuers other executed for the ſame Rebellion. Looke into the ſame Booke, and there it is plainely ſette downe. Did not ye Earles Ibidē. 165. of Norththumberland and Weſtmerlande, with fiftie Knights, Eſquires and Gentlemen, beſides a great Northern rebellion. number of the common ſorte, rebell in the North parts of this Realme, in the xi. yéere of her Maieſties ratgne, to the ende to haue had alteration of this Religion and moſt happy ſtate. But what was the ende of theſe 
                  
                     ••
                  . dē. 192. Earles, were not they both attainted of treaſon, was

not the Earle of Northumberlande beheaded at Yorke, and did not the other flie the Realme, and were not the ſaid fiftie perſons attainted alſo of high treaſon. Looke into the confirmation of their attainder, by parliament Decimo tercio Elizabeth. in the xiii. yéere of her Maieſties raigne, and you ſhall finde it there apparant. Diuers of which ſayde fiftie, perſonnes, beſides many other of the common ſort, were executed for that rebellion.
            Conſider of Arden, which about the 25. yéere of her Arden. Maieſties raigne, conſpired her Maieſties with others death, to the ende to haue had alteration of this Religion and eſtate, were not they alſo then attainted of high treaſon, was not Arden executed like a Traitor, and did not Ientleman an other of them after his condemnation ſor that offence, hang himſelfe in Newgate, ye day before he that ſhold haue beene executed. Then remember yt moſt rankeſt Traytor yt hath been heard of in our time, Parry 
               Parry. by name, who notwithſtanding hee had béene attainted for Burglarie, and for the ſame attained her Maieſties pardon, went afterwardes beyond the Scas, and there carrying an offenſiue mind againſt this ſtate and Religion, moſt wickedly with other forrainers, conſpired her highnes deſtruction, and did remaine in that damnable purpoſe by the ſpace of two yéeres, & then returned into England, meaning to haue performed the ſame: was not he in the 26. yéere of her Maieſties raigne, hanged drawne and quartered, as a deteſtable traytor to hys Earle of Northumberland. L. Pagget. Charles Paget Throgmorton, Shelley. Prince and Countrie. Did not the Earle of Northumberland conſpire with the Lord Paget, and Charles his Brother, with Shelley and Throgmorton, to haue ſuppreſſed this Religion, to haue aduaunced the Romiſh Religion, and by forraine inuaſion into this Lande, to haue vtterly ſubuerted this noble ſtate, and to haue aduaunced to the Crowne the S. Quéene. In which their

treaſons was alſo imployed, the deſtruction of our moſt gracious ſoueraigne Ladie. So it appeareth by a ſmall Treatiſe, wherein theſe treaſons are particularly ſette forth. Was not the ſaide Throgmorton, about two yéeres laſt paſt executed as a Traytor for that cauſe. Did not the ſaid Earle, knowing himſelfe guiltye of Faile of Northumberland. thoſe treaſous, moſt miſerablie deſtroy himſelfe with his owne hand in the Towre of London, the xxvii. yéere of her Maieſties raigne. Was not the ſayde Shelley ſhortly after condemned for that conſpiracie, and remaineth at the Quéenes mercie: and are not the ſayde Lord Pagett and his Brother attainted for that offence by vtlarie.
            Was not Babington and thirteene other, alſo executed in the xxviii. yéere of her highnes raigne, as Traitors for the like crimes. And laſtly, haue not fourtéene Babington. Ieſuites. Ieſuites, and Seminarie Prieſtes, within theſe fiue yéeres béene erecuted as Traytors, for practiſing to withdrawe her Maieſties ſubiects, frō there due allegyance to her highnes, and for that intent, from the Religion now eſtabliſhed, to the Religion of Rome, and to yeelde ſubiection to that Sea.
            By theſe notable and memorable examples, you may plainelie ſee, the ſhamefull and miſerable end of Traytors, falſe conſpirators, and Rebelles againſt theyr Prince and ſoueraigne Gouernour, what ſoeuer theyr pretences of Religion hath béene. And theſe examples are héere ſette downe for warnings to other, and happy is he that can take béede by an others danger, and miſhappe, as the wiſe Cato ſayth, Faelix quem faciunt aliena 
               Cato. 
               pericula cautum. And was not the ſaid late S. Queene, priuie to ſundry of the ſaid conſpiracies, and treaſons, was ſhe not a principall, a better and comforter of the ſaid offenders therein: It is very euident by a Treatiſe,

publiſhed in print, whereby appeareth, that the Lordes and Commons of the high Court of Parliamēt, hauing of long time to their intollerable gréefe, ſounde, by howe many practiſes the ſayd Scottiſh Quéene, had compaſſed the deſtruction of her highnes moſt royall perſonne (in whoſe ſafety next vnder God they acknowledged their cheefe felicitie to conſiſt) thereby not onelie to bereaue them of the ſincere and true Religion in this Realme profeſſed and eſtabliſhed, but to bring backe againe this noble Realme into the thraldome of Romiſh tyrannie, and to ouerthrowe the happy eſtate thereof: wherein, although her highneſſe of her aboundant gratious naturall clemency, and princely magnanimitie, had eyther lightly paſſed them ouer, or with no ſmall indulgence tolerated, notwithſtanding, the often and earneſt inſtances of her Nobilitie and Commons, in ſundry Parliaments héeretofore: and further had protected her from the violent purſuite of her own people: ſhée yet, as a perſon obdurate in malice (as it appeared) continued her former practiſes, as had béene lately manifeſted by certaine wicked conſpiracies, plotted by the ſayd Babington, and diuers deſperate perſons, that had combined and confederated themſelues by vowe & oath in a moſt horrible enterpriſe, by murther to take away the life of her Maieſtie: where in the Scottiſh Quéene did not onely aduiſe them, but alſo direct, comfort, and abette them, with perſwaſion, counſell, promiſe of reward, and earneſt obteſtation. Wherevpon, her Maieſtie, at the earneſt requeſt of ſuch as tendered ye ſafety of her royall perſonne, and the quiet of the Realme, did direct her Commiſſion vnder the great ſeale to ſundrye Lordes and others of her Maieſties priuie Counſeil, and a great number of Lords of Parliament, of ye greateſt and moſt auncient degree, aſſiſted with ſome of the

principall Iudges of the Realme, to heare, examine and determine the ſame, according to a Statute in that behalfe made in the xxvii. yéere of her raigne. Who to the number of thirty ſixe, hauing artended the execution of the ſaid Commiſſion, and diuers dayes and times, heard the allegations againſt the ſaid Scottiſh Quéene in her owne preſence and hearing, (ſhe béeingpermitted to ſay what ſhe woulde in her owne execuſe,) dyd wyth one aſſent, finde her culpable both in priuitie, and conſent to the ſayd crimes obiected, and alſo in compaſſing the Quéenes Maieſties death. Which ſentence, by her owne directions, vpon the hearing of the prooues and proceſſe in Parliament, was iudged to haue béene moſt honourable and iuſt. And for aſmuch as the ſaid Quéene of Scots, was the very ground and onely ſubiect, whervpon ſuch daungerous practiſes and complots, had béen founded againſt her Maieſties moſt royall perſon, and the eſtate of this Realme for theſe many yéenes, to the ouerthrowe of ſundry of the Nobilitie of the lande; and daunger of Chriſtian Religion, and that they could ſee no hope of her, deſiſting, and her adherents but that ſtill her Maieſties ſafetie muſt be hazarded, and ſtand to the euent of the like miraculous diſcoueries:
            Therefore, as moſt humble and inſtant ſuppliants, they did vpon theyr knées at her moſt gracious féete, beſéeche and requeſt in moſt earneſt manner, that aſwell for the continuaunce of Gods Religion, the quiet of this Kingdome, preſeruation of her perſon, and defence of them and theyr poſterities, that it woulde pleaſe her highnes to take order, that the ſayd ſentence might bee publiſhed, and ſuch further direction giuen, as was requiſite in this ſo waighty a cauſe, according to the purport and intent of the ſayd Statute, touching the daungers that her Maieſties perſon was in, by the practiſes

of the Scottiſh Quéene, and her fauourers they appeare in that they did thinke that ſhe had right, not to ſuccéede her Maieſtie, but to enioy her Crowne in poſſeſſion, and therefore as ſhe was a moſt impatient competitor thereof, ſo ſhe would haue ſpared no meanes whatſouer, that might haue bereft vs of her Maieſtie, the onelie impediment that ſhee could not enioy her deſire.
            Shee was obdurate in malice againſt her royall perſon, notwithſtanding her Maieſtie had ſhewed her all fauour and mercie, as well in preſeruing her hingdome, as ſauing her life, and ſaluing her henour. And therefore there was no place for mercie, ſince there was no hope that ſhee would haue deſiſted from her moſt wicked attempts.
            Shee boldly and openly profeſſed, that it was lawfull for her to mooue inuaſion vppon her Maieſtie, and therefore, as of inuaſion victory might enſue, and of victorie, the death of the vanquiſhed: ſo did ſhe therby not obſcurely bewraie, that ſhe thought it lawfull, for her to deſtroy her Maieſties ſacred perſonne.
            She did thinke it not onely lawfull, but honorable alſo and meritorious to take her Maieſties life from her, as béeing all ready depriued of her Crowne, by the excommunication of the holy Father. And therefore it was like ſhe would (as ſhe had doone) continually ſéeke it by whatſoeuer meanes.
            That ſhe was gréedie of her Maieſties death, and preferred it before her owne life and ſafetie, appeareth, for in her direction to one of her late Complices, ſhe aduiſed (vnder couert termes,) that whatſoeuer ſhoulde become of her, that tragicall execution ſhould bee performed, vpon our moſt gracious ſoueraigne Lady, namely, the deſtruction of her royall perſonne.
            She was the onely hope of all diſcontented ſubiects,

ſhe was the foundation, whereon all the euill diſpoſed did builde, ſhe was the roote from whence all rebellions and trecheries did ſpring: And therefore, while this hope laſted, this foundation ſtoode, and thys roote liued, they would haue retained hart, and ſet on foote whatſoeuer theyr deuiſes againſt this Realme, which otherwiſe will fall away, die, and come to nothing.
            All theſe matters her Maieſtie did moſt déepelye conſider of, and yet to the ende it might euidently appeare, howe vnwylling ſhe was to take away ye Quéene of Scots life, ſhe required to vnderſtand by the conſideration and reſolution of the high Court of Parliament, whether any other meanes could be thought of, or ſound by anie of them, how the Scottiſh Queenes life might be ſpared, and yet her Maieſties perſonne ſaued out of perill, and the ſtate of the Realme preſerued in quiet: For her Maieſties further ſatiſfaction, they enteredinto a new conſultation, & for that prupoſe, ſelected a great number of the choyſeſt perſons of the higher houſe of Parliament, to conferre thereof, eyther prinately, or together with the lower houſe: and vppon ſundry conferences had in that behalfe at ſeueral times, it was concluded by the whole aſſemblic of both houſes, that there could be no other aſſured meanes for the preſeruation of her Maieſties life, continuance of Gods Religion, and quiet of this ſtate, then by the full execution of the ſayd ſentence.
            That if her Maieſtie ſhould be ſafe without taking away the life of the Scottiſh Queene, the ſame were moſt likely and probably to grow by one of theſe means following.
            Firſt, that happilie ſhe myght haue béene reclaimed and become & repentaunt conuert, agniſing her Maieſties

great mercie and fauour, in remitting her heynous offence, and by her loyaltic haue performed the fruites of ſuch conuerſion.
            2. Or els, by a more ſtraight guarde might haue béen ſo kept as there ſhould haue béene no feare of the like at tempts after.
            3. Or, that good aſſuraunce might haue béene gyuen by O the, Bondes or Hoſtages, as cautions for her good and loyall demeanour from thenceforth.
            4. Or laſtlie, by Baniſhment, the Realme might haue béene boyded of her perſonne, and thereby the perils further remooued, that might growe to her Maieſty by her preſence.
            All which matters béeing duely pondered, it did yet appeare in all theyr iudgments, that they durſt not aduiſe anie ſecuritie to reſt in any, no, not in all of them.
            For touching her Conuerſion, it was conſidered, that if pietie or duety could haue reſtrained her from ſuch haynous attempts, there was cauſe aboundantlye miniſtred to her on her Maieſties behalfe, when ſhe not onelie protected her againſt the violence of her owne Subiectes, who purſued her to death by Iuſtice, but couered her honour, when yt ſame by publique fame was touched, and by verie heynous and capitall crimes obiected and prooued againſt her, before certaine Commiſſarie delegates aſſigned to examine the ſame, more then blemiſhed and ſpared her life, when for her former conſpiracies and confederacies with ye Northren Rebels, her highnes was with great inſtance preſſed by bothe the houſes in the fouretéene yéere of her Maieſties raigne, to do like Iuſtice vpon her as now was deſired, and as her treaſonable practiſes then, hadde moſt iuſtly deſerued.
            And where the penaltie of thys Acte ſufficientlye

notified vnto her, ſhould haue terrified her from ſo wicked attempts, ſhe did neuertheleſſe inſiſt in her former practiſes, as a perſonne obdurate in malice againſt her Maieſtie, and irrecouerable: ſo as there was no probable hope of anie conuerſion, but rather great doubt and feare of relaps, foraſmuch as ſhe ſtoode obſtinatly in the deniall of matter moſt euivently prooued, and moſte iuſtly ſentenced againſt her, and was not entered into the firſt parte of repentaunce. The recognition of her offence, and ſo much the farther off from the true fruits that ſhoulde accompanie the ſame.
            As for a ſurer guarde, and more ſtraite impriſonment, it was reſolued, that there was no ſecurity therin, nor yet in the other two meanes propounded of Bondes and Hoſtages. foraſmuch as the ſame meanes that ſhould be practiſed to take her Maieſties life away (which God forbid) would aptly ſerue, bothe for the deliuerie of her perſon, and releaſe of the Bondes & Hoſtages, that ſhould be giuen for cautions in that behalfe: which béeing vnaptlie atchiued, and to our irreparable leſſe, who ſhould ſue the Bondes, or detaine ye Hoſtages? or béeing detained, what proportion was there in bonds or hoſtages whatſoeuer, to counteruaile the value of ſo precious and ineſtimable a Iewell, as her Maieſtie is to this Realme, and to vs all?
            That ſhée would ſolemnly haue vowed and taken an othe, that ſhe would not haue attempted any thing to the hurt of her Maieſties perſon: Shée had already ſundry time falſifyed her word, her writing & her othe, and held it for an Article of Religion. That faith was not to be holden with Heretickes, of which ſorte ſhee accounted her Maieſtie, and all the profeſſors of ye Goſpell to be: And therfore there was little reaſon to truſt her in that, whereof ſhe made ſo ſmall a conſcience.
            
               
As for baniſhment, that was a ſtep de malo in pei
                     •…
                  s to ſette her at libertie, béeing athing ſo greatly deſired and thirſted for by her adherents, and by ſome Princes her Allies, who ſought her enlargement chiefly, tomake her a head to be ſette vp againſt her Maieſty, in time of inuaſion.
            Upon all which reaſons and matters opened, and petitiones made to her Maieſtie as is aforeſayd, ſhe not withſtanding thought good & very neceſſary in ſo great a cauſe to deliberate, as by her moſt wiſe and graue anſwers to the premiſſes, in the ſayd Treatiſe, ſet downe among other things, plainely appeareth: and afterward the ſayd Scottiſh Quéene was executed in the Caſtle of Fodringham in the County of North-hampton, (where ſhe was moſt carefully kept, vnder the charge of that right honourable, truſty and right faythfull Counſeller to her Maieſty, Sir Amyas Pawlett Knight) on Wedneſday, the 8, of Feburary. 1586. And the next day after, there were Bonfiers, ringing of Belles, and ſinging of Pſalmes, by children and many others at the ſayd fiers, in the Cittie of London, whereby appeareth that the people were ioyfull that ſo daungerous an enemie to this Common wealth was taken away.
            Let me Remember the moſt vnnaturall and horible Princes not ſpared which haue oppoſed themſelues or laidhāds vppon the L. annointed. murder, of the two ſennes of C. 4. committed, by the cō
               maundement of K. Richard the third who thereby attayned the crowne, and was afterwardes ſlaine in the battaile of Boſworth in Leiceſterſhyre, 
                  •…
               y the Earle of Richmond, who ſuccéeded him in the crowne by iuſt title, whoſe deade corpes was layd croſſe vpon an horſe, and ſo brought to Leyceſter, his legges and armes, hanging downe all naked, be ſprinckled (with turt, and blody

with ſuch woundes as he receiued in the fielde) and there buryed baſely without any manner of ſolemnity, Hall fo. a inſt plague of God and a moſt worthy ſpectacle for ſo monſterous an acte, and likewiſe how H. 4. hauing obteyned the crowne rather by force, then lawfull ſucceſſion, doubting that he could not bee in ſaftie thereof ſo longe as R. 2. dyd lyue, cauſed the ſayd R. 2. to bee deſtroyed in Pomfret Caſtell, whereupon great troubles and ſundry inſurrectiones, within this Realme did happen vnto hym, and though hee dyed poſſeſſed of the Crowne, yet H 6. his ſennes ſonne was put from the ſame by E. 4. as Grafton dooth ſet it downe, whereby the olde ſaying appeareth to bee true, De rebus male partis vix gaudebit tertius haeres. By theſe examples you may ſee, how almightie God hath puniſhed euen Princes, which haue conſpyred or oppoſed themſelues, or laid violent handes vpon the Lordes annointed, and not ſpared the ofſpring of the offender in that behalfe.
            And becauſe ſome will perhaps ſay, that the Quéenes Maieſtie could not procéede againſt the ſayde Scottiſhe Quéene, as is aboue mencioned in reſpect of the dignity of her perſon, therefore (although the ſayd tryall by the ſayd Commiſſion and Eſtatute, and reſolution of the reuerend Confirmation by authority of Lawe in this proceeding. Iudges of the Lawe therein, and that her Maieſtie might haue tryed her by courſe of the Common Lawes, ought to ſatiſfie euery dutifull Subiect in yt behalfe) yet it ſhal not be in vaine beere to ſet downe ſome authority for confirmation of theyr graue and ſounde iudgement in this procéeding. Wherevpon it is to bee noted, that there is no difference in our Lawe betwixt

naturall Subiect of this Realme, and a méere Straunger or Alyen borne, that in time of peace ſhall come into thys Realme, and committe any offence there, for which any naturall ſubiect thereof, ſhould incurre the iudgment, eyther of felony or treaſon, but the ſame ſtraunger or Alien ſhalbe alſo in the ſame ſtate or degrée. Dyer. 145, For example, in the caſe of Felony it appeareth, by a Recorde in the thyrde yeere of King Edwarde the ſixt, that Charles Gauare a Spaniarde, for murthering of one Gambo in England, was attainted and executed for the ſame in Smithfield. And for example of treaſon it appeareth, by a Recorde in the third and fourth Dyer, 14, yéeres of Phillip and Mary, that one Iohn Sharles a Frenchman, in the time of peace betwixt the ſayd Phillip 
               Bro, 32. 4, Ma, and Mary, and the French King, with one Stafford an Engliſhman, dyd rebelliouſly take ye Caſtle of Scarborough, in the North partes of thys Realme, and the ſame detayned certayne dayes, for which they bothe were arraigned and attainted of treaſon (for ſuch taking or detayning, is a leuying of warre againſt the Prince) and therefore it is treaſon, and the inditement 25, Ed. 3, Bro, 24, 1, Ma. wherevpon they were arraygned, was, contra legianciae ſuae debitum, that is, againſt the duetie of their allegiaunce, but if it had béene in the time of warre betwixt the ſayd Princes, then it had béene treaſon only in Stafford, and the other ſhould haue béene counted but an enemy to bée raunſemed according to the law of Armes. But it may be that ſome wyll ſay, that the ſayd examples proue nothing in this caſe, for yt ſhe was a Quéene. Scotiſh Queene not exempt from the ſenſure of our lawe though ſhe were a Queene. To that I aunſwere, though ſhe ſo were, yet ſhee was not our Quéene, neither were we ſubiects to her, and that which almighty God ſayth by hys Prophet Dauid Touch not mine annointed, did not exempt the ſayde Scottiſh Quéene, but ſhe was to bee taken of neceſſitie

as a Subiect, and ordered by the Lawes of thys Lands ſo long as ſhe was reſident héere, ſith ſhe had not anye tytle to the Crowne of thys Land, for otherwiſe, if any forraine Prince in the time of peace, ſhoulde come into an others Kingdome, and ſhould enter into any offence againſt the Crowne, as ioyne with the Subiect to leauy warre againſt that Prince, or conſpyre hys death, and ſhould not therefore be puniſhed by the Lawe of that Land, euery Prince might be deſtroyed and ſtate ſubuerted.
            And nowe to returne againe to the matter, touching the duety of Subiects to theyr Prince.
            There is a ſaying in the tenth of Eccleſiaſtes, verye notable, where it is written thus. Wiſh no euill to the King in thy thought, nor ſpeake any hurt of him in 
               Eccleſia. 10. 
               thy priuie Chamber, for the byrdes of the ayre ſhall betray thee, and wyth theyr winges ſhall bewray thy 
               Not lawfull to wiſh euil to the Prince. 
               voyce. And ſurely it is moſt true, for though theyr conſpyracies be neuer ſo ſecrete, theyr treaſons neuer ſo cunninglie contriued, yet God doth in tymes alwayes reueale them, to the deſtruction of the parties to the ſame, as by the ſayde examples may appeare. Nowe for proofe by the word of God, that it is not lawfull for the Subiect to touch the Princes perſon. Howe often doth almighty God by hys Prophet Dauid, ſay (as is aboue ſayd) Touch not mine annoynted, as though he ſhould ſay, Foraſmuch as I haue placed her in the kynglye throne of thys Realme, and haue appoynted her to rule and gouerne my people, looke thou touch her not, lay no handes on her, offer no violence vnto her perſonne, for I haue annoynted and conſecrated her to that office and function.
            I finde in the firſt Booke of Samuell, where Dauid was vrged by hys men to haue kylled Saule, a great Samuel, 1.
               
and mighty Prince, and yet out of the fauour of God, a mortall enemy to Dauid, of whom almighty God ſo often ſayth: I haue found Dauid, a man euen according to my hartes deſire: but what did Dauid, dyd hee laye hys handes on hym, no, he made his prayers to almighty Not lawfull to lay violent handes vppon the Prince. God, ſaying: Lord keepe me that I lay not my hands vpon my maſter, the Lordes annoynted, for as ſurely as the Lord lyueth, except he diſcende into the battayle and there periſh, or that hys day become to dye, or that the Lord doo ſmyte hym, the Lord bee mercifull 
               1, Sam. 26 
               to me that I lay not my handes vppon the Lordes annointed, and ſo they departed without dooing any hurt to Saule.
            
            I find alſo in the ſame Booke, that Dauid and Abyſay hys ſeruaunt, at an other time came into the Tent where Saule was faſt a ſléepe, and Abyſay ſayde vnto Dauid, Foraſmuch as the Lord hath deliuered thy enemy Saule into thy handes at thys time, ſuffer me to ſtrike him but once with my ſpeare, and I wyll not ſmite him the ſecond time. Meaning to haue kylled hym euen at the firſt blowe, but Dauid ſayde, deſtroy him not, for who can lay his hands vppon the Lordes annointed, and be guiltles, for as ſure as the Lorde lyueth, except he diſcend into the battaile, and there periſh, or that the Lord doth ſmyte him, or that hys day become, God forbidd that thou ſhouldeſt lay thy hande vpon the Lords annoynted, and ſo they departed without dooing any hurt to him.
            
            I finde alſo in the Hiſtory of Kynges, that an Amelekite 2. Sam, 1, taking vpō him the death of Saule whom he found dead, brought his Crowne of Gold vnto Dauid, becauſe he thought thereby the rather to perſwade Dauid, that hee was the man that had ſlayne Saule, and hoped to haue had ſome great rewad for hys labour, whē 
               Dauid
               
did ſée the Crowne, and did knowe that it was Saules Crowne, he rent his clothes and wept, ſaying to thys Amalekite, How is it that thou waſt not afrayd to laye thy hand vppon the annointed of the Lord, to deſtroy him, as truely as the Lord lyueth, foraſmuch as thy owne mouth doth witnes againſt thee, thou ſhalt dye the death, and ſo he commaunded his ſeruauntes, and Not lawfull to murmer againſt ruiers. they did kill him preſentlie. Now let vs ſée what hath happened to murmurers againſt the Rulers and Magiſtrates appointed ouer them by God. It appeareth in ſundry places of the Scriptures, that ſome of them Examples of the puriſhment of murmerers by God. Nu, 11, 12, were ſtriken with foule leproſie, many burned wyth fire ſuddainlie ſent from God, ſometime a great many of thouſandes were conſumed with the peſtilence, ſome times they were ſtinged to death, with fierie Serpents of ſtraunge kind, ſometime the earth opened and ſwallowed vp quicke into hell, their Captaynes and bandes of murmurers, and their wiues, children and familie. Thus you ſée what ſtraunge and horrible plagues hath Num, 16. fallen vpon ſuch ſubiects, as did but onelie murmure and ſpeake euill againſt theyr heads and Rulers. Then touching ſuch as haue appoſed themſelues againſt their Puniſhement of rebellion of gods hand. ſoueraigne Gouernour by rebellion, though they haue not laid violent hande vpon him, yet it appeareth they haue béene by Gods iuſt iudgment ſundry wayes puniſhed, as by the example of Abſolon is manifeſt, who entred into conſpiracie againſt King Dauid his father, 
                  
                     •
                  . Sam. 15, 17 and vſed the aduiſe of manie wittie men, and aſſembled a verie great and huge company of Rebelles: which Abſolon, though he were moſt goodly of perſonne, of great nobility béeing the Kinges ſonne, in great fauour of the people, and ſo déerely beloued of the King himſelf, ſo much that he gaue commandement notwithſtanding hys rebellion, his life ſhould be ſaued. When for theſe

conſiderations moſt men were afraid to lay their hands vpon him, a great Trée ſtretching forth her arme (as it were for that purpoſe) caught him by the great & long buſh of his goodly haire, lapping about it, as he fled haſtilie 2 Samuel, 18 bare-headed vnder the ſaid Trée, and ſo hanged him vp by the hayre of the head in the ayre, to giue an eternall document, that neither comlines of perſonage, neither nobilitie, nor the fauoure of the people, nor the fauour of the King himſelfe, can ſaue a Rebell from due puniſhment, God the King of all kinges béeing ſo offended with him, that rather then he ſhould lacke due execution for his treaſons, euery trée by the way will bée a gallowes or Iebbet vnto him, and the haire of hys own head, will be vnto him in ſtedde of a haulter to hang him vp with, rather then he ſhould lacke one. A fearefull example of Gods puniſhment to conſider. Achitophell, 
               2, Samu, 17. though otherwiſe an excéeding wiſe man, yet the miſcheuous Counſeller of Abſolon in this wicked rebellion, for lacke of a hangman (a conuenient ſeruiter for ſuch a Traytor,) went and hanged vppe himſelfe, a worthie end of all Rebelles, who rather then they ſhould lacke due execution, will by Gods iuſt iudgment become hangmen to themſelues. Thus happened it to the Captaynes of that rebellion, beſides forty thouſande of raſcall rebelles ſlayne in the fielde, and in the chaſe, likewiſe it is to be ſéene in the holy Scriptures, howe 2, Samu, 20. that great rebellion, which the Traytor Seba mooued in Iſraell, was ſuddainly appeaſed, the heade of ye Captaine Traytor, (by meanes of a ſilly woman) beeing cutt off. Thus you ſée alſo the ende of Traytors & falſe Rebels, though theyr intent were not to touch the perſon of their ſoueraigne Gouernour. Surely it is not lawfull for the Subiect of the Turke, nor of the moſt vngodlieſt King that raigneth, to murmure or rebell aagainſt

his Prince, whom God hath placed in ye throne The Subiect of the wicked Prince may not rebell. Pro. 1. 6 2. Para. 2. Iob, 34, Oſee. 13. Prou, 21, Eſdras, 7. Subiects muſt be obedient. Rom, 13, Wiſdom. 6. Damnation No difference betwyxt the chriſtian prince & the heathen touching ſubmiſſion to higher powers. Ioh. 19. 6, 10 of gouernment, either for the comfort of good people, or for the puniſhmēt of the bad, if ought be to be reformed touching gouernment in the king, it dooth not belong to the Subiect to redreſſe the ſame, but he muſt refer the matter to God onely, who hath the hartes of Kinges in his order, and diſpoſeth them as it ſéemeth beſt to hys godlie wiſedome. The duety of the Subiect is alwayes to be obedient, as S. Paule ſaith, Submitte your ſelues vnto the higher powers, for there is no power but of God, & all powers that be, are ordeyned of God, who that reſiſteth powers, reſiſteth the ordenaunce of God, and procureth vnto himſelfe damnation. Héere is no exception of Turke nor Infidell, of the wicked and vngodlie Prince, more then of the Chriſtian and vertuous King, for his wordes be generall, there is no power but of God, and all powers that are be ordeyned of God. When pilate ſaid to Chriſt, Knoweſt not thou that I haue power to looſe thee, and alſo to crucifie thee? hée aunſwered, thou couldeſt haue no power at all ouer me except it were giuen thee from aboue. As he confeſſed his authoritie to be from aboue, ſo he ſubmitted himſelf vnto the ſame, though he were an heathen Gouernour, to giue vs an example ſo to doo, whether they he Chriſtian Subiects muſt pray for theyr Rulers. Rulers or others. And as the Subiect ought to ſubmitte himſelfe vnto the higher powers, and to theyr ordenaunces, to beware of murmuringes, conſpiracies, and inſurrections againſt their ſoueraigne Gouernor, ſo is it alſo their dueties to pray for them, as S. Paule 
               1. Timo. cap. 2. ſaith. I exhort you aboue all thinges, that prayers and ſupplications, interceſſions and giuing of thankes bee had for all men, for Kinges and all other that are in authoritie, that wee may liue a quiet and a peaceable life, withall godlines, for that is good and acceptable in

the ſight of God our Sauiour. When Gods holy ſpirite by S. Paul gaue this Leſſon to the Chriſtians, they liued for the moſt part vnder Calygula, Clodius, and Nero, who were heathen Princes, Pagans, and ſuch as Hethen Princes prayed for. did not know God, and were cruell tyrants, and yet the Chriſtians that liued vnder them were exhorted to pray for them. When Nabuchodonaſor, king of Babilon, had ſlayne the king and manie nobles of the Iewes with a great number of their Children and kinſ-folkes, burned their Country, and Citties yea, and Ieruſalem it ſelfe, and the holy Temple, and had caryed to Babilon the reſt of them captiues. The Prophet Barucke 
               Baruck. 1 ſaid vnto the Captiues, béeing the people of God, pray yée for the life of Nabuchodonoſor king of Babilon, and for the life of Balthazer his ſonne, that theire dayes may be as the dayes of heauen vpon the earth, yt God alſo may giue vs ſtrength, and lighten our eies, that we may liue vnder the defence of Nabuchodonaſor, king Tyrant Princes prayed for. of Babilon, and vnder the protection of Balthazer hys ſonne, that we maie long doo them ſeruice, and finde fauour in their ſight. If then the people of God were willed to pray for Infidels, for Pagans, for Tyrantes, for murtherers, and cruell oppreſſors of them, and that they might long liue vnder their protections, it followeth conſequentlie, that it is vtterly againſt the wyll of God to deſtroy, or to appoſe themſelues againſt the Prince, by making of inſurrections or rebellions, if they ſhal praie for ſuch Princes and Rulers, then howe much more ought we to pray for the proſperous eſtate of our moſt gracious ſoueraigne Ladie, that wee may long liue vnder her gracious gouernment, béeing a Chriſtian Prince, one that doth ſet forth the honor and glorie of God, that doth loue God, ſerue God, and feare God, that maketh good lawes, that deſireth that Iuſtice

may be equally miniſtred to all that deſireth to raigne with pittie, mercy, and with clemencie, and not by tyranny, not by ſhedding of blood, nor oppreſſion of her people, that is mercifull to offenders, bountifull to weldeſeruers, carefull to defend her dominions and Countries, vnder her ſubiection from forraine inuaſions, that her ſubiects may liue in peace and reſt vnder her. Foraſmuch therefore, as it hath pleaſed God to place her in the kingly ſeate of thys Realme, to addorne and decke her head with a Crowne of golde and precious ſtones, to annoint her Quéene of this Land, according to her moſt iuſt and rightfull title therevnto, and for that wée daily doo inioy ſo many bleſſings of God, vnder her moſt gracious regiment, and ſuch dailie benefites by her great kindnes and loue towardes vs. Let vs therefore be humble ſutors to almighty God, that it may pleaſe We muſt pray for her maieſtie. him to holde his holie hand ouer her, to graunt her life, with moſt proſperous health, long to indure, & that ſhée may in high felicity long raigne ouer vs: to defend her from Traytors, and falſe conſpirators, to diſcouer them in time, that they may be rooted out as corrupt mēbers of the body of thys Common wealth, that others her good and faithfull Subiects may thereby the rather bée incouraged to continue in their wel-dooings. Let vs alſo pray for her moſt honourable Counſell, that it wyll For her moſt honorable Coū
                  ſell. pleaſe God, that they may long liue, and loue together like Brethren, that they may continue faithfull Counſellers to this moſt happy ſtate and gouernment, as they haue doone hetherto to theyr great honours and fames, neuer to dye. That it will pleaſe him alſo to giue vs grace, that we may loue, honour & obey her, in God and for God, acccording to hys bleſſed worde and ordenance. And that we may ſhew our ſelues in hart, word Pray for our ſelues to be true ſubiects. and déede, true, faithfull, loyall and duetiful ſubiects vnto

her, Ma. as we are bound by ye lawes of God, by the lawes of nature, and by the lawes of this land. And now The prime and commō wealth preſerued and maintained by lawe and execution of Iuſtice. Princes are ordained to gouerne. becauſe yt by the laws and execution of iuſtice, ye Prince is preſerued, and the common wealth maintained, as by the ſaid examples you may plainely ſee, it ſhall not be impertinent to ſet downe héere, what law and iuſtice is and in particularity, ſome of ye great benefits & profittes which growe by ye ſame to the Common wealth & ſtate of euerie kingdome. By that which is ſayde afore among other things, it plainly appeareth, that kings are ordeyned to gouerne the people, and ſubiects, commanded by God to ſubmit themſelues vnto their authority, for there is no Common wealth, ſtate, or ſocietie of man No commō wealth where thereis not ſuperioritie in gouernement. Cicero de legib'. li. 3. kind, that can continue, where there is not ſuperiority or preheminence in gouernmēt, according to their kinde and quallity, as Tully the famous Orator, in his booke de legibus, intreating of gouernment (euen by the law of nature) ſaith. Nihil tam aptum est ad legem condicionemque naturae, quam imperium ſine quo nec domus vlla, nec ciuitas, nec gens, nec hominum vniuerſum genus, nec rerum natura, nec ipſe mundus stare poſſit, nam et hic deo paret, et huic obediunt maria, terrae
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   et hominum vita iuſſis ſupreme legis obtemperat. That is to ſay, nothing is ſo apt to the Law and condition of nature, as authoritie and Gouernment, without which, no houſe, no Cittie, no nation nor mankind, nor the nature of thinges. nor the worlde it ſelfe can ſtand, for the world obeyeth God, and to him the Seas and landes are ſubiect, and the life of man to the commaundement of the hygheſt Lawe doth obey, as ſuperiority then muſt be in gouernmēt, ſo muſt there There muſt be good lawes to gouerne by. be alſo good lawes, ſtatutes and ordenaunces to rule and gouerne. Nam ſicut per naruos compago corporis ſolidatur ſic res publica per legē (quie aligando diciturae ligatur et ſeruatur.
            
            
               
As by the ſinnowes the body is made ſtrong, ſo the Iuſtice muſt be execuſed, otherwiſe neither Prince nor Lawe auaileth. Common wealth by Lawe (which is ſo called of bynding) is knit and preſerued together, yet neither Prince nor law can much profit, where iuſtice is not executed. Almighty God therefore, knowing in his euerlaſting wiſedome and preſcience, how neceſſary good and holeſome lawes, and the execution thereof, ſhould be to rule his people, after they had béene both before the vniuerſall floodde, and by manie yéeres after, gouerned by the Exod. 20. law of nature; did giue the Law of the tenne Commandements in the Mount Sinay, wherein is firſt contained Law of the tenne Commaundements. our duetie to God, and next to our Neighbours, and alſo did ordeyne Kinges and Magiſtrates to rule and correct them by the ſame and other lawes, as in the Booke of Exodus, and ſundrie other places of the holie Scripture appeareth, he gaue alſo power to Princes to 
                  Exod. 19. By God power is giuen to Princes to make good lawes. Prou 8. make good lawes, for the preſeruation of their kingdomes, Countries, and ſeignories, and for the politique regiment of their Subiects, as it is written in the Prouerbs of Salomon. Through me Kinges raigne, and Princes make iuſt Lawes: which Lawes muſt bee conſonant and agréeing, or at the leaſt not contrarie to the Lawe of God. For woe is threatned in the Scriptures to them that make vnrighteous Lawes, too harde for people to kéepe, and withall, did giue ſpeciall commaundement to the ſubiects, to ſubmitte themſelues to theyr Lawes and ordenaunces, as S. Peter doth tetifie, as is afore remembred. Peter. 2.
            
            Now touching what thing lawe is, ſome define it thus, Lex est ſumma ratio intua in natura que iubet que faciendo ſunt prohibet
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   contraria, that is. The Lawe is Lawe of Nature. the higheſt reaſon grafted in nature, that commandeth the thinges which are to be doone, and forbiddeth the contrarie. And Cicero in his ſecond booke de legibus, affirmeth, Cicero lib. 2 de legibꝰ
               
               Legem neque ſapientiſsimorum fuiſse ſententiam, 
               Lawe of Nature. 
               ne
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   hominum ingenijs excogitatam, neque ſcitum eſſe populorum, ſed eternum quiddam quod vniuerſum mundum regeret, imperandi prohibendique, ſapiencia, that is, the Law was neither ye iudgment of ye wiſeſt, neither foūd out by mans wit, nor eſtabliſhed by the people, but a certaine euerlaſting thing which ſhould gouerne ye whole worlde by wiſedome, to command, and to prohibite, which ſaying, rather ſéemeth to be a diffinition of ye Law of Nature, then of the Law generally, after the opinion of Oſorius. 
               Oſorius. 178. 
               Lex est recta ratio deterrens a flagitijs, et ad studium honeſtatis impellent. That is, the Lawe is the perfect Definition of lawe generally. reaſon, fearing men from euill and wicked actes, & forcing them to the ſtuddie of vertue and good things. And Muſculus in his common places, ſaith. That Law may be ſaid to bee reaſon, rule and ſentence, which is ſtrengthened Muſculus. 76 with authoritie and Iuſtice, whereby are commaunded ſuch things as are to be kept and performed, and ſuch thinges as are to be auoided, are forbidden, which me ſéemeth is very aptly ſaide. Nowe touching what iuſtice is. Bracton ſaith, Iusticia est constans et 
               Lib primo. 
               perpetua voluntas ius ſuum cuique tribueus, that is iuſtice is a conſtant and perpetual will, to yéelde to euery one his right, he calleth her conſtant, becauſe ſhe is not mutable: perpetual, becauſe ſhe ſhal neuer decay, touching the qualities of lawe, Tully ſaith, that Leges ſunt fundamenta 
               
                  Cicero. Commodities of law. 
               ciuitatum ſunt humani generis praeſidium at
                     
                        
                     
                     que
                   regimen, quibus homines astricti abstinēt iniurijs et faciunt hō
                  mines mitiores ac valde exultantes repremunt legum habene. That is, the lawes are the foundations of Citties, the ſafegard and gouernours of mankind, by which men being bound, abſtaine from iniuries, they make men gentle, the reignes of law, doo greatly bridle and reſtraine the proude and haughty perſons. And yet Anacharſis 
               Anacharſis
               
the wyſe Sythian was wont to ſay, that Lawes are made like Spyders webs, wherein the weakeſt & moſte Lawes are compared to Spiders webbes. ſéebleſt beaſtes be catched and ſtick faſt, but the ſtrongeſt breake out: ſo lawes bynd the poore and meane perſons, but the rich cubbes eſcape vnpuniſhed, but thys is not the default of lawe, which is indifferent to all, but of them that haue the law in gouernment. The ſame is not more neceſſary to the world (ſayth Ariſtotel) thē good and holeſome lawes are for the preſeruation of Ariſtotel. the weale publique, and ſurely he ſayth true, for as the ſunne by hys naturall heate and influence, doth comfort The Sun is not more neceſſay to the world then good lawes to the commō wealth. preſerue and mayntaine euery lyuing thing, hearbe, plant and trée, and giueth vertue and ſtrength to them, whereby they yéelde fruite in theyr due time, according to theyr kindes and properties, neceſſary for mans vſe, ſo doo good and holeſome lawes preſerue and maintaine the ſtate of euery kingdome and common wealth, for by law, the honour of God is aduaunced, Traytors, rebelles, and falſe conſpirators (the mortall enemies to enery Common wealth, as the Poet ſayth, Regnorum 
               Profits of lawe. 
               peſſima pestis, ſeditio) are cutt off, whereby the Prince ſitteth the more ſure in his royall ſeate. By execution of iuſtice, we poſſeſſe our liues, our wyues, our children, our landes, our goods, and what ſoeuer other things we haue, when murtherers, théeues, robbers, and other offenders haue theyr deſeruing. By law, common peace and quietnes is maintayned, if there were no lawe there wold be no order, if there were no order, al things would be confounded, as the Scripture ſayth, vbi nullus ordo, ibi est confuſio. The law of it ſelfe is an honourable thing, it hath no deſire of reuenge, it doth carry an indifferent mind to all ſortes in poynt of Iuſtice, it oppreſſeth none, it is not angry wyth any, it coueteth no mans life, goods, nor landes, it is induced only for equities

cauſe, to puniſh and redreſſe wronges and iniuries, it hateth none, for it knoweth not when nor vpon whōe it ſhould be reuenged, it condemneth none without premonition or forewarning to ſpeake for himſelfe. It generally forbiddeth all men to doo euill, it threatneth to all reuenge which doo tranſgreſſe her preceptes, like as the bridle and the ſpurre driueth and conſtrayneth the horſe ſwyftly and well to performe his iurney, ſo do good and reaſonable ordinaunces & lawes, lead & direct men to vſe good manners and conditions, and thereby to honour, dreade, loue, and ſerue God, & vertuouſly to liue among their neighbours, in continuall peace and tranquilitie, in firme concorde and agréement, in a vnitie of wyll and minde, and in ſincere loue and charitie, which thing duelie to performe, is not gyuen to mankinde immediatly and onely by nature, as is gyuen to all other creatures, which are by nature conſtrayned to doo and to liue after theyr kindes, but by Gods reaſonable ordenaunces, to inſtruct and direct men to the ſame, the law induceth the good ſubiect to be true and faythfull to hys Prince and ſoueraigne Gouernour, it encourageth him to doo well, whereby he increaſeth in wealth, and enioyeth the fruites of hys owne indeuour. The Lawe is terrible to offenders, but comfortable to well dooers, 
                  Rom. ca. 13 Lawes are terrible to offenders but comfortable to wel dooers as S. Paule ſayth: The Magiſtrate is not fearefull to them that doo well, but to them that do euill. Wylt thou be without feare of the power (ſaith S. Paule) doo well then, and ſo ſhalt thou bee prayſed of him, for hee is the miniſter of God ordayned for thy wealth, but if thou doo euill, then feare, for he beareth not the ſword in vaine, for he is the miniſter of God to take vengeance on them that doo euil, which is meant by Law and Iuſtice. The lawe that yéeldeth ſuch good Lawes can not be ſufficiently praiſed. things as aforeſaid, ought to be had in great price, & cannot be ſufficiently aduaunced, magnified and prayſed,

and therefore let euery good Subiect ſay alwaies, viuat Rex et currat lex. God graunt the Prince long life, and the Law to haue his courſe. If you wyl conſider the miſerable eſtate of ſuch people as liue vnder heathen Princes, The miſerable condition of people that liue where no lawes be. 
               quorum arbitria pro legibus extant, whoſe iudgmēts are holden for Lawes, and where the King ſaith, Sic volo ſic iubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas, ſo I will, ſo I commaund, my pleaſure doth ſtand for reaſon. And compare the ſame with the moſt happy condition of ſuch Nations as liue vnder the Chriſtian Princes, and Monarks of the world, yée ſhall ſoone ſée the great bendage of the one, and the moſt happy condition and liberty of the other, and among other Chriſtian Nations, howe much are we bound to the goodnes of almighty God, that liue vnder ſo gracious, and ſo chriſtian a Prince, that dooth not onelie make holeſome lawes, but alſo dooth maintaine The happy ſtate of people that liue vnder good lawes all the good lawes of her noble progenitors, and among other, that moſt honourable, moſt reaſonable, moſt indifferent Lawe that anie nation in the worlde hath, or that can be deuiſed, which was ordeyned by Parliament, in the ninth yéere of the raigne of the noble King Henry the third, in this maner. Nullus liber 
               9. H. 3. ca. 28. The honorable law of Henry the thyrd 
               homo capietur ſeu impriſonetur aut diſſeiſietur de libero tēto ſuo, nec de libertatibus aut liberis conſuetudinibus ſuis nec vtlagetur aut expuletur, vel aliquo alio modo deſtruetur, nec ſuper ipſum ibimus nec ſuper ipſum mittemus niſi ꝑ legale iudicium parium ſuorum, vel per legem terrae, nulls vendemus, nulli negabimus, nulli differemus iustitiam ſine rectum. That is to ſay, no man ſhalbe taken or impriſoned, nor diſſeiſed of his fréehold, nor put out of his liberties or frée cuſtomes, or ſhalbe outlawed, or exiled, or by any means deſtroyed, neither ſhal we goe or paſſe vpō him but by ye lawful iudgment of hys Péeres, or by the Lawes of this land, we ſhall ſell, deny or defer iuſtice

or right to anie. I find in the xlii. yéere of Edwarde the 42, Ed, 3, thyrd, that a Commiſſion was graunted out of ye Chancerte, to take a man and his goods, and to put him in priſon, and it was adiudged to be a voyde procéeding, becauſe it was doone without inditement or ſute of ye parties, or other due proces, and not according to the ſayde Eſtatute. There is alſo an other honourable Law made in the xiiii. yéere of king E. 3. That the Iuſtice of any 14 E 3. ca 4, ſta 1. Court whatſoeuer, ſhall not let to doo the Common law for any commaundement which ſhall come to them vnder the great ſeale, or the priuie ſeale. And to the ende the Iuſtices of the Common lawes ſhould be the more The Iuſtice ſhall not lett to do iuſtice for anye comman dement of the Prince. carefull to performe that law, it is ordeyned by a ſtatute made 18 E. 3. ſtatuto tertio,
                that it ſhalbe part of theyr othe, when they are made Iuſtices (and ſo it is indéede) ſo as they are bound as well by that ſtatute, as in reſpect of their othe to doo iuſtice to all men: and euerye P
                  ••
               nce of this Realme, doth take a ſolemne othe in the day of their Corronation, to maintaine, and to cauſe to bee obſerued, the lawes, ſtatutes, and cuſtomes of thys Realme, and her Maieſtie is alſo well pleaſed, (albeit ſhee be aboue her lawes in ſome reſpect) yet to be ordered and yeelde to the ſame, as other her noble progenitors Prince ſworne to maintayne lawe. haue doone, to her and their great honors, and immortall fames. And becauſe the Lawe of it ſelfe is as Tully ſayth. Mutus magiſtratus ſed magistratus est lex loquens, that is. The Lawe is a dombe Magiſtrate, Cicero Lib 3. de legibꝰ. but the Magiſtrate is a ſpeaking Law, therefore officers and Miniſters muſt bee appointed to execute the ſame lawes. And for that her Maieſtie cannot be in euery minyſters muſt be appointed to execute Lawes. place to doo iuſtice, nor can in caſes betwixt her ſelfe and her people be a Iudge, ſhee is of neceſſity to impart her authority to others, to ayde and aſſiſt her in the adminiſtration of iuſtice, in the choiſe of which officers ſhe hath great care (as by ye auncient ſtatute made

in the firſt yéere of E. 3. is ordeyned touching Iuſtice of peace, that they ſhall be no maintainers of euill, nor barators 1. E. 3. ca, 16, What men may not be Iuſtices. in the Countrie, but ſhalbe ſuch as Bracton writeth of: Viri ſapientes et timentes Deum, in quibus est veritas eloquiorum, et qui oderunt auaritiam quae inducit cupiditatem, 
               Fcc. e, 10. 
               qui ad 
                     •
                  extram neque ad ſinistram vel propter 
               What men men ought to be choſē to bee Iuſtices. what they muſt doo. 
               proſ
                     •
                   eritatem terrenam vel aduerſitatis metum, a tramite iusticiae declin
                     •
                  nt, ſed iudicent populum dei in equitate, vt dici poſſunt quod pſalmista vult eos dici, de vultu corum iudicium prodiit veritatis, et quod conſiderent efficaſiter quid oportuerit ſecundum neceſſitatem, quod expediret ſecundum vtilitatem, quod ligatum fuerit ſecundum promiſsionem, et quid deceat ſecundum honestatem, et tale iudicium diliget honor regis, cuius perſonam iudicando repreſentant, nulli au tem iuris beneficium denegent, a nullo praemium petant recipiantue, vt quiſque ius ſuum libero proſequatur vt in cauſa vid uae ad eos introcatur, vt ſint Orphano et pupillo adiuto, res vt nulli calumniam fieri patientur, vt constitutiones eorum et edicta iure et conſuetudinibus approbate cōmuni vtilitati conueniant, coram eis nulla deprimat aduerſariorum potentia ſed agat vnuſquiſque quod cauſa ſuae deſiderat et ſe temperat, ab iniuria, nec a limitibus iudiciorum iustorum auertat eos odium fauor, aut gratia, vt dici poſſit de eis iustus es domine et rectum iudicium tuum. That is to ſay: Wiſemen fearing GOD, in whoſe mouth is trueth, which hate couetouſnes, that bringeth deſire, which neyther to the right hand nor to the left, eyther for worldlie proſperitie or for feare of aduerſitie, from the path of right ſhall decline, but ſhall iudge the people of God in equitie, that it may be ſayd of them, as the Pſalme ſpeaketh, out of their countenaunces the iudgment of trueth doth procéede, and that they conſider effectually, what is to be doone for neceſſitie, and what is expedient for profit, what ſhall be bound according to promiſe, what is méete according to honeſtie, and ſuch

iudgment the honour of the King doth loue, whoſe perſonne in iudgment they repreſent, which ſhall deny the benefit of Law to none, nor ſhall aſke or take any reward of any, that euery man may fréely proſecute law, that the widdow may haue acceſſe to them, that they be helpes to the Orphanes and infants, that they ſuffer no wrong to anie to be doone, that their conſtitutions and edicts approoued by Cuſtomes, may agrée to the common profitte, before them no power of the aduerſarie muſt ſuppreſſe any, but that euery one doo that which his cauſe doth require, and temper himſelf from wrong, and that from the lymits of the iudgments of the iuſt, no hatred, fauour, nor thankes do turne them, that it may be ſaid of them, iuſt art thou Lorde, and thy iudgment is right. Which ſaying of Bracton, though it bee ſpoken chiefely of Iuſtice of the Cammon lawes, for that Iuſtices of Peace, were not til long after this time ordeyned, yet in the choyſe of them his opinion is ſo conuenient to be vſed. A Iuſtice muſt be alſo milde, patient Property of a Iuſtice and gentle, in hearing the cauſes brought afore him and graue in his anſwers, as it is well written.
            
               Si fueris Iudex mitiſis corde momento, dicito quae poſſunt dicta decere ſenem, He muſt alſo remember that which Pereneſis Iſocrates wryteth: Ad demonicum, quicquid 
               Pereneſis, Iſocrates, 
               dicturus es prius apud animum tuum expende, multorum enim cogitationem lingua praecurrit. That is, whatſoeuer thou ſhalt ſpeake, firſt waie it in thy mind, for many Nota. mens tongues doo runne aſore theyr thoughtes. And to the end the Iuſtice of peace ſhalbe the more carefull to doo iuſtice according to the lawes, ſtatutes, & cuſtemes Euery Iuſtice is ſworne to doo Iuſtice of this realme, euery of them in their entry into that office, doth take a ſolemne othe, vpon the holy Booke of God, as by a ſtatute made in the 13. yeere of the raygne of R. the ſecond is ordeyned: whereby the moſt godlie, 13 R. 2. gracious, and honourable deſire, and diſpoſition of the

Princes of this land, that iuſtice ſhould be equally miniſtred to al ſorts of her people, doth moſt manifeſtly appeare. Now they which are called to ſitte in place of iuſtice, are further to conſider, that they occupy the iudgment The Iuſtice doth ſit in the place of God. ſeate of God, and therfore it is ſayd to them, 
                  Ʋide te quid faciatis non enim hominis ſed des exercetis iudicium, that is, take héede what you doo, for you doe not exerciſe the iudgment of man but of God, and the Goſpell ſayth Quodcūque metieritis et vobis metietur, Whatſoeuer you meaſure to others, it ſhall be meaſured to you againe. And almighty God ſaith to the Iudges, Audite illos, et ꝙ iuſtū est iudicate ſiue ſit ille ciuis ſiue per egrinus, nulla erit 
               
                  Deu. 1. His dutye in Iudgment. 
               perſonarū diſtātia ita paruū audietis vt magnū, quia dei iudiciū est. That is, here them, & iudge rightly whether he be a Cittizen or a ſtraūger, there ſhal be no difference of perſon, here the ſmall as well as the great. And againe. He muſt take no rewardes to do Iuſtice. 
               Non accipies perſonā nec munera quia munera excaecant oculo siudicū, et mutant verba iuſtorum. That is, accept no perſonne in iudgment, nor gyfts, for gyfts blynd ye eyes of the Iudge, and change the words of the iuſt. And almighty God by Salomon, ſaith vnto the Iudges, take 
                  Pro, 17. He maye not ſaue ye wicked nor condenme the Iuſte héede thou iuſtifie not the wicked, nor condemne ye iuſt, for both are abhomination to the Lord, let it not be ſayd of you as it is written, Chriſtus crucifigitur, Barrabas autem demittitur. That is, Chriſt is crucified, and Barrabas (which was a notable théefe) is let goe, for then it may be rightly ſayd of you. Dat veniam coruis, damnat 
               
                  Lib, primo in fine Thoffice of the Iuſtice in cauſes brought a fore him in iudgment. Deu, 16, 
               Cenſura columbas. That is, he pardoneth the Rauen which is a rauening foule, and condemneth the Doue, which is a ſimple Byrde. The office of the Iudge (as Bracton ſayth) is alſo diligenter examinare et cuncta rimari. That is, dilligently to examine, and all thinges to open and make plaine, he muſt make doubtfull thinges certaine, and that which carieth likelihoode of trueth, he muſt ſerch out. Almighty God further ſayth to ye Iudge,

               quod iustum est perſequeris vt viuas, et poſſedeas terram 
               Deu. 16. 
               quam dominus deus tuus dabit tibi. That is to ſay, that which is right purſue and follow, that thou maieſt liue and poſſeſſe the land which the Lord thy God ſhal gyue thée. They are with all do conſider, that they haue taken in hand a thing of right great importance, namely, the execution of Law and iuſtice. whereby the honour of God is aduaunced, the Prince preſerued, and the Common wealth as is aforeſaid maintained. Therfore they ought with all dilligence and diſcretion, effectually to purſue and execute the ſame, according to the truſt repoſed in them, in dooing whereof, God ſhall aſſiſt them, and the Prince will and ought to ayde and mayntayne them in that they ſupply her place, and ſo you ſhal ſhew your ſelues worthy to ſitte in place of Iuſtice, and to be accounted good members of the Common wealth, for the preſeruation whereof, eche good ſubiect ought to imploy himſelfe, and the rather, ſith euery one is borne to Euerye good man muſt haue care to leue after him a commendable memory of his good actes. ſerue his Prince and Countrie. And euery man ought to indeuour himſelfe, and haue great deſire to leaue to his poſteritie, a commendable memory of his good actes doone in hys life time. Quia viuit poſt funera virtus. for a mans good déedes liue when he is dead, and what better fame or commendation can a Iudge leaue after him then that he was a righteous Iudge, a graue, diſcrete and ſage man in his dooings touching iuſtice, that he regarded alwaies the trueth and right of ye cauſe brought before him, and not the perſon, and that he would patiently and quietly beare both parties, and not vnaduiſedly credite the one, before he hath heard the other, for which cauſe, almighty God hath giuen a mā two eares, one on the one ſide, and the other on the other ſide of his head, and reaſon, ſence and vnder ſtanding hath placed betwixt both, to conceiue and decerne the cauſe, and a tongue to vtter that which is right. And foraſmuch as

the Iuſtice cannot by courſe of law procéede in the era▪ execution of iuſtice without information of others therefore the Iurors which are called and charged to inquire and preſent offences before them inquirable, or to Duty of Iurors. trye any cauſe, are to conſider that they haue alſo taken vpon them a great charge, wherein, if they be remiſſe or ſlacke in dooing theyr dueties, offenders cannot be puniſhed, for the Iuſtice cannot be a Iudge and an informer or accuſer alſo, and ſo the euill ſhould not onely bee encouraged to continue in theyr euill dooings, but alſo others would be imboldened to attempt the like, to the great loſſe, hinderaunce, and diſcouragement of ſuch as deſire to liue in the feare of God, and due obſeruation of her Maieſties lawes. Theſe Iurors take a ſolemne othe vpon the holy booke of God, truely to inquire, and Iurors are ſworne to doo truely. true preſentment to make of ſuch thinges, wherewyth they ſhall be charged, and ſhall not let for fauour or affection, dyſpleaſure or malice, to ſay the truth, as God ſhall helpe them and the contents of the Booke, wherein they are to conſider, that in thys booke are contayned Gods euerlaſting trueth, hys moſt holy & eternal word, What conſideration men ought to haue which take an oath. whereby we haue forgyuenes of our ſins, and be made inheritors of heauen, to liue for euer, with Gods angels and his ſaynts in ioy & gladnes. And in the ſame Booke is contayned alſo Gods terrible threates to obſtinate ſinners, which wyll not amend theyr liues, nor beléeue the trueth of Gods holy word, and the euerlaſting paine prepared in hell for hypocrites, vayne ſwearers, periured perſons, falſe wytnes bearers, vniuſt condemners of innocent and guiltles men, and for them which for fauour hyde the offences of euill dooers, that they ſhoulde not be puniſhed, ſo that whoſoeuer wilfullie forſweareth himſelfe, hauing taken an othe as is aforeſayd, doth vtterly forſake Gods mercy, goodnes and trueth, by the merites of Chriſtes death, and whatſoeuer he hath deſerued

for vs. They refuſe forgiuenes of ſinnes promiſed to all penitent ſinners, the ioyes of heauen, the company with angels and ſaints for euer. Al which benefits and comforts are promiſed to true Chriſtian perſons in the Goſpell, and they ſo beeing for ſworne doo betake thē ſelues to the deuils ſeruice, the father of all lyers, falſehoode, deceipt, and periurie, prouoking the great indignation and curſe of God, againſt them in thys life, and the terrible wrath and iudgment of our Sauior Chriſt, at the great day of the laſt iudgment, when he ſhall iuſtly iudg both the quicke and the dead, according to theyr workes. For whoſoeuer forſaketh the trueth for loue or diſpleaſure of any man, or for lucre or profitte to hymſelfe, doth forſake Chriſt, and with Iudas doth betraye him, and although ſuch periured mens falſehood be now kept ſecrete, yet it ſhall be opened at the laſt day, when the ſecretes of all mens harts ſhall be manifeſt to al the world, and the trueth ſhal appeare and accuſe them, and theyr owne conſcience, with all the bleſſed company of heauen, ſhall beare witnes truely againſt them, and Chriſt the righteous iudge, ſhall then iuſtly condemne them to euerlaſting ſhame and death. Thys ſinne of Mala, 3. periurie, almighty God by the prophet Malachy dooth threaten to puniſh ſeuerely, ſaying to the Iewes, I wyll 
               Puniſhment of per iurie by God. 
               come to you in iudgment, and I wyll be a ſwyft wytnes, and a ſharpe iudge vpon ſorcerers, adulterers, and periured perſons.
            
            Which thing to the Prophet Zacherie, almightye Zach. 5. God declareth in a viſion, wherein the prophet did ſée a Booke flying in ye ayre, which was 20. cubits long, & 10 cubits broad, & God ſaid then to him this is ye curſe that ſhal goe forth vpon the face of ye earth, for 
                  〈◊…〉
               , falſe ſwearing, & periurie, and thys curſe ſhal enter 
                  〈◊…〉
                houſe of the falſe man, and into the houſe of the per
                  •••…
               ed

man, and it ſhall remaine in the middeſt thereof & conſume euen thé timber & ſtones of the ſame. Thus you ſée how much God doth hate periorie, and what puniſhment he hath prepared for falſe ſwearers and periured perſons. It is commanded by the law of God, that none ſhould take his name in vaine, for the Lorde wyll not holde him guiltles that taketh his name in vaine, and how can a man more deepely offende againſt that law, then when he ſweareth and taketh God to witnes that he will ſay trueth, and yet ſetteth forth falſhood, and couereth the trueth, and as the offence of periury is deteſtable before God, ſo are the offenders therein ſubiect to the puniſhment of the Law of this Realme. For by a 3. H. 7, Cap. 1. ſtatute made in the 3. yéere of the Raigne of the noble king Henry the ſeauenth, it is ordayned, that the Iuſtices afore whom ſuch men are ſworne, haue power to impanell a Iurie, to enquire of their conſealinge Puniſhment of Iurors by the law for conſeling of the truthe. whereof if they happen to be indited & conuicted, they may impoſe ſuch fines vpon them, as to theyr diſcretion in that behalfe ſhall ſéeme conuenient: beſides thys, none of them ſhall afterwardes be receiued to giue teſtimonie in matter of trueth, nor bee put in Iuries for tryal of any cauſe, ſo much doth the law deteſt their vniuſt and wicked dealinges, to their vtter reproche and diſcredite for euer. Wherefore, as they wil ſhew them ſelues to feare God, to aduaunce his honour, to tender nota. her Maieſties ſeruice, the Common wealth of thys Country, auoide the daunger of Law, and deſire that the world may continue in that good opinion which it hath conceyued of their vpright and iuſt dealing, ſo they are to indeuour themſelues to diſcharge there dueties in the thinges to be committed to theyr charge.
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   