
      
         
            
            
            
               ❧ An Epitaph vpon the death of Richard Price Eſquier (the ſecond ſonne of Sir Iohn Price Knight, deceaſed) which Richard left this life the fifth day of Ianuarie, 1586.
            
               
                  MY ſorrow doth ſuppreſſe my memorie,
               My griefe eke grieues my hart, and all my powres,
               My teares do pierce my paper thorowlie,
               My Muſe me failes, my wo my wit deuoures,
               So as amaſd I ſit deuoid of might,
               In verſe, or proſe, my meaning to indight.
            
            
               Of princely iewels, precious are the price,
               Of gold the gaine who wiſheth not to haue,
               Of houſe and land, and all by land that riſe,
               Of all for life, who ſeeketh not to ſaue:
               But when I weigh the depth of mine intent,
               A Price to prayſe, I cannot but lament.
            
            
               A Price for gentle bloud, of price he was,
               A Price well taught in youth to liue in age,
               A Price ſo fraught with vertues that ſurpaſſe,
               A Price though yong in yeeres, in wiſedom ſage:
               A precious Price, as Wales did euer yeeld,
               A Price of peace in towne, yet fierce in field.
            
            
               His vertues rare, his wiſedom ſo profound.
               His learned ſkill, his curteſie ſo ſeene,
               His bountie great in houſe did ſo abound,
               His trauell ſuch for Countrey, and for Queene,
               Made him beloued, and for his friendſhip faſt,
               So famouſly, as euermore ſhall laſt.
            
            
               He liued no doubt with well contented mind,
               He liued vpright, iuſt both in word and deed,
               He liued a ſubiect true, as man may find,
               He liued to God a child of Abrahams ſeed:
               He liued to die, content to leaue each frend,
               He died to liue in ioy, that ſhall not end.
            
            
               His wofull wife may chiefly waile his want,
               His ſeruants next haue greateſt cauſe to grieue,
               His countrey then (ſith ſuch as he be ſcant)
               His friends each one may ſorow whileſt they liue:
               Among the which a greater loſſe had none,
               Then I my ſelfe, that cauſleſſe do not mone.
            
            
               Oh God graunt vs thy grace, and daily aide,
               Oh God put feare and loue into our hart,
               Oh God to ſinne make vs full ſore afraid,
               Oh God thy loue from vs do not diuart:
               Thou that from vs our peereleſſe Price haſt reft,
               Be our defence, that heere behind are left.
            
            
               R. D.
            
         
      
      
         
            
               
                  ET SI MORS, INDIES ACCELERAT
                  POST FVNERA VIRTVS VIVET TAMEN
               
            
            
               ❧ Imprinted at London by Iohn Charlewood.
         
      
   