
      
         
            
            A SERMON
PREACHED BEfore
His Maiestie at
White-Hall, On the 24. of March last, being
Easter day, and being also the day of
the Beginning of His Maiesties
most Gracious Reigne.
            ¶By the Bishop of Elie His
Maiesties Almoner.
            
            ¶Imprinted at London by Robert
Barker, Printer to the Kings
most Excellent Maiestie.
ANNO 1611.
         
      
      
         
            
            
            A SERMON
PREACHED BEFORE
His Maiestie at White-Hall,
on Easter day last.
            
               PSAL. 118. verse 22.
               The Stone, which the Builders refused,
the same Stone, is become, (or
made) the Head of the Corner.
            
            
               
                  THE Stone, which the 
Builders refused: saith the
Prophet Dauid. This is the
Stone, which yee Builders refused:
               Act. 4. 11.
saith the Apostle Peter.
And saith it; of CHRIST
our Sauiour, Hic est lapis, He is the Stone. And
saith it; to Caiaphas and the rest, that went for
Builders. We know then, who this Stone is,
and who these Builders be, to begin with.
            And in the very same place,Act. 4. 10. the same Apostle
telleth vs further, what is meant by Refused,
and what, by made Head of the Corner.
Quem vos, whom ye denied and crucified: that
was, His refusing. And then, Quem Deus, whom

God hath raised againe from the dead; 
                  〈◊〉
               
was His making Caput Anguli. Refused, when 
                  •
               
Three dayes agoe. Made Head, When? This
very day: for, Hic est dies, followeth streight,
within a verse,Verse 24. 
               This is the Day. Which Day,
there is not one of the Fathers, that I haue
read, but interpret it of Easter Day.
            And so we haue brought the Text, and the
Time together. We know, who is the Stone▪
               
Christ. Who the Builders: Caiphas and those
with him. When refused? In his Passion. When
made Head? at his Resurrection: that is, this day▪
which day is therefore, (at the 27. verse) said to
bee, Constitutus dies solennis: made a solemne
Feast day: in condensis, on which the Church to
stand thicke and full: vsque ad cornua Altaris▪
               
euen vp to the very Corners of the Altar.
            This (I take it) is a good warrant, for our
Church, to make this Psalme, a select choise
Psalme, for this Day; as peculiar and pertinen
                  •
               
to the Feast it selfe. And a good warrant, for
vs, so to apply it. It is the Holy Ghosts owne
application, by the mouth of S. Peter: we may
boldly make it, ours.
            
                But though this be the chiefe sense: yet, is it
not, the onely. The chiefe it is: for the Spirit of

Prophesie, is in it, which is the testimony of Iesus.
               Apoc 19.
Yet, not the onely: for according to the letter,
wee cannot deny, but that originally, it was
ment of Dauid. Hee was a Stone too, and in his
time refused: yet after, raised by God to the
highest place, euen to bee King of his people.
The Chaldey Paraphrast,) (the oldest we haue)
is enough for this; thus, hee turneth the
verse. 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                
               &c. The Childe, whom the chiefest
men oppugned, Hee of all the Sonnes of Ishai, was
made Ruler of Israel. A second sense then it
hath, of Dauid.
            
            And, by analogie, it will beare a third; and 
will sort with Ours, or with any Prince: in like
manner banded against, and sought to bee put
by, as Hee: and yet, after brought by God, to
the same place, that Dauid was. To any such it
will well agree, and bee truely verified of him,
and rightly applied to him. And, I confesse,
I chose it the rather for this third. Because, (as
this yeere falleth out) vpon one day, (and Hic
est dies, This is the day) Wee haue in one a
memoriall of two benefits; of our Sauiours
exalting, by his Resurrection: and of our
Soueraignes exalting, and making Head of
this Kingdome. Both, lighting so together,

we were (as mee thought) so to remember the
one, that we left not the other out. And this
text, will serue for both. Both, may in one be
set before vs: and so wee reioyce and render
thankes to God for both: For the Lord Christ▪
               
and for the Lords Christ, vnder one.
            Three senses then, there are of the Text
and (to do it right) we to touch them all three.
1. Christ in prophesie. 2. Dauid in History. 3.
Our owne in analogie. But will giue Christ the
praecedence. Both for his Person, He is Dauid
                     •
                  
               
Lord, and the head of all Head-stones. It is
meete,Col. 1. 18. Hee haue primatum in omnibus, Hee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
all things, haue the preheminence: And, for that
the trueth of the Text, neuer was so verified in
any, as in Him. We may truely say, None euer,
so low cast downe: None euer, so high lift vp
againe as Hee. Others refused, but none like
Him: and their heads exalted, but nothing in
comparison of His .1. First then of Christs, 2. afte
                  •
               
of Dauids briefly▪ 3. and last, of Our owne.
            
            To apply it to Christ. The Stone, is the ground
of all. Two things befall it: two things as
contrary as may be .1. Refused, cast away: 2.
then, called for againe, and made Head of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Building. So, two parts there are, to the eye, 1.

The refusing. 2. and the raising: which, are his
two estates, His humiliation: and His exaltation.
            
            In either of these, ye may obserue, two degrees.
A quibus, and Quousque: By whom, and 
               How farre: By whom refused? We weigh the
word, Aedificantes: Not by men vnskilfull; but,
by workmen, Builders professed: It is, so much
the more.
            
            
               How farre? We weigh the word, Reprobauerunt.
vsque ad reprobari: euen to a reprobation.
It is not improbauerunt, disliked, as not
fit, for some eminent place: but reprobauerunt,
vtterly reprobate, for any place at all.
            
            Againe, exalted, by whom? The next words
are, 
                  •
                
               Domino, by God, as good a Builder, nay
better, then the best of them; which makes amends
for the former.
            
            And, how farre? Placed by Him, not in any
part of the Building: but, in the part most in
the eye, (the Corner:) and, in the highest
place of it, (the very Head.)
            So, Reiected, and that by the Builders, and
to the lowest estate: And from the lowest estate,
exalted in Caput Anguli, to the chiefest place of
all; and that, by God himselfe. This for Christ.
            And Dauid is a Stone, and so is Ours, and so 
               
is euery good Prince, Lapis Israel, (as Iacob in
his Testament calleth them.Gen. 49. 24) And Builders
                there bee, such as by office should, but many
times do not their office, no more then Caiphas
heere. Reprobauerunt is, when they deuise to
put Him by,
               Psal. 62. 4. 
               whom God would exalt: And Factus
Caput, when God, for all that, doth them right,
& brings them to their place, the Throne Royall.
As, This was the day, when God so brought
Dauid, (as appeareth by the 24. verse:) And
Hic est dies, This is the day, when hee brought
His Maiestie to bee Head of this Kingdome. O
                  •
               
these in their order.
            
               The Stone that the Builders
refused, &c.
               THe estate of mankinde, as they are in Societie,
either or Church or Kingdome, is, in
diuers termes set forth to vs in Scripture: Sometimes
of a Flocke: sometimes of Husbandry:
otherwhile, of a Building. Yee are his flocke, diuers
times in the Psalmes.1. Cor. 3. 9. 
                  You are Gods Husbandry,
You are Gods building, both in one verse▪
Now, the Style of this Text, runnes in termes
of this last, of Building, or Architecture. For

heere are Builders, and heere is Stone, and a
Coine or Corner, and a Top or Turret ouer it.
               Of this Spirituall Building, we all are Stones:
and (which is strange) we all are Builders too:
To be built, and to build, both Stones; in regard
of them whom God hath set ouer vs; who are
to frame vs, and we so to suffer them. Builders,
in regard of our selues first: then, such as are
committed to vs, by bond, either of duty, or
charity; Euery one, beeing (as St. Chrysostome
saith well) de subditâ sibi plebe, quasi domum Deo
struere; of those vnder his charge, to make God
an house. As Stones; it is said to vs, by S. Peter,
                  2. Pet. 1. 5
                  Super aedificamini, Bee yee built vp, or framed. As
Builders; it is said to vs, first, by St. Iude,
                  lud. 20 
                  Build
your selues in your most Holy faith. Then, by St.
Paul, Edifie yee, or build ye one an other. Be built;
                  1. The. 5. 11
by obedience & conformity: Build your selues,
by encrease in vertue and good workes: Build
one an other, by good example, and wholesome
exhortation. The short is. This is to bee our
study, all: if wee be, but our selues, euery one in
himselfe, and of himselfe, to build God an Oratory;
If we haue an Houshold, of them, to build
him a Chappell. If a larger circuit, then a Church.
If a Country or Kingdome, then a Basilica, or

                  Metropolitan Church: which is properly, the
Princes Building.
               This in the Text (the builders heere were in
hand with) was a Basilica: for it was the frame
of the Iewes Gouernment: but, is applied, to all
States in generall. For Iury was the Scene or
Stage, whereon the errors or vertues of all Gouernments,
were represented, to all posterity.
               Foure words there be in the Text. 1. Aedificantes,
Builders. 2. Lapis, Stone. 3. Angulus, a
Corner, and 4. Caput, the Head. From the first
word Aedificantes; this wee haue: That States
would not bee, as Tents: set vp, and taken
downe, and remouable. They would bee buildings;
to stand steddie and fixed. Nothing so
opposite vnto a State, as not to stand.
               2. From the second, Lapis: that, this building
would be, not of clay and wood, or (as wee
call them) Paper walles: but, Stone-worke, as
strong, as defensible, as little subiect to concussion,
or cumbustion, as might be.
               3. From the two parts specified; first, Anguli:
This Stone-worke, is not a wall, forthright, to
part in sunder, or to keepe out: but, it consists of
diuerse sides: those sides meete in one Angle:
where if they meet, and knit well: all the better
will the building be.
               
                  
4. Caput. And they will knit the better, if
they haue a good Head. For, where they meet,
no place so much in danger of weather going
in, and making the sides flie off, if it want a Couering.
A head it would haue, to couer it: It is
a speciall defence, and besides, it is a Soueraigne
beauty, to the whole building.
               
               And that Head, would not be of plaister, to
crumble away: or of wood, to warp or rot, with
the weather: or of lead, to bow or bend, and to
cracke: but of Stone, and the principallest Stone,
that could be. The chiefe part it is, the head: the
chief care, & consultation would be, what Stone
meet for that place: for indeed, it is all, in all.
               That: is the consultation here. Here is Christ,
                  The first sense, Christ.
what say you to him? He is a Stone. 2. a building
Stone. 3. a Corner Stone. 4. a Headstone.
A stone. So the Prophets terme Him. Dan. 2. 34.
Zachar. 3. 9. Esay 28. 16. And so the Apostles,
Peter, Acts. 4. 11. Paul, 1. Cor. 10. 4. 1. In his
birth: Daniels stone, cut forth without hands. 2.Dan. 2. 34
In his passion: Zacharies stone,
                  Zach. 3. 9 
                  grauen, and cut
full of eyes all ouer. 3. In his Resurrection:
Esays stone, layde in Sion,
                  Esay 28. 16 
                  Qui crediderit non confundetur,
Hee that beleeueth in him then, shall not
bee confounded, saith Saint Peter, 1. Pet. 2. 6.

Hic est lapis. He is the Stone of our faith, saith St.
Peter,
                  Acts 4. 11 
                  Lapis erat Christus. And Petra erat Christus,
saith St. Paul.
                  1. Cor. 10. 4 Hee is the Stone of our Sacraments,
the water of our Baptisme and of ou
                     •
                  
Spirituall drinke: both issue from him. A Ston:
first, for his nature, of the earth as Stones are, out
of Abrahams Quarry (saith Esay) to shew his
Humanity. And, out of 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  the very lowest
parts of the earth (saith the Apostle;Esay 51. 1) to shew
his Humility.Ephe. 4. 9. Indeede nothing so subiect to
contempt, to be troden on, to be spurned aside,
as it. And such was his condition, Vermis, non
homo,
                  Psal. 22. 6 and, Lapis, non homo. A Worme, or a stone,
and no man.
               
               
                   A Stone will endure much sorrow, nothing
more. And, who did euer suffer like Him? or in
his suffering, who more patient, or still, or stonelike,
then He?
               
               
                   But the chiefe vertue of a Stone is: that it is
firme and sure; And so is He. Ye may trust Him,
yee may build on Him. Hee will not fayle you.
What yee lay on Him,
                  Psalm. 40. 3 is sure. Dauid may haue
sure footing,Exo. 17. 12 and rest his feet. Moses, his hands. 
                        ••
                     cob,
                  Gen. 28. 11
                  his head, on this Stone. This, is it hee hat
                     ••
                  
his denomination from. Hee that trusts in him▪
nothing,Mat. 16. 18 
                  not the gates of hell, shall preuaile

against him. Trustines, with non confundetur, the
chiefe vertue of a Stone: of Christ: and of those,
that are Headstones by, and vnder him.
               But, there are Stone, that lye scattered, that 
will neither head well, nor bed well, (as they say)
not meet, to build withall: meet, for nothing
but to hurle, and to doe hurt with. But Christ is
a Stone, to doe good with, to build with, Lapis
ad aedificationem. And, He loueth not to scatter,
or be by himselfe,Prou. 8. 31. 
                  His delight is, to be with the
Sonnes of men: and to grow with them, into one
frame of building.
               
                  A Cornerstone. Of al the places in the building,
that one speciall place, liketh Him: where the
sides meet, there He is. To ioyne together, to
make two one,
                  Ephes. 2. 14. He loueth it aboue all, stretching
Himselfe, to both walles, that both may rest
on Him.
               And lastly, Lapis primarius, a Headstone. For,
there he should be; there, is his right place, and
it will neuer be well with the Building, till He be
in that place; till Christ be 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , Caput, in omni
procuratione, The highest and chiefest end
of all. This he is, and in the end, This he will
be: if not by Men, yet by God.
               But now, we haue to doe with Men: and we
are to put it to voices, their voices, with whom

he liued, what they thinke of Christ, for Caput
Anguli. It is returned, Quem reprobauerunt: He
is refused.
                  Luke 19. 14. Will yee heare it, from themselues?
Nolumus hunc regnare, Wee will not haue him
King; not in that place; no Head, in any wise.
               
                   But à quibus, Who were these? These were
foolish people,
                  Iere. 5. 4. that knew not the vertue or value
of a Stone: no heed to be taken what they cry.
We will get vs,
                  Iere. 5. 5. with Ieremie, to men of skill; that
know, what Stone is for euery place, professed
builders, by their trade: But these also, were no
better conceited of Him, then the other: for, doe
any of the Rulers make any account of him? Ioh. 7.
48. As who say, None of them neither, The
very Builders refuse him too.
               
                   Wel, we wil make the best of it: It may be, not
for the Head: But, there be more places then
that: if not allow him there, yet hee may be in
some else. Improbauerunt, it may be, but not reprobauerunt:
disalowed, but not cast aside quite.
We aske then, how farre? Will ye put him vp
the second time, and (to see the Quousque, in
kinde) will ye put vp Barabbas with him? No
                        •
                     
hunc.
                  Iohn 18. 40. 
                  sed Barabbam. So it went: That was their
verdict. Now, by this time it is reprobauerunt,
(as flat as may be) a refuse indeed, and that with
a foule indignitie.
               
                  
But these, were but the vulgar, againe. What
say the Builders to this? He, or them, that tooke
himselfe for a very Vitruui
                        •
                     s, such a workman,
as he said, all the rest vnderstood nothing at all,
the Master-builder Caiphas,
                  Ioh. 11. 49. 50. he was flat, Expedit, It was expedient he should die; be cast aside
into the heap of rubbish, be put out of the building,
cleane. That, is his doome.
               Now, lay these two together. To be refused,
                  
is not so much; it may be, it is of such, as are ignorant.
But, to be refused of Builders, and those
the chiefe, is much; for, they are presumed to
be skilfull. Againe, to be disliked for the chiefe 
place, not so much; if not for that, he may bee
for another: But, to be vtterly reprobate, (that
is,) not refused, for the Head, nor refused for the
Corner, but refused simply for any roome at
all: not in the tappe, nay not in the bottome;
not in the Corner, nay not in any ranke of 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Building: that, is as much as may be. And this,
was Christs lot.
               Yet this was all but in words, nothing was
done to him; But there is, a reprobation, in deed,

                     •
                  nd that is yet far worse. And to that, they pro
                  
                     •
                  eeded,
euen to actuall matters, to reall reproba
                     
                        •
                     ion.
Before they cast him aside, (this poore

                  Stone,) they hackt and they hewed it, and
mangled it pitiously, they shewed their mali
                     ••
                  
euen in that,Zach. 3. 9. too. Celauerunt Sculptur am ei
                        •
                     s▪
                  
saith the Prophet, their tooles walked on him,
they graued him, and cut him with a witnesse,
and made him full of eyes, on euery side. Wh
                     ••
                  
skilled that? What disgrace, or what sorrow is
done, to a Stone, the Stone feeles it not. The cry,
of Non hunc, or the edge of the grauing toole,
affect it nothing. True: But he was Lapis viu
                        •
                     s,
a liuing Stone, (as Peter calleth him, 1. Pet. 2.
5.) a Stone that had life; life and sense, and

                     〈◊〉
                   all: Felt his grauing, the edge and point both▪
felt his despising, the scorne, and malice both▪
(of the twaine; this the more,) but both he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  ▪
When they made furrowes on his backe,
                  Psal. 129. 3. with th
                     •
                  
scourges:Matth. 27. 29. when they platted the Crowne 
                        〈◊〉
                     
Thornes, and made it 
                        •
                     it close to his head; 
                     〈…〉
                  
                  digged his hands,
                  Psal. 22. 16. 
                  and feet, he felt all. 
                     〈◊〉
                  
endured it patiently, tanquam lapis: but he 
                     〈◊〉
                  
it sensibly, tanquam viuus. Had quicke sense, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
his paine in grauing: had liuely apprehensio
                     •
                  
of his contempt in refusing.
               And these very two words, (in the Text 
                     •
                  
                  Lapidem, and Reprobauerunt, set out vnto 
                     〈◊〉
                  
both parts of his Passion fully; As if, hee 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  
beene Stone, so layd they on him: As if hee had
beene a Reprobate, so powred they all disgrace
vpon him. And, euen as a Stone he was in his
Passion. For, as the Stones giue against the weather:
so, was there not to bee seene vpon him,
a bloody sweat?
                  Luke 22. 44. Did he not giue (as it were) of
himselfe, against the tempest came? And when
it came, was it not so strange, (euen that, which
this liuing Stone suffered;) as the dead Stones,
that had no life, as if they had had life, and
compassion of his case rent in sunder with it?Matth. 27. 51.
                  Lapidem then, is true.
               And, for reprobauerunt, that is, as true. For
how could they haue entreated a reprobate,
worse then they entreated Him? In his thirst,
                  Iohn 19. 29.
                  In his prayer, In the very pangs of death, what
words of scorne and spitefull opprobrie?Matth. 27. 47, 49. what
deeds of malice and wretched indignitie? Of
himselfe, it is said, (and by way of exaggeration,)
Hee humbled himselfe to death,
                  Phil. 2. 8. 
                  the death of
the Crosse: of them, it may be no lesse, Reprobauerunt
ad mortem, mortem Crucis, they reiected
Him to death, the death of Reprobates, the death,
whereunto a Curse is annexed, the death of the
Crosse. And, neuer gaue Him ouer, till they
brought him,Matth. 27. 60. 
                  Lapis ad lapidem, into a graue of

                  Stone, and rolled a Stone vpon him, and there
left him. And thus much, for Lapis quem reprobauerunt.
               
               
                   It is the Feast of the Passeouer; We now, passe
ouer, to His other estate; His Exaltation, ad Caput
Anguli. Were it not strange, the stone
should be rolled away, and this Stone should be
digged vp againe, and set vp in the Antes, the
place most conspicuous, (that is) made a Cornerstone:
and that, in the very top, the highest part
of all, (that is) made a head-stone? Were not
this, a strange Passeouer, from death, to life;
from lowest reprobation, to highest approbation;
from basest reproach, to greatest glory?
               
               But, seeing builders (we see) may be deceiued,
and that in Capite, (as we finde here) and
that, though Caiphas be one of them; and a stone
may haue wrong; would it not be well, we called
to scrutinie againe? Is there any builder yet
left, before whom, we may bring the matter?
Yes,Hebr. 3. 4. there is. Euery house is built of some 
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
(saith the Apostle) but hee that is the Builder of
all, is GOD. Hee that set vp, this great vaulted
worke, of Heauen ouer our heads: that layed
the Corner-stone of the earth;Iob 38. 6. 
                  Hee is a builder.
                  Psal. 104. 3.
But he that layeth his Chamber-beames in the

waters; Et appendit terram super nihilum,
                  Iob 26. 7. hangs
this great Masse no man knowes vpon what:
He that beginneth at the top, and builds downwards,
Heauen first, and then Earth: (as hee
did) hee passeth all ours, hee is a skilfull builder
indeed. Is hee of the same minde? Offer
Christ to His probation. He will reprobare reprobantes,
cōdemne them, that so refused Him:
And all wil turne,1. Pet. 2. 4. quite contrary: Saint Peter
saith it. Hee was 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  reprobate with
men, but 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                     , chosen of God: 
                        〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                      nothing
worth, with them, but 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   
                  pretious, with him:
Meete to bee in the building; Nay no building,
meet to be, without him. And in the building,
if any part more obiect to the sight, then other:
there. And in that, if any place, higher then
an other: there. In aedificio, Angulo aedificij, Capite
Anguli. In the building, the Corner of the
building, the head of the Corner: (that is) in the
highest place, of the chiefest part of all. This,
hee thought him, and as hee thought him, so he made him: and made him so this day, the day
of His Resurrection. Whom they cast downe,
God lift vp, from the graue: whom they vilified,
he glorified, glorified and made him Caput
Anguli, The head of the Corner.
               
               
                  
How of the Corner?
                  Anguli. The Corner, is the place,
where two walles meet: and there bee many
two's, in this Building. The two walles of Nations,
Iewes and Gentiles: The two, of Conditions,
bond and Free: The two, of Sexe, Male and
Female: the great two (which this day we celebrate,)
of the Quicke and the Dead: aboue
all, the greatest two of all, Heauen and Earth.
               
               The two first meet in Him: There was a partition,
but Hee downe with it: Et fecit vtraq
                        ••
                     
vnum. Ephes. 2. 14. So that, there is neither 
                        〈◊〉
                     
nor Greeke,
                  Gal. 3. 28. 
                  neither bond nor Free, neither Male
                        ••
                     
Female, but all one in Christ Iesus: Yea, the Quick
                        •
                     
                  
and the Dead, both liue to Him. And all these,
so many Combinations, as in the Center, meet
in Him: and Hee in the middest of all, drawes
all, and knits all, in one holy Faith; one blessed
hope of his Comming; one mutuall vnfained
loue, towards each other. Ex te Angulus, well
said Zacharie.
                  Zach. 10. 4
               
               And as Vnitie,Caput. is in the Angle; so Order, is
vnder the Head, As al, one, in Him; so He is Head
of all. Head of the lewes, Iesus, in their tongue:
Head of the Gentiles, Christ in their tongue:
Head of the Church:
                  Col. 1. 18. 
                  Head of all Principality and
                  Col. 2. 10. 
                  Power. Therefore this day, Christ that died,

rose againe, that He might be Lord, both of Quicke
and Dead, Rom. 14. 9 And of the great Angle
of all,Mat. 28. 18 consisting of Heauen and Earth; for all Power
was giuen him in heauen and earth, and Hee
made Head of both.
               Now then: will ye lay these together? there 
can come to a stone, no greater dignity, then,
there to bee (in the Head.) To any stone; but it
is much increased, by that Circumstance, that it
is not onely, Lapis, (barely:) but, Lapis quem reprobauerunt,
                  
that now is there in the Head: Not
any stone, but a stone so refused (as we heard) for
such a stone, there to bee; from that Terminus à quo,
to come to this Terminus ad quem, from so
base an estate, there to bee; that is a great encrease
to it. And thirdly, by such a person, a 
                  Builder so matchlesse, there to bee: that is yet a
degree higher: and this triplicity exalteth much
his Exaltation. That by God, and not Gods suffering,
but his doing: and that, factum mirabile,
his wonderfull doing, it came to pas
                     •
                  e. As indeed,
wonderfull it is to see, that which all the world
now 
                     •
                  eeth: Christ, that for the present, was so
strangely deiected: since, to bee so exceedingly
glorified: So many knees to bow to Him,Phil. 2. 9. 10 11. 
                  so many
tongues to confesse Him, His Name to be aboue all

Names, heauen and earth to bee full of the Maiesty
of his glory.
               
               Now, from these two words, Caput, Anguli:
that which we learne morally, is: to make much
of the two Vertues, commended to vs, in these
two words: Virtus Anguli, and Anguli sub Capite.
               
               First, the vertue of two walles vnited in one
Angle, that is, Vnity. For Christ will not bee Caput
Maceriae, of a Partie wall, but of an Angle ioyned.
Hee is not of their spirit, that so they may
be Head, care not, though it be of neuer so broken
a wall.
               Secondly, not euery Vnitie, but Vnitas ordinata,
that hath, or is vnder a Head. For it is not,
Cuiusuis Anguli, but Anguli cui Caput: not of euery
Angle, but of an Angle, the vnity whereof,
is neither in the tayle, nor in the sides, but in
the head: That is, commendeth to vs, as Vnitie
against Diuision, so Order against Confusion.
They that can bee content to corner well, but
would bee Acephali, Head-lesse, haue no head,
please him not: no more doe they, that would
ioine, but would bee Polycephali, haue a Consistory
of heads, many heads: as many as the
Beast of Babylon. For sure it is, and Angle can

haue no more heads but one. To loue an Angle
well, but an Angle that hath a head, and but one
head. To loue a head well, but a head, not of a
single wall, but of an Angle. Bothe these, & both
to be regarded.Zach. 11. 7. 10. 14 They bee Zacharies two staues,
bands, & beauty, which vphold all gouernment;
breake one, and the other will not long be, vnbroken.
The head without Vnity: Vnity without
the head: either without other will not long
hold.
               Both then: but especially vnitie, for that
commeth in heere, no
                     •
                   necessarily, as doth the
head: but extraordinarily. And therefore extraordinary
regard, to be had of it. For I was thinking,
why hee should heere in this second part,
say that Hee was made head of the Corner: Why
should it not suffice, to haue said, factus est Caput,
and no more? Or if more, factus est Caput
Aedificij? to haue said, Hee was made the head:
at least wise, made the Head of the whole Building.
Why must Anguli be added? What needed
any mention of the Corner? no occasion
was giuen, no mention was made of it, in his
Refusing: The word head, would haue serued

                     •
                  ully, to haue set His Exaltation 
                  
                     •
                  oorth. Some
matter then there was, that this word must

come in. And sure, no other, but to shew, Christ
                        •
                     
                  
speciall delight and loue of that place. At his
rising,Ioh. 20. 19 this day, Stetit in medio: and heere he is
come to his place againe: for Stetit in medio, and
Caput Anguli, come both to one. Therefore,
that like loue, like speciall regard, bee had by vs,
of that place, and of the vertue of that place,
(vnitie:) that it be sought and preserued carefully,
that the sides flie not off, the well knitting
whereof, is the very strength, of the whole
Building.
               
               By Bede, it is rendered, as a reason, why the
Iewish builders refused our Sauiour Christ, fo
                     •
                  
the head place, Quia in vno pariete, stare amabant.
They could endure no Corner; they must stand
alone, vpon their owne single wall; be of themselues,
not ioyne with Gentile, or Samaritane.
And Christ they endured not, because they
thought, i
                     •
                   
                  hee had beene head, hee would haue
inclined that way.Ioh. 10. 16 
                  Alias oues oportet me adducere.
Alias, they could not abide. But sure, a purpose
there must be alias oues adducendi, of bringing
in others: of ioyning a corner, or else we doe
not facere secundùm exemplar,
                  Heb. 5. 8 build not according
to Christs patterne; our fashion of Fabrique,
is not like his. They that thinke, to

make Christ head of a Single wall, are deceiued:
it will not be: They that say, So the head, all is
well, it skils not for the Corner, erre too. Hee is

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   a Corner-stone first, and then 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , a
headstone after. And they that had rather, be a
Front in a wall, then in a meaner place sub Lapide
Angulari: And they, that stand vpon their
owne partition, and will not endure to heare of
any ioyning, care not what become of Angulus,
if it were stroken out:Phil. 2. 5. 
                  the same minde, is not
i
                        •
                      them, in neither of them, which was in Christ
Iesus. His minde we see. He looks to the Angle,
as to the head; and to the head, as to the Angle.
And they build best,Luc. 7 35. that build likest him, Wisedome
is iustified of all her Children.
               
               And last; the due
                     •
                  y of the whole Second part,
                  
and so, this dayes du
                        •
                     ty, is this. When the headstone
is brought foorth, and reared, (as to day it
was,) we are to prosecute it,Verse 25. 26. with Hosanna, and
Benedictus qui venit, (as it straightway followeth
in the Psalme) with acclamation of, Grace,
Grace vnto it.
                  Zach. 4. 7. For so, (saith the Prophet) Lapis
primarius, would be layd, with reioycing. Reioycing:
as in His regard, that hath obteined
his due: so, euen in the buildings, that hath got
such a head; such, and so gracious a head, as

could endure, thus to be refused by them: and
yet, admit, yea euen those that so refused him,
(if the fault be not in themselues) to be Stones
in his building, for all that: and to be members
of the Body, whereof He is the head.
               
               
                   Then secondly, as God, hath: so we to make
him, head. Actually, wee cannot, he is made to
our hands: but, in account wee may: Giuing
him, the highest place in all our respects; Magnifying
his Name, and his Word, aboue all things:
his Word,
                  Psal. 138. 2. making it our chiefe ground: his
Name, and the Glory of it; making it, our
chiefe end. That other considerations cary vs
not away, as these builders here it did, of Venient
Romani,
                  Ioh. 11. 48. or, I wot not what; but that euer,
(as the Heathen Lawyer said) it be, Potior ratio,
quae facit pro Religione, the best 
                     •
                  eason, that
maketh best for Religion, and for the good of
the Body of this head (that is,) the peace of His
Church. And this, for, Lapis erat Christus.
               
               But,The second sense▪ Dauid. 
                  Lapis erat Dauid, is likewise true. Therefore,
that we doe King Dauid no wrong, let vs
 shew, how it fits him too: but briefly, because,
this, is not His day. Dauid was a Stone. The
Iewes say, it was his nic-name, or name of disgrace;
that, in scorne they called him so. For

that, all his credit (forsooth) came, by casting a
Stone, and hitting Goliah, by chance, right in
the forehead: and so, they thwited him with
that name. They gaue it him, in scorne: but he
bare it, in earnest. For sure, much sorrow he endured:
had, that propertie of a Stone. And nothing
could remoue him, or make him shrinke,
from his Trust in God, or from his Allegiance
to Saul his liege lord: that qualitie also.
               And, refused he was: not as Christ, we must 
not looke for that, neither in him, nor in any.
God forbid, that any, euer should be so refused,
as hee. As Christ: none, but Christ. No: but yet,
in his degree refused he was, though. A hard
time he had, and many hard termes, and hard
vsages he endured, for many yeeres together;
pursued, and followed, and should haue bene
no head, nay, should haue had no head, if He
had bene gotten.
               
                  Refused, and by whom? Euen by Saul, all his 
life time:2. Sam. 2. 8. and when Saul was dead, Abner refused
him, and set vp another against him. And
when he was out of his Country,1. Sam. 29▪ 4. in Gath, refused
there too,1. Sam. 17. 28. by the Princes of Achis. And euen
at home, by his own brethren, & fathers house.
Yea Samuel himselfe,1. Sam. 16. 6. had giuen it away, (the

Head-place) from him, to Eliab, and so refused
him; but, for God. And these, went then, for
the chiefe builders in Israel, at that time. So, the
builders refused him.
               
                   But, after all this, all this notwithstanding,
this Stone became the head, (that is) Dauid got
the Crowne, and was King at last. For, (head)
is the Kings Name. So doeth Samuel call the
King. 1. Sam. 15. 17. So doeth Esay cap. 7. 4. So
doeth Hose. 1. 11. But especially, so Daniel in expresse
termes,Chap. 2. 38. 
                  Tu es Caput aureum, speaking to
the King, Thou art the head of gold.
               
               
                  
                  Head, and of the Corner: that is (as some interpret
it) of Iuda, and Israel; But that is thought
somewhat hard. For those two, were not two
Kingdomes, nor euer so reckoned, till Roboams
time. And, what if Dauid, had not happened
to haue bene first King of one Tribe, and after,
of all; should hee haue lost this name then?
Should he not haue bene 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  ? Shal no King
be Caput Anguli, if he haue but one entire kingdome?
Shall not Salomon as well as Dauid? No
question but he shall.
               The better part therefore thinke good, to
giue it that sense, which neuer failes in any
State: and which sundry times yee shall finde

pointed at by Dauid himselfe, as in theVers. 9. 10 12. 115. before,
and in theVer. 19 135. after. Yea euen heere in
Ver. 2. 3 this Psalme at the beginning, Dom
                        ••
                     s Israel,
and Domus Aaron, the house of Israel, and the
house of Aaron; that is, the two estates, Ciuill
and Ecclesiasticall, which make the maine Angle,
in euery Gouernment. God himselfe hath seuered
them, and made these, two: but to meete in
one; not one to maligne and consume the other.
And, the happie combining of these two,
is the strength of the Head, and the strength of
the whole Building. If it beare but vpon one of
them, it will certainely decay. It did so in Sauls
time: He little regarded the Arke, and lesse the
Priests. Dauid saw Sauls error, and in his Psalme
(where hee singeth▪
                  Psalm. 75. 3 
                  Ne perdas, to a Commonwealth)
promiseth to haue equall care of both
pillars, and to vphold them both.
               The first Booke of Chronicles, is sufficient to
prooue, and perswade any, hee dealt in both, as
chiefe ouer both. Not by right of Priest
                        •
                     hood, for
none hee had. And that of his Prophesie, is as
cold. Others also did the like, Asa, Iosaphat, Ezekias,
Iosias, that were no Prophets, nor euer so
accounted.
               In the Law, (it is Philo's note) both Tables

meete in the fifth Commandement, (which is,
the Crowne Commandement,) as it were in an
Angle; which Commandement, is placed (saith
he) 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   as it were in the middle or confines
of both tables, that of Religion; and this other
of Iustice Ciuill: That, with the right arme, the
Prince may support that, and with the left, this,
and so vphold both;Mat. 21. 42 And in the Gospell, Christ
applyeth this very verse, to himselfe, as heire of
the Vineyard. Heire hee was not, but as King,
not as Priest; Hee could not; for of that Tribe
hee was not borne but was called to it,
                  Heb. 7. 13. 14. 
                  as was
Aaron.
               
               Since then, here we finde both, and that Dauid
was both, it is no error (I trust) to call a King,
Caput Anguli; no more is it, to call him Lapidem
primarium, or angularem, choose yee whether.
The Persian (by the light of nature) called the
King Ahashuerosh (that is) Soueraigne head. The
Graecian (by the same light) called the King,

                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , that is, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   the base or Corner-stone of
his People.
               Shall I adde this? This word (Stone) which is
heere affirmed, of Dauid, in this verse: is, in the
new Testament fiue seuerall times, turned by
the Syrian Translator, Cepha: thrice in the three

                  Matt. 21. 42 Mar. 12. 10 Luke 20. 17 
                  Gospels: once in theActs. 4. 11 
                  Acts: and once in1. Pet. 2. 7 Saint
Peter. So that hee did not thinke it strange, to

                     •
                  all King Dauid Cephas. So Cepha, as wel said of
Dauid, as of Peter. And2. Sam. 5. 2 1. Chro. 11 Zach. 4. 10 
                  Tu pasces, as well said

                     •
                  o Dauid, as Pasce to Peter. And Zorobabel hath

                     •
                  n his hand, the Line, as well a Iosua the high

                        •
                     riest, towards the building of the Temple. The

                     
                        •
                     hing, the duety it selfe, and the bounds of it, let vs

                     •
                  ay foorth and agree of, as we can: but sure, the
Name, is not to bee stood on; it cannot bee de
                  
                     •
                  ied
Him.
               ANd now to our selues:The third sense. His Maiesty to whom, as This is 
the day which the Lord hath made, touching
Christ, and his Resurrection; so is it, likewise, the
day, that he hath made the second time, by making

                     ••
                  n it, his Maiestie head of this Kingdome, the ve
                  
                     •
                  y
Name whereof, hath affinitie, and carieth an

                     •
                  llusion to the terme, Anguli, in the sound of it.
               And, neither were your Maiestie, without 
your part of refusing, in a kinde: but did partici
                  
                     •
                  ate,
somewhat of it, with Dauid, though in a

                     •
                  esse degree. Good and firme and sure, though
your Right were as any Stone; yet allegations
were studied, to subiect it to question, yea, to re
                     
                        •
                     using.
For, did no body euer see, a proiect
drawen, wherein some other stone was marked

out, to haue beene caput Anguli? Yes, it is 
                     〈◊〉
                  
knowen, T
                        •
                     les were raised, and set on foot, 
                     〈◊〉
                  
Bookes written, to that end.
               
                   And, they tooke them selues for no mean
                     •
                  
workemen, that were the deuisers of them: tha
                     •
                  
both at home and abroad, contriued it anoth
                     ••
                  
way: and plotted, to haue put You by, and 
                     〈◊〉
                  
haue had some other Head-stone, of their owne
hewing out, in your roome.
               
                   Yea, to make your case, yet more like 
                     〈◊〉
                  
                  Christs case: euen the High Priest, he that clai
                     •
                  meth
Caiphas place, He and his crue, had the
                     ••
                  
hands in it. We may no lesse truly, say to them,
then St. Peter did to Caiphas; Quem vos, Wh
                        ••
                     
yee would haue cast aside, if yee might haue 
                     〈◊〉
                  
your willes. And to that end, had your fir
                     ••
                  
                  Breues ready drawen, and sent abroad; and others,
in a readinesse, to second them.
               
                   Yet for all their Breues, and Buls; this 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
is the Head, for all that. Factus, made he is, and▪
made by God: For à Domino, Gods doing it wa
                     ••
                  
euidently, that after so much plotting, so many
yeeres together; at the very time, God bow
                     ••
                  
the harts, of so many thousands, as it had be
                     ••
                  
the heart of one man, to agree in one: as th
                     ••
                  
all that foresaw it, thought it had not bee
                     ••
                  
                  
                  
                     〈◊〉
                  ; and all that saw it confessed it admirable;
and all men said,
                  Psal. 64. 9. 
                  This hath God done: for
they saw euidently, It was his worke.
               
               The head, You were then made: and head,
                  
not of One Angle, as You were before (for Caput
Anguli, I hold a King to be, though he haue
but one Kingdome) but Caput Trianguli, Head
now of three, euen of a whole Triangle. So
their titles were dashed, their plots disappointed,
and all their deuises,Esa. 29. 16. as the Potters clay.
Yours it was of right, and God hath brought You
to it: So it is; and our eyes doe see it, and our
hearts ioy in it, and our tongues blesse God for
it; and here we are, this day, with all praise and
thankes to acknowledge it, that so it is. It is a
part of this Dayes duetie, that so we should acknowledge
it, and giue him thankes for it, that
brought it to passe.
               And, may I not further, put you in minde, of 
another making yet? And it is not impertinent
neither: to this day, especially. For, after
the first making or placing: looke, how many
after attempts are made, to vnmake or displace
the Head-stone againe; so many times,
as it is heaued at, to that ende; and those attempts
defeated: so many new placings, so many

new makings, are wee to reckon of 
                     
                        〈◊〉
                     
                  
was made Head, not onely when Soul, and 
                     
                        ••
                     
                     ner
sought to put Him downe, and were put
downe themselues; which was, before he came
to the Crowne: but, euen after he had it, & had
worne it long, when Absalon and Sheba refused
Him (being their head,) & cried,2. Sam. 20. 1. 
                  No part in Dauid,
and so, sought to set him besids the Throne▪
               
               And builders there wanted not in that designe,
Absalon had15. 31. 
                  Achitophel, and9. 30. 
                  Amasa▪
                  
two as principall Master-builders, as then were
any. When God brought Dauid backe to his
Seat againe, and deliuered Him from them,
that sought to remooue Him from it: He did
as good, as place Him in it, anew. Dauid himselfe
saith so, before (at the 13. Verse.) Hee 
                        〈◊〉
                     
shrewdly lifted at, and ready to turne ouer: but God
stayed him, and set him right, in his Seate again
                        •
                     .
And in very deed, the Verse next before (the
21.) where he saith, God had heard him, and was
become his deliuerer, make the writers to thinke▪
this Psalme was endited rather for this Second▪
then for His first placing.
               
                   Now, a like Second making, we may well remember:
and we cannot doe it better, then vpon
this day. This day (as we shall see) hath an interest

in it. That, since Your setting in the
Seat of this Kingdome, Some there were, builders
one would haue taken them to be, if hee
had seene them, with their tooles in their
hands, as if they had bene to haue layed some
foundation; where their meaning was, to vndermine;
and to cast downe foundations and
all: yea to haue made a right Stone of you, and
blowne you vp among the Stones, you, and yours,
without any more adoe.
               And, Master builders they had amongst 
them, (so they wil needs be accounted) that encouraged
their hearts, and strengthened their
hands, to the worke. And that, they might do,
there was no Seale to hinder it: But disclose it,
that they might not, for feare of breaking a
Seale: there was a Seale for that. And thus did
they aedificare ad gehennam: edifie their followers
to Helward, to set them forward andActs. 1. 25. 
                  send
them to their owne place. That Day, which God 
                  
                     ••
                  ndid that wretched designe, and brought
their mischiefe vpon their owne heads, That
Day, did GOD make you Caput trianguli, the second
time. That Day, that He brought you backe
(if not from death it selfe, yet) frō deaths doore,

                     •
                  rom the very gates of destruction, That Day,
                  
was a very Easter day to You, though it were in
Nouember.
                  Heb. 11. 19. And 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   after a sort, a very
Resurrection: as very a resurrection, as Isaacks
was, which the Apostle there speaketh of:
That Day, the destroying Angel, (I am sure) past
ouer You, and so, it was truely the Feast of the
Passeouer. Fit therefore to be remembred 
this day, Hic est Dies, This is the day of the Passeouer,
This is Easter day, the day of the Resurrection.
               
               But, to returne to the first making of all. By
the true course of the yeere, this Moneth being
the very Moneth, this day being the very day,
of that, of the first laying this Head-stone: Wee
are, (as before in Christo Domino, so againe here)
in Christo Domini, to prosecute it with Dauids
cry of Hosanna, and Benedictus: and with Zacharies
acclamation, of Grace, Grace vnto it,
euen to this Head-stone. Grace, in His eyes
that so made you: And againe, Grace, in their
eyes and hearts to whom hee so made you: But
aboue all, the Grace of all Graces, that you may
make him euer your 
                  
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                  , your stone of
                  1. Sam. 7. 12. 
                  chiefe
trust, and your
                  20. 19. 
                  marke of highest regard in al
                     •
                  
your Counsels and purposes, that so made you:
And, seeke to reduce the disiecta latera, the sides and walles flyen off, of this great Building

(for which the world it selfe was built)
His Church; and reduce them to one Angle:
the greatest seruice, that can bee done him, on
earth.
               And so: he that, this day made You the Head:
so make You, and so keepe You long, and many
dayes. Hee that refused, them that refused You,
(refused them, with reprobation,) still may he so
doe, toties quoties, to their continual co
                     •
                  fusion;
That, the Head ouer the Triangle; and the Triangle
vnder the Head, may many yeeres stand
fast, and flourish; in all peace, plenty and prosperity,
health, honour, and happinesse. And, after
all: Hee that hath crowned You heere, with
two Crownes, already; crowned You also with
the third, of Glory, and Immortali
                     •
                  ie, in his
Heauenly Kingdome▪
               
               I haue now done. Onely I would moue one
thi
                     •
                  g, and it shall agree well, with that hath
bene said of the Corner-stone: and it shall serue
to further our duety of thankes, and be a good
closing vp of the whole. Many waies, was Christ
our blessed Sauiour a Corner-stone: among others,
especially in this, saith St. Hieron. Quando
agnum, cum pane coniunxit, 
                        •
                     iniens vnum, inchoans
alterum, vtrumque perficiens in semetipso.
                  
One chiefe Corner point of his, was: when hee
ioyned, the Lambe of the Passeouer, and the
Bread of the Eucharist: ending the one, and beginning
the other, recapitulating both Lambe
and bread into himself: making that Sacrament
(by the very institution of it) to bee, as it were,
the very Corner-stone of both the Testaments.
               No act then, more fit for this Feast, (the Feast
of the Passeouer,) then, that act, which is it selfe
the passage ouer, from the old Testament to the
new. No way better, to expresse our thankes,
for this Corner-stone, then by the holy Eucharist,
which it selfe is, the Cornerstone, of the Law, and
the Gospell.
               
               
                   And, there is in it a perfect representation
of the substance, of this verse and Text, set before
our eies: wherein, two poore Elements of
no great value in themselues, but, that they
might well bee refused: are exalted by God, to
the estate of a Diuine Mysterie, euen of the
highest Mysterie in the Church of Christ.
               
                   And, a kinde of resurrection there is in them,
and therefore fit for the day of the Resurrection,
(as euer in Christs Church, Easter day, hath
pleaded a speciall propertie in them) Sowen, as
it were,1. Cor. 15. 43. 
                  in weakenes and dishonor: and (after they

be consecrated,) rysing againe, in honor & power.
               
               And that, a great honour and power: not only 
to represent, but to exhibite that it representeth;
nor to set before vs, or remember
vs of; but euen to serue vs for a Corner-stone:
first, vniting vs to Christ the Head, whereby wee
grow into one frame of Building, into one body
mysticall, with Him. And againe, vniting
vs also, as liuing stones, or liuely members, omnes
in idipsum, one to another, & altogether in one,
by mutuall loue and charitie.Ioh. 6. 56 
                  Qui comedit de hoc
Pane, & bibit de hoc Calice, manet in me, & ego in
illo. Hee that eateth of this Bread, and drinketh of
this Cup, abideth in me, and I in him. There is our
Corner with Him.1. Cor. 10. 17. And againe, Vnum corpus omnes
sumus, qui de vno Pane participamus. All we,
that partake one Bread, or Cup, growe all, into one
Body mysticall. There is our Corner, either with
other. By the same meanes, expressing our
thankes for it, and by the same, possessing our
selues of it; sealing vp both waies our duty to
GOD, for making CHRIST the LORD, our
greatest and chiefest: and for making his Anointed
this day, vnder him, either in their seuerall
degrees, our 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   our chiefe, or head Corner-stone.
For which, together with all other his

benefits, but specially, as the time calleth to vs,
for these two, [Christs rysing] and [Our Soueraignes
raysing to his Royall place,] render
we, as we are bound, to GOD the
FATHER, &c.
               
            
         
      
   