
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  I. KILL YOV ALL
               
            
            
               Marke well the effect, purtreyed here in all:
               The Prelate with his dignities renowne,
            
            
               The King that rules, the Lawyer in the hall,
               The Harlot and the countrey toyling Clowne:
            
            
               Howe and which way together they agree,
               And what their talke and conference might be.
            
            
               Ech to their cauſe, for gard of their degree,
               And yet death is the conquerour you ſee.
            
            
               THe biſhop vaunts to pray for thother fower,
               As who wold ſay, he holds the palme & pri e,
               And that in him and his moſt holy power,
               It doth depend, their cauſes to ſuffiſe
               I pray (ſaith he) that Chriſts continual grace
               May them conduct, & guide in euery place.
            
            
               THe puiſſant King he claimeth to defend,
               The biſhop and the other three like caſe,
               In all conflictes or broyles vnto the end,
               Who but his power their enemies doth deface
               He 
                     •
                  urſters men, and ſends them forth a farre
               In their behalf, to maintaine deadly warre.
            
            
               THe ſmiling queane, the harlot cald by name,
               Stands ſtiffe vpon the blafe of beauty braue,
               To vanquiſh all, ſhe makes her prized clame.
               And that ſhe ought the golden ſpurs to haue,
               For by her flights ſhe can bewitch the beſt,
               The ſtrong, the Lawyer, & the reſt.
            
            
               THe Lawyer he, in title of his clame,
               Preſumeth next, by law and iuſtice true,
               Somwhat the more, to eleuate his name:
               For law (ſaith he) all diſcord doth ſubdue:
               It endeth ſtrife, it giues to ech his right,
               And wholy doth contention vanquiſh quight
            
            
               THe contry clowne full loth to loſe his rigth,
               Puts in his foot, and pleads to be the chiefe.
               What can they do (ſaith he) by power or might,
               If that by me they haue not their reliefe?
               For want of food they ſhould all periſh than,
               What ſay you now to me the countrey man.
            
            
               For want of me they ſhould both line and lacke,
               For want of me they could not till the earth,
               And thats the cauſe I cary on my backe,
               This table here of plenty not of dearth.
               I feaſt them all, their hunger I appeaſe,
               For by my toyle they feede euen at their eaſe.
            
            
               DEath that aloofe in ſtealing wiſe doth ſtand
               Hearing the vaunts that they begin to make.
               Straight ſteppeth forth, with piercing dart 
                     •
                   hād
               And boldly ſeemes the quarell vp to take.
               Are they (ſaith he) ſo proud in their degree,
               Lo, here by me ſoone conquered ſhall they bee,
            
            
               And ſtanding by to giue their later foode,
               He entreth ſtraight, the conqueſt to attaine,
               Thers none of them (ſaith he) the chiefeſt blond
               That valiant death intendeth to refraine,
               Ile crop their crowne & garlands freſh and gay,
               And at the laſt Ile ſhrine them all in clay.
            
            
               I pray for you all.
               I help you all to your right.
               I defend you all.
               I vanquiſh you all.
               I ſeede you all.
               I will kill you all.
            
            
               (⁂) The Authors Apoſtrophe to the Reader.
               
                  Here may you ſee, what as the world might be,
                  The rich, the poore, Earle, Ceſar, Duke, & King▪
                  
                  Death ſpareth not the chiefeſt high degree,
                  He triumphes ſtill, on euery earthly thing,
                  While then we liue let vs endeuour ſtill,
                  That all our works agree with Gods goodwill.
               
            
         
      
   