
      
         
            
            
            ¶A SERMON
preached before the
Queenes Maiestie, by the
reuerende Father in God
the Bishop of Chichester,
at Grenewiche, the .14.
day of Marche.
1573.
            Seene and allowed according to
the order appoynted.
            Quam speciosi pedes euangelizantium
pacem, euangelizantium
bona. Rom. 9.
            ¶Imprinted at London
dy Henry Binneman,
for Francis Coldocke.
Anno. 1573.
         
         
            
            
            ¶To the Reader, Thomas
Browne wisheth grace and peace.
            
               WHeras among other learned
and notable▪ Sermons
preached th
                  ••
                Lent before the
Queenes most excellent Maiestie,
and by h
                  •
               r grace highly
commended, I vnderstood by
those that were presente, that
hir Highnesse also liked very well, & comm
                  •
               nded
most graciously that sermon whiche the learned &
reuerende father in God, the Bishop of Chichester
preached before hir Maiestie, in so much that
some noble Peeres, and many other desired a copie
of the same. I partly to satisfie their desire▪
partly to signifie some sparke of my good will and
duetie towardes the author and preacher of thy
                  •
               
Sermon, my very good Lord (of whom I haue
receiued benefite) trauelled so f
                  •
               rre wyth those
that could pleasure me in this behalfe, that I o
                  •
               
length not onely receyued notes▪ but almost the
whole discourse of that learned sermon, although
not altogither in suche sorte as it was by the reuerend
Father preached▪ yet as 
                  ••
               gh ther vnto as
could be remembred. And for the benefit of other
I haue heere publishe
                  •
                the 
                  •
               ame, trusting that
this my labour wyll be no otherwise construed
than thus: tha
                  •
                whereas I my selfe can offer
as of my selfe very little or nothing at all to the
buylding of Gods Temple, I thoughte good to
bring therevnto a goodly and beautifull pyller
made by a cunning and noble workeman, which
I truste for the excellencie thereof will be of a

greate manye with plausible allowance ioyfully
receyued, to whome for the greater encreasing
of their ioy, I will say that which Aeschines sayd
vnto the men of Rhodes, who wondered maruelously
at the oration of that famous Orator Demosthenes,
beeing but sayde and recited by him
vnto them: Quid inquit Aeschines 
                     •
                  i ipsum audissetis
sua verba resonantem? sentiens in Demosthene
magnum Demosthenis partem deesse, 
                     •
                  i
quae ipse dixit ab alio recitarentur: Doe ye maruell,
sayde Aeschines, at this my rehearsall of
Demosthenes oration? what if you had hearde
him selfe sounding and pronouncing hys own
                  •
               
words? Meaning therby, that in Demosthenes
great part of Demosthenes was wanting, when
that those things which he spake were recited of
an other. I doubt not, but vnto all, this my little
trauell wil be acceptable: to them that were present,
bicause they shall agayne be put in mynde of
that whiche they before heard, and so maye more
deepely consider the same: to those that were absent,
for that they shall heare that whiche before
they heard not, & so be made better learned vnto
saluation. And thus desiring thee good Reader▪
to be thankfull vnto God for this and other
good fruites of the laborers in his vineyardes,
I bid thee farewell, from
Westminster the .vj. of April.
1574.
         
      
      
         
            
            A godly Sermon preached
at Grenewiche.
            
               God bee mercyfull vnto vs, and blesse vs, and
shewe vs the light of his countenance, and
bee mercyfull vnto vs: that his waye may
bee knowne vpon earthe, hys sauyng health
among all Nations, through our Lorde Iesus
Christ. Amen.
               REmember thy maker in the dayes
of thy youth,Eccl. 12▪
                   before the tyme of
trouble come, and the yeres approch,
of the vvhiche thou shalt say, I haue
no pleasure in them.
               2 Before the sunne, & the light, and
the moone, and the stars be darkned,
and the cloudes returne after rayne.
               3 Before the keepers of the house
doe tremble, and the strong men do
bovv, and the grinders do cease, being
fevve in number, and they that looke
out of the vvindovves vvaxe darke.
               4 And they shut the doores in the
streate through the vveaknesse of the
voyce of the grinding: & they yvake
at the noyse of the birde: and all the
daughters of musicke de deafe.
               
                  
5 Before the high ones doe dreade
and shake in the vvay: The Almond
trees doe blossome, and the Grashoppers
doe stick
                     •
                   vp, and the Capers
vvasted: for man shall go to his long
home, and the mourners shall goe about
in the streate.
               6 Before the siluer thread be lengthned,
and the golden caule do shrinke,
and the Pype bee broken vpon the
spring, and the vvheele vpon the cisterne.
               7 For dust shall returne to earthe
from vvhence it vvas, and the spirite
to God vvhich gaue it.
            
            
               Before I proc
                     •
                  ede any farther, I shal most
humbly beseeche you to pray.
               
                  THe Preacher king Salomon
in the .ii. chapters going
before, hathe reckened vp
all the ioyes & pleasures, bothe
of the body, and of the minde, & hath found

by the wisedome of God, that they be all
méere vanitie and miserie: for he saithe,
I haue considered all the workes that are
done vnder the sunne,Eccl. 1. 14
                        •
                     
                   and beholde all is
vanitie and vexation of the spirite. And
thervpon taketh occasion in this twelfth
chapter, to exhort euery one to serue God
in tyme, before trouble come, or sicknesse
gréeue, or age presse, or death carrie vs away.
For the body that is but dust, shall
goe againe to dust, and the spirite whiche
is eternall shall returne to God, as wyll
more playnly appeare by a bréef discourse
and expounding of the Metaphors and
darke speaches.
               
                  Remember thy maker in the dayes of thy
youth. That is: Serue the Lord thy God
that made thée of nothing, & redéemed thée
of worse than nothing, whilest thou arte
yong, strong, helthfull, riche, and mery.
               
                  Before the time of trouble come, and the
yeeres, of the whiche thou shalt say, I haue no
pleasure in them. That is: before pouertie,
sicknesse, losse of fri
                     •
                  nds, banishmēt, persecution,
and miserie come vpon thée, in the
which flesh and bloud bath no pleasure.
               
                  
                  Before the sunne, and the moone, and the
starres be darkned, and the clouds returne after
rayne. That is: Before thou fall to such
extremitie, that thou not only do not take
any ioy or cōfort of ye light of the sunne, of
the moone, & of the stars, & other creatures
which God hath made for ye cōfort of man:
but ye clouds returne after rayne, sicknesse
grow vpō sicknesse, grief vpon grief, paine
vpon paine, sorow vpō sorow. These Metaphors
do signifie trouble and sicknesse.
               
                  Before the keepers of the house doe tremble.
The body is called ye house, for that as
a man is lodged & dwelleth in his house for
a time: So the soule or spirite is lodged &
dwelleth in the body as in his house for a
time. The handes be called the keepers of
this house or body: for that, as the kéepers
of the house do dresse vp the house, repayre
and defende the house from spoyles and
breaches: So the hands do apparell, féede,
repayre, and defende the body from spoyles
and inconueniences.
               
                  The strong men do bow. The legges bée
called strong men: for that as strong men
be porters, and beare burdens, & as postes

and pillers do beare vp houses, and buyldings:
so the legges of men doe beare vp
the burdens, the buyldings, the houses or
bodies of men.
               
                  And thy grinders do cease, beeing fewe in
number. The téeth be called the grinders:
for that, as the milstones do grinde, bruse,
and make small the corne that is to be baked:
Euen so the téeth do grinde, chawe,
and make small the meate that is to be baked
or concocted in the stomake.
               
                  And they that looke out at the windowes
waxe darke. The windowes he called eye
lids, the eyes be those that looke out by the
windowes. For as they which are in the
house, are comforted & directed by the light
which they sée by the windowe opened: so
the powers of the body be comforted, and
directed by the light which they receyue by
the eyes, the eye liddes béeing opened.
               
                  And they shutt
                        •
                      the doores in the streat
                        •
                     .
The lippes be called the doores, for that
as the doores do shut and close in all things
that be in the house: Euen so the lippes do
shut & close the tong, the breath, & all other
things that be in the house of the body.
               
                  
                  And they wake at the noyse of the birde.
When men waxe olde, their brayne waxeth
dry, sléepe fayleth, and then they rather

                     ••
                  umber tha
                     •
                   sléepe, in so muche that th
                     •
                  
crowing of a cocke, the chirping of a birde,
or any little noyse will awake them.
               
                  And all the daughters of musicke be deafe.
The eares be called the daughters of musicke,
for that the harmonie and consente
of notes and soundes, is tuned and iudged
by the eare.
               
                  The high ones doe dread and shake in the
way. The vpper partes of the body be called
the high ones, which in aged persons
do crooke and stoupe, and as it were shake
for feare.
               
                  Before the Almōd trees do blossome. The
head is called the Almonde trée, and gray
heares the blossomes: for that as the blossomes
do cause the Almond tree to shewe
all white, so the gray heares do make the
head shew all white.
               
                  And the Grashoppers stick vp. The shoulders
he called the grashoppers, for that as
the legges and wings of Grashoppers do
                     •
                  
stick vp, and appeare aboue the body: so

the shoulders in leane and aged persons do
sticke vp and appeare aboue the body.
               
                  And the capers wasted. The capers do
heere signifie the reynes: for that Caparis is
an hath which is v
                     •
                  ry good for the reynes.
His meaning is, before you be aged: for
that in aged persons the hands do quauer
and tremble, the legges be faint and féeble,
the teeth decay and f
                     •
                  ll out, the eyes waxe
dimme, the lippes wil not easily open and
shutte: they sleepe little, and watch muche
through the drinesse of their brayne: their
hearing fayleth, they stoupe, and shake as
they go, their heades be white, their shoulders
sticke out, & their reines be wasted.
               
                  Before the siluer thread bee lengthened.
The siluer thread is the sinewes which do
stretch and lengthen vpon death, and they
be called siluer threades, for that they be
white like siluer, and doe holde, binde, and
tye togither the bones of the body, whiche
would els one fall frō an other, as threads
and lynes doe bynde togither other loose
things.
               
                  And the golden caule do shrinke. The
skinne whiche couereth and encloseth the

brayne is called the golden caule: bicause
it is yelow like golde, and dothe enclose,
and kéepe togither the brayne, as the
caule dothe enclose, and kéepe togither the
heare.
               
                  The pypes be broken vpō the spring. The
hart is called the spring, & the Arterie the
pipe: for that as water hauing the beginning
in the spring, dothe flowe out of the
spring into the pipe, and from one pipe to
an other to euery office in the house: so the
vitall spirites springing or beginning in
the heart, go out of the heart into the arteries,
which be round & hollow like cundite
pypes, and runne from one arterie to an
other, to all the partes of the bodie.
               
                  And the wheele vppon the cisterne. The
stomacke is called a cisterne, a lake, or a
poole. For so the Hebrue word doth signifie,
and the liuer is called the whéele, the
wrench, or plumpe: for that as waters do
not spring in a lake or poole, but eyther

                     •
                  all by rayne, or be gathered togither by
the industrie and deuise of man: so meat &
drink haue not their beginning in the stomacke,
but he put into it by the hande or

mouth. And as by a whéele and wrench,
or plumpe and certayne lynes, men do
                     •
                  
plumpe and drawe water out of the lake
or poole for their necessarie vses: so the liuer
by the veynes doth plumpe and draw
the iuyce out of the stomake, and doth alter
and change it into blou
                     •
                  , and conuey it to
the nourishment of the body.
               
                  For dust. That is, the fleshe and bones,
which were made of earth and dust shall
dye and rot, and returne to earth and dust
agayne.
               
                  The spirite shall go agayne to God, which
gaue it. That is (sayth the Chalde Paraphrast)
the soule shall go agayne to stande
in iudgement before the Lord which gaue
it to man.
               The principall lessons be these: First,
that ech one ought to serue God in time.
               Nexte, that trouble, sicknesse, age, and
death be Gods bayliffes to arrest & warne
vs of our dutie to God.
               Thirdly, that euery one shall ryse agayne,
and giue an accompt to God of his
dooings.
               The firste lesson is conteyned in thes
                     •
                  
                  
wordes: Remember thy maker in the daye
                        •
                     
of thy youth: in the which we are to learn:

                     1 First, what it is to remember God.
                     2 Secondly, to note the cause that moueth
vs to remember him.
                     3 Thirdly, the time and season of this remembrance.
                  
               
            
            
               The remembrance or duetifull
seruing of God.
               IT appeareth by the course of the Scriptures,
that to remember our maker, is
to beléeue in God,Rom. 5. 10 and Christ Iesus, which
gaue him selfe to dye for vs beeing his enimies,
which hath quickned vs beeing dead
in sinne,Eph. 2. 1. who being once dead in the in
                     •
                  irmitie
of the flesh, rose againe with power,
ascended into heauen with maiestie,Eph. 4. 8. hath
led away Captiuitie captiue,Eph. 1. 21. and reigneth
in heauenly thinges aboue all principalities
and powers, and aboue euery name
that is named, not onely in this world, but
in the world to come. Who by his fleshe
hath taken away the diuision and separation
that was betwene God and vs,Eph. 2. 15. abolishing
the law which was set against vs

in precepts & decrées. Who is our peac
                     •
                  ,Eph. 
                        •
                     . 14.
our aduocate, and propitiation for the
sinnes of the whole world.Iohn. 2. 2. By whom we
haue boldnesse,Eph. 3. 12. and entrance with all confidence
through fayth in him. For as ther
                     •
                  
is no way into the house but by the doore:
so there is no commyng to God, but by
fayth in Christ.A
                        •
                     t. 10. 
                        •
                     . By this doore entred Cornelius
the Romane: by this dore entred y•
                  Aethiopian Eunuch.
                  Act. 8. 37. By this doore Zacheus
receiued y• person of Christ into his house,
& saluatiō to him & his whole familie.Luc. 19. 5. By
this dore the Iaylor mētioned in the .16.Act. 16. 31. of
the Acts, receyued saluation to himselfe, &
all his house. And Ambrose
                  Ambrosiu
                        •
                     . vpon the Epistle
to the Romanes. This was God his
determination, that the lawe surceasing,
the grace of God should require only fayth
to saluation. And Basill
                  Basilius. in his booke de hu
                        •
                     
militate. The humble knoweth that he is
voyde of true iustice, and that he is iusti
                  
                     ••
                  ed
by onely fayth in Christ. And Heze
                     
                        •
                     hius
                  H
                        •
                     zechiu
                        •
                     .
vpon Leuiticus, sayth: The grace of
God is giuen of mercy and fauour, and
receyued by onely fayth. And Chrysostome
                  Chryso
                        •
                     .
vpon the epistle to the Galathians. chap. 3.

They sayde: whosoeuer stayeth himselfe
vpon only fayth is accursed. Contrariwise
S. Paule proueth that whosoeuer stayeth
himselfe vpon only fayth, is blessed.
               And yet as fire euer giueth lighte and
heate, so true fayth euer yéeldeth the feare
of God, and loue of God. When S. Paule
had first taught the Romanes that they
were sealed and assured of eternall lyfe by
fayth in Christ:Rom. 12. 1. After he 
                     •
                  eacheth them to
yéelde them selues, a quicke, holy, & pleasant
sacrifice to God, which is their dutiful
seruing of God.Eph. 1. 14 When S. Paule had first
taught the Ephesians, that Christ is the
earnest of their inheritance, after he teacheth
them to put on the cōplet armour of
God,Eph. 6. 14 hauing the loynes girded in truth, &
hauing on the brestplate of righteousnes,
and their féete shodde with the Gospell of
peace, to take vnto them selues the shield
of fayth, and the helmet of saluation, & the
sworde of the spirite, which is the word of
God, and to pray & watch with al perseuerance.
So when the Praecher had taught
first the remēbrance of God, after he teacheth
the feare & loue of God:Eccl. 12. 13 let vs heare

the conclusion of all, sayth he: feare God,
and keepe his commandements, for that
is the duetie of eache man. Nowe to keepe
God his commaundements, and to loue
God is all one as Christ teacheth vs in the
14. of Iohn.Ioh. 14. 12 If you loue me, kepe my commaundements.
To the same effecte dothe
S. Hilarie
                  Hilarius. expound this sentence. Remember
thy maker, that thou mayst reuerence
his maiestie mightely, loue his goodnesse
feruently, embrace his truth zelously, and
beléeue his promises faythfully. and also
S. Augustine,
                  August. Remember thy maker, that
is, remember his might, that thou maysts
beléeue: his mercy, that thou mayst hope:
his iustice, that thou mayst be fearefull:
his goodnesse that thou mayst be thankful.
            
            
               The cause which moueth vs to
remember God.
               THe cause which moueth vs to rememb
                     •
                  r
God is imployed in thys worde
Maker. For diuers good writers bothe old
                     •
                  
and new say, that this is the sense. Bycause
thou arte made after the image of
God, Totu
                        •
                      es obligatus ad eius seruitutē: Thou

art wholy bound to serue him. The Image
of God (according to S. Paule)Eph. 4. 24 is nothing
els but rightuousnesse & holinesse of truth:
So that the Preacher sayth thus muche:
God hath made thée, & made thée iust and
holy, therefore thou oughtest to serue him.
               In the .20. of Exodus,
                  Exo. 20. 2. the Lorde spake
all these sayings: I am the Lord thy God,
which brought thee out of the lande of Egypt,
out of the house of bondage. Thou
shalt haue none other God but me. In the
19. of Exodus,
                  Exo. 19. 3. God sayth to Moses: These
things shalt thou tell to the house of Iacob,
and declare to the house of Israell: your
selues haue seene what I haue done to the
Egyptians, howe I haue caryed you vpon
the wings of Eagles, and haue adopted
you to me: if therefore you heare my
voyce, and kéepe my couenaunt. &c. In
the .5. chapter of Esay,Esa. 5. 1. My beloued had a
vineyarde in a plentifull grounde, and he
hedged it, and walled it, and pickte stones
out of it, and planted it with good Grapes,
and buylded a tower in the middes of it,
and a wine presse in the middes of it.
What could I haue done (sayth he) for my

vineyarde that I haue not done: but that
I looked it should yéelde grapes, and it yelded
wild grapes. I looked for iudgement, &
beholde iniquitie: I looked for iustice, and
beholde outcry. In Micheas the .6. chapter:Mich. 6. 3
My people what haue I done to thée, or
wherein haue I gréeued thée? answere
me. Surely I brought thée out of the lande
of Egypt, I deliuered thée from the house
of bondage, I sent before thée Moses, Aaron,
& Miriah. Remember therefore what
Balak king of M
                     •
                  ab had deuised, and
what Balam the Sonne of Beor answered
him from Sittim vnto Gilgall, that
thou mayest knowe th
                     •
                   righteousnesse of
the Lord, and what the Lorde requireth of
thée: to do iustly, & to loue mercy, & to humble
thy selfe, & walke with thy God. And
in the .102. Psalm▪
                  Psa. 102. 1 O my soule prayse thou
the Lorde, and all that is within me blesse
his holy name. O my soule praise thou the
Lorde, and forget not all hys benefites,
whiche forgiueth thée all thine iniquities,
which healeth all thine infirmities, which
deliuereth thy life frō death, whiche crowneth
thée with mercy and goodnesse.
               
                  
The grace & mercy of God hath mad
                     •
                  
man iust and holy. The grace and mercy
of God hath brought mā out of the hellish
Egypt, and caried him vpon the wings of
Angels. The grace & mercy of God hath
planted the vineyarde of his Churche in a
fertile grounde: hathe hedged it with his
law: hath walled it with his sacraments:
hath picked out the stones of superstition
and wickednesse: hath buylded a toure, &
set watchmen, Patriarches, Prophets,
Apostles, Euāgelists, & Pastours to kéepe
it: hath made a wyne presse of Princes,
Iudges & Magistrates. The grace & mercy
of God hath set ouer his people godly
Kings and Quéenes, godly preachers and
Ministers. The grace and mercy of God
forgiueth all their sinnes, healeth all their
infirmities, and giueth them the crowne
of mercy and goodnesse. The grace and
mercy of God is the cause of all blessings
and goodnesses.Ier. 1. 17. Euery good gift, and euery
perfect gifte (as sayth S. Iames) is from
aboue from the father of light.
               Blessed be therefore God▪
                  Eph. 1. 3. euen the father
of our Lorde Iesus Christe, whiche

hath blessed vs with all spirituall blessings
in heauenly things in Christe. As he hath
chosen vs in him before the foundation of
the world, that we should be holy & without
blame before him in loue, who hathe

                     •
                  oreapointed vs to be adopted through Iesus
Christ, vnto him selfe, according to the
good pleasure of his will to the praise of the
glory of his grace, wherwith he hath made
vs accepted in his beloued: by whome we
haue redemption through his bloud, euen
th
                     •
                   forgiuenesse of sinnes, according to his
rich grace, wherby he hath bene abundant
toward vs, in al wisdome & vnderstāding.
And therefore he giueth great & iust cause
to euery one to remember and serue him.
               For sith the father hathe entayled hys
lands vnto his sonne, ech sonne ought, & a
good sonne will honour, loue & obey so good
a father. Sith a friende hath made a déede
of gift of al his goods to his friend, ech friend
ought, & a good friend wil be kind & thankfull
to him and his agayne. The God and
father of heauen & earth hath entayled and
assured the lande of eternall ioy to vs bys
children. Their good friende and brother

Christ Iesus hath giuen them himselfe to
be borne of a virgin,Mat. 1. 25 to hunger & thirst, to
be spitted on and scurged,Mat. 4. 2. to be rent and
torne,Ioh. 19. 28. to suffer death, & death of the crosse,
to heare the paynes and forments of hell,Math. 26. 67.
and Gods wrath.Ioh. 19. 1. He hath giuen them his
holinesse,Iohn. 19. his righteousnesse, his truth, his
pacience,Math. 27. 46. his mercy, and the inheritance
of his glorious kingdome.
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 1. 30. And therefore
they ought to be obediēt to so good a father,
and to be thankfull to so louing a brother.
The Oxe dothe knowe his owner,Esa. 1. 3. and the
Asse his masters cribbe: and muche more
ought man to know the mightie Lord, and
mercifull God.Ps. 103. 9. The sunne setteth & riseth:
the Moone kéepeth his full, his wane and
change: the sea dothe ebbe and flowe: the
earth yéeldeth grasse and corne, and fruite
for man, as God hath made them, and appoynted
them to do: And shall not man labour
and watche, pray and fast, be mercyfull,
iust, holy, and true, as God hath made
him, and appoynted him to be?
               The frowarde sayth: we may do what
we li
                     •
                  t: but the holy ghost sayth,Deu. 11. 32 thou shalt
only do that I cōmaūd thée. The Epicure

saith: Let vs eate and drinke, and be mery,
for to morowe shall we dye:1. Cor. 15. 32. But the
holy ghost sayth:1. Co. 6. 13 Meates are ordeyned for
the bellie, and the bellie for meates: but
God shall destroy bothe it, and them. The
reiecte sayth: It is as good to sitte idle, as
worke idle, & it néedes not, or it bootes not:
But the holy Ghost sayth: All these blessings
shall come vpon thee and take holde
of thée, if thou shalt kéepe my worde.Deu. 28. 
                        •
                     
                   Blessed
shal
                     •
                  e thou be in the citie, and also in
the fielde: blessed shalt thou be when thou
goest forth, and when thou cōmest in: blessed
shall be the fruite of thy body, and the
fruite of thy grounde, and the fruite of thy
cattell, and all that thou settest thy hande
vnto. But if thou do not kéepe my lawe:
Cursed shalt thou be in the Citie, and also
in the fielde: cursed shalte thou be when
thou goest foorth, and when thou commest
in: cursed shall be the fruite of thy body,
and the fruite of thy ground, and the fruite
of thy cattell: and cursed shall be all that
thou settest thy hande vnto.
            
            
               
               The time of our remembrance.
               
                  IN the dayes of thy youth. The Hebrue
word Bakarah signifieth youth, or a thing
chosen of the roote Bakar. For that a yong
man is chosen, and apte for any worke, or
any thing. So the time of 
                     •
                  ur remembraunce
is our young yéeres, our flourishing
days, the time of prosperitie, y• time
of this our life, whilest we may be framed
to remember God.Eccl. 11. 6. In the morning sowe
thy séede:Eccl. 5. 7. make no tarying to turne vnto
the Lord, and put not off from day to day:
for sodaynly shall the wrath of the Lorde
breake forth, and in thy security thou shalt
be destroyed, and thou shalt perishe in the
dayes of vengeance, for man dothe not
knowe his time, but as the fyshes that are
taken in an euill nette, and as birdes that
are caught in a snare: so are the children
of menne besnared in the euyll tyme,
when it falleth vpon them sodaynly. Ecce
venio sicut fur:
                  Apo. 16. 15 
                  Beholde I come sodaynly lyke
a theefe: Blessed is he that watcheth, and
kéepeth his garmentes.Eccl. 9. 10. What soeuer thy
hande can doe, doe it by and by. For there
is neyther worke, nor inuention, nor

knowledge, nor wisedome in the graue
whither thou goest. Worke while day is,
for nyghte wyll come when no body can
worke.Ioh. 9. 4. Cast thy bread vpon the waters,
for after many dayes thou shalt finde it.
Giue a portion to seuen, and also to eyght:
for thou knowest not what euill shall be
vpon the earth.Gen. 6. 14 Noah buylded the Arke
whylest the wether was fayre:G
                        •
                     . 41. 48 Ioseph
made barnes and grayners, and layde vp
grayne and corne in the s
                     •
                  uen plentyfull
yeres. The Ante hauing no guide,Pro. 6. 7. master,
nor ruler, prouideth meate for hir selfe in
sommer.Ecc. 18. 1
                        •
                     
                   
                  Ante languorem adhi
                        •
                     e medicinam:
Before sicknesse take phisicke, and before
iudgement trye thy selfe, and thou shalte
finde fauour in the sight of God.Mat. 25. 1. The fiue
wyse Uirgins tooke oyle in their vessels,
with their lampes, and were readie when
the Bridegrome came foorth, and went in
with him to the mariage.Luk. 16. 8. The Lord prayseth
the vniust Stewarde, for that be had
done wisely: and Chryste willeth his to
make them friendes of the Mammon of
iniquitie, that when they fayle, they may
receyue thē into euerlasting tabernacles.
               
                  
Nowe for oure particular instruction:
God hath deliuered England from forren
bondage: the burden whereof as we may
beholde in our neighbours on euery side,
so haue we domesticall glasses to sée it in.
Howe the Danes ouerrunning this lande
caused the Englishe men to eare and sow
                     •
                  
their lande, and doe all other labours, and
the Danes did vse their wiues, daughters
and seruants at their pleasure: and if any
Englishe man had met a Dane vpon a
bridge, the Englishe man might not stirre
one foote before the Lord Dane was past:
and if the English man had not made low
curtes
                     •
                  e to the Dane at his comming by,
he was sure to be sharply punished. The
Normands hauing title by English bloud,
and spéeding by the good will of the most of
Englishe nation, yet burdened them with
great tribute and exactions, tooke to themselues
the chiefe possessions of the lande,
ordeyned newe lawes and newe coynes,
ouerthrew the houses of the Nobilitie, and
filled all Churches with strangers.
               God hathe delyuered hys Englishe
Church from the Romish Pharao, whiche

dyd not onely kéepe it vnder with the burdens
of Annates,Exo. 5. 4. Electiōs, Preuentions,
Totquots, Tollerations, Bulles, Seales,
Signatures, Smokefarthings, and Peter
pens, and such like: But also loaded their
consciences with the straw and clay of superstition,Exo. 5. 7.
errour, and ignorance.
               God hath caried the chiefe of England,
the Nobles, Ministers, & many other good
folk vpō the Eagles wings, through maruelous
dangers, & miraculously preserued
them, as their owne consciences doe best
knowe.2. Re. 11. 1. For remember what Athalia
and hir bloudy priest Matham:2. Re. 11. 18 what Balam
of Italie & his persecuting kings Balaac
and Sehon:Num. 22. what his cruell Dukes

                     •
                  absache and Holoferne:2. Reg. 18. 19. what Ado
                     •
                  ias,
and Abisac had deuised:Iud. 7. 1. and what their
Balamites answered them from Sittim
to Gilgall,1. Re. 2. 17 from the beginning of thornes
and troubles, to the whéele & type of rule
and dominion.
               God hath planted his English Churche
in a pleasant, fertile, and healthfull soyle:
he hathe giuen it plentie of all manner of
vittailes: he hathe endued it with peace

and concorde aboue all countreys rounde
about it: He hath hedged it with his Gospell,
the séede of grace, which sowen in the

                     •
                  urrowes of Christian hearts encreaseth
and multiplieth excéedingly:Mat. 13. 3. the precious
iewell more deare to the godly,Matth. 13. 45. than all
the treasures of the world:Eph. 6. 17 the spirituall
sworde, that cutteth the hearts, and parteth
the flesh from the spirite: the heauenly
Nette,Matth. 13. 47. that encloseth, and bringeth togither
the children of God: the water of
life which washeth away our sinnes:Apo. 22. 17 the
sacr
                     •
                  d fyre,Ier. 23. 29 that burneth away the superfluous
humors of worldely desires: the
wholsome leauen that seasoneth and edifyeth
the soule:Mat. 13. 33 the swéete bread, that 
                     •
                  éedeth
the man of God:Luk. 11. 52 And the true keye
that openeth to vs Christ Iesus, the doore
of the kingdome of heauen.
               God hath buyld
                     •
                  d in it the sincere and
substantiall walles of the Sacraments of
Baptisme and the Lordes Supper, the
seales of fayth, the watche words of Christian
souldiers, the images of our Resurrection,
and the pawnes of our saluation.
He hathe pickte out the stones of errour

and heres
                     •
                  e.
               God hath set ouer it Miriah▪
                   
                  
                     •
                  o set foorth
his glory, to cause his worde to be taught,
to aduaunce vertue, to punishe vice, to be
a nurse and fosterer of his people,Esa. 49. 23 to write
out his booke,D
                        •
                     . 17. 18. and to reade on it continually,
to keepe his commaundementes, not
turning from them to the lefte hande, nor
to the right. He hath set ouer it many good
Moyseses, that many stande in the gappe,Ps. 106. 23
to turne away Gods wrath, to guide gods
people in the wildernesse of these perillous
dayes, and to iudge them from morning
to euening:Exo. 18. 35 and many good Aarons to ring
the golden belles of the Law and Gospell
in Gods Sanctuarie and Churche, to present
sacrifices of thankesgiuing,Ecc. 45. 17 and to
giue light to Gods people by his worde.
He hath pla
                     ••
                  d in it kéepers and watchemen,
preachers & ministers, whiche fe
                     •
                  d
                     •
                  
his flocke, plowe his grounde, and sounde
the trumpet of his worde, so godly, so learnedly
and paynefully, as thys 
                     〈◊〉
                   seldome
or neuer hathe tasted the lyke. Although
Cicer
                     •
                  es dogges that should barke
at the Romish
                     •
                   wolues, begi
                     •
                   to snatche

at the christian Belwethers.
               He hath made a winepresse of Iudges,
Iustices, and Magistrates, to presse the
husk of controuersies and suites from the
iuyce, vi
                     •
                  e from vertue, falshoode from
truthe.
               And al these hath he done, to moue vs to
beléeue that he is God almightie,Gen. 17. 1. the first
and the last,Apo. 1. 17. the God of Gods, Lorde of
Lordes,D
                        •
                     . 10. 17. and that besides him is none. To
moue vs to feare the profoundnesse of his
riches,Deu. 4. 35 wisedome, and knowledge. Who
is greater than our hearts,Ro. 11. 33. and knoweth
all things,1. Io. 3. 20 who yéeldeth wrath in the day
of wrath,Rom. 25. to euery one according to the
hardnesse of his heart:Psal. 7. 13. who if we will not
turne, hath whe
                     •
                   his sword, bent his bow,
and prepared the arrowes of deathe.Deu. 32. 4 To
loue him as true and faythfull,Io
                        •
                     l. 2. 13. as gentle
and mercyfull, who hath not dealte wyth
vs after our sinnes, nor rewarded vs after
our iniquities: But looke howe wide
the East is from the west,
                     
                        •
                     s. 102. 10 so farre hath he
set our sinnes from vs.
               All these hathe he done to moue vs to
séeke the Lorde with all our hearts, & to be

zelous in the truthe of the ieolous God,
whiche giueth not his glorie to an other,
whiche will haue vs all,Den. 4. 2
                        •
                     
                   or no part of vs,Ex. 34. 14
and casteth the luke warme oute of hys
mouth.Esa. 42. 8. To kéepe our spirites, soules,Apo. 2. 10. and
bodies pure,Le. 11. 44. and without blame to the
comming of our Lorde Iesus Christ.1. Th. 5. 48 To
be faythfull and constante that we may
receyue the crowne of life:Apo. 2. 10. To labour to
ouercome,Apo. 2. 18. that we may eate of the hidden
Manna,Ap. 3. 5. 1
                        •
                     
                   to be clothed with whyte aray,
and to be made pillers in the Temple of
God.
               All these hathe he done to moue vs to
girde our selues with truthe,Eph. 6. 14 to binde it
about our neckes,Prou. 3. 3. and to write it in the
table of our heartes,Eze. 13. 18. to flye the softe pillowes
of flatterie, the paynted cloake of
dissimulation,Psal. 52. 4 the sharpe rasors of slandering,
and speake the truthe eche one to another.Eph. 4. 25.
To arme our selues with righteousnesse,Eph. 6. 14
and to make good good, and euill
euill,Esa. 5. 20. darkenesse darkenesse, and lighte
lighte, swéete swéete, and sowre sowre,
To put on the shoes of peace,Eph. 6. 15. the chayne
that lincketh Christians togither wyth

the bonde of loue,Eph. 4. 3. the Image of Christ
                     •
                  
grauen in mans heart,Psal. 132. 2. 3. the swéete dewe o
                     •
                  
Hermon, and the precious oyntment of
Aaron to the Leuites and seruaunts of
God. To moue vs to kéepe the garments
of innocencie,Apo. 16. 15 to labour the wo
                     •
                  ke of God
in the day of this life,Ioh. 9. 10. to cast ou
                     •
                   bread vpon
the waters,Esa. 
                        •
                     8. 7. to deale our breade to the
hungry, to bring the poore that wander
into our houses, when we see the naked to
cloth them, to loose the bandes of wyckednesse,
to take off the heauy burdens, to let
the oppressed go free, to breake euery yoke
of the vngodly,Esa. 58. 6. to helpe the blind and lame
the widow and fatherlesse, the staunger
and friendlesse.
               All these hath be done to moue vs lyke
prudente Noahs,Gen. 6. 41 to bu
                     •
                  lde the arke of a
good conscience before the floud of Iudgement
doe ouerflowe. Like prouident Iosephs,G
                        •
                     . 41. 48
to lay vp the grayne of godlynesse
in the barnes of our heartes, before the
dearth of mercy shall be. Like paynefull
Antes to prouide the foode of th
                     •
                   soule,Pro. 6. 7. before
the winter of Iustice approche.Ecc. 18. 18 Lyke
tractable patients to take the preparatiues

of repentance before the pangs of deathe
do come.Mat. 25. 1 Likewise virgins to haue readie
the lampe of fayth, and the oyle of vertue
before the bridegrome Christe Iesus doe
shutte the doores.Luk. 16. 8 Lyke good Stewardes
to prouyde for the Tabernacle of heauen,
before we loose the office of this life. In the
dayes of fayre wether, of plentie of Sommer,
of health, of oportunitie, of this life,
to remember our maker, and to serue him
dutifully. And thus much of the first principall
lesson.
            
            
               Trouble, age, sicknesse, and death, be
Gods Bay
                     ••
                  ffes.
               BUt the nature of man is so crabbed and
frowarde, that commonly the mercies
and graces of God do little preuayle with
him, and therefore when man forgetting
the goodnesse of God, beginneth to waxe
secure and carelesse. God hathe certayne
Bayliffes and scourges, as trouble, sickenesse,
age, and deathe, whiche he sendeth
foorth to arest them to come to his Court
of Iustice, th
                     •
                  re to be warned of their duties,

                     〈…〉
                   for their offences. As the

holy ghost dothe teache in the .28. of Deuteronomie,De. 18. 15.
by Moyses: If they will not
obey the voyce of the Lorde their God,
the Lorde shall sende vpon them, trouble,
cursing, and shame: The Lorde shall
make the pestilence cleaue vnto them:
the Lorde shall smite them with pouertie,
sicknesse, and colde, drought, blasting,
and meldewe: the heauen that is ouer
their heads shall be brasen, and the earth
that is vnder them yron. In the .32. of
Deuteronom.De. 32. 18. Thou haste forsaken th
                     •
                  
mightie God that begatte thée, and haste
forgotten the Lorde that made thée. Th
                     •
                  
Lorde then sawe it, and was angry, and
sayde, I will hide my face from thée, and
thou shalte bee consumed wyth hunger,
and burnte with heate, and bitter destruction.
I will also sende vpon thée the teethe
of beastes, with the venim of Serpentes.
Also he dothe complayne by the Prophet
Ozee.Ozee. 2. 5. Your mother hathe sayde, I wyll
goe after my louers, whiche gaue me my
bread and my water, my wool & my 
                     •
                  laxe,
my oyle and my wyne. Therefore will I
stoppe hir wayes with thornes, and make

a wall, that she shall not finde hir pathes.
And by the Prophet Ierem.Iere. 15. 2. Cast out this
people, and let them departe? And if they
say, whither shall we departe? Then tell
them: Thus sayth the Lorde. Suche as
are appoynted to death, vnto death: and
suche as are for the sworde, to the sworde:
and suche as are for the famine, to the famine:
and suche as are for captiuitie, to
captiuitie.Gen. 11. 24 Nimrod and his adherents forgat
God, and sayde one to another: Come
let vs make bricke, & burne it in the fire,
and let vs buylde vp a Citie and a Toure
whose toppe may reach vnto heauen, that
we may get vs a name: But God sent his
bailiffe Trouble, which arrested thē with
a writ of confusion, and confounded their
language, that one might not perceiue anothers
spéeche.Iob. 1. 4. Iobs sonnes forgat God, &
made feastes euery one in his course, but
on a daye when they were eating and
drinking in their elder brothers house,
GOD caused his bayliffe Trouble to
arrest them with a writ of tempest, which
smote the foure corners of the house, and
kylled them all. The people of Israell

forgat God,Exo. 17. 2. and murmured for bread and
drinke: But God caused hys Bayliffe
trouble to arrest them with a writte of
warre, for the Amalechites smote a great
number of them.
               The people of Israell mere wéerie of
their iourney to the lande of promyse,Num. 21. 6
wherefore God caused them to be arrested
with a writte of fyre, which consumed the
vttermost part of the host.
               The people of God blasphemed God,Num. 21. 6
but he caused them to be arrested with a
writte of fyrie Serpentes, whiche stoong
them so, that many of the people of Israell
were destroyed. The inhabitauntes
of Iuda and Ierusalem trespassed wonderfully,2. Par. 36. 14.
accordyng to all the wyckednesse
of the Heathen, and polluted the
house of God, and mocked the messangers
of God, despised hys worde, and
euill vsed his Prophetes, wherefore the
Lords caused them to be arrested a
                     •
                  d

                     ••
                  ed with long captiuitie: for they were
ledde awaye prysoners vnto Babylon.
The tenne trybes worshypped straunge
Gods,
                     
                        •
                     . Reg. 17. 23. and walked after the rytes of the

Gentiles, and therefore GOO caused
them to bée arrested, and fyned
with long captiuitie: for they were prisoners
amongest the Assyrians.1. Re. 13. 
                        •
                     
                   Ieroboam
King of Israell, hearing the wordes
of the man of God whiche cursed the altar
in Bethell, stretched foorth his hande, saying,
lay holde on him: But his hande withered,
and he coulde not plucke it in agayne.2. Re. 1. 1.
Okezias trusted in Belsebub of
Esceron, and therefore he did fall out of
the Gallerie in the toppe of his house in
Samaria, and dyed vpon it.2. Re. 25. 7 Zedechias did
euill in the sight of the Lorde, and Nabuchodonozer
king of Babylon slewe his
sonnes before his face, & put out his eyes,
and bounde him in chaynes, and caryed
him prisoner to Babylon.1. Mach. 9 55. Alcimus generall
to king Demetrius, commaunded all
the walles of the holye house, and the
monumentes of Prophetes, to be pulled
downe: But he was plagued, and hys
mouth was stopped, for he weas stricken
with a palsey, and could no more speake.
Ualerian the Emperoure cruelly persecuted

the Christians, whome Sapor king
of Persia tooke in battayle: and dyd not
onely leade hym about with a leace like a
bloude hounde, but also vsed him for a
footstoole to get vpon his horse.1. Reg. 21. 13. Achab caused
Naboth to be put to deathe, for that
hée refused to sell him hys Uyneyarde:
But bothe Achab him selfe was slayne in
battayle, and all hys house vtterlye destroyed.2. Mach. 9 9.
Antiochus swelled in pride agaynst
God: but God smote hym with
an incurable and inuincible plague: the
payne of the bowels (whiche was remedylesse)
came vpon hym, and hée fell
downe from the Chariot that ran swiftely,
and brused all hys bones, and the
wormes came out of his body in abundaunce,
and whylest hée was alyue his
fleshe fell off from hym for payne and
torment.
               They of the Churche of Israell were
vnthankfull ot GOD, and ascribed vnto
Idols their breade, and their water,
their wooll and their flaxe, their Oyle
and their drinke: they gloryed in themselues,

and made them Castles and
Towres: they were secure and carelesse,
and gaue them selues to eating
and drynking, and pastyme: They followed
the wyckednesse of the Heathen,
and mocked the Prophetes of God, and
despised hys woorde: They gaue them
selues to couetousnesse and wrong: They
grewe in pride, infidelitie, and contempte
of God: and therefore GOD dyd arrest
them with Trouble, with pestilence,
with famyne, with sworde, with
fyre, with serpentes, with captiuitie, with
destruction.
               Wee of the Churche of Englande, are
vnthankfull to God for our Treasures,
and Iewels, for oure houses and landes,
oure vnitie and peace: his blessed worde
and Sacramentes, and manye other
hys vnspeakeable benefites and ryche
blessynges of GOD. Wée thynke
they come not from GOD, but from
oure Parentes, from oure Friendes,
from oure witte and cunning, from our

                     ••
                  ppe and laboure. Wée buylde Castles

and toures in the ayre to get vs a name.
So many heads, so many wittes, so many
common wealthes. Plato his Idaea, Aristotles
felicitie, and Pythagoras numbers,
trouble most mens brayns. Wishers and
woulders were neuer good housholders,
deuisers and phansiers were neuer good
Common wealthes menne. Phaeton
thought that he could haue ruled Phebus
Chariot, but his body was too light for the
flying horses.Gen. 11. 4. Nimrod thoughte he could
haue buylded a toure to heauen, but he
wrought cōfusion vpon earth. The bramble
thought it could haue shadowed all the
trées of Lybanon▪ but it brought destruction.Iud. 9. 15
These light Phaetons, these deuising
Nimrods, disturbing brambles, phansie
many chariots and formes, deuise many
toures and plats, and promise many shadowes
of common wealthes, but the ende
of all is in
                     •
                  idelitie, confusion & destruction.
The figtree woulde not leaue his sweetenesse,Iud. 9. 9.
the oliue tree his fatnesse, the vyne
his wine, wherewith he dyd cheare both
God and man: neyther shoulde we leaue
the sweetnesse of vnitie, the fatnesse & substance

of religion, the wine of obedience,
which do please both God and man, and be
caried away with the brambles of infidelitie
and confusion.
               We grow secure & carelesse, we eate,
we drinke, we buye, we sell, we plant, we
buylde, we pastime, and make merie.
Euery one looketh that an other shoulde
serue God, they care not to serue God
them selues.Iob. 1. 5. They thinke that Iob should
pray and sacrifice for them. The spirituall
men (say they) shoulde kéepe hospitalitie,
the spirituall men shoulde sée the people
taught, should giue almes, shoulde liue according
to their profession: most true, and
therefore should Gentlemen, and Noble
men kéepe hospitalitie, should see the people
taught, giue almes, lyue according to
their profession. For all be, or ought to be
spirituall men. I knowe not whence that
distinction of spirituall and temporal men
came, I suppose from beyonde the Alpes.
The worde of God dothe acknowledge no
difference of man but spirituall or carnal:1. Cor. 3. 1.
and carnall none should be. You are (sayth
S. Peter to all generally) a chosen people,

a regall priesthoode, a holy nation, that yo
                     •
                  
should shew fo
                     •
                  rth the vertues of him that

                     •
                  ath called you out of darknesse into maruellous
light. But these that be called spirituall
men haue their liuinges for the
sayde purposes: and so haue they whome
we call temporall men also. Their landes
be not their owne, they haue them not of
their friendes,
                     
                        •
                     . Cor. 4. 7 they haue them from God,
who giueth to euery one according to hys
abilitie, and requireth againe a reckening
according to his receipt:Mat. 25. 15 for one talent of
the seruaunte and labourer: for two talentes
of the farmer and marchaunt: for
thrée talentes of gentlemen and knights:
for mo of the Nobles and Counsaylours:
for most of the Princes: whosoeuer hath
most liuing and authoritie, is most bound
to walke in the feare of God, and to sée
such as be vnder his gouernment brought
vp in the knowledge and feare of God.
For euery one is Gods Stewarde,Luc. 16. 1. and
euery Stewarde is bound to make his accompte,
according to hys receipte, and
charge.
               We despise Gods worde, and mock
                     •
                  
                  
his Ministers, wée blaspheme God, and
abuse his holy name, we worship strange
Gods, our belly, our purse, our birthe,
our landes, our witte and authoritie: we
trust more to Belzebub of Ecceron,2. Reg. 1. 
                        •
                     
                   and
Apollo of Delphos, to cōiurers and southsayers,
than to the Prophetes, and Apostles.
Euery man hunteth his brother
with a nette:Mich. 7. 2 Euery man hunteth after
Nabothes vineyard.1. Reg. 22. 17. Such as haue Lordshippes
and Manours, long after Naboths
little field. They that haue to much,
or spente too muche, long after the vyneyardes
of poore Parsons and Uicars, and
other that labour full truely in God his
vineyarde.
               We swell in pride & contempt of God
and man, disdayning one another, contemning
one another, and are sorie that an
other dothe liue or thriue by vs: And yet
we thinke that God can not, or dothe not
sée it.Gen. 3. 7. We are clothed with the fig leaues
of authoritie, of parentage, of friendshippe,
of selfe loue, of flatterie, dissemblyng,
and our owne fansies.Gen. 11. Well, our
language hath not bene confounded: our

houses smitten downe:Exod. 17. 2 the Amalechites
haue not preuayled agaynst vs in warre:
Nabuchodonozor hath not killed our children
before our faces,2. Reg. 25. 7. bound vs in chayns,
caried vs away captiues: we haue not
béene striken with palseis:1. Mach. 9 let vs not despise
the great pacience and long sufferingRom. 2. 4.
of God. We knowe what hath bene: God
knoweth what may be, and shall be. But
be these things as they shall be, yet if these
two bayliffes can not finde vs, God hath a
thirde Bayliffe, Bayliffe Age, which will
finde vs out, and cause our strong men or
legges to bowe, the kéepers of our house
and handes to tremble, our grinders and
téeth to decay, those that looke out of the
windowes and the eyes to be blinde, the
doores and lippes to shut, sléepe to 
                     •
                  ayle, the
da
                     •
                  ghters of Musicke & eares to be deafe,
the Almond trée and head to be whyte, the
highe ones and shoulders to sticke vp, the
capers and reynes to waste: for all thes
                     •
                  
when we f
                     •
                  ele them in our selues, or sée
them in others, be Gods bailiffs to warne
vs, and tell vs that it is time for vs to
prepare our selues to beginne to remember,

and serue God.
               But some can vse them selues so cunningly,Ma
                        •
                     h. 4. 3
that Bayliffe trouble shall neuer
finde them. For if he séeke them with pouerty,
they wil make stones bread rather
than want. They will 
                     •
                  ord vp their corne
and wares, vntill the poorer sort hath sold,
and then sell it at their own price, or kéepe
it vntill it be rotte. They wyll varnishe
their wares, and make them shewe fayre
to the eye, though neuer so bad to the vse:
or they will leaue their naturall and lawfull
trauell, and vse vnnaturall and vnlawfull
multiplication of money: or they
will sell their landes and liue by vsurie:
or they will set their landes vpon the last,
and stretche them from sixe pounde a yere
to sixe score pounde a yere. Or they will
make all fish that commeth to net by S
                     •
                  a
or by lande, or they will transporte corne,
butter, chéese, and all kinde of good necessaries,
and that to them that neyther loue
Gods worde, nor this countrey: or they
will sell their landes thrée or foure times
to be sure.
               If trouble séeke thē by losse of friends,

they can comforte them selues with th
                     •
                  
cōmoditie that they reape of their friends
goods and lands, after they haue worne
blacke a while.
               If trouble séeke them by displesure, they
will say that white is blacke, and blacke
white: they will runne with the hare, and
holde with the hounde: they will cary fire
in one hande, and water in another: They
will play Ait, Aio, Negat, Nego. They will
leaue truthe, iustice, and equitie, and play
the Englishe Coliar, who first met King
Henry the sixte souldiers, and was beaten
of them, for that he sayde he serued king
Edwarde the fourth: Nexte he met king
Edwarde the fourthes souldiers, and was
beaten of them, for that he sayde he serued
king Henry the sixt: Afterwarde he met
a thirde hande of men, to whome he answered
he serued the Diuell, who when
they had him be gone in the diuels name,
so he answered he would: for quoth he, I
haue bin beaten of king Henries men, and
king Edwards men, for answering that
I serued the one, and then the other, and
now I haue sayd I serue the Diuell, I go

without hurte, he is the beste master I
met with this morning. They will leaue
their dueties towards God, their Prince,
and their countrey, rather than by displeasure
to fall into trouble.
               Some partly by the goodnesse of nature,
partly by diet and exercise▪ partly by medicines,
will order their body in suche sorte,
that Bayliffe sicknesse shall not finde thē.
And some with faire and pleasant houses,
with their warme and softe apparell,
with their choyse of meates and drinkes,
with their seuerall pastimes and recreations
wil cherish bayliffe Age in such sort,
that he shall little or nothing grieue them.
Mary yet God hath one sure and trustie
Bayliffe, Bayliffe Death, whiche neuer
fayleth him. For he neuer returneth, Non
est in
                        •
                     entus in baliua mea, but bringeth corpus
cum causa. Be he olde, be he young,
ryche or poore, Lorde or Ladie, Knight
or Emp
                     •
                  roure; he kéepeth them without
bayle or maynprise. This Bayliffe can
neyther bée deceyued by subtiltie, nor allured
by beautie, nor corrupted by money,
nor withstoode by strength.
               
                  
When death commeth there is no waye
to escape: Be it to day, be it to morrowe,
it will be, it is a debte, it muste be payde.
Striue man neuer so muche, this sentence
definitiue of God shall neuer be reuersed,
earth thou arte,Gen. 3. 16. to earth thou shalte. Liue
you neuer so long, you must say with Iob:Iob. 17. 13
The graue is my house, darknesse is my
bedde, I sayd vnto rottennesse, you are my
father: I sayd vnto the wormes, you are
my mother, you are my sisters.
               What say some, I haue in bank a hundred
thousand pounds, my plate, my iewels,
my landes are worth as muche: and
yet must you say: The graue is my house,
darknesse is my bedde: yet muste you say
to rottennesse, you are my father, and to
the wormes, you are my mother, you are
my sisters. But I am able to ouerrule any
case in the lawe, I am able to be an
Embassadour through the worlde, I haue
the knowledge of all toungs and learning.
I am able to serue any Prince in the field,
I am able to bée of Councell with anye
Prince Christian. Yet must you say, the
graue is my house. &c. I am a gentleman,

a Noble man, I came in with the conqueror,
I can fetche my pedegrée long before
the Conquest, a King was my father, a
Quéene was my mother, a King my brother,
a Quéene my sister: yet muste you
say, The graue is my house, darknesse is
my bed: yet must you say to rottennesse,
you are my father, and to the wormes, you
are my mother, you are my sisters. For
the siluer threads & sinewes shal stretche,
your golden caule and brayne-skinne shal
shrinke, your spring and hart, your pipes
and Arteries shal fayle, your cisterne and
whéele, your liuer & stomacke shal be dried
vp, and consumed, and man shall goe to
his long home, and duste to earthe, from
whence it came. And now followeth the
thirde principall lesson.
            
            
               That eche one shall rise agayne, and giue an
accompt to God of his doings.
               THe earth is a mistresse vnto vs of our
resurrection: whose trées, floures and
hearbes doe dye in winter, and reuiue in
sommer. The day, the moneth, the yeare,
the spring, the sommer, y• winter, do pass
                     •
                  ,

& returne againe, & teach our resurrection.
We our selues once in .24. houres do as it
were dye in sléepe, but the morning awaketh
vs out of sléepe, & sheweth vs a manifest
token of our resurrection. But we
maruel how the dry and rotten bones can
be fetched out of the Sea, out of the earth,
out of the ashes agayne. He that fetcheth
the sunne out of his caue euery morning:

                     •
                  e that (as it were) quickeneth the deade
Moone euery moneth:Num. 17. 8 he that caused Aaron
his rodde, that had béene many yeres
dried, in one night to bud, blossome, & beare
ripe Almonds, can also bring ye dry bones
out of the graue, sea, & ashes, & cause them
to heare ripe & perfect flesh. And why shuld
we doubt, that of the rotten body a perfect
body may spring, since we sée by dayly experience
that of rotten corne perfect corne
doth grow, and that of rotten séedes & kirnels
perfect séedes & kirnels do come, which
be clothed with stalke, huske, & leaues: and
this mortalitie shall put on immortalitie,1. Cor. 15. 53.
and this corruption incorruption. Iohn. 5.
The houre shall come,Ioh. 5. 25. when all that be
in the graue shall heare the voyce of the

Sonne of GOD, and shall come foorth.
Rom. 8.Rom. 8. 11 If the power of him that raised vp
Iesus from the dead dwelleth in you, he
that raysed vp Christe from the dead shall
also quicken your mortall bodies. For as
in Adam all doe dye,1. Cor. 15. 22. so in Christ all shall
bée made alyue.Apo. 10. 11 Apoca. 20. I sawe (sayth
S. Iohn) a greate white throne, and one
that sate on it, from whose face fled away
bothe heauen and earth. I sawe the dead
bothe great and small stande before God.
For the sea gaue vp hir dead that were in
hir, and death, and the graue gaue vp the
deade that were in them, and they were
iudged euery one according to their workes.
Whosoeuer was not written in the
booke of lyfe, were caste into the fire. As
S. Iohn Baptist sayth,Mat. 3. 12. he hath his fanne
in hys hande, and wyll make cleane hys
floore, a
                     •
                  d gather hys Wheate into his
garner, but will burne vp the chaffe with
vnquenchable fyre.Math. 13. 30. In the tyme of Haruest,
in the ende of the world, the Sunne
of man shall sende foorthe his Angels, and
they shall gather out of his kingdome, all
things that offende, and them that do iniquitie,

and shall caste them into a fornace
of fire, there shall be wéeping and gnashing
of téeth: Then shall the iuste shine
as the sunne in the kingdom of the father.Math. 13. 47.
The kingdome of Heauen is lyke vnto a
draw nette, cast into the Sea, that gathereth
of all kinde of things: which when it
is full, men drawe to lande, and sitte and
gather the good into vesselles, and cast the
bad away: so shall it be at the ende of the
worlde. The Angels shall goe foorth and
seuer the good from the badde: and shall
cast thē into the fornace of fyre, there shall
be wayling and gnashing of téethe. When
the Sonne of man commeth in his glorie,Math. 25. 31.
and all the holy Angelles with him, then
shall be gathered all Nations, and he shall
separate them one from an other, as a
shephearde separateth his shéepe from the
Goates. And hée shall sette the Shéepe
on hys ryghte hande, and the Goates on
the lefte: Then shall the Kyng saye to
them on hys righte hande, Come yée blessed
of my Father, enherite yée the kingdome
prepared for you from the foundation
of the worlde: Then shall he saye to

them on the lefte hande, Depart from me
yée cursed into euerlasting fire, whiche is
prepared for the Diuell and his Angelles.
And therfore S. Paules rule to the Corinthians
is very necessary, where he sayth:
Let euery man take héede,1. Cor. 3. 11 howe he buyl
                  
                     •
                  eth,
for other foundation can no man lay,
than that which is layde, whiche is Iesus
Christ. And if any man buylde on this foū
                  dation,
golde, siluer, precious stones, tymber,

                     •
                  ay, or stubble: euery mās work shall
be made manifest, for the day shall declare
it, bicause it shall be reuealed by the fyre:
and the fire shall trye euery mans worke
of what sort it is. If any mans work that
he hath buylt vpon, abide, he shall receiue
wages, if any mans worke burne he shal
loose. Beholde the Lorde will come with
fire, and his chariots like a whirle winde,
that he may recompence his anger withEsa. 66. 15
wrath, and his iudgement with the flame
of fire: for the Lorde will iudge with fire
and with his sworde all flesh. Thou after
the hardnesse of thy heart, whiche can not
repent,Rom. 2. 5. heapest vnto thy selfe wrath in the
day of wrath, and of the iust declaration of

the iust iudgemēt of God, who wil reward
euery one according to his works, that is,
to them which by continuance of well doing,
seeke glorie & honour, & immortalitie,
eternall life: But vnto them that are contentious,

                     •
                   disobey the truth, and obey vnrightuousnesse,
shall be indignation and
wrath, tribulation and anguishe, vpon the
soule of euery man that doth euill. For we
must all appeare before the tribunall seate
of Christ,2. Co. 5. 10 that euery man may receiue the
things that are done in his body, according
to y• he hath don, whether it be good or euil.
               Learne therfore to remember your maker
in the dayes of your youth, for eyther
trouble will come, or sicknesse will come,
or age will come, and death wil come, and
we shall rise agayne, and the Iudge will
come, which wil neyther shewe fauour or
mercy, nor receyue money, nor allow repentance.
Héere let euery soule repente
whilest there is place and time for mercy:
for there is onely time & place for iustice.
The day of iudgement shall come, in the
which pure hearts shal more auayle, than
fayre wordes, and a good conscience than

great Treasure. And thoughe some ma
                     •
                  
thinke that that day is far 
                     •
                  ence, let him
be sure, that his last day is not far hence:
And looke how this his laste daye in this
world shall take him, so shall the last day
in the next world finde him. For suche as
he dyeth in this daye, suche shall he be iudged
in that day. And therfore S. HieromeHiero.
sayth well, whether I eate or drinke, or
what soeuer I do, me thinke I heare this
sounde alwayes in my eares: Surgite mortui,
& venite ad iudicium, Arise ye dead, and
come to iudgement.
                  
                  Psa. 66. 1. God be mercifull vnto
vs, and blesse vs, and shew vs the light
of his countenance, and be mercyfull vnto
vs, that in the youth of this life we may be
thankfull to the mercyfull and gracious
God, for 
                     •
                  is infinite mercies & blessings:
And that we may learne to beléeue in him
as almightie, to feare him as iust, to loue
him as mercifull, to be zelous in his truth,
holy and constant, that we may girde our
selues with truth, put on the brestpla
                     •
                  e of
righteousnesse, the shoes of peace, take the
shielde of fayth, the sworde of the spirite,
which is the worde of God, and the helmet

of saluation, and to watche, and pray with
all perseuerance, that we may kéepe the
garments of innocency, labour the worke
of God in the day of thys lyfe, yéelde the
sweete grapes of iudgement, caste oure
breade vpon the waters of the poore, that
when Christe Iesus shall come to iudge
both quicke and dead, we maye be déemed
the good corne to be layde vp in the grayner
of blisse, the good fishe to be put into
the vessels of glory, and liue for euer
with God the father, God the
sonne, and God the
holy Ghost:
               To whom be all honour, prayse,
and glory, bothe nowe,
and eu
                     •
                  rmore.
               Amen.
               
            
         
      
   