
      
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  A SVVETE AND DEVOVTE SERMON OF HOLY saynt Ciprian of mortalitie of man. The rules of a Christian lyfe made by Picus erle of Mirandula, bothe translated into englyshe by syr Thomas Elyot knyghte.
                  LONDINI IN AEDIBVS. THO. BERTHELETI.
               
               
                  
                  
                  Preface. ¶To my ryghte worshypfull suster dame Suzan Kyngestone.
                  THe circumspecte person, whiche is accustomed one tyme in the yere, to be vexed with feuer, Catarre, or lyke sykenes, preuenteth that tyme by expulsynge the matter, whiche moughte be occasion of suche desseases, and studyeth to reduce the bodye into suche temperaunce, and so to preserue hit, as the sayde matter shall not be augmented, wherby moughte ensue any detriment: Lyke industry, or rather moche more, ought to be vsed, good Suster, of euery raysonable creature, as well agaynste the mooste certayne sikenes

and fynall dyssolution of nature called corporall death, as also agaynst all worldly vexations and troubles, called the toyes of fortune, or the crankes of the worlde: consyderyng that of any of them neyther the tyme can be knowen, whan they shal happen, nor assured remedy may be founden for to repelle theym, onely a pure and constante faythe, hauynge therto ioyned wysedome and pacience, may sustayne theyr assaultes, and stronglye resyste them. As it is excellently declared and taughte by the holy doctour and martyr sayncte Cyprian
                        •
                      in a sermon which he made to the people of Affrica, where he was Bushop, in the tyme whan 
                        •
                     here was continuall persecution of paynyms, and also mortalitie

by generall pestilence. whiche sermone whan I had ones ꝑ vsed in redynge, I liked so well, that I desyred that all other persones mought vnderstonde it. Remembrynge that many there be (whiche I doubte not) are as neglygente as I in consyderyng those sondry calamities, not withstandynge that they haue beholden men and women of euery astate, whiche haue dyed eyther before that they looked for death, or in some other wyse than they vouched saulfe, or els forsaken of fortune haue lyued in pouertye. Wherfore as welle for theyr instructyon as myne, howe we may be alway prepared agaynst those naturall and worldly afflictions, I haue traunslated this lyttell boke: not supersticiouselye folowynge

the letter, whiche is verely elegante, and therfore the harder to trāslate into our langage, but kepynge the sentence and intent of the Autour I haue attemted (not with lyttell study) to reduce into english the right phrase or forme of speakyng, vsed in this treatise, whiche I haue dedycate and sente vnto you for a token: that ye shall perceyue, that I doo not forgeat you: and that I doo vnfaynedly loue you, not onelye for our allyaunce, but also moche more for your perseuerance in vertu & warkes of true faith, praieng you to communicate it with our two susters religiouse Dorothe & Alianour, and to ioyne in your praiers to god for me, that I may be constante in his seruice, and performe well such other warkes

as ben in my handes onely to his honour and glory.
                  ¶I haue added hereto a litel tretise, but wonderful frutful, made by the vertuouse & noble prince Iohn̄ Picus Erle of Mirandula, who in abundāce of lerning & grace incomparablye excelled all other in his tyme and sens. whose picture I wolde to god were in all noble mens Chambers, and his grace and vertues in theyr soules and maners. Hartyly fare ye wel. At london the fyrst day of Iuly, the yere of our lorde god 1534.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  
                  The sermon of holy sayncte Ciprian, of mortalytie of man.
                  
                     RIGHTE wel beloued frendes, all be it that manye of you, haue your myndes intier & perfecte, the fayth stable, and the soule deuoute: not beinge meued with the hugenesse of this present mortalytie, but like to a puissant & stedfaste rocke rather do breake the troublous assaultes of this worlde, and the violente floodes of this present tyme, the soule her selfe not beinge broken ne ouercome with any temptations, but onely proued. Nethelesse for as moche as I doo consyder to be in the multitude dyuers whiche eyther by waykenes of courage, or

by smalnes of faythe, or by swetenesse of the lyfe of this worlde, or by the delicatenes of theyr kinde, or (that whiche is a more heuye thynge) beynge deceyued in the opinion of truthe, doo not stande faste ne set forth the diuine and inuincible might of their stomakes. I moughte no lengre dissemble that mater, ne retaine it in silence, but that as ferre forth as the meanesse of my lernynge or wytte moughte extende I wold declare the doctryne of Christe by a sermone conceyued & lyfely expressed, to the intent that the slouthe and dulnesse of delycate myndes moughe be reformed. And also that he, whiche hathe all redye professed to be the sernaunte of Christe, may hereafter be demed worthy of Christe, & therto accepted.

Uerely good frendes, he that fyghteth for god, & being in the celestial cāpe doth hope on thing is that be godlye, oughte to knowe well hym selfe, to the intente that in the tempestes and stormes of this world, there be in vs no dred or fearefulnesse, sense almyghtye god hath afore warned, that such thynges shulde happen. Instructynge and teachynge vs by his owne mouthe with a prouidente exhortation, and therwith preparynge and comfortynge the people of his churche to the paciente sufferaunce of thynges to come, wherin he prophecied and declared vnto vs, that bataile, famine, erthquakes, and pestilence shuld aryse in sondrye contrayes and places. And to the intente that no sodayne dreade, or feare of

straunge thynges anoyenge vs, shoulde in any wyse oppresse or a bashe vs, he tolde vs before, that towarde the ende of the worlde, aduersities and troubles shulde more and more be increased. Now beholde, all that whiche he spake of hath happened, and is come amonge vs. And sith that is now happened, whiche was before spoken of, there shall also nowe ensue all that whiche was promysed, our lorde hym selfe promysyng and sayeng:
                        Luc. 21.
                      What time ye shall see all these thinges come to passe, than be you sure that the kyngedome of heuen is at hande. The kyngedome of heuen good frendes beginneth now to approche. The rewarde of life, and the comforte of helthe euerlastynge, parpetuall gladnesse,

and the possession of Paradyse, whiche before we hadde lost, now the worlde passynge awaye, become & at hande: euen nowe after thynges erthlye doo succede that whiche is heuenlye, after smalle thynges, greate thynges and precious: after thynges transytory, thynges eternall or euerlastynge. What tyme is it nowe to be sad? Or who amonge these troubles wyl be timorus or sorowfull: but onely he in whome lacketh booth fayth and hope? for he onely feareth death, whiche wyl not go vnto Christe, and he whiche wyl not go vnto Christe, is he whiche doeth not beleue, that he nowe begynneth to raygne with Christe. It is writen, The iust man liueth by fayth:
                        Ro. 1.
                      If thou be a iuste man, thou lyuest by fayth. If thou beleuest

trewely in god, commyng to Christe, and beinge sure of his promyse, why doeste not thou runne and imbrace Christe nowe thou arte called? Why doest not thou thanke god and reioyce, that thou arte out of the diuilles daunger.
                  ¶The iuste man Symeon, who verelye was a good and a iuste man, and kepte the commaundementes of god fulle of faythe, whan aunswere was made vnto hym from almyghty god, that he shulde not dye vntyl he had seene Christe: whan Christe beinge ababe came with his mother into the Temple, he in spirite knewe, that Christe was nowe borne, of whose commynge he was before warned. And whan he behelde hym, he knewe that he hym selfe

shulde shortly after departe from this worlde: wherfore being ioyfull of death that approchid, and beinge sure of his soone sendinge for, he toke the blessed babe in his armes, and with prayses & thankes vnto god, he sayde with a lowde voyce.
                        Luc. 2.
                      Nowe good lorde thou wylte lycence thy seruance to departe from this mortall lyfe in peace accordynge to the worde that thou sendest me. For nowe myne eyen haue beholde thy prouision of remedye that thou haste prepared in the syghte of all people. As who sayth prouynge and witnessynge also, that then peace was comne to the seruantes of god: and that then was a pesible quietnesse. Whan we being drawen oute of the stormes of this worlde desyre to come to the hauen

of parpetuall suretye, and also whan deathe beinge from vs excluded, we atteine to immortalite or life euerlastyng. That is our peace, that is our sure tranquillite, that is our stedfast, our fyrme, & perpetual suretie. Furthermore what els do we in this world: but fight against the deuyll daylye in batayle, and agaynst his waypon and ordinaunce make resistence with contynuall conflictes?Enmies of man
                           •
                        
                      we stryue dayly with auarice, with lechery, with wrathe, with Ambicion, we haue a busy & payneful wrastlynge, with carnall vices and worldlye delectacions. The mynde of man is besyged and all aboute compassed and assaulted with synne, and hardly is matched on al partes, and may vneth resiste and defende hym frome

all. For if he ouerthrowe Auarice, than sterteth vppe lecherye: If lechery be oppressed, ambicion cometh in her place: & althoughe ambition be neglected, yet wrath wyll exasperate, pride inflatith, drunkennesse allureth, enuy breketh concorde, and by the same is frendshyp dissolued. Thou arte constrayned to curse, whiche the lawe of god doothe prohibite: Thou arte compelled to sweare, whiche is vnlefull. These persecutions thy mynde daylye doeth suffer, with these many perils thy stomake is vexed: And yet doeste thou delyte to tarye longe here amonge the swordes of people malycious, whan rather thou shuldest couayte and desire (dethe settynge the forwarde) to haste the towarde Christe,
                        Ioan. 16.
                      he sayenge

to vs in his doctryne:
                        Ioan. 16.
                      I telle you verely, ye shall boothe wepe and wayle, but the worlde shal reioice and be mery: ye sha
                        •
                      be heuy and sorowefulle, but your heuynesse shalbe torned into myrthe. Nowe who wyll not make haste to come where he shall be mery? who will not wyshe to lacke alwaye heuynesse? But at what tyme our sorowe shall be torned to mirth, our lorde hym selfe declareth, sayeng: I shal se you againe,
                        I
                              •••
                           . 16.
                      & your hartes shal reioyce, and that gladnes shall no man take from you. Wherfore sith to see Christ is perfecte reioysyng: and our gladnes maye not be without beholdinge of him, what blyndenes of minde yea what madnesse were hit to loue the vexacions, paynes, and continual sorowes of this present

worlde: And not rather to make all spedy deligence to come to the ioyes, whiche maye neuer be taken from the? This doth happen dere frendes by cause that faythe lacketh: for no man doeth beleue that suche thynges shall come, whiche almyghty god, who euer is trewe, hath all redy promised, whose worde is eternall, and to theym that beleue, alwaye sure and constant.
                  ¶If an honorable man and of greate grauitie dyd promise the any thynge, thou woldest truste him, and woldest not thynke to be deceyued of hym, whome thou knewest to be as well in worde as in dede substanciall and stedfaste. But nowe all mighty god talkith with the in his scripture, and thou as false and disloyall

doste flitter in a mynde mistrustefull and wauerynge. God hath promised to the whan thou shalt departe from this world, immortalitie and lyfe euerlastynge. And yet not withstandynge thou doubtest: that is as moche to say, as thou knoweste not god. And also thou wyllynglye offendest Christe the mayster of all theym that beleue, with the synne of incredulitie or lacke of beleue, and that thou beinge constitute and admitted in to the church of god haste not faythe in the house of fayth. How moche the departing from this worlde shall be to thy profite Christe him selfe master of our profyte and helthe dothe declare, where he sayth to his disciples, whiche sorowed by cause he tolde them that he wolde depart.

If ye loued me, ye wolde reioyce,
                        Io. 14
                      for as moche as I goo to my father. Therby teachinge and declaringe vnto vs, that whan they whome we doo mooste fauour or loue, doo departe oute of this worlde, we shulde rather be glad than sorye. Whiche thynge the blessed appostole remembrynge sayth in his Epistole:
                        Phil. 1
                      My liuing is Christe, & death is to me gayne and auauntage. Accomptinge the gretteste gayne not to be tangled in the snares of this worlde, not to be subiecte to synne or carnall vices: And beinge deliuered from troublous vexacions, and from the venemouse teeth of the diuell, to departe (Christe calling vs) to the ioye of helthe euerlastynge.
                  But there be some men, which be

greued for as moch as this trouble vexeth vs, equallye as moche as the infydels. As it were that a christen man beleueth, to that intente onely, that he wolde be free from the touche of al grefe and disease, and inioy this worlde prosperousely. Some be offended for as moche as mortalite is to vs with other in commune. What thynge, I pray you, haue not we with other in commune, as longe as this commune carnalytie remayneth accordynge to the ordinaunce of our fyrste natiuitie? As longe as we be here in this world, we be ioyned together with al man kynde in equalyty of fleshely substāce: but in spirite we be separate. Therfore vntyl this corruptible matter be with incorrupcion induyd, and this mortall

substance do receyue immortalite, and this spirite do bringe vs vnto god our father, what so euer incommodities do belong to this carnall bodye, they be to vs with mankynde in commune. For like as whan with colde blastes (whiche do the cause barennesse) the erthe is (as it were) fastinge and withoute foode, hungre doethe excepte no man. And whan a citie is wonne with enemyes, by captiuitie all thynge is wasted. And whan fayre wether restraynethe showers, hit is but one drowth vnto all men. And whan a shyppe is all to rent on a rocke, the wrecke is cōmune to al them, whiche be in it: Also the payne of the eyen, violence of feuers, and disseasis of all other membres be to vs with all other in commune,

as longe as this commune bodye is borne aboute in the worlde. More ouer a christen man beleuinge by any lawe or condicion, lette hym knowe and remembre that he must trauaile more in this worlde than anye other, for as moche as it partayneth to hym to wrastle with the diuyl, with greatter resystence. And that to do he is warned and taughte by holye scripture, sayenge:
                        Eccl. 2,
                      My sonne whiche gost to the seruice of god, stonde faste in iustice and dreade, and prepare thy soule to receyue temptatiō. And in an other place. Suffre both in grefe and in feare, and haue pacience in thine humilyte, for as well golde as siluer be tryed with fyre. In this wyse Iob,
                        Iob. 1.
                      after the losse of his goodes, and deathe of his chyldren,

beinge tormented with paynefull sores and bytynge of wormes, was not vanquished, but onelye proued: who in his paynes and afflictions, declarynge the pacience of his deuout minde, said as foloweth:
                        Iob. 1.
                      Naked I came from the wombe of my mother, and naked I shal retorne to the erthe, our lorde gaue it to me, and our lorde hath taken it from me, as to oure lorde it best semith, so is hit happened: blessed be the name of our lorde. And whan his wyfe wolde haue perswaded hym, that as if he were by the violence of payne out of pacience, he shoulde with a grudginge and disdaynouse voyce speake some thynge agaynste almyghty god, he aunswered vnto her and sayd: Thou spekiste like one of the lewde or

foolishe women.
                        Iob. 2.
                      If we haue receyued goodes of the handes of oure lorde, why shall not we than suffre euilles paciently? In all those thynges whiche happed to Iob, he neuer offended with his lippes in ye sight of our lord. And therfore our lorde doeth witnesse thus of hym saying to Sathan: Haste thou taken good heede of my seruaunt Iob? there is none in the worlde lyke to hym: A manne without grutchynge, the verye trewe worssyppar of god almyghty.
                  ¶Also Toby after his honourable warkes, and the manyfolde and famous commendacions of his deedes of mercy, he was striken with blyndnesse, and notwithstandynge he dreadyng and blessynge almyghty god in all aduersities,

finally by that bodilye detriment he increaced to parpetuall praise: nat withstandinge that his wife, willinge to abuse hym, tempted hym, in this wyse saynge: where ben thy warkes of marcie become?
                        Tob 2.
                      Lo nowe what thou suffrest. But Thobias beinge constante and stedfast, and also armed with trewe faith, wherby he suffred vexations and grefes, yelded not to the temptation of his frayle wife, but moche rather with greatter pacience deserued the fauour of god. And therfore he was afterwarde of Raphael the aungel commended, who sayde to hym these wordes. To publysshe and confesse the warkes of almyghtye god hit is honorable. For whan thou and Sara thy sonnes wyfe prayed,

I offered the remembraunce of your prayer in the presence of the clerenesse of almightye god, sens thou haste buryed them, whiche died openly, and hast not forborn to ryse and leaue thy dynar, and gone thy waye and buryed the deed: I am sente to proue the. And in an other place the same angell sayth: God hath sente me to heale the and Sara thy sones wife, I am Raphaell one of the seuen angelles, whiche be present and conuersaunte before the cleernesse of god almightye.
                  ¶This maner of sufferaunce is alwaye in good men. This lesson the holye apostoles kepte according to goddes commaundment, not to murmoure in aduersitie, but what so euer hapnith in this worlde, to take it paciently, consyderynge

that the Iewes offended by murmourynge often tymes agaynste god, as our lorde hym selfe wytnesseth in the booke named Numeri, sayenge:
                        Nu. 20
                              •
                           
                        
                      Lette them leaue theyr murmourynge, and they shall not dye. Trewely deere bretherne we oughte not to murmour or grudge in aduersities, but to suffre strongly and paciently all that shall happen vnto vs, sens it is writen:
                        Psal. 50
                              •
                           
                        
                      The spirite that is troubled is a sacrifice to god. For the harte which is contrite & made humble, god neuer despisith. Also the holy goste by Moyses in the booke of Deutromy warnith the sayinge:
                        Deut. 8.
                      Thy lorde god shall vexe the, and sende to the scar
                        •
                     cite: And than it shall be knowen in thy harte, if thou shalte kepe well his commandmentes

or no. And agayne, your lorde god tempteth you, that he may knowe if ye do loue your lord god with al your hart & with all your soule. For so was god pleased with Abraham,
                        Gen. 22.
                      who to plese god neyther fered to lose his sonne, nor yet refused to sle him. But thou what so euer thou arte, that maiste not suffre the losse of thy son taken from the, eyther by the lawe, or by chaunce of mortalitie: what woldeste thou do, if thou were cōmanded to sle him? The feare of god & faithe shulde make the redye to sustayne all thynge. Admitte that thou haste losse of thy goodes, or that thou be cruelly vexed with syknesse of thy membres contynuallye: or that thou be despoiled by the deth of thy wyfe, thy children, or thy

mooste deere frendes and companions. Let not these be to the any displeasures, but rather batayle agaynste worldlye affections, ne let theym not breake or make wayker the fayth of Christ, but rather lette theym declare in that debate thy vertue or puisance: sens al violence of yuelles, which be presente are to be had in contempte vppon truste of good thynges, whiche shall happen hereafter. For excepte warre go before, there maye be no victory. But whan after batayle ioyned there ensuethe victorye, than to the vaynquishours is gyuen the garlande. Semblablye in a tempest a good master is knowen, & the soudiour in bataile is proued. Bosting out of perill is pleasant, but resystence in aduersitie is the

tryall of truthe. The tree whiche with a deepe roote standeth faste in the groūde, is not meued with euerye puffe of wynde that bloweth. Also the shyppe whiche is well couched to gether with a stronge frame, thoughe she be often hitte with the wawes, yet is she not bouged. And whan the corne is thresshed in the barne, the sounde and stronge grayne continueth the wyndes, while the chaffe is blowen about with euery light blaste. So the Apostole Paule after his wrecke on the se, after his whippynges, after sondry and greuouse tormentes sustayned in his body, he dothe not saye, that he was vexed or troubled, but that by those aduersities he was amended: as he wold say, that the more greuously that

he was troubled, the more surely was he than proued.
                        2. Cor. 12.
                      There is gyuen to me (sayth he) a pricke in my fleshe, a messenger of the diuell, whiche continually stryketh me to the intente that I shall not be extolled in mynde. Wherfore thrise I desyred god, that I moughte be therof delyuered. And he aunswered me: Content the with my grace. For in infirmitie vertue is tried.
                  Therfore whan we be vexed eyther with infirmitie, feblenesse, or any aduersite, than is our vertue proued: than our faithe, if it abide and be constant, is crowned, accordyng as it is writen:
                        Eccl. 27.
                      The fornaise trieth the pottars vessel, and temptacion of trouble trieth men that be good. Betwene vs christen men and other, 
                        •
                     he onely

diuersitie is, that they in aduersitie doo grutche and complayne, And vs Christen people aduersitie may not calle a way from the truthe of vertue and faythe: but doth corroborat or strength vs in the grefe, that we suffre. That the bealy resolued with fluxes expulsethe by the bowels bodylye strength: or that the superfluos heat ingendred in the marowe of our bones, inflameth out by blysters in our chekes: that our bowelles be shaken with continuall vomyttes: that with abundaunce of bloudde our eyen do burne in oure heedes: that some mennes fete and other membres putrified be cutte of or rotted: that by losse of membres or other harme taken by siknes either our goinge is febled, or our heringe is stoppid, or

our syghte is peryshed: all this profiteth to the doctrine of fayth. And to resyste with the powars of an immouable mynde agaynst so many assaultes of dystruction and dethe. what valyantenesse of currage is hit, ye and what honour to stande bolte vpprighte amonge the ruynes of man kinde, and not to lie prostrat with them, whiche hope not in god? We therfore muste rather reioyce, & take in good worth the rewarde of the tyme: that whyle we do constantly declare our fayth, & by sustaynynge of labour doo approche vnto Christe: by Christes strait
                        •
                      passage, we may receyue by his iudgemente the rewarde of lyfe, whiche fayth doth require. Lette him hardyly feare, that not being regenerate by water and the holy

gost, is committed to the terrible fiers of hel: Let him feare that is rekened no partener of the crosse & passion of Christ: Let him also fere which from this carnal deth, shal passe to the second deth: & let him feare, whome ones departed out of this world, euerlasting fyre shal torment with paines continual: Finally let him be a ferd, vnto whom by longe tarieng here this one thing auaileth, that his tormē
                     tes & wailinges be in the meane tyme put of or differred. Manye of our numbre do die in this mortalytie, that is as who sayth, many of our numbre be oute of this worlde deliuered. Forsothe this mortalitie lyke wise as to the Iewes and paynims hit is a pestilence: soo to the seruantes of god hit is a holsome departynge.

What if good men withoute any dyuersitie doo dye with the yuell men: there is no cause, that ye shoulde therfore thynke that deth is commune to good men with them that be yll. For good men be called to ioye: the yuell men be drawen into paine, so suertie to them that beleue well, and payne to miscreauntis the soner doothe happen. Uerily good brethern we be vncurtaise and negligent hauynge regarde to goddes benefites: ne we doo recognise what is offered vnto vs. Beholde howe virgins be departid saulfe and in peace, with theyr glorye and praise, not fearinge the thretninges, corruptions, nor bordel houses of Antichrist, who is now commynge. Children are eskape
                        •
                      the peryll of theyr slypper aege,

and haue attayned happily to the rewarde of innocencie and pure continence. The delicate matrone nowe fearith no tormentes, sence with spedy deth she hath preuented the feare of persecucion, and the handes and tormentes of cruell tyrantes. More ouer by feare of mortalitie and troubles of this tyme, they whiche were late colde in faythe, be nowe chaufed and warme: they whiche were remysse or louse, be knytte together and made substancial: they that were cowardes, be quickned in corage. The forsakers of theyr faythe be compelled to retourne: The paynems constrayned to beleue: The olde faithfull people be called to quiete: And a freshe and greatte 
                        •
                     oste of theym, whiche becamme souldiours of Christ in the tyme

of mortalitie, is assembled with a more puisance to fyght withoute drede, whē the battaile is ioyned. what a thyng is this good frendes, how conueniente and necessary is this pestilence and moraine, which semyng to be monstruouse and horrible, trieth out the goodnesse of dyuers men, and examineth the myndes of all men? that is to say whether the hole men do ayde them that be sycke: If kynsmen be kinde one to an other: If the maisters do pitie their fraile & weake seruantes: If phisicions do not abandon theyr pacientes: If they which be cruell wyl withdrawe theyr violence. If the oppressours and robbers (at the lest for feare of deathe) wyll asswage the insaciable appetite of furiouse auaryce: If prowde menne

wyll stoupe, or vnthryftes auale theyr lewed courage? If they that be ryche and shall dye withoute heires of theyr bodyes, wyll any thynge distrybute amonge theyr nedy neyghboures. And surely althoughe this mortalytye were to nothynge els profitable, yet in this it hath benne aduantage to christen men, and them whiche be goddes seruauntes, that in lernynge not to feare deathe, we the more wyllyngely desyre martyrdome. This to vs is no death, but an exercise, whiche bryngeth to the mynde renoume of valyante courage, and by dispisynge of deathe prepareth to receiue the garlande of vyctory. But parchaunce some man wyl reply and saye: yet not withstandynge this griueth me in this present mortalitie,

that where I had prepared my selfe to confesse my faythe, and hadde disposed me with all my hole harte and full power to the sufferaunce of passion, nowe preuented by deathe I am dissapoynted of martyrdome.
                  ¶Fyrst to be a martyr it is not in thyne owne power, but in goddes wyll and election. Ne thou mayest not saye, that thou haste loste that thynge, whiche thou knowest not, whether thou were euer worthy to haue it. More ouer, god the sercher of hartes, and beholder and iuge of secrte thoughtes, doeth see the, and doeth commende and allowe the. And he whiche perceyueth to be in the, vertue prepared, for thy
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      shal yelde vnto the a 
                        〈◊〉
                      
                     
                        •
                     ewarde. Supposest thou, hadde

Cayne slayne his brother Abell, at what tyme he off
                        •
                     id the sacryfice vnto almighty god? wel and yet god beynge ware of his purpose condemned the murder conceyued in the mynde, whiche Cayne dyd afterwarde execute: So like as in Cayne a malicious thoughte and a mischeuous imagination was afore seene by goddes prouidence, lyke wyse in the seruantes of god, whiche confessynge fayth in theyr thoughtes, and in theyr intentes conceyuyng martyrdome, theyr soules beinge gyuen to that good purpose, be crowned of god theyr iudge, whiche knoweth all thynge. It is not one thynge to lacke a wyll to be martired, and to lacke martyrdome to a good wyll. Suche as god fyndeth the to be whan he

calleth the, so doethe he iuge the, accordynge as he hym selfe witnesseth sayenge:
                        Apoc. 2.
                      And all congregations shall knowe that I am the serchour of mans harte and his reynes. Nor god loketh for your bloude, but for your fayth. For neyther Abraham nor Isaac nor Iacob were slayne. And yet not withstandynge they deserued to be honoured for theyr faythe and Iustice: and to be the chefe of all patriarches: vnto whose feaste is called euery man that is founde faythfull, iuste, and commendable. we muste remembre to doo not as we our selfe wyll, but accordynge to goddis
                        •
                      wyll. And so god commaundeth vs euery daye to praye. Howe ouerthwarte and peruerse a thing is it that where we desyre that the wyl

of god be doone whan he calleth and sendethe for vs oute of this world, we do not furth with obey his commaundement & pleasure, but agaynste that we murmoure and stryue, and be broughte lyke frowarde seruantes with heuye and sower countenaunce to our maysters presence: departynge hense with the bonde of necessitie, not with a wyllynge obedyence: and yet wyll we be honoured with heuēly rewardes of him, vnto whom we come not wyllingly, but by constraynte onely. wherfore than do we aske and desyre, that the kyngedome of heuen may come vnto vs, if worldly captiuitie so moche doth delyte vs? Wherfore do we aske and desyre in our prayers so often rehersed, that the tyme of the reygne,

whiche is promised shulde come spedyly, if our desyres and wishes to serue the dyuell are more to be sette by then to raygne with oure Sauiour?
                  ¶More ouer for the playner declaration of goddes prouidence, and that our lorde, whiche afore seeth all thynges to come, will gyue to vs counsayle concernyng our very helth, it happened late, that one of our companye and a preeste, beyng atteynted with siknesse, and lokynge for death, whiche approched, desyred leaue to departe: as he was prayenge and in poynte of deathe, there stoode hard by him a goodly yonge
                        •
                      man of an honorable porte and maiestie, hyghe of stature and fayre, whome the syght of man mought vneth beholde with carnall eyen

sauynge that he whiche was departynge out of the worlde with eyen more spiritual mought loke on suche one, and the same person so apperyng, not without indignation, as well in countenaunce as speche, grudchinglye spake in this wyse: ye feare to suffer, and ye wyll not go forthe, what shall I doo to you? whiche was the speakyng of one that blamed and also exhorted: who allowed not them, whiche for the tyme present were carefull of persecution, and yet sure of theyr departynge, but gaue counsayle for the tyme comming. Our said brother herde, whē he was dyenge, what he shoulde tel vnto other. For he herde whan he shoulde dye, that whiche he shulde reporte vnto other, and he herde not for him selfe but for vs.

For what shulde he lerne, whiche was than in departyng: In dede he lerned for vs, whiche remayned, to the intent that in herynge the preeste of god blamed, whiche asked his ryghtes, we shulde knowe what was to al menne expedyente.
                  More ouer to vs of al other most symple, howe often hath it benne shewed by reuelation? howe sondry tymes haue I ben playnelye commaunded of the goodnes of god, that I shulde alway affirme and openly preache, that our bretherne delyuered from this world by the callinge of god, shoulde not be bewayled and sorowed for, sens I knewe well that they were not loste but sent onely befor
                        •
                      vs, and so departynge preceded: And therfore as men being in iournay

or vyage to be desired, but in no wyse lamented. Ne we shoulde putte on vs blacke gownes for theym, whiche nowe haue receyued and put on whyte garmentes: Ne we oughe to gyue occasion to infidels to reproue vs lefully & with good reason, for as moche as we do mourne for theym, as they were dede and looste for euer, whiche we saye do lyue euer with god, and so with the witnes of our awne hartes and stomakes reproue the fayth, which in word and sentence we haue confessed. Surelye we be the deceyuours of our owne faythe and hope, 
                        •
                     if that, that we say apere to be false and dyssembled. It profiteth no thinge to shewe in wordes vertu, and in dedes to distroye verytie. The apostolle Paule rebuketh,
                        Thes. 4.
                     
                     
chydeth, and blameth suche as be heuy or sorowfull for the deathe of theyr frendes: We wyll not (sayth he) good bretherne, that ye shoulde be ignorante in that whiche concerneth them that do slepe in naturall deathe, to the intente ye shulde not be sorowful, like as they be, which are without hope. If we beleue that Iesu Christe dyed and roose agayne afterwarde: In like wise god almighty shall finally brynge with hym those that slepte in Christe. Also he saythe, that they whiche doo lacke hope, be heuy whan theyr frendes do departe. But we, wh
                        •
                     
                     che lyue in hope, and beleue in god, & do verely trust that Chri
                        ••
                      suffred for vs, and dyd eftsones ryse. We I say, whiche dwell
                        •
                      in Christe, and do arise by hym

and in hym, why refuse we to departe hense? or waylē and lament for theym that be goone? Christe hym selfe our god warneth vs, sayenge:
                        Ioan. 11.
                      I am the resurrection and lyfe, he that beleueth in me, although that he dyethe, he shall lyue: and all that lyueth, and beleueth in me, shal neuer die. If we beleue Christe, lette vs haue faith in his wordes and promises, and we shall neuer dye. Let vs come therfore with asure gladnesse vnto Christe, with whome we shall liue and raygne euer. For by that, that we dye, we passe from death to immortalytye: in as moche as lyfe euerlastyng may not succede, without departynge from hense. All be it, it is no clere departyng, but rather a passage, & chaunge of this lyfe for the lyfe eternal, the

temporall iournay perfourmed. who wyll not hye hym from the warse to the better? Who wyll not couayte to be reformed and chaunged to the figure of Christ? or wyll not desyre to come shortly to the dygnitie of celestiall grace? Paule the apostell preachynge:
                        Phil. 
                              •
                           .
                      our abydynge (sayth he) is in heuen, frō whens we abyde the commynge of Christe Iesu, who shall transforme our symple bodye in semblable figure to the bodye of his clerenes. And Christ our lord promised, that we shall be suche whan he praied to his father, that we mought be with him, and lyue with hym in eternall places, and be ioyfull and mery in the kyngedome of heuen, sayenge:
                        Ioan. 17.
                      Father I wyll that suche as thou hast giuen to me, that they be with me

where so euer I be, and that they se the clerenesse that thou gaueste to me before that the worlde was create. wherfore he that intendeth to come to the place, where Christe is, to the bryghtnes of the Realmes celestyalle, oughte not wayle or lament, but accordynge to the hope, whiche he hath in the promyse of god, and truste that he hath in trouthe, be ioyfull and gladde in his departyng or translation from hence: For as moche as we rede, that Enoch was translated or taken oute of this worlde, by cause he pleased god, as holy scripture witnesseth in the booke of Genesis, in this wyse:
                        Gen. 
                              •
                           
                        
                      Enoch pleased god, and was not afterwarde founden, for god translated him from hense. That thyng wherwith he pleased in the

syghte of god, was that he deserued to be taken from the perylles of this presente worlde. Moreouer the holye gooste teacheth by Salomon,
                        Sap. 4
                              •
                           
                        
                      that they, with whom god is pleasid, be the soner taken a way & deliuered from hense, lest if they shulde abyde lenger, they shoulde be polluted with worldly infections. Therfore Enoch was rapte and taken a way sodaynly, leste sensualle appetite shoulde corrupte his vnderstandynge. For his soule was vnto god pleasynge, and therfore he hastened to brynge hym out of the myddes of iniquitie.
                        Psal. 85
                              •
                           
                        
                      Semblably in the psalmes the deuout soule hasteth spedelye towarde her god, with a syngular fayth, as it is wryten: O thou god of vertues and puissance, how wonderfull delectable

be thine habitations, my soule desyrith and hastith to come to thy palayces? Uerely he onely shuld haue wil to abyde in this worlde, whom the worlde deliteth, whom flateringe and deceptfull tyme inuiteth with vayne delectations of worldly pleasures. Nowe sens the worlde hatith a true christen man, why doeste thou loue that thinge, wherof thou art hated: & folowest not rather Christ, who hath redemed the and also loueth the.
                  
                     
                        1. Io. 2.
                     ¶ Sayncte Iohn̄ in his Epistole speaketh and cryeth vnto vs, exhorting vs not to loue this world in folowing our appetites: Loue not the worlde (saythe he) ne the thynges whiche be in it. For who so euer loueth the worlde, the charitie of the father of heuen is not

in him: sens all that is in the worlde is inordinate appetite of the fleshe, inordinate appetite of the eyen, and desyre of worldlye honour, whiche do not procede of our father, but of worldly appetite. And yet the worlde and his vayne appetite shall vanishe away, but he whiche shall fulfyll the pleasure of god, shall abyde euerlastynge, lyke as god is euer eternall. Therfore good frendes let vs allway be bounde and redy to parforme all thynge that god willeth with a parfecte mynde, a faithe stable and constante, with vertue puissante and stronge, all feare of deathe vtterlye excluded, and onelye thynkinge on the immortalitie, whiche immediatelye folowethe. Let vs declare, that to be the thinge that we do beleue

in: and not lament the departing of theym, whome we do fauour. And whan the daye of our sending for shal approche, let vs willynglye and withoute anye stickynge, come vnto god whan he calleth, whiche sens it oughte to be done of theym, whiche be the seruantes of god, moche rather nowe the worlde decayenge, and in poynte to falle, and also compassed with tempestes of euilles contynually assaultinge it. Also we parceyue that great myshiefe is all redye begonne, and we knowe that moche gretter is commynge: Let vs reken the grettest aduantage to departe shortelye from hense, which shal be for our speciall commoditie. If the walles in thy house shulde shake for age, and the roufe shuld trymble,

and all the hole house werye of rockynge of the beames and rafters, sholde thrette to fall shortlye in ruine, woldest thou not depart thense in all the haste possible? If whan thou art on the see, the wawes beinge dryuen vppe with a sturdye wynde, a troublous and stormy tempeste wolde warne the that thy shyp were in daunger of losinge: woldeste thou not make haste to come to some hauen? Lo beholde the worlde rockith, and is now in fallynge: and declarith his imminent ruyne not for age or feblenes of thinges, but onely for that his ende nowe approcheth: and yet thou thankest 
                        〈◊〉
                      god, nor doeste not reioyce in thy selfe, that beynge taken away with a more redye, and (as I mought say) a more riper departynge,

thou mayste escape the ruynes, wreckes, and plages, whiche nowe thou seeste commynge. we must consyder good frendes, and often tymes thynke, that we haue renouncid this worlde, and that we dwell here but as pylgrimys and gestes. Therfore lette vs imbrace ioyfully the day whiche doeth appoynte euery man to his habitation, and delyuerynge vs hence, escaped from the snares of this worlde, restoreth vs vnto Paradise, and the kyngedome of heuen. who beynge I praye you, in a farre iornaye, wyll not make haaste to retorne home to his countraye? who beynge on the see sayling homeward, wolde not desyre to haue a prosperouse wynde, that he maye the sooner salute and imbrace his good frendes?

Lette vs accompte Paradise to be our very countray. For there haue we the blessed Patriarches oure verye Auncetours. Why make we not haste, ye why doo not we runne a pase to see our countray, that we may salute oure good Auncetours? There doothe abyde and looke for vs a greate numbre of our deere frendes, our Auncetours, our fathers and mothers, our bretherne and children. A plentuouse and great multitude, whiche nowe be sure of theyr immortalytie, and yet do care for our suretie, do desyre to haue vs in theyr company. To come to beholde & imbrace them, lorde god what a ioye and comforte shall it be bothe to them and to vs? what an uncomparable dilectation of the he
                        •••
                     lye Regious,

without feare to dye, & with assured eternitie to lyue euer: O with howe perfecte and eternall felycytie? There is the moste gloryouse quiere of the blessed apostoles: There is the college of the gladde prophettes: There is people innumerable of holy martyrs adourned with crownes of victory for their vexatiōs & sondry passiōs: there be the tēder & pure virgyns triumphynge, whiche with contynence of soule and body dyd subdue the puisaunce of carnall appetites: There be they whiche beinge mercifulle in giuynge sustynaunce to the nedy personnes, dyd therby fulfyll the warkes of Iustice: There also be they, whiche obseruynge dilygentelye the commaundementes of god, dyd transpose worldly possessiōs vnto

the heuenly treasure. To those let vs hye vs a peace good frendes that we may shortly be with them, lette vs desyre feruently to come vnto Chryste. That thought let god almyghty see in vs: That intent of our mynde and fayth, lette our lorde Christe perceyue and beholde, sens vnto the them whiche towarde hym haue moste affection, his goodnes wyll gyue his rewardes mooste abundante and pleantuouse.
                  Amen.
               
               
                  ¶The rules of a Christian lyfe made by Iohn̄ Picus the elder Erle of Mirandula.
                  FIrst if to man or woman the way of vertue dothe seme harde or paynefull, bycause

we muste nedes fyghte agaynste the fleshe, the diuell, & the worlde, lette hym or her calle to remembraunce, that what so euer lyfe they wyll chose accordynge to the worlde, many aduersities incommodities, moche heuynes and labour are to be suffred.
                  ¶More ouer lette them haue in remembraunce, that in welth and worldly possessions is moche and longe contention, laboriouse also, and ther with vnfrutefulle, wherin trauayle is the conclusyon or ende of labour, and fynally payne euerlastynge, if those thynges be not well ordered and charitably disposed.
                  ¶Remembre also, that it is very folishnes to thinke to come vnto heuē by any other meane than by the sayde batayle, considering

that our hed and mayster Christe did not ascende vnto heuen but by his passion:
                        Luc. 24.
                      And the seruaunt oughte not to be in better astate or condicion than his mayster or souerayne.
                        Ioan. 13.
                     
                  
                  Furthermore consyder, that this bataile ought not to be grudged at, but to be desired & wished for, all though thereof no price or rewarde mought ensue or happen, but onely that therby we mought be conformed or ioyned to Christe our god and mayster. Wherfore as often as in resistinge any temptacion thou dooest withstande any of thy sences or wittes, thinke vnto what parte of Christes passion thou mayste applye thy selfe or make thy selfe lyke: As resistinge glotony, whil
                        •
                     s thou doest punyshe thy tast 
                        〈◊〉
                      appetite: remembre

that Christe receyued in his drynke,
                        Mat. 27. Marc. 15. Luc. 23. Io. 19.
                      ayselle myxte with the gall of a beaste, a drinke moste vnsauery and lothesome. Whan thou withdraweste thy hande from vnlefull takinge or kepinge of any thinge, whiche liketh thyne appetite: remembre Christes handis as they were fast nayled vnto the tree of the crosse. And resisting of pryde, thinke on him,
                        Phil. 2.
                      who being very god almighty, for thy sake receiued the forme of a subiecte, and humbled hym selfe vnto the mooste vile and reprochefull deathe of the crosse. And whan thou art tempted with wrathe:
                        Mat. 27. Mar. 14. Luc. 22. Ioan. 18.
                      Remembre that he whiche was god, and of all men the most iuste or rightwyse, whan he behelde hym selfe mocked, spit on, scourged, and punished withalle

dispites and rebukes, and sette on the crosse amonge errant theues, as if he hym selfe were a false harlot, he not withstandyng shewed neuer token of indignacion or that he were greued, but suffering al thinges with wonderful pacience, aunswered al men most gentilly. In this wise if thou peruse al thinges one after an other, thou mayst finde, that there is no passion or trouble, that shall not make the in some parte conformable or like vnto Christe.
                  ¶ Also putte not thy truste in mannes helpe, but in the onelye vertue of Christe Iesu, whiche sayde:
                        Ioan. 16
                              •
                           
                        
                      Truste well, for I haue vaynquishid the worlde. And in an other place he say
                        •
                     he:
                        Ioan. 13.
                      The prince of this worlde is caste oute therof. wherfore let vs truste by

his onely vertue, to vaynquishe the worlde, and to subdue the diuell. And therfore oughte we to aske his helpe by the prayers of vs and of his sainctes.
                  ¶Remembre also, that as soone as thou hast vanquished one temtation, alway an other is to be loked for:
                        1. Pet. 5.
                      The diuell goeth alwaye aboute the seketh for hym whome he wolde deuoure. Wherfore we ought to serue dylygently and be euer in feare, and to saye with the prophete: I wyll stande alway at my defence.
                  ¶ Take heed more ouer, that not onelye thou be not vaynquished of the dyuel, that temptith the, but also that thou vanquishe and ouer come him. And that is not onelye whan thou doeste no syn, but also whan of that thinge

wherin he tempted the, thou takest occasion for to do good. As if he offrith to the some good acte to be done to the intent that therby thou mayste fall in to vayne glory: furth with thou thinkinge it, not to be thy deede or warke, but the benefitte or rewarde of god, humble thou thy selfe, and iudge the to be vnkynde vnto god in respecte of his manyfolde benefytes.
                  ¶As often as thou doest fyghte, fyght as in hope to vanquishe, & to haue atte the laste perpetualle peace. For that parauenture god of his abundante grace shal gyue vnto the, and the diuell beynge confusid of thy victory, shall retorne no more agayne. But yet whan thou haste vaynquishid, beare thy selfe so as if thou sholdest

fighte agayne shortly. Thus alwaye in battayle thou muste thinke on victory: and after victory thou must prepare the to bataile immediately.
                  ¶All though thou felest thy selfe wil armed and redy, yet flee, not wethstandynge all occasyons to synne.
                        Eccl 
                              •
                           .
                      For as the wise man saith: who louethe perylle, shall therin peryshe.
                  ¶In all temptations resyste the begynnynge, and beate the Children of Babilon againe the stone, whiche stone is Christe, and the chyldren be yuell thoughtes and imaginations. For in longe contynuinge of synne, seldome warketh any medycyne or remedy.
                  ¶Remembre, that althoughe in the sayde conflicte of temptation the battayle seemeth to be verye

daungerouse: yet consyder howe moche sweter it is to vanquishe temptation, than to folowe sinne, wherto she inclyneth the, wherof the ende is repentance. And here in many be foule deceyued, whiche compare not the swetnesse of victory to the swetnesse of synne, but onely compareth battayle to pleasure. Not withstandynge a man or woman, whiche hathe a thousande times knowen what it is to gyue place to temptation, shoulde ones assaye, what it is to vanquishe temptation.
                  ¶If thou be tempted, thynke thou not therfore that god hathe forsaken the, or that he setteth but lyttell by the, or th
                        ••
                      thou art not in the syght of god
                        •
                      
                     
                        〈◊〉
                      or perfecte: but rememb
                        •••
                      that after sayncte Paule hadde seene god,

                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
                     
                        •
                     etull for any man to speake or reherce, he for all that suffred temptation of the fleshe, wherwith god suffred hym to be tempted, lest he shoulde be assaulted with pryde. wherin a man ought to consider, that saynt Paule, which was the pure vessell of election,
                        1. Co
                              •
                           . 2.
                      and rapte in to the thyrde heuen, was not withstandynge in perylle to be proude of his vertues, as he saith of hym selfe. Wherfore aboue al temptations manne or woman oughte to arme theym mooste stronglye agaynste the temptation of pryde, sens pryde is the rote of all myschyfe, agaynste the whiche the onelye remedye is to thynke alway that god humbled hym selfe for vs vnto the crosse.
                        Eccl. 10.
                     
                     
                     
                        〈1 line〉
                     
or no, that our bodyes shal be the meate of wormes lothesome and venymouse.
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  ☞Thomas Berthelet regius impressor excudebat. An. 1534. CVM PRIVILEGIO.
                  
               
            
         
         
            
               
                  
                  
                  PASQVYLL THE PLAYNE
                  ANNO. M. D. XL.
                  
                     〈2 pages duplicate〉
                  
                  
                  
               
               
                  
                  
                  PASQVILL. THOMAS ELIOT KNIGHT, TO THE GENtile reders.
                  
                     SENS playnnes in speaking is of wyse men commended, and diuerse do abhorre long prohemes of rhetoryke: I haue set out this mery treatyse, wherein playnnes, and flatery do come in tryall, in suche wyse as none honeste manne wille be therwith offended
                        •
                      The personages, that do reasone, be of 
                        ••
                     nal reputation: For Pasquillus, that speketh moste, is an image of stone, sitting in the cytie of Rome openly: on whome ones in the yere, it is l
                        •
                     ful to euery man, to set in verse or prose any taunte that he will, agaynst whome he lyst, howe great an astate so euer he be. Not withstandynge in this booke he vsithe suche a temperaunce, that he noteth not any partycular persone or Countrey. Gnatho was brought in by writers of Comedies for suche a seruante, as alway affyrmed, what so euer was spoken of his maister: but he was a Greke borne, and therfore he sauorith some what of retorike. Pasquille is an olde Romaine, but by longe sittinge in the strete, and herynge

market men chat, he is become rude and homely. Harpocrates was the prelate of the temple of Isis and Serapis, which were honorid for goddis in Aegipt, whose image is made, holdinge his finger at his mouthe, betokenynge silence. These thre communed to gether, as it folowethe, but where, I had forgoten to aske. All be it bicause the matter is meryly brought in, and therewith sauoreth somwhat of wisedome: I thought it not inconuenient to particypate it with you that will not interprete it, but according to the beste meaning. And in the reding of this litil tretise distinctli, wyl consider diligently the state & condition of the person that speketh, with the ordre & conclusion of his hole reasō. And if it seme to you, that Pasquill saythe true, in declarynge howe moche ye do fauoure truthe, defend hym against venemous tunges and ouerthwart wittis, which doeth more mischief, than Pasquyllus bablynge. Fare ye well.
               
            
            
               
                  
                  PASQVILL. PASQVILL VS. GNATO. HARPOCRATES. PASQVILL.
                  
                     
                        IT is a wōder to se the world: Now adayes, the more straunge, the better lyked, therfore vnnethe a man may knowe an honeste man from a false harlotte. But peace, who is this gentilman, that standeth here harkenynge? what I say myn olde felowe 
                           ••
                        a
                           •
                        h
                           •
                        , I pray the come forthe, ye steale not so away. Perdye I knowe youre olde fascion, though ye be nowe thus straūgely disguised.
                  
                  
                     GNATO.
                     who speaketh to me
                           •
                         Pasquill? Sawest thou not Harpocrates late? I seeke for hym, he muste come to my mayster.
                  
                  
                     PASQVILL.
                     I wote not whether thyne eye soughte for Harpocrates, but sure I am, that thyne eare soughte for Pasquillus. But I praye the tourne about: thou haste the str
                           •
                        ngest apparaile that euer I loked on: what haue we here? A cappe ful of aglettes and bottons, this longe estrige fether doeth wonderly wel, the tirfe of the cappe tourned downe afore like a pentise hathe a maruailous good grace: but this longe gowne with strayte sleues, is a non sequitur, and

it shall lette you to flee, and than youre fethers shal stande you in no stede, and soo moughte ye happen to be combred, yf ye shulde come in to astoure, where ye wolde shyft for youre selfe. God a vowe wharte doste thou with this longe typpete? If it were whyte as it is blacke, I wolde haue sayde, thou camest to challenge menne at wrastlyng, but I wene ye haue walked late in the strete, and pulled it from some worshypfull doctour. What a gods name, haue ye a booke in youre hand? A good feloweshyp wherof is it? Let me se. No
                           •
                        um stestamentum? What, thou deceiuest me, I had w
                           •
                        nde thou couldest haue skylled of nothinge, but onely of flaterye. But what is this in youre bosom? An other boke, or els a payre of cardes of valery 
                           •
                        alsehed? Dyd I not saye at the fyrste, that it is a wonder to se this worlde? Lo some will be in the bowelles of diuinitie or they knowe what belongethe to good humanytie. Let se, what is here? Troylus? Chreseid? Lorde what discord is bytwene these two bokes? yet a great dele more is there in thine aparayl. And yet most of al betwene the boke in thy hand, and thy condiciones. As god helpe me, as moch as betwene trouth and leasinge, 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     well Pasquillus, thou wylt neuer leue thyn olde custome in raylynge.

Yet haste thou wyt ynough to perceyue what domage and hyndraunce thou haste thereby susteyned: and more art thou likely and with greater perill, if thou haue not good awayte, what, and to whome, and where thou spekest. I herde the wordes that thou spakeste whyle ere, wherof if I wolde be a reporter, it mought tourne the to no littell displeasure: but I knowe that thou arte a good felowe, and woldeste that al thing were wel, though thy wordes be all crabbed. Wherefore not withstanding that thou speakest rebukefully to me, I take it in iape, 
                           •
                        e wyll cary hense with me the presumtuous wordes that thou spakeste. But by myne aduise seue now at the last thin vndiscret liberty in speche, wherin thou vsest vnprofitable taūtes and rebukes, I may well calle them vnprofytable, wherby nothynge that thou blamist, is of one iote amended, and thou loseste therby preferment, which thyne excellente wit
                           •
                        e doth require: and that wors is, trauaylest in study of minde to augmente then owne detriment, and therin losist moche tyme, that mought be better employed.
                     ¶I remembre, that ones I asked a man, that was wyse and very well lerned, howe I mought soneste come to promotion: he sayde: vsynge Aeschylus counsaylle, whiche

was a writar of tragedies: and I demanded, what it was? And he answered, holding thy tonge where it behoueth the. And spekynge in tyme that whiche is conuenient. And the same lesson Pasquillus, if thou woldeste obserue, I doute not, but that thou shuldest finde therin no litel cō
                        modity. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Mary Gnato, I wyll no more wonder at thy syde gowne: for thou arte moche wyser than I supposed: I had wende all this while, that by nature onely thou haddest ben instructed to flatter, but by saynt Ione I se now, that thou ioynest also therto a shrewde wyt, and preparest to the helpinge therof, as it were a crafte gathered of lernynge and scripture. Not withstandinge a good feloweshyp, if thy taryeng shall not be greuouse or hurtefull vnto the (for I knowe howe expedient it is that thou be not longe out of the syght of thy mayster, if thou wylt be Gnatho alone) tell me how thou vnderstandest the sayde sentence of Aeschylus tragedy: for I feare we two do vnderstond hym dyuersely, & than thy counsaile in respecte to thy purpose shal lytel profyte me. 
                  
                  
                     GNATO.
                     Supposeste thou so? In good faythe, and to me it semeth so playne, that it nedethe none expositor, but to the intent that my counsayll to the may take some effecte, in

the lyttell tyme that I may nowe tary, I wyl as compendiously as I can, shewe my conceyte, in declaryng what I thinke, that Aeschilus mente by the sayde sentence.
                     ¶It behoueth a man to holde his tonge, whan he aforeseethe by any experyence, that the thynge, which he wolde purpose or speke of to his superioure, shall neyther be pleasantly herd, nor thankefully taken. And in wordes oportunitie and tyme alway do depend on the affection and appetite of hym that herethe them. How saiest thou Pasquill, is it not so? 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     So? No so mote I go. But one thinge here me, I wyll nat flatter the Gnatho. If thou vnderstandest no better the newe testament (which thou cariest as solemnely with the, as thou shuldeste rede a priuy lesson, hem, I had almoste tolde where openly) than thou doest Aeschilus sentence, whiche as if thou haddest bene lerned, thou toldest to me for a counsaylle, thy brethe wyll be so hote shortly, that thou wylt make men aferde to come within twenty fote of the. And harke in thyne eare. By my trouth, I wene it be neyther better nor warse. 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Wyl ye not leue youre ouerthwart facion. I can no more. I se it is wayne to counsaile a mad man to loke to his profite. Fare well, I haue somwhat els to do, than

to attende to thy pratynge. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     What be you angry for this? Loke on the boke in youre hande: perdy it agreeth not with your profession to be out of charitie. But gentyll Gnatho tary soo long as I maye shewe the howe I vnderstande the sayde sentence of Aeschilus.
                  
                  
                     GNATO.
                     Say on. 
                  
                  
                     PASQVIL.
                     ¶Where two hostes be assembled, and in poynte to fyght: if thou be amonge them, thoughe thou be a great astronomer, it behouethe the to holde thy tunge, and not to talke of coniunctions, and of the tryne or quartil aspectes, but to prepare the to bataylle. Where a good felowshyp is sette at dyce or at cardes, thoughe thou be lerned in geometry: holde thy tunge, and speake not of proporcions or figures. Where men be set at a good soupper, and be busily occupied in eatynge and drinkynge, though thou be depely sene in philosophie, holde thy tong, and dispute not of temperaunce, or moderate diete. Where thou art amonge a great companye, at bankettynges or other recreations: though thou be well lerned in holy scripture, holde thy tonge, interprete not Paules epistels, for therin is no daliaunce.
                     ¶Whan thou arte syttynge in counsayle aboute maters of weyghty importaunce:

talke not than of passetyme or dalyaunce, but omyttinge affection or dreede, speke than to the pourpose.
                     ¶Where thou seeste thy frende in a great presence honoured of al men, though thou knoweste in him notable vices, yet there holde thy tonge, and reproche hym not of them. Where thou 
                           •
                        eest thy lorde or mayster in the presence of many, resolued in to fury or wantonnesse, thoughe thou hast all rody aduertisementes, how he shal refraine it: yet holde thy tonge than, for troublyng that presen
                           •
                        e.
                     ¶On the other parte. If before batayle ioyned, thou beholdest thy side the weiker and thyne aduersaryes more puissaunt and stronger: speke than of policie, wherby thou hopeste to optayne the vyctory.
                     ¶Before that thy frende syttethe downe to dyce, if thou dost perceyue, that he shal be ouermatched: discorage hym be tyme, or he repente hym in pouerty.
                     ¶Whan thy frendes be set downe to souper, before the cuppes be twyse fylled: reherce the peryll and also dishonesty that hapeneth by glotony.
                     ¶Whā yong men & women haue apointed a banket, than er the ouens be hete, and tables al couered, reherce hardely the sentē
                        ces of saint Paul or of saint Hierom, if thou

be lerned.
                     ¶If thou be called to counsayle, after 
                           •
                        hou hast eyther herde one rayson before the, or at the least weye, in the balaunce of thine owne rayson ponderid the question: spare not to shewe thyne aduyse, and to speke truly, remembringe that god is not so farre of, but that he can here the.
                     ¶If thou knowest a vice in thy frende, which is of a fewe men suspected, er it be talked of at the tauerne, or of his enemy reproched, warne hym of the damage that may happen, if it be not amended.
                     ¶Whan thou perceyuest thy Mayster to be resolued in to wrath or affections dishonest: Before wrathe be increased in to furye, and affection in to voluptuous appetyte. As oportunitie serueth the, reuerently & with tokens of loue towarde him speke such wordes as shalbe conuenient.
                     ¶Oportunitie consisteth in place or time; where and whan the sayde affections or passion of wrathe be some dele mytygate and out of extremitie. And wordes be called conueniente, which haue respecte to the nature and state of the personne, vnto whom they be spoken, and also to the detrymente, which mought ensue by the vice or lacke that thou haste espied, & it ought not to be as thou haste supposed. For o
                           •
                        
                        portunity

and tyme for a counsayllour to speke, do not depende of the affection and appetyte of hym that is counsayled: mar
                           •
                         than counsaylle were but a vayne worde
                           •
                         and euery man wolde do as hym lyste. For if he listed not to here any counsayle, he shuld neuer be warned of his owne errour but by saciety and tediousnesse of his own vice, or by grace (if he were worthye to haue it. 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Nowe by the faythe I owe to god, I wolde not haue thoughte, that thou haddest bene soo well raysoned. For men haue alway reputed the, but for a babbler and rayler.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Ye what men? By god those, which ought moste to haue thanked me. I saye harke in thyne eare: Popes, emperoures, kynges, and cardinalles. Thou hereste what I saye. Whan they, by such as thou and Harpocrates be, were with flatterye and dyssymulation brought in to the hate of god and the people, ones in a yere, I gaue them warning, neither for menaces, nor yet for beatinges I neuer cessed. Thou arte remembred whā pope Leo sware, that he wold throwe me in to the ryuer of Tyber. And that yere I went to saynct Iames on pilgremage, which I auowed, if I escaped drowning. But in a vnlucky houre was I a pilgreme: for sens there haue comen bothe to saynt

Iames at Compostella, and to saynt Peter at Rome euery yere ten thousande pilgremes fewer, thā there did a thousand yeres before that tyme. And menne saye, that in other contreys dyuers monasteryes be lyke to breake hospitalyty, bycause theyr offringes be not the thyrde parte so moch as they were accustomed. For in deede nowe adayes mens deuotion waxeth euen as coulde, as the mounkes be in the quier at midnyght, that commoditye had Rome by myne absence. And yet after my pilgremage done, I had for my trouth and plainnesse as moche pardone of god, as if I had bylded one cloyster in Rome, and an other in Parise, and put in to eueryche of them an hundred friers conuentuals. And yet were that a blessed dede, if the lawe were not agaynst incresinge of valiant beggers. But to my purpose. If these men that we speake of, had wysely and coldely expended and tryed my wordes, that they called rayllynge, many thinges mought haue ben preuented, that were after lamented. Germany shulde not haue kicked agaynst her mother: Emperours and princis shulde not haue ben in perpetual discord, and often tymes in peril: prelattes haue bene laughed at, as dissardes: saynctes blasphemed, and miracles reproued for iugglinges,

lawes and statutes contemned, and officers littell regarded. What muste nedes folowe, sens my breth faile the me? I leue that to the Gnatho to coniect, for thou arte wyse inoughe to consider. 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     I knowe what thou meaneste, but a felyshyp leaue thy bourdinge and currishe philosophie, sens it is neyther profitable, plesant, nor thankfull. Who wolde be so madde to driue about a myll, and is sure, that all the meale, that he gryndeth, shall fall on the floore: sauinge a lyttle mylduste, that shall flie in to his eien, and putte hym to payne, and perchaunce make hym blynde? And thou studiest to speke many good wordes, whiche be lost in the rushes: and if any yll meanynge may be pycked out, it is caste in thy nose to put the in daunger. L
                           •
                        se no more laboure Pasquil, but folow my counsayle: and if within two yeres thou be not newe paynted and gylt, and haue mo men wonderynge at the, than at any other ymage in Rome, by my trouthe I wyl stand in the rayne and sonne as longe as thou haste done, and yet it were an vnresonable wager. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Go to lette se, what is thy counsaill?
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Mary I wyll telle the. Thou haste a verye sharpe wytte and aredy: wherfore thou arte mete for the world. And pitie it were, that such a iewel

shulde be neglected. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And pitie i
                           •
                         were, that suche a flatterar as thou art, shulde longe be vnhanged. But passe on a goddis name. 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     I wiste well, that in suche a frowarde piece of tymbre, I shuld lose moche laboure: yet will I proue, if good counsayle may warke any thinge in the. Nowe here Pasquill what I say. By thy longe rayling, thy wit is well knowen. Now tourne the lefe. And whan thou hereste any thynge purposed by them, whom thou haste offended, what so euer it be, affirme it to be well, and therwith auaunce the wytte and intent of the persone, that spake it, whiche thou mayste do excellently wel. For he that can dispise spitfully, can if he liste, prayse and commend also incomparably. And if thou canst not refrain from rebukinge and tauntynge: practyse thy naturall fury and woodnesse agayne them that repugne agayne the sayde purpose. And where thou dyddest wonder to see me haue in my hande the Newe testament, if thou woldist do the same, and now in thine age, laye aparte the lesson of gentyles, called humanitie, sens thou mayste haue good leysour, beinge not yet called to counsaile, picke out here and there sentences out of holy scripture, to fournyshe thy reason with authoritie. I make god

auow, thou shalt be within thre monethes able to confounde the greattest diuine in all Italy. And whan thy conuersation and good opinion is knowen, than shalte thou be called for. But than alwaye remembre how so euer the tenoure bel ringeth he ringethe alway in tune, and thoughe he iarre somwhat, yet thou canste not here it, his so
                           •
                        ne is so great, and thine eares be so lytell. And if other men fynde it, saye that it is no faulte, but a quauer in musicke, and became the bell, if they had the wytte to perceiue it. I teach the in parables, for this crafte wolde not be opened to euery man: for it sholde not be for my profyte: but thy subtill wyt comprehendeth al that I mene, thou art so acquainted with all oure experience. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Nowe on my feyth wel sayd, I coude not haue founden a craftier knaue to lerne of betwene this and Hierusalem. But who comethe here? He semethe a reuerende personage, he is none of thy sorte I trowe? 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     By god we be right cosens, I by the mother syde, and he by the father. And that caused me to speake soo moche as I doo, and him so lyttle, and yet is there smal diuersite betwene oure condicions. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     What meaneste thou therby? 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     For we bothe haue one maister. And whan he spekethe, or doethe

any thinge for his pleasure: I study with wordes to commende it. If my couseyn stande by, he speketh littell or nothing, but forminge his visage in to a grauitie with sylence, lokethe as if he affirmed all thing, that is spoken. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     what is his name? 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Harpocrates. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     That is a harde name by Iesus. But why holdethe he his finger at his mouthe. 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     For he hathe espied me talkynge, and bycause he 
                           •
                        enethe that I speke to moche, he makethe a sygne, that I shulde cesse: but I am gladde, that I haue met with hym. Cosin Harpocrates, I haue sought for you this two houres. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     why speketh he not?
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     O that is his grauitie to pause a while or he speke, he lerned it whan he was student at Bonony. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     What is the matter Gnato? 
                  
                  
                     GN.
                     My maister whan he hath dined, wyll syt in counsail aboute waightie causes. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                      And whan I haue din
                           •
                        d, I wil giue attendaunce. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Lo is it not as I sayd, a wonder to se this world? In olde time men vsed to occupy the mornynge in deepe and subtile studies, and in counsailes concerninge the cōmune weal, and other matters of great importaunce. In lyke wyse than to here controuersies, and gyue iudgementes. And if they had any causes of theyr owne, than to treate of

them, and that didde they not without a greate consyderation, procedynge bothe of naturall rayson, and also counsayle of ph
                           •
                        yke. And after diner they refreshed theyr wittes, eyther with instrumentes of musyke, or withe redinge or heringe some pleasant story, or beholdinge some thinge delectable and hones
                           •
                        e. And after theyr diner was digested, than eyther they exercysed them selfes in rydinge, runnynge on fote, shotynge, or other lyke pastyme, or went with their haukes to se a f
                           •
                        ight at the ryuer, or wold se their grehoundes course the hare for the dere: whiche they didde as well to recreate theyr wittes, as also to gette them good appetite. But lo, nowe all this is tourned in to a newe fascion, god helpe vs, the worlde is almoste at an ende: For after noone is tourned to fore noone
                           •
                         vertue into vyce, vice into vertu, deuocion into hypocresie, and in some places menne say, fayth is tourned to herisye. Dyd I not now say well at the beginninge. That it is a wonder to see this worlde? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     H
                           •
                        m Pasquillus.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     wel, ye thinke as moche as I speke, for al your poynting and wynkyng.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     But in silence is surety.
                  
                  
                     PA.
                     Per
                           •
                        haunce naye. If I perceyued one at thy backe with a sworde drawen, redy to strike the, woldest thou that I shuld hold

my peace, or els tel the? 
                  
                  
                     HA.
                     Naye, silence were than oute of season.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Now wel fare you for your bald reson, a manne may see, what wisedome there is in youre compendiouse speaking, ye wyll season silence. Mary I wene my lorde shuld haue a better cooke of you than a counsayllour. Not withstanding for youre silence ye mought be a confessour. But yet I doute me: for I remembre Gnato what thou say deste whyle ere, that whan ye were present both with your mayster, if thou commendest his sayenges or doinges, this man wolde, approue it with sylence and coūtenance, whiche mought do more harme, than all thy flatery, than what mischiefe mought folow of his damnable sylence, if in secrete tyme of confession, wherein confessours haue aboue al men moste largest lyberte to blame and reproue, he shulde eyther dissemble the vyces that he knoweth in him, whom he hathe in confession, or els forbeare to declare to hym the enormity of suche capytall synnes as he hath confessed.
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     By my trouthe thou arte a busy felowe, doest thou remembre, what thou saydeste, whan thou dydest espie, that I had a boke of the Newe Testament. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     what said I? 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Mary this thou saydeste, that some wolde be in the bowels of diuinite or

they knowe what belongethe to good humanite. Nowe thou takest thy selfe by the nose: for without hauing regarde to whom thou spekest, thou presumest to teche this worshipful man, what he shal do in confession. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     It is well raysoned of you by swete saynt Ronion: ye define teachynge, as well as he dyd season his sylence. Dydest thou here me teache hym, what he shulde do? Nay & if thou haste so moch wit to remembre, vpō the wordes that thou thy selfe speakest, I declare what inconuenience inought happen by the flaterynge silence of 
                           •
                         confessour: wenest thou that I was neuer confessed? Yes I haue tolde a tale to a frier or this tyme with a grote in my hande, and haue ben assoyled forthwith without any further rehersall: where if a pore man had tolde halfe somoch, he shuld haue ben made equall to the diuell, & haue ben so chid, that whan he had gone frome confession, he shulde haue hanged doune the eres, as if he had ben lerning of pricke songe. All be it, it is the custome of some of you, that be courtiars, whan ye can not defende your mater with raison, to embraied hym that speaketh, with presumption, treson, misprision, or suche other lyke pratye morselles, to stoppe hym of talkynge. But betwene two men full of wordes, trouthe

shall neuer or late be espied: wherfore I wil no more Gnatho meddell with the, but from hens forthe I wyll speake to Harpocrates for if he can perswade me, that his silence is better than my bablynge, I wyl folow his doctrine rather than thine, for I haue professed from my chyldehode neuer to speke in erneste to my mayster or frende, contrarye to that, that I thynke. 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Ergo thou haste professed to stand styl in the rayne, and ones perchance to be throwen in to Cyber, or broken in pieces. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And perchaunce if god neuer lied, I may be in the palaice mery, whan thou shalte syt withoute on a ladder, and make all thy frendes sorye. Herdest thou neuer, that the worlde is rounde, and therfore it is euer tourninge, nowe the wrongeside vpwarde, an other tyme the right, but lette this passe. I praye the Harpocrates teache me howe thou doest season thy sylence, doest thou it with salte or with spyces? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Naye with sugar, for I vse lyttell salte. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And that maketh your counsayl more swete than sau
                           •
                        ry. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Ye speake lyke a potticary.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And I haue knowen a wyse poticary done moch more good, if he were trusted, than a folyshe phisition. But nowe to thy sylence, that thou so moche praysest Harpocrates.

Thou saydest that in sylence was suertie. And I asked, If I perceyued one at thy back with a sworde drawen redy to strike the, whether shuld I speke or kepe silēce? And thou answerest, that sylence was thā oute of season. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     So sayde I.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     I can the thanke, thou abidest by thy worde: although at this day, that be acomted no polyce. But why saydest thou, that sylence were than out of seson? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     For I mought be sore hurt, or perchance kylled, if I were not than warned, myne enmy beinge so nygh me. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Ye: I wiste well, that ye wolde not be slayne, nor yet wounded, if ye mought haue rome ynough to ronne, or youre long clothes did not let you. But I put case I knewe, that youre enmye were at youre chamber dore, or let it be further, at Poytiers in France, who had auowed to slee you, and were in his iourney towarde you, but whan or where he wolde strike you, I knowe not: shuld I forthe withe warne you, or els kepe silence vntyl I sawe his sworde ouer youre head
                           •
                         redy to kyl you, that I mought keepe sylence all waye in 
                           •
                        eason? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     
                        
                           •
                        o that were no frendshype but rather traison, to knowe me to be in such peryl, and to 
                           〈◊〉
                         it from me, that there were no mean 
                           〈◊〉
                         
                        
                           ••
                        
                        cape, but onely by fortune.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     What 
                           〈◊〉
                        
                        
lasse than trayson? Peace ye are yet no pope, & bycause ye be a priest ye be exempted frome being emperour or kynge. 
                  
                  
                     HA.
                      Haste thou any other terme more propre, where a man consenteth to the destruction of his frend, which specially trusteth him?
                  
                  
                     PA.
                     By my trouth nay, if I shal not ly
                           •
                         but now I am glad, that I haue found you, yet will I a litel better assaie you. If I saw your cousen Gnatho put poyson in to a cuppe of wyne secretly, & brynge it vnto you, shulde I holde my peace, or els tell you? 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Mary I defye the, thou knowest no
                           •
                         me to be of suche disposition. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     what? ye be of a very coler
                           •
                        ke complexion: what art thou the warse, that I name the herein for an example? If by the waye of argument, & to make the offence the more horrible, I wolde put for the case, that Pope Adriane were poisoned by one of his cardinalles, bycause he wold haue minisshed theyr maiestie, and haue broughte them to humblenes: Perdy this were no blasphemy. 
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     There is in thy raylynge none harmony.
                  
                  
                     PA.
                     No, for therin is no flatery. But Harpocrates that with thy sober sylence mockest vs both, what sayeste thou to my question?
                  
                  
                     HA.
                     Nowe on my faythe thou arte a mery companyon. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Ye good ynough, whan ye haue nothinge left

to saue with your honeste, than ye brynge forthe that mery conclusyon: but saye on, woldest thou than, that I shulde kepe sylence or no? Admitte the ca
                           •
                        e to be true, though Gnatho be angrie. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Kepe sylence than quoda, nay by the faythe of my bodye.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     So I thought, excepte ye be wery of worldly worship, & be now contented to die, and let other men steppe in to youre rowmes, and take peynes for you: but ye say, that sylence were than out of seson? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     By saint Iohn ye. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And for what cause tell me youre rayson. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Mary for if thou diddist not warne me, I mought be deceyued by hym, that I trusted, and drynke poyson in the stede of wyne: where of I shulde eyther be dead, or fall in to suche sickenes and brekynge out, that al men shulde abhorre me. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     I wolde to god, that thou woldest affirme alway truthe to thy maister, as thou doeste nowe to me. But Harpocrates thou woldest not die, nor yet lyue to be abhorred of all men: therein I can prayse the. Nowe sens thou arte a good man (as I suppose and also lerned, woldeste thou that any werse thing shulde happen to thy maister, that trusteth the, than thou woldest to thy selfe?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     No truely.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And if thou kneweste any daunger towarde hym, as I

haue rehersed, thou oughtest as well to warne him of it, as I ought the. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     I can not deny that. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And also thou woldest. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Why, wherfore shulde I not? 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     For perauenture if youre maister mistrustethe hym not, that hathe auowed to kyll hym, and accomted youre tale for a fantasy, or if he fauourethe hym moche that ye knowe wolde poyson hym: he wyll suppose, that ye tell it hym of some suspicion or malyce, and wyll leane a defe
                        
                           •
                        are towarde you. And than he, on whom ye complayned, beinge aduertised, shall omitte that, which he purposed, to proue you a lyar. And than shulde ye bothe lese your thanke of your mayster, and be called a detractour: and also haue hym, whom ye accused and al his bende, vigilant espialles to bringe you in daunger, is it not thus?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Ye syr by Iesus. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     What if another man, whiche louethe your mayster no lasse than ye doo, gaue hym suche warnynge, and ye knewe it to be true: but ye perceyue, that youre mayster listeth not to here of suche matter, or perchaunce commendethe hym, which is complayned on: wolde ye also preyse hym, to support the truste that your mayster hathe in hym, or commende your maister therin, for his constance and li
                           •
                        tell mistrus
                           •
                        inge? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     
                        
Nay than were I worthy a hote mischiuing if I wolde helpe to bring so my maister vnto his confusyon. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     What, wolde you holde your tunge, & say nothinge? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     No but I wolde forbere for a tyme, and awayte dylygentely, to see yf the perylle wold cesse, or mought be by some occasion preuented, or by my mayster other wyse spied: but whan it were imminente, thanne wolde I giue warninge.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Imminent, what calle ye that?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Whan his ennemie is at his backe with his sword drawen, redy to strike him. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And what for poysonynge?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Whan I sawe my frende haue the cuppe in his hande, and were redy to drynke.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Howe gate ye all this witte with so litell lernynge? It is not for nought, that ye be a counsaillour, sens ye haue suche a praty feate in seasonyng. Of likelihood ye be wel sene in constellations, and doo knowe perfectly the subtile distinctions of tymes & momentes, ye wolde forbere to warne youre maister at the begynnynge of daungier, and whan he is at the poynt to fall in to it, perchance or ye shall not be presente, or els not able
                           •
                         or of powar to resiste it: but teache me I pray you, what ye calle imminent, for it is a worde taken out of latyne, and not commenly vsed.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Marie the thynge that

                        
                           〈◊〉
                         imminente, is whan it apperethe to be in the instante to be done or to happen: and after some mens exposition, as it thretened to come.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     It is well expounded and clerkly. Than if ye wyll diuide the tyme into instantes, bycause perchance ye be a good Dunse man: ye must remembre that the instante whan it appereth, that youre frende shall be slayne, and the instant whan he is in sleing, be not one, but those instantes be diuerse. Nor the acte is not in one pointe, whan it is thretned, and whan it is in doing. Wherfore whan there is a sword drawen at youre masters backe, redy to kyll hym, or your maister hath a cup with poison in his hande, and is redy to d
                           •
                        ynke: the perell is not nowe imminent, that is to say, to be done, or to happen: but it is in the instant of doyng or happenynge. Neyther it threteth, but is at the verye pointe of executing. Wherfore ther is repugnancie in youre owne reasoninge, if this worde, Imminent, be truely expounded.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Yes that may not be denyed, it hathe bene so long by noble authors approued. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Than resorte to your fyrste assertion Whā the perill were imminent, than wolde ye gyue warnynge: and it foloweth, that than sylence where out of season.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Ye truely.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Ergo speche were than in

good season: is not this your conclusyon
                           •
                        
                     
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Thou hittest it iustly in myne opynyon.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     What before and after this instant?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Speche is vnprofytable: before, to him that speketh as I haue rehersed: after, to him, whiche is spoken vnto. For where may be no longer defence, or resistence, spech nothinge auaileth.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Ye thought al this while, that in maynteyning your sylence ye had reproued my lybertie of speache, whiche ye calle babblyng. And that ye had apointed a time for silēce & speking, which ye thought that I lacked. Nowe beholde Harpocrates, howe in the tyme to speke ye and I haue al this while agreed. And in the two inslantes, wherwith ye season your silence, if we two disagree: se that it is bycause ye erre so moch frome naturall reson.
                  
                  
                     HER.
                     How proue ye that. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Euen by your owne conclusion.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Naye, ye can not bringe that to passe for all youre subtylle inuention.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Wel, I wil do what I can. And I trowe, ye will not deny me, if ye be not of the condicion of some men, whiche by no reason wyll be remoued f
                           •
                        om theyr owne opinion. But nowe to the matter. Thou saydest at the fyrst, that if thyne ennemy stode at thy backe with his sworde drawen to slee the, thou woldeste than be

warned, lest thou moughtest be sore hurt, or perchance kylled, whiche all though it were folishely spoken of so great a lerned man (as who sayth thyne ennemye coulde not slee the, excepte he stode at thy backe, and had his sword drawen) yet in speking we two haue accorded. But to your owne saienge ye haue repugned: where ye sayd that in sylence was suertie. But to excuse that, ye dyd season your sylence: that is to saye, puttynge to tyme: which vndoutedly is an holsome herbe and a 
                           •
                        au
                           •
                        ry: & than ye were contente to warne youre frende, whan the perell were imminent. And that terme ye expounded thus: whan the thing appered to be in the instante to be done or to happē: & as it is were thretned to come. And herevpon ye grounded your conclusyon, that spech were than in good seasō. Which argument I wil not deny, for I haue ben alway of the same opiniō. But now remembre your grammer, & consider that the said definition is in the future tyme, that is to saye, the thing, whiche is imminente, is to be done hereafter, & not in doing, whiche is the presente tyme. Than whyther youre maisters ennemye be at his backe, or at Poyters in France, as I sayde at the fyrst, if ye know, that he purposeth to slee hym: than it appereth to you, that the killinge

of your maister is in the instant to be done, and is thretned to happen, ergo the perille is imminent, and ye are bounde to gyue your frende warnynge.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Perchaunce I may knowe a thinge, and yet it appereth not to me, and than your argumente auaileth not an herringe. As I may knowe by other mennes tellynge, or by coniecture of a lyght suspicion.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Nay than shall we haue moche a do with you, if ye wyll compel me of euery worde that I speke, to make definition. Though I haue not so moche lerninge as you, I vse alway my wordes in theyr propre sygnification, & to serue to the matter that I reason vnto. I knowe a thing, which by a cause I consider euidentely. And that whiche is onely reported, I doo heare, but I know not: but coniecture is by sygnes, resemblaunce, or likely hoode, whiche may be false: and yet is it not to be neglected, as it shal appere afterward. But now retourn we to knowlege, whiche beinge certein, as I haue defyned it, as sone as thou knowest that one wyll kylle or poyson thy mayster, the perill is imminent: than by thyne owne reson, thou oughtest to warne hyme: if not, thou art by thine own sentence condemned of treason.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Thou sayest soore to me Pasquill. Not with standing yet me semethe:

I shulde not warne hym so soone, for the daungers, whiche thou rehersyddest, moughte happen vnto me, if I lacked a thankfull and secrete herer, or els the purpose were chaunged: but it were better to tary
                           •
                         vntil it came to suche preparatyon, that it mought not be denied. 
                  
                  
                     PASQVIL.
                     So mought it be, if ye were partner of the conspiracie, for than mought ye happen to be made priuie to the tyme, whan, and the place, where that your maister shulde stand in such ieopardy: but els ye mought knowe of suche a thinge purposed, and ye be not suer of the tyme, whan it shulde be executed. Than if ye forbere to warn your mayster vntyll the peryll mought be more euident, and as ye say, moughte not be denyed: before that tyme it mought be more than imminent, and in the seconde instant, that is to say in the selfe doing, or to speke it more clenly, in execucion. 
                  
                  
                     HARPO.
                     But than were I out of daunger.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Ye that is all that ye care for: yet moughte ye happen to be deceiued, and your sylence in stede of suertie tourne you to trouble. For seldome is the maister in ieopardie, and the seruantes at libertie, specially they whiche be next about hym: Or if ye happen to escape ennemies, if it may be perceyued that ye knewe of the perile, and wold not

discouer it, ye shuld perchaūce escape hardly the halter, though ye had shakē of al youre longe robes, and were but in a ierkynne. Ye
                           •
                         if ye warned youre mayster at the be
                        
                           •
                        ynninge, thoughe he toke it not thankfully, yet did you your duetie, and can not lacke rewarde of god, who louethe truth, for youre fydellite. And though he, whom ye disapoynted, or his affynitie, shall seke howe to be auenged on you: eyther god wyll defende you, or if there fall to you, therby any aduersytie, fynally falsehode longe kepte in, wyll braste out at the laste, and than shal repentan
                           •
                        e cause youre simplicite to be had in renome and perpetual memory: whiche parte of honour to euery honest man, passeth all other reward, that may be gyuen in this life that is transitory. But bycause we speake while ere of coniecture. If by signes and liklihodes, d
                           •
                        pely consydered without malice or other vicious affection, ye do coniect, that youre mayster is in peryll. Althoughe ye be not so moche bounden to tel him, as if ye knew it: yet if ye tel it hym with your coniecture ye fulfil more the partes of a good seruant than he that hath the same coniecture and spekethe nothynge. For if that thynge happen not, that ye mistrusted, the cause is to be referred to god: but the sygnes &

lykelyhoodes oughte not for al that to be an other tyme dispised: and your care and loue toward your maister are to be highly commended. If it do happen, than your dilygence and study are to be extolled.
                  
                  
                     HA.
                     By the faithe of my body thou hast raisoned cunnyngly.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     That cunning I neuer lerned in scoles, but by longe obseruacion and markynge of other mennes foly. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     But Pasquil, thoughe in perylles concerninge mans lyfe, speche may be preferred somtime before silēce. It cōcludeth not, that it shall be so in all other thynges. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     To bringe the to this point haue I made all this long babbling. Estemest thou lyfe more than good renome, or the welthe of thy countraye? For the whiche soo many puissant and noble princis, so manye wise and excellent philosophers haue left theyr lyues willingely? Who gladly wyll leue a better thyng 
                           •
                        or a warse? Except for wantōnesse, or for the newe facion. Is any dethe so moche to be drad as perpetual infamye, the subuercyon of the common weale, vniuersall distruction of all the hole countrey? Whiche to escape or resist, many valyante knyghtes, honorable matrones
                           •
                         and chaste damoyselles haue offred them selfes to the d
                           •
                        th. And who refusethe the lasse peyn to cast hym selfe in to the gra
                           •
                        tter

tourment? Or doste thou esteme the deth of the soule to be of lasse importance than the deathe of the body? What sayeste thou? that iudgement belongethe to thy facultie.
                  
                  
                     HARPOCRATES.
                     In dede there ye touche me. 
                  
                  
                     PASQVILL.
                     Lyke wise, a knocke on the heed, thoughe it be to the scul, is not so daungerous to be healed, as an yuell affection thrast in to thy maysters braynes by false opinion. Nor a wipe ouer his face with a sworde shall not blemmishe so moch his visage, as vice shall deforme his soule and deface his renome, wherby he is further knowen than by his phisonomy. Is there any poyson can make hym to be so abhorred of man, as auarice, tyranny, or bestly lyuynge shall cause hym be hated of god and of man vnyuersally?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     No in good faythe, I thinke thou sayest truly.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Than conferre all this togither, with that which we before raysoned, and se where in any thinge that thy maister speakethe or dothe, if there be any of the perilles imminent, which I late rehersed: whether it were better to speke or kepe sylence, and in whiche of them were moste surety. And consider also, that bytwene these two perylles, that I haue rehersed, is no lyttel diuersyte, besydes that the one is moche more than the other. For

in the bodily peril, in the time of the stroke perchaunce your mayster wold here you, and therby escape, or ye mought defende him, but the other peryll of soule or mynd, the lenger that he contynueth therin, the more gladly he receyueth the stroke, and the more he wyll disdayne to be warned by you: and than ye put your selfe in more danger of that, which we spake of before: but for all that neyther in tyme of daunger thou oughtest to leaue thy maister vnwarned, whiche thou hast all redy graunted: nor yet whan thy maister is striken or poisoned, speche is vnprofytable as thou hast supposed. 
                  
                  
                     HARPOCRA.
                     Howe proue you that? For if ye be a surgeon, ye knowe it muste be your dedes and not your wordis, that must helpe him.
                  
                  
                     PASQVILL.
                     Nowe it is wel remembred, ye shall haue goddes blessinge. I neuer herd a more fole by my holydome, doeth a surgeon all his cure with plaisters and instrumentes? somtyme he spekethe also, or if he be domme, one speakethe for hym, and telleth his pacient, what metes & drynkes be vnholsome, whiche be leuitiues and helpeth his medicine. Also whan he perceyueth hym to be faynte or discomforted, than with swete wordes and faire promisys he reuiueth his courage. If he be disobedient or riottouse,

he rebuketh hym, & do aggrauate the danger to make the syckenes more greuous. The same is the office of a good confessor, where he perceiueth mannes soule to be wounded with viciouse affections, sins that a conffessour serueth for none other pourpose, but to cure mannes soule of deadly synnes, whiche be her mortal diseases: but can he do that without speaking? Also ye sayd where mought be no longer resistēce, speche nothinge auaylled: I wene ye saide truer than ye were ware. For whan Gnatho with his flatery, & ye with your silence haue ones rootid in youre maysters harte false opinions and vicious affecti
                           •
                        , whiche is the poyson, that we so moche speake of, thoughe ye perceue the daunger, and than sore repent you, yet shall it perchance be impossible with speche to remoue those opinions, and cure those affectis, except ye lou
                           •
                        d so well your mayster, that for his helthe ye wolde confesse youre owne errours.
                  
                  
                     GN.
                     Nay goddes body, so mought we get for oure selfe a payre of tariars.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Well it were better tary, than runne to the dyuel with youre mayster, or that good re
                           •
                        o
                           •
                        me shulde runne away from hym. But tell me Harpocrates as thou thinkest, were not speche nowe expedient? or howe mought thy maister be otherwise

curid? with sylence trowist thou?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     It semethe that sylence shuld nothynge profyte, nor speche shuld any thing auaylle, if the opinions and affectes be so impressed, that they can not be remoued.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Yet agayne, if ye speke no wyseliar to youre mayster, than ye do to me, he hathe of you a worshypfull counsayloure, I demaunde of you remedy to cure wronge opinions and vycious affectes: and ye answere me, that neyther speche nor sylence is profytable. Lyke as if I had asked counsayl of a phisytion what thing wold heale me, of my syckenes, and he wolde say, that gyuinge to me medicine or gyuinge me none, shulde not auayle me.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Spake I not welle, where I fynde no remedy?
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     No, and ye loke wysely. For and if ye remembre, I dyd not affyrme expressely, that it shuld be impossible to remoue false oppinions or vicious affectes, where they were impressed: but I ioyned therto peraduenture, and also an exception, if ye that induced them, confessed not your owne errour. Than if youre confessyon mought cure them, speche were than not vnprofitable. And if youre owne confessyon auailid not, sens I affyrmed not expressely, that the sayde diseases were incurable: if neither sylence, nor speche shulde be profitable,

what shulde than be the remedye?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                      I make god a vowe. I can not tell, excepte it were grace. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     I herde the neuer speke so wysely. But yet supposest thou, that grace wylle so lyghtely entre, where false opinion and viciouse affectes be so depely imprinted, excepte they be first some what remoued by good perswasyon? onles thou thinkest, that euery man shalbe called of god, as saint Paule was, who was elected. And yet now I remembre me, at his conuersyon Chryste spake vnto hym, & tolde him that it was hard to spurne againe the prycke: where if Chryst had hold his peace, Saule which was thā beaten downe to the grounde, moughte haue happened neuer to haue bene called saynt Paule: but if he had escaped, he wold by lykelihod haue contynued styll in his errour. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     It is not for vs Pasquill to inserche the impenetrable iugementes of god: but the grace of god hathe happened farre aboue mennes expectation: & where al other remedy lacked. For thā the puissaunce of all myghty god is specially proued.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     But trustynge only therein, to leue oure owne indeuour, I thinke it presumption. And what indeuour may be in silence? Wherfore speche is not onely profytable but also of necessitie muste be vsed

in healinge the dyseases, bothe of the soule and also the body. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     I can not denye that, if I say truly.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Than whan is youre sylence in season? 
                  
                  
                     HAR
                     I can not shortly tel, I am so abashed at thy froward reson. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Than wyll I helpe you to knowe your owne vertue, wherin ye haue suche delectation. I trowe ye herde not howe I dyd expound the sentence of A
                           •
                        schylus, whiche Gnatho rehersed to me for a counsayle? 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Yes, that I dyd, for I stode all that whyle at the 
                           •
                        wyndowe herkenynge of the.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Se howe full the world is of suche false ymages, that do here all, whan they seme to here nothinge: as I trust to be saued, with suche felowes it is perillous dealyng. But yet that shal not cause Pasquill to leaue hys bablyng. Nowe Harpocrates, beare away the sayd sentence with myne exposition, and vse it. 
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     So I wyl, as moche as perteineth to sylens. 
                  
                  
                     PASQVIL.
                     Ye god a vow and also to spekyng, or els all the counsayle is not worth thre halspens. Thynke ye to be a counsailour, and speake not? What where the Emperoure the better, if in stede of counsailours he had set in his chambre the ymages of Cato, Mettellus, Lelius, Cicero, and suche other persones, who lyuinge, ferre excelled in wytte, experyence,

and lernynge, them, which be nowe about hym? be men that sytte and speke nothing, any better than they? No, but rather moch warse: for they serue for nothyng, yet the ymages do that, wherfore they be ordeyned, that is to say b
                           •
                        ynge to mens remembrance the wysedom and vertu of them, whome they represented. But doumme counsaylours do not theyr offyce, wherfore they be called to counsail, but by their sylence they cause many thynges to be broughte to an vnlucky conclusion.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     And thou that art nat called to counsayle, arte full of bablynge.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     But ones in a yere: and wo
                           •
                        ist thou why that is?
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Nay, tell me I pray the. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Mary if they that be called, wolde alway play the partis of good Counsailoures: And bothe spirytuall and temporall gouernours wold banysh the and Gnatho out of theyr Courtes, excepte ye amende your condicions. I wolde speake neuer a worde, but syt as styll as a stone, lyke as ye se me: But for as moche as it hapneth all contrary, and that thynges be so far out of frame, that stones doo grouche at it (remembrest thou nat what a clatteryng they made at the laste warres in Italy?) and yet counsaylours be spechelesse: I that am set in the cytie of Rome, which is the head of the world,

ones in the yere shall here of the state of all princis and regions. And bicause in the moneth of Maye men be all sette in pleasure, and than they take merily such wordes as be spoken agayn them: than boldly I put forth my verdict
                           •
                        , and that openly.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     There thou doest folysshely: for thou shuldest do more good, yf thou spakest priuily. 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Tushe man, my playnnesse is so well knowen, that I shall neuer come vnto priuy chamber or galery.
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Sens thou profytest so lytel, why art thou so busy? 
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     To thintent that men shal perceyue, that theyr vyces, whyche they thynke to be wonderfull secrete, be knowen to al mē. And that I hope alway, that by moche clamour, and open repentaunce, whan they see the thynge not succede to theyr purpose, they wyll be ashamed.
                  
                  
                     HA.
                     Yet mayste thou happen to be deceyued.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     But they moche more, whan they knowe not who loueth them truly.
                  
                  
                     GNA.
                     Harpocrates, it is time that we repaire to the court, lest we be blamed. And lette vs leaue Pasquyll with his praterye.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     And I wyl leaue you both with your flattery. Yet I trust in god to see the day, that I wyll not sette by the best of you bothe a butterflye. As great a wonder haue I seneer this tyme,
                  
                  
                     HAR.
                     Farwell Pasquyl, and

thynke on silence.
                  
                  
                     PAS.
                     Farewell Harpocrates, and thynke on thy conscience, I wene I mought bie as moch of the costard monger for two pence. Nowe whan these two felowes comme to theyr maister, they wyl tell al that they haue hard of me, it maketh no matter. For I haue sayd nothyng, but by the way of aduertisement, without reprochyng of any one person, wherwith no good mā hath cause to take any displesure. And he that doth, by that whyche is spoken, he is soone spied, to what parte he leaneth, Iudge what men lyst, my thought shall be free. And god, who shall iudge all men, knoweth, that I desyre all thynges to be in good point, on the cō
                        dicion, that I mought euer be specheles, as it is my very nature to be. Adieu gentyll herers, and saye well by Pasquyll, whan he is from you.
                  
                  FINIS.
               
            
            
               
                  Londini in aedibus Thomae Bertheleti typis impress. Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum. ANNO. M. D. XL.
               
               
                  
                  
                     
                  
                  
               
            
         
      
   