
      
         
            
            
            
               
                  THE HISTORIE OF QVINTVS Curcius, conteyning the Actes of the greate Alexander tranſlated out of Latine into Engliſhe by Iohn Brende.
                  1553. ¶Imprinted at London by Rycharde Tottell.
                  Cum Priuilegio ab imprimendum ſo lam.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧TO THE RIGHT hyghe and myghtye Prince, Ihon Duke of Northumberlande, Earle, marſhall of Englande. &c. Iohn Brende wiſheth continuall proſperitie, wyth encreaſe of honour.
            
               MAnye haue wrytten, and experyence beſydes declareth, how neceſſary hiſtorical knowledge is to all kynd of men, but ſpecially to princes, and to others whi
                  •
               h excel in dignitye or beare aucthorytye in eny commune wealth: the ſame beyng counted the moſt excellent kynde of knowledge, the chiefeſt parte of ciuyl prudence, and the mirrour of mans lyfe. There is required in all magiſtrates both a fayeth and feare in God, and alſo an outwarde policye in worldly thynges, wherof as the one is to be learned by ye ſcryptures, ſo the other muſt chiefly be gathered by readyng of hiſtories. For in them men may ſee the groundes and beginnynges of cōmen wealthes, ye cauſes of their encreaſe, of their proſperous mayntenaūce, and good preſeruation: and againe by what meanes they decreaſed, decayed, and came to ruyne. There the vertues and vices of men do appeare, howe by their good doynges they floriſhed, & by their euil actes they decayed. How they proſpered ſo lōg as they mainteyned iuſtice, perſecutd vice, vſed clemencye & mercye, were liberal, religyous, vertuous, and voyde of couetouſnes. And contrariwiſe, howe they fell into manifold calamityes, miſeries, & troubles, when they embraced vyce and forſoke vertue. In hiſtoryes it is apparāt how daūgerous it is to begyn alteracions in a cōmen wealth. How enuy

& hatredes oft riſyng vpō ſmal cauſes, haue ben the deſtruction of great kyngdomes. And that diſobeyete of hygher powers, & ſuche as rebellyd agaynſt magyſtrates, neuer eſcapyd punyſhment, nor came to good end. In theym there be preſydentys for all caſes that may happē, in folowyng the good, in eſchuyng the euyl, in auoydyng incōuenyences, & in forſeyng miſchiefes. In them may be learnyd how to temper in proſperitye, how to endure in aduerſytye, & after what maner men ſhould vſe them ſelues both in tyme of peace & warre. As in all artes there be certeyne prynciples and rules for men to folowe, ſo in hyſtoryes there be enſamples paynted out of all kynde of vertues, wherin both the dignitye of vertue, & foulenes of vyce, appeareth much more lyuelye then in eny morall teachyng: there beyng expreſſed by way of enſample, all that Philoſophy doth teach by waye of precepts. Thys is ſuche a kynde of knowledge, as make men apt euē wyth ſmal experyēce eyther to gouerne in publyke matters, or in their owne pryuate affayres: For by cōparyng thynges paſt, wyth thynges preſente, men maye eaſelye gather what is to be folowyd, and what is to be eſchuyd. And he whyche can reade thē wyth ſuch iudgement, waiyng the tymes wyth the cauſes and occaſions of thynges, ſhall bothe ſee moſte deepelye in all matters, beſt declare hys opynion, & wynne moſt eſtymaciō of prudence & wyſdome. For if aged men be eſtemyd for the wyſeſt by reaſon of their experyēce. Or if Homer paynted forth in ye perſō of Vlyxes, the ymage of a perfyte wyſe man: imputyng the cauſe therof, to the knowledge he hadde gatheryd by traueylyng many coūtreyes, & by vewyng and markyng the cuſtomes and maners of dyuers nacyous.
            
               Then ſuch as be wel experte in hyſtories and by the well applying of them, can take the due fruite perteyning to the ſame: muſt nedes obteygne profoūdnes of iudgement, with a ſtable and groūded wyſedome. For in them men may beholde as it were before there eies, both the whole worlde, and the gouerment therof, with the policies and lawes, the diſcipline cuſtomes & mā
               ners of al people from the begynnyng. Thys is ſuche a thyng, that who ſo euer is clerely voyde of it, though he be endued wyth neuer ſo greate a wytte otherwiſe, with ſuch aptnes of nature, or other goodly vertues. Yet when he ſhall haue to do in weyghtye affaires, he ſhall fynde a certeigne mayme and imperfection, not onely in ciuyll gouerment, but alſo in the matters perteining to the warre.
            For al though in an excellent capitaine nature muſt geue the chiefeſt partes, that is to ſay: hardines, ſtowtenes of ſtomacke, wyth a natural wiſdome and vnderſtanding: by which qualities onely (experience therunto adioyned) diuers haue become famous capitaines.
            Yet thys is a thynge that geueth a greter policye, groundeth a deaper Iudgemente, addeth a further ornament and glory, and formeth a perfitnes & an excellencie in a ſhorter ſpace. The ſhortnes of a mans liefe ſhortened beſides by ſo manye caſualties, is the cauſe that men be taken awaye before the canne get ſuche an actual experience as may make thē perfite, and cō
               monly become rotten, before they canne attayne to a rypenes in knowledge. But by thys kynd of learning in youth a man is become aged, he hathe knowledge wythout experience, he is wyſe before it is loked for, he is become a councelour the firſte houre, and a man of warre the fyrſte daye. The ſame thynge hath bene

verified in manye, whych in young age haue bene prudente councellours, and in ſmall experience politique capitaynes. Alexander hereof is an euidente enſample, who, brought vp vndre Ariſtotle in learnynge, and ſo geuen to this kinde of ſtudye, that he had Homer alwayes laied vnder his beddes hede (wherby he myght be admoniſhed of the vertues and offyce of an excellent Prynce) entered into hys kingdome, whan he was but .xx. yeares of age: and neuertheleſſe bothe eſtabliſhed hys owne eſtate wyth ſuche prudence, that wythin ſhorte ſpace (beſides the enlargynge of hys owne boundes) he ſubdued the greateſt parte of the worlde. And albeit he began ſo young, and continued ſo ſmale tyme: yet no mans actes be comparable to his: beinge counted the moſt excellente captayne from the begynnyng. But if eny man wyl impute the greatnes of his doynges to the perfyte diſciplyne the Macedons vſed in the warres, and to the politique Capitaynes, and expert ſouldiers, left to hym by hys father Phyllyp: it ſhal appeare euydētly by the decaye of Realmes when they haue bene gouerned by imprudent Prynces, and by the ouerthrowes the Romaynes receyued when they were conducted by euyll Capitaines, that no prudence of counſellours can take place, nor eny dyſciplyne or experience of the ſouldiours can auayle, if the heade be not a mā of excellēt vertue. There is nothing newe vnder the Sunne (as the wyſe man faith) and it is impoſſible for eny thing to chaūce either in the war or in cōmon policye, but that the lyke maye be founde to haue chaunced in times paſt. Al which thinges laied vp in memorye, as in a place of ſtore: mē may alwayes be furniſhed for all chaunces that maye occurre. Seing hiſtories be then ſo good and neceſſary, it were

muche requiſite for mens inſtruccion, that they were tranſlated into ſuche toūges as moſt men myght vnderſtād them: and ſpecially the hiſtories of antiquitye, whych both for the greatnes of the actes done in thoſe daies, and for the excellencie of the writers haue much maieſtye and many enſamples of vertue. I therfore hauyng alwayes deſired that we engliſhmē might be founde as forwarde in that behalfe as other nations, which haue brought all worthie hiſtories into their naturall language, did a fewe yeares paſte attempte the tranſlacion of Quintus Curtius, and lately vpon an occaſion performed & accompliſhed the ſame. Whych auctour treating of thactes of ye great Alexāder, being figured in the Prophetes, Ieremie & Danyel, & mencioned in the firſt boke of ye Machabies, ſeme to haue bene borne, and brought forth into the world, not with out a mooſte ſpeciall prouidence and predeſtinacion of god: who proſpered ſo his procedinges that (as Iuſtine writeth (he neuer encountred with eny enemyes whō he ouercame not, he beſeiged no citye that he wanne not, nor aſſailed nation that he ſubdued not. Thys ſo worthie a matter I thoughte good to dedicate vnto youre grace, folowyng their enſample that haue traueyled in the like ſtudye, whiche are wonte to declare their good willes, by beſtowing of their labours. Therunto I was alſo moued yt rather, by conſidering ye qualities of your grace, which ſeme to haue certeine affinitie and reſemblaunce wyth ſuch as were ye very vertues in Alexander. For Arianus writeth of hym yt he was of a ſemelie ſtature, bolde in his enterpriſes, ſtowte of ſtomack, moderate in pleaſures, wiſe in coū
               ſayle, and prouident to forſee thynges. That he was excellent in conductyng of an armye, moſte pollitique

in orderyng hys battailes, that he could encourage his ſouldiers wyth apt wordes, and when neade requyred take part of their peril. What partes of this be in your grace, let them iudge that haue knowen your actes in the warres, and your excellent ſeruice done, both in the time of the kinges maieſtie that nowe is, and alſo in his fathers dayes of moſt famous memorye. Although in doing hereof I haue not parauenture ſatiſfied al mens expectacyōs, yet my truſt is, that your grace will accept the ſame in good part, and conſider that in a tranſlacion a man can not alwayes vſe is owne vaine, but ſhalbe cōpelled to tread in the aucthores ſteppis: Whyche is harder, and a more difficulte thynge to do, then to walke his owne pace.
         
      
      
         
            
            ¶The firſte boke of Quintus Curtius, ſupplied of the actes of the greete Alexander Kyng of Macedonie.
            
               PHilip of Macedonie whiche by ſubduynge of Grece,Amyntas king of Macedon. dyd firſt bryng his countrey in reputation, was the ſonne of Amintas, a man endued with wiſdome, hardines, & all other vertues of a noble capitaine. Theſame Amintas had by Euridice his wife thre ſonnes, Alexander, Perdicas, and Philip, who was the father of great, Alexāder: with a doughter alſo called Euriones.Euridice. The Quene Euridice being in amoures with one that had maried her doughter, conſpired the death of the Kyng her huſband, to thintent to haue maried with her ſonne in lawe, and to make him king, whiche thing ſhe had brought to effect, had not the treaſon and whordom of the mother, ben opened by the doughter in tyme.Alex
                     •
                   the 
                     〈…〉
                   A
                     •
                  
                After the death of Amyntas Alexander the eldeſt ſonne enioyed his fathers kyngdome whiche in the beginning of his raigne was ſo aſſailed on all ſides, that he was driuen of force to purchaſe peace of Thillyrians with money by geuing his brother Philip in hoſtage. And afterwardes by theſame pledge made a like peace with the Thebans, whiche was thoccaſiō that Philip dyd atteine to ſuche excellency of knowledge and wiſdome, for by reaſon that he was committed to the cuſtodie of Epimanundas,Epymanundas. beyng both

a valiant capteyn and an excellent philoſopher, he was brought vp in the trade of honeſt diſciplines, and Princely maners, wherin he greatly proffited vnder a philoſopher of Pythagoras ſchole, whom Epymanundas keapt in his houſe for thenſtruccion of his ſonne. In the meane ſeaſon Alexander was ſlaine by the meanes of Euridice his mother, whoſe former treaſon kyng Amyntas her huſband had pardoned in reſpecte of the chyldren had betwene them, little thinkyng that ſhe would afterwardes haue bene their diſtruccion. For when Alexander was dead, ſhe cauſed in like maner her other ſonne Perdicas to be ſlayne:Perdicas. whiche Perdicas lefte behinde hym one ſonne being a young babe. About theſame tyme Philip the yongeſt brother being by good happe eſcaped out of priſon retorned into Macedon,Philip, and not taking vpon hym the name of Kyng, remayned a great while no otherwiſe but as Gouernour or tutor to his yōg neuewe. Neuertheles afterwardes by occaſion of ſundry myſchefes growing in the ſtate, theſame being ſuche as might not well hang till the yong kyng ſhould come to his age, for that he apered to be a man of ſinguler actiuitie, and of no leſſe ſkylle in feates of warre than in knowledge of philoſophie, was compelled by the people to take vpon hym the kingdom̄ of Macedon, whiche as than ſtode in hard plight, and great daunger of ruyne. This was done .400. yeare 
                  •
               fter the building of Rome and the .105. Olympiade. In the beginning of his raigne he was combred with 
                  ••
               finite troubles, for all the contries nere about (as it were by a generall conſpiracie) moued warre againſt him, and at one tyme ſondrie nacions ſwarmyd together out of ſondrie partes to ouerronne his kyngdom. Wherfore conſidering that it ſtode hym vpon to worke warely (being not able to mache them all at ones) pacyfied

ſome with fayre promyſes, other with money▪ and the weakeſt he withſtode with force. whereby he bothe made his enemies afrayed, and confirmed the hertes of his people, whiche he found diſcouraged, and in great doubte. Theſe thinges he wrought with great ſleight and fynenes of wytte, in ſuche ſorte that he mynyſſhed not any parte of his honour, eſtate, or reputacion, determinyng neuertheleſſe as tyme ſhould ſerue to deale with euery one aparte.Philips firſt warre was with the Atheniene. His firſt warre was with the Atheniens whome he ouercame by ſleyght and policie. And where it laye in his power to haue put them all to the ſworde, he let them all at libertie without raunſome. By whiche poinct of elemencie (though it was but conterfaite, for it was done for feare of a greater warre at hand) yet it gat hym great good will and eſtimacion vniuerſally. After that he ſubdued the Peons,Peons· Illyrians. and from thence turned his power againſt the Illyrians, of whome he ſlewe many thouſandes, and wanne the noble Cytie of Lariſſa. That done he moued warre againſt the Teſſalians,Teſſalians. not for any deſire of their goodes, or ſpoyle of their Countrey, but of a policie to adde to his ſtrength the force of their horſmen, whiche at thoſe dayes were counted the chiefe of the worlde, whiche his purpoſe he brought to paſſe, for beyng ſodeinly aſſailed, they were ſone brought to ſubieccion. So Philip ioyned the force of their horſemen vnto his footemen, whereby he made his powre inuincible. After all theſe thinges beyng happely brought to paſſe, he toke to wyfe Olympias one of the daughters of Neoptolenius Kyng of the Moloſſons,Olimpias Philippes wyfe. whiche mariage was cōcluded by ye meanes of Ariſba,Ariſba. who hauīg ye gouernemēt of Olympias was become king by ye mariage of her other ſiſter called Troada.Troada This mariage whiche he thought to haue made for his ſuertie turned

afterwardes to his ſubuercion. For thynking to haue made him ſelf ſtrong by thaffinitie of Philip, he was at length by hym depryued of the hole kyngdome, ending his life myſerably in exile: Not long after this mariage Kyng Philip dreamed that he ſawe his wiues wombe wonderfully ſwollen,Philippes dreame. and to his ſeming a liuely Image of a lion thereuppō, by whiche dreame the deuyners & dreame readers, did enterprete that his wyfe was cōceiued of a chylde that ſhould be of a lions hert and courage: with whiche interpretaciō he was mitch pleaſed.Methron. Afterwardes at thaſſault of a citie called Methron by ſhot of an arrowe he loſte his right eie. Wherof though the diſpleaſure was great, yet was he contēt vpon their ſubmiſſiō, to take them to mercy, He wanne alſo the cytie of Pagus and annexed the ſame vnto his kingdome:Pagus. He inuaded the lande of the Triballes,Tryballes. and at one inſtant conquered it with all the contreis thereaboute. Thus hauyng made his kyngdome ſtrong by ſubduing his neighbours, at his retournyng home his wyfe Olympias was deliuered of his ſonne Alexander,The byrthe of Alexand. the .8. daye of Aprill: Of theſe good fortunes the kyng reioyſed no leſſe than reaſon was, hauyng ſtablyſhed his contrey at home, ſubdued his enemies abrode▪ and gotten an heire to ſuccede in his kyngdome. He coulde haue deſired no more of God, if the mynde of man could euer be ſatiſfied, whiche the more it hath the more it coueteth: And as the dominion encreaſeth, ſo doth alſo the deſire to haue more. Which was wel ſeen in Philip that ſtill did compaſſe howe to growe great, by taking from his neighbours, and laye alwayes like a ſpie, awayting tyme and occaſion howe to catche frō euerie man, whereunto he had occaſion myniſtred by the Cyties of Greace, for whiles one did couet to ſubdue an other, and through ambition were at ſtrife who

ſhould be chief, by one and one, at laſte he brought all to ſubiection, firſte perſuadyng the ſmaler ſtates to moue warre agaynſte the greater, and to ſerue his purpoſe contcyued the wayes to ſet them all together by the eares, but at lenght when his practizes were perceyued, dyuers Cyties fearyng his encreaſe, confeadered agaynſte hym, as their commen ennemye, and namely the Thebans. Neuertheles in a neceſſitie when they were dryuen to wage men of warre, they choſe hym to be there generall Capitaine agaynſte the Lacedemonians, and the Phoceans,Philip choſen Captain agaynſt the Phoceans and the Lacedemoniās whiche had ſpoyled the temple of Apollo. This warre he honorablie acheued, ſo that by pounyſſhement of their ſacryledge, he gat hym ſelf great honour in all thoſe places. But in thende eſpyeng either of thoſe Countreis to be brought lowe with warre, he founde the meanes to ſubdue both the one and the other compellyng as well the ouercommers, as the ouercomme to be his Tributaries and ſubiectes. Then made he a voyage into Cappadoce, where killyng, and takyng all the Princes there aboutes priſoners, reducede the hole prouince to the ſubiection of Macedon. He conquered Olinthus, and within a while put his fote in Thrace. For where the two Kynges of that countrey were at variaunce aboute the limites of ther kyngdomes, and choyſe hym to be Arbitrer, he gladly toke it vpon hym, but at the daye a
                  •
               oynted for the Iugement, he came not thither like a Iudge in a Counſell, but like a warrier with an army, and to parte the ſtrife expulſid both the partes from their kyngdomes. By this time yong Alexander was of twelue yeares of age,The towardnes of Alexander. and began to take great delyght in the feates of warre, ſhewyng moſte manifeſte ſignes 
                  •
               f noble harte and Princely courage. He was very ſwifte of foote, and one daie at a ſolempne

game of ronnyng called Olimpiacum, beyng demaunded by ſome of his Companions whether he would ronne a raſe with them: gladly (quod he) If I had kynges ſonnes to ronne withall. Another tyme when certayne Embaſſadours of the Percians came into Macedon. Alexander whiche in his fathers abſence toke vpon hym their entertaynement and deuiſyng with them of diuers thinges, and in all his communication there neuer paſſed from him one chyldiſhe or vaine worde, but either he enquired the ſtate of their Countrey, the maners of the people, the diſtance of the waies, the powre of their kyng, or the order of his warres and ſuche other like. So that the Embaſſadours hauing meruaill the rat, eſteamed the prouffe of the father to be muche leſſe thē the towardnes of the ſonne, and that his courage was muche more then was to be loked for in one of his yeres. As oftē as tidinges came that the kyng his father had wonne any ſtronge or ryche Towne, or obteyned any notable victory. He neuer ſeamed greatly ioyfull, but would ſaye to his playe fellowes, my father doth ſo many great actes, that he will leaue no occaſion of any notable thing for vs to do together. Suche were his wordes, ſuche was his talke: whereby it was eaſy to cōiecture what a mā he would after proue in age, whiche ſo begā in youth. His delight was not ſet in any kynde of pleaſure, or gredines of gayne, but in the only exerciſe of vertue, and deſire of honoure. And the more aucthoritie yt he receiued of his father, the leſſe he would ſeame to beare. And although by the great encreaſe of his fathers dominion, it ſemed that he ſhould haue the leſſe occaſion to vſe the warres yet he did not ſet his delight in vayne pleaſure, or heapyng vp of treaſure, but ſought all the meanes he could to vſe mercial feates, and exerciſes of warre, coueting

ſuche a kingdome, wherein for his vertue and proues he might purchaſe fame and immortalitie, whiche hope neuer deceiued Alexander nor any other, when it happeneth in a mā of vertue and noble hert, that hath wille or occaſion to put the ſame in vre.Alexander was cōmitted to the gouernementes of Ariſtotle. The charge and gouernaunce of this young Prince was committed to ſondrie excellēt Maiſters and Gouernours, but chiefly to the greate Philoſopher Ariſtotle, whoſe vertue, learnyng, and knowledge, Kynge Philip ſo muche eſtemed, that he would often ſaye: he toke no greater comforte in the byrthe of his ſonne, then in that he was prouided of ſuche a Maiſter for hym as Ariſtotle, vnder whoſe tuicion he remayned ten yeares. Many thynges there chaunſed beſydes, whereby it was coniectured that Alexander ſhould proue a man of greate valoure.The oracle at Delphos For when his father ſent to Delphos to receyue aunſwere of the goddes who ſhould be his ſucceſſour, the Oracle was geuen that ſuche one ſhould not only ſuccede hym, but alſo be Lorde of the worlde. whom Buchephalus would ſuffre to ſytte vppon hys back. This Bucephalus was a paſſyng fayre horſe,Bucephalꝰ fyerſe and full of courage, whiche Philip had brought of a Teſſalien for thirtene talentes, and becauſe of his fierſenes kept hym within a brake of Iron barres, yet for all that he remayned ſo fell & wode that none durſte come nexe to dreſſe hym. Whereof the kyng was ſo wery that he would faine haue bene ridde of the horſe. It fortuned that Alexander came one day with his father vnto ye ſtable. What a horſe (qd he) is marred here for lack of good handling, & with that came more nere, and without any great difficulty gat vpon his back, & vſed both ye ſpurre & the rodde to thuttermoſte, both rū
               ning & mānaging him vp & down, whiche ye horſe abide very well. And hauing ridden his fil brought back the

horſe againe. As he alighted the kyng for ioye embraſed and kiſſed hym, and with teares in his eyes ſayde: O ſonne ſeke ſome other kingdome mete for thy harte. for Macedon cannot ſuffiſe. So that euen then the foreſeing father did full well perceiue all his poſſeſſion farre inſufficient for his ſonnes harte. After this Kyng Philip determined to make warre againſte all Greace. for the maintenaunce whereof he thought it great auauntage,Byzancium if he myght firſte wynne Byzancium a famous Citie on the ſee coaſte, wherfore committing the charge & gouernement of his Realme to his ſonne being then .15. yeares olde, he laide ſiege to the Towne whiche made him great reſiſtaunce. When he had conſumed all his riches and treaſure about the ſiege, he was driuen to ſo narrowe ſhifte, that to furniſhe hym ſelfe of money, he became a Pyrat and roued on the ſea, where he toke .170. ſhippes all the ſpoile wherof he departed amonges his ſouldiers. And lette his hole Armye ſhould be detayned about the wynnyng of that towne he ſorted out the moſte choſen bandes of all his Souldiers, and went into Gerſoneſus, where he toke and put to ſack manye notable Townes. Becauſe his ſonne Alexander was then about .18. yeares olde and had ſhewed euident proufe of his vertue and manhod in all his attemptes: His father ſent for hym thither to thentent he might in his warres learne and exerciſe all feates belongyng to a Souldier, & with hym made a voyage into Scythia, vpon no other quarell but to ſpoyle the Countrey. Thus vſing the practiſe of Merchauntes, with the gayne of one warre bare out the charges of an other. After he had brought the contrey in ſubiection,The bot o
                     •
                   Philip been S
                     ••
                   oute o
                     •
                   Scythi
                     •
                  . becauſe no riches of gold nor ſiluer was to be gotten there, he caried thens .20. thouſand of mē, women and children, beſides a great multitude of Cattaile,

with .20. thouſand choyſe mares to make a race in Macedon. In his retourne frō thence he was encoū
               tred with the Triballes, whiche denied him paſſage, except they myght haue part of his boutie, whereuppon debating of the matter, from wordes they fell to fyghting,Philip was wounded by the Tribals whereat Kynge Philip was ſo wounded in his thighe, that the violence of the ſtroke ranne through the body of his horſe, whereof all men iudgyng hym to be ſlayne, the botie was loſt therby. Aſſone as he was recouered of his hurte, his long diſſembled grudge againſt the Athenians braſte out ſo farre fourth, that he made open warre vpon them. By reaſon whereof the Thebanes ſeing the fyer ſo nere at hande,The Thebans and other Cities conſpired againſt Philip. gaue ſuccours to their neighbours, fearing leſte if the Atheniās were ouercome, thend of the warres ſhould tourne vpon them. Wherefore the Cyties that a little before were mortall ennemies one to another, confederated togithers in one leage, and ſent their Embaſſadours through all Grece, perſuading it to be moſte mete with a common ayde to withſtande a cōmon enemy. Some conſidering the peril to be vniuerſall ſtake to the Athenians. And ſome fearing Philips power encreaſyng, and the other decayeng toke parte with hym. In this warre Alexander was made Capitayne of one of the battailles, wherein his noble hert and courage did well apeare, ſpecially when it came to the ſtroke of the fight, for there he acquited him ſelf ſo valiauntly yt he ſemed not inferiour vnto his father, nor to any man els, but by moſte iuſte deſert got the honour of the victory. Albeit he was defrauded thereof by the enuie & ſleight of his father, as he him ſelf complayned afterwardes. This battaile was fought at Cherony,The battail at Cherony. wherin though the Atheniens were the greater nombre, yet were they ouercome by the Macedones, beyng the fewer, but yet

experte Souldiers by reaſon of their long and continuall practiſe in warres: neuertheleſſe the Athenians as men not vnmyndful of their former honoure ſpent their liues valiaūtly. That day made an ende of al the Grekes glory, aſwell of their large rule & gouernaūce, as alſo of their moſte auncient fredome and libertie: whiche beyng hardly wonne, and long tyme kept, was thus loſt in a moment. For theſe and many other experimentes of the valour and proues in yong Alexander, although the kyng his father did alwayes beare hym ſinguler affection and fauour, yet neuertheles by certayn occaſions enſuyng it was vnhappely broken. For Philip beyng maried to Olimpias mother of Alexander (as is ſayed before) toke to wyfe beſides her,The diſſenſiō betwixt Philip and Alexander. Cleopatra. one Cleopatra, whereupon fell great diſcorde and vnkindnes betwene the father and the ſonne. The occaſion was geuen by one Attalus vncle of Cleopatra, who beyng at the new mariage, exhorted ye multitude to make prayers to the Goddes to ſend betwene the Kyng and his nece a laufull heire to ſuccede in the kyngdome of Macedon. Whereat Alexander beyng moued: Thou naughty villaine (qd he) doeſt thou coūte me a baſtarde? And with that worde flange the Cuppe at his head. The Kyng hearyng this, roſe vp, and with his ſwoord drawen, ran at his ſonne, who by ſwaruyng with his body, auoided the ſtroke, ſo that it did no harme. Wherupon Alexander with many ſtowte and diſpiteful wordes departed from his father, and went with his mother into Epirus.Epirus. Neuertheles ſone after, by the meane of one Demoratus a Corinthian,Demoratus who perſwaded the kyng that this diſcorde was nothyng for his honoure, Alexander was ſent for agayne, and muche labour and greate meanes was made before they could be well reconciled. Wherefore to confirme this atonement there

was a mariage made betwene Alexander the brother of Olympiades (whome Philip by the expulſion of Ariſba had made Kynge of Epirus) and Cleopatra the newe Quenes doughter. The triumphe of that daye was notable accordyng to the ſtate and magnificence of ſuche two Princes, the one beſtowing his doughter, and the other marieng a wyfe. There were ſet furth ſondry notable playes and deuiſes pleſaunt to beholde. And as Kyng Philip betwene the two Alexanders, the one his natural ſonne, and the other his ſonne in lawe, was paſſyng through the preaſſe without any guarde:The death of Philip. One Panſanias a young man of the nobilitie of Macedon, when no man ſuſpected any ſuche thing, ſodainly ſlewe him ſtarck dead, making that day whiche was apoincted to Ioye and triumphe, lamentable and dolorous by the death of ſuche a prince.Panſanias. This Panſanias being a boie was enforced by Attalus to the vnnatural vſe of his body, whiche not content to do ſo himſelf, at an other open banket cauſed diuers of his familiars to abuſe him likewyſe,Attalus. with whiche ſhame and villany the young man beyng ſore greued (as reaſon would) cō
               playned to the kyng, whome although the diſhoneſtie of the matter moued muche, yet for the loue he bare to Attalus, and for the reſpect of his ſeruice forbare to vſe any reformacion in the matter. This Attalus was very nere vnto the kynge and in ſpeciall fauoure, by reaſon he was kynſman vnto the Quene Cleopatra whō Philip had laſte maried: He was alſo elected generall Capytayne of the Kynges Armye prepared to paſſe into Aſia, as one that was bothe valiaunt of hys perſone, and no leſſe politique in the feates of warre vpon theſe reſpectes the Kynge endeuoured by all the meanes he coulde to pacefie Panſanias (beyng kyndled with moſte iuſte cauſe of grief) aſwell by

gyuing him great giftes and promocions, as placing hym honourably amongeſt thoſe Ientlemē that were for the guarde of his perſone. But all this could not appeaſe the iuſt rage of his Ire, whiche wrought ſo in hym, that he determined to be reuenged, not only vpon Attalus that dyd the villony, but alſo vpon the Kynge that would not miniſter iuſtice. Whiche determinacion he put in effect, as is ſayd before. Many thynges myght be ſayd more of the doynges and ſayenges of this Philip, but one thyng aboue an other is to be noted, that although for the more parte he was alwayes occupied in the tourmoyle of the warres, and other like buſines, yet had he euer ſuche affeccion to the ſtudies of humanitie and good learnyng, that he both did and ſpake many thynges worthy memory, whiche were both witty and pleſaunt. He lyued ſeuen and fourty yeares, and reigned .xxv. yeares beyng the .xxiii. kynge of the Macedons, as they reigned in ordre.
         
         
            
            ¶The ſeconde boke of Quintus Curtius, ſupplied of the actes of Alexander the greate, Kyng of Macedonie.
            
               WHen Philip was dead,Alexander toke vpon hym as king the .20. yere of his age. his ſonne whiche for the greatnes of his actes was afterwardes called the great Alexander toke vpon him the kyngdome the .4.26. yeare after the buylding of Rome, being of the age of .20. yeares. His ſtate ſtode at that tyme ſubiect to muche enuie, hatred, and haſard from all partes. For the nacions and prouinces borderyng vpon hym could not wel beare their preſent bondage, and euery one of them ſought howe to recouer agayne their auncient dominion and enheritaunce. The firſt thyng he attempted after he was kyng was the greuous execution he dyd vpon as manye as hadde conſpiryd his fathers death whyche done, he celebrated his funeralles, with great pompe. Concernyng his eſtate he ſone eſtablyſſhed it, and that muche better thē any man could haue imagyned, in one beyng of ſo yōg and tendre yeares, for beyng of ſome had in contempt, and of ſome ſuſpected to be cruell, towardes the one he bare hym ſelf ſo ſtoutely, that he toke from them all contempt, and to the other ſo gentylly, that their ymagened feare of his cruell diſpoſition was cleane taken away, he graunted vnto the Macedons fredom and priuiledge from all exaccion and bondage, ſauing from the ſeruice of warre, by whiche act he got ſo great fauour and loue amonges his people that all affirmed by one conſent, howe the perſone of their Kynge was chaunged and not his vertue, his name was altered,

but not his good gouernement. In the beginning of his raigne rebellion was made againſt hym on all ſydes, he by and by with an incredible ſtowtenes and cō
               ſtancy of mynde ſtayed all their tumultes, which thyng pacified and ſet in ordre, he went to Corinthe in Peloponeſe,Corinthe. where callyng a generall Counſell of all the ſtates of Grece,Alexander elected Capitain generall againſt the Perciās he was elected their generall Capitain againſt the Percians, whiche before tyme had afflicted Grece with many plagues, and at that preſent poſſeſſed the greateſt Empire in the world, his father had purpoſed that warre before, but the preuenciō of death was the cauſe he brought not his purpoſe to paſſe. Whiles he was in preparacion of this enterpriſe, he was enfourmed howe the Atheniens, the Thebanes, and Lacedemonians were reuolted from hym, and confederate with the Percians, and all by meanes of an Oratour called Demoſthenes,Demoſthenes. whiche was corrupted by them with a great ſomme of money. For the reformacion whereof Alexander ſo ſodeynly had prepared an Army, wherewith he came vpon them, that they could ſcarſely beleue they ſawe hym preſent, of whoſe commyng they had not herde before. In his way he practyſed wyth the Teſſalians, and vſed to them ſuche gentle wordes and apte perſuaſions, by puttyng them in remembraunce of his fathers benefites, and of the aūcient kynrede betwene thē by the diſcent frō Hercules, that he brought them to the pointe, that by an vnyuerſall decre of the hole Countrey, he was created their Gouernour. So great was the celeritie that this young man vſed, and his diligence ſo effectuall in all his doynges, that he brought all ſuche in feare of hym, as before turned from hym, and regarded hym litle. As the Atheniens were the firſte that fayled, ſo they firſte of all repented, and extolled with

prayſes Alexanders chyldhode, whyche before they had deſpyſed, aboue the vertue of the auncient conquerours. They alſo ſent Embaſſadours to require of hym peace, whome he ſore rebuked when they came to his preſence, but yet was content at length to remytte their offence. And although Demoſthenes was choſen one of the Embaſſadours, yet he came not to his Prince, but from Cythron retourned agayne to Athens, whiche his doyng was ether for feare that he had ſo often 
                  •
               ayled agaynſt Philip, and ſtoored the Atheniens againſt hym, or els to take away the ſuſpicion of hym ſelfe from the Kynge of Percie, of whome it was ſayd that he had receyued a great ſomme of gold to ſtand agaynſte the Macedons. The ſame thyng was layed agaynſte hym by Aeſthines in an Oracion, where he ſaieth:Aeſthynes preſently the Kynges gold doth beare his charges, but that can not laſte hym long, ſeyng no ryches can ſuffiſe his prodigall liuyng. When Alexander had pacified thoſe ſturnes that were begonne in Grece, before he would paſſe his Army into Aſia, he made a iourney agaynſt the Peones, the Triballes, and Thillicians, becauſe he vnderſtode they were conſpityng togethers. And for that they bordred vppon hys Countrey: and were woute to inuade theſame vpon euery occaſion, thought to ſet ſtay amonges them before he would remoue hys power ſo farre of.Amphipolis From the Cytie of Amphipolis therefore he ſet forewardes agaynſte the Tracians, whiche at that tyme were not vnder the rule or lawe of any man. And in ten daies came to the mount Hemus,Mount Hemus. in ye toppe wherof he found thē encamped with a great power to reſiſt his paſſage. In ſteade of trēches they had impaled thē ſelfes wt their cariages croſſe ye ſtreightes

purpoſyng ther to let his iourney. And if they ſhould be inuaded by any other waye then by the ſtrayghtes▪ they dyd determyne to roulle the Cariages downe the hyll vpon the Macedones, to breake the array of their battailes, whiche deuiſe in dede they put in execution. But the Souldiers had receyued before inſtruccions by Alexāder, that as occaſiō ſhould ſerue, parte ſhould open their arraye to lette the Cartes and Wheales paſſe through them, and that other ſhould fall flat vpō the grounde, and by coueryng their bodies with their Targattes auoyde the daunger. They vſed the matter accordyng to their inſtruccions, and when the Cartes were paſſed by, they with a courage and crye mounted vp agaynſt their enemies, and in a moment put them to flyght: When Alexander was paſſed the Mountayne he entred into the Contrey of the Triballes as farre as the ryuer of Ligens.Syrmus kyng of the Trybals. When Syrmus Kynge of that lande vnderſtode of his comyng he ſent his wyfe and hys chyldren with ſuche of hys people, as were not mere for the warres into an Iland called Pencaſcytuate within the Riuer of Danubye.Penca. Into whiche lande the Thracians that bordered with the Triballes were fledde alſo. It was not long after that Syrmus hym ſelfe fledde thither lykewyſe. The reſt of the Tryballes that were not with the Kynge withdrewe into an other Ilande, where they kepte them ſelfes agaynſte Alexander. But he by polecye founde the meanes to drawe them out of theree ſtrength, whereby he ſlewe of them the nombre of thre thouſande, and the reſte fledde awaye, for of pryſoners there were fewe taken. After this battayles he marched towardes the Ryuer of Danubye, to that Ilande where the Tracians and the other Tryballes were fledde. They made notable

reſiſtans againſte him, which they might the better do, by reaſon that Alexander wanted boates, & the bankes of the Iland were ſo highe & ſtepe, that they could not be mounted vpon, but with great difficulty the ſtreame beſides ronnyng meruelouſly ſwifte, becauſe that the Ilande made yt narowe▪ when Alexander perceyued the impoſſibility to aſſaile them, he withdrewe to another place, where gettyng a fewe boates paſſed the ryuer in the night to the nōber of .M.ccccc. horſemen & 4000 fotemen, wyth whiche company he ſet vpon a people called Getes,Getes. that ſtode redye in bataile on the further ſide, of purpoſe to ſtoppe the Macedones their paſſage wt .4000. horſemen & .x.M. fotemē. By which ſodeyne comyng ouer, the Getes beīg afraid did not abyde the furſte onſet. it ſeamed to thē a matter of wonderful aduenture. for Alexander in one nyght wythout a bridge,Danuby. to paſſe his power ouer the brodeſt and depeſt ryuer of al Europe. this matter ſtroke ſuch fear in thē that they fledde into the woddes and deſerte places. leuing their cytie deſolate which was taken by Alexander and ouerthrone. Syrmus Kyng of the Triballes, the Germains, and the other Inhabiters of Danubie, ſent Embaſſadours thether vnto Alexander to enter with him in frendſhyppe, and amitie. And he condiſcending to their requeſtes, enquired of the Germaines what thing it was in the world that they doubted moſt, thinkinge in deade that the terrour of his name had bene the moſt feareful thing vnto thē. But when they vnderſtode his meanynge they aunſwered: that they doubted greatly the falling of the ſkye with whoſe preſumptious aūſwer Alexander was nothing moued, nor further replied, ſauing only that he ſaid, the Germains were alwaies a proud people, and thereupon diſmiſſed thē.Agrians. As he was going frō thence againſt ye Agrians &

ye Peās.Agryans. clitꝰ Bardeleius Glancias Kynge of Thalāts Lagarus. he was aduertiſed that Clitus Bardeleius had rebelled, and was confederate with Glancias ye kynge of the Thaulantes. he had alſo intelligēce, that ye people of Anteria wold giue him bataile in his paſſage wherefore he cōmytted to Lagarus the Kynge of Agryans (wich was welbeloued of King Philip, & no les fauored of Alexander) ye charge to go againſte ye Anterians,Anterians. and promyſed him vpon his retorne to giue him his ſuſter Cyna in mariage.Cina. And Alexāder him ſelf wt great celeritie wēt againſt Clytus & Glaucias, whō in ſondrey bataylles he ouercame, & put to flight. Whiles Alexander was about thes thinges,The Greks rebellyd. he receiued aduertiſemēt, ye diuers Cities in Greace & ſpecially the Thebans had rebelled which thinge moued him muche, & was ye cauſe that he retorned wt ſpede to oppreſſe ye cōmocion. The Thebanes in this meane ſeaſon beſieged ye Caſtle of Thebes, wher in was a guarriſon of Macedones, and wēt about by al meanes to win it. To whoſe reſcue Alexander came by greate iourneys. & encamped wt his hoſt nere to ye Citie.The ſiege of Thebes Such as bare rule amōges ye Thebanes, whē thei ſawe Alexāder cōe, contrary to yt they loked for, & doubted whether ſuch ayde ſhuld cōe to thē frō other Cities, as was promyſed, began to conſulte how to procede. At lēgth by a general conſent they determyned to abide thaduenture of ye warre. The King in ye meane ſeaſō ſtode at a ſtaye, geuyng thē ſpare to be better aduiſed, & chaūge purpoſe for he was of opiniō. that not one Citye wold euer haue made reſiſtance, againſt ſo great a power as he had, beinge aboue .xxx. thouſand, fotmen, and thre thouſand horſemen, al olde Souldyers, and experte in the traueiles of warre. The truſte of whoſe manhode and valyantenes had cauſed hym to vndertake the warres agaynſt the Percians. Trulye yf the Thebans had gyuen place too

fortune, & to ye tyme, and wold haue required peace they mighte eaſelie haue obtained it his diſire was ſo greate to paſſe into Aſia againſt ye Percians. but ye Thebans yt were determined to trye their force, and vſe no praiers, fought agaynſt ye Macedōes that far exceded their nō
               bre obſtynatly & with greate manhode. But whiles the batailes were ioyning the guarriſon of the caſtle iſſued out vpon the Thebanes backe, wherby being encloſed they were vanquyſhed, their Cytie taken, ſpoiled,The diſtraccion of Thebes and vtterly raſed. Which thynge Alexander did of purpoſe becauſe he thought ye reſte ye Grecians afraied by their ēſample, wold be ye more quiet whiles he ſhoulde be in the warres of Aſia. to gratifie the Phocians and Plateans that were confederat with hym, through the manifold accuſations that they brought in agaynſte the Thebanes, he ſlewe of them Six thouſande▪ and ſolde thirte thouſand as Slaues the money wherof coming amoūted to the ſom of foure hūdred and forty talentes yet he ſpared al the linage of Pindarus ye Poete,Pindarus the Poet. wherbye he woulde wytnes vnto the worlde, the fauour he did beate vnto learned men. In this Citie of Thebes was a notable woman called Timoclea▪
               Tymoclea. whome when A capteyne of Thrace did rauiſhe, & wold haue enforced her to confes her monye, ſhe brought him to a well where ſhe ſaide all her precious gere was hydden. And whiles he ſtouped downe to loke into the wel, ſhe thruſt him in, and threwe ſtones after▪ wherby he was ſlaine For this facte ſhe being comitted to pryſone and afterwardes brought before Alexander: he aſked her what ſhe was, ſhe aūſwered wt out feare, yt ſhe was Suſter to Theogenes whych beind elected general Captayne againſt kīg Philip his father, māfully died for ye libertie of Grece. At woſe ſtowtnes & cōſtācy ye King merueled ſo much yt he cauſed her we her childrē to be ſet at liberte

The Athenians had ſo greate pitie and compaſſion of the eſtate of the Thebanes, that contrarye to the commaundement of Alexander, they receyued into theyr Citie ſuch of them as eſcaped. Whiche thing Alexander toke in ſuch diſpleaſure, that when thei ſente Embaſſadours the ſecond tyme to demaunde peace, he would not graunte atonement, vpon any other condicion, but that ſuch Oratours & Captaines which had ſturred thē to rebelliō, ſhuld be deliuered vnto his handes. But at length the matter was brought to that poynet that the Oratours were reſerued, & the Captaynes baniſhed, which ſtraight fled to Darius Kyng of Percia. At ſuch tyme as Alexāder aſſembled the Greciās in Iſthmos for the determinaciō of his iourney into Percia, many Oratours & Philoſophers came to viſite him,Diogenes. only Diogenes that remayned about Corinthe kept hym ſelfe away, as one that eſtemed Alexander nothyng at all. wherat he marueiled much, & wēt to viſit him, wher he was beking of him ſelfe in the ſō. He aſked Diogenes if he had nede of any thīge yt he might do. To whō Diogenes nether gaue reuerēce nor thāks, but willed hym to ſtād out of his ſon ſhine. With whoſe behauour and wordes Alexāder was ſo delited, that turning to thoſe that were with hym ſaid: if he were not Alexander, he would wyſh to be Diogenes. Whē he had put in ordre thaffaires of Grece, comitting the rule therof togither with the Realme of Macedō to the gouernemēt of Antipater,Antipater. whō he moſt truſted. in ye begīning of ye ſpring came to Helleſpont wt his hole Armye,Helleſpont which he tranſported into Aſia with incredible ſpede & diligēs. Whē they were come to the furder ſhore, Alexāder threwe a darte to thennemies land, and as he was armed lepyd out of the ſhip wyth great chetefulnes, and their ſacrified, making peticiō vnto the gods that thei wold voucſafe

                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
towardes his enemies, and forbad his Souldiers to make eny ſpoyle vpon the contrey, perſuadinge thē to ſpare that was ther owne, and that thei ſhuld not deſtroyt ye thinge, which they came to poſſeſſe. He not had in his Army aboue the nombre of .xxxii.M.The number of Alexander Armye. fotemen & v.M. horſemen, and but .Clxxx. ſhips. wherfore yt is harde to iudge whither yt be more, wonderful, that he conquered the worde, or that he durſd attempte ye conqueſte therof, wyth ſo ſmall a powre, he chaſe not out to ſuche a dangerus enterpryſe the yonge men whych were in ye firſte floure of there age, but thold ſouldiers of whom the more parte for there longe contiunans in warres, were by the cuſtome at lyberty, whither they wold go to the warres any more or no, ſauing at there owne pleaſure. And there was none of the captaynes nor of ani other that bare office in the Army that was vnder the age of .lx. yeares. So that the ſouldiers, for their experiēce ſemed to be Scolemaſtres of ye warres. And the captayns for there grauitie apered to be Senators in ſome auncient comon welth. That was the couſe that in the fighte none of the minded any flieng but everie one conceyued the victorie in his hedde, nor any put truſt in his fete, but in his handes. Alexander that euery where made ſacrifice, did vſe moſte ſolempnitie at Troye vpō Achilles Tombe,Achylles. of whom he was diſcended by his mothers ſide. He iudged hym moſte happye of all men that had bene before, becauſe in ſuche glory he died yonge, and had hys actes ſet forthe of ſuch one as Homer was.Homer. From thence he paſſed forewardes into the domynions of Diarus Kynge of Perce, which beinge the ſonne of Arſanus,Darius king of Perce. and the fourtene Kyng after Cirus, had gotten the poſſeſſion of the Monarchie of the hole eaſte parte of the worlde. The chiefe cauſe that moued Alexander too

inuade hī was to be reuēged of ye damgs & diſtruccōs, wherwith his predeceſſours had afflicted ye contrei of Greace, & alſo for demāding tribut of Philip his father for yt wiche he ſent a proude & preſumptious ambaſſad called hīſelf ye King of kīges & Kiuſmā of ye gods, laſtly he had written to Alexander & called him his ſeruant, & gaue commiſſion to his lieutenants yt thei ſhuld beat ye mad boy ye ſonne of Philip wt roddes & afterwards bring him to his preſēce in kings aparaile And laſteli yt they ſhuld drowne both ſhip & mariners & conuey al ye Souldirs yt ſhuld be lefte on liue, beyond ye rede ſeas theytherfore purpoſīg to execute ye kings cōmādemēt,Troye Propontydes. aſſembled theyr powre at ye riuer of Grāik (which doth deuid ye cōtrei of Troie from propōtidis) thei had to ye nombre of .xx.M. fotmen & aſ many horſemē, wt whō thei had takē ye groūd on ye further ſid of ye ryuer, wher Alexāder muſt nedes paſſe ouer, wherof he being advertiſid though he ſawe but p̄ſēt ꝑil in thēterpriſe to fight in ye water & ye ouſe frō ye lower groūd,The battal vppn the Ryuer of Grauyk. agaynſt his enemyes which had thaduantage of ye higher bank. yet vpon a ſinguler truſte of hys owne good fortune, and the valiantnes of his ſoulders, attempted the matter. At the fyrſt he was ſore reſiſted, & put in great haſard of repulſe, but at length he vanqueſhed and otuerthrewe his enemies. In doing whereof there neither wanted polycie in him ſelf, nor yet ſingler manhode in his men. Ther was ſlayne in that battell of the percians .xx.M. fotemen with .cc.l. horſmen. And of ye Macedones but .xxxiiii. Thys victorie was greatlye effectuall to Alexanders purpoſe, for therby he wan the Cytie of Sardes,Sardes. beinge the cheyfe ſtrength the percians had for the maiſtering of the ſeas,Lydia, Ephelos. vnto the whyche Cytye and to all the reſte of the contreye of

lidia he gaue libertye to liue vnder their owne lawes He got alſo into his poſſeſſyon the Cytye of Epheſes by reaſon that the fourth daye after the battell yt was abandoned of ye guariſon which Darius ſet ther.Magneſia. In the meane ſeaſon ther cam Anbaſſedours frō Magneſia & frō ye Tralliās proffering ye delyuery of thier Cities. Parmenio was ſent to thē with .iii.Meliton. thouſand fotemen & .cc. horſemen,Helicarnaſſus. wyth whych powre he wan Miletum yt ſ
                  •
               od at defēce, & marching frō thēs toward helycarnaſſus got al the townes therabouts at ye firſt approche & afterwardes beſieged helicarnaſſus yt ſelf which with great trauaile he wan at length,Ada the Quene of Carya. & raſed to the ground. As Alexander entered into Caria,Orontoc
                     •
                  tes Ada the Quēe of that Countrey,Alynda. which had bene ſpoiled of al hir Domynion by Orontobates Darius lieutenant (ſauinge of one ſtrong Citye called Alinda) mette wt Alexander, and adopted hym for hir ſonne and heire, He wold not refuſe ye name & the proffer of hir liberalitie, but dyd betake to hyr againe, the cuſtody of hyr owne Citie.Licia. And beſides for ye memory of hyr beneuolens, put the hole Contrey of Caria vnder hyr rule and ſubiection. From thence he wente into Lycia and Pamphilia to thentent that by gettyng the poſſeſſion of the ſea coſtes of thoſe contries,Pamphilia ſhulde cauſſe the ſea powre of Darius to ſtand to none effecte. whē he had ones ſubdued the people of Piſydia,Piſydia. he entred into Phrigia by the which contrey he was enforſed to paſſe, and marched towards Darius,Phrigia. with whom he had great deſire to encounter, hearynge ſaye that he was comming againſt him with many thouſand of men of warre.
         
         
            
            ¶The thyrde boke of Quyntus Curtius of the Act
                  •
               s of the great Alexander Kyng of Macedon.
            
               Geander.
               ALexander in the meane ſeaſon hauing ſēte Geāder to wage mē of warre out of Peleponeſe. & eſtabliſhed the contreis of Lycia and Pamphilia, remoued his Armye to the Citye of Celenas.Celenas. 
               Marcia. throughe thys Citye theyr rane the ſame tyme the Riuer of Marcia verie famous in the greake poeſis whoſe hed ſpringing out of the tope of an highe mountayne, and fallyng downe vpon a rock beneth, made muche noſe & toringe. It floweth from thence, and watreth the feldes all about wythout encreaſe of any ſtreame ſauing hys owne. The collore wherof being like vnto the calmeeſe, gaue occaſion to the poetes to fayne howe the Nymphes for the delight they toke in ye Riuer, choiſe their dwellyng vnder that roke. So longe as it ronnethe within compaſſe of the walles yt keapeth his owne name, but whē it cometh without, where ye ſtreme is more ſwyfte & vehemente, is then called Lycum.Lycum. Alexander dyd enter into thys towne being foreſaken of the Inhabitaunts, and perceyuing they were fled into the caſtle whych he determined to winne before he departed ſēt, friſt to ſommō them by an Heraulde whych declared that except they wold yelde them ſelues, they ſhould ſuffre the extremytie of the law of Armys. They brought the herauld into an highe towre which was ſtrong both by nature and workmāſhip, willing him to cōſider the thing, & to declare vnto Alexander yt he wayed not ſufficiently ye ſtrengthe of the place, for thei ſaid they knewe it to be impringable, & if ye worſtſhuld falle, yet were thei redy to dye in there truth & allegeance. Notwth ſtandinge which wordes. whē it came to ye pointe, yt thei ſawe thē ſelues be ſieged, & al thinges wax ſcarſe. They toke truſe for l
                  •
                dayes, wt thys compoſition, yt if they were

not reſeued by Darius within ye time, they wold rēdre it vp into his hāds. Which thei did afterwards at ye dai apointed, whē thei ſaw no ſuccors coming. To ye place there ceme Embaſſadors to hym frō Athens makyng requeſt, that ſuch of there Citie as were takē priſōres at ye battel fought vppon the riuer of Granyke myght be reſtored to thē· To whom aunſwer was made, that whē ye warres of percie wer ōes brōght to an end, both thers & al other yt wer greaks ſhuld be reſtored to their libertie. Alexander had his preſent care & Imagenarō alwaies vpō Darius, whō he knew not yet to be paſſed the ryuer of Euphrates. He aſſembled therfore all hys powre togethers purpoſing to aduēture the haſard of the bataile. The cōtrey was called Phriga yt he paſſed thorugh plentyful of villages but ſcarſe of Cyties,Cytye of Gordyn. yet their was one therin of great Antiquitie called Gordin the roiall ſeat ſometyme of Kynge Mydas The riuer Sangarius doth ronne throught yt, and it ſtandeth in midewaye tetwēe the Seā of Ponte & Cilicia, being iudged to be the naroweſt parte of Aſia by reaſō of the Sees which lye on both ſides repreſenting ye forme of an Ilād. And if it were not for a ſmale point of land, yt do lie betwext thoſe ſes, thei ſhuld win both togithers. Alexander hauing brought this Citye vnder his boeyſans, entered into the temple of Iubyter, were he ſaw the wagon wherin Mydas the builder of ye Citie was wonte to ride. The ſame in the furniture & outwarde appearance differred lyttle frō other common wagōs,Gordies knotte. but there was in yt a thing notable: which was a rope folded & knit with many knots, one ſo wrethed within an otheir, that no man could perceyue the maner of yt nether where the knotes began, nor wher thei eanded Vpon theys the Contremen had a propheſie yt he ſhuld be lord of all Aſia that could vndo that endles knot which matter put the kinge in a meruelus deſire to become

the fulfiller of that propheſie. Ther ſtod a great nombre aboute him bothe of Phrigians & Macedons 
                  •
               hone parte of thē muſing to what cōcluſiō this matter wold come to, and the other feacing the raſhe preſiumpcō of the kyng. Foraſmuch as they could perceyue bi no reaſō now ye knot ſhuld be vndōe. The Kynge him ſelf alſo doughting yt the failing of his purpoſe in ye matter, might be take as a tokē of his euel fortune to come. Wherfore after he had cōſidred the thing: What matter maketh it (qd he) which way it be vndone, and ſtriued nolenger how to vnknit it, but out of hand cut wt his ſword the cordes a ſondre: therbi etheir illuding or els fulfilling theffecte of the prophecye. When this was dōe Alexāder purpoſed to find out Darius wher ſo euer he wer. And to the intēt he wold leue al thinges cleare behind his back, made Amphitorus captayne of his name vpon the coſte of Hellieſpont,Amphitorus. comettyng ye charge of ye mē of warre to Egilocus.Egilocus. Thei two haue commiſſō to deliuer ye Ilāds of Leſbos,Leſbos. Scyo. Coos. Scyo, & Coos from ye handes of ye Percians. And for ye furniture of their chargs apointed to thē .l. talēts. And ſent to Antipater & ſuch as had ye gouernans of ye Cities of Greac threſcore talēts. He gaue order ye ſuchas wer his cōfederats ſhuld wt ther own powre of ſhips defed ye ſeas of Helleſpōt according to ye leage betwixt thē. It was not yet come to his knowledg how Menō was deade vpō whō he ſet his hole regard,Menon. knowing if yt he moued not againſt hī, nomā ſhuld enterrupt his paſſage before he cam to Darius.The Cytye of Ancire. Alexander came to the cytye Ancyre where he made hys muſteres, and ſo entred into Paphlagomya wherunto the Grecians be borderers, of whome (it is ſaid) the venetians be diſcended.Rhaphlagomya. Al this Contrey yealdid vnto him, gaue him pledgs, obteining to be free of tribute, ſeing they neuer paid any 
                  ••
                the percians. Calas was captayne there, who taking wt
               
him the band of Souldirs yt were lately come out of Macedon went vnto Capadocea.Calas, But Darius hearing of the deathe of Menon,Capadocia was noles moued therwyth then the caſe required, for then allother hope ſet apert he determyned to trye the matter in perſon, cō
               dempnyng all thynges yt had ben don by hys deputies, hauing opinion that good gouerment wanted in many of them, and that fortune had fayled in them all. He came therefore to Babylon, wher he encamped. Aſſembling al his force togithers in ſight, bicauſe he wold ſhewe the greater courage. And vſing the enſample of Xrexes in takīg of his muſters, entrenched ſo much ground abut as was able to receiue .x. thouſand men. within the whych he lodged in the night ſuche as had bene muſtred in the daye. And from thens they were beſtowed abrode in ye plaine contrey of Meſepotanya, the numbre of his horſmen & fotemē were innumerable, and yet ſeamed to the ſyght to be more then they were. There were of the Percyans an .C. thouſand of whom .xxx. thouſand were horſemen. Of the Medeans .x. thouſand horſemē, & .xxx. thouſand fotemen. Of the Barcanyts two thouſand horſemen,Themnubre of Darius men of warre. with brode ſwordes & light bucklers, and .x.M. fotmē wt like weapōs. Ther were of ye Armēians .xl. thouſand fotemen & .vii. thouſand horſemen The hircanyans of great eſtymaciō emongeſte thoſe naciōs had .vi. thouſand horſemē. The deruicens were .xl. thouſand fotemē armed wt pikes, wherof parte had no hedes of Irō, but dried ye poīts of thē in ye fiere therwer alſo of the ſame naciō .ii.M. horſmē. Ther cāe frō ye Caſpiā ſea viii.M. fotmē & .cc. horſmē. And with thē of ye rude nacions of Aſia .ii.M. fotemen and .iiii.M. hoſemen. To the increaſe af thes numbres there were .xxx.M Mercenary ſauldiers yt were Greaks. Haſt wold not ſuffer to cal for the Bactriās, Sogdians, Indians, wt
               
other thinhabiters of ye red ſea, naciōs which had nāes ſcarſely knowen to ther owne kynge. Thus Darius wanting nothing leſſe thē ye mullitud of mē greatly reioſſed to behold them. And puffed vp wt the vanitye & flattery of ye greate men yt were aboute hym, turned to Charidemus of Athēs an experte mā of warre (which for ye diſpleaſure yt Alexāder did bere him was bāiſhed his cōtrey) & aſked him if he thought not this cōpany ſufficient to ouerthrowe ye Macedons. Wheriūto Charidemus without reſptte of the kinges pride, or of hys owne eſtate aunſwered.Charidemus words 
                     •
                  nto Drius Peraduenture ſix (qd he) ye will not be content to heare ye truth & excepte I tell yt nowe, it ſhalbe to late hereafter. This great preparatō & hiughe army of yours, gathered of ye multitud of ſomany naciōs yt you haue raiſed vp frō al pies of Thorient is more fearfull to theinhabiturs hereabouts, then terrible to your enemies. your mē ſhine in colors and gliſter in armure of gold, exceding ſo much in ryches, yt they which haue not ſene thē wc ther eies cānot cōceiue any ſuch thīg in their minds. But cōtrariwiſe the Macedōes being rough ſouldiers, wtout any ſuch exceſſe be terrible to behold ye frōts of ther batailes ſtād cloſe togethers alwais in ſtrēgth furniſhed wt pikes & targets for defēce.The Phalant of the Macedons yt which thei call ther Phallant is an immouable ſquare of fotemen, wherin euery one ſtād cloſe to other ioyning weapō to weapon, euery ſouldier obediēt toyt whych is commaūded him redy at his captaines beck whyther it be tofolowe his enſigne, to kepe hys armye, to ſtand ſtil, to rūne, to fetche a cōpas, to chang thorder of the battell, to fight on this ſide or that ſide: euery ſouldier can do thes thinges aſwel as the captaines. And becauſe you ſhal not thinke gold & ſiluer to be effectuall to thys matier, they began and obſerued this diſcipline pouerty beīg Mayſtres. Whē they be werye ye ground, is there bed, they are ſattſfiedfied

with ſuche meate as thei find by chaunce, and thei meaſure not their ſleape by the lengthe of the nyght. Thinke you the horſmen of Theſſaly, the Alcharnans, and Etolians whych be inuincible men of warre, wilbe repulſed with 
                  •
               lynges or ſtaues hardned in the fire. It behoueth you to haue a like force to repulce thē, and to be ſerued of the ſame kind of men. Mi counſel is therfore that you ſēd this gold and ſiluer to wage ſouldiers out of thoſe countreis from whence thei come. Darius was a man of a meke and tractable dyſpoſicion, if the heighte of his eſtate had not altered the goodnes of hys nature: which made hym ſo vnpatyent to here the truthe, that he commaunded Charydemus to bee put ſtreight wayes to death: being a man that was fled to his proteccion, and that gaue hym right profitable coū
               ſel. When he was going towards his death he left not his libertye to ſpeake, but ſaide: there is one at hande that ſhal reuenge my deathe. For he againſte whome I haue geuen the counſell, ſhall punyſhe the for not folowinge of the ſame. And thou being thus altered with the libertye thou haſte being a King, ſhalt be an enſample to ſuche as ſhal come after that when they commit their doinges to fortune they clerely forget thē ſelues. whiles Charidemus was ſpeaking theſe wordes, they which had the charge committed vnto them put him to death. whereof afterwardes the Kynge toke ouer late repētance, for he confeſſed that he had ſpokē the truth. & cauſed him to be buried.Thymones Ther was one Thymones the ſōne of Menter a yōg mā of great actiuite, to whō Darius gaue the charge of al the ſouldiers ſtraungers, in whom he had great cōfidence and willed hym to receyue thē at Pharnabaſus handes. And gaue to Pharnabaſus yt rule ye Menō had before. Thus Dariꝰ beīg careful of the buſines he had in hand, whither it were

through penſiuenes of mind, or yt his fancie did deuine thīges to cōe was cōtinually troubled wt viſiōs in his ſleape.D
                     •
                  riue dreame. He dreamed yt ye Macedōs cāpe was al on fire. And ſhortly after yt ſemed to hym that Alexander was brought to his preſēce in ſuch kid of appariel as he him ſelf did were, when he was firſt choſen Kyng, and that Alexander ſhould ther be caried on horſebacke through Babilō, and ſo to vaniſhe out of ſight. Hereupon thinterpretors of dreames with the diuerſitie of theyr deuininge, did driue Darius into diuers ymaginacions. Some ſaid his dreame betokened good fortune to him ſelfe bicauſe of ye fire that ſemed to be in his enemyes campe & for that Alexander wyth out any veſture of a King aperid in the vulgare apariel of ye Parcians. Other did enterprete it otherwiſe: that the lightenīg in yt Macedons campe ſignified glory & victorie to Alexander, & alſo then ioyment of ye empire of Aſia. which they made a clere matter for as muche as Alexander apered in the ſame veſtures that Darius ware when he was choſen King. Care beſydes and trouble of mynd (as it often chaunſeth) brought thinges by paſte again to remembrance. It was reherſed howe Darius in ye beginning of his raigne chaūged ye ſcabard of hys ſword from the Percian manner into the faſchion that the Grekes vſed. Whereupon yt Caldees did prenoſticat yt the Kyngdome of Perce ſhuld be tranſlated to thoſe, whoſe faſchion he had counterfaited. Notwithſtāding through the confidence of ſuch prophecies as were commonly ſene abrode, and of of the viſion, that he ſeamed to haue ſene in his ſleape became very mery, and commaunded his Army to marche forwards to the riuer of Euphrates. It was the auncient cuſtome amongeſte the Perciās, at the ſonne riſinge to raiſe their campe and warnyng of their ſetting forewardes to be geuen

by the blaſte of a Trompet ſowned at the kinges paullion vpō the which there ſtode an Image of the ſonne encloſed in chriſtall ſhininge ſo bright, that it might be ſene throught out ye campe.The order of the percians in their merchins. The order of their marche was in this maner. The fire which thei cal holie and eternall was caried before vpon ſiluer aultars, and the prieſtes of their lawe went next ſynginge after theyr contrey maner. There folowed .ccc.lxv. yong men in ſcarlet robes. like in nombre vnto ye daies of the yeare. Then came the chariots that was cōſecrate to Iupiter drawen with whyte palfreis, a great horſe folowinge which thei cal yt horſe of yt ſonne. Such as did ride vpon the palfreys dyd weare white garmentes, and had roddes of gold in theyr handes, next in order came ten chariots garniſhed and wrought with ſiluer and gold. The horſemen of twelue nacions folowed next in ſondry ſorte of Armoure. Thē came a cōpany that the Percians call immortall the ryches of whoſe apparell. exceded farre ye reſte thei had al cheines of gold, coates embrodered with gold, and ſleues ſet with Perle. there folowed with in a ſmale diſtans a band of xv. thouſand called Doriphere reputed for the King kinſmen, which were diſguiſed in maner like women, more notable for their gallentnes and varietie of apariel thē for the armour they did weare. Such as were wont to receyue the kynges robes at his hādes did ryde next before the chariot vpō yt which Darius did ſit on high with great pompe and magnificens his chariot was ſet on bothe ſides with carued Images of their gods both of ſiluer and gold. & al the former parte was adorned with perles and precious ſtones hauing two Images of golde their ſtandynge of a cubyte lengthe combattant on againſt the other and ouer their heades an Egle of gold diſplayed. But amongeſte all the reſte the Kynges apparell

ſhewed maruelous ſumptuouſe, whych was of purple empaled whit, with a border embroidred of gold faucons fighting togithers. He was gird effemynately with a gerdle of golde, and the ſword that hung therupon had the ſcabard made of a perle. The diadeame the Kyng were vpon his head called by the Percyans Cydarys had a 
                  •
               oule about yt of white and grene. Next behind the Kyng came .x. thouſande, horſemen, which had all their ſpeares plated with ſiluer & their ſpeares heades gilded. He was encloſed on both ſides with .cc of ye bloud royal, at whoſe backes there folowed .xxx.M fotemen,Siſigambis darius mother. and after them .cccc. of the Kynges courſers: wythin the diſtance of one furlonge Siſigambis the mother of Darius was caried in a Wagone and hys wief in an other, yt trayne of their women ridinge on horſback. Next them wēt .xv. wagons, wherin the kinges children were caried, their nurces and Enuches, which are greatly eſtemed in ye nacion. And after them folowed .ccc. .lx. of the Kinges concubines al aparelled like Quenes. Then came .vi.c. mules and .ccc. Camels that caried the Kynges treaſure whych were garded with a band of Archers. the wiues of the Kinges kinſmen and the other that were about the Kyng came ridinge next. & after them a great companye of ſlaues and verlets. Laſt came their reward, lightly armed, of whom euery captaine ſeueraly with his own company cloſed in ye army. Such was ye order of Darius hoſt on the other ſide beholding Alexanders Armye,Alexanders Armye. there was to be ſene agreat dyfference, niether the men nor the horſe were ſet forthe with ſuch gold nor precious furnymentes gliſtering only with the brightnes of their harnes, but they were obediēt at their captaines beck, alwaies in redines to ſtay or to paſſe forwardes, nether combred with ouer greate multitude. nor peſtered with

to muche bagage. Thei wanted not in any place either groūd for their encāping or victualles for their feding wherby theire ſmalle nombre was alwayes ſufficient when they came to fyght. Where as Darius the lorde of ſo huge a multitude. through the ſtreightnes of the ground. wherein he was driuen to geue battaille could worke theffect but of a ſmall nombre, whiche he before had diſpiſed in his enemy. Alexander appointed Abiſtamines the rule of Capadocia, and marching with his army towardes Calicia, came to the place that was called Cyrus Campe, becauſe he lodged there when he paſſed into Licia againſt kyng Creaſus. This place was diſtant aboutes .50. forlonges from the ſtreight, wherby he muſt entre Cilicia. The enhabyters vſe to cal thoſe ſtreightes Pyloe, where as the natural ſcituacion of the place had made a fortification as it were made with mans handes,Arſanes. When Arſanes gouernour of Cilicia vnderſtode of Alexanders comyng. remembryng what opinion Menon was of in the beginnyng of the warres, put in executiō his wiſe coūſell, thought it were ouer late, waſtyng and deſtroyeng through out Cilicia, all ſuche thinges as he thought might ſtande his enemy in ſtede, leuyng the countrey waſte, whiche he thought he was not able to defend: where as it had bene muche better to haue preuented his enemy in the ſtreightes, where from the hilles lyeng ouer the way he might without haſard either haue letted his entrey. or els haue diſtreſſed hym in his paſſing. But he leuieng a ſmall nombre for the defence of the ſtreyght, retired him ſelfe back to waſte the countrey, whiche his parte had bene to defend from deſtructiō. Of his departure it came to paſſe that thoſe whiche he left behynd, thynking them ſelues betrayed, would not ſo muche as abyde

the fyght of their enemies, when a muche leſſe nō
               bre had bene ſufficient to haue kept the paſſage.The deſtruccion o
                     •
                   Cilicia. For the ſcituaciō of Cilicia is ſuche that it is enuironed round about with a continuall rough and ſteade Mountayne whiche ryſing from the ſea on the one ſyde, & fetchyng a compaſſe aboute, ioyneth againe with the ſea, on the other ſyde. Through that parte of this Mountayne whiche lieth furdeſt from the Sea, beyng thre narowe and rough paſſages, by one of the whiche they muſt entre that will paſſe into Cilicia. This coūtrey towardes the Sea is playne and full of Riuers, amonges which two be notable Pyramus and Cydnus,Pyramus, Cydnus. but Cydnus moſte ſpeciall, not ſo muche for his greatnes, as for the clerenes of his water, whiche from his firſte ſpryng ronneth pleſauntly through all the Countrey, and hath no other Ryuer runnyng into hym to diſturbe the purenes of his ſtreame. For whiche cauſe it remayneth alwaies clere▪ and alſo coold by reaſon of the woodes that do ſhadowe all the banckes. Tyme hath conſumed many antiquities within that countrey, whiche be remembred of the Poeres. There maie yet be ſene the foundacions of the Cities of Lyrneſſus,Lyrneſſus, Cebeſtus. Coricius. and Cebeſtus with the caue and woode of Coricius where ſaffron groweth with many other thynges whereof nothyng remayneth ſauyng only the ſame. When Alexander entred the ſtraytes that before be mencioned, and beheld the ſcituacion of them, he neuer in all his life marueiled more of his owne felicitie and good fortune, confeſſyng that it had not bene poſſible for hym to haue paſſed, if any had ſtand at defence agaynſt hym. for that with ſtones only he myght haue bene deſtreſſed, and the ſtrayte beſydes was ſo narrowe, that there could not paſſe aboue foure in a front. To thencreaſe

of whiche difficulty the toppes of the Mountaynes hong ouer the ways, whiche in many places were broken and made hollowe with the ſtreames that ranne downe from the hilles. Alexander ſent the Thracians that were lyght armed to ſcower & diſcouer the ways, for feare the enemies ſhould lye there in buſſhement, and ſodeynly breake forth vpon hym: He appoyncted alſo a bād of Archers to take the toppe of the hyl, which were willed ſo to marche, that they myght be alwayes in a redines to fyghte. After this maner he came with his army to the Cytie of Tarſon,Tarſon. whiche was ſet on fyre by the Percions, becauſe that Alexander ſhould fynde no herborow there. But Parmeno was ſent thether with a choyſe nomber of horſemen to quenche the fyer, who vnderſtandyng that the enemies were fled away through his commyng, entred into the Cytie and by that meanes ſaued it from burnyng. The Ryuer of Cydnus ſpoken of before, dyd ronne through this Cytie, where the kyng arryued about mydday, it beynge in the Sommer ſeaſon, what tyme the heate is no where more feruent then in that countrey. He toke ſuche delyght in the pleaſauntnes of the water, that he would nedes bathe his body, to waſhe awaye the ſweate & duſt he had caught: and being in an heate entred naked into the water in euery mans ſyght, thynckyng it ſhould be a contentacion to his ſouldiers to ſe that the furnemētes about his body was no other but ſuche as they cōmonly vſed to weare.Alexander by bathing in a Ryuer became in great perill of his life. He was not ſo ſone entred but all the partes of his body began to ſhake & tremble, his face waxed pale, & the liuely heate was mortified in all partes of his body: His ſeruauntes toke hym vp and caried hym into his tent, as one beſides him ſelf, and at the poinct of death. Then there

was a great deſolacion and heuines in the campe, they wepte, lamented, and bewayled, that ſuche a Kyng, ſo noble a Capitaine as had not bene ſene in any age, ſhould thus be taken from them in the chief of his enterpriſe and brunte of all his buſines, and that after ſuche a manner, not in battaile ſlayne by his enemies, but thus caſt away bathing in a ryuer. It greued them that Darius now beyng at hand ſhould obtein the victory by ſuche a chaunce, without ſeing of his enemy, & that they ſhould be enforced to retourne back agayne as men vanquyſſhed by thoſe Countreis, through the whiche they had paſſed before as victorers. In whiche countreis all thynges beyng deſtroyed by themſelues or by their enemies, it was of neceſſitie for them to dye for hunger, though no man ſhould perſue them. It became a queſtion amonges them ſelues who ſhould be their Capitayne in their flyeng away? or what he were that durſte ſuccede Alexander? And though they might ſaufely arriue at ye Sea of Helleſpont, yet who ſhould prepare them paſſage there. And when they had diſputed theſe queſtions, their argument by and by was turned in compaſſion towardes their Prince, lamentyng as mē out of their wittes, that ſuche a floure of yought ſuche a force of courage as was in hym, that theſame their kyng and companion in armes ſhould after this ſorte be taken from them. In the meane ſeaſon Alexā
               der began to drawe his breath ſomwhat better, & when he came vnto himſelfe, he lifted vp his eyes and began to knowe his frendes that were about hym, the vehemens of his ſicknes ſomwhat aſſuaging, whiche was perceiued in that he began to vnderſtand the perill he was in. But the penſiuenes of his mynde was greate hinderaunce vnto his health, for tidinges came that

Darius within fiue dayes would be in Cilicia, whiche was the thing that made him to ſorowe and lamēt. He could not take it but greuouſly, that ſuche a victory ſhould be plucked out of his handes through his infirmitie. And that he ſhould be taken as one tied in bondes, and be put to ſome ſhamefull and vile death. He called therfore to hym both his frendes and Phiſiciōs, and ſayd vnto them: ye ſee in what ſtate of my buſines fortune hath taken me.The wordes of Alexander to his frendes in his ſickenes Me thyncke the noyſe of myne enemies do ringe in mine eares, and I whiche moued firſt the warre, am now chalenged and prouoked to fyght. When Darius did wrytte to me ſuche proude letters, he was not ignoraunt of myne eſtate, yet peraduenture he ſhalbe deceyued if I may vſe myne own mynde in recouery of myne owne health. My caſe requireth no ſlacke medicines, nor ſlowe Phiſicions. I had rather dye ſloutly at ones, then to conſume long tyme in my recouery. Wherfore if there be any hope or connyng in phyſicke let it be ſhewed. And thincke that I ſeke not remedy ſo muche for mine own life, as I do for the care I haue to encountre with myne enemies. When they harde him ſpeake thoſe wordes, they were in great doubte of his ſodein raſhnes, & therfore euery one required him apart, that he would not encreaſe his perill through any haſte, but ſuffre himſelf to be ordred by thaduiſe of his Phiſiciōs. For thei alledged that vnproued remedies were not ſuſpected of them without cauſe, ſeing his enemy had gone about to corrupt ſuche as were about him, by promiſing a .M. talentes to his killer. Which cauſe alleged, they thought no mā would be ſo bold to make any experiment of phiſicke vpō him, which for the want of triall therof, myght in any wyſe geue cauſe of ſuſpection. There was amongeſt the excellent

phiſicions that came with Alexāder out of Macedon one Philip of Acaxnon whiche was preferred to him for preſeruacion of his health,Philip Alexanders phiſicion. and had faithfully ſerued him from his childhode, and therfore loued him with entire affection. He promiſed to prouide for the Kynge an approued remedy, but ſuche one as would worke ſore vpon him, by the drinkyng wherof he doubted not (he ſayd) but to expulſe the force of his diſeaſe: That promiſe pleaſed no mā, but only him which in the proufe therof ſhould abide the perill: For he could abide all thinges better then delay. Darius and his power was alwayes in his eye, and he had aſſured confidence that ye victory ſhould fall on his ſide, if he myght be able but to ſtand in the ſight of his mē. The thing that only greued him, was that the Phiſiciō would not miniſter vnto him before the third day. In the meane ſeaſon Parmenio, whome of all his nobilitie he truſted moſte, had exhorted him by his letter, that he ſhould not cōmit himſelf to the cure of Philip, for that he was corrupted by Darius with a thouſand talentes, and the promis of his ſyſter in mariage. Thoſe letters brought the kyng in great care and doubt, and moued hym to way and pondre ſecretly with himſelf all thoſe thinges, that fear or hope could put in his hedde, of thone ſyde or thother. Shall I aduenture (thought he) to drynke this medicine?Alexanders Imaginaciō
                what if it be poyſon? ſhal I not then be accoūpted the cauſe of myne owne death? ſhall I ſuſpecte the fidelitie of my Phyſicion? or ſhall I ſuffre myne enemy to kyll me in my bedde? yet were it better to peryſhe by other mens treaſon, then thus to dye through myne owne faynt herte. His mynde beyng thus diuerſely wrought, he would ſhewe the contentes of the letter to no man, but ſealed it with his owne ring, and layde it

vnderneth his pillowe. Two dayes nere paſſed on in theſe Imaginacions, and the third daye the Phiſicion came to his beddes ſyde with the medicine redy made. When the kyng ſawe hym he rayſed vp hymſelfe vpon his elbowe, and takyng the letter in his lefte hande, with the other hande toke the cuppe, and ſtreyght ſupped it of. When he had ſo done he delyuered the letter to Philip to reade, and whyles he was readyng he beheld hym continually in the face ſuppoſing that if he had bene faulty, ſome token would haue apeared in his countenaunce. When Philip had redde the letter he ſhewed more tokens of diſpleſauntnes then of feare, and there withall fell downe vpon his knees, and ſaid: Sir I ſe my lyfe doth depende vpon your health. But your recouery ſhall declare that I am falſely charged with this treaſon: But when that by my meanes you ſhall get your health; I truſte ye will not deny me then my lyfe. In the meane ſeaſon laye feare aſyde, and ſuffre the medicine to worke, and to haue his operacion. Kepe your ſelf quiet, and ſuffer not your ſelf to be troubled with the ſuperſticious carefulnes of your frē
               des, which though it procedeth of good wil, is yet much impediment vnto your health. His wordes not only ſatiſfied the kyng, but made him to conceiue perfite hope to be hole, and ſaid vnto Philip: If the goddes would haue graūted yt to deuiſe a meane to proue ye cōfidēce I haue in the, & the good wil towardes the yu couldeſt not haue choſen any ſo good as this is: for notwithſtāding ye lfe, I drāke of ye medicine, beleuing yt to be no leſſe careful for declaraciō of thine own truth, thē for my heth, & therwith gaue him his hād: yet afterwardes whē the medicine begā to worke it was ſuch in operaciō, yt it ſemed to verefie Parmenios accuſemēt: for he faited oft

and had muche labour to drawe his breath. Then Philip left nothing vnproued or vndonne that might ſerue for his purpoſe. He laid warme clothes to his body, and alwaies as he fainted reuiued him againe with the ſauour of one thing & other. And when he perceiued him once to come to him ſelf, he ceaſed not to fede him with talke, and one while put him in remembraunce of his mother and his ſuſters, and an other while of the great victory that was at hand.Alexanders recoueryng. When the powre of medicine was once entred into his vaines, ther apeared ſtreight in all partes of his body manifeſt tokens of healt. Firſt quicknes came to the ſpirites, and after the body recouered his ſtrength a great deale ſoner then any mā loked for he ſhould. For the third day after he had bene in this caſe, he walked in ye ſight of his ſouldiours, which wonderfully reioyſed to ſee him. And they ſhewed no leſſe affeccion vnto Philip, whom euery one ſeuerally embraced & gaue him thankes, as vnto God. It cannot be expreſſed beſides the naturall veneraciō the Macedons vſe to beare vnto their prince, in what reuerence they eſpecially had Alexander, and how feruently they loued him. They had conceiued of him an opinion that he could enterpriſe nothing but that it was furthered by God, & fortune was ſo fauorable vnto him that his raſhenes was always encreaſe of his glory. His age beſydes ſcarcely rype, and yet ſufficient for ſo greate thynges, dyd marueylouſly ſet forth all his doynges. And thinges whiche out of the warres ſhould be coū
               ted lightnes, are wōt to be moſte acceptable to the ſouldiers, as thexerciſing of his body amonges thē, his apparell not differing from the cōmon ſort, with his courage & forwardnes in the fielde: whiche giftes geuen him of nature, & thīges done of policy did get him both

loue and reuerence of his people. When Darius harde of Alexanders ſicknes, he marched towardes the riuer of Euphrates with all the haſte he could make in conueying of ſo cōbrouſe an army. He made there a brydge and in .v. daies paſſed ouer his people, hauing great deſire to get Cilicia before his enemy. By that time Alexander had recouered his ſtrength, and was come to a Cytie called Solos,Solos. whiche the inhabitauntes yelded vnto him, and for two hundred talentes obtayned aſſuraunce. Notwithſtāding he put a gariſon in the Caſtle, and there celebrated playes, and triumphes whiche he had vowed to Aeſculapius, and Minerua for the recouery of his health: Where being geuē ſo quietly to his paſtime, ſhewed howe litle he eſtemed the commyng of his enemies. Whiles Alexāder was buſied about theſe thinges, he receiued pleſaunt newes, how his men had wonne a battaille of the Percians at Halicarnaſſus, and that the Myndians, and Cawnians,Myndians. Cawnians. with diuers other nacions in thoſe partes were brought vnder his obediēce. This triumphe ones ended he remoued, and by a brydge made ouer the ryuer of Piramus, he came to the Cytie of Malon:Malon. Caſtabulon. and from thence with an other remoue, came to a towne called Caſtabulon. There Parmenio returned to the kyng whiche had bene ſent to ſearche the ſtrayte that lay betwene them and the Cytie of Iſſon. He had preuented the Percians at the paſſage, and ſo leuyng men for the defence therof, toke the Citie of Iſſon that was lefte deſolate:Iſſon. he departed from thence and did driue the Perciās out of the moū
               taynes, & ſerched all the waies. So that hauing made all thinges clere for tharmy to paſſe, he returned again both the aucthour of the acte, & the reporter of the thing done. Alexander encamped within the Citie, & debated

there in coūſail, whether it were better to paſſe on further, or els to tary there for a more power whiche was cōming to him out of Macedon:Parmenios opinion. Parmenio was of opinion that this place was moſte meteſt to abide Dariꝰ in, and geue him battaille, where both tharmies ſhould be of like force by reaſō of ye ſtraytes, wherein no great multitude could fight at once: He ſhewed reaſons why thei ought to eſchue the plaines, wherein their enemies ſhoud haue great auantage through their great nōbre that might encloſe thē about. Wherin (he ſaid) he doubted not his enemies ſtoutnes, but only feared that their own men might be ouercōme with werenes, where a multitude ſhould fight with a fewe, & freſhe men ſuccede in the place of them that fainted. This counſaill was receiued for good, and Alexander determined in yt place to abide his enemies. There was in the hoſt of ye Macedons one Syſenes a perſone ſent before tyme from the gouernour of Egipt vnto kyng Philip:Syſenes. who being aduaunced with rewarde and promociōs choyſe to lyue out of his own con̄trey, & ſo folowing Alexāder into Aſia, was eſtemed among thoſe that the kyng truſted well: A ſouldier of Create deliuered hym a letter from Nabazzanes, Darius Lieutenaunt, wherin he exhorted him to do ſome notable enterpriſe, wherby he might wynne fauour & reputaciō with Darius. Syſenes innocēt of this matter was about diuers times to preſent the letter to the king, but ſeing him occupied wt weyghty affaires of prouiſion for the battaille, prolonged the matter. And whiles he wayted for a more conuenient time he brought himſelf in ſuſpiciō of treaſon, for the letter was brought to the kinges handes before it was deliuered vnto him: who readyng it, did ſeale ye ſame with a ſtrong ſeale, and cauſed it to be deliuered

to Syſenes, to proue therby his fidelite, but becauſe he counſealed the thyng many dayes and opened not the matter to the kyng it ſemed that he conſented thereunto: And therefore by the kynges commaundement he was put to death by the band of ye Cretēſians: The Greke ſouldiers whiche Tymodes had receyued of Pharnabaſus, beyng thoſe that Darius truſted moſte, were come vnto him.The grekes ad
                     •
                  iſe. They perſwaded muche Darius to retire backe into the playnes of Meſopotania, and if he would not do ſo, that at the leſte he ſhould deuide his power, and not commyt the hole force of his eſtate, to one ſtroke of fortune. This counſaill was not ſo diſpleſaunt vnto the Kyng, as it was to ſuche that were about hym: For they ſayd, mercinary ſouldiours were alwayes full of treaſon, and were to be doubted the more for that they counſayled the Army to be deuided, whiche was for no other purpoſe but only that they myght haue commoditie to flee vnto Alexander, when they ſhould haue any charge committed vnto them. There is nothyng therefore more ſure for vs (quod they) then to encloſe them round about with our army and to cut them in peces, to be an enſample to the worlde that treaſon ſhould neuer be vnreuenged. But Darius whiche was of a meke and good diſpoſicion,Darius clemency. refuſed to commit ſo cruell an acte in ſleyng ſuche as had betaken themſelues to his truſte:Darmes anſwere vnto his counſail For if we ſhould fyle oure handes (quod he) with their bloude, what ſtraunge nacion would euer then committe them ſelues into our handes? alledgyng that there ought no man to loſe his lyfe for geuyng folyſhe counſayll. For who would be bolde to geue Counſaylle, yf in counſayllyng there ſhould be any peryll? For I call you (quod he) to counſaill daily, and heare the

diuerſitie of your opinions, & yet miſtruſte not thē that geue me not always the beſt counſaill. He cauſed the Grekes to be aunſwered, that he gaue them thākes for their good will. But in retourning backe (he ſaied) he ſhould geue vp him his countrey into his enemies hā
               des, whiche were not conuenient. And conſidering ye force yt fame is of in the warre, in going backe he ſhuld appeare to flee. But to deferre the fight he thought it worſte of al, ſeing ſo great an army as he had (the winter thē approching) could not be victailed in a deſolate coūtrey, that had bene waſted both by them ſelues & by their ennemies. And for the deuiding of his power, he ſhewed that he could not do it, obſeruing the cuſtomes of his predeceſſours, which were not wont to haſard ye battaille, but wt their hole power. He declared yt Alexā
               der before his cōming ſemed terrible to the worlde, and through his abſence was brought in a vaine preſumption. But after he ſawe him come, became ware & wel aduiſed, hiding him in the ſtraytes of the mountaines, like thoſe coward beaſtes, that hearing the noyſe of cō
               mers by, do hide them ſelues in the dēs of the woddes. He hath blynded his ſouldiers (qd he) with his coūterfeit ſicknes, but nowe I will not ſuffer him to prolōge the fyght any longer, whiche if he will refuſe, I wyll oppreſſe hym in his lurkyng hole. Theſe wordes he ſpake with greater auaunte. then truthe. And ſent his treaſure and Iuelles with a ſmalle conuoye to Damaſco in Syria, and entred with his Army into Cilicia, bryngyng with hym accordyng to hys Countrey maner, both his mother, his wyfe, his little ſonne, and his doughters. It chaunſed theſame night that Alexā
               der was come to the ſtrayte entryng into Siria. Darius came vnto ye place which thei cal Pylae Amāicae.Pylae Amanicae The Perciās not doubtīg at al, but that the Macedōs

would haue forſaken the Citie of Iſſon, and fled away for feare, for certayne of thē that were weke and could not folowe were taken, the whiche Darius through inſtigacion of the great men about him, raging in barbarouſe crueltie, cauſed their handes to be cut of, and to be lead about his campe, to the entēt they might behold the multitude of his men, whom after ſufficient vowe taken, he lette go to ſhewe Alexander what they had ſene. Darius remoued and paſſed the riuer of Piramꝰ of purpoſe to purſue after the Macedons, whiche he thought had bene fleing away. They whiche had their handes cut of, came runnyng in amonges the Macedons, declaryng that Darius was commyng in greate haſte. There was ſcarſely any credens geuen to their wordes, but to be ſure Alexander ſent ſpyes towardes the Sea coaſte, to knowe whether Darius were there in perſone, or els had ſent ſome other to make a ſhewe of a powre. The Spies retournyng dyd reporte that his hole army was at hand, and ſtrayght wayes the fierce myght be ſene, whiche gaue ſuche a ſhewe (by reaſon they lay ſtraglyng ſo farre abrode to get forage) as though the hole Countrey had bene on fyre. When Alexander was aſſertayned of the truthe, he encamped in the ſame place where the tydynges came vnto hym, beyng marueylous glad that he knewe he ſhould fyght, ſpecially in the ſtreyghtes whiche was the thing that he had alwayes deſyred. But as it is commonly ſene when daunger and extremitie is at hand, confidens is conuerted into feare.Alexanders Imaginaciō before the battaille. So he doubted not without greate cauſe, that fortune myght charge vpon hym, by whoſe fauour he had done ſo great actes, & conſidered her mutabilitie by ſuch thinges as ſhe had takē from other and geuen to hym, he ſawe there was no

prorograciō of the time, but that after one night paſſed the victory ſhould be determined. But on ye other ſide, he called vnto remēbraunce howe the reward enſuing of the victory, farre exceded the aduenture. For as the ſame was dowbtfull, ſo beyng diſconfited, he was certayne to dye with honour and perpetuall praiſe. When he had waied theſe thinges, he gaue ordre that the ſouldiours ſhould refreſſhe them ſelues, and at the third watche to be armed and in a redines to ſet forwardes. He himſelfe went vp into the toppe of a moūtayn with many torches and lightes about hym, where he made ſacrifice vnto the goddes after his Countrey maner. And when the houre was come apoincted vnto the ſouldiers, at the third ſound of the trompet, they ware in a redines both to marche and fight. Then exhortacion was geuen vnto them to paſſe on with bould courage, and ſo by the ſpryng of the day they were come to the ſtreightes wherein their purpoſe was to preuent Dariꝰ. By that time ſuch as were ſent before to ſcowre the contrey, came in and reported that the Percians were within .30. furlonges. Then the battayles were ſtayed and ſet in ſuche ordre as they ſhould fight. Lyke as Alexander was enfourmed of Darius, ſo he was aduertiſed of Alexander by the peſauntes of the coūtrey, whiche came fearfully runnyng vnto hym, declaryng that Alexander was at hande. Theſe wordes were not beleued, for they could not thinck them to be comming, whom they thought before to be fledde. But when thei perceiued that it was ſo in dede, becauſe they were in better ordre to purſue their enemies then to encoūtre with them in battaile, they were ſtriken with a marueilous ſodeine feare. Euery man toke him to his armour in haſte, whiche haſte and the callyng that one made

vpon an other, did put a greater feare amonges them. Some ran vp to the toppes of the hilles to view the Macedons, other fell to brydling their horſes. So that the hoſte full of diuerſite and not ruled by any certayn gouernement, with their hurley burley, put all thinges out of ordre.The ordre that Dariꝰ gaue for the battaille. Darius at the firſt had apoincted one part of his power to take the mountayne. Whiche ſettyng vpon his enemies backes might encloſe them both behynde and before: and aſſigned an other company to paſſe along the ſea ſyde whiche was on the right hand, to kepe his enemies doing on euery parte. He gaue ordre alſo that .xx. thouſand fotemen with a band of Archers ſhould paſſe the ryuer of Pyramus, and geue an vnſet that way. But if they found any impedimēt why they might do ſo, then he willed them to retire amōges the mountaines, and to inuade their enemies on their backes. But fortune whiche was of greater force then any policie, determined thoſe thinges that were wel deuiſed according as ſhe thought good. For ſome durſte not for feare execute the thing that was commaunded them, and then the reſt worked in vayne, for where the membres faile the hole body is confounded.The order of the Perecians. The ordre of Darius army ſtode thus arāgid to fight: his power being deuided into two battailles, one marchīg on the left hand and the other on the right. Nabarzanes enpaled the battaille on the right hād with a great power of horſmē, and .xxx. thouſand Slingers and Archers. Thymones was alſo in ye battaille with .xxx. thouſand mercenary Grekes, being in very deade Dariꝰ chiefeſt force, a power equall vnto Phalanx of the Macedons. In the battaille on the left hand Ariſtomenes was in the fore front with .xxx.M. fotemen hauing plāted for his ſuccour & relief ſuch naciōs as were coūted moſte

valiaunt. There were about the kynge beyng alſo in that battayle thre thouſand choyſe horſemen that were of the ordinary guard of his perſone, and .xl. thouſand footemen with the horſemen of Hircany and Medya, and the horſemen of other nacions were wynges on both ſydes. And beſydes theſe nombres there went before this battaille in a forlorne heape .vi. thouſand Slingers and caſters of Dartes. All the plaine groūd betwene the ſtreightes was filled with men of warre▪ and Darius battaille ſtode araunged from the mountayne downe to the Sea ſyde. The mother and wyfe of Darius with all the flockes of women were receyued into the myddes of the battaille.The order of the Macedons. Alexander on the other ſyde ſet his ſquare battaille of fote men called Phalanx (beyng the Macedons chiefeſt force) in the fore fronte. Mycanor the ſonne Parmenio was capitayne of the battaylle on the ryght hande, and with him Cenos and Perdicas Meleager, Tolomeus, and Amintas were ioyned euery one with his owne bande. Parmenio & Caterus had the rule of the battaille on the left hand, whiche ſtretched towardes the Sea, but Parmenio had the chief charge. Horſemen were ſet in wynges to both thoſe battailles. The Macedō & Teſſalien horſemen beyng apoyncted to the rygth hande battaille, and the horſemē of Peleponeſe to the battaile on the other ſide, before whiche battaylle there were alſo ſet Slingers with Archers amonges them, and the Cretences that were lyghtely armed, went before the mayne battaille. The band of Agrians that were lately come out of Grece, were aſſigned to encoūtre wt thoſe yt Darius had ſent to take ye toppe of ye moūtaine. He willed Parmenio yt as much as he might he ſhould ſtretch out his bād towardes ye ſea, to wtdrawe as farre

as he could from the hilles, whiche the enemies had taken. But ſuch as had directiō by Darius to take the hilles neither durſte reſiſte ſuche as came againſt thē, nor yet to cōpaſſe thoſe about that were paſſed by thē, but fled away at the firſt ſight of the Slingers. Which thing chaunſed wel for Alexander, for it was the thing that he doubted moſte, that they from the higher groūd ſhould inuade the open ſide of his battaille, whiche lay vnflancked towardes them. The Macedons marched xxxii. in a rāke, for the ſtreightnes of the groūd would not ſuffer them to go any broder, but by little and little as the playne betwene the mountaygnes began to enlarge, ſo they had libertie both to make their battailles broder, and alſo for the horſemen to marche vpon the ſydes. Whē both the battailes were come within ſight togethers, the Percians firſt gaue a terrible and rude ſhoute, whiche was agayn doubled of the Macedons, not with their nombre whiche were farre inferiour vnto the Percians, but with the rebounde of the hilles and the rockes, which doubled euery voice of theirs. Alexander did ryde vp and downe before the frontes of his battailles, makyng a ſygne to his ſouldiours with his hand, that they ſhould not make ouermuche haſte to ioyne with their enemies, for bringing thēſelues out of breath. And as he paſſed by,The exhortacions that Alexander gaue vnto his ſouldiours. he vſed to euery naciō ſondry exhortacions, as he thought mete for their diſpoſicions and qualitie. He put the Macedons in remembraunce of their olde prowes and māhode with the nō
               bre of battailles that they had wonne in Europe, howe that they were come hether aſwel by their own deſires as by his conducte, to ſubdue Aſia and the vttermoſte bondes of the Orient. He ſhewed them to be the people that were ordayned to conquere the worlde. & to paſſe

the boundes both of Hercules, & Bachus. He declared that both Bactria and Inde ſhould be theirs, in reſpect of whiche the coūtreis that they had ſene were but trifles, & yet were to be gotten all with one victory, wherin he ſaid their trauaile ſhould not be in vain, as it was in the baraine rockes of Illiria, or in the mountaynes of Thrace, but that in this cōqueſt the ſpoyle of the hole Orient was offred vnto them. For the getting wherof they ſhould ſcarſely nede to occupie their wordes, ſince the battailles of their enemies wauered ſo alredy for feare, that with their approche only they ſhould put thē to flight. He reduced his father Philip vnto their memory how he cōquered the Atheniās with the coūtrey of Boetia, where he raſed to the ground the noble cytie of Thebes. After that he made reherſall of the battail wonne at the ryuer of the Granik, and of all the Cities that he had taken, or that had bene youlden vnto hym, with the countreis thei had paſſed through & ſubdued. When he came vnto the Grekes, he deſired them to call to mynd the greate warres that had bene made againſt their countrey in tymes paſt by the Percians. Firſt by the pride of the Xerxes and after by Darius who made deſtruction both by water and land in ſuche ſorte that the riuers could not ſerue them of drinke, nor the earth of victualles for to eate: reherſyng alſo howe the Temples of their Goddes had bene by them poluted, and put to ruen, their Cyties ouerthrowen, and the truces and promyſes by them violated and broken that were confirmed both by deuine and humanie lawes. When he was paſſed by the Illirians and Thracians whiche were accuſtomed alwayes to lyue vpon thefte, and ſpoyle: he had them behold their enemies whiche gliſtered with gold, and bare no armour, but ſpoyle fro

them & take. He encouraged them to go forwardes like men, and pluck the pray from thoſe effeminat womē, & to make exchaunge of their kraggie rockes and bare hilles alwaies full of ſnowe, for the plentiful groundes and ryche landes of Perce.The battal betwixt Darius and Alexander. By the time he had made theſe exhortacions they were come within throwe of their dartes. And Dariꝰ horſemē gaue a fierce charge vpon the right hand battaille of the Macedōs. For Darius deſire was to trie. ye battaille by horſemen iudging (as it was indede) that ye chiefeſt power of his enemies conſiſted in their ſquare battaille of fotemē. So that ye battaille where Alexāder was, was brought to the point of encloſing about, if he had not ꝑceiued ye ſame in time. who cōmaunded two tropes of his horſemē to kepe the top of the hill, & brought all the reſt to the encounter of his enemies. Then he cōueied the Teſſalians horſmē from the place where they ſtode to fight, willing their captain to bring thē about behind the battailles, & there ioyning with Parmenio to do the thing manfully yt he ſhould appoinct thē. By this the Phalanx of the Macedōs in maner encloſed about wt their enemies, fought notably on all partes, but they ſtode ſo thick, & ſo were ioyned one to an other, that there wāted ſcope to welde their dartes. Thei were ſo mīgled together, yt in caſtīg one letted another: very few lighted vpō ye enemies wt weake dintes, & the moſte parte fel on ye groūd without harme doing, wherfore being enforced to ioyne hād for hand, they valiaūtly vſed the ſworde. Then there was great effuſiō of bloud, for both tharmies cloſed ſo nere that their harnes claſſhed together, wepō againſt wepō & foyned one at an others face wt their ſwordes. Ther was no place for ye fearfull or ye coward for to fle back, but eche ſet his fote to other, & by fighting kept ſtil their place, til thei could make their way bi force, & ſo always

paſſed forwardes, as they could ouerthrowe their enemies, being weried and trauailed thus with fightyng, they were euer receiued with freſhe enemies: & ſuche as were wounded myght not parte out of the battaille (as it hath bene ſene els where) their enemies aſſayled them ſo fierſſy before, and their fellowes thruſt on ſo hard behind. Alexander did that day not only ſuche thynges as pertained to a Captayne, but aduentured himſelf as farre as any priuate ſouldier, couetyng by al meanes to kill Darius whiche he eſtemed the greateſt honour. Darius did ride alofte vpon his chariot geuing great prouocation both to his enemies to aſſayle hym,Oxatres Dariꝰ brother. and for his own men to defend him. As Oxatres his brother apeared moſte notable amonges them all in his furniture and perſonage, ſo in hardines and affection towardes the kyng he exceaded farre the reſt, ſpecially in that caſe of neceſſitie. For when he ſawe Alexander aproche ſo nere, he thruſte in before Darius with the band of horſemen wherof he had the charge, where as ouerthrowing diuerſe, he put many to flight. But the Macedones ſwarmed ſo about the kyng and were in ſuche a courage by thexhortaciō that eche made to other, that they charged againe vpon that band of horſemen. Then apeared the ſlaughter lyke an ouerthrowe. About the Chayre of Darius lay the moſte noble of his Captaines, all dyeng honorably afore the eies of their kyng, with their faces to the groūd like as they fel, receiued their death woūdes without turnyng their backes: Amonges whome Aticies, Romythres, & Sabaces gouernour of Egipt, that had the charge of great nombres of men, were ouerthrowen and ſlayne, and about them there lay by heapes a huyge nombre of the vulgare ſorte, both of horſemen and fotemen. Of the

Macedons alſo ſome were ſlayne of ſuche as preſſed moſte foreward, amonges whome the ryght ſhoulder of Darius was ſomwhat hurte with a ſworde. In this thronge the horſes that drue Darius Chariot, were thruſte in with pykes, whiche beyng woode for payne of their woundes, began to ſtroggle and ouerthrowe their maiſter Darius. He fearyng therfore to be taken a lyue, leaped downe and was ſet vpon a ledde horſe, and ſo fledde away caſtyng from his head his diademe becauſe he would not be knowen.Dariꝰ ouerthrowen. Then all his men for feare diſparkled, flyeng by ſuche wayes as were open for them, and throwe away their armoure whiche before thei had taken for their defence. Suche a thing is feare, that refuſeth the thyng that ſhould be his ſauegarde. When Parmenio ſawe them flee, he ſtraight commaunded the horſemen to purſue them in the chaſe, and put all his enemies to flyght that were on that parte. But on the other hand the Percians dyd put the Teſſaliens horſemen to a ſore ſtreſſe, for at the firſt ſhock they had broken one of their tropes: yet for all that when the Teſſalians ſawe their enemies paſſe through them, they cloſed themſelues together agayne and charged vpō the Percians, who by reaſon of their onſetgeuing and for that they though themſelues ſure of the victory, became cleane out of ordre, & were ouerthrowen with great ſlaughter. The Teſſalians had herein a great aduauntage by reaſon that the Perciās beſides that they be armed thēſelues haue their horſes alſo barbed with plates of ſtele, whiche was the cauſe that they could not, either in the vnſet, or retire be ſo quicke as yt Teſſaliās were: for by their celeritie wherin the feate of horſemen chiefly conſiſte, they had ouerthrowen many of them before they could tourne their

horſes about. When Alexāder vnderſtode that his mē preuailed of their enemies on that parte likewiſe, was bold then to folowe in the chaſe, whiche he durſt not do before he knew the battail to be clerely wōne & thennemies repulſed on all ſides. Alexāder had not about him aboue a .M. horſemē, with whō he ſlewe innumerable of his enemies. For who is he that in an ouerthrowe or a chaſe can nōbre men? Thoſe few Macedōs did driue the multitude of their enemies before thē like ſhepe. & theſame feare that cauſed thē flee, ſtayed thē likewiſe in their flieng. The Grecians that were on Darius ſide, vnder their capitain Amyntas which ſōtime had bene in great aucthoritie with Alexander,Amyntas. but then againſt him, brake out from the reſt and marched away in ordre of battaill. All the reſt fled diuerſe wayes, ſome directly towardes Perce, & ſome by pathes, & priuy wayes eſcaped by the moūtaines & the woodes. A few ther where that recouered their former cāpe, whiche they could not defend any time againſt the Macedons that were victours, but the ſame immediatly was wonne being habundāt of all riches of gold & ſiluer with appertaining not only to the warres but to all voluptuouſnes & exceſſe: whiche riches whiles the ſouldiers violētly ſpoiled, they ſtrowed the waies full of packes and fardels, whiche they would not touche in reſpect of ye couetous deſire they had to thinges of greater valew. But when thei came vnto the women as their tirementes were moſte precious, the more violētly thei plucked thē away and their bodies were not fre from their luſte & enforcement. The campe euery where was ful of tumulte & lamentaciō, as chaūce fel to eche one. The libertie of ye victours was ſuche, that their crueltie raged vpon all ages & kynd of creatures, & no kynd of miſchief wāted

amonges thē. There might haue bene ſene the variablenes of fortune, when they whiche had prepared Darius pauilion with al kynd of delicacie and riche furniture reſerued & kept theſame for Alexand as for their old maiſter, for the Macedons had lefte that vnſpoiled according to their aunciēt cuſtome which are euer wōt to receiue their king whē he is victorious, into the kinges pauilion that he hath vanquiſhed.Dariu
                     •
                   mother his w
                     •
                  fe & his children takē priſoners The mother and wyfe of Darius that where there taken priſoners moued all men to caſte their eyes and inwarde contēplacion towardes thē, wherof thone deſerued to be reuerenced for the maner that was in her, & for her yeares and the other for thexelēcy of her beuty, which through her miſaduentur was nothing ſtained. She was ſene embraſing her littell ſonne in her armes not yet of the age of .vi. yeares, borne as inheritour to the dominion whiche his father newly had loſte. There lay alſo two yong virgines in their grādmothers lappe, yeuen then mariable, whiche languyſhed and lamēted not ſomuch through their own priuate ſorowe, as for ye dolorouſnes of thould woman. About the mother and the wife were a great nombre of noble womē that pulled their heare, and tare their clothes without reſpecte what apperteined to their eſtate. Who vnmyndfull of the falle Darius wife and his mother were come vnto▪ called them by the name of Quenes, with ſuche other titles of honour as they did before. They all had forgot their own miſery & were diligēt to enquire ye fortune of the field, & what ſucceſſe ye battell had that Darius was in. For if he were aliue (they ſayd) they could in no wiſe thinke thēſelues priſoners: But he by the chaunging of many horſes was by that tyme fled far awaye. There were ſlayne of the Percians a hundred thouſand footemen,

and .x.M.The nōbre of thē that were ſlayne horſemen. And of Alexanders cōpany only v.C.iiii. hurte, & .xxxii. fotemē and .Cl. horſemē killed: So great a victory was gotten with ſo ſmall a loſſe. Alexander that was weried with purſuyng of Darius, when he perceaued the night to drawe on. & that there was no hope to ouertake him whom he folowed, returned into the Percians campe whiche a little before his commyng was taken by his men, that night he made a banquet to ſuche as he accuſtomed to call for the hurte of his ſhoulder, wherof the ſkinne was but ſmaly periſhed, letted him not to kepe cōpany. As thei ſat at meat ſodainly they heard a piteful crie with a ſtraunge howling and lamentacion, that put them all in great feare: Inſomuche that the band that kept the watche about ye kinges pauilion, fearing it to be the beginning of ſome greater matter began to arme themſelues. The wyfe and mother of Darius with the other noble womē that were taken priſoners, were the cauſe of this ſodayne feare by lamenting of Darius, whō they ſuppoſed had bene ſlayne. Which opiniō they conceiued through one of the Enuches, whiche ſtanding before their tent dore ſawe a ſouldier cary a parcel of Dariꝰ diademe, which he a litle before had caſt from his head. When Alexander vnderſtode their errour wept (as it was ſaid) to cō
               ſider Darius myſfortune, and the womens affectiō towardes him. And for their comforte ſent to them one Mythrenes that betrayed Sardes who was expecte in the Percian tonge,
                  
                     •
                  ythrenes but yet cōſidering that the ſight of him beīg a traitour ſhould but encreaſe their ſorow. ſent a noble mā called Leonatus to declare to thē how they were deceiued,Leonatus. & that Darius was a liue. He came towardes the tent where the womē were, with certain men in harnes, & ſent worde before that he was come

thether frō the kyng, but when ſuch as ſtode at the tent dore ſawe armed men cōming, ſuppoſing their errand had bene to murther their meſtreſſes, ran into them & cried out that their laſte houre was come, for the men were at hand that were ſent to kill thē. The ſeruaūtes therfore yt neither durſt let Leonatus in, nor kepe him out, brought him no aunſwere, but remained quietly to ſe what he would do. When Leonatus had long taried at the dore & ſawe none came fourth to call him in, left 
                  •
               is men without & entred amōges the women. Whoſe 
                  •
               omming vnto them before he was admitted, was the 
                  •
               hing that feared thē moſte of al. The mother therfore & wyfe of Darius fell down at his fete, requiring hym 
                  •
               hat before thei were ſlaine, he would ſuffer thē to bury Darius after his countrey manner▪ whiche laſte obſer
               
                  •
               aunce perfourmed they were cōtent (they ſaid) gladly 
                  •
               o ſuffer death. Leonatus aſſured them that both Darius was aliue, & that there was no harme towardes 
                  •
               hem but ſhould remaine in theſame eſtate thei were in 
                  •
               efore. When Siligābis heard thoſe wordes, ſhe was content to be lift vp from the groūd, & to receiue ſome comforte. The next day Alexander with great diligēce buried the bodies of ſuch of his owne men as could be founde and willed theſame to be done to the noble mē of the Percians. geuing licence to Darius mother to bury ſo many as ſhe liſte, after ye cuſtume of her cōtrey, whiche thing ſhe perfourmed to a fewe that were next of her kynne▪ according to the habilitie of her preſente fortune, for if ſhe ſhould haue vſed the Percians pōpe therin, ye Macedons might haue enuied it, which being victours vſed no great curioſitie in the matter. Whē ye due was perfourmed to the dead, Alexāder ſignified to 
                  •
               he women priſoners that he himſelf would come to viſitie

them and cauſing ſuch as came with hym to tarie without, he only with Epheſtion entred in amonges thē.Epheſtion. Theſame Epheſtion of all men was moſte dere vnto Alexander brought vp in his companie from his yougth▪ & moſte preuie with him in al thinges. There was none that had ſuch libertie to ſpeake his mynde plainlye to the kinge as he had. Which he vſed after ſuche ſorte, that he ſeamed to do it by no authoritie, but by ſuffraunce. and as he was of like yeares vnto him. ſo in makīg and perſonage he did ſomwhat excel hym. Wherfore the women thinking Epheſtion to be the kinge, did falle downe and worſhyp hym as there contrey maner was to do to kinges till ſuch tyme as one of the Enukes that was takē pryſoner ſhewed which of them was Alexander. Then Siſigambis fell downe at his fete requiring pardon of her ignoraūce, forſomuche as ſhe did neuer ſe him before. The king toke her vp by the hand, and ſaied: mother you be not deceyued, for this is Alexandar alſo. Whiche his humilitie continēcy of mind if he had continually obſerued to this latter daies,A diſgrſſion. I would haue thought him muche more hapier then he was, whē that he hauing ſubdued all Aſia from Helliſpont to the Occiā ſee, would counterfiet the triūphes of Bacchus. Or if that amonges the reſte of hys conqueſte he woulde haue labored to conquere his pride and his Ire, which be vices inuincible. Or if that in his dronkenes he would haue abſtayned from the ſlaughter of his nobilitie, and not to haue put to deathe thoſe excellent men of warre without iudgemēt, that helped him to cōquere ſo many naciōs. At this time ye greatnes of his fortune had not yet altered his nature, but afterwardes he coulde not beare his victories whith yt vertue, yt he did winne thē.

Thē he behaued him ſelf after ſuche a manner that he exceded in continencie and cōpaſſion all the kinges yt had bene before his time.Alexanders cō
                  
                     •
                  ynuance and Clemē
                  cye. Entreating ye two Quenes with thoſe Virgines that were of excellent bewtye ſo reuerently as if thei had bene his ſieſters. He not only abſteyned from all violacion, of Darius wief, with in beuty excelled all the women of her time, but alſo toke great care and diligence yt none other ſhould procure her to any diſhonour. And to all ye womē he cōmaūded their ornementes and apparell to be reſtored. So yt thei wāted nothing of the magnificēce of their former eſtate, ſauing only that aſſured cōfidēce that creatures want in myſerye. Whiche thinges conſidred by Siſigambis ſhe ſaid vnto ye king.Siſigambis words vnto Alexander. Sir your goodnes towardes vs doth deſerue yt we ſhuld make yeſame praier for you yt we did ſomtyme for Darius, and we perceiue yow worthye to paſſe ſo greate a kyng as he was, in felicitie and good fortune, that habound ſo in iuſtice and clemencie. you vouchſaue to cal me by the name of mother and of Quene, but I confeſſe my ſelfe to be your hand maide. For bothe I conceiue the greatnes of my eſtate paſte, and feale yt I can beare this preſent ſeruitude. It lieth only in your handes how we ſhall be delt with all, and whether ye wyll make vs notable to the worlde through your clemencie or crueltie. The kynge comforted them all he myght, and willing them to be of good chere, toke Darius ſonne in hys armes. Wherat the childe was nothinge afrayde. hauyng neuer ſene him before, but toke and embraſed him about the necke. He was ſo moued with the conſtancy of the child that he beheld Epheſtron, and ſaied, oh I would that Darius had, had ſome part of thys gontle diſpoſiicon. When he was deperted

from thence he cauſed .iii. aultars to be made vpon the Ryuer of Piramus, and there did ſacrifice to Iupiter. Hercules and Mynerua and ſo went forewardes into Siria.Syria. Damaſco. He ſent Parmenio before to Damaſco, wheras Darius treaſure did remayne: who vnderſtanding by the way that Darius had ſent one of his nobles thether, fearing that for the ſmalnes of his owne nombre, the Damaſcēs would kepe him out, determined to ſend for a greater power,Mardus. but by chaunce one Mardus fell into the handes of the horſemē that he had ſent before to ſcore the Countrey, whiche beyng brought before Parmenio deliuered hym the letters that the Capitayne of Damaſco had ſent to Alexander, and beſydes the letters added of hym ſelfe, that he doubted not but all Darius ryches and his treaſure ſhould be delyuered to hym at his arriuall. Parmenio gaue the charge to certayne of his men for his ſure keapyng, and then opened the letters, wherin it was cōteined that Alexā
               der in all haſte ſhould ſende one of his Capitaines thether with a ſmall power. Whiche thyng knowē, he ſent Mardus backe agayne to Damaſco with certayne to accompany him, but he eſcaped out of their handes & came to Damaſco before day light. That thīg troubled greatly Parmenio, doubting that they had layde ſome embuſhement for him, & therefore durſt not go an vnknowen way without a guide. yet notwithſtāding vpō the confidence he had in the felicitie of his prince, toke peſantes of the coūtrey to cōduite him the way, which the fourth day brought him to the Cytie of Damaſco. The captain doubting yt credēce ſhould not haue bene geuen to his letter pretended to miſtruſte the ſtrength of the towne, and made countenaunce as though he would fle away. And by ſpryng of the daye he cauſed

Darius treaſure (whiche the Percians call Gaza) with the reſt of all his precious thinges to be brought forth of the towne, of purpoſe to betray theſame into the Macedons handes. Then there were many thouſandes of men and women that folowed, a piteous ſyght to all that ſawe them, ſauyng to hym to whoſe fidelitie they were committed. For he to wynne hymſelf thancke, purpoſed to deliuer to his enemies a praye more precious then all the reſt, which were thoſe of the nobilitie he had in keping. With the wiues and childrē of great men that bare rule vnder Darius, and beſides the Embaſſadours of the Cities of Grece, whome Darius had left in the Traitours handes as in a fortreſſe (as he thought) of moſte ſuertie. The Percians call thoſe Gangabe that cary burthens vpon their ſhoulders, who hauing the cariage of thinges of moſte valoure, when they could not endure the colde for the froſt and ſnowe that ſodainly fell, they put vpon them the robes of cloth of gold and purple, which they caried wrapt vp together with the money, there being no man to let thē, for the aduerſitie of Darius cauſed that baſe ſorte of men to vſe a licencious libertie. Thoſe kynde of men ſeamed to Parmenio at the firſt ſight to be no ſmal army, and therfore regarded not the matter litle, but gaue exhortaciō to thoſe that were with him, as though they ſhould haue fought a ſore battaill, and willed them to put their ſpurres to their horſe and geue the charge: Whiche thynge perceiued by them that bare the burdeyns fled awaye for feare, and ſo dyd the men of warre that were with them by ſuch wayes as they beſt 
                  •
               newe. The Capitayne of Damaſco counterfeityng ſuche feare as other feared in dede, was the cauſe of all this confuſion. The ryches of Darius was left alone

and lay ſparkled abrode ouer all the fieldes, with the money that was prepared for the wages of ſo infynite a nombre of Souldiers, and alſo thapparell of ſo many great men and noble women, veſſell of golde, golding furnimentes for horſes, pauilions adorned with regall magnificens, and wagons full of infinite ryches. A thing euen ſorowfull to behold to the ſpoiles if any thing could ſtay the couetouſenes of men. Was it not a pytefull thynge to behold the ryches that had bene gathered together in ſo great nombre of yeares, whiles the ſtate of the Percians ſtode in that incredyble heigthe of fortune, one parte to be torne with buſſhes, and an other drowned in the myer, it beyng ſo great beſides that the handes of the ſpo
                  •
               lers could not ſuffiſe for the ſpoile. When the horſemē had ouertaken them that fled firſt they found diuers womē harying of the ſmale chyldren amonges whome there where foure Virgins the doughters of Occhus that reigned next before Darius.Occhus kyng before Darius. Thei before that time had ſuffred chaunge of fortune, when the ſtate was altered from their fathers line. But this aduarſitie was much more greuous vnto them. There was in thys flocke the wife of Occhus, the daughter of Oxatrix that was Darius brother, and the wife of Artabaſus which was of the head houſe of Percia. And alſo hys ſonne called Ilioneſus. The wyfe and the ſonne of Farnabazus were alſo taken, to whom Darius had commytted the charge of al ye ſea coſtes. With thē the thre doughters of Mentor, and the wyfe and the Sonne of the noble captain Memnon, there was ſcarſely any houſe of the nobilitie of Percia that was fre of that euel aduēture There were bothe Lacedemonians and Athenians. that contrary to the league betwene Alexander and

them, toke Darius parte. Amonges the Athenians Ariſtogiton, Dropides, and Leuertes were of moſte notable fame, and linage. And of the Lacedemonians the chefeſt were Periſippus and Onomaſtorides with Omanys and Callicratides. The ſōme of the coined money there taken was two thouſand .lx.The 
                     •
                  omme of the treaſure taken at Damaſco talentes & of maſſy ſiluer .v. hundred talentes. Beſides .xxx. thouſand men. and .vii. thouſand beaſtes that caried burdeins on their backes. But the goddes did perſecute with due puniſhement the betraier of ſuch a treaſure. For one whom he had made priuie to ye matter pitieng therin the ſtate of hys prince dyd ſle the traitour and brought his head to Darius a comfort not vnapte for the tyme to the betrayed kyng for therby he was both reuenged of his ennemy, and perceiued that the memorie due vnto hys eſtate, was not growen 
                  •
               ut of al mens hartes.
         
         
            
            ¶The fourth boke of Quintus Curtius of the actes of the great Alexander Kyng of Macedonie.
            
               DArius whiche alittle before was Lorde of ſo great an army, and that came vnto the field caried alofte vpon his chariot more like to triū
               phe then to fight: fled by the places then waſte and deſerte whiche he before had filled with his infinite nombres of men of warre. There were but fewe that folowed hym, for neither they fled all one way, nor ſuche as folowed could kepe pace with him that ſo oftē chaunged horſes.Vnchas. At length he came to Vnchas where he was receiued of .iiii. or .v. thouſand Grekes, whiche conducted him to the Ryuer of Euphrates, thinkyng that onely to be his, in the whiche he could preuent Alexander by his haſte makyng. Parmenio was apoincted gouernour of Siria, and to be the keper of the treaſure and priſoners whiche he toke at Damaſco. The Sirians could not at the firſt beare their newe gouernement, becauſe they had not yet felt the ſcourge of the warres: but as they reuolted, they were ſtraightway ſubdued, perfourming all that they were apoincted to do.Strato king of Arade. The Ile of Arade was yeldē to Alexāder, wherof Strato was kyng, that had in ſubiection all the ſea coaſte with diuerſe of the Inland countreis, whiche being ſubdued by the Macedons, Alexander remoued to the cytie of Marathon, where he receyued letters from Darius that put him in great coller,Letters frō Darius vnto Alexand
                becauſe they were ſo arrogantly written, the ſpeciall poincte that

moued Alexāder was for that Darius writing himſelf king, did not vouchſaue to geue him that title, but dyd write rather by way of cōmaundement then of requeſt proffering for the ranſom of his wife & childrē ſomuch money as Macedon could receiue. For the ſuperioritie (he ſaid) he put it to his choiſe, to trie it by the ſworde if he liſte but if he would be better aduiſed, he willed him to be content with his owne enheritaūce, & ſo he would ioyne in amitie with him & become his frend, in whiche poinct he was redy to enter into treatie▪
               Alexanders aunſwere to Darius letters. Alexander did wryte to him againe after this maner: Darius whoſe name thou haſt vſurped, did great deſtruction vpon the Grekes inhabiting on the coaſt of Helleſpont and vpō the Iomans whiche be Greke cyties. and from thence did paſſe the ſea wt a great army to make warre agaīſt Grece and Macedon. And alſo king zerxes the predeceſſour came to ſubdue vs with infinitie nōbres, which being vanquiſhed in a battel on the ſea, left notwithſtā
               ding Mardonius behind him in Grece, to deſtroy their cities, and burne their coūtreis. It is manifeſt beſides that Philip my father was ſlayne, by ſuch as were corrupted therūto with your money, ye vndertake always vniuſt warres, and occupyeng armes, go about for all that to circumuent men with treaſon. As thou of late hauing ſuche nōbre of men in thine army diddeſt procure my death with the promis of a thouſand talentes. I am not therfore the beginner of the warres, but repulce ſuch iniuries as be proffered me. In doing wherof through the help of the Goddes, which fauour alway the right, haue brought the more parte of Aſia vnder my ſubiectiō: & hauing ouercōme the in battail by force of armes, there is no cauſe that I ſhould graunt the any thyng whiche haſte not obſerued towardes me the

lawe of armes. yet if thou wilt come and ſubmit thyſelf I promis the that I will deliuer frely both thy mother wife and childrē, for both I knowe howe to get the victory and howe to vſe ſuche as I ouercome: but if thou feareſt to commit thy ſelf to vs. I will geue the ſaufeconduite to come frely. In the reſte when thou writeſt vnto me, remembre that thou writeſt, not only to a king but alſo vnto hym that is thy kyng. He ſent this letter by Therſippus, and went from thence into Phenicia,Phenicia. Biblon Sydon. where the Cytie of Biblon was youlden vnto him. And ſo came vnto Sydon which was a Cytie of great nobilitie by reaſon of the antiquitie and fame of the builders. The ſame was vnder Stratos dominiō, ſupported by the power of Darius who yeldyng more by the conſtreinte of the people, then of his own good will was thought vnworthy to reigne there. Alexand made a graunt to Epheſtion that he ſhould make ſuche one kyng whome the Sidons thought moſte worthy that place. There were diuerſe noble yong men in that cytie that had familiaritie with Epheſtion, of whome he purpoſed to haue choſen one kynge: but they refuſed his offre, affirming that none myght enioye that dignitie except he were deſcended of the bloud roiall. Epheſtion wondred at the magnaminitie that was in them, in deſpiſyng the thyng, whiche other ſought for by ſworde and fier, and therfore ſayd: continewe you ſtill in that vertuous mynde, whiche be the firſte that haue vnderſtande howe muche more better it is to refuſe, then to receyue a kyngdome. Chouſe ye therefore ſuche one of the bloud royall, that may remembre that he hath receyued the rule at your handes. But when they ſawe that diuers gaped for it, and for the gredines they had to reigne, fell to flatteryng ſuch as were nere

about Alexander, reſolued that there was none more mete for that dignitie then one Abdolominus who being of the auncient bloud of the kynges,Abdolominus was made kyng for pouertie was enforced to dwell in a ſmale grange without the Cytie. His honeſtie was the cauſe of his pouertie (as it is to many other) and beyng occupied in his daily labour, harde no noyſe of the warres that troubled all Aſia. They of whome we ſpake of before came into his gardein with garmentes to apparell hym lyke a kyng and found him weding of his ground, whome they ſaluted as kyng, and ſayd vnto hym, you muſte make exchaunge of the vilenes of your apparell with theſe ryche robes we here ꝑſent you: waſhe the body yt is now foull and filthe, take vpon you the harte of a kyng, and in the fortune you be worthy to haue, ſhewe the ſame moderacion and continencie you do vſe preſently. And when you ſhall ſit in your regall ſeate, hauing in your handes power of the life and death of your people, do in no wyſe forget the eſtate ye were in when ye toke the kyngdom vpon you nor yet for what purpoſe ye did receiue it. The matter ſeamed to Abdolominus lyke a dreame, and aſked them if they were madde that would mocke him after that manner. But when he ſawe thē affirme by othes the thyng to be in earneſt, he waſhed himſelf, & receiued the garment which was of purple & gold, & ſo went with the into the palaice. The fame (as is wont in ſuch a caſe) did notably ronne abrode of this matter. Some fauored the cauſe, & ſome did diſdain it, but ſuche as were riche did reproue his pouertie & baſe eſtate to ſuch as were nere about Alexād, which cauſed the king to ſend for him, & when he had lōg beholdē his behauour, ſaied: your perſonage doth not diſagre to the fame of your lynage. But I deſire much to know with

what pacience you did ſuſtain your pouertie. I would to God (qd he) I could beare my proſperitie in like caſe now when I am a kyng. Theſe handes did get that I deſired & hauing nothing I lacked nothing. His wordes cauſed Alexander to conceiue of him a maruelous opinion, ſo that he gaue vnto him not only the ryches, ſtuf, and furnimentes that appertained to the king before, but alſo many thinges that were takē frō the Percians, adding to his dominion all the countrey nere about the citie. In the meane ſeaſon Amyntas with .iiii M. Grekes that eſcaped with him out of the field fled to Tripolis where he enbarcked them & ſailed vnto Cipres,Tripolis. thinking the world to be ſuch then, that euery one might enioy yt he could get, like as it had bene his owne enheritaūce. His purpoſe was to go into Egipt, & ſo he thought to becōme enemy both to Darius & Alexander waying with the worlde, according as the tyme ſhould alter.Amintas ꝑſwaſion to his ſouldiours. To brīg therfore his ſouldiers to hope wel of his enterprice, he declared how ye gouernour of Egipt was ſlaine in the battell, & that ye Perciās left their enguarriſon were but of ſmale nōbre, of littel force, & without any head. He ſhewed how the Egipciās vſed to rebel againſt their gouernours wherfore they were ſure to be receiued as frendes. For ſince neceſſitie (qd he) hath enforced vs to proue our fortunes, which failīg vs in our firſt hope, we muſt now thinck ye thīges to come ſhalbe much better thē our p̄ſent eſtat. They al agreed wt one voice yt he ſhuld leade thē where he liſte, wherupō thinking good not to pretermit thoccaſiō whiles ye hope was hote in their hartes, cōueied thē into Egipt & entred ye hauē at Peluſiū vnder pretence yt he had bene ſent thether by Darius.Peluſium Whē he had gottē Peluſiū he ſet forwardes towards Mēphis,Memphis. at ye fame of woſe coming ye
               
Egiptians beyng a lyght nation, and more apt to make a ſtore, then to maintayne it when it is oure begonne, ran to hym out of al townes and villages with entent to deſtroy all the Percians, who notwithſtanding for all the feare they were in did, not leaue the defence of the countrey, but fought with the Grekes and were put to flyght. After that victory Amintas beſeged Memphis, and his men deſtroyed ſo all the countrey there aboutes, that they left nothing vnſpoiled. Wherupon Mareches though he perceiued his ſouldiers much amaſed with the feare of their late ouerthrowe.Mazeches. yet when he ſawe his enemies ſcatered abrode, & without ordre for the pride they had conciued of their victory, at length perſuaded his men to iſſue out of the cytie and in ſetting vpon their enemies to recouer again that they had loſt. Whiche aduiſe being good of it ſelfe, toke by good handling moſte fortunate 
                  •
               eſſe for thei ſ
                  •
               ewe at that tyme both A
                  ••
               intas and all his company. This puniſhement he ſuffred for the offence committed to both princes. Being neither faithfull to Alexander whome he forſake, nor to Darius to whom he fled. Darius capitaines whiche eſcaped from the battaille at Iſſon gathering together ſuch mē as wer ſcattered after ye battaille, with ſuch power beſides as they could leuie in Capaducea and Paphlagonia, did attempte to recouer again the countrey of Lidia. Antigonus was gouernour for Alexander there, who notwithſtanding that he had take many ſouldiers out of the guarriſones to ſend vnto Alexander: yet he ſo litle eſtemed his enemies, that he doubted not to aduenture the battaille. Where the Percians receiued the like fortune they did in other places: Whiche attempting the fyght in thre ſondry countreis, were vainguiſſhed in them all. At the

ſame time the nauie of the Macedons whiche Alexander had ſent for out of Grece met Ariſtomeues (whom Darius had apoincted to make warre vpō the coaſt of Helleſpont) where they did take and drowne all his ſhips.ariſtomenes Farnabazus Darius admirall, hauing exacted money at Nuleſium,Nuleſium and ſet guariſon in Sio, paſſed into the Ile of Andros with a hundred ſhippes.Andros Syphuns And from thence he went to Syphuns, puttyng men of warre into all the Ilandes, exacted of them money, The greatnes of the warre that was in hand betwene two of the moſte puiſſant princes of Aſia and Europe, did drawe both Grece and Crete to armes. Agys the kyng of Lacedenon gathered together .viii. thouſand Grekes that were come home out of Cilicia, and moued warre to Antipater that was gouernour of Macedonia. The Cretians folowing ſometime one parte & ſometyme another receiued one while guarriſoners of Macedons, and an other while of Lacedemonians to lie amonges them. But thoſe warres were of no great importunaunce. For all mens eies were fixed vpon the warres that were in v
                  •
               e betwene Alexāder & Darius. wherupon all the reſt did depend. The Macedons had ſudbued all Siria & Phenices.The Citie of Tyre. Tire only except. which being the greateſt & moſte notable cytie of all that coū
               trey. ſhewed that they eſtemed themſelues worthy rather to ioyne with Alexāder as frendes, then to become his ſubiectes. For when he was come nere vnto them. and encamped vpon the the mayn land. whiche is deuided from their Cytie with a ſmall arme of the Sea. They ſent to hym by their Embaſſadours a crowne of gold for a preſent, with great plenty beſides of victuals for his army. He receiued their giftes, as frō his frēdes and gaue gentle aunſweres vnto the Embaſſadours:

but he ſhewed thē that he deſired to make ſacrifice vnto Hercules (whom the Cirians ſpecially worſhipped:) for the Macedons opinion was that they were deſcē
               ded of him, whiche to do (he ſaied) he was admoniſhed by an Oracle, the Embaſſadours aunſwered: that there was a temple of Hercules without their Cytie in the place whiche they call Paleteriō, where as he might do ſacrifice at his pleaſure. At thoſe wordes Alexand could not refraine his Ire, whereunto he was much ſubiect. but fell in a rage: I perceiue nowe (qd he) becauſe ye dwell in an Iland ye truſte ſo muche in the Cituacion of your citie, that ye deſpiſe my land power. But I wil ſhortly do you to vnderſtande that ye dwell vpon the mayne land, and bring you to ſuche caſe as your Iland ſhal not helpe you: and therfore truſte to it that if ye receiue me not in, I will enter by force. When the Embaſſadours were diſmiſſed with this aunſwere, ſuche as were nere about the king perſuaded them that they ſhould not exclude him whome all Siria and Pheniſes had receiued. But they had conceiued ſuch a confidence, for that their Cytie ſtode in the ſea deuyded .lxxx. furlonges from the mayn land, that they vtterly determined to abyde the ſiege. That Sea of theirs was ſo muche ſubiecte to the ſouthweſt wynd whiche made at euery ſtorme the waues beate ſo highe againſt the Shore, that it would not ſuffer the Macedōs to make any worcke for the ioynyng of the mayn land to the cytie, it being ſcarſely poſſible to worcke any thyng there when the wether was moſte caulme.The Siege of Tyre. The firſt worke that the Macedōs began was by & by throwē down wt the vehemens of the ſeas that were driuē by the wynd. Nor thei could make no mole ſo ſtrōg within ye ſea. but

that it was waſhed awaie and brought downe by beating of the waues. And when the wynd blewe ſtrenth able it wold bring ye Seas clene ouer the work. Ther was an other difficultie no les then this. For by reaſone that the walles were enuironed about wyth the deapnes of ye Sea, they could rayſe no engine to ſhote but a far of out of ſhippes, nor ther was not ani groūd about the Cytie, wherupon ladders mought haue bene raiſed againſte the walles, or aproche made vpon the land. Alexander had no ſhippes, and though he had had ſome, and would haue coueted to bryng them to ye walles, yet by reaſon of the water, might with ſhotte eaſely haue bene keapt of. But emonges the reſte of other thinges, ye Tyrians were wōderfully encouraged by the commynge of the Embaſſadores that were ſent from Cartage to celebrat there yearly ſacrifice, according to rhere cuſtome.Carthage. For the Tyrians being the builders of Cartage were ſince that tyme had in veneracion as there parentes and furſte founders. Thoſe Embaſſadores exorted thē in any wiſe to abide the ſiege, and promyſed them ſhortly and which they alleged might eſelye and ſone be done, forſomuche as that tyme al the Seas were ful of the Cartage fletes vpon this hat
                  •
               ing they determyned to abide thextremitie, and placed ther engynes vpon the towers and the walles, deuyding ther armour emōges the yought of the Cytie. The Artificers, wherof that Citie had great plēty, were deuided into worcke houſes to make all ſuche thinges as were neciſſarye for the warres. There were deuiſed certaine inſtrimentes wherwith thei might pull downe the workes that ther ennemies made, called Harpagones, and alſo crowes of Iron which be named corui, with al other thīges that might

be inuented for the defence of Cyties. But a ſtraunge thinge is reported,P
                     •
                  odigous lighted. that whē the Iron was put in the forge & blowne in the fire the ſame was ſene to be full of droppes of bloud. Whiche wonder the Tirians did interprete as a token of good fortune towardes them ſelues, & as ſignificatiō of deſtructiō towardes their ennemies. A like thing was ſene amonges the Macedons for when a certayn ſouldier was breakyng of his breade, droppes of bloud appeared therin. Whereat Alexander being aſtonied.Ariſtander. Ariſtander that was moſte connyng of all the deuiners of their Religon. Did enterprete thus the matter. If the bloud had apered outwardly then it had ſignified il fortune to ye Macedons but in aſmuch as it was found within, it betokened deſtruction to the Cytie they went about to wynne.The lawe of nacions bryken. Alexander conſidering his nauie to be farre from him and that a longe ſiege▪ ſhould be great impedyment to his other affaires. Sent officers of Armes vnto the Citie to perſwade them vnto peace, whō the Tirians againſt the lawe of Nacoues did drowne in the ſea. There vniuſte death ſtored Alexander ſo muche, that he then vtterly determined to go forwardes with the ſiege, but before he could make his aproche it was of neceſſitie for him to make a Pers or a Mole, whereby they might paſſe from the mayne land to the Citie. But in the making therof ther entered great deſpaire into all mens hartes, conſidering the deapnes of the ſea which they ſawe not poſſible to be filled ſ
                  •
               arcly by any deuine powre. For thei thought no ſtones ſo great, any trees ſo highe, nor any contrey to haue ſuch plētie as mighte ſuffiſe for the building of a bank in ſuche a place, conſidring the Sea was alwaies troubled. And narowes the place was betwēe the Citie and the land,

ſo much more greater was the rage. But Alexander that had ye way to allure his ſouldiers to what effect hī pleaſed, declared how that Hercules apered vnto him in his ſlepe and gaue him his hand proffering to be his captaine and him giude for the entraunce of the Citie. Therunto he added the killing of his Embaſſadours, and howe that they had violated and broken the lawe that all nacions obſerued. and that there remayned but only one Cytie whiche ſtaied his victorie. Wherupon he deuided the worcke amonges his capteines. that euerye one might applye his owne band. And ſo put the worck in vre,Mounte Libanus. when he had oues ſufficientlye encouraged his men. There were great plentye of ſtones had of the mynes of thould Cytie where Tite ſtode before and for the making of bores and Towres tymber was brought from the mount Libanus. The worcke did growe from the bottom of the Sea like a mountayne, but not yet brought to the highe wartee marke. And the further the Pere was wrought from the land vnto the Sea ward, ſo muche the ſoner the Sea did ſwallowe vp the ſubſtance of thinges, wherof the ſame was made. Whiles the Macedons were thus about their worcke the Tiriās would rōne about them in ſmale veſſels, and giue the wordes of reproche and ſcorne as that they were nowe become goodly mē of warre that would be made pioners & cary burdens like beaſtes vpon ther backes And they aſked them alſo If they thought Alexander to be greater then the god of the Sea. But ther reproffe did not hynder but encreaſe the cherefulnes of the ſouldiers in there payne and trauaile. In ſo muche the mole in a ſhort ſpace ſurmounted aboue the water, encreaſing much in bredth, aproched nere vnto the Cytie. Then the

Tyrians ſeinge the hugenes of the worcke. whereof they before had bene diſeiued in there opynion. littell thinking that it woulde haue growen to ſuche a paſſe. they in littell veſſels came rowynge aboute the Pere. and did driue the ſoulders with ſhote from ther woreking. and bicauſe it lay in them to bryng there boats ſodeinly forwardes, and returne ſone ageine they hurte many of the Macedons without any daunger to them ſelues, which enforſed them to leue ther worck and fall to ther owne defence. For remedie wherof & to auoyde ther enemies ſhote. they were compelled to ſtreach out beaſtes ſkynes vpon poles like ſayles. and ſet thoſe betwene thē and their enemies. And beſides at the hedde of the Peace they rayſed vp two Towres from whence with ſhote and caſtinge of dartes they keapt of the boates that came aboutes them. On the other ſide the Tirians would lande with ther boates farre out of the ſight of the Campt & kill ſuch as were carriēg of ſtones. The peaſants beſides of Arabie did ſet vpon certayne Macedons that were ſ
                  •
               atred abrod in the mount Libanus, where they ſlewe and toke diuers. That was one cauſe whith moued Alexander to deuide his army. And leſt he might ſeme to remaine idely about the ſiege of one citie, he apointed Perdicas and Craterus to take the charge of the worcke he had in hande and went into Arabia with ſuch parte of his powre as was moſt apte for his porpoſe.Arabia. In the meane ſeaſon the Tyrians prepared agreat ſhyppe laden with ſtones and grauell behind, ſo that the fore patte flotid aboue the water, which ſhip anoynted ouer wt pitche & brymſtone, they brought ſodenly by ſailinge and force of oers vnto the pere. and there remaining the mariners

ſet the ſhippe on fier, and then leaped into boates which folowed after for the purpoſe. The ſhip thus ſet on fire ſo enflamed the wood worcke perteining to the pere, that before any reſcue could come, the fire had taken the towers and al the reſt of the workes that were made in the head thereof. When they that were leaped into the boates ſawe the matter take ſuche effect, they put betwixt the timbre and other voide places both fire brandes, and all ſuche thinges as might geue noryſhement and encreaſe the fire. So that the towers and al the reſt being on a flame. many of the Macedōs were conſumed therewith and the reſt forſoke their armour and throwe themſelues into the ſea. Then the Talās that were more deſirous to take them on liue then to kyll them, with ſtaues and ſtones did ſo beate them on the handes, as they were ſwymming, that for werenes they were glad to be taken vp into their boates. The hole worcke was not conſumed with this fire only, for it chaunſed alſo theſame daye a terrible wynde to ryſe, whiche blowing out of the Sea, brought the waues with ſuche violence vpon the Mole that with often beating of the Seas the ioyntes that knitte the worck together began to loſe and leue their hold. Then the water that waſſhed through brake downe the Mole in the myddes, ſo that the heapes of ſtones whiche were before ſuſteyned by the tymbre and earth caſte betwixt them once broken aſonder, the hole worcke fell to ruyn and was caried away into the deape ſea. By that time Alexander was returned out of Arabie, and ſcarſely found any remayne or token that any ſuche worck had bene. In that caſe (as it is euer vſed in thynges that chaunce
                  •
               ll) one laide the faulte vpon an other▪ when in dede the violence of the ſea was the cauſe of al. Alexā
               der

begā to make the Pere againe after a newe ſorte,A newe Pere made a
                     •
                  ter amoyer force. ſo that it ran with the fore front into the wind, and not with the open ſide as before. The fore front alwaies defending the reſte of the worcke lieng behind. which he made of ſuche bredth, becauſe the Toweres might be builded in the middes to be the further of from the ſhott. Hole trees were put into the Sea with all ther braunches, and after great ſtones thrown vpon them. And ouer thoſe a newe courſe of trees and ſtones againe, by which deuice this hole worke was ioyned. & knit all in one. As the Macedons were buſie to bring ther worcke forwardes, ſo the Tyrians were as diligent to inuent all ſuch thinges as might giue impediment to their proceding. Their cheife practiſe was for a nombre of them to go vnder water a farre of out of the macedones ſight, and ſo come diuing vnder the water till they came vnto the Pere, wher with hokes they would pull vnto them the bramuches of the trees that apered out of the ſtones. wherby the ſtones and thother ſubſtaunce folowed after into the depe. For the trees being diſcharged of ther burden were eſely drawen awaie, and then the foundacion failing, the hole worcke that ſtaied vpon the trees fell to ruyne. Amongs thes impedimentes Alexander ſtode in great perplexitie of mynde doutinge whither he ſhould continewe the ſiege ſtill. or els deperte his waye. When he was in this imaginacion ſodenly his nauie arriued from Cipres, and Cleander alſo with ſuch ſouldiers as he had brought out of Greace and hauing to the nombre of .c.lxxx. ſhippes, deuided theim into two batailes. wherof he committed thone vnto Pitagoras ye kinge of Cipres, and to Craterus,Pytagor
                     •
                  s king of Cipris. and toke charge of the other him ſelfe taking for his owne perſone a Galey

called Cin
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               :reme, which had fiue oers in a bancke. The Tiriās durſt not aduēture the ſea figh although they had a great nauy but ſet al there galies in a froūt before the walles of ther Citie which the king aſſailed and put to diſtreſſe The next daye the Macedons wt ther ſhippes enuironed the Citie round about, and did beate downe the walles, ſpecially with ſuch engynes as they call Arietes.Arietes. But the Tirians ſtrayght waye renforced and made vp ther walles againe with ſtōes that laie at hande and raiſed vp an inward wale roūd aboute within the Citie, which might be there defence if the other failed. But their deſtruction approched on euerie ſide, the Mole was wrought with in caſte of darte, and the ſhippes gaue the approche round about the walles, ſo that they were ouer laide both by Sea and by land. The Macedones had deuiſed to ioyne ther gallayes two and two togither in ſuch ſorte that the forepartes met cloſe before, and the hinderpartes lay farre of one from the other. And ouer the ſpaces that remayne betwixt ruppe and puppe they made brydges with maſtes and many yardes laied betwixt Galey and galey, and faſte bounde together to carie ſouldiers vpon, when they had put ther galeis in this ordre they ſet forwardes towardes the Cytie. And hauinge rampared the prores for defence of the ſouldiers that were behind They ſtode in the Galies and did ſhoote and caſt dartes againſt ther enemies without any perill or daunger to themſelues. It was midnight whē they had commaundement to ſet forwards after this maner.A Tempeſt As the ſhippes were approching on all partes, and the Tyrians ſtode aſtonied for feare & deſperacion, Sodēly the ſkie was ouerwhelmed with dimeine clowdes, & a ſodeine darkenes toke away the light. Then the ſea by litell & litell waxed terrible and roughe, the wyend blewe and rayſed vp the waues, &

beate the ſhippes one againſte an other, the violences wherof bruſt a ſonder the bandes and graſpers wherwith ye galaies were faſtened togethers. Which doun the bridges craſhed and flewe aſonder, and with the ſouldiers that ſtoode vpon them fell into the Sea. Ther was great confuſion, for the ſhippes entangled thus togither could by no means be gouerned in ſuch a tempeſt, the ſouldiers diſturbing the feate of the mariners, and the mariners giuinge impediment to the office of the Souldiers. Thus as it doth often happē in ſuch a caſe, the expert were obedient to the ignorant for the ſhippe maſters that were wont to commaunde then for feare of death were derected by other. But at length by force of rowing, the galeis recouered the ſhore the more parte of them being broken and torne. It chaunſed at the ſame time .xxx. Embaſſeadores to come from Cartage to Tyre, who gaue more comfort then aſſiſtance to them that were beſieged. For they ſhewed howe the Carthaginens were ſo aſſailed with warre at ther owne dores, that they could by no meanes ſend them ſuccore.Saracuſās In ſomuche as the Saracuſans were burning in Afrike, and had encāped them ſelues vnder the verie walles of Cartage. The Tirians yet were not diſcomfite, for al that they were diſapointed of ther ſpeciall truſte, but deliuered vnto thoſe Embaſſadours their wyues and their childrien to carie vnto Cartage, thinking to endure more ſtowtly the ſiege, if the thinges which were moſte deare vnto them were remoued out of Daunger. Ther was a Tirian which in an open aſſemble declared that Apollo (whom the Tyrians gretlly do worſhyppe) had appered to him in his ſlepe, ſemyng to him that he had forſaken the Cytie and trauſformed the mole that the Macedons had made, into a grate woode. Hereupon

though the autter were of ſmall credite, yet foraſmuch as men in feare be apte to beleue the worſte, they tied faſte Apolloes Image with a golden cherie, and they bound faſte alſo the aulter of Hercules (to whom the Cytie was dedicate) thinking that by deteaning of thone. to keape ſtill the other. The Cartagēs in times paſte had brought that Image from Siracuſe and had plaſed yt in the hed Cytie out of the which they were deſcēded. For their cuſtome was to addorne dyre with ſuch ſpoiles as they had taken, no les then they did Cartage. They at ye time wold alſo haue bene auctores vnto the Tiryans for the renuieng of an old ſacrifice that had bene omitted many yeares. wherin they vſed to offre vp to Saturne a fre borne childe, Which beīg rather a ſacriledge then a ſacrifice. of the Cartagens receyued of there fyrſte founders, and ſtill obſerued the ſame, till ther citie was deſtroyed. And but that the auncient men by whom al thinges was gouerned had withſtand yt, this wicked ſuperſticon had taken place, which nature and humaintie doth abhorre. The neceſſitie that was hanging ouer there heades being more effectuall then aine arte or ſcience, practiſed not onlye ſuche thinges as were accuſtomed for defences, but alſo found one that was neuer enuented before. For to the deſturbours of the ſhippes that approched the wales, they deuiſed longe rafters to the which the faſtened graſples of Iron and great hokes like ſithes which letten downe with ropes by an engyue, ether tare the ſhippes or deſtroyed the men. They inuented alſo Targettes of metall to be made fire hote, in the which they put burning ſand, & ſcalding lyme. and thē poured the ſame down vpon the Macedones that cam nere the walles, which was a miſchief that they feared

moſte of all other. For when the hote ſande entered betwene the harnes & the body, there was no meanes to auoyde it away: and where it touched it burned to the bones, ſo that they were enforced to throwe away their harnes, and teare away all thynges they had vpon their bodies. Whereby they became ſubiecte to be hurte by their enemies, and were not in caſe to endomage them againe. But ſpecially the graſples letten downe (whiche be called corui) toke violently away many of the ſouldiers that were within the ſhyppes. Alexander ſeyng their obſtinate defence was wery of the matter and determined to rayſe vp his ſiege, and go vnto Egypt. For conſideryng in howe ſhort a ſpace he had ouercome Aſia, it greued hym to be detayned ſo long about the walles of that Cytie, whereby he omitted the occaſion and oportunitie of greater thynges in the meane ſeaſon. But he was aſmuche aſhamed to departe without his purpoſe, as to remayne there and leue other thynges vndone: iudgyng that if he ſhould leue Tyre after that ſorte, as a wytnes that he myght be withſtādid, it ſhould much impaire his fame. wherewith he had gotten more then with force. And it chaunſed at theſame tyme a monſter of an excedyng bygnes to appere aſwell in the ſyght of the Tyrians as the Macedons. whiche lyeng vpon his back aboue the water came towardes the mole, and when he had beaten the water and lyfted vp hymſelfe at the head of the mole, diued vnder the water agayne, ſometyme appeatyng aboue and ſometyme vnderneath, and when he came nere the walles of the Cytie vanyſhed out of fyght. The appearyng of this monſter reioyſed bothe parties. The Macedons dyd enterprete theſame to be ſent to them as a guide to leade them away to furniſhe

out the worcke. The Tyrians deuined that Neptune reuenging the vſurpacion that the Macedons had made vpon the ſea, would ſhortely deſtroy the worcke that they had made, in lyke ſorte as he had taken away the monſter, and vpon their owne imagination had conceiued ſuche a gladnes, and pronoſticated to them ſelues ſuche good fortune, that they fel to bancqueting and drinkyng. And when they were well charged with wine at the ſonne riſing thei ſet garlandes of flowers vpon their heades, and mounted into their galleis, not only with hope of victory, but with a triumphe made beforehand. It chaunſed at the ſametime that Alexander had conueyed his nauy to the contrary ſyde of the Cytie, and lefte vpon the ſhore .xxx. of the ſmalleſt veſſels, of the whiche the Tyrians caught two, and put the reſt in great feare of diſtreſſing, vntyll ſuche tyme as the kynge hearyng the alarome, ſette forwardes with his nauy towardes that parte where the ſk
                  •
               ye was heard. The firſte Galley of the Macedons that came nere them was a quinquereme moſte ſwyfte amonges all the reſte, whiche when the Tirians eſpied, they came againſt her with two gallies ouerwhart vpon her ſide: wherof the one ſtroke full with her ſpurne, and the cinquereme graſpled with her, but the other whiche was loſs and at libertie fell vn the contrary ſyde, but leſte betwixt them two ſhe myght haue ſuſtained ſome domage, there came a tryreme of Alexanders to the reſcue with ſuche violence that the maiſter of the loſe galley was ſtriken into the ſea. But when the Tirians ſawe Alexander was come himſelfe and more of his ſhyppes were at hande, then with ſtrength of oers and great difficultie they ſet their galley that was entangled loſe againe and at libertie, and made towardes

their hauen with all the haſte they myght make. Alexā
               der immediatly purſued, but when he came to the hauē he could not enter, but was beaten of with ſhot from the walles, but that not withſtandyng the more parte of their galleis were eyther drowned or taken. After this aduenture he reſted his ſouldiers two dayes, and then willed his ſhyppes to be brought forwardes, and the engines in them, to the intent that by aſſaylyng the Tirians on all ſydes, he might put them in extreme feare. Alexander with a wonderfull courage not with out great parill vnto his perſone, mounted vp into the toppe of a tower that was made in a ſhyppe, and there knowen by his apparell and ryche armour was chiefly layde at, and ſhot to from all partes. He wrought wonderfull feates with his owne perſone, for bothe with his pike he ſlewe diuers that ſtode at defence, and afterwardes alſo fought hande to hande with hys ſworde and his target, and threwe diuers downe from their defence, for the towre wherein he fought ioyned hard to the walles. By that time the Engines called Arietes with muche beatyng had ſtriken downe the walles, the nauie was got within the hauen, and certayne of the Macedons had wonne the towres, and dryuen the Tirians from them.The winning of Ti
                     •
                  
                  re. Oppreſſed them with the multitude of theſe myſeries they were cleane diſcomfited, ſome fled for ſuccour vnto the temples, ſome did ſhut their dores takyng that kynde of death they lyked beſte. And other ran vpon their enemies to ſell their liues dere. But ye more parte got vp into ye toppes of their houſes, and frō thence did caſt down vpō their enemies, whatſoeuer came vnto their handes, Alexand cōmaūded al to be ſlayne with exceptiō ſauing ſuch as fled into the temples. and the houſes to be ſet on fyer.

Though that was proclaymed through out the Cytie: yet there was none bearyng armour that woulde ſaue themſelues that way. For as the women and chyldren filled the temples, ſo the men kept the entrees of their houſes redie to abyde the crueltie of their enemies. yet the Sydonians were the cauſe that many were ſaued who amonges the Macedons ſeruyng in the warres, and entring the Cytie amonges the reſte,Agenour. were myndfull of their affinitie with the Tirians (Agenour being builder of both their Cyties) and conueyed many into their ſhippes whiche they ſent priuely vnto Sydone: By whiche meanes fiftene thouſand eſcaped the crueltie of the ſworde. The nombre of them that were ſlain may partely be coniectured, in that there were founde dead within the Cytie ſyx thouſand of them that bare armour.A notable reuēging of the breache of the lawe of armes. The Kynges wrath towardes the Cytie made the ſyght dolerous vnto the victors. For twoo thouſand whome the furye of the ſlaughter had lefte on lyue, were afterwardes hanged vpon croſſes along the ſea coaſte. The Embaſſadours of the Cartagens were ſaued, but he threatened to make warre againſt them, from the whiche he was then letted by other buſines he had in hand. Thus Tyre was taken the .vii. moneth after it was beſieged, a Cytie notable to the poſteritie, aſwell through the antiquitie it was of, as alſo by the often chaunge of fortune that it had ſuffred. It was buylded by Agenour, and many yeares was maiſter of the ſeas, not only nere thereabout but in all places where as their nauies came. And if we lyſte to credite the fame, that Cytie was the firſte whiche either taught or learned letters. They buylded Cyties and put in them inhabiters through out the more partes of the worlde, bothe Carthago

in Affrick, Thebes in boecia, and Gades in Spayne vpon the Occian. It is to be thought that by reaſon of their fre recourſe throught al ſeas, and by viſeting of many ſtraunge coūtries they had occaſion to choſſe out Seates to place in ther youthe, wherof they then habounded Or els as ſome write the Inhabitores weried to dwell their by reaſon of many earthequakes, were compelled of force to ſeke out ſtraunge dwelling places. But after manie caſualties that happened vnto Tyre after the deſtrucion newely renued, and all thinges grown againe thorugh long peace, remaineth nowe vnder the defence of the romaines Clemency. About the ſame tyme Alexāder receyued letters from Darius, wherein at laſte he was contented to name him king.The contentee of Darius l
                     •
                  tters. His requeſte was that Alexander woulde receiue his doughter Saptyne for his wief with whō he offred in dowre all the countrey betwen Helleſpont and the Riuer of Alys, and would receiue vnto him ſelfe onlye ſuche kyngdomes, as lay from thence towardes theaſte. And if peraduenture he ſhould make any doubt to receyue this offre, he willed him to conſider that fortune is not wont to continewe longe in one eſtate, and that the greater felicitie men haue, the greater enuie doth folowe them. It was to be dow
                  •
               ed (he ſaied) leſſe he exalted him ſelfe through a vaine & a childiſhe affeccion like as byrdes vſe to do whoſe naturall lightnes conuey them to the ſtares. For ther was nothing more difficulty in ſo yonge yeares, then to beare wel ſuch heigh and greatnes of fortune. He willed him alſo to conſider that there remaynede yet meane contreies that he had not touched, and that he ſhould not alwaies mete him in ſtreightes. Hauing to paſſe the Riuer of Euphrates, Tygre, Araxes and

Hidaſpes, which were like bulwarks vnto his dominiō. & when that he ſhuld come vnto the playnes, he ſhould be aſhamed of his ſmalle nombre. He put him in remē
               braunce to waye howe longe it ſhould be or he coulde paſſe Media, Hi
                  •
               cania, Baetria, and the Indians, that bordered on the Occian Sea. And likewyſe the Sogdians and Aracho
                  •
               ians of whome men haue no other knowledge then of their name, with other nacions lieng towardes the mount Caucaſus, and the Ryuer of Tanays. Though no man ſhould lette hym, nor offer hym battaille, yet he ſhould growe in age (he ſaied) before he coulde paſſe ſo many landes. In the latter ende he aduyſed hym to call hym no more forewardes. for he would come ſone enough and that to his deſtruccion.Thef
                     •
                  ect of Darius a
                     •
                  nſwere. Alexander made aunſwer to thoſe letters by the meſſengers that brought them in effect that Darius offred to hym that was none of his owne, and made a proffer to geue that he had all loſte. For Lidia, Ionia, Acolides, and the coſte of the Helleſpont, whiche he appoincted in dowre, were alredy become the rewardes of his victory. And as for lawes and condicions thoſe were wonte to be geuen and appoyncted by the victors, and receyued of ſuche as were ouercome. And if he were ignoraunt in whiche of thoſe two eſtates he were in, he ſhould come of and aduenture the battaille once agayne. For he was not ignoraunt (he ſayed) before he paſſed the Sea howe Lidia, and Cilicia, were ouer ſmale rewardes, for the making of ſuche a warre. But his determinacion was euer to ſubdue and bring vnder his dominion, both Percipolis the chief Citie of his kyngdome, and alſo Bactria, and Echatania, with the vttermoſte boundes of the Orient. He could fle no

where but he was able to folowe. and therefore counſailed him that he ſhould leue to feare him with ryuers which had learned how to paſſe ſeas. Thus the kinges did write one to another:Rhodian
                     •
                  . & in the meane ſeaſon ye Rhodians yelded their cytie and their hauen vnto Alexander, who cōmitted the rule of Cilicia vnto Socrates. and the coūtrey about Tyre vnto Philotas. And Parmenio made Andromachus his deputie in Celi Siria.Celi Siria For from thence they had to ſet forwardes to the reſte of their iourney. Alexander gaue commaundement to Epheſtion that he ſhould fetche about with his nauie ye coſte of Phenices, and came with his hole power to ye cytie of Gaza.Ol
                     •
                  mpiades About theſame time there were ſolēpne triumphes and plaies at Iſthnios, accuſtomed to be celebrated with the aſſemblie of all Grece. In that counſell, as ye wittes of ye Grekes be ſodain, decreed to ſend xii. Embaſſadours vnto Alexander to cary him a croun of gold in gratefiēg the victory he had won, & the actes he had done for the ſaulfegard & libertie of Grece, but a little before they harkened how the fame went, & were redy to bend that way that fortune enclined. Alexander viſited not in perſone all ſuche countreis, and cyties as refuſed their obedience vnto him, but made conqueſt of them by his deputies. For Calas toke Paphlagonia, Antigonus Licaonia, and Balacrus ouercame Idarne, Darius lieutenaunt, and wan Miletum. Amphitorus and Egilochus with a nauie of hundred and .lx. ſhyppes ſubdued all the Ilandes betwene Aſia and Achaia. And alſo by the conſent of the inhabiters got Tenedon whiche alwaies was a receptacle to the Percians.Tenedon. They were at the poinct to haue gotten Scio, but that Pharnabaſus Darius deputie hauing intelligence of the matter, did fyrſte apprehende all ſuche

as were of the Macedons faccion, and committed the cytie with a ſmall guarriſon to Appollodines and Athenagoras that were enclined to the Percians. Alexanders captaines for al this continued the ſiege of the citie ſtill, not ſo muche in truſte of their own ſtrength as they did in hope of the facciō they had within the citie. In whiche poinct they were not deceiued, for through a ſedicion whiche did aryſe betwene Apollodines and the captaines of the men of warre, occaſion was miniſtred vnto the Macedons to breake into the Cytie. When the gate was broken vp, and a band of Macedons entred,Scio taken then the cyteſens whiche before had deuiſed to rebell againſt the Percians, toke parte with Amphiterus and Egilochus, ſo that the guarriſon of the Percians were ſlaine, and Pharnabaſus with Apolloindes and Anathogoras were takē priſoners. There were .xii. galies takē with their ſouldiers and rowers, beſides .xxx. ſhippes and veſſels of Pirates, with thre thouſand Grekes that were in wages with the Percians, with the Grekes they furnyſhed vp their owne bandes, and put the pyrotes to death beſtowyng the rowers in their owne galeis.Ariſtonicus It chaunſed that Ariſtonicus the vſurper of Methina ignoraunt of any ſuche matter as was chaunſed, in the firſt parte of the night came with certayn piraters ſhippes to enter into the hauen, whome when the watche demaunded what he was, he ſayd: he was Ariſtonicus, and came to the ſuccour of Pharnabaſus, they ſaid he was at reſte & could not then be ſpoken with all, but it ſhould be laufull for hym beyng their frende to enter into the hauē for that night and ſpeake with hym when it was day. Ariſtonicus was the firſt that entred, and the pirates folowed him. But whiles they placed their ſhyppes, the watchemen

drewe the chayne againe ouer the hauen, and then called vp ſuche as lay there nere about, ſo that none of them durſt reſiſt but were al taken priſoners, and ſo deliuered to Amphiterus and Egilocus.Mytelene From thence the Macedons paſſed to Mytelene whiche was kept by Chares of Athens with a guariſon of two thouſand Perciās: but when he was not able to endure ye ſiege, he yelded vp the Cytie with conpoſicion to haue their liues ſaued and to departe in ſauegarde vnto Imbros.Imbros. Darius diſpairing of peace, which he had procured both by his lettres and Embaſſadours, gaue his mynd to aſſemble a new power, and freſhely to renue the warre. Therfore he commaunded the Capitaines and rulers of his men to aſſemble at Babilon. and that Beſſus gouernour of the Bactrians,Bactrians ſhould come thether with al the power he could make. The Bactrians be the moſte hardie people amōges thoſe nacions, vnciuill men, and much abhorring from the delicatnes of the Percians: for by reaſon yt they border vpō the Scithians whiche be a warlicke people, they are accuſtomed to lyue by thefte, and be conuerſant continually in armes. But Beſſus that was ſuſpect of treaſon that he would not be content with the ſecond place, put Darius in great doubte. Who hauing an inckling that he compaſſed to be kyng feared only his treaſon, hauyng no other way to bryng his purpoſe to paſſe. Alexander wrought all the wayes he could obtayne to knoweledge where Darius was become, and into what coūtrey he was gone. And yet could not get any intelligence by reaſon of a cuſtome amonges the Percians whiche are wont with a marueylous fidelitie to kepe cloſe their princes ſecretes: in the vtteryng wherof neither feare of death. nor hope of rewarde can cauſe them bryng forth a worde.

This was a goodly diſcipline that the kinges ther had of olde time vſed emōges their ſubiectes in poniſhing with loſſe of lief, the laveſnes of the tounge, which is there more greuoſly chaſtyſed then any other cryme.The laueſnes of the tounge ponyſhed with the Perciās Nor ther is not in thoſe partes any goodnes loked for at any mans handes that hath not the gifte of ſecretnes, wherof nature hath giuen a facilitye in mā. Thys was the cauſe that Alexander was ingnorant of all thinges that his enemies did, and therefore continued his ſiege before Gaza.The Siege of Gaza. Beties was Captayne there who was a man of a notable fidelitie towardes hys prince, which with a ſmall guariſon defended the Cytie that was of a large compaſſe. Wherfore Alexander perceyuing the aduauntage of the Scituacion ſet maney mynes in hande. For the lightnes of the ground made ye worcke eaſye hauinge nether rockes nor ſtones to gyue any impediment. They began their mines on that ſide, wher thei within could not deſtroy them. And to auoyde the ſuſpcion of any ſuch worck in hande, cauſed an aproche to be made to the wales wyth Towres that he had made of Tymbre. But the ground woulde not ſerue for their carieng and remouing, by reaſon of the loſenes of the ſande whereinto the wheles ſonk, and was cauſe that the ioyntes of the towres bracke a ſonder. About the conuoyans of them many were hurte and as muche truble they had in wythdrawinge of them as in ſetting them forwardes. When he perceyued he could not preuail by that meanes he retired againe his mē for that time. But the next daye he enuironed the Citie round about to gyue thaſſaulte in euerye parte at ones and before he remoued out of his campte, made ſacrifice after his

contrey maner, requiring the aide of the goddes. It chaunſed as he was ſo doing, that a Rauen flieng by let falle a clodde, which ſhe caried in hir clawes vpon the kinges Hede, where it bracke & reſolued in peces. And the rauen flewe vnto the next towre, wher hir fethers were ſo entangled with Piche that ſhe lighted vpon, that ſhe coulde not flee away, but was taken of the ſtanders theraboutes. This was thought a matter worthye whereupon the deuyners ſhould conſulte, for he him ſelfe was not free from the ſuperſticon of ſuch thynges. Therefore Ariſtander to whom he gaue moſte credite, did interprete the ſame to be a ſigne of the diſtrucion of that Cytie, but yet there was ſome parill apearing towardes the kynges perſon. For which cauſe he perſwaded Alexander that he ſhoulde not go about any enterpryſe that daye. Whyche, though it greued hym muche that one Cytie ſhoulde be a ſtaye and impedient vnto hym for hys free paſſage into Egipt, yet he obeied the pronoſticator & cauſed all his men to returne. Thennemies toke courage of their departure, and thinkinge feare to haue bene the cauſe whie they came not forwardes, ſayled out of the Cytie and ſet vpon their tayle. But they were more fierſe in the beginnyng of the ſkyrmiſhe, then conſtante in maintaining of the ſame. For when they ſawe the Macedons turne about, they ſtayed and purſued no further. Alexander hering the larume and remembring nothing the parill that was propheſied vnto hym, at hys frendes requeſte put on hys harnys which he was ſeldom accuſtmued to do, & reſorted thether where the ſkyrmuſhe was moſte hote. There he was knowne by a certayne Arabiane that was one

of Darius ſouldiers which toke vpon him a deſperate entterpriſe of the ſleainge of Alexander and therfore makyng his pretencs to haue bene fugitiue from the Percians, keapt his ſword ſecret vnder nethe his targat, and fell downe on his knees before him. Who iudging that he had fled to him forſocore willed him to be receyued amonges his owne men. But tharrabian therwithall ſtracke at the kinge wyth his ſword, which he by little ſteppinge aſide auoyded it from his throte and cutte of the Arabians hand that miſſed of hys ſtrocke Alexander then iudged that he had cleane eſcaped the perill that ſhould haue chaunſed to him that daie, but (as I thincke) deſteyn cannot be auoyded: for whiles he was egre to fight amongss the formoſte he was ſtriken with an arrowe wich paſſed throughe his Corſelet and did ſticke in his ſhoulder. Philip his Phiſiciō did plucke it out, and great haboundaunce of blood did folowe, wherof euery man was afraied, in ſo much as they neuer ſawe an arrowe paſſe ſo farre through any Armore before. But he neuer chaunged countenance nor couller, but cauſinge the blood to be ſtanched and his wound to be wrapt vp continued ſtil in the ſkyrmiſhe amonges the foremoſte, either ſuffring or diſſimuling his paine and dolore but when the bloode that was ſtaied for the tyme braſte out againe. And the wound whiche for the greues greued hym not muche beganne to ſwell and ranc
                  •
               e as the bloode waxed coulde then he began to faynt and fall downe and was taken vp by ſuche as were next him, and caried into his tent. Betis that perceyued thys, ſuppoſyng him to be ſlaine retorned bnto the Citie agayne with great ioye and triumphe. But Alexāders wound being yet vnhealed he cauſed a mounte to be caſte vp

as highe as the toppe of the walles, and the walles to be caſt downe in diuers places by the Myners. But they within made a countermure as highe as the olde wall. but that coulde not ſtretche to the heyghte of the towres made vpon the Mounte, ſo that the inner partes of the citie were ſubiecte to ſhotte. But a mine wherby the wa
                  •
               le was ouerthrown, and a breach made wherby the Macedones did enter was the vtter loſſe of the towne wher as Alexander preſſing on amōges the foremoſte aduenterouſly,The winning of Gaza. had his legge hurte with a ſtone. Whiche notwithſtanding he mounted vp by help of his weapon (his former wound yet vncloſed) and fought emongs the formoſt being in a great furie that in the ſiege of that one Citie he had receyued two wounds. Betis that had fought notably and receyued many woundes was forſaken of his owne men yet not withſtanding he mainteyned ſtill the fight, and had all his Armour embrued with his owne blood and his ennemies. But when he was encloſed round about, thē Alexander which was wount to wonder at the vertue of his enemies puffed vp with a ioyful pride ſaide vnto him: Betis thou ſhalt not die as thou wouldeſt thy ſelfe, but whatſoeuer tormētes may be inuented, thīck that thou ſhalt ſuffre them. For all his wordes ther apeared in Betis no token of feare, but beheld the king with an arrogant countenance, and would not aunſwere him one worde. Then Alexander ſaide ſe you not howe obſtynat he is to hold his peace, he would not knele; nor ones deſire mercye. But I will breke his ſilence with groning if nothing els can do it. Thus his fortune alteringe hys nature chaunged hym into ſtraunge maners, and turned his wrath into wodnes.The death of Betys For cauſing cordes to be putte throughe Betys feate

whyles he was a lyue did drawe hym about the Citye with horſes glorieng in that he did coūterfiet Achilles (of whom he was deſcendid) in afflyctyng of his enymye. There were ſlaine of the Percians and Arabies ten thouſand, and the victorye was not vnblodye vnto the Macedones. This ſiege was not ſo famous by the Nobylitie of the Cytie as it was by ye double daungier the kynge was in. Whiche makynge haſte to paſſe into Egypt ſent Amyntas wyth ten Galies into Macedonia to leuie more ſouldiers. For though he were alwyes victorer in proſperous battayles, yet hys men were deminiſhed, and he truſted not ſo muche to the ſouldiers of thoſe contries he had ſubdued, as he did to his own nacion. Egyptians be a nacion that alwaies were offēded with thencreſe and good fortune of the Percians.Egipcyans. who in there gouerment ouer them vſed muche pride and couetouſnes. And therefore ſekinge all occaſions to reuolt, had receyued Amyntas whiche came to them rather by way of treaty then by any force, but nowe ſpecially at Alexanders comming plucked vp ther ſprightes and aſſembled a great nombre to mete hym at Peluſiū where they iudged he woulde enter.Alexander entred into Egipte. The .vii. daye he remoued from Gaza and came to that place in Egipte which nowe is called Alexanders campe, from whence he ſent hys Armye vnto pelluzium by the land way and he him ſelf with a choiſe band of mē was conueyed thether vpon the Riuer of Nile. The Percians durſte not abide his comming being in doubt that the Egiptiās would reuolt.Memphys. And therfore whē Alexander drewe nere vnto Memphis where Aſtaces Darius lieutennant was wyth a powre of men of warre, he came ouer the Ryuer to mete Alexander, and yealdinge hym ſelfe delyuered

hym .viii.C. talentes with all the Riches belonging to the kynge of Perce. From Memphis he paſſed vpon the ſame Ryuer vnto the inwarde partes of Egypt, and ſet a ſtaie and order of the gouerment of the countrey in ſuche ſorte that he chaunged nothing of theyr lawes and cuſtumes. Which thing ones brought to paſſe, he had a great deſire to viſite the Oracle of Iupiter Hammon. But it was declared vnto him that the waye he had to go was not paſſable wyth anye great nombre and thoſe ought to be light, and trimmed mete to iourney without bagage or much cariage. The countrey he had to trauaill throughe was ſayde to be ſpread ouer all wyth bareyn ſande, which ones put in an heate wyth the Sonne woulde burne there feate in ſuche forte that it ſhould be intollerable for them to iourney. And had to contend not only wyth the heate and want of water, but alſo wyth the rowlynge ſande, whych was ſo deape, and woulde ſo ſink vnder there feet that it ſhould be great empediment vnto ther trauaile. All whiche difficulties the Egiptians ſet forth to be greater then they were indede. But Alexander for the deſire he had to excede mans eſtate was ſo fervently bent to viſite that famous Oracle of Iupiter, whome ether he beleued, or coueted that other ſhould beleue to be his father. that nothing could ſtaye him in performinge of that enterpriſe. Therefore with ſuch as he had apointed,The Cyrenians. to accompany him in that iourny paſſed by water vpon Nile til he came to the Meare of Meotes. The Embaſſadours of ye Cyreniās came to him thither & brought him p̄ſentes, whō he iently entertained, aſſuring thē of his frendſhip. And yt done went forwards in his voyage. The firſte & the ſecond daies traueil ſeamed tollerable, not beīg yet come to ye barein

and wild wildernes, and yet the ground they paſſed on was but vnfrutefull and dead erth. But when the plaens apeared that were couered ouer wyth deape ſand, they then loked and ſought a farre of wyth their eyes for the land, euē as men be accuſtomed to do whē they ſaill in the mayne Sea. For they could not iudge them ſelues on lande. where they neuer ſawe tree nor any apearance of habitacion or haunt of men. And water ther was none to be found in that drie and burnīg ſand and ſuch as thei had brought with them in bottels vpon camelles backes was conſumed and ſpent. Beſides the ſonne was ſo hote that it dried and burned vp all thinges. When they were afflicted after this maner, whither yt were by the wil of god or by chaūce the clowdes ſodenly ouerwelmed the ſkye, and ſo ſhadowed them that it was great cōfort to ſuche as were forweried with the heat, thoughe they wanted water to drinck. But to ſupplie ther lacke therin ther fell by and by a great ſhoure which euery man (for the greate deſire they had to drincke) gaped to receyue with open mouth. When they had traueled foure dayes in paſſīg of theſe wild deſertes and were come nere vnto the place of the Oracle, there apeared a great ſwarme of Crowes flieng lowe before the troupe, and when the hoſte merched ſoftely they ſat downe vpon the groūd and ſometime flewe forwardes, as they had bene guides the ſhewe vnto tharmye the way.The deſtricion of Hamon. At length they came vnto the place conſecrate vnto Iupiter, where as it was a wonder to ſe in the mides of ſo wyld a deſert ſuch a groūd ſo enuironed on al partes with high trees defending the heat of the ſonne, & ſuch a nombre of ſpringes ronyng euery where, which cauſe the woodes alwaies to loke greane. The ayer there al ſeaſons

of the yeare is like vnto the ſpringe tyme holſom and temperat to liue in. This cuntrey doth border wyth the Ethiops towardes the Eſte and vpon the arabies that they cal Troglodites vpō the ſouthe.Ethiops. Whoſe contrey ſtretche to the Red ſea vpon the weſt it confineth with other Ethiops that be called Symenos vpon the the north by a Naciō called Naſamōs, who inhabiting vpon a flat ſhore be acuſtumed to liue on ſpoiles of the ſea, and lye alwaies in a wayt vpon the coſte to ſpoyle ſuch ſhips as ſuffre wracke, the people which inhabite about the wood be called Hāmonios & dwel in cotages ſcatered abrode. The middes of there woode cloſed about with a treable walle is vnto them as a Caſtle. In the fyrſte warde is the Palaice of there auncient kinges in the ſecond ther wyues, children, and concubines were lodged in whych place the Oracle of Iupiter is alſo.The deſcricon of the Idolle. And the laſte is a place apointed for the men of warre Ther is alſo an other wood whiche in ye middes hath a ſpring called the fountaine of the ſonne which at the riſing is luke warme, in ye heat of the day it is coolde, in the euenynge warmeth againe, ſo that at mydnight it is ſcalding hote and as it draweth towardes daie it demyniſheth his heate more and more. The ſame thing that is worſhipped for Iubiter hath not the ſymilitude of other Images that craftes men do make for goddes but is very like vnto the faſhiō of a nauell hauing in the middes a Emera
                  •
               de & ſet about with perles. Whē any anſwer is required the prieſtes cary theſame in a ſhip of gold that hath many plates of ſiluer hanging on both ſides. The Matrones & the virgines folowe after ſinginge a iude ſonge after their coūtrey manner, wherby they beleue to obtayne of Iupiter to ſhewe hys Oracle manifeſte and true. When Alexander was come vnto the place, the eldeſte of the

Prieſtes met him and called him ſonne, affirming that Iupiter his father had geuen hym that name, and he forgetting the ſtate of his mortalitie, ſaid: that he bothe did receyue and acknowledge theſame. Then he demaunded further, if thempire of the hole worlde were apointed to hym by deſtiny.The flattery of the prophettes. Whereupon the prophet prepared before to flattery aunſwered: that the hole worlde ſhould come vnder his obeyſaunce. After that he demaunded whether al had ſuffred death that murthered his father. The prieſt anſwered that his father could not be harmed by the treaſon of any man, but he ſaid: that all Philippes killers were put to death, & one thing he added more, yt he ſhould be inuincible til ſuche time as he ſhould departe to the gods. Thereupon Alexander made ſacrifice, & both offred vnto Iupiter & gaue great giftes vnto the prieſtes. He licēſed alſo his frendes that they might cōſult with the oracle, for ſuche thinges as they would demaūde, but they enquired no further, but if it were Iupiter his wil yt thei ſhuld worſhip their king with deuine honours. To them it was anſwered: that if they honoured their prince being victorer as a god,A digreſſiō. it ſhould be acceptable vnto Iupiter. If he had with iudgement wayed the oracle according to the veritie, he ſhould well haue perceiued the vntruthe that was therein: but whome fortune hath brought to beleue in her, ſhe make thē many times more deſirous of glory, then able to receiue it. Alexander not only ſuffred, but alſo cōmaunded himſelf to be called the ſonne of Iupiter, & whiles he wēt about to encreaſe the fame of his actes, he did corrupt and deface them through ſuche vayne titles. Whereby the Macedons accuſtomed to be gouerned by kinges, but yet reſeruīg a greater ſhadowe of libertie then other naciōs, did withſtāde

hym more arogantly in affecting of hys, in mortalytie then was eyther expedyent for hym or them but thes thinges ſhalbe declared in tyme conuenient. Nowe I will procede in the reſte of his doinges.The building of Alexand
                     •
                  a. When Alexāder was returned from hamon and come to the mariſſe of Marcotes ſcituat nere vnto the Iſle of Pharos, viewed the nature of the place, & was at the fyrſte determined to biuld a Citie within the Iland. But afterwardes cōſidering the Iſle not to be large enough choſe out the ground where Alexādria is nowe (called by the name of the biulder) contayning all that ground betwēe the Mere and the ſea, the which was in cōpaſſ as the walles went .lxxx. furlonges. When he had takē ordre for building of this Citie, leuing ſuch behind him as he had apointed for the performās therof, departed vnto Memphis. He had a deſire (not vnreaſōable if it had ben in time conueniēt) to haue viſited both the inward partes of Egipt, & alſo Ethiopia. And ye affeccion he had to viewe antiquities & the famous pallaces of Memon and Tyron had nere drawn him beyond the boūdes of the ſonne.Memnon Tyron. But the warres he had in hande being of much more momēt thē any ſuch idle peregrinacion; gaue him no time to fulfill his fantaſie. And therfore apointed Aeſtylus a Rodyan,Aeſtylus Pewceſtes. and Pewceſtes a Macedon the gouernās of Egipt. And aſſigning to the .iiii. thouſād ſouldiers for defēce of ye Region gaue Tolomā .xxx. galles to keape the mouthe of Nile. He made Poſomus ruler of that parte of Afrik which ioyneth vnto Egipt, and Cliomenes receyuer of the Tributes in both Contreis.Clyomenes. This newe Cytye was ſone repleniſhed wyth a great multitude, for commandiment was giuen to all the Cyties theraboutes to ſend inhabiters vnto Alexandrey. It is ſaide that when the kynge occordinge to the Macedones cuſtume vſede

the kyng according to the Macedons cuſtome vſed the ceremony of ſteping barley at ye making of the walles, that the birdes came & fed thereupon which being takē of many for an vnlucky token: it was aunſwered by their deuiners yt ther ſhuld be great reſort of ſtraūgers to that citie. & that it ſhould giue noriſhement to many landes.The Ryuer of Nyle. As the king went down ye riuer of Nile Hector Parmenio his ſōne deſirous to folowe him was drowned. For the veſſel ſonke yt caried him. being peſtred wt ouer many mē. He ſtriued lōg with the ſtreame. but his garmentes gaue impediment to his ſwimming. ſo that his breath was nere gone before he could recouer the banke.The death of Hector Parmen
                     •
                  os ſonne. wherfore want of ſuccour he died. Whoſe vnfortunate chaūce Alexāder toke greuouſly as one yt did beare him ſpeciall fauour, & therfore cauſed his body to be honorably buried. The death of Andromachus lieutenaunt of Siria,Andromachus burnid by the Samaritans. whō the Samaritās had burned was encreaſe of Alexāders ſorow for ye reuengemēt wherof he made al the halfe he might. & at his cōming into Samaria, had the auctours of the acte deliuered into his handes, whom he put to death. & then placed Nemnō in Andromachus rowme.Methinians He deliuered into ye Methiniās handes Ariſtonicus, & Criſolaus, that had vſurped amonges them, whō they after many greuous tormētes did hāg ouer their walles. That done he gaue audiēce to the Embaſſadours of the Athenians the Rodians, & the Sciottis. The Athenians did gratefie vnto hym his victory and required that ſuch Grekes as were takē priſoners might be reſtored to libertie. The Rodiās and the Sciotes demaunded aſſiſtaunce of ſome guarriſon: he graunted to them all their requeſtes and reſtoryng to the Mytelens their pledges, encreaſed their territorie and dominion in reſpecte of the fidelitie

they ſhewed vnto hym, and the money that they employed in the warres. He gaue honour alſo according to their deſeruinges vnto he kynges of Cipres whiche reuolted from Darius vnto him, and had aided him with ſhippes at the ſiege of Tyre. Amphoterus his admiral had cōmiſſion to driue the Percians out of the Iſle Crete, but ſpecially that he ſhuld ridde the ſeas of the pirates, whiche troubled and ſpoiled all the Ilādes, whiles theſe two princes conuerted their powers one againſt another. When he had geuen order to all theſe thinges he did dedicate to Hercules at Tyre a greate ſtanding pece and .xxx. bowles of gold.Alexander & Darius prepared to fight another battel. That done he ſet his hole mynde and care vpon Darius, cauſing it to be proclaimed that euery man ſhould ſet forwardes towardes Euphrates. But Darius vnderſtanding that his enemy was gone through Egipt into Affrick, ſtode in doubte whether he ſhuld ſtay about Meſopotania, or withdrawe into the inward partes of his kyngdome, iudging that he ſhould be hable to worcke with thoſe farre nacions in bringing of them forwardes to the warres, that his lieftenaunt ſhould not be able to doe. yet when the fame had publiſhed, and he vnderſtode by aſſured aduertiſement that Alexander was retourned out of Egipt, and fully reſolued to folowe him with all his power into what countrey ſoeuer he ſhould go: he then gaue order that the force of all the farre nations ſhould drawe towardes Babilō, knowing the ſtoutnes of his enemy he had to match withal. Thither reſorted both Bactrians, Scythians, and Indians, for the power of other countreys were come thether before. And hauing the double nombre of men that he had before in Cilicia, prepared much armour for them with diligēce, wherof many of them had want. Both the horſemen

and the horſes were armed with plates of ſtele. And ſuch as before had no weapōs but dartes, had ſwordes and bucklers geuen to them more. And to encreaſe the power of his horſemē, deliuered many horſes to be broken amōges the footemen. He had prepared alſo .CC. wagons ſet with hokes, whiche in thoſe coūtreys were eſtemed thynges of great force, and iudged to be a wō
               derfull terrour to the ennemie: they were made with greate lōg pykes ſtyking out before, and with ſwordes ſet ouerwhart on both ſydes. The wheales were alſo full of Iron pikes ryght forth, and of great hokes both vpward and downward, wherewith all thyng was cutte a ſondre that came in their waye. When his people were thus furnyſſhed of armour, and had prouided ſufficiently for the warres, he remoued from Babilon. and kepyng the ryuer of Tygre on his ryght hand▪
               Tygre. Euphrates. and Euphrates on his lefte hand, ouerſpredde with his army all the playnes of Meſopotania. After that he paſſed Tigre, and vnderſtandyng that his enemy was commyng at hand ſent firſt Satrapaces before with a thouſand choſen horſemen,Satrapaces and afterwardes appointed ſyx thouſand to Maſcens to ſtop Alexander the paſſage of the Ryuer.Maſens. Who had alſo in commiſſion to waſte & burne all the coūtrey where he iudged that his enemies ſhould come, thynking to famyſhe them with wante of victualles, conſyderyng that they had no other prouiſion but ſuche as they got by rauyne, and by ſtelthe: they themſelues hauyng plenty brought them both by lande and by the ryuer of Tigre. At length he came vnto a village called Arbella,Arbella. whiche was afterwardes famous by reaſon of his ouerthrowe. There he lefte the chief furniture of his victualles and cariage,Licus. and made a brydge ouer the Ryuer of Licus,

and in fyue dayes conueyed ouer his army as he had done before ouer Euphrates: paſſyng forewardes from thence about foure ſtore forlōges. He came vnto an other ryuer called Bowmello,Bowmello. and there encamped. The countrey ſerued wonderfull well for the arrangyng of his battailles in the large playnes, paſſable for horſes euery where, and without ſtubbes, or ſhorte bruſhe, to couer the ground withall, but ſo free a proſpect, that the eye might decerne thynges a great waye of. And if there appeared any hilles within the playne. Darius cauſed theſame to be caſte downe, and the ground to be made ſmothe. Suche as by coniecture made reporte to Alexander of Darius power coulde not be credited, for he could not thinke after ſo many ſlayne, there coulde be a greater power gathered together, that he had before. But he that neuer doubted any perill, and muche leſſe the multitude of men, after the eleuēth encāping came to the riuer of Euphrates, ouer the whiche he made brudges and paſſed ouer his horſemen and afterwardes his footemen. For Mazeus that was ſent againſt him with ſix thouſand horſemen to let his paſſage, durſt not encoūter with him. When he had continued there a fewe dayes not only to reſte his ſouldiers but alſo to confirme their myndes and encourage them, he ſette forewardes ſtoutly againſt his enemy, fearyng that he would haue retired back into the inwarde partes of his coūtrey, whether he ſhould haue bene enforced to folowe by waſte places and deſertes. Therefore the fourth daye he paſſed by Arbella and came vnto the ryuer of Tigre. All the countrey beyond the Ryuer was on a ſmoke newely ſette on fier by Mazeus, who burned all thynges where he came euen as he had bene an enemy. Alexander at the

fyrſte by reaſon of the darcknes of the ſmoke ſtayed for feare of embuſhementes. But when they which were ſent to ſcoure the contrey reported that all thing was clere he apoynted a fewe horſemen to proue the paſſage of the Riuer, who founde the deapnes at the fyrſt entre to come to the horſe breaſte, and in the middes of the ſtreame to the horſe neckes. There is no Riuer in all the eaſt partes of the worlde that ronneth ſo violētly, which beſides the waters of other riuers that do rōne into it, driueth downe ſtones with the ſtreame ſo that of his ſwiftnes it is called Tigre, whiche in the percian tonge is ſo much to ſay as an arrowe. The footemē therfore deuided into two bādes, holdīg there armour ouer ther heades were encloſed on both ſydes with the horſemen, and ſo paſſed till they came in the deape of the chanell without anye great difficultye. The kinge was the firſte amonge the fotemen that paſſed ouer to the furtherſide, who with his hande (ſeinge his voyre could not be harde) ſhewed the ſhallowe places vnto the ſouldiers. But they had muche paine to kepe their footing by reaſon of ſtones whervpon they ſtumbled, and of the violence of the water that toke their feete away. Suche as caried burthens on their backes had the greateſt trauaill whyche not beinge able to ſtaye them ſelues by reaſon of the troble of their carriage were borne downe by violence, of the ſtreame. And whiles euery man went about to recouer agayne his owne, ther fel greater ſtrife amōges themſelues, then they had with the ſtreame. And the heapes of fardelles that fleted euery where vpon the water bare downe many. The king cried to them that it was ſufficyent to keape their armour and lette the reſt go, promyſing to recompence euery man. But they nether folowed his counſell, nor did as he commaunded

them beſides the noyſe, that was emonges them, feare ſo fiſſed their eares in ther, ſwimming and wading through the water. Atlēgth where the ſtreame was moſt ſhallow thei came furth, there being nothing myſ caried or wantinge emonges them all, ſauinge afew fardelles. If their enemies had made but a proffer againſte them. they might eaſely haue put them to diſtreſſe. But Alexanders continuall good fortune turned then his enemyes away from hym. Wyth whiche fortune he paſſed the Ryuer of Granyk, when ſo many thouſandes both of horſemen and footemen kept the paſſage againſt him. After that ſort he ouercame the multitude of hys enemies in the ſtreyghtes of Cilicia. Though his bouldnes were ſuche, that is ſome tyme wanted praiſe, yet his felicitie euer deliuered hym out of all extreme perill. If Mazeus had done his parte and ſet vpon them as they were paſſynge the Ryuer, he myght eaſely haue put them to diſtreſſe, being vnarmed and out of ordre. But after the Macedones had Armed them ſelfes (being then to late) he began to ſhewe himſelfe wyth a thouſande horſemen. When Alexander perceyued the ſmall nombre that came againſt him he cauſed Ariſton captayne of Peonians to giue a full charge vpon them. The horſemen that daye notably behaued them ſelfes, but in eſpeciall Ariſton,Ariſton. which wt his ſpece ran Satropaces the chief captayn through the throte, & purſuyng him into the middeſt of hys campe threw him from his horſe and cut of his heade, which to his great commendacion he brought and threw downe before the kynge. Alexander taried there two dayes, and againſt the morning cauſed warning to be giuen by proclamacion for his ſetting forwardes. But in the firſt watche of ye
               
                  〈1 page missing〉
               
               
the mone ſuffred Ecclips whiche loſing her brightnes afterwardes became as redde as bloud and therewith waxed dimme & backe.An Ecclips of the Moone The ſtraūgenes of this matter did ſtrike a religious feare amōges ye Macedōs, wherof proceded ſuch a doubte & feare, yt they fell into a murmur & grudging that they ſhuld be brought forwardes after ſuch a maner againſt the will of the goddes into the vttermoſt boundes of the earth, wher as they were not hable to paſſe the Riuers, nor could enioye the accuſtomed vſe of the elementes, finding nothing but waſte groundes and wild deſertes, al which was done (they ſayed) for the ambicion of one man. for whoſe vainglory the bloude of ſo many thouſandes ſhould be ſhedde. He deſpiſeth (qd they) his countrey, he hathe forſaken Philip for his father and affected heauen in his foliſh imaginacion. When Alexander perceiued the matter to come to a mutterīg, he that in al thinges was without feare cōmaunded the chief rulers & capteins of his men of warre to aſſemble at his pauilion, and there commaunded the Aſtronomers of the Egiptiane (whom he iudged to haue moſte vnderſtandyng of the planettes) to declare their opinions. They vnderſtanding very well the reuolucyons of the tyme, & their apointed courſes knewe that the moone did euer eclipſe, when that either ſhe went vnderneth the earth or elles when her light was blemiſhed by oppoſiciō of the ſōne, which reaſon conceiued amōges them ſelfes they accuſtomed not to teache the people. They affirmed alſo that the greakes were vnder the Regyon of the Sonne, and the Percyans vnder the moone, & therfore ſo oftē as the moone fel of her light it ſignified great deſtruction to the naciōs vnder that cōſtellaciō. And to confirme that opyniō of theirs they

brought in olde preſidentes of the kynges of Perce to whō the eclips of the moone had ſignified, yt the goddes were agaīſt thē in fighting of their battailles.The force of ſuperſticion to gouerne a multitude. There is nothing more effectuall then ſuperſticion to gouerne a multitude, whiche otherwiſe is without rule, fierſe, & mutable. But when they haue once cōceiued a religiō: though it be but vaine, they be more obedient to their deuynes, then to their captaines whiche thing might be well perceiued, when theſe aunſweres of the Egipcians were ſpread abrode amonges the people, for they ſtreight wayes were remoued from their dulnes and diſpaire, and ſlurred vp to hope and confidence. Alexā
               der therfore that could vſe the tyme, and employe his ſouldiers in their good mode: in the ſecond watche remoued his campe, kepyng Tigre on his right hād, and the mount whiche they cal Gordeion his left hand. By the ſpring of the day the ſcouters that he ſent before to diſcouer, returned to hym with reporte that Darius was coming. Then the ſouldiers prepared themſelues to the fyght, & marched forwardes in ordre of battaille. But thoſe that diſcouered for the Percians, were but a thouſand horſemen, which keping the ſcoute a farreof, ſemed to the Macedons to be a great army. The ſcouters commonly haue that propertie that when they can not fynde out the truthe, they imagen thorowe feare thinges that be falſe. When Alexander vnderſtode the certayntie he ſent out towardes them a ſmalle, nombre of his owne horſemen: at whoſe commyng they fled, & were partely ſlayne, and partely taken priſoners. That done, he ſent horſemen as well to diſcouer further, as alſo to quenche the fire whiche the Percians had made through all the countrey. For as they fled away they put fier into the ruffes of the houſes and the ſtackes of

torne, whiche ſone toke holde aboue and conſumed all till it came to the ground. By extinguiſſhing of thoſe fiers great plenty of corne was found, and habundāce of all other thinges enſued amonges the Macedons. That was a matter whiche encouraged the ſouldiers greatly to purſue their enemies. For doubting leſt they ſhould burne and conſume all ſuche thinges as myght ſerue to their vſe: purſued them with al the ſpeade they could make, wyſdome growing of neceſſitie. For Mazeus whiche before did burne the countrey at leyſure. whē he ſawe himſelf purſued. fled away & left vnto the Macedons the more parte vntouched. Alexander vnderſtanding that Darius drewe towardes hym, & was come within an hundred and fiftie furlonges, made prouiſion of victualles, and remayned foure dayes in theſame place. Darius letters were there intercepted, whiche he had written to the Grekes, in perſwaſion either to kyll or betray Allexander. Who doubted whether he ſhould recite theſame letters openly or no, hauing no miſtruſt of their beneuolence and affection towardes hym: But Parmeno diſſwaded the putting of any ſuche promiſes into the ſouldiers heades, conſidering that the committing of ſuche an acte conſiſted in one mans hand, and that couetouſnes iudged neuer any thing vnlawfull. He folowed Parmenios counſel, and ſo remoued his campe. As thei were marching one of the Enukes that attendid vpō Darius wife brought worde that ſhe fainted, and drew her breath with great difficultie. Who in very dede was ſo weried with continuall trauaill of her iourney, and care of mynde, that ſhe fel downe in a ſwowne betwixt her mother in law and her yoūg daughter, and ſo died. He had not ſo ſone tolde the tale but another came with tidinges that ſhe

was dead in dede: wherat Alexāder was no les ſorowful then if his owne mother had bene in the ſame caſe. and ſuch teares falling frō his eyes as Darius ſh
                  •
               ld haue ſhed: repairid into the tent where Darius mother was ſitting by the dead body. There his ſorow renued when he ſawe her lye proſtrat vpon the grounde, who by the chaunce that preſently fell being put in remembraūce of her aduerſitie paſt, enbraſed in hir armes Darius .ii. doughters a cōfort to hee in their mutual dokir but that ſhe was enforced to cōfort thē. Her young nephewe ſtoode in her preſence the more to be petied, becauſe yt for his yought he yet vnderſtoode not the calamytie that was growing towardes him. A man would haue iudged that Alexāder had wept for his own caſe, whiche lamented and would receiue no comforte but abſtayned from meat, & reſerued all honor to be done to the dead corſe after the coūtrey cuſtome of the Percians. Worthy he was hereby to receyue the frute of ſuch mekenes and continency. He had only ſene her once before, whych was the daye of her takynge, and thē came not to viſite her, but as Dariꝰ mother. The excellencye of her beutye, was no prouoking to him of luſte, but of glory. Of thoſe Enukes that were about the Quene there was one Tiriotes which during this murning and lamentacion, eſcaped by a gate that was vnwarded, and fled vnto the Percians Campe, where he was by the watchmen brought to Darius preſence. When Darius ſawe hym lamentyng and tearynge of his clothes. he was in a wōderful expectaciō what his ſorowe ſhould be, doubting what thing he myght feare moſte. Thy countenaunce (qd he) declareth that ſome great miſhefe is happened.Darius to Tyrw
                     •
                  es. Take hede thou confeleſt nothing from my miſerable ears. I haue learned to

be vnfortunate, and it is often tymes a comforte of a mans calamitie to knowe his miſſhapp. Is it not the miſuſing of my wife and children that thou woldeſt tel me? which is the thing I ſuſpecte moſt and feare to vtter and (as I beleue) is more greuous vnto them then any kynde of torment. Nothing les (qd Tiriotes) The ſame honor that was giuen vnto thē by your ſubiectes the like is vſed by him that is victorer. But your wife is the cauſe of my amaſement, which is euen nowe dedde. Whē that word was ones ſpoken ther was nothing but lamētacion & howling out through the camp And Darius could not be otherwiſe perſuadid but that ſhe was ſlaine, bicauſe ſhe would not conſent to hyr miſuſement, and in the vehemency of his ſorowe cryed out.Darius exclamacion in his ſorow O Alexander what ſo great an offence haue I committed againſte the whom of thy kinred haue I ſlaine, that thou ſhuldeſt require me with this crueltie? Thou haſt done it without enye peruokement of my parte. But be it ſo that thou do
                  ••
               e moue & iuſte warre agaynſte me yet is it thy parte therefore to kepe warre with womē? Tyriotes therupon did ſwere by the gods immortal, that ſhe had receiued no kynd of violēce nor harme, but that Alexander lamēted hir death, and wept no leſſ thē he him ſelfe would haue done. Thoſe words driue him into further ſuſpicion and Ielouſie, cō
               
                  •
               ec
                  •
               uring that Alexāders behauor therin had riſen vpon the familier conuerſacion had betwixt them. Therfore he auoyded all perſones from him, ſauing only Tyriotes, & leauing his weping, but yet nere dead for ſorow ſaid vnto hym: Thou ſeeſte nowe Ciriotes that lyes can take no place. Tormētes ſtreight ways ſhalbe brought before the
                  •
                I require thē therfore if any reuerence of the Prince remayne within thy harte, tel me whithout

compulcion the thing that I deſire to knowe and am aſhamed to enquire. Is it poſſible being of thage that he is, and hauing hir in his handes, that he ſhould notattempt hir: Tiriotes offered hym ſelf to be racked in tryall of the cauſe, and called the gods to witnes, that ſhe was neuer vſed but chaſtly & reuerently. Atlēgth when he was once parſuaded that hys wordes were true,. He couered his heade, weping longe ſpace. And afterwards the teares yet diſtilling down his chekes vncouered his face, and holding vp his handes to heauen, ſaid. O you goddes that I do worſhip I require you cheflie to ſtabliſhe this kyngdome vnto my ſelfe.Darius peticion. But if ye haue determyned my ruyn and decaye, then my requeſt is that none maye reigne as kynge in my domynion, but euen he that is ſo iuſt an ennemy, and ſo mercifull a victorer. And therefore though he had twiſe before required peace at Alexander his handes & preuailed not, but had conuerted al his mind towardes the warres: yet he was then ſo ouercome with the continencye of his ennemy, that he ſent ten of the chiefeſt of his blod as Embaſſedors to treate wyth hym vpon condicons of peace. Alexander calling a counſel gaue them preſence. to whom the eldeſt ſpake in this wiſe. That Darius hath nowe the third tyme demaunded peace of you no powre hath cōpelled hym,The words of Darius Embaſſeadores. but your iuſtice & cōtinency hath moued him. He ſhuld not perceiue yt ether his mother, wife, or childrē were pryſoners ſauing for want of their cōpany, you take care of their chaſtities which remaine on liue, yea euen as you were their father you giue to thē the hōor aꝑtaining, & ſuffer thē to cōtinewe in their former eſtate. Iſe ye dolorouſnes in your face, that I ſaw in darius whē I ꝑted frō hī, & yet he doth morn̄ for his wif, & you for your enemy

And if the care of her buriall had not bene, you had nowe ſtand in battell in redynes to fyght. Is it anye maruell therefore if he require peace of ſuche one, that is ſo frendly diſpoſed towardes him? What ſhall they nede to contend with armes, betwene whom there remaineth no hatred. In his former treaties he offred ye Riuer of Alys whych boundeth vpon Lydia to be the confynes of your empire, but nowe he proffereth you in dowre with his doughter to be deliuered out of hād, al thoſe countreis that lie betwene Helleſpōt and Euphrates. For the performans of which his promys: and for the obſeruing of peace. Occhus his ſonne nowe in your poſſeſſion ſhallbe the pledge for his parte. Hys requeſt is to haue his mother, and his two daughters reſtored vnto him, for which thre you ſhall receyue .xxx thouſand Talentes. Except I knewe the moderacion that is in you I would not be ſo bold to ſay that this is a time when you ought not only to graūt peace, but alſo to ſeke for it yourſelf: Loke back and behold what a great thing you leue behind you, and force how much it is that you couet before you. Ouer great an empire is daungerus. And it is harde to hold that you be not able to receiue. Do you not ſe that thoſe ſhippes which be of exceding greatnes, that they cannot well be gouerned. Iudge that to be the cauſe that Darius loſte ſo muche. Bicauſe that ouermuche is the occaſion of much loſſe. It is more facil to get many thinges then to keape a fewe. How much more eaſly do our handes catche, then holde ſtyll. The verie deathe of Darius wyfe nowe doth ſhewe, that you haue not ſo get at occaſion to ſhewe your cōpaſſion as you had before. The Embaſſadours were remoued vnto an other place and he debated in counſell his opynion. It was long

before any durſt vtter what they thought, becauſe they were vncertain howe the kyng was enclined.Parmenios opinion concerning the raunſoming of priſoners At lēgth Parmenio ſpake, and ſaid: my opiniō was euer that the priſoners taken at Damaſeo ſhould haue bene deliuered to ſuch as wold redeme thē, wherby a great ſomme of money might haue bene made of them, whiche nowe remaining in captiuitie peſter the hādes of many a mā of ſeruice. And nowe I thinke moſte neceſſary of all, yt you exchaunce for .xxx. talentes of gold, this olde womā and the two yong damoſels which be but impedimētes and diſturbaunce to you in your iourneis. The cōqueſt (he ſaid) was better that was gottē by treaty, rather thē by force. And that there was neuer none before him yt was lorde of all the countreis in length & breadth lieng betwene Iſter and Euphrates: he willed him therefore rather to haue reſpect towardes Macedonia, then to loke forewardes towardes Bactria & the Indiās. His wordes liked not the king, & therfore ſo ſone as Parmenio had made an end of his tale, he made this anſwere: And I, if I were Parmenio, would rather deſire money then glory. But now ſeing I am Alexander, I am not in any doubte of pouertie, & haue cōſideracion that I am a king & no marchaunt. I haue nothing wherof I wil make ſaie, and muche leſſe ſell my fortune. If I were in minde to deliuer the priſoners it were muche better to geue them frely, then to ranſome thē for money. Hereupō he called in the Embaſſadours & anſwered thē in this ſort.Alexanders aunſwere to the Embaſſadours. Shew you to Dariꝰ that ye geuing of thankes is but waſte to a mans enemy, and let hym not thinke. that I haue had any reſpect to his frendſhip, in thoſe thinges yt I haue done of mine owne clemency & liberalitie, nor let him not impute the ſame in any wiſe towardes himſelf, but to thinclinaciō of mine owne nature, and that I contende not againſt mens

calamities, but againſt the force of mine enemies I vſe not to make warres wt women & priſoners, for he muſt be armed to whome I ſhall ſhewe my hatred. And though it were ſo in dede that he mēt good faith in his peace aſking, yet peraduenture I would aduiſe me before I would conſent. But ſeyng that at ſome tyme he hath by his letters prouoked my ſouldiers to betray me and at other tyme ſtored vp my frendes with money to my deſtruction: I muſt purſue him to thuttermoſt, not as a righteous enemy, but as one that worketh his thinges by treaſon. If I ſhould accept the condicions of peace that you do bring, I ſhould acknowledge him to be victorer, whiche liberally doth geue me all that is behynd the ryuer of Euphrates, not conſideryng in what place I ſpeake now vnto you. Haue you forgotte that I am paſſed the ryuer of Euphrates. & encamped beyond the boundes ye proffer me in dowre? driue me from hence that I may knowe the ſame to be yours, wherewith ye would infeoffe m
                  •
               . He proffereth me his doughter with no greater liberalitie then he would do to one of his ſeruauntes. Dothe he thinke to do me a pleaſure in preferryng me to be his ſonne in lawe before Mazeus? Go and ſhewe this to your kyng, that both that he hath loſt, and that he hath yet in poſſeſſion, ſhall be vnto me rewardes of the warre, whiche warre ſhall diſcuſſe the boundes of both our Empires, and by the fortune of the battaille we ſhall fight to morowe, appoincted to eche of vs our limittes. Let hym knowe that I came not into Aſia to receiue but to geue. If he would haue bene content to be ſecond perſone and not coueted to be equall with me. I would peraduenture haue graūted his requeſt. But as two ſonnes cannot ſhyne on the earth at once, ſo likewiſe two ſuche great

kingdomes cannot be at one time in the world without the ſubuerſion therof. Therfore let him either this day yelde himſelf, or els prepare himſelf againſt ye morowes fight, nor let him not ꝑſuade himſelf to haue other fortune, then he hath proued alredy. The Embaſſadours replied: yt ſeing he was reſolued to procede with warre he did royally in that he was plain, and did not fode the furth with hope of peace, their requeſt was therefore that they might be diſpatched to the kynge to warne him to prepare likewiſe for the warre: When they returned they declared that Alexander was determined out of hand to trie the matter by battaille. Wherefore Darius ſent Mazeus out of hand with iii.M. horſemē to kepe the paſſages whereby the Macedones ſhould paſſe. When Alexāder had perfourmed the funeralles of Darius wife, leuyng with a ſmall guarriſon al ſuch as were vnprofitable for the fight, within the ſtrength of his campe, ſet forwardes towardes his enemies. His footemen were deuided into two battailles empaled with horſemen on both ſydes, and his cariage went in the myddes. Then he ſent Medinas with horſemen vpon the ſpores to diſcouer where Darius was: Who commyng within the viewe of Mazeus, durſt not paſſe any further, but brought reporte that he could here nothing els but the noyſe of men and neying of horſes. Mazeus likewyſe diſcouered them and returned back to Darius, declaring that his enemies were commyng: Then Darius, whoſe deſire was to encounter his enemies in the playne and open fieldes,The ordre of Darius battilles. commaunded his men to armour, and deuided them into two partes, wherof the one marched on the left hand, and the other on the ryght. In the battaille on the

left hande a .M. of the Bactrian horſemen had the firſt place, with the like nōbre of Dahans and .iiii.M. Arac
                  •
               oſians and Suſians, after whiche band of horſemē there folowed,Beſſus. C. hoked wagons, and behind thē Beſſus with an other band of .viii.M. Bactrians horſemē & .ii.M. Maſſagetes. The footemen of diuers naciōs came next in ordre of battaille, not mixed together, but eche contreymē by themſelues.Ariobarzanes. Ariobar
                  •
               anes and Oribates had the gouernement of the Percians, Mardiās and Sogdiās. But their charge was deuided, and Orſines that was come of the .vii. Perciās & of the bloud of noble king Cyrus had ye rule of the whole: Other nacions folowed whoſe names were ſcarſely knowen to their owne company.Cradates. Cradates was the next whiche hauing alſo fiftie hoked wagons, placed a band of Caſpians horſemen before them, and behind them the Indians and other the inhabiters of the redde ſea, rather names of men then good aſſiſtaūce. This ſquare was empaled with fiftie wagons, vnto the whiche the mercenary ſouldiers were ioyned. After them folowed the men of Armeny the leſſe, then the Babilonians, and next the Bellitans with ſuche as inhabite the Coſſean mountaynes. The Gortuans came next, whiche ſometyme folowed the Mediās out of Euboia, but at thoſe dayes degenerated from their countrey cuſtomes. The Phrigians, Cathonians, and Parthians, encloſed the tayle. This was the battaille on the left hand. In the battaille on the ryght hand were the people of the greater army, the Caduſians, Capadociās, Siriās, and medians, who had fifty hoked wagons. The ſome of his whole army was .xlv.M. horſemē, & .CC. thouſand footemē. When they were placed in ordre of battaille, they marched forewardes ten furlōges, and they

were commaunded to ſtay. Whiles the Perciās after that maner taried for their enemies, the
                  •
                fell a ſodain feare amonges the Macedons: wherof there apeared no cauſe, & yet euery mā was amaſed, & a certain bread entred into their hertes. The lightening that fel out of the ayer being in the ſomer ſeaſon ſemed like fier, and the flames ſodainly appearing, were thought to come from Darius campe. If Mezeus whiche was ſent to obſerue their comming had ſet vpon them while
                  •
                they were in this feare, he might haue done thē ſome notable domage. But he was 
                  •
               lack to do his enterprice & remained vpon the toppe of an hille, cōtent
                  •
                that he was not aſſailed. Alexāder perceiuing the terrour that was come amonges his men made a ſigne for them is ſtay, and gaue ordre that they ſhould warme themſelues▪ & refreſhe their bodies: geuing them to vnderſtand that there was no cauſe why they ſhould ſo ſodainly conceiue a feare, ſeing their enemies were yet a good diſtaunce from them. At length, when he perceiued they had recouered their ſpirites, he exhorted them both to receiue courage and to put on their armour. But yet he thoughte nothing more expedient for the caſe preſent, then to fortifie his campe in the ſame place. The next daye Mazeus whiche had planted himſelfe on a hygh hill from whence he might beholde his enemies campe, either for feare or els becauſe his commiſſion was but only to diſcouer, returned agayne vnto Darius. Vpon his departure the Macedōs by and by t
                  •
               ke the hille whiche he had forſaken, the ſame being of more ſtrength then the playne where they remayned before, from whence he might beholde their enemies campe. And though the miſte whiche the moiſte hilles did caſte forth toke not away clerely the vſe of the proſpe
                  •
               : yet

it letted them to deſerue the deuiſion of their enemies barteles, and ther ordre: the multitude of whom ouerſpreade the fyldes, and the noyſe of ſuche a nombre fylled there eares thoughe they wepe farre of. Then Alexander began to reuolue in his heade, and debaſe wyth hym ſelfe, one while Pe
                  •
               menyos opynion, and a nother tyme his owne. For he was come ſo farforth that he could not retire excepte he were victoret with out the great deſtruccyon of hys Armye. The multytude of hys enemyes moued hym muche in reſpect of hys ſmall noumbre. yet on the other parte he remembred what great actes he had don with them, and howe many nacions he had vanquyſſhed. So that hope ſurmountynge hys feare, he thought it moſte daunger of all to differ the battell any lenger, leſte deſperacion might growe amongeſt hys men, and therefore diſſ
                  •
               mblyng the matter cauſed the Mercenarye horſemen, and the Peones to paſſe on before, and deuided hys Phalanx as it hath bene ſaied before, into two battayles, and empaled the ſame wyth horſemen on both ſides. By that tyme the m
                  •
               ſte auoyded, and began to wax clere, the ordre of ther enemies apearing manifeſtly. The Macedones then whither it were of courage, or for that they were impacient to tarie any lenger, made ſuch a ſhoute as men of warre vſe when they ioyne in battel the like was alſo made by the Percians. So that the woods and vaille is round about, rebounded wyth the terryble ſounde. The Macedōes then coulde not abſteine any lenger, but woulde haue ronne forwardes towardes there enemies. But Alexander thought it better to fortifie his campe vpon that hyll, and ſo commaunded it to be entrenched aboute. Whych worke being ſpedely p
                  •
               rformed he enteres in

his tent from whens he might beholde his 
                  〈◊〉
                hoſt. Then the hole faſhiō and fourme of the 
                  〈◊〉
                that was at hand was preſented before his eies: doth horſemen and fotemen gliſtred in there bright armour, and al thinges were prepared with great diligēce. He beheld the care of the captaines in his enemies campe howe they did ride vp & downe to ſet thinges in ordre. And diuers thinges whiche were but vaine in dede: as the noyſe of mē, the n
                  •
               yng of horſes & the gliſtering of their armour trouble 
                  •
               he mind: that was careful in thexpectacion of the matter, Therefore whither it were that he was not fully reſolued in his mynd or els to proue the mindes of ſuch as were aboutes hym,Permenio his opinion. called hys frendes to conſult what was beſt to do▪ Parmenio that was the moſte expert man amonges al the captaines in the feates of warre: thought 
                  〈◊〉
                not to giue his ennemies plaine battell, but rather to ſet vpō them in the dead time of the night wherby he thought they might eaſely be diſcomfited. Suppoſing that they amōgs whō there was ſo great diuerſitie of cuſtomes and alteracion of language could neuer aſſemble wel togither▪ ſpecially whē they ſhuld be put ſodēly in feare in the night tyme beinge a ſleape: wheras in the daye tyme the harpe of the Scythians and Bactryans wyth their rough faces, and longe heare, beſydes the hugenes of their bodies ſhould appere terrible. And argued how ſouldiers were more moued wyth vaine cauſes of feare and ſuche were of no Moment then with ſuch as were iuſte cauſes in dede he declared alſo howe their enemies by reaſon of ye great multitude ſhoulde be hable to encloſe there ſmal nombre rounde aboute: and that they ſhoulde not nowe fyght in the

ſtraites and narow paſſages of Cilicia, but in an open and large playne. They all in maner agreed to Parmenios ſayeng: and Policarpon was of a plaine opynion, that the victorie conſiſted in the pointe which he had deuiſed. The king that before had taunted Parmenio more bitterly then he thought good, would not check him againe. but beheld Polycarpon and ſayed: That policie that you aduiſe me pertaineth to robbers and theues,A
                     •
                  exanders aunſwer for it is their propertye to worke by fle
                  •
               ht and d
                  ••
               ce it. I will no more ſuffre that eyther Darius abſence, the ſtreytnes of the ground or the 
                  ••
               elthe in the night, ſhalbe an hinderaunce to my glorye. I am plainly determined to haue to do with hym in the open day, and had rather repent me of my fortune, than be aſhamed of my victory. Beſides this it is to be conſideryd, that the Percians keape good watche and ſtand armed alwaies in a redines to receyue vs. wherof I haue aduertiſement: So that they cannot be deceiued that waye. Therefore ther doth remayne no more, but that you prepare your ſelues to the battayll. When he had by theſe wordes put thē in a courage, he diſmiſſes them from counſel, to refreſſhe there bodies. Darius coniecturing that hys enemyes would haue done the ſame thing yt Parmenio did perſuade, cauſed the horſes to ſtand redy brideled, the hole night, and the more of his hoſte to continue armed and keape good watche. His cāpe ſhone bright with the fiers that were made, and he him ſelf wyth his capitaynes and kinſfolkes wēt about his batte
                  •
               ls that ſtode in ordre and in armes making inuocation to the Sonne, to Mars, and to the euerlaſting fier, that they woulde inſpire vnto them a fortitude of mynd, that might aunſwer to the auncient glory and actes of his predeceſſors. And ſhewed if the

mynde of man were noble to conceyue any tokens or ſignes of the goddes fauore or aſſiſtaunce, it was no doubte but that they were bent on ther ſyde, hauing alredy ſtreken a ſode
                  •
                feare amonges the Macedones which (he ſaied) might he ſene by ther rō
               
                  •
               ing here and there by the 
                  •
               arieng and caſting of ther Armour. And that the gods which toke care of the Percians Impire were newe determined to puniſhe thoſe towardes: Whoſe captayne being of another ſorte then the reſte was like vnto theſe wilde beaſtes, which through gredines of the 
                  •
               ray, that they do couet, fal into the ſ
                  •
               ares that be ſet f
                  ••
                them. The like care was emonges the Macedones, for as though the matter ſhould haue ben tried that night, thei paſſed i
                  •
                ouer in doubte and feare. Alexander himſelfe that was neuer ſene i
                  •
                ſuch ſcare before that tyme called for Ariſtander to meke vowes & praiers, wh
                  •
                in a white garment cariēg V
                  •
               rberies in his hand, with his hedde, couered went before the king calling vpon Iupiter, Mynerua & Victoria. When he had thus ꝑformed his ſacrifice accordīg to ther religiō retorned into his 
                  〈◊〉
                him to reſt ye reſidue of ye night. But he 
                  •
               ulde nether reſte▪ nor ſleape, but continually debated with him ſelf which way he ſhould affaile hys enemies: One while he was of opinion to gyue his firſt vnſet wō that battel of the Percians that ſhould come on his right hande: Some tyme he determined to mete his enemies in a plaine fronte, and an other while was in doubte whither it were better to ſet firſt on their left batteyll, atlength hys bodye became heuy with trauaill of the mynd and fell into a ſound ſleape. Whē the daye apeared, the capteines aſſembled about the kinges Pauilion, to receyue ther charge. Where they ſtode amaſed with greater ſilence then they were

accuſtumed. For they could not but wonder that Alexander who was euer wount 
                  ••
                caſt vpon other men, and to reproue ſuche as were ſlowe or neglygent, not to be then ſtoryng when the matte
                  •
                was come to the poincte of the extreme daunger. And many were of opinion that he ſlept not but ſhronke for feare, yet for all that none of them that were about his perſone durſte attempte to wake hym. In the meane ſeaſon the tyme paſte away, and the ſouldiers myght neyther put on their armour, nor go in ordre of battaille without commaundement of their hea
                  •
               . When they had thus taried a good whyle. Parmenio gaue commaundement they ſhoulde fall to meate. At length when the tyme came, that of neceſſitie they muſte ſette their battaylles, he entered into the kynges l
                  •
               dgyng, and called vpon hym diuers tymes by his name, but when he could not awake hym with his voyce he ſtored hym with his hand:Parmenio to Alexād. It is farfourth day (quod he) and your enemies come forewardes in ordre of battaylle and your ſouldiers beyng yet vnarmed, 
                  〈◊〉
                no commaundement yet geuen them what they ſhal do
                  •
                where is▪ that there fulnes and courage of yours become whiche were wonte to ſtirre 
                  •
               p other men▪ vnto whom Alexander made aunſwere: Thinke you that I could ſlepe before I had rid myſelf of the rare that letteth me to take my reſt? and therupon cauſed the 
                  ••
               ompettes to blowe to the battaille. But when Parmenio continued 
                  ••
               ll in admiracion that he in ſuche a tyme could ſlepe ſo quietly. It is no marueile (quod Alexander) when Darius burned the countrey 
                  ••
               ſted the vyllages, and deſtroyed the victualles. I could then in no wyſe be quiet. But now what cauſe haue I of feare, ſeyng he prepareth hymſelf to fyght? He hath nowe fulfilled

my deſire, reſ
                  ••
               te now where your charge lye, and I wyll ſtreyght 
                  •
               lyes come to ge
                  ••
               e, ordre amonges you, and reaſon this matter afterwardes. He vſe 
                  •
                ſeldome to take his frendes a
                  •
               u
                  •
               e when my 
                  〈◊〉
                
               
                  ••
                daunger was at hande, when Parmenio was gone he armed himſelf, and came forwardes amonges the ſouldiers. Who ſeing him loke ſo thereful as they had not done before 
                  〈◊〉
                yued by the boldnes of his coū
               tenaunce a certayne hope of the victory: Then he cauſed the trenches of he
                  •
                campe 
                  〈◊〉
                caſte downe, that the ſouldiers myght haue free paſſage forth and ſo did ſet his battailles in ordre. The horſemen whiche they call Age
                  •
               a of whome Cli
                  •
               us was Capitaine, were ſet in the wynge of his ryght hand battaylle: to whome he ioyned Philotas and other Capitaines.The order that Alexā
                  der vſed at the battaill of Arbella. The laſte hande of horſemen was Me
                  •
               e
                  •
               gers whiche went next vnto the ſquare battaylle of footemen that the Macedons name Phalanx. After the Phalanx thoſe footemen went that he called Argyraſpides,
                  Argiraſpid
                        •
                     
                  
                of whome Nycanour the ſonne of Parmenio was Capitaine. Cen
                  •
               s with his hand was appoincted to be a relief▪ Horeſtes and L
                  •
               ta 
                  〈◊〉
                next 
                  •
               n ordre, and after them Poly
                  •
               arp
                  •
               n that had the rule of the ſtraungers Ph
                  •
               lag
                  ••
                had the rule of the Balacr
                  •
               us. And this was the ordre of Alexanders battaylle in the right hand wherof Ami
                  •
               tas was chief. In the left battaille. Cr
                  •
               terus had the charge of the Peloperenſion horſemen and had with h
                  •
               m alſo the bandes of the Atheiās Locrenſians, and Mole
                  •••
               ſians, and the laſt trops were the horſemen of Laſſalia vnder Philip their Capitaine. Thus the horſemen couering the foote men made the front of the left battaylle. And lefte

thennemies through their multitude ſhould encloſe the battell about, he planted a great force behinde for the relief of that matter, and ſet a relief alſo vpon the winges not to front with the reſt but vpon the ſides. to thentent that if the enemies atempted to compaſſe about the battailles, that there ſhould be redy to kepe them doing. Thoſe that occupied the places of relief were the Agrians, of whome Attalus was capitayne. and the archers of Crete ioyned vnto them: ſuche as ſtode in the hinder partes of the battailles were ordred to turne their faces frō the frontwardes; becauſe that being in a redines euery waye, the battailles in euery place ſhould be of like force. They whiche ſtode with their faces cōtrariwyſe were the Illicians & the mercinary ſouldiers, with the Thraciās that were lightly armed. Theſe his battailles were ſet ſo aptly to be turned euery way, that ſuch as ſtode in ye hinder partes could not be encloſed about, but myghte towardes eche parte make their front: So the front, the flankes, and the hinder partes were alſo of like force. When he had ſet his men in ordre after this maner, he gaue commaū
               dement that if the Perciās ſhould put forwardes vpō them their hoked wagons with a crie or noyſe, that thē they ſhould open their battailles and receyue thē with ſilence, not doubting but that they ſhould paſſe through without harme doing, if no man did reſiſte them. But if they ſhould come without any ſhout or 
                  〈◊〉
               , that then they themſelues ſhould make a crye 
                  〈◊〉
                fear
                  •
                the horſe withal, and ſo with p
                  •
               kes thruſt them in on euery ſyde. They which had the charge of the battailles were commaunded to extende them ſo muche in breadth as they myght, leſte by ſtanding ouer cloſe the myght be enuironed, and yet not to ſtretche them ſo farre out, to

leue the places voyde or thinne in the middes. The cariage and the priſoners amonges whom Darius mother was, were ſet in the toppe of an hill wyth a ſmall guarde about them. The charge of the left battel was cōmitted to Parmenio as was accuſtomed before time and Alexander him ſelf was in thother. When they were come nere together one Bion came flieng from the Percian campe in all the haſte he could make, and declared vnto the king that Darius had planted Irō galtroppes. Where as he thought hys horſemen ſhoulde paſſe, and by a certaine ſigne ſhewed him the place, bicauſe it might be auoyded. Alexander wylled the fugitiue to be keapt ſauffe, and aſſembled all hys captains together, declaring the matter and exorting them to make their ſouldiers priuie to the daunger, for eſchewyng the place poynted out to them. But all that were in ſo great an army could not hear ye warning giuen, the noyſe of both armies takyng away the vſe of the eares.Alexanders exortacion to hys men. But Alexāder riding betwixt the battels, gaue exortacion to the Capitains and to all other that were within hearing. He declared that ther was but one haſarde remayninge to them that had paſſed through ſo many coūtreis in hope of the vitorie which they were now ready to fight for. Therupō he reduced to their memorie the battelles they had fought, at the Ryuer of Granike, in the mountaynes of Cilicia, and with what ſpede they had paſſed ouer both Siria and Egipt, the reherſal wherof put them in great hope and pricked them forwardes to the deſire of glory. He ſhewed that the Percians being withdrawen again from their former flieng, were now cōpelled to fight of neſeſſitie bicauſe they could fle no further, and how that thre days together amaſed for feare thei had remained

ſtill in one place wyth their armor on their backes. Of whoſe diſpaire (he ſayd) there coulde be no greater argument, then that they had ſet on fire their owne contrey, confeſſing all to be their ennemies, that they diſtroyed not. He exhorted them not to feare the vaine names of vnknown naciōs, as a thing nothing pertinent to the warre, whych were called Scythians or Caduſians. For that they were vnknown naciōs, was the greateſt tokē that they were mē of no valour. For that ſuch as be valiāt mē could neuer be vnknown in the world. And contrariwiſe daſtards, when they come forth of ther dēnes bring nothing wt them but names of men wher as you yt be Macedons haue obtained by your vertue & manhod, that ther is no Contrey in the world ignorāt of your artes. He willed thē to behold ye euil order yt was in their enemies hoſt, of whom ſome had no weapō but a darte, other a ſlinge to caſt ſtones, & very few had ſuch armour as thei ought to haue. So that though there were a great nombre on the other parte, yet he ſaid thei had more on their ſide that ſhould cōe to hand ſtrippes. And yt for his ꝑte he would not require any mā to aduēture hym ſelf, except he were an enſāple to thē to ſhewe their valiātnes & courage. For he promiſed yt he ſhould be ſene fighting wt the formoſt knowing yt ſo many wounds as he ſhould get, ſhould be ſo many ornamēntes to his ꝑſon. He ſaid they them ſelues knew yt he would be no ꝑtaker of the pray, but yt euer his cuſ
                  •
               ume was to beſtowe the rewardes of the victory to their behoue & cōmoditie. His former words he ſhewed to be ſpoken to ſuch as were mē of courage But if ther were any yt were otherwiſe, he had to ſaye vnto the: that they were come to the place from whēs they could not fle, hauīg leſt ſo many coūtreis behīd thē which they had paſſed ouer, & ſo many riuers & mounteyns

at their backes. So that now there was no way to their houſes and countrey, but ſuch as they muſte make open with their owne handes. This was the exhortacion he gaue vnto the captaines, and to ſuch of ye ſouldiers as ſtode next him. Dariꝰ that was in his left battail accompaned with a choyſe band of electe horſemē, & fotemē, diſpiced the ſmal nōbre of his ennemies their battails appearing to him ſhinne & voyde of mē, when he ſaw ther winges ſtretched ſo fat abrode. He ſtode therfore in his Chariot on hie, & turning him ſelf both on the right hand and the left,The oraciō of Daryus. ſpake in this ſort to ſuch as were abouts him. We that lōg ago were lords of al the coūtries lieng betwixt Helleſpōt & the Occian Sea, are cōpelled now to fight not for fame and glori but for our ſauegard and our libertie, with chyefly is to be eſtemed. This daie ſhal I either eſtabliſhe, or make an ende of the greateſt Impire that hath bene in any age. At ye riuer of Granik we fought wt a ſmal part of our powre. Whē we were vāquiſhed in Cilicia, Siria was able to receiue vs, and the Ryuers of Tigre and Emphrates were as bulwarkes to defende our kingdome. But now we come to that pointe, that we haue no place to fle to, if we be put to flight. All thinges behind our backes are waſted wt this long warre, nether cities be inhabited nor mē left to tylle the groūd. Both our wiefes and chyldren do folowe thys armye, a praye redie for our ennemyes, except we put forth our bodyes for the defence of ſuche as be dere vnto vs. So much as hath cōcerned me. I perfourmed preparing ſuch an army as this huge plaine is ſcarſly able to receiue: I diſtributed emonges you horſe & armour prouided ye vitels ſhould not want for ſuch a multitude and haue choſē out an apt place to derayn ye batailes in

All the reſte remaineth in your handes. Do but dare, and the victorie is yours, Deſpiſe you this fame which is but a weke wepon againſt men of valeur. It is raſhenes which hitherto ye haue feared as a vertue, wherof when the furſte brunt is ſpent, it waxeth then dul as the bees when they haue ones loſt their thōges. This plaine hath diſcloſed their final nombre, which ye moūtaines of Cilicia did hide: you ſe how thinne their rankes be, their winges how they be extended abrode. howe their battels be emptie, and voyde of men. And ſuch as be hinder moſt haue alredy turned their backes They may be ouerthrowne wyth the horſe fete though I ſend none againſt them but the hoked wagons And if we wynne the battaile we make an end of the warre for thei haue no place to flie vnto. They be ſhut in with Tigre on the one ſide, & with Euphrates on the other: and ſuch things as before made for their purpoſe, now be turned and make clere againſt them. Our Armie is light, and without much baggage, and they be laden with prayes and with booties. We ſhal kill them therfore as they be wrayt in our ſpoiles. And the ſame one thing ſhalbe both our gaine, and the cauſe of our victorye. If any of you be moued wyth the fame of the nacion you muſt thinke that the armour and outward ſhew & not ye bodies of the veraie Macedons be their p̄ſent we haue cōſumed ſo much of their bloud ſince ye warre begā. And ſeing they be but few, their loſſe muſt nedes be to them the greater. For howe great ſo euer Alexander doth ſeme to ſuche as be fearfull, and towardes, he is but a mā, and if you truſt me, both raſhe and without conſideracion: and hetherto more fortunat through ouer feare, then by his own valure. Ther is nothing can cōtinue that is not gouerned by reaſō.

for though fortune ſeme to fauour for a whyle, yet at length ſhe ſhall not ſupporte his raſſhenes. Beſydes that the eſtate of thynges be full of chaunge, and no man hath perpetuall felicitie. It may be that the prouidence of the goddes haue ſo ordeyned it, that the Empire of the Percians encreaſed with ſuche proſperous ſucceſſe by the ſpace of two hundred and thirty yeares, and brought to ſo great an height of fortune, ſhould nowe rather be ſhaken, then vtterly ouerthrowen: Therby to admonyſhe vs of mans fragility, whiche vſeth to forget himſelf ouermuch in proſperous eſtate. It is not long agoe ſince of our own mocion and courage, we moued warre againſt the Grecians, and inuaded their dominions, but nowe we ſtand at defence in our owne countrey. Thus we be toſſed one againſt an other by exchaunge of fortune. For one nacion cannot 
                  •
               eare the greatnes of the Empire whiche we both do 
                  •
               ouet. But be it ſo that hope were taken from vs, yet neceſſitie ought to prick vs forwardes, the matter is come to ſuche extremitie. He keapeth nowe as priſoners, both my mother, my two doughters, and Occhus my ſonne, borne to the ſucceſſion of this Empire. He keapeth captiue your princes, the iſſue that is deſcended of the bloud royall, yea & your capitaines equall with kynges, and if you do not now lay to your handes I my ſelf am lyke to become captiue. Deliuer you therfore my bowels out of my priſon, and reſtore to me my children, for whoſe ſake I do not refuſe to die. Be you all ſure that both my mother and my children (for my wyfe is dead in priſon be holding vp their hādes criēg vnto the goddes, & calling for your helpe, your cōpaſſiō and fidelitie, that you would deliuer them from ſeruitude, from fetters, & from the ſtate they are in, liuing at

other mens will & apointment. Thinke you yt they can be cōtent to liue vnder ſuch as thei could ſcarſly vouch ſaue to haue for ſubiectes? I ſee that our enemies battailles do approche, & the nere the daunger is at hand, ye leſſe the wordes I haue ſpokē do content me, I make requeſt to you by the goddes of our coūtrey by the eternall fier that is caried vpon the aulters, by the brightnes of the ſonne that riſeth within the boūdes of mine Empire, by ye euerlaſting memory of Cyrus, which firſt did take the Empire frō the Medes & Lidians & gaue it to the Perciās, deliuer their name & this nacion frō ſhame & reproche. Go fourth cherefully haue you good hope, and ſe that you reſtore to your poſteritie, the glory you haue receiued of your elders. Lo you cary now in your hādes your libertie, your help, & your hope in time to come. Whoſoeuer contēpneth death, eſcaped death, & death ouertaketh ſuche, as do flie frō death▪ I ride here in a chariot, not only for that it is my coūtrey, cuſtome▪ but alſo that I may be ſene of you al. And I deſire nothing ſo muche as ye ye will folowe me, whether I ſhew you an enſample of proues or of cowardnes. In the meane ſeaſon whiles Alexander did couet to eſcue the place of parill, yt he was warned of, & enforced himſelfe to encounter with Darius lefte battaill where he was in perſon,The battail 
                     •
                  ught or 
                     •
                  rbella bewixt Alexa
                     •
                  der & Darius. was compelled to fetche a compaſſe about. Whom whē Darius perceiued he turned likewiſe his own battail towardes him, willing beſſus to apoint the Maſſagites horſemen to geu a charge on Alexanders left battaill. He ſet before him his hoked wagōs, which by a ſigne geuen brake out ſodenly vpon their enemies with a full courſe to thintent that by their cōming vnbewares they might do the greater deſtruction. The pikes that were ſet before in the wagons deſtroyed diuers,

& many were torne a ſōdre by ye houkes that were on both ſides. The Macedons gaue not place to thē by a little & little, but troubled their array wt a mayn fute. When Mazeus ſawe their diſordre, he put thē in more feare, and apointed out a thouſand horſemē to fetche a compaſſe about the Macedōs battailles to ſpoyle their cariage, ſuppoſing that the priſoners which were there kept, would breake their bādes, whē they ſhuld ſee their own naciō approche. Parmenio which was in the left winge perceiued this matter well, & therfore ſent by & by Polidamas vnto Alexander to ſhewe him the daunger, and know his pleaſure what he would haue done. When he vnderſtode the caſe by Polidamas: Go thy way (qd he) and ſhewe Parmenio, if we wynne the battaill, we ſhall not only recouer again our own, but ſhal haue alſo the ſpoyle of our enemies. Therfore I would not that any parte of our force ſhould be remoued from the maine battell, but let him fight it out manfully, and not regarde the loſſe of baggage, wherin he ſhal obſerue the honour of me, & my father Philip whoſe cuſtome was to do the like. In the meane ſeaſon the Percians were entred amonges the cariages & had ſlam diuers that were left in their defence wherupon the priſoners began to loſe themſelues, and taking vp whatſoeuer came to hande, toke parte with the horſemen, & ſharply aſſailed the Macedōs. Diuers were ſo ioyful that they ranne to beare tidinges to Siſigambis howe Darius had wonne the victory, and had ouerthrowen his enemies to their great ſlaughter, and alſo that all their cariage was wonne, thynkyng the lyke fortune had bene euery where, ſeyng they ſawe the Percians fall to ſpoyle. And although they exhorted Siſigambis that ſhe ſhould leue her heuynes and reioyſe, yet ſhe continued in theſame eſtate ſhe was in before, not ſpeaking

one worde nor chaūging collour nor coūtenaunce, but ſat ſtil immouable. She was ſo ouercōe (as it was thought) with ſodain ioye yt ſhe durſt not ſturre nor attēpte fortune, for ſuche as did behold her, could not perceiue whiche way ſhe was enclined. In the meane ſeaſon Amyntas,Amyntas. that was maiſter of the horſe to Alexand, came with a fewe bandes of horſemen to ſucrour the carriages, but vncertain it was whither he did it of his own head, or by the kinges apointmēt. He was not able to endure the force of the Caduſians & Scithians, for ſcarſly attempting the ſkirmiſhe, he was driuen back & fled again vnto Alexāder, being rather a witnes of the loſſe of the cariage, thē a reſcuer of theſame. The grief that Alexander conceiued of this matter ouercame the purpoſe he toke before, & feared (not without cauſe) leſt the ſouldiers through ye carfulnes to recouer their own might leaue the fight, & reſort toward their bagage: he ſent therfore Aretes captein of the ſpearemē that were named Sariſſopheros againſt the Scythes.Aretes. By this time the hoked wagons, whiche had ſomwhat troubled the forefront, were come within the ſquare whiche the Macedons cal Phalanx, yet the ſouldiers neuer ſhrōk at the matter, but receiued thē into the middes of their battail, where as, ioyning thēſelues cloſe together, they ſtode like a wal on both ſides▪ thruſting their pikes into the bowels of ye horſes, & ran about ye wagōs, throwing downe ſuch as ſtode in thē at defence. The whole battaill was entāgled & troubled with the ruyne, & killing of the horſes, & ſuche as gouerned thē. They could not rule their horſes when they were once gualled & hurt, whiche with muche leaping & ſtrugling not only brake out of their trace, but alſo ouerthrewe the wagons, drawing at their tailes the mē yt were ſlayn, neither being

able to ſtande ſtill for the feare they were in, nor yet go forwardes beyng ſo fainte of their woundes, yet a fewe of them paſſed through the battaille, wherby ſuch as the wagons did lite vpon, were myſerably ſtayne, lyeng vpon the ground with their members, cut in ſondre, yet becauſe that through the greneſſe of their woū
               des they felt litle payne, they kept their weapons ſtill notwithſtāding they were maimed & without ſtrength, till ſuche tyme as by continuall bleadyng, they ſoncke downe dead. Aretes in the meane tyme had ſlayne the capitaine of the Scythians that were ſpoyling of the cariages and repulſed them back. But ſtreight way came the Bactrians by Darius ſendyng, and turned the fortune of the field agayne. Many Macedōs were ſlayne at the firſt encountrey, but more fled vnto Alexander. Then the Percians made ſuche a ſhowte as men are wont to do that wynne the victory, and fierſely aſſayled their enemies thinkyng that they had in euery place bene put to flyght. When Alexander perceyued his men ſhrinke, he rebuked ſuche as he ſawe afrayed, and encouragyng very many that he ſawe alone reſtored the battaille that began to faynt, & geue ground. When he had put them in harte, he required them to preſſe forwardes, and go on frely againſt their enemies. When Alexander perceyuing that the Bactrians were departed to the defeating of the cariages, and by their going had left the right hande battaille of Darius thinne & naked, he bent his force wholy yt way, and there made a wonderfull ſlaughter and deſtructiō of his enemies, whiche by reaſon of their loſe array were not able to withſtand him. The Percians in the left wynge ſeing this thing, were in hope to haue encloſed Alexender about, and came forwardes to ſet vpon

his backe parte, wherby greate daunger had enſued to him beyng enuironed both before and behind. If the Agrians had not put their ſpurres to their horſes and geuen a charge to their enemies, that had nere hande enuironed their kyng about, and ſo compelled the Percians to turne their faces againe towardes them. The battailles thus were ſore trauailed on both ſydes. Alexander had his enemies bothe before and behynd▪ and his enemies that came on his back were ſore oppreſſed by the Agrians. The Bactrians alſo that had ſpoyled the cariages, were excluded from their own company, and could not recouer their place agayne. Thus the battaylles were deuyded in diuers partes, and fought one againſt an other as their chaunce fell. The two kynges, that ioyned their battaylles hard one to an other renued agayne the fyght. There were moſte of the Percians ſlayne, but the nombre of the wounded were lyke on both ſydes. Darius did ryde in a chariot and Alexander vpon an horſe. They both had a choiſe band about them whiche were careles of their owne lyues. For if their kynges ſhould miſcary, neyther they could be ſaufe, nor yet deſired to lyue. Wherfore euery of them thought it a noble thyng to aduenture them ſelues before the face of their prince. And he that coueted moſte to defende his maiſter▪ was in moſte peryll, for eche man coueted the honour to kyll the kynge on his contrary parte. There (whether it were an imaginacion of the eyes or a thyng done in dede) ſuche as were about Alexander▪ beleued that they ſawe an Egle flickeryng aboue his head, whiche neyther feared with claſſyng of the harneys, nor by the cryeng of them that were dyeng, honge ſtyll in the ayet a lyttle aboue hym. Then Ariſlander whiche ware a whyte

garment, and caried lawrell in hys hande ſhewed thys thyng vnto the ſouldiers as they were buſye fyghtyng, as a certayne token of victory, whiche thyng did cauſe them, whiche before were in ſome doubte, cherefully and with great confidence, to aſſayle their ennemies. The fyght contynued after thys ſorte vntill the tyme that he was ſlayne whiche gouerned the horſe, that drue Darius chariot. Then neyther the Percians nor Macedons, doubted but that Darius had bene ſlayne. And the Percians vpon that imaginacion made a barbarous noyſe, and a ſorowefull howlyng, wherewith they ſore troubled and aſtonied their whole hoſte, that were yet fyghtyng with equall victory. Darius kynſmen and the Squires for his body that were on his left hand, lefte hym and fled away with a mayn flyght: but ſuche as ſtode in his defence dn his ryght hande, conuoyed hym into the hart of the battaill. It is ſayd that Darius drue out his ſworde and was determined diuerſe tymes to kyll hymſelfe, rather then to ſuſteine the ſhame of flyeng away. But when he ſawe as he ſat alofte in his chariot, that a great parte of his army remayned yet fighting, he was aſhamed to leue them in ſuche ſorte. And whyles he thus wauered in his opiniō betwixt hope and diſpaire, the Percians by little and lytle gaue grounde, and ſhronck from their order. Alexander that had tyred many horſes, did chaunge the ſame he did at that time ryde vpon, & ſtrake at the faces of thē that ſtode at defence. There was none then that made reſiſtaūce any lēger▪ but a manifeſt ſlaughter fell on the Percians,Darius 
                     •
                  led and Darius tourned his chariot to flye awaye. The Macedons purſued them hard that fled, and the duſte that flue vp to the ſkie toke away their proſpect, ſo that they

wandred as it had bene in darknes, and euer dreue together when they hard any voice that they knew. Only the ratling and noyſe of the chariot was a marcke for the Macedones to folowe after. As fortune was proſperous to the Macedons on this parte. and contrarious to their ennemies: ſo on the other ſyde, where Permenio in the lefte winge encountred with the Percians▪ they had the better, and the Macedons the worſe.Mazeus. Mazeus wyth his whole bande gaue a great charge, and put the horſemen that ſtoode in the winges to a ſore diſtres. And thervpon by reaſon he aboūded with multitude began to encloſe the footemē about. Then Parmenio ſent worde to Alexander in what daunger they were in whiche he ſignified to be ſuch, that except they had ſuccour in tyme, they coulde not reſiſte, but he enforced to flye awaye. Alexander was gone farre in the chaſe, when this ſorowfull meſſage was brought him. Wherfore he commanded the horſemen to ſtaye and chafed wounderfullye, that the victory was thus taken out of his hādes, & that Dariꝰ had better fortune in fleing then he in hys folowing. In the meane ſeaſon the fame of Darius ouerthrowe was brought vnto Mazeus. And therefore though he had the vpper hand yet he was ſtriken with ſuch feare of his fellowes miſfortune, that he made aſtarke purſuite vpon his enemies. Parmenio was ignorant of the cauſe why the fight did ſlake ſo willingly of there parte,Parmenio encouraged his ſoldiers but boldly vſing the occacion of the victorie called the Teſſalien horeſmen vnto hym and ſayed. Se you not how our enemies that euen nowe gaue vs a feirſe onſet, be ſodenly afrayed, and withdrawe them ſelues. I ſee the fortune of our kyng doth giue vs the victoryie. All the feldes be ſtrown with the Percians

that be ſlaine. Why do you therfore ſtaye? are you not good anoughe for men that be fleing? They ſawe his wordes had an apparaunce of a truthe▪ and therfore by and by they toke courage, and putting their ſpores to the horſe made a full charge vpon their enemies who retired not by littell & littill, but marched away a great pace. And they wanted nothing of flieng ſauing that they had not yet directly turned their backes: yet for al that inſomuch as Permenio knewe not what was become of the king, nor of hys battell, ſtayed and woulde not purſue after them. Mazeus hauing leiſure geuen him to flie at his libertie, paſſed the riuer of Tigre, not the next way, but by a further cōpaſſe about with more ſuretie, and ſo recouered the Citie of Babilon with the remaynes of that vanqueſhed Armye. In the meane ſeaſon Darius with a fewe that accompained him in his flieng came to the Riuer of Licus▪ wher paſſinge ouer he ſtode in doubte, whither he ſhould breake the bridge or no, for it was ſhewed him that his enemies were at hand. But conſidering how many thouſandes of his men by the breakinge therof ſhould be a pray to hys enemies, he left the bridge ſtanding, and at his departure, ſaid that he had rather open the waye to them that purſued him, then to ſhut it againſt them that fled after him. But Darius lefte not his flieng til he came to Arbilla, where he arriued about midnight. Who is able to conceyue in his mind or expreſſe in wordes,the diſcomfirture. the manifold chaſiſes in this diſcōfiture, the ſlaughter that fell both vpon captaines and ſouldiers, the chaſing of them that were put to flight the deſtruccion in particular and in generall. Fortune heaped to gether that one daye the chaunces of a whole world. Some toke the way that came next to hand, a nother ſort fled vnto

the woods, and ſought out by pathes, to eſcape ſuch as folowed after them. Ther was a confuſion of horſmē & footemē mixed togither without any head, the armed with the vnarmed, and the whole wyth the hurte. At length the compaſſion that one had of an other was turned into feare, and they that could not folow, were lefte bewailing themſelues one to another. But thireſt chieflie afflicted the wounded and weried, which laye alōg euerie where in the waies where any water was gaſping after it with open mouth. And when for gredines they had gulled in the troubled water, they began to ſwell, when the mudde ones entred into their entrayles. And bienge thus not in caſe to moue, the enemie came and ſturred them vp with new wounds. Some when the brookes nere hand, were taken vp by other: ſought out for ſpringes in euery ſecret place. Nor their was no puddle ſo drie nor ſo farre out of the way, that could be hidden from the thireſt of them that ſerched them out. The olde men and women were hard howling and crieng in all the villages nere the waies ſide, how Darius was yet their kinge. Alexander as it hath bene ſaied before ſtaieng the chaſe, was come to the Riuer of Licus, where as the multitude of the fliers was greater then could paſſe the bridge. So that many when their enemyes purſued them, lept into the water, and their laden wyth their armour, and weried wyth fightyng and flienge were conſumed wyth the ſtreame. But within a while neither the bridge nor the riuer were hable to receyue the companies that continually encreaſed by their vndiſcret flieng. For when feare was once entred into their hartes, they doubted only that, which put them firſt in feare. The Macedōs were eger in the purſute

of their enemies▪ and required Alexāder that he would not ſuffre their enemies to eſcape fre away. But he to ſtay them alledgid that their weapons were dull, their hādes weried, their bodies faint with long purſute, and that the daye drue towards night. But in veraie dede the care of his other battail which he thought to be yet fighting, cauſed him to returne to their ſocour. He had not ſo ſone turned his enſignes, but ye certaine horſmē brought him worde from Permenio yt the victory was wōne alſo on their part. He was not in ſo great a daū
               ger al yt day, as whē he was cōming towards his cāpe.The daungier Alexander was in at his returne from the chaſe For there were but fewe yt folowed him and thoſe out of ordre, as men that reioiſing of the victorye, iudged all their enemies either to be fled or ſlaine in the field: then ſodēly ther appered a band of horſemē of the contrary parte coming againſt thē, which at the firſt ſtaied but afterwardes perceiuing the ſmall nombre of the Macedōs, gaue a charge vpō thē. The king rode formoſte rather diſimuling▪ then deſpiſing the perill he was in: but his perpetual felicitie neuer failed him in extremities. For at the firſt encountre he ſtracke thorough with a ſpeare, the captaine of the Percians, who in egernes of the fight vnaduiſedly came agaynſt hym Whē he through his ſtroke was fallen to the ground▪ Alexāder ſlewe the next to him with the ſame weapō
               ▪ and after diuers other, wherewith his company ſeing the Percians amaſed, bracke vpon them, and threwe many to the earthe, yet they for their partes were not vnreuenged▪ for the whole battaill did not ſo erneſtly fyght as that ſmall bande aſſembled ſo by chaunce. But at lengthe when they ſawe that flyenge in the darke ſhould be more ſuretie to thē then fighting ſhocked away in diuers companies. Alexander hauing eſcaped thys extraordinarie perill, brought hys men in

ſaufegarde vnto his campe. There were ſlayne of the Percians,The nobre of the dead. whiche came to the knowledge of them that had the victory .xl.M. and of the Macedons leſſe then iii.C. whiche victory Alexander wan more by his own vertue, then by any fortune: and with hardines & courage, more then through any aduantage of the ground. For he both ordred his battailles politikely, and fought manfully. With greate wyſdome he contemned the loſſe of the bagage, cōſideryng the weight of the whole matter to conſiſt in the battaille it ſelf. Whiles the fortune of the field was yet doubtfull, he vſed hymſelf as aſſured of the victory. And when he had put his enemies in feare, he ceſſed not till he had ſet them flyeng, and that whiche ſcarſely can be beleued in that fierſenes of ſpirite, he purſued in the chaſe more wiſely then gredely. For if he ſhould haue folowed on ſtill, parte of his powre yet fighting in the field, he ſhuld either haue loſt the battaylle through his owne fault, or els haue wonne the victory through the prowes of other men. Or if after he had gottē the victory he had ſhewed him ſelfe afrayed of the horſemen that he met, he muſt either haue ſhamefully fled, or haue bene miſerably ſlain Nor his capitains were not to be defrauded of their cō
               mendacion: For the woundes that they did receyue, were tokens of their manhode. Epheſtions arme was wounded with a ſpere. Perdicas, Cenos, and Menidas, with ſhot of arrowes were nere ſlayne. And if we will geue a true iudgement of the Macedons that were there, we muſte confeſſe that he was a kyng worthy ſuch miniſters, and they men worthy of ſuche a maiſter.
         
         
            
            ¶The fifte boke of Quintus Curtius of the actes of the great Alexander Kyng of Macedonie.
            
               IF I ſhall make mencion of the matters that chaunſed in the meane ſeaſon both in Grece. Iliria, and Thracia, by the appointment and commiſſion of Alexander in order as they fell the matters of Aſia ſhuld therby be interrupted, which I thought moſt cōuenient to put wholy together vntil the death of Darius, and then to ioyne them in thys worke as they agre with the tyme.Darius wordes to them that were fledde from the felde I will firſte ſpeake of thoſe thinges that enſued after the battayll at Arbella, where Darius arriued about midnight. And as it chaunſed the more parte of his fryndes and of all other that were eſcaped from the felde were come thither, he called them all togither and made an oracion to this effect: That he doubted not but Alexander and his men, gaping with gredy deſire for the haboūdance of ſpoyle that was in redines for them, would viſite ſuche cities and cōtries, of his as were moſte notable & plentiful of riches: which thing (he ſaid) conſidering his eſtate▪ could not but turne at length to his auaill. Hys purpoſe was nowe with a ſmall band to repayre into the deſertes. And ſeing the vttermoſte partes of his kingdōe were yet vntouched, he ſhould from thēce eaſely repayre hys powre agayne to renue the warre, Let therefore that gredy nacion (qd he) take my treaſure, and ſatiſfie their great hunger with gold, which ſhortly ſhall cauſe both the ſame and them alſo, to be a pray vnto vs. For he had learned (he ſaid) by experiēce

that the haboudance and exceſſe of ther preciouſe furniture▪ their flockes of Concubines & Eunukes, were nothing els but burdens and impedimentes. Whych Alexander poſſeſſing and carieng about ſhould make him inferior vnto them of whom before he was victorius. His oracion ſemed to all men to be full of deſperacion. For they ſawe therby that the riche Citie of babilon ſhould be geuen vp vnto the Macedōs, & Suſa ſhortly after wyth all other ornamentes of the realme that were cauſe of ye warre. But he procedid in perſuading them, howe that men in aduerſitie ought not do thinges yt ſhould ſeame goodly in the ſpeaking, but neceſſary in thexperiēce. That warres were made wyth iron, and not with gold, wyth men, and not wyth the walles of Cities. For all thinges folowe them that be armed and in ſtrength. He ſhewed that his auntetors were afflicted after this maner in the begining, & yet recouered againe quickly their former eſtate. After he had ſpoken theſe wordes. either for yt they were therby encouraged, or els that they rather obeid his autoritie then liked his counſell, folowed hym into the bondes of Media.Arbella yeldid vnto Alexander Shortly after Arbella was geuen vp vnto Alexander, which was full of the kynges ryches and treaſure, of precious ſtuf, and appariell. And beſides in that towne the ſubſtāce of the hole army was leſſe. The ſiknes that began in Alexanders campe, riſing of the ſauor of the deade bodies ſcatered ouer all the fieldes, was the cauſe that he did the ſoner remoue.Arabye. The champion contrey of Arabia very notable with the haboundāce of ſwete odoers there growyng lay vpon the right hand as they marched. And ſo paſſed through ye coūtrey lieng betwen Tigre and. Euphrates whyche is ſo fat and plentyfull a ground.

that the inhabiters be fayne to dryue their beſtes from feading, leaſte they ſhould kill them ſelues by eating ouer muche. The cauſe of thys fertilitie commeth of the moiſter that iſſueth from both riuers,Tygre. diſtilling by vaines through the grounde. Both theſe riuer haue their beginning in the mountaynes of Armenia,Euphrates. wher they be diſtaunt .v. thouſand thouſand .v.C. fuclonges and ſo runne forwardes keaping their diſtāce, till they come nere the boundes of Media and Gordia. For thē by little and little the further they go they draue more nere together leuing les ſpace betwixte them. They encloſe of both ſids the coūtrey that is called Meſopotania,Meſopotamia. from whence they runne through the bonds of Babilō in the redde ſea. After Alexāder had chaunged hys campe foure tymes,Mennium. he came to a citie called Mennium wher as there is a fountaine within a caue: that boyleth out great plenty of pycche ſo it apeareth that the Babilonians had there cement from thence, which they employed about the making of their huge walles. As Alexāder was going frō thence towardes Babilō Mazeus which was ſaid before to haue fled from the battell, came to mete hym in moſte humble maner. where cōmitting hys children into his hands, yelded him ſelf; and rendred vp the cytie. Hys comming was very greate full vnto the kynge conſidering what trauayll he ſhoulde haue ſuſteyned in the ſyege of ſo ſtrong a Citie, if it had bene keapte agaynſt hym. And beſides forſomuchas Mazeus was a mā both famous and valient, & much noted for his doing in the laſt battel, thought his enſamble ſhould much prouoke others do to the like. For that cauſe he receyued both hym and hys childrē wyth gentil maner, and yet gaue ordre to hys men that they ſhould enter into the Cytye in

ſuche array of battaill as if they ſhould fight. A great nōbre of the Babilonians ſtoode vpon the walles, deſirous to behold him that was ther new king. But the more parte went forthe to mete hym.Bagiſtenes. Bagiſtenes, that was captayne of the caſtle, and keaper of the kynges treaſour, becauſe he would ſhewe hym ſelfe to be no leſſe affectionate towardes Alexander than Mazeus was, ſtrowed all the waies where he ſhould paſſe, with flowers and garlādes, and ſet aulters of ſiluer on both ſides the waye, wherupon frankenſence was burning, and all other kinde of ſwete odours. Next vnto hym came flockes of beaſtes, great nombres of horſes wyth Lyons, and Pardalies caried in cages, which he brought to geue as preſentes vnto Alexander. And after them the Magies ſinging according to their contrey manner. Caldees went next with their deuiners and prophetes, and then muſicians wyth their kindes of inſtrumētes: their propertie was to ſinge the praiſes of kinges. And the Caldeis vſed to declare the mociōs of ye planetes,The diſtruccion of Babilon. with the courſe & reuolucion of the time. Laſte in ordre came the Babilonian horſemen, whoſe ſumptuous furniture, both for them ſelues and their horſes, tendid more to voluptuouſnes and delicacy, thē to any magnificence. Alexander that was encloſed about wyth armed men willed that the Babilonians ſhould come behind his footemen, and he riding alofte in his chariot entred into the cytie, and afterwardes into the palace, where the next daye he ſurueyed Darius threaſure and riches. The beuty and pleſauntnes of that Citie gaue iuſte occaſion to Alexander and ſuch as were with him to wonder much vpon it. Semiramis was the builder therof and according to ſome mens opinion Belus,Semiramis Belus. whoſe palaice is to be ſene their.

The walles be made all of brick ſet with pitche, whiche is called bytumen. And they be .xxxii. foote in bredth, ſo that two cartes may eaſely go vpō them afront. They be in height .C. cubites, & the towers be .x. foote higher then the reſte of the walles. The compaſſe of thē about is .CCClxviii. furlonges, being builded as it is left in memory in ſo many dayes. The houſes ſtand the brede of an acre diſtaūt from the walles not builded through out the cytie, but only by the ſpace of .iiii. ſcore & .x. forlōges, and thoſe not ioyned nere one to another, but for ſome conſideracion deuided a ſondre. The reſt of the ground is ſowed and tilled, to thintēt that if any forein powre cometh againſt them, thei ſhould be able to be releued by the frute therof comyng. The ryuer of Euphrates doth ronne through the middes of the citie, and is kept in on both ſides with walles of a wounderfull worckmanſhip, but the great caues made of bricke, and in pitche in ſteade of morter wrought lowe within the ground to receiue the violence of the ſtreame, do excede all the relle of ye worckes there made: for except theſame were of quantitie and largenes to receiue the water when the ſtreame floweth ouer the bankes that be made to kepe it in, the violēce therof ſhuld beare down the houſes of the citie. There is alſo ouer that ryuer a ſtone brydge, whiche ioyneth both partes of the citie togethers: counted amonges the marueilous workes of the Orient. For by reaſon that Euphrates is ſo full of mudde and owſe, ground can ſcarſely there be found to lay the foundaciō vpon, and the ſtreame beſides caſteth vp ſuch heapes of ſande againſt the brydge, that it is an impediment for the water frely to paſſe, and therfore beateth vpon the brydge with greater force,The Caſtel of Babilon. then if it had his fre recourſe. There is alſo a caſtle that is: xx

forlonges about, the towres, wherof be .xxx. foote depe within the ground, and .iiii. ſcore foote in height aboue the ground. Where alſo the wōders are to be ſene, that are ſo often mencioned in the Greke poeſis. For in the ſame be whole groues of trees ſet by wounderful arte aboue the ground, ſo highe as the toppes of the towres, whiche be marueilous beuteful and pleaſaunt through their height and ſhadowe that they make. The whole weight of them is ſuſteined and borne by huge pillers made of ſtone, vpon whiche pillers there is a floure of ſquare ſtone, that both vphold the earth that lieth deape vpō the ſame, & alſo ye humour wherewith it is watred. The trees yt growe therupon be of eight cubites about and as fruteful as though they grew in natural earth. And though proces of time is wont by little & little not only to deſtroy thinges made with hande, but alſo the very worckes of nature: yet this worcke, for all it is oppreſſed with the rootes of ſo many trees, and burdened with the weight of ſo much earth, & of ſo great a wood, yet it remaineth vnperiſſhed in any point, being ſuſteined vp with .xx. broade walles diſtāt .xi. foote one from another. Whē theſe trees be ſene afarre of, they feame to be a wood growing vpon a mountaine. It is ſaid yt aking of Siria raigning in Babilō builded this worke for his wifes fanſy, who for the loue ſhe had to woodes and ſhadowe places, moued her huſbād in doing therof to counterfeit the pleſauntnes of nature. Alexāder taried lenger here then in any other citie, whiche hurted more the diſcipline of the Macedons in their warres, thē any other place.The cuſtomes of the Babiloniās For nothing was more corrupt thē the maners & cuſtomes of that citie, nor any other was more haboundantly furniſſhed of al thinges, wherwith men be allured and ſturred to exceſſiue pleaſures. The parentes & huſbādes are contēted for gaine, that their

children & w
                  •
               es ha
                  •
               tes company with ſuch ſtraungers as came amōges thē. The kinges & nobilitie of Pe
                  ••
               e, delite much in banqueting paſtime, but the Bablioniās be ſpecially geuen thereūto, to wyne, and to dronkenes, wher the womē vſe ſuch a cuſtome, yt in the beginning of the feaſt their apparel ſemeth womāly & demure, but afterwardes by little & little they put of the vppermoſt garmentes, and layeng a ſide al ſhamefaſtnes do diſcouer thēſelues naked. Whiche vile cuſtome is not vſed by harlottes only, but by thē all in general whiche coūte the making of their bodies comen, but a ciuilitie & good maner. In this voluptuouſnes and abhominacion the conquerour of Aſia walowed by the ſpace of .xxxiiii. dayes, wherby he became muche the weaker to haue done other enterpriſes, if he had had an enemy to ſtand againſt him. But to thintent the harme he toke ſhould be ye leſſe perceiued, he encreaſed his power with a new ſupplie of mē.Amyntas came to Alexander with a new ſupplie of men. For Amintas the ſonne of Andromenes brought him from Antipater ſyx thouſand Macedons footemen, and .v.C. horſemen, & with them .v.C. Tracian horſemen, with .iii.M.v.C. footemen of the ſame nacion. He had alſo out of Peloponeſe .iiii.M. footemē & .iiii.C.iiii. ſcore horſmē being Mercenary ſouldiers. Amintas alſo brought with hym .L. young men of the nobilitie of Macedonia to attēde vpon Alexāders perſon: whoſe office was to ſerue the king at meat, to brīg him his horſe when he wēt to battel. They accuſtomed to be aboute hym when he hunted, and kept the watche by courſe at his chambre dore: Theſe were they whiche afterwardes proued greate capitaines, and that was the race out of the whiche the rulers of their men of warre dyd come.Agathon, Alexander appoincted Agathon capitaine of the caſtel of Babilon, with .vii. hundred Macedons

and .iii.C. mercenary ſouldiers,Mynetas▪ Appollydorus. & left Minetas & Apollidorus gouernours of the citie and the countrey. to whome he aſſigned two .M. footemen and a .M. talentes, geuing them in commiſſion to wage more ſouldiers. He made Mazeus that gaue the citie into his hā
               des, lieutenaunt of the whole, and cauſed Bagiſtanes that yelded vp the caſtle to folowe hym in his warres. Armenia was geuen to Methrenes that betraied the citie of Sardos,Armenia. and to encourage his ſouldiers to the enterpriſing of other thynges, gaue out of the treaſure of Babilon to euery Macedon horſemā .v.C. deneres, to euery horſeman of the ſtraungers .v.C. and to euery footeman two .C. When he had ſet ordre in all theſe thinges,The countrey of Atrapene. he came into ye coūtrey called Atrapene which being plentifull of all thinges and haboundaunt of vitayle, cauſed the kyng to tary the lenger there. And leſt idlenes ſhould be any abatement of his mennes courages, deuiſed to ſlurre vp their ſpirites and kepe them occupied, by appoincting iudges to trye out ſuch as had ſhewed themſelues moſte valiaunt in the warres, to whom he aſſigned rewardes due to their deſeruinges. There were eight found out, whoſe doinges appeared aboue the reſt, and euery one of thē was appointed the charge of a .M. men, and were called Chiliarchi: that was the firſt time that the ſouldiers were deuided into ſuche nōbres, for before they vſed .v.C. in a bād which was not as they reputed for any preferment or reward of valiauntnes. The nombre of ſouldiers was greate that came to pleade their right in this behalf, and that before the iudges yt gaue ſentēce brought in teſtimony of their doinges: So yt it could not be knowē which of thē had deſerued iuſtly ſuch honor or not, the firſt place was adiuged to old Adarchias,Adarchias. for his valiaūtnes vſed in ye battail at Alicarnaſſon, where he chiefly did reſtore

againe the fyght, when the young ſouldiers had geuen it ouer, the ſecond place of honour was geuen Antigonus, & Philotas, Angeus obteyned the third, the fourth was adiudged to Amyntas. The fifte to Antigonus. Amintas the ſonne of Lynceſtes obtained the ſyxt. Theodorus the ſeuenth, and Hellacanicus the laſte. Hereupon to great purpoſe he altered many thynges that were vſed by his predeceſſours in the diſcipline of warre. For where as before the horſemen of euery coū
               trey were in ſeueral bandes by themſelues, he without reſpect of any nacion apointed to them ſuche capitains as he thought expediēt. And where as at the remouing of his campe warning was accuſtomed to be geuen by a trompet, the ſound wherof in any noyſe or tumulte could not be ſufficiently harde. Therefore he cauſed an hyghe pole to be alwayes ſet before his pauilion, wherupon remayned a ſygne apparaunt to all men. The token that they obſerued was fire in the nyght & ſmoke in the daye tyme. As he was marchyng towardes Suſa, Abulites that was ruler of that region,Abulites. either by Darius commaundement thynkyng by meanes of the ſpoyle to deteyne Alexander the lenger there, or els of his owne fre wyll, ſent his ſonne agaynſt hym, profferyng the deliuery of the cytie. The young man was entreated very gently, and by his conduccion Alexander paſſed forwardes, till he came to the ryuer of Hydaſpis,Hydaſpis. whiche is counted to be a very delicat water. Abulites there mette Alexāder with princely and riche giftes, and preſented him amonges the reſte of other thinges. Dromedary camels, that were wounderfull ſwift, with .xii. elephantes that Darius had ſent for out of India to be a terrour to the Macedons, which now were become an encreaſe of their ſtrēgth, when the riches

of the vanquiſſhed,Suſa whei Alexander found incredible treaſours. was come into the victorers handes. He foūd in ye citie an incredible treaſure .l.M talentes of maſſy ſiluer yt was vncoyned: which riches gathered together in ye ſpace of many yeares by diuers kinges for their ſucceſſiō & poſteritie, thus in a momēt came into the hādes of a forein prince. Alexāder being lodged within the palaice did ſit down in Darius ſeate whiche being higher then ſerued for his ſtature, by reaſon his fete could not reche to the groūd, one of the kinges pages put a bord vnderneth for him to treade vpō. At the doing wherof one of the Enukes yt belonged to Darius, loked heuely & fetched great ſythe: whoſe ſadnes when Alexander perceiued, he enquired of him the cauſe. He anſwered yt when he beheld the bord wherupon Darius was wont to eate, employed to ſo baſe an vſe, he could not behold it without great grief. Alexander being therfore aſhamed, ſo muche to miſuſe ye thing that before was had in ſuche a reuerence, cauſed the ſame to be taken away. Wherupon Philotas required hym not ſo to do, but rather take it as a diuinaciō of his good lucke and fortune that the table wherupō his enemy did eate, ſhould now become ſubiect vnder his fete. Alexander purpoſing from thence to paſſe into Percia committed the cytie of Suſa to Archilaus with .iii.M mē of warre,Archilaus 
               zenophilus. and to zenophilus the charge of the caſtle, leuing ſuche Macedons as were aged, there in guariſon. But he did betake the keping of the treaſure vnto Callicrates & reſtored to Abulites the gouernement & principalitie of the coūtrey of Suſa,Callicrates leuing within the cytie Darius mother & his children. And foraſmuch as Alexander had at theſame tyme plēty of cloth of purple ſent hym out of his coūtrey, with garmētes redy made after the Macedon maner for the honour he bare to

Siſigambis (whome he had in reuerence as if ſhe had bene his mother) thought good to preſent parte of thoſe to her, with the perſones that vſed to make them, and willed it ſhould be told her if ſhe liked them, that ſhe ſhould accuſtome her neces to make the lyke, and geue them for preſentes. At the declaring of whiche meſſage the teares ran out of her eyes, whiche declared the gift not to be acceptable to her. For the Percian womē take nothyng in more deſpite the men to put their handes to wolle. When reporte was made to Alexander in what ſorte ſhe had receiued his preſēt, thought both the matter meete to be excuſed, and her to be comforted.Alexanders excuſe to Siſigambis of the preſent he ſent her. Therfore he came to viſite her & ſayd: This garment which I were was both of the gifte & makyng of my ſuſters: our cuſtomes brought me into errour. Therfore I require you that ye wil not take myne ignoraunce in euel parte. I truſt that otherwiſe I haue obſerued ſufficiētly all thynges whiche I knewe to be your cuſtomes: When I vnderſtode that it was not laufull amonges you, for the ſonne to ſit in the mothers preſence except ſhe doth geue hym leue, whenſoeuer I came vnto your preſence. I would neuer ſitte til you willed me ſo to do: you would oftentimes haue fallen down & worſhip me, but I would not ſuffer you, but haue euer honored you and geuen you the name due to my ſwete mother Olimpiades. Whē the king with theſe wordes had wel pacified her, he departed, & by four encāpinges came vnto a ryuer yt the coūtreimē cal Paſatigras,Paſatigras which ſpringing the moūtaines of ye Vxiōs rōneth ſtepe down amōges ye rockes wt woody bākes by ye ſpace of .30. forlōges: but then deſcēding into a plain it becometh nauigable, & ſo rōneth wt a more quiet ſtreame, & in a ſofter groūd by ye ſpace of .vi.c. forlōgs, til ſuch time as it doth ēter into

the Percian ſea. Alexander paſſing this riuer wyth nyne thouſand footemē of the Macedons, with the Agrians, the Mecenary Grekes and with .iiii. thouſand Thraciās,The vxione came amōges the Vxions. Whoſe coūtrey is nere vnto Suſis, and ſtretcheth out into Percia leuing betwixt it and Suſis a narowe ſtreight. Madates had the rule of that contrey,Madates. who was ſuch a man as was rare at yt time, for he determed to abide thextremitie for his duties ſake. Such as knewe the contrey did enforme Alexander that their was a priuie waye through the hilles, wherby men might get to the farre ſide of the chief citie that partayned to them, and if he would ſend a few that were light armed: thei might be brought to a place, where thei ſhuld appere aboue their enemies heades. This counſell liked him ſo well, that he made the councellers guydes, and committed them to Tauron,Tauron. whome he apointed cheif of that enterpriſe He aſſigned to him, a thouſād .v.c. mercenary ſoldiers and a thouſand Agrians, wyth whom after the ſonne was gone downe he entred into his iourney. Alexander in the third watche remoued hys campe, and by the ſpringe of the daye had paſſed the ſtreightes. There he ſet his mē in hand to cut downe timbre for the making of Towres and al other ſuch thinges as pretayned to the aſſault of a cytie, and ſo beganne his ſeige. It was a difficult matter to make the approche, the cytie ſtode ſo highe, and the rockes gaue ſuch impediment, wherby the ſouldiers were repulced, & receyued many h
                  •
               rtes, contending both with thenemyes and the Scytuacion of the place. Notwithſtanding they gaue it not ouer, by reaſon the kinge was euer amonges the foremoſte, aſking of them if they were not aſhamed being the Conquerours of ſo many cyties, to be ſo longe in

the winning of a ſmal caſtle, that was ſo obſcure & vnknowen in the world. As he was traueling amonges the reſt they did ſhote and caſte ſtones at him from the walles, whom the ſouldiers defended wyth their tergettes, becauſe they could not remoue hym away. At length Tauron apered aboue the caſtle of the cytie at whoſe ſight the enemies hartes faynted, and the Macedons the more fierſlye did aſſayll them. When they ſawe themſelf with this extremitie and perceiued they were not of powre to withſtand the Macedons they became of diuers diſpoſiciōs. For ſome were determined to dye, and many to flye awaye. But the greater parte retired them ſelues into the caſtle from whence they ſent vnto Alexander .xxx. Embaſſadours to aſke mercy. But he gaue vnto them a ſorowfull aunſwere that there was no pardō to be obtained at his handes, wherupō being in doubt of death and excluded from al other remedies, ſent vnto Siſigambes by a priuy way vnknowne to their enemies, makyng their requeſte that ſhe would vouchſaufe to be a meane to Alexāder for the pacefieng of his rigour & wrath towardes thē. In her only they put theyr hope, knowing howe much Alexāder loued her, & that he eſtemed her as if ſhe had ben his mother. And they thought ſhe would the rather encline to their deſire becauſe Madates that was captaine there had maried her ſiſters daughter, wherby he became a kyn to Darius. Siſigambis ſtode longe in deniall of their requeſte, ſheweng that it agreed not with her fortune to become an interceſſor for others. addyng therunto, that ſhe feared leſt ſhe might miſuſe the victorers fauor, and make him we by of her, for (ſhe ſaid) ſhe had more remēbraūce that ſhe was a priſoner then that ſhe was a Quene. But at lengthe ſhe was

ouercome with there ſuite, and by hir letters made interceſſion vnto Alexander after that ſorte, that ſhe fyrſte excuſed hir ſelf of her ſuite making and after required him that he would pardon them or at the leſte waies yt he would forgiue her that was peticioner but for the life only of ſuch one as was hir frend and hyr kinſmā, and now no lenger any enemy to his maieſtie but in redines to ſubmit him ſelf. This one matter is ſufficiēt to declare the Moderacion and clemēcy that was then in Alexander. For he dyd not only pardon Madates, but alſo left the Citie vntouched graunting to all that were within it both libertie and fredom, with enioyment of their landes and goods, without paieng of any tribute: more then the which ſhe could not haue obtayned of Darius being hir ſonne. When he had thus ſubdued the Vxions he annexed them to the prouince of Suſa, and purpoſing to paſſe forwards deuided his army into two partes, wherof he cōmitted the one to Permenio to be conuaied by thē plaine contrey, and reſeruing ſuch a parte as was peſtered leſte wyth bagage, toke the way of the mounteins, whych wyth a contiunall ridge ronne out in length from thence into Perce. In his paſſage he deſtroyed al the moūteine coūtrey, arriuing the thirdday in the boūdes of Percia The fifte day he entred into ye ſtreightes called Piloe, Suſidoe,Ariobazzanes keapt the ſtreight betwixt Suſys and Percia. which were defended by Ariobazzanes with xv.M. fotemē who keping the toppes of the highe and ſteepe rockes yt hange ouer on both ſides of the way, at the firſte keapt them ſelues quyet of purpoſe pretēding a feare vntyll ſuch time as the army was entered into the naroweſt of the ſtreight. But when they ſawe the Macedons paſſe onforwards in their contempte, then they threw downe great ſtones vpon them, which falling

vpon the tiethermoſte rockes, and theſe breaking in peaces rebounded amonge the Macedons, fel with greater violence, and diſtreſſed hole bands at ones. And beſides that did thē great damage with ſhot of arrowes, and ſtones that they did caſte out of ſlinges. Suche as were men of courage were not ſo muche greued with the death & deſtruciō that they ſawe their preſently, as that they ſhuld be ſlain after ſuch a maner like beaſtes caught in a pitte, wher as thei could not be reuenged vpon their enemies. Their wrath hereupon was turned into ſuch a rage and woodnes, that they ran vp againſt the rokes. & ther enforced them ſelues by taking holde, and by hauing vp one of an other to mount vp vnto their enemies: But when they hade caught hold vpon ſome outward parte, and therby labored to aſcend, by force of ſo many handes that faſtened to it at ones, they pulled a ſondre the thing they held by, and ſo fell downe all togithers. In this caſe they could neither ſtand, paſſe forwards, nor yet defend themſelues, by any deuiſe thei could make wt their targetes, ſeing the ſtones were of ſuch weight that were throwen down vpō thē. Alexāder was in great trouble of minde not only for ye greif he receiued by the deſtrucion of his mē, but much more for the ſhame yt he had ſo raſheli brought his armi into ſuch a daūgerus ſtreight He had bene inuincible before yt daie & neuer attēpted thing in vaine. He had paſſed yt ſtreightes of Cilicia wt out damage & opened to himſelf a new way by ſea into Pāphilia. Which felicity of his ſemed thē to be ſtaied & plucked back, for he could ꝑceiue no other remedy thē to returne by ye way he cam, he cauſed ye retreit therfore to be blown. & gaue ordre to his ſoldiers to go cloſe together & by caſtīg their targets ouer their heads returne back again, after thei had merched .xxx. forlōges wtin ye ſtreyte▪
               
When he was retourned and had planted his campe in an open ground, he cōſulted what was beſt to doe, and therewith ſuche a ſuperſticion entred into his minde, that he called for the prieſtes and deuiners to healpe herein by their inuocation. But Ariſtander, to whome he gaue moſte confidence, could do nothing in the caſe, ſo that Alexander condempning their ſacrifices which he thought then done out of tyme, called for ſuche as knewe the coūtray: They ſhewed him of an other way that was playne and open enough, but he lyked it not, he was ſo aſhamed to leue his ſouldiers vnburied. yt were ſlayne. For amonges al other ceremonies obſerued in the diſcipline of their warres, there was none more religiouſly kept then the burieng of the dead. He cauſed therefore ſuche priſoners as were lately taken to be called before him, amonges whom there was one experte both of the Greke and Percian tongue, whiche ſhewed to ye kyng yt he laboured in vayne, if he thought to conuoy his army ouer the toppes of thoſe moūtaines whiche (he ſayd) beginne at mount Caufaſus,The deſcription of the ſtreyte & the coūtrey therunto adioyning. and cloſed in the one ſyde of Perce by the ſpace of .M.vi.C. furlonges in length, and .Clx. in bredth, till ſuche tyme as they come vnto the ſea, which alſo encloſed the coū
               trey from the place where the moūtaines ceaſed. The countrey lyeng at the foote of the mountaynes, he dedeſcribed to be playne, frutefull, and replenyſſhed with many faire cyties and villages, and that the ryuer of Arares ronning through theſame,Arates. falleth into another ryuer called Medus,Medus. bringing with it the wa
                  •
               eds of many ſmale ſtreames. Whiche ryuer of Medus beyng muche leſſe then theſame whiche it doth receyue runneth from thence towardes the ſouth Sea: No place could be more aboundant of graſſe, for euerery where

nere vnto the water, the grounde was couered ouer wyth flowres. The riuer was ſhadowed ouer wyth plantyne and pople trees, which by reaſon they ſtande ſomwhat highe, and the water ronne lowe in a depe chanell: ſeme to ſuch as be a farre, to be woodes adioynning to the Mountains. He counted no contrey in al Aſia to be more holſome, or to haue more temperat ayer then thys, both by reaſon of ſhadowing moūtein that euermore defendeth the heate, and alſo of the ſea which on the parte being at hand with a certeine temperature doth noriſhe the ground. When the priſoner had made a deſcriptiō of the contrey after this maner, the kinge enquired of hym whither he knewe thoſe thinges by hearing ſay, or els had ſene them with hys eyes. He ſayde, that he had bene an herdman & knewe the contrey veraie well and al the wayes thither. And that he had bene twiſe taken priſoner, ones by Percās in Licia, and now the ſecond time by hym. Vpon thoſe wordes Alexander called an oracle to memorye, wherby it was ſignified to him that a Lician ſhou
                  •
               d be hys guide into Perce. Wherfore promiſing to him ſuche rewardes as the preſent neceſſitie required, & as hys eſtate was mete to receiue, willed him to be armed after the Macedons maner, and wyth good ſpede to go ſhewe on the waye. Which though he had declared to be but ſtreight and difficult, yet Alexāder put no doubt to paſſe it wyth a fewe mē, except any thought (he ſaid) that Alexander would not attempte that thyng for to wynne glorye and perpetuall commendacion that the herdman had done often tymes in feading of his beaſtes. Thē the priſoner left not to alledge the difficulties of the waye, ſpecially for ſuch as ware armour. Then the kinge ſaid: Take me for ſuertie that neuer one of them that be appoynted to the, ſhall refuce to go, where

thou ſhalt paſſe.Craterus. That done he left Craterus with the charge of his campe, and he hym ſelf paſſed forwardes with ſuche fotemen as were accuſtomed to his perſon, with thoſe hādes of whom Meleager had charge,Meleager. and a thouſād Archers on horſback, taking firſt ordre with Crateus that he ſhould kepe his cāpe in ſuch forme as it had bene vſed before, & cauſe many fiers to be made of purpoſe, yt the enemies might yt rather think, hym to be there ſtil preſent, aduiſing him further yt if Ariobarzanes ſhuld get knowlege of his enterpriſe, & ſend part of his powre to ſtop his paſſage, yt thē Craterus ſhould ſhew al ye terror they could to cauſe him cōuert thē ſelf to the defence of the daunger yt was next at hand. But if he ſhould deceiue his enemye & recouer the hil vpon hym, that then vpon the hearing of the alarome in the Percians campe, preparing thē ſelues to his reſiſtaūce he ſhould not doubt to paſſe that way from which they wer repulced the day before, wher he iudged thei ſhould find no reſiſtaunce, the enemies being conuerted towards him. In ye third watch he ſet forwardes in great ſilēce, without blowyng of trompet, & paſſed on by ſuch way as was ſhewed him by the guide, Euery ſouldier that was lyght armed carieng thre dayes vitaile. But when he was on his way, beſides the wild rockes and ſharpe ſtones, that cauſed them oft fayle their foting, the ſnowe alſo driuen wyth the wynd, was a great impediment to them in their iourney. For they fell diuers tymes downe into pittes, and ſuche as coueted to pull them out were oft times drawen after. The night alſo wyth the countrey vnknowne, and the guide of whoſe fidelitye they doubted, encreaſed muche their feare, conſidering 
                  •
               hat if they ſhould not deceiue their enemies watch, they ſhould be taken like beaſtes, they

wayed alſo that both the ſauegard of them, and of the king lay in the handes of one that was a priſoner. At length they came to a mounteyne, wher as the way towards Ariobarzanes lay on the right hād. Thē he ſent before by the guiding of ſuch as they had taken priſoners, Philotas, Cenon, Amintas, & Policarpon wyth a band of the lighteſte Armed, whom he aduiſed that foraſmuch as they had both horſemē and fotemen, and the coūtrey fertell and habound of fodder, that they ſhould make no haſte but paſſe forwardes faire & eaſely. And he with the eſquiers of his body, & the band of horſemē that they called Agema, was guided by another bipath farre of frō yt place wher his enemies kept their watch But the way was ſo ſtreight and ſo depe, yt thei ſuffred great trouble & vexaciō in paſſing therof. It was middaie, & they were ſo weried, that of neceſſitie they muſt take reſte, for they had ſo farre to go as they had trauailed all redy, ſauing that the waye was not ſo difficult nor ſo roughe. He refreſhed therefore his men wt meat & with ſleape, & in the ſecōd watche, did riſe vp & paſſed the reſte of hys iourney without any great difficultie. Sauing in ye part where the moūtayne begāne to fall aſlope towards the plaine, their paſſage was ſodeinly ſtopped, by a great gull made with the violence of the ſtreames that ranne downe the moūtains, by wearing away of ye earth. And beſids the trees ſtāding ſo thick, & the bowes that grewe one within another appeared before thē as a cōtinual hedge. Whē they ſaw thēſelues ſtaied after this maner, ſuch deſperaciō fel amōges thē yt thei could ſ
                  •
               arſly abſtain frō teares. The darknes being a great encreaſe of their terror ſeing thei could not enioy any benefit of ye ſtatres. For if any gaue light, ye ſame was takē away by ye ſhadow of ye trees. And ye vſe

of the eares could not ſerue for one to receiue counſel and comforte at an other, the wynd whyrlid ſo amōges the leaues, and the ſhakyng of the bowes made ſuch a noyſe. But at length the daie which they ſo much deſired, demyniſhed wyth his lighte the terrors that the darknes of the night did make. For by fetching of a little compaſſe about, they paſſed the holow gylle, and euery man began to be aguide. Finally they got vp in the toppe of the hille from whence they might beholde their enemies lieng in campe. Thē the macedons ſhewed them ſelues ſtoutly in their Armour, appering ſodeinly on their backes, when they miſtruſted no ſuche thyng, and there ſlewe ſuche as came fyrſte to encountre wyth them. So that on the one parte the greuous noyſe of them that were ſlayne, and the miſerable ſhowt of ſuche as ran in for ſuccour amonges their owne companye, put the reſt to flyght without making any reſiſtaunce. When the alarome was once hard in the camp wher Craterus lay, the Army by and by paſſed forwards to go through the ſtreightes in the which they were repulſed the day before. Philotas alſo who with Policarpō Cenos and Amyntas were gone the other waye arriued at the ſame tyme and gaue a further terror vnto their enemies. Whē the Perciēs ſawe ther enemies agreing in al partes at ons, though they were ſo oppreſt wyth their ſodaine inuaſion that at the fyrſt they were in doubt what to do, yet at length they aſſembled to githers and fought notably: Neceſſitie ſtyring vp the faintnes of theyr hartes. For oftentymes diſpaire is cauſe of mennes good hope. They being vnarmed, cloſed with them that were armed, and wyth the weyght of their bodies drewe their enemies to the earth and killed diuers with their owne weapōs

Arriobarzanes with fourty horſemen, & fiue thouſand footemē, that kept about his perſone, brake through the battaill of the Macedons, to the great ſlaughter both of his owne men and of his enemies, & by makyng of haſte, recouered Perſepolis the chief citie of the countrey. But when he was excluded from thence by them that were within, he renued againe the fight with ſuch as were with him, & ſo was ſlayne: by ye time Craterus that made all the ſpede he could deuiſe, was come vnto them. Alexander fortefied his campe in theſame place where he did diſconfite his enemies. For though they were all fled, and he certaine of the victory, yet becauſe he found his way ſtopped in many places with great and deape diches, he thought good to vſe circumſpection, and not to make ouer great haſte, not ſo muche for feare of his enemies force, as of the nature of the ground whiche he ſawe apt for them to worke policie againſt hym. As he was paſſing forwardes, he receyued letters from Tyrydates the keaper of Darius treaſure,Tyrydates ſygnifieng that the inhabiters of Percepolis hearyng of his cōmyng were about to ſpoyle the treaſure, and therfore he ſhould make haſte to preuent the matter, for the way was ready enough, notwithſtāding that the ryuer of Araxes was in his way. There was no vertue in Alexander more commendable then his celeritie, whiche he ſhewed in this matter, for leuyng his footemen behynd, trauayled all nyght with his horſemen, and by the daylyght came to the ryuer of Arapos. There he found villages at hande, wherof the tymber they brake downe of the houſes, a brydge was made in a moment, by the helpe of ſtones whiche were layde in the foundacion. When Alexander was paſſed the riuer, and came nere vnto the cytie, a company met

him ſo miſerable, as ſeldome haue bene found in any memory: the ſame were Grekes to the nombre of .iiii. thouſande, whome the Percians before time had taken priſoners, & afflicted with diuers kyndes of tormē
               tes. For of them ſome had their feete cut of ſome their handes, & other their eares, but all were marked in the fleſh with hote yrons. Whō the Percians mayming & deforming after this maner, had kept & reſerued amō
               ges them, as a memory of the deſpite towardes the nacion. But when thei ſawe yt they ſhould become vnder the obediēce of another prince, they ſuffred the Grekes to mete Alexāder. Thei appeared rather to be the Images of ſome ſtraunge mōſters, then of mē. For nothing could be decerned or knowen in them but their voice. The compaſſion of their wretched eſtate cauſed the beholders to let fall no fewer teares, then they did thēſelues. For it could not appeare whiche of thē were moſte miſerable, though their afflictions were diuers. But whē they cried out before Alexāder that Iupiter the reuēger of Grece had opened their eies in beholding him that ſhuld deliuer thē: they iudged then all their grefes as one. Alexander wiped the teares from his eyes, and willed them to be of good chere, for that they ſhuld both ſee their countrey and their frendes, & he encamped in theſame place, where he mette thē being two forlōges from Perſepolis.Perſepolis. The Grekes drue themſelues together to conſult what was beſte for them to demaūde of Alexander, and when ſome were of opiniō to aſke dwelling places within Aſia, & others had more minde to retourne vnto their coūtreis:Entemeons oracion. Entemeon Cimeus ſpake thus vnto them. We that were euen nowe aſhamed to ſhew our heades out of the priſon & darkenes we were in, to make ſuite for our own aide and relief, or become

of ſuch ſimplicitie, that we preſently deſire to ſhew vnto Grece as a pleaſant ſpectacle our infirmities & maimes, wherof we haue as much cauſe to be aſhamed, as to be ſorowfull, you muſt thinke that ſuche beare their miſeries beſt, which can finde the meanes to hide them moſte, & that there is none ſo familier a countrey to mē that be vnfortunate as ſolitarines and forgetfulnes of their former eſtate. For they whiche make an accōpt of their frendes pitie & compaſſion, know not howe ſone their teares wil drie vp, no creature can loue faythfully whome they abhorre. For as calamitie of his nature is querelous, ſo felicitie is always proude, & euery one doth vſe to cōſider his own fortune, when he determineth of an other mans. For except we had all bene in myſery, one of vs long ago had bene wery of an other. What meruayle is it then though men infelicitie ſeke always their equalies. My opinion is therfore that we as mē whiche long ago were as dead in this lyfe, ſeke vs a place wherein we may hyde our maymed members, and where exyle may hyde our horryble ſcarres. For if we ſhall retourne vnto our countrey, beyng in this caſe, we cannot be but vngrateful to our wyues, whom we maried young, ſhall our chyldren, ſhall our brethren acknowledge vs, beyng priſon ſlaues? and though all thynges ſhould there ſuccede as we would wyſhe, yet there be but a ſmall nombre of vs able to trauayll through ſo many countreys? Howe is it poſſible for vs that be here banyſſhed into the vttermoſte bondes of the Orient, aged, impotent, and maymed, to ſuffre thoſe thynges, whiche haue tyred men then were in force and victorious. It is to be axed what ſhal become of our wyues whome chaunce and neceſſitie hathe

gotten vnto vs here for the only comforte of our priſonement? what ſhall we do with our children we haue begotten here? take them with vs, or leue them behinde vs? If we returne with ſuche as we haue here, none of thoſe in Grece will acknowledge vs, and ſhall we then be ſo madde to leue thoſe comfortes we haue already, being vncertayne whether we ſhall come to thoſe that we ſeke or no? Verely muche better it were for vs, to hyde our ſelues amonges them whiche haue bene acquainted with vs in our myſery. Theſe were Eutemon wordes:Theatus wordes. But Theatus of Athens, reaſoned to the contrary. There is no creature (qd he) in whome remaineth any ſparke of goodnes. that will eſteme vs by our outward ſhape, ſeyng that our calamitie is not come of nature, or by our own deſeruyng, but through miſfortune, and our enemies crueltie, and ſuche as be aſhamed of fortunes chaunſes, are well worthy to ſuffer miſaduenture. They geue a greuous ſentence vpon the eſtate of mans mortalitie, & diſpaire muche of mercy, that deny their cōpaſſion to mē in miſery. Now therfore ſince the goddes haue offered to you the thing whiche ye durſte neuer haue wiſſhed for: that is your countrey, your wiues, & your childrē, being the thinges whiche men eſteme more then lyfe, & redeame oftentymes with death: why do you doubt for the enioymēt of thē to breake out of this impriſonemēt? I iudge yt a yet of our own countrey moſte naturall to vs, where me thīkes is an other maner of beholding ye light, other cuſtomes, other religiō, & another maner of tonge, whiche for ye pleaſaūtnes is coueted of the barbarous naciōs: what great thinges therfore be thoſe that ye would willingly leaue, ye wāte of which only is ye cauſe of your miſery. My opiniō is plain yt we viſite our countrey & our home

and not refuſe ſo great a benefite as Alexander hath proffered vs, and if any be ſo deteined with the loue of ſuche wifes & children as they haue gotten here in ſeruitude, let ſuche be no impedement to others, that of al thinges eſteme moſte their naturall countrey. There were but few of his opiniō, for cuſtome that is of greater force then nature, preuailed in that matter. They agreed to demaunde of Alexander that he would geue vnto them ſome place to inhabite in, and there choſed out an hundred to be ſuters vnto hym in that behalfe. Whome when Alexander perceiued coming towardes hym, thynking that they would haue required the thing that he conceiued in his minde. I haue apointed to you (qd he) beaſtes to cary you, and to euery one a .M. denires, and when you ſhal come to Grece. I wil ſo do for you, yt excepting your miſfortune, no other ſhall thinke themſelues in better caſe then you. But when he ſawe them loke ſtill towardes the ground, and that they neither lifted vp their countenaūces, nor did ſpeake, he enquired the cauſe of their heuines. Then Eutemon rehearſed again thoſe thinges in effect which he had ſpoken before in coūſel. The king therfore pitieng no leſſe their demaunde then he did their miſfortune, cōmaunded .iii.M. deneres to be geuen to euery one of them, & garmentes beſides with ſhepe, cattell, and corne, wherby they might till and ſowe the lande that ſhould be appointed vnto them. The next day he aſſembled all the captaines of his army togethers, and ſhewed thē that there was no citie more enemy to the Grekes, then the ſame that was the chief ſeage of the aunciēt kinges of Perce, from whence all the great armies had bene ſent into Grece, and howe Darius firſt, & after Xerxes had come out of that place to moue their vniuſt warre

againſt Europe with the deſtruction of whiche cytie he thought good to reuenge their predeceſſours. Thinhabiters had abandoned the citie,The taking of Perſepolis. & fled where feare dyd driue thē. Wherupon the king ſtreight wayes brought in all his footemen to the ſpoyle therof. He had before that time wonne many cities, ſome by force, & ſome by compoſicion, that were full of ſubſtaūce, & princes treaſure. But the ryches of that citie, did excide all the reſt, as in the place where the Perciās had layd their whole ſubſtaunce. Gold and ſiluer was there foūd in heapes, and great plenty of ryche veſtures and furnimentes of houſes, not only for neceſſitie and neceſſary vſe, but for exceſſe and oſtentacion, whiche was ſo great that it gaue the victourers occaſion to fight amonges them ſelues, eche takyng other for enemies that had gotten the rycheſt ſpoyle. The plenty there was ſuche, that they could not employe to their vſe the ryches they found, but when they ſawe thynges of value, eſtemed them rather then toke them away. Till ſuche time that euery one couetyng to haue a parte of euery thyng, tare and brake a ſonder the princely robes, and the precious veſſels of curious workemanſhip, and the Images of gold and ſyluer were either beaton in gobetes or plucked in peces, as euery one caught holde: nothing was left vntouched, nor nothing caried away whole. Crueltie bare no leſſe rule there then couetouſnes, euery one was ſo laden with gold and ſiluer, that they eſteamed not the keping of priſoners, but kylled ſuche as they firſt ſpared in hope of gayne. There were many therefore that preuented their enemies handes with voluntary death, and diuerſe that clothyng them ſelues in their moſte precious apparell, leaped downe from the walles with their wyfes and chyldren. Certayne there

were that ſet their owne houſes on fyer, (whiche they iudged their enemies woulde els haue done ſhortely after) becauſe they would burne themſelues amunges their owne family. At length the kyng dyd forbyd any violence to be done to women, and that no man ſhould medle with any thyng pertayning to them. The ſome of money taken within this Cytie, was greater then any man can well credite: but eyther we muſte doubte of the reſte, or els beleue that hath bene lefte in memory, howe that the treaſure there found,The treaſure taken at Perſepolis. amounted to a hundred and twenty thouſand talentes: whiche treaſure becauſe that Alexander purpoſed to employ in his warres, cauſed horſe and camels to be brought from Suſis and Babilon to cary theſame. The takyng of the Cytie of Perſagadis,Perſagadis wherein was founde ſyx thouſand talentes, was an encreaſe to this ſome, whiche Cytie beyng buylded by Cyrus, was yeldid vp by Gobares that had the kepyng therof.Gobares. Alexander lefte in the caſtle of Perſepolis, thre thouſand Macedons in guarriſon vnder Nycarides,Nicarydes. capitaine of the ſame, and reſerued to Tiridates that deliuered hym the treaſure, theſame honour that he enioyed with Darius. Leuing in this cytie the greater parte of his army with his cariages vnder the rule of Permenio and Craterus. He with a thouſand horſemen and a band of footemen without any bagage, went to viſite in the winter ſeaſon, the inward partes of Perce. There he was vexed & troubled with ſhoures & tēpeſtes yt were in maner intollerable: but yet he letted not to go forwardes in his enterpriſe to ye place yt he appointed. In his iourney he came vnto a coūtrey yt was couered all with ſnowe, & theſame alſo froſen by force of the could.

The wildnes and deſert maner therof, put the ſouldiers that were weried of trauail inſuch a feare and terror, that they imagened to haue ſene the vttermoſte boūdes of the world. For when they beheld all thinges waſt, and no ſigne appearing of habitaciō of man, they were amaſed, and made requeſte to returne againe, before that the light and the elementes ſhould fail them. The king would not chaſtice them being in this terror but leped frō his horſe, and went one fote in the ſnow and ice. Which thing whē his frēdes ſawe, they could not for ſhame but folow, then the captaines did the like and finally the ſouldiers. The kyng was the firſt that did breake the ice and made him ſelfe away, whoſe enſample the reſte did folowe. At length hauing paſſed the woodes that were without way, thei foūd here and there ſome appearaunce of habitacion and perceyued flockes of ſhepe. When thinhabitours that dwelled in Cotages diſparcled there aboutes, ſawe men cōming. whome they iudged to be their enemies, thinking they had bene encloſed about, ſlew ſuch as were not able to folowe them and fledde, to the wild mountains that were ful of ſnowe. But at length by cōmunicatiō with ſuch as they toke priſoners, their wildnes was ſōwhat mitigated, & they yelded them ſelues to Alexander, whō he hurted not any kind of way. Whē he had deſtroied all that parte of Perce, & brought the townes vnder his obediēce, he came into ye coūtrey of ye warlike Mardōs,The Mardons. whiche differed much frō the reſt of ye other Percians in their maner of their liuing. They with their wiues and children dyd inhabite within caues in the mountaines, and liued wyth the fleſhe of ſhepe, & wyld beaſtes. Nor ye womē according to their kind had any more appearaūte of mekenes or mildnes thē the men, either in theyr perſonages or diſpoſitions. But their curled

heere did hang down before vpon their faces, and their garmentes came but to their knee The band of theyr ſlinge was a fyllet for their forhead, whyche they vſed both for ornament, and for defence. This nacion for al their vncyuill and rude maner, could not eſcape to be ſubdued with the ſame force of fortune yt others were. So that the .xxx. daie after he departed from Perſepoles, he returned thither againe. Then he gaue rewardes to his fredes, & to al the reſte, according to their deſeruing, diſtributing in a maner al his riches which he found within that cytie. But al his excellēt vertues of the mind, his princely qualities wherin he excelled al kinges, both that conſtancy in al daungers & perilles, yt celeritie in deuiſing & perfourming his enterpriſes. his promis keaping towards yt yelden, his clemēcie towardes priſoners, & that tēperaūce in lawful & accuſtomable pleaſures: were all defaced through the intollerable deſire & delite he had in drinking. For notwithſtanding that his enemie which cōtended with him for thempire, did chiefly then prepare for the warres, and was gathering of his powre togethers, and though the people newly cōquered, had not receiued quiet ſubiection, yet he gaue him ſelfe continually to feaſting and banqueting, wher womē were euer preſēt, but not ſuch to whō mē had reſpect of honeſtie, but harlotes whiche had there more libertie, then was beſeming in the cōpany of men of warre. And amonges thē ther was one Thays,Thays. who vpō a daie in her dronkenes, affirmed to Alexāder that he ſhould wonderfully winne the fauor of the Greakes, if he would commaund the palaice of Perſepoles to be ſet on fire. The diſtruction wherof (ſhe ſaid) they greatlie deſired, forſomuch as the ſame was the chief Seate of the kinges of Perce, which in

tymes paſte had diſtroyed ſo many great Cities. Whē the dronken harlot had giuen hir ſentence: their were other preſent who being likewiſe drōken cōfirmed hir wordes. Alexander then that had in him more enclinacion of heate then of pacience, ſaid: whi do we not then reuenge Greace, and ſet this Citie on fire. They were al chaffed with drinking & roſe immediatly vpon thoſe wordes to burne that citie in there dronkennes, which the men of warre had ſpared in their fury. The king him ſelf firſt, and after his geſtes, his ſeruauntes and his concubines ſet fier in the palaice. which being builded for the moſte parte of cedre trees, became ſodeinly in a flame. When the army that was encamped nere vnto the citie ſaw the fire, which they thought had ben kendled by ſome caſualty, came ronning to quench the ſame again. But when thei ſawe the king ther preſent noriſhing of the fire, they powred downe the water which they brought, and healped likewiſe the matter forwardes.The diſtrucion of Perſepoles. Thus the palaice that was the hedde of the whole Orient, from whence ſo many nacions before had fetched their lawes to liue vnder. The ſeate of ſo many kinges yt only terror ſomtyme of Grece. The ſame that hath bene the ſender forth of the Nauies of .x. thouſand ſhippes, & of the armies that ouerflowed all Europe that made bridges ouer the Sea, and vndermined mountaines where the ſea hath nowe hys courſe: was cōſumed and had his eand, and neuer roſe againe in all the age that did enſue. For the kinges of Macedon vſed other cities which be now in the Parthians handes. The deſtruccion of this citie was ſuch that the foundacion thereof at this daye coulde not be found, but that the riuer of Araxes doth ſhew where it ſtode. Which was diſtant frō perſepolis .xx. furlonges

as the inhabitātes rather do beleue then knowe. The Macedons were aſhamed that ſo noble a Cytie was deſtroyed by their king in hys drōkenes: yet at length it was turned into an earneſte matter, and were content to thynke it expedient that the Cytie ſhould haue bene deſtroyed after that maner. But it is certeine that when Alexander had taken his reſte and was, become better aduiſed he repented hym of his doing and ſayed: That the Percians ſhould haue doone the Greakes more harme if it had ben his chaunce to haue reigned in Xerxes ſted. The next daie he gaue .xxx. talentes for a rewarde to him that was his guide into Perce, and from thence he toke his iourney into Media,Media. where a new ſupplie of ſouldiers, of whom Plato (of Athens had the conduccion) came to him out of Cilicia, being .v.c. fotemē and a thouſand horſemen. Whē he had by this meanes encreaſed his powre, he dettermined to purſue Darius,Ecathana. who was come to Ecathana the hedde citie of Media, & was purpoſed from thence to haue paſſed into Bactria. But fearing to be preuented by the ſpede his enemies made, altered his purpoſe and his iourney. Alexāder was not come nere hym by a.M.v.c. forlōg but he could not think any diſtāce ſufficiēt to defend him againſt his celeritie & therfore prepared him ſelf rather to fight then to fle. He had wt him xxx.M. footemen, amōgs whō ther were .iiii.M. grekes whoſe fidilitie neuer failed in al his aduers fortūe He had alſo .iiii.M. archers & Slingers, & beſides .iii. thouſand .iii.c. Bactrian horſemen, which were vnder Beſſus charge being gouernour both of ye citie of Bactria and the contrey. Darius with his band wythdrue a litell from the highe waye, and commaundyng the verlets & ſuch as had charge of the caryng to paſſe on

before,Darius wordes. called a counſell and ſpake theſe wordes vnto them. If fortune had matched me with cowardes, and with ſuche as eſtemed any kynde of lyfe, before an honeſt death. I would rather haue holden my peace, then conſume my wordes in vaine. But I haue had greater experience then I would wyſhe both of your valiaunt courage and fidelitie towardes me. So that I for my parte ought rather labour to ſeme worthy to haue ſuche frendes as you are, then to doubte whether ye yet remaine theſame men towardes me that ye were before. For of ſo many thouſandes that were vnder myne empire, you are thoſe that haue folowed and ſticked by me. When I haue bene twyſe ouerthrowen in the field, & twyſe enforced to flye away, your fidelitie & your conſtancy maketh me thinke that I remayne ſtill a kyng. Traitours and fugitiues reigne in my cyties, not for that they be thought worthy of ſuche honour, but that you myght be prouoked by their rewardes to reuolte againſt me. Notwithſtanding, you haue choſen rather to folowe me in my miſfortune, then be partakers of the victorers felicitie, you are worthy, whome the Goddes ſhall reward (if I may not) as vndoubtedly they wyll. There can no poſteritie be ſo ſilent, nor no fame ſo vngrateful, which ſhal not with due cōmendaciōs extolle you to the ſterres. Though I was determined ſtill to haue fled, whereūto my harte neuer agreed: yet now I haue conceyued ſuche a truſte of your vertue and man hode, that I purpoſe to paſſe againſt myne enemies. Howe long ſhall I be baniſſhed within myne own dominion, from a ſtraunge and a forein prince? and flye within the boundes of myne owne kingdome, when I may by haſarding of the battaill, either recouer that I haue loſte, or els dye an honeſt death? Except peraduenture

it ſemeth better to ſome mē that I ſhould ſubmit myſelf to enemies will, and by thenſample of Mazens and Mithrenes, to receiue by peticion the dominion of ſome one nacion. Wherin I iuge that Alexander had rather folowe thinclinacyon of his glorie then of hys wrath. No, let the gods neuer graunte that it may lye in any mans powre, eyther to take awaye, or gyue vnto me, thys Deadeame vpon my hede, nor that I loſe this Impire ſo longe as I remaine on liue. For in this I am determined that my breath and my kingdome, ſhall end both togither. If this mynd remayne in you, and if thys lawe be graffed in your hartes, their is none of you that can want libertie, their is non that ſhalbe cō
               pelled to endure the vrkeſomnes of your enemies, neither their proud porte, nor their ſtately lokes. For euery mans ryght hand ſhall giue vnto hym ſelf either a reuenge, or an end of all thes euils. Nothing can ſtand long in one ſtay. I my ſelfe am enſample of the alteracion of fortune, nor it is not without cauſe that I loke for a better change. And if the worſt fall that the gods wyll neds be againſte vs in our warres that be lauful and honeſte, yet it cannot be taken from vs but that we may alway manfully and honeſtly dye. I require and make interceſſion to you by the honor of our predeceſſors that with ſuche fame and glory poſſeſſed the kingdomes of the hole Orient, by thoſe mē to whō Macedon ſometyme was tributarie, by ſo many nauies of ſhips ſent into Grece, and by ſo many victories wonne, that ye wyll take ſuche courage and hart vnto you, as may ſeme worthy your nobilitie and your nacion. So that with the ſame conſtancie of minde wherwith ye haue endured thinges paſte, ye wyll proue and attempte what ſoeuer chaunge ſend to you hereafter.

For I am reſolued for my part to get my ſelf perpetual fame either by the victorie or by the notable aduenture I will giue for the wynning therof. When Darius had ſpoken theis wordes the repreſentacion of the preſent perill ſo amaſyd them all, that they were not able either to ſhew there aduiſe or to ſpeake a worde to the matter,Artabazus. til ſuch tyme as Artabazus the moſte auncient of his frendes, which before tyme had bene wyth king Philip, began to ſay hys fancie: We are come into the felde (qd he) with you that is our king, in our moſte precious apparell, and richeſt armoure▪ with the entent to win the victorie, and if neſſeſſitie require, not to refuſe death. To whoſe wordes the reſte with ther voice ſeamed to agre. Sauing Nabarzanes who being preſent in that counſell wyth Beſſus and of hys opynion conſpired a treaſō ſo wonderful that the like hath ſeldome ben hard of before. Their determinacion was by force of the ſouldiers they had vnder their charg to put ther kinge in hold. Wyth this purpoſe, that if Alexander purſued them to deliuer him then aliue into his hādes for to wynne therby his fauor, as a thing which they thought he would eſteame greatly. But if they coulde eſcape conueniently, then they were in mynde to kyll Darius, and deuiding the kyngdome betwixt them renue againe the warre againſte the Macedons. They hauing imagened this treaſō long before in their mind Nabarzanes thoughte this an occaſion to make a preparatiue to his wicked intent, by a perſuaſion which he their vttered.Nabarzanes wordes. I knowe (qd he) that I ſhall ſpeake the thing which in the firſte apparaunce ſhall not be grateful vnto your eares, but pheſicions vſe to cure deſeaſes that be greate with ſharpe & bitter medycines, and the ſhipmaiſters whē they fear a ſhipwrack accuſtume

to redeame ſuch thinges as may be ſaued, with the diſtruction and loſſe of the reſte. But thys matter that I meane is no parſuaſion to loſſe, but a deuice by what meanes ye may preſerue your ſelf & your kingdome. We make a warre wherin the gods ſeme manifeſtly to be againſt vs and fortune ceaſeth not obſtinatly to purſue vs. It is nedefull therfore that we lay new foūdacions, & ſeke out men which haue other fortune. My opinion is therefore that you deliuer vp your kingdom vnto ſome mānes hādes, which ſhal haue the name of king, ſo longe as your enemies remaine within Aſya. And when they be once departed (which my minde geueth me to be ſhortly) he ſhal reſtore the ſame vnto you againe. The countrey of Bactria is yet vntouched: the Indians & Saeans be at your apointement, ſo many people, ſo many armes, ſo many thouſandes of horſemen & fotemē haue their force in redines to renue this warre again. So yt a muche greater force remaineth then yt which is cōſumed. Why do we then like beaſtes wilfully runne to a diſtruction that is not neceſſary? It is ye ꝓpertie of ſuch as be men of courage, rather to diſpiſe death then hate the life, and oftentymes by werines of trauayll towardes are driuen to take little regarde of them ſelues. But vertue leaueth nothing vnprouided. So that death beynge the ende of all thynges it is ſufficient if we god not to yt lyke ſluggardes. Therefore if we ſhal go vnto Bactria which is now our next refuge: let vs for the times ſake make Beſſus king, who is alredy ruler of ye countrey, & whē ye matters be once brought to ſome ſtaie, he ſhal reſtore to you thempire againe as to the righteouſe king. Although Darius ꝑceiued not ye greatnes of the miſchief that laye hidden vnder hys wicked wordes yet was it

no meruaill though he could not obſtayne. He turned towardes him, and ſaid: thou vile ſlaue haſt thou now found out a time mete to diſcloſe the treaſon that lyeth in thy harte, and therwyth all pulled out hys ſworde to haue ſlaine him if Beſſus had not ſtraight waye come and the other Bactrians about him and letted his purpoſe they pretendyd to be ſory for the matter, But mindid in very dede to bind him if he had continued in his purpoſe. In the meane ſeaſon Nabazzanes eſcaped away, and Beſſus folowed after, who imedialy dyd ſeperate the bandes they had charge of from the reſt of the armye, bicauſe they would vſe them apart to their purpoſe. Whē thei were departed Artabazus framed his talke according to theſtate of the time then preſent and beganne to pacifie Darius wyth wordes putting him in remembraunce howe hys caſe was ſuche, that it behoued hym to beare quietly the foliſhnes, or rather the error of hys own men: For aſmuch as Alexander was at hande, ouer ſore an enemy for thē though there were no diſcord nor diſobedience. But if we ſhalbe at variaunce (qd he) when he doth purſue vs, our matters ſhal ſtand in very euil plight. Thereupō Darius enclyned ſome what to Artabaſus aduiſe, & though he was determined to remoue, yet bicauſe he parceiued euery man to be troubled in mind, remained ſtill in the ſame place. But he him ſelfe was ſo aſtoined with ſorowe and diſperaciō that he kept him ſelf cloſe and came not forth of his pauilion, Wherupon the campe being without gouerment, the hedes not conſulting togither as they did before, there roſe amonges them great diuerſitie of opynions, and mocions of mynd. Which thing when Patron ſawe that was capetaine of the Greake ſouldiers he wylled his men to put on their armour, to

be in a redines to do as they ſhould be apointed. The Percyans encampyd by them ſelues, and Beſſus remained amonges the Bactrians, practiſing to cary away the Percians into Bactria, and to leue Darius: ſignifieng to them, the riches of that region yet vntouched and the perell they were in, if they remayned ſtyl. But they were al in maner of one opynion, that it was ouer great an offence for them to forſake their prince. In the meane ſeaſon. Artabaſus executed the kinges offence, and went amongs the Percians in their lodginges admoniſhing and exorting them, ſometyme aparte, and otherwhile all togithers, and lefte them not before it apeared that they would do as the king would haue them. That done with great paine & difficulte he parſuaded Darius to take hys meate, and to ſet hys mynd vpon hys buſines. But Beſſus and Nabarzanes were ſo gredy to get the gouernement into their handes, that they reſolued to put in excution the thing, they had longe conſpired betwyxt them. For ſo longe as Darius was in ſauegard, thei could not hope to cō
               paſſe nor atteine ſo great powre and auctoritie. The maieſtie of a king is had in ſo great veneraciō amōges thoſe nacions, that at hys verie name they vſe to aſſemble togither. And the reuerens of Darius former fortune, cauſed them to beare the like obedience to him in his aduerſitie. The greatnes and powre of the countreies whereof Beſſus and Nabarzanes had the rule, not being inferior to any other nacions in that parte of the world, either in armour, men or largenes of their territory gaue a great encourage vnto their wicked diſpoſicions in attempting of this matter. Which poſſeſſing the third part of Aſia were able to make as great nombre of men, as Darius before had loſte. In confidence

wherof they not only diſpiſed Darius, but Alexander purpoſing when they were once become lordes of that countrey to reenforce from thence againe the powre of thempire, & mainteine the warres againſt the Macedōs. Whē they had long deuiſed & debated theſe thinges, they determined to take Darius by ye Bactriā ſouldiers, which were at there cōmandiment, & then to ſend word to Alexander that they reſerued him on liue to deliuer him vnto his hādes. And if ſo be that Alexā
               der ſhould nor accept their doing, (whiche in dede they doubted) then ther purpoſe was to kill Darius, and with their powre to flie into Bactria. But for ſomuche as they ſawe, that Darius could not be taken openly, ſeing there were ſo many thouſādes redy to aide him. And fearinge alſo the fidelitye of the Greakes, determined to work by ſleight, the thing that they could not bring to paſſe by force. Their deuiſe was lo coūterfeit a repentance of their former doinges in excuſing vnto the king the feare they were in. And in the mean ſeaſon they ſent certaine to practiſe with the Percians, & to proue their mindes. The ſouldiers were toſſed to & fro with hope and feare. Sometime thei thought that by leauing of ther king, they ſhould cōmit them ſelues to manifeſte ruyne and deſtruccion: and againe they remembred what entertaynment was promiſed them in Bactria that lay open for them, where they ſhould be receyued with ſuch giftes and riches as they coulde not wel imagien. Whiles Beſſus & Nabarzanes were bearīg of theſe thīges in their heades. Artabaſus came vnto them declaring howe Darius was wel pacefied, and that they might of they would, be in the ſame eſtate and degre with him that they were in before. Therupon thei fel to weaping and purging of them ſelues, requiring

Artabaſus that he would take vpon him the defence of there cauſe, and cary their requeſte and ſubmiſſiō vnto the king. The night was cōſumed in this kind of buſines. When it was day Nabarzanes wyth the Bactriā ſouldiers ſtode at the entrey of the kinges lodging, colouring hys preuy treaſon with a ſolempne pretence of doing his dutye. Darius cauſed warnyng to be giuen for his remoue, and ſo mounted vpon hys chariot after his accuſtumed manner, Nabarzanes and the other traytores fell vpon the ground to worſhipe him and ſhed teares in token of repentaunce, notwithſtanding that they determined ſhortly after to put him in fetters: mens nature is ſo apart to diſſymulacion. Darius being of a ſimple and gentle nature, was enforced through their behauor not only to beleue yt they pretēded, but alſo cauſed him to weape for ioie: yet that could not cauſe the traitors to alter ther porpoſe. Whē they parceiued what kynd of man, and what maner of prince they went about to deceiue. Darius doubting nothing of his peril that was next at hand, made al the haſte he could to eſcape Alexander, whom he only doubted.Patron. Patron that was captaine of the Grecians commaunded his ſouldiers to put on their harneys, which they caried before in truſſes, and to be ready and attēt to euery thing that ſhould be appointed thē. For he vnderſtanding the treaſon that Beſſus went about folowed ye kinges chariot ſeking occaſiō to ſpeake wt him And Beſſus doubting the ſame thing, would not departe frō the chariot, but folowed rather as a watche, then a wayter. Patron therefore hauing taried long, & interrupted oftentimes as he was about to ſpeak, ſtod in a ſtay betwixt feare and fidelitie, beholding the king in the face. Whē Darius parceiued that he beheld hym

after that maner he wylled Bubace his Enuche that rode next hym,Bubace. to enquire of Patron if he had any thyng to ſaye to hym. Patron ſayde ye, but his matter was ſuche as he woulde no man ſhould here. Then he was wylled to come nere, and without any interpretour. (Darius vnderſtandyng ſomwhat of the Greke tongue) Patron ſayd vnto hym.Patrons wordes to Darius. Syr of fyfty thouſand Grekes that ſerued you, there is a ſmalle nombre of vs ramaining whiche haue continually folowed you in all fortunes, bearing vnto you theſame fidelitie and affection that we did in your moſte floryſſhing eſtate. And are determined whereſoeuer you be, to take that for our countrey, and home, both proſperitie and aduerſitie hath ſo coupled vs together, by whiche inuincible fidelitie that is in vs. I deſire and require you, that you would vouchſaue to lodge within our campe, and ſuffer vs to be the guarde of your perſone. We haue loſt Grece, we haue no Bactria to go vnto, al our hope is in you, and God graunt that other had the lyke. It is not neceſſarye I ſhoulde ſpeake any more, nor would not demaunde the cuſtody of your perſone beyng an alien and a ſtraunger, if I knewe that others were well mynded towardes you. Although Beſſus was ignoraunt of the Greke tongue, yet his cōſcience pricked him to beleue that Patrō had diſcloſed ſome ſuch matter, & therefore carieng away ſome part of his wordes, by a greke interpretour, became out of doubte. Darius nothing afraid as it appeared by his coūtenaūce, enquired of Patrō what moued him to geue him ſuch aduiſe. Wherupon he thought not good to deferre it any lēger, but ſaid: Beſſus & Nabarzanes worke treaſon againſt you, ſo that your life and your eſtate ſtand in extreame

peril, and this day ſhalbe the laſt either to the traitours or to you: whoſe wordes if Darius had wel wayed and regarded. Patron had receiued great glory of the preſecuacion of his prince. But let them mocke that lyſt, whiche be perſuaded yt theſtate of man is gouerned at aduenture and by chaunce, but I beleue that euery mā runneth his race by an immutable ordre, and an euerlaſting appointment, by a knitting together of cauſes vnknowen appointed long before.Darius aunſwere vnto Parron. Darius aunſwere was: that although the fidelitie of the Greke ſouldiers was ſufficiently knowen vnto hym, yet he was determined neuer to departe from his owne nation, by whō though he might be diſceyued, yet it was harde for hym to miſtruſt them: whatſoeuer ſhould chaunce to him he ſayd. he was mynded rather to ſuffer it amonges his owne ſubiectes, then to parte from them. Not deſiring to liue if his own ſouldiers deſired not his ſauegarde. Whereupon Patron diſpairing of the kinges well doyng, returned to them of whome he had the charge, redy to aduenture any thyng for his ſake. Beſſus in the meane ſeaſon had vtterly determyned to ſlee Darius, but fearing that he could not wynne Alexāders fauour except he deliuered his enemy into his handes aliue, deferred his purpoſe till yt night folowing. In the meane ſeaſon he came to Darius and gaue him thankes that he had ſo warely and with ſuche wiſdome auoyded the treaſon of that falſe Grecian, who being corrupted by Alexander, ſought nothing but howe to make a preſent of his head: whereat (he ſaid) he could not maruaill that a mercenary mā ſhuld leue any thing vndone for money, being without any pledge of his honeſtie, without houſe, home, baniſſhed out of the world, a doubtful enemy, toſſed here and there at the backe of all men, that

will corrupt hym. And then he fell to purging of hym ſelfe, callyng the Goddes of his countrey to wytnes of his innocentie in the matter. Darius by his countenaunce ſemed to beleue hym, yet he doubted not of the truth of the tale that Patron had tolde him, but he was come to ſuche a pointe, that it was as daungerous for hym not to beleue his owne men, as to be deceyued. There were .xxx. thouſand whoſe lytenes was feared to haue conſented to this conſpiracy: and Patron had but foure thouſand, to whome if he had committed his ſauegarde, and thereby condempned the fidelitie of his owne nacion, he ſawe that then they myght haue therof a goodly colour and a pretence to perfourme the thyng they went about, and therefore choſe rather to be killed innocently, then to geue any occaſion whereby he ſhould ſeame to haue deſerued death. And yet when Beſſus purged hymſelfe, he aunſwered that he knewe there was no leſſe iuſtice in Alexander, then manhode, and that they were deceiued that loked for any reward of treaſon at his handes, knowyng that there was no ſorer punyſſher nor reuenger of the breche of fidelitie. When the nyght drewe nere, the Percians after their accuſtomed maner put of their armour, and repayred to the next villages to prouide thynges neceſſary. But the Bactrians as Beſſus had commaunded them ſtode ſtyll armed. In the meane ſeaſon Darius had ſent for Artabaſus and ſhewed hym what Patron had declared. Whereupon Artabaſus made no doubte, but that he ſhoulde ſtrayght wayes commit hym ſelfe amonges the Grekes, thynkyng that the Percians whē the kynges perill ſhould be publyſhed abroade, would ioyne with the Grecians. But Darius predeſtinat to his chaunce, could not beare then any holſome counſel

nor ſought for any help in that caſe, but embraſed Artabazus, as though he ſhould neuer ſee hym more, and being wet with the teares that one of them lette fall vpon another, cauſed Artabazus to be taken away that claue faſte vnto hym, and becauſe he would not ſee his ſorowe in departing from hym, he couered hys head and fell flat vpon the ground. Then ſuche as were accuſtomed to the guarde of his perſone, whiche ſhould haue bene his defence in all perils, fled awaye, thynkyng themſelues ouer weake, for ſuche nombre of armed men, as they ſuppoſed to be commyng. Then there was great ſolitarines within his lodgyng, for none remayned about the kyng but a fewe Enukes, that had no place to repaire vnto. Then he debated and deuiſed with himſelfe alone▪ ſometyme one thyng, and ſometyme another, and by and by waxed wery of that ſolitarines, whiche before he toke for a comforte, and called Bubace vnto hym, whome he behelde, and ſayd: Go prouyde your ſelues, whiche according to your duties haue bene true to your prince till the laſt howre, Here I doe tary for the fatall lawe of my deſtynie. peraduenture ye do maruayle that I do not ende myne owne lyfe. I had rather dye thorough other mens wickednes, then by mine own. After thoſe wordes Bub
                  •
               ce filled both the kynges lodging, and alſo the hole campe with morning and lamentacion, and diuerſe brake into Darius, which tearyng their clothes, bewayled his caſe with a barbarous howling out. Whē the crie came vnto the Perciās they were ſo amaſed for feare, that they durſt neither put on their armour. leſt they might geue occaſiō to ye Bactriās to ſet vpō thē, nor they could not remaine quiet, leſt thei might ſeme ſo wickedly to leue

their kynge. There were clamours through out the campe of diuers ſortes and tunes, wythout any head, and without any apointment. Such as partayned to Nabarzanes and Beſſus deceiued by ſuch lamētacion as they harde, brought them worde that the kyng had killed him ſelf. Whereupon the prepaired thither ſo faſt as thei could gallop,Darius taken priſoner by Beſſus and Nabarzanes. and ſuch folowed after as thei had choſen to be myniſters of their miſcheife. When they were entred into the kings pauilion, bicauſe the Enuches declared that he was on liue, they cōmaunded him to be bound. Thus he whych before was caried in a chariot and honoured of his men like a god, was made priſoner by hys owne ſeruauntes, without any foreine powre, and put into a vile cart couered ouer with beaſtes ſkynnes: and ſpoyle was made of the kinges ſtufe in ſuch ſort, as if it had bene taken in the warres. And when they had laden them ſelues with the pray gotten after ſo foule a maner they conuaied them ſelues into their countries. But Artabazus with thoſe of whom he had the charge, and with the Greake ſouldiers, toke the way towardes Parthina thinking to be more ſure any where, then in the felowſhip of thoſe traitors. The Percians whom Beſſus had burdened with ſo many faire promiſes, ſpecially bicauſe thei had no other mā to folowe, ioyned them ſelues to the Bactrians, and the third daye ouertoke them. But to thintent Darius ſhould not want ſuch honor as was due vnto his eſtate Beſſus cauſed him to be bound wyth golden fetters. ſuch were the deſpightes that his fortune made him ſubiect vnto. And for that he ſhould not be knowen by his apparell▪ they couered the carte with foull hides of beaſtes, and cauſed vnknowē mē to driue it forwards. And leſt by enquiring the Armye he might be diſcouered,

ſuch as had the charge of hym folowed afarre of. Whan Alexander hard that Darius was remoued to Echatane, he lefte the way that he was in, and with all the ſpede he could make, folowed after Darius yt was ſaid to be gone into Media. But when Alexander was come to Taba, which is the cheife Citie of Paratacene,Taba. Paratacene. it was there ſhewed him by fugitiues that came out of Darius camp, that he was fled with al ſpede into Bactria. And afterwardes vnderſtod the matter more certeinly by Bagiſtenes of Babilō. who could not affirme directly that Darius was vſed as a priſoner, but declared that either he was in daūger of death, or of captiuitie. Alexander vpon thoſe newes called his capteines togither, and ſhewed them that he had a greate enterpriſe, but ſuch one as the trauail was verie ſhort. Darius (he ſayd) was not far of, forſaken of his own men, and either takē as a preſoner or ſlaine. In whoſe parſon he ſhewed their whole victorye to conſiſte, and the greatnes of the matter, to be reward ſufficient of their haſte making. They all cried with one voice that they were redy to folowe him where he would go, and that he ſhould neither ſpare there labor nor their perill. Wherupon he cōueied his army forwardes with merueilous ſpede, rather in poſt, then after the cōmon ordre of marching, neither reſting daie nor night til they had paſſed .v.c. furlōges, & come to the village where Darius was taken. There Melun,Melun. Darius Interpreter, who by reaſon of his ſicknes could not folowe the army, was taken through Alexanders celeritie, who fayning that he fledde awaye from his maiſter, declared the whole matter, but how great ſo euer his deſire was to ouertake his enemies, it was neceſſary for hym to giue his men reſt of their trauayle. So that determining

to leue the teſte of his army behinde, did choſe out ſix thouſand horſemen, and added to them .iii.c. whiche they cal Dimichas, that were fotemen heuy harniſed, but yet did ride on horſeback, and when the matter and place required, lighted & fought on foote. When Alexander was taking ordre about theſe thinges. Orſellos and Mythracenes which for the hatred they bare to Beſſus for his treaſon, fled from him, declared to the kynge that the Percians were but .v.c. furlonges of. and proffered to guide hym by a nearer way. Their cōmyng was gratefull to the king, for by their conduccion, in the begynning of the nigh, the toke his iourney wyth ſuche horſemen as he had appointed, willing his fote battell to folowe after wyth all ſpede poſſible. He marched forwardes in a ſquare battell, and kept ſuch an ordre that the firſte might ioyne with the laſte, and ſuch as came behind, releue them ye went before. When they had paſſed .ccc. furlonges of their way.Broculus. Broculus the ſonne of Mazeus that ſometime had bene gouernour of Siria met Alexander and declared that Beſſus was within two hūdred furlonges marching with his men out of all ordre, as one that did caſte no doubtes, ſeming to him that they went towardes Hircania. wherfore yf haſte were made (he ſaid) they myght ſone be ouertaken, & found diſparckled here & ther, out of al aray. He affirmed alſo that Darius was yet aliue, Alexander that was hote before in his purſuite, was with his wordes muche more pricked forwardes, ſo that he cauſed them put ſpores to their horſes, and paſſed forwardes a gallop, and went ſo farre forth, that they might heare the noiſe of their enemies, made as thei marched. But the duſte that dyd ryſe toke awaye their fight, and therefore he ſtayed a while, tyl the duſte was

vaniſhed away. And then both Beſſus parceyued the Macedons, and they ſawe the Percians as they fled. Notwithſtanding they had not ben hable to haue matched with them, if Beſſus had had as great courage to fight, as he had to betraye hys maſter. For beſides that they excedid the Macedons in nombre and powre, who being forweried and ſore trauayled, ſhould haue had to do with them that were iuſtie & freſhe. But the name of Alexander and his fame, which is of great moment, euer in the warres put thē in ſuch feare, that thei could not ſtaye them ſelues. Then Beſſus and other that were parteners of the cōſpiracy came to ye carte, where Darius was, & parſuaded him to leape on horſebacke, and fle from hys enemies that were at hand. But he affirming that the gods were come to his reueng, and calling for the aſſiſtaunce of Alexander,Darius wounded to death. ſaid that in no wyſe he woulde go wyth traitors: wherewith they were ſo ſturred to wrath, that they threw dartes at him, and left him woūded in many places of his body. They thucſt in the beaſtes alſo that driew the cart, to thintent they ſhould not be hable to paſſe forwardes. & ſlew his two ſeruaūtes that did waite vpon him. Whē they had cōmitted this acte, they thought it expedient to diſperſe them ſelues in their flieng. And ſo Nabarzanes toke the waye to Hircania, and Beſſus to Bactria, with a few horſemen that eche of them had in their company. When their ſouldiers were forſaken of theyr Captaines, they ſcatered here and there, where hope and feare did lead thē. There were only fiue hundred horſmen which aſſembled them ſelf togither, and ſtode in a māmoryng, whither it were better to reſiſte, or to flee. Alexander vnderſtanding the feare his enemies were in ſent Nycanor before wyth parte of hys horſemen,

by keping of them occupied, and he with the reſt folowed after. Where were ſlayn about the nombre of .iii. thouſand that ſtode at their defence, and they dyd dryue before them the reſte of the army like beaſtes, from killyng of whome, the kyng gaue commaundement to abſtaine. Amonges all the priſoners there was none that was able to ſhewe which was the cart that caried Darius, for euery one was ſo deſirous to fynd him, that as they ſawe any carte thei ſought Darius therin, and yet they could perceyue by no meanes where he was become. Alexander made ſuche haſte that ſcarſely thre thouſand horſemen folowed hym, of all his nombre, but the whole army of the Percians, fell into their lappes that folowed behynde. It is ſcarſely credible to be beleued, that there ſhould be more priſoners taken, then there were men to take thē. But fortune in that feare had ſo taken away their ſence, that they could not conſyder their owne multitude, nor the ſmale nombre of their enemies. In the meane ſeaſon the beaſtes that drewe Darius wagon, hauing no man to gouerne thē, were ſwarued out of the hyghe way, and wanderyng here and there, had drawen Darius four furlonges frō the place he was woūded, into a valley, where they fainted, by reaſon of their heate and their hurtes. There was a ſpring there at hand, whiche certaine that knew the countrey,Poliſtratus had ſhewed to Poliſtratus a Macedon, that was ouercome for thruſt. And whiles he was drinking water out of his helmet, he ſpyed the beaſtes that were thruſt in with darres, and marueilyng that they were not rather caried away, then hurt after that maner. He loked, & foūd in the foule cart the body of a mā haulf aliue, and at length perceiued it was Darius that lay there ſore wounded, & drawing of his breath. Then

Poliſtratus drought to hym a Percian whome he had taken priſone
                  •
               . Whome when Darius knewe by his voyce, to be of his countrey, ſayde: he toke that for a cō
               fort of his preſent fortune, that he ſhould ſpeake before he died, to one that vnderſtode hym,The meſſage that Darius ſent to Alexand before his death. and not vtter his laſt wordes in vayne. He required hym to declare vnto Alexāder, that though he had neuer deſerued any thing at his handes, yet it was his chaunce to die greatly his debtour, and had great thankes to geue hym, for the fauour and goodnes that he had ſhewed towardes his mother, his wife, and his children, to whome he had not only graūted lyfe, but alſo the reuerēce of their former eſtate & dignitie, where as he of his kinſmen & frendes to whome he had geuen both life and landes, was now by thē bereaued of al. He praied therefore that he might alwayes be victor, and that the Empire of the whole worlde myght come vnto his handes requiring that he would not neglecte to take reuengaunce of ſo foull an act, not only for his cauſe, but for enſample and the loue of other princes, which ſhould be a thing honorable vnto hym, and proffitable in tyme cōmyng. When he had ſpoken theſe wordes, he fainted and called for water, & after he had dronke, ſaid to Polyſtratus that preſented it vnto hym. Whatſoeuer thou art, this is vnto me the laſt myſery in all my aduerſe chaunce, that I am not able to requite the this benefite. But Alexander ſhal rewarde the, & the goddes ſhall requite him for his great humanite & clemency ſhewed towardes mine. Vnto whome, in my behalfe thou ſhalt geue my hande as a pledge of a kinges promiſe. When he had ſpoken theſe wordes, and geuen Poliſtratus his hand, he died. Whē theſe thinges were reported to Alexander, he repayred where the dead corſe lay, & there be wayled with teares,

that it was his chaunce to dye, a death ſo vnworthy for ſo great an eſtate, and taking of his owne clooke to couer the dead coorſe withall, adorned theſame with all thinges that pertayned to a kyng, and ſent it to his mother Siſigambis to be buried, in ſuche ſorte as the countrey maner was to bury kynges, and to be layde amonges the reſt of his predeceſſours.
            ☞Here the firſt parte of the ſyxt booke doth want, wherin was conteyned the cauſe of the warre betwixt the Lacedemonians and Macedons: with the preparacion of both nacions to the battaill that was fought betwixt Antipater Alexanders lieutenaunt in Macedonia, and Agis, kyng of the Lacedemonians.
         
         
            
            ¶The ſixte boke of Quintus Curtius of the actes of the great Alexander Kyng of Macedonie.
            
               HE preaſſed forwardes where the fyght was moſte daungerous,The batail betwyxt Agys kynge of Lacedemon and Antipater laeutenāt in Macedonia and ſleyng ſuche as made moſte reſiſtaunce put the greater parte of his enemies to flyght. Then ſuche as were victorers before began to flye, till they had drawe
                  •
                their enemies, gredely folowyng them, out of the ſtreyte into a more playne ground. In the retire many of them were ſlayne, but when they had once recouered ſuche a ground where as they might ſtaye and fall in ordre, the battailes ioyned equally againe on both ſides. Amonges them all, the kyng of the Lacedemonians, appeared moſte notable in all mens eyes, not ſo muche by the beawty of his armour and goodly perſonage, as through the greatnes of his courage, wherein only he could not be ouercome. He was layde to on all partes, both nere hande, and a farre of ye
                  •
                for all that he endured long in armes againſt his enemies, auoiding their ſtrokes parte with his target, and parte with his body, til ſuche tyme as he was thruſt through both thies with a ſpere, when by great effuſion of bloud he was not able any lōger to endure the fyght: Then the eſquiers for his body toke hym vp vpon his target, and caried hym into their campe, that with great payne endured the ſlurring of his woundes. The Lacedemoniās for all their kynges departure, gaue not ouer the fyght, but aſſone as they could recouer any ground of aduauntage, they clooſed them ſelues in battaylle

togither, and receyued ſtowtly ther enemies that came ful vpon them. Their is not found in any memorie of a battayl more vehemētly fought then that was, where the armies of two nacions that were moſte excellent in the warres contended togithers the victory not yet enclyning to any part. The Lacedemonians called to mynde ther aunciente manhode and prowes, and the Macedons conſidred ther preſent eſtymacion they had in the world. The Lacedemonians ſtriued for their libertie, and the Macedons for the ſouereyntye. The one partie lacked a capteine, and the other rowme to fight in. The manifolde aduentures and cauſes that fel that daie, encreaſed both the hope and feare of both parties, fortune as it were of purpoſe bringing ſuche valiant men to fight togithers, neither of them preuailing vpon other. But the ſtreytnes of the place, wherin they fought, did not ſuffre them to ioyne with there whole force at ones: for more were beholders the fighters, and ſuch as ſtode without daunger encouraged the other with their crie. Atlength the Lacedemoniās began to faint, and ſcarſly able for ſweating to ſuſtain their armour began to drawe backe, to haue the more libertie to fle from their enemies that preaſed ſore vpon them. Whē they were ones brokē and ſcatered abrode the victor purſued after. And paſſing the place wherupon the Lacedemonians batteyll was firſt araynged, with all haſte, made a ſore purſuyt vpon Agym, who ſeing his men flieng and his enemies approch at hāde, wylled his men to ſet him downe. Where ſtretching out him ſelfe, to fele if the force of his body could aunſwere vnto his hart. When he found him ſelfe vnable to ſtand, remaining vpon his knees, put on his helmet, and couering his body with his target, ſhaked his ſpere

               
               
and prouoked his enemies to drawe nere, if any were deſirous of his ſpoile, but there was not one that preaſſed nere hym, but did caſt dartes afarre of, which he alwayes toke and threwe at his enemies againe, till ſuch tyme as he was thruſt into ye bare breaſt with a ſpeare,Agi
                     •
                   was ſlayne. which pulled out of the wound, he fainted and bowing downe himſelf vpon his target, ſhortly after fel downe dead bloud and lyfe failing both together. There were ſlayne of the Lacedemoniās .v.M.iii.C.lx. and of the Macedons, not paſſing .iii.C. but there was ſcarſely any of thē that eſcaped vnwoūded. This victory brake the hartes not only of the Lacedemoniās and of their confederates, but alſo of all other whiche lay in wayte loking for ye ſucceſſe of that warre. Antiparer was not ignorant howe the coūtenaūces of ſuch as did gratefie his victory, differed muche from the ententes of their hartes: but deſirous to finiſhe the warre that was begonne, perceiued it neceſſary for him to diſſēble, & ſuffre hīſelf to be deceiued. And though he reioyſed much in the fortune of the thing, yet he feared the enuy that might enſue therof, being a greater matter then the eſtate of a lieutenaunt did beare. For Alexāder was of ye nature, that he deſired that his enemies had wonne the victory, ſhewyng manifeſtly that he was not contented with Antiparers good ſucceſſe, thinking that what honour ſoeuer chaunſed to any other man, was a derogacion to his owne glory. Antipater therefore which knew full wel his ſtomake, durſt not vſe the victory according to his owne will. But aſſembled a counſel of Grekes to aduiſe, what thei thought expediēt. The Lacedemoniās made no other requeſt, but that they might ſend Embaſſadours vnto Alexander, whiche vpon their repaire to him and their ſuite made, obtained pardon to all men.

ſauing to ſuche as were the authores of the rebellion. The Megapolitans whoſe citie did abide the ſieg,Megapolitane. were cōpelled to pay as a fine for ther rebellion .xx. talentes to the Aheians and the catolians. This was the ende of the warre,Howe Alexander in proſprytie 
                     •
                  ell to vice. which being ſodeinly begone was ended before that Alexander had ouerthrowne Darius at Arbella. Aſſone as his minde was deliuered of thoſe preſent cares, as one that coulde beare better the warres then quietnes or reſt, gaue him ſelfe al to pleaſures. By the vices wherof enſewing he was ouercome, whom no powre of the Percians or any other was able to ſubdue. He was geuen to banquetting out of ſeaſon, & to a fonde delight of drinking & watching, in plaies, and amonges flocks of Concubines yt drwe him into ſtraūg manners & cuſtumes. Which he folowing as thinges better then the vſagies of his countrey, offended therby greatly both ye eyes & the hartes of his owne nacion, & cauſed many yt loued hym before entierly, to hate him then as an enemy. For the Macedōs yt were obſtinate in keaping their own diſcipline, & accuſtumed not to be curius, but ſo ſcarſe in their diet as might ſuffiſe nature. Whē they ſawe he went about to bring in amonges them ye vices of thoſe nacions whych they had ſubdued: cōſpiracies then began to be made againſte hym, mutyne riſſe amonges the ſouldiers, & euery one complaynning to an other frely vttred ther griefes, therby he was prouoked to wrath, to ſuſpicion & ſodeine feare, diuers other inconuenience enſuing therupon which ſhalbe declared herafter. Alexander being giuen as it hath bene ſaied before to vnreaſonable banquetinge wherin he conſumed both daie & night. When he was ſatiſfied of eating & drinking, paſſed ouer the tyme wt plaies & paſtimes. And not cōtented wt ſuch muſiciās as he brought out of Greace, cauſed the womē yt were taken captiue toſing before him ſuch ſongs as abhored

the eares of the Macedons not accuſtumed to ſuche thinges. Emonges thoſe women Alexander ſpyed one more ſadder then the reſt, which with a certaine ſhamfaſtnes did ſtriue with them that brought hir fourth. She was excellent of bewty & throughe hir ſhamfaſtnes hir bewty was augmentyd. Bicauſe ſhe did caſte hir eies towardes the earth, & couered hir face ſo much as ſhe might: cauſed him to ſuſpect hir to come of greater nobilitie, then yt ſhe ought to be ſhewed furth amō
               ſuch banquetting plaies. And therfore being demaunded what ſhe was: ſhe ſhewed hir ſelf to be the doughter of the ſonne of Occhus yt lately reigned in Perce, & the wief of Hiſtaſpis which was Darius kinſmā,Hiſtaſpis. and had ben his lieutennant ouer great armies. Their yet remaynned in the kinges hart ſome ſmalle ſparkes of his former vertue. For in reſpect of her eſtate beinge come of kinges blood, & the reuerence he bare to ſuch a name as the neſe of Occhus, commaunded hir not only to be ſet free, but alſo to be reſtored to hir goods and hir huſband, whō he willed to be ſought out. The next daie he apointed Epheſtiō to bring al the priſoners vnto the court, where enquering of the nobilitie of euery one commaunded them which were deſcended of noble blood to be ſeuered from the reſte amonges whom they found Oxatres brother to Darius, yt was no leſſe noble of mind then of blood. There was made of the laſte ſpoile .xxvi.M. talentes, whereof .xii.M. were conſumed in rewardes amonges the men of warre: & the ſmoe amōted to no leſſe value yt was cōuaied away by them that had the keapinge thereof. There was one Oxydates a noble man of Perce that was put in priſon by Darius, and apointed to ſuffre death,Oxydates. whom Alexander delyuered and gaue vnto hym the ſignorie of Medya, and receyued Darius brother amonges the nombre of his frendes, reſeruing to him all the accuſtomed

honour of his nobilitie. Thē thei came to the countrey of Parthenia,Parthenia. then being but obſcure & vnknowen: but now the head of all thoſe countreis which lie vpon Tigre & Euphrates, & be boūded with the read ſeas. This countrey, being frutefull & haboundaunt of al thinges, was taken by the Scithians, whiche poſſeſſing part both of Aſia & Europe, be troubleous neyghbours to them both. They, which inhabite vpō the Boſpheron ſea,Baſpheron. are aſcribed to be in Aſia. And ſuch as be in Europe, poſſeſſe the coūtreis lieng on the lefte ſide of Thracia ſo far as Boriſthenes,Boriſtenes. & frō thence right furth ſo farre as the ryuer of Tanais, that parteth Europe & Aſia. It is certain that the Sythes, of whom the Percians be deſcended, came not from Boſpheron, but out of Europe. There was a noble cytie in thoſe daies called Atomphilos builded by the Grekes,Ato
                     •
                  philos where Alexander remained with his army, conuoieng vittels thether from all partes.A tumulte that roſe vpon a rumour. Amonges the ſouldiers lieng there in idlenes, there did riſe ſodainly a rumour, yt enterid into their heades without any certain auctour or beginnīg. The rumor was, how that Alexander ſatiſfied with the actes he had done, purpoſed immediatly to returne into Macedon. This fame was not ſo ſone ſowen abrode, but yt they ran like madde men to their lodginges, and truſſed vp their baggage and their ſtufa: making ſuch preparacion to depart, that euery man iudged warning had bene geuen to remoue, and that the thing had bene done by appointmēt. The tumult that ryſſe in the cāpe by lading of cariages, & the calling that one made vnto another, came vnto ye kynges eares. This rumour obtained ye ſoner credite, by ye diſpatche of certain Greke ſouldiers, whom Alexāder had diſmiſſed into their coū
               trey, with the gift of .vi. thouſand deneres, to euery horſeman, wherupon they toke occaſion to thinke that the

               
               
warre had bene at an ende. Alexander, whoſe purpoſe was to paſſe into India, and the vttermoſte bandes of the orient, was no leſſe afraied of this matter, then the caſe required. And therefore called before him the capteins of his army: And with ye teares in his eies, made a great complaint vnto them: that in the middle courſe of his glorie ſhould thus be pulled back, and compelled to returne into his countrey, rather as a man vainquiſhed then as a victor. Whiche miſfortune (he ſaide) he could not impute to his ſouldiers, nor iudge in thē any cowardnes, to giue impedimēt to his procedinges, but that it was only the enuie of ye goddes, which put ſo ſodeine a deſire of their countrey into the mindes of valiaunt men, that within a while ſhould haue returned with great glory and fame. Therupon they al promiſed him to trauaill in reformation of the matter, offeringe them ſelues in al thinges (were they neuer ſo difficult) to do as he would haue them. And they promiſed alſo, the obedience of the ſouldiers, if ſo be that he would make ſome gentle & apt oracion to pacefie them: which were neuer yet ſene departe from him in any deſperacion or diſturbāce of mind, if they once beheld the cherfulnes of his coūtenaūce and the courage that proceded from his harte. He promiſed that he would ſo do. & required at their handes to prepare in the multitude an aptnes to gyue eare vnto hym. When all thinges were prepared which were thought expedient for the purpoſe, he aſſembled all his armye togither and made this oracion vnto them.Alexanders oracion vnto the ſouldiers. When ye conſider (my ſouldiers) the greatnes of the actes which ye haue done, & the manifolde conqueſtes that ye haue made, it is no merueill at all, though ye be enclined to the deſyer of quietnes, and fully ſatiſfied with fame and glorye. For

leuing to ſpeake of the Illirians, & Triballes, of Boetia, Thracia, & Sparta, of the Acheians & Peloponeſians, whom I haue ſubdued part in perſone, & the reſt by my apointmēt. I will not make reherſal of ye warre we began at Helleſpont, and how we deliuered frō the intollerable ſeruitude of the Barbarians nations, Ionas and Aeolides, and got vnto our poſſeſſiō both Caria, Lydia, Cappadocia, Phrigia, Paphlagonia, Pamphilia, Piſides, Cilicia, Siria, Phenices, Armenia, Perce, Mede, and Parthenia. We haue gotten more coūtreis, then other haue taken cities, & yet (I am ſure) the multitude of them, haue cauſed me to leue ſome of thē vnreherſed. If I could thinke that the poſſeſſion of theſe landes that we haue cōquered in ſo ſhort time could remain ſure vnto vs, thē (my ſouldiers) I would, though it were againſt your willes, breake from you, to viſite my houſe and my home, to ſee my mother, my ſiſters, & my countreymen, to enioy there the laude & glory that I haue gotten with you. Where as the ioyfull conuerſacion of our wifes, our children, & parētes, peace, quietnes, & a ſure poſſeſſion of thinges gotten through our valiauntnes, do tary for vs, as large rewardes of our victory. But if we wil cōfeſſe ye truth, this new empire whiche we haue not yet at cōmaundement, but is kept as it were by way of entreaty, doth require a time, that this ſtiffe necked people, may learne to beare our yoke, & framing their diſpoſiciōs to a more humanitie, bring their cruell nature to a more ciuill cōuerſacion. Do we not ſee that the corne in the field axeth a time for his riping? and though the ſame be without ſence, yet hath it his courſe to be brought to perfection. Do you beleue that ſo many nacions not agreing with vs in religion, in cuſtomes, nor in vſe of tongue, accuſtomed to thempire,

and name of an other man, will be conquered and brought to ſubiectiō with the wynning of one battail? No, truſt me, they be kept vnder with the feare of our powre, and do not obey vs of their owne good willes. And they whiche ſhewe you obedience when ye be here amonges them, when you be abſent, wilbe your enemies▪ you muſt thinke, that ye haue to doe with wilde beaſtes, whiche, being fierſe of nature, whē they be firſt taken, muſt be ſhut vp, and tamed with tyme. Hetherto I haue reaſoned with you as though we had conquered the hole dominion that perteyned to Darius, which is nothyng ſo: For Nabarzanes poſſeſſeth Hircania, and the traitour Beſſus not only enioyeth Bactria, but alſo threateneth vs. The Sogdians, Dahans, Maſſagetes, Sagans, and the Indians, remayne yet in their owne libertie and iuriſdiction, whiche ſhall not ſee our backes ſo ſone turned, but they will followe vs in the tayles. They all haue a certayne frendſhyp and amitie one with an other, but we be all ſtraungers and foryners vnto them. There is no creature but that will more gladly be obedient to rulers of his own nacion, then to foryners, be their gouernement neuer ſo terryble. We are dryuen of neceſſitie therefore to wynne that we haue not, or els to loſe that we haue all redy gotten. As phiſicions in ſick bodies will leaue no humour that maye hurt, ſo lykewyſe we muſt cut away whatſoeuer ſhall be impediment vnto our Empire. Haue you not ſene great fiers riſen of ſmall ſparkes not regarded? We may not neglect any thīg in our enemies, whom the more we diſpiſe, the more ſtrōg we make them. And becauſe you ſhal not thinke it ſuch an impoſſibilitie for Beſſus to make him ſelf kyng, where

as a kyng wanteth: you ſhall vnderſtande that Darius came not to his Empire by enheritaunce, but got into the ſeate of Cirus by the benefite of Bagoas his Enuche. We commit an heinous offence (my ſouldiers) if we made warre to Darius, and put him downe for the entent to geue his kyngdome vnto his ſeruaunt, yea, and to ſuche one as attempted ſo vyle an acte againſt his maiſter, at ſuche a tyme as he had moſte neade of helpe, and whō, we being his enemies would haue ſpared, he being his ſubiect, put him in chaynes as a captiue, and finally ſlewe him, becauſe he ſhould not be preſerued by vs. Shall you ſuffre this kynd of man to reigne? no, let vs make all the ſpede we may to ſee him crucified, and ſo to ſhewe vnto all kynges and nacions a iuſtice done vpon one, that ſo vilely falſefied his fayth. If the reporte ſhould come vnto you, beyng in your own countreis, that theſame man were diſtroyeng of the Greke cities about Heleſpont. O God howe ſorye would you be then, and howe muche would you lamente, that Beſſus ſhould enioye that you haue gotten, and vſurpe the rewardes of your victory? Then would you make haſte to recouer your own, thē would you bend your ſelues to the warres. But how muche better is it nowe to oppreſſe him whiles he remaineth in ſuche feare, and is vncertayne what way to take? Shal we ſpare to ſpēd .iiii. ſcore daies iourney to come to hym, that haue ouertroden ſuche ſnowes, that haue paſſed ſo many ryuers, that haue clymed ſo many moū
               taines? to whoſe iourney the flowyng ſea could be no impediment, nor the ſtreyte of Cilicia could ſhut vp our way. Nowe all thinges are made playne and open, and we ſtande in the entrey of our victory. There be but a fewe fugitiues, and killers of their maiſters that do remaine.

What more notable worcke can you leaue vnto your poſteritie, to be regeſ
                  •
               red by fame vnto your glory then in reuenging ſuch as were traitours to Darius? you ſhal therby ſhewe that whē you were enemies vnto him, yet your hatred ended with his death, & that no wicked perſon could eſcape your handes. Which thing if you bring to paſſe, howe muche more obedient do you thinke the Perciās ſhalbe vnto you, whē they perceiue that you take iuſt warres in hand, and it was not Beſſus name wherewith ye were offended, but with his faultes and euill doinges? His oracion was receiued of the ſouldiers with ſuch gladnes, that thei ſtreightwaies deſired him to cary them whether he would. And he that could vſe the occaſion of their good mode, paſſed through Parthenia, and came to the boundes of Hircania,Hircania. leuyng Craterus with the band wherof he had the rule, and ſix thouſand horſemen, of whome Amyntas had the charge, with the like nombre of archers to defend Parthenia from the incurſion of the barberous naciōs. He appointed Erigonus a ſmal power to attēd vpō his cariages, willing him to paſſe with thē through the plaine countrey. And he himſelf with his fotemen, and with the reſte of his horſemen, marched forwardes C. fyfty furlonges, and encamped in a valley at the entrey of Hircania. In theſame place, be greate woodes full of hyghe and thyck trees, and the botome of the valey is very frutefull, by reaſon of the ſprynges that come forth of the rockes. Out of the foote of the mountaynes, there ryſeth a ryuer called zioberis,zioberis. which with in thre furlonges of the head, is deuided by a rocke, ſtā
               dyng in the middes of the ſtreame, cauſyng the water to go two ſondrie wayes. Whiche afterwardes comming again into one chanell, ronneth more violently

then before, by reaſon of the fall of the rockes. And ſodenly it ſinketh into the ground, and ſo rōneth hidden by the ſpace of .ccc. furlonges, and then cōmeth furthe againe as it were out of a newe ſpring, the ſame being then in bredth .xiii. furlonges, and as it ronneth forewardes drawith more narow, and falleth into an other ſtreame named Rhydago.Rhydago. The inhabiters of the countrey affirmed that al thinges caſte in, where the ſtreme ſunk into the ground, would apeare & come out again at the next iſſue. For the prouing of which concluſion. Alexāder cauſed two bulles to be caſt in where the water entered, whoſe bodies were found by ſuch as were apoynted for the purpoſe, where the ſtreame brake out againe. In this place he refreſhed his army .iiii. daies, during which time Nabarzanes which was confederat with Beſſus in killing of ye king, did write l
                  •
               es to him, in effect,The effecte of Nabarzanes letters to Alexāder howe that he was no enemie vnto Darius, but counſeiled hym euer to doe ſuche thynges as he iudged moſte proffitable, and for his faithfull counſell was put in daunger of his life by him, who went about againſt al reaſon to commit the cuſtodie of his perſon to ſtraungers, condemning therby the fidelitie of hys owne nacion, which they had kept vnſpotted towards theyr kinges by the ſpace of .ccxxx. yeares. Wherefore ſeing himſelf in that perill and daunger, toke counſel of his preſent neceſſite. And alledged that it was allwaies admitted lauful for a man to kil ſuch one, whom he knewe to imagyn his death, which was an excuſe (he ſaid) wherwith Darius ſatiſfied the people, when he had ſlain Bagoas. He alledged yt nothing was more deare to mortal creatures then life, for the loue wherof he was driuen to this extremytie, in committing an act which neceſſity rather cōpelled him to do, then his own

diſpoſion. For in a generall calamitie eueri man hath his fortune. If he would commaund hym to come to his preſence, he ſaid he woulde not refuſe to doe it, for he coulde not feare that ſo great a kyng would violat his promis, ſeing one God is not wont to deceiue an other. But if he ſhoulde ſeame vnworthy to whom he would giue his aſſuraunce, ther were many countries for him to fle vnto. For al men hauing vertue in them, counte alwaies that for their coūtrey, where they make their dwelling place. Alexander made no ſtay in giuing him his faith, after ſuch ſorte as the Parcians vſed to receiue it: which was to do him no harme if he came to him. Notwithſtanding he marched in ordre of battell ſending euer ſcourers before to diſcouer the ground. The light armed were apointed to the voward, ye phalanx folowed after, & the baggage behind. For by reaſō the ſame was a warlik nacion, & the countrey harde to entre vpon, cauſed the kinge to loke erneſtly vpon the matter. The ſame valley ſtretcheth out to the Caſpian ſea, the bākes therof reſembling ye hornes of the mone before it cōmeth to the full, the ſea lieng betwyxt them like a great bay, vpon the lefte hand the people inhabite that be called Cercetes,Cercetes, whyche lye open towardes the north, and vpon the other parte the Leucoſyrians,Leucoſiriās Moſſynes,Moſſynes. Chalybes. and Chalibes and the plaines of the Amazones lye towardes the weſte. This ſea whiche ſome call the Caſpion and ſome the Hyrcanian ſea,The caſpyō ſea, being more ſweater then anie other, bringeth forth Serpentes of a wonderfull bignes, and fyſhes differinge in colour much from all the reſte. Theyr be dyuers of opynion that the lake of Meotis ſhoulde ronne into thys ſea, whiche they coniecture of the water, thinkyng the ſame to receyue hys ſweatnes of the lake.

Towardes the north the ſea groweth into a fleat ſhore and putteth furth his waters farre vpō the lād, which riſing high make many meares and plaſhes. And as by certaine courſe of the planets they flowe out, ſo at certaine time by an ebbe, they returne in againe reſtoring the groūd to his former eſtate. Some beleue thoſe waters to be no parcel of the Caſpian ſea, but that they come out of Inde and rōne into Hyrcania, which lieth low in the forſaid vailey. The king being remoued frō that place, marched forwardes .xx. furlonge in a wylde deſert way. Where great woodes honge continually ner their heades, and brokes of water and myer gaue great impediment to ther iourney. But at length with out any impedimēt of his enemies he paſſed thoſe difficulties, and came vnto a more faire countrei, wherin beſides other vittells (whereof it dyd habound) grewe great plenty of appulles, and the ground was veray apt for vynes. There were alſo plenty of a certayne kynd of trees, much like vnto okes, whoſe leaues were couered with hony, which the inhabitors gather before ye ſonne riſing, for els the moiſter would be drie vp with the heate. When Alexander had paſſed .xxx. furlonges more forwardes. Phrataphernes mette him, yeldinge both him ſelfe, & ſuch other as fled away after Darius death, whom he receyued gentely, and came to a towne called Aruas.Aruas. Phradates. Thether came Craterus and Erigonus bringing with thē Phradates that had the rule of the Tapurians:Tapurians whoſe frendly receyuing and gentle entertainment was the cauſe that many folowed his enſample in committing themſelues to Alexanders mercy Menape was made their prince of Hitcania,Menape. who, being a baniſhed man, in the tyme of Occhus, came to king Philipp for refuge & Phradates alſo was reſtored

to the office he had before. When Alexander was come to the vttermoſt boūdes of Hi
                  •
               cania, Artabaſus,Artabayus yelded to A
                     •
                  exander. whom we declared to ſhewe hym ſelfe faithfull alway to hys Maſter, met Alexāder with Darius kinſmen and children, and with a ſmalle bande of Greake ſouldiers. The kyng at his comming proffered him his hand, bicauſe he had byn entertayned before by king Philippe when he was baniſhed by Occhus? but the chief cauſe that he accepted him ſo well, was for the cōtinual fidelitie that he obſerued towardes his prince. He beinge thus gentlye receyued by Alexander, ſayd vnto him: Sir, long may you floriſhe and reigne in perpetuall felicitie. I that reioyce in all other thinges, with one ani chiefly greuid, that by reaſon of myne olde age. I ſhall not be hable long to reioyſe your goodnes. He was iiii. ſcore .v. yeares of age, & brought, with him .ix. ſonnes borne of one mother, whō he preſented before the king, prayeng god to continewe their liues: ſo long as their ſeruice might be acceptable vnto him. Alexander was accuſtomed much to walk on fote, but then left he the olde man might be aſhamed to ride, he goinge on fote called for horſes for them bothe. When he was encāped, he ſent for the Grekes that Artabaſus brought. But they made requeſte firſte that he woulde giue aſſurance to the Lacedemoniās that were amōges thē, or els they would take aduiſe amonges them ſelues what were beſte to do: The ſame were the Embaſſeadours that the Lacedemoniās had ſent vnto Darius. After whoſe ouerthrowe they ioyned them ſelues to the Greakes that were in his wages. The king willed thē to leue al aſſuraūces & cōpoſiciōs & come to receiue ſuch apointment as he would gyue them. They ſtode long in a ſtaye vareing in openions but at length they

agreed ſo to do: Sauing Democrates of Athēce which chefly had euer oppugned the ſucceſſe of the Mace dons, diſpairing of pardon flewe him ſelf. But thother, as they had determyned, ſubmitted them ſelues to Alexā
               ders wil, being .x.M.vc. in nūbre, beſides .iiii ſcore & .x of ſuch as were ſēt Embaſſadores vnto, Darius. The more parte of the ſouldiers were diſtrubuted amongs the bandes, to fyll vp the nombres that wāted, and the reſt were ſent home except the Lacedemonians, which he commaunded to be put in priſon. Ther was a nacion called Mardons bounding next to Hircania,The Mardons rude in their manners and vſagies, accuſtumed to lyue by theft: They neither ſent Embaſſadores, nor gaue anye ſignificacion that they woulde be at Alexanders commaūdiment, he toke therat great indingnaciō that any one people ſhould giue impediment to his victory. And therfore leuing a guard for his cariages, went againſt them with a ſtrong powre. He merched forwardes in the night, and by the tyme that the day appeared his enemies were in ſight. But the matter came rather to a larom then to any fyght. For thennemies were ſone driuen from the hilles. Who flieng away left their villagies to be ſacked by the Macedons. But the armye could not paſſe into the inward partes of the countrey without great trouble & veracion, the ſame being compaſſed about wt high montains, great woodes & deſert rockes▪ & the partes which were plaine were defended with a ſtraung kind of fortificacion, that is to ſay with tres ſet thick of purpoſe, the bowes whereof whē they were yong were wreathed one wythin an other: The toppes bowed downe were put into the groūd againe, from whence as out of an other rote ther ſprong new b
                  •
               aunches. Which they would not ſuffre to growe as

nature brought furth, but did knit them ſo one with an other, that when they were full of leaues they couered clene the earth. The trees thus wreathed one wt an other, encloſed in the countrey as it were with a continuall hedge, and were as ſnares to entangle ſuche as would go about to entre, ther was no way could be deuiſed to paſſe through ye ſame but onliby cutting down of the wood. And therin they found a great difficultie and much trauail, by reaſon that the wreathing & wrappinge togither of the bowes kept them of from the bodies of the tres. And the weaknes of the bowes ſo yelded to the ſtrokes that they could not wel be cut a ſonder. The inhabiters of the countrey were accuſ
                  •
               umed to creape amonges the bruſh like wilde beſtes, and by pryuie ſalies breake out vpon their enemies. Alexāder therfore cauſed his men after ye maner of hunters to ſake out ther lurkīg places & killed many of them. But at length he enuironed the woode with his ſouldiers round about, to thintent they might breake in at euery place, wher they ſhould ſpie any entrey, Wherby many wandred & loſt ther company in places that they knew not, and were taken pryſoners: And amonges them Bucephalus Alexāders horſe,Bucephalus Alexanders horſe. whom he did not eſteame as men do other beaſtes, for he would not ſuffre any other man to come vpon hys back. and when the kynge would ride he would kneell downe vpon hys knees to receiue him, ſo that he ſeamed to haue the ſence to vnderſtand whom he caried. Alexander was more ſorowfull and ſturred to a greater wrath for the loſſe of the horſe thē was expedient for ſuch a cauſe, for ſerching about to get ye horſe againe cauſed proclamaciō to be made by an interpreter, ye except he were reſtored he wold not leaue one of them aliue. Whē they hard this terrible threating, amōges other giftes they preſented vnto

Alexander his horſe. yet he was not therwyth pacefied but comaunded the woodes to be cut downe, & earth to be brought for making of the wayes ſmooth, which he cutt through the woodes. This worck went ſo wel forward, that the inhabiters diſpayring of habilitie to defend their countrey, yelded them ſelues to the kinge, who receyuing their pledges, committed them to the keaping of Phradates. And from thence the fifte day returned againe to his campe. There he gaue to Artabaſus the double honor that Darius did vnto him, and ſent him home againe into his countrey. After that he came to that citie of Hircania where Darius Palace was Nabarzanes vpon aſſurance, came thither bringing with him great giftes, and amonges the reſte preſented vnto Alexāder Bagoas an Enuche of ſinguler beauty, being in the firſte flowre of youth, whom Darius accuſtomed, and after Alexander.The Amazons. At whoſe interceſſion ſpeicially he did pardon Nabarzanes. The nacion of the Amazōs being nere vnto Hircania (as hath bene ſayed before) did inhabite the playnes of Themiſcirae about the riuer of Thermodoonta,Thermodoonta. & had a quene reigning ouer thē called Thaleſtris, which kept vnder her dominion all the countries betwene the Mount Caucaſus, and the riuer of Phaſis:Phaſis. who for the greate affeccion ſhe had to ſee Alexander, trauailed out of hir owne countrey, and being come nere where he was, ſhe ſente certayne before, to declare that a quene was come of deſire to viſite him, and to make hir acquayntaunce. Whan libertie was giuen her to come to his preſence, ſhe cauſed all the reſt of hir band to ſtay, and the came forwardes accompanied with .ccc. women. Aſſone as ſhe parceyued Alexander,Thaleſtrys me
                     •
                  te Alexander. ſhe leaped from her horſe carieng two Lances in hir hande, The Amazons

               
               
apparell is ſuche that it doth not couer all their bodies, for their breſtes be bare on the lefte ſyde, nor their garmentes whiche they vſe to knytte vp with a knot, come not to their knees. One breſte thei alwaies reſerue vntouched wherewith they noryſhe their woman children, but their ryght breaſtes thei vſe to ſeare, to make them more apt to drawe their bowes, and caſte their dartes. Thaleſtis behelde Alexander with a bold countenaunce, and conſidered in lokyng vpon hym, that his perſonage aunſwered not to the ſame that ſhe had heard of his actes. For the barbarous nacions geue great veneracion to the maieſtie of the perſonage, thynking none to be ſufficient for the doing of greate actes, but ſuche as nature haue endued with great perſonages. It was demaunded of her, if ſhe had any requeſt to make vnto Alexander: Wherat ſhe abaſhed not to confeſſe that ſhe was come thether to get chyldren with hym, thynkyng her ſelfe a perſonage worthy of whome he ſhould get heires to enherite his kyngdome. Couenanting that if it were a womā ſhe wold kepe it ſtyll, and if it were a man chylde, ſhe would reſtore it to the father. Alexander enquired of her, if ſhe would go forwardes with him in his warres, but therin ſhe excuſed her ſelfe, that ſhe had left no ordre for the defence of her kyngdome. But ſhe continued ſtyll in declaration of the cauſe of her commyng, and required that her hope therein myght not be in vayne. The womans appetite, ſeamed to be more vehemently geuen to luſte then the kynges was, yet ſhe obtayned of hym to ſtay for her cauſe, and conſumed thirtene daies in ſatiſfieng of her deſire.Here Alexā
                  der firſt forſoke vertue and fell to vice. That done ſhe departed to her owne kyngdome, and Alexander went to Patthinia, which was the place where he firſt ſhewed

manifeſtly the vices that were in hym: there he turned his continency, and moderacion, being the moſte excellent vertues appearing in any kynde of eſtate, into pryde and voluptuouſneſſe, not eſteamyng hys countrey cuſtomes, nor the holſome temperaunce that was in the vſagies and diſcipline of the kynges of Macedon, whiche iudged their ciuill vſage and maner to be ouer baſe for his greatnes, but did counterfeit the heyghte and pompe of the Kynges of Perce, repreſenting the greatnes of the Goddes. He was content to ſuffre men there to fall downe flat vpon the ground, and worſhyp hym, and accuſtomed the victors of ſo many nacions, by litle and litle, to ſeruile offices, coueting to make them equall vnto his captiues. He ware vpon his head a diademe of purple, interpaled with white, lyke as Darius was accuſtomed, and faſſhioned his apparell of the maner of the Percians, without ſcrupuleſitie of any euell token that it ſignified, for the victorer to chaunge his habite into the faſſhion of hym whome he had vanquiſſhed. And though he aduaunted that he ware the ſpoiles of his enemies, yet with thoſe ſpoyles he put vpon him their euell maners, and the inſolency of the mynde, followed the pride of the apparell. Beſides he ſealed ſuche letters as he ſent into Europe with his accuſtomed ſeale, but all the letters he ſent abrode into Aſia, were ſealed with Darius rynge. So it appeared that one mynde could not beare the greatnes that apperteyned to two. He apparelled alſo his frendes, his capitaynes, and his horſemen in Percian apparell, wherat though they grudged in their myndes, yet they durſt not refuſe it for feare of his diſpleaſure. His court was repleniſſhed with concubines, for he ſtill maynteined thre hundred

& .lx. that belonged to Darius, & amonges them were flockes of Enukes accuſtomed to perfourme the vſe of women. The old ſouldiers of Philippe naturally abhorryng ſuche thinges manifeſtly withſtode to be infected with ſuche voluptuouſnes and ſtraūge cuſtomes. Wherupon there roſe a general talke and opiniō throughout the cāpe: that they had loſt more by the victory, then they had wonne by the warre. For when they ſawe themſelues ouercome in ſuche exceſſe, & foreine cuſtomes ſo to preuaile amonges them, they iudged it aſlender reward of their long being abrode, to returne home in the habite of priſoners. They began to be aſhamed of their king that was more like to ſuche as were ſubdued, then to them that were victorious, and that of a kyng of Macedon, was become a prince of Perce, & one of Darius courtiers. When he vnderſtode that the chefe of his frendes, and his men of warre, were greuouſly offended with his doynges, he went about to recouer fauour againe with giftes and liberalitie, but it is to be thought that the rewardes of ſeruitude, be vngratefull to fre men. And therfore leſt this matter might turne into a ſedicion, he thought good to breake the imaginaciōs encreaſed by idlenes, with the exerciſe of warres, wherof an apt occaſiō was geuen. For Beſſus inueſting him ſelfe as a kyng,Beſſus toke vpon him as kyng. toke vpon hym the name of Artaxerſes, drawing to his parte the Scithians and other that were the inhabiters of the Ryuer of Tanais: whiche thinges were reported to hym by Nabarzanes, whome he had receiued into his fauour, & geuen the rule of the countrey that he had before. When he had determined this new expediciō, he found his army ſo ouercharged and laden with ſpoyle, & other furnimētes of voluptuouſnes, that they could

not ſcarſly moue. Wherfore he commaunded the baggage and ſtuf of the whole army to be brought together in one place, excepting only ſuch thinges as were very neceſſary. The place was large and playne whether the cartes were brought laden, and when euery one ſtode wayting and muſing what he woulde commaunde them to doe, he cauſed the beaſtes to be remoued firſt out of the way, and then ſet his owne fardels on fyer, and after all the reſte. Whiles theſe thynges were burning the owners were on fyer, to ſee thoſe thinges conſumed, for the ſauing wherof they had oft quenched the flambes in Cyties of their enemies, yet no man durſte lament the price of his owne bloud, ſeing they ſawe the fyer conſume the kynges ryches, as well as their owne, but the rather to pacefie them, the kyng did mytigate their dolour with a briefe oracion. Whereupon they that were euer apt for the warres, and redy to doe all thynges, began to be ioyfull that with the loſſe of their baggage, they had ſaued their diſcipline accuſtomed in the warres. As they were ſettyng forwardes towardes Bactria.Nycanour. Nycanour the ſonne of Parmenio died ſodainly, whome euery man greatly lamented, but chefely the kyng was ſo ſorowefull, deſiring to haue ſtayed for the celebracion of his buriall but that want of vitayles. cauſed hym to haſte forwardes. Philotas therfore was left behynde with two thouſand and ſyx hundred ſouldiers to perfourme the ceremonis apperteining to his brothers buriall, and he hym ſelfe marched towardes Beſſus. In the way letters were brought to Alexander from the lordes there about, that Beſſus was comming towardes hym with a great army,Satribarzanes. adding thereunto that Satribarzanes whome he had made prince of the Arians, was newely

rebelled agaynſte hym. For that cauſe notwythſtandynge he was come nere vnto Beſſus, yet he thought it beſt firſt to oppreſſe Satribarzanes, and for that entent brought forwardes his horſemen and footemen that were lyght armed, to come ſodaynly vpon his enemies. His comming was not ſo pryuye, but Satribarzanes knewe and fled into Bactria with two thouſand horſemen. For by reaſon he was not able to aſſemble any more in ſo ſhorte a tyme, the reſte toke the next mountaynes for their refuge.The ſiege of a rocke. There was a rock whiche towardes the weſt was hyghe and ſteape, but towardes the eaſt more lowe and eaſye to be clymbed, vpon whiche parte it was full of trees. The ſame rock had a fountayne that ran continually with great plenty of water, and was in compaſſe two and thirty furlonges. In the toppe was a grene plaine full of graſſe, where they placed the weaker multitude, but the reſt that were apt for defence beyng to the nō
               bre of thirtene thouſand, got them ſelues to the eggies of the rock, and there threwe downe ſtones and ſtockes of trees againſte the Macedonians that came to aſſayle them. He left Craterus to beſyege this rocke, going him ſelf to purſue Satribarzanes. And becauſe he vnderſtode that he was gone farre on his waye, returned backe agayne to the ſiege of them that were vpon the rocke. Fyrſt he cauſed all thynges to be taken away, that myght be any impediment to them in the aſſault therof. But whē they came to the bare and ſteape rock, ye labour ſemed waſte, where nature had wrought againſt them. But he that was of a diſpoſiciō alwayes to ſtriue agaynſt difficulties, conſideryng howe hard a matter it was to go forwardes, and daungerous to returne backe agayne, did caſte in his head all the wayes

and deuiſes that could be Imagined, and nowe fanteſied one thing, and then an other, as men be wont whē the waies they haue found out firſt, do not pleaſe them. As he ſtode in a ſtay in doubt what to doe, fortune did miniſter vnto him a meane, which neither wit nor reaſon could inuente. It chaunſed that the wynde blewe ſore at the ſouthweſt, what tyme the ſouldiers had felled great plenty of wood, wherof thei thought to make them ſelues away vp againſt the rocke, and the heat of the ſonne had made theſame drye. When Alexander perceiued the wynd to blowe after that ſorte, and the woode lieng in that place, cōceiued by and by his purpoſe, and willed more trees to be cut downe, & laid vpō them, putting all other thinges to it, that were apt to kyndle and noryſhe fier: So that trees heaped vpon trees, became as it were a mountaine, ſo hyghe as the top of the rocke. The ſame being ſet a fire in al partes at once, the wynde caried the flambe into the face of their enemies, & the ſmoke couered ouer the ſky. The noiſe was then great that the fier made, which burned not only the trees that were fired of purpoſe, but alſo the reſt of the woode growing nere there about. The enemies were ſo tormented with the flambe & heate of the fire, that they were enforced to forſake their place of ſtrength, & attempted to eſcape away where the fyer gaue them leſt impediment. But where the fier gaue place, the Macedons ſtode in redines to receiue them, ſo that they were conſumed & ſlayne, diuers kynde of wayes. Some threwe them ſelues downe the rockes, ſome ran into the middes of ye fier, other fell into their enemies hādes, and a fewe, haulf conſumed with fier were takē priſoners. Whē Alexāder had done this act, he returned to Craterꝰ, which beſieged Artacnan,Art
                     •
                  cnan. who

hauing prepared all thinges in redines taried only for the kinges cōming to giue him the honour of the winning of the Cytie. When Alexander was come he approched nere the walles with the towres of timbre that he had prepared for the aſſault, at the ſyght whereof the inhabitaunts were ſo afrayed that they held vp their handes from the walles requiring hym to ſpare them, and execute his wrath vpon Sattibarzanes that was the aucthour of their rebellion. Alexander pardoned them frely, and not only leuied his ſiege, but alſo reſtored to the inhabitauntes, all thynges that pertayned to them. As he remoued from this Cytie, there came vnto hym a newe ſupply of ſouldiers. zolus brought out of Grece fyue hundred horſemen, and thre thouſand footemen, whiche Antipater ſent out of Iliria, and hundred and thirty Teſſalian horſemen that came with Philip, who alſo brought of ſouldiers ſtraungers out of Lidia, two thouſand fiue hundred footemen with .iii. hundred horſemen. Alexander hauing thus encreaſed his power, entred into the countrey of the Drangans,Drangans. whiche were a warlyke nacion, and vnder the gouernement of Nabarzanes, who beyng of counſell with Beſſus in the treaſon that he committed againſt his prince, when he heard of Alexanders commyng, for feare of the puniſhement that he had deſerued, fledde into India. Thus had they lien in campe nyne dayes, when Alexander being without feare of any enemy, and inuincible againſte all foren powers was brought in perill by treaſon of his own people.A treaſon cō
                  ſpired againſt Alexand
                It chaūſed that one Dymnus a mā of meane behauour and aucthoritie with his prince, was greatly enflābed in the loue of a young man called Nicomachus, with whō he vſed much familier cōuerſatiō
               
This Dimnus on a tyme beyng in a paſſion,Dimnus. as it wel appeared by his countenaunce, allured this yong man into a Temple, where remayning alone togethers, declared that he had certaine ſecretes to ſhewe him, whiche in no wiſe were to be reported againe. Thereby he brought Nycomachus in great ſuſpection,Nichomacus. what the matter ſhoulde be: For before he woulde tell him, he made a proteſtation by the loue & familiaritie betwixte thē, that he would aſſure him by his oth to kepe ye thing ſecrete, who ſuppoſinge the matter to be of no ſuche weight, that he ought with periurie and breakynge of his othe to diſcloſe the ſame againe, ſware by the goddes there preſente. Then Dymnus opened vnto him howe there was a treaſon conſpired againſt the kinge, whiche within three dayes ſhoulde be put in execution, wherof (he ſaied) he him ſelfe was prittie with diuers men of nobilitie and eſtimation. When Nicomachus did heare it to be ſuche a matter, conſtauntlye denied then that his promiſe extēded to conceil treaſon, whervnto no othe nor religion coulde binde a man. When Dymnus hearde him ſaye ſo, he became in a rage betwixte loue and feare, and claſped the yong man by the hand, requiryng him with wepyng eyes that he would not ſtycke to be a partaker in the execution of this cō
               ſpiracye, or at the leaſte, if his harte woulde not ſerue him, that he woulde kepe his counſaile ſecrete, in reſpecte that he had founde ſuche proufe of loue in him, to commit his life into his hādes without any further proufe of his fidelitie. But in concluſion when he perceiued that Nicomachus woulde in no wiſe agree to his purpoſe, but manifeſtly abhorred the acte, he vſed diuers meanes to bring him to his counſaile, one while entreatyng him with fayre wordes, and an other while

threatenynge to kyll him. He called him towarde and traitour to his frende, commendyng the goodlines of the enterprice, and putte him in hope of greate prefermentes, in that he ſhoulde be part
                  •
               ener of the Kingdome thei went about to get. When he had proued all theſe waies, and yet founde him ſtraunge, he thruſte his ſwerde one while to Nicomachus throte, and another while to his owne, ſo that at lengthe by threating and faire ſpeakyng, he brought him to promiſe, both to kepe his counſaile ſecrete, and alſo to be aſſiſtaunte to the dede doyng, yet neuertheleſſe as one of a conſtaūt mynde (though for the time preſente he ſeamed to be wonne with the loue of his frende, & become agreable to his requeſtes) chaunged no parte of his former purpoſe. This done, Nicomachus required to know what the men were, that had confederated them ſelues in ſo weightie a matter, becauſe the perſons (he ſaied) were muche materiall that ſhoulde take ſo greate an enterprice in hand. Then Dimnus, though he were in great trouble of minde that he hadde brought the matter ſo farre forth, yet when he hearde him aſke that queſtion, reioyſed, and thanked him greatlye, that he would frely aſſociate him ſelfe with ſuche maner of men, as Demetrius of the priuie chābre was, Peculaus, Nichanor, Aphobetus, Loceus, Dioſenus, Arche
                  ••
               is, & Amintas This communication once ended betwixt
                  •
                theim, Nicomachus departed, and diſcloſed all the ma
                  •
               er whiche he had hearde before, to a brother of his called Ceballinus:Ceballinus· agreyng betwixt them two, that Nicomachus ſhoulde remaine ſtyll ſecrete in his tente, leaſt by his commyng to the kynges lodgynge, not vſyng to haue acceſſe vnto the kynge, the conſpiratours might perceiue them ſelues bewraied.
            
               Ceballinus repaired to the kynges lodgynge, and taried before the gate, waitynge for ſome man nere about the kynge, to brynge him to his prince. It fortuned that amongeſt many whiche paſſed by, onely Philotas the ſonne of Parmenio,Philotas. demaūded why he waited there. To whom Ceballinus with a baſhed countenaunce (wel declaring the vnquietnes of his minde) reported all thoſe thinges whiche he had hearde of his brother, requiryng him that he would declare the ſame immediatly vnto the kynge. Philotas departed from him vnto the kynge, with whom that daie he had much communication of other thinges, and yet opened no parte of the ſame matter whiche was tolde him by Ceballinus. At nyght as Philotas came forthe. Ceballinus mette him at the court gate, and enquired whether he hadde done his meſſage to the king or not. He excuſed the matter, that he could find him at no leaſure. The nexte daye Ceballinus mette him againe goynge to the kynge, and put him in remembraunce of that he hadde tolde him before, to whom he aunſwered that he remēbred it wel, but yet for al that? he diſcloſed no part of the matter. Ceballinus began then to ſuſpecte him, and intended no lenger to differ the thynge, but opened the ſame to one Metrone maſter of the Kynges armorye,The treaſō diſcloſed. who immediatlye conueied Ciballinus into the armorye, and wente ſtrayght to the kynge whyche was bath
                  •
               nge, and enfourmed him of all that he had hearde Alexandre then made no delaye, but ſente certaine of his guarde to take Dymnus, and after came him ſelfe into the armorye. Whom aſſone as Ceballinus lawe, he ranne to him with great reioyſynge, and ſayd: loe, I haue preſerued the from the hādes of thine

enemie. But Alexander examined him of all the circumſtaunces, and when he againe aunſwered to euerye poynte in order. The kynge was earneſt to know howe longe it was ſence Nicomachus had geuen him this information, he confeſſed that it was three dayes, wherupon the kynge conſideringe that he coulde not with trueth haue conceiled this matter ſo longe, commaunded that he ſhoulde be put in warde. Then cried he out, and declared that at the ſame inſtaunt he knew of the conſpiracye firſte, he opened it to Philotas, of whom (he ſaied) he might enquere the trueth. Therupō it was demaunded of him, whether he hadde required Philotas to be broughte to the kynges preſence or no. Whiche thynge when the kyng by his confeſſion perceiued to be true, and that he did ſtifly abide by his firſt tale, he lifted vp his handes to heauen, the teares fallynge from his eyes, greatlye complainynge that Philotas ſhoulde requite him with ſuche vntruthe, whom he moſte aſſuredly truſted.Dimnus ſlew him ſelfe, Dymnus in the meane ſeaſon knowynge for what cauſe he was ſente for, wounded him ſelfe to death, but yet ſomewhat letted by thē that were ſente to take hym, was broughte before the kynge, whom as ſone as he behelde, ſaied vnto him. Dymnus, what haue I offended the, that thou ſhouldeſt thinke Philotas more worthy to be kynge of Macedon then I. At whyche wordes Dymnus became ſpeacheles, and caſtynge forthe a greate ſighe, turned his face from the kynges ſight, and fell downe deade.The kings wordes to Philotas The kynge called Philotas before him, and ſaied: this man whom thou here ſeeſt ſhould haue ſuffered death if it could haue bene proued that he hadde conceiled two dayes. the treaſon prepenſed againſte me.

with the whiche matter he chargeth Philotas, to whome (as he ſayth) he gaue knowledge immediatly: the more nere thou art about me, ſo muche more greater is thy offence, and the fault had bene more tollerable in hym then in the. Howbeit thou haſt a fauorable iudge, for if there be any thyng that cannot be excuſed, yet at the leſt it may be pardoned.Philotas aunſwere To this Philotas nothing abaſſhed (if the hart may be iudged by the coū
               tenaunce) made aunſwere, that Ciballinus brought hym a tale, the reporter wherof was ouer light of credit to be beleued, and that he feared leſt by the preſentyng of ſuche a matter whiche did ryſe vpon brabling betwixt two perſones of euill diſpoſiciō, he might haue bene laught to ſcorne: But afterwardes when he once knewe that Dymnus had ſlayne hymſelfe, he was clerely then reſolued no longer to haue prolonged the thyng. And ſo fallyng down before the kyng, be ſought him that he would rather haue reſpect to his life paſte, then to his fault whiche was only a conſealement and no acte done. It is hard to ſay, whether the kyng beleued hym, or grounded his diſpleaſure more deapely in his harte, neuertheles in token of pardon, gaue hym his hand, ſayeng: howe it appeared that thaccuſacion was rather miſcredited by hym, then conſealed of malice.Alexander called a coū
                  ſell, Notwithſtanding he called his counſell together, amonges whom Philotas was not admitted, but Nycomachus was brought in before thē, where he declared all ſuche matters as he before had ſhewed to the kyng. There was one Craterus in ſpeciall fauour with Alexander, whiche for thenuie he had to Philotas aduauncement, bare him alwaies grudge: Who knew very wel that the kyng had often bene diſpleaſed with Philotas, for the ouermuche auaunting of his good

ſeruice and valeaunt actes: but yet for all that in thoſe matters he was not ſuſpected of treaſon, but onelye noted of preſumption and arrogancie. Craterus thought that he could not haue a better occaſion to oppreſſe his enemy, by colouryng his priuate hatred with a pretence of dutie towardes his Prince. Woulde God (quod he) ye had taken our counſaile in the beginnyng of this matter: for if ye woulde nedes haue pardoned ye ſhoulde haue kept from his knowledge how muche he was in your daunger, rather then to haue brought him in feare of his life, wherby ye ſhal make him more mindefull of his owne perill, then of your goodneſſe. For he maie alwayes imagine your death, but you ſhal not be alwaies in caſe to pardō him. Let it neuer ſinke in your hart, that he which purpoſed ſo haynous a treaſon, woulde chaunge his purpoſe for the beneuolence of a pardon. you knowe well that ſuch as offende are often in diſpayre of mercy. And though he perchaunce either with repentaunce of his faulte, or remembraūce of your goodnes woulde chaunge his minde, yet I am ſure that his father Parmenio, generall capitaine of ſo greate an armye, and of ſo grounded aucthoritie amongeſt your ſouldiours (that is with theim in maner as your ſelfe) would be euill content to be in your debt for his ſonnes life. There be certaine benefites hatefull to men, and it is ſhame to confeſſe to haue deſerued death. Therefore I conclude, that he had rather it ſhoulde be thought you had done him wronge, thē that ye had geuen him his life. I can not ſee therefore, but you ſhall be enforced to deſtroye theim for your owne ſuertie. There be enemies enoughe remainynge yet vnconquered, againſt whom we be goyng: make your ſelfe ſure from your foes at home, ſo ſhal ye haue leſſe

nede to feare your enemies abrode.The opiniō of the coū
                  ſaile. Theſe were Craterus wordes, and the reſidue of the counſail were of opinion that Philotas woulde neuer haue conſeiled this conſpiracie, excepte he had bene either principall or priuye therunto. For thei thought there was no true man, or of honeſt hart, though he had bene none of the kynges familiers but one of his meane Seruauntes, hearinge ſo muche as Philotas hearde, but woulde forthwith haue opened the marter, yet he beynge the ſonne of Parmenio, the maſter of the kynges horſe, & of his priuie coūſaile, did not ſo much as the ſtraūger, which ſtraight waies made relation of that his brother had told him. And where as he pretended that the king was at no leaſure, that thei iudged to be done to thentente the accuſer ſhoulde not ſeke any other to whom he might vtter it. Wher as Nicomachus albeit he was bounde by his othe to the cōtrary, yet woulde he neuer reſt till he had diſcharged his conſcience. But Philotas when he cōſumed in maner the whole daie in ſport and paſtime with the Kynge, coulde not finde in his harte to caſte forthe a fewe wordes, ſpecially in a matter ſo muche concernyng the kynges ſafegarde. But admit (quod they) he had geuē no credite to the matter throughe the lightnes of the reporter, why ſhoulde he haue differred the accuſer .ii. daies, as thoughe he had beleued it. For if he had miſliked ye tale, he might haue diſmiſſed the partye. It was alſo alledged that euerye mans mynde muche miſgeueth him, when the matter concerneth his owne ieopardye. Muche more ought men to be credulous when it touched the ſuretie of a kynges perſon, in whiche eaſe it ought to be examined though it be of ſmall weight. Thei al therfore determined that Philotas ſhould be enforced to diſcloſe ye parteners

of the conſpiracie. The king cōmaundyng thē to kepe the matter ſecrete, departed, and to the entente no inglynge ſhoulde appeare of this newe counſaile, he cauſed it to be proclaimed that the armye ſhould ſet forwardes the next daye. The ſame night the Kynge called Philotas to a bācquete, with whom he vouchſafed not onelye to eate: but alſo familiarly to commen, notwithſtandynge he hadde before in the counſayle determined his deathe, after in the ſeconde watche of the night, Epheſtion, Craterus, and Erigonus whiche were of the Kynges counſaile, came priuelye into the courte without lyghte, and of the eſquiers, there came Perdicas, and Leonatus, by whom commaundement was geuen, that all ſuche as laye neare the Kynges lodgynge ſhoulde watche in harneys. By this time ſouldiours were appoynted to all the Paſſages, and horſemen were ſente to kepe the wayes, that no man ſhoulde paſſe priuelye to Parmenio, whiche then was gouernoure of Media with a greate power. Then Attaras came into the courte with .ccc. armed men,Attaras vnto whom there were appoincted ten of thoſe that had the charge of the kynges perſon, euerye one of theim accōpanied wyth ten Eſquiers, whiche were ſorted into diuers cōpanies to take the other conſpiratours. But Attaras with his .ccc. was ſent to Philotas lodging, where wyth fiftye of the hardieſt brake vp his chambre dore that was ſhutte againſte them. The reſidue were commaunded to beſet the houſe, leaſt he might eſcape by ſome ſecrete waye. Philotas, whether it were through the ſuertye of his owne conſcience, or through wearineſſe of ſuche trauayle of mynde, was in ſo profounde and deade ſleape, that Attaras brake in vpon him before he wyſte.
            
               
               Philotas taken.But at length when he was awaked and come to him ſelfe, perceiuing them about to binde him: he exclamed and ſaied: O Alexandre, the malice of mine enemies haue preuailed aboue thy mercye. Speakyng theſe wordes, thei couered his face, and brought him into the courte. The nexte daye the kynge gaue commaundement that certaine of the men of warre ſhoulde aſſē
               ble in harneys to the numbre of .vi.M. beſides ſlaues and raſcalles that filled full the courte, whiche beyng aſſembled together, the guarde compaſſed in Philotas with their bande, to the entent he ſhoulde not be eſpied of the people, vntill ſuch time as the king might ſpeake vnto them. For by an olde lawe of the Macedons the kynges in their owne perſons were wonte to enquire in matters of treaſō, yet could not the kinges aucthoritie preuayle to condempnation, except it were confirmed by the conſent of the men of warre. Therefore the bodye of Dymnus was firſt brought into the place (the moſte parte vnknowynge what he had done, or by what chaunce he was ſlayne.) Then came the Kynge forth to ſpeake vnto the multitude, whiche in his countenaunce declared the doloure of his hart, and the ſadneſſe of ſuch as were nere about him, cauſed vnto the reſte great expectation of the matter▪ He did caſte his eyes towardes thearth, and ſtode long aſtonied and in a muſe, but at length he plucked vp his ſpirites, & ſpake vnto them on this wiſe.The Oratiō of Alexandre againſte Philotas.
            
            
                By the treaſon of ſome men I was almoſte taken from you, but through the mercy and prouidence of the Gods, I am yet preſerued, your honourable preſence dothe conſtreine me more vehemently to be moued againſt thoſe traytours. Becauſe the onely comforte and fruite of my life is, that I remayne to geue thankes to ſo many noble men, to whō
                  
I am ſo muche bounden. With ſpeaking of theſe wordes the murmur of the multitude did interrupt his tale, and the teares did fall from their eyes. Then the king began againe his tale. Howe much more will you be moued when I ſhall ſhewe you the authours of ſo horrible a treaſon, the reherſal of whom I yet refrain, as one very loth to diſcouer their names. But I muſt ouercome the memory of my former fauour & vtter the conſpiracie of my vnnatural people, for how is it poſſible for me to hide ſo great a treaſon. Parmenio a man of that age ſo depely in my dette, through the moſt ample benefites both of me and my father, and whome I moſte eſtemed of all my frendes, is the captaine & contriuer of all this miſchief. His miniſter Philotas hath procured Lencolaus, Demetrius, and this Dymnus (whoſe body here you ſe) with other parteners of their fury to my deſtructiō. Whē he came to that point there roſe throughout ye multitude a great cherme of a murmur and complaint, ſuche as is wont to be amonges a nombre, and ſpecially of men of warre, when they are moued either with affection, or diſpleaſure. With that Nichomacus, Metrō, & Ciballinꝰ were brought furth, euery one of thē geuing in euidence that they had ſpoken afore. Yet appered it not by any mās tale that Philotas was priuy to that conſpiracy. But at the laſt whē the noyſe was ceſſed, & the witneſſes had ſaid all they could, the king proceded in this wiſe. Of what maner mynd thinke you was this man whiche hearing the whole report, could find in his hart to cōſeale ye matter the truth wherof is wel declared by the death of Dimnus. Ceballinus that reported an vncertaine tale, for ye triall therof was afrayed of no tormentes, & neuer delaied the leſt moment of time, vntill he had diſcharged

hym ſelf, inſomuche that he brake into the place where I was bathing, but Philotas only feared nothyng, he beleued nothing. O how greate a harte had this man whiche hauing knowledge of the daunger of his king, did neuer chaunge coūtenaunce, neither take ſo much paine as to heare out the tale of thaccuſer: but in this ſilence and conſealement there is treaſon hidden, and the gredy deſire he had to reigne, did driue him hedlōg to attempt extreme miſchief. His father is gouernour of Media, and heareth ſuche a ſtroke amonges the capitaines and men of warre thorowe myne aucthoritie, that he hopeth for a great deale more then he hath. And becauſe I am without children he eſtemeth me not. But Philotas is deceiued. I haue children, frendes, and kinſfolke amonges you. So long as you be in ſauegard, I ſhal not recken my ſelf without heires. Then did he reſite a letter that was taken, whiche Parmenio had writtē to his ſonnes Nicanour, & Philotas, wherein there appeared no greate proufe of any great treaſon intended.A letter. Theffect was this: Firſt take good hede to your ſelues, and then to thoſe that long to you, ſo ſhall we bring to paſſe that we haue purpoſed. Whiche letter the king enforced, ſayeng: it was writtē after ſuche a manner, that if it came to his ſonnes hā
                  des it might be perceiued of them that knewe the matter. And if it were caught by the way, it ſhuld deceyue them that knewe it not. Then proceded he: nowe wyll Philotas perhappes ſaye that when Dymnus named all that were partakers of his conſpiracy, he named not him: as for that it is no prouf of his innocency, but a token of his power and aucthoritie, becauſe he was ſpared of them that might beſt bewray hym, that confeſſing of them ſelues, durſt not yet ſpeake of hym. But what maner mā he hath bene, his lyfe doth ſhew.

He was fellowe and companion to Aniyntas my kynſman, whiche conſpired highe treaſon againſte my perſone in Macedon. He gaue his ſuſter in mariage, to Attalus, then whome I had neuer greater enemye. When by reaſon of olde frendſhip and familiaritie I wrote to hym of the title geuen to me by the oracle of Iupiter Hammon, he did not ſtick to aunſwere: that he was very glad that I was admitted into the nombre of Goddes, howbeit very ſory for thoſe that ſhould liue vnder ſuche o
                     •
                  e
                     •
                   as woulde ox
                     ••
                  de the ſtate of a man. Theſe were playne tokens that his harte was turned from me and that he 
                     •
                  pitedony glory. Whiche I kept cloſe in my hart ſo long as I myght. For I thought my bowels pulled from me, if I ſhould make a litle ſtore of them, for whome, I had done ſo muche. But, now it is not their wordes that muſt be puniſhed for the raſhenes of their tōgues is turned to ſwordes, whiche (if ye beleue me) Philotas hath wh
                     •
                  tted to my deſtruction. Whome if I ſhould ſuffer to eſcape, alas my ſouldiers whether ſhould I go? to whom ſhould I commit my perſon? He was the man that I made generall of my horſemen of the greateſt part of myne army & of all the noble yong gentlemen. To his trouth & fidelitie haue I committed my ſaueguarde, my truſte, & victory. His father did I preſerue vnto the ſame eſtate, wherunto you aduaunced me. Media then whiche there is not a richer countrey, with many thouſandes of your frendes and fellowes I haue put vnder his gouernaunce, and aucthoritie. Where I truſted of moſte ſurty, there found I moſte perill. Howe muche more happy had I bene to haue died in battell, and rather ſlayne of myne enemies, then thus betrayed of my ſubiectes. For now being ſaued frō the daungers that I moſte feared, I haue fallen into thoſe that I ought

to haue doubted leſt. You haue bene wont often times to warne me that I ſhould regard my ſurtie. It is you that may make me ſure of that that you coūſeil me. To your handes & to your ſuccour I fle. I would not liue though I might agaīſt your willes, & though you wold yet can I not, except I be deliuered from theſe my enemies. Hereupon Philotas was brought furth in an old garment, his hādes bound behind his back. It wel appeared how much this miſerable ſight moued thē whiche late before enuied him. The daye before they ſawe him generall of the horſemē, they knew that he was at ſupper with the king, & ſodainly they ſawe him both priſoner, bound like a thefe, & alſo cōdempned to dye. So did it pity their hartes to cōſider how Parmenio ſo noble a mā, ſo great a captain, which late hauing loſt two of his ſonnes, Hector, & Nicanor, ſhuld be put to anſwer abſent, with the third ſonne, whō euell fortune had left him. The multitude being thus enclined to pitye. Amintas one of the kinges officers,Amyntas tale. with a cruel tale ſet them all againſt the priſoner, we be all (qd he) betrayed to the barbarous naciōs, none of vs ſhal returne home to his coūtrey, wife nor frēdes, but as a maymed body without an head without honour, without fame, in a ſtraunge countrey, ſhalbe a mocking ſtock to our enemies. His tale was nothing pleaſaūt to ye king, becauſe he put the ſouldiers in remēbraunce of their wifes & coūtrey, wherby he thought they would be the leſſe willing to go forwardes in his warres. There was one Cenus which though he had maried the ſuſter of Philotas,Cenus. yet did he more extremely 
                     ••
                  uay againſte hym then any other, calling hym traitour againſt his kyng, to his countrey & to the whole army. And therupō toke vp a ſtone that by chaunce laye at his feete, to haue

caſt at Philotas; which he dyd (as ſome thought) to thende he might rid him from racking. But the king kepte backe his hand, & ſaid yt the priſoner ſhould haue libertie to ſpeake for him ſelf, & would not ſuffre him to be cōdempned otherwiſe. Then Philotas being admitted to ſpeak, were it through ye cōſcience of his offence, or through the greatnes of his perill, as a mā aſtonied, and beſides him ſelf, durſte neither loke vp nor ſpeake, but burſte out into teares. Wherupon his hart fainted, and he ſwowned downe vpon thoſe that ledde him But afterwardes when he had wiped his eyes, and by little and little recouered his hart, and tonge, he made countenaunce to ſpeake. What tyme the kinge beheld hym and ſaid. The Macedons ſhalbe thy iudges. I woulde knowe therefore whither thou wilt ſpeake vnto them in thy countrey language or not, to whom Philotas aunſwered? There be diuers nacions here beſides the Macedons, which as I truſt ſhall perceiue my wordes the better. If I vſe the ſame language that you did, bicauſe the moe myght vnderſtand your tale. Then ſaid the kinge marke howe this man hath his owne Countrey tonge in hatred, for ther is none but he that will dyſdaine to ſpeake it: but let him ſay what he will ſo long as you remembre, that he not onely diſdayneth our cuſtumes but alſo our language. And with yt word the king departed from thaſſemble. Then ſaied Philotas.The aunſwere of Philotas. It is eaſy for an innoſent to finde words to ſpeake, but it is very hard for a mā in miſery to keape a temperaunce in his tale. Thus ſtandyng betwixt a cleare cōſcience & moſt vnhappie fortune. I know not in what wiſe I ſhal ſatiſfie my ſelf, & the time both togither. For he yt might beſte haue iudged my cauſe is gone, what ye cauſe is he would not here me, I cannot

well imagen, ſith vpon the matter heard, it lieth onely in his hādes both to diſcharge, & cōdemne me. For the matter not heard, he can not acquite me beyng abſent, ſince he cōdēpned me whē he was here preſēt. But not withſtanding that the defence of a priſoner is not only ſuperfluous, but alſo hatefull, which ſemeth not to enforme, but to reproue the iudge. Yet wil I not forſake my ſelf, nor ſo do, that I ſhal ſeme cōdempned by mine owne defaulte. I ſe not of what treaſon I ſhoulde be gilty, emong the cōſpiratours no man named me. Nichomacus ſaied nothing of me. Ceballinus could not tel more of me then he heard. And yet doth the king beleue that I ſhould be head of this conſpiracye. Was it poſſible that Dymnus ſhould forget to name him that was chefe? or is it likely that he wold haue ouerſlipped me, whē the names of the conſpirators were demaunded of him? he would rather haue named me falſely to alure the yong man the ſoner to his opinion, yet when he tolde ye matter priuely to Nichomacas, which he beleued verilye would haue kept it ſecrede, namyng hym ſelfe and all the reſt, of me only he made no mencion: wherin it can not be gathered: that he omitted me, for bicauſe he woulde haue ſpared me. I 
                     •
                  raye you my felowes if no man had come to me, no
                     •
                  ge
                     ••
                  en me knowledge of the matter, ſhould I this day haue bene put to anſwere, whē no man could haue accuſed me? But beit that Dimnus were aliue & wold ſpare me, what thinke you by the other? would thei cōfeſſe of thēſelues, & forbeare me aduerſitie as ſubiecte to manye miſeries. An offender whē he is puniſhed him ſelf, vſeth not to kepe ſilence to ſpare another man. Comonlye he that goeth to death wil ſpare no man nor no mā wil ſpare him yt is ready to dye, & yet ſo many as be giltye & put to tormentes,

wil there none cōfeſſe the trueth? But now I muſt aunſwere to the point yt was offence, if there were any. Why did I cōceile treaſō? why did I heare it with ſo ſmall regarde? this fault, if it were a faulte, thou haſt pardoned me O Alexander wherſoeuer thou a
                     •
                  t, by geuing me thy hand, & bidding me to thy banc
                     •
                  uet in token of atonement. If thou didſt beleue me, I am clere. If thou forgaueſt me, I am quitte. Stand at the leaſt to thine owne iudgemēt. Alas what haue I done ſīce this laſte nyghte▪ I wente from thy bourde? What newe reporte hathe chaunged thy mynde?
               I reſted in a ſound ſlepe, when mine enemies by their bindyng waked me that was ſleapyng in myne, owne miſfortune? Offēders whē thei can not ſlepe through their vnquiet coſcience are wont to be vexed with rages, not onely when their miſchiefe is intended, but alſo whē it is ended. But this 
                     •
                  uietnes came to me firſt throughe mine owne innocencye, and then by the kinges pardon. I feared not that others cruel
                     •
                  y, ſhoulde take more place then his mercye. But leaſt he ſhoulde forthinke that he beleued me, ye ſhall vnderſtande that the matter was firſte ſhewed me by a light felow, who could not bring any witnes or warāt of his tale, which if I had diſcloſed, ſhould haue put many men to trouble. O vnhappy man. I thought mine eares had bene ſeduced, with the brabblemētes of two boggerers, and I ſuſpected the trouth of the partie, becauſe he did not vtter the matter him ſelfe, but procured his brother to do it. I was in feare that the one ſhoulde haue denied that euer he ſhewed anye ſuche matter to the other, and then ſhoulde I haue ſeamed to procure much trouble to manye of the Kynges frendes.
               So that where I offended none, I haue found ſome

more deſirous to procure my death then to ſaue my lief What hatred ſuppoſe ye ſhuld I haue gotten if I had accuſed innocents? But Dymnus ſlew him ſelf? could I therefore deuyne afore that he would ſo do? no ſurely Thus his death being the thing that only tried thaccuſatyon trewe, could not moue me to vtter it being preuēted by an other. And if I had bene cōſpiratour with Dymnus of ſo great a treaſon: It is not like that I would haue dyſſimuled by the ſpace of two daies after it was diſcouered? As for Ceballinus it had bene ſmal maſtery to haue diſpatched him out of ye way. After the thing dyſcloſed wherefore ſhould I haue delayed the matter? I entred into the kings chambre alone hauing weapon about me, whye deferred I my purpoſe? durſt I not attempt it with out Dymnus? no parchaunce ye wyll ſaye, bicauſe he was the cheife conſpirator howe then ſtandeth it to gither, that I ſhould be hys vnderling, which did couet to be king of Macedon? which of you al hath bene corrupte of me wyth bribes, what capitaine, what officer haue I made of aboue other? It is laide to my charge that I abhorre the ſpeakinge of my countrey language, and that I diſdaine the manners of the Macedons. What? do I ſo diſpiſe the kyngdome that I couet? Ye knowe well that our naturall tounge through the conuerſacion of ſtraung nacions is gonne out of vre, aſ wel we that be victorers as they that be ſubdued muſt learne a newe language. But ſuerly theſe things make no more againſt me thē dyd the treaſon that Amintas the ſonne of Pardycas intended agaynſte the Kynge. Wyth whom I had frendſhyp I wyll not deny, excepte ye wyll make it a thinge vnlawfull to loue the kynges brother. But 
                     •
                  ythens it was our dutie to honor a mā called to ye degre

of fortune I beſech you am I gilty bicauſe I coulde not geſſe before that he would offend. Is the lawe ſo yt the frends of offenders muſt ſuffre being innocents? If that be reaſon why liue I ſo longe? if it be no reaſō why am I cōdempned to die? But then I wrot that I had pietie of thoſe that ſhould liue vnder ſuch a one as beleued him ſelfe the Sonne of Iupiter. O faithfull fendſhip and daungerous libertie of true counſel, that deceiued me, that compelled me not to hide yt I thought I confeſſe that I wrote ſo to the kinge but not of the king. I dyd it not for ſpite, but for my duities ſake. Mee thought it more meter for Alexander to haue knowledged the kindred of Iupiter wyth ſilence, then to haue made auannt therof with vaine boſting. But forbicauſe the truth of goddes Oracle is certeine, lette god be witnes in my cauſe. Retaine me in priſon till ye may know Iupiters aunſwere concerning this cō
                  ſpiraſie. And in the meane ſeaſon he that hath vouchſaued our kynge to be his ſonne, will ſuffre none of them that haue cōſpired againſte his ofſpring to be vnknown If you ſuppoſe tormentes more certaine then Oracles I wil not deſire to be ſaued from them in triall of the truth. There is an olde vſage that ſuch as be put to aunſwere vpon life & death are wont to bring there parents and kinſfolks before you. Two brothers of late haue I loſte, my father neither I can bringe forth, nor dare cal for, bicauſe he is accuſed of this treaſon likewiſe. Is it a ſmall thing for him that was the father of many children, and hauing but one ſonne leſt him in whom to take pleaſure, not only to loſe him, but alſo to leaſe his owne life with him? Therfore my moſt dere father ſhalt thou dye for me, & with me it is I that take thy liefe from the. It is I that ende thyne olde

dayes. Why diddeſt thou beget me vnhappy wretch in hatred of the gods? to take ſuch frute by me, as is prepared for the. I am in doubt whether my youth be more vnhappy or thy age. For I in the very floure of myne yeres am wedded vp▪ & there cutioner ſhall bereue the thy life. Whiche if fortune would haue ſuffred to continew, yet nature would haue aſked or it had bene lōg. The remēbraunce of my father doth put me in mynd, how loth & timerous that I ought to haue bene in reporting of tales. For when my father was enfourmed that Philip the phiſiciō had prepared poyſon for ye king, he wrote a letter to warne the king, that he ſhould not receiue the medicine, that his phiſicion had prepared: was my father beleued? was his letter of any aucthoritie? I my ſelf when I haue reported ſuch thinges as I hard, how often haue I bene ſhaken of with a check for my light belefe, ſo that when we tel thinges we are hated, & whē we hold our peace, we are ſuſpected: what would you haue vs do? Then one of the company that ſtode by, cried out, yt none ought to be traitours to them that put them in truſt. Thou ſaieſt well (qd Philotas) whoſoeuer thou art. And therfore if I haue done treaſon. I require no reſpect of my paine. And here will I make an end of ſpeaking, becauſe my laſt wordes ſeme tedious to your eares.
            
             And as he was ſpeaking ſo, his keapers led him away. There was amōges the captaines one Belon,Belons euidence, a hardy man, but very rude of al honeſt maner & ciuilitie, who being an old ſouldier, was promoted frō lowe eſtate to the rowme of a captain. This Belon preſuming vpon a foliſhe audacitie (when all others had done) began to tell thē: that whē diuers had taken vp their lodginges in the campe, how they were thurſt out by the ſeruauntes of Philotas, which would

lay their baggage, where other mē were placed before. And how all the ſtreates were ful of his wagons, ladē with gold and ſiluer. He added further that Philotas would ſuffre none to lodge nere him, but alwayes appointed certaine to wayte whiles he ſtept, which ſhould voyde al men alowf to thintēt he ſhould not be diſquieted with any noyſe, not ſo much for wakening of him. as for his diſeaſing. And howe he was ſo hault that he diſpiſed the plaine men of Phrigia, and Paphlagonia, & being a Macedō borne, would not be aſhamed to here men of his owne nacion by an interpreter. And where as Philotas had before moued to haue the oracle of Iupiter enquired of, he ſayd it was ment therby to make God a lier, for knowledging Alexāder, to be his ſonne, as though any man ſhould enuie the king for that title whiche the goddes had geuen him. But why (qd he) did he not aſke counſel of Iupiter afore he did offend, For nowe he would haue vs ſend for an oracle, that in the meane ſeaſon his father which ruleth in Media might raiſe a power vp, & with the money yt he hath in cuſtody might aſſemble diſperat perſones to the felowſhip of his miſchief. Neuertheles we ſhal (qd he) ſend to Iupiter, not to enquire of any thing towching the matter, but to geue him thankes, & do him ſacrifice, for the preſeruacion of ſo good a king. Then all the cōpany was moued, and amonges the kinges houſhold there began a crye that the traytour ſhoulde be rent in peaces. Whiche thyng Philotas (who feared more greuous punyſhement) was content to heare. The kyng returnyng into the preaſe, deferred the counſell till the next day, to thintēt to cōmit Philotas either to priſon there to be racked, or els in the meane ſeaſon to get further knowledge of thinges. And albeit, it drue towardes

night yet commaunded he hys counſell to be called together. Some of them thought it beſt Philotas ſhould be ſtoned to death after the Macedōs lawes. Epheſtiō Craterus, and Cenus determined to haue the trouth tried by tormentes, and then they which counſeled the contrary turned to their opynion. Therfore when the counſel was broken vp. Epheſtion, with craterus and Cenus aroſe to take Philotas thexaminacion. The king called Craterus vnto him, and commauding the reſt to auoide, had ſecret cōmuinicacion with him in the innermoſte parte of his lodging, theffect wherof came not to any mans knowledg. And their taried tyll the night was farre paſſed,Philotas. 
                     •
                  acked to here thend of thexaminaciō The executyoners ſet forth al ſortes of cruel torments in the ſight of Philotas who of his own mind ſaid vnto them. Why deferre you to kill ſuch one as hath confeſſed hym ſelfe the kings enemy and a traitour? what nedeth more examinacion? It was myne intent, It was my wil. Craterꝰ mind was that whatſoeuer was confeſſed before, ſhould be cōfeſſed by Philotas againe vpon the racke. Whych whiles he was taken vp. hys eyes bounden, and ſpoyled of his clothes, cried out vpon the lawe of nature, and the gods of the countrey. But al was in vaine to their death eares. Fynally as a condempned man, he was torne wyth moſte extreame torments by his enemies, that wronge him ſore for the kinges pleaſure. And notwithſtanding that at the firſt fire on the one ſide, and ſcourges on thother were miniſtred vnto him, more to payne him then for any examinacion ſake, yet he had powre of him ſelf to refraine both from ſpeaking and groning. But after that hys body beganne to be bolne with ſtripes, & that he coulde not abide the ſcourges that perſed vnto the bare bones

Then he promiſed if they would torment him no more, he would confeſſe whatſoeuer they ſhoulde require to know. But firſt he would haue them ſwere by the life of Alexander, that thei ſhoulde ceſſe their tormentes, & ſet the racke aſide. The which thing obteyned, he ſaied to Craterus: Tell me what wil ye haue me to cōfeſſe? Therat Craterus was diſpleaſed, thinkinge by thoſe wordes yt he had mocked him,The confeſſion or Philotas. & cauſed his tormentes to be renued. Then Philotas beſought him to haue a time of reſpite, whiles he might take his breath, & then he would vtter all that euer he knewe. In the meane ſeaſon, the chefe of the men at armes, & eſpecially ſuch as were nere to Parmenio in any degre of kinred, after that the fame had bruted that Philotas was tormē
               ted, fearing the Macedōs law, wherin it was ordeined that the kinſ
                  •
               olke of ſuche as had done treaſō againſt the king, ſhould be put to death wt the traitors: Some ſlew them ſelues, ſome fled into wilde moūtaines, and waiſt wilderneſſes, & great dreade & feare fell through all the hoſt, vntil ſuch time as the king hauing knowlege of that vprore, made proclamation yt he would pardon the rigour of the lawe to the kinſfolke of the traitours. But in cōcluſion Philotas made this cōfeſſion, whether it were to deliuer him ſelf out of paine, by accuſyng him ſelf falſly or not it is doubted. Seing it is cōmunely ſene, that both ſuch as truely cōfeſſe, & falſly denye, come all to one ende. You are not ignoraunt (quod he) how familier my father was wt Egilocus. I meane the ſame that was ſlaine in the feild: he was the cauſe of all our miſchiefe: For when the kyng toke vpō him the title of Iupiters ſonne, he diſdained therat. Shal we knowlege him (quod he) to be our kyng yt taketh ſcorne that Phillip was his father? We are al vndone

if we can ſuffer this. He doth not onelye deſpiſe men, but ye Gods alſo, which wil be reputed a God. We haue loſt Alexander, we haue loſt our kyng. We are fallen to preſumption, nether tollerable to the Gods with whom he cōpareth, neither to men whom he deſpiſeth. Haue we with our bloud made him a god, which deſpiſeth vs which diſdayneth to be in the numbre of men? Truſt me yt we alſo if we be men ſhall be adopted likewiſe of the Gods. Who hath reuēged the deathes of Alexādre his great grandfather, or of Archilaus or Perdicas? But this man (quod he) hath forgeuen thē that ſlewe his father. Theſe were the wordes yt Egilocus ſpake about ſupper time, and on the morowe early my father ſent for me, who was heauy and ſawe me ſadde, for we both had heard that, which made vs out of quiet. Therefore to proue whether he babled thoſe woordes through exceſſe of wine, or of an aduiſed purpoſe cōceiued before, we thought good to ſend for him, & ſekyng occaſion of the ſame cōmunicatiō he of his own mind ſaid further: that if we durſt vndertake the aduenture, he would not ſhrynke from vs, or if our hartes ſerued not he would kepe our counſayle. Yet ſo long as Darius was liuyng my father thought all the matter out of time becauſe the death of Alexāder ſhould be to the auaile of our enemies, and not of our ſelues. But Darius once ridde out of the waye, then he that could deſtroy the kynge ſhould obtaine the empire of Aſia, and all the orient for his reward, whiche coūſaile beyng approued, faieth and trouth was geuen therupon. But concernyng Dimnus I know nothing. When he had confeſſed all thys matter, I perceyue (quod he) that it dothe not auayle me that I am vtterlye gilties of this treaſon. Then thei renued his tormentes againe, and

ſo beate his face and his eyes with the troncheons of their ſpeares, vntil they enforced him, not onely to cō
               feſſe of him ſelfe, but alſo to ſhewe the circumſtaunces of the whole treaſon prepēced.The ſecōde cōfeſſion of Philotas. Becauſe (quod he) it ſemed yt the king would ſoiourne long among the Bactriās, I was afrayed leaſt my father that had ſo greate a power in his handes, and the keping of ſo much treaſure, (beyng .lxx. yere of age) ſhould happe to die in the meane ſeaſon, & thē being diſarmed of ſo great a ſtrē
               gth, ſhould not get oportunitie to ſlea the kyng. Wherfore I haſted the matter, while the praye was in hand. Thus diſcouered he the conſpiracye, wherof if thei beleued his father to be aucthour, he ſaied for his trial he refuſed not to be tormented againe, though it were to greuous for him to endure. The officers then whiſperyng together thought the examination to be ſufficient, returned therwithall to the Kynge, whiche on the morow cauſed al the cōfeſſion there to be opēly recited before Philotas, whō he cauſed to be led into the place, becauſe he was not able to go, where he cōfeſſed all the matter againe. Then Demetrius was brought forth,Demetrius whiche was counted the greateſt doer in this conſpiracye next to Philotas. But he with great proteſtatiō and incredible ſloutenes both of harte & coūtenaunce, denyed that he euer intended any euill againſt ye king, and for his triall deſiered to be tormented. Then Philotas caſtyng his eyes about,Calis ſpied one Calis ſtanding by, and made a ſygne to him to draw nere. Who being abaſhed, & refuſing to come forwards. Wilt thou (quod he) ſuffer Demetrius to lye, & me to be ſtrayned again. With thoſe words Calis became ſpeachles, & chaūged color. Thē the Macedōs begā to ſuſpect yt he wold accuſe innocēt, bicauſe ye ſame Calis was nether named by

Nichomacus, nor by Philotas him ſelfe in his tormentes. But finallye Philotas before the kinges officers ſtanding therabout, cōfeſſed that all the treaſon was conſpired by him ſelf & Demetrius. Wherfore as many as were appeached by Nichomacus, vpon a tokē geuen,Philotas put to death were ſtoned to death according to the Macedons lawe. Thus was Alexander deliuered frō great peril not only of his life, but alſo of his ſurety. For Parmenio and Philotas, beyng of ſuche power▪ if thei had not openly bene found culpable, coulde not haue bene condempned without the great grudge of the armye. So long therfore as Philotas as denied the thing, the matter ſemed doubtfull, and many men thought him cruellye handled. But after he hadde confeſſed the circumſtaunces, no man, not ſo muche as his neare frendes toke any pitye of him.
         
         
            
            The ſeuenth boke of Quintus Curtius of the actes of the great Alexander Kyng of Macedon.
            
               LIke as the men of warre thought Philotas iuſtly put to death, his offence beyng freſh in memorie, euen ſo after he was gone, whō thei before hated, their enuye was turned to pitie. The noblenes of the yong man moued theim muche, ſo did the remēbraunce of the olde yeres and deſolatiō of his father. He was the firſte that made the waye open for Alexander into Aſia, alwaies partaker of his perils, as he whiche in the warres was euer captayne of his vowarde, chiefe a counſaile with the kynge his father, and ſo truſty to Alexander him ſelfe, that in oppreſſing of Attalus his enemye, he would vſe no other mans ſeruice. The remembraunce of theſe thinges was ripe among al the ſouldiours, & ſedicious wordes came to the kinges eares, who being litle moued therwith, did wiſely with trauaile auoide the euel occaſiōs cōming of idlenes. Wherfore he made it ſo be proclaimed that all men ſhould be in redines before the court gate, where thei being once aſſembled, he came for
                  •
               h to ſpeake vnto thē. And as it was before deuiſed, required the bande of the Agrians to bring forth one Alexander Linceſtes, whiche long before Philotas.Alexander Linceſtes had cō
               ſpired the kinges death. This mā being accuſed of two witneſſes (as afore is ſaid) had remained in priſon .iii. yeres together. It was alſo proued yt he was of counſell with Pāſanias in the killing of king Phillip. But becauſe he ſaluted firſt Alexāder by the name of king, his puniſhement was deferred, rather then his offēce

forgeuē. For at the interceſſiō of Antipater his father in law, the king had reſpected his iuſt indignation for the time. But the old feſtred ſore brake out againe, and the cōſideration of his perill preſent, renued the remē
               braunce of that yt was paſſed. Therefore when he was brought forth of pryſon, & commaunded to ſaye for him ſelfe, albeit he had .iii. yeres leaſure to deuiſe his aunſwere, yet ſtammeryng and tremblinge coulde bringe forth but little of that whiche he purpoſed to ſaie, & finally both his memory and his harte failed him. Wherfore there was none that doubted, but that his fearfulnes was a token of a gilty conſcience, and no default of memory, ſo that whiles he was ſtaggering and hacking in his tale, they that ſtode next thruſt him through with their pikes, whoſe bodye conueied out of the place the kinge commaunded Amintas and Simmannas to be brought forth,Amintas & Simmannas brought to iudgement. for Palemon their yongeſt brother after he had knowledge of Philotas torment fledde away. Of al Philotas frēdes, theſe .ii. were moſt deare vnto him, & through his commendation, aduaunced to high & honorable offices. The kinge remēbryng wyth what earneſtnes and labour Philotas had brought thē into his fauour, doubted not but they wer priuy to this laſt cōſpiracy. And therupon he declared to the multitude,Alexāders accuſatiō againſt them that he had occaſiō of ſuſpectiō againſt thoſe mē long agoe by his mothers letters, wherby he had warning to beware of thē, and yt now fearing the ſequel of worſer incōueniences, had made thē ſure, wherunto he was enforced by apparaūt preſūptions. Firſt he ſaied yt day before Philotas treaſon came to light, it was well knowen yt they had much cōference wt him in ſecrete, & alſo their brother which fled away whē Philotas was on yt racke, had declared by the abſēting of him ſelf the

cauſe of his fliyng. He ſhewed alſo that of late, cōtrary to their accuſtomed maner of waiting, without any cauſe mouing thē therunto, but only by pretence of diligence preaſed next about the king of all other, wherat marueilyng that they would furniſh a roume wherunto thei were not appointed, became ſo in doubt of their cluſtering together, that he returned into the traine of the gētlemen yt folowed him. He declared beſides that when Antiphanes clarke of the ſtable,Antiphanes the daye before Philotas treaſō came to light, according to his accuſtomable maner, gaue knowlege to Amintas yt he ſhould deliuer of his horſe to ſuch as had loſte their owne: He proudly aunſwered again, that except he would cōtent him ſelfe, he ſhould know ſhortly what maner of man he was. Which violence of tonge, & raſhnes of wordes bulked out (quod he) was nothing els but a declaratiō & token of his traiterous hart. Theſe thinges beyng true (he ſaied) thei had no leſſe deſerued thē Philotas, and if they were otherwiſe, he deſired thei might aunſwere vnto the pointes. Therupon Antiphanes was brought in to geue euidence of the horſe not deliuered and of his proud aunſwere geuē wt threatening. Whē Amintas had gottē libertie to ſpeake, he deſired of the king, yt whiles they anſwered for thē ſelues, their bādes might be loſed, which thing obtayned, he made ſuite to haue his garment caſt vpō him.Thanſwer of Amintas Which Alexander not only graūted, but willed alſo ſuch a ſpere to be deliuerd to his handes as other eſquires vſed. When he had receiued the ſame, he eſchued a little the place where the corps of Linceſtes laye, & ſaied in this wiſe. Whatſoeuer ſhall become of vs (ſir kyng) we muſte thinke if our chaunce be good, ye ſame to procede of your fauour

& if it be yil, we muſt iudge ye fault to be in our fortune ſeinge you ſuffer vs to pleade our cauſe without preiudice, ſetting our mindes free, & our bodies at large, with ye ſame apparel reſtored vs, wherin we were wōte to folow you. Our cauſe is ſuche that we cā not doubt of it, and we are paſſed the feare of fortune. Therfore with your fauoure I wil aunſwere firſt thoſe poyntes wherwith you charged vs laſte. We knowe moſt aſſuredly that we be innocent of any kind of wordes ſpokē to the derogation of your maieſtie. And durſt affirme that you had ouercome all enuy of men, but that peraduenture you would thinke that I wente aboute wyth faire wordes to excuſe thinges that haue bene maliciouſly ſpoken. Though it were ſo that wordes ſometime did eſcape vs, either when we were fainte, or weried in marchyng, haſardyng our ſelues in fightynge, or elles when we were ſicke, or dreſſyng of our woūdes, our honeſt doynges otherwiſe do deſerue, yt ye ſhoulde rather impute the ſame to the time, then to any euil diſpoſitiō in vs. For it is commenly ſene where any thing chaū
               ceth amiſſe, al mē in maner become gilty of this fault. We do violence ſometime to our owne bodies whiche we hate not. Yea, the comming of the fathers vnto the children ſometime is bothe vngratefull, and alſo hateful. But on the other ſide, whē we receiue rewardes or giftes, or whē we come ladē home with ſpoyle, who can the ſtay vs? who cā reſtraine our chearefulnes? or who cā reſiſt our courage in fighting? The nature of mā is nether to kepe meaſure in diſpleaſure, nor in gladnes. Thus are we driuē by the violēce of affectiō, ſometime wt pitie, & ſometime with fury, as our preſēt deſire doth gouern vs. One while we are in mind to paſſe through India as far as the Occeā ſea, & by & by the memory of our

wiues, children, and countrey, call vs backe agayne, & dothe alter our purpoſe. But as ſone as the trumpet bloweth, ſtraight al theſe imaginations do paſſe away, and euerye man then runneth into his araye, and reuenge vpon their enemies, the diſpleaſures thei haue conceiued within their lodgynges. I woulde Philotas had offended but onelye in wordes, but paſſynge ouer that, I will returne to the other poynte wherof we be accuſed. The frendſhip yt was betwixt Philotas & vs. I will not onely not denye, but alſo confeſſe that we did couet the ſame, & receiued therby great cōmoditye. Do you maruaile that we did honoure and eſteme the Sonne of Parmenio, whom you did choſe to be next about your perſone, and did auaunce aboue all other your frēdes? you your ſelf (if it pleaſe you to heare the trueth) are the cauſe of this our peryl. What other thing moued vs to couet Philotas frendſhyppe, then that wee deſired to pleaſe you. By his preferment we were aduaūced to that degree of your fauour. He ſtode in ſuch caſe wyth you, that it behoued vs as well to ſue for his beneuolence, as to feare to get his diſpleaſure. Haue not we ſworne that we ſhoulde repute your enemies our enemies? and honoure your frendes as our owne? Should we haue bene found diſobediēt in thys bonde of our dutie? and ſpecially towardes him, whom ye did preferre aboue al mē. If this be a fault, ye haue fewe innocentes, or ſurely none at all. All men deſired to be Philotas frendes, but all that did couet coulde not be accepted. So if ye will make no difference betwene the parteners of his treaſon, and ſuche as were his frendes, then ſo many be offenders as would haue bene his frendes. What preſūption haue you now that we ſhoulde offende? I thinke becauſe yeſterday Philotas

talked wt vs familiarly alone. Therof I cā not excuſe my ſelfe, if yeſterday I chaūged any thing of mine accuſtomed maner & liuyng, but if ſo be we vſed euery day to do the like, then cuſtome muſt nedes make it to be none offēce. But it may be ſaid the horſes were not deliuered to Antiphanes? and the day before Philotas was detected, this matter was betwene Antiphanes & me, for which cauſe if he wold make me to be ſuſpected becauſe I deliuered him not my horſes that day. There ſhal riſe a doubtfull plee betwene the denier & the demaūder, ſauing that his cauſe is better that kepeth ſtil his owne, thē his that requireth another mans. I had ten horſes, of ye which Antiphanes had diſtributed .viii to ſuche as had loſte their owne, ſo there remained behind onely two, which whē he would proudly, & wrongfully haue taken away. I was enforced to kepe thē ſtil, except I would haue ſerued on fote. I can not denye but this cōmunicatiō was had betwene a man of a fre ſtomake, & a perſon of a vile nature, which could do no maner ſeruice, but take away mēs horſes, & geue thē to other. What miſchef is this, yt at one time I muſt purge my ſelfe both to Alexander and to Antiphanes. But to the other poynte that your mother did write to you of vs, as of your enemies. I would god ſhe had more wiſely bene careful of hir ſonnes ſafegarde, thē doubtfully imagined ſuch fained figures. Why doth ſhe not alſo expreſſe ye cauſe of hir feare? Beſides ſhe ſheweth not hir aucthour, nor yet ſignifieth one word wherby ſhe was moued to write to you ſuche letters of feare. O wretched eſtate of mine, whiche ſtandeth in leſſe haſarde to howe my peace, thē to ſpeake. Yet howſoeuer the matter ſhall paſſe. I had rather mine excuſe ſhoulde diſpleaſe you, then my cauſe. If you remembre when ye

ſente me to fetche newe ſouldiours out of Macedon, ye ſhewed me that in your mothers houſe there lurked many luſty yong gētlemen, wherfore ye cōmaūded me that in executing your cōmiſſiō I ſhould ſpare none, but brynge with me perforce all ſuche as refuſed the warres. Whyche thynge I did, and fulfilled your will therin more largelye then was expedient for me. For I brought vnto you Gorgeas, Herateus, and Gorgata, whiche nowe miniſter vnto you right acceptable ſeruice. What creature therfore is more wretched thē I? which if I had not fulfilled your will, ſhould rightfully haue ſuffered, and nowe peryſhe becauſe I obeyed you. For truely there was none other cauſe that moued your Mother to perſecute vs, then that we preferred your vtilitie before a womans fauoure. I brought vnto you of Macedons .vi.M. footemen. & .viii. hūdred horſemen, of the which, the more part woulde not haue folowed me. If I hadde releaſed ſuche as woulde not haue come. It is reaſon therefore, that in as muche as your mother is diſpleaſed wyth vs for your cauſe, that ye mitigate her, in whoſe diſpleaſure ye haue put vs. Whiles Amyntas was thus pleadynge his cauſe, thei yt had purſued his brother Palemon (of whō we ſpake before) came leadyng him bounde into the place.Palemon. Then the rage of the people could ſcareſly be pacified, but as the maner was in ſuch cauſes, thei would haue ſtoned Palemon to deathe. Yet he boldelye ſpake to theim and ſaied. I deſire no fauoure for my ſelfe, ſo that my fliynge be not hurteful to the innocency of my brethrē, whom if ye can not thinke cleare, let the faulte be layed to me. For their matter appeareth the better, becauſe I whyche fled awaye am ſuſpected.
            Aſſone as he had ſpokē theſe wordes, the whole aſſēble

were inclined in his fauoure. and reſolued to teares, beyng ſo ſodainly cōtrary turned, that now they were al conuerted on his parte, whiche a litle before were al againſt him. He was in the prime ſtoure of his youth, & through other mens feare, fled away amōgeſt thoſe horſemen, which were amaſed at Philotas tormentes. His cōpanye had left him behinde, & whiles he was in doubte whether he might turne againe, or fle further forwardes, was taken by theim whiche purſued after him. He thē began to wepe, and beate him ſelfe about the face, not ſo much lamentyng his owne chaūce, as ye caſe of his brethren beyng in daūger for his cauſe, with which his behauour he moued the kyng, and al the cō
               pany there preſent. Onely his brother Amintas coulde not be pacified, but behelde him with a fierce countenaunce, & ſaied: O madde creature, then oughteſt thou to haue wept, when thou diddeſt put thy ſpores to thy horſe, as a traitour to thy brethren, and a companion of traitours. Thou wretche, whether & from whence dideſt thou flye? Thou haſt now brought to paſſe yt bothe I am thought worthy of death, & alſo muſt become an accuſer of other. Palemon therupō confeſſed him ſelfe to haue offended in that pointe, but more greuouſly againſt his brethren, then towardes him ſelfe. Thē the multitude coulde not abſtaine from weaping & ſhowting, being tokens wherby men in an aſſēble are wont to declare their affections, and with one conſent they cried all to the kyng with one voyce, yt he woulde ſpare innocentes, and men of ſeruice, his frendes alſo vpon that occaſion did riſe, and with wepyng eyes required the kynge of mercye.
            
               Amyntas pardoned.Then he comman̄ded ſilence, & ſaied: By mine owne iudgemente I do pardon bothe you Amyntas, & your

brethren, deſirous that ye ſhould be more myndfull of my benefite, then of your owne ieopardy. Come in fauour againe with me with that fidelitie I am reconſiled vnto you, except thoſe thinges which were brought in euidence had bene debated and tried to the vttermoſte, my diſſimulacion might haue bene ſuſpected in this matter, better it is therfore to be clered, then to remayne in Ielouſy, and thinke that no man can be acquited except he be firſt detected. Thou Amintas pardon thy brother, & let that be a tokē of thy harte recōſiled vnto me. This done, the king diſmiſſed the aſſēble, & ſent for Poledamas,Poledamas whō of all mē Parmenio loued beſt, accuſtomed alwayes to ſtand next hym in battayll, and though the clerenes of his conſcience did aſſure him to come boldly, yet after he was commaunded to bryng furth his brethren being but young & vnknowē to the kyng. his confidence was turned into feare, and began to doubte, imagening in his minde rather ſuche thinges as might hurte him, then by what meanes he was thus circūuented. In the meane ſeaſō the guarde whiche had commaundemēt thereunto, brought furth his brethrē. When the kyng ſawe Poledamas pale for feare, he called hym nere, and commaunding al men aparte, ſayd vnto hym. Through Parmenios treaſon,Alexanders wordes to Poledamas we were all in daunger, but chiefly I and thou, whome vnder colour of frendſhip, he diſceiued moſte: In the purſuyng and puniſhement of whome, ſee howe much I truſt thy fidelitie, for I am determined to vſe the as a miniſter therein, and whiles thou goeſt about it, thy brethrē ſhalbe thy pledges. Thou ſhalt go into Media and beare my letters to my officers, writtē with mine owne hand. It is neceſſary haſte be made, that the ſwiftnes of the fame may be preuented. I will that ye

come thether in the night, and that the tenour of my writing be executed the day after, ye ſhall cary letters likewiſe to Parmenio, one from me, and an other written in the name of Philotas, I haue his ſignet in my cuſtody. So that when Parmenio ſhall ſee both the, & the letter ſealed with his ſonnes ringe, he wilbe without any ſuſpition. Polydamas being thus deliuered of his feare, promiſed his diligence a great deale more erneſtly then he was required. When Alexāder ſawe his promptnes in the matter, bothe commended his good will, and rewarded him accordingly. And Polidamas chaunged his owne apparell, and toke other after the Araby faſhion with two men of the ſame countrey, to be his guide, for whoſe truth their wifes and children were pledges in the meane ſeaſon. And ſo they paſſed on Camels through ſuche places as were deſert for lacke of moyſture, and within .xi. dayes came to their iourneys ende, before any knewe of their commyng. Polydamas then toke againe his Macedons apparell, and in the dead of the night,Cleander. came into Cleanders lodging, whiche had the chief auctoritie there, next vnto Parmenio. When Cleander by his letters vnderſtode ye kinges pleaſure, Polydamas hauing more letters to deliuer likewiſe to others, agreed by the ſpryng of the day to go al togethers vnto Parmenio. As they were going, tidīges came to Parmenio of Polydamas arriual, who reioyſing both for the cōming of his frēd, and for the deſire he had to knowe of the kinges eſtate (the rather becauſe he had receiued no letter from him a long ſpace) commaunded Polydamas to be ſought out. The houſes of that countrey haue large backſydes, and pleaſaunt orchardes, full of trees beyng the chefe delight of princes, and greate lordes there.

The capitaines whiche had receiued commaundemēt by the kynges letters to kyll hym, came to Parmenio, walkyng vnder the ſhadow of the trees, beyng agreed amonges them ſelues to execute the thyng, when he ſhould begynne to rede his letters. So ſone as Parmenio had ſpied Polydamas comming a farre of, with a ſemblaunt of ioye (as it appeared by his coūtenaūce) ranne to embrace hym, and after ſalutacion geuen eche to other, deliuered the kinges letter. As he was vncloſing it, he demaunded of Polidamas what the king intended to do: you ſhall knowe that (quod he) by the content of your letters. Whiche when he had redde. I perceiue (quod Parmenio) that the kyng purpoſeth a voyage againſte the Arochoſians, ſurely he is a painfull prince, and neuer in reſt. But nowe after ſo much glory wonne, it were tyme for hym to take his eaſe, & haue conſideracion of his health and ſauegarde. And then he redde the other letter written in the name of Philotas, wherat he was ioyfull as appeared by his countenaunce.Parmenio ſlayne. With that Cleander ſtabbed him with his ſworde into the ſide, & after ſtriking him ouer the throte the reſidue thurſt him in as he lay dyēg. But Parmenios men whiche ſtode nere at hād, and ſawe the murder, wherof they knew not the cauſe, ran into the cāpe, & with their troublous tydinges, ſet all thoſe ſouldiers in a rore. Whiche ſtreight ran al to harneis, & cluſtring together about the place where the murder was done, made an exclamacion, that except Polydamas & the other doers of that dede, were deliuered to their hādes, they would ouerthrow the walle and make ſacrifice to their dead capitayne, with their bloud. Cleander willed the chief of thē to be let in, & recited the kinges letters, wherin was cōteined the treaſō of Parmenio intēded

againſt him, with a requeſt to them to ſee it reuenged. Then immediatly vpon the kynges pleaſure knowen the ſedicion was appeaſed, but the grudge was not rid out of their hartes. The moſte part departed, ſauing a fewe whiche required inſtantly that at the leſt they might be ſuffred to bury the body. It was denied thē long by reaſon of Cleander, who dreaded the kynges diſpleaſure, but becauſe they beganne to waxe more earneſt, intending to auoyde matter of ſedicion, he cut of the head whiche he ſent to the kyng, and lefte them the body to bury. This was the end of Parmenio, a noble man both in warre and peace, many thynges had he done valiaūtly without the kyng, but the kyng with out hym did euer any thyng worthy prayſe. He ſerued and ſatiſfied in all affaires, a kyng moſte happy & fortunate, and being .lxx. yeares of age, executed thoffice of a capitaine, as liuely as though he had bene young in yeares, and pretermitted not oftentimes the partes of a common ſouldier. He was quicke in counſel, doubtie of dead, welbeloued of all princes, but moſte dere to the common ſorte of ſouldiers. yet whether thoſe thynges did moue him to couer to be kyng, or els cauſed hym to be ſuſpected therof, it is yet doubted. For whether the wordes that Philotas ſpake, whē he was ouercome with the paines in his laſt tormentes were true or falſe, or els that he ſought and end of his paine, by accuſing hym ſelf falſely, it was muche doubtfull, ſeyng there was nothing proued at ſuche tyme as the matter was moſte freſh in memory. Such as Alexander perceiued to grudge at the death of Philotas, were ſeperated from the reſt of the army, and put into one Cohort vnder Leonidas their Capitaine,Leonidas. whiche in times paſt was of nere familiaritie with Parmenio,

the kyng bare priuie diſpleaſure againſt them, and therefore willing to proue the diſpoſiciō of euery man, gaue warnyng throughout the army, that all ſuche as would write into Macedonia, and haue their letters ſurely conueyed, ſhould bring them to be caried with ſuch as he would ſend. Wherupō euery man did write frākely to their frendes, ſuch thinges as were in their hartes. Some ſhewed thē ſelues to be offended with the long wa
                  •
               res, and ſome ſemed to be well pleaſed. But all their letters were intercepted aſwell of ſuche as commended the kyng, as of thoſe that grudged at his doinges. Wherfore he willed ſuche as by their letters diſcloſed them ſelues to be wery of the trauaill of the warres, for their reproche to be put in a band apart from the reſt. Wherby he both gaue them occaſion to ſhewe their hardines, and beſides remoued the libertie of their tongues, from the credulous eares of the reſt. Whiche raſhe deuiſe, as all other thinges, turned to the ſetting furth of the kinges felicitie. For in al extremities they ſhewed themſelues the redieſt and the moſte forward, and whyles they coueted to redeame their reproche, their valiaunt doinges could not be hidden in ſo ſmall a nombre ſeparate by them ſelues. Theſe thinges being ordred after this maner, he appointed a ruler ouer the Arians,Arians, and proclaymed his iourney againſt the Ariaſpians, whiche by chaunging of their name, were called Euergitans,Euergitans ſince the tyme that they releued Cyrus army with lodging and vitel, beyng afflicted with colde and penury. It was the fift daye before he entred into their countrey, where he vnderſtode that Satibarzanes whiche toke Beſſus part was with a power of horſemen entered againe amonges the Arians. He ſent againſt hym Caranus & Erigius,

and in their ayde Artabaſus, and Andromacus, with ſyx thouſand Greke footemen, and ſyxe hundred horſemen. Alexander continued .lx. dayes in ſettyng ordre amonges the Euergitans, vpon whome he beſtowed a greate ſomme of money, for the notable fidelitie they ſhewed towardes Cirus, & leuing Amydines to be their gouernour,Amydines Arachoſſiās (who was Darius ſecretary) He went to ſubdue the Arachoſiās, which border vpon the ſea of Ponte. The men of warre that were vnder Parmenios rule, came then to Alexander, beyng ſyxe thouſand Macedons, with two hūdred of the nobilitie, v.M. Greke footemen, and two hundred horſemen, whiche were the chiefeſt porcion of all his power. To theſe Arachoſians,Mennon. Mennon was appointed lieutenāt with .iiii. thouſand footemen, and .vi.C. horſemen. Alexander from thence entred with his army into a coū
               trey not knowen to ſuch as borderd vpō it. For thinhabitaūtes would not haue cōuerſaciō with any other people. Thei were called Paramiſadans,Paramiſadans. being a ruſtical kynd of men, & moſte rude amongeſt all the barbarous nacions. The hardnes of the countrey had ſo indurated their diſpoſicions. They lye moſte towardes the coold north pole, ioyning with the Bactrians vpō the weſt, and bend towardes the Indian ſea vpon the ſouth. They vſe to build their houſes of brick, and becauſe the land is full of bareyne mountaynes & voyde of timbre, they make their whole houſes of the ſame. Whiche beginning brode beneth, growing euermore narrowe towardes the toppe endeth like the keele of a ſhyp, wheras a hole is made aboue to receiue light. Such of their vynes and trees that bring furth frute, as they will preſerue frō the violence of the cold, they couer thē with earth during the winter ſeaſon, & when

the ſnowe is vaniſhed away, they reſtore them agayne to the ayer and to the ſonne. The earth was there couered with ſuch ſnow froſen ſo hard, that there remained no ſygne of any birde or beſte within the coūtrey. The ayer beſides was ſo darck that litle light appeared, but the earth couered as it were with a dymme ſhadowe, men could ſcarſly deſerue thinges very nere at hand. The armye brought into this countrey deſtitute of all cultiuacion of man, ſuffred all the diſcomodities and miſeries that might be endured, both of hungre, colde, werynes, and diſpayre. There were many of them that died for colde, and the ſnowe deſtroyed their feete, but ſpecially it peryſſhed many mennes ſyght. When they were weried and not able to traueyll any further, they layd themſelues downe vpon the froſen ſnowe. Whiche hauyng once left the mocion of their bodies, whiche ſtored in thē their naturall heate. They were ſtreyght wayes ſo nummed for coolde, that they could not ryſe agayne tyll they were lift vp by their cō
               panions. And remedy was there none in this matter but to compell them to go forwardes, for then by ſtoryng of them ſelues their naturall heat was reuiued, and they recouered agayne ſome ſtrength. Suche as recouered the Cotagies wherin the coūtreymen dwelled, were very well refreſſhed. But the darkenes was ſo greate, that the houſes could not be otherwyſe deſerned then by the ſmoke. The inhabiters that had neuer ſene ſtraungers before amonges them, when they behelde the armed men come ſodaynly vpon them, were amaſed for feare, and brought furth what ſoeuer they had, to ſaue their bodies frō violēce, Alexā
               der went on his fete amōges his men, raiſing ſuch as

were lieng, & releuing ſuche as he ſawe afflicted with the cold, with his own clothes. He was ſene, one while in the forward, another while in the middes, and ſome tyme in the rereward to the great trauaill of his body. At length they came to places better manured, where he refreſſhed his army with plenty of vittels, & there remained in campe till ſuche tyme as al that were left behinde, came vnto their fellowes. Then he went forwardes with his army to the mount Caucaſus whiche deuideth all Aſia into two partes.Caucaſus. For on the one ſyde it ſtretcheth towardes the ſea of Cilicia, and on the other ſide, to the Caſpian ſea, to the ryuer of Araxes, and the deſertes of Scythia. To this mount Caucaſus, there ioyneth another mountaine, called Taurus,Taurus. next vnto it in bignes, whiche riſeth frō Capadochia & paſſing by Cilicia, cloſeth with the mountaines of Armeny. Out of theſe mountaines ioyning thus together as it were in one continuall rydge, all the ryuers of Aſia do diſcende. Some of them ronning into the redde ſea, ſome into the Caſpian and Hircanian ſea, & other into the Sea of Ponte. In .xvii. dayes Alexander with hys army paſſed the mounte Caucaſus, wherin a rocke that is .x. furlonges in compaſſe, and foure in height,Prometheus. the antiquitie fayned that Prometheus laye bound. At the foote of this mountaine Alexāder chaſe out a place to build a cytie, wherin he placed .vii. thouſand of the moſte auncient Macedons, and ſuch other beſides, whoſe ſeruice he woulde not vſe any more in the warres, and called theſame Alexandria.Alexandria But Beſſus that was put in feare with Alexanders celecyte, made ſacrifice vnto the Goddes of his countrey, and according to the cuſtome of thoſe nacions, conſulted with his frendes and his capitaines, for the mayntenaunce

of the warres beyng at meate. And when thei were wel charged with wine, thei extolled greatly their owne power, and deſpiſyng the raſhenes of their enemies, and their ſmall numbre. But chiefelye Beſſus was moſte arrogant in his wordes, who puffed vp with pride by reaſon of the kingdome he had newely gotten by treaſon,Beſſus wordes. and not maſter of his wyttes began to declare howe that Darius by his folye hadde encreaſed his enemies fame, who woulde nedes fight with them in the ſtraightes of Celicia, when by retirynge backe he myght haue drawen them (before they ſhoulde haue ben ware) into deſert places, and there haue put riuers and moūtaines betwene his enemies and him, and amonges the ſaine ſo encloſed them, that they coulde by no poſſibilitye haue fledde away, and much leſſe make any reſiſtaunce. Wherfore (he ſaied) he was become of opiniō to go backe amōges the Sogdians, wheras the riuer of Oxus ſhoulde be as a walle betwixte him and his enemies, tyll ſuche time as he myghte aſſemble a ſtronge power of the nacions therabout: knowing very well that the Choraſmyons, the Dahans, and Sacans, the Indians, and Scythyans inhabitynge beyonde the riuer of Tanais, woulde come to his aſſiſtaunce, of whō there was none ſo little, that any Macedon with the toppe of his heade coulde reache to his ſhoulders. They al in their dronkēnes aſſēted to him, affirming that onely to be the wiſeſt waye. Wherupō Beſſus cauſed the wine to be caried about plentifully to cōquere Alexander vpon drinke. There was at that feaſte one Cobares a Median, whyche in the Arte Magick, (if it be an Arte, and not rather a diſceyte of ſ
                  •
               me vayne manne) was more notable by his profeſſion then by his knoweledge, but otherwiſe a moderate

and an honeſt man. He making a preamble before his tale:Cobarus wordes. ſayd. He was not ignoraunt howe muche more better it was to be obedient to others counſell then to be a counſell geuer. For ſuche as be folowers of other mennes deuiſes, are ſure to haue no worſe fortune then the reſt, but ſuche as be authours and perſuaders of any matter, commonly prepare their owne perill, and therwith deliuered the cup he had in his hand, and proceded thus: The nature of man in this reſpect may be called peruers and euell, becauſe euery one can ſe better in other mennes matters, then in their own. Their counſels muſt nedes be alwayes full of perturbacion, whiche take their own aduiſe. For feare is impediment to ſome, deſire vnto other and to many, the ſelf loue of the thyng that they haue deuiſed, I will not ſpeake of pryde nor impute it vnto you. Ye haue ſene experience howe euery man doth exteme that thyng only to be beſt, whiche he him ſelf hath inuented. The diademe of a kyng that you were vpon your head is a great burden, whiche if it be not borne moderatly, the weight therof will oppreſſe the berer: It is not furye can auayle in this caſe, but wyſe and prudent counſel. When he had ſpoken thoſe wordes, he reherſed a prouerbe commonly vſed amonges the Bactrians which is, that the fearfull dogge dothe barcke more then he doth byte, and that the depeſt ryuers doth runne with leſt noyſe. Whiche thinges I haue reherſed, becauſe ſuche prudence may appeare, as remayned amonges the Barbarous. As he talked after this maner ſuche as ha
                  •
               de him, wondred to what ende his tale woulde come to. Then he began to ſhewe his aduiſe, whiche was more proffitable to beſſus then gratefull. Alexanders

celerity (qd he) is ſuche that he is come in maner to the entrey of your court. He can remoue his armye before you can remoue this table. You ſay that you will drawe your aſſiſtaunce from the ryuer of Tanais, and that you will put ryuers betwixt you & your enemies. I would know if he be not able to folowe, wherſoeuer you ſhall flee. If the way be indifferent, it muſt nedes be moſte eaſy and aſſured to the victorer. And though you thinke feare wil make much ſpede, yet hope is more ſwifter. It were therfore me thinkes expediēt to procure the fauour of hym that is the mightieſt, and yelde your ſelf vnto the ſtronger. Howe ſoeuer he ſhal accept it, your fortune is more lyke to be better that way, then to remayne ſtill an enemy. Conſider that you poſſeſſe another mans kyngdome, and therfore ye may the better departe therwithall. For ye cannot be a iuſt kyng, till you receiue the kyngdome of hym that is able to gyue it, and toke it away. This is a faythfull counſell, wherfore it is not neceſſary to delay the execution therof. The horſe that of noble courage is gouerned with the ſhadowe of a rodde. But the dulle beaſt is not pricked forward with the ſpoores. Beſſus that was fierſe of nature and well ſet forwardes with drynking, became in ſuche a fury with his wordes that he could ſcarſely be holden by his frendes, from the ſleing of Cobares, for he pulled out his ſworde to haue done the dede, and departed out of the feaſt in a greate rage. But Cobares in this ſtore eſcaped away & came vnto Alexander. Beſſus had .viii.M Bactriās armed attending vpon him. Which ſo lōg as they iudged ye by reaſō of the intēperatnes of the ayre in thoſe partes yt
               
Macedons woulde rather haue gone into Inde then into Bactria, were verye obediente at his commaundemente. But when they vnderſtode that Alexander was commynge towardes theim, euerye one ſhronke away, and forſoke Beſſus. Then he with a band of his familie whiche were yet faiethfull vnto him, paſſed the riuer of Oxus,Oxus burnynge ſuche bo
                  ••
               es as caried him ouer, becauſe that the ſame ſhoulde not ſerue his enemie in folowynge him, and aſſembled a newe power amonges the Sogdians. Alexander as it hath ben ſaid before paſſed the mounte Caucaſus, but for lacke of corne his army was brought in maner to the extremitie of hōger. In ſtede of oyle they were faine to noint them ſelues with iuſe whiche they wringe out of Seſema, but euerie meaſure therof called Amphora, was ſolde for .ccxl. deners, euery like meaſure of honye for cccxc. and of wyne for .ccc. and yet of the ſame was verye little to be gotten. They haue in that countrey certaine veſſels called Syri, which thinhabitaūtes vſe to hide ſo priuely that they can not be foūd, except they be digged for within the earth. The coūtrey men bury their corne after that maner, for want wherof the ſouldiours were fayne to lyue with herbes, and ſuche fiſhe as thei caught in the Riuers. But that kynde of fode wantinge alſo, they were enforced to ſlea their beaſtes that caried their baggage, and with the fleſhe of theim liued till thei came into Bactria.The deſcription of Bactria. The nature of the ſoyle of whiche countrey is diuers and of ſundrye kindes. Some place is plentifull of woode and vines, and aboundaunte of pleaſaunte f
                  •
               uite, the grounde fatte, well watered, and full of ſpringes. Thoſe partes which be moſt temperate are ſowed with corne, and

the reſt be reſerued for fedyng of beaſtes. But ye greater part of that countrey is couered ouer with baraine ſandes, & withered vp for want of moiſture, nouriſhing niether man, nor bringinge forth fruite. But with certaine windes that come from the ſea of Ponte, the ſād in the plaines is blowen together in heapes, whiche ſeme a farre of like great hilles, wherby the accuſtomed wayes be damned, ſo that no ſigne of them can appere. Therfore ſuch as do paſſe thoſe plaines, vſe to obſerue the ſtarres in the night, as thei do that ſayle the ſeas, & by the courſe of thē direct their iourney. The nightes for the more parte be brighter then the dayes, wherfore in the daye time the countrey is wild and vnpaſſable, when they can nether finde any tracte nor waye to go in, nor marke or ſigne whereby to paſſe, the ſtarres beyng hidden by the miſte. If the ſame wind chaunce to come duryng the time that mē be paſſyng, it ouerwhelmeth them with ſande. Where the countrey is temperate, it bringeth forth great plenty both of men & horſe So that the Bactrians may make .xxx.M. horſemen. Bactria whiche is the heade citie of that region, ſtandeth vnder a mountaine called Parapaniſus,Parapanyſus. Bactras. the riuer called Bactras runneth by the walles, wherof both the citye and the countrey take their names. Alexander liyng there in campe, receiued aduertiſemēt out of Grece, how the Lacedemonians, and the whole countrey of Peliponeſe had rebelled againſte him. For thei had not loſt the battail at ſuch time as the meſſēgers were diſpatched that brought the newes of their reuolt. In the necke of this euil tidinges, there came another preſente terroure: whiche was that the Scythians inhabitynge beyonde the riuer of Tanays were comming to ayde Beſſus. And at the ſame tyme tidynges was

brought him of the battayle that Caranus and Erigius hadde fought amonges the Arians,Caranus, Erigius. where Satybarzanes that was newlye reuolted beynge chiefe of the countrey, ſeynge the battayle to ſtande equall on bothe ſides ridde into the fore fronte, and plucked of his helmet, forbiddyng anye of his ſyde eyther to caſte darte or ſtrike anye ſtroke, and there make a chalenge to fight hande to hande, if any man durſte come forthe and proue his ſtrength. Erigius capitayne to the Macedons was a man ſtriken in yeres. But yet not inferiour to any yong man, either in ſtowtnes of ſtomake, or ſtrength of bodye, who could not beare the proud arrogancy of Satibarzanes, but ſtepped forwardes, and pluckyng of his helmet likewiſe, ſhewed his hoar heer. The daye is come (quod he) that I will ſhewe either by the victorye or by my honeſt death what kynde of men Alexandre hath to his frendes and his ſouldiours, and without more wordes made towardes his enemye. It coulde not be iudged but that bothe armies had ſtayed their handes by appoyntmēt. For they gaue backe immediatly on both ſides to let thē haue fre ſcope ech party ſtandyng in expectatiō what ſhould become of ye chalengers, for thei could not but thinke them ſelues partakers of their aduēture. Satibarzanes firſt charged his ſtaffe, whiche Erigius auoyded by bendynge hys heade aſide but he in the middes of his race, ſtrake 
                  •
               he other with his ſpere through the throte, ſo that it came forth againe at his necke. Satibarzanes vpon that ſtroke fell from hys horſe,Satibarzanes ſlaine but yet made reſiſtaunce, tyll ſuche tyme as Erigius plucked the ſpeare oute of the wounde, and thruſte it agayne into his mouth who to rydde him ſelfe oute payne, furthered his enemies

ſtroke. Then the Arians ſeyng their capitayne ſlaine whom they hadde folowed rather of neceſſitye then of their owne free wylles, called to remembraunce Alexanders benefites and yelded them ſelues to Erigius. Alexander reioyſed muche of the good ſucceſſe of this matter, doubtynge greatelye the Lacedemonians, but he bare out the rebellion ſtoutelye, ſaiynge: that they durſte neuer diſcloſe their meanynge, tyll they knewe he was come to the confines of India. Alexander hauynge remoued his Campe, and goynge forwardes in the purſuite of Beſſus. Erigius mette him, preſentynge the ſpoyle of his Enemye, as a memorye of his victorye. Wherupon he committed the rule of Bactria to Artabaſus. Where wyth a guariſon he left his cariage, and wyth a power that was lyght to iourney, entered into the deſertes of the Sufitanes,The Suſirans, conueiynge his army by nyght. In the wante of water (that hath bene declared before) deſperation moued theim to thieſt before they had deſire to drinke. For by the ſpace of .iiii.C. furlonges, they founde no water at all. The vapoure of the Sunne beynge in the ſommer ſeaſon did ſo burne the ſande, that whē it began to waxe hote it ſtarched all thinges as it had bene with a continuall fire. And then the lyght ſomewhat obſcured by a miſt that roſe out of thearth by the immoderate heate, cauſed the playnes to haue appearaunce of a maine Sea. Their iourney in the nyght ſeamed tollerable, becauſe their bodyes were ſomewhat refreſhed with the dewe and the coolde of the mornynge.
            But when the daye came and the heate roſe, then ye drought driyng vp al ye natural humoures both their

mouthes and their bowels were enflamed for heate. Then their hartes failed, and their bodies fainted, beynge in caſe that thei could neither ſtand ſtyl, nor paſſe forwardes. A few that were taught by ſuche as knew the countrey, had gotten water whiche refreſhed them ſomewhat, but as the heate encreaſed, ſo their deſire grewe againe to drinke. Then was there no remedye but to geue amonges the ſouldiours all the wine & oile that remained in ſtore. For drinke was ſo ſwete vnto them, that it toke away the feare of any thirſt to come. But ſuche as had gulled in gredely the water that thei gote, became ſo heauye, that they were neither able to beare their armoure, nor go forwardes, ſo that thei ſemed then moſte happy that had gotten no water at all, for ſuche as had takē of it inordinately, were enforced by vomit to put vp the ſame againe. As Alexander carefull in this calamitie ſtode with his frendes that wer perſwading of him to haue reſpect to him ſelf, for that he onely, and the greatnes of his harte, ſhould be reliefe of this aduerſitie. There came two ſouldiours, whiche goynge before wyth ſuche as had taken vp the campe, had founde water, and were cariynge of it in bottelles vnto their ſonnes whiche were ſore afflicted for wante of drincke behynde in the armye. When they ſawe the kynge, one of theim opened his bottell, and fillynge a cuppe that he had, preſented water to the kynge, who receiuing it at his hande, demaū
               ded to whom they caried that water: they ſaied to their ſōnes. Then he reſtored to him the cuppe again ful as it was geuen him, and ſaied: I wyl not drynke alone, for ſo lyttle can not be deuided amonges vs all. Make you haſte therefore to carye to your Sonnes that you haue gotten wyth your trauayle.
            
               But he trauayled ſo long that before night he came to the ryuer of Oxus, the more parte of the army, not able to folowe, for feblenes were left farre behind: to thintent therefore that ſuche as folowed after, might know where the campe was become. He cauſed a fier to be made in the toppe of an hille, and gaue ordre that when the voward had refreſſhed them ſelues with meate & drinke they ſhould fill their bottels, with water and go back with theſame to releaue their fellowes. The breath of ſuche as dronke intemperatly cloſed vp, and they died immediatly, the nombre of whom was greater, then euer Alexander loſt in any battayll. But he would neither put of harneys, refreſhe hym ſelf with meate or drinke, nor eaſe his body: but ſtode in the way where his army paſſed, not departing till the laſt man was come into the Campe. He watched all that night, and paſſed it ouer in great trouble of mynd. And the daye that enſued, brought no releaſe of his care. For there were neither bootes to paſſe the ryuer with all, nor he coulde make any brydge ſeyng there was no wood growing nere at hand. But at length he found out a deuiſe whereunto only neceſſitie did dryue hym, they toke beaſtes ſkynnes & ſtuffed thē full of ſtrawe, wherupon they layd them ſelues, and ſome ſwomme ouer the water. And ſuche as firſt recouered the further ſyde, ſtode in order of battaill till the reſt were paſſed: by whiche meanes in ſyxe dayes he conuoyed ouer his hole armye. Hauing thus paſſed ouer the ryuer of Oxus, his purpoſe was to paſſe forwardes in the purſuit of Beſſus, till he vnderſtode ſuche thinges as had chaūſed amōges the Suſians.Spytanicnes conſpyred againſt Beſſus. There was one Spitamenes, whome Beſſus chiefly honored of al his frē
               des. But there be no benefites that can ſtaye a man

geuen to perfidie and falſhode, whiche in him was the more tollerable becauſe he iudged no miſchief to great for him that hath ſlayne his prince. For the reueng of Darius was a faire colour to his offence, but it is to be thought that his preſent fortune was more enuied, then his doinges by paſt, hated. When it was knowen that Alexander had paſſed the ryuer of Oxus, Spitamenes did aſſociate with hym in counſell of his enterpriſe Dataphernes.Dataphernes. Cathenes. and Catenes, whome Beſſus ſpecially truſted. They agreed to the matter more redely then he would deſire them, and takyng to them .viii. young men that were ſtrong of perſonage, vſed this kinde of polecy. Spitamenes repayred to Beſſus, and getting hym alone, enformed hym that he had found out howe Dataphernes, and Catenes, had conſpired to deliuer him aliue into Alexanders handes, wheras (he ſaid) he had preuented thē, whiles they were about their purpoſe, hauing taken them both, & put them faſt in priſon. Beſſus then thinking himſelf muche bound to him for ſo greate a good turne, gaue him many thā
               kes. And for the deſire he had to be reuēged of his enemies, willed Spitamenes to bring thē to his preſence. He cauſed their hādes to be bound behind their backes and to be brought by ſuche as were priuy to their coū
               ſell, when they came in Beſſus preſence, he beheld thē with a fell countenaunce and roſe vp to haue ſtriken at them. But thē they left their coūterfeiting & ſtreight wayes encloſing Beſſus about, bound him faſt whiche ſtrugled in vayne and pulled the diademe frō his head, tearing his garment from his back, whiche was parte of the ſpoyle of his prince, whome he had ſlayne. When he ſawe hym ſelf thus vſed, he confeſſed that the gods had ryghtfully reuenged his treaſon, and perceyued

by the plague they ſent hym, that bothe they fauoured Darius, and were frendes to Alexander, whoſe enemies euermore preferred his victory. It is vncertain whether the multitude would haue aſſiſted Beſſus or no, but that ſpitamenes had deuyſed the thyng to be done by Alexanders appointmēt, wherby he put them in feare being yet doubtfull of mynde, and ſet Beſſus vpon an horſe whereupon he brought hym vnto Alexander. He in the meane ſeaſon had choſen out nyne hundred ſuche as for their age, were not mete any more for the warres, and gaue to euery one of them b
                  •
               yng horſemen two talentes, and to euery footeman thre thouſand deneres: whome he diſpatched home, and gaue thankes vnto the reſte, becauſe they promiſed to continewe with hym tyll he had brought his warres to an ende. Beſſus was preſented vnto hym at a litle towne wherof the inhabiters be called Branchidans,Brāchidās, whiche in tymes paſte by the commaundement of Xerxes when he came out of Grece, were brought from Miletum and placed there, becauſe that in his fauour they had violated a temple that was called Dydyma. They had not all together forgotten their countrey cuſtomes, but had myxed their tongue that by little and little they were fallen from their owne language, and yet had not attayned the countrey ſpeache. They receyued the kyng with great ioye, yealdyng them ſelues and their cytie vnto his wyll. Whereupon he called vnto hym the Myleſians that ſerued hym in his warres,Mileſians (who bare an auncient hatred againſt the generacion of the Branchidans) & put it in their handes to determine where thei would ſaue thē for ye countrey ſake, or els deſtroy thē for the iniury

they had do it in times paſt. But when the Mileſians could not agre in opinion, he ſaid he would ordre the matter him ſelf. The next day when the Branchidans came to mete him, he returned them all againe into the cytie, & cōmaunding his footemen to encloſe the cytie about, entered with ſuche as he appointed for the purpoſe, and by a token geuen put all to the ſworde, and ſpoyled the cytie as a receptacle of traytours. They whiche were without armour and vnprouided were ſlayne in euery place. For neither the affinitie of their tongue, nor any prayer or interceſſion could mitigate their enemies crueltie. Whiche after the deſtruction of the towne, did caſt downe the walles to the foundaciō, ſo that no memory therof ſhould remayne. That done they did not only cut downe the woodes wherin they vſed their ſacrifice, but alſo plucked vp the trees by the rootes, that the ground might be left barayn as a deſert. If the ſame thinges had bene done againſte the very offenders, the reuenge might haue bene thought rightuous, but to lay the fault of the predeceſſours vpō the poſteritie it might be thought a cruell acte, ſeing there was not any of them that had euer ſene Myletum or done to Xexes any kynd of pleaſure. As Alexā
               der remoued from thence towardes the ryuer of Tanays, Beſſus was brought before him,Beſſus preſented vnto Alexander. not only bound as a captiue, but alſo ſpoyled of all his garmētes, whō Spitamenes led in a theme put about his neck: a pleſaunt ſight to beholde as well to the Barbarous, as to the Macedons. When Spitamenes was come with him in Alexanders preſence, he ſayd: I haue brought here vnto you the kyller of his owne maiſter, after the ſame maner that he him ſelf gaue then ſample, wherin I haue both reuenged Darius that was my king, and

you alſo that nowe haue got the ſouereignty. Let Darius open his eyes, and ryſe from death to beholde this ſight, that was vnworthy of ſuch an ende, and worthy to receiue ſuch a cōfort as this is. After that Alexāder had geuen Spitamenes thankes,Alexander to Beſſus. he turned hym ſelf vnto Beſſus and ſayd: what beaſtly woodnes was in thy mynd, that durſt firſt take thine owne prince pryſoner, & afterwardes kill hym, that had ſo well deſerued of yt, of whiche thy doinges thou haſt receiued ſufficiēt rewarde, by the coūterfeit name of a king whiche thou diddeſt vſurpe. He had no hart to make anſwere, nor excuſe his offence: ſauing that he ſayd he toke vpon him to be kyng, becauſe he might deliuer hym poſſeſſion of the countrey. Whiche thing if he had omitted, ſome other would haue taken in hande. Then Alexander called for Oxatres Darius brother, whome he had placed about his perſone, and committed Beſſus to his keaping, to thintent he ſhould cutte of his eares and his noſe, and hang hym vpon a croſſe, cauſing his owne men to ſhote him thorowe with arrowes, ſo preſeruing his body that byrdes ſhould not touche it. Oxatres promyſed to perfourme all the reſt, ſauing the keapyng awaye of the byrdes, whiche for the deſyre he had to ſet forth Cathenes conning, affirmed that none could ſo well keape them away as he, who did ſhote ſo aſſuredly, that he could ſtrike the birdes flyeng in the ayer. And though it was a conning not ſo muche to be marueiled at, in a nacion ſo expert in ſhooting, yet was it greatly wondred at of ſuche as did beholde him, & was great honour vnto the doer. He gaue rewardes to all ſuch as were the bryngers of Beſſus, but he differred his puniſhmēt becauſe he mynded to put him to death in the ſame place where he ſlewe Darius. The Macedons

in the meane ſeaſon going a forraging, without ordre were ouerthrowen by their enemies, that came ronnidg downe from the next mountaines they toke mo then they did kille, and driuing their priſoners before them returned againe into the moūtaines. There were of them to the nombre of .xx.M. whiche accuſtomed to liue by theft, vſed ſlinges and bowes in their fight, whome whiles Alexander did beſiege, & in a ſkirmiſh preſſed forth with the foremoſte, he was ſtroiken with an arrowe in the middes of his legge, where the hed did ſtike ſtill. The Macedons that were ſorowfull and amaſed for their kinges hurt, caried him into his campe, of whoſe departure out of the field his enemies were not ignoraunt, for they might behold all thinges from the mountaine, Wherupon the next day they ſent Embaſſadours vnto Alexander, whom he admitted to his preſence, & vnfolding his woūd, wherby he thought to diſſimule the greatnes therof, ſhewed his legge vnto them. When they were commaunded to ſit downe, they ſaid: that he ring of his hurte, they were as ſorowfull for it as his owne ſubiectes whiche ſhould welbe knowen, for if they could find out the perſone, that did the dede, he ſhuld be deliuered vnto his hādes. Seing they could not iudge them but ſacrileges that woulde fight with goddes, of whoſe vertue they ſuppoſed hym to be, and therfore were determined to yeld thē ſelues. Therupon he gaue them aſſuraunce & receiued againe his men that were takē priſoners, and admitted them as his ſubiectes. That done he remoued his campe & was caried in a foote litter, for the bearing wherof the horſemen and footemen cōtended together. The horſmen alledged it to be their office, becauſe the king accuſtomed to fight amonges them. And the footemen

argued for their parte, that in aſmuche as they vſed to cary the hurt ſouldiers, that thought no reaſon their office ſhould be taken from them, chiefly when the kyng ſhould be caried. Alexander therfore in ſo great a contention of both partes, thought it a difficult matter to geue ſentēce, becauſe the iudgemēt ſhould be greuous to them that ſhould be put frō the office, & therfore ordred that they ſhould cary him by courſe. Frō thence ye fourth day he came vnto a citie called Maracanda the walles wherof were .lxx. furlōges about,Maracanda but the caſtle was without any wall, he ſet a guarriſon in the citie & then burned and deſtroied the countrey thereaboutes. Embaſſadours came vnto him,The Scythians there frō the Scythes called Auians, whiche had bene fre ſince the time that Cyrus was amonges them, but yet they ſhewed them ſelues then redy to be at his commaundement. They were knowen to be the moſte rightuous people of all the barbarous naciō 
               
                  〈◊〉
                that neuer vſed to make warre but when thei 
                  •
               e prouoked, whoſe moderaciō and temperaūce in vſing of their libertie, made the inferriours equall vnto the ſupperiours. Alexander receiued them gently, and ſent Penidas a frend of his to thoſe Scithes that inhabited within Europe,Penydas. to forbid thē to paſſe the riuer of Tanais without his appointment. Who had alſo a ſecrete commiſſion to viewe the ſcituaciō of the coūtrey, & to viſit thoſe Scithiās that inhabited about Boſphorus, he willed him beſides to choiſe out a place vpō the brinke of Tanais where as he might build a citie, to remain as a fortres for ye ſubduing of thoſe people yt he entended to viſite.The rebellion of the Sogdians But this deuiſe was delayed by the rebelliō of ye Sogdiās who had alſo drawen ye Bactriās to their part. There were of thē .vii. in horſmē, whoſe autoritie ye reſt folowed, for the

daunting of whome Alexander cauſed Spytamenes and Catenes (the betrayers of Beſſus) to be ſent for, thinking by their meanes to bring the countrey agayn to his obedience and to ſubdue ſuche as had made this ſturre. But they whiche were iudged mete to ſtay the rebelliō, and were ſent for to that intent, were the chief authours of all the reuolt, whiche cauſed it to be noyſed abrode, that Alexander had ſent for the Bactrian horſemen of purpoſe to kill them all. Whiche commiſſion (they ſayd) being appointed to them, they would not execute becauſe they thought it ouer foull an act to commit againſt their countreymen. And for that cauſe could as il beare then Alexanders crueltie, as in times paſt Beſſus treaſon. By this meanes when feare of death was put into their heades, they were eaſely ſturred to armes whiche before were ſufficiently enclyned of their owne myndes. When Alexander was aduertiſed of their doinges, he willed Craterus to beſiege Cyropolis.Ciropolis. And he him ſelf warme an other city of that countrey by an aſſault whiche he gaue to it on all partes at once, and by a ſigne geuen, cauſed all the chyldrē to be put to death, making the reſt a pray for the ſouldiers. This done the cytie was raſed to the ground, to thintent that others by their enſample might be kept in obedience. There was a valiaunt people called Memacenans,Memacenans. who were determined to abide the ſiege, not only for their honeſties ſake, but alſo for that they thought it moſte for their ſuertie. For the mitigating of whoſe wilfulnes the kyng ſent to them fifty horſemen to declare his clemency towardes ſuche as ſubmitted them ſelues, and howe inexorable he was to ſuche as he wan by force. Their anſwere was to them, that they neither doubted of the kynges promis, nor of

his power, but after their anſwere geuen, they lodged them without their walles, where as enterteining thē with great there till it was the depe of the nyght, they ſet vpon them, and ſlewe them all. Alexander was no leſſe moued with this matter, then the caſe required, but made an aſſault vnto the cytie on all partes at once, whiche he found furniſſhed in ſuche wyſe, that he could not take it at the firſt attempt. Wherfore he appointed Meleager and Perdicas to the ſiege therof, whiche firſt were at the ſiege of Ciropolis, mynding to ſpare theſame, becauſe it was builded by Cyrus. For he had not ſo great admiracion of any kyng that had reigned in thoſe partes as of hym, and Semyramis, whoſe magnaminitie of mynde and fame of their actes, ſemed to hym to excede all the reſt. But the obſtinate wilfulnes of the inhabitauntes, ſturred vp his wrath. For when he had taken the cytie, he willed the Macedons to ſpoyle it, whiche had great cauſe to be moued againſt them, and ſo returned agayne to Meleager and Perdicas. There was not one cytie that did more valiauntly abide the ſiege then the ſame did, for both the hardieſt of the ſouldiers were ſlayne, and the kyng was brought in great daunger, being ſtriken in the necke with a ſtone, ſo that he loſt his ſight, and was felled to the earth ſo that he loſt his ſence. The army lamēted, thinking he had bene dead: but he was inuincible againſt thoſe thinges which put other men moſte in feare. For without tarieng he dreſſed his wounde, and returned to the fyght, and after anger had ſturred vp, the egernes he had of nature, he renued the aſſault againe more fierſely then before. At length a great peace of the wall was ouerthrowen by a myne at the whiche he brake in, and put the whole cytie to

ſacke and to ruyne.Menedemꝰ He ſent from thēce Menedemus with .iii.M. footemen and .viii.C. horſemen to the citie of Maracanda, which Spitamenes had newly taken and put out from thēce the guarriſon of the Macedons. Yet the cyteſens were not of his opinion, but when they ſawe they could not let him it was of neceſſitie for them to agree to his will.Alexander builded a newe cytie vpō Tanais Alexander in the meane ſeaſon came to the riuer of Tanais, where he encloſed about with a wall ſo muche grounde as his Campe did conteine, extending in compaſſe .lx. furlonges, and named the ſame cytie Alexandria. This thing was done with ſuche expediciō that within .xvii. daies after the walles were v
                  •
               , the houſes alſo were builded. And the whole was perfourmed in a very ſmale ſeaſō, through the contencion amonges the ſouldiers who ſhould perfourme his worke firſt, when theſame was deuided into partes amōges them. The priſoners thei had taken, whoſe raunſomes Alexāder paid to their takers, were appointed to inhabite this cytie. Whoſe poſteritie after ſo lōg time, be not yet worne out, ſuch fauour hath bene ſhewed to thē, in the memory of Alexā
               der. The king of Scythia whoſe Empire was thē beyond the ryuer of Tanais, iudging yt the fortifiēg vpō the ryuers ſide ſhuld be as a yoke to his neck, ſent his brother Carcaſis with a great power of horſemen to defeate the fortification,Carcaſis. and to remoue away the Macedons from the waters ſyde. Which is the ryuer that deuideth the Bactriās from the Scithiās of Europe, and is the limite whiche parteth Aſia and Europe a ſondre. But the countreis that ye Scithes inhabite beginne not farre from Tracia, & lie betwixt the north & theſt, ioyning with Sarmacia, & poſſeſſing part of it. the countrey alſo that lieth beyōd the ryuer of Iſter is inhabited by thē,Iſter. & their vttermoſte boūdes ſtretche to

Bactria, & to the further boūdes of Aſia northwardes, wheras be wōderful great woods & wild deſertes. But ſuche of thē as bounded nere vnto Tanais & Bactria lack not muche the ciuilitie of other nacions. This being the firſt time that Alexander had to do with theſe people, when he ſawe that then he had to entre into a warre, for the which he was not prouided, his enemies riding vp & downe in his ſight, and he diſeaſed of his wound, ſpecially not hauing thuſe of his ſpeach, which failed much by reaſon of this longe abſtinence,Alexanders wordes to hys friendes and the paine in his necke, called his friendes to counſell, & declare vnto thē: that he was not troubled with any fear of his ennemies but with the iniquitye of the tyme, the Bactrians rebelling, & the Scithians prouokyng him, when neyther he was able to ſtande vpon the ground, or ſtrōg enough to ryde on horſbacke, or in caſe to geue aduiſe or exhortacion to hys men. In conſideracion therefore of the doubtful daūger he ſaw him ſelf wrapt in he accuſed the gods, complayning that he was then enforſed to lye ſtyll as a ſtocke, whoſe ſwiftnes before tyme, none was hable to eſcape.Aduerſitie maketh men religious. The matters grue ſoo great that his owne men beleued he had counterfeited his ſicknes for feare. And therefore he which ſince the ouerthrowe of Darius had lefte conſultacion with the deuiners & prophetes turned himſelf againe to the vanitie & ſuperſticion of man, willinge Ariſtander (to whō he was addicted in beliefe) that he ſhoulde trye out by Sacrifice what his ſucceſſe ſhoulde be. The cuſtome of them which were called Auruſpices was to conſider the intrayles of the beaſtes wythout the kynge,Auruſpices and to make report to him of there ſignificacion. In ye meane ſeaſon whiles they were ſerching ſecretes that kind of way he willed Epheſtiō, Craterus, Erigius & other his frends to draw nere about him, leſt by ſtreyning of his voice

he might breake out his woūd again, & ſaid thus vnto them:Alexanders wordes. The daunger I am in, hath cauſed the time to ſerue better for mine enemies, then for me, neceſſitie I ſee chiefly in the warres to go before reaſon. For it is ſeldome geuen to men, to choyſe their owne tyme. The Bactrians be reuolted, vpō whoſe ſhoulders yet we ſtande, purpoſing to trie what courage we be of, by our behauour towardes the Scithians. If we leaue of with doubtful fortune, and meddle not with thē, which of their own mindes haue prouoked vs, we ſhal at our retourne be had in contempt of them whome we entend to viſit. But if we ſhal paſſe the riuer of Tanais, and by the deſtruction of the Scythians & ſhedding of their bloud, ſhewe our ſelues inuincible euery where. Who will then doubt but that Europe will lye open & geue obedience to vs being victorers? he is deceiued that doth meaſure by any diſtaunce the boundes of our glory that we entende to paſſe. There is but one riuer that letteth vs nowe for bringing of our power ouer into Europe, whiche if we ſhall bring to paſſe what an eſtimaciō ſhal it be for vs: whiles we be ſubduing of Aſia, to ſet vp the monumentes of our victories as it we
                  •
               e in a newe world, ioyning ſo ſone together with one victory, the thing that nature ſeme to haue deuided with ſo great diſtaūce? but if we ſhal ſtay neuer ſo little and geue ground, the Scythians will then come after vs, & purſue vs in taile. Be there no more but we yt haue paſſed riuers? there be many inuenciōs yet remaining amonges our ſelues, wherby we haue gotten victories. But fortune of the warre doth teache policy to ſuche as be ouercomme, we haue ſhewed a preſident of late, howe to ſwymme ouer ryuers vpon bottels. Whiche thyng if the Scythians can not doe, the Bactrians ſhall teache them. It is but the

power of one nacion, that nowe come againſt you, all the other yet ſtande in a ſtay to vnderſtande of our doinges. So that by eſchewing battail we ſhal noryſh warre, and be cōpelled to receyue thoſe blowes, whiche it lieth in vs to geue to other. The reaſon of my aduiſe is manyfeſt. But whether the Macedons wyll ſuffre me to vſe mine owne diſpoſicion, I doubte, becauſe that ſince I receiued this wound, I haue not ridden on horſeback, nor gone on foote. If you will folowe me my frēdes I am whole. I haue then ſtrength enough to endure theſe thynges, if thende of my lyfe be at hande wherin can I ſpend it better. Theſe wordes that he ſpake were vttered with a broken and weake voice, ſo that they could ſcarſely be hard of ſuch as were next hym. But when his meanyng was perceyued all that were preſent went about to fray hym from ſo raſhe an enterprice.Erigius. But Erigius wrought chiefly in the matter, whiche perceiuing that his authoritie could not preuayle againſt the kynges obſtinat mynde, attempted to worcke hym by religion, whiche was of greater force. For he declared to hym that the Goddes were againſt his determinacion, whiche had ſignified great perill to enſue, if he paſſed the ryuer. (He ſaid) he had vnderſtande that thyng by Ariſtaunder, who told hym at his comming into the pauilion what he had perceiued in the beaſtes intrailes. Alexā
               der vpon his wordes was wonderfully troubled both with anger and ſhame, when he ſawe the ſecretes of the religion brought to light, which he thought to haue kept ſecrete to him ſelf: and therfore cauſed Erigius to go aſide, and Ariſtander to be called in vnto him. Whō he beheld in the face, & ſaid: I ſeme to the rather a priuate man then a king. Seing I commaunded the to

make ſacrifice, and thou haſt declared the ſignificatiō therof to other & not to me. For Erigius by thy report knoweth the priuities pertaining to me. But ſure I iudge that through his own feare he deuiſed an interpretacion of himſelfe. Therfore let me heare of thyne own mouth what yu haſt found in the intrailes, to thintent thou ſhalt not deny that thou haſt ſpoken. Ariſtā
               der therupō was amaſed, & loked pale not able to anſwere one word for feare. But at length the ſame feare that made him holde his peace, pricked him forwardes to ſpeake, leſt the prolonging of the kinges expectacion might prouoke him to further wrath, anſwered: I ſaid (qd he) there was in the enterpriſe great daunger and difficultie, but yet yt your attēpt ſhuld not be in vaine. There is nothing that I haue perceiued by my ſciēce trouble me ſo much, as the loue I beare towardes you, for I both cōſider your infirmitie, & what a momēt cō
               ſiſteth in your owne perſone, fearing you ſhuld not be able to endure the thinges, that fortune is diſpoſed to geue vnto you. When Alexander hard him ſpeake after that maner, he willed him to haue confidence in his felicitie to whom fortune had graunted glory in greater thinges, & therupō diſmiſſed him. Afterwardes as the king was debating with ſuche as he cōſulted with before, by what meanes he ſhuld paſſe the riuer. Ariſtā
               der came amonges them, affirming that he had found the intrailes contrary to yt he did before, with as likely ſignes of good ſucceſſe as any yt euer he ſawe, ſhewīg thē as great cauſes to reioyſe, as he did before to feare. But immediatly hereupon he receiued newes yt muche appaired the continuall felicitie he was wont to haue, in all his procedinges. Menedemus being ſent (as it hath bene ſaid before) to beſiege Spitamenes, the auctour

of the Bactrians rebellion. When he vnderſtode of his enemies cōming both in auoidīg to be encloſed within walles, & truſting beſides to take ſome aduaū
               tage of the Macedōs, laid an imbuſhemēt to entrappe them. There was a wood through the which thei ſhuld paſſe very apt for ye purpoſe, where he laid the Dahās, whoſe cuſtome was to cary two armed men vpon one horſe, from whence they vſed to leape down by courſe. And by reaſon the ſwiftnes of the footemen was little inferior vnto the horſemē, they troubled greatly the ordre of the horſemans fight. Spitamenes gaue ordre to thē that whē their enemies ſhuld enter into the wood they ſhould enuirone them about on all ſides, whiche when they perfourmed according to their appointmēt, Menedemus ſeing him ſelf encloſed on al parts, & not equall in nombre vnto his enemies, reſiſted a greate while, crieng out to the ſouldiers, that there remayned no hope to them being intrapt after that maner, but by making ſlaughter vpon their enemies, receiue the cō
               fort of an honeſt death. Menedemus rid vpon a ſtrōg horſe charging oft times vpon his enemies, wherby he brake their ordre, and made great ſlaughter, till ſuch tyme, that he being laid at on all partes,Hiſpydes. receiued many woundes, and fainted for want of bloud. Then he exhorted Hiſpides that was one of his frendes to leape vpon his horſe, and eſcape away, and with that worde he ſwounded & fel to the ground from his horſe. Hiſpides might haue got away, but after he had loſt his frēd determined there to die, taking no other care but how to ſpend his life, with the loſſe of his enemies. Wherfore he put his ſpoores to the horſe, and ranne in amonges them, where he fought notably, and at lengthe was ſlayne. When the reſte ſawe thys

ouerthrowe, and loſſe of their capitaine, they recouered an hill, where Spitamenes did beſiege them, thinking to ſubdue them for want of vitaill. There were ſlaine in that battaill two .M. footemen, and .iii. hundred horſemen. Whiche miſaduēture Alexander with great policy kept ſecret, commaunding them that parted from the field, vnder payne of death not publyſhe this matter abrode. But when he could not beare out any lenger a countenaunce contrary to his harte, he went alone vnto his pauilion whiche he had ſet of purpoſe vpō the riuers ſide. There he waked all the night deuiſing with him ſelfe, what was beſt to doe. And diuers times he lifted vp his tent to behold the fires in his enemies campe, therby to coniecture their nombre, when the daye apeared he put on a corſelet and came forth amonges the ſouldiers, beyng the firſt tyme they had ſene him ſince he receiued his hurt. They bare ſuche a veneracion vnto their kyng that with his preſence only, they put away the remēbraunce of the feare whiche cauſed them before to ſhrinke, and reioyſed ſo hartely, that when they ſaluted him, the teares diſtilled from their eyes, and earneſtly required the fight, which before they had refuſed. He toke ordre there amonges them that the horſemē, and ſuch as were of the ſquare battaill of footemen ſhould be caried ouer in boates, & that the light armed ſhuld ſwimme vpon bottels. Neither the matter required any more to be ſpoken, nor the king could not ſay any more by reaſon of his infirmitie. For the ſouldiers went about the matter with ſuche good will & cherefulnes of mind that within thre daies thei had finiſhed .xii.M. boates. Whē al thinges were prepared in redines for their paſſage there came xx. embaſſadours of ye Scithiās ridīg by ye cāpe, which

required that it might be declared vnto the kinge that they hadde matter in commiſſion to declare vnto him. When they were receiued into his pauilion, and commaunded to ſit downe, thei fixed their loke cōtinually vpon the kinges countenaunce, whereby it was thought, that waiynge the greatenes of his courage by his perſonage that they ſawe preſente, it appeared to theim but ſmall in reſpecte of the ſame they hearde of him. The wittes of the Scythians be not rude and wtout knowledge as other barbarous people be. For it is ſaid that many of thē atteine to ſuch learnyng as is poſſible for a nacion being alwayes in exerciſe of the warres. Whoſe wordes ſpoken vnto Alexāder be left in memorie, whiche thoughe thei differ from the maner of vs that haue happened in more ciuil times, and framed our ſelues to a more humanitie. Yet the fidelitie of the matter is not to be deſpiſed, thoughe the phraſe of their ſpeach be not alowed. And therfore I ſhall declare vncorruptlye the ſaiynges whiche the eldeſte of thoſe Embaſſadours did ſpeake after this maner.
            
               If the Goddes had geuen the a bodye accordyng to the vnſaciable deſire of thi mind,The oracion of the Scithians vnto Alexander. the world ſhould not be able to receiue the, but ſhouldeſt touche the Orient with ye one hand, & the occidēt wt the other, which once obteined, thy deſire ſhould be to knowe where 
                     •
                  o place thy Perſonage, haboundinge with ſuche excellencye. Thus thou doeſt couet the thing thou arte not able to cōpaſſe. From Europe thou goeſt into Aſia, and frō Aſia paſſe into Europe. It muſte come to paſſe that if thou ouercome all mankynde, thou muſte kepe warre with woodes and ſnowes, with riuers & wilde beaſtes. What? art thou ignorant that trees do growe till they be great, and thē be plucked vp from the rote in a momente?

He is a foole that doth couet the frute, and conſidereth not the height of the tree wheron it growith. Take hed leſt whiles thou dooſt labour to attaine vnto the toppe, thou falleſte wyth the boous which thou doeſt embrace. The Lion hath bene ſome tyme the foode of ſmalle byrds, and the ruſte doth conſume the Iron. There is nothing ſo ſure, that is not in daungier of hys inferior. What haue we to do wyth the? we neuer touched thy countrey. Is it not lawfull for vs that liue in the waſt woodes, to be ignoraunt what thou arte, and from whence thou commeſt? we can neither be ſubiect to any man, nor deſire to rule ouer any creature. And bicauſe ye ſhal not be ignorant of theſtate of our nacion we haue certayne giftes in proper vnto vs, the yoke of Oxen, the plough, the ſpeare, the bowe, and the bowle: which be the thyngs that we vſe both wyth our frendes and againſt our enemies. We do giue vnto our frendes of the frutes gotten wyth labour. With the bowle we ſacrefice wyne vnto the godes. Wyth our bowe we ſtrike our enemies afarre of, and with the ſpeare nere at hand. After that ſort we in tymes paſt ouercame the king of Scythia, and afterwardes the king of Perce and Media making the waye open to vs into Egipt. But thou which doſt gloryfie, that art come to be a parſecuter of theues, arte a robber of all nacions, that thou comeſte amonges. Thou haſte taken Lydia, poſſeſſed Siria enioyed Perce, and haſte the Bactrians vnder thy power. Thou doſt viſite the Indies, and now ſtreacheſt furth thy rauenowes hands vnto our cattel. Why doſt thou couet that riches that cauſe the to be pore. Thou art the firſt of al men which with haboundance haſt prepared thy ſelf honger and that with the more thou haſte

the more gredely thou doſte couet ye things thou haſte not. Doſt thou not remēbre how lōge thou haſt ſtiked about Bactria. And whiles thou goeſt about to ſubdue them, how the Sogdians begin to rebel. Thus warre doth growe vnto the of thy victorie. For be thou neuer ſo great, and of force aboue any other yet ther be none that can endure to be gouerned by ſtraungers. Paſſe nowe Tanais, thou ſhalt parceyue what bredth it beareth, and yet thou ſhalt neuer ouertake the Scithiās whoſe pouertie is ſwyfter, then thy army, which cariing ye ſpoile of ſo many naciōs can attaine to. For whē thou ſhalt thinke vs to be farre of, thou ſhalt ſee vs within thy Campe. with like ſwiftnes, we folowe, and fle away. I heare that our deſertes beſkorned by the Greake prouerbes, we couet rather the deſertes and places vnhabited, then cities and plentiful countres. Therefore hold thou thy fortune faſt for, ſhe is ſlipper and cannot be kept agaynſt hir wyll. Folowe thou the counſell yt is good, and ſpecially whilles the tyme doth ſerue. Put a bridle to thy felicitye, and thou ſhalt gouerne it the better. We ſaye that fortune is without feete, & that ſhe hath only hands, & winges & whē ſhe putteth furth her hand, ſhe wil not ſuffre hir winges to be touched. If thou be a god then geue benefites vnto mortal men, and take not away the commodities they haue alredy. If thou be a man conſidre alwaye thine owne eſtate. It is foliſhe to remembre thoſe thynges, which cauſe the to forget thy ſelfe. Suche as by warre: thou makeſt thy enemies, by peace thou maiſt make them thy veray frendes. The moſt firme frēdſhip is amōgeſt them that be equal, and they ſeme equall which haue not yet made any trial of ther force

Take hede thou take them not for thy frendes, whom thou doeſt ſubdue and bring to ſubiectiō. There is no frendſhip betwene the Lorde & the ſlaue, and in peace the lawe of Armes is obſerued. Thinke not that the Scythians do confirme their frendeſhippe with anye othe. For thei thinke thei ſweare in kepynge of their faieth. The cuſtome of the Grekes is to iuſtifye their doynges by calling their Goddes to witneſſe. But we acknowledge Religion to conſiſte in the faieth it ſelfe. Thei which do not their due reuerēce to men, deceiue the Gods. Thinke not thoſe frendes to be neceſſary vnto the, of whoſe good will thou ſhalt nede to doubt. Thou maiſt vſe vs as kepers bothe of Europe and Aſia. For we ſhoulde ioyne with Bactria, but that Tanais dothe deuide vs, and beyonde Tanais out dominion ſtretche ſo farre as Tracia, and the fame is that Tracia cōfineth wt Macedon. Conſider therfore whether it be neceſſarye for the or no to haue vs as frēdes or foes to bothe thine empires.
            
             Theſe were the Scythians wordes, to whom the king made aunſwere: that he woulde bothe vſe his owne fortune and their counſaile whiche aduiſed him well. He woulde folowe his fortune becauſe he had great cōfidence in it, and other mens counſaile, becauſe he would do nothinge raſhelye nor vpon a ſodaine. Therupon he diſmiſſed the Embaſſadours and enbarked his armie in the boates he hadde prepared.Alexander paſſed the riuer of Thanais againſt the Scithians. In the fore partes of the boates he ſet ſuche as had targettes, willyng theim to knele vpō their knees for their more ſafegarde againſte the ſhote of arrowes. And they were placed behinde theim that hadde the charge of the Engines, who before, and on bothe ſides were encloſed with armed men. The reſt whiche ſtode beyonde the engines beyng armed theim

ſelues, defended with targattes ſuche as rowed the ſame ordre was alſo obſerued in thoſe boates that caried ouer the horſmē. The more part drue their horſes after thē by the reynes ſwimming at the boates tailes, and ſuch as were caried vpō truſſes filled with ſtraw, were defended by the boates that rowed betwixt them and their enemies. Alexander with ſuche men as he had choſen to be about his perſone, firſt lanched from the land, and directed his courſe towardes the further ſide. The Scythians came againſte them with their horſemen in ordre of battaill, ſtanding upon the brinck of the further ſhore to let their landing: whoſe ſhewe being a terrour to the Macedōs, thei had alſo an other cauſe of feare in their paſſing ouer, for the boatemaiſters were not able to keape their courſe againſte the force of the ſtreame. And the ſouldiers ſwaying to and fro, for the doubte they had to fal in the water, troubled the mariners in doing of their office. By reaſon wher of the Macedons could not haue ſcoope to caſte their dartes with any force, taking more care howe to place them ſelues out of perill, then for to auoyde their enemies. Their ingyns ſtode them in great ſteade, which ſeldome did ſhote in vaine againſt their enemies that ſtoode thicke before them, proffering to reſiſte their lā
               ding. When the Scithians ſawe them nere the ſhore, they did ſhote an infinite nombre of arrowes into the boates, ſo that there was not in maner any target that had not many heades ſticking in it. At length the boates arriued at the land, then the target men did ryſe vpon their feete, and hauing more ſcope and ſure footing, threw their dartes more certainly & with greater force: wherby when they perceiued their enemies to ſhrinke, and reane backe their horſes, they then leaped

cherefully vnto the land, one exhorting and encourging an other, and frely purſued the Scythians whō they ſawe falle out of aray. By that tyme Alexanders horſemen which had aſſembled them ſelues in tropes, brake vpon their ennemies, and put them to great dyſordre. In the meane ſeaſon the reſt being defended by them that were fighting landed and prepared them ſelues to the battell. Nor Alexander letted not wyth ſtowtnes of courage to ſupplye the impotency of hys bodye. Hys voyce could not be hard when he ſpake & exhorted his men (the ſcarre of his wound not yet cloſed) but all men might ſe him fighting. Wherefore euery one vſed the office of a captaine in giuing exhortacion vnto hys fellowes, and ran vpon their ennemies wythout reſpect of their owne liues. Then the Scythians could not endure any lenger the countenance, the force, nor the crye of ther enemies, but being all on horſback fled away vpon the ſpoores. Whom the king purſued .iiii. ſcore furlonges, notwithſtāding that with great payne he endured hys informitye. When his hart faynted he cōmaunded hys men that they ſhould folowe ſtill in the chace ſo long as the day laſted, and not hauing ſtrength to ſuſtaine any further trauaile returned into hys camp to reſt hym ſelfe. The Macedons in their purſuite paſſed the boundes of Bacchus. In mounment of whom their were great ſtones ſet vp by equal diſtaunce, and highe trees, whoſe ſtocks were couered ouer with I vye. But no boūdes could be a ſtay to the Macedōs▪ being caried forwards in there fury for it was midde night before they returned againe to their campe who hauing killed many, and taken great nombre of priſoners. dyd driue before them .M.viii.c. horſes Ther were ſlayne of the Macedons .lx. horſemen, of the fotemen to the poynt of

one hundred, & a thouſand of them were hurte. This enterpriſe wt the fame of the victory falling in ſo good a ſeaſō, kept the more part of Aſia in obedience, which was of the point to haue rebelled. For they beleued that the Scythians were inuincible. Who being veinqueſhed they iudged no naciō hable to withſtand ye powre of the Macedons.Sacans. The Sacans therefore after thys victory, ſent ther Embaſſadours vnto Alexander offring them ſelues to come vnder his obedience. To ye doing whereof they were not ſo greatly moued with feare of his force, as they were wt report of ye clemency he vſed towardes ye Scythans after he had diſcōfited them. For he deliuered home all their priſoners wtout raunſome to witnes to the world that he made warre with thoſe firſte nacions, to ſhew his powre, & his vertue, & not for any malice, nor to ſhewe his wrath vpon them. That was the cauſe that he ſo gētly receiued the Embaſſadours of ye Sacās cauſing Excipinus to accompany them,Excipinus. who being a beutiful yong man in the firſt flowre of his youth, was in that reſpect in great fauour, and familarity with Alexander. In parſonage he was like to Epheſtion, but inferior to him in pleaſaūtnes of ſpeach. After this Alexander giuing ordre to Craterus to folowe him by ſmall iorneys, with the greater parte of hys armie, he him ſelfe came to the city of Maracāda from whence Spitamenes that hard of his cōmyng, was fled into Bactria. The king therfore making great iourneyes foure dayes continuially, came into the place, where as vnder the conduct of Megedemus he had loſt two .M. fotemen & .iii.C. horſemē. Whoſe bōes he cauſed to be gathered togithers & buried, celebrating their funeralls after his contrey maner. By yt time Craterus wt the phalaux was come vnto ye king, & to thintēt he might pūiſhe wt the ſword

al ſuche as had rebelled, he deuided his powre into diuerſe partes cōman̄ding them to burne in euery place where they went and to kyl al the children. The contrey of the Sogdiās is for the more parte waſt, by reaſon of the great deſertes that be there, wherof ſome be iiii. ſcore, furlonges in bredth. The riuer called Bolytimetum paſſeth in maner throught the length of the countrey, which ronneth violently in a narowe chanel, and then is receyued into an hole of the earth from whence it goeth vnderneth the ground whoſe courſe is manifeſt by the noiſe of the water that may be hard. And yet in all grounde vnder the which ſuche a riuer doth ronne, ther do not apeare any moiſture put forth. Of the captiues that were taken amōgs the Sagdians, there were .xxx. of the moſt nobleſt brought vnto Alexander. Which vnderſtanding by an interpreter, that by the kinges commaundement they ſhoulde be put to execution. They beganne as men in myrth to ſing and daunce, and by a certaine laſiuious mocion of ther bodies expreſſed a great ioyfulnes of the mind Alexander merueling that they toke their death wyth ſuch ſ
                  •
               owtnes and magnanmitye of harte, called them vnto him, enquering why they ſhewed ſo great a gladnes, when they had death before therface. They aunſwerrd that if they had bene put to death by any, ſavinge by ſuch one as he was, that they ſhould haue takē their death ſorofully. But now ſeing they ſhould be reſtored to their predeceſſors by a kyng that was a conqerour of all nacions, they reioyſed in their honeſt death, as the thing that all men ſhould wyſhe & deſyre. The king then meruayling at there magnauymitye: I enquere of you (qd he) if you can be content to liue, & become frendes to him, by whoſe benifite you ſhal receiue

your life. They ſaid that as they neuer were his enemies, but as they were prouoked by occaſion to the warres, euen ſo if he would make an experiment of them rather by a benefite then an iniury. They would labour not to be ouercome in good will, nor in doyng the thing that pertained to their dutie. Thei were axed what pledge they would laye of their promyſe. They ſaid their liues they had receiued, ſhuld be their pledge redy to be yelded againe, when it were required, wherin they brake no promiſe, for ſuche of them as were returned home into their coūtrey kept the people in good obedience, & foure of them that were appointed to be of the kinges guard, gaue place to none of the Macedons in loue or affection towardes their prince. When he had ordred all thinges amonges the Sogdians, he left Pencolaus there with .iii.M. men of warre,Pencolaus. and remoued into Bactria. From whence he cōmaunded Beſſus to be caried to Echatan, there to ſuffre death for the killing of Darius. About the ſame time Ptololomeus and Menidas brought .iii.M. footemen and a thouſand horſemen of mercenary ſouldiers, and one Alexander came to him out of Licia with .iii.M. foote men and .v.C. horſemen. Aſclexeodorus had leuied the like nombre out of Siria, and Antipater ſent .viii.M. Grekes emonges whome there were .v.C. horſemen. When he had thus encreaſed his armye with the ſupply of his newe power, he went about in euery place to quiet thoſe ſlures that bene raiſed vp by the rebellion. And hauing ſlayne them that were the authours and beginners therof, the fourth day came to the ryuer of Oxus, which being a water vnholſom to be drōke, becauſe it is euer troubled & full of mudde. The Macedons fell to digging of welles, & whē by digging deape

they could fynd no water, there was a ſpring ſodeinly found vnder the kinges tent, which becauſe it was not found at the firſt, they fained that it came by miracle. Wherewith the king was pleaſed, and content, men ſhuld beleue that theſame was ſent by the gift of god. When he paſſed the ryuer of Ochus and Oxus, they came vnto a cytie called Marginia,Marginia. nere vnto yt which he choſe out places for the buildyng of ſyxe townes: wherof he planted two towardes the ſouth, and foure towardes the eaſt. Euery one diſtāt a ſmalle ſpace frō an other, to thintent, that their mutuall aſſiſtaunce in tyme of nede ſhould not be farre to ſeke. They were all ſcituate vpon high hilles, as bridels to keape vnder thoſe wild nacions. But now they haue forgottē their originall,A rock kept againſt Alexander by Arimazes. & be ſubiect to thoſe they were wont to rule. The king hauing ſubdued all the reſt, one rock only remained whiche Arimazes a Sogdian had taken with xxx.M. armed men, & furnyſhed theſame of vitels for two yeres. Theſame rock was, xxx. furlōges in height &, Cl, about, being in all partes ſteape & broken, hauing one ſtreight path only to paſſe vp vnto it. In the midde way to the toppe it had a caue which was narowe and darck in the entrey, but by littell and litell it waxed wyder, and had large lodginges within for a great multitude, and was beſides ſo ful of ſpringes, that whē they met together they ranne downe the rock like a greate ryuer. Alexander beholding the ſtrēgth of this place, & the difficultie to wynne it: Determined to depart frō thence. But there entred ſodēly into his hart a deſire to wery nature, and worcke againſt her power. Yet be fore that he would attempt the fortune of any ſiege, he ſent Cophes the ſonne of Artabaſus,Cophes. to perſuade them to geue it ouer, Arimazes vpon truſt of the ſtrength of

the place aunſwered in all thinges arrogauntly, but ſpecially in that he axed whether Alexander could flie. Whiche wordes reported to the kyng, did put in ſuche an heate, that ſtreightwayes he called for ſuche as he vſed to conſult with all, declaryng the pride and preſumption of Arymazes, and after what maner he had ſkorned him. But ſhortly (he ſaid) he would deuiſe ſuch waye, that he would make hym thynke the Macedons had wynges. He required them therfore that out of the whole armye, they woulde chyſe out and bryng to hym thre hundred of the moſte lighteſt young men, whiche had bene accuſtomed to driue beaſtes amonges the rockes and ſtreight pathes of the mountaynes. Whereupon they brought ſuche to the kyng, as bothe for lyghtnes of body, and hardines of harte were moſte mete for ſuche a purpoſe. Vnto whome he ſayd:The exhortacion that Alexander made to thē whome he had appointed to clime the rocke. my fellowes that be of myne owne age, with you I haue wonne Cyties that were counted inexpugnable, and haue paſſed the toppes of mountaynes, couered continually with ſnowe. With you I haue gone through the ſtreyghtes of Cylicia, and haue without werynes ſuſtayned the violence of the colde, whereby I haue experience of you, and you of me. The rocke whiche you ſee haue but one entrey, whiche our enemies do obſerue, the reſt they neglect. They keape no watche but towardes our campe. If you diligently ſerche, you ſhall fynde ſome waye to bryng you to the toppe. Nature hath made nothing ſo hyghe, but that it may be attayned to, by the induſtry of man. In puttyng thynges in proufe, wherof other haue diſpayred, we haue gotten Aſia into our poſſeſſion.
            Deuiſe you the meanes to get vp into the top, which when you haue takē, you ſhal geue a tokē to me by ſetting vp of ſome white cloth, you ſhall ſe me then come

forwardes with my power, and turne the enemies frō you towardes me. He ſhall haue ten talentes for a reward that doth recouer the toppe firſt, & he that getteth vp next, ſhall haue one leſſe, & the like ordre ſhalbe obſerued with ten of the firſt. I am aſſured that you regarde not ſo much my liberalitie as my fauour. When they had heard the king ſpeake after that maner, they imagined the thing won, and departing out of his preſence, prepared ſtrong ropes and yron hokes, whiche they might aſten to the rockes, and ſo clyme vp. The king brought them about the rock, where as it ſemed leſt ſtepe and moſte plaine to mounte vpon, and in the ſecond watche willed them to paſſe forwardes with good ſpeade. They being furniſſhed with two dayes vitell, and arme only with ſwordes and ſpeares, at the firſt wēt forwardes without any great difficulty. But when they came to the ſteapnes of the rock, ſome toke hold of the broken cragges to lift vp thēſelues, & ſome faſtening their hokes on ye rockes, clame vp by the ropes. They were compelled to reſt & ſtay diuers tymes, and ſo conſumed the day in trauaill & in feare. When they had paſſed many difficult places, further difficulties alwayes appeared, the height of the rock ſeming to to growe more & more. When they failed either of their hold or of their footing, it was a miſerable thing to ſee howe they fell downe hedlong, ſhewing to the other by their miſfortune, an enſāple what was likely to becōe of thē. Notwithſtāding at length through al theſe difficulties thei got vp into the top, where thei al weried wt the trauail of their cōtinual labour, & ſome with ye hurtes & maines they had receiued, ſlept there all yt night, amonges the wilde and rough rockes, vnmyndfull of the perill they were in. Whē it was day they wakened

out of their deape ſleape, and beholding the valeis vnderneath them, were ignoraunt in what parte of the rocke ſo great a multitude of their enemies ſhould lye, but at length thei perceiued by the ſmoke in what place they were. Then vpon the pointes of two ſpeares they ſet vp the ſigne that was appointed them, and founde that in their coming vp, they had loſt of their nombre two and thirty. The kyng being carefull not ſo muche for the deſire he had to winne the rocke, as for to ſaue thoſe whom he had ſent to ſo manifeſt a daūger, ſtode all daye beholding the toppe of the mountayne. And when darckenes of the night toke away the proſpecte of the eyes, he departed to refreſhe his body. The next day before it was ful light, he perceiued the white cloth ſet vp in the toppe of the rocke, but the varietie of the ayer, and the ſonne beginning to apeare and yet hiddē, cauſed him to doubte a while whether his ſighte had fayled him or no. But when it was full and open daye, it appeared manifeſtly, and all doubte was takē away. Then he called Cophes, by whome he had attempted their myndes before, willing him ones agayne to exhorte them to be better aduiſed. And if ſo be that in truſt of their ſtrength, they would not ſubmit them ſelues, that then he ſhould ſhewe to thē the men that had taken the rocke ouer their heades. Whē Cophes came thether, he beganne to perſuade Arimazes to geue vp his ſtrength, therby to winne the kinges fauour, and not enforce him to ſtay in the ſiege of a rock, hauing ſo many weighty affaires in hād: But he foūd him more obſtinat and proude then he did before, and willed Cophes to depart and moue him no more in the matter. Then he toke Arimazes by the hād, and required him to go with him out of the caue. When they were come

where as they might loke about, he ſhewed him thoſe that were gotten to the top of the cragge, and ſkorning thē his pride: axed of him whether Alexāders ſouldiers had gottē winges or no? but yt time the trōpettes were blowen in the Macedons campe, & thei might here the alarome that was made in the armye. Whiche matter as many and vaine and trifling thinges are wont in the warres to growe to greate effect, ſo that was the cauſe why they yelded them ſelues. For feare ſo troubled them, that they could not conſider the ſmalle nombre that were ouer their heades, but called Cophen againe in great haſt, who was departed away, and ſent with him Alexander .xxx. of the chief men, authoriſed to yelde vp the rocke with compoſition for to depart in ſauegard. But Alexander not withſtanding that he doubted, leſt his enemies diſcouering the fewnes of his men, might put them to diſtreſſe: yet truſting in the felicitie of his owne fortune, and offended with the pride of Arimazes, would agre to no cōdicion, but that they ſhould yelde ſimply. Arimazes therupon diſpayring more of his eſtate, then he had cauſe. Deſcended downe to the campe with the chiefeſt of the nacion, that were of kinne to him. All the whiche Alexander cauſed to be ſcourged with roddes, and be crucified at the foote of the rocke. The multitude that yelded with the money that there was taken, were geuen in gifte to thinhabiters of the newe cities. And the rule of the ſayd rocke was committed to Artabaſus, with the charge of the countrey there about.
         
         
            
            The eigth boke of Quintus Curtius of the actes of the great Alexander Kyng of Macedon.
            
               ALexander hauing wonne this rock, with greater fame then glory, becauſe his enemies remained in no place certaine, it was neceſſary for him to ſeperate his power, & ſo deuided his army in thre partes. He gaue the charge of the one part to Epheſtion, to Cenon the other, & toke the third part vnto him ſelf. His enemies were not all of one opinion, for ſome of them ſeing their defence could not auaill, yelded them ſelues before the fight, to whome he gaue the cyties and the landes of thoſe that continued ſtill his enemies.Meſſagetes Atynas. But the outlawes of Bactria with .viii.C. horſemen waſted the villages of the Meſſagetes. For the redreſſe wherof, Attynas gouernour of that countrey, went againſt them with .iii.C. horſemen, not knowing that his enemies lay in wayte for him, whiche had layd their imbuſhement in a wood ioyning to a great playne, wheras they had appointed a certaine to driue cattel, therby to drawe their enemies with the gredines of the praye, within daunger of the buſhemen. When Attinas men ſawe the driuers of the cattell, they purſued them without ordre, and whē they were paſſed the wood where thimbuſhement lay, their enemies brake out vpon them caſting no ſuche perils, and ſlewe them euery one. The fame of this ouerthrowe, came immediatly vnto Craterus, whiche drue thether with the horſemē. But the Maſſagetes being fled before his comming, he ſlewe .M.Dahans. of the Dahans that toke their parte, wherby the whole rebellion of the

whole countrey ceſſed. Thus Alexander hauing ſubdued the Sogdians, returned to Maracanda. Whether (Berdes whom he had ſent to the Scythians inhabiting about Boſphrous) came to him with Embaſſadours of that coūtrey.Phrataphernes. Phrataphernes alſo that had the chief rule of the Maſagetes and Dahans, (whiche nacions were ioyned by affinitie togethers) ſent certaine meſſengers to Alexander offring to be at his cō
               maundemēt. The Scythian Embaſſadours made requeſt that Alexander would mary their kinges doughter, & if the affinitie pleaſed him, that he would ſuffre the princes of the Macedons to enter in mariage likewiſe, with the noble mens doughters of their coūtrey: promiſing that the king ſhould come in perſon to viſite him. He hard gently both the Embaſſades, and ſtyll continued in that place, till Epheſtion and Artabaſus came vnto him, and then ioyning his power againe together, came into the countrey that is called Baſaria.Baſaria. There is nothing more eſtemed in that nacion, then to haue great herdes of wild beaſtes encloſed in parkes, whiche be very pleſaunt, and full of ſpringes. Thoſe parkes be encloſed with walles, and towers builded within them to be lodges for the hunters. There was one parke in that countrey that had remained vnhunted, during the tyme of foure mens ages. Wherinto Alexander entred with his whole army, chaſing the wilde beaſtes in euery quarter. Amōges the reſt there was a liō of a rare bignes that came rōning towardes Alexander.Lyſimachus. Whiche thing when Lyſimachus (that afterwardes was king, perceiued ſtanding by chaunce then next to Alexāder) perceiued, he ſtepped before him, to receiue the lyon with his hūting ſpeare. But Alexā
               der plucked him back, and willed him to auoyde, ſayēg:

that he was able to kyll a lyon ſo well as Lyſimachus. This Lyſimacus on a time hūting in Siria killed by himſelf alone an huge lyon. But he was torne to ye bones vnder his left ſhoulder, & put in great daunger of his life. Which being ye matter that Alexāder ment, he performed wt that worde, no leſſe then he promiſed for he did not only receiue ye lyon, but killed hym with one ſtroke. Wherupon the fable riſe howe Alexander ſhuld haue caſt Lyſimachus to a lyon. But though Alexanders chaunce was good herein, yet the Macedōs knewe that by the cuſtome of his countrey, he ſhoulde not haue hunted on foote without the chiefeſt of his nobilitie and frendes about him. He killed within that parke .iiii.M. wilde beaſtes, and there did banket his army, returning afterwardes to Macicanda. Actabaſus excuſing himſelf there by his age, that he was vnapt for the rule of that countrey, Alexāder committed the ſame to Clitus,Clytus. whiche was he that defended him with his target when he was fighting bareheaded at the ryuer of Granick, & there cut of with his ſworde Roſaceris hand, that was in a redines to ſtryke the kyng. He was an old ſouldier of Philippes his father, & notable in many feates of warre that he had done. Hellanice his ſuſter was Alexanders nurſe,Hellanice. whome he loued no leſſe then his owne mother. For theſe cauſes he committed the ſtrongeſt part of his Empire to his fidelititie. The kyng that purpoſed to ſet forward in his iourney the next day,Alexander offended his frēdes with ouermuche aduaunting of himſelf. made that night a ſolempne banket, wherin (being ouergreat an aduaunter of him ſelf) when he was chafed with drinking, began to ſet furth the actes that he had done, in ſuche ſort that his wordes offended the eares of ſuche as knewe them to be trewe. The auncient men kept ſilence till ſuch time

as he began to deface the doynges of Philippe his father, aduauntynge the notable victorye at Cheroneſe to be his dede. The glorye wherof (he ſaide) was taken from him by the malice and enuy of his father. For he alledged howe in the mutine whiche roſe betwene the Macedons and the Greke ſouldiours, when Philippe lay hurt of a wounde whiche he receiued at that fraye. thought him ſelfe ſure no otherwiſe then to counterfaite to be dead: When he defended his body wyth his buckeler, & ſlewe them with his owne hand that ranne vpon Philip to haue killed him. Which act (he ſaied) his father would neuer gladly cōfeſſe, nor neuer could abide to acknowlege his ſafegard to come by his ſōne. He alſo declared how after the iourney he made by him ſelf into Illiria, in writyng vnto his father he aſcribed the victorye vnto him ſelfe, whiche ouerthrew his enemies & put them to flight, when Philip was awaye. He ſaid that in his opiniō it deſerued but ſmall cōmendation to make a iourney into Samothracia, when Aſia ought to haue bene ſpoyled & brente. Nor he thought no man worthy praiſe in dede but ſuche as do ſo great actes, that thei excede all mens credite. The yong men that were preſent were glad to heare theſe wordes and ſuch other like, but thei were vngrateful vnto the auncientes ſpecially for Philips cauſe, vnder whō they had long ſerued. Then Clitus which in like caſe was not very ſober, turned to ſuch as ſate beneth him, rehearſinge verſes of Euripides, wherof the kyng myght rather heare the ſounde then the wordes. The effect of thē was, that the Grekes did euil, which in the monumētes of their victories, did ſubſcribe only the names of their kyngꝭ, which vſurped ye glory to thē ſelfes ye other

men did wynne by ſheding of ther bloud. Alexander therefore which iudged his wordes to bene worſe then they were, enquered of ſuch as ſat next him what Clitus ſaid. But whē they keapt ſilence: Clitus wt a lowder voyce reherſed philips doinges, & warres he made in Greace one after an other, prefarring them before any actes done ſince that time. Wherupon ther did riſe a contencion betwene the yong men and the old. But the king enforcing a paciens in him ſelf, when he hard Clitus deface his prayſe, cōceiued a wōderfull wrath in his mind. Yet it ſemed yt he wold haue bridled his affection, if Clitus wold haue made ane and of his preſumptuous talk. But whē he would not ceaſſe, he gaue occaſion to Alexander to be further moued. Then Clitus did procede ſo fareforth, that he durſt defend Parmenio caſe and prefarred the victory that Philip wāne of the Athenyens, before the diſtruccion of Thebes, & going further & further, not only through dronkenſhip but euen of a forwardnes of a contencious minde, at length ſaid: If we muſt dye through the,Clitus wordes. Clitus is the firſt. For they receyue greateſt rewards of thy victory that can moſt ſhamefully deface thy fathers memory. The coūtrey of Sogdiā is giuen vnto me, that hath ſo often rebelled, and now not onely vnſubdued, but ſuch one as by no meanes can be brought to ſubiectiō I am placed amōgs thoſe wild beaſtes, that be of ſuch an vnciuil diſpoſicion. But I could paſſe ouer things parteyning to my ſelf: if the ſouldiers of Philip were not diſpiſed, forgetting yt if ye old Atharias had not turned againe ye yong men▪ that gaue ouer ye fight, we had yet ſtyked about Alycarnaſus. How is it then that Aſia is cōquered wt thes yong mē? But I ſe it is true yt
               
your vncle ſaid in Italy he chaunſed vpon men & you vpō womē. Ther was nothing that Clitus ſpeak or did in his raſhnes, yt moued more ye king, then ye honorable mencion made of Parmenio yet for al yt he kept in his greif & was cōtented to cōmaund hym only to depart out of ye feſtnor ſpeake eny euil words againſt Clitus, Sauing that he ſaid: if he ſhould talke a little lenger he would brayde me with the ſauing of his life: wherof in very dede he wold oftentymes proudly aduaūce him ſelfe. But notwithſtandinge that the king had willed hym to departe, yet he taried ſtil and would not riſe. And therefore ſuch as ſat next him toke him by the armes to leade him away blaming and giuing him exhortacion, for his better vſage. When Clitus ſawe him ſelfe drawn forth againſt his wyll. Ire was added to his dronknes, and declared then alowde: howe that he with his breſte defended the kinges backe, but now when the good turne was paſt, the very memory of his benefit was hated. And therwyth layd to his charge the death of Attalus, and fynally mocked the Oracle of Iupiter whom Alexander claymed to be his father and ſaid, that he told him better truth, then his father did. At thoſe wordes the king was ſturred to ſuche wrath, as he could ſcarſly haue borne being ſobre. But hauing then his ſences ouercome wyth drink leped ſodeinly from the table. His frendes were amaſed wyth throwing down the cups for haſt, riſſe to wayt the end of the thing, they ſawe hym go about in ſuch a fury. He toke a ſpeare out of a ſquires hand and would haue ſtriken Clitus that was yet raging with thintemperaunce of his toung. But he was ſtopped by Ptolomeus and Perdicas who tooke him in theyr armes & ſtayed him for all hys ſtriuing. And Lyſimachus and

Leonatus toke away the ſpeare. Then he called to hys ſouldiers for ayde, crying out that he was taken by his next frēdes as Darius was of late, & willed the trumpet to be blowen, that ye armed men might aſſēble vnto the court. Then Perdicas and Ptolomeus fell downe vpon their knees, requiring him that he would not perſeuer in his wrath, whiche he ſo ſodaynely had conceyued, but rather reſpite his diſpleaſure, ſeynge that he might the next day much more better order the matter But his wrath preuayled ſo much, that his eares were ſhutte vp, and he ranne in a fury amonges the watchmen, pluckyng a ſpeare from one of them, which once gotten, he ſtode in the entrye, throughe the whiche they that ſupped with him muſt nedes paſſe. When all the the reſt were come forth, Clitus came laſt without light And becauſe Alexander could not diſcerne him, he aſked what he was, but that was done ſo terribly, that the cruelty of the acte he went about apeared in his voice. But Clitus which ſeyng the king in a fury, had no reſpect howe much he had offended him before, aunſwered that he was Clitus, whiche was commynge from the kinges banquet. With ye worde he ſtrake him throughe the body ſo that he fel downe ſtarke dead, & was al beſprinckeled wt his bloud. Go now (quod he) to Philip, Parmenio, & Attalus. Herein it may be ſene that nature prouided euill in the diſpoſition of man, which for the more part can not conſider ſo well thinges to come as thoſe that be paſt. For after that Alexanders ire was aſſwaged, and his dronkennes paſt, weying aduiſedlye the foulenes of the acte he had done: conſidered then that thoughe Clitus hadde vſed ouermuch libertie in his talke, that yet he ought not to haue ſlayne ſo noble a manne of warre: yea, and the ſauer of his owne life,

though he were aſhamed to confeſſe it. He ſawe that he beyng a kyng hadde vſed the deteſtable office of an hangman, in reuengyng with wicked ſlaughter the libertye of wordes, whiche might haue bene imputed to wyne. When he behelde the bloude of hym whiche a litle before he had bydden to his banquet runne ouer all the entrey, and that the watchemen were ſo aſtonied and amaſed that they ſtode a farre of, and durſte not come nere, his ſolitarines cauſed hys repentaunce to be the greater. Then he plucked the ſpeare out of the dead corſe, and would haue thruſte it through his owne bodye, if the watchemen had not come runnynge, and with great ſtriuynge wronge the ſame out of his handes. That done they toke hym vp, and caried him into hys lodgynge. Wheras he fell downe flatte vpon the grounde, fillyng full all the courte wyth the miſerable noyſe of hys howlynge and lamentation. He tare hys face wyth his nayles, & required ſuche as ſtode aboute hym, that they woulde not ſuffer hym to lyue in ſuche a ſhame and diſhonoure. In theſe requeſtes he conſumed the whole nyght, and cauſed diligente ſearche to be made whether it were the ire of the Goddes or no, that had cauſed him to commit ſo haynous an acte. At length it was founde yt the yerelye ſacrifice due vnto Bacchus was not done in due tyme. And therfore it appeared manifeſtlye that it ſhoulde be the wrathe of the Goddes, that hadde moued him to committe murther vpon eatynge and drynckyng. But the greateſte thyng that encreaſed his ſorowe, was the amaſement of hys frendes, when he ſawe thē ſhrinke from hym, & that none of them after that dede done, woulde gladly vſe ſuche familiar communication as they dyd before.

Then he parceyued that he ſhould liue as a wild beaſt in a deſart both fearing others, and alſo afrayed hym ſelfe. The next morning he commaunded the body blody as it was, to be brought into his chambre, which when he ſaw lyeng before him fell in weping and ſayd Shal I after this ſort requit my norſe whoſe .ii.Alexanders lamentacyō for the deal of Clitus. ſōnes ſlaine for my glory at milatun. I haue nowe killed her brother that was her only Ioy at myne owne bourd? What refuge ſhal that wretched woman haue. I was al the cōfort that did remaine to her, and now ſhe ſhal neuer be gladde to be hold me. Shall I the wicked killer of my preſeruers, returne into my coūtrey, whē I ſhal not be able to preſente my hand vnto my nurſe wythout the remembraunce of her miſery? When he could put no end to theſe kind of bewailinges & complayntes, ye body was taken awaye by the apoyntmēt of his frēdes. After he had laien thre daies ſhut vp in his chambre, ſorowing after this manner, the ſquiers & ſuch as had the keaping of his perſone ſeing him geuen obſtinatly to death, brake all into his lodging, and with great payne brought hym (though he long withſtode their prayers) at lenght to take ſome reliefe and ſuſtenaunce And to the intent he ſhould be the leſſe aſhamed of Clitus death the Macedones decreed that he was lawfully killed and would not ſuffre him to be buried, but that the king commaunded it. Hauinge conſumed ten dayes at Maracanda ſpecially to confyrme the ſhame he had cōceyued of Clitus death, ſent Epheſtion wt parte of his army into bactria to prouide vitells againſte wynter. And commytted the ſame prouience vnto Amintas which before he had giuen to Clytus.
            
               
               zenippa.From thence he went into a countrey called zenyppa that confyneth with the Scythians: which being well inhabited and full of villages, doth with the plentyfulnes thereof not only detayne theinhabiters to dwell their ſtill but alſo inuite ſtraungers to come amonges them. The ſame was a refuge to the outlaws of Bactria that ſtyll rebelled, but after Alexanders comming was knowne they were driuen furth by the countreye men and two .M. and two hondred of them aſſembled to gither which were horſemen accuſtumed to lyue by theft and ſpoyle in tyme of peace. And then not onely the warre but alſo dyſpayre of forgeuenes, had made ther cruel and wild diſpoſicions worſe. They gaue an onſet ſodeynly vpon Amyntas,Amyntas. that was Darius lieutenant. The battel was long doubtful betwixt them. But fynally they loſt .vii.C. of there nombre whereof iii.c. were taken preſoners, and turned ther backes to the victorers not without a reueng for they ſlewe of them .iiii. ſcore beſides .iii.C.L. that they wounded. And yet notwithſtanding after this ſecond rebellion they obteyned pardon. When Alexander had brought them to obedience, He came with his hole Army into a coūtrey called Naura the lord wherof was called Syſymithers,Naura. 
               Syſymythres. who had gotten two ſonnes by hys owne mother, it being lawfull there for the parentes to vſe ther children. The ſame Syſimythres with two thouſande armed men fortefyed and kepte the ſtreight at the entreye of the countreye where as it was moſte narawe. The paſſage was defended bothe with a riuer and wt a rock, through yt which rock the way was made by force of hand. The light is receyued in at the entrey but further inward ther is non, but ſuch as mē bryng wyth them. Frō thys rock there goeth a vawte

                  〈5 pages missing〉
               
            
            
               From this rocke there goeth a vaure vnderneth the grounde that hath iſſues into the playnes, whyche be not knowen but to ſuche as be of the ſame countrey. Though this ſtraight was naturally ſtrong, and defē
               ded beſides by a ſtrong power, that letted not Alexander to attempt it, but brought engynes which they call Arietes, to beate downe ſuch fortificatiō as was made with hande, and with ſlinges and ſhote of arrowes, did beate his enemyes from the places of their defence. When he had driuen them awaye, he paſſed throughe the fortificatiōs he had wonne, and made approche vnto the rocke. But the ſtreame that grewe of the aſſemble of waters falling from the mountayne was an impedimente to him therin. And it ſemed a wonderfull worke to fil the chanel of the riuer, yet he cauſed trees and ſtones to be brought to the place, and ſet the thing in hande. When his enemyes that neuer had ſene any ſuche worke before, ſawe the worke riſe ſodaynlye lyke a mountayne, were put in a marueylous feare, wherby the kynge ſuppoſyng they might haue bene brought to render it vp: ſent one Oxatres of the ſame nacion to perſuade Siſymythres to render vp the rocke. And in the meane ſeaſon to put them in the more terrour, he cauſed towers of woode to be brought forwardes, and did ſhote wyth engynes ſo oute of the ſame, that the enemies forſakynge all other ſtrengthes, retired into the toppe of the rocke. Oxatres finding Siſymythres in this feare, perſwaded hym rather to proue Alexanders beneuolence then his force, ſeynge that all creatures ſubmitted theim ſelues vnto him, & that he onely ſhould not be his let, goynge with his victorious army into India, wherby he ſhould turne other mens plage vpon his owne necke. Siſymythres would haue

bene contented to folowe his aduiſe, but that ſhe whiche was both his mother and his wyfe affyrmed howe ſhe woulde rather dye then commit hir ſelfe into anye mans handes. And therfore beynge aſhamed that the loue of libertye ſhoulde remayne more in a womanne then in him, altered his purpoſe, takinge that way whiche was more honeſt then ſure, and diſmiſſed him that was the meane for peace, determinyng vtterly to abide the extremitye of the ſiege. Yet when he had weyghed well his enemies power and hys owne togethers, began againe to repent him of his wiues counſail, which was more raſhe then neceſſarie, & made ſute that Oxatres woulde returne, proferinge then to commit hym ſelfe to the kinges will, onely requirynge of Oxatres that he would not vtter hys wyues mynde and opinion, for feare leaſt ſhe ſhould not obteyne hir Pardon.
            He ſente therfore Oxatres before, and he came after wyth his wyfe his children, & all his kynſfolke wythout tariynge for any aſſuraunce promiſed to hym by Oxatres. Alexander hearynge of their commyng, ſent hys horſemen before to cauſe theim to ſtaye and tarye for hys cōmyng. And when he was come to the place wher they were, he offered Sacrifice to Minerua and Victoria, reſtorynge to Syſymythres his former rule and aucthoritie, and put him in hope of a greater countrey, if he would faythfully cōtinue his frendſhip, and toke his two ſonnes preſented to him by the father, to ſerue in his warres. Alexander lefte his fotemenne to ſubdue ſuche as were yet vnyelden, and wente forwardes with hys horſemen into other partes. The way was craggye and difficulte, whyche at the firſte they endured indifferentlye, but afterwardes when their horſe houes were torne aſunder, and they vtterly forweried,

manye were not able to folowe, but rydde diſperkled, and out of order, the werines of their trauaile ſo much ouercame ſhame. The kyng notwithſtandyng chaunged often horſe, and purſued wythout ceaſſyng his enemies that fledde before hym. By reaſon wherof all the noble young men that were wonte to accompanye him were lefte behynde, ſauynge onelye Philippe Lyſimachus brother,Philip who then beynge in the floure of his youthe, and of great likelihode to become an excellent manne, folowed on fote the kynge that did ride on horſebacke by the ſpace of fifty furlōges, Liſymachus diuers times profring to him his horſe. But in no wiſe he would depart from the kyng, notwithſtandyng that he had on his corſelet and all his armoure. When the kinge paſſed through a woode where his enemies laye in embuſhement, he fought notablye, and reſcued the kynge fightynge wyth hys enemyes. But after they were 
                  •
               ite to flyght and driuen out of the woodes, the greatnes of his courage which hadde ſuſteyned him in the heate of the fight, faynted wyth his bodye, and beyng all on a ſwette, leaned him ſelfe to a tree, whyche did not ſo ſtaye him, but that he fel to the earth, and beynge taken vp againe by the Kinges handes, ſhronke downe from hym and dyed. The kynge beyng ſorowfull for his deathe, receiued an other tidynges, no leſſe to be lamented. For before he came to his campe, he was aduertiſed of the deathe of Erigius, one of hys moſte notable Capitaynes, whoſe funerals were bothe celebrated wyth greate pompe and ceremonies of honoure.
            From thence he determined to goo vnto the Dahans, where he vnderſtode that Spitamenes was. But Fortune that neuer ceaſed to fauoure hym,

finiſhed ye iourney of his,ſpitamenes. as ſhe did many other. Spytamenes was enflamed wyth the ouermuche loue of his wife, whom he caried wyth hym in al his haſardes and aduentures. But ſhe that coulde not well endure fliynge, nor to chaunge places like an outlawe, became ſo wery of trauayl, that by flattery and fayre meanes, ſhe entiſed her huſbande to leaue his fliyng, and go about (ſeyng he ſawe no waye to eſcape) to procure Alexanders fauoure, of whoſe clemencye (ſhe ſaied) he had ſene ſo great experience. And to moue him the more in the matter, ſhe brought before him their childrē begottē betwixt them, makyng requeſt, that at the leaſt wayes he would take pity on thē, wherin ſhe thought her praier would be the more effectual bicauſe Alexander was ſo nere at hand. But Spitamenes iudging her not to do this by way of coūſail, but of purpoſe to betray him, and yt ſhe deſiered to ſubmit her ſelfe vnto Alexander in confidence of hir beuty, drew out his ſwerde to haue ſtrikē her, if he had not bene letted by his brethrē. Whē they would not ſuffer him otherwiſe to hurt her, he cō
               maunded hir to auoyde hys ſyght, threatenynge to kyll hir, if ſhe profered to come agayne to his preſence. And to mitigate his loue towardes hir, he ſpente the nyght amonges hys concubynes. But his loue that was ſo deapelye grounded thereby ceaſſed not, but rather kyndeled the more towardes his wyfe. Wherfore he reconciled him ſelfe agayne vnto hir, makyng his continuall requeſt, that ſhe would not counſayl nor moue hym anye more in the matter, but be content wyth ſuche chaunces as Fortune woulde ſende hym, for he eſtemed, death lyghter then to yeld him ſelfe. She purged her ſelfe of her former perſwaſion, which appered

to her ſhe ſaied to haue bene good, and though it were after a womans maner, yet it proceaded of a faithfull meanynge. But from thence forth ſhe was contented to do as it ſhoulde pleaſe him. Spitamenes ouercome with her counterfait affection, made a great feaſt, and after much eatyng and drinkyng became drowſie, and was caried into his chambre. Whē his wife perceiued him to be in a depe ſlepe, ſhe pulled out a ſwerde which ſhe had kept ſecretely for that purpoſe, and cut of hys head, deliueryng the ſame being ſprinkeled with bloud vnto her ſeruaunte that was priuye to the facte, and with hym onely as ſhe was enbrued with bloude came vnto the Macedons campe, willynge it to be ſignified to Alexander that there was one come, that hadde to ſpeake with hym. He by and by gaue commaundemēt that ſhe ſhoulde enter, but when he perceyued her defiled wyth bloude, thinkynge that ſhe had come to lament ſome iniurie done vnto her, willed her to declare what ſhe woulde haue. She deſiered that her ſeruaūt myght come in, from vnderneth whoſe garmente ſhe toke Spitamenes heade, and preſented it vnto Alexander. The palenes of the face wantynge bloude had taken awaye the knowledge whoſe it was. But when the kynge perceiued it to be a mans heade he departed forth of the tente, and by enquery vnderſtode the matter. The caſe brought him in greate perplexitie, and was dryuen by diuers imaginations into ſundrye opinions. He iudged the kyllynge of ſuche one beynge a fugityue and a rebell to be greate benefite vnto him, which liuynge myght haue bene a greate let and impediment to his proceadynges.
            But one the other ſyde, conſiderynge the horriblenes of the dede, that ſhe ſhoulde kyll hym by treaſon

dede, that ſhe ſhould kyll him by treaſon which loued her ſo entirely, and by whom ſhe had had children, the violences of the actes, ouercame the thank of her benefite. & ſhe was commaunded to departe the Campe, leſt the enſample of ſuch lycencyouſnes might corrupt the manners and ciuill dyſpoſion of the Greakes. When the Dahans vnderſtod of Spitamenes death they brought Dataphernes bound that was partener with him in his conſpiracy,Dahans. & yelded them ſelues vnto Alexander. Who being delyuered from the greateſte part of his precent care, determined to reuenge the iniuries of them whiche had bene myſuſed by the pride and couetouſnes of his deputyes & officers. Therfore he committed Hircania with the Mardons and Tapirious to Phrataphernes, to whom he gaue in commiſſion to ſend Phradates his predeeeſſour to him as a priſoner.Staſamer. Staſamer was ſubſtituted ruler of Caria in ye place of Arſamus. Arſaces was ſent into Media to thintēt yt Oxidates ſhould remoue frō thence.Arſaces. Babylon vpon the death of Maſeus was committed to diditamenes.Dydytmens When he had ordeyned theſe thinges the third moneth, he drue hys Armye out of ther winter lodgines to go vnto a Countrey that was called Gabaſa.Gabaſa. The firſte dayes iourney was quiet, and the next not very tempeſtuous, but yet darker then had bene accuſtumed, and not wythout ſome ſignyfycatyon of ther calamites that were cōming. The third daie the element was ful of lightning & whē the lightning ceſſed,A tempaſte. it was very darke. The beholding wherof amaſed ye ſouldiers & put them in great feare. It thū
               dred in maner cōtinually, & the lightning fel in ſtraūg ſymile
                  •
               udes, So that the Army ſtode aſtonyed, and durſt neither go forwardes nor remaine ſtyll in a place
            
               Then there came ſodaynely a ſhower of hayle dryuynge lyke a ſtreame, whyche at the firſte they defended by couerture of their harneys. But ſhortelye after their handes were ſo colde and wette, that they could not holde their weapons, nor yet deuiſe whiche waye to turne them ſelues, findynge alwayes where they turned their faces, more violence of the tempeſte then before. Euerye manne therefore brake his araye, wanderynge aboute the woodes, and manye that were weried, by feare rather then by trauayle, laye downe vpon the ground, notwithſtandyng that the force of the cold hadde conuerted the ſhower into a froſte. The trees agaynſt whiche they leaned, was a great refuge & helpe to manye. And yet they were not ignoraunte when they reſted, that thei choſe them ſelues a place of death, for when they lefte to moue their bodyes, the naturall heate left theim. But eaſe was ſo pleaſaunt to ſuch as were weried that they refuſed not to dye in reſting of them ſelues. Their affliction was not onely vehemēt for the tyme, but alſo continued verye longe to the encreaſe wherof the lyghte whyche is a naturall dilectation vnto menne, through the darknes of the ſhower, and the ſhadowe of the woode was ſo taken awaye, that it appeared as it hadde bene nyght. The Kynge onelye was able to endure this miſchiefe, whiche ceaſſed not to go aboute the armye, drawynge the ſouldioures together when they were diſperkled, liftynge theim vp that laye on the grounde, and to encourage theim, he ſhewed theim the ſmoke that roſe afarre of from the Cotages, whether he exhorted them to drawe for ſuccour. There was not any thinge more effectual to their ſaufeguarde, then that whiles they were aſhamed to leaue their Prynce, whome they ſawe▪ endure

this miſchiefe, they chafed theim ſelues with their labour and trauaile. But neceſſity which in aduers fortune is of more force then any reaſon, founde out a remedye for this colde. They fell to cuttynge downe the woode making euery where heapes and ſtackes therof, and ſet them on fyre. Then a man would haue iudged that the whole woode had bene on a flambe. For there was ſcarcely ſpace left betwixt the fires for men to ſtande. Then their nummed members began to be moued with the heate, and their ſprites which were oppreſſed by force of the colde, began to haue their free recours. Some recouered the cotagies whyche neceſſitie cauſed them to ſeke out in the furthermoſt part of the woode, & the ceſt recouered the campe, whiche was plonted in a moyſte ground. But by that time ye ſhower was ceaſſed. The ſame tempeſt conſumed a thouſand ſouldiours, veriets and ſlaues. It is ſaide that diuers were found froſen to death leaning againſt trees, and yet ſemed as thoughe they had bene liuynge and ſpeakyng together. It chaunſed that a common ſouldiour of the Macedons which had much payne to go and carye his armour, came at the laſt into the campe where the kyng was, who notwithſtandyng that he was chafyng of hys owne bodye agaynſt he fyre, yet he did riſe out of hys chyre, and pullyng of the nummed ſouldiers armoure that was paſte his remembraunce, ſette him downe therin. He a greate whyle knewe not where he ſate, or who had receiued him. But at length when his naturall heate came to hym, and perceiued it to be his kynges ſeate, and the kynge to be there preſente, was afrayed, and ſtarte vp agayne.
            But Alexander behelde hym in the face, and ſayed:

Perceiueſt thou not now my ſouldier with how much better condicion thou liueſt then the Percians do vnder their king? For it is death for thē to ſit in ye kinges ſeate, and the ſame hath bene the ſaueguarde of thy lyfe. The next day he called his frendes, and the captaines of the armye togethers promyſing to reſtore to them whatſoeuer they had loſt. Wherin he perfourmed his promis. For Syſimithres bringing vnto him many beaſtes of burden with two .M. Camels and great nombre of ſhepe and oxen, he diſtributed all amonges the ſouldiers, wherin he bothe reſtored to them their loſſe, and alſo deliuered them of their honger. The kyng gaue great thankes vnto Syſimithres, and cō
               maunded his ſouldiers to cary ſyx dayes vitels ready dreſſed, went to the Sacans,Sacans. where he deſtroyed all their countrey, and of the botie there taken gaue .xxx. thouſand ſhepe in gift to Syſimythres. From thence he came vnto a countrey belonging to a noble prince called Cohortanus,Cohortanꝰ whiche ſubmitted him ſelfe vnto the kyng. And he againe reſtored his countrey vnto hym, exacting nothing of his, but that of his thre ſonnes, he ſhould ſende two with hym to ſerue in his warres. But Cohortanus offred to hym all three and made a feaſte vnto Alexander with all ſuche ſumptuouſnes as belonged to the maner of the countrey. Wherein all the pleaſures beyng ſhewed that coulde be deuiſed, thyrty virgines of the noble mens chyldren were brought in before Alexander, amonges whome, there was Cohortanus doughter called Roxane,Roxane. which in beuty, excellens of perſonage, and in comlynes of apparell (rare amonges thoſe nacions) excelled all the reſte. And notwithſtandyng that they were all electe with whome ſhe was accompanied, yet ſhe drewe

all mens eyes towardes her and ſpecially the kynges, that coulde not well nowe gouerne his affections in ſuche proſperitie of fortune, whiche is the thyng that the fraylenes of man ſeldome can auoyde. So that he whiche behelde the wyfe of Darius and her two doughters (to whome Roxane was nothyng comparable) with no other entent then he myght haue done his mother, was then ſo farre ouercome with the loue of a young virgine, being but of a baſe ſtock, if ſhe ſhould be compared to kynges bloud, that he affirmed it to be a thyng neceſſary for the eſtablyſhement of the Empire, for the Percians and Macedons to mary togethers: by whiche only meanes ſhame myght be taken from the vanquyſhed, and pryde from the victorers. He alſo for his purpoſe alledged a preſident howe Achilles (of whome he was deſcended) ioyned hym ſelfe with a captiue. And leſt his doynges ſhould be thought iniury, he would couple hym ſelfe by waye of mariage.
            The father ioyfull of theſe newes that he loked not for, gladly confirmed the kynges wordes. Who in the heate of his deſire,A ceremony of mariage amōges the Macedons. cauſed bread to be brought furth accordyng to the cuſtome of his countrey, the ſame beyng the moſte religious ceremony of mariage amonges the Macedons. Whiche bread was cut a ſonder with a ſworde, and eche of them made of it a ſacrifice. It is to be thought that ſuche as eſtablyſhed the cuſtomes of that nacion, coueted by a moderate and a ſcarſe diet, to ſhewe to them that were the gatherers of great ryches with howe ſmall a thyng they ought to content them ſelues. Thus he that was both kyng of Aſia and Europe, ioyned him ſelfe in mariage with a mayde brought in at a maſke, to beget vpon a captiue,

that ſhoulde reigne ouer the victorious Macedons. His frendes were aſhamed that he ſhould choſe vpon drinke a father in lawe, of them that he had lately ſubdued. But after the death of Clitus all libertie and franckenes of ſpeache being taken away, they ſemed to agre with their countenaunces, the moſte apt inſtrument to declare the conſent of the mynde. After this was done, he prepared his iourney towardes India, purpoſing to viſite the Occian Sea. And becauſe he would leaue nothyng behynde his backe that myght be impediment to his expedition: toke ordre for thyrty thouſand young men to be leuied out of all the prouinces, and to be brought vnto hym armed, myndyng to vſe them both as pledges and ſouldiers. He ſent Craterus, to purſue Hauſtenes, and Cathenes, of whome the one was taken and the other ſlayne. Polycarpon alſo ſubdued the countrey that was called Bubacen.Bubacen. And ſo hauing ſet all his thinges in ordre, he ſette his whole imagination vpon the warre of Inde, whiche was counted to be a very ryche countrey, and to habound bothe with gold, perles, and precious ſtones, thynges more appertenent to voluptuouſnes, then to magnificence, and it was ſayde that the Souldiers there had their targettes made of Iuery, and of gold. And therfore leſt he whiche thought hym ſelfe to excell the reſt, ſhould be paſſed in any poynt, cauſed his ſouldiers to ſet their targettes with plates of ſyluer, the horſemen to make their brydels of gold, and their corſeletes to be bewtefied, ſome with gold, and ſome with ſyluer. There a were hūdred & .xx. thouſād armed men that folowed Alexander to that warre. When all thinges were in redines, for the purpoſe he long before

conceyued in his euell diſpoſed mynd,Alexander coueteth to be honored as a god. thought it tyme to compaſſe how he might vſurpe the name and honor of a god, and ſo willed him ſelfe not only to be called, but alſo beleaued to be the ſonne of Iuppiter: aſthough his powre had bene aſwell to reſtranie mens thoughtes as their tonges. His entent was that the Macedons ſhoulde fall grouelinges vpon the groūde and worſhip him after the like maner the Parcians did their kinges. And to ſuch his deſire, there wanted not Parnicious flatterye: the parpetuall poyſon of princes▪ whoſe eſtat hath had more often ouerthroues by flattery, then by any force of enemies. The Macedōs were not in blame of this, for non of them ſuffred gladly ther countrey cuſtumes to be ſubuerted. But it was the fault of the Greakes, whiche with ther naughty condicions, corrupted the profeſſion of honeſte ſciences.Hagys. Chyrillus. Cleo. There was one Hagys of Argiue as euell a poet as was ſince Chirillus daies and another called Cleo a Ciciliā geuē to flatterie both of nature and by the cuſ
                  •
               ūe of his countrey. They with other the dredge and refuſe of their countreys (whō Alexāder reputed more then any of his captaines or his kinſemen) wold haue made it apere to the world, that heauen had layen open for Alexāder, and ſtiked not openly to pronownce that both Herculus, and Bacchus Chaſter, and Poſ
                  •
               ux ſhoulde all giue place to his newe godhed. For the bringing of this thing to paſſe the kyng commaunded vpon a lolempne day a feaſt to be prepared with great pompe, inuiting ther vnto al the great lords, and gentlemen boſh of the Macedons and the Greakes with whom whē he had ſitten and eatyng a whyle he departed from them out of the feaſt. Then Cleo (as was before determined) ſet furth his talk wt great praiſe &

wonder of the kings vertues reherſing his exceding benefites towardes them al which to requite (he ſaied) ther was but one waye, and that was: if they woulde acknowleg him a god whō they knew to be one. For it is a ſmal thing (qd he) to recōpence ſuch great benefites towards you al wt the coſt of alitel frākinſence. He ſhewed the Percians cuſtume to be both religious and wyſe in worſhipping there kinges as gods, thinking ther defence & ſaueguard to conſiſte in ye maieſtie of ther prince. He ſaid, yt Hercules & bacchus wer defied whē they had once ouercome the enuie of ſuch as liued 
                  •
                ther time. And mē yt come after do eaſely beleue ſuch thinges, as haue bene confyrmed by there predeceſſours. And if any of you (qd he) will ſticke at this matter, ye ſhal ſe me the fyrſte that at the kinges comming in, ſhall fall downe gr
                  •
               ueling on the earth and worſhip him. Which preſident others ought to folow, & ſpicially men of moſte wyſdome, that ſhould alwayes be enſample to others in doing their duities towards their Prince. His tale tended direcly agaiſt Caliſtenes whoſe grauitye and prompte libertye of ſpeaking was hatefull vnto the Kinge, for he thoutht him the man. which only had ſtayed the Macedones, that ells would redely haue done to hym that honor. Herupon euery manes eies were inurned towardes Caliſtenes,The worde of Caliſ
                     •
                  enes. which 
                  ••
               ter ſilence made, ſaid in this wiſe: If the king were preſent, Cleo, to heare thes thy words, yt ſhuld not be nedeful then to aūſwer the, for he him ſelf wold make requeſt that he might not thus ſwarue out of his kind, into the cuſtumes of ſtraungiers. Nor he would not ſuffre yt thou ſhouldeſt deface & bring in the obloquie & enuye of men, with ſuch thy parnicious flattery, hys noble actes brought to paſſe with ſuche f
                  ••
               icety
                  •
                and

good fortune. But becauſe he is away, I for hym will thus aunſwere the. There is no frute ſone rype that will continew long. This I meane by the deuine honours, whiche whiles thou goeſt about to geue vnto the kyng, thou takeſt his honour from hym. There is a time required that men ſhoulde beleue hym to be a god, for that gift hath alwayes bene geuē to great mē. When they are once dead, by ſuche as came after thē. I wyſhe vnto the kyng immortalitie after his death, & that his life may be long and his eſtate continual. But ſanctifieng is a thing that ſometime doth followe 
                  •
                man, but it doth neuer accompany him. Thou diddeſt reherſe enſamples of the defyeng of Hercules, and Bacchus. Thinkeſt thou that thei were madde goddes vpō drinke, and by the decre of one dynner? the nature of Alexanders manhode muſt be remoued from our mortall eyes, before the fame can bring hym into heauen. Are not they goodly goddes (Cleo) that thou and I can make? Would the kyng (troweſt thou) be content to receiue of vs the aucthoritie of his godhedde. I haue great deſire to proue thy power. If thou canſt make a good, firſt make a kynge. It is muche more eaſy to geue a worldly kingdome, then the poſſeſſion of heauen. Thinkeſt thou (Cleo) that the immortall goddes will heare the without diſdayne, or ſuffre theſe thy wicked deuiſes to take effecte? they would we ſhou
                  ••
                holde vs cōtent with the cuſtomes of our fore fathers and for my part I am not aſhamed of my coūtrey, nor I requi
                  •
               e not to learne after what maner I ſhould honour my prince. For in mine opinion, we acknowledge him ſufficiently to be king and victorer, of whome we receiue lawes to liue vnder. Caliſtenes was fauourably hard of all men, as the perſone whom they counted

the recouerer of their vniuerſall libertie. He did not only in his tale paynte out ſuche flatterers, but alſo liuely expreſſed the opinion of the Macedons, ſpecially of ſuche as were auncient men, to whome the exchaunge of their olde vſages were greuous. The kyng was nothyng ignoraunt of the wordes that had paſſed betwyxt them, for he ſtode behynde a particion of the hall and heard all the matter. He ſent word therfore to Hages, and Cleo, that at his comming in, they ſhould moue the ſtraungers only to fall downe and worſhip hym after their countrey cuſtome. And after a whyle the kyng as though he had bene about ſome matters of importaunce, returned agayne into the feaſte, then the Percians fell downe and worſhypped him after ſuche ſorte as was deuiſed. But Policarpon that ſat aboue the kyng at the bo
                  •
               de,Polycarpon. aſked one in ſkorne that touched the grounde with his chyrine, why he kyſſed no harder. With whiche wordes he moued Alexander to yre, wherof he was euer vnpacient. So that, he ſayd vnto Polycarpon: It is thou that diſdayneſt to honour me? ſhall I be mocked of the alone? He aunſwered that it was not ſeamely that a kynge ſhould be ſkorned, nor yet a ſubiect be diſpyſed. With whiche worde the kyng plucked hym from the table, and threwe him downe, to whome he ſayd, failyng grouelynges vpon the earth: Loo haſt thou not done thy ſelf, that before thou diddeſt ſkorne in an other man, & therupon he commaunded him toward, & ſo brake vp the feaſt. Polycarpon being thus puniſhed, was afterwardes pardoned. But Caliſtenes whoſe contempt & ſtobburnes the kyng had long grudged at, grounded his diſpleaſure then more deaper, vpon whome, there chaunſed ſhortly after an apt occaſion, to be reuenged.

It was a cuſtome (as it hath bene ſayd before) amonges the noble men of Macedon to put their ſonnes when they were paſt their childhode in ſeruice to the king, as pages to doe neceſſary buſines about his perſone. Their vſage was to watche nightly by courſe at the chambre dore where the kyng lay. The concubines were brought in by them, by an other way then where the guarde watched. Thei likewiſe receiued the horſes of the gromes of the ſtable, and brought them to the king when he leped on. They alwayes were about the kyng both in hunting and in battail, and were brought vp in the ſtudy of liberall ſciences. The chiefeſt honour was geuen vnto them, becauſe they might ſitte and eate with the kyng, none had power to correct thē with ſtripes but only the king himſelf. This company was like a maſſe or ſtore, from whēce al the capitaines and gouernours of the Macedons did come. From thence came their latter kynges whoſe lynage the power of the Romaynes long after did extinct.A treaſon conſpired againſt Alexander. Harmalaus one of that nombre, becauſe he had ſtriken a hore whome the kyng had thought to haue ſtriken him ſelf, was by his commaundement beaten, and ſcourged with roddes, whiche rebuke he toke greuouſly, and cō
               playned to Soſtrates his frende that was one of the ſame company.Soſtrates. Whiche ſeing the body torne, wherunto he had ſo great affeccion, and peraduenture offē
               ded alſo with the kyng before for ſome other cauſe. Stirred ſo Harmolaus (whiche was prouoked ſufficiently alredy) yt eche gaue faith to other to find a way to deſtroye the kyng. Whiche they executed not with any chyldiſhe proceding, but wyſely agreed to bring Nycoſtratus, Antipater, Aſclepiodorus, and Philotas, into the felowſhip of their cōſpiracie. And afteawards

they ioyned vnto them more Anticles, Elaptonius & Phimanes. But ye meane how to perfourme this purpoſe ſemed very difficult. It behoued al the to watche togethers, the vſage being, ye according to their courſe ſome watched one night, and ſome another. For if any ſhould happen amonges thē that were not priuy to the matter, might be a let to ye whole enterpriſe. Therfore about chaunging the courſe of their watche, & in other preparaciō for thexecutiō of their purpoſe; there paſſed xxxii. daies. At lēgth the night came when ye whole nō
               bre of the cōpiratours ſhuld watche togethers, who rē
               ioyſed greatly amonges thē ſelues, that eche had kept faith to other, wherof ſo many daies ſilence had geuen good proufe, during which time neither feare, nor hope, had altered any of their mindes: ſo great was the diſpleaſure they had conceiued againſt the king or els the fidelitie thei bare eche to other. Thei were ſtanding at the dore where the king did eate, to thintent that at his riſing frō the banquet, thei might bring him to his chā
               ber. But Alexanders fortune, & the pleſaūtnes of ſuch as were in his company, moued him to drinke largely, wherby & with other paſtimes & deuiſes, ye time was ſo prolōged, yt the cōſpiratours ſtode in a marueilous perplexitie, one while glad becauſe thei truſted to find him dronke when they ſhuld go about their enterpriſe, & an other while in great agony leſt he ſhuld ſit til daylight for then the cuſtome was to releue ye watche. & other to ſuccede in their places, and ſince their courſe ſhuld not come againe till the .vii. night after, they could not be aſſured that euery one of thē wold keape the thing ſecrete during theſame time. But whē the day began to appeare, & Alexander was ryſen from the banquet thei were ſo glad to execute their malice, that thei were ioyfull

to receyue the kyng. There was a woman accuſtomed to haunt the court (whiche being extraught of her minde and ſeming by ſome inſpiraciō to ſhew thinges to come) mette Alexander, and would in no wiſe ſuffer him to paſſe, but perſuaded him by al meanes ſhe could deuiſe to returne and ſit downe agayne. He ſayde to her in ſporte that the goddes gaue hym good aduyſe, and therupō called backe againe his familiers and ſat drinkyng tyll it was two owres after daye lyght. By which time an other company had releued the watche, and were ſtanding before the kynges chambre dore: notwithſtandyng whoſe commyng the conſpiratoures remayned ſtill after the time of their watche exſpired. So vehement is the hope whiche mens myndes conceiue, when they be drowned in the deſire of greate thinges. The king ſpake more gently to them then he was accuſtomed, and willed thē to go to their reſt, forſomuche as they had watched al the night before, & gaue vnto euery one of thē in reward .50. ſeſtercies, with cō
               mendacion of their diligence that thei continued their watche lenger then their tyme. Beyng thus deceyued of the great hope they were in, they departed to their lodginges, in expectaciō of the night when their courſe ſhould come againe.Ephimanes diſcloſed the conſpiracie. But Ephimanes whiche either by the genlenes the kynge ſhewed him amonges the reſt, or els that he thought the prouidence of God had withſtande their purpoſe, ſodainly chan̄ged his minde, and opened the matter they had gone about to his brother Eurilochus,Eurilochus that was not priuy to the matter before. The puniſhement of Philotas was ſo freſhe in euery mans memory, yt Eurilochus layd ſtraightways handes vpon his brother, and broughth him into the court. He called to the watche and ſhewed them, that

he brought 
                  •
               ewes pertayning to the kynges ſaueguarde. Whiche thing well apeared, al 
                  〈◊〉
                by their cōming at ſuche a time as alſo by their ſadnes, which was a teſtimony of their rebubled mindes. The watch men called vp Ptolomens & Leonatus that lay within the kinges chambre, which ſtreightway brought them into the king, & wakened him whiche by reaſon of his muche drinking lay in a dead ſleape. It was long or he awoke, but by litle & litle he came to himſelf, and aſked what the matter was. Then ſaid Eurilothus, thanked be the goddes y• haue not vtterly determined the ruyne of our 
                  •
               amely. For though my brother purpoſed an heynous act, yet is he come to repētaūce, & by him the matter is brought to light. This ſame very hight treaſon was cōſpired againſt you, the authours therof be ſuch as you would ſcarſely thinke. And therupon Ephimanes declared al thinges in ordre, with the names of the conſpiratours.Caliſtenes. It is certaine that Caleſtines was not named as one priuy to that treaſon out it was cōfeſſed that he gladly gaue care to others take, when they blamed & ſpake euil of the kinges procedinges. Some do adde therunto, that when Harmoleus did cōplayne to Caliſ
                  •
               enes howe the king had beaten him, he had him remembre how he was a man. But whether he ſpoke it to cauſe him to take the thing in paciēce, or els to ſturre him to further malice, it remaineth in doubte. Whē the king was fully awaked, & called to his memory ye peril he was in, gaue Eurilochus fifty talentes, with the forfeit of a riche mās goodes called Tyridates, & forgaue his brother before his pardō was required. He cōmauded the principall of this treaſō to be kept boūd, & amō
               ges them Caliſtenes which being takē & brought into the courte, the kyng ſlept all that daye and the nyght

enſuyng he was ſo 
                  〈◊〉
                with drin
                  ••
               ng and watchyng. The next day he called a great counſail, wherat the fathers and kinſfolkes of the conſpiratours were preſent, not very well aſſured of their owne ſauegarde, becauſe that by the lawe of the Macedons all ought to dye, that were any thyng a kynne to traytours. All the conſpiratours excepte Caliſiynes by the kynges commaundement were brought furth. Who immediatly confeſſed the whole treaſon they had deuiſed. Then euery man preſent reuiled them, and the kyng enquired what he had done to them, why they ſhould conſpire his death. When all the other ſtode ſtyll and held their peace,The wordes of Harmolaus to the kyng. Harmolaus aunſwered thus. Thou doeſt demaunde this thyng of vs as though thou knoweſt not the matter. We went about to kyll the, becauſe thou beganne to reigne ouer vs, as ſlaues and not free borne. As he was ſpeakyng thoſe wordes his father Perſepolys firſt of all called hym traytour and murtherer of his parentes, ſtoppyng his mouthe with his hande, that he ſhould ſpeake no further. Then the kyng plucked his father backe, and wylled Harmolaus to ſpeake, ſuch thynges as he had learned of his maiſter Caliſtenes. Then Harmolaus proceded: I will vſe thy benefite, and declare thoſe thynges whiche I haue learned to the greate myſchief of vs all. Howe ſmalle is the nombre of the Macedons remayning, that haue eſcaped thy crueltye? Attalus, Philotas, Parmenio, Lynceſtes Alexander, and Clytus, be nowe deade, but to our ennemyes behoue alyue. They ſtode in the fyghte, and defended the with their ſwordes, receyuing woundes for thy glory and victory, whome thou haſte very well rewarded. The one be ſprynckled thy table

with his bloud, and the other coulde not be ſuffred to dye a ſimple death. Thus the capitaines of thy people be tormented and put to death: a pleſaunt ſpectacle to the Percians, of whome they were victorers, Parmenio by whome thou diddeſt ſie thine enemy Attalus, was put to death without iudgement. Thus thou vſeſt thy handes of vs wretches, as inſtrumentes one to kill another, and whom thou diddeſt make thy tormentours, alitle before, ſtraightwayes thou commaundeſt them to be tormented of others. At thoſe wordes the multitude began to ſhout againſt Harmolaus, and his father drewe his ſworde of purpoſe to haue ſlaine him, if he had not bene letted by the kyng, whiche cōmaunded Harmolaus to ſpeake, & required the reſt to heare him paciently, whiche (he ſaid) enforced the cauſe of his own puniſhemēt. At lēgth with great labour thei held their peace, & then Harmolaus began again: how liberall is he to ſuffre rude children to ſpeake? When the voice of Caliſtenes is ſhut vp in priſon, becauſe he alone is able to tell his tale, and why? becauſe thou feareſt the freſpeche of an innocent, & becauſe thou canſt not endure to behold his face, & yet I will iuſtifie he is not priuy to this matter. But other there be here that purpoſed with me a noble enterpriſe, of whom there is not any that can accuſe Caliſtenes of conſent, and yet thou that art our pacient and rightuous king haſt determined here his death. Theſe be the rewardes of the Macedons, whoſe bloud thou doeſt miſuſe as vile and of no valeur. Thou haſt .xxx.M. mules carieng ſpoyle and treaſure, and yet the poore ſouldiers cary nothing with them but vnrewarded woundes and ſkarres. All which thinges we did eaſely ſuffre before thou diddeſt betray vs to the barbarous, and after a newe trade, of

victourers make vs ſlaues. Thou alloweſt the apparell and diſciplyne of the Percians, and deſpyſeſt the maners of thine own coūtrey. And therfore we determined to kil the, not king of Macedō but kyng of Perce, and as a fugitiue we perſecuted the by the lawe of armes. Thou wouldeſt haue the Macedōs knele to the and worſhip the as a god. Thou doeſt refuſe Philip for thy father, & if any God had bene before Iupiter, thou wouldeſt haue refuſed him likewyſe. Doeſt thou maruaille if free men can not beare this thy pryde? what can we hope for at thy handes? ſeyng we muſte either dye as innocentes, or els that is worſe then death, lyue and remayne in boundage as ſlaues. Thou arte greatly in my debte, if by this thou couldeſt amende, for thou haſte begunne to learne of me, the thyng that free hartes cannot endure. Spare them whoſe age ſhalbe ſufficiently tormented with the loſſe of their chyldren, but vpon vs cauſe execution to be done, to thintent we maye obtayne by our owne death the thynge we ſought for by thyne. When Harmolaus had ſpoken theſe wordes, the kynge then aunſwered after this maner:The oraciō of Alexāder
            
            
               Howe falſe theſe thynges be whiche he hath learned of his inſtructour, my pacience doth declare.For notwithſtanding he before confeſſed this treaſon. Yet my mynde was ye ſhould heare what he could ſaye. Knowyng very well that when I gaue lybertie to this thief to ſpeake, that he woulde vſe theſame rage and fury in his talke, which before moued him to haue kylled me, whome he ought to haue loued as his father. Of late when that in huntyng he vſed a great preſumption. I commaunded hym to be chaſtiſed after the cuſtome of our countrey vſed by the kynges of Macedon.
Whiche chaſtiſement

we muſt graunt nedefull to be done, lyke as the people bee accuſtomed of their tutors, the wyfes of their huſbandes, and ſeruauntes of their maiſters.
               This was all the crueltie I vſed towardes hym, which he would haue reuenged with murther and treaſon. But howe gentle I am to all perſones, that ſuffre me to vſe myne owne diſpoſicion, ſynce you your ſelfe doe knowe, it were ſuperfluous for me to reherſe. I can not maruayll at all, though the punyſhement of traytours be diſpleſaunt to Harmelaus, ſince he hym ſelfe is in theſame caſe, for when he commendeth Parmenio and Philotas, it maketh for his owne purpoſe. I pardoned Lynceſtes Alexandre, whiche was accuſed by two witneſſes, that he twiſe cōſpired treaſon againſt me. And againe conuicted, yet deferred I his puniſhment twoo yeares, tyll you your ſelues required he might haue his deſeruing. Towching Attalus ye remembre very well howe he wrought treaſon agaynſte me before I was kyng. And for Clytus I would God he had not moued me to yre, whoſe raſhe tounge ſpeaking rebuke and ſhame both of me and you, I ſuffred lenger then he would haue done me, ſpeaking the like. The clemency of kynges and rulers, cōſiſteth not only in their owne diſpoſicions, but in theres, that be vnder their ſubiection. For the rigor of ſuche as be rulers, is mitigated with humilitie. But when mens mindes be voyd of reuerence, & high & lowe be confounded as a like, thē force is neceſſary to repulce violēce. But why maruel I, yt he did lay cruelty againſt me, yt durſt obiect towardes me couetouſnes. I wil not cal you to witnes one by one, leſt I ſhuld braide you wt liberalitie, by making declaraciō what I haue beſtowed vpon you. Behold ye whole multitude, which a litle while ago, had nothing

els but their bare armour, doe they not lye in ſyluer beddes? be not their tables charged with plate, and poſſeſſe they not whole flockes of ſlaues? They are not able to ſuſteyne the ſpoyles of their enemies. But it is ſayd the Percians be honoured of me whom we haue conquered. Truly they be ſo, & yet, what greater proufcan there be of my moderaciō,
                     
                        〈1 paragraph〉
                     
                   thē that I do not reigne proudely ouer ſuche as I haue ſubdued. I came into Aſia not vtterly to ſubuert the naciōs, nor to make the one half of the worlde deſert, but to geue the cōquered cauſe, not to repent them of our victory. This is the occaſion they gladly fight for you, and for your kyngdome they ſpend their bloud: which if they were proudly vſed, would ſtreight rebell againſt you. The poſſeſſion is not durable whiche is poſſeſſed by violence, but the thankes of gentlenes receiued, endureth euerlaſtingly. If we purpoſe to enioye Aſia, and not to make a progreſſe through it, we muſte make them partakers of our clemency and then their fidelitie ſhal make our empire ſtable and perpetuall. And truly we haue nowe more then we can well wyſhe or deſire. Couetouſnes is an vnſaciable thyng, ſpecially when men deſire to fill the veſſell that ronneth ouer. But ye will ſaye that I myxe and brynge their cuſtomes amonges ours: It is ſo, and whie? becauſe I ſee in diuers nacions right many thynges whiche we nede not be aſhamed to folowe. And ſo greate an Empire as we haue gotten, cannot otherwiſe be aptly gouerned, except we deliuer ſome thynges to thē, and receiue likewiſe ſome again. One thing is to be laught at, that I ſhould refuſe Iupiter for my father, being ſo acknowledged by his oracle, as who ſaith, the anſwere of the gods were in my power, he proffered ye name of his ſōne vnto me which

was not vnmete for ye thinges we purpoſed. I woulde wiſhe yt the Indians beleued me to be a god, for ye ſucceſſe in warre ſtand much by fame, and that which is faulſely beleued ſomtyme worketh theffect of thinges true. Do you me geue too exceſſe and prodigalyte, bicauſe I garniſhed your armor with gold and ſiluer, my purpoſe was to ſhewe to men accuſtumed with it, nothing to be more vile then ſuch kynd of mettell, and to declare that the Macedōs inuincible in other thinges could not be ouercome with gold it ſelf. After this maner I ſhall blynd the eyes of the barbarous, which are wont at the firſt ſight to wonder at things be they neuer ſo baſe and wile. And in that we ſhewe to make no eſtimacion of it. We ſhal declare to euery one that we are not com for deſire of gold nor ſiluer but to ſubdue the hole world. From which glory, thou traitour, woldeſt haue bereued me, and betraied the Macedons (I being ſlaine) to the barbarous nacions Thou doeſt exhorte me, to ſpare your Parentes, It is nedefull I ſhould make him priuie what I haue determyned vpon them? no and to that intent he might die wyth the greater dolour, if he hath any care or memory of them. It is long ago ſins I did fordo the cuſtume of putting thinnocent parentes and kinſfolkes of traytours to death with them. And I now profeſſe to pardon, and haue them al in the ſame eſtymacion I had before. I knowe whie thou wouldeſt haue thy Maiſter Caliſtenes brought furth whiche only eſtemeth the being of his ſorte bicauſe thou deſireſt to he re pronoūced of his mouth, thoſe rayling wordes, which euen nowe thou diddeſt ſpyt out agaynſt me. If he had bene a Macedon borne I had brought hym in wyth the a worthye mayſter for ſuch a deſiple. But being borne in another

countrey, he is ſubiect to an other lawe.
            
            When he had ſpoken theſe wordes, he diſmiſſed the counſail, & commaunded all ſuche as were condempned, to be deliuered to the ſouldioures of their owne bandes, who bicauſe they woulde declare by ſome crueltye, the loue they bare towardes their prince, flew theim all by tormentes. Caliſtenes alſo died vpon the racke, innocent of the conſpiracye againſt the kinges perſon, but a mā not pliable to the cuſtome of the courte, and abhorring from the diſpoſition of flatterers. There was neuer thynge that brought the Grekes in greater indignation againſte Alexander, then that he not onelye kylled, but cauſed to be tormented to death, and that wythout iudgement, a man endued with Godly maners & good ſciences, by whom he was perſwaded to liue, when he purpoſed to haue died for ſorowe that he hadde ſlayne Clitus with his cruelty, repentaūce folowed that came to late. But leaſt he myght nouriſhe idlenes, apte for ſowynge of ſedicious rumours, he marched towarde India, alwayes more glorious in warre then after his victorye.The diſcriptiō of India The whole countrey of India lieth chiefely towardes the Eaſt, conteyning more in length, then it doth in breadth. The North partes be full of mountaines and hilles, but all the reſt of the lande is plaine, hauynge manye faire riuers, whiche runninge out of mounte Caucaſus, do paſſe pleaſauntlye throughe the countrey.Indus Indus is more colde thē any of the other riuers, whoſe water is not vnlike the coler of ye ſea. But of al the riuers in the orient Ganges is moſt excellent,Ganges. which running frō the ſouth paſſeth directly throughe many great moūtaines, vntil that by the encountring of rockes, his courſe is turned towarde the eaſt, where it is receiued into the red ſea, the violence of ye ſtreame

breaketh downe his bakes, ſwalowing in trees, & much of the grounde. In many places the ſtreme is kept in with rockes, wherupō it beateth. But where the groūd is more ſofte, there the riuer becommeth more larger, & maketh many Ilandes. The greatnes of Ganges is much encreaſed by Aceſines,Aceſynes. wherunto Aceſines doth enter into ye ſea, where theſe two riuers mete, the water is violētly troubled, whiles the one reſiſteth the others enter, neither of them ſeme to geue place? Diardenes is a riuer of the leſſe fame,Diardenes. bicauſe it runneth in ye vttermoſt bondes of India, but yet it bryngeth forth Crocadiles as Nylus dothe, & alſo Dolphines, with other monſters vnknowen to other nations.Erimāthus Croked Erymanthus with his many turnynges and reflexiōs is conſumed by the inhabitours with wateryng their grounde which is the cauſe that when it draweth nere the ſea, it becommeth very little, and beareth no nāme There be many other riuers that do deuide the countrey but none of theim be ſo famous as theſe, becauſe they do not runne ſo farre. The northe wynde dothe blaſt and harme moſt thoſe partes that be nexte vnto the ſea. But thoſe wyndes be ſo broken wyth the toppes of the mountaynes, that they can not endomage the inwarde partes of the countrey, wherfore fruites be very plentifull there and perfite. But that region doth differ ſo much for thordinary courſe of time in other partes of the world, yt when other coūtries be burned moſt wt the ſunne, India is couered ouer wt ſnow. And when other places be froſē, the heat is there moſt intollerable, & yet there appeare not any natural cauſe why it ſhould be ſo.
            The couler of the Indian ſea not differing much frō the water of other ſeas, did take his name of king Erithrus, wherof the ignoraunte toke opinion yt the water

of thoſe Seas was redde. The land is very haboū
               dant of flaxe whereof the more part of their garments be made. The twygges of the trees be ſo tender, that they receyue the prynt of letrs lyke waxe. The byrdes by teaching counterfeit mens voyce. There be manye beaſtes that are not bred, amonges other nacions. Rinocerities, be there brought furth, but not bredde. The Elyphantes of that countrey be ſtronger then thoſe yt be made tame in Affrike, and thre bignes do aunſwer vnto there ſtrenght The water of the Riuers do cary downe gold, and ronne mildly without any great fall. The Sea doth caſt vpon the Shore both parles and precious ſtones: Wherof proceded the cauſe of there great riches after ther Marchandiſe was once knowē to other nacions? the purgings of the ſeas being then eſtemed as mans fanſy would make the price. The diſſpoſyſiōs of the men (as in all other places) be according to the ſcytuacion of the countreys they dwell in. They make there garmentes of lynnyn cloth whych couer their bodyes downe to there fete. They bynde ſoules vnder there fete of beaſtes ſkynnes, & wrappe roules of linnine aboute there heades. Such as be in any degre either of nobilitie, or riches, haue precious ſtones hanging at there eares, and couer all there armes wyth braſlettes and ornamentes of gould. They vſe greate curioſitye in kymminge of there heades, which they rounde very ſildome. They ſhaue without anye forme of grauitie, all partes of there face ſauinge their chinne.The voluptuouſnes and exceſſe in the kings of India. But thexceſſe in voluptuouſnes (which they cal magnificence) vſed by the kynges ther do excede the vices of all nacions. When there will is to be ſene abrode there ſeruamite cary about them parfuming pannes of ſiluer, & fyll al the wayes where

they go
                  ••
                fine are ſauoures, and they theim ſelues be borne in litters of golds hangynge full of pearles, and the garmentes they were be of golde and purple enpaled together. The armed men folow their litter, & ſuch as be of their garde, emong whō there be birdes borne vpon boughes, whyche they haue taught alwayes to ſynge, when they be occupied in earneſt matters.
            In the kynges palayce there be pillers of golde carued aboute wyth Vynes of golde, wherin the images of thoſe byrdes they delight moſte in, be artificiallye wrought. The court is open to all commers, when the Kynges do kembe and dreſſe their heades, then they vſe to gaue aunſwere to the imbaſſadoures, and to do iuſtice vnto their people. When their ſoles be taken of their fete be anoynted wyth ſwete odours. The greateſt trauayle they take, is when they hunt wilde beaſtꝭ encloſed in Parkes, whyche they ſtryke whiles their concubynes be ſyngynge and daliynge wyth them. The arrowes that they ſhote be of two cubites long, whyche doo not the effecte of the force they be ſhotte wythall, by reaſon of ther weyght, which is an impedimente to their ſwiftenes, wherin the propertye of the arowe chiefely conſiſteth. In ſmall iourneys they vſe to ryde on horſebacke, but when they haue to trauayle further, they be caried vpon Elephantes, the huge bodies be couered all ouer with golde. And becauſe no vice ſhoulde wante amonges their corrupte maners, great rowtes of concubines do folowe them in golden litters. The Quenes haue their bandes ſeperate by thē ſelues, which in all exceſſe of voluptuouſnes be nothing inferior vnto ye kinges. It belongeth to the womē there to dreſſe meat, & they alſo ſerue men of wine, wherof there is great plentye amonges the Indians.

When the kyng hath largelye dronke, and is fallen in a ſleape, hys concubynnes vſe to carye hym into hys chamber, callyng vpon their Goddes, with a ſonge after their countrey maner. Who woulde thinke that amonges all theſe vices, there were any regarde had of uertue.The wiſe men of India. There is amonges them a rude and an vnciuill kynde of people, whom they call wiſe men, whyche count it the moſt glorious thyng to preuent their owne deathes, and they vſe to burne them ſelfes whiles thei be a liue. It is imputed for a great ſhanie to ſuch as ether can not wel ſtere for age, or haue not their perfite health if they prolong their life till their natural death approche. Nor there is no honoure geuen to thoſe bodies that dye for age. They thinke the Fiers be defiled if the bodyes be not alyue that be burned in them. Suche as liue in cityes after a ciuill maner, attayne to the moſt apt knowledge of the ſtarres mo
                  •
               yng, and to the propheciyng of thynges to come. Nor they can not thinke that anye man dothe ſhorten his life, that loketh for death without feare. They eſteme thoſe for Goddes that they begynne once to worſhippe, and ſpecially trees, the violatyng of the whiche, they forbidde vnder paine of death. They count after fiftye dayes to the moneth, & notwithſtandynge limitte their yeres as they do in other places. They note not their tymes by ſuch courſe of the moune as is cōmunely vſed, that is from the ful moūe, but frō the firſt quarter whē ſhe beginneth firſte horned, & by coūtynge of thē after the ſame maner, make thē ye ſhorter. There be many other thinges reported of thē, wt the which I thought not neceſſary to interrupt ye order of this ſtory. As Alexander entred into India, the Princes of the countrey came vnto him ſubmitting thē ſelues, declaring that he was

the thirde man that euer came amonges them beynge begotten of Iupiter. They ſaid that Hercules & Bacchus was not knowen to them, but onely by fame, but they reioyſed that they mighte beholde him preſentlye with their eyes. Alexander receiued thē wyth all gentlenes he coulde deuiſe, & willed them to accōpany him, becauſe he woulde vſe them as guides in his iourney. But when he ſawe that the whole numbre came not, he ſent Epheſtion & Perdicas with part of his armye before, to ſubdue ſuche as would not ſubmit them ſeluee, and willed them to go forwardes tyll they came to the riuer of Indus, and there to make boates, wherby he myght tranſport his armye. And bycauſe they had to paſſe many riuers the boates were ſo deuiſed that thei myght be taken a ſunder to be caried in cartes, and afterwardes ioyned agayne together. He appointed Craterus to folow him with the phalanx, and he wyth ſuch horſemen and fotemen that were lightarmed went before, and beynge encountred in his waye, foughte a ſmall battayle, and did driue his enemies into the next 
                  •
               itye. When Craterus was come, to thintent he might ſtrike terrour amonges thoſe people that had not yet proued the Macedons force, commaunded that when they wanne the citye, they ſhoulde kyll both man, woman, and child, and burne the ſame to the hard groūd. But whiles he ridde about the walles, he was ſtriken with an arowe. Notwithſtanding the city was wonne, and al put to the ſwerd: the verye houſes not eſcaping the victorers cruelty. After this he ſubdued an obſcure nacion and came to a citye called Nyſa.The citye of Niſa. It chaunſed ye whiles ther encamped in a woode before the citye, there fell a cold in the nyght yt more afflicted the Macedons then euer it had done before in any other place.

Againſt the whiche thei prepared the remedy that was next at hande, and cutte doune the woode to make thē great fires. The flame wherof caught the ſepulchres belonging to the citye, which by reaſō they were made of Cedre, were ſone ſet on fire, and neuer left burning till they were all conſumed. That fire made both a
                  •
               arum to the Citye, and to the campe: for therby the citizens iudged that their enemies woulde make ſome attempt againſt them, and the Macedōs perceiued by the barkyng of the dogges and noyſe of men, that the Indians would ſalye out vpon them. Wherfore Alexander iſſuyng out of his campe in order of battel, ſlew ſuch of them as attempted the fight.
            Wherupon they within the Citie became of diuers opinions, ſome were minded to yelde, and other thought good to aduenture the extremitie. When Alexander vnderſtode of their diuiſon, he cauſed his men to abſtayne from ſlaughter, & only to maintaine the ſiege. At length they were ſo weried wyth the diſcommodities of the warre, that they yelded them ſelues. They affirmed their original to come of Bacchꝰ, who in dede builded their city at the fote of a moūtaine called Meroe.The moūte Meroe. The qualitie of whiche mountaine being reported to Alexander by thinhabiters he ſent vittels before, & paſſed thether with his whole armye, aſcendyng vp to the toppe. The mountayne grew ful of vynes & Iuie, aboundyng with ſprynges yt flowed out in euery place. The ſame was alſo plētiful of many kindes of Apples of moſt pleaſaunt taſte, the ground alſo brought forthe corne without any cultiuation. There grew alſo plēty of Laurell trees, wt many kind of wild frute. I cā not impute it to any m
                  •
               cion of religiō, but rather to plēty and wantonnes, yt cauſed thē to repaire thither, wherof

the Iuye and the vyne leaues they made them ſelfes garlandes and ran vp and downe after a diſſolute maner, all the holowes and valeyes there about rebounding with ye voice of ſo many thouſandes, calling vpō Bacchus, to whom that place was dedicate. Which licence and libertie begonne a fewe, was ſpredde ſoſodeinly through out the hole armye, that the ſouldiers ſcatered abrode wythout ordre, lay heare and there repoſing them ſelues vpon the graſſe and leaues they had gathered togither, as it had bene in a time of quiet and moſte aſſured peace. Whiche lycenſiouſnes of the ſouldiers riſing by chaunce, Alexander dyd not withſtand, but ten daies togither made feaſtes to Bacchus during which tyme he plentyfully banketed hys hole armye. Who can therefore denye but that greatnes of fame and glory, is oftentymes a benefite rather of fortune then of vertue? for ther enemies had no harte to ſet vpon them whiles they were drowned in thys exceſſe of banketting, dronkenſhip, and drowſenes but were as much afrayed of there dronken noyſe, as if they had hard there cry encountring with them in battell whiche felicitie preſeruing them here, did afterwardes defend them after the ſame maner in the middes of their enemies retorning as it were in triumphe from the Ocean Sea, when they were giuen all to feſting, and to dronkenes. When Alexander deſcended from the mountaine he went to a countrey called Dedala which thinhabiters forſoke & fledde to the woods and the wyld mountaines,Dedala. and therfore paſſed from thence into Achadera,Achadera. which he found both burned and habandoned likewiſe of thinhabiters, wherby of neceſſitye he was compelled to vſe the warre after an other maner. For he deuided hys armye into diuers partes

& ſhewed his powre in many places at ones. By which meanes he oppreſſed them before they coulde prouide, and ſubdued them to their vtter ruyne. Ptolomeus toke moſt Cities but Alexander wanne the greateſte, and afterwardes ioyned agayne his armye togither, which he had thus deuided.Coaſpe. That done he went forwards and paſſed a riuer called Coaſpe where he left Cenon to beſiege a riche Cytie called Bezira,Bezira. 
               Amazaga. and he him ſelfe went to Amazaga where Aſſacanns beinge deade had lefte the dominion both of the countrey and the Citie to his mother Cleophes.Quene Cleophes. There were .xxx. thouſand fotemen to defend that Cytie whiche bothe was well fortified and ſtronge of ſcituacion▪ being encloſed vpon the eſte with a ſwift riuer that hath ſ
                  •
               epe bankes defendyng the cytie▪ that it cānot be approched on that ſide, vpon the South and the weſte partes nature as it were for the nonce, had planted high rockes betwyxt the which there laye depe holowes and pittes made of old antyquitie, wheras the rockes ceſſed, ther began a dike of a woūderfull depth and widenes. The wall wherwith the citie was encloſed was .xxxv. furlonges in compaſſe, whereof the nether partes were builded of ſtonne, and the vpper partes of Claye. Yet ſtones were mixed with the clay, to the intent that the fraille ſubſtance clinging to the hardre, the one ſhould bynd the other. And left the earth waſſhed vpon with the raine might fal altogether, there were ſtanchinges of Tymbre put betwixt to ſtay the holle worck: Which couered ouer wyth bordes was a waye for men to go vpon.
            Alexander beholding this kynde of fortificacion was vncertayne what to do, For he ſawe he could not approche to the walles but by fylling of thoſe dikes and

holowe places. And that he could not otherwiſe fil thē, then by making of a mounte, which was the only way he had to bryng his engines to the walles. But whiles he was viewing the towne after that maner, he was ſtriken from the wall with an arrowe in the thieghe. Which he pulled out and without wrappinge of his wound called for his horſe, and letted not for hys hurt to giue order for ſuch thinges as he though expedient But at length when by hanging of hys legge, the blod drue from the wounde and waxed colde, wherby hys hurte beganne to payne hym, he then ſayde: That he was called the Sonne of Iuppiter but he felt in hym ſelf the paſſions of a deſeaſed bodye. Yet notwithſtandyng he would not returne into the campe before he had viewed all thinges that were neceſſary, and apoynted all thinges he would haue done. After that the ſouldiers had receyued there apointment, by plu
                  •
               
               kyng downe of houſes without the towne, they gotte great plenty of ſtuf to make the mount withal. And by caſting ſtockes of trees on heapes into the dykes and holowe places, the mount within nyne dayes was raiſed vp to the top of the wales, and the towres were planted vpon the ſame: ſuch was the labour and dilygence the ſouldiers vſed in the matier.
            The kynge before hys wounde was cloſed vp went to ſee howe the workes went forwarde and, when he parceyued them in ſuch caſe, commended the ſouldiers for there dilygence, & cauſed thyngynes to be brought to the walles out of the whych they that defended the walles were ſore afflicted wyth ſhotte. And by reaſon they had not ſene any ſuch kynd of worke, were wonderfully amaſed, ſpeſially when they beheld the towres of ſuche bignes come forwardes, and yet coulde

not perceiue b
                  •
                what meanes they were moued iudged thoſe things to be done by ye powre of ye Gods. And beſides they could not think it a mateir of mans inuencion that ſo great dartes and ſpeares as came amonges them, ſhould be ſhot by engynes, diſperyng therefore of the defence of there Citye, they retired into the Caſtle. And bicauſe they could not be ſatiſfied any maner of waie til they had yealded thē ſelfes▪ they ſent Embaſſeadors to the king to aſk pardon. Which thing obtained at his hands, the Quene with a great trayne of noble women came furth bearing in there handes cuppes of gold ful of wyne. Who preſenting her little ſonne before the kinges feete, not onely obtayned pardonne but alſo reſtorement of her former dignytie. Wherefore ſome thought that her beuty procured hir more fauore, then his mercie. But this is certaine that the child which afterwardes ſhe brought furth, who ſoeuer did beget it. was called Alexāder. Frō this place Polycarpon was ſent with a powre vnto a City called Ora,Ora. where he ouerthrewe in battel thinhabiters that encountred with him, whereby he got the Citye into hys poſſeſſion. Ther were many other Cities obſcure of fame, that came into Alexanders handes by thabā
               doning of thinhabiters, which aſſembled them ſelfes togither in armes and kept a rock called Aorun.The rocke called Aorun. The fame was that Hercules had beſieged the ſame before tyme in vaine, and by reaſon of an earthquake enforced to departe.
            When Alexander viewed thys rocke, and ſawe howe ſtepe it was and vnpaſſable, became voyde of counſell tyl ſuch tyme as an old man that knewe wel the place came to hym with hys two ſonnes, offring for a reward to guyde hys men awaye vp to toppe.
            
               Alexander promiſed them .iiii. ſcore talentes, and keapinge one of his ſonnes as pledge, ſente him to parfourme that he had promyſed. Mulinus the kynges Secretary was apoynted with certayne ſouldiers lighte armed to folowe the guyde, whoſe purpoſe was to receiue the Indians by fetching a compaſſe about the rock. But the ſame rock was not as the more parte be, whiche lieng aſlope hath wayes vp vnto the toppe by degrees. For it ſtode bolte vpright after the faſhion of a but, brode benethe and euer as it groweth vpward leſſe and leſſe, tyll it becometh ſharpe in the 
                  •
               oppe. And it is encloſed on yt on ſyde wt the Riuer of Indus that hath highe & ſtepe banckes & vpon the otheirwith depe dikes & holowe places, ful of water and mudde. Wherefore there could be deuiſed no way to wynne it except thoſe dikes were firſte fylled. There was a woode at hand which the king commaunded to be cut downe, and cauſyng the bowes to be ſhred of for the cariage, filled the holowes with the bare ſtockes. Alexander bare the fyrſt tree, and all the ſouldiers folowed after with a couragious ſhowt, for there was no man that would refuce to do that they ſawe the kynge begynne: So that within .vii. dayes the dikes and hollowe places were fylled vp. Then the king apoynted ye Agrians and the archers to go to the aſſaulte of the rocke, and did choſe .xxx. yonge men of ſuch as he iudged moſt apt for ye purpoſe out of hys owne bande,Charus and Alexander. to leading of whō he apointed Charus and Alexander whom he put in remembraunce of his name that was in comen to them bothe. At the fyrſt bicauſe the haſard was ſo manifeſt, the kyng was not determyned to aduenture his own parſon. But when the trompet blewe to thaſſault, he was of ſuch a redy courag that he could

not obſtaine, but making a ſigne to his guard that thei ſhoulde folowe him, was the fyrſte that ſet fote vpon the rock. Then there were fewe of the Macedons that would gladly haue taried behind, but many lefte their array where as they ſtode in ordre of battell, and folowed the king. The cauſe of many was miſerable whom the riuer that ran by ſwalowed in, when they fell downe from the rocke. Which ſight was ſorowfull to ſuch as were out of daungeir being admoniſhed by the perel of other, what they ought to feare them ſelfs So that their cumpaſſion being turned into feare, lamented aſwell them ſelues, as thoſe whome they ſawe ſlayne after that maner. At length they went ſo farre 
                  •
               urth, that without the getting of the rocke they coulde not returne back againe without there greate deſtruccion. For there enemies rowled downe great ſtones vpon them wherwith they were eaſely beaten downe, the rocke hauing ſo ſlippar and vnſtable ſtanding. Yet for all that Charus and Alexander whiche were apointed the leading of the .xxx. choſen ſouldiers, had gotten to ye toppe, and beganne to fight hand to hand. But there were ſo many dartes caſt at them from afarre, that they receiued mo woūdes then they could gyue. Wherefore Alexander bothe myndfull of his name, and of his promiſe, whiles he fought more egerly then warely, was encloſed aboute and ſlayne. Whom when Charus ſawe deade, he ranne vpon his enemies, and vnmyndefull of all thynges ſauing of reueng, ſlewe many wyth hys pike and dyuers wyth hys ſworde. But beinge layed at by ſo manye at onſe, he fell downe deade vpon the bodye of hys frende. The death of thes two ſo hardy yonge men▪ and of the reſte moued Alexander greatly, yet

parceyuing no remedy in ye matter, cauſed the retracte to be ſowned. It was gretly for their ſalfgard▪ that they retired by lettle and little without aperaunce of anye feare and the Indians contented to haue repulſed their enemies, purſued not after them. Alexander herupon was determined to leaue of his purpoce, ſeing he ſawe no hope howe to wynne the rock, yet he made a countenaunce as though he ment to cōtinewe the ſieg ſtyll. For both he cauſed the wayes to be cloſed vp. And made an approche with towers of woode, alwayes putting freſhe men in place of them that were weried. When the Indians parceiued Alexanders abſtinacy, two dayes and two night they banketed contiunially, and played vpon timbrels after there maner, to cauſe there enemies thinke that they had no doubte in the ſiege, but truſted ſuerly to preuaill. The thirde nighte the noyſe of there 
                  •
               imbreles ceaſed, and many torches were ſene burning, which the Indians had lighted to ſe which way they might eſcape downe the rocke in the darke night. Alexander ſent Balacrus to deſcouer the matter,Balacrus. who found that the Indians were fledde, and that the rock was habandoned. Then aſigne was geuen that the holle Armye ſhould giue a ſhowte at once, wherbye they dyd ſtrycke ſuche feare amongys their enemyes that fledde wythout ordre. That many of them thynkynge their enemies had bene at there backes, leaped downe the rockes and ſlewe them ſelues, and ſome mayned in there falling were left behind by there felowes that fled awaie, Thus the kynge being victorer of the place, rathere then of the man teſtyfied natwithſtāding wt ſolempne ſacrifyces vnto the gods a greatnes of victory, and ſet vp aulters vpon the rock to Minarua and Victoria.

And though ye guides that he apoynted to his light armed men, parfourmed not ſo much as they promiſed, yet there reward was truely giuen them. And the rule of the rock with the countrey thereaboutes was cōmitted to Syſocoſtus.S
                     •
                  ſocoſtus. And he him ſelf went forwardes wyth his army from thence to Echolyma.Echolyma. But vnderſtanding that certayne ſtreightes through the whych he ſhould paſſe were kept by one Erix with,Erix. xx. thouſand armed men. He committed that parte of hys army that were heuie armed to Cenon to be brought on by ſoft iorneyes, and going before in parſon with the ſlyngers and Archers, put his enemies to flight, making the way clere for hys army to paſſe that folowed after. The Indians whither it were for the hatred they bare vnto their capteine, or els for to get ye fauour of the victorer, kylled Eryx as he fled awaye, and brought hys head, and hys armour vnto Alexander. Who conſidering the fowlenes of the act woulde n
                  •
               t honor the doers, for then ſample ſake, nor puniſhe them bicauſe they ſerued his purpoſe. From thence by .xvi. remouinges he came to that parte of the Riuer of Indus, where Epheſtion had prepared al thynges in ſuch ſort as he had commiſſion. One Omphis was king of that countrey,Omphis on of the kinges of Iuda which before had perſuaded his father to ſubmyt him ſelfe vnto Alexāder. Who in meadiatly vpon his fathers death ſent Embaſſadours vnto hym to know his pleaſure, whither he ſhoulde take vpon hym as a kynge before his comming or els liue priuately in the meane ſeaſon? And although it was permitted him to gouerne as a king, yet he would not vſe the auctoritie that was graunted him. He had cauſed Epheſtion to be receiued in the beaſte ſort he could deuiſe, but notwythſtandyng had not viſited him, by

cauſe he would not commit his parſone to any mans fidelitie but to the kinges. But when he vnder ſtode of Alexanders comming, he wente againſt him wyth his holle power. whoſe Eliphantes by ſmall diſtaūce myxed in battell amonges his fotemen, ſhewed afarre of, like caſtelles. At the fyrſte Alexander did not take him as a frend, but as an enemye, and therefore ſet his men in ordre of battell, and hys horſemen in winges in redynes for to fight. When Omphis vnderſtode the errour of the Macedons, he commaūded his men to ſtaye, and puttinge his ſpores to his horſe ridde forwardes alone. Alexāder did the like making no doubt whither he were afrend or an enemie but thought him ſelfe ſure, eyther through his owne manhode, or the others fidelity. Theyr me
                  •
               ing as it apered by their coū
               tenaunces was very frendely, but for want, of an interpretor they could not ſpeake togithers. Therefore after they had called one vnto them: the Indian king declared vnto Alexander, that the cauſe he met him wt an army. was to put in mediatly his hole powre into his handes, nor that he had not taried to treate for any aſſuraunce by meſſengers, but vpō truſt only had committed both his parſon and his kingdome to hym whom he knewe to make warre for the wynning of of glory and fame, and therfore could not feare in him any parfidye. Alexander reioyſed to ſe hys ſimplicitie, and prouffred hym his righthand as pledg of hys promiſe, and reſtoring to him agayne his kyngdome, he preſented vnto Alexāder .lvi. Elephantes with many other beaſtes of exceding greatnes and .iii, thouſande bulles, which is a cattell of great value in thoſe countreys, and much eſtemed of kinges. Alexander enquited of hym whither he had vnder hys dominion more

ſouldiers or tyllers of the grounde. He aunſwered that he was driuen of neceſſity to haue more ſouldiers bicauſe he was at warre with two kinges whoſe kingdoms lay beyond the riuer of Hidaſpis. There names were Abyaſſares and Porus, but the auctoritie remayned in Porus. And ſayed that he was prepared and reſolued to aduenture the haſard of the battell wyth ſuch of them as ſhould inuade him fyrſt. Hereupon Alexander graunted vnto Omphis both to take vpon him the Diadeame and the name of hys father that was called Taxiles: the cuſtome of the countrey being ſuch that the name euer folowed the kingdome whoſoeuer enioyed it. When he had receyued Alexander honorablye in hoſpitalitie thre dayes, the fourth daye declaring howe much corne he had deliuered to Epheſtion and to his army, preſented to the kyng and to all his frendes Crownes af gold, and beſides of coyned ſiluer .lxxx. talentes. Alexander reioyſed ſo much in hys good will that he bothe returned agayne to hym hys giftes, and gaue him beſydes a thouſands talentes of the pray he brought with him, with much plate of gold and ſiluer, many garments after the Parcian maner, and .xxx. of his owne horſes with the ſame furnymentes they warre, when he did ride vpon them. Which lyberalytie as it bound Omphis, ſo it greatlye offended the mynds of the Macedones. For Meleager at ſupper when he had well dronk: ſaied he was verie glad that Alexander had yet found one in India whome he iudged worthy to receiue the gyfte of a thouſand talentes The kyng bearing in mynd, howe much he had repented the ſ
                  •
               eaing of Clitus for the raſhenes of his tounge, refrayned his anger but yet 
                  •
               old him: That inuious men, were euer tormenters

to themſelfes. The next day the Imbaſſeadours of king Abyaſares came,King Abyaſares. vnto Alexāder, who according to there commiſſion offred all thinges vnto hys wyll. Whervpon promiſe and aſſuraunce being confirmed,Kynge Porus. they retorned againe to their Maſter. Alexander therfore thinking that through the greatnes of hys name Porus might be brought to do ye like, ſent Cleochares to him for to demaunde tribute, and to ſomone him to come and make his homage, when he ſhould entre the boundes of hys kingdome. Porus made aunſwer that of thoſe two requeſts he would parforme on, which was to mete him at ye entrey of his kingdome, but yt ſhould be in armes & with a powre. Alexander therfore being determined to paſſe the riuer of Hidaſpes.Barzentes. Barzentes that had bene author of the rebellion amonges the Arachoſias was taken & brought to him bound with .xxx. Elephantes which was an apt aſſiſtance againſte the Indiās, yt were wont to put more truſt in thoſe beaſts then in the force of there own nacion.Gamaxus. Gamaxus king of a ſmale porcion of India, which had cōfederat with Barzentes, was brought likewiſe bounde vnto him. Wherfore cōmitting thē bothe to priſon, & the Elephā
               tes to Omphs, came vnto the riuer of Hidaſpes. But Porus lay in camp on the further ſide to let his paſſag hauing .iiii. ſcore, v. Elephātes of huge ſtrength of body, CCC. wagōs of war, & .xxx.M. fotemen, amōges whō there were many archers whoſe ſhaftes (as hath bene ſaid before) were more heuie then they could wel weld. Porus him ſelf did ride vpō an Elephāt greater then all the reſt, who alſo being of a big ſtature, apeared notable in his armour that was garnyſhed wyth golde and ſyluer, hauinge alſo a courage equall to the ſtrength of his body, and ſo great a wyſedome as was poſſible to be found amonges ſuch rude nacions.
            
               The Macedons were not ſo muche afrayed wyth the ſight of ther enemies.The Riuer of Hyda
                     ••
                  is as they were wt the greatnes of the riuer that they had to paſſe, which beinge .iiii. thouſand furlonges in bredth and ſo depe that no ford could be found, apeared to them lyke a great Sea. And yet the largenes thereof mitigated nothing the violence of the ſtreame, but ranne wyth no leſſe furye then if it had bene narowe, apering by the reparcuſſiō of the water in many places to be ful of great ſtones in in the bottome. This riuer being ſufficient to feare them of it ſelf, ye ſight of the further banck ful of horſe and men was an encreaſe of there terror. Where the Elephantes that had bodies of vnreaſonable greatenes ſtode in there ſight being prouoked to bray of purpoſe, to thintent that with their terrible noyſe, they ſhould fill their eares ful of feare. Though the Macedons were couragious and had there hartes full of good hope, as they which often tymes had had expeyience of there owne actes. Yet there enemies and the Riuer bothe togither made them wonderfully amaſed For they could not think how to keape a ſtedfaſt courſe to the further ſhore, in ſo weake, and tottring boates. nor when they were there, coulde ſee howe to arriue wyth ſurety. There were many Ilands in the middes of the Riuer, into the which both the Indians and the Macedons did ſwyme holding there weapons aboue there heddes. And there ſkyrmiſhed together in the ſyght of both the kinges, which by experymente of ſuch ſmale thinges, made triall of the ſucceſſe of the holle.Symachus Nycanor. But amonges al the Macedones ther were two noble yong mē called Symachus and Nycanor excelling in bouldnes & in deſperat attemptes and through there continuall good fortune had goten a courage to

deſpice all perill. Other yong men of the moſte hardieſt toke them for there captaynes, and without any other armour ſauing there pikes ſwome ouer into an Iland that was full of their enemies, where through bouldnes only they ſlewe many of them, and ſo myght haue returned with glory, if raſhnes where it findeth proſperous ſucceſſe could euer be content with meaſure. But whiles with ſkorne and pride they taried for ther enemies, they were ſodeinly encloſed of ſuch as pryuely ſwome ouer the riuer and were killed with dartes which they caſte at them from afarre. Such as in thys caſe eſcaped there enemies, were either drowned with the violence, or the Eddyes of the ſtreame. Thys fight put Porus in great courage, that ſawe all theyr doinges from the further ſhore. And though Alexander was longe vncertayne what waye to take, yet at length he deceyued his enemye by thys policy.The policie Alexander vſed in paſſing of Hydaſpys. There was an Iland in the riuer greater then ye reſt, & apte to hide his deuiſe, by reaſon it was full of woode, and had a great rampire caſt vpō that banck that was towards hys enemies. Where both his fotemen and horſemen might ſtand couered from the ſight of the Indians. And the rather to turne there eies a nother way from the ſpying out of ye oportunitye, he cauſed Ptolomeus with a great nombre of hys horſemen, to ſhewe them ſelues againſt there enemies farre of from the Iland and to put the Indians in feare of there crye, making euer a ſhewe aſ though they would ſwyme ouer the riuer. Which thing Ptolomens dyd many dayes continially together, to the intent that Porus ſhould be enforced to remoue hys powre to that part to withſtād him, and by that meanes brought them out of the ſight of the Ilande. Alexander alſo cauſed hys owne

Pauilyon to be ſet vpon the riuers ſide ouer agaynſte hys enemies, and all the pompe that partayned to the ſtate of a kyng, to be ſet furth within there viewe, with the ſame band ſtanding in ſight, whych was wonte to remayne about hys parſon. Furthermore Attalus that was equall wyth Alexander in yeares, and lyke to him of face and parſonage, ſtode there openly aparayled lyke a kynge that it might appere to Porus, that Alexander was ſtyll remayning there, and went not about to paſſe the riuer. Thexecucion of this deuiſe was firſt letted by a tempeſte, whereby afterwardes it was furthered, & brought to good effect: fortune euer vſed to turne her dyſcommodities into good ſucceſſe towardes hym. For when the enemies were thus attent to obſerue Ptolomeus, that lay beneth vpon the riuer agaynſt them, and Alexander with the reſt of tharmye buſie about the paſſing of his men into the Iland before mencioned. There fell ſodeinly a great ſtorme ſcarſely tollerable to ſuch as lay within there cabbens, which ſo much afflicted the ſouldiers abrode, that they forſoke the boates and fled agayne to land. And yet for all this ther clamor and there noiſe was not harde of theyr enemies through the vehemency of ye ſhowre. As this tempaſt begāne ſodeynly, ſo it ſodeinly ceſſed. But the clowdes remayned darke, that there appered not ſo much light, as the ſouldiers myght knowe one an other by the face when they ſpake togethers.
            Whyche darknes myght haue feared ſome other man, conſiderynge they had to rowe in a Ryuer that they knewe not, their enemies paraduenture wayting for them at ther landynge, whither they went as blind men, that for glory, ſought for parill.
            But Alexander vſed that thing that put other men in

teror to ſerue for his purpoſe and willed that euery mā vpō a ſigne giuen ſhould enter into there boates wi
                  •
               h ſilence. His boat was the firſt that launched from the ſhore towardes the further ſyde that was voyd of hys enemies, Porus only keping hys wache agaynſt Ptolomeus. There was but one boate yt ſticked by the way vpon a rocke, and all the other recouered the lande. Alexander then commaunded the ſouldiers to prepare there armour,The batteil betwixt Porus and Alexander. and fal into aray and whiles he was deuidyng hys men to put them in ordre of battayll▪ and marching towardes hys enemies, it was reported to Porus, that a great nombre of men of warre were come ouer the riuer and landed, whych would ſtreyght wayes giue him the battell. But he at the fyrſte according to the fault that is in mans nature, through the ouermuch confidence he had in hym ſelf, beleued not the matter, but thought that Abyaſares whych was confederat with him, had come in his aſſiſtaunce. But when the daye appeared, and the matter was manyfeſt, Porus then put furth .C. armed wagons and foure thouſand horſemen vnder the leading of Hages his brother, to keape Alexander doyng.Hages Poras brother They counted thoſe wagons there pryncypall force, for euerye one of them caryed .vi. men, two archers, two wyth targets, and two that ruled the horſes, which were not vnarmed, but when it came to the fyght, they let there reaynes looſe, and beſtowed there dartes amonges there enemies.
            But the uſe of thoſe wagons ſerued that daye to ſmal purpoſe, for the ſhoure that had fallen more violently then was accuſtumed, had made the feldes ſo wete & ſlabbye, that the wagons coulde not ſturre but ſticked in the mire & becāe immouable.
            
               Wheras Alexander being without baggage or anye other thing that might be impediment vnto him fireſely inuaded his enemies. The Scythians and the Dahans were the firſt that gaue the onſet and Pardicas was apoynted with the horſemen to charge vpon the right hand battell of the Indians. Then the battells beginning to ioyne in al partes, they that had the charge of the wagons counting them the laſte refuge ſlacked there raynes, and ruſhed forwardes into the middes of the fight. The comming of thes wagons apeared to be a matter daungerous, and doubtfull to both parties. For at the fyrſt brunt both the Macedōs were borne ouer, and ouer thrown by them, and when the wagons came in any roughe or myrye places, the Indians were thrown out of them. For when the horſes that drewe were ones galled, and put in feare, they caried ye wagons without gouernment, and tombled parte in the myre, and parte in the riuer. A fewe trauarſed ye felds & fled for ſuccour vnto Porus: who ſeinge hys wagons ſcatered ouer all the feldes. and wāder aboute wtout there rulers diſtributed ye charge of hys Elephantes amonges hys frendes and placed hys fotemen and archers behind them.
            He had many ye ſoundyd vpon Timbrells, beinge inſtrumentes that ye Indians vſe in ſtede of trōpettes wherwith there eares were ſo filled that the noyſe of there enemies little moued them. They bare alſo the Image of Hercules in the frunt of there fote battell, whiche was done for an encouragement for them to fight wel, and for a note of a reprouf & offence to them that ſhould flee from that there ſtandard. For it was loſſe of lyfe to them that left it in the feld. So that

So that the feare whiche they conceiued of Hercules that ſometyme had bene their enemye, was then turned into a veneration and a religion. The ſight bothe of the Elephantes and Porus him ſelfe, aſtonied the Macedons, and cauſed them a while to ſtaye. For the beaſtes beyng ſet in order amonges armed men, ſhewed a farre of, lyke highe towers, and Porus him ſelfe exceadynge in maner the ſtature of manne: the Elephant wherupon he did ryde, was a ſettyng forth vnto hys bygnes, whiche excelled ſo muche all the other Elephantes as he him ſelfe excelled the reſt of menne. So that Alexander beholdynge both Porus and hys power, ſaied that at lengthe he had founde a perell equall vnto hys harte. For we haue to do (
                  〈◊〉
                he) both with terrible beaſtes, and wyth notable men of warre. And therupon loked towardes Cenō, & ſaid vnto him: When I with Ptolomeus, Perditas, and Epheſtion, ſhal ſet vpon the left battaile of our enemies, and ſhalt ſee vs in the heate of the fyghte, doo you then ſet forwardes my ryght battayle, and freſhlye aſſayle theim, when you ſee them begynne to fall out of order. Antigonus, Leonatus, and Tauron, do you bende agaynſt their maine battayle, and ſet vpon their fronte. Our pikes be longe and ſtronge, and can not ſerue to anye better vſe, then againſte the Elephantes and ſuche as they cary ouerthrow them, & thruſt the beaſtes through. The Elephantes be but an vncertayne force, whyche vſe to do moſte harme to their owne parte.
            For as they vſe to goo agaynſte their Enemies ſo longe as they be at commaundemente: ſo when they be once putte in feare, they tourne agaynſte theyr owne ſyde, and ſhewe mooſte rage towardes theim. He hadde not ſo ſone ſpoken thoſe wordes but

he put ſpores to his horſe, paſſyng againſt his enemies, and when accordynge to hys appoyntment he hadde geuen the charge, Cenus with a great force brake vpō the left battell. And the Phalanx at the ſame inſtant brake in amonges the middes of their enemies. When Porus ſaw the horſemē geue ye charge, he put forwardꝭ his Elephantes to encoūter thē. But they beyng ſlow beaſtes & not apt ſodaynly to moue, were preuented by the ſwiftnes of the horſes, and their bowes were not to them of any great effect.
            For by reaſon their arowes were ſo long and heauy that they could not nock thē within their bowes, except they ſtaied firſt their bowes vpon the ground, and the groūd being ſo ſlippery that thei could haue no perfite foting:The confuſion that 
                     •
                  ell amōges Porus men. whiles thei were preparing thē ſelues to ſhote, their enemies were come amonges them. Then euery man fell from thorder that Porus had geuē, as it chaū
               ſeth oftētimes amonges troubled mindes, where fear beareth more rule thē the capitaines appointment. For in ſo many partes as their army was deuided, ſo many generals there became amonges thē, Some would ioyne all their battels in one, other would haue them deuided. Some willed to ſtaie, & other to go forwardes, and encloſe their enemies about. There was no generall conſultation amonges them. Porus notwithſtandinge accompanied with a fewe, with whom ſhame preuailed more thē feare, aſſembled ſuch together as were diſperkled abroade, and went forwardes againſt his enemies, ſettinge his Elephantes in the fronte of the battaile. They put the Macedōs in terrour, troublyng with their vnwonted crye not onely the horſe; that naturally do feare them, but alſo amaſed the men, and diſturbed their order. In ſo muche that thei whiche a little

before thought them ſelues victorers, loked aboute whiche waye to flee, and ſaue theim ſelues. Whiche thinge when Alexander perceiued, he ſente againſt the Elephantes, 
                  •
               he Agrians, and Tharians that were men light armed, and apter to ſkyrmiſh a farre of, then to fight hande to hand. They gaue the Elephantes and their gouernours muche a doo, and ſore afflicted them wyth the multitude of their dartes and arrowes, that they beſtowed amonges them. And the Phalanx came conſtantly forwardes againſte them that were in feare. But ſuche as preſſed ouer forwarde in fyghtynge wyth the Elephantes, procured their manifeſt deſtruction, who beynge trampeled to death wyth their fete, were an example to other, not to be ouer haſtye in aduenturynge them ſelues. The moſte terrible ſight was when the Elephantes wyth their longe trunkes, (whiche they called proboſtides) toke menne in their armoure from the grounde, and deliuered them vp to their gouernours. The battaile was prolonged doubtfully tyll the daye was farre ſpente. The Souldiours ſometime fliyng from the Elephantes, and ſometime purſuing after them, vntil that with a certaine kynde of weapons called Copida (whyche croked lyke ſithes, and prepared for the purpoſe) they cut the Elephantes vpon the legges. Thoſe the Macedons had right aptly deuiſed, for not onely the feare of death, but alſo the feare of a newe kinde of torment in death, cauſed them to leaue nothynge vnproued. Finally the Elephantes weried with Woundes, with their violente ſtruglynge did raſte their gouernoures to the Earth, and tare them in pieces, for they were put in ſuch fear, that they were no more hurtfull to their enemies but driuē out of the battayle like ſhepe.
            
               Porus beynge forſaken of the more parte of hys men, ceaſſed not to caſte Dartes (wherof he had plentye prepared vpon hys Elephant) amonges them that flocked aboute hym, wherby he woundyng manye, by reaſon he laye open to euerye mannes blowe, was layed at on all partes, tyll he hadde receiued nine woundes behynde and before, throughe the whiche he bledde ſo muche, that he had no power to caſt any more, but for feblenes they fell out of hys handes.
            The Elephante alſo whyche he didde ryde vpon, pricked forwardes wyth furye, made a great diſturbaunce amonges the Macedons, vntyll that hys gouernoure ſeynge the Kynge ſo faynte, that he let fall hys Dartes, and to be almoſt paſt hys remembraunce, ſturred the beaſt to flee awaye, whom Alexander folowed in all that he myght, but his horſe that was thruſt in wyth manye woundes, fel downe deade vnder him. Wherfore whiles he was aboute to chaunge and take an other, was caſte farre behinde. In the meane ſeaſon Taxiles brother, that was ſent by Alexander vnto Porus, began to exhorte him that he ſhould not be ſo abſtinate to proue the extremitye, but rather yelde him ſelfe vnto the victorer. But he notwithſtandyng that his ſtrength was nere paſt, and his bloude fayled, yet ſturred vp at a knowen voyce, ſaied▪ that he knewe him to be the brother of Taxiles, A traytoure to hys king and his countrey, and with that word toke a dart whiche by chaunce was not fallen awaye, and threwe it ſo at Taxyles brother, that it paſſed throughe the middes of hys breſte vnto hys backe. And hauynge ſhewed this laſt profe of his manhode, he fled agayne more faſter then before.
            
               But when the Elephant through many woundes that he had receiued fainted in like ſort, then he ſtayed and turned his fotemen towards his enemies that folowed. By that time alexāder was come nere him, who vnderſtandyng the wilfulnes of Porus, willed none to be ſpared that made reſiſtaunce. Wherupon euery man threw dartes againſt Porus, & ſuche fotemen as ſtode in his defēce, wherwith at length he was ſo oppreſſed that he began to fal from his Elephant. Then the Indian wyiche was his gouernoure thinkyng that Porus deſiered to haue lighted, cauſed the beaſt after hys accuſtomed maner to bende towarde the earth, whyche ſubmittynge him ſelfe, all the reſt as they were taught bowed downe their bodies likewiſe, which was ye cauſe of Porus takynge and of the reſte. When Alexander ſawe Porus bodye vpon the grounde, cauſed him to be ſpoyled, thinkyhg he had bene dead, and diuers ranne about him to pull of his harnays and his veſture, whiche thyng when the Elephant ſaw, He began to defēd his maſter, runnyng vpō his ſpoylers and went about to lift him agayne vpon his backe. Wherupon they all ſettyng vpon the Elephant, ſlewe hym, and layed Porus in a carte. Whom when Alexander did beholde lyftyng vp his eyes, moued with no hatred but with compaſſion, ſaied vnto him. What miſchiefe and madnes was in thy mynde, hearyng of the fame of my actes,Alexanders wordes to Porus. to haſard the battayle with me and my power, ſeyng Tapyles was ſo neare an example of the clemency that I vſe to ſuche as ſubmit them ſelues? To whom he made anſwere. Forſomuch (quod he) as I am demaunded a queſtion: I wyl aunſwere as frely as I am ſpokē vnto, knowing mine owne ſtrength,Porus anſwere. & not hauing yet proued thine, thought no mā of greater power thē mi ſelfe

But nowe the ſucceſſe of this battel hath declared the to be mightier. And yet therin I do impute to my ſelfe not a little felicitie, that I haue gotten the ſecond place and am next vnto the.
            He was aſked more ouer his opiniō, after what maner he thought good the victorye ſhoulde be vſed. Vſe it (quod he) after ſuch ſort, as this dayes fortune ſhal put in thy mind, wherin ther hath ben ſufficiēt profe ſhewed you, how trāſitory ye felicity of mā is. This admoniſhment aduailed him more, then if he had ſubmitted him ſelfe or made any ſute. For when Alexander ſawe the greatnes of his courage, and his hart ſo voide of feare that it coulde not be broken with any aduerſitye, was moued not onely to geue him his life, but alſo honorablye to entertayne hym. For ſo long as he laye diſeaſed of his woundꝭ, toke no leſſe care of his curing thē if he had fought in his quarel. And when he was once healed contrary to that which all men loked for he receiued him amonges the numbre of his frendes, and enlarged his kingdome greater thē before. There was nothing in Alexāders nature more perfite or more cō
               ſtante, then that he woulde euer haue vertue in admiration when it was ſuche, that it deſerued true praiſe and glory. And ſpecially when he ſaw the ſame in hys enemy. For when it chaunſed in any of his owne men, it was ſomwhat terrible vnto him, thinking that their fame might be a deſtructiō to his owne greatnes, whiche he euer thought to growe more greater, as they were of greatnes that he ſubdued.
         
         
            
            The ninth boke of Quintus Curtius of the actes of the great Alexander Kyng of Macedon.
            
               ALexander reioyſinge in ſo notable a victorye, wherby he ſawe the confines of ye Orient opened vnto hym, offred vp ſacrifice vnto the Sunne, & to cauſe his ſouldiours to be more willyng to goo forwardes in finiſhynge the reſt of the warres, aſſembled thē togethers, & after he had commended their doynges: declared how in that latter battayle, they hadde defeated & broken the force of all the Indians, and ſhoulde fynde frome thenceforthe nothynge but a plentifull praye. For (he ſayed) that in the countrey wherunto he was goynge, the riches chiefelye remayned, that was ſo muche ſpoken of throughout the whole worlde. In reſpect wherof, the ſpoyles of the Percians were but vyle and baggage, and that occaſion nowe was geuen theim, not onelye to fill their owne houſes, but alſo all Macedonia and Greace with pearles. wyth precious ſtones, wyth gold, and wyth Iuorye. The Souldiours beynge deſierous bothe of riches and of glorye, becauſe they hadde neuer fownde his wordes vayne, promiſed him to do whatſoeuer he woulde haue them. Wherupon he diſmiſſed them full of good hope, and ſet theim about the makyng of ſhyppes, to the intente that hauynge ouerrunne all Aſia▪ he myght viſite the Occean Sea, that was in the ende of the worlde.
            The Mountaynes nexte at hande were plentifull of Tymber, to make Shippes withall, in cuttynge

downe wherof the Macedons founde Serpentes of ſuch bignes, as they hadde not ſene before, & alſo Rhynocerites,Rinocerites beaſtes that be ſeldome founde in any other place, whiche name was geuen to theim by the Grekes, for in the Indian language they be otherwiſe called. Alexander builded a Citye vpon either ſide of the Riuer of Hidaſpys, whyche once perfourmed, he gaue to euerye one of his capitaynes a crowne of golde, and a thouſand pieces of golde beſides, preferryng and rewardynge euery other accordynge to their qualitie, degree, and deſeruyng. Abyazares whyche had ſent Embaſſadours vnto Alexdnder before the battayle fought wyth Porus, ſent then Embaſſadours to him agayne, offeryng to do all thynges that he woulde appoynt, ſo that he kepe his bodye at libertye. For he deſiered not to lyue, except he myght remayne a kyng, and he thought hym ſelf vnmete to raygne after he had bene once a captiue. He ſignified bi them to Abyazares, that if his commyng ſhould be greuous, he woulde not ſtycke to viſite him in parſon. Hauyng thus vainquiſhed Porus, and paſſed the riuer of Hidaſpis, he wente forwardes into the inwarde partes of India, whyche was a countrey full of great woodes, and high trees, the ayre very holeſome & temperate, the ſhadowe of the trees mitigatynge the heate of the ſunne, and the plentye of ſprynges kepynge the grounde moyſte. There were alſo manye Serpentes ſene, whoſe ſcales gliſtered lyke golde. There was nothynge more daungerous then the poyſon that proceaded from theim, for immediatlye vpon the ſtingynge, Death folowed, tyll ſuche tyme as the inhabitours of the Countrey ſhewed a remedye. Frome thence throughe Deſertes they came vnto the great Ryuer of Hyraotys,Hyraotys. wherevnto

there ioyned a great wood. Whiche hauing ſuch trees as are not wont to be ſene in other places, was alſo full of wilde pecokes. Alexander remouing his campe from thēce wan a towne by aſſault, and taking pledges, appointed them to pay tribute. After that he came to a great cytie (after the maner of that coūtrey) which was both wel walled, and alſo enuyroned about with a mariſſe. The inhabitaunce came furth againſt Alexander, and ioyning their cartes together in a frōt (wherin their cuſtome was to fight) thei proffered him the battaill. Some occupied dartes, ſome ſpeares, and other axes, and with greate agilitie leaped to and fro their cartes, when either they woulde relieue their fellowes that were wery of fighting, or els ſuccour or reſcue ſuch as were in diſtreſſe. This vnwonted kind of fighting put the Macedons at the firſt in feare, ſpecially beyng hurt a farre of by their enemies, and not able to come to hande ſtripes with thē. But after they had cōſidered their diſordred maner, they eſteamed not their force, but encloſed their enemies about & thurſt thē in with pikes, & the ſoner to defeate them they cut the bandes wherwith the cartes were tied to ſeperate them aſonder. When they had after that maner loſt eight hundred of their men, they fled again into the cytie, whiche the next day the Macedons did wynne by aſſault: Certayne there were that ſaued them ſelues by flieng, whiche ſeing the cytie loſt, ſwomme ouer the water, and filled al the townes thereabout with feare. They declared of what inuincible force their enemies were of, iudging them in reſpecte of their power rather goddes then men. When Alexander had gotten that cytie, he ſent Perdicas with a parte of his army to deſtroy the countrey, and committing another parte to

Emnenes for the ſubduing of ſuche as would not become obedient,Emnenes. he with the reſt of his power came vnto a ſtrong cytie whiche was the refuge of all the countrey thereabout. Notwithſtanding that the inhabitaū
               tes ſent to Alexander for peace, yet they prepared neuertheles for the warre, by reaſon of a ſedicion which roſe amonges them, that made them to be of diuers opinions. Some wold rather haue endured any extremitie then to yelde, and other thought they were not able to make reſiſtaunce, and whiles they differred ſo in opinions, and made no commen conſultacion amō
               ges them. Suche as helde opinion to yelde vp the cytie▪ opened the gates, and receyued in their enemies. And notwithſtanding that Alexander had iuſte cauſe of diſpleaſure againſt the countrey faccion, yet he pardoned them all, and receyuing their pledges, remoued towardes the next cytie. When the Indians that ſtoode vpon the walles, ſawe the pledges that were brought before the army, whome they perceyued to be of the ſame nacion, deſyred communicacion with thē, who declaring bothe the kynges clemencye, and his force dyd moue them to rendre vp their cytie: whoſe enſample the reſt of the cytie dyd folowe.Sophytes. From thence he came into the cytie of Sophites whiche is a nacion (as the Indians thynke) moſte excellyng in wiſdome, beſt gouerned, and that haue the beſt cuſtomes amonges them. The chyldren that be there gotten, are not noryſſhed and brought vp, accordyng to the wyll of their parentes, but by the ordre of ſuche as haue the charge committed vnto them to viewe the ſtate of the infantes. If they perceyue any not apt to be come actiue, or els wantyng any of their lymmes, they cauſe them ſtreyght wayes to be killed. They

vſe to mary without any reſpect of the kyndred they come of, or the greatnes of pa
                  •
               entage, makyng no choſe, but in the ſhape of the body, whiche is the ſhyng that is only eſtemed amonges them. The kyng hym ſelf was within ye chief citie of the countrey, againſt the which Alexander brought his power. The gates were ſhut, and no man appeared in armes vpon the walles to make any defence, wherefore he ſtode in doubte a great while, whether the cytie was abandoned, or els that the inhabiters had kepte them ſelues ſecrete for ſome policy. Whiles he remained in that expectacion, ſodainly ye gate was opened, & the king (which in good lines of perſonage excelled al the reſt) came furth with his two ſonnes, he ware a garmēt of gold and purple enpaled, that couered the caulf of his legge, & the ſoles he ware on his feete were ſet with pricious ſtones. All his armes were garnyſhed with pearles, and had hangyng at his eares two precious ſtones whiche were excellēt, both for bignes, and brightnes, & there he had a ſcepter of gold ſet with precious ſtones called Berillis, which he after his ſalutacion made, with hū
               ble ſubmiſſion deliuered vnto Alexander: yelding both him ſelfe his chyldren, and his kyngdome into hys handes. There were in that countrey very notable dogges for the huntyng of wylde beaſtes, whiche ſpecially were geuen to be egre vpon the lyon. The kyng therfore to ſhewe their force and propertie vnto Alexā
               der, put foure of them vnto a great lyon, which ſteight wayes caught hym faſte. Then one whiche was accuſtomed to that office, toke one of thoſe dogges by the legge to plucke hym of the lyon, and becauſe he woulde not looſe hys holde cut of his legge wi
                  •
               h a ſworde. But when the dogge ſticked neuer theleſſe

vnto his game, he was cut a ſondre in peace meale, till ſuche tyme as he died: hauing his teath ſtil faſtened in the lyons fleſhe. Suche a feruentnes nature had wrought in thoſe beaſtes, as we vnderſtode by the reporte. Some tyme I am enforced to write thynges that I can ſcarſely beleue. For I neither dare affirme the thinges wherof I doubt, nor counceale ſuche thinges as I haue receiued for truthe. Alexander leuing this kyng within his owne kingdome, came vnto the ryuer of Hipaſis,Hyſpaſis. kyng Phegelas. and there ioyned with Epheſtion, whiche had ſubdued the countrey thereabout. One Phegelas was kyng of the next nacion, whiche commaunding his ſubiectes to continue in tilling of the ground as thei were wont to do, mette Alexander with riche preſentes, refuſing nothing that was commaunded him. When he had taried with him two dayes, and was determined the third daye to haue paſſed the ryuer, he found therin great difficultie by reaſon that the ſtreame was ſo large, and full of great ſtones. He ſtaied therfore a while, to be more fully aduertiſed of ye eſtate of thoſe coūtreis, & of all ſuche thinges as were neceſſary for him to knowe. He vnderſtode by Phegelas howe beyonde that ryuer the
                  •
               e lay a deſert of ten dayes iourney, & next to that deſert, the ryuer of Ganges, which was the greateſt ryuer in al the Orient. He ſhewed that beionde Ganges there inhabited two nacions called Gangaridans,Gangaridans. Pharraſiās Agramenes and Pharraſians, whoſe kyng was called Agramenes, whiche vſed to come to the field with .xx. thouſand horſemē, & .CC. thouſand footemen, two thouſand armed wagons, and thre .M. Elephantes, whiche were coūted the greateſt terrour. Thoſe thinges ſemed incredible vnto Alexander, and therfore enquired of Porus, if the thinges were true

that had bene told him. He cōfirmed Phegelas reporte concernyng the force of the nacion▪ But he ſayde their king was come of no noble bloud, but of the baſeſt ſorte of men, whoſe father being a Barbour and with great payne getting his daily liuyng, came in fauour with the quene, by reaſon of his perſonage, who brought him to haue al the doinges about the king her huſband, which was afterwardes ſ
                  •
               ayn by their treaſon, and vnder colour to be come tutor vnto the chyldren, vſurped the kyngdome to him ſelfe, and puttyng the childrē to death, did beget him that was now king, whiche was in hatred and diſgrace of the people folowyng more the maners of his fathers former eſtate, thē ſuch as did beſeme ye dignitie he was come to. whē Alexander harde Porus affirme this matter he became in great trouble of minde, not that he regarded the multitude of his enemies, nor the force of their Elephantes. But he feared the greatnes of the riuers and the ſcituacion of the coūtrey, ſo difficult, to entre vpō. He thought it a hard enterpriſe to ſeke out nacions ſo farre inhabityng in the vttermoſte boundes of the worlde. Yet on the other ſyde the gredines of glory, & the vnſaciable deſire of fame, made no place to ſ
                  •
               me to far, nor no aduenture to be ouerharde. He doubted alſo that the Macedons whiche had paſſed ſo many countreys, and were waxed daged with warres, would not be content to folow hym ouer ſo many ryuers and againſt ſo many difficulties of nature lyeng in their way. For he iudged, that ſince they habounded, & were ſo laden with ſpoyle, they would rather ſeke to enioye ſuche thynges as they had gotten then to trauaill any further in getting of more. He could not thinke ye ſame appetite to be in his ſouldiers that was in himſelfe.

For he cōpaſſed in his mynd how to get the Empire of the hole worlde, into which matter he had but made his entre: where as they weried with trauail and thinking to haue paſt all perill, loked now to enioy with ſpede, ye frute of all their labour: yet for all that, his aſſertion ouercame reaſon. For he aſſembled his army together & ſpake vnto them after this maner.Alexanders Oracion to his ſouldiers. 
            
            
               I am not ignorant (my ſouldiers) howe yt there be now many rumores ſowed amonges you by the Indians, of purpoſe to put you in feare. But the vanitie of their lieng is not ſo newe a thing, that it is able nowe to decei
                     •
                  e you.
The Perciās after that maner would haue made both the ſtreytes of Cili
                     •
                  ia, and the plaines of Meſopotamy terrible vnto you, yea & put you in feare of the ryuers of Tigre & Euphrates, & yet we wadyd ouer thone of thē, and paſſed the other by a brydge. The fame neuer reporte thinges truly, but maketh al thinges greater thē thei be in dede. Euen our glory, though it be growen to certain perfectiō, yet it is more in fame, then in effect. Whiche of you of late did thinke, that you ſhould haue bene able to endure the Elephātes, ſhewing afarre of like caſtels. Who thought I could haue paſſed the ryuer of Hydaſpis, when I hard it reported to be muche greather then it was? We ſhould long ago (my ſouldiers) haue fled out of Aſia, if tales could haue cauſed vs to turne our backes. Thinke you that the nōbre of the Elephantes be greater, then you haue ſene herdes of beaſtes in other places? ſeing thei be ſo rare in ye world and being hard to be taken, are muche harder to be tamed. Theſame vanitie that hath reported them to you to be of ſuche nombre, haue nombred alſo their horſemen and their footemen.
Concernyng the ryuers, the more broder they be, the more gently they muſt runne.

For ſuche as be narowe and of ſmalle brede, runne alwayes with moſte vehement ſtreme. Where as contrariwiſe the brode ryuer paſſe their courſe more mildly. But you will peraduenture ſaye that all the perill is at the ſhore, where youre enemies ſhall wayte for your arriuall. Whatſoeuer the ryuer be the haſard is all one at the landing. But ymagen that al thoſe thinges were true. Whether is it the greatnes of the beaſtes, or the multitude of the men that put you in feare? As concerning the Elephantes we haue had experiēce of them of late, howe muche more vigorouſly the rage againſt their owne party then againſt vs. What ſhould we eſteme thē, but only abate the greatnes of their bodies, with ſuche weapons as we haue prepared for the purpoſe. What matter is it whether they be of the like nōbre that Porus had, or whether thei be .iii.M. ſeing that we perceiue, that when two or thre be once wounded, the reſt bende them ſelues to 
                     •
                  le away? And foraſmuche as thei cannot well be gouerned when they be but fewe, when there be ſo many thouſandes together they muſt then nedes be an impedimēt one to another, and brede a confuſion amonges them ſelues, they be ſo vnweldy by reaſon of their huge bodies, that they be neither apt to paſſe forwardes, nor yet to fle. I haue alwayes ſo litle eſtemed thē, that when I haue had plēty of yt kynd, I wold neuer vſe thē: knowing very well yt they be more daūgerous to ſuch as occupie thē, thē thei be to their enemies. But peraduenture it is ye multitude of their horſemē & fotemē that do moue you? haue you bene accuſtomed to fight, againſt ſmalle nombres, or is it the firſt tyme that you haue encountred with diſordred multitudes? The ryuers of Granick is a witnes howe inuincible the power of the Macedons

is againſt any multitude. And ſo is Cilicia ye flowed with the Percians bloud, and Arbella whoſe playnes be ſtrewed with their bones. It is ouer late to counte the nombre of your enemies, after that with your victory ye haue made Aſia deſert. When ye paſſed ouer Helleſpont, you ſhould then haue conſidered your ſmalle nombre. Nowe the Scythians do folowe vs, we haue ayde at hande from the Bactrians, & we ſupply our power with the Sogdians. Yet for all that it is not in them I put my confidence. I haue a regarde vnto your force, I reſerue your manhode about me, as a pledge and aſſuraunce of my actes and doinges. So long as I may ſtande in the field amonges you, I wil neither way my ſelf nor myne enemies. Doe you but ſhewe an apparaunce that there is hope in you & cherefulnes. We are not nowe newly entred into our trauailes, but haue paſſed all our labours, being come to the riſing of the ſonne, and to the Occean ſea, except our owne ſlougthe be our impediment. From thence hauing ſubdued the worlde, we ſhall returne as victorers into our countrey. Doe not you as theſe negligēt huſbandmen, that loſe their frute after it is once rype. The rewardes of our iourney be greater then our perill. The countrey that we go vnto, is ryche and of no force, thether I purpoſe to bryng you bothe to wynne glory, & to get you ſpoile, for worthy you are to cary ſuch riches in to your coūtrey, whiche be ſo plentifull there, that the ſea doth caſt them vp againſt the ſhore. You be men of that vertue, that ye ought to leaue not 
                     •
                  yng vnproued, nor nothing vndone for feare. I deſire and praye you by the glory ye haue gotten in whiche ye excede the ſtate of men, and by all that I haue deſerued of you, and you of me, wherewith ye remaine as inuincible:

that ye wil not forſake me, purpoſing to viſite the end of the worlde, me I ſay, that haue bene brought vp as a chyld amonges you, I will make no menciō howe I am your kyng: In the reſt of thinges I haue commaunded you, let me nowe entreate you in this one point. It is I that make this requeſt vnto you, whiche neuer commaunded you any thing, but I put my ſelfe formoſt in thaduenture & daunger, and the which oftē times in mine own perſone, haue bene the formoſte in defence of the battaill, take not the victory out of my handes, with the whiche (if enuy be not the let) I ſhall become equal in glory, both to Hercules and Bacchus. Geue your aſſent to myne interceſſion, and at length breake your obſtinate ſilence. Where is your ſhowting become that was wont to be a declaratiō of your cherefulnes? Where be the countenaunces of my coū
                  trey men? I know you not my ſouldiers, and it ſemeth that I am not knowen of you? Me thinkes I crye to your defe eares in vayne, and go about in waſte to ſturre vp your vnwilling and vnmoueable myndes. Notwithſtanding all theſe wordes, they hong downe their heades towardes the earth, and perſeuered ſtil in ſilence. Then he proceded: I know not (quod he) wherin I haue vnwitting offended you, that you will not once voucheſaue to loke me in the face. I ſeme to be ſolitary and in a deſert. Is there none of you that I ſpeake vnto will aunſwere me? Is there none at the leſt wayes will deny my requeſte? What is the thyng that I require? euen your owne glory, and your owne greatnes. Where be they nowe, whome I ſawe not long ago contending, who ſhould firſt take their kyng when he was wounded, and nowe ye leaue me alone▪ ye forſake me, ye betraye me to myne enemies. But I

will not leaue mine enterpriſe though I go alone. Put me forwardes to thoſe ryuers, to thoſe beaſtes, & to thoſe nacions, the very names of whome ye feare ſo muche. The Scythians and Bactrians ſhall go with me, whiche of late were myne enemies, and now be my ſouldiers. I had rather dye then be a king, to be ruled, and at other mens appointment. Departe you home, go I ſay, and triumphe of the habandoninge of your kyng. For I will either obteine here the victory, wherof you haue diſpayred, or els dye a death that ſhal be honorable. Notwithſtanding all that he had ſayde, there was not one ſouldier that would open his mouth to ſpeake, but ſtode wayting that ſome of the princes, and great capitaynes, ſhoulde declare vnto the kynge their eſtates, and howe that there remayned not in them any obſtinat refuſall of the warres, but that they were ſo exhauſted with woundes, and weried with continuall trauaill that they were not able to endure any lenger.
            
             As they ſtode thus aſtonied and afrayed, keping ſilence and lookyng vpon the grounde, there beganne firſte a whiſperyng and a rumor, and afterwardes a lamentacion amonges them, and by lyttle and little thei beganne more manifeſtly to ſhewe their dolour, the teares fallyng frō their eyes. The kynges anger was then ſo turned into compaſſion, that he was not able to keape hym ſelfe from weapyng. At length the whole aſſemble braſt out into an exceſſiue wepyng. And when all the reſt were at a ſtay to ſpeake Cenus toke vpon hym to preſſe forwarde towardes the iudgement ſeate where Alexander ſtoode, ſignifieng that he had ſomewhat to ſaye. When the ſouldiers ſawe he pulled his helmet from his head (for ſo it was the cuſtome to ſpeake vnto the kyng) they began

to require hym that he woulde vtter the cauſe of the whole army. Then Cenus beganne in this wyſe▪
               Cenus wordes in the name of the whole army▪
                The Goddes defende our myndes from all wicked thoughtes (as I doubt not but they wyll) there is none of your ſouldiers but be of the ſame mynde towardes you that they haue bene in tymes paſt. Whether it be your pleaſure to commaunde them to go forwardes, to fyght, to haſarde them ſelues, or with their bloud commend your name vnto the poſteritie. And if you will nedes perſeuer in your opinion, though we be vnarmed, naked, and without bloud, we will either come after you, or go before, as you ſhall thynke expedient. But if you wyll be content to heare the griefes and complayntes of your ſouldiers that be not fayned, but expreſſed by force of very neceſſitie, I humblie beſeche you then that ye woulde voucheſaue fauourably to heare them, that conſtantly haue folowed your authoritie and fortune, and are yet redy to folow whereſoeuer you wil appoynte. O Alexander with the greatnes of your actes, ye haue not ouercome only your enemies, but alſo your owne ſouldiers. Whatſoeuer mans mortalitie is able to fulfyll, that is perfourmed by vs, hauing paſſed ouer ſo manye Seas, and countreys, better knowen to vs then to the very inhabiters, nowe remayning in maner in the vttermoſte ende of the worlde. And yet for all this, your purpoſe is to paſſe into an other worlde and ſeke out an Inde vnknowen to the Indians. Ye couet to plucke out the wilde beaſtes, and ſerpentes out of their dennes & lurking places, minding to ſerche further with your victory, then the ſonne hath viſited wt her beames, which truly is an imaginaciō mete for

your harte, but farre exceding our capacitie and power. Your manhode and courage is alwayes an encreaſe, but our force groweth in declinacion. Behold our bodies deſtitute of bloud perced with ſo many woundes, and rotted with ſo many ſcarres. Our weapons nowe be dulled, and our armour is waſted & conſumed, we weare our apparell after the Perciās maner, becauſe our countrey garmentes do faill vs. We are degenerate out of our own faſſhion, & growen into a ſtraūge habite. What is he that hath his corſelet, or horſe particuler to himſelfe? Cauſe it to be enquired how many ſeruaūtes, do folowe their maiſters, and what remaineth to euery mā of the ſpoyle. Being the victorers of al mē, of all men we are the pooreſt. It is not hadoundaunce or exceſſe that trouble vs, but the very warre it ſelfe. Our municion is conſumed, and yet your will put furth this goodly army of yours naked vnto thoſe beaſtes. The multitude of whom though the Indians purpoſely do encreaſe, yet of their lieng we maye perceyue the nombre to be greate. But if ye be vtterly determined to paſſe yet further into Inde, the coūtrey that lyeth ſouthward is not ſo deſert, whiche beyng ſubdued you may paſſe to that Sea, whiche nature hath appointed to bound in the worlde. Why doe you ſeke that glory afarre of, whiche remayneth to you redy at your hande? Here the Occean ſea doth mete vs, and except your mynde be to wonder, we are come to a place whether your fortune hath brought vs.
            I had rather ſpeake theſe thynges before you, then behynde your backe, for I ſeke not to wynne fauour amonges the men of warre that ſtande here about me, but deſire you ſhould rather heare their mindes expreſſed in playne woordes, then to heare their

grief and their grudge, vttered in muttering & in murmour. When Cenus had made an ende of his tale, thē roſe a crie, and a lamentacion, whiche with confuſed voyces euery where called Alexandre their king, their father, and their lord. Then the other captaines & ſpecially thelders, whiche by reaſon of their age had the more honeſt excuſe, and greater aucthoritie, made the like requeſt. So that the king was not able to chaſtiſe them being in that obſtinacie, nor mitigate them being ſo moued. Therfore vncertayne what to do, he lept frō the iudgement place, and commaunding his lodging to be ſhut in, admitted no man but ſuche as were accuſtomed about his perſone. Two dayes he conſumed in his anger, and the third he came furth amonges his men, cauſing .xii. aulters of ſquare ſtone there to be ſet vp as a monument of his expedicion, & willed the trenches of his campe to be made greater, and the places of mens lieng, to be enlarged bigger, then ſerued for their bodies. For he thought by the encreaſyng, of the fourme and ſhape of thynges to leaue a diſceitful wō
               dre vnto his poſteritie. From thence he returned again by the way he had paſſed before, & encamped vpon the riuer of Aceſines. Cenus chaunſed there to die, whoſe death the king lamented, but yet he ſaid: that for a few daies he had made a long oracion, as though he alone ſhuld haue returned into Macedon. By that time the nauy of ſhippes which he had apoīted to be made, ſtode in redines aflote. Memnō in ye meane ſeaſon brought him out of Thrace a ſupply of .vi.M. horſemen,Wemnon. & beſides from Harpalas .vii.M. fotemen, with .xxv.M. armours that were wrought with ſiluer & gold, which he diſtributed amonges his men, & cōmaunded the olde to be burned, purpoſing to paſſe vnto ye Occeā ſea wt .M.

ſhips. But before his departure he recōciled together by affinitie Porus & Taxiles, betwixt whō there was a new diſcord riſen, vpō the old hatreds that had bene betwixt thē. He had of thē great aide both in ye making and furniſhing of his nauy. During the tyme he was about that buſines, he builded there two cyties wherof he called thone Nycea,Nycea. Bucephalō. & the other Buchephalon, dedicating the latter by the name of his horſe yt was dead. He gaue order that his Elephantes and cariage ſhuld paſſe by lande, and he ſayled downe the ryuer, procedyng euery daye about .xl. furlonges, ſo that he might euer land his power in ſuche places as he thought conueniēt. At length he came into a coūtrey where as the ryuer of Hidaſpis and Aceſynes do ioyne togethers & ronne from thence into the boundes of a nacion called Sobyons.The Sobians. They declared that their predeceſſours came of Hercules army, whiche beyng left there ſicke, did inhabite the countrey. They were clothed in beaſtes ſkinnes, vſyng clubbes for their weapons, and though they had left the cuſtomes of the Grekes, yet there appeared many thinges amonges them, that declared from whence they were deſcended. Here the kyng landed and merched .CCx. furlonges within the countrey, whiche he waſted, and toke the chiefeſt cytie in the ſame. There were .xl.M. men that ſtode in defence againſt hym vpon a ryuer ſyde, but he paſſed the water, puttyng them to flyght, and after they fledde into the cytie, he wanne it by force. The chyldren were ſlayne, and the reſt ſolde as ſlaues. He aſſaulted an other cytie where he was repulced, with the great force of the defendauntes, and loſt many of his men. But when the inhabitauntes ſawe, that he continued ſtill the ſiege, diſpayring of their ſaulfeguarde, they ſet fire

on their houſes, & burned them ſelues, their wifes and their children. Which fire when the Macedons quenched, they kyndled agayne, it ſeamed a ſtraunge contencion. The Cyteſins deſtroyed their owne cytie, their enemies laboured to ſaue it: the warres ſo contrariouſly chaunged the lawes wrought in man by nature. The caſtle was ſaued, wherin a guarriſon was left. Alexander went about this caſtle by water which was inuironed with thre of the greateſt ryuers in all India, Ganges except. Indus paſſing vpon the north ſyde, and Aceſynes ronnyng into Hidaſpis vpon the ſouth. Where theſe ryuers met, the waues roſe, lyke as they do in the ſea. They be full of mudde and 
                  •
               oes, whiche by the courſe of the water dryuen vnto the ſydes, for all that the ryuers he broade, yet the chanelles be but narowe the ſhyppes muſt paſſe in. The waues dyd ryſe ſo hygh and thicke breaking ſomtyme vpon the puppes of the ſhippes, and ſomtime vpō the ſydes, that the ſhipmen beganne to vale their ſayles. But they were ſo troubled through feare, and the violent ſwiftnes of the ſtreame, that they could not ordre their tackling, ſo that two of their greateſt ſhyppes were drowned within ſyght. And the ſmaller veſſels which they were as vnable to gouerne, were driuen vpon the ſhore without any harme. The kyng chaunſed vpon the place where the waues went hygheſt, wherwith his ſhyppe was ſo toſſed and trauerſed, that the helme could not direct his courſe. Wherfore the kyng doubtyng of drownyng, pulled of his garment redy to caſte hym ſelfe into the water, and his frendes dyd ſwymme nere there about redy to receyue hym. It appearīg to him doubtful, which peril was greateſt, either to ſwimme, or to cōtinew ſtill aborde. But ye mariners

laboured wōderfully with their 
                  •
               ers, adding all ye force that lay in mans power, to cut through the waues. By whoſe importunate trauaill, the water ſemed to deuide a ſondre, and to geue place. So that at length they haled out of the ſurges, and yet not able to bring the ſhip to the ſhore, daſhed vpon the next flat, it appearyng that the ſhyppes, and the ſtreame had fought a battaill togethers. Alexander hauing eſcaped this perill, ſette vp to euery ryuer an aultar, whereupon he offred due ſacrifice, and that done, paſt forwardes thirty furlonges. From thence he came into the countrey of the Sudrychans and Mallians,
                  
                     ••
                  drichāe 
                     •
                  allians. whiche accuſtomed to be at warre amonges them ſelues, then for their owne defence ioyned in ſocietie. They aſſembled in armes to the nombre of .ix. thouſand footemē .x.M. horſemē, and .ix.C. armed wagons. Wherof when the Macedons were aduertiſed, whiche beleued that they had paſſed all perils, ſeing a freſhe warre ariſe, with a new fierſe nacion, were amaſed with a ſodayne feare, and began agayne with ſedicious wordes to reproue their kyng.The 
                     •
                  uty 
                     ••
                  s words of the ſouldiers. They alledged that he would lately haue compelled them to paſſe the ryuer of Ganges, for to make warre vpon thoſe nacions lyeng beyonde the ſame. Which enterpryſe though it were left, they had not for all yt ended the warre neuer the more, but rather made an exchaunge of a newe labour, beyng put furthe amonges theſe wylde nacions, to make the Occean ſea open to hym with their bloud and to be drawen beyonde the ſonne and ſterres. They were compelled (they ſayde) to vyſite thoſe places whiche nature coueted to remoue from mans knowledge. They grudged that to their newe armour, th
                  ••
                were nowe enemies rayſed vp, whom if they ſhould van
                  ••
               iſhe and put to

flyght, they coulde not ſee what benefite they ſhoulde receiue therby, but onely darkenes and obſcuritie of the ayre, whiche alwayes couered the depe ſea, whyche ſea was repleniſhed wyth multitude of monſters, wallowynge in thoſe immoueable waters, where as Nature decayinge, fayled of her force. The kynge little moued in his owne reſpecte, was greatly troubled with thoſe paſſions of his ſouldiours.Alexander perſwaded his ſouldiours. Wherfore he aſſembled theim altogether, declaring of howe feable a force thoſe nacions were, whom they feared ſo muche, which only remayned, and were impediment vnto them (hauyng paſſed ouer ſo manye countreys) to atteine both to the ende of their trauayle, & to the ende of the world. He ſhewed howe that in reſpect of their former feare, he had lefte his enterprice ouer Ganges, with the conqueſt of the Nacions, inhabitynge beyonde the ſame, and had directed his iourney this waye, where as their glorye ſhould be as great, and their peryll muche leſſe, and wherin they had not farre to trauayle, ſeynge the Occean was in maner within ſighte, the ayre wherof he felt blowyng in his face. He required them therfore that they woulde not enuye the glorye that he ſought, by paſſyng the boundes of Hercules, and Bacchus, ſeyng that with ſo little payne they myght geue vnto their kynge perpetuall fame and immortalitye. In doynge wherof they ſhoulde departe out of India as victorers, where as otherwiſe they ſhoulde ſeme to flye from thence. It is the propertye of euerye multitude, and ſpecially of men of warre, to be drawen wt euery lyttle mocion, amonges whom, as ſedition dothe ſone riſe, ſo it is ſone pacefied. There was neuer a more cherefull crye made of any armye before, thē the Souldiours then made vnto Alexander, whiche willed

him to leade them whether ſoeuer he would, and make him ſelfe equall in glorye to them, whoſe actes he dyd counterfeite. Alexander reioyſinge in the willyngnes that appeared in them, remoued ſtraightwayes towardes hys enemyes that were the ſtowteſt people of all the Indians. They prepared theim ſelues boldely for the warres, and choſe for their capitayne one of the Oxidracans that was of an approued manhode, who encamped at the fote of a mountayne, made fiers all abroade, to cauſe his numbre appeare the greater, and wente aboute in vayne to feare the Macedons when they were at reſte, by makynge of ala
                  •
               oms, with their cryes and maner of howlynge. When the daye appeared, Alexander hauynge an aſſured truſte to winne the victorye, commaunded the Souldiours to put on their armoure, & cherefully to fall in order of battayle. But the Indians whether it were for feare, or by reaſon of ſome ſedition riſen amonges them, ſodainelye fledde into the deſerte mountaynes, whom Alexander folowed in vaine, and not able to ouertake them, toke their cariage. After this he came vnto a citye of the Oxidracans wherunto great numbre were fled,The Oxidracans. aſwell in truſt of the ſtrength of the place, as of their owne power. As Alexander was about to make the approch, Demophon his deuiner admoniſhed him,Demophon. yt he ſhould eiher deferre the matter, or els not meddle with it at all, for yt there appered ſignes that his life ſhould be in perill. When Alexander had hearde his wordes, he behelde him and ſaide. If any man ſhould interrupt the, when thou art buſie about thy ſcience, or conſideryng of the intrailes, ſhoulde not he ſeme vnto the troublous, and his cōmyng vngratefull? Yes truely quod

he. So art thou nowe vnto me (quod Alexander.) For hauynge ſo greate matters in hande, whiche paſſe the intrailes of Beaſtes, I fynde no greater impedimente, then a ſuperſticious diuiner.
            And as ſone as he hadde ſpoken the worde, he cauſed them to rere, vp ladders, and whiles other menne ſticked and ſtayed at the matter, he mounted vp the walle. The ſame was verye narrowe in the toppe, not deuided wyth lopes (as is communely vſed,) but encloſed with one whole and continuall battilment rounde aboute, which cauſed it to be the more hard to ſcale.
            Alexander therfore hauyng no conuenient rowme to ſtande at his defence, ſtayed vpon the walle, receyuyng vpon his target the dartes whyche were caſte at him from all partes. His ſouldiours could not get vnto him, they were ſo beaten from the walles by caſtyng of Dartes, and multitude of ſhotte that came from aboue. Yet at length when by their ſtayinge thei ſawe their kyng geuen vp into their enemies hands, ſhame ouercame their immaculate daunger. But their ouermuche haſte was ouer great a lette, and the cauſe why they coulde not come to the reſcue of their king. For whyles euery manne coueted vp the ladders, they were ſo ſore laden that they brake aſunder, and ſuche as were mounted vpon theim fell downe agayne, deceyuynge Alexander of hys onelye hope. So that in the ſyght of all the armye, he ſtode deſtitute as in a deſerte wythout anye ayde or ſuccoure, and hadde weried hys lefte arme (wyth the whyche he helde his Target) in receiuynge the blowes. His frendes cried vnto hym that he ſhoulde leape downe vnto theim, who ſtode in readines to receyue hym. But he geuynge no eare vnto theim, vndertoke an incredible enterprice,

and ſuch one as hath not bene hearde of before, deſeruynge rather fame of raſhenes, then of any commendation that might ſounde to his glorye. For with a ful leape he did caſte him ſelfe into the citye that was full of his enemies, wheras he coulde ſ
                  •
               arſelye haue anye hope to fyght for his life, or in diynge to be reuenged vpon his enemyes. For before he coulde recouer hys fete agayne, it was likelye either he ſhoulde haue bene ſlayne, or taken aliue. But he by chaunce ſo conueied his bodye, that he fell vpon his fete, and ſtandinge, encountred with ſuch as came againſte him, Fortune ſo prouidyng yt he coulde not be encloſed about by reaſō of an olde tree, which (as it had bene of purpoſe) ſtode neare vnto the wall, whoſe broade boughes full of leaues couered him from aboue, and the greatnes of the ſtocke kept his enemies from comming on his backe, and vpon the fore front he receiued the dartes yt were caſt againſt him with his target. For though there were neuer ſo many that contented with him a farre of, yet durſt there no man come neare vnto him, and the boughes kept of the arrowes and the dartes ſo well as his target did. In this extremitie the greatnes of Alexanders fame chiefly fought for him, and next deſperatiō, a great encouragement for a man to dye honeſtlye. At length through the multitude of his enemies that continually flocked about him, both his target was laden with ſhotte, his helmet was broken wyth ſtones, and his legges fainted and fayled vnder him, by reaſon of his continuall trauaile. Whiche thing when his enemies perceiued, they toke leſſe regarde to them ſelues, and drue more neare him, of whome he receiued two with his ſwerde in ſuch ſort, that thei fell downe dead at his fete. And from that time forwardes none was

ſo bolde to approche againe ſo neare him, but threwe dartes and ſhotte arowes at him a farre of. He laye open to euery mans blowe, and yet though it were with great payne defended him ſelfe vpon his knees, vntil ſuche time as an Indian ſhotte an arowe at hym that was two cubites long, whyche a little aboue his right thighe paſſed throughe his corſelet. By reaſon of that wounde he ſhedde ſo muche bloude, that he lette his ſwerde fall, as one at the pointe of death, and therwith ſo faynte, that he hadde not ſtrengthe to plucke oute the arrowe. Then the Indian whiche hadde hurte him, came with great ioye to ſpoyle hys bodye. But when Alexander felte his enemies hande vpon hym (moued as it is to be thought) with deſpite, to receyue an infamie to that extremitie, called againe his ſprites that were paſſynge awaye, and with his ſwerde thruſt his enemye (beynge vnarmed) throughe the bodye. When he had thus ſlayne two of his enemies whyche laye dead before him, all the reſte ſtode amaſed a farre of. Then Alexander deſieryng before his laſt breathe ſhoulde fayle hym, to be kylled fightyng, began to raiſe vp his bodye vpon his target, but his ſtrength woulde not ſerue him therunto, & therfore reiched at a bough that honge ouer his heade, couetynge therby to haue rayſed vp hym ſelfe, but his ſtrength not ſuffiſynge therunto, he fell downe agayne vpon his knees, and by a ſigne made with his hande, chalenged his enemies, if any of them durſte come and matche with him. At the laſt Penceſtes repulcinge his enemies vpon an other parte of the citye, gotte into the towne,Penceſtes and coaſtyng along the walles, came vnto the place where the kynge was. When Alexander eſpied hym, thoughe he had no hope to liue, yet he toke his comming for a comforte

to hys deathe, and for all his feablenes beganne to reare vp him ſelfe.Timeus. Leonatus. Ariſtonus. Then came Timeus, and within a while Leonatus▪ and after them Ariſtanus. When it was once publiſhed amonges the Indians, that Alexander was entred within the walles, they left their defence in other places, and came flockynge thither, where as they fiercely aſſailed ſuch as ſtode in defence of the Kynges perſon. Tymeus after that he hadde fought notablye, and receiued manye woundes, was there ſlayne. Penceſtes alſo notwithſtandynge that he was ſtricken and wounded wyth their Dartes, yet with his Target he defended the kynges perſon, without anie reguarde of him ſelfe. And Leonatus whiles he reſiſted the Indians, that egerlye preſſed vpon Alexander, receyued ſo ſore a ſtripe vpon the necke, that he fell downe in a ſwowne at the kinges fete. By that time Penceſtes became ſo feable of his woundes, that he was not able to defende him anye more. The laſte hope and refuge remayned in Ariſtonus, who alſo was ſo greuouſlye wounded, that he coulde not endure anye lenger the force of the Indians.
            In the meane ſeaſon the fame was ſpredde amonges the Macedons, that their kynge was ſlayne, whiche beinge a matter that ſhoulde haue putte others in feare, ſturred vp their ha
                  •
               res, and made theim the hardier. For from that time forwardes, there was none that hadde reſpect of his owne peryll, but aduentured to the wall, and breakynge downe the ſame with pikeaxes, entred at the breache makinge ſlaughter of their enemies, of whom fewe ſtode at defence, but fledde awaye. There was neuer man nor woman ſpared, olde nor yonge. For they mette none but they iudged him to be the perſon that hadde hurte their kynge, and ſo at

length with the murder of the multitude, their iuſte ire was ſatiſfied.Clitarchus Timagenes Clitarchus and Tymagenes do write that Ptolomeus whiche afterwardes became king of Egipte was preſente in this encountre. But he him ſelfe that vſed not to denye any thynge that ſtode with his owne glorye, did put in memorie howe that he was then abſent, and ſent about an other enterprice. Such a negligence was in theim that did write the antiquities of thinges, or elles an ouermuche credulitie, whiche is a faulte, no leſſe then the other. When Alexander was brought into his lodgyng, the Surgians cut of the ſtale of that ſhaft in ſuche wiſe, that they moued not the heade that was wythin the fleſhe. And when they ſawe the wounde bare, they perceaued hokes to be within the arrowe heade, ſo that wythoute the deſtruction of his bodye it could not be pulled out, except by inciſion they made the wounde greater. And yet in that poynte they feared, leaſt aboundaunce of bloud ſhoulde be impediment vnto them. For the heade was verye great, and it ſeamed to be entered farre wythin his bodye.
            There was one Critobolus that was verye cunnynge and moſte excellente amonges all the Phiſitions and ſurgions,Crytobol
                     •
                  . and yet in ſo daungerous a matter as this, he was fearful and in doubte to ſet to his handes, leaſt if any thing ſhoulde chaunce to the kynge otherwiſe then well, whiles he remayned in hys cure, the blame myght lyght vpon his heade. Therfore whē Alexander perceiued by his weping the fea
                  •
                he was in, and that through trouble of mynd he loked pale in the face, ſayde vnto hym: What is it that thou lokeſt for, or whye doeſt thou ſtaye in riddyng me quickelye

out of this payne, at the leaſte wayes by death, if thou canſt not otherwiſe bringe it to paſſe? For ſeinge my wounde is vncurable, why doeſt thou feare that anye thing ſhoulde be laied vnto thy charge. When Critobolus hearde his wordes, he either ceaſſed, or diſſimuled his feare, and exhorted Alexander that he woulde ſuffer him ſelfe to be holden whiles they pulled out the arrowes heade that was within his fleſhe, for the leaſt mocion (he ſaied) might be hurtefull vnto him. The kynge woulde not be holden, but helde his bodye at a ſtaye without mouyng in ſuch ſorte as they appoynted him. When they had cut the wounde wider, and pulled out the heade, there iſſued ſuche aboundaunce of bloude, that the kinge fell in a ſownde, & dimnes came ouer his ſight, he ſtretching out him ſelfe as one in the pointe of death. Then they wrought all the meanes they coulde to ſtaunche the bloulde, but when they perceiued it would not auaile, his frendes beganne to cry out and lamente, thinkyng verely that there had bene no waye but death. Notwithſtanding at length he ceaſed his bleadynge, and recouering againe his ſpirites, began to knowe theim that ſtode about him. All that daye and the nyght enſuynge, the men of warre ſtode in armes aboute the kinges lodgynge, confeſſing that al their liues depended vpon his breath and would not remoue from thence, before they vnderſtode that he toke ſome reſt. But when they knewe that he was fallen a ſleape, they returned into the campe, bringynge vnto the reſt more certayne hope of his recouerye. Alexander about the curynge of his wounde, remayned there ſeuen dayes, and vnderſtandynge that a conſtante fame of his death was ſpreade abroade amonges the Indians, he cauſed two Shyppes to be faſtened

togither, and a lodgynge to be made for him in the middes. So that remayninge vpon the water, he myght be ſene from bothe ſides of the lande, of theim that thought he hadde bene deade. When the countrey menne by the viewe of hym, perceiued he was on liue they toke awaye the hope that ſome hadde conceiued vpon the falſe reporte. Frō thence he paſſed downe the ſtreame, leauynge a diſtaunce betwene his ſhippe, and the reſte of the nauye, to the entente that wyth the beatynge of the oores, they ſhoulde not diſturbe hym of his reſte, whiche was neceſſarye for his weake bodye. The fourth daye after his enbarkynge, he came into a countrey habandoned of the inhabitours, but yet plentifull bothe of corne and cattell, in which place he thought expediente bothe to reſte him ſelfe and hys ſouldiours. It was a cuſtome amonges the Macedons, that when their Kynge was diſeaſed, the chiefe Princes, and the greate men, watched aboute his lodgynge. Whiche maner beynge then obſerued, they entred all together into the chamber where Alexander laye, at whoſe ſodoine comminge he was ſome what amaſed, ſpeciallye bicauſe they came all together. He thought thei had brought him ſome ſtraunge tidinges and enquered of them if they vnderſtode of any new aſſemble of his enemies. Then Craterus which was appoynted to ſpeake in the behalfe of them all, ſayed to him after this maner.
            Do you thynke that the commynge of any enemies coulde make vs ſo carefull,Craterus wordes to Alexander. thoughe they were entered within your campe, as we be of your health and ſaufeguarde, for all that it is a thinge whiche you reguarde leaſt. Though all nacions conſpire: againſte vs wyth their power, thoughe the whole worlde were filled full

of men of warre, the Seas ouerſpreade with ſhippes and neuer ſo manye ſtraunge beaſtes brought againſt vs, it confiſteth in the moment of your perſon to make vs victorers. But howe can anye God promiſe that you whiche be lyght and ſtarre of Macedon, can be of anye continuaunce▪ ſeynge that you be ſo deſierous to put your perſone in ſuche manifeſt peryls, not remembrynge that with your death you drawe wyth you into ruine, the liues of ſo many of your countreymen? What is he that either can or dothe deſire to lyue after you? We are come ſo farre forthe folowynge your fortune and aucthoritye, that without you, none of vs is able toreturne home againe.
            If ye were yet contendynge with Darius for the kingdome of Perce, thoughe we all woulde wiſhe that you woulde not aduenture your perſon ſo per
                  •
               louſlye yet in that caſe we coulde not maruayle ſo muche of your prompt audaritie. For where the daunger and the benefite that enſueth therof is equall, then the fruite is the greater when the matter ſucceadeth wel, and the comforte is the more, when the thinge chaunſeth euill. There is no man, not onelye of vs that be your ſouldiours, but euen of ſuche as were your enemyes, hauynge anye vnderſtandinge of your greatnes, that can ſuffer ſo baſe a towne and of ſo little fame, be bought with the price of your life, my harte ſhrinkes at the remembraunce of the thinge, whiche we but late did ſee wyth our eyes. I am amaſed to rehearſe howe thoſe vile handes were in readines to haue caried the ſpoyles of your inuincible perſon, if Fortune of her mercye hadde not preſerued and deliuered you from their crueltye. So manye of vs as were notable to folowe you, were all traytours and forſakers of

our Prince, and though it were a matter that laye not in our power, yet if it pleaſe you to note vs all with reproche, there is none that will refuſe anye puniſhment in the purgation of the matter. Notwithſtandyng we woulde require that you woulde ſpace vs for ſome other purpoſe▪ We will gladly go whether ſoeuer ye will haue vs, we require warre be it neuer ſo obſcure, and couet the battaile, thoughe our fightynge ſhall wante fame. So that you will reſerue your ſelfe to thoſe haſardes whiche be mete for the greatnes of your eſtate. Howe ſone doth glorye vaniſhe awaye, and become of no prayſe, amonges ſuche enemies as be of no reputation? And what thing is there more vnworthye, then to conſume the glorie ye haue gotten els where amonges them, where as your glorye can not appeare. Whē Craterus hadde tolde his tale, Ptolome and the other ſpake to hym in like effecte. And required him all at once with weapynge eyes, that he woulde not frome thence forth be any more ſo thirſty to winne prayſe, but ſeynge he hadde gotte ſufficient all readye, he ſhoulde content him ſelfe therwithall, and regarde his health and ſafegarde wherupon their vniuerſall eſtate did depende. The kynge toke ſo gratefullye their louynge affection, that he familiarlye embraced euerye one of them, and after he had wylled them to ſitte, repetynge more depelye their former communicaſion, he ſaied thus vnto them.
            My faiethfull louinge frendes and countreymen,Alexander vnto his frendes. I geue and render to you my hartye thankes, not onely for that ye prefer my ſafegard before your owne, but alſo for that ſence the beginnyng of ye warres, ye haue not pretermitted any thinge, wherin your loue & beneuolence might be ſhewed towardes me. So yt I muſt

confeſſe that my lyfe was neuer ſo 
                  •
               eare as it is now, becauſe I deſire longe to enioye you. You be deſierous to offer your ſelues to death in my quarell, becauſe you iudge that I haue deſerued that beneuolēce at your handes. But your imagination and myne is not after one ſorte. You peraduenture do 
                  •
               oue
                  •
                continuallye to enioye me, & to take of me continuall fruite. And I meaſure not my ſelfe by the cōtinuaūce of my time, but by the greatnes of my glorye. I myght haue bene contente wyth the riches my father lefte me, and with reſt of my bodye haue loked for with the boundes of Macedon, an age obſcure and without any fame. And yet I can not ſee that they whiche liue in ſlougth and idlenes can aſſure them ſelfe of their owne deſtenye. For euen ſuche as eſteme felicitie in long life, be oftentimes preuented with bitter death. But I whiche number not my yeres but my victories, haue liued longe, if I will weye the giftes of Fortune. For beginnynge mine Empire in Macedonia, I haue Greace in mine owne handes, I haue ſubdued Thrace and the Illirians, I raigne ouer the Triballes and the Medeans, poſſeſſynge an Aſia that lye betwixt Helleſpont and the redde Sea, and nowe am not farre from the ende of the worlde, the whiche I determined to viſite, and to make open to men a newe nature, and a newe worlde. I paſſed out of Aſia into Europe in the moment of an houre, and beynge but .xxviii. yeres olde, & hauyng raigned but nine, am become victorer of both regions.
            Do you thinke it then mete yt I ſhould nowe ceaſſe from winning of that glorye, wherunto I haue onelye addict my ſelfe? No I wil neuer ceaſſe, but wherſoeuer

I ſhall haue occaſion to fyght, I ſhall thinke my ſelfe to be in the Theatre, where the whole worlde dothe beholde me. I will geue nobilitye and fame to places that be obſcure. And will laye open to all Nacions thoſe countreys, that nature hath remoued furdeſt frō them. In doynge wherof it ſhall be gratefull for me to ende my lyfe, if Fortune will haue it ſo. I am come of that ſtocke that I ought to deſire many thinges before longe lyfe. I praye you to remembre that we be come into thoſe countreys where the name of a woman is muche celebrated for hir vertues. What cityes did Semiramis builde? what nacions did ſhe ſubdue? and what great workes did ſhe accompliſhe? We are not yet become equal to a woman in glory, and yet you woulde haue me to be ſatiſfied of laude.. The Gods be fauourable vnto our purpoſe, for there remaine for vs yet greater thinges to do. And it is the next way to make thoſe countreys we haue not yet touched to become ours, if we eſteme nothing to be of ſmall valure, where as there is anye occaſion to winne glorye. Let it be your care onelye to preſerue me from ciuill conſpiracie and treaſon of mine owne people, & then there be no aduentures of the warre ſhall put me in feare, Philippe was more ſure in the front of the battaile abroade, then in quiet tarians at home. He oftentimes auoyded the force of his enemies, but he coulde not eſchue the violēce of his owne ſubiectes. And if you cō
               ſider the ende of other Kynges, you ſhall count more that haue bene ſlayne by their owne menne, then by anye forayne power. But bicauſe there is an occaſion nowe offered me to vtter the thing I haue longe conceaued in my minde. It ſhall be the greateſt fruite I can receyue of my actes, and of my trauayles, if my

trauailes, if my Mother Olympiades when ſhe departeth this lyfe, might be conſecrated to immortalitie. If ſhe departe in my tyme, I wil do the thing my ſelfe. But if I ſhall be preuented by Death, remember you to perfourme that I haue determined. And therupon he diſmiſſed his frendes from him, and continued manye dayes in the ſame place. Whiles theſe thinges were a doynge in India, the Greake ſouldiours that hadde lande and habitacion appoynted them at Catabactra, throughe a ſedicion that chaunſed amonges them,A rebellion of the Grekes whiche Alexander had planted at Catabact
                     •
                  s. rebelled againſte Alexander. Notſomuche for anye hatred they bare hym, as for feare of puniſhemente. For they kylled diuers of their chiefe rulers, and aſſemblynge in force togethers, toke the caſtle of Bactria, that was negligentlye kepte, and procured the Bactrians to rebell with them.
            
               Athenod
                     •
                  
                  rus.Athenodorus was the chiefe amonges theim, who toke vpon hym the name of a kynge, not ſo muche for the deſire of the kyngdome, as by aucthoritye to make him ſelfe of power to conueye hym ſelfe and others home into his countrey.Bycon. But one Bycon of his owne nacion became his enemye, and conſpirynge agaynſte him, did bidde hym to a banquet, where he was ſlayne by one Boxus Macerianus. The nexte daye folowynge Bicon aſſembled the Greakes together, perſwadinge theim that he ſlewe Athenodorus but in hys owne defence, whoſe purpoſe was to haue deſtroyed him. But there were ſome that perceiued his policye, and ſuſpicion was ſpreade amonges the reſt. So that the Greakes fell to armes of purpoſe to ſlea Bycon. But ſuche as were chiefe mitigated the wrathe of the multitude, and contrary to his expectation was deliuered from that preſente peryll. Yet he coulde not be

ſo contented, but wythin a while after, conſpired againſte them that ſaued his lyfe. whoſe falſehode knowen, they toke bothe hym and Boxus, determinynge that Boxus ſhoulde be put to death out of hande, and that Bycon ſhoulde ende hys lyfe by tormentes. As they were tormentinge of him, the Greake ſouldiours ſodainelye in a furye (for what cauſe it is vncertayne) ranne to Armes, the noyſe of whom beynge hearde wyth them that had the charge of Bycon, did let him at libertye, fearynge that the rumoure hadde bene made for his deliuerye. He as he was naked came runninge amonges the Grekes, where as they were aſſembled, whoſe miſerable eſtate ſo ſodainelye chaunged their minds, yt thei willed him immediatly to be ſet at liberty.
            By thys meanes Bicon beynge twiſe deliuered from death, returned into his countrey with the Grekes, leauynge the Colonye wherunto he was appointed by Alexander. Theſe thinges were done in the cō
               fynes of Bactria and Scythia. In the meane ſeaſon the kynge of the two nacions whyche we ſpake of before, ſent an hundred Embaſſadours vnto Alexander, whiche beynge men of goodly perſonages, ridde in wagons ſemely appaireled, hauing garmentes of linnen clothe embroydred with golde, and empaled with purple. They declared that the cauſe of their commynge was to yeld them ſelues, their citye, their countrey, and their libertye, whiche thei had kepte inuiolatelye by ſo many ages to his wil & appointmēt. Of which their ſubmiſſion the Gods (thei ſaid) were aucthours, & not any fear, for thei were cōtēted to yeld thē ſelues, before thei had proued their power with him.
            The kynge called a counſayle, & receiued thē vnder his protection, appointing to thē to pay ſuch tribute as they before paied to the Arachoſiās. And beſides to ſēd

two thouſand fiue hundred horſemen to ſerue hym in his warres, all whiche thinges they perfourmed obedientlye. This done he made a great feaſt, wherunto he inuited thoſe Embaſſadours and his Lordes. He vſed therin ſumptuous preparation, ordeinynge .C. beddes of golde to eate vpon, which beyng ſet a ſmall diſtaunce one from another, were drawen about with curteynes garniſhed with golde and purple. In that feaſt there was ſhewed and ſette forthe all the exceſſe and voluptuouſnes, which either by long cuſtome was vſed among the Perciās, or by corruption of their old vſages taken vp amonges the Macedons, the vyces of both thoſe nacions beynge there mingled & myxed togethers.Dioxippus, There was at that feaſt one Dioxippus of Athens, a notable champion, by reaſon of his excellent force well knowen vnto the Kynge, whome certayne enuiouſſe and malicious Perſones betwyxte earneſt and paſtyme dyd reproue that he was geuen to farre hys bodye as an vnprofitable beaſte. And when other went to the battaile, he would anoynt his body wt oyle, and prepare him ſelfe to eate. Emonges other that vſed wordes of deſpyte agaynſte hym, there was at the ſame feaſt,
                  
                     ••
                  rratus. one Horratus a Macedon who in his dronkennes chalenged Dio
                  •
               ippus, that if he were a man he ſhoulde fight the campe with him the nexte daye vpon llife and death,A combate. where as the kynge ſhoulde iudge either him to be to raſhe, or the other to much a daſtar
                  •
               . Dioxippus then laughyng to ſcorne the pride and arrogancie of the ſouldiour, accepted his profer. The next day they were more earneſt to go to the combate, then they were before in makynge of the chalenge, therfore when the kyng ſawe them ſo bente, and that they would not leaue their purpoſe, he cōſented to their will.

There were greate nombre of men aſſembled at the combate, amonges whom there were many Grecians whiche fauoured Dioxippus parte. The Macedon came into the Lyſtes armed at all peaces, holdyng in his left hande an yron buckler and a ſpeare, and in his right hande a caſting launce, hauing his ſworde beſydes girte to his ſyde, was furnyſſhed as though he ſhould haue fought with many men at once. Dioxippus came furth anoynted with oyle, with a garlande vpon his head, and hauing a read cloke wrapt about his left arme, held in his right hande a great knottiye cudgell. The diuerſitie of their furniſhement brought euery man in a wonderfull expectaciō. For they could not thinke it only a raſhenes but a madnes, for Dioxippus that was naked, to matche with the other that was armed: The Macedon thinking to kil his aduerſary before they ſhould come to hand ſtrippes, threwe at him his launce, whiche Dioxippus auoided with bē
               ding of his body, & before that he could charge his pike, he leaped to him and with his cudgell brake theſame aſondre. When the Macedon had loſt both his weapōs, he beganne to drawe his ſworde, but Dioxippus preuented him wit a cloſe, and taking both his feete from vnder him▪ threwe him to the earth and there plucking his ſworde from him, ſet his foote vpon his necke, and held vp his cudgell to haue ſtriken out his braynes, if the kyng had not cauſed him to ſtaye his hand. This triumphe ended with diſpleaſure both vnto the Macedons, and vnto vnto Alexāder himſelfe, ſpecially becauſe this thing was done in the Indians preſence. he feared leſt the valiauntnes of the Macedōs famed ſo muche in the worlde, might therby come into contēpt. Hereupon Alexāder grudging at Dioxippus bare his

eares open to the accuſacion of the enuyous. They within a fewe dayes after had cauſed a golden cuppe to be purpoſely conueyed out of the waye, whiche the miniſters hauing imbeſealed them ſelues, made complaynt vnto Alexander of the loſſe thereof. Oftymes men ſhewe leſſe conſtauncy, then in the offence it ſelfe. For in their complaynt Dioxippus perceyued by their lokes that they noted hym as the thefe, whiche he coulde not endure, but partyng out of the feaſte after he had wrytten a letter to the kyng, he kylled hymſelfe. Alexander was very ſory for his death whiche he tooke for no token of repentaunce, but rather of indignacion. For afterwardes it appeared through the ouermuche reioyſing of hys enemies, that he had bene falſely accuſed. The Embaſſadours of the Indians that were diſmiſſed home, within a fewe dayes after returned agayne, preſenting vnto Alexander thre .C. horſes .M. and .xxx. wagons euery one drawen with foure horſes, certain veſtures of linnen cloth .M. Indian targetes, & an hundred talentes of white Iren, both lyons of a rare bygnes, and Tigres that were made 
                  •
               ame, the ſkinnes of great Lyzardes, and the ſhelles of certain fiſſhes. The kyng then commaunded Craterus to conduct his army along the ryuer wherupon he ſayled, and he enbarking ſuche as were wont to accompany him, with the ſtreame paſſed into the boundes of the Mallians, and from thence came vnto the Sabracans,Sabracans. whiche was a nacion of great power, not ruled by kynges, but by a gouernement of the people. They had gathered together .vi.M. footemen and .vi.M. horſemen, and .v.C. armed wagons, and had choſen thre capitaines that were approued men of warre. But when ſuche as inhabited

next vnto the ryuer (the bankes being full of villages) ſawe all the ryuer ſo farre as they coulde view ſtrowed with ſhippes, and the armour gliſtering of ſo many men of warre, they were amaſed with the ſtraungenes of the ſight, and thought that ſome army of the Goddes, or els Bacchus (whoſe name was famous amonges thoſe nacions) had become amonges them. The crye of the men of warre with the claſſing of the oers, and the ſtraunge noyſe of the mariners exhortyng one another, fylled full their fearefull eares. They ranne therfore amonges their countrey men whiche had aſſembled their force, declaring their madnes if they woulde contende with Goddes. For they ſayde the ſhippes coulde not be nombred, that caried thoſe inuicible people. With whiche wordes they put ſuche feare amonges the men of warre of their owne nacion, that they ſent immediatly Embaſſadours to yelde them ſelues. When he had receyued aſſuraunce of them, he came the fourth day into an other nacion, whiche durſte no more withſtande then the reſte dyd, and there he buylded a cytie whiche he named Alexandria, and from thence entred into a coū
               trey the inhabiters whereof be called Muſycans.Muſycans. Caracanuſidans. There he vnderſtode by the accuſacion of the Caramiſidans that Deſtirioldes (whom Alexander had appointed lieutenant amōges them) had ruled in exceſſiue pride and couetouſnes, & therfore cōmaunded him to be put to death. And Oxarres lieutenaūt of the Bactrians being alſo accuſed, was not only acquited, but alſo had a greater rule cōmitted vnto him. Whē he had ſubdued ye vtter partes of the Muſicās he put a guarriſon in their cytie,Porticanus kyng of the Preſtyans. and went from thence to another nacion of the Indians called Preſtians of whome

Porticanus was kyng whiche with a great powre got him ſelfe into a ſtrong citie whiche Alexander wanne the thirde daye after he beganne his ſiege. Vpon the taking of the towne Porticanus fled into the caſtle and ſent Embaſſadours to treate of peace. But before they were come to Alexanders preſence, twoo towres of the Caſtle fell with a greate craſhe, by the ruynes wherof the Macedons got into the caſtle, where Porticanus whiche with a fewe ſtanding at defence, was ſlayne. The caſtle being raſed and all that were with in ſould as ſlaues, Alexander came into the boundes of Saba,Python. where beſydes many cyties that yelded vnto hym, he toke the ſtrongeſt cytie of that countrey by force of a myne. It ſemed a monſtrous thyng vnto the Indians, being ignoraunt of ſuche policies of warre, for armed men to come furthe of the grounde in the myddes of their cytie, there appearyng before, no ſigne of any way vnder the earth. Clitar
                  •
               us doth write that there were foure ſcore thouſand Indians ſlayne in that countrey, beſydes many priſoners ſolde as ſlaues. The Muſicanes in the meane tyme rebelled,Saba. for the oppreſſion of whome Python was ſent thether, who toke the prince of the nacion priſoner, and brought hym to Alexander, whom he cauſed to be hanged on a croſſe as the aucthour of the reuolt, and that done returned agayne to the ryuer where as he had willed his nauy to tary for hym. The fourth daye after paſſing downe the ſtreme, he came to a towne at the entrey of the kyngdome of Samus.Samus The kynge whereof had newely yelded hymſelfe, but the cytezens dyd ſhutte their gates, and woulde not be at commaundement. Whoſe ſmalle nombre Alexander regarded

ſo little that he ſent fyue hundred Agrians vnto their gates to proffer them the ſkirmyſhe, to the intent by retiryng little and little they myght drawe them out of their ſtrength, whiche were thought would folowe in the chaſe, when they ſhould ſee their enemies flyeng. The Agrians did as it was appoynted them, for when they had once prouoked their enemies, they turned their backes, and the Indians folowed them, till they came to the embuſhement where the kyng lay. Then the Agrians turned and the fight was renued agayne, ſo that of thre thouſand Indians there were fyue hundred ſlaine and a thouſand taken, the reſt recouered agayne the cytie. But the ende of the victory was not ſo pleaſaunt as it appeared in the begynnyng, for the Indians had ſo inuenemed their ſwordes, that ſuche as were hurte dyed of their woundes. And the Phiſicio
                  •
               s could not deuyſe the cauſe of ſo ſtraunge a death, for euen the very lyght hurtes were vncurable. The Indians truſted that Alexander through his raſhenes myght haue come within that daunger, whiche by chaunſe fyghting amonges the thyckeſt, eſcaped vnhurte.Ptolomeus Ptolomeus was fyghtly wounded vpon his lefte ſhoulder, who beyng in greater daunger, then the greatnes of his wounde ſhewed, cauſed the kynge to be carefull of hym. For he was nere of his kynne, and as ſome thought Philippe was his father. But it is certayne that his mother was Philippes concubyne, he was one that had the charge of the kynges perſone, a valiaunt man of warre, and yet more famous in the faculties of peace. He was moderate both in his apparell and lyuing, lyberall, eaſye to be ſpoken to, and without any ſuche

height of mynde, as is wont to be in men diſcended of bloud royall, by reaſon of whiche qualities it is vncertaine whether he was better beloued with the kyng, or with the reſt of men. That was the firſt occaſion he had to proue how the mindes of men were affectionat towardes him, for euen in that daunger he was in, the Macedons beganne to deuyne of his fortune, wherunto afterwardes he aſcended. They had no leſſe care of Ptolomeus, then of the kyng him ſelfe, who vſed hym ſo familierly that when he was weried either with trauayll, or care of mynde, woulde ſit for his ſolace with Ptolomeus, and at that time cauſed his bedd to be brought into his owne chambre. When Ptolomeus was layde there, he fell ſodeinly into a profounde ſleape, in the whiche it appeared vnto hym that a dragonne offred to hym a herbe out of his mouthe of the healing of his wounde, and takyng away of the venyme. When he awaked he declared his dreame and ſhewed both the colour and faſhion of the herbe, affirmyng that he coulde knowe it, if any man could fynde it out. The ſame was ſought by ſo many, that at length it was founde, and being put vpon the wounde, the paine ſtreight wayes ceſſed, and the ſkarre within ſhort ſpace was cloſed. When the Indians were diſappointed of the hope they had conceyued that waye, they yelded them ſelues and their Cytie. From thence Alexander went into the next countrey called Pathalia,Meres king of Pathalia the kyng wherof called Meres lefte the Cytie and fledde into the Mountaynes, ſo that Alexander toke the ſame and deſtroyed all the countrey, fyndyng bothe a wonderfull praye of Sheape, of Cattell, and of Corne.
            There he toke Pilotes that knewe that Ryuer, and

came vnto an Iland whiche ſtode in the middes of the ſtreame, he was compelled to remayne there the lenger, becauſe the Pilotes beyng negligentlye keapt were eſcaped awaye▪ 
               
                  •
               e ſent therfore to ſeke out other, but when he coulde fynde none, there entred a vehement deſyre into his head to viſite the Occean Sea, and the ende of the worlde without any guyde, and ſo committed his owne lyfe, and the lyues of ſo many thouſandes, to a ryuer that none of them dyd knowe. They ſayled as men ignoraunt of all the places they came vnto, either howe farre the Sea was diſtaunt frō what nacions did inhabite the countreys there aboutes, whether the mouthe of the ryuer were nauigable for Galeis or no.
            In all theſe thynges they were ledde by a blynde and doubtfull imaginacion, hauyng no comfort in their raſſhe enterpriſe, but only their continuall felicitie. When they had gone forwardes foure hundred furlonges, the ſhyppemaiſters tolde the kynge that they felt the ayre of the Sea, wherby they knewe that the Occean was at hande. Thereat he reioyſed greatly and exhorted the mariners, that they woulde in all that they myght make waye with the 
                  •
               ers to bryng hym to the ſyght of the ende of the worlde, which he had ſo long deſired. Nowe (quod he) our glory is perfite, when our manhode is ſuche that nothyng can geue impediment vnto vs, nowe the worlde is come into our hādes without any further haſard of warre, or ſheding of bloud. Nowe ſince the b
                  •
               undes that nature hath wrought be ſo nere at hande, we ſhall ſhortly ſe thinges vnknowē ſauing to the immortal gods. Yet notwithſtanding he ſet certain a land to take foure of

the countrey men, by whome he truſted to haue knowen more certaintie of the truthe. When they ſerched out their cotagies at length founde out ſome that were hydden. Whiche beyng demaunded howe farre the ſea was from them, they made aunſwere that they neuer harde it named, but they ſayde that within thre dayes ſaylyng they ſhoulde come vnto a place, where as a brakiſhe water did corrupt the freſhe. By whiche wordes the mariners vnderſtode that they ment the Sea, of the nature whereof the people were ignoraunt. Then the mariners rowed cherefully, their deſire growing euer the greater as they approched nere vnto the place, whiche they hoped to be the ende of their trauaill. The third daye they came where the ſea and the ryuer ioyned together, mixing with a ſmale floud, their waters that were of a contrary nature. Then becauſe the tyde was ſomwhat againſte them, they haled towardes an other Iland ſtanding in the myddes of the ryuer, whiche beyng an eaſy place to lande at, the Macedons, ran about to ſeke vit
                  •
               lles, in ſuretie (as they thought) being ignoraunt of the chaunce that came vpon them. The thirde houre accordyng to the ordinary courſe the floud came from the Sea, and with his force, did dryue the ſtreame backeward, whiche at the firſt beyng but ſtayed, was afterwardes ſo vehemently repulced, that it cauſed the water to returne backwarde with greater fury then any ſwifte ſtreame is wont to ronne. The commen ſort that knewe not the nature of the Occeā,The nature of the occeā was vnknowen to the Macedons. thought the ſ
                  ••
               me to be a wō
               derfull matter and that it had bene a token ſent to them of the goddes wrath, and whiles they were in that imaginacion, the Sea ſwellyng more and more, ouerflowed the lande whiche they ſawe before drye,

and as the water roſſe the ſhipps mounted, and al the nauy was diſperkled here and there. Such as were vpō land were amaſed with the ſodeinnes of the thing and ran frō al partes in great feare vnto their ſhips. But in a tumulte haſte doth hurte, & gyue the impediment. Some there were that went about to ſet ther ſhipes forwardes, other forbad rowyng and remoued not at all. Other whiles they made haſte awaye, and would not tary to take in ther companye, moued vnaptly, and could make no waie. Some when they ſawe them preſſe a ſhipbord in ſuch thronges, for feare of takyng into many, woulde receyue none at all. So that both multitude and ſmal numbre, was a let vnto ye haſt they made. The crye that ſome made in bidding men tary, and the noiſe that other made willing them to go forwardes, and there voyſes that differed, and agred not in one effect, toke away the vſe both of their ſight and hearing. The mariners could not help the matter, whoſe wordes in the tumult coulde not be harde, nor their commaundementes obſerued amonges men in feare and out of order. The ſhyppes therfore daſhed one agaynſt an other, the Ores craſſhed a ſonder, and euery ſhippe either thurſt forwards, or put backe an other. No man would haue iudged it to be one nauye but rather two ſondrey fighting a battell togither vpon the Sea. The poores did ſtrycke agaynſt the puppes, ſuch as went before troubled them that came after, and the wordes of men in their wrath, came vnto ſtrypes.
            By that tyme the fludde had ouer flowne al the playnes there about, ſo that nothyng appeared aboue the water ſauinge the hilles whyche ſeamed lyke lyttle

Ilands, wherunto many did ſwyme and left ther ſhippes for feare. Whyles the nauye thus diſperkled abrode, partlye ſtode a flote when they hapned in anye valey, and pacte ſtycked vpon the grounde if they dyd hit vpon the flattes, according as the ground was that the water couered: ſodeinly there came an other terror greatter then the firſt. For when then the Sea began to ebbe, the water fell backe agayne into hys wonted courſe with ſo greate violence as it came forwardes, and reſtored and ſight of the lande, whiche before was drowned as in a depe Sea.
            The ſhippes then forſaken of the water fel vpon their ſides, and the feldes were ſtrowen with broken bordes and wyth peares of Ores. The ſouldiers durſt not go furth to land, and yet were in feare to tarye a ſhipbord lokynge euer for ſome greater miſchiefe to come, then that they ſawe preſent or paſte.
            They could ſcarſly beleue that they ſawe and ſuffred, which was ſhipwarck vpon the land, and the Sea within a riuer. And they thought no eand could come of hys myſchiefe. For they knewe not that the fludde ſhould ſhortly returne agayne and ſet their ſhippes aflote. And therefore they Imagyned to them ſelfes famyne and all extremities. The monſters alſo of the Sea that after the water was paſte were left on drye land put them in great feare.
            The nyght approached, and deſpayre brought the kynge into a great agonye.
            Yet no care could ouercome his hart that was inuincible, but that he watched all night, and ſent horſemen to the mouth of the riuer, to bryng him word when the tyde came. He cauſed the ſhippes that were broken to

be amended, and ſuche as were ouerwhelmed to be hoiſed vp agayne, warning al men to laye awayte and be in redines agaynſt the water ſhould riſe. When he had conſumed all that night in watchinge and gyuing exhortacion to his men, ſtreightwaies the horſemen returned amayne gallop, and the fludde folowed them, which mildly encreaſing begane to raiſe againe their ſhyppes, and when it had ones ouerflowne the bankes the holle nauye beganne to moue. Then al the cooſt rebounded with the vnmeaſurable reio
                  •
               ſing that the ſouldiers and mariners made for there ſaulfgarde whereof they were before in deſpaire. When they ſawe the daungier paſ
                  •
               e they enquered with wonder one of an other, by what reaſon ye ſea could ſo ſone after that maner go and come, and debated the nature of that element, whych one while diſagred, and an otherwhile was obedient and ſubiect to the time. The kyng coniecturing by the ſignes he had ſene before, that after ye ſonne riſyng the tyde would ſerue hys purpoſe, to preuent the matier, at midnight wyth a fewe ſhippes he fleted downe the ſtreame, and paſſing out at the mouth of the riuer, entred foure hūdred furlongs into the ſea where attayning the thing that he deſired, made ſacrifice to the goddes of the Sea which were worſhipped in thoſe countreyes, and returned agayne into hys nauye.
            From thence the next day he returned backwardes agaynſt the ſtreame, and arriued at a ſalt lake, the nature wherof beynge vnknowne diſceyued many that raſhely entered into the water, for ther bodies by and by became ful of ſcabbes, which diſceaſe takē by ſome, the contagyon therof infected many other. But they

founde that oyle was a remedye for the ſame. Alexander lyeng ſtill wyth hys armye waiting for the ſpring time of ye yeare, ſent Leonatus before by ye land which waie he thought to paſſe, for to digge welles bicauſe the countrey was verye drye and deſtitute of water. In the meane ſeaſon he builded many Cytyes, and commaunded Nearchus and Oneſicritus,Nearchus. Oneſicritus that were moſt expert of naual thinges, with his ſtrongeſt ſhippes to paſſe into the Occeane and to go ſo farre forwards as they myght wt ſuretye for to vnderſtand the nature of the ſea, and willed them at theyr returne to land either wt that riuer, or ells within Euphrates. When the winter was well paſſed, he burned thoſe ſhyppes whych he occupied not, and conueyed hys armye by land. After ix. encampinges he came into the coūtrey of ye Arabitans,Arabytans. Gedroſians. and from thence in nine dayes came amonges the Gedroſians, which being a fre nacion by a general counſeill had amonges them, yealded them ſelfes, of whom their was not any thynge demaunded ſauinge only vittelles.
            
               Arabon.The fift day he came vnto a riuer whych the coūtrey men cal Arabon beyond the which there laye a barein countrey greatly deſtitute of water through the which he paſſed, and entred amonges the Horitans.Horitans. There he betoke the greater parte of hys armye to Empheſtion and parted hys ſouldiers that were light armed wyth Ptolomeus and Leonatus and ſo waſted the countrey wt thre armies at once & toke great praies Ptolomeus burned towardes the Sea, Leonatus vpon the other hand, and Alexander him ſelf in the mides. In that countrey he builded alſo a cytie, and brought men out of Arrachoſia to enhabite the ſame. From thence he came amonges the Indians, which lieng vpō the Sea

cooſt do inhabite a great countrey, that is waſt and deſert. They vſe no traffick, enter courſe▪ nor cōuerſaciō with any of their neighboures, but ye deſertnes of their countrey haue made them ſauage, being wild of there owne nature. They ware long nailes that be neuer cut, and longe here that is neuer clipped. They make there howſes of the Shelles of fiſſhes, and of other thinges that the Sea caſte vp. And being clad wyth the ſkynnes of wilde beaſtes, eate fiſhe dryed with the Sonne, and feade vpon ſuch monſters as the Sea caſt vp on the lande.The famine that fell amonges the Macedons. Heare the Macedons conſumed ther vitelles & firſt endured ſcarſcitie, and afterwards extreame honger, ſerching out in euery place the rootes of palmes whiche is the only tree that groweth in that countrey. But when that kind of noriſhemente ſayled them, they killed there cariage beaſtes, and abſtained not from there horſes: whereby lacked beaſtes to beare there bagage, they were enforced to conſume with fire, the ſpoyles of there enemyes, whyche had cauſed them to trauayll into the vttermoſte boundes of the Orient. After their famine folowed a peſtilence, for the vnaccuſtumed noriſhmente of the vnholſome meates they did eate with the trauayle of ther Iorney and the care of mynd, ſpreade diſeaſes amōges them, in ſuch ſort that they could neither continue in a place nor yet go forwardes without great diſtruction.
            Honger oppreſſed them when they taried, and the peſtilence was more vehement euer as they went forwardes. The fildes therefore were ſtrowen ful of mē that were half dead, and half aliue. And ſuch as were but ſmally ſick, where not hable to folowe tharmye, it marched wyth ſuch ſpeade. For euery man thought to further ſo much his owne ſaufguard, as by makynge

haſt he could get before his felowes. Such as fainted and could not folowe, deſired both ſuch as they knewe and knewe not, to helpe them forwardes. But they had no beaſtes wherupō to ſet them, and the ſouldiers could ſcarſly bare their owne armour, which had the imminent myſchiefe that fell vpon other men, repreſented before there own eies. Wherfore whē they were often called vpon, they would not vouchſaue ones to loke backe, feare had ſo taken awaye all compaſſion from them.
            Then they which were lefte behind, cryed vpon the goddes, and their king for helpe, alledgyng their relygion that was in comen to them, with ſuch as had forſaken them. But when they had cried long in vayne vnto their deaf eares through deſperation they began to rage, and wiſſhed the like eand to ther frendes and companions, that they thē ſelfes had. The king troubled bothe with ſorowe & wt ſhame, did write to Phratap hernes ruler of the Parthinyans to ſend to hym vpon Camelles, vittelles in redines to be eaten, and certifyed the prynces of the countres therabout of hys neceſſitye, whych did not ſlack the tyme, but made prouiſion according to hys wyll. Thus hys army deliuered only from famyne was brought wythin the boundes of the Godroſyans.Godorſyans And foraſmuch as ye ſame was a countrey fertyl of all thynges, he thought good to ſtay there awhyle, wyth reſt to recouer agayne hys feble ſouldiers.
            Ther he receyued letteres frō Leonatus howe he had wonne the victorye of the Horitans, which encountred him with .viii. thouſand fotemen and .v. .C. horſemen,Ozynes. Zariaſpes. and was aduertiſed alſo from Craterus howe he had taken and put in hold Ozynes and zariaſpes

noble men of Per
                  •
               e that went about to rebell. Alexander alſo vnderſtandynge that Memnon was deade, gaue the charge of the countrey wherof he had the rule vnto Sibur
                  •
               ius and afterwardes went into Carmania.Syburcius. 
               Carmania. Aſtaſpes. Aſtaſpes was gouernour of that nacion, who being ſuſpected of innouacion whiles Alexander was in India, met
                  •
                hym on hys waye, who diſſimulynge his Ire enterteined him gentlie, and did to him his accuſtumed honor, tyll ſuch tyme as he had better proufe of the matter that was layed agaynſt him.
            When the princes of India had according to hys apointment, ſent out of al countreis vnder his Impire great plentye of horſe and other beaſtes, bothe of cariage and of draught, he gaue cariage againe to all men that wanted, and reſtored there armour to the former beutyfulnes, and excellency.
            For they were come into a countrey ioyning vpon Perce, whych bothe was haboundant of all thynges, and alſo brought quietly vnder hys ſubieccion. He thought it then a tyme to counterfeit Bacchus in hys glorye and fame, whych the gotte amonges thoſe nacions. Whither it were a trumphe yt Bacchus firſt inſtituted, or a paſtyme of him vſed in dronkennes, Alexander was determyned to counterfeit it, hauynge hys mynde puffed vp aboue mans eſtate.
            He commaunded therefore all the villagies,The Tryumphe that Alexander made in hys retor
                     •
                  e o
                     •
                  t of Inde. throughe the which he ſhould paſſe to be ſtrowne with flowres and garlandes, and cuppes wyth other great veſſelles to be ſet full of wyne at the entreye of euerye houſe.
            He cauſed Wagons alſo to be made of ſuche la
                  •
               
               genes, that they might be hable to cary maniſouldiers, atons and decking the ſame with precious furnim
                  •
               ees
            
               The kynge went fyrſte in order wyth hys frendes, and next to them the kings guard, wearyng vpon ther heddes garlādes of flowers, ſome plaing vpon flutes and ſome vpon harpes. Euery one generally throughe tharmy decked his Chariot according to hys habilitye and ſubſtaunce, where as they geuen to bankettynge, did hang ther riche armour about them. Alexander with ſuch as he called to hys companye, was caried in a Chariot laden wyth Cuppes of gold and other goldē veſſell. He wyth his dronken armye, marched after this maner .vii. daies togither in oſtentacion of the praye they had gotten. Wherein they ſhewed ſuch diſſolutenes, that if one thouſand of the ſubdued people, durſt duringe the ſpace of thoſe .vii. daies haue geuen them the onſet, they might haue taken them priſoners and led them away in triumphe. But fortune whiche hath apoynted both fame and eſtymacion to thinges, turned all this diſordre of warre vnto his glorye. For both the age that was then, and the poſterity that came after, meruailed and toke it for a wonder▪ that he durſt go ſo diſſolutely amonges thoſe nacions, not yet eſtabliſſhed vnder hys Impire, the harberous people reputing hys raſhenes, for an aſſured confidnce. But ſheding of blood enſued after this tryumphe. For prince Aſpaſtes (that hath bene ſpoken of before) was commaunded to be put to death ſo that his exceſſe in voluptuouſnes was no let vnto his crueltye, nor o
                  •
               ueltye impediment to his voluptuouſnes.
         
         
            
            The tenth boke of Quintus Curtius of the actes of Alexander the great Kyng of Macedon.
            
               ABout the ſame time, Cleandre, Scytalces, Agathon, & Eracion which by the kinges apoyntment had put Parmenio to deathe returned to hym, brynging wyth them .v. thouſand fotemen, and a thouſand horſemen. There were many accuſers that folowed them out of the prouince whereof they had the gouernaunce. Whoſe behauor there was ſuch, that the acceptable ſeruice they had done to Alexander in killing of Parmento, coulde be no ſatiſfaccion for the multitude of the offence they had committed. They vſed ſuch an vniuerſall ſpoyle not abſtayning from the Temples, nor from ſacred thinges. The virgins alſo and great Ladies of the countrey, whom they had rauiſhed complained of thē lamentyng the ſhame they had ſuſteined. They vſed ſo ther couetouſnes and inordinat luſt in there authoritye, that it cauſed the name of the Macedons to be hated amonges thoſe nacions. And yet amonges al the reſte Cleanders offence was moſte horrible, which rauiſhing a virgyn of noble bloode, gaue hyr to hys ſlaue to vſe as his Concubine. The more part of Alexanders frendes were not ſo much offended with ther crueltye and fowle actes whereof they were accuſed, as wyth the remembraunce of Parmenios deathe, whiche they kept in ſilence leſte the reherſall thereof myght haue procured them fauour with the Kynge

reioyſing that the kinges wrath was fallen vpon the minyſters of hys Ire, & that no powre nor auctorytye gotten by euell meanes, could haue any longe contynuans. Alexander hearing the cauſe, ſayd that thatcuſers ouerſlipt ye geateſt offence, which was ye diſpaire of hys ſaueguard. For if they had eyther hoped or beleaued, that he ſhould euer haue returned out of India,A notable Iuſtice. they durſte neuer haue committed any ſuche offences. He commaunded therefore them to pryſon, and put .vi. .C. ſouldiers to death, that had bene the myniſters of there crueltye, and they alſo were executed the ſame daye which Craterus had brought for auctors of the rebellion out of Perci. Within a while after Nearchus and Oneſiccitus which had bene commaunded by the king to ſerche the Occean Sea, returned vnto him declaring ſome thinges by reporte. They ſhewed of an Ilande not farre from the mouth of Indus whyche habounded with golde, and had no breed of horſes amonges them, wherefore the inhabytors would giue a talēt of gold for euery horſe brought from the mayne land. They alſo told of great monſterous fyſſhes (wherof thoſe Seas were full) whyche caried downe with the tide, would ſhewe there bodies aboue the water, as bigge as a great ſhip, and folowe ther nauye wyth a terrible noiſe. And when they diued vnderneth the water, they troubled the Seas as it had bene in a ſhypw
                  •
               ack. Thes were thinges they had ſene, the reſt they had receyued by reporte of thinhabiters: as howe that the redde Sea toke hys name of kinge Erithrus, and not of the couler of the water. They ſhewed alſo of an other Iland, not fare from the mayne lande growing full of palme trees Wher was a great wood, in the middes whereof ſtode a piller where as king Erithrus was buried, with inſcripciō
               
of ſuch lettres as be vſed in ye countrey. They added beſids yt ſuch mariners as caried ye marchantes & the durdges of tharmie, through couetouſnes of the gold which had ben reported vnto them, lāded in yt Iland and were neuer ſene after. There wordes moued Alexander much, and put in hym a great deſire, to get more certayne knowlege of thoſe partyes & therefore he cōmaūded them againe to tha Sea, willing yt they ſhould coſt the land, tyll they come wtin ye riuer of Euphrates, & frō thence to come vp to Babilō againſt the ſtreame. The thinges were infinite yt he compaſſed in his head.The enterpriſes that Alexander determined. For he determined after he had brought the Sea cooſt of ye Orient vnder his ſubieccion to go out of Siria into Affrick, for ye euytie he bare to the Carthagens. His purpoſe was frō thence to paſſe ouer the deſertes of Numidia towardes Gades, wher he vnderſtode by the fame that Hercules had plāted his pillers, & ſo directing his iourney through Spaine (the which ye Greakes of the riuer Iberus call Iberia) to go ouer ye Alpes & ſo into Italie tyll he ſhould come to that part therof were the next paſſage was into Epyrus. For thys intent he gaue commaundement to hys officers in Meſopotamia that they ſhould cut downe tymber in the mount Lybanus,Tapſagas. and conuey the ſame to Tapſagas a Cytye in Syria. And ther to make galeis of ſuch greatnes, that euerye one of them myght be hable to carye .vi. Ores vpon abanke, and from thence he wylled them to be conuayed vnto Babylone. He ſent commaundement to the kynges of Cipres, to furniſhe them of Iren, hempe, and ſayles. Whyles thes thinges were in doing he receyued letteres from Porus and Taxiles, ſignifieng that Abyaſares was deade of a diſeaſe, and that Phelix hys lieutenaunt in thoſe parties was ſlayne, and they put to death that

were the doers therof. Alexandr therefore in the place of Phelix apointed Endemon that was captaine of the Thracians,Eudemon. and gaue Abyaſares kingdome vnto hys ſonne.Paſargadas From thence he came to Paſargadas beyng a countrey of the Percians, the Prynce wherof was called Orſines which both in nobilytie and ryches,Orſynes. exceded all other men in thoſe parties, and conueyed hys pedigre frō Cirus that ſometime was king of Perce. The riches his predeceſſours left him was greate, and he by a long continuaūce in his enheritaunce and auctorytie, had much encreaſed the ſame. He mett Alexā
               der comming thitherwardes and preſented bothe hym and his freendes with gyftes of ſondery fortes: which were a multitude of horſes redye to be ridden vpon, Charyotes wrought with golde and ſiluer, precious ſtuf, excellent pearles, and precious ſtones, weighti veſſel of gold, robes of purple, and foure thouſand talents of coyned ſiluer. But that his liberalitie was occaſion of hys death. For when he had preſented al the kinges frendes with giftes aboue there deſire, he honoured not with anye giftes at all Bagoas the Enuke,Bagone ther Enuke. whom Alexāder ſpecially fauoured of ye vſage he had of him. There were therefore that gaue him admonition how much Alexander eſtemed Bagoas. But he aunſewred them: that hys cuſtume was to honour the kynges freendes, and no harlottes. Nor that it was not the Percians maner to haue any in eſtimacion, which did effeminate them ſelfes with ſo ſhamefull an abuſe.
            When hys wordes were reported to the Enuke he vſed the powre whiche he had gotten with diſhoneſte meanes, to the diſtruction of that noble and innocent man. For he did ſubornat certayne leud parſones of Orcynes countrey, to brynge in falſe accuſacons againſte

him, whiche he willed them to preſent at ſuche tyme as he ſhould apoynt vnto them. In the meane ſeaſon whenſoeuer Bagoas got the kyng alone, he would fil his credulous eares wyth tales agaynſt Orcynes euer deſſimulinge the cauſe of hys diſpleaſure, leſt therby he might loſe the credite of his falſe report. The king had not Orcynes yet in ſuſpect of ſuch mater as afterwardes was laid againſt him, but began to growe wyth him out of eſtimacion. Hys accuſacion was euer ſo ſecret, that he could neuer get knowledge of ye peril that was preuily wrought againſt him. That importunat harlot in hys vile conuerſacion had with the king, was myndfull euer of the malice he bare to Oreynes, whom he would not ceaſe to bring in ſuſpicion of couetouſnes or of rebellion ſo ofte as he ſawe Alexander bent to vſe him familierly. By that time the falſe accuſacions were in redynes, which he had prepared to the diſtruccion of the innocent, whoſe fatall deſtynie yt did approch, could not be auoyded.Cyrus Tombe was opened by Alexander. It chaū
               ſed yt Alexāder cauſed Cyrus tombe wherin his body was buried to be opened, pretēding to vſe certaine 
                  •
               eremonies for ye dead. But thinking in very dede yt his tombe had bene full of golde and ſiluer, wherof ther was a conſtant fame amonges the Percians.
            But when it was vyewed there was not thyng
                  •
                found but a 
                  •
               otten target, two Scythian bowes and aſword. Alexander therefore cauſed the Coffyn wherein Cyrus body was laid, to be couered wyth the garment he was accuſtomed to weare, and ſet therupon a crowne of golde, meruailinge that ther was no more ſumptuouſnes vſed in buryall of ſuch a kyng, endued wyth ſo great riches, that laie there,What an occacion Bagoas toke to accuſe Orſynes. but after the commen ſort of men. When this thing was done Bagoas ſtode next vnto Alexander, who behyld him in the face

and ſayed: what maruail is it though the ſepulchres of kinges be emptie, when lordes houſes be not hable to receyue the goulde they haue taken out from thence. For my parte I neuer ſawe this tombe before, but I haue hard Darius reporte, that there were .iii.M. talentes buried with Eirus. (Therof (qd he) proceded Orcynes liberalitie, in wynning your fauour by ye gift of the thinges, which he knewe he could not keape. When he had thus ſturred vp Alexanders wrathe againſt Orcynes, he preſented them whō he had ſuborned to accuſe him. By whoſe reporte and by Bagoas ſurmiſed tales, Alexander was ſo encenſed againſte Orcynes, that he was put in pryſon, before he coulde ſuſpect that he was accuſed. The Enuke was not contented with the deſtruccion of this Innocent man, but at his death, laied violent hands vpon him. Vnto whō Orcines ſaide: I haue hard that women in times paſt haue reigned, & borne great rule in Aſia, but it is nowe a more ſtraung thing, ye agelding ſhould haue thimpire in hys handes. This was the ende of the moſte noble man amonges the Percians, who was not onely an innocent in the matter, but ſuch one as bare ſinguler affectiō vnto Alexander, and had ſhewed great liberalitie to him & his. At the ſame time Phradrates whiche was ſuſpected to haue gone about to make hym ſelfe king,Alexander began to be enclined to the ſhedyng of blood. was put to death. Alexander beganne then to be much enclyned to the ſheding of bloode, and to be credulous in hearing of euil report. Proſperitie is of ſuch a force to chaunge a mans nature. Wherein fewe men haue conſederacion of vertue. Thus he which a lyttle before would not condempne Linceſtes Alexander when he was accuſed by two witneſſes, that ſuffred dyuers of more meane eſtate to be acquited, though it

grudged hys mynde, bycauſe they ſeamed not gilty to other men. And he whiche beſtowed kingdomes vpon his ennemies, whome he had ſubdued: was in the ende ſoo muche altered from his former enclinacion that agaynſte his owne appetite, at the wyll of an harlot he would gyue kyngedomes to ſome, and take awaye the lyues from other. About the ſame time he receiued letters of thynges done in Europe, whereby he vnderſtode that whiles he was in India, zophirus hys Lieutenaunte in Thrace, had made iourney againſte the Getes,The Getes. where by ſtormes and tempeſtes that ſodeinly riſſe vpon hym, he was deſtroyed and all hys armye.Senthes. When Senthes vnderſtode the defeate of that armye he procured the Odriſians that were hys countrey mē to reuolt. So that al Thrace was in maner loſte therby and Greace ſtode in no great ſure
                  •
               ye.
            The writers of the actes of great Alexander make menciō in this place of Calanus an Indian that was verie famour in philoſophye,Calanus. which by the perſuaſion of kyng Taxiles folowed Alexander, and ended hys life after a ſtraunge ſort. When he had liued .lxxiii. yeares without any diſeaſe, at hys comming into Percia he felt a payne in hys bely, wherefore co
                  •
               iecturynge that the ende of hys life was come, leſte ſuche a perpe
                  •
               uall felicitie as he had liued in▪ ſhould be ſpotted wyth anie longe diſeaſe, or tormented wyth the multitude of medicines that phiſicions vſe to miniſter, requyred Alexander that he myghte cauſe a fyer to be made, and to burne hym ſelfe in the ſame. The kyng began to diſſuade him frō his purpoſe, thinkyng to haue brought him frō the doinge of ſo horryble an act, but when he perceiued with what ſtedfaſtnes and cōſtancy he ſtode in his intent, and that there was no way to keape hym any lenger in lyfe. He ſuffred a fyre to be made accordyng

to his will, where into Calanus did ryde on horſback, makyng firſt his prayer to the goddes of his coū
               trey, and takyng the Macedons by the handes, required them that they would ſpende that daye pleaſantly in banketting with their kyng, whom within a while, he ſhould ſee at Babylon. When he had ſpoken thoſe wordes he went merely into the fyre, where as plieng his body comly, kept ſtill theſame geſture & coūtenaūce at his death, which he was wont to vſe. When the fire flamed the trumpettes blewe, the men of warre making ſuch a ſhout as they accuſtomed going to the battaill, whiche rebounded vp to the ſkye, & the Elephātes alſo made a terrible noyſe. Theſe be the thinges that ſage writers do teſtifie of Calanus, whiche was a notable enſample of an inuincible mynde, cōſtantly bent to ſuffer any aduerſitie. From thence Alexander went vnto Suſa,Alexander maried Satyra Darius doughter. wheras he toke to wife & laufully maried Satyra Darius eldeſt doughter. Whoſe yonger ſuſter called Dripetis he gaue to wife vnto Epheſtion. And beſtowed to the nōbre of .ixxx. virgins of the nobleſt of all the nacions he had conquered,Drypetis. to the principal Macedons & to the chiefeſt of his frēdes, becauſe he wold not ſeme alone to begin ſo ſtraūge a cuſtome. Theſe mariages were celebrate after the Percian maner, & a princely feaſt prepared at the eſpowſels. Wherat there were .ix.M. geſtes, to euery one of whome, Alexander gaue a cuppe of gold to ſacrifice wt al. At the ſame time the rulers of cities which Alexander had ſubdued and builded, ſent vnto him .xxx.M. yong ſouldiers yt were all of one age, & furniſſhed with faire armour, apt to do any enterpriſe of the warre which he called Epigoni: that is to ſaie his ſucceſſours. The Macedōs at theyr comming ſemed to be ſomwhat apalled, whych weried

with long warre, vſed often in aſſembles to murmur & ſpeake mutinous wordes againſt the king. For ye cauſe he had prepared theſe ſouldiers to reſtraine ye arrogā
               cy of other, & gaue to them great benefites.Harpalus. Harpalus to whome the king had cōmitted the charge of the treaſure and reuenewes at Babilon, hearing of the actes that Alexāder had done in ſubduing the more part of ye kynges of India, & his ſucceſſe to be ſo proſperous yt nothing could withſtand him. Knowing the inſaciable deſire yt was in Alexander to viſite farre coūtreis, & to encreaſe his glory, though it ſhold be a hard matter for him to returned to Babilō again. wherfore he gaue him ſelf to delight & to luſt, miſuſing many that were noble & f
                  •
               e women, wallowing in al kind of voluptuouſnes. Inſomuch that he ſent vnto Athēs for a famous harlot called Patonice,Patonice to whom he both gaue many great and princely giftes while ſhe was aliue, and alſo after her death ſpent .xxx. talentes vpon her tombe. Hauing in theſe & ſuche other like voluptuous vanities conſumed a great part of the treaſure. When he vnderſtode Alexāder to be come out of India, & to vſe extreme iuſtice vpon his officers that miſuſed them of whō they had rule, by reaſon he was priuy to his own fowle conſcience feared the like might tome to himſelf. And therfore gathering together .v.M. talentes & .vi.M. mercenary ſouldiers, toke ye way towardes Athens no mā willing to receiue him by the way.Tenaron. When he came to Tena
                  •
               on (where as a great nombre of the mercenary Grekes which had bene diſcharged out of Aſia were aſſembled) he left his ſouldiers there & went to Athens with his money: when he was come thether nō
               bre of the citezens flocked about him, more for loue of his money then for his own ſake, but ſpecially the oratours,

& ſuche as vſed to make their gaine by oraciōs and perſuading of the people, whō by ſmall rewardes he eaſely corrupted to defēd his cauſe with the people. But afterwardes at a generall aſſemble vpō the matter, he was commaunded to depart the cytie, and ſo returned againe amonges the Greke ſouldiers by whō he was ſlayne.
            
               Sunium.Therfore with .xxx. ſhippes thei paſſed ouer to Suniū whiche is a pointe of the land in the territory of Athēs, from whence they determined to haue entred into Athens hauen. Theſe thinges being knowen, Alexāder that was ſore moued aſwell againſte the Athenians as againſt Harpalus, prepared a nauy to make warre in perſone immediatly againſt thē. And as he was buſied about ye matter, he vnderſtode by ſecret letters both ye Harpalus had bene in Athens, & corrupted with money the chief of the cytie: And alſo that afterwardes by a counſel of the people, he was cōmaunded to depart frō thence, & as he returned amōges the Greke ſouldiers he was ſlayne by one of thē by treaſon.The death of Harpalꝰ. Theſe newes greatly reioyſed Alexander, wherby he had occaſion to leaue of his iourney into Europe, but he ſent cōmaūdement to all the cities of Grece, that they ſhuld receyue againe all their baniſſhed men, except ſuch only as had committed any murther vpon their owne countrey men. Although the Grekes knewe the ſame to be the breache of their liberties & their lawes, & the beginnīg of their bondage, yet as men that durſt not diſobey his will, they called home their baniſhed men, & reſtored to thē ſuch of their goodes as did remaine. Only the Athenians, which euer defended obſtinatly ye liberties of their comē wealth, & which had not bene accuſtomed to liue vnder ye obediēce of any king, but vnder ye lawes & cuſtomes of their coūtrey, wold not agre, yt ſuch dredge

of men ſhuld liue amonges them, but did driue thē out of their boūdes, redy to ſuffre any thing, rather thē to receiue ſuch againe as ſometime were the raſcall of al their citie, & then the refuſe of al the outlawes. The time was come that Alexander minded to diſmiſſe his olde ſouldiers, & ſende them into their countrey, but he willed firſt .xiii.M. fotemē & .ii.M. horſemē to be choſen out to remaine ſtill in Aſia, which he iudged might be kept with a ſmall army, becauſe he thought the guarriſons he had plāted in many places, & the cities which he had newly builded & filled with inhabiters, ſhuld be able to ſtay ſuch as wold attēpt any rebellion.Alexander paide al his ſouldiers debtes. But before he would make any deuiſion of ſuch as ſhould depart, & remaine. He cauſed a proclamaciō to be made yt all ſouldiers ſhould declare their debtes, wherwith he perceiued many of them ſore burdened, & though their debte did riſe through their own diſordre & exceſſe, yet he was determined to diſcharge euery man. But the ſouldiers thinking it had bene but a deuiſe, to find out the prodigall frō the reſt delaied the time & brought not in their declaracions. The king perceiued ſhame to be the let therof & no diſobediēce, or ſelf wil. And therfore cauſed tables to be ſet vp throughout his cāpe, & .x.M talentes to be brought fu
                  •
               th. Of all whiche treaſure when their debtes were payd accordyng to the iuſt declaracion, there remayned no more but .Cxxx. talētes. Wherby it appeared that thei whiche were the conquerours of ſo many riche nacions,A mutine amonges the ſouldiers. brought out of Aſia more glory then ſpoyle. But after it was once knowen that ſome ſhould be diſpached, and ſome remayne ſtill, they thought the kynge would haue eſtablyſhed his kingdome perpetually in Aſia. Wherfore like madde men, and vnmyndfull of all diſciplyne of warre, fylled the campe full of ſedicious wordes, and came to the

kyng more arrogantly, and with greater rygour then euer they did before, al with one voyce requiring to be diſcharged, ſhewyng furth the hortnes of their heete, and their faces diſformed with ſcarres, and herein thei could not be ſtaied eith
                  ••
                by chaſtiſement of their officers or by any r
                  •
               uerence of their kynge, but when he would haue ſpoken vnto them, they would not ſuffre hym to be heard, but diſturbed his tale with their tumultuous crye, & violent thronge: proteſting opēly that they would neuer moue one foote forwardes to any place, except it were towardes their owne countrey. After a great ſpace becauſe they thought that Alexander would enclyne to their purpoſe, they kept ſilence, & ſtode in expectacion what he would do.Alexanders wordes vnto his ſouldiers. Then Alexander ſpake vnto them: what meaneth this ſodain trouble of mynde, this ſo malypart and vnlaufull libertie? I am afraied to ſpeake vnto you, you haue ſo manifeſtly broken your obedience towardes me, I am now become a kyng at the appointmēt of my people, you haue neither lefte me the libertie, to knowe you, to exhorte you, nor to behold you. Beyng determined to ſende ſome into their countrey before, and to bryng the reſte with me, ſhortly after, I ſee them aſwell that ſhall go, crying and mutining, as thoſe that I appoint to come with me. What a matter is this? Their crie is al a like, notwithſtanding that their cauſe is diuers. I woulde fayne knowe whether they complaine that departe, or they that tary ſtill? When he had ſpoken thoſe wordes, they cried all as it had bene with one mouth, that they complayned euery man. Then he ſaid: truly it cannot be ſo, nor I cannot be perſuaded, that you ſhould all be greued for the cauſe ye declare ſeing the caſe towcheth not the moſte parte of you, for I haue appointed more

to departe, then to remaine ſtill. There muſt nedes be ſome greater miſchief then apeareth, that ſhuld turne you al from me. When was it euer ſene that an whole army hath forſaken their kyng. The ſlaues ronne not from their maiſters all at once, but there is alwayes a ſhame in ſome to leaue thē whō the reſt forſakes. But why do I forget that you be madde in your myndes? or why go I about to cure you that be vncurable? I condempne from hencefurth all the good hope that euer I conceiued of you, & am determined to worke no more with you as wt my ſouldiers, ſeing ye wil not be mine, but with men vngrateful and vnmindfull of my goodnes. The cauſe of this your madnes, is euē the haboū
               daunce of your proſperitie, wherby you forget your old eſtate, frō the which ye be deliuered through my benefite. You are men worthy to haue ſpent your lyues in your former beggerie, ſeing you cā better beare aduerſitie, then proſperous fortune behold you, which a while ago were tributaries to the Illicians, & the Percians, do now diſdaine Aſia, & the ſpoiles of ſo many naciōs. You whiche vnder Philip went haulf naked, now cō
               tepne robes of purple. Your eyes cannot endure any lenger to behold the ſight of gold & ſiluer. You deſire againe your wodden diſſhes, your targettes made of wikers, & your ſwordes couered with ruſt. I receiued you in this ſimple eſtate, with .v.C. talentes in debte, when all my furnymētes exceded not in valure .lx. talentes. This was the foūdaciō of my actes, wherwith (without enuie be it ſpoken) I haue ſubdued the greateſt part of the world. Are you wery of Aſia, which haue miniſtred vnto you occaſion of ſuch glory, that by the greatnes of your actes ye be made equal vnto ye gods? do you al make ſuch haſte into Europe, to forſake me yt
               
am your kyng? the more parte of you ſhould haue lacked money to beare your charges there, if I of my beneuolens had not payde your debtes? Are you not aſhamed that haue robbed all Aſia, to beare the ſpoyles of ſo many nacions within your belies, and now to returne home to your wyfes & childrē, vnto whom there be but few of you that are able to ſhewe any rewardes of your victory. For many of you ſhalbe compelled to gage your armour, if ye forſake this good hope, ye might receiue at my handes. Theſe be the good men of warre that I ſhall want, which of all their riches haue nothing left them but only their cōcubines. The waye lieth open for your departure, get you hence quickly out of my ſyght. I with the Percians ſhall defende your backes when ye be gone. I will hold none of you, deliuer myne eyes ye vngratefull countremē, of the ſight I ſee of you. Shal your parētes & children receiue you with ioye, whē they ſhal ſee you returne without your king? Shall they couet to mete ſuche as be fugitiues, & forſakers of ther prince? I truly ſhal triūphe vpō your departure, & wherſoeuer you ſhall be, I ſhall deſire to be reuēged, honoring alwaies & preferring before you. thoſe whiche ye haue left here with me. Now you ſhall knowe of what force an army is, that lacketh a kyng, and what moment doth conſiſte in me alone. When he had ſpoken thoſe wordes he leped in a fury from the iudgement ſeate, and ranne into the throng of the armed men, whereas he toke with his owne handes ſuche as had mutined moſte againſt him. Of whome there were none that durſt make reſiſtaunce, deliuered xiii. to his guarde for to be ſaufly kept. Who woulde thinke that an aſſembly whiche a little before had ſpoken vnto their prince with ſuche fierſenes and rigour,

could haue bene ſo ſodenly appalled for feare? Which ſeing there companions ledde to execution, durſt not moue, nor make any attempt.
            But the inordinate libertie they vſed before, & their ſedicious violence was then ſo ſtayed, that neuer one of them durſt reſiſte, the king ronning amōges them, but were al aſtonied for feare, and ſtode like men amaſed, with doubtfull imaginaciōs loking what he would determine of the offenders.
            Whether it were the reuerēce they bare to his name, becauſe the naciōs that liue vnder kinges, are wōt to honour thē as gods; or were it the maieſtie of his perſone, or els his own aſſured cōſtancy executing his auctoritie with ſuche violence, that put them in feare: thei ſhewed a notable enſample of paciēce. For they remained not only without ſlurre or mociō at the executing of their companions, whō they knew to be put to death in the night time, but alſo were more diligent in doing their duties then euer they were before, pretermitting nothing pertaining to obedience, & naturall affeccion towardes their prince. For the next day whē thei came to the courte, and were not ſuffred to entre, but all ſhotte out ſauing the ſouldiers of Aſia, they made a ſorowfull crye and lamentacion whiche ſpred ouer al the campe, proteſting that they would not liue, if the kyng continued ſtill in his wrath. But he that was obſtinat in all thinges that he had once conceiued in his head, commaunded all the Macedons to keape ſtill their cā
               pe, and aſſembled the ſouldiers ſtraungers together, to whome by an Interpretour he made this Oracion.Alexanders Oracion to the ſtraūge ſouldiers. At ſuche tyme as I came firſte out of Europe into Aſia, my truſte was to brynge vnder myne Empyre manye noble Nacions, and greate power of men,

wherin I was not deceaued. For beſides that the fame reported you to be men of value, I haue founde in you one thinge more, whiche is an incomperable obediēce, fidelitie, and affection towardes your prince. I thought voluptuouſnes had ouerflowen all vertue amonges you, and yt through your great filicitie, ye had bene drowned in pleaſures. But I finde it otherwiſe, and perceyue that none obſerue the diſcipline and order of the warres better then you do, nor execute the ſame with more actiuitie nor ſtoutenes. And beynge manfull and valeaunt menne, ye embrace fidelitie, no leſſe then you do the reſt. This thinge I do but nowe acknowledge, but I knewe it longe ago. Whiche was the cauſe that I choſe you out of the youth of your nacions to be my ſouldiours, and did incorporate you amonges mine owne people, cauſinge you to vſe the ſame habite, and the ſame armoure. But your obedience and pacience towardes the aucthoritie, appeareth muche better in you then in them. Therfore I haue ioyned to my ſelfe in mariage the daughter of Oxatres that is a Percian, not diſdayninge to beget children vpon a captiue. And afterwardes deſiringe more aboundauntlye to encreaſe the iſſue of my bodye, I toke to wife the daughter of Darius, and was the aucthour that my neare frendes, likewiſe ſhoulde beget children vpon captiues: mindynge by this holye couenāte to exclude the difference betwene the victorers, and the vainquiſhed. Wherfore you muſt now thinke that you be not ſouldiours vnto me adopted but more naturall. And that Aſia and Europe is one kyngdome without any difference. I haue geuen vnto you armoure after the maner of the Macedons. I haue brought all ſtraungnes and noueltie into a cuſtome,

and nowe ye be both my countreymen and my ſouldiours, all thinges take vpon them one fourme and faſhion. I haue not thought it vnſemely for the Perſians to ſhadowe the cuſtomes of the Macedons, nor for the Macedons to counterfeit ye Percians, ſeynge thei ought to be vnder one lawe & cuſtome that ſhould liue vnder one kynge.
            When he had made this oration, he committed the cuſtody of his perſon vnto the Perſians, he made them of his guarde and his officers of iuſtice, bi whom when the Macedons whiche had geuen occaſion of this ſedicion were ledde bound vnto execution, one of them that was more auncient and of greater eſtimacion thē the reſt, ſpake after this maner.
            Howe longe will you thus geue place vnto your wil, in executynge vs after the ſtraungers maner? Your ſouldiours and countreymen be drawen to execuſion by their owne priſoners before their cauſe be hearde. If you haue iudged vs worthye of death, at leaſtwayes chaung the miniſters of your wrath. This was a good admoniſhmente, if he hadde bene pacient to heare the trueth. But his wrath was growē into a woodnes, ſo that when he ſawe theim whiche hadde the charge of the priſoners ſtaye a little at the matter, he cauſed the priſoners to be tumbled into the riuer, and there drowned. Notwithſtandynge the crueltye of this puniſhement, the ſouldiours were not ſ
                  •
               urred to any ſedition, but repayred by rowtes vnto their capitaines, and vnto ſuche as were neare aboute the kynge, requirynge that if there yet remained anye infected with the ſame offence, that he ſhoulde commaunde theim to be putte to death, proferynge their bodyes to be puniſhed and executed at his owne will.
            
               After it was knowen that Liuetenaunteſhips were geuen vnto the Perciās, and that they were diſtributed into diuers orders, and ſuche names geuen vnto them as were vnto the Macedons, and that they were reiected wyth reproche, they coulde not then any lenger conteine theim ſelues, nor ſuffer the doloure they had conceyued in their hertes, but with a great throng preſſed to the courte, wearyng onely their nethermoſt garmentes, and leauynge their weapons without the gate in token of repentaunce. There wyth weapynge and all tokens of humilitie, they made requeſt to be admitted to the kynges preſence, & that he would vouchſafe to pardon their offence, pacifiynge his wrath with the deathe of ſo manye of theim as he ſhoulde thinke good, rather thē to ſuffer them to liue in ſuch reproch: whiche excepte he woulde releaſe,Alexander was reconſiled to his ſouldiours. they proteſted they woulde neuer departe out of the place. When thoſe thynges were declared vnto Alexander, he cauſed the courte gates to be opened, and came forthe amonges them. Wheras beholdynge their lamentation and repentaunce, their miſerable behauour and affliction, he coulde not abſtayne to weape longe tyme wyth theim, and in cōſideration of their modeſtie, forgaue thē their former offēces. And after he had temperately told thē their faultes, and againe comforted them with gentle words, he diſcharged many frō ye ſeruice of the warres, & ſent thē home liberally rewarded: writing to Antipater his liuetenant in Macedon, yt he ſhould aſſigne thē the chiefe places in the Threatres, at triumphes, and open playes, wheras they ſhoulde ſit with garlādes on their heades, & he willed that their children after their deathes ſhould enioye their fathers wages.
            He appointed Craterus to be their ruler, to whō in the place of Antipater he had committed the gouernement

of Macedon, Teſſalie, and Thrace, ſendynge for Antipater to repaire vnto him with a ſupplie of yong ſouldiers. Alexander had receiued letters before both frō hym, and Olympias his mother,Olymyias Alexāders mother. wherby diſſenſion appeared to be betwixt them. For his mother acuſed Antipater that he wente aboute to make him ſelfe kyng. And Antipater did write howe Olympias did manye thinges otherwiſe then it did become her. Antipater did take his callynge awaye ſo greuouſlye in his hart, that he conſpired therupon to poyſon Alexander, who hauynge accompliſhed the matters that before be mē
               cioned, went to Echatan that ſtandeth in Media, to ſet order in the neceſſarie affaires of his Empire, and there ordeyned ſolempne triumphes and feaſting. It chaunſed Epheſtion whom the kynge ſpecially loued,The death of Epheſtiō
                and vſed in place of a brother, about the ſame time to dye of a feuer. Whoſe death Alexander toke more ſorowfullye then can well be credited, committynge in his doloure manie thinges that were vnſeaminge for the maieſtye of a Prince. He commaunded Epheſtions phiſition to be hanged, as though he had died through his negligence. He laye embracynge of the dead bodye and coulde hardlye be taken awaye by his frendes, but continued his ſorowe night and daye. There be many other thinges written in that behalfe, which be ſcarſely credible. But it is certayne that he commaunded ſacrifice to be made vnto him as vnto a God, and conſumed in his buriall and making of his tombe aboue .xii.M. talentes. As he was returninge to Babilon, the Caldian Prophetes met him on the waye, exhortynge him that he ſhoulde not enter into the citye. For that it was ſignified, that if he wente thether at that time, he ſhould be in great peryll of his life. Notwithſtanding

he regarded not their admoniſhmentes, but went forwardes in his iourney accordynge as he hadde appoynted. For he vnderſtode that Embaſſadours were come thither from all Regions tariynge for his comming. The terrour of his name was ſo ſpredde throughe the worlde, that all nacions ſhewed an obſequiouſnes towardes him, as though he had bene appoynted to be their kynge. That cauſed him to make haſte towardes Babylon, to kepe there as it were a Parliamente of the whole worlde. When he was come thither, he receiued the Embaſſadours gentlye, and afterwardes diſpatched them home agayne. There was aboute the ſame tyme a banquet prepared at one Teſſalus Medius houſe.Theſſalus Medius wherunto the kynge beinge bidden, came thither wyth ſuch as were appoynted to kepe him companye. But he had not ſo ſone dronke of Hercules cuppe,Alexander was poyſoned but that he gaue a grunte as thoughe he had bene ſtriken to the harte. And beynge caried out of the feaſt halfe dead, was ſo tormented wyth payne that he required a ſwerde to haue killed him ſelfe. His frendes did publyſhe abroade dronkennes to be the cauſe of his diſeaſe, but in verye dede it was prepenſed treaſon the infamye wherof the power of his ſucceſſours did oppreſſe. The poyſon prepared longe before was deliuered by Antipater vnto Caſſander his ſōne, whiche wyth his brethren Phillippe, and Iolla, were wonte to ſerue the kynge at meate. He was warned that he ſhoulde not committe the ſame poyſon to anye perſon, except it were to Theſſalus or to his brethren. Philippe therfore and Iollas, whiche were wonte to take the ſaye of the kynge cuppes, hauyng the poyſon readye in colde water, mixed it with the wine, after they had taſted it. When the fourth daye was come

the ſouldiours partly for that they ſuſpected he hadde bene dead, and partlye becauſe they coulde not endure to wante longe his ſyght, came ſorowfullye vnto the courte, deſirynge to ſee the kynge, whiche by his commaundemēt were admitted vnto his preſence, by ſuch as had the charge of his perſon.
            When they behelde him liynge in that caſe, they made great ſorowe and lamentacion, for he ſemed not to them to be the ſame their kynge, whom they were wont to ſee, but rather a deade corſe. If their griefe were great, the ſorowe of theim that ſtode nexte to the bedde appeared muche more, whom when Alexander behelde lamentyng after that ſorte, he ſaied vnto thē. When I ſhall departe, you ſhall finde a kynge worthye for ſuche men as you be. It is a thynge incredible howe that he durynge the tyme, the ſouldiours of his whole armye came to viſet hym, he neuer altered countenaunce nor geſture, but continued in that kind of preſence he gaue vnto the firſte, vnto the laſte man. When he hadde diſmiſſed the multitude, as though he had bene diſcharged of al the debt of life, he laye downe againe to reſt his weake body, & his voyce beginnyng to fayle him, cōmaunded his frendes to come neare aboute him, and then takinge his rynge from his finger, deliuered it to Perdicas, and gaue therwith a commaundemente that his bodye ſhoulde be conueyed to Hammon. They demaunded to whom he would leaue his kingdome. He ſaide: to the worthieſt. By whiche wordes it appeared that he forſawe the contention that was like to enſue vpon his death. Perdicas more ouer demaunded of him when he woulde haue diuine honours done vnto him. At ſuch time (quod he) as you

ſhall finde your ſelfes in felicitie. Theſe were the laſte wordes Alexander ſpake, and ſhortelye after he died. Immediatlye after his death, the courte was full of howlynge,The ſorow that was made vpon Alexāders death. lamentynge, and ſorowe makynge, and by and by as it hadde bene in a deſerte, or a place ſolitary, all thynges were whiſte, and a ſorowfull ſilence was ſpredde ouer all, euerye man beynge conuerted into imagination, what ſhoulde become of the matter. The yonge menne of the nobilitye that were accuſtomed aboute Alexanders perſon, coulde not beare the greatnes of their doloure, nor kepe them ſelfes within compaſſe of the courte, but ranne aboute as menne out of their wyttes, wherby the citye was filled with heauines and complainte, and no kinde of lamentation pretermitted, that ſorow is wont to miniſter in ſuch a caſe Suche therfore as were without the courte, vnderſtandynge this matter, as well Macedones as other came runnynge thither, wheras the Conquerours from the conquered, nor the Victorers from the vainquiſhed coulde not be diſcerned, the ſorowe was ſo indifferent to thē al. The Percians called vpō their iuſt and mercifull Lorde, and the Macedons made inuocation to him, that was ſo valeaunte and gracious a kynge, and thus there was a certaine contencion of ſorow amōges thē. Men did not vſe their only wordes of griefe and heauines, but alſo of grudge and indignation, that ſo yonge a prince beynge in the flower of his age, and of his fortunate ſucceſſe, ſhoulde by the enuy of the Goddes, be ſo taken out of this worlde. They called to remembraūce what a cherefulnes they had alwaies ſene in his countenaunce, ether when he led them to the battel, when he beſieged, or aſſaulted any citie, or when he would geue any commendacion to

the worthye in anye aſſemble. Then the Macedons repented that euer they hadde denied him deuine honours, confeſſyng them ſelues bothe wicked and vngratefull for depriuynge him of anye name wherof he was worthye. And when they had continued long in the veneration and deſire of him that was dead, then they began to pitye their owne caſe, whiche commyng out of Macedon were paſſed the riuer of Euphrates, amonges the middes of their enemies, yt vnwillinglye receiued their new gouernement. They ſaw them ſelues left deſtitute, & the Empire without any certaine heyre, for wāt of whō, euery one wold go about to draw the power of the ſtate vnto his priuate behofe. And thē they began to conceiue and forſee in their mindes, the ciuill warres that did enſue, & that they ſhoulde be enforced to ſhede their bloude againe, not for the cōqueſt of Aſia, but for the title of ſome ſuch one yt would go about to make him ſelfe king: wherby their old ſcarres ſhould breake out againe into new woūdes, & that ſuch as by reaſon of their age had bene diſcharged from the warres by their noble & righteous king, ſhould now be enforced to ſpend their liues in ye quarell of ſome ſuch one as was but his ſouldier. Whiles thei were in theſe imaginaciōs, the night came on, & encreaſed their terroure. The men of warre watched in harnayes & the Babilonians loked ouer ye walles; pepyng out frō the toppes of their houſes to ſpye ſome certaintye how the matter wēt. There was none yt durſt kyndle any light. And bicauſe ye vſe of ye eie did fail, thei laied their eares to heare the rumours & wordes that were ſpoken. And many times thei wer afraied whē no cauſe was, & whē thei met together in the narow ſtretes or darke lanes, thei would be amaſed, & ſuſpect eche other as enemies

The Percians after their accuſtumed maner clipped there heare and with ther wiues and children lamented the death of Alexander in mourning garmentes, with vnfained affeccion, not as a conqueror and one that lately had bene there enemye; but as there rightwiſe and naturall kyng. For they being accuſtumed to liue vnder a king, could think no man more worthy then he, to rule ouer them. Thys ſorowe was not only conteined within the walles of the citie, but ſtreightwayes ſpred ouer all the countrey ther aboutes. And the fame of ſo great a miſchiefe flyenge through oute Aſia, brought ſome tydinges therof vnto Darius mother. She at the fyrſte reporte tare a ſonder the garment ſhe ware and put on morning appareill, ſhe pulled her heare, and fel downe groueling vpon the earth One of her neces ſat by her morning the death of Epheſtion whom ſhe had maried, and in an vniuerſall heuines, bewayled the cauſe of hir owne ſorowe. But Syſigambis alone ſuſteyned all there miſeries,The behauour of Darius mother vpon the death of Alexander. and bewayled bothe hir owne caſe and her nefes, her freſhe ſorowe cauſing her to call to mynde thinges paſte. A man would haue iudged by her behauour that Darius had bene newly ſlayne, and that ſhe had celebrated the funeralles of bothe her ſonnes togither. She did not only lament the deade, but ſorowed alſo for the lyuing. Who ſhall nowe (qd ſhe) take care of this yong woman? or who can be like vnto Alexander nowe we be taken priſoners againe, nowe we be newly fallen from our dignitie and eſtate.
            After Darius death we found one to defend vs. But nowe ſince Alexander is gone, who wyll haue reſpect of vs? Amongs ſhe called to mind, how Occhus the cruell kinge had ſlayne her father and foure ſcore

of her brethren on one daye, and that of ſeuen children borne of hir bodye, there was but one of theim lefte aliue. She ſawe that fortune had aduaunced Darius and cauſed him to floryſhe for a tyme, to the entente he myght ende his life by greater crueltye. Finallye ſhe was ſo ouercome wyth ſorowe, that ſhe couered her head, turning her ſelfe from her neſe and nephew that ſate at her fete, and abſtayninge both frō meate & frō beholdynge of the light, ended hir life the fift daye after ſhe was determined to dye. This hir death was a great argument of the clemencye Alexander hadde ſhewed towardes her, and of the iuſtice towardes all the captyues, ſeyng that after Darius death ſhe could abide to liue, but after Alexanders departure, ſhe was aſhamed to continue any lenger.
            Conſiderynge Alexander rightwiſelye,A diſcourſe of Alexanders vices and his vertues. we muſt impute all his vertues to his owne nature, and his vices either to hys youth, or to the greatnes of his fortune. There was in him an incredible force of courage, and an exceadynge ſufferaunce of trauaile. He was endued with manhode excellinge, not onely amonges kynges, but alſo amonges ſuch as had neither vertue nor qualitye. He was of that liberalitye that oftentymes he gaue greater thinges then the reciuers could haue aſked of God. The multitude of kyngdomes that he gaue in gift, and reſtored to ſuch from whom he had taken theim by force, was a token of his clemencye towardes them that he ſubdued. He ſhewed a perpetuall contempte of deathe, the feare wherof doth amaſe other men. And as there was in him a greater deſire of glorye and worldely prayſe then reaſon woulde beare: ſo was it intollerable in ſo yong a man enterpriſynge ſo great actes. The reuerence and affection he bare

towardes his parentes, appeared in that he purpoſed to conſecrate his mother Olimpias to immortalitie, and that he ſo ſore reuenged Philips death. How gentle and familiar was he towardes his frēdes, and how beniuolence towarde his ſouldiours. He had a wiſedome equall to the greatnes of his harte, and ſuche a policie and forecaſt, as ſo yong yeres were ſcarſely able to receiue. A meaſure in immoderate pleſures. And the vſe of his luſt leſſe then nature deſiered, vſing no pleaſure but that was lawefull: theſe were wonderfull greate giftes and vertues.
            But in that he compared him ſelfe to the Gods, coueted diuine honours, and beleued the Oracles that perſwaded ſuch thinges, that he was offended wt thē that woulde not worſhip him, and geuen more vehementlye to wrath then was expedient. That he altered his habite and apparell into the faſhion of ſtraungers, & coū
               terfaited the cuſtome of them he had ſubdued, and deſpiſed before his victorye: were vices to be attributed to the greatnes of fortune. As the heate of youthe ſtirred him to anger, and to the deſyre of drinkyng: ſo age might haue mitigated againe thoſe faultes. Notwithſtandynge it muſte nedes be confeſſed, that though he preuailed muche by his vertue, yet ought he to impute more vnto his fortune, which only of al mortal men, he had in his owne power. Howe oftē did ſhe deliuer him from the poynte of death? Howe often did ſhe defende him wyth perpetuall felicitie, when he hadde raſhelye brought him ſelfe in peryll? And when ſhe poynted an ende to his glorye, ſhe euen then was contente to finyſhe his life, ſtayinge his fatall deſtenye tyll he had ſubdued the Orient, viſited the Occean Sea, and fulfilled all that mans mortalitie was able to performe.
            To this ſo greate a kynge and noble conqueroure,

a ſucceſſour was loked for: But the matter was of ouermuch importaūce for any one mā to take vpō him. Alexanders name and renowne was ſo great amonges all Nacions, and they were counted moſte noble that might be partakers of his proſperous fortune, thoughe the porcion was neuer ſo ſmall. But to returne agayne to Babilon from whence this digreſſion hath bene made:The aſſēble after the death of Alexander. They whiche had the guarde and cuſtodie of Alexanders perſone▪ called into the courte ſuche as hadde bene his chiefe frendes and captaines of the men of warre, after whom there folowed a great multitude of Souldioures, deſierynge to knowe who ſhoulde be ſucceſſoure vnto Alexander. The thronge of the ſouldiours was ſuche, that manye of the capitaynes were excluded, and coulde not enter into the courte. A Proclamation therfore was made wherby all men were forbidden to enter, except ſuche as were called by name. But becauſe their commaundement ſemed to want aucthoritie, it was little regarded, & the multitude at the firſt began to make a greuous ſorow & lamentation. But ſtraightwaies the deſire they had to vnderſtande the ſucceſſe of the matter, ſtopped their lamētatiō, & made ſilēce. Thē Perditas brought forth in ſight of al the people ye kinges chayre of eſtate, wherin Alexanders Diademe, his veſtures regall, & hys armor was laide. Emōges yt which ornamētes, Perdicas alſo laide downe ye kinges ſignet, deliuered to him the day before, at the ſight wherof they began to wepe, and to renue againe their ſorowe.
            Then ſaied Perdicas:Perdicas wordes. Lo here is the rynge wherwith he was wōt to ſeale ſuch thinges as perteined to the force of his Empire, & as he deliuered the ſame to me, I ſo do reſtore it agayne to you. And although no aduerſitye can be deuiſed by the Goddes (were they

neuer ſo muche offended) comperable to this. Yet conſidering ye greatnes of the actes whych he hath done, we muſte thinke that the Goddes ſent ſuche a man as he was to raigne in the worlde, whoſe tyme beyng expired that was appointed, they haue called him againe to the place from whence he came. Forſomuche therefore as none other thinge remaine of hym amonges vs, but onely that whiche is alwayes wont to be remoued from immortalitie: let vs perfourme the due pertayninge bothe to his bodye, and to his name, remembringe in what citye we be, amonges what kynde of people, and what a kynge, and what maner of gouernoure we haue loſte. We muſt debate and deuiſe how to maintaine our conqueſt amonges theim of whom it is gotten. For the doynge wherof, it is nedefull for vs to haue an heade. But whether the ſame ſhall be one, or manye, that conſiſteth in you. You are not ignorant that a multitude of men of warre wythout an heade, is a body without any life. Sixe monethes be now paſſed ſence Roxane was cōceiued wyth chylde, we deſire of God that ſhe maye bringe forthe a male, whiche maye enioye this kyngdome, when he cometh to age. In the meane ſeaſon appoynte you, of whom ye wyll be gouerned.Nearchus wordes. When Perdicas had ſpokē theſe wordes, Nearchus riſſe vp and ſaied: There is no man can denye but that it were mete for Alexanders ſucceſſion to cō
               tinue in the bloude royall, but to loke for a kynge that is not yet borne & to paſſe ouer one that is in his being already, is nether expedient for ſuch men as the Macedons be, nor yet dothe ſerue the neceſſitie of the time.
            
               BarſynesThere is a ſonne whiche Alexander begot by Barſines, what ſhould let why ye diademe may not be ſet on his heade? Nearchus tale was acceptable to no man.

therfore the ſouldiers accordyng to their cuſtome claſſhed the ſpeares againſt the targets, & continued makinge of a noyſe. And when he woulde not forſake his opinion, but obſtinately maintened the ſame, the matter had almoſt bredde a ſedition, which thing perceiued by Ptolomeus, he ſpake after this maner.
            Neither the ſonne of Roxane nor Barſines,Ptolomeus wordes is an iſſue mete to raigne ouer the Macedons, whoſe names we ſhold be aſhamed to rehearſe within Europe, their mothers beinge captiue. Haue we ſubdued the Percians to that ende to become ſubiect to ſuche as be deſcended of them? That was the thinge which Darius and zerxes beynge Kynges of Perce wrought for in vain, with ſo mani mileons of men of warre, and with ſo many nauies. This therfore is my opinion, that Alexanders chaire of eſtate be ſet in the middes of the court, and that all ſuch as were wont to be of counſail with him, ſhal aſſemble together, ſo often as any matter require to be cōſulted vpon. And that the captaines and rulers of the armye ſhalbe obedient to that order, wherunto the greater number do aſſent. There were ſome agreed wyth Ptolomeus, but fewe with Perdicas. Then Ariſtonus ſpake in this wiſe.Ariſtonus wordes. When Alexander was conſulted withall, to whom he would leaue his kingdome, he willed the worthieſt to be choſē. Whō iudged he worthieſt but Perdicas, to whom he deliuered his rynge?. This was not done at ſuch time as Alexander was alone, but when al his frendes were preſente, he did caſte his eyes amonges them, and at length choſe out one to whom he deliuered it. Wherfore I thinke it ryght that the kingdome be committed vnto Perdicas.
            
               There were many that agreed to his opinion, ſo that the aſſemble cried to Perdicas that he ſhoulde come forthe amonges them, and take vp the kynges ſignet. But he ſtayed betwene ambition and ſhamefaſtnes, thinkynge that the more modeſtye he vſed in gettynge the thinge whiche he coueted, they woulde be ſo muche the more earneſt to profer it hym. When he had ſtande a good while at a ſtaye, doubtyng what to do, at length he drewe backe, and ſtode behind them which ſate next vnto hym.
            
               Weleagers wordes.When Meleager that was one of the capitaynes, ſawe the ſtaye that Perdicas made, toke courage therupon, and ſaide: Neither the Goddes will permit, nor men wil ſuffer, that Alexanders eſtate, and the weight of ſo great an empire ſhould reſt vpon his ſhoulders. I will not rehearſe how there be many men more noble thē he is, and of greater worthines, againſt whoſe wyll no ſuche thinge may be ſuffred to be done. There is no difference whether ye make Perdicas kynge, or the ſonne of Roxane, whēſoeuer he ſhalbe borne. Seynge Pedicas goeth aboute to make him ſelfe Kynge, vnder pretence to be gouernoure to the other. That is the cauſe why no kinge can pleaſe him, but ſuch one as is not yet borne. And in ſuche an haſte as all we make to haue a kynge, whyche haſte is bothe mete and neceſſary for the preſeruation of our eſtate. He onelye doth waite for the expirynge of tymes, and monethes, imaginynge that ſhe ſhoulde brynge forthe a manne chylde, whiche I thinke ye doubte not but he is readye to counterfayte and exchaunge, if nede be. If it were ſo in very dede that Alexāder had appointed him to be our king, I am of opinion that the ſame thing onely of all the thinges he hath commaunded, oughte not to be

perfourmed and kepte. Why do not you runne therfore to ſpoyle the treaſure? ſeyng that this kynde of riches, the people ought to enherite. When he hadde ſpoken thoſe wordes, he brake through the preaſe of the armed men, and they whiche gaue him waye, folowed him to the ſpoyle, wherof he had made mencion. The gredines of the treaſure cauſed a greate bande of armed men to flocke about Meleager, and the aſſemble began to fall to diſcorde and ſedicion, whiche had growen to greater incōuenience, if a meane ſouldier whō verye fewe did knowe, had not ſtepped forthe,The words of a ſouldiour in the aſſemble. and ſpoken to the multitude. What nede we (quod he) to fall to force or ciuill warre ſeynge we haue a kynge alredye whiche you ſeke to finde. The ſame is Aridens Philips ſonne,Aridens brother to Alexander that latelye was our kynge, borne and brought vp in the ſame religion, and ceremonies that we do vſe, who beyng the onelye heyre, I maruayle by what deſeruynge of his he is ouerſlipped or what he hath done, why he ſhoulde not enioye his ryght, deſcended vnto hym by the vniuerſall lawe of the worlde. If you ſeke one to be comparable to Alexander, you ſhall neuer fynde hym. If you will haue ſuche one as ſhall approche nexte vnto him, this is onelye he. When theſe wordes were hearde amonges the multitude, they kept ſilence at the firſte, as if they had bene commaūded ſo to do, but afterwardes they cryed with one voyce, that Aridens ſhould be called, and that they were worthy deathe whiche made any aſſemble wythout him.Pythons wordes. Then Python all beſprinkeled wyth teares, began to ſpeake. Nowe I perceyue (quod he) Alexanders caſe to be moſte miſerable, ſeyng he is defrauded of ye frute wyth ſuch as wer his ſouldiers & ſubiects ſhold bringforth at ſuch a time as this is

For you hauynge reſpect onelye to the name and memory of your kynge, ye be vtterly blinde in the reſt of thynges. His wordes tended directlye to the reprofe of Aridens that was elected kynge, but the tale procured more hatred to the ſpeaker, then contempte to hym againſt whom they were mente. For the compaſſion they had of Aridens, cauſed them the more to fauoure his cauſe, and therfore declarred by an obſtinate crye, that they woulde not ſuffer any to reigne ouer them, but him onely which was borne to that poſſibilitie, and ſtill called for Aridens to come forthe amonges them. Wherupon Meleager for the malice and enuy he bare vnto Perdicas, toke an occaſion boldlye to bring him into the aſſemble, whō the multitude ſaluted as kinge, and called him Philippe. This was the voyce of the people,Aridens was choſen kyng. but the nobilitie was of an other mind, of whō Pithon toke vpon him to put Perdicas deuiſe in execution, and appoynted Perdicas and Leonatus (whiche were deſcended of the bloude royall) to be gouernours of the ſonne whiche ſhoulde be borne of Roxane: addinge moreouer that Craterus and Antipater ſhoulde haue the rule within Europe. And vpon this they ſware men to be obedient to Alexanders iſſue, Meleager then doubting notwithout cauſe, that ſome euill might come to him, departed with ſuche as were of his faction, but he returned immediatly againe, and brought Philip wt him into the court, criyng out to the multitude for the aſſiſtyng of the cōmune welth, in aydynge of the newe Kynge, whiche a little before they had elected: and wylled them to make an experimente of his actiuitie, perſuadinge that he was the meteſt to rule ouer thē, that was ye iſſue of Philip, that had bothe a king to his father, and a king to his brother.
            
               There is no profoūd ſea, ſo ſtormy nor tēpeſtuous,The inconſtancy of a multitude. that raiſeth vp ſo many ſourges & waues, as a multitude doth mocions and alteracions, when they haue gotten the bridle of a newe libertie, not likely long to cōtinue. There wanted not ſome that gaue their conſent to Perdicas, but more agreed to make Philip king. They could neither agre nor diſagre, to any thyng long time together. One while repenting them of that they had determined, and ſtreightwaies forthought thē of that repentaunce. Yet finally they were enclyned to preferre the kinges bloud. Aridens was put in ſuch feare with the aucthoritie of the nobilite, that he departed out of the aſſemble, after whoſe departure, the fauour of the ſouldiers was rather ſilent, then ceſſed towardes him. So that at length he was called agayne, and put vpon him his brothers veſture regal, whiche laye in the chayre. And Meleager put on his armour folowing as a guarde to the perſone of the newe king. The ſouldiers of the Phalanx claſſhed their ſpeares to their targettes, threatening to ſhed their bloud, whiche coueted the kingdome that pertained not to them. They reioyſed that the force of the Empire ſhould ſtill continue in the ſame familie, the right of whoſe enheritaunce comming of the bloud royall they ſhewed themſelues redy alwayes to defende. For by reaſon they were accuſtomed to honour the name of their kyng, and to haue it in veneracion: they thought no man worthy for it, but ſuche one as came therunto by diſcent of bloud. Perdicas therfore was afraied, and with .vi. hundred men that were of an approued manhode, kept the lodging wheras the body of Alexander lay. Ptolomeus ioyned him ſelfe vnto hym, and the bande of the younge men that were about the kynges perſone. But ſo many

thouſand of armed men as were vpon the other ſide, did eaſely breake in vpon them. Amonges whome the king was preſent, with a great bande for the guard about his perſone, wherof Meleager was chief. Perdicas therfore in a greate furye, called them to his parte which would defende Alexāders body, but they which brake in vpon thē ſhrew dartes at him afarre of, wherby many were hurt. At the laſt the auncient men plucked of their head peces the better to be knowen, & deſired them whiche were with perdicas to abſtayne from ciuill warre, & geue place to the kyng & to the greater parte. Wherupon Perdicas was the firſte that layde downe his weapon, & the reſt did in like maner. Meleager then perſuaded thē that they ſhould not depart, but remayne ſtill about the dead corſe, but he iudging that to be a deceite and a meane to entrap hym, fled to the further ſide of Euphrates lieng ouer againſt the court. Then the horſemen whiche conſiſted chiefly of the nobilitie, flocked about Perdicas, and Leonatus, whiche thought good to departe out of the cytie, and take the fieldes, but becauſe Perdicas was not without hope, that the footemen woulde haue taken his parte, remained ſtil within the cytie, leſt he myght ſeme to be the cauſe that the horſemen ſhould deuide them ſelues from the reſt of the armye. Meleager ceaſſed not to beate in the kynges head, that he could not eſtablyſhe himſelfe ſurely in his eſtate, but by the death of Perdicas, whoſe ambicious mynde deſirous of innouation, was (he ſayde) to be preuented in time. Willyng the kyng to remembre what Perdicas had deſerued at his hādes, and that no man could be faithfull to him, whom he feared. The kyng ſuffring the thing, rather then geuing his cōſent to the matter, Meleager toke

his ſilence for a commaundement, and ſent for Perdicas in the kynges name, and they whiche were ſent had commiſſion to kyll hym, if he made any ſticking to come with them. Perdicas hearing of their comming, accompanied only with .xvi. yonge men that were of Alexanders guarde, mette them at the entrey of the houſe, and callyng them Meleagers ſlaues, rebuked them with ſuche a conſtancy both of mynde and countenaunce, that they returned back agayne as men amaſed. Perdicas wylled ſuche as were in his company to leape on horſebacke, and ſo with a fewe of hys frendes came vnto Leonatus, mynding if any violence were moued againſte hym, to repulce it with a greater force. The next daye the Macedons grudged and thought it a matter vnworthy, that Perdicas after this maner ſhould be brought in daunger of death, and therfore determined with force to reuenge the raſhenes of Meleagers doynges.
            But he vnderſtanding the mutyne that was amonges the ſouldiers gaue place, and they repayred vnto the kyng demaundyng of hym if he had cōmaunded Perdicas to be taken. He cōfeſſed he had ſo done, but that was by Meleagers mocion, whiche was no cauſe (he ſayde) for them to make any ſtorre, ſeing that Perdicas was alyue. The aſſemble hereupon brake vp and Meleager became greatly afrayed, ſpecially by the parting of the horſemen, ſo yt he wiſte not what to do, for he ſawe the miſchief whiche he a little before had wrought againſt his enemy, lyke to light vpō him ſelfe, and whyles he deuyſed this and that, three dayes were conſumed. The wonted fourme and fa
                  ••
               on of the courte dyd remayne in the meane ſeaſon.
            
               For the Embaſſadours of diuers nacions made repaire vnto the kyng, the captaines of the army did aſſemble about him, and the guard wayted in armour as they were accuſtomed. But the great ſadnes that was there without any apparant cauſe, ſignified ſome extreame diſpaire. There was ſuche a ſuſpicion amonges them ſelues, that men durſt not company togethers, nor ſpeake one to another, but ſtode imagening ſecretly with them ſelues, and by comparing the time preſent with the tyme paſt, and the new kyng with the olde, they began to deſire hym that was gone. Then one enquired of another where he was become, whoſe fortune and authoritie they had folowed? Then they founde themſelues abandoned, amōges ſo many wyld nacions which were deſirous vpon any occaſion that might fall, to be reuenged of the iniuryes they had receyued. Whyles they were troubled in theſe imaginacions, worde was brought that the horſemen whiche were vnder Perdicas, kept the fieldes about Babylō, and ſtayed the vitels, that was commyng to the cytie. Whereupon firſt beganne a ſcarſitie, and afterwardes a famyne. Therfore ſuche as were within the cytie thought good either to make a reconciliacion with Perdicas, or els to fight out the matter. It chaunſed that they which dwelled abrode in the coūtrey fearyng the ſpoyle of the villages, repayred into the cytie. And they within the cytie for lacke of vitelles, departed into the countrey. So that euery one thought them ſelues ſurer any where, then in their owne habitacions. Then the Macedons doubting ſome greate inconuenience that myght come of this feare,
                  
                     •
                  mbaſſadours were ſent about a reconciliacion. aſſembled together in the courte, and ſhewed furth their opinions. It was agreed amonges them that Embaſſadours ſhuld

be ſent to the horſemen, for the ſucceſſing of all ſtrife, & deuiſion. Paſus a Teſſalion, Amiſſas a Megapolitan and Perelaus were ſent from the kyng. Whiche declaring their commiſſion, receiued anſwere, that the horſemen wold not feuer their power, till the auctours of the ſediciō were deliuered into their handes. When they were returned and their aunſwere knowen, the ſouldiers without any appointment put on their armour, and made ſuche a tumult, that the kyng was enforced to come furth of the court, and ſaide vnto them: If we ſhalbe at ſtrife amōges our ſelues,The kinges wordes vnto the ſouldiers. our enemies that be quiet, ſhall enioye the frute of our contencion. Remembre you that the quarell is with your own coū
               treymen, with whome if ye raſhly breake the hope of reconcilemēt, ye ſhalbe the beginners of a ciuil warre. Let vs proue if the matter may be mitigated by an other Embaſſade. I am of opinion, that foraſmuche as Alexāders body remayne yet vnburied, they will gladly come together, to perfourme the due vnto the dead. And for my parte, I had rather ſurrendre vp againe this dignitie, then any bloud ſhould be ſhedde amōges my countrey men. For if no other hope of concorde do remayne I deſire and pray you to choiſe this, as the better of both. And with that worde he wepte, and pulled the diademe frō his head, holding theſame furth with his hande, redy to haue deliuered it to any man, that would haue claymed to be more worthy then he. The moderacion that he vſed both in his wordes, and his behauour, cauſed them all to cōceiue a great good hope of his noble nature, whiche til that time was obſcured with the greatnes of his brothers fame. Thei therfore required and encouraged him to go forwardes in the matter as he had deuiſed. Wherupon he ſent agayne

the ſame for Embaſſadours that went before, whiche had commiſſion to require, that Meleager might be the thirde capitayne. Whiche matter was not muche ſticked at. For Perdicas was deſirous to remoue Meleager from the kyng, and thought that he alone ſhold not be able to matche with Leonatus and hym. Vpon this Meleager marched out of the cytie with the fotemen: and Perdicas met him in the fieldes, ryding before the bandes of the horſemen. Where bothe battailles ſaluting one an other, concorde, peace and amitie, was cōfirmed betwixt thē, for euer as it was thought. But it was decreed by deſtiny that ciuil warres ſhuld ryſe amonges the Macedons. For gouernement is vnpacient of parteners, and the kingdome was couered by many. Which as it firſt grewe in force, ſo afterwardes it was diſperſed againe. And when the body was burdened more then it coulde beare, the other membres began to faill.A degreſſiō to the praiſe of themperour that was in the auctours tyme. So thempire of the Macedons whiche vnder one head might well haue ſtande, when it was deuided into partes, fell to ruyne. For whiche cauſe the people of Rome iuſtly muſt confeſſe them ſelues bound vnto their prince, for the felicitie they haue founde. Whiche as a ſtarre in the nyght appeared vnto them, that were nere loſte. And as the ſunne gaue light to the worlde being in darkenes, when without ſuche a head, the membres that were at variaunce, muſte nedes haue quayled. Howe many fyre brandes did he quenche? howe many ſwordes ready drawen dyd he put vp agayne? Howe great a tempeſt did he pacifye with the ſodayne caulme of his preſence? The Empire now therfore doth waxe grene and floryſhe: Let me deſire without enuye, that his houſe may continewe many ages, and his poſteritie remaine

for euermore. But to returne againe to the ordre of hiſtory, from whence I was brought through the contemplacion of our vniuerſal felicitie.Perdicas deuiſed the death of Meleager. Perdicas iudged the only hope of his owne ſauegarde, to conſiſte in the death of Meleager, thinking it neceſſary to preuēt him whiche was a man both variable, vnfaithful, geuen to innouacion, and beſides his mortall enemy. But with deape diſſimulaciō he kept his purpoſe ſecrete to thintent that with ye leſſe difficultie, he might oppreſſe him vnbewares. He did ſubornate therfore priuely certain of the bandes that were vnder his rule, to complayne opēly (as though it were without his knowledge) that Meleager ſhuld be made equal with him, which wordes of the ſouldiers, whē they were reported vnto Meleager, be came in a great rage, & declared their ſayenges to Perdicas. Who ſemed to wonder at the matter, blaming their doing, as though he had bene ſory for the thing, and finally they agreed that the auctours of ſuch ſedicious wordes ſhould be taken. When Meleager perceiued Perdicas ſo confirmable, he embraced hym and gaue him thankes for his fidelitie & beneuolence. Thereby a conſultacion had betwixt them both, they deuiſed how to deſtroy them that wrought this deuiſiō betwixt them. For the bringing of that to paſſe they agreed, that tharmy ſhuld be purged according to their countrey cuſtome. For the doing wherof, they ſemed to haue a ſufficient occaſion, by reaſon of the late diſcord that was amōges thē.A ceremony that was vſed in the purifiyng of tharmy after any offē
                  ce made. The kinges of Macedon in purifiyng of their ſouldiers, were wonte to vſe a kind of ceremony, in deuiding the bowelles of a dogge in two partes, & caſt the ſame in the vttermoſte boūdes of the field, wheron they purpoſed to bring furth the army.

Betwixt whiche ſpace the men of warre, accuſtomed to ſtande armed, the horſemē, the mercenary ſouldiers and the phalanx euery one aparte. The ſame daye that this ceremony was put in execution, the kyng ſtoode with the horſemen & the Elephantes againſt the footemen of whome Meleager had the rule. When the battell of horſemen began to moue, the footemē were ſtroken ſodainly with feare, and by reaſon of the late diſcorde, conceiued a ſuſpicion that the horſemen ment them no good. Wherfore they ſtode a while in a doubt, whether they ſhould retire into the cytie or no, by reaſon that the fieldes ſerued beſt for the horſemen. But left without cauſe they myght condempne the fidelity of their companions, they ſtode ſtill with a determinate mynde to fight, if any would proffer them violence. When the battailles were almoſte mette together, and only a ſmalle diſtaunce left betwixt them, wherby the one parte was deuided from the other, the kyng by the prouocation of Perdicas with one bande of horſemen did ride along the footemen, requiring the deliuery of thoſe to be executed, which wer the aucthors of the diſcorde (whome in very dede he ought to haue defended) whiche if thei refuſed to deliuer, he threatened to bring againſt them, both the horſemen and the Elephantes. The footemen were amaſed with the ſodeines of the miſchief whiche they loked not for, and there was no more counſell nor courage in Meleager then in the reſt, but they all iudged it moſte expedient for them, rather to abyde the aduēture of that matter, then further to haſard fortune. When Perdicas ſawe them aſtonied and in feare, he ſeuered out to the nombre of three hundred of ſuch as folowed Meleager, when he brake out of the aſſemble, that was firſt made, after Alexanders

death, whiche in the ſight of all the armye were caſte to the Elephantes and there trampled to death with their feete. Of which matter Philippe was neither the author, nor the forbidder, but thought to claime that for his owne doing, whiche ſhould appeare beſt in the ende. This was a ſignification and a beginning, vnto the Macedons of ciuill warre that enſued. Meleager vnderſtanding ouerl
                  •
               te the ſleyght of that deuiſe, becauſe there was no violence offred to his perſone, ſtode at the firſte quietly within the ſquare: but ſhortly after, when he ſawe his enemies abuſing the name of him, whome he had made king to his deſtruccion, he diſpaired of his own ſaueguarde, & fled into a temple. But the religion of the place could not defend him, but that he was there ſlayne.The deuiſiō of Thēpire. Perdicas hereupon brought againe the army into the citie, and called counſell of all the principall perſonages, wherin it was agreed ſo to deuide thempire, that the kyng ſhould remayne as chief of the whole. Ptolomeus to be lieutenaunt in Egipt and Affricke, and to haue the rule of the nacions there, that were vnder the Macedons dominion. Siria and Phenices were appointed to Laomedon. Cylicia to Philotas. Licia with Pamphilia, & the greater Phrigia, were aſſigned to Antigonus. Caſſander was ſent into Caria, and Menander into Lydia. The leſſer Phrigia that ioyned vnto Helleſpont, was Leonatus prouince. Emmenes had Cappadotia and Paphlagonia, who was commaunded to defende that countrey ſo farre as Trapezunt, and make warre to Arbates whiche only remained enemy to the Empire.Arbates. Media was apointed to Python, and Thrace to Lyſmachus with other nacions there about borderyng vpon the ſea of Ponte. It was ordeined alſo

that ſuche as ſhould be preſidentes amonges the Indians, Bactrians, Sogdians, and other naciōs lieng vpon the Occean, and read ſeas, ſhould in matters of iuſtice vſe regall iuriſdictiō. It was decceed that Perdicas ſhould remaine with the kyng, and haue the gouernaunce of the men of warre that folowed him. Some beleue that theſe prouinces were diſtributed, by Alexāders teſtament, but we haue found that ſame to be falſe, though ſome authors do witnes the ſame. The Empire being deuided into partes, euerye one might well haue defended his portion, if any boundes could conteine mens immoderate deſires. Or if they whiche being but miniſters vnto a kyng, when vnder the colour of the adminiſtracion of an others dominiō had encroched into great kingdomes, could haue auoyded the occaſions of warre, ſeing they were all of one nacion, and had their coūtreis by limittes. But it was hard for them to be contented with that they had in poſſeſſion, when occaſion was proffered them of more. For the firſt thynges alwayes appeare of no valure, when men be in hope of greater thynges to come. So that euery one of them thought it an eaſier matter to encreaſe his kyngdome, then it was to come by it at the firſte. Alexanders body had layen ſeuen dayes vnburied, for whyles euery man had care vpon the eſtablyſhing of the ſtate, their myndes were drawen from doing of that ſolempne office.
            There is no countrey that haue more feruent heat then Meſopotamia. For the ſonne there burneth ſo hote that it killeth the beaſtes that be without couert, and burne vp all thynges, as it were with the fyer. And to the encreaſe therof there be fewe ſpringes of water, and the inhabiters vſe ſuche policy in hiding of

thoſe they haue, that ſtraūgers can haue no vſe of thē. This notwithſtandinge, when Alexanders frendes had gotten leaſure to take care of the deade corſe, and came to viſite the ſame, they founde it wythout infeccion, corruption, or chaunge of coloure, the ſame cherefulnes whiche conſiſteth of the ſpirite, not beynge yet departed out of his countenaunce. Then the Egipcians and the Caldeis were commaunded to dreſſe hys bodye after their maner, who at the firſte (as though he had bene aliue) durſt not put their handes to him. But afterwardes makyng their prayers that it might be lawfull for mortall men to touche him, they purged his bodye, and filled it wyth ſwete odours. And afterwardes layed him vpon a hearſe of golde, and ſet a diademe vpon his heade.
            Many thought that he dyed of poyſon, & that Iolla Antipaters ſōne beyng one of his miniſters, had geuē him the ſame. Alexander oftentimes woulde ſaye, that Antipater coueted the eſtate of a kinge, affecting more greatnes, then parteined to a Liuetenaūt, and through glorie of the victory he had gotten of the Lacedemonians, was become ſo proude, that he claymed al thinges committed vnto him as his owne. It is thought alſo that Craterus was ſente to kyll him with thoſe olde ſouldiours that were diſmiſſed. It is certayne that there is a poyſon in Macedon founde in a water called Stiges,Stiges. of ſuche force, that it conſumeth yron, and will not be conteined in any thinge, ſauing in the houe of an horſe or mule, which poiſon was brought by Caſſander, and deliuered to his brother Iolle, whiche preſented it in the drinke that the kinge laſt dronke. Howſoeuer theſe thinges be reported, the power of them of whō the rumour wēt, ſhortly after oppreſſed ye infamy.
            
               For Antipater betame Kynge bothe of Macedon and of Greace, and his chyldren after him, that did cut to death all ſuche as were anye thynge neare of kinne vnto Alexander. Ptolomeus whiche had the rule of Egipte conueyed Alexanders bodye to Memphis, whiche within fewe yeares after was remoued to Alexandria, where as all honoure is geuen to the memorye of him, and to his name.
            Finis.
         
      
      
         
            
               ❧IMPRYNTED at London by Richarde Tottell, dwellynge in Fleteſtrete at the ſigne of the hande and ſtarre, within Temple barre. Anno domini. 1553.
            ¶Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum ſolum. per ſeptennium.
            
         
      
   