
      
         
            
            
            
               THE Pleaſaunt and vvittie Playe of the Cheaſts renewed, with Inſtructions both to learne it eaſely, and to play it well. Lately tranſlated out of Italian into French: And now ſet furth in Engliſhe by Iames Rowbothum.
            
            
               PRINTED AT LONdon by Roulande Hall, for Iames Rowbothum, and are to be ſold at hys ſhoppe vnder Bowe churche in Cheape ſyde.
            1562.
         
         
            
            LIBER AD LECTOREM.
            HVne ego pingo iocū luſori fraude carentē
            
            Caetera ſunt variis omnia plena dolis.
            Nobilis hic iocus eſt, vllas nec ſuſcitat iras,
            Atrae nec quicquam bilis ineſse poteſt.
            Caetera ſēꝑ habēt fucos, hic ſemꝑ 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
               
            
            Caetera fraus ornat, nullus in hoc dolus eſt.
            Etſi flexibili ligno latrunculus omnis
            Cultro excindatur, ſtet
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                carens anima
            Hic tamen armati nunc militis induit arma
            Belligeri
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                gerit ligneus effigiem.
            Sunt hic regis omnis qui ſuſcepere regendi
            Pentheſilea quibus prima locata loco eſt,
            Sūt comites, equites, elephātes, ſunt pediteſ
                  
                     
                  
                  que
               
            
            Ex quibus eſt acies ordine ſtructa bono.
            Ludite nunc reges, animis ſecludite curas
            Regali
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                ioco tempora conterite:
            Ludice nūc proceres, nūc anglica lude iuuētus
            Et mercatores ludite, lude puer.
            Vxor lude, rogo, colludas at
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                marite
            Et ſimul innuptae ludite pierides
            Ludite ductores, ludat quo
                  
                     
                  
                  que
                miles in armis.
            Ludite milltiae, ludite vterque domi.
            Si quis in hoc abaco cupiat ꝑdiſcere quicquā
            
            Me legat vt le
                  •••
                doctior eſſe queat.
            
               W. Ward.
            
         
         
            
            
               To the right honorable, the Lorde ROBERT DVDDELEY Maiſter of the Queenes horſe, and Knight of the noble order of the Sarter, Iames Rowbothum wiſſheth long lyfe with encreaſe of godly honour.
            
               AS THE graue and waightye affaires of Princes (moſte honorable) require men of profoūde knowledge and experience, whiche muſt dayly conſider and eaſte in their myndes ſome good, holeſome and profitable counſell for the gouernement of the common wealth by good lawes: ſo alſo muſte they for recreation ſake, ſurceaſe ſometime from thoſe extreme trauailes of the mynde, and refreſhe theyr memorie and carefull heades with ſome recreatiue exerciſe meete for their eſtate. And as there bee for noble men noble paſtimes (and

inuented firſt onelye for the nobilitie) as feates of armes, turneys, fighting at the barriers, runninge at the tilt, cleane ryding of horſes, with other like, whereby the nobilitie of realmes was firſt increaſed and great renowne gotten, & were done altogether with the ſtrength of the arme and corage of the hart: ſo is there alſo for the lyke, certain other wittie inuentions of playes or games to recreate the mynde withall, and are learned and exerciſed not with the outward ſtregth of the bodye, but with the inwarde force of witte and intelligence, to the great ſharpening of the ententiue partes of mannes vnderſtanding, the which I will not trouble your Lordſhip with in numbringe them: but amonge ſo many as are vſed and exerciſed in courtes of Princes, in Lordes, Knightes, and Gentelmens houſes, none (in my iudgement) is more meete for noble men, then the noble playe or game of the Cheaſtes inuented firſt

by a noble Philoſopher, or as ſome thinke by the noble King Xerxes. Wherein if I ſhoulde declare perticulerly the witte, the inuention, ye warlyke order, the polityke conueyaunce, that great pleaſure is taken in it, of them that haue practiſed the knowledge of it, I ſhoulde ſeeme to tedious vnto your Lordſhippe: but yet left I ſhould pretermit the commendation of ſuche a kingly game, I thought it my dutie to preſent your Lordſhip with this lytle booke, teaching an order how to playe perfitly and to the aduauntage, with the names that both the French men, Spaniardes and Italians call the Cheaſtmen by, & alſo the faſhion and ordering of ye chraſt bourd, which was neuer before this tyme in our tonge as farre as I can learne with ſo good and compendious a waye to learne the ſame. And althoughe I knowe that bothe your Lordſhip, with diuers other of ye noble men & gentle mē of this realme cā play excellent

ly at this game of ye Cheaſt, & haue as deepe knowledge therein as either French men, Italians or Spaniardes haue: yet becauſe none euer attempted to put in writynge the feate, witte, and pollicie that is in it, and that they vnderſtande. I was ſo bolde (hauing found it tranſlated out of French into Engliſhe after the forme and maner in all poyntes as it is here printed) to chooſe your honoure to whome I mighte offer this ſimple preſent, truſtinge that as your Lordſhippe doth alwais gratefully accept more the giuers good will, than the value of the gift, the ſame will receyue this booke into the number of thoſe which other haue geuen vnto your honour, although of greater importaunce, yet not of greater good will. Which I doubt not but in many thinges you wil delyte to reade, and to conſider when ſo euer occaſion ſhalbe offred to your lordſhip to playe at the ſame game, being a paſtime wtout all tediouſnes,

malice, melancoly, anger, gyle, or deceit, and hath in it ſelf a certaine maieſtie bothe in the ſetting of the men and alſo in naming them. Beſides that it hath formam inſtructae acici and of a raunged battaile the Kinge placed in the middle as is ſeene by the ſettinge of the men. The cauſe why, of whom, and whē it was made, your Lordſhip ſhall read in the beginning of the booke which is a thing worthy to be knowen, for that it is now ſo common lye vſed in this realme, as well of noble men as of others of lower eſtate and degree, to the great quickening of their wit and memorie. Whiche game as it is kinglye and honeſt, and meete for diuers ſortes of men, ſo is it (in manye mennes iudgements) not altogether vnprofitable for Captains, Conductours of armies, and commō Soldiours. For out of thoſe wodden men may ſome knowledge bee had howe to marche and ſette furth Soldiours in the fielde, how to garde a King,

and what forces ought to be in the ſides of ye battaile, as in ye diſcourſe of playing it, men maye eaſely ſee.
            Thus leauynge to holde your Lordſhippe with any longer Epiſtle, from the reading of the booke, I wiſhe the ſame longe lyfe in healthe, with muche encreaſe of vertus and honor. (‡)
            
               Your Lordſhippes to commaunde
Iames Rowbothum.
            
         
         
            
            To the reader.
            
               IT may peraduenture ſeeme ſtraunge vnto ſome that anye man ſhould beſtow his labour and tyme in ſetting out ſuch kynd of bookes as this is, whereby men may learne to playe, when in dede moſt men are geuen rather to play then to ſtudye. And becauſe there may be alledged ſome reaſons, why no man ought to allure anye vnto games: ſome more curious then wiſe wyll by and by catch occaſion if not to condempne yet to diſproue the trauayle and paynes that hath ben taken in this, & ſo thinke that either the authour or the tranſlatour might haue bene much better occupied. Whoſe opinion and iudgement I graunt were true & good if it were a booke cōteinig any art of diſe plaie, of cogging, or ſetting dyce, of falſhod in carde play, or any

other like ſleights for the deceiuing one another or for ſturring men to anger as ſuche games do often tymes. But for aſmuch as this game or rather kingly paſtime is not only voyde of all crafte, gyle, fraude, deceyt, colour, ſwearing, ſtaring, impacience, fretting, or falling out: but alſo it breadeth in playes a certaine ſtudye, pollicie, wit, forcaſt, memorie, with other properties, to make men circumſpect not onelye in playing this game, but alſo comparing it to a publick gouernemēt, or more properly a batttel, all men as well Captaines as ſouldiours, may pike out of theſe woddē pieces ſome pretie pollicie how to lead or conduct liuely men in the field. For this game hath a certaine alluſion or ſimilitude of a ranged battel, as by order in placing the men and ſetting them forth in their marche, it maye eaſely appeare. The kinge is here as a king in the field placed in the middle of his armie, and hathe his welbeloued queene nexte vnto

him, and his nobilitie aboute him, with the ſouldiours in the forfront orderly ſet. And although this bee but a briefe inſtruction to teache to playe, yet the onſet beinge geuen, ſome other will folowe to amplifie or to finiſhe this ingenious and pretie deuiſe, that thereby the ſubtelties and hidden gyles of this game maye be more diſcouered, with the maner how to play without bourd or men walking or riding on horſe backe with as great delite and contentation as if thei had the cheſtebourde and men in their handes, which thing is done by diligent noting the place and houſes wherein eche man ſtandeth, and whither or into what houſe he marcheth or may marche, euery one hauing his way appoynted him to go. And in the meane tyme content your ſelfe with this, for I aſſure you the difficultie to expreſſe or ſet out the types and figures of the men is ſo muche and the chardges ſo greate, that as yet no man woulde euer

gladly take in hand to prynt them. Albeit Hieronimus Cardan' in his boke de varietate rerum, geueth a certayne forme and maner, how to ſet out in print the cheſte bourd and the men vpon it, according to the diuerſitie of the colours blacke and whyte. But he that would folow him ſhuld cut as many bourdes and diuers figures of men as the playe hath diuers wayes to bee played, whiche woulde be intollerable charges. And therefore (curioſitie ſet a part) take in good worth theſe types and figures here preſented vntyll ſome better inuention be founde. For I doubt not but there be in England as good heades as either Italians or Spaniards, yt can if thei woulde inuent as fine a way to plai at this game as this is: but yet when a thing is begon, it is the eaſier and the ſoner made an end of. Now thei that will playe well at this game, muſte beware that they talke not with any other ſtandinge by, nor geue eare to anye that talketh by,

for then ſhal his ſenſes be occupied ſo with other matters that his enemie that playeth againſt him will with his diligēce giue him ye foyle: for this game (as the beſt players ſay) requireth the whole man, and conſequently all the ſenſes. Take hede alſo that the by ſtanders (whiche commonlye ſee more then the plaiers) do neither by ſigne or word admoniſhe your aduerſe partie of any good or gaynfull draughte: for that is one thing amonge many other that cauſeth choler, and offendeth one of ye plaiers, but it is ſuch a kind of choler that paſſeth awaye lightly, farre vnlike ye dyſe plaiers anger, for he fretteth, he fumeth, be curſeth, and banneth the dyſe, & deſpyteth his ill lucke, and you at the cheſt, blame not your men but your ſelfe, ſo that yf you haue a mate you ſaye commonly, yf I had played thus or thus I had ſaued the mate, herein is no offence to anye but vnto your ſelfe, and anone it is gone. Suche and other lyke pleaſure

is there in this game, beynge a moſte princely exerciſe, and full of good pollicie, and quickenynge of a mans witte. Theſe things conſidered, I thoughte it no labour euill beſtowed to occupie me ſelfe in the tranſlation hereof, at tymes extraordinarie, when my more earneſt ſtudies and buſynes were done: Thus fare well gentell Reader.
         
      
      
         
            
            The cheaſtes play.
            
               ¶ The fyrſt Chapter.
               
                  THE principle is to knowe the pieces, to wit, the name, the number, and the ſeat of euery one. As for the faſhion of the pieces, that is according to the fantaſie of the workman, which maketh them after his maner. Some make them lyke men, whereof the kynge is the higheſt, and the Quene (whiche ſome name Amaſone or ladye) is the next, bothe two crowned. The Biſhoppes ſome name Alphius, ſome fooles, & ſome name them Princes, lyke as alſo they are next vnto the king and the Quene: other ſome cal them archers, and their are faſhioned accordinge to the wyll of the workeman. The knights ſome call horſemen, and thei are men on horſe backe. The Rookes ſome cal

Elephantes, cariyng towres vpon their backes, and men within the towres. The Paunes ſome cal fote men, and they are ſouldiours on fote, cariyng ſome of them pykes, other ſome harquebuſhes, other ſome halbards, and other ſome the tauelyn and target. Other makers of Cheaſtmen make them of other faſhions: but the vſe thereof wyll cauſe perfect knowledge.
               (Our Engliſhe Cheaſtmen, are commonly made nothing like vnto theſe foreſayde faſhions: to wit, the king is made the higheſt or lōgeſt: the Queene is longeſt nexte vnto him: the Biſhoppe is made with a ſharpe toppe and clouen in the mid deſt not muche vnlyke to a biſhops Myter: the knight hath his top cut asloope, as thoughe beynge dubbed knight: the Rooke is made lykeſt to the Kinge and the Queene, but that he is not ſo long: the Paunes he made the ſmaleſt & leaſt of all, & thereby they may beſt be knowen. This haue I added hereunto good

reader for the better vnderſtanding and knowing of ye ſaid cheaſtmen).
               I wil not therfore figurate them at this preſent: but onely in ſpeaking of euery piece particularly, I will name them accordinge to the moſte frequent phraſe in the Engliſhe tonge. To wit, the (king beinge the head of the playe) I wyll name kyng: the Queene (being the beſt piece in the game) I will name quene: the biſhops (being next vnto the king and quene) I wil name biſhops: the knights (being next vnto the biſhops) I will cal knights: the Rookes (being next vnto ye knights and ſtanding in the corners) I will call Rookes: the Paunes (ſtanding in a rowe before them al) I wil call Paunes.
               
                  Of the Rooke, or Towre.
                  THe Towre is named amongeſt the Spaniards, Portingales, and, Italians Rocho, whiche is as muche to ſay in their language,

as a Fortreſſe, becauſe it is a great vpholdynge to the game, alſo the Towres are ſet in the vttermoſte ends of the Cheaſtbourd, as a ſtrōg rampier in the fronte. Their office is not to remoue but in neceſſitie, and chiefelye for the ſuccoure of theyr Kynge.
               
               
                  Of the knight or horſeman.
                  THe Horſeman is alſo named, as repreſentinge a man of Armes, whiche fighteth on horſebarke, and his ſeat is next vnto the Towre, from whence he muſt come into battaile, and place him ſelfe where he may moſt offēd. For there is no piece in the Cheaſtbourd that more readily may do hurt then he, becauſe of his marching forth, whiche is made from three into three places, to witte, from whyte into blacke, and from black into whyte, and yet he ceaſſeth not to make his aſſault or leape, although he be enuyroned, prouided that he haue

roume to place him ſelfe in.
               
               
                  Of the Biſhop or Archer.
                  IN the auncient tyme the French men named him Foole, whiche ſeemeth vnto me an improper name. The Spaniardes named him prince, with ſome reaſon: For (as Prince of the blood) he is nerer vnto the King and the Quene then any other of the Cheaſtmen. And ſome name him Archer, becauſe that their draughtes draw alwaies aſyde, and neuer forthe right: as it is the office of a good Archer or Har quebuſier in warre: whiche neuer planteth him ſelf right againſt his enemie, but in ſkirmiſhinge or in plaine fight, make ſemblaunce to ſhoote at one, and ſhooteth at another, not remainynge longe in a place. If our Cheaſſe Archer haue the paſſage open, he maye go from one corner of the Cheaſtbourde into the other. But as for the aduantage of him, or of the Knight, it is

litle, and hathe therein but the diſpoſings of the game, in the whiche ſome tymes the one is better then the other. Like as alſo there bee players or gamſters, which helpe them ſelues better with the horſeman then with ye archer, & ſome other contrarywiſe.
               
               
                  Of the Kyng.
                  THe king is the head of the Conducte, According to the Spaniards, he hath libertie to aſſault thre roumes or ſtepps, as he liſteth, yea he maye make the aſſaulte of the knight, ſo that he haue not the waye: but it muſte be then whyleſt he is yet in his lodgyng, and that he is not remoued, otherwyſe he can make no more but one ſteppe. Although that in Italy the kynge (yf he haue the waye open) maye runne all the length of the Cheaſtbourd, or may remoue a Paune, to ſet him ſelfe in his place. And in France thei cauſe him to make two

ſteppes alonge his front. Prouided that there bee no pieces betwene him and the Rooke, & ſet the rooke in the place of the king. Beholde here his marchinges, and his libertie, prouided that he haue had no checke. And for to tel you the truth the kinge was played none otherwyſe in the auncient tyme, but after the maner of the Frenchmen, yea the moſt part of the Spaniards and Portingales (who are eſtemed the beſt players) did play it ſo.
               
               
                  Of the Quene or Amaſone.
                  SOme name her Queene, other ſome Lady, it is the beſt piece on the Cheaſtbourd, alſo ſhe repreſenteth the Kings wife. Her lodginge is nexte to the Kinges, and hath as great a traine as the king. Briefely ſhe repreſenteth a Kings Lieutenant in an armye: ſhe doth (whē ſhe wil) the office of yerooks & alſo of ye biſhops. And becauſe ye ſeldom the wiues go to warre, & that the firſt that ſo much aduauntaged

their kynde (as to go thither and worke merueyles) were the Amaſones, therefore ſome name her Amaſone whyte, Amaſone blacke. But aboue all, the Players ought to kepe her well, becauſe that the game is ſeldome wonne, after that ſhe is once loſte.
               
               
                  Of the Paune or foteman.
                  THe footeman is the rampier & the target of the great Cheaſt men, and by the kynges eſpecialtie: For this cauſe that when he can procede ſo well in warre, as to arriue at the laſte rancke of hys enemies, he is choſen and made the beſt piece of the playe, to wit, he is the Quene. And if in making himſelfe Queene, he can geue checke, he is ſo muche the more to be eſtemed. The marchynge forthe of the Paune, for the fyrſte tyme, is to make two aſſaultes or leapes, yf he wyll, or one only, marchyng alwayes right before him, and not aſyde.

And the beſt Paunes are next vnto the King. Alſo, therefore whē check is geuē to ye king, the Paune can not paſſe the barres of hys way for to ſuccour him: that is to ſay, yf checke be geuen to the Kyng, the Paune can not marche aſyde, be it on the lefte, or on the right, for to couer his Kinge: for his waye is beſet on bothe ſydes, and can not go but right forth, and alwayes ſteppe by ſteppe, after his fyrſt marchyng forthe, prouided that his waye bee not ſtopped. It is true, that in takyng, he marcheth awrye one only ſteppe, of what ſyde ſo euer it bee, and can not take that whiche is right agaynſt him. It ſhalbe alſo beſt for the Paune, not to auaunce him ſelfe muche within the campe of his enemie.
               
               
                  The Checker or Cheaſtbourde, vvherevpon are placed the pieces, euery one accordynge to hys order.
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  BEholde here the forme of the Checker or Cheaſtbourde, and how the Cheaſtmen ought to be placed in euery houſe, wherof there are ſixtie foure in all. To wit, thirtie

two on either halfe or ſyde, whereof the eight vttermoſt oppoſites (or one againſt another) are ful of principall pieces on both ſydes. The other eight alſo nexte them on both ſides are full of Pawnes. So that there are thirtie two pieces, whyche is to eche player ſixtene, whereof there be eight greate ones and eight litle ones. And the rowmes where euery one of them are ſet, I wyll name Seates: the other which be emptie, I will name them places or houſes indifferētly. Thorough the which, (aſwel Seates as places,) the greate Cheaſtmen and ſmal doe runne accordinge to their order, be it in aduancinge or reculinge, for to geue the mate to the contrary King. For to be able to tel you why there is ſo many houſes, and why there is neither mo nor leſſe, that paſſeth my intelligence. Neither hath any man ſpoken of it. And I beleue that there wyll bee founde none other reſolution but onely the wil of hym that made the

playe, of whome there are dyuers opinions. Some ſaye that it was Yerſes: and yet the Spaniardes do retaine the name Aredres, albeit corrupted by the mutation of s into d ſet before r.
                  Other ſome ſaye that they were two brethren: The one named 
                        •
                     idie, and the other Tirrhene, who beinge afflicted with great hunger and famine did inuent this playe, to the ende that in playinge of it, they mighte employe their ſpirites ſo behementlye, that they myghte more eaſely paſſe the faminall affliction. And in deede they paſſed the tyme ſo well, that they made but three meales in twoo dayes.
               
               
                  Generall rules.
                  YOU muſte playe no caſte (or draughte) in vayne, if it be not for neceſſitie.
                  You muſte make not faulte.
                  You muſt not be to haſtie to play.
                  
                     
Yf you haue a good draughte to make, looke if there be not a better. Yf you haue aduauntage, you may well make a chaunge, and yet not looſe it.
                  Yf you haue aduauntage, wherewith you may wyn the game, take good heede for vndoing your game, nor to abandone your king, for to winne only a paune.
                  The principall thinge that you haue to doe, is to ſet your king in a ſure place, when he marcheth forthe.
                  The two Paunes whiche bee on that ſyde where the kinge is tranſported, oughte not to be remoued, but in great neceſſitie: for that, that often tymes the game is loſt by remouinge the Rookes Paune or knightes Paune one roume, becauſe that not there the contrarye Kyng findeth the way of the mate.
                  You muſte goe abrode wyth your pieces, and not keepe them encloſed.

It is good that the two Paunes of the King and of the Queene be vpon their fourth houſes: Yea, alſo thoſe of the Biſhopps.
                  It is to be noted, for the wel vnderſtanding of the marching for the of the Cheaſtmen, that the cheaſtbourd ought to be ſet in ſuch ſorte, that the Rooke on the right ſide be ſet in a white place, & take ye cheaſt men which you wil, white or black. Further, you muſt know the name of ye pieces & of ye houſes & places: for ye cheaſtmen which are of the kings ſyde, bee named the Kings Cheaſtmen, and lykewyſe the Kings houſes, vnto the middeſt of the Cheaſtbourd: Becauſe that from thence forwarde, thoſe are the contrarye Kyngs houſes. As for example, the Paune whiche is before thy King, is in the ſeconde houſe of thy King: and if thou remoue him one ſteppe, he ſhalbe in the thyrd, or if he go as far as he may, he ſhalbe in ye fourth houſe of thy King: but afterwardes if he paſſe further, he ſhalbe in the

fourth houſe of the king of thy contrary partye. And ſo it is of all the other Cheaſtmen of that ſyde.
                  The other ſyde is that of the quene aſwel in cheaſtmē as in houſes: for this cauſe it is nedefull to haue before you a Cheaſtbourde with the Cheaſtmen, for to ſee with youre eye the art which ſhalbe declared in this preſent treatiſe. And after hauynge preſuppoſed the game you may beginne after two ſortes.
               
            
            
               The ſeconde Chapter.
               THE firſt maner is to beginne with the Kinges Paune. And the ſeconde is to beginne with the Queenes Paune. The firſt (accordinge to my iudgement) is beſt. That is to wit, to begin with the Kings Paune, as far as he may go. (I will cauſe thee alwayes to holde the whyte part.) And if thy contrary partie play his Kings Paune as farre as he maye, thou ſhalt playe thy kings Knight to three houſes

from the kinges biſhoppe. And if he play his kings knight to thre houſes frō his kings biſhop, thou ſhalt take with thy knight his kinges Paune, & if he take alſo thy paune with his knight, playe thy queene before thy king.
               
               
                  
And if he retyre his knight into the thirde houſe of his kinges biſhop, yu ſhalt geue him checke wt thy quene, in turning her away frō thy knight the whiche ye ſhalt remoue into the thirde houſe of his queenes biſhop. And he can not play ſo wel but that he ſhall loſe his quene.
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  〈1 page duplicate〉
               
               
               
                  
                  
               
               If in ſteede of takinge thy Paune with his knight, he take it with his quene, yu ſhalt take his with thine, whiche afterwarde ſhall be taken with his knight. This done, thou ſhalt geue him check wt thy knight in taking the Paune of his quenes

biſhop, and therefore he ſhalbe forced to looſe his queenes Rooke.
               
               And if he take not thy Paune, but (to ſaue his queene) placeth her in This 5 table foloweth the play thre marked A. 2. the thirde houſe of his queenes biſhoppe.
               
                  
And if he remoue not his Knight, but play his quene before his king, thou ſhalt take his knight with thy Quene: then he wyl play his Quenes Paune one roume againſt thy Knight, to the ende that if thou remoue it from thence, he maye take thy Queene. For this cauſe thou ſhalt playe thy Queenes Paune as farre as he may go, and if he playe the Paune of his Kings biſhop one ſteppe, thou ſhalt play the paune of thy kings biſhop as far as he maye go, & if he take thy knight with his queenes paune, thou ſhalt take his paune with that of thine, and yf he play his other knight to the ſecond houſe of his queene, thou ſhalt remoue thyne to the thyrde houſe of thy queenes biſhop: by that meanes thy quene ſhall remayne ſafe. And if ye paune of his kings biſhop take thy paune, yu ſhalt play thy knyght to the fourth place of his queene for to take her, and if he ſet her in her thirde houſe, thou ſhalte take hys paune with thyne.
               
                  
                  
               
               And if he take thy Paune with hys This table is the continuatiō of the firſt, leuing the 2. marked with. B. 1. knight, thou ſhalt ſet thy queenes biſhoppe in the fourth houſe of thy kings biſhop, & in ſo doing he ſhall looſe of force his knight: but if he take not thy paune wt his knight, he ſhall haue loſte hys.
               
                  
                  
               
               Thou ſhalt playe thy kings biſhop This table foloweth the. 3. of an other faſhion thā the article of the. 5. to the fourth houſe of his queenes knight for to take her, & if in ſtede of takinge her, ſhe take thy biſhop, thou ſhalte geue him checke wyth thy knight, in taking the paune of his quenes biſhop, then ſhalt thou

take his Queene, for the gayne is much greater then of the Rooke.
               
               And if in ſtede of placyng his quene in the thirde houſe of his biſhop, he This table foloweth the laſt before. place her in the fourth, thou ſhalte ſet thy quenes biſhop in the thyrde roume of thy king for to take her.
               
                  
And if he geue the checke with his queene in the fourth houſe of hys Rooke, thou ſhalt couer it with thy biſhop, by which meanes he can do no more but remoue her into the thirde houſe of his biſhop, and thou ſhalt play the Paune of thy quenes knight, as far as he may go, for to take his queene, then he ſhalbe forced to ſet his quene in ye third houſe of his biſhop, & thou ſhalt playe thy kings biſhop into the fourth houſe of his knight for to take his queue, and if ſhe take it, thou haſte thyne inſtruction in the laſt article before. And he can not play but ill: for if it come to pillage (or ſpoyle) of quenes thou ſhalt haue ſtil the aduauntage of the checke of thy knight for to take his Rooke. And therefore he ſhalbe alwayes the weaker both in great and ſmale pieces, as ſhalbe declared in the article folowing.
               
                  
                  
               
               And yf he ſette hys Queene in the This table is the continuatiō of the 3. of another maner then the other. thirde houſe of hys Kynge, thou ſhalte yet geue hym checke wyth thy knight, accordinge to the laſte inſtruction. But yf he ſette her in the thyrde place of hys Kynges

knight, (whiche is the beſt that he could play) ye ſhall ſpoyle together your queenes, & then ſhalte ye geue the checke with thy knight, in taking the paune of his queenes biſhop for to take his Rooke.
               
               
                  
                  Another maner of playing.
                  YF thou haſt the draughte, thou ſhalt play the kinges Paune as farre as he maye go. If he playe ſo lykewyſe his kings Paune, thou ſhalt playe thy kinges knight into three houſes from the Biſhop. And if he playe his queenes Knight into three roumes from his Biſhoppe, thou ſhalte playe thy kynges Biſhoppe into the fourth houſe of thy queenes Biſhoppe: If he playe his kinges Biſhoppe into the fourth houſe of his queenes Biſhoppe, thou ſhalte playe the Paune of thy queenes Biſhoppe one ſteppe: and if he playe his kinges Knight into the thyrde roume of his Biſhoppe, thou ſhalt playe the quenes Paune one ſteppe: If he playe his queenes Paune one ſteppe, thou ſhalt playe thy kynges Rooke in the place of the Biſhoppe: and if he playe hys queenes Biſhoppe into the fourth houſe of thy kinges Knight, thou ſhalt ſette thy Queene in the thyrd houſe of thy queenes Knighte, and

ſhalt win a paune, to wit, yt of his kings biſhop, by thy biſhop, or yt of his quenees knight by thy queene. But if he play his queenes Knight into the fourth houſe of his Rooke, for to take thy Quene, yu ſhalt take the Paune of his kinges biſhoppe wt thyne, ſaying checke: then ſhalte thou ſet thy Queene in the fourth houſe of thy queenes Rooke, and if his Kinge take thy Biſhoppe, thy Queene ſhal take his Knight. But if he take not thy Biſhop, but plaieth the Paune of his quenes biſhop one ſteppe, yu ſhalt play the Paune of thy quenes Knight as farre as he maye go: for if thou remoue thy biſhop, thou ſhalt either looſe him, or thy Queene: by this meanes thou ſhalte bee ſtronger then he by one Paune, becauſe that if he take thy Biſhop, thy Queene ſhall take his Knight, & if he will take her wt his Quene, the exchaunge ſhalbe made by thy knights Paune, and ſo ſhalt thou ſtil be ſtronger by one paune.
                  
                     
                     
                  
               
               
                  Another maner of playing. Ye muſte finiſhe the game.
                  
                  
                     I If thou playe the firſt, thou ſhalt ſette thy kynges Paune in the fourth houſe, yf he playe alſo wyth hys Paune the ſame, then ſet thy kynges knyght in the thyrd

houſe of thy Biſhoppe, for to take his paune, if he do not ſaue it. The whiche he maye do in three ſortes: to witte, in placinge his queenes Knighte in the thirde houſe of hys Biſhopps, whiche is the beſt playe: or in ſauing him with his queenes Paune, whiche is not ſo ſure, becauſe that the paſſage of the kings Biſhoppe is ſtopped: Or with the Paune of hys kynges Biſhoppe, whiche is the worſte. If he ſaue it with his ſaide Paune of the kinges Biſhoppe, thou ſhalte not faile to take him with thy Knight: and yf with his Paune he take thy knight thy Queene ſhall geue him checke, in makinge her draughte vnto the fourth houſe of his kinges Rooke.
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  He may couer it with the Paune of his kinges Knight, or ſet his King in the ſeconde houſe. If he couer it with his Paune, thou ſhalte take with thy Quene his kings Paune, whiche is in his fourth houſe, and ſhalt ſay checke. If he couer it with

his quene, thou ſhalt take his kinges Rooke with thy Quene, and he will alſo take thy kinges Paune with his Queene, and will ſaye to thee checke. Then remoue thy king into the ſeate of thy queene, & ſo he can do the no hurt. And then he ſhal be forced to keepe his kings knight or the rookes Paune, that thou tokeſt of him. He will playe then his knight into the ſecond houſe of his King, and thou ſhalte take of hym his rookes Paune: So ſhalte thou haue greate aduauntage then hauynge of his one Rooke and three Paunes, when as he hath of thine but one Knight and one Paune.
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  If when thou haſte geuen hym checke wyth thy Queene, he remoue hys Kynge one roume forwarde, thou ſhalte take his Paune wyth thy Queene, and ſhalte

ſaye checke, and he will retyre into the ſeconde houſe of his kings Biſhoppe, for he hath non other ſhift: then ſhalte thou geue him checke with thy kings Biſhoppe, cauſing him to remoue vnto ye fourth houſe 3. anſwerīg to the firſt. of thy queenes Biſhoppe.
                  
                  
                     
He wyll retyre into the thyrd houſe of his Knight, or elles couer it with his queenes Paune, whiche is the better. If he retourne into the third houſe of his knight, thou ſhalt geue him checke with thy Queene, remouinge her one roume, that is to wytte, into the fourth houſe of hys kynges Byſhoppe, then hathe he none other retracte or draught but the thirde place of his Rooke: therefore thou ſhalte playe thy queenes Paune one ſteppe, geuing him checke by diſcouery of thy queenes Biſhoppe: then ſhal he not haue anye wherewith to couer it, but with his knightes Paune, and thou ſhalte playe the Paune of thy Kinges Rooke as farre as he maye go. He ſhall than be forced to playe the Paune of his queene as farre as he maye go, if he wyll not looſe his Queene. Then yf he playe that Paune as farre as he maye go, for to take thy Queene with his queenes Biſhoppe, or thy kings Biſhop with his quenes Paune, thou ſhalt

take his knightes Paune with thy rookes Paune, geuing him double checke, to wit, with thy Rooke and with thy rookes Paune, and he ſhalbe forced to retyre into the ſeconde houſe of his knight, but there thou ſhalt geue him checke, ſetting thy Queene in the fourth houſe of his Kings. The beſt then that he ſhall haue to do, ſhalbe to couer it with his Knighte, the whiche thy rookes paune ſhall take, ſayinge checke, & he will take thy paune wt his Quene, by which meanes ye two queenes ſhalbe ſpoyled. That done thou ſhalt take his queenes paune with thy Biſhoppe. And ſo ſhalte thou haue ſtyll ſeuen paunes, and he ſhal haue but foure, whiche is a great diſuauntage.
                  
                     
                     
                  
                  If in geuinge him checke with thy 4 folowing the. 3. kinges Biſhoppe, he couer it with his queenes Paune, thy Biſhoppe ſhal take his Paune, and thou ſhalt Ye muſte holde on this play. ſay yet checke. Then he will retyre into the thyrd place of hys Knight.

That is to the ende that thou geue him not checke with thy Quene in the fourth houſe of his kinges Biſhop. By meanes whereof yu ſhalte play ye paune of thy kings Rooke, as far as he may go. He wyll playe his rookes Paune oppoſite one ſtep only, which is the beſt that he could playe. Thou on the other part ſhalt Fygure. take with thy kinges biſhoppe, the Paune of his queenes knight: and if his Biſhoppe take thyne, thou ſhalt geue checke and mate, ſetting thy Queene in the fourth houſe of his kings Biſhoppe. But if he take not thy Biſhoppe with his, but play him in ye ſecond houſe of his quene, thou ſhalte ſet thy Queene in the fourth houſe of his queenes Rooke, then ſhalte thou take with thy Biſhoppe his Rooke, and ſo ſhalt thou winne the game.
                  
                     
                     
                  
               
            
            
               The thyrde Chapter. 5. folowing the. 3. 
                  Ye muſte holde on.
               
               
                  
                  
               
               THE ſeconde maner of playing is to beginne with the queenes Fygure. Paune. If therefore thou beginne, thou ſhalt remoue thy queenes paune, as farre as he may goe: and if he playe that of his queene alſo, as farre as he maye, thou ſhalt

playe the paune of thy queenes biſhoppe as farre as he maye go: and if he take it, playe thy kings paune as farre as he maye go: he wil play then the paune of hys queenes knight, as farre as he maye, for to ſaue his other paune, & thou ſhalte playe the paune of thy queenes Rooke two ſteppes: and if he take it with his paune, thou ſhalte take his other paune with thy kinges Biſhoppe: afterwarde he ſhal take of force that knightes paune, in playing thy queenes Knight into the thyrde houſe of thy Biſhoppe of the ſame ſyde. Becauſe that thou ſhalt haue three pieces prepared vp on him againſt the whiche he can haue no remedie but to his loſſe and confuſion.
               
                  
                  
               
               But if he take not thy rooks paune Ye muſte holde on. but playe the Paune of his quenes Biſhoppe one ſteppe, thou ſhalte take his Paune with that of thy Rooke, and he wil take thine with that of his Biſhoppe. Then ſhalte thou playe ye Paune of thy queenes

knight one ſteppe, and if he take it, thou ſhalt take with thy kings biſhop his knightes paune, and ſhalt ſaye checke, of the which he wyll couer it with his quenes biſhop, and with thy Queene thou ſhalte take his other Paune.
               
               
                  
And if he take thy biſhop with his, thou ſhalt take his with thy quene, and ſhalte ſaye checke, and yf he couer it with his queene, it wyll bee no greate daunger to ſpoyle them bothe to together, becauſe that the Paune of hys queenes Rooke, beinge without companye ſhall looſe him ſelfe of force, yf thou prepare thither thy Knighte, or thy Biſhoppe.
               
                  
                  
               
               But if with his Biſhoppe he take Ye muſte holde on. not thyne, but playe his queenes Knight to the thyrde houſe of hys Biſhoppe, for to take thy queenes Paune, thou ſhalt playe thy queenes Biſhoppe to the thyrde houſe

of the Kinge: and if he playe hys queenes Rooke in the ſeate of the Knight, then remoue thy Queene (out of the diſcouerye) to the fourth houſe of thy queenes Rooke, and if he ſet hys Queene in the thyrde houſe of his Knight, thou ſhalte remoue thy queenes Knighte to the thyrde houſe of the Biſhoppe.
               This done, thy Biſhoppe ſhall kill his Knighte, and his Queene ſhall put to deathe thy Biſhoppe, then thy Queene ſhall take his Rookes Paune who wyll ſette hym ſelfe out of the waye for feare of feeling the heauye ſtrookes of thy queene, and in ſo doing ſuffereth his Kyng to fall into checke, & yet for ſome other conſiderations: yt which for to withſtande, thou ſhalt remoue thy kynges Knighte into the ſeconde

houſe of thy King, and then ſhalt yu ſerue thee of thy Rookes, in looſynge the one for to wynne the other, and in ſo doynge, thou ſhalte not fayle to ſurmounte.
               
            
            
               
               The .iiii. Chapter.
               
                  How he ought to playe to whom is geuen the aduauntage of a Paune.
               
               VVHEN the aduantage of a Paune is geuen, it is the cuſtome to take awaye that of the kinges Biſhoppe, becauſe that it is the beſt: then if thy contrarye partie play his kings Paune as far as he maye, thou ſhalte playe alſo that of thy King as farre as he may goe: he wyll remoue hys kynges Knighte to the thirde houſe of hys Biſhoppe, and thou ſhalt playe the Paune of thy kinges Biſhoppe as farre as he maye goe.
               
                  
                  
               
               And if he take thy kinges Paune with his knighte, thou ſhalte geue him checke with thy Queene, cauſinge her to remoue into the fourth houſe of his kings Rooke: and if he couer it with the paune of ye kings

Knight, thou ſhalt take his kinges Paune wt thy Queene, & ſhalt ſaye checke, whereof he wyll couer it with his Queene, and thyne ſhall take his kinges Rooke.
               
               
                  
And if he geue thee checke by the diſcouerye of his Knight whiche he wyll cauſe to remoue into the third houſe of his kinges Knighte, thou ſhalt couer it with thy kinges Biſhoppe, ſetting him in the ſeconde houſe of thy King. And if with his Knighte be take thy Rooke, thou ſhalte playe thy Queene to the fourth houſe of his Kinge. Then of force he wyll take her from thee with his, the whiche thou ſhalte alſo take with thy biſhops Paune, and hys Knighte can not ſaue hym ſelfe, ſo ſhall he looſe the game: for thou haſte the greater aduauntage if thou canſt keepe it well.
               
                  
                  
               
               But if in ſteede of taking thy Kinges paune with his knight, he take the Paune of thy kinges Biſhoppe with his kinges Paune, thou ſhalt playe thy queenes Paune as farre as he maye goe.
               
                  
                  
               
               If he take thy Kinges Paune with A table folowing the firſt of the 4. Chap. by another faſhion. his Knight, thou ſhalt geue him the check of thy quene here aboue mencioned, ſettynge thy Queene in ye fourth houſe of his kings Rooke, for to take his Rooke if he couer it with the knightes Paune, if not,

if his King march forth into his ſeconde houſe, thou ſhalte geue hym checke with thy queene, which ſhal com into ye fourth place of his king, who in retyring him ſelf to ye ſecond of his knight for to eſcape from the check, ſhall of force loſe his knight.
               
               
                  
And if he giue thee not check by the diſcouerie of his knight, as I haue tolde thee (beinge the playe according to ye ſecond table of this chapter) but geue the checke with hys Queene in the fourth houſe of thy kinges Rooke, thou ſhalte remoue thy King into ye ſeate of thy quene. And if he geue thee not checke with his Knight at the ſeconde houſe of thy kinges Biſhoppe: thou ſhalte ſette thy King in his ſecond houſe. And if he take thy Rooke, yu ſhalt geue him checke with thy Queens in the fourth place of his Kinge.
               From thence forthe he ſhall looſe: for his Knight can not eſcape withoute beinge taken. So ſhalte thou haue the aduauntage.
               
                  
                  
               
               And if (after yt thou haſt played thy queenes Paune, according as it is in the fourthe table) he take not with his Knight thy kings paune, but playe the Paune of his kinges Knight, as farre as he maye goe, for to ſuccour hys other Paune,

whiche is within the barres of thy campe: thou ſhalt playe thy kinges Paune, one ſteppe, for to take his Knight, whome to meete he will ſet his Queene before thy King: for if thou wouldeſt thinke to take his Knight with thy Paune, thy King ſhoulde be in checke. Wherefore thou ſhalt ſet alſo thy Queene, one roume before thy King, and he wil remoue his Knighte to the fourth houſe of his Queene, whiche is the beſt draughte that he coulde make. And thou ſhalte playe the Paune of thy Queenes biſhoppe, as farre as he maye, that is to witte, aboue his Knight, and if he geue checke with hys Queene at the fourth houſe of thy queenes Knight.
               
                  
                  
               
               Thou ſhalte remoue thy Kinge to the ſeconde houſe of thy kinges biſhoppe, then he ſhalbe forced to ſaue his Knight in the ſecond houſe of his King. And thou ſhalte geue him checke with thy Queene, in the fourthe houſe of hys kynges

Rooke. Wherefore his kinge will march into the ſeate of his queene. Then thy queene ſhall take the Paune of his kinges knight without daunger, and alſo that of hys biſhop, and therefore he ſhal looſe: for thou haſt the aduauntage.
               
               
                  
And if he geue thee not checke with his Queene, (as it is ſayde in the ſeuenth table of this preſent chapter,) but for ſauing his Knight, ſet him in the fourth houſe of thy queenes Knighte: thou ſhalte remoue thy queenes Paune one ſteppe, for to keepe that his queenes Knighte doe not remoue, and if he ſette hys kinges Biſhoppe in the ſeconde houſe of his Knighte (whiche is a good draughte) cauſe yu his Knighte to auoyde, in remouing the Paune of thy queenes Rooke one ſteppe.
               Then his Knight will remoue into the thyrde houſe of his queenes Rooke. Afterwarde thou ſhalt play thy kinges Knighte to the thyrde houſe of thy kinges Biſhoppe, and if he putte the Paune of his kinges Knighte, one roume further, for to take thy Knight: thou ſhalte remoue him into the fourth place of thy Queene: then he maye take with his Queene, or wyth his kinges Biſhoppe thy kinges Paune.
               If he take it with his Biſhoppe,

thou ſhalte ſette thy Knyght in the fourthe houſe of hys kynges Biſhoppe, for to take his Queene: but he will remoue her one ſteppe into the thyrde houſe of his kinges Biſhoppe. And thou ſhalt take the Paune of hys kinges Biſhoppe by thy Queenes Biſhoppe. And yf his Queene take thy Knighte, thy Biſhoppe ſhall take hys. So ſhall he bee forced, for the ſafegarde of his Rooke, to remoue him into the ſeate of the Knighte: for if he did otherwiſe (in taking his Rooke with thy Biſhoppe) thou ſhalte geue hym checke with thy queene, in turnynge her awaye from thy Biſhoppe, the whiche (not beynge able to take anye moore the kinges Rooke,) ſhall marche one ſteppe into the thyrde houſe of his Queene, and thou ſhalte ſaye, checke: Whereof he ſhall ſaue

him in the ſeconde houſe of his Biſhoppe, becauſe that otherwyſe he ſhould be mate at the firſt draught, playing thy queene in the ſeconde houſe of his kinge, the which thou ſhalt not ceaſe to playe, and ſhalte geue him checke, of the whiche he ſhall ſaue him in the thyrd houſe of his Knight, alſo he can not otherwiſe: wherefore thou ſhalte ſet thy Queene in the thyrde houſe of thy King: and if he take thy Biſhopp, thou ſhalte couer his Queene with thy Kinges biſhoppe, ſetting him in the thirde houſe of thy Queene: but if he take not thy Biſhoppe, but playe his Queene to the fourth houſe of his kinges Knight, for to ſpoyle together the Queenes, thou ſhalte geue him checke with thy kinges Biſhop, to the thyrde place of thy Queene. And if his Kinge marche into the fourth houſe of his Rooke, thou ſhalte couer thy Queene wyth the queenes Biſhoppe, ſettinge him in the fourth houſe of thy kings Biſhop, for to

take his Queene, whome he wyll retyre into the thyrde place of his kinges Biſhoppe, and thou ſhalte ſette thy kings Rooke in the place of the Biſhoppe. If he drawe his Queene from thence, thou ſhalte geue him checke and mate well and readily: for albeit that he put hys Queene in place where he may defende the checke that thou ſhalte geue him with thy Queene in the fourth houſe of his Kinge, it behoueth (for to make him retyre) to ſet thy queenes Knighte in the ſame fourth place of the King, and then to geue him check with thy Rooke, in ſuche ſorte, that he ſhall incontinent be mate.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               The .v. Chapter.
               
                  How thou ſhalt playe, when thou haſt the aduaūtage of a Paune, and the firſt draughte.
               
               
                  
FIrſt thou ſhalt playe the Paune of thy King, as farre as he may goe, and he wyll remoue hys queenes Paune one ſteppe: and thou ſhalte remoue thy queenes Paune two ſteppes. Then he will place his kinges Knight, in ye third houſe of thy kinges Biſhoppe, and thou ſhalt ſet thy queenes Knight, in the thyrde houſe of thy queenes Biſhoppe: and if he playe his kinges Paune, as far as he may, thou ſhalte take him with thy queenes Paune: and yf he take thyne with his queenes Paune, thou ſhalte ſpoyle his Queene with thine, who ſhall alſo be taken with his King, the whiche (by this meanes) can no further procede. Then thou ſhalte play the kings Biſhop to the third houſe of his Queene: And if he remoue the Paune of his queenes biſhop one ſteppe, thou ſhalte ſet thy kinges Knight, in the ſecond houſe of the King, and he wyll playe his Kinge to the ſeconde houſe of the queenes Biſhoppe.

Therefore thou ſhalte playe thy Knighte to the thyrde houſe of thy kinges Knight, and if he playe hys queenes Biſhoppe to three houſes from his Kinge, thou ſhalte cauſe thy Kinge to marche into his ſeconde houſe, from whence he wyll geue the checke by his queenes Biſhoppe, ſettinge him in the fourth houſe of thy kinges Knighte, the whiche thou ſhalte couer by the Paune of thy kinges Biſhoppe, remouinge him one ſteppe: whereby he ſhall bee forced to retyre, from whence he came laſte. And thou ſhalte remoue the Paune of thy kinges Rooke one ſtepps. And if he come with his queenes Knight into the ſeconde houſe of his Quene, thou ſhalte playe thy queenes Biſhoppe to the thyrde houſe of thy Kinge, and if he playe his kinges Biſhop ſo farre as vnto the fourth houſe of thy queenes Knight, thou ſhalte cauſe thy Knight to retyre to the lodging of thy Queene: and yf he playe the Paune of his queenes

Biſhoppe one ſteppe, thou ſhalte playe the Paune of thy queenes Biſhoppe one ſteppe, to the ende that if he puſhe his Paune one ſteppe more, thou mayſte alſo retyre thy Biſhoppe one ſteppe: but firſt he ſhall retyre his to the fourth houſe of hys queenes Rooke.
               Then ſhalte thou ſet thy Knighte in the ſeconde houſe of thy kynges Biſhoppe. And yf he puſhe the Paune of hys queenes Biſhoppe, for to take thy Biſhoppe, thou ſhalte retyre him into the ſeconde houſe of thy queenes Biſhoppe.
               
                  
                  
               
               And if (in aſſailing to breake thy defences, or to put thy campe in diſorder) he playe the Paune of his queenes Knight as far as he maye: thou ſhalte ouerthrowe his enterpriſe, in marchinge the Paune of thy queenes Rooke one ſteppe.
               
                  
                  
               
               And if (in not being able to offende thee on that ſyde) he goe about on the other parte to playe the Paune of his kinges Rooke, euen vnto the fourthe houſe of it, it behoueth that thou ſtaye hym for commynge, in playinge alſo the

Paune of thy kynges Rooke, one ſteppe. And if he playe his kynges Biſhoppe into the thyrde houſe of hys queenes Knighte, for to take thyne, which is in the thyrde houſe of thy Kynge, ſuffer him to doe it: for if he take thyne, thou ſhalt take his with thy Kinge: when therefore he ſhall haue played hys Biſhoppe, to the thyrde houſe of hys Knyghte: cauſe that thy Knighte, (whiche is in the ſeconde houſe of thy kinges Biſhoppe) maye remoue into the thyrde houſe of thy kinges Rooke, and he wyll take him with his queenes Biſhoppe, for to keepe thee from ſettinge him into the fourth houſe of his kinges Knight. And thy Rooke ſhall take his Biſhoppe. So ſhalte thou haue the aduauntage ouer hym of two Paunes: and alſo thy game ſhall bee ſette in ſuche ſorte that thou

mayeſt eaſelye make a Queene, of one of thy Paunes, of the kynges ſyde. And therefore thou canſt not fayle to winne the game.
               
            
            
               
               The .vi. Chapter.
               
                  How he ought to playe to whom is geuen the aduauntage of a knight in the ſteade of the paune of the kings Biſhoppe.
               
               YF he whiche playeth agaynſte thee, playe with one Knight only, and thou with ſeuen paunes, and that thou leaueſt awaye the Paune of thy kynges Biſhop. He wyll playe the Paune of hys King as farre as he maye goe: and thou ſhalt remoue thy kings paune one ſteppe: and if he play his queenes Paune, as farre as he may go, thou ſhalt play thy quenes Paune as farre alſo.
               
                  
                  
               
               And yf hys kyngs Paune take thy queenes Paune, thou ſhalte take hys wyth thy kynges Paune.
               And if with hys Queene he geue thee checke in the fourth houſe of thy kings Rooke thou ſhalt couer it

wyth the Paune of thy Kynges Knighte. And yf yet he geue thee another checke with hys Queene, in the fourthe houſe of thy Kynge, for to haue thy kynges Rooke, thou ſhalt couer it with thy quene. And by that meanes he can not playe hys: for he ſhoulde putte hym ſelfe in checke. Wherefore yf you will bothe of you, ye ſhall ſpoyle together youre Queenes: by that meanes the aduauntage ſhall alwayes be on thy ſyde.
               
                  
                  
               
               And yf he take not thy queenes Paune with his kings Paune, but remoueth him one ſteppe, entryng within the barres of thy campe, thou ſhalte play abroad the Paune of thy queenes Biſhoppe as farre as may. And if he playe the Paune

of his queenes Biſhoppe one ſtepe, for to defende hys queenes Paune, thou ſhalt not let to take him with thy Biſhoppes paune, and he will take it with his, and thou ſhalte playe thy queenes Knighte to the thyrd houſe of thy Biſhoppe.
               
               
                  
And if he playe the kinges Biſhop to the thyrde houſe of his Queene, thou ſhalt take his queenes Paune with thy Knighte, and if he geue thee checke with his Queene, in ſetting her in the fourth houſe of thy kinges Rooke, take good heede to couer it with thy knightes Paune, otherwyſe thou ſhalte playe verye euill, in place of that, thou ſhalte marche forthe thy Kynge into the ſeconde houſe of thy Queene. And if his kings Biſhop take thy Rookes paune, thou ſhalte geue hym checke with thy Knight, in ſetting him in the ſeconde houſe of hys queenes Biſhoppe, and therefore he can not chuſe but looſe his queenes Rooke, or his Queene, yf he tooke thy Knight with hys kinges Biſhoppe.
               
                  
                  
               
               But if after that thou haſte played thy queenes Knight into the thirde houſe of the Biſhoppe, he play not his kinges Biſhoppe to the thyrde houſe of hys Queene: but playe his kinges Knight to the thyrde houſe of his Biſhoppe: or his queenes

Biſhoppe to the thyrd houſe of the Kynge, for to ſaue hys Queenes Paune, thou ſhalt geue him checke with thy kynges Biſhoppe, ſettynge hym in the fourth houſe of his queenes Knight.
               
               
                  
And yf he couer it with his queenes Biſhoppe, thou ſhalte playe thy Queene to the fourth houſe of thy queenes Rooke. And if he couer it not with his Biſhoppe, but ſet hys Kyng in his thyrde houſe, his game ſhalbe euyll appoynted: for thou ſhalte playe the Paune of thy queenes Knighte one ſteppe. And if he playe hys Queene into the fourth houſe of his queenes Rooke, for to auoyde the checke, whiche thou wouldeſt geue him with thy queenes Biſhoppe, in ſetting him in the thyrde houſe of thy Rooke. Thou ſhalte geue him the ſayde checke, and he ſhalbe forced to ſet him ſelfe in campe at the thyrde houſe, and ye ſhall ſpoyle together your two Biſhoppes.
               
                  
                  
               
               But if to auoyde that checke, he ſet his Queene in the fourth place of his Rooke: thou ſhalt ſet thy queenes Biſhoppe in the ſeconde houſe of thy Queene. And if he take not hys Quene from thence, thou ſhalt geue him checke with thy Knight,

in taking his queenes Paune, whiche is in the fourth houſe. And by that meanes ſhall he looſe hys Queene. But in what ſort ſo euer it be he can not but play euill, your two playes being ſet, as is aboue, whereof the table foloweth.
               
            
            
               
               The .vii. Chapter.
               
                  Another maner of playinge with the aduauntage of a knyght, for the paune of the kynges Biſhoppe.
               
               IF he play his kinges Paune, as farre as he maye, thou ſhalte remoue thy queenes Paune one ſteppe, and if he playe the Paune of his kinges Biſhoppe as farre as he maye go, thou ſhalt play forthe thy kinges Paune two ſteppes.
               And if he take thy kinges Paune, with his biſhoppes Paune, thou ſhalte geue hym checke wyth thy Queene, in remouyng her into the fourth houſe of his kinges Rooke, whereof he ſhall couer it with the Paune of his Knight, wherefore in takinge with thy Queene his kinges Paune, thou ſhalte ſay checke, and if he couer it with his queene, thou mayeſt take his Rooke: but it is not the beſt, for thou muſt take hys Paune whiche is behinde thy

Queene, to the ende that in taking thyne with hys Queene, thou maiſte retake his with thy queenes Paune. So ſhalte thou haue the aduauntage free of a Knight.
               
               
                  
And if he playe of another faſhion, to wit, his kings Paune two ſteppes, and thou thy queenes Paune one ſteppe, and his queenes Paune as farre as he may, thou ſhalt play thy kynges Knighte to the thyrde houſe of the Biſhoppe.
               
               
                  
And he wyll not puſhe hys kynges Paune vpon thy Knight for to take It ſemeth that thys play is falſe for his kīg had not ſtayed, and was yet in his whyte houſe, which is out of the checke of this lepe of thy knight, in the ſecōd hous of his kinges biſhop which is alſo a whyte houſe, and ioyninge a ſyde to that of his ſayd kynge. him: for thy queenes Paune ſhulde take hys, not withſtanding if theſe two Paunes take one another, and he take thyne with his queenes Paune, ye ſhall ſpoyle together youre Queenes: then ſhalte thou playe thy Knighte into the fourth houſe of hys kings Knight, for to take hys paune, whiche toke thyne. And if he defende him by hys queenes Biſhoppe, ſettynge hym in the fourthe houſe of hys kynges Biſhoppe, or in ſettynge hys kynges Knyghte in the thyrde houſe of hys kynges Byſhoppe, thou ſhalte geue him checke with

thy Knighte, in takyng the Paune of his kynges Biſhoppe, for in drawing him ſelfe out of the checke, to take hys Rooke, than ſhall hys loſſe be euident.
               
               
                  
And yf he puſhe not hys kynges Paune vpon thy Knight, but playe his kinges Biſhoppe to the thyrde houſe of his Queene: ſuffre not his kinges Paune to deſcende vpon thy Knight, and for to tourne him awaye thou ſhalte make to him an obſtacle of thy kinges Paune, remouing him two ſteppes. He wyll playe the Paune of his Queenes Biſhoppe one ſteppe, and thou ſhalte playe the Paune of thy Biſhoppe as farre as he maye goe, for to keepe him from hauinge the two Paunes of his King and of his Queene, bothe two together.
               By meanes whereof he wyll puſhe his queenes Paune one ſteppe, whiche is better played for hym, then to ſpoyle one another, becauſe that he is ye weaker in great pieces. When therefore he ſhall haue puſhed his queenes Paune one ſteppe within the borders of thy campe, thou ſhalte ſette thy queenes Biſhoppe

in the fourth houſe of hys kynges Knyghte, for to take hys Queene (the whiche for to reſiſt) he wyll remoue the Paune of his kinges Biſhoppe, one ſteppe, whiche will cauſe to retyre thy Biſhoppe to the fourth houſe of thy Rooke.
               And yf he playe the other kynges Knight hys two ſteppes, thou ſhalt retyre thy Biſhoppe into the third houſe of thy kynges Knighte, and yf he wyll breake thy barres in playinge the Paune of his kynges Biſhoppe one ſteppe: thou ſhalte take hym with thy kynges Paune and yf he take thy Paune with his quenes Biſhop, thou ſhalt play thy quenes Knight into the ſecōd houſe

of thy Queene, for to hinder alwayes that hys Kynges paune doe not deſcende into thy campe, but yf peraduenture he doe deſcende after that draughte made, thou ſhalt take him with thy queenes paune, and yf hys Biſhoppe take thy paune, thou ſhalte take hys Biſhoppe with thy Knighte, and yf he take not thy paune with his biſhoppe, thou ſhalte take his other queenes paune with thy kynges Knighte. So ſhall he bee weaker then thou aſwell in great Cheaſtmen as in ſmall.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            
               The .viii. Chapter.
               
                  How he ought to playe to whom is geuen the aduauntage of a knight.
               
               
                  
IF thy contrarye partie playe hys kinges Paune as farre as maye go, thou ſhalt playe ſo likewyſe thy kinges Paune: and if he playe his kinges Knighte to the thyrde houſe of the Biſhoppe, thou ſhalte playe thy queenes Knighte to the thyrde houſe of the Biſhop. He wil remoue his kynges Biſhop to the fourth houſe of his queenes Biſhoppe: and thou ſhalte playe alſo thy kinges Biſhoppe to the fourth houſe of thy queenes Biſhop: & yf he playe the Paune of his queenes Biſhoppe one ſteppe, thou ſhalte ſette thy kinges Biſhoppe in the thyrd houſe of the queenes knight. And if he playe his queenes paune as farre as he maye, for to breake thy poynte, thou ſhalte playe thy queenes Paune one ſteppe, and yf he take thy kinges Paune wyth his queenes Paune, thou ſhalte take his with that of thy Queene. And what thing ſo euer it be, hinder him alwayes, if it be poſſible, for takinge of thy kinges Paune:

becauſe that it is one of the greateſt ſtrengthes of thy game.
               If therefore he playe his kynges Rooke one ſteppe, for to hynder that with thy queenes Biſhoppe thou doe couer his Knighte, thou ſhalt play forth thy kinges Knight to the thyrde houſe of the Biſhop. And if he ſet his queenes Biſhoppe in the fourth houſe of his kynges Knighte, thou ſhalte remoue thy rookes Paune one ſtep, which wil cauſe him to retyre into the fourth houſe of his kinges Rooke. And then thou ſhalte playe the Paune of thy kinges Knighte as farre as he maye goe, in ſuche ſorte that he ſhalbe forced either to loſe hys kinges Paune (whiche thou ſhalt take with thy kinges Knight) or elles his queenes Biſhoppe (which thou ſhalte take wyth thy Knyghtes Paune) yf he retyre not one roume backewarde.
               
                  
                  
               
               But if (in taking with his Knight the Paune of thy kinges Knight) he bee content to looſe the ſame Knighte, for to winne thy twoo

Paunes, to wit, that of thy kinges Knighte, and then that of thy Rooke, whiche he will take wyth his queenes Biſhoppe: thou ſhalte ſette thy Rooke in the ſeate of thy Knyghte in the roume of the ſayde Biſhoppe, and (if for to defende hys Biſhoppe) he remoue hys Rookes Paune one ſteppe, thou ſhalte ſet thy Queene in hys thyrde houſe, and therefore he can not hynder thee to take hys kinges Paune, and ſo ſhall his game be in an yll order.
               
                  
                  
               
            
            The ende of the Cheaſtes play.
         
      
      
         
            
            PRINTED at london by Rouland Hall, for Ia-Rovvbothum, & are to bee ſolde at his ſhoppe vnder Bovve church. 1562.
         
      
   