
      
         
            
            
            A BRIEFE DISCOVERIE OF DOCTOR ALlens ſeditious drifts, contriued in a Pamphlet written by him, Concerning the yeelding vp of the towne of Deuenter, (in Ouerriſſel) vnto the king of Spain, by Sir William Stanley.
The contentes whereof are particularly ſet downe in the page following.
            
               Reuelation Cap. 17. ver. 3.
            And I ſawe a woman ſit vpon a skarlet-coloured beaſt, full of names of blaſphemy, which had ſeiren heades, and ten hornes. and ver. 9. The ſeuen heads are ſeuen mountaines, whereon the woman ſitteth.
            
               Matth. Chap. 15. ver. 6.
            Thus haue ye made the commandement of God of no authoritie by your traditions. and Chap. 23. ver. 13. Woe therefore be vnto you Scribes and Phariſees, Hypocrites, becauſe ye ſhutvp the kingdome of heauen before men, for ye your ſelues goe not in, neither ſuffer ye them that would enter, to come in.
            
               Matth. Chap. 7. ver. 15.
            Beware of falſe prophets, which come to you in ſheepes cloathing, but inwardly they are rauening woolues.
            LONDON Imprinted by I. W. for Francis Coldock.
1588.
         
         
            
            A Summarie collection of the particular contentes of this diſcourſe.
            
            
               FIrſt, all the arguments brought by D. Allen in his ſaid pāphlet, for the iuſtification of the deliuering vp of Deuenter, are particularly diſcuſſed, and fully anſwered: & her Maieſties actions in the reliefe and defenſe of the lowe Countreys, againſt the king of Spain, by D. Allens owne arguments and aſſertions, & by the authorities of his own autours, proued moſt iuſt and lawfull.
               Secondly, his malicious mynde and purpoſes againſt her Maieſtie and the ſtate, are openly diſplayed together with his cūning order, methode, & meanes which he vſeth to accompliſh the ſame: his ſclandrous defamations alſo of her Maieſties moſt honorable and princely actions, and of her Miniſters & countrey, in like ſort anſwered, and retorted: and the Popes autoritie to depoſe princes vtterly confuted and ouerthrowen by D. Allens owne arguments, and examples of Scripture, which hee himſelfe produceth.
               Thirdly, his ſeditious perſuaſiōs to her Maieſties liege people, are by the defeating of his arguments and examples (cited to that effect) moſt forcibly encoū
                  tred: and ſome groſſe errours & ouerſights in pollicie, eſcaped him in his pāflet, manifeſtly detected.
               Laſtly, the Subiectes are by example of the Romaniſts double and irreligious dealing, diſſwaded from the credit of their doctrine and perſuaſions, and by the due conſideration of their owne dutie, weale, and tranquillitie, exhorted to the due obedience of her Maieſtie, maintenance of their own ſafetie, and defenſe of their deer Countrey.
            
         
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               THis pamphlet of Doctor Allens, which hath miniſtred the occaſion of this diſcouerie, is pretended to be written by him in manner of a letter, dated at Rome the 20. of Aprill, 1587 to ſatiſfie the conſciences of thoſe Engliſh ſouldiers, which had in Ianuarie before deliuered vp the Cittie of Deuenter vnto the King of Spaine, and reuolted frō her Maieſtie (their liege Soueraigne) vnto his ſeruice, that their action therein was both lawfull, honorable, and neceſſarie, and that all others, eſpecially thoſe of the Engliſh nation, that deteine any Townes or other places in the lowe Countreies from the King of Spain, are bound vpon paine of damnation to doe the like: for occaſion wherof, there is alſo prefixed before it, another very ſhort letter, only of three pages, pretended in like ſort to bee vvritten to Doctor Allen from Bruxels, the 20. day of March next fore paſt, by an Engliſh Gentleman, (whom Doctor Allen termeth

               honorable, vnder the name of R. A)There is another print of this pamphlet extant (without mēciō of place) which differeth much and in ſunday pla
                     •
                  es, from the coppie printed at Deuenter. For in that, the gentlemās letter is dated the 20. day of May. 1587. and ſubſcribed with the letters N. R. & D. Allens anſwer dated the 20. of Iuly following, beſides diuers other differences in the ſubſtance of the pamphlet. demaunding his opinion and reſolution touching the aforeſaid action. This queſtion and anſvvere being thus compiled in one pamflet, is ſuppoſed to be imprinted at Deuenter in the Sōmer follovving, of likelihood by the appointment or procuremēt of Sir VVilliam Stanley, as ſhould ſeeme. Which comming by hap vnto my hands, and vpon diligent peruſing therof, finding nothing in it but meer malice & miſchiefe, no one iott of ſound doctrine or ſubſtance, anſvverable to the grauitie and learning of ſuch a 
                  〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                as the autor thereof is eſteemed to be: I did at the firſt vtterly contemne and reiect it, as a thing of no account, thinking it neither vvholſom to ſtirre ſo foule and ſtinking a puddle, nor glorious to ouerthrovve ſo ſclender and ſuperficiall a defenſe. Yet conſidering better of the moſt ſeditious driftes and deuiliſh perſuaſions cunningly conueyed in the argument of this pamflet, vnder the cloak and ſhadovve of Religion,

by meanes of vvhich title it might happly obtaine the more credit, if the fraud vvere not detected, I thought it a thing verie neceſſarie, to diſcouer and lay open to the vvorld, the ſlye & ſubtile dealings of D. Allen in this pamflet, together vvith the moſt abſurd, prophane, and impious ſhifts vſed by him therein, to th'end that no man might either by ſimplicitie and ignorance, or for affection to him & his faction, or through ouermuch credulitie of his doctrine, be ſeduced by his deceitful abuſes & impoſtures, to their ovvn vtter ruine & deſtructiō. As for the more appoſite and perticular anſvvering of this pamflet from point to point throughout, the chiefe queſtions therein being matters of Diuinitie, not of pollicie, I leaue therefore to the further diſquiſition of the learned Diuines, of vvhom ſome perhaps vvhē this pamflet ſhall happen to be more publik, and come to their hands, vvill for the quarrels ſake, being good & iuſt (though not for the woorth or weight of the thing

it ſelfe) vouchſafe to beſtow a litle paines in that argument. For mine owne parte, being neither of that profeſsion, and hauing alſo another purpoſe, it ſufficeth me to confute only thoſe arguments, which lye in my waye, to hinder the ſcope of mine intent, which is only in the behalfe of our countrey, to diſcouer his pollicies, and encounter his perſuaſiōs, which tend wholy to the hurt and ouerthrow of our countrey. The ſafetie, peace, and proſperitie whereof, whoſoeuer reſpecteth, loueth, and wiſheth to continue, as (no doubt) all good, honeſt, and well affected ſubiectes doe; let him with iudgement reade this ſmall treatiſe enſuing, and with reaſon, and conſcience vveighe the abuſes therein diſcouered, and then I doubt not but he ſhalbe thereby ſtirred vp, to a better Religion tovvards God, a more faithfull obedience tovvardes hir Maieſtie, and a more naturall loue of his countrey.
            
               G. D.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A briefe diſcouerie of Doctor Allens ſeditious drifts, contriued in a Pamphlet written by him, Concerning the yeelding vp of the Towne of Deuenter (in Oueriſſel) vnto the King of Spaine, by Sir W. Stanley.
            
            
               
                  SInon the ſubtil Greek, (in whoſeAeneid. lib. 2▪
                perſon the learned Poet pourtraieth out the liuely patterne of a craftie companion) beeing caught by the Troian ſhepheards, albeit hee came of his owne accord, and put himſelfe voluntarily in their way to be taken, vpon purpoſe to deceiue them with a counterfeit tale, and thereby to betraie them into their enemies handes: yet (the better to colour his intent, and to mooue the Troians to giue the more credit to his talke) neither would he vtter any thing vnto them, but what they by their demands firſt vrged him vnto: & hauing both occaſion and encouragement giuen him to ſpeake, yet (the more cunningly to diſguiſe his principall drift) not without a preamble of manie ſolemne Proteſtations, he ſtill deferred that to the verie laſt end of his diſcourſe, which was indeed the firſt and only purpoſed ende of his comming.
            Whoſe preſident Doctor Allen ſeeming verie rightly to haue imitated, as well in the matter, as in the methode of this his politike Pamphlet, firſt

becauſe he will haue it ſeeme to proceede of an occaſion offered, and not of his owne voluntarie motion, leaſt his intent therin might be ſuſpected, andA tricke of D. Allens cunning,, to write a letter to him ſelfe in another mans name, demanding his reſolution, only to giue himſelfe ſome probabilitie of occaſion to enter into the treatie of this argument. his worke thereby diſcredited, frameth a letter to himſelfe, in the name of two letters of the Alphabet (his ſuppoſed honourable friend) whom hee faineth thereby verie inſtantly to demand his opinion, touching the lawfulnes of S. W. Stanleys and Captaine Yorkes action, in rendring vp the Towne of Deuenter and Fortes of Zutphen vnto the Duke of Parma: and thereupon taketh occaſion in his anſwere thereunto, to fall (as it were by the way) into a further matter, whereto in truth the whole purpoſe of his treatie was from the beginning intended.
            A ſorie ſhift of ſo cunning a Clerke, in an Apes skin to couer a Foxe, whom euen his verie taile may bewraie. As though men were ſo ſimple, or of ſo ſlender iudgement, as that they could not diſcerne by the ſtile, the letter and anſwere to bee bothA far further purpoſe in D. Allens Pamphlet, then that which is pretended by the title. of one ſtampe. And, for the chiefe purpoſe of this Pamphlet, that it tendeth to a farre further end, then to the ſatisfying of the conſciences of S. William Stanley and Capt. Yorke, and other like Romain Catholikes, touching the lawfulnes of the yeelding vp of Deuenter and Zutphen Fortes, if this were not a ſufficient argument thereof, that the parties themſelues neuer made conſcience or queſtion of the matter, either before the yeelding of them, or ſince, and therefore needed no ſuch reſolution

as D. Allen will needs intreat himſelfe to offer them, which were and are ſtill as reſolute as himſelfe in diſobedience: the verie plaine dealing of D. Allen himſelfe generally throughout the whole Pamphlet, but particularly in the latter and greater halfe of it, maketh the thing more then manifeſt, as ſhalbe laide open vnto you more at large, when wee come to the particular handeling of that point.
            I am ſorie that I ſhould haue ſuch occaſion giuen mee, euen in the verie firſt entrance to vſe aAn vnſeemely thing for a man of D. Allens profeſſion or calling, to vſe ſhifting and diſſimulation. compariſon ſo odious and vnbeſeeming the name, profeſsion, and calling of ſuch a man as D. Allen is, or ſhould be, as to liken him to one, in whom the verie Prince of Poets emploied his beſt witte and skill, in liuelieſt colours, to expreſſe the true ſhape and ſubſtance of a moſt ſubtil and malicious diſſembler: for in truth I doe naturally and inwardly hate all immodeſtie, bitternes, and violence of ſpeech, generally in all actions of life and conuerſation, and eſpecially in theſe of controuerſie and confutation, where the trueth is to bee defended, not our owne paſsions diſplaied, the aduerſarie with reaſon conuinced, not with railing defaced, his ſiniſter and lewde dealings orderly reprooued, not his perſon in any wiſe vndecētly outraged. ButD. Allens dealings in this Painphlet, both for the maner, matter, and meaning, doe in all pointes moſt euidently reſemble the dealings of Sinon. if D. Allen haue in this Pamphlet both in manner and matter ſo rightlie reſembled Sinon, as that hee hath not left mee the choice of anie man to whom I may ſo rightly reſemble him, as to Sinon,
               
it is hee himſelfe (and not I) that hath made himſelfe comparable to Sinon. Nay, if it appeare further by this Pamphlet, that he hath the verie minde, meaning, intent, and counſell of Sinon, by like ſolemne proteſtations and ſubtill perſuaſions, vnder colour of Religion to intice you (I meane ſuch as are wholie deuoted to his Religion, or haue been affected to his doctrine, or can be allured by his enchantments) to proſtrate and laie open your Countrey, by your armes and aſsiſtance, to bring in the Spaniſh and other forreine forces, to the certaine ruine, deſtruction, and ouerthrow both of your ſelues and your Countrey: I thinke I may lawfully without iuſt touch of malice or immodeſtie, bee bold to ſhew you his ſhadow in a glaſſe, that hideth his bodie from you vnder a gloſſe, and by the example of his doings whom this man ſo liuely reſembleth, laie before your eies the verie marke, which hee ſo cunninglie aimeth at: to the ende that beeing once warned, you may bee euer armed againſt his pernicious practiſes.
            But I know it will bee a matter of great labour and difficultie for mee to perſuade you that are of D. Allens religion, to ſee or acknowledge anie errour, falſhood, or malicious intent in him, becauſe you are alreadie ſetled in perſuaſion of his learning, ſinceritie, and goodnes of his cauſe, and carrie the contrarie opinion of mee, becauſe you eſteeme mee to bee of a contrarie Religion

both to him and your ſelues.
            Albeit my purpoſe is not particularly either to drawe him into diſcredit with you, or to withdraw you from the Religion you profeſſe (though I could bee content (nay moſt willing and deſirous) to hazarde mine owne life in trauelling to winne you to the true waie of eternall life:) but onelie to laie open his errours and abuſes to the worlde indifferentlie, that ſuch as haue
               Matth. 13. 9. 
               eares to heart, maie heare, and ſuch as are not wilfullie blinde maie ſee, and ſatisfie themſelues accordinglie: yet if either by example or perſuaſions, I maie ſtirre you vp to the ſtraighter examination of your conſciences, and better conſideration of the groundes of your religion, togither with more aduiſed deliberation, how you giue credit to mens counſailes, or enter into their confederacies, and conſequentlie into your owne deſtructions, I ſhall thinke my ſelfe, of all thinges that euer happened or can happen to mee, moſt happie in this, that it hath pleaſed God to make me the meanes of ſo happie an effect to you. Of whom I will therefore thinke it no skorne to craueA preiudicate opiniō ought not to make men ſo obſtinate, as to condemne a thing before they know, or haue ſeene it, & ſo vtterly to reiect, reaſon. euen vpon the knees of my heart, onely that which you ought your ſelues to yeelde mee of your owne accord, beeing a thing no waie poſsiblie hurtfull, but likelie manie waies beneficiall vnto you, that is, that you will onelie bee content for a time to laie aſide all affection, partialitie, and preiudicate opinion, and to reade with indifferencie,

weigh with aduiſement, and with vprightnes to iudge of that litle which ſhall be moſt faithfullie deliuered vnto you.
            I will not in truth (neither can I if I would) denie my ſelfe to bee of that religion, wherein I haue been bred and brought vp euen from mine infancie, that is, the true ancient, Catholike, and Apoſtolike religion profeſſed in the Church of England, which the Romaniſts do ſo much impugne, and ſo earneſtlie endeuour to ſupplant. But as I doe confeſſe my ſelfe moſt ſtedfaſtlie to holde that Religion, and therein to ſtand fullie reſolued: ſo do I vnfainedlie proteſt, that ſince I came to the yeares of reaſon and diſcretion to conceiue what Religion was, I neuer held anie opinion obſtinatelie, as one that beeing in an errour ſhould hate to
               Pſal. 50. 
               bee reformed, but came firſt to the reading and conſideration of thoſe thinges which it behoouedHow humbly, circumſpectly, and vprightly mē ought to behaue themſelues in matters of religion. a Chriſtian to know, euen with a bare and naked minde, voide of all foredeeming, and apt to receiue anie impreſsion, onelie humble and deſirous to bee inſtructed in the trueth: and whatſoeuer I read or heard expounded out of the holie Scriptures, neither did I eſteeme it by the credit of the perſon that taught it, but by the authoritie of the doctrine it ſelfe, neither was I led vnto anie opinion by the voice or opinion of multitude, but by the teſtimonie of mine owne conſcience conſenting thereunto, neither did I attribute the more credit to it, for that it was firſt taught mee, but

for that dailie inſtruction and reaſon confirmedEuery man ought to examine his own conſcience, and ſift his religion, and endeuour ſtill to be rightly enformed of the truth, not to rely wholy vpon the example, authoritie, or perſwaſions of other men (eſpecially in matters of controuerſie) ſtopping their eares againſt reaſon: for euery veſſell ſhall ſtand vpon his own bottome. it vnto mee: neuer variable, yet euer willing to yeeld vnto reaſon and the trueth. For I am not of their minde that make Religion as a matter of inheritance, to bee taken of their anceſtors or their parentes, or that thinke it ſufficient to ſaie, I beleeue as the Queene beleeues: But I thinke it the duetie of a Christian ſtill to endeuour to informe himſelfe how hee ought to ſerue God, and not to pinne his ſoule on another mans ſleeue. Such a reuerend regard haue I alwaies had, and euer will haue of Religion, as a matter of ſaluation, not as euerie common action of mans life, as a thing to bee meaſured not by opinion, but by trueth, to bee choſen not by example, but by iudgement, to bee holden not for companie, but for conſcience. If you alſo haue the ſame meaſure, choice, and grounde of your Religion, as in reaſon you ought to haue: it maie happlie fall out, that the diſcouerie of the weakenes of D. Allens arguments, and of his deceitfull and malicious dealing in this his Pamphlet, as it hath confirmed in mee the Religion I hold, ſo it maie alter in you the opinion you haue hitherto perſiſted in: and not without great cauſe, knowing that the naked trueth ſeeketh neither cloake nor corner, nor a ſimple and good cauſe, anie ſubtill, or bad conueyance.
            
               Let not then anie preiudicate opinion of my Religion differing from yours, withdraw you from the patient reading and conſidering of my ſimple diſcourſe, no more then the like opinion of D. Allens Religion hath withdrawen me from the diligent peruſing and perpending of his ſubtill pamphlet, a greater learned and farre more cunning allurer then myſelfe: eſpecially ſeeing, that it is no part of my meaning herein, either to impugne your Religion, which is nothing at all fortified by this pamphlet: or to ſtrengthen mine owne, which is as little weakened thereby: for thoſe pointes I leaue to Diuines, if there be any that thinke it worth the reading, or anſwering. For mine own part I find nothing in it, for which I would haue caſt away ſo much paper and inck, ſauing onely a cunning conueiance of pernicious driftes, tending to the practiſe of ſedition & miſchiefe, which I thought fit to be diſplayed and laied open to the world, that the ſimple and ſuch as giue too much credit to his doctrine, might not be therewith deceiued, and thereby drawne to their owne vtter deſtruction: and on the other ſide, that ſuch as are of more capacity, and iudgement, either better affected in religiō, or men indifferent, ſeeing the monſtrous ſhiftes vſed by ſuch a principall Romaine Catholike, as D. Allen is, might thereby take a Caueat, to be the more wary, how they yeeld themſelues to be ſeduced by ſuch Catholiks perſwaſions.
            
               But let vs now come to the examination of this pamphlet, and ſee what it is that maiſter Doctor vndertaketh therein, and how well he perfourmeth his taske.
            He pretendeth vpon occaſion of the former counterfeit letter (which I mentioned to you before) to reſolue the conſciences of thoſe Engliſh men which were the yeelders vp of Deuenter and Zutphen fortes to the Duke of Parma, touching the lawfulnes of their actiō: Wherof though he had alreadie by his letters to Sir William Stanley, giuen his opinion, as he ſaith, yet he will, for better clearing of the cauſe, ſet here downe his mind more largely and diſtinctly.
            
            
               BEfore I runne into the particulars, I muſt note vnto you a thing in generall, which is not to be omitted. I aſſure you though I be farre from the profeſſion of Diuinity, yet can I not but bluſh to ſee a thing written by way of a Reſolution for the ſatisfying of mens conſciences (being a matter of Diuinity) a treatiſe of 60. pages, and not ſo much in all as halfe 6. textes of Scripture cited for confirmation of the matter propoſed, either directly or indirectly: eſpecially being done by an ancient D. of Diuinity, by eſtimation ſingularly well read and learned, and the onely man of name among all the Engliſh Catholikes.
                  It is a ſhame for D. Allen (ſo great a Diuine) to handle a matter of ſaluatiō or damnation ſo profanely, vſing altogether argumēts and authorities drawen from philoſophers, but none frō the holy Scriptures. What is there to bee preſumed of it, that ſo learned a man, ſo great a Diuine, now a Cardinall and chiefe piller of the Church of Rome, ſhould

vndertake to reſolue mens conſciences in a matter of Chriſtian duty (yea whereon he pretendeth ſaluation or damnation to depend) only with a Chaos of wordes, a confuſion of arguments, drawne from morall philoſophie, the law of Nature, and heathen conſtitutions, and with definitions, diſtinctions, and authorities fet from Plato, Ariſtotle, Cicero, &c: leauing vtterly all proofes, arguments, and authorities of holy Scripture, yea skarce ſo much as alleadging one text by way of exhortation? In mine opinion men are in common ſenſe to iudge, that either the matter is very bad, and not iuſtifiable by Gods word, which yeeldeth not ſufficient argument or authority (nay none at all) for the defenſe of it: or that ſuchHis prophane handling, & neglect of Scripture proofe, is a great argument either of weakenes in his cauſe, or hypocriſy in himſelfe, or of both. Diuines ſhew themſelues to haue very litle zeale or religion in them, when they meaſure matters of conſcience, ſaluation, or damnation, by the line of prophane Doctrine, and not of the holy Scriptures. Whereupon muſt neceſſarily be inferred, that they are either impoſtors and deceiuers, in ſeeking to perſwade men by a ſhew of naturall reaſon (verniſhed ouer with a gloſſe of gay wordes, and ſuperficiall colours of philoſophie) that which they are not able to proue by Diuinity; or els plaine Atheiſts & Hypocrits, in carying onely the bare name of Religion on their backes, for a cloake to their diſguiſed practiſes, and neglecting wholly the ground and ſubſtance thereof, in their cogitations, doctrine, and perſwaſions.

But the leſſe M. D. hath vſed the proofes of Scripture and Diuinity in this argument, though it be nothing the more for his owne commendation, or for the credit of his Doctrine, yet haue I the leſſe cauſe to be diſpleaſed with it, conſidering that he hath thereby made it the fitter for ſo meane a ſcholler as my ſelfe (no Diuine at all) to deale with, and the eaſier for any man to ouerthrow.
               Albeit my purpoſe is not (in truth) ſo much to enter into the particular confutation of his arguments (which are indeede none at all, or notD. Allen neither frameth nor followeth any one argument in due forme, & orderly, but ſhuffleth out ſingle propoſitions at randon & confuſedly. worth the ſtanding vpon) as to decipher vnto you his driftes and pollicies, which are founded euen vpon as weake groundes: yet to th'end you may perceiue how looſe, imperfect, and quite voide of force his reaſons are, I will not grudge to caſt away a litle time and labour in repeating, and reducing them to a kind of forme, which are ſo diſorderly, confuſedly, and diſſolutely ſhufled out by him.
               The maine propoſition and ground of his firſtThe maine propoſition and ground of his firſt argument. argument is this, That euery thing wrongfully obteined, and vniuſtly deteined from the true owners, whether they be by fraud or violence come by, according to all Diuine, and humane lawes, & by the very rule of nature, ought to be reſtored to them to whō they duely perteine.
               
               M. Doctor would ſeeme by ſpeech to drawe his argument from Diuinity, and yet not ſo entirely

from Diuinity, but that he can be content with Diuine lawes, to mingle both humane lawes, and the rule of Nature: how be it his maner of proſecuting it, togither with his authorities which he alleageth, do argue it rather to bee deriued principally from the rule of Morall iuſtice, whichDrawne from the rule of moral Iuſtice, whoſe peculiar office is, ſuum cuique tribuere.
                   giueth vnto euery man his owne: But let him take his choice from which he will drawe it, for all is to one effect, that is, to none effect at all for his purpoſe, for (to cut off this propoſition ſhort) ſee, I pray you, how ſophiſtically he dealeth. HeD. Allens ſophiſtrie. ſetteth firſt his propoſition indefinite: That euery thing wrongfully obteined, and vniuſtly deteined, ought to be reſtored to the true owners, without adding by whom it ought be reſtored, and concludeth (as he muſt needes, if he conclude to his purpoſe) definitely, that is, That it ought to be reſtored by Sir William Stanley &c. Whereby he maketh his argument conſiſt of foure termini (as the Logicians terme it) which is a foule fault in logike,His argumēt being laid togither, conſiſteth of 4. termini.
                   as euery wrangling ſophiſter of halfe a yeares ſtanding in the Vniuerſity can tell you. Therefore good M. D. ſet downe your propoſition certaine, and reaſon ad idem, and then we will yeelde it to be true: that is, That euery thing wrōgfully obteined, and vniuſtly deteined, from the true owners ought to be reſtored to them againe, that is, by them that wrongfully obteined, and vniuſtly deteined it: (for there is no man bound to ſatiſfaction, neither by Diuine nor humane lawes, nor
                  
                  by the rule of Nature, but he onely that hath done the wrong:) and ſo will I agree with you, that, whatſoeuer Sir William Stanley and the reſt had wrongfully obteined, and did vniuſtly deteine from the king of Spayne, ought to be by them reſtored vnto him againe. But you know well inough, and all men know that Deuenter, & Zutphen fortes were neither obteined, nor deteined wrongfully by Sir William Stanley and his complices, but quietly, peaceably, iuſtly and by lawfull authority deliuered vnto them in charge and cuſtodie, vnder her Maieſtie, by my L. of Leiceſter her Lieutenant there: and therfore were not they any way bound to the reſtitution of them (ſauing only vnto thoſe of whom they had receiued them) being neither obteiners, nor deteiners of them, but onely miniſters of their Princes commandement. For howſoeuer the towne and fortes were obteined, yet the ſubiect being tyed to his Prince by allegeance and oth, and hauing vpon that othe receiued from his Prince, or her lawfull deputy, any place of charge to keepe and hold to her vſe, is not toEuery priuate ſubiect is not to examine his princes publike actions, be they right, or wrong, but to looke to his owne peculiar charge, duety, and othe. enquire into her right, how iuſtly or vniuſtly ſhe hath gotten or keepeth it, but to looke into his owne charge and othe, whereof he is bound to giue account. Yea ſuppoſe the Queenes Maieſtie had by violence, fraude, or iniuſtice entred vpon thoſe places, and ſo deteined them from the k. of Spaine: yet the ſame iuſtice, which giueth vnto euery man his owne, and in ſuch caſe tyeth her

to reſtitution of whatſoeuer ſhe wrongfullyMuch leſſe may any priuate ſubiect make himſelfe iudge, corrector, and executioner of Iuſtice againſt his Prince, vpon his owne authority, and at his owne pleaſure. Offic. lib. 1. D. Allen ſheweth no authority of Scripture, whereby the Popes Bull may diſpenſe with this breach▪ of their oth. witholdeth, yet the ſame iuſtice (I ſay) giueth her ſubiectes no ſuch authoritie ouer her, as to bee iudges of her iuſt or vniuſt dealing, much leſſe to make themſelues correctors, or executors of iuſtice againſt her vpon their owne iudgement, and at their owne pleaſure. Nay, the ſame Iuſtice, whoſe foundation, (as your owne Author Cicero affirmeth) is Faith, tieth them to the performance of their faith and oath giuen vnto their Prince: which oath how litle authoritie your Popes Bull hath to diſpenſe withall, as learned men as yourſelfe M. Doctor (without offence of compariſon) haue alreadie diſcuſſed. And therefore let them, whoſe conſciences you vndertake to ſatisfie, examine their conſciences better touching the lawfulnes of this their action.
               Thus you ſee M. Doctors ſubtil Sophiſtication, and how litle his principall Baſis, whereon he buildeth his whole argument, ſerueth his purpoſe. But, that you may ſee the weakenes of the reſt of his conſequences, as well as of this foundation, let vs for good fellowſhip grant him this propoſition euen in ſuch ſort as hee putteth it (that wee maie haue more of his cuſtome) and ſuffer him to proceed, that wee maie ſee how he will conclude.
               
                  Euerie thing (ſaith hee) wrongfully obteined,
                  His argumēt. 
                  and vniustly deteined from the true owners, whether it be by fraude or violence come by, ought to be reſtored
                  
                  to them, to whom it duely perteineth. What inferreth he hereupon?
               
                  But the Towne of Deuēter & the Forts of Zutphē were both wrongfully obteined, and vniustly deteined from the true owner (viz. the King of Spaine) beeing by fraude or violence come by, by the Queene of England.
               
               
                  Ergo, The Towne of Deuenter and the Forts of
                  Here now appeareth manifeſtly the fault of his argument, being drawn to a forme of Syllogiſme. 
                  Zutphen ought to bee reſtored (and therefore were lawfully and iuſtly reſtored) to the King of Spaine, by S. W. Stanley and Capt. Yorke, who had the charge and keeping of them for and vnder the Q. of England.
               
               Here may you now (by the way) more plainely diſcerne the fault of his argument, whereof I told you before, which he himſelfe hath not ſo laied togither nor reduced into ſtreight forme, in his pamphlet, leaſt the fault ſhould too eaſily be eſpied, but to colour his fallacie, hath gone about the buſh with a circumſtance of words, creeping ſlilie by degrees to the top of his intent, thinking by that meanes to ſteale it away vndeſcried, as in truth he might eaſily from plaine ſimple men, and ſuch as are no ſchollers, which might well haue ſuffiſed his turne, for he ſeeketh no more: But let a man of anie meane iudgement marke it, and lay it together, and it is preſently diſcouered. For the argument is euident inough, and cannot be otherwiſe framed to his purpoſe, as any man of reaſon maie plainely perceiue, and he

himſelfe (I am ſure) will not denie. Now to examine his Minor, marke, I pray you, of how manie partes it conſiſteth.
               
                  1. Firſt: that the towne of Deuenter, and Zutphen
                     All theſe three pointes are contained in his Minor, which he is to prooue. 
                     fortes were both wrongfully obteined and vniuſtly deteined from the k. of Spaine by the Q. of England.
                  
                  2. That the k. of Spaine is the true owner of them.
                  
                  3. That they were by fraude, or violence come by, by the Queene of England.
                  
               
               All theſe three ſeuerall pointes ought D. Allen to proue, or els he proueth not his argument: & yet of the two latter hath he not ſpoken a word, more then a bare affirmation: of the firſt he hath ſpoken much, and proued iuſt nothing. But becauſe his manner of reaſoning is not cloſe and well knit togither, but in a declamatorie kind, which is fitter for his purpoſe to perſwade, though not ſo forcible in reaſon to proue, I will endeuour to ſeuer his Logike from his Rhetorike, and gather his arguments aparte, that we may ſee what, and how directly he proueth.
               
                  Whatſoeuer (ſaith he) is obteined by vnlawfull
                  His argumēt for the proofe of his Minor. 
                  warres, and ſo deteined, is both wrongfully obteined, and vniuſtly deteined.
               
               
                  But the Queene of Englands warres in the low countries, whereby ſhe obteined Deuenter and Zutphen fortes, and ſo deteined them, are altogither vnlawfull.
               
               
                  
                  Ergo, The towne of Deuenter & Zutphen fortes were both wrongfully obteined, and vniuſtly deteined by the Q. of England (from the true owner, the k. of Spaine.)
               
               For this muſt alſo be added to his concluſion, otherwiſe doth he not fully proue the Minor, of his former argument, which he is to proue: Wherein if a man would ſtand with him vpon euery ſtrict point, he might iuſtly ſay this argument is euen as good as the former, for there isThis argument is euen as good as the former. more in the Concluſion, then is conteined in both the Praemiſſes.
               But let that go, and let vs graunt him alſo his Maior, and come directly to his Minor, viz.
               
               
                  That the Queene of Englands warres in the low
                  The Minor of this ſecond argument, which he is to proue. 
                  countries, whereby ſhe obteined Deuenter and Zutphen fortes, and ſo deteined them, are altogither vnlawfull.
               
               What if we ſhould deny, firſt that the QueenesTwo pointes of this Minor to be denyed, whereof D. Allen proueth neither. Maieſtie helde any warres at all in the low countries?
               Secondly, and if ſhe did, yet that ſhe obteined not Deuenter by warres?
               
                  D. Allen is able to proue neither of them, andThe cauſes why they may both, iuſtly be denyed. we might iuſtly deny both: For no man can ſaye (and ſay truely) that euer her Maieſtie tooke the warre vpon her ſelfe, but onely ſent ſome forces for gods cauſe to relieue the poore diſtreſſed coū
                  tries, crauing her aſſiſtance. And for Deuenter, neither did her Maieſtie obteine it by warres (for

the towne did voluntarily of itſelfe receiue, nay, they earneſtly deſired our garriſon:) neither did her Maieſtie obteine it at al, for it was neuer hers, neither did ſhe euer claime it, or accept it as her owne, but onely was content at the requeſt of the better ſort of the towne, for their ſafety, to put her ſoldiours into it, to defend it. So is M.Theſe two pointes being denyed (as appeareth they may be with good reaſon) D. Allens argument is vtterly auoyded, without further anſwere or proceeding: for he proueth neither. Doctors argument cleane auoyded.
               But I know he will ſay theſe are but cauils, for tryall whereof, I referre them to the iudgement of any man of reaſon and indifferencie, which hath bene rightly informed therein: howbeit, becauſe, if I will ſtand vpon them, he is able to go no further, I am therefore content to ouerpaſſe them and ſuffer him to proceede.
               I pray you let vs ſee how hee proueth The Engliſh warres in the low countries (ſeeing ſo it pleaſeth him to terme them warres) to be altogither vnlawfull.
               
               His rule whereby he meaſureth the lawfulnes of warres, is fet from Cicero, who ſaith in his books De Republica, as Iſidorus citeth it: The warre is iuſt, which is denounced for recompence or reuenge of iniuries, and annoyance, or for defence againſt enimies.
               
               This poſition being laied, becauſe the Queens Marſhall not iuſtifie her doings vpon anye title ſhe hath to the low countries (which is without the compaſſe of his diuiſiō) he preſuppoſeth that all the world knoweth that ſhee can make no iuſt claime to Holland, Zelād, or any other of thoſe parts
                  
                  which ſhe hath (as he ſaith) by armes ſeiſed on: all
                  There was neuer any ſuch confeſſion heard of, as D, Allen here impoſeth vpon vs, but the contrarie is both affirmed, and abſolutely mainteined at this day. 
                  thoſe prouinces being confeſſed to 
                        〈◊〉
                      his Catholike Maieſties ancient and vndoubtfull inheritance.
               
               Theſe matters cōcerning Princes titles are fitter for other mē then M. D. & me to decide: therfore I wil not take vpon me to ſay any thing touching her Maieſties right to the low countries, or any part of them, howſoeuer D. Allen dares affirme them all to be the king of Spaines ancient and vndoubtfull inheritance, by what authority I know not: but how ancient and vndoubted ſoeuer hee maketh it, I am ſure men better acquainted with thoſe cauſes then he, do not onely doubt of the kings title to ſundry of the prouinces, but are flatly reſolued the contrary. But it is beſide my purpoſe, and therefore I leaue it. Now let vs ſee how he proueth the Engliſh warres (as he termeth them) in the low countries to be neither for recompence or reuenge of iniuries and annoyance, nor for defence againſt enimies, & therefore not iuſt, accordingD. Allens aſſertion to proue the Engliſh warres in the low coūtries not to be for defence againſt enimies. to this former poſition out of Cicero.
               
               
                  The defence (ſaith he) of the kings rebels againſt their moſt iuſt Lord & Souereigne is no lawful nor honorable quarrell of war; neither haue the ſaid Traytors and rebels any authority to yeelde vp their Souereignes townes, and portes into his enimies handes, or themſelues to the Engliſh protection or ſubiection. All this is but a bare affirmation, which beingAll D. Allens proofes depend vpon th'authority of his owne word: for he doth but barely affirme what it pleaſeth him, without adding any reaſon to confirme his aſſertions. denyed, his argument is at an end, for he prooueth no one parte of it. Beſides it is a

                  Beſides, in this aſſertion he doth petere principium, aſſume that which is all the matter in queſtion. plaine petitio principij, which is a groſſe error in Logike, whe
                     •…
                  e groundeth his argumēt vpon that which is itſelfe in queſtion. For he preſumeth the people of all the low countries to be the k. of Spaines rebels, & him their moſt iuſt Lord and Souereigne: which is the whole matter in cō
                  trouerſie. So you ſee this argument is cleane cut off by the roote.
               
                  The Engliſh warres in the low countries iuſtified by ſeuerall reaſons drawne from D. Allen himſelfe. And ſince he hath nothing diſproued her Maieſties dealings in this point by the reaſon hee hath brought, giue me leaue now to iuſtifie thē by an argument or two drawne from himſelfe.
               
                  Pag. 41. 42. 43. 44. 45. 46. In the latter part of this pamphlet, where he goeth about to perſwade her Maieſties ſubiects to reuolt from her, he doubteth not to affirme, that it is lawfull for the ſubiects for religions ſake not only to reuolt from their ſouereigne, and to deliuer vp his cities & countries into other mens hands, but alſo to beare armes againſt him, being in ſuch caſe clerely diſcharged from all bond of othe and fidelitie to him.
               Whereupon I inferre, firſt, that thoſe of theThe firſt argument drawne from D. Allen. low countries, though they were (as he ſuppoſeth) the lawfull ſubiects of the k. of Spaine, yet might they for Religion (if there were no other cauſe) lawfully reuolte from the k. and yeeld vp his cities, and countries to the Queenes Maieſty, or any other.
               Secondly, that if it be lawfull for the ſubiect, for religiō to beare armes againſt his ſouereigne:

then is it much more lawfull for an abſolute Prince, for Religiō alſo to yeeld ſuccours to her diſtreſſed neighbors, againſt a Stranger. The argument followeth verie well, à fortiori.
               
               I am content M. Doctor to vſe your owne arguments againſt yourſelfe, albeit I doe neither allow of them, nor thinke them in truth to be ſound; yet ſince you thought it no iniurie to vs, to make vnlawfull weapons for your owne aduantage againſt vs, you muſt thinke it no iniurie to yourſelfe to be beaten with your owne rodde.
               Yet muſt I be ſo bold as to borrow another argument from you, for the iuſtifying of her Maieſties dealings in the low Countreys to bee lawfull by your owne rule, as being for defence against enemies.
               
               In your Inuectiue againſt our vniuſt dealings,Pag. 23. Another argumēt drawn from D. Allens owne words, to iuſtifie the Engliſh warres in any ſort againſt the K. of Spaine, as being for defence againſt enemies. you ſaie, that wee thinke it cauſe of warre good inough to hinder our neighbours greatnes, and to diſturbe other mens quietnes, to procure our owne peace and ſafetie. Let vs ſee what Engliſh is to be picked out of this. Why ſhould we ſeeke to hinder our neighbours greatnes? are we anie thing the leſſe, by his being greater? no: vnleſſe he make himſelf greater, by making vs leſſe: what need we then to feare his greatnes? Belike it is to bee feared, that, if he be greater, he will make vs leſſe. What neede I, nodum in in ſcirpo quaerere? what neede I ſo to hunt out the cauſe why wee ſhould ſeeke to hinder his greatnes, when D. Allen himſelfe hath ſet

it downe in plaine termes, to procure our owne peace, and ſafety? Whereby he giueth vs a good caueat to prouide for both, giuing vs to vnderſtand, that ifD. Allen giueth vs to vnderſtand, that if the K. of Spaine were once quietly poſſeſt of the low Countreys, we were not likely lōg to enioy either peace or ſafetie. the King of Spaine ſhould once grow great, as D. Allen thinketh he ſhould in deede, if he were once quietly poſſeſſed of the Low Countries, then ſhould not we long enioy either peace, or ſafety. Which in trueth hath bene vpon good cauſe long ſuſpected by vs, but may now better be beleeued, when D. Allen (though I thinke in trueth vnaduiſedly, and againſt his will) doth ſo plainely aſſure vs of it.
               Now where he ſaith, that We thinke it cauſe of warre good inough to hinder our neighbours greatnes, and to diſturbe other mens quietnes, to procure our owne peace & ſafety, Let vs ſee whether no man els thinketh ſo, beſides our ſelues. VVhat ſaie you if his owne Author Cicero thinke ſo as well as we?
               
                  Suſcipienda quidem bella ſunt (ſaith hee) ob eam
                  Lib. 1. de Offic. 
                  cauſam, vt ſine iniuria in pace viuatur▪ Warres are to be taken in hand, that is, may & muſt be taken in hād for that cauſe, & to that intent, that men may liue in peace without iniurie, that is all one as if hee ſhould ſay, in peace and ſafetie. VVhereupon I frame my argument thus:
               
                  Thoſe warres which are taken in hand, to the
                  The Argument gathered into a Syllogiſme.
                   
                  end that the vndertakers thereof may liue in peace and ſafetie, are taken in hand vpon iuſt cauſe, & conſequently lawfull.
               
               
                  But our warres againſt the K. of Spaine (if wee hold any warres againſt him) are taken in hand, to the end that we may liue in peace and ſafetie.
               
               
                  
                  Ergo, Our warres againſt the King of Spaine are taken in hand vpon iuſt cauſe, & cōſequently lawfull.
               
               The Maior I take out of Cicero: the Minor out of D. Allens own words: the Argument cannot be denied, for it is a good and true Syllogiſme, and the conſequence neceſſarie. VVherby you may euidētly perceiue, that not only our wars in the low countries, but thoſe alſo by Sea, which D. Allen ſo defameth (if we did mainteine any ſuch warres) or anie other warres which wee ſhould vndertake againſt the K. of Spaine, are both iuſt and lawfull, euen by his owne allowance, beeing for our owne defenſe, and the procurement of our own peace and ſafetie.
               Further, becauſe D. Allen ſhall haue no ſhew ofAnother Argumēt drawn from D. Allen himſelfe alſo, to proue the King of Spaine our enemy. reaſon left him, whereby hee may cauill vpon the word, ſaying that we cannot iuſtifie our wars to be for defenſe againſt enemies, the K. of Spaine beeing (as he termeth him) our neighbour, allie, and confederate: albeit it is a thing not needfull to bee prooued, nor doeth anie way concerne my argument, (which is moſt ſtrong & infallible without it) neither will I take vpon me of my ſelfe to affirme the K. of Spaine to be our enemie, or touch him in anie wiſe with breach of his league & confederacie with vs; yet to ſtoppe M. Allens mouth with his owne words, that he may (I ſaie) haue nothing to cauill vpon, I will onlie ſet himſelfe to anſwere himſelfe in this behalfe.
               
                  The defēſe (ſaith he) of the kings rebels againſt their moſt iuſt Lord, & Souereigne, is no lawfull, nor honorable quarrel of warres: neither haue the ſaid traitors
                  
                  and rebels any authority to yeeld vp their Souereigns Townes and Ports into his enemies hands, or themſelues to the Engliſh protection, or ſubiection.
               
               Here D. Allen termeth vs the K. of Spaines enemies,The Argument a Relatiuis.
                   and if wee bee his enemies (as D. Allen affirmeth) then muſt he neceſſarily bee our enemie in like ſort, for it is a word of Relation, which beeing rightly pronounced of the one, muſt alſo neceſſarily bee pronounced of the other. For a Prince can not bee ſaid to bee the confederate of him that is his enemie: but they muſt bee both as the one is, either both Socij, or both hoſtes, both Confederates, or both enemies. This a very meane ſcholler, nay euerie man of anie reaſon or common ſenſe may perceiue to be true. And I doe not doubt but D. Allen himſelfe, when he termed vs the K. of Spaines enemies, knew him well inough to bee our enemie.
               Thus you ſee not only that D. Allen hath failed in the proofe of the one part of his diuiſion, that is: That our warres are not for defence againſt enemies, and therfore vnlawfull: but alſo that we haue prooued the contrarie againſt him, both according to his owne diuiſion, that is: That our warres are for defence againſt enemies, & therefore lawfull: & alſo by other reaſons of our owne, that is: That our warres are for the procurement of our owne peace and ſafetie, and therefore moſt iuſt, and lawfull. Wherein our proofes & arguments (though they be ſtrong inough of themſelues againſt anie man)

yet are they ſtrongeſt againſt him of all men, beeing drawen euen from his owne Allegations, reaſons, and aſſertions: and therefore the more to be credited.
               Now come we to the other part, and let vs ſeeThe other part which D. Allen is to prooue, of his diuiſion drawen from Cicero. D. Allens aſſertion, that the King of Spaine hath done vnto her Maieſtie no iniurie. &c. how hee prooueth The Engliſh warres in the low Countreys not to be mooued for reuenge of iniuries or annoyance.
               
               
                  The Kings Maieſtie (ſaith he) hath done to the Queene or her Realme no ſuch iniuries, for redreſſe or reuenge whereof ſhee ſhould by hoſtilitie enter into his Dominions, and ſurpriſe his Townes and Castles, and bring his people into her ſubiection.
               
               This is a point wherein I am loth to meddle in vttering what I thinke, or haue heard, yea ſcarcely would I touch that which is commonly bruted abroad in the mouthes of all men, conſidering that the matter concerneth Princes, & is not fit for priuate men to deale in: therfore would I rather refer the iudgement therof to euery mans own particular knowledge, opinion, & conſcience. Yet bicauſe it is a part of D. Allens argument, which hee muſt not ſo clearly carry away, leaſt it ſhould ſeeme to be yeelded vnto him, as true: I will craue pardon and leaue, only to remember ſome particulars either knowen, or commonly beleeued and reported.
               And firſt I know men of iudgement think it no great kindnes in a Prince to harbour (much leſſe to enterteine & mainteine) within his Dominions the fugitiue Rebels or Traitors of another Prince, his

confederate, vnderſtanding how vnduetifully (nay how lewdly and impiouſly) they haue dealt with their naturall Souereign. But theſe (you wil ſaie) are but actions of vnkindnes, not ſuch hainous iniuries. VVell: I would they were leſſe, offences I am ſure they are at the leaſt, & ſuch as fall within one of the kinds of Iniuſtice and Iniurie. For greater, it is not fit for me to ſpeake of.
               
                  A touch only of ſome parts offered the Q. Maieſtie by the K. of Spaine, which may well be deemed Iniuries, yea in the higheſt degree. Yet I doubt not but D. Allen himſelfe (whatſoeuer he ſaith here) and a great number of Romiſh Catholikes more beſides him, know ſomewhat touching the Inuaſiō made by the K. of Spains ſubiects in The Inuaſiō in Ireland, Anno. 1580. 
                  Ireland, in the year 1580. & of the practiſes of his Embaſſador The practiſes of Mendoza, his Embaſſador here, with our Engliſh Traitors. 
                  Mendoza ſince that time, and of others her Maieſties moſt vnnatural, ſubiects ſhal I ſaie? nay moſt bloodie, abhominable, & butcherly minded traitors, both before & ſince. The verie bowels and ſecrets whereof although they haue been happely kept from our knowledge, (I meane from the knowledge of the meaner ſort:) yet their owne confeſsions haue diſcouered more then is meet for me to rehearſe: and ſo much as hath bred a general opinion & rumor yea euen in the verie cōmon people of England, that the K. of Spaine hath been not onlie priuy to thē, but a principall Author & Actor in them all. I will not ſpeake of the ſecret practiſes conſpired for the depoſing of her Maieſtie, and aduancingThe practices for the depoſing of her Maieſtie, and aduancing of the Q. of Scots to the crown. of the Q. of Scots to the crown of Englād: which whether, or how iuſtly they may touch the K. of Spain, it is no part of my duetie to deale with. I am ſory to haue had occaſion to ſaie ſo much, in a

thing ſo litle apperteining to me: but I am the more to be pardoned, in that the argument hath inforced me thereunto, & in that I haue mentioned nothing more then is knowen & common to the multitude, and I could not haue ſaid leſſe, vnleſſe I ſhould haue ſaid nothing at al. But I hope this that hath ben ſaid,For this point I appeale to the conſcience and knowledge of the Papiſts themſelues which know anie thing. may be ſufficient to S. W. Stanley, Capt. Yorke, & to all the Engliſh Romaniſts, to whom D. Allen doeth eſpecially direct his Pamphlet. For I know there is not any of that ſort of any account, but is ſo wel acquainted with the priuities of theſe actions, as that he can picke out of theſe inough to aſſure him, that D. Allen hath but diſſembled with thē in this point. VVhich being ſo, they muſt alſo know & confeſſe, and all men els may plainly perceiue, that this other part of his diuiſion ſerueth not his turne, no more then the former, to prooue her Maieſties dealings in the low Countries vnlawfull, being grounded vpon a falſe ſuppoſition, that is, That the K. of Spain hath done vnto her Maieſtie no ſuch iniurie, wherof ſhee ſhould ſeeke reuenge.
                  All D. Allens arguments end in ſingle affirmations, which alſo are neither confirmed with any authoritie, or reaſon by him, nor carry any truth, or probabilitie in themſelues.
               
               Thus haue you heard his argument brought to an end, for here he reſteth euen in ſimple affirmations, which I hope haue been ſufficientlie conuicted both by ſubſtantiall reaſons and inſtances: ſo that there remaineth not now anie thing to be further anſwered, his whole argument and euerie part thereof, being confuted in order from the firſt propoſition to the laſt. And, beſides this vvhich you haue heard, hath he not anie argumēt in his vvhole

Pamphlet, either to iuſtifie the rendering of Deuenter and Zutphen Forts, or to diſprooue her Maieſties doings againſt the K. of Spaine anie way; which I haue heere both by the authorities of his owne Authours, and by reaſons deriued euen from himſelfe, moſt euidently declared to bee iuſtifiable euerie waie, if they were greater then they are: which I could with further & more infallible reaſons alſo confirme, if it vvere requiſite, or apperteining to my purpoſe.
               But I muſt novv beſtovv a vvord or tvvo in noting vnto you ſome errours or ouerſightes (at theSome groſſe errors or ouerſights, eſcaped D. Allen, in the handling of this argument. leaſt) eſcaped from D. Allen, euen in the verie entrie almoſt of his argumēt: vvhere in the circumſtance he vſeth, to induce a probabilitie and credit of his firſt propoſition, he ſetteth dovvne a generall Theſis flat contrarie to that vvhich he goeth about to prooue. For after manie ſpeeches touching the neceſsitie of Reſtitution, hovv thinges vvrongfullie gotten and deteined, ought to bee reſtored, in the ende hee concludeth vvith theſe verie vvordes: Yet whatſoeuer is done againſt
                  A generall Theſis pronounced by himſelfe, flatly cōdemning the action which he laboureth ſo much to iuſtifie, and commend. 
                  military diſcipline and Iustice, is ſinne and puniſhable by Gods lawes. What can there bee ſaide more directly againſt the action of S. W. Stanley, and the reſt? For there is none of them, nor anie ſoldier els of any knowledge or experience, but knoweth, that to yeeld a Towne, Fort, or holde, wherewith a man is put in truſt, to the enemy (yea beſieging it) ſo long as there is within it ſufficient

ſtrength and meanes to defend it, yea though it were not defenſible, yet to yeeld it before due ſummons, is death by the law of Armes: much more to render a Towne freely, without either force or demand; or rather corruptly and traitorouſly to ſel it for money: but the law of Arms doth not puniſh anie fact with death, which is not done againſt theThe rendering of Deuē
                        ter prooued by D. Allens owne poſition, to be ſin, and puniſhable by Gods lawes. ſame law and diſcipline: therefore it muſt needs follow that the rendring vp of Deuenter and Zutphen Forts is againſt military diſcipline, and conſequently (by D. Allens own poſition) ſin, and puniſhable by Gods lawes. VVhat a reſolution call you this for the ſatisfying of mens conſciences touching the lawfulnes of their action, to lead them about with a circumſtance of other meaning, and in concluſion to tell them in plaine termes, that that which they haue done is ſin, & puniſhable by Gods lawes?
               Yet are there two other errors, though not ſo euident,Two other ouerſightes, (or rather groſſe abſurdities) more ſentence. yet as worthy the noting, euen in the next ſentence immediatly going before: where, after, he hath taught, that reſtitutiō is to be made of al things vniuſtly takē & withholdē, vpō pain of damnatiō, he addeth theſe wordes: And this I ſay euen in lawfull warres, or ſuch as to the common people may be vpō their Princes credit ſo deemed. Where though they may offend th'enimy in life, goods, liberty, & otherwiſe: &c.
               
               Wherein firſt he maketh no difference betweeneThe firſt of the two ouerſightes. lawfull warres, & vnlawfull warres, which may vpon their Princes credit be by the common

people deemed lawfull: as though thinges were iuſt or vniuſt either vpon the Princes credit, or according to the peoples opinion of them, not of their own nature, and according to the groundes and cauſes of them. By this reaſon there ſhould no warres be vnlawfull: for there is no warre vndertaken, but that both the Prince which mooueth it, is able, and doth pretend ſome reaſon (or colour of reaſon) to make it ſeeme iuſt, and the common people alſo, by the Princes declaration and perſwaſions, may eaſily be induced to eſteeme it to be lawfull. Wherein by the way I muſt note ſome ſimplicitie, or great diſſimulation in D. Allen, which would admit the lawfulnes, or vnlawfulnes of warres, to be meaſured by the opinion of the common people, who (God wot) are furtheſt from the knowledge of State matters, and the ſecret dealings which paſſe betweene Princes, and from the conſideration of the iniuries and occaſions of warre, and therefore the vnmeeteſt of all men to be iudges of the lawfulnes thereof.
               But howſoeuer it be deemed lawfull, whether by the common people, or by the better and wiſer ſort, and ſuch as are moſt priuie to the ſecrets of the State, vpon the Princes credit, or otherwiſe, if it be in trueth vniuſt; neither can theNo compariſon betweene thinges ſimply iuſt, and things onely deemed iuſt. warre it ſelfe bee in anye ſort equalled with that warre, which is indeede lawfull, neither can th'executions thereof be allowed and iuſtified

as th'executions of a lawfull warre. For the one is ſimply iuſt, and th'other ſimply vniuſt. And howſoeuer the ſubiect preſuming a thing to be iuſt vpon the Princes credit, perſwadeth himſelfe that he doth no iniuſtice, becauſe hee knoweth not that which he doth, to be vniuſt: yet is his action in it ſelfe neuer the leſſe vniuſt: for, ignorantia non excuſat peccatum.
               
               You ſee what a foule error in Diuinity this is; yet is there as bad euen in the next wordes following:The ſecond abſurdity. viz. where though they may offend th'enimy in life, goods, liberty, &c.
               
               Hauing ſhewed before that reſtitution ought to be made of all things vniuſtly gotten and deteined, vpon paine of damnation, and that euen in lawfull warres, or ſuch as to the common people may vpon the Princes credit be ſo deemed, he now maketh it lawfull notwithſtanding, euen in the ſame warres, to offend th'enimy in life, goods, and libertie. As though it were not as great an offence, vniuſtlye to take awayeVno abſurdo dato, infinita conſequuntur. a mans goods, as to withholde them: or not a greater offence to take awaye life or liberty, then to take awaye goods: Nay, as though to take away both goods, liberty, and life, were no offence at all (for he maketh them all lawfull) where, in the ſame caſe, to withholde the ſame goods, is an offence damnable. What groſſe abſurdities are theſe, and how contrary to all Diuinity, humane reaſon, and lawes

politike, yea euen vnto themſelues? For what can bee more contrarye to it ſelfe, then firſt to ſay that reſtitution of thinges wrongfully obteined and vniuſtly deteined, is to be made, vnder paine of mortall ſinne and damnation (wherein is plainely implyed by himſelfe that both wrongfull obteining, and vniuſt deteining,D. Allen firſt maketh both wrongful obteining and deteining of goods, ſinnes mortall and damnable, & afterward maketh the obteining lawfull, and the deteining damnable. is mortall & damnable ſinne,) & now after to ſay that the obteining is lawfull, and the deteining dānable? A thing being iuſtly & lawfully gottē, how cā the poſſeſſiō of it be vniuſt & vnlawfull?
               For better diſtinction of the actions, let vs ſuppoſe them to be in diſtinct and ſeueral perſons. Is not he that robbeth a man, and taketh away his goods, in as great fault, both by Diuine and humane lawes, as he that receiueth and poſſeſſeth The wrongfull taking away of goods as as great, or rather a greater ſinne, then the wrongful withholding of the ſame goods. them? Nay rather in greater: for we account him principall, the other but acceſſarie: and by great reaſon. For if the goods had not beene firſt wrongfully taken, they could neuer haue bene wrongfully deteined. So the vniuſt taking was the thing that made the deteining vniuſt: & (euen by the rules of Philoſophie) Quicquid efficit tale, id ipſum eſt magis tale.
               
               Now if the taking away of goods be a greater offenſe, or but as great, as the deteining of them, what is then the taking away of libertie, yea of life? Vndoubtedly, vnleſſe we will hold with Illyricus the opinion of the Stoiks, omnia peccata eſſe aequalia, which opinion the holy church hath

condemned, and Illyricus himſelfe for an heretikeThe wrongfull taking away of liberty, and life, a greater ſinne then ye wrongfull taking away of goods onely. in holding it, we muſt needes confeſſe the offence to be farre greater, as the thinges themſelues which are taken away, are of greater account, and deerer vnto men. Being then a greater offence in reaſon, lawes politike, and eſpecially in Diuinitie, to take away life, goods, and liberty,Ergo the wrongfull taking away both of goods, liberty and life (all which D. Allen maketh no ſin, but a thing lawful) are farre greater ſinnes, thē the wrongful deteining of goods onely, which D. Allen pronounceth to be a ſinne mortall and damnable, euen in the ſame caſe. then to deteine onely goods ſo taken, it muſt needes appeare to be a great error for a man to affirme, that the wrongfull deteining of goods (which is the leſſe ſinne) is a mortall and damnable ſinne, and the wrongfull taking away both of goods, liberty, and life (which is proued to be the farre greater ſinne) euen in the ſame caſe, is no ſinne at all, but a thing lawfull.
               What man then, that is of any iudgment, reaſon, or ſenſe, will giue credit to his doctrine, or thinke him to be an honeſtman, Note the honeſt and Syncere dealing of D. Allen. which hauing expreſſely taught, that the greater ſinne is no ſin at all, goeth about to perſwade him that the leſſe ſinne is a ſinne mortall and damnable, and thereupon groundeth his whole argument? It is an olde rule for ſuch as will practiſe the trade of lying, that Mendacem oportet eſſe memorem, A lyer muſt haue a good memorie, leaſt he be entrapped in his owne tale: but it ſeemeth D. Allen preſumed ſo much vpon his continuall exerciſe in the art, and thought himſelfe ſo much his craſies maiſter, as that he neuer minded the precept made for Schollers. But ſo it fareth euer with a badde

cauſe, which haue it neuer ſo ſtout a patrone andA bad cauſe betrayeth it ſelfe. defender, yet will it by one meanes or other betray it ſelfe: ſuch is the force of the naked, ſimple, and vndiſguiſed truth, which confoundeth falſhood,
                  1. Eſdr. 4. 41. euen in her owne colours. For, Magna eſt veritas, & praeualet: Great is the truth, and preuaileth: yea it breaketh out vnwares, euen out of the mouthes of thoſe that labour moſt to obſcure and ſuppreſſe it, that God (the authour of Truth, yea the very truth itſelfe) may be glorified euen by his enimies.
               Diuers other thinges could I note vnto you out of this pamphlet, euen as groſſe, and abſurd, and as directly againſt D. Allens purpoſe, as any thing may be: But it were vaine to ſpend time in the further confuting of that, which is skarce worth the looking on: and beſides, it is not my ſpeciall purpoſe, as I told you before, neither would I haue ſaid ſo much concerning this parte of his pamphlet, but only to th'intent to make my way plainer to the reſt, by laying firſt euē with the ground this dead rotten hedgerow of his diſordered, diſſolute, and ſcattered argumēt: wherin you ſee not onely euery part therof, in order (as wel as it might be gathered & put togither) clean diſſolued, anſwered, & confuted, with ſubſtantial reaſons & authorities produced therupō at large, ſo far forth as the matter required; but alſo ſundry ouerſights & errors (cōmitted in the handling therof) ſo manifeſtly diſcouered, and retorted

vpon him, as moſt effectuall againſt himſelfe: In ſomuch as I do not a litle maruell how he durſt aduēture to write ſo ſlender & ſuperficiall a thing vnto them, & ſo patched togither & ſtuffed vp with ſo many & ſo apparant contrarieties, & falſhoods, vnleſſe he either preſumed of their ignorance (which is the vertue that he, & the cūning clarkes, & learned ſort of his ſect, do ſomuch cō
                  mendD. Allen preſumeth either vpō the ignorance of thē to whom he writeth, that they are not able to diſcerne his abuſes: or els vpon their credulity, that they account all Goſpell that he ſpeaketh: otherwiſe would he be more wary how he publiſhed ſuch euident abſurdities, and falſhoods. vnto their ſchollers, as the mother of Deuotion) or els aſſured himſelf of aſ much credit & authority with them, as Pythagoras had with his followers, that would beleue whatſoeuer he ſaid, without any reaſō or further enquiry of the matter, & thought it a ſufficient cauſe to alleage alſo vnto others, 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   that he ſaid ſo. If D. Allen haue brought his Catholikes ſo much to the bēt of his bow, he may be bold to tell them that the ſoule which was in the Coblers cocke, after many 
                     〈 in non-Latin alphabet 〉
                   is crept at the lēgth into his body.
               But in matters of conſcience, ſaluation, or dā
                  nation (as he ſaith theſe are) let ſuch as haue a conſcience, looke to their conſciences, & not hazarde their ſaluation, or dānation vpon his word, but leane vnto reaſon & ſeek to informe themſelues rightly of the truth. For if it be true (as it is moſt true) that Chriſt ſaith, If the blind lead the
                  Math. 15. 14. 
                  blind, they fall both into the pit, which he meaneth of thoſe that are blind indeede of ignorance; much more ſhall it be true, being meant of them that are wilfully blinde, of obſtinacie, and deſire not to ſee, that both the leader, & the follower
                  
                  ſhall fall into the bottomleſſe pit of euerlaſting deſtruction.
               
            
            
               BBut let vs now come to the very point andNow to the very purpoſe of D. Allens pamphlet. purpoſe, whereunto this cunning pamphlet of D. Allens appeareth wholy to tend: for he were very ſimple & of a ſhallow reach, that woulde thinke that D. Allen had not a further meaning herein, then to ſatisfie the conſciences of Sir William Stanley and his complices, touching the lawfulnes of their giuing vp of Deuenter, eſpecially when he had before (as he ſaith himſelfe) deliuered his opinion by his letters to Sir W. Stanley therevpon, (and therefore needed the leſſe to go about to reſolue them againe, which were neuer vnreſolued in that point:) & beſides, euen in this pamphlet which he pretendeth to write onely for their reſolution, ſpēdeth leaſt part of his time,D. Allen ſpē
                     deth the leaſt part of his labour in the iuſtification of the action which he pretendeth to be the occaſion of his pamphlet: & beſides leaueth it in the ende more indefenſible then in the beginning. labour, or cunning in that argument, neither iuſtifieth their action in any ſort, but onely with bare wordes voide of weight or ſubſtance (as hath bene ſufficiently ſhewed) but rather by his owne reaſons diſalloweth & reproueth it, & leaueth it in the midſt more doubtful & indefēſible then before: leaping into an other argument inuectiue againſt her Maieſtie; her doings, of her excōmunication, & depoſition by the Pope, & from thence to a perſwaſion of her liege people to reuolte from their obedience and allegeance vnto her. Whereby he plainely bewrayeth (euen more cleere and manifeſt then the light of the Sunne) to all men of any meane vnderſtanding,

yea to him that hath but halfe an eie, that his verie direct ende and purpoſe was wholy to prepareWhat his direct purpoſe is. the mindes of the Romiſh Recuſants (ſuch as are apt hearers, & readie followers of his doctrine) for the furtherance and aſsiſtance of all ſeditious practiſes, that maie bee mooued and attempted againſt her Maieſtie by the malicious Aſſociates of that wicked confederacie, and eſpecially of the moſt iniurious inuaſion, long ſince conſpired, and complotted, and now preſently prouided to bee put in execution againſt her Maieſtie and her Realme, by the K. of Spaine, the Pope, and their Adherents. And to this purpoſe wholy was this Pamphlet of D. Allens intended, and the other Theme (touching the rendring of Deuenter) enterteined onlie for an introduction therunto. WherinWhether D. Allen haue had any wrōg offered him in reſembling him to Sinon, let all men iudge. whether he haue had anie wrong offred him in reſembling him to Sinon, whom he hath ſo truely repreſented herein, I referre to the iudgement of the Romiſh Catholikes themſelues, that hold him in greateſt reuerence. Who, how ſoeuer they are affected towardes him for Religions ſake, yet if there be anie ſparke of true honor, Engliſh valour, or loue of their Countrie in them (as I truſt and aſſure my ſelfe there is) I doubt not but looking into, and well foreſeeing the end of his purpoſes, they will vtterly abhorre his vnnaturall practiſes.
               But marke I praie you the order hee obſeruethThe order which D Allen obſerueth to attaine vnto his purpoſe. to attaine vnto his intent.
               Firſt to drawe her Maieſtie into diſcredit and

diſliking with all men, and conſequently with her ſubiects, whereby they maie bee the more eaſilie incited againſt her: hee defameth all her moſt noble,Firſt, he defameth her Maieſties moſt noble and Princely actions. princelie, and Religious actions, vndertaken for the reliefe of her poore oppreſſed neighbours, by the name of publike robberies, and ſacrilegious warres againſt God and his Church.
               
               Secondly, to giue them ſome encouragementSecondly, he giueth the Subiect a warrant to diſobey and reuolt from her Maieſtie. and warrant (as it were) whereby they maie be the bolder to diſobey, and to renounce their due allegeance and ſeruice vnto her Maieſtie: hee teacheth them that ſince her Excommunication and Depoſition by the Pope, ſhee hath no iuſt title or intereſt vnto her Crowne and Kingdome, nor anie power or authoritie ouer them, to command them, but that they are euer ſince that time, freelie diſcharged from all duetie and allegeance vnto her Maieſtie: nay further, that no act done by her authoritie, ſince the publication of that Excommunication & Depoſition, hath beene, or can be lawfull by the law of God, or man: and therefore that no man may lawfully ſerue her in any action, be it otherwiſe neuer ſo iuſt.
               
               Whereupon he runneth into an earneſt perſuaſionThirdly, Hee perſuadeth them flatly to diſobedience, and plaine rebellion. of reuolt, to withdraw her Subiects from her ſeruice, and exhort them to the ſeruice of the Romiſh Catholike partie, and her enemies.
               What blaſphemous ſlanders, prodigious affirmations, impudent lies, and deuiliſh perſuaſions are theſe? and how farre vnbeſeeming the name,

profeſsion and calling of a Diuine? But what is there ſo honeſt and godlie, that D. Allen will not defame? what ſo falſe and incredible, that hee will not affirme? what ſo wicked and abhominable, that hee will not perſwade? It had been far fitterThe names and doings of Princes, are not to be called in queſtion by ſuch companions. for D. Allen to haue dealt with his Portis, and let alone the names and doings of Princes. If hee had been as buſie in his booke, and as carefull of thoſe thinges which belong to his vocation, he might haue ſought out more Diuinitie to ſatiſfie the Conſciences of his Catholike Soldiers, and with more credit (or probabilitie at the leaſt) defended their action, then he hath done.
               And as vnfit as it was for him, to call in queſtion the names and dooings of Princes, ſo vnmeet were it for mee, and repugnant to all good diſcretion, to preſume to enter into their defenſe, of whoſe actions I am neither able, nor worthie to ſpeake, ſufficiently for their worthines: whoſe ſacred Maieſtie and authoritie deriued from the high Gouernor of the world, is as the brightnes of the Sunne ſhining in his greateſt perfection, not to bee gazed on by our dazled eies, & ought to be a ſhield of protection to all their dooings, againſt the curious ſcanning, and venimous detraction of malicious monſters. Wherefore I wil not dare to meddle, ſo much as with the mention of their namesPrinces repreſent the power and Maieſtie of God on earth. or actions, whom God hath ordeined to repreſent his owne power, and authoritie ouer vs here on earth, without former crauing of pardon

with all humilitie, that I maie bee licenced onlie to examine the truth, (nay the deteſtable falſhood) of theſe moſt iniurious calumniations. Whereof alſo, that I maie not ſeeme to make a queſtion of that which is paſt al queſtion, & not to be brought into queſtion by ſuch companions, I will bee as ſpare of ſpeech, and vſe as much breuitie, as the cauſe and caſe will permit.
               Now then I praie you M. Allen (for to you will I now addreſſe my ſpeech, to you, which are the defamer of vertue it ſelfe, and the detracter of all godlines) what publike robberies are thoſe you obiect vnto vs (for her Maieſties name is not fit to be defiled by your impure lippes)? what ſacrilegious warres againſt God and his Church? If you meane the defenſe or reliefe of the low Countries, which is the onelie thing that galleth you, in reſpect of the K. of Spaine your chiefe Patrone, and the onlie matter that miniſtred you the argumentHer Maieſties dealings in the low countries alreadie iuſtified by D. Allens owne arguments. of this your pamphlet, her Maieſties dealings in that cauſe (which it pleaſeth you to terme wars) haue ben ſufficiently iuſtified alreadie againſt your obiections, in this former diſcourſe, as well by the ouerthrow of your arguments, as alſo by better and more forcible arguments brought againſt you, drawen euen from your owne Authors, nay from your owne manifeſt affirmations. Therefore haue you ſmall cauſe, and leſſe reaſon to runne on, vpon a headlong concluſion of your owne falſe aſſumptions, to defame thoſe actions, which you could

not diſprooue, nay which your owne aſſertions haue prooued moſt lawfull. This only ſhould bee ſufficient to ſtoppe your mouth, though there were nothing more to be ſaid in that behalfe.
               But becauſe I thinke it more expedient to ſatiſfie other men (ſuch as wil with reaſon be ſatiſfied) then neceſſarie to anſwere your ſlanders, I will not ſtand wholy vpon thoſe aduantages. VVherefore if anie man doubt either of the reaſon, intent, or IuſticeThe declaration of the cauſes that mooued her Maieſtie to relieue the diſtreſſed people of the low Countries: publiſhed, Anno. 1585. of that action; firſt, for the former pointes I referre him to the declaration publiſhed by authoritie, at the time when her Maieſtie firſt ſent her forces ouer into the low Countries, Anno. 1585. wherein are declared the cauſes that mooued her Maieſtie to giue aide and ſuccourſe vnto thoſe afflicted Countries, ſo fully and plainely, as I doubt not but may ſatiſfie anie reaſonable man, touching her reaſon, and intent therein.
               As for the iuſtice and lavvfulnes of the action, albeit the reaſon and intent thereof being before declared, and allovved, muſt needes make the action alſo iuſtifiable, vnto ſuch as ſhall allovv of the cauſes, yet becauſe D. Allen ſhall not runne cleare away vvith an opinion of his conceit, IHer Maieſties actions in the low Countries by further reaſons prooued lawfull. Offic. lib. 1. vvil thinke it no great labor to iuſtifie alſo the action, by argumēts dravven from his ovvn authors.
               
                  Iniuſtitiae duo ſunt genera, (ſaith Cicero): vnum eorum qui inferunt: alterum eorum, qui ab ijs, quibus infertur, ſi poſsint, non propulſant iniuriam. There are two kinds of iniuſtice: the one, in them that
                  
                  doe wrong, themſelues: the other in them that doe
                  It is one of the kindes of Iniury, or Iniuſtice, not to defend the iniuried. 
                  not reskue and defend other men, from the iniuries offered them, if they be able.
               
               Now of theſe two kinds of Iniustice, the one was exerciſed by the K. of Spaine vpon the people of the low Countries (as they ſaie themſelues, for I, for my part, will not imitate the example of D. Allen in charging Princes with Iniuſtice): whereupon the ſaid people crauing her Maieſties aide and aſsiſtance, the other kinde (ſaith Cicero) ſhould haue been offered them by her, if ſhee ſhould haue denied them her helpe and ſuccours, to defend themIbidem. from iniurie. Qui autem non defendit (ſaith hee) nec obſiſtit, ſi poteſt, iniuriae, tàm est in vitio, quàm ſi parentes, aut patriam, aut ſocios deſerat. But hee that doeth not defend, nor withstand, if hee can, the wrong done to others, is as much in fault, as if hee ſhould forſake his parentes, Countrie, or friendes: which is the moſt vnnaturall iniuſtice.
               Now if it be a principall point of Iniuſtice for a man not to defend and ſuccour them that are iniuried, if he be able, and ſo farre foorth as hee is able to doe it: then it followeth a contrarijs,
                  A principall part of Iuſtice, to defend the iniuried. that it is a principall part of Iustice, to aſsiſt and defend them that are wronged. By which argument her Maieſties moſt gracious and Princely action, in yeelding aide and defenſe vnto the poore oppreſſed people of the low Countries, is effectually prooued to bee moſt iuſt, lawfull,

and honourable, and hee a lyer, a ſlanderer, and an abuſer of men, that hath wickedly ſought to diſhonour it.
               I will not (though well and iuſtly I might) iuſtifie the action vpon Religion, (as beeing for the defenſe of the true Catholike and Apostolike Religion, which we profeſſe) becauſe I will not runne into the ſame fault, which I reprehend in him, that is, Petere principium, to ground mine argument vpon that which is in queſtion between him and me: no more then I wil allow him to impeach it vpon the authoritie of his former aſſumption, That all the Prouinces (of the low Countries) are confeſſed to bee his Catholike Maieſties ancient and vndoubtfull inheritance: which is in queſtion of armes euen at this day, and therefore not neceſſarie to bee diſprooued by mee: neither might I doe it, vnles I would offende in the ſame fault, which I alſo reprooue in D. Allen, that is, in dealing with Princes titles, which is no part of his duetie and mine.How falſly D. Allen chargeth her Maieſtie with entring by hoſtilitie into the K. of Spaines Dominions, &c.
                  
               
               Now how vniuſtly and falſly he chargeth her Maieſtie with entring by hostilitie into the King of Spaines Dominions, ſurpriſing his Townes and Castles, and bringing his people into her ſubiection: let all men iudge, that haue in them either reaſon, diſcretion, or indifferencie.
               Firſt, it is (as hath been alreadie ſaid) a thing in queſtion & cōtrouerſie, whether thoſe parts of the low coūtries, where her Maieſties forces haue bin,

be the K. of Spaines Dominions, or no: and if they bee not, then is this a moſt euident and manifeſt ſlander, euen before the face of the whole world.
               But ſuppoſe them to be the K. of Spaines Dominions, as he preſumeth; yet is it not vnknowen to anie priuate mean man in this Realme, that knoweth anie thing of the affaires of thoſe Countries, that her Maieſtie hath beene offered, yea, with humble and earneſt ſute of the people of thoſe partes, intreated, to take both them and their Countries into her abſolute protection, rule and gouernment, which, though thereHer Maieſtie being offered and intreated to take the low Countries into her abſolute gouernment, hath refuſed them. were no great doubt, but that ſhee might lawfully haue done, yet hath her Maieſtie euer hitherto vtterlie refuſed them: which ſhee needed not, neither by all likelihood would haue done, if ſhee had had anie ſuch great thirſt after thoſe Townes, Caſtles, Countries or peoples Dominion.
               
               No, her Maieſtie is content with her owneHer Maieſtie content with hir own kingdome. Her iuſt and mercifull gouernment. kingdome, and gouerneth her ſubiects by lawfull authoritie, with Iuſtice and Clemency, not by tyranny, with rigor, and oppreſsion: neither ſeeketh ſhee, either by the Popes pretended authoritie and aſsiſtance to depoſe, or by violēt armes to depriue, other Princes of their kingdomes. Shee cleaueth not to the Pope, to make his ſupreme power a warrant for her will, though ſhe might haue many aduantages and priuiledges therby, to take & leaueIt is a great benefit for him that ſeeketh worldly pleaſure or profit, to be frendes with the Pope, who by his ſpeciall prerogatiue can diſpence with any ſin, be it neuer ſo abhommable and make all thinges lawfull that he luſteth, howſoeuer God forbid them. what, where, when, & how ſhe liketh, to confound

all lawes, both of God and man, and to make all lawfull that ſhe luſteth: but ſhe hath care of her owneſoule, and conſcience, and of the charge committed vnto her by him, to whom onely ſhe is to giue account thereof: ſhe reſpecteth not her own profit or pleaſure, but the puritie and ſyncerity of religion, and the true worſhip of God: & therefore ſhe reiecteth all frendſhip, fauour, and countenance of the Pope. She thinketh not kingdomes to be rightly theirs that can catch them, nor practiſeth by Machiauelian ſhiftes (as you terme them) to diſpoſſeſſe Princes of their liues, to the intent to poſſeſſe her ſelfe of their kingdomes.For this which D. Allen obiecteth to vs, let him looke to his own party. She thruſteth not her neighbours out of their rightfull inheritance, to enlarge her owne dominions, but diminiſheth her owne forces, to ſuccour and relieue her diſtreſſed neighbours. And ſhall theſe her moſt vertuous, godly, and religious actions be defamed by a moſt vitious, vngodly, and malicious detractor?
               But the Palme tree, which reſembleth vertue, the more it is burthened, the more it riſeth againe, and the pure gold the more it is rubbed, the more it gliſtereth; and her vertuous, pure, andD. Allens tongue is no ſlaunder. golden deedes, the more they are blaſphemed by ſuch an one, whoſe tongue (as they ſay) is no ſlaunder, but his reproch rather a credit, the brighter ſhall they ſhine in glorie to the euerlaſting memorie of her vnſpotted renowne.
               And ſince I am in hand with D. Allens malicious

and ſlanderous inueighing againſt her Maieſtie, and her miniſters, I may not by the way omit this proper quippe giuen my L of Leiceſter (wherein he ſeemeth wonderfully to haue pleaſed his owne queint conceit) by offering a compariſon betweene the D. of Parmaes glorious exploits, and his Lordſhips famous
                  D. Allens Scoſſes at the Earle of Leiceſter.
                   
                  factes (as it pleaſeth him skornefully to terme them) with a ſcilicet.
               
               
                  O le pidum caput, O luſty Cardinall: ſo well it becometh a man of your coate and calling, to play Dauus, to take vpon you the part and perſon of a ſcoffer? And I pray you what great1. Pſal. 1. and hath not ſit in the seat of skorners. diſhonor haue you done the noble Earle therin? As though his vertues were ſo farre inferiour, to the others. I ſpeake not any way to the derogatiō of the Dukes honor, for I know him to be a worthy a Prince, and a famous ſoldiour: neither by way of compariſon, for I am not ſo il nurtured, as to make cōpariſons betwene Princes. But I hope your Catholike ſoldiours Sir W. Stanley, and Rowland Yorke, & the reſt will confeſſe, that for the ſmall time he was in thoſe countries, & the little meanes he had there, conſidering alſo the great croſſes he had both there and elſewhere, he wasThe Earle of Leiceſters managing of the low coū
                     trie affaires during his abode there. neither idle, nor ſpent his time & trauell in vaine: he ſhewed ſufficiencie inough both in his temperate, prudent, and politike gouernment of the State, and managing of the militarie affaires: neither was he backward for his owne perſon

(if he were not too forward) at any ſeruice in the field, where either his counſell, preſence, or help of hand was required. They all know this to bee
                     Graue betrayed. true. And, howſoeuer Graue was cowardly (and by euident proofe alſo trayterouſly) deliuered by Hemert the Gouernor, Venlo ſold by the Burghers,
                     Venlo ſolde. before th'enimie euer prepared to march towards it, Nuys (after the wounding of the Gouernor)
                     Nuys badly loſt. with little force obteined, but not without ſome trechery, & laſtly Berke two monethes
                     Berke two moneths beſieged and then abandoned for feare of our army marching towardes it. beſieged, & in the end abādoned for fe
                     •…
                  e of the Earle of Leiceſter with his army, being at Eltē
                   onward in his march thither, to leauy the ſiege: yet my L. of Leiceſter (with a very ſmal power, not aboue 5000. men, of al ſorts) encāped before Duisburgh on tueſday, entrēched it on wedneſday, plāted
                     Duisburgh yeelded to the Earle of Leiceſter on Fryday the ſecōd of Septembre 1586. his ordinance on Thurſday, battered it on Friday, and had it yeelded to his mercy the ſame day by noone: and within a fortnight after, remoued with the ſame power to Zutphen, abode the Duke of Parmaes coming (who was reportedThis encoū
                     ter was the 22. of Sept. 1586, wherin the moſt worthy, noble, and valiant knight Sir Philip Sidney receiued his deth
                        •
                      wound. to come with almoſt foure times ſo many) encountred his vantgard one to ſixe at the leaſt, beſieged the fort, and within three weekes The Earle of Leiceſter wan the ſort, the 6. day of October following, the Prince being with his whole army within two mile of the place. wan it, euen in the Duke of Parmaes ſight, which had before that time endured ten monethes ſiege of more thē twice ſo great an army, & yet held good Neither did the Earle of Leiceſter raiſe his ſiege from either of theſe pieces, till he had gottē thē:

neither bought he either of them, but with theHere are not mentioned all the ſeruices which were done vnder the Earle of Leiceſters conduct in the low countries, as the ouerthrow of the Spaniards at Graue, the winning of Axell, and diuers fortes and Caſtles in thoſe partes, but onely thoſe partes, but onely thoſe ſeruices wherat he himſelfe was preſent in perſon, & a principall director and actor in them all. price of his owne labour & induſtrie (being preſent in perſon and giuing both direction & aſſiſtance in all theſe ſeruices) and with the bloud of his ſoldiours, and thoſe very few. All this your Catholike ſoldiours alſo know to bee moſt true. And are theſe exploits, none at all, or to be contemned and derided?
               But in truth M. Doctor you know not what they be, and therefore you make light of them. If D. Allen had bene there, I beleeue hee would haue bene in an other humour, skarce ſo pleaſant, though happely more ridiculous. I would you had bene preſent your ſelfe either in the towne of Duisburgh, or in one of the fortes of Zutphen, to haue ſeene them: then might you better haue iudged of them, at the leaſt I am perſwaded you would not ſo haue skorned them.
               And if you thinke the infortunate ſucceſſe of Sluys the yeare following, an impeachment to the credit gotten by theſe exploits: you do greatly abuſe your ſelfe. The fault of the loſſe of Sluys, not to be imputed to the Earle of Leiceſter, which was in other mens negligence, or For it is very▪ well knowne to all men (eſpecially of thoſe countries) where and in whom the fault of that default lay. For if thoſe preparations which my L. of Leiceſter commanded, and made ſure account of, had bin duely accompliſhed, as they were certainely promiſed and aſſured by them that had the charge thereof: the towne had (with Gods helpe) vndoubtedly bene relieued. But howſoeuer the matter fel out either by the negligent or treacherous dealings of other men, that were put in truſt therein: I ſay with Ouid: careat ſucceſsibus opto,
                  
                  Quiſquis ab euentu facta notanda put at: Ill may he
                  Epiſt. 2. 
                  chieue, that meaſureth the fact by the euent: and little reaſon hath he, that will impute another mans fault, as a diſhonour to my L. of Leiceſter.
               
               But herein may you plainely ſee the intemperancie of D. Allen, and how he dealeth by affection, that when he hath nothing that he can iuſtly obiect in particular to ſo honorable and worthy a noble man, yet he will in a general ſort glaunce at him, only to bring his name in queſtion with the multitude. But all the worlde may eaſily know the cauſe why the Earle of Leiceſter
                  The cauſe why the Earle of Leiceſter is moſt odious to D. Allen. is aboue al mē the moſt odious to D. Allē, that is, onely becauſe he is one of the greateſt, & principall patrons of true religion, which D. Allen ſo much hateth.
               And for this cauſe alſo haue there bene ſundrySundry libels heretofore caſt forth by Papiſts particularly againſt the Earle of Leiceſter.
                   other infamous libels heretofore ſecretly caſt out and ſpred abroad, againſt this moſt noble gentlemā, likely inough by Allen himſelfe, or by Perſons, or atleaſt ſome one of that viperous backbiting generation. Wherein, the authors (as if Belzebub himſelfe, the maiſter of that malicious ſect, had ſat by, & giuen them inſtructions) haue not only raked their owne braines to theThe Papiſtes cankred malice to the Earle of Leiceſter
                   bare ſcull, but (I am ſure) haue not left any one corner within the whole compaſſe of Hell it ſelfe vnranſacked, to ſeeke and find out ſome new & ſtrange kinds of rancor and venim (more then

all the Poets from the beginning of the worlde could euer inuent for the deſcription of Enuie, & the Furies themſelues) wherewith to exaſperate and empoiſon their moſt outragious ſlaunders, breathed out againſt him. Which euen vpon the very firſt view haue appeared vnto all men ſo manifeſtly falſe, monſtrous, and farre from all colour of truth, credit, or likelyhood, as his very enimies themſelues, and ſuch asTheir libels diſcredited euen by the notorious falſhoods conteined in them. hate him in their hartes, haue not onely bene aſhamed of the ſlaunders, but openlye condemned the authours of that moſt barbarous villany, and ſhameleſſe immanity. In which reſpect being with all men generally ſo much diſcredited, deteſted and abhorred for their abhominable vntruth, they haue not hitherto beneAnd therefore thought not fit to be anſwered. thought worthy, fit, or ſeemely to be anſwered by any man, and therefore ſhall not preſently be further ſtirred by me, but returned to the filthy ſinke, from whence they proceeded.
               And for the authours thereof, as, thinking byThe miſchief which the authours therof meant vnto the Earle, is fallen vpon their own heads. this meanes to make his Lordſhip odious amōgſt men, they haue not onely failed of their purpoſe, but haue thereby alſo made themſelues hatefull vnto God, and infamous to the worlde, and fallen themſelues into the pit which they digged for him: So haue they contrarie to theirPſal. 7. 15. own minds, and againſt their willes) heaped on his head the heauenly bleſſings which Chriſt himſelfe with his owne mouth pronounceth

vpon thoſe which are reuiled, perſecuted, & falſely
                  Matth. 5. 11. 
                  ſlandered for his ſake. Which may be, and (no doubt) is a ſingular comfort to the moſt honourable, zealous, and godly minded Earle, not onely to deſpiſe and contemne their deſpitefull ſlanders, but ſo much the more hartily to reioyce and triumph ouer their malice, as he ſeeth him ſelfe the more impudently, and furiouſly aſſailed with their iniurious reproches.
               It were too much labour, and too ill beſtowed, either to reply vpon, or to repeate all the railing and ſlanderous ſpeeches, which D. Allen belcheth out againſt his Soueraigne, her miniſters, and countrey: for therein onely (in mine opinion) he ſeemeth to himſelfe to haue beſt grace. But he that will defile his owne neſt (as they ſay) the countrey wherein he was borne and bred, calling it the Buckler of all rebellion and iniuſtice,
                  D. Allens vnnaturall impiety towards his countrey. 
                  and an enimie of lawfull Dominion and Superioritie, yea, he that will not ſticke to rippe vp the wombe, and to teare and take out the bowels of his owne mother, he that will endeuour to bring in an inuaſion, to the vtter ſpoyle, ruine, and depopulation of his deare countrye: what iniurie, what wickedneſſe, what impietye, will hee leaue vnattempted?
               But now will I come to the ſecond ſtep of hisThe ſecond ſteppe of D Allens ladder. ladder, wherein (hauing already ſought, by defaming her Maieſties moſt iuſt & honorable actiōs,

to withdraw the hartes & loue of her ſubiectesTo giue the ſubiect a warrant for his diſobedience. from her) he now goeth about to embolden them to diſobey her, by giuing them a warrant for their diſobedience, teaching that ſince her Maieſtie was excommunicate and depoſed by the Popes authoritye, there is no ſubiect that neede or ought, or may lawfully ſerue her in any caſe, be it otherwiſe neuer ſo lawfull.
               
               A very good doctrine (no doubt) and well agreeing with the word of God.
               
               The holy Ghoſt ſaith, Let euery ſoule be ſubiect
                  Obedience & ſubiection both to the Prince and his miniſters, commanded. 
                  to the higher power: and whoſoeuer reſiſteth the power, reſiſteth the ordinance of God, and they that reſiſt ſhall receiue to themſelues iudgement. And further: Submit your ſelues, whether it be to the king,
                  Rom. 13. 1, & 2. 
                        •
                     . Pet. 2. 13. 14. & 15. ver. 
                  as vnto the ſuperiour, or vnto Gouernours, as ſent by him: for ſo is the will of God. &c.
               
               But theſe are matters out of my profeſsion, and meeter to be argued by Diuines, and ſo is all this whole queſtion touching the excommunication and depoſition of Princes. Yet becauſe I ſee litle Diuinitie vſed by D. Allen for the proofe ofLittle Diuinity or rather none at all vſed by D. Allen to warrant the ſubiects diſobedience. his part, but ſuch as may eaſily be anſwered by a man of ſmall reading, I may be the bolder in briefe manner to examine his handling of this point, that you may ſee what he hath to ſay for manteinance of this ſeditious doctrine. Wherein if I proceede vltra crepidam (as D. Allen hath doone in dealing with Princes

titles and State matters) or ſteppe a little out of ſquare, I humbly craue pardon of the learned Diuines, for entring into their profeſsiō, which D. Allen doeth not of Princes, for entring into their poſſeſsion. But the leſſe maruell is it that hee is ſo bold with Princes in that point, when he toucheth theirD. Allen is very bold with Princes, which maketh them all ſubiect to a Prieſt.
                   freeholds ſo much neerer, in making both them, their perſons, and kingdomes ſubiect to the Commandement, and diſpoſing of a man of as meane qualitie (in a maner) as himſelfe.
               But we ſee God hath giuen vnto Princes authoritie and commandement ouer their Subiects, and hath willed all ſorts of people, as well Eccleſiaſticall, as Temporall (and conſequently both D. Allen and the Pope himſelfe) to ſubmit themſelues vnto Princes, to be ſubiect vnto them, to obey, and not to reſiſt them, vnder paine of iudgement: let vs ſee then by what authoritie D. Allen can releaſe and diſcharge the Subiect from his obedience, duetie, and allegeance vnto his Prince.
               His firſt authoritie is taken from Hildebrand
                  D. Allens firſt authoritie to warrant diſobedience to the Prince▪ Hildebrand a Pope of Rome, otherwiſe called Gregory the ſeuenth. (whom hee calleth Gregory the ſeuenth) who taking vpon him more like a king of kinges, or lord of the whole world, then like a true ſcholler and follower of Christ, pronounceth his decree with a great Maieſtie in the plurall number, We (ſaith he) according to our predeceſſours Decrees, doe aſſoile & diſcharge all them that by obligation of oath, or fidelitie, are bound to perſons excommunicate: and that they doe not obey ſuch, we do expreſly forbid.
               
               
                  His ſecōd authoritie (which is euen the like) heD. Allens ſecond authoritie to warrant diſobedience. Pope Vrban the ſecond. fetcheth from Vrbanus the ſecond, who vſeth this inhibition: forbid (ſaith hee) the ſworne ſoldiers of Conte Hugh, that they ſerue him not ſo long as hee ſtandeth Excommunicate: And if they pretende their former oath made vnto him: admoniſh them that God is to be ſerued before men, and that the oth which they made to him when hee was a Chriſtian Prince, is not now to be kept towards him, being an enemy to God and his Saints, and a breaker and contemner of their commandements.
               
               A faire paire of authorities, drawen from a coupleA good warrant from a paire of Popes.
                   of Popes, who had euen as good authoritie to giue theſe diſcharges and inhibitions, as D. Allen himſelfe.
               Is this the beſt warrant you haue to releaſe the
                     Pope Hildebrand tooke vpon him to Excommunicate the Emperour Henry the fourth, & to make wars againſt him, and erect another Emperour in his place: But God (to puniſh the pride of the Pope, & diſobedience of his Adherents) giuing the victorie vnto the true Emperour Henry the fourth, againſt the vſurping Pope and Emperour, the ſaid Henry cauſed Hildebrand himſelfe by a Synode in Italy to be depoſed, as Pope Iohn, Sylueſter, Benet, and Gregory the ſixt, were alſo by other Emperours, foure Popes within a few yeeres depoſed. ſubiect of his oath and obedience to his Prince, becauſe two Popes of your owne pack (whoſe whole practiſe hath been for theſe foure or fiue hundreth yeeres, to bring the heads of Princes vnder their girdles) haue, to that intēt, pronounced it to be lawful for the ſubiect, to renounce his allegeance to his Prince, whenſoeuer it ſhould pleaſe his holines (forſooth) vpon any diſpleaſure or priuate occaſion (vnder pretence of ſome hainous crime) to Excommunicate him?
               What if we ſhould deny that theſe Popes, or any other Pope euer had, or hath any authoritie to

Excommunicate a forrein Prince, no way ſubiect to his charge? D. Allen hath not prooued it in his Pamphlet, nor anie where els, neither is hee able to prooue it with the helpe of all the Cardinals in Rome (yea and of the Pope himſelfe too) while he liueth.
               But ſuch as are Romaniſts, are of another minde, and will happely beleeue D. Allens bare affirmation in this behalfe, and ſo may be perſuaded, not onely that the Pope hath authoritie to Excommunicate and depoſe Princes at his pleaſure, but alſo that the ſubiects of Princes ſo Excommunicate and depoſed by the Pope, may lawfully, and ought in duetie to diſobey and reuolt from their ſeruice.
               How they may bee ſeduced by erroneous doctrine, I know not: but for other men, that are either of ſounder Religion, or men indifferent, or not ſo throughly, and obſtinately (as vpon a meereNeither D. Allens affirmation, nor the authoritie of anie Pope, ought to haue any credit, being directly contradictorie to the expreſſe word of God.
                   ſelfewill) addicted to that faction, I doubt not but they will be better aduiſed, then to giue credit vnto the affirmation of anie man, or the authoritie of anie Pope (though hee make himſelfe more then a man) beeing directly contradictorie to the expreſſe word, and will of God, as hath been ſhewed by the places of Scripture aboue rehearſed, and by manie more may be.
               But becauſe they alſo ſhall not haue anie colour of defenſe left them, whereby to excuſe themſelues ſo much as vpon ignorance in this behalfe, I will (ſince I am entred into it) laie before

them, in as few words as I can, the abuſes of D. Allen whereby hee goeth about to deceiue them in this point, and prooue directly and manifeſtly vnto them, that neither the Pope hath any authoritie to depoſe Princes from their thrones, which is the ground whereon he buildeth his warrant of reuolt: and further that it is vtterly vnlawfull for the Subiect, for any ſuch occaſion to deny the Prince the obedience, ſubiection, and ſeruice due vnto him, much more in traitorous manner to rebell againſt him; which D. Allen ſo alloweth and commendeth.
               Firſt therefore, as concerning the Popes authoritieThat the Pope hath no authoritie to depoſe Princes. to depoſe Princes, I demand from whom hee hath that authoritie, whether of himſelfe, or from God? Of himſelfe I know he will not ſay, for that were as great arrogancie, as abſurditie in him to ſaie. And if he would (as perhaps he could be content to take it vpon himſelfe, if hee thought it might go for currant) yet can hee not yeeld any colour or ſhew of reaſon to mainteine it, being
                     Rom. 13. There is no power, but of God, Ergo, the Pope can haue no power of himſelfe to depoſe Princes. contrarie to the expreſſe word of God. For There is no power (ſaith the Apoſtle) but of God, and the powers that be, are ordeined of God. Then can the Pope haue no power or authoritie of himſelfe, vnleſſe he will affirme himſelfe to be God. Againe, No man hath power of himſelfe to fruſtrate the ordinance of God, Ergo the Pope hath no power of himſelfe to depoſe Princes, which are ordeined of God. And the Prince being a power, and conſequently ordeined of God, it were great preſumption in him to affirm, and greater blindnes in men to beleeue, that the authoritie of man can fruſtrate or take away the ordinance of God.
               
               
                  It reſteth therefore, that the Pope, if he haue anieIf the Pope haue any authoritie to depoſe Princes, he muſt haue it from God. authoritie to depoſe Princes, he muſt haue it from God. 
                  If he haue it from God, he muſt haue it by ſome warrant out of his word. And if he haue it from God, thē is there ſome warrant in his word to authoriſe the Pope thereunto: But no place of Scripture giueth him warrant to depoſe Princes. But there is not anie place of Scripture that giueth the Pope any expreſſe power to depoſe Princes: Ergo, he hath no authoritie from God. and therfore hath he no ſuch authoritie from God.
               
               For the proofe of my Minor: Firſt it is likely, that If any place of Scripture had warranted the Pope to depoſe Princes, it is likely D. Allen would haue alledged it: but he alledgeth none. if there were any ſuch place of Scripture, as giueth the Pope expreſſe power to depoſe Princes, D. Allen would vndoubtedly haue alledged it, for the more credit of the cauſe, and not haue paſſed it ouer with a bare affirmation, beeing a matter heretofore by many and manifeſt arguments and proofes of Scripture, cleerly diſprooued, and conuinced againſt him.
               Secondly, for further confirmation thereof, I reaſon thus: Beſides the obedience and ſubiection which God hath commanded in the Scripture to be done vnto Princes, hee hath further forbidden all men Exod. 22. 28. Eccleſiaſtes, 10. 20. 
                  to ſpeake euill of the ruler of the people, or to curſe the King, yea ſo much as in thought. Whereupon I frame this argument.
               
                  God forbiddeth all men to ſpeake euil of Princes, ſo much as in thought: Ergo much more to hurt them in deed, and to depriue them of their kingdomes, and liues too, which the Pope ſeeketh to doe, and D Allen mainteineth, may lawfully be done. 
                  God forbiddeth all men to curſe the King, yea ſo much as in thought, Ergo: he forbiddeth the Pope to curſe the King, ſo much as in thought; And he that forbiddeth to doe the leſſe, much more forbiddeth to doe the greater: But it is far greater to curſe the K. indeed, & openly, and to depriue him of his

kingdome, then to curſe him in thought only, or to ſpeake euill of him: Ergo, God forbidding the Pope to ſpeake euill of the King, or to curſe him in his thought, much more forbiddeth him to curſe the King openly, or to depriue him of his kingdome: wherupon it followeth by good conſequence, that God doth not in any place of Scripture authoriſe the Pope to depoſe Princes: for ſo ſhould he allow and warrant that in one place, which he hath forbidden in another: whereof you ſee what inconuenience ſhould follow, that God ſhould command contraries, and the Scriptures ſhould bee repugnant to themſelues, which were plaine Atheiſme to affirm. Whereby it maie be cleare and manifeſt vnto euerie man, that hath any ſenſe of Chriſtianitie in him, that God hauing in theſe former places of Scripture expreſly forbidden all men to curſe in thought, or to ſpeake euill of the King, much more to curſe him openly or to bereaue him of his kingdome, doeth not therefore in anie place of Scripture admit or authoriſe anie man (contrarie to this inhibition) to curſe, excommunicate, and depoſe PrincesWhat God commandeth in one place of Scripture, he doth not countermand in another: neither are the Scriptures cō
                     trarie one to another. out of their kingdomes. For that were to countermand his owne commandements, and to ſhew himſelfe variable, inconſtant, & repugnant to himſelfe, which were high impietie for anie man to imagine.
               Thus you ſee (beſide the preſumption, which is to be gathered out of D. Allens own dealing, in that hee alledgeth no place of Scripture to warrant the Popes depriuing of Princes, that it is therfore likely that no place of Scripture doth authoriſe him thervnto)

you ſee it (I ſay) directly proued by ſound and ſubſtantiall argumēt, (as by many more alſo might be verie aboundantly, if either the cauſe required proofe, or if it were my purpoſe to ſtand vpon the confirmation of that, which is of itſelfe ſo manifeſt) that the Pope neither hath, nor can haue anie expreſſe authoritie, giuen him directly by the word of God to depoſe Princes: which is the thing that God reſerueth wholy to himſelfe: for it is he (not the Pope) that depoſeth the mighty from their ſeat, & exalteth
                  Luke. 1. Dan. 2. 20. & cap. 4. 14. & 22. 
                  them that are low: it is he (not the Pope) that putteth downe kings, & ſetteth vp kings, and giueth kingdomes to whomſoeuer he will. For God hath ordeined
                     God (not the Pope) putteth downe and ſetteth vp Kings. Princes to rule his people, and to repreſent his own Maieſtie amongſt them, which cannot be ſubiect to any earthly creature: & as he hath put all men in ſubiection vnder them (as his own Vicegerents on Earth) ſo hath he ſubiected thē vnto none, but onely and immediatly to himſelfe. Which ſupremeThe ancient Fathers and Doctors of the Church, confirme the ſupreme authoritie of Princes next immediatly vnder God. Tertul. ad Scapulam.
                   authoritie of Princes next vnder God, howſoeuer D. Allen doth maliciouſly and wickedly impugne, yet the Church of Chriſt hath euer confeſſed & confirmed it, as appeareth by the ſentences of the holie Fathers and Doctors of the Church touching that point. Colimus imperatorem (ſaith Tertullian) vt hominē a Deo ſecundum, & ſolo Deo minorem: we worſhip the Emperour, as a man next vnto God, & inferiour to God only. And againe, Deum eſſe
                  Idem in Apologetico. 
                  ſolum, in cuius ſolius potestate ſunt, à quo ſunt ſecundi, post quem primi, ante omnes & ſuper omnes Deos & homines: That it is
                  
                  God onely, in whoſe power alone Princes are, to whom they are ſecond, and after whom they are firſt, before all, and ouer all both Gods and men. Optatus in likeOptat. contra Parmenian. lib. 3. ſort ſaith: Super Imperatorem non eſt niſi ſolus Deus qui fecit Imperatorem: There is none aboue the Emperour but onely God, who made the Emperour.
                  Chryſoſtom ad populum Antioch. hom. 2. Greg. epiſt. lib. 3. cap. 100. & cap. 103. And Chryſoſtome ſaith: Parem vllum ſuper terram non habet: The Emperour hath no equall on earth. And Gregory affirmeth further, That power is giuen to Princes from heauen ouer all men, not only ſoldiers, but Prieſts.
               
               If Princes then (by the iudgement of the old learned Fathers and Doctors of the Church, whoſe names D. Allen doeth more boaſt of, then alledge their teſtimonies) bee in authoritie next vnto God, inferior to him only, & ſuperiors to all men; and if there be none aboue the Prince, but onely God
                  The Pope muſt neceſſarily preſume himſelfe to be God, els can he not be aboue Princes. who made the Prince: the Pope muſt of neceſsitie either preſume himſelfe to be God, els can he not be aboue the Prince, or at the leaſt make himſelfe no man, but a monſter, otherwiſe muſt he needes be inferiour to the Prince.
               And if the Prince haue no equall on earth: theThe Pope muſt either acknowledge himſelfe to be no man, and not to bee at all, or els muſt he neceſſarily be inferior to Princes. 
                  Pope muſt either acknowledge himſelfe to bee vnder the Prince, or els not to bee at all.
               
                  The Pope, whatſoeuer he be, Eccleſiaſticall or temporall perſon, muſt needes be ſubiect to the power of Princes. And if power be giuen vnto Princes from heauen ouer all men, not only ſoldiers, but Prieſtes alſo: then cannot the Pope (whether hee bee ſoldier, or Prieſt, or whatſoeuer hee be, ſo hee be a man) exempt himſelfe frō that power, which God hath giuen vnto the Prince ouer him: much les can

he take away from Princes that power, whichThe power to ſet vp, and put downe Princes, peculiar to God alone. 
                  God hath giuen vnto them. For the power of ſetting vp and putting downe Princes (being in Maieſtie the greateſt on earth, and proper to God himſelfe alone) hath he not imparted vnto anye earthly creature, either abſolutely from himhimſelfe, or iointly with himſelfe, but hath reſerued it wholy to himſelfe.
               But becauſe D. Allen is ſo much more deuotedD. Allen more deuoted to the Pope then to God.
                   vnto the Pope then to God, as that he can bee content to pull out of Gods hand his peculiar authority and prerogatiue, to draw the ſame wholy vnto the Pope, by what meanes he careth not,A notable impiety added to ſacrilege right, or wrong, and (the more to augment the iniurie) will needes make Gods own word a warrant to robbe himſelfe of his honour, and right: hauing already ſhewed that he cannot by anye meanes directly drawe from God vnto the Pope, the authoritie of depoſing Princes, I will lay before you alſo the indirect meanes he vſeth in this pamphlet, to accompliſh his intent, and how litleWhat D. Allen cannot proue directly by ſentence of Scripture, he endeuoureth indirectly to induce by example. Athalia. Ahab. Ieſabell.
                   they alſo ſerue his turne.
               What he cannot proue by ſentence of Scripture, he laboureth (by the way) to induce by example: as namely by the mention of the vſurping Queene Athalia, the wicked King Ahab, and curſed Ieſabell, who were all (as he ſeemeth to intend) depoſed from their kingdomes and ſlaine: becauſe the Prieſtes and Prophets of God did therein giue aſſiſtance, counſell, or direction, he

woulde hereupon faine inferre, that the Pope may by theſe examples take away both the crownes and liues of princes.
               An argument farre fet, in truth, and ſauouringAn argumēt ſauouring more of malice, then of ſubſtance. more of malice then of ſubſtance. For, the compariſon of her Maieſtie vnto an vſurper, or to wicked Idolaters, is as odious and vnproper, as the reſemblance of the Pope to the holy Prophets, is vnfitte and vnequall. Wherin I muſt note vnto you by the way an euill ſpirite in D. Allen, that ſeeketh (or rather ſnatcheth)
                     D. Allens cankred mind. all opportunities to ſpit forth his venim againſt ſo gratious a princeſſe. But let vs leaue his vice vpon himſelfe, and looke in to the vertue of his argument.
               
                  Athalia, was lawfully depoſed from the kingdom,
                  
                     D. Allens argument drawne from the example of Athalia.
                   
                  and ſlaine, by the authoritie of Ioiada the high prieſt: Ergo the Pope hath authority both to depoſe, and procure the death of the Queenes Maieſtie: (For that is it, that D. Allen doth as earneſtly labour to iuſtify, as the Pope doth diligently endeuour to atchieue:) but I truſt the Pope ſhall faile aſmuch of his wicked intent, as the Doctor faileth in his weake argument.
               Whereof, to ſpeake firſt of the whole, I doeThe conſequent denyed vtterly deny his conſequent. For neither is it to be graunted him, that the Popes authority isThe reaſon why. as great againſt the Queenes Maieſtie, as Ioiadaes was againſt Athalia: neither is her Maieſties caſe like to Athaliaes: of both which

I will make plaine demonſtration.
               Firſt concerning Ioiada, as he was high prieſt,The Demonſtration ſhewing the difference betweene both the perſons▪ and caſes. ſo was he alſo the Priace of his tribe, and thereby had more authoritie to deale in the ſtate of that kingdome, then the Pope can haue to deale in a forreine kingdome. And for Athalia, ſhe was an vſurper, who came to the crowne by killing the kinges children, all ſauing one, whom Ioiada kept ſecret and ſaued from her furie, vntill he had the meanes to reſtore him to his kingdome, by ſuppreſſing the vſurper. But it is very well knowne, that the Queenes Maieſtie is no vſurper, but a lawfullThe Queenes Maieſtie knowne to be a lawfull prince, no vſurper. Prince, neither came to the crowne by any ſuch wicked meanes, but by due right of inheritaunce: So is there as great oddes betwixt her caſe and Athaliaes, as betweene the authority of Ioiada, and of the Pope: And the caſes being vnlike, the conſequent cannot be good. For though an vſurper may lawfully be depoſed, and ſlaine, yet it followeth not therefore that a rightfull Prince may: and though the chiefe Princes and States of a countrey vnited together, may aide and aſsiſt the lawfull King to place him in his throne, and to put downe the vſurper: yet doth it not follow, that a prieſt, which is a meere ſtraunger to the countrie, may therefore thruſt a lawfull Prince out of his kingdome.
               And as little reaſon as there is in his conſequent,
                  D. Allens Antecedent alſo falſe.
                  
ſo litle truth is there in the antecedent. For neither was Athalia depoſed and ſlaine by Ioiada himſelfe, neither by his authority (much leſſe by the authority of his prieſthood:) For he did not in any ſort take the matter, or the authority vpon himſelfe, but what he did, he did by the common conſent of the Nobles and Capteines, whom (as the text ſaith) before he would attempt any thing, he cauſed to come vnto him into the houſe of the Lord, and made a couenant with thē,
                  2. Kings. 11. 
                  and tooke an oth of them in the houſe of the Lord, & ſhewed them the kinges ſonne, After which conſent and couenant accorded amongſt them, hauing diſpoſed an order for the proclaiming and
                     Ioaſh was reſtored not by Ioiada alone, but by the whole Nobility and State.
                   eſtabliſhing of Ioaſh (the young & rightfull king) whom he had ſo ſaued from the maſſacre, hee brought him forth (as the text ſaith) and put the Crowne vpon him, and gaue him the teſtimonie, and têhy made him king: And when Athalia hearing
                     Athalia depoſed and ſlaine by the Nobles and State, not by Ioiada alone, nor by his authority. the noiſe of the running of the people, came in, and cryed treaſon, treaſon: the text ſaith, thêy layd handes on her and ſhe went by the way, by which the horſes go to the houſe of the king, and there was ſhee ſlaine.
               
               So it appeareth by the very text itſelfe, that Athalia was neither depoſed nor ſlaine by Ioiada, nor by his authority, but by the Nobles & whole ſtate of the countrey, and by the authoritye of the rightfull king, whom they firſtcrowned, annointed, and proclaimed: neither did

                  Ioiada any thing in the matter, more then duety, nature, and conſcience moued him vnto, to preſent vnto the nobles and fathers of Iſraell, the kinges ſonne whom he had ſaued, and to further the reſtoring of him to his right, being the king his maiſters ſonne, and neereſt allyed vnto him, and (eſpecially) right heire to the kingdome: None authoritie did hee take vpon himſelfe therein, eſpecially in reſpect of his prieſthood. Thus you ſee how little this example of of the vſurping Queene Athalia ſerueth D. Allens turne to proue the Popes authority to depoſe Princes.
               And for the other of Ahab, & Ieſabell, theyAhab and Ieſabell. proue euen as much. For if D. Allen meane Ahab himſelfe, touching his owne perſon: he was neither
                     Ahab himſelf was neuer depoſed. depriued of his kingdome nor ſlaine by any prieſt or prophet, but died king of Iſraell, and was ſlaine in the field fighting againſt the king of Aram, about Ramoth Gilead. But if he1. King. 22. meane the ſonnes and whole houſe of Ahab, which were deſtroyed by Iehu, D. Allen abuſeth both himſelfe and you very much, to tell you that they were depoſed and deſtroyed eitherNeither prieſt nor prophet but Iehu (king of Iſraell, depoſed, and ſmote the whole houſe of Ahab. 2. Kings 9. by Prieſt or Prophet: for it was Iehu (the king of Iſraell) that ſlue Iehoram, and ſmote the houſe of Ahab, and cauſed Ieſabell to be caſt out of the window.
               But (ſaith D. Allen) Iehu receiued authority and commiſſion ſo to do, from Eliſeus the prophet: &

therefore the Pope may giue (and conſequently hath himſelfe) authoritie to depoſe and kill Princes.
               I deny your antecedent (M. Doctor:) For it is moſt falſe that Iehu receiued authority from Eliſeus (as you ſeeme to intend he did from Elias, miſtaking either the man, or the matter, in your defenſe of the Engliſh Catholike) to put downe the ſonne and whole houſe of Ahab: for the Prophet which was ſent by Eliſeus vnto Iehu to annoynt him, neuer ſpake word of Eliſeus to him, much leſſe deliuered him any authority from Eliſeus, but deliuered his meſſage expreſſely from God, beginning with, Thus ſaith the Lord God of Iſraell,
                  2. Kings. 9. 6. 
                  &c: not, Thus ſaith Eliſeus.
               
               So was it the authority of God (and not of aThe houſe of Ahab, and Ieſabell, depoſed and ſlaine by the authority and expreſſe commandement of God, not of a prieſt, or prophet.
                   Prophet) wherby the houſe of Ahab, and Ieſabel were put downe & ſlaine; neither was prieſt or prophet the doer, but Iehu the king of Iſraell, whom God had by ſpeciall commandement appointed to depoſe and ſmite them, being himſelf before annoynted king in their place by the ſame commandement. Now if D. Allen will hereupon gather any argument to mainteine the ſame authority in the Pope, to depoſe & deſtroy princes, he nuſt needs make him equall in authority with God: which neither Chriſtian, Iew, nor Pagan, will in reaſon allow vnto any mortall creature.
               Now for his other example of k. Saul, wherbyD. Allens example of k. Saul depoſed. he goeth about to inferre, that as Samuel depoſed

                  Saul, ſo the Pope may depoſe Princes: it doth not onely make nothing at all for his purpoſe, but is alſo moſt forcible againſt himſelfe, as ſhall bee moſt plainely declared vnto you. For whereas firſt he aſſumeth it as a thing moſt true and certeine, that Samuel depoſed Saul, he vtterlye
                     Saul not depoſed by Samuel.
                   miſtaketh, or rather moſt wickedly belyeth the holy hiſtorie in this, as he hath done in the others: For the Scripture ſaith, that God rebuked1. Sam. 16. 
                  Samuel for mourning for Saul, that God had reiected him from reigning ouer Iſrael. Whereby it appeareth manifeſtly, that although Samuel in this place (as the reſt of the prophets in other places) did by Gods expreſſe commaundement denounce the ſentence of depoſition; yet was it not Samuel but God himſelfe, that depoſed
                     Saule depoſed by God himſelfe to the great griefe of Samuel.
                   
                  Saule from his kingdome, to the great griefe of Samuel. So is D. Allens argument cleane ouerthrowne in this example aſwell as in the former, vnleſſe he will conclude, that the Pope
                  D. Allens argumēt ouerthrowne, vnleſſe he will conclude that the Popes authority is equall to Gods. hath in himſelfe as much authority, as God himſelfe; which I thinke he would not greatly ſticke to affirme, if he thought he might be belieued: for he maketh it not dainty to dubbe that which is as falſe, in ſaying that the prophets depoſed Princes. So little regard hath he either of God, or man, ſo that he may bring his purpoſe to effect.
               But let vs look further into this example, andThis example further proſecuted againſt D. Allen.
                   we ſhall ſee how farre it ſetteth him beſide the

ſaddle. Albeit Saule was thus depoſed by God himſelfe, and Dauid annointed king in his place by Gods owne preciſe commandement, yet did Samuell thereupon euer go about to depriue him of his kingdome, or encourage the people to reuolt from him, and diſobey him? Or did the people themſelues ſtir againſt him ſo long as he liued? Or did Dauid which was the annointed king in his place, euer offer to thruſt him out of the kingdome, or ſeeke his life? No: Saul reigned many yeares after that, and the people both obeyed and ſerued him. Yea and Dauid himſelfe when he might haue ſlaine him in the Caue, and ſo haue gotten alſo the preſent poſſeſſion of the kingdom to himſelfe, yet he would not, nay he thought it a ſinne for Though Saul were depoſed by God himſelfe, yet neither did Samuell encourage the people to reuolte from him, neither did Dauid (the annnointed king) ſecke to put him out of the kingdome, neither did the people diſobey him ſo long as he liued, which was many yeares after. him to haue done it: For who (ſaid he) can laye his hand on the Lordes annointed,
                   
                     Dauid when he might haue ſlaine Saule, would not: nay, he thought it ſinne to haue done it: and calleth him the Lords annointed, after his depoſition. 
                  and be guiltleſſe? Yea, 1. Sam. 26. 
                  percuſſo corde trepidauit (ſaith S. Auguſtine.) he was ſtroken, and trembled at the heart, becauſe hee had cut but the lappe of Saules coate. And in th'end when word was brought him of Saules death, how rewarded he the meſſenger, I pray you, for his tydings, and for the Crowne and Bracelet of Saule
                        •
                     , which hee brought him? Aug. contradit Petihan. lib. 2. cap. 48. Forſooth he cauſed him to bee ſlaine forthwith in his preſence, ſaying: How waſt thou not afraid to put forth thine hand to deſtroye the Lords annointed? Thy bloud be vpō thine own head, for thine own mouth hath witneſſed againſt
                  3 Dauid cauſed him that brought newes of Saules death, to be forthwith ſlaine. 2. Sam. 1.
                  
                  thee, ſaying, I haue ſlaine the Lords annointed.
               
               Thus you ſee Saul a wicked King depoſed, not by a Pope, nor by a Prieſt, nor by a Prophet, but byMarke how direct this example is againſt D. Allen.
                   
                  God himſelfe, and Dauid choſen and appointed by God, and anointed in his place: and yet neither the Prophet euer counſelled or mooued the people to diſobey Saul, being ſo depoſed, nor the people euer offered to reuolt or to deny him their obedience & ſeruice, nor Dauid (the true and rightfull king appointed by God in his place) euer ſought or cōſēted to depriue him of the kingdome, though due vnto himſelfe, but (notwithſtanding he knew him to be his deadly enemy and to hunt after his life) yet hauing him twice in his hands, where he might ſafely haue ſlaine him, and therby inueſted himſelfe of the kingdom, neuertheleſſe wold he neither touch him himſelfe, nor ſuffer any other to touch him, calling him the Lords annointed, and eſteeming it a high ſin to laie his hand on him, though hee were depoſed by God himſelfe: Howſoeuer D. Allen intē
                     deth Saul to haue been depoſed by Samuel: yet the learneder Diuines take the ſentence of God pronoū
                     ced by Samuel touching his reiecting of Saul, not to extend to the preſent depoſing of Saul himſelfe and (which is yet moſt notable) cauſed the meſſenger, that brought him the firſt newes of his death, to be forthwith ſlaine for his labour. And all this notwithſtanding, yet is not D. Allen aſhamed to wreſt this example quite contrarie to the trueth, for a preſident to prooue that the Pope hath authoritie to depoſe and depriue Princes both of their kingdomes and liues, and to releaſe & diſcharge the ſubiects of their allegeance: and further, that it is lawfull for ſubiects to reuolt from their Souereignes, to yeeld vp their holdes

trecherouſly vnto their enemies, and to beare armesNo example in the whole ſcripture more directly againſt D. Allens doctrine and purpoſe, then this. againſt them. To which doctrine hee could not haue found in all the whole Scriptures (though all bee flat againſt it) anie one example more directlie contrarie then this: the iudgement whereof I referre to the reaſon, conſideration, and conſcience of all men that haue anie ſparke of Chriſtianitie, morall vertue, or naturall reaſon in them.
               Now then, if none of all theſe examples of Scripture,
                  The Concluſion.
                   which D. Allen hath cited to prooue the Popes authoritie to depoſe Princes, doe ſhew that anie of thoſe Princes, whom he mencioneth, was depoſed either by Prieſt or Prophet (as hee falſlie aſſumeth) but by God himſelfe: how can hee then inferre vpon theſe examples, that the Pope hath anie ſuch authoritie, vnleſſe hee attribute (as I ſaid before) as much authoritie vnto him, as to God himſelfe?
               And if (Saul being depoſed by God himſelfe) yet neither the Prophet did thereupon diſſwade the people from obeying him, nor the people once offered to reuolt from him, but continued in all duetie and obedience towardes him as long as he liued, which was manie yeeres after his depoſition: and if Dauid, beeing the lawfull annointed King in his place, yet neither ſought to put him out of the kingdome, but yeelded him obedience and ſeruice (calling him Lord & maiſter) during his life, & thought it ſin to laie his hand on him, notwithſtanding he was depoſed: & laſtly, in token of

the miſliking and diſpleaſure he tooke at the death of Saul, cauſed the meſſenger that brought him the tidings thereof, to be ſlaine: how can D. Allen by this example induce men of anie reaſon or ſenſe to beleeue, that either the Pope maie lawfully authoriſe, encourage, or exhort ſubiects to diſobey, or to laie hands on the Lords annointed, or that anie ſubiect may lawfully renounce his allegeance, reuolt, from, and beare armes againſt his Souereigne, beeing a lawfull Prince, onelie vpon a colourable warrant of depoſition, by a man, a Prieſt, a ſtranger, who hath no authoritie in the worlde to depoſe anie Prince from his kingdome (no, though hee were an Infidel) but is himſelfe euen by Gods ordinance a ſubiect to Princes? With what face can hee vtter ſuch manifeſt vntruthes? with what confidence can hee perſuade himſelfe to bee beleeued, when his lies are ſo monſtrous, and his impoſtures ſo euident? But moſt of all, with what conſcience can hee preſume to force the word of God to his purpoſe, which is ſo directly againſt him? But hereby may all men plainely perceiue how ſmall regard that ſect hath vnto religion, but onlie to ſerue their turnes, which are not aſhamed to make ſuch impudent and vngodly ſhiftes, to maintein their vſurped authoritie. Call you this holines, M. D. to abuſe the people with falſe doctrine, to belie the ſcriptures, & to peruert the moſt ſacred word of God, & to rob him of his own peculiar authoritie

and prerogatiue, for the defence and furtherance of your owne rebellious practiſes? In trueth it reſemblethAs much conſcience in D. Allens holie thiefe, whom hee mentioneth in his Pamphlet, as in himſelfe. much the holines of your holie thiefe, whom it pleaſeth you ſomewhat merrily in your Pamphlet to compare vnto vs, but in truth a righter patterne of your own profeſsion: which (to ſpeake truely what I thinke in my conſcience) is much diſcredited by your owne double dealing.
               You your ſelfe, to further your owne purpoſe (as you ſuppoſed) could prefixe before your Pamphlet euen in the firſt page, as a ſentence vnder the title thereof, the reſolution giuen by Christ, vponMatth. 22. the tempting demand of the Phariſees, Reddite quae ſunt Caeſaris, Caeſari: wherein Christ himſelfe commandeth
                     D. Allen prefixeth before his Pamphlet the ſentence of Christ, which notwithſtanding in the ſame Pamphlet he doth wholy courtermand in his doctrine. all men to giue vnto Caeſar (that is to the King and Ciuill Magiſtrate) whatſoeuer is due vnto him, that is feare, honor, ſubiection, and tribute: And how dare you then, euen in the ſame Pamphlet countermaund this commandement of our Sauiour, bending all your forces, craft, and cunning to perſuade the ſubiect to reſiſt his Souereigne, and thereby to break this high and peremptorie commandement?
               But you ſaie the Pope hath authoritie to diſcharge the ſubiect of this duetie and obedience, which is here commanded. Shew me then, I praie you, ſome Text of Scripture, that giueth the Pope ſo large Commiſsion as you ſpeake of: nay, ſhew me anie diſpenſation out of Gods word, that may exempt you, or the Pope himſelfe out of the compaſſe of this commandement. For the precept is

generall, and therefore extendeth to all men, and beſides, was expreſly giuen by Chriſt vnto his Diſciples, to whom hee ſpake in preſence. And if the Pope and you bee the Diſciples of Christ, as you would ſeeme to bee, then muſt you alſo (as well, or rather then others) yeeld obedience and ſubiection to your Ciuill gouernours, or els fall into the breach of Christs commandement. And if you bee ſubiect to the ciuill Magiſtrate, as you are by this rule of Christ: how can you take that authoritie from them, which Chriſt hath giuen them ouer you?
               If you ſaie there is no ſubiection due vnto them, longer then they continue in the truth of Religion:The Pope and his followers will be both parties, iudges, and executioners of their owne doome, in their owne cauſe. Princes, whether they be Heretikes, Turkes, or Heathens, yet is there ſubiection due vnto them. Rom. 13. I pray you tell mee firſt, how prooue you them to be heretikes, vnleſſe you your ſelues may be Iudges? Will you then both condemne and puniſh them, before they bee conuicted of crime? and will you that are parties, bee both iudges, and executors of your owne will and pleaſure?
               Secondly, ſuppoſe they were (as you vniuſtly condemne them to be) heretikes,) yea ſuppoſe they were Iewes, Turkes, Heathens: yet is there neuertheles obedience and ſubiection due vnto them. For what was Caeſar himſelfe, but a Heathen? what were the Princes in the Apoſties times (of whom it is ſaid, Let euerie ſoule be ſubiect vnto them: and whoſoeuer reſiſteth them, reſiſteth the ordinance of God) what were they all, but Heathens? If Chriſt himſelfe then hath confirmed the authoritie

and power euen of Heathen Princes: how can the Pope diſſolue and take away the authoritie, power, kingdom, yea & life too, of Chriſtian Princes?
               And yet he claimeth his authoritie from Christ,
                  The Pope claimeth his authoritie from Chriſt, as his Vicar.
                   as his Diſciple, and Vicar here on earth: by which title he maketh all Princes ſubiect vnto his authoritie. In truth ſo is the greateſt Prince liuing, ſubiect vnto the meaneſt Preacher and Miniſter of God, toThe greateſt Prince liuing, ſubiect to the admonition and reproofe of the meaneſt Miniſter, but not to his correction. obey the doctrine and word, which hee deliuereth out of the Scriptures, and to receiue his inſtruction, exhortation, admonition, and reproofe: yet is hee not (though he ſhould reiect his inſtructions) to be therefore depoſed from his kingdome, or reſiſted and diſobeyed by him. And greater authoritie hath not the Pope himſelfe ouer anie Prince, then the meaneſt Miniſter and meſſenger of God.
               
               I finde not in all the Scripture that euer Christ gaue vnto his Diſciples anie Commiſsion to depoſe Princes, although they ſhould diſobey his word: but I finde that he gaue them Commiſsion
                     Matth. 10. The puniſhment for diſobedience of Gods word, and contempt of the Miniſter, is reſerued vnto God.
                   to Preach: And whoſoeuer ſhuld not receiue them, nor heare their words, he bad them, that when they ſhould depart out of that houſe or Citie, they ſhould ſhake the duſt of their feete, reſeruing the puniſhment of them vnto God.
               
               As for the ſuperioritie which the Pope challengeth ouer Princes, as the Succeſſor of Peter, & diſciple
                     Peter, from whom the Pope claimeth authoritie, as his ſucceſſor, was commā
                     ded by Chriſt to feede his ſheepe, but expreſly forbidden to vſe the ſword. of Chriſt: I finde no ſuch Commiſsion giuen vnto Peter himſelfe, to authoriſe him in ſuch ſort ouer Princes: but I finde that Chriſt ſaid vnto him

three times, Ioh. 21. 
                  Feede my ſheepe. As for the ſwoord (wherby is ſignified the Ciuil Authoritie) Chriſt expreſly forbad Peter to vſe it, commanding him to Matth. 26. 53. Ioh. 18. 11. 
                  put it vp into the ſheath. To the ſame effect alſo ſpake he not only to Peter, but to all the reſt of his fellowes the Apoſtles, when there was ſome contention riſen amongſt them about ſuperioritie: Ye know (ſaith hee) that the Lords of the Gentiles haue
                  Matth. 20. 
                  domination ouer them, and they that are great, exerciſe authoritie ouer them: But it ſhall not be ſo among you: But whoſoeuer will be great among you, let him be your ſeruant.
               
               And if the Pope bee Chriſts Diſciple, hee muſt learne this leſſon of his Maiſter, to be a ſeruant to his fellows, not a Commander of Kings.
               
                  Chriſt, from whom the Pope deriueth his authoritie, neuer tooke vpon him the authothoritie to depoſe Princes. But the Pope doeth. 
                  Chriſt himſelfe, from whom the Pope deriueth his ſupreme authoritie, as his Vicar on Earth, neuer tooke vpon him the authoritie to depriue Princes of their kingdoms, nor to diſcharge the ſubiects of their dutie & obedience: Chriſt not only commanded others, to obey, but did himſelfe alſo obey Princes: but contrariwiſe confirmed the power of Princes both by his doctrine (teaching that Feare, Honor, Obedience, & Subiection
                  The Pope not only refuſeth himſelfe, but alſo forbiddeth others to obey Princes. is due euen to Heathen Princes) and alſo by his owne example, yeelding tribute, with all duetie and obedience vnto them, and ſubmitting himſelfe, his bodie, and life to their authoritie, iudgement & correctiō: Chriſt profeſſed himſelfe not to be a king of this world, but a ſubiect to kings, and a ſeruant. And for himſelf profeſſed that Ioh. 18. 36. Matth. 20. 
                        ••
                     . 
                  his king dō was not of this world, & that he came not to be ſerued, but to ſerue. And if Chriſt acknowledged himſelfe not to haue any kingly authoritie in this world, but to be a ſubiect vnto kings & to their inferior officers

and a ſeruant: how can the Pope deriue vnto himſelfThe Pope preſ
                        ••
                     neth himſelfe not to be a ſubiect to Kings but a ſuperiour and Lord ouer all Kings of this world. from Chriſt not onlie a kingly authoritie, but a predominant authoritie ouer all kings? The Scholler aboue his Maiſter. Can the ſcholler bee greater then his Maiſter? 
                  The Vicars authoritie greater then his, from whom he taketh all his authoritie. will the Vicar take vpon him more authoritie, then hee, from whom he taketh all his authoritie? Nay, will he of himſelfe preſume to giue warrant Phe Pope in all points oppoſite to Chriſt. directly cōtrarie to the commandement of Chriſt? Let euerie man then iudge, both what he is, What is this, but Antichriſt? that ſo oppoſeth him ſelf againſt Chriſt, & what D. Allen is, that iuſtifieth his ſo doing, & (for iuſtification thereof, pretendeth warrant of Scriptures againſt God himſelfe:
                     D. Allen a wreſter, peruerter, & belier of the Scriptures.
                   which how ſhamefully he hath therin wreſted, peruerted, and belied, hath been (I hope) alreadie ſufficiently declared vnto you, ſo far forth as his pamphlet gaue occaſion, and farther ſhould haue been, but that this queſtion is handled at large, and all that D. Allen can ſay therein, abundantly confuted by a learned 
                     M. Bilſon, Warden of Wincheſter, in a booke publiſhed Anno. 1586. whereof it ſeemes D. Allen will take no knowledge. 
                  Diuine, a man of as great ſufficiencie, and of more ſinceritie then himſelfe, in the anſwere to his Defenſe of Engliſh Catholikes.
               
               Now to come to the matter, and to the proſecuting of D. Allens purpoſe, you ſee that hee hath not onlie failed in the proofe of the Popes authoritie to depoſe Princes, and conſequently of his warrant for the ſubiects reuolt: but alſo his own examples and arguments retorted againſt himſelfe, and the contrarie part prooued both by them, and by diuers other reaſons, and authorities of Scriptures: out of which Doctor Allen bringeth not ſo much as one Text (in trueth, I muſt

confeſſe, becauſe he cannot, vnleſſe hee ſhould coyne it himſelfe) to proue directly his prophane aſſertions. So that no man can be ſo blind, but he muſt needes perceiue and acknowledge, that the Pope hath neither power of himſelfe, nor authority from God, to depoſe Princes from their kingdomes: neither can giue to the ſubiect any commiſſiō, or licence (ſauing only that licence whichAll this hath bene directly proued, both by expreſſe authority of Scripture and by arguments drawn from D. Allēs owne examples. he hath himſelfe, that is, that licence qua ſumus omnes deteriores) ſo much as to diſobey their Souereignes, much leſſe to reuolte from them to their enimies, to lay handes on them, & to beare armes againſt them. Whereby it cannot but bee moſt apparant that D. Allen reſpected wholye herein the ſubtilty of his drifte, not the ſoundnes of his doctrine, and for the obteinment of credit,
                     D. Allen reſpecteth the cunning conueiance of his purpoſe, not the ſound teaching of the truth. and attainment of his purpoſe thereby, affied him ſelfe altogither vpon the ſmoothnes of his perſwaſions, and the affectionate mindes and inclinations of his adherents.
            
            
               ANd ſithens we haue alreadie diſcouered theAn entrance into th'examination of D. Allens perſwaſions. foundation of his perſwaſions to bee weake, falſe, and rotten: it ſhall not be amiſſe to beſtowe a little labour, to trie if a ſmall wind will not ouerthrow the building it ſelfe, which I doubt not but we ſhall find to be patched togither of as rotten ſtuffe, and of as ſlender ſubſtance as the foundation is, and to haue nothing in it to withſtand the weather, but onely the bare outſide and colour of religion.
               
               
                  The ende whereunto this perſwaſion ofThe end of his perſwaſions, already declared. diſobedience, and reuolte from her Maieſtie, tendeth, hath bene alreadie declared; namely the furtherance of all trayterous and rebellious deſignementes that may be by any perſon, or in any wiſe attempted againſt her Maieſtie, and particularly the aſſiſtance of the k. of Spaine, and the other forreine forces inuaſion, nowe preſently intended, and prepared againſt our countrey. Let vs then next ſee to what perſonsTo what perſons his perſwaſions are intended. 
                  D. Allen principally purpoſeth and addreſſeth his perſuaſions.
               Firſt for Proteſtants, and ſuch as are of ſound Religion (as I truſt the greateſt parte of England,
                  Not to Proteſtants.
                   by great ods, is) D. Allen cannot be ſo madde as to hope, that his perſwaſions can haue any authoritie, or worke any effect with them, but to confirme them rather in her Maieſties ſeruice and obedience, for the better mayntenaunce of their Religion, and defence of themſelues and their goods: which they know, if the contrarie faction ſhould preuaile (which God I truſt will neuer ſuffer) not onely th'eſtate of Religion were cleane ouerthrowne, but themſelues alſo, and all theirs proſtrate to the ſword, rapine and ſpoile, which it ſitteth them neereſt, with all their force, might, & maine, to defend.Nor (likely by any great reaſon) to Newters, or men indifferent.
               
               As for ſuch as are neither Proteſtants, nor Papiſts, but men indifferent, or of no religion at

all, and (as D. Allen termeth them) plaine Atheiſts, into which eſtate he moſt ſlanderouſlye in his pamphlet reporteth our countrey to beeHe ſlaunderouſly reporteth our whole countrey to be fallen into Atheiſme. falne, but I truſt, and do fully aſſure my ſelfe, that hee ſhall find fewer of that ſort in England than in Rome, though the ſcope be far larger: his perſwaſion (in mine opinion) ſhoulde doe but litle good (or harme) with them: Firſt, by his owne reaſon, being drawne from Religion, how can it worke with them that are of no religion, and therefore regard not Religion? And if they be men indifferent, and ſuch as maye by reading, inſtruction, and exhortation bee drawne alike to the embracing of either religion:Why ſhould men indifferent be lead rather by D. Allens lurking perſwaſions, to a blind and ſuperſticious religion, then by our publike and continuall preaching to a cleare and perſpicuous religion? what reaſon hath D. Allen to thinke, that his perſwaſions ſhould rather draw them to his religion, then the continuall preaching & teaching of a great number of our godly miniſters (men as learned and more zealous then D. Allen) ſhould winne them to ours? Or why ſhould hee imagine, that they ſhoulde more eaſily bend vnto a blind and ſuperſtitious religion grounded vpon ignorance, then to a cleere and perſpicuous religion, grounded vpon knowledge of the truth, vnleſſe he preſume vpon the corruption of mens nature, which is more inclined to euil, thē to good? But neither of theſe ſorts of men are the perſons, vnto whom D. Allen purpoſely intēded his perſwaſions: for the matter requireth hearers more affected and aſſured

to his faction: howſoeuer he might happely put it in aduenture to ſeduce others, ſuch as were apt to be defiled with his pitch, being all but one labour to him. But I hope this ſhall not bee the laſt labour that ſuch brokers of miſchiefe ſhall ſpend in vaine.It reſteth that D. Allens perſuaſions muſt needes be chiefly or wholly intended to the papiſts.
                  
               
               They muſt needes bee therefore of your owne fraternity (M. Doctor) men ſworne to the Popes pantofle, with whom your wholſome perſwaſions muſt preuaile: who (I truſt) when they come to the tale, will not bee ſo many by two partes of the three, as you preſume. But ſuch and ſo many as they are, do you thinke them ſo ſimpleThe papiſts in England not ſo many, as D. Allen preſumeth. or ſottiſh, as to bee bewitched by your enchauntments, to reſpect more your tromperie, then their own oth, alleageance and duety? But the Pope hath diſcharged them of all duety, you ſay: But they ſee the contrarie proued againſt you. But whatſoeuer they ſee, you do happelyThere are none ſo blind but will ſee when a man giueth them counſell againſt themſelues. aſſure your ſelfe, they will ſee nothing againſt you: But good M. Doctor charme them not ſo blinde, but that you giue them leaue to ſee, what counſell you giue them againſt themſelues. Your wordes are weightie and forcible with them in other caſes, but their owne weale and ſafety is much deerer vnto them in this caſe. They ſee theThe D. of G. and thoſe of the holy league in France, though they pretend the patronage of the popiſh Religion, they ſpare no papiſt more thē proteſtant, from the ſpoile, and ſword. dealings of the Duke of G. and the reſt of the holy league in France: who, though they pretend the quarrell and patronage of the pretended Catholike Religion, yet ſpare they neither Catholike perſon,

nor place, but vſe all violence, ſpoile, and ſackage of ſuch townes as are meere Catholike, and of Catholikes goods, without fauour or difference: Wherein as they haue ſhewed thēſelues (cōformably to your doctrine) very obſeruant of ciuill Iuſtice, in vſing little partialitie, or reſpect of perſons: ſo haue they bewrayed their intent (anſwerable to your pollicy) to be the wreake of priuate malice, the diſturbance of the publike peace,The very quarrell and intent of the D. of G. and the ambition of a kingdome, ſhadowed onely with the colour of their Catholike Religion. In ſo much as ſome of the greateſt and beſt Catholikes
                  Some of the greateſt and beſt affected papiſts hane abandoned that party. of that ſort, which of zeale were entred into that confederacy: beſides many others moſt earneſtly and ſincerely affected to that religion, finding at length their diſguiſed purpoſes, haue already cleane abandoned that partie, and reuolted to the contrarie.
               And do you imagine, our Engliſh Romaniſts ſo beſotted with your Siren ſongs, as that they will take no heede to themſelues by th'examples of others their neighbours? Yes, doubt you not, they will forecaſt all euents that may happen, & conſider what is moſt likely to happen, and ſeekeWhat danger the Engliſh papiſts runne into, if they ſhould but offer to ſtirre againſt her Maieſtie, to take part with a forrein power. their owne ſafety whatſoeuer happen. They know, if they ſhould but offer to ſtir towards a forreine enimies partie, againſt their owne countrey, if we get the vpper hand (as we faithfully aſſure our ſelues, God being on our ſide) they looſe all they haue, both goods, landes, and liues too, like traytors, as they well deſerue. On the

otherſide, if th'enimie ſhold preuaile (which weThe Pretended Catholik armies in France, ſpare not their fellow Catholikes, being their owne countrymen: how then wil a forreine army ſpare our Engliſh Catholikes, being ſtrangers to them. little doubt, and God, I truſt, will neuer permit) what protection ſhall they haue by their Catholike Religion? They ſee the pretended Catholike armies in France, ſpare not the like Catholikes being their owne countreymen; what fauour can Engliſh Catholikes then expect of a forreine army? eſpecially of the Spaniſh ſouldiour, who in the opinion and report of thoſe nations which haue felt his furie, and endured his yoake, is very hardly thought of, and almoſt infamous for his pride, inſolence, crueltie, rauiſhments, and ſuch like kindes of violence, without regard of eſtate, religion,The Spaniſh ſoldiour very hardly thought and reported of, for his inſolence, cruelty, and vitious dealings, where he ſubdueth. decree, or calling, whereſoeuer he getteth the maiſtry? And if theſe be his natural properties generally to all men, how much more will malice augment his furie towards our nation, to whom the very name of an Engliſh man is no leſſe odious for the enuie of our vertue, and valour, then the the name of a Spaniard is vnto vs, for the report of his vice, and inſolencie? Small fauour orThe Spaniard malicious to the Engliſh nation.
                   curteſie (God wot) is an Engliſhman to hope for at a Spaniards hand, be he neuer ſo Catholike. The Spaniſh ſouldiour, where he is lord, neuer vſethThe Spaniſh ſoldiour maketh little cō
                     ſcience in his choice. to aske (or to heare) whoſe wife is this? whoſe daughter, whoſe ſiſter, whoſe houſe or goods theſe are: A Catholikes wife, daughter, houſe, & goods, are as ſweete to him, as another mans. And whatIt would be an intolerable deſpight to an Engliſh man, to ſee his wife, ſiſter, or daughter forced before his face. pleaſure would this be to an Engliſh man, whatſoeuer his religion be, to ſee his wife forced, his

ſiſters rauiſhed, his daughters deflowred, his houſe ſacked, his goods pilled and ſpoyled by a ſtranger before his face? yea, and his own throat cut, if he but offer to make defenſe? Such is the fury and violence of the ſoldiour, eſpecially of the Spaniard. What auaileth him then the name of a Catholike, if it pleaſe the lyon in his rauening mood, to take the hare for an aſſe, becauſe hee hath long eares? To whom ſhal his headleſſe body complaine for redreſſe?
               And is this the goodwill you beare to yourD. Allens kindnes to his Catholike countreymē. brethren and Catholike countreymen (M. Doctor) that you would allure them to the bringing in of their own aſſured calamity, & vtter ouerthrow? They loue yôu better, I am perſwaded, yet not ſo well, as to caſt away themſelues, and all theirs, at your requeſt & counſell. They are profeſſors of your religion, but wil be no partakers of your rebellion. They like to be of your fraternity, but not of your conſpiracie. They can be content to heare your doctrine: but you muſt be content to let thē prefer their own ſafety. They ſee Religion is not the quarrell, that can ſtir vp forrein forces to anReligion is not the Spaniards quarrell to England. inuaſion, with ſuch terrible threatnings of vtter raſing and depopulation of themſelues and their countrey, but meere malice and reuenge of priuate grudges, with a greedy thirſt after the ſpoile and ſacking of a rich and plentifull countrey. They could wiſh with all their hartes that the Catholike Religion might preuayle and floriſh in their countrey: but they will ſtriue

with hart and hand both to defend their owneAll our liues and liberties and the weale and freedom of our countrey depend vpon this quarrell. liues, and liberties, and the weale & freedome of their countrey, which they ſee are al aſſaulted, all in perill, & all likely to be loſt, if forreine powers ſhould get the conqueſt of their countrey.
               Is this then ſo eaſie a matter thinke you, M. Doctor, to perſwade your Catholike countreymen vnto? For mine own part, I am of another mind, & ſo ſhal you find thē alſo, I doubt not, if euer the matter come to triall. For, admit they bare ſo malicious minds towards her Maieſtie, as you giue good cauſe to ſuſpect, yet they are Engliſh men, and if they beare Engliſh hearts in their bodies, they wil neuer endure a ſtranger, much leſſe an enimy, eſpecially ſo inſolent, cruell, and intollerable an enimy, to tyrāniſe ouer their coūtrey. And if they were ſo void of al duety, piety, humanity, good nature, & manhood, as to betray their liege Souereigne, abandon the defenſe of their deere countrey, & to abiect their minds, honor, & reputation, & ſubiect their names to euerlaſting infamie: yet that inward working of naturall loue, affection, & care of themſelues, their wiues, their children, their parents, and kinred, yea of their own liues, & liberties, (which lye al vpō the ſtake) wil be continually knocking at their boſomes, at their heads, & at their harts, to ſtir them vp to the withſtanding of their own calamities.
               But as we haue conſidered ſomewhat of theTo the force of D. Allens Perſwaſions. perſons, whom D. Allen chiefely goeth about to perſwade by this pamphlet: ſo let vs now examin

a litle the force and weight of his perſuaſions.
               After a long dehortation of the Q. Maieſties liege ſubiectes from her ſeruice in theſe warres, (which it pleaſeth him to terme vniuſt) and perſuaſion to them to reuolt vnto the other ſide, for Religiōs ſake, with diuers circumſtances tending wholy to that purpoſe, wherein he vſeth onlie his owne authoritie for reaſon: amongſt the reſt, to mooue them thereunto the rather by examples, he citeth out of Euſebius, How for refuſing to commit Idolatry
                  
                     D. Allens examples cited out of Euſebius, to perſuade the Papiſts to reuolt for Religion.
                   
                  by ſacrificing vnto Idols, and in particular for diſobeying the Emperour Maximinus his commandement therein, the famous Colonell S. Maurice with the whole legion of Thebes, ſuſteined moſt glorious martyrdome. As diuers others did vnder Iulian the Apostata, and the like: And many noble ſoldiers, for that they could not exerciſe their Chriſtian vſages, partly were driuen to abandon their profeſsion in diſpleaſure of their Princes, and partly were licenced to depart: &c.
               
               Marke, I praie you, the force of theſe examples,Some abandoned their profeſſion, ſome their Countries, & ſome ſuffered death for Religions ſake, but none reuolted, no not from Heathen Princes, nor from Iulian the Apoſtat
                           •
                        
                      himſelfe. and how well they ſerue the purpoſe, for which D. Allen citeth them. We ſee not by them, that anie of all theſe valiant Christian Soldiers, whom he mencioneth, did euer reuolt from the Princes whom they ſerued, or take armes againſt them; which is the purpoſe whereunto they are cited: but rather, that to auoide ſuperſtition, and the abhominable ſeruice of Idols, they forſooke their profeſsion, their Countries, yea and their liues alſo,

before they woulde offer to reuolt to their Princes enemies.
               Yet ſee the oddes betweene the perſons & caſes. They were Soldiers, and were vrged to forſake the true God & to commit Idolatry, yet rather endured death then they would offer to reuolt from a Heathen Prince, notwithſtanding hee would haue enforced them to renounce Christ: And yet M. Allen goeth about by theſe examples, to perſuade ſubiects, to Rebell againſt their naturall Prince, beeingThe Queenes Maieſtie doth not driue anie from the ſeruice of God, but endeuoureth to draw all men from Idolatrie to the true knowledge & worſhip of God.
                   a Christian, neither compelling, nor commanding them to forſake God, but endeuouring by all good & godly means to draw them to the true knowledge and worſhip of God, from the blindnes of ſuperſtition and Idolatrie. Is not this a ſtraunge thing, to ſee a man ſo learned, as hee is eſteemed to be, ſo much to ouerſhoote himſelfe, in offering ſuch euident abuſes, to ſeduce thoſe with whom his credit may preuaile?
               Yet hath he another argument as fit for his purpoſeAnother trim argument of D. Allens, to encourage the Papiſts to reuolt. as this, whererein hee encourageth the Engliſh Catholikes, and ſuch as are pliable to his perſuaſions, to reuolt from her Maieſties ſeruice vnto the pretended Catholike partie, by mention of the great victories and happie ſucceſſe, which God giueth vnto thoſe, that with their armes vpholdThat God fighteth himſelfe, for the defenſe of his owne cauſe, and of the right. and mainteine the true Religion, declaring alſo that God fighteth himſelfe for the defenſe of his owne cauſe and of the right, which (in mine opinion) can bee no encouragement, but

ought rather to be a great terror to the Engliſh Romaniſts, for enterpriſing to take armes againſt their gracious Souereigne.
               For firſt looking into home examples of theThe rebellion in the North by the Earles of Northumberland, and Weſtmerland:
                   like ſort, within their owne memorie, they know what befell vnto the two late Earles of Northumberland, and Weſtmerland, and the reſt of that rebellious faction: who hauing entred into the like conſpiracie, and for the like cauſe that D. Allen now ſo much recommendeth vnto his Catholike Countreymen, and hauing madeFor the ſame cauſe that D. Allen here ſo much commendeth. The Rebels by Gods power and aſſiſtance ouerthrowen. a verie ſtrong partie, in ſeuerall partes of the Realme, and ſodeinly raiſed a great power of the greateſt ſtrength of the North of England, were notwithſtanding by the prouidence and aſsiſtance of God (for it is hee onelie that giueth victorie, not the ſtrength of man, or of Horſe) within verie ſhort time ouerthrowen, diſperſed, and ſcattered, the moſt and principalleſt of the Ringleaders taken, and executed according to their deſert, and the reſt driuen to abandon their Countrey, and to liue abroad like outcaſts and vagabonds.
               They remember likewiſe ſince that time whatThe Inuaſion in Ireland, Anno. 1580. vpō the ſame cauſe & quarrell. became of the Romiſh Catholike Forces (whom I before mencioned) which landed in Ireland in the yeere 1580: who as they came in defenſe of the ſame cauſe, and of the ſame Religion, ſo found they euen the ſame encounter, in ſo much as few of them (I thinke) returned home, to boaſt

or make report of their victorie.
               If then this poſition of D. Allens perſuaſion beeThe ſucceſſe of theſe Rebels and Inuaders doth) by D. Allens own argument) both ſhew the cauſe to bee naught, and warneth our Engliſh Papiſts, for the like cauſe not to enter into the like action. true (as it is moſt true) that God fighteth for the defenſe of true Religion, and of the right: the Engliſh Catholikes, and all men els, may ſee by theſe examples, that the cauſe was naught and vniuſt, and the Religion corrupt and falſe, in the defenſe whereof theſe armies were ſo diſcomfited: & may likewiſe bee warned by their ſucceſſe, to take heed how for the like cauſe they enter into the like action.
               Secondly, the examples which D. Allen reciteth of the ouerthrows, which haue happened vnto the K. of Spaines Rebels (as hee termeth them) in theThe ouerthrows which haue lighted vpō the K. of Spaines Rebels (as D. Allen ſaith) ought to terrifie all men from Rebellion.
                   low Countries: what doe they els but admoniſh all Engliſh men to beware, how they rebell or ſtirre in armes againſt their lawfull Souereigne; ſeeing ouerthrow and confuſion threatened as a iuſt recompence of rebellion? And if our Engliſh Romaniſts, or anie other whoſoeuer, her Maieſties naturall ſubiects, will but duely and vprightly conſider of theſe arguments, though brought by D. Allen to a contrarie purpoſe: I doubt not but they may bee thereby ſufficiently diſſuaded and diſcouraged, from all ſuch wicked and vnnaturall attempts.
               But, becauſe this Pamphlet of D. Allens (is as weA note of certeine ouerſights in policie eſcaped this great politicien in this Pamphlet, which is mere politike.
                   haue ſhewed you) altogither politike, tending not ſo much to the defenſe of the action which he pretendeth, as to a further purpoſe, which I haue alſo diſcouered herein: it ſhall bee no great labour to me, but ſome reproofe to him, to note in a word

or two, before I make an ende, ſome ouerſights euen in pollicie, eſcaped this great politicien, euen in this ſmall Pamphlet, which is nothing els but a packet of politike driftes, compoſed for a preparatiue vnto miſchiefe.
               And firſt to beginne with the whole argument of his perſuaſion, affirming it to be lawfullHis whole argument of reuolt for Religion, a warrant for the reuolt of the low Countreymen, and conſequently for all that aſsiſt them, againſt the K. of Spain
                   for the ſubiect in cauſe of Religion to reuolt from his Souereigne: what doeth it els but giue warrant and defenſe to the people of the low Countries in reſiſting the King of Spaine, (though he were, as D. Allen ſuppoſeth him to bee) their lawfull and vndoubted Souereigne, and conſequently to the actions of all ſuch, as hitherto haue, or hereafter ſhall yeeld them anie ſuccours or aſsiſtance againſt him? For it is well knowen, that the firſt and principall matter, wherewith they founde themſelues agreeued, was the reſtraintTheir firſt diſcontentment for Religion.
                   of Religion, for that they might not freely vſe and enioy the libertie of their conſciences vnder him. Which beeing the true ancient Catholike, and Apostolike Religion, clenſed from the dregges and ſuperſtition of the Romiſh Church, it was and is lawfull for the people of thoſe Countries (by Doctor Allens poſition) for defenſe of that Religion to take armes againſt the King of Spaine, though hee were their rightfull king, and conſequently for vs, or anie other, in that lawfull quarrell to aſsiſt them. Thus the policie which D. Allen contriueth to impeach vs one

way, is not only a defenſe vnto vs in the principall cauſe, which he impugneth, but as great an impeachment to his owne Patrone.
               Another ouerſight in policie, which I note
                     D. Allens wordes may be preiudiciall to the K. of Spaine, his Patrone. in Doctor Allens Pamphlet, is, that in the whole diſcourſe throughout, whereſoeuer he ſpeaketh of the people of the low Countreys, hee termeth them Rebels and Heretikes: which termes, as they cannot but bee verie ſcandalous to the people, ſo may they bee verie preiudiciall to the K. of Spaine, whoſe partie he ſo much fauoureth.
               For where the Duke of Parma hath long endeuoured, and ſtill doth, by ſuch factors and ſecret practiſers, as he hath among the States of the countries, to win them by faire meanes and inticements to the obedience & ſubiection of the K. of Spaine: what a hindrance may this be to that practiſe, whē the people ſhall ſee themſelues reputed & publiſhed Rebels & Heretikes by ſo great a man as D. Allen, a Cardinall, & profeſſed Aduocate to the K. of Spaine, whom they may imagine, for his credit, calling, and adherencie with the King, to know better then themſelues, what opinion is held of them, & what minde towards them, by the King, and not to caſtWhat conſtruction the low Countreymen may make of it, that D. Allen openly termeth them Heretikes and Rebels.
                   out ſuch words at randon, of his owne meere intemperancy? What may they gather of it? or what conſtruction may any man in reaſon make of it?
               This onelie may they well thinke with themſelues. All is not gold that gliſtereth, and within a faire bait, may bee hidden a foule hooke. And

howſoeuer the Duke of Parma in the behalfe of the King (his Maiſter) allureth vs with curteſie and faire promiſes (as it ſtandeth with good policie for him to doe) if hee may by that meanes draw vs home to his obedience, yet hauing once gotten vs vnder his hand, it is doubtfull how hee will intreat vs. For the wound which wee haue made him by theſe long warres and infinite troubles, charges, and expenſes, is ſo great, as it can neuer bee ſo cleane healed, but there will ſtill remaine a foule ſkarre, which will put him alwaies in remembrance of the hurt hee hath receiued by vs: ſo that though it bee for the preſent in ſhew forgiuen, yet wee may well aſſure our ſelues, it can not in heart bee for euer forgotten: neither is it wiſedome to truſt a reconciled friend, much leſſe a ſcarce reconciled Lorde, that hath our liues and all at commandement. Beſides, this may alſo be a caueat vnto vs to be the more circumſpect how we truſt him, that we ſee euen whileſt he is yet ſeeking to win vs, his deuote fauourers, & ſuch as for their credit vvith him, are priuy to the eſtate of his dealings, & opinion of vs, doe not ſticke openly to call vs Rebels & Heretikes: hovv much more then may vve aſſure our ſelues, that we are in inward account ſo eſteemed by him? And if heeA Maxime of the Papiſts, That there is no faith to be kept with Heretikes.
                   hold vs for Heretikes, what faith or promiſe wil he keep with vs, vvhē vve are once faſt in hand? If Rebels, vvhat other thing are vvee to expect at his hāds, then the flat reward of Rebels? Thus may D.
                  
                  Allens termes (and not without great reaſon) kindle, or at the leaſt encreaſe ſuch a ſuſpition, in a ſubtill, ielous, and wauering people, alreadie doubtfull of their ſecuritie, as may fruſtrate all the Duke of Parmaes earneſt endeuours, and ſecrete practiſes for the reclayming of thoſe Countreys, and greatly endomage the King of Spaine, his owne Patrone. For in truth, that people is verie apt, and hath good cauſe vpon former experience to bee ſuſpicious in this caſe, by how much the more likely it is, theſe verie termes may drawe them into a further ielouſie of the Kinges meaning towardes them: which occaſion Doctor Allen ſhould not in policie haue miniſtred, to the preiudice of this Catholike Protector.
               3 Now for the whole latter part of his Pamphlet conteining the perſuaſion of reuolt, iudge, I pray you, what policie it was for him to enter into that argument, in ſuch open ſort, and in ſo dangerous a ſeaſon. For where his purpoſe and whole intent therein is, to ſtir vp his Catholike countreymen againſt her Maieſtie, to the aide and aſsiſtance of thoſe forrein forces, which are prepared for the inuaſionThe meanes which D. Allen vſeth to effect his purpoſe, is a moſt likely occaſion to preuent and defeat his purpoſe. of her & her Realme: ſee if the very meanes which he vſeth to atteine vnto his purpoſe, do not giue ſufficient occaſion to preuent and cleane cut off the accompliſhment and ende of his purpoſe, for which he vſeth thē. For when her Maieſtie ſhal ſee an opē perſuaſion vſed publikely vnto her ſubiects

(eſpecially thoſe that are of the Romiſh Religion) inciting them to reuolte from her obedience, to ioyne with her enimies againſt her, and to employ their vttermoſt forces to the bereauing of her both of kingdome, and of life, with a iuſtification of the action, drawne from the authority of their holy Father the Pope (which their ignorant and ſuperſtitious deuotion hath by all likelyhood perſwaded them, that it were damnable for them to diſobey:) and publiſhed by a principal piller of their Church, the credit of whoſe Cardinalſhip, is likely inough to preuaile with thē, euen againſt their owne knowledge, nature, and ſpirite: when her Maieſtie (I ſay) ſhall in ſo perillous a time and expectation of inuaſion, ſee ſo great a dangerHis pamphlet a good occaſion to her Maieſtie to loke ſtraightly to the Papiſts.
                   imminent ouer her, by her Romiſh Catholike ſubiects, and (as it were) a plaine denuntiation and threatening of the vtter ruine & ouerthrow, both of her ſelfe and her whole ſtate, to be doubted (or rather certainly expected) at their hands, will it not make her looke better to her ſelfe, and ſtreighter to thoſe Catholikes? Nay, being thusD. Allens dealing might well and iuſtly prouoke her Maieſtie to take a ſeuere courſe with the papiſts, & not for Religion, but for the better eſtabliſhment and aſſurance of her ſelfe and her eſtate, eſpecially conſidering her great dangers paſt, and ſeeing the perils imminent, and dayly threatened vnto her by them: but Clemency hath euer preuailed with her, which God continue till, ſo that it may be with her ſafety. warned, as ſhe may well be, by this perſwaſion of D. Allens, what can ſhe do leſſe (if ſhe wil do but that, which in reaſon & in all good policie ſhe may, and is by this pamphlet admoniſhed and whetted on to do, for the preſeruation of her ſelfe and her kingdome) then prouide ſpeedily to cut ſuch Catholiks cleane of, and to roote them

out of her countrey, and not to nouriſh any longer ſo manye and ſo venimous ſerpents, yea ſuch peſtilent hydraes in her boſome, by whom ſuch aſſured daunger and miſchiefe is portended and threatened towards her? At the leaſt, if her princely nature and clemencie, which hath euer hitherto but too much preuailed with her in the like caſes, will not ſuffer her to vſe that meanes, which in reaſon were moſt fitte and neceſſarie for her beſt aſſuraunce: yet the naturall and due care of her owne ſafety, and the weale publike, muſt of neceſſity inforce her, at the leaſt to diſarme, and vtterly diſable them from doing harme. By which meanes D. Allen (I truſt) ſhall at the leaſt be diſappointed of his purpoſe (for any aſſiſtance his Catholike brethren here, ſhall be able to yeelde vnto his Catholike king, againſt their liege Souereigne)The papiſts are much beholding to D. Allen for prouoking her Maieſtie by his pamphlet, to deale hardlyer with them, then any proteſtant would wiſh. euen by occaſion of his Religious perſwaſions: which, if her Maieſties mercie were not greater then his wiſedome and foreſight in this point, might bee a meane of more diſpleaſure and harme vnto the Engliſh Romaniſts, then either D. Allens counſell, or the king of Spaines forces, or the Popes bleſſing, will euer be able to repaire. And for this might they thanke D. Allen, whoſe prophane policies turne to the confuſion of his own frends and folowers.A briefe recapitulation of the premiſſes.
               
               Now, to growe towardes an end, and to giue you a briefe remembrance of that which hath

bene alreadie ſpoken: you haue herein ſeene,
               1 Firſt, all D. Allens arguments, brought in his pamphlet for the iuſtification of the deliuering vp of Deuenter, particularly anſwered and confuted, the fact of Sir William Stanley and Yorke (by his owne poſition) proued plaine treaſon, and all her Maieſties actions in the low Countreys (or otherwiſe) towards the k. of Spaine (by D. Allens owne arguments, aſſertions, and authors) proued moſt lawfull, iuſt, and honorable:
               2 Secondly, his moſt wicked and malicious mind and practiſe, againſt her moſt Excellent Maieſtie, and the whole State and Countrey, moſt plainely and euidently diſcouered; togither with his cunning order, methode, and meanes he vſeth to atteine vnto his trecherous purpoſe: his ſlanderous defamations of her Maieſties moſt princely and godly actions, and of her miniſters and countrey, moſt truely and iuſtlye refuted, and rebanded vpon himſelfe and his partie: and his holy fathers authoritie to depoſe Princes, togither with his warrant for the ſubiectes diſobedience, vtterly diſproued & ouerthrowne, not onely by ſundry authorities, both of the holy Scriptures, and of the ancient fathers and Doctors of the Church, but alſo by thoſe very examples, which D. Allen himſelfe produceth, for his beſt confirmation thereof:
               
                  Thirdly, his ſeditious and vngodly perſwaſions vnto her Maieſties naturall borne ſubiectes, ſhewed to be moſt deceitfull, corrupt, malicious, and ſuch as ought to haue no force, being grounded vpon ſuch examples and arguments, as doe rather inforce the contrarie: and his policies ſo prophane, abſurd, and vnaduiſed, as (being meaſured by the line of right conſideration) they turne wholy to the aduantage of them, againſt whom they are intended, and to the great preiudice of himſelfe, and his aſſociats.
               Wherin, that you may the better perceiue byNotes to be conſidered both in the whole, and in euery particular. the whole courſe of his dealings, and euery particular point thereof, the honeſt and religious mind and diſpoſition of this Cardinall, you are in the firſt to conſider the lawdable and high renowmedIn the firſt what facts, & perſons D. Allen defendeth. fact, which he taketh vpon him in this pamphlet to defend and extoll, and the worthy and famous perſons, for whom he offereth himſelfe an Aduocate▪
                   and broacheth his beſt veſſels of Rhetorike, with his ruinous and decayed eloquence to ſolemniſe, & proclaime their veluetheaded vertue and deuotion.
               
               Touching the fact, I neede not by bitternesThe fact, treaſon. of wordes to augment the infamie thereof, being not onely moſt apparant of it ſelfe, but by D. Allens owne aſſertions alſo proued, moſt traiterous, diſhonorable, and infamous.The perſons diſcontented, diſloyall, and ingrate.
               
               For the perſons, I rather remember them with pitie, then purſue them with malice: that the

one of them being of an ancient & noble houſe, a man well frended and greatly fauored, andSir W. Stanley.
                   then euen in the ready way of aduauncement, ſhould (of a meere diſcontented mind) deceiue the expectation and good opinion of his gratious Souereigne and honorable frendes, and preuent his owne good happes: the otherR. Yorke. hauing in former times lead a looſe and diſſolute life, and played ſome ſlippery partes, to the touch of the beſt ioynt in his bodie, andIn the low countreys. yet hauing afterwardes found extraordinary frendſhip for the ſauing of his life, and ſaluing of his former treſpaſſes, and being now receiued into ſome fauour, and credit aboue his demerits, ſhould (of a vagrant humour, and vitious diſpoſition) returne with the dogge to his vomit, and with the ſwine to his former filth and wickednes: and laſtly, and eſpecially, that both of them ſhould vnto the foule attaint of Treaſon, adde the moſt odious and ſhamefull guilt of Ingratitude,
                  Ingratitude. Sir W. Stanley ſometime ſeruant to the E. of Leiceſter.
                   the one of them in betraying his L. and Maiſter, by whom, and through whom he had receiued all his honour and preferment, and greater was to receiue, if his diſloyalty had not preuented it: the R. Yorke. other in betraying his moſt honorable The E. of Leiceſter.
                   benefactor, of whom he had receiued ſundry fauours and great benefits, and by whoſe ſpeciall meanes he had receiued his life: both of them in betraying their Generall, which had truſted them both, aboue their deſert: both of

them in preferring the preſent gaine of ſome few crownes, before the reſpect of their own conſciences and reputation, their duety & allegeance vnto their moſt gracious Souereigne, and the honor of their countrey.
               But it were but a ſmall glorie, to inſult vpon the miſerable, and leſſe pleaſure it is to me, to oppreſſe them with reproches, whom their own doings haue already caſt downe to the loweſt dungeon of diſcredit. I will therefore onely bewayle their want of grace, not afflict their perſons, by rubbing ouer the rawe skarres of their freſhe woundes, not yet fullye skynned.
               And theſe (forſooth) are the famous facts, which D. Allen ſo highly commendeth: theſe the honorable perſons, whoſe Orator he maketh himſelfe, to declaime of their praiſes. And no maruell if an Archtraytor defend Treaſon: for if Treaſon
                  An Archtraytor muſt needs defend Treaſon.
                   ſhould haue no defenſe, his owne fact were the more infamous: and if the inferiour Traytors be ſo highly extolled, how much the greater is his own glory?
               In the ſecond, you are to obſerue the actions,In the ſecond, what actions and perſons he inueigheth againſt. which he ſetteth himſelfe to impugne and diſcommend, and the perſons againſt whom he oppoſeth himſelfe, and ſhooteth out the moſt venimous ſting of his ſlaunderous and blaſphemousThe actions already proued godly, vertuous and honorable. tongue. The actions, ſuch as by the aduerſaries owne arguments, affirmations, and authorities,

haue bene already ſufficiently iuſtified againſt his falſe calumniations, and are in themſelues moſt apparent godly, vertuous, and honorable:
               The perſons ſo ſacred, ſo religious, ſo vnſpotted, ſo far aboue all blemiſh of detraction, as Malice
                  The perſons, ſacred, religious, and vnſtayned with reproach. it ſelfe cannot name without reuerence, nor thinke on without trembling; and ſuch, as D. Allen is by Gods owne worde expreſſely forbidden, not onelye to ſpeake, but ſo much as
                  Exod. 22. 28. Eccleſiaſtes. 10. 20. 
                  to imagine euill of, in thought. Yet ſuch is the corruption of his mind, the diſobedience of his heart, the neglect and contempt he hath of Gods commandement, as no regard of vertue, no reſpect of ciuility, no feare of God or man, can reſtraine his outragious intemperancie. But herein hath he obſerued Decorum, and ſhewed himſelfe in all pointes like himſelfe: for he thatHe that is a profeſſed patrone of vice, muſt needes be an open enimy to vertue.
                   hath profeſſed himſelfe an open patrone of vice and trecherie, and a cannoniſer of diſloyall traytors, it fitteth beſt his perſon and quality, to obiect himſelfe as a ſworne aduerſarie to all honorable, godly and religious actions, and a malicious and ſlanderous defamer of all true noble, vertuous, and renowmed perſonages.In the third, what it is, that he perſwadeth you to.
               
               In the third, you are to note the nature of the thing, whereunto he goeth about to perſwade you, that is, to reuolte from the due obedience and ſeruice of your Souereigne, to rebell and to take armes againſt her, & your countrey: a thing firſt, in it ſelfe,A thing vnlawfull, and repugnant to Gods word. vnlawfull, diſpleaſing to God, and repugnant

vnto his word, as hath bene by ſundry argumēts, and expreſſe authorities of Scripture, manifeſtly declared vnto you: ſecondly, for the effects, vnnaturall, odious, and infamous throughout theVnnaturall and odious to the world. whole world, as being the moſt peſtilent diſeaſe of the bodie politike, the greateſt enimie to ciuill gouernment, and the diſſoluer of all humane ſociety: thirdly, for the intent, moſt dommageable,Moſt hurtfull and pernicious to yourſelues. and vtterly pernicious to yourſelues, as tending directly to the very ruine and ouerthrow of your peace, liberty, welth, proſperitie, and finally in a word, to the extreme miſerie, calamity, and deſtruction of yourſelues and your countrey.
               A fit perſwaſion for ſuch an author, whereinFit for ſuch a perſwader. he hath ſhewed himſelfe hitherto no changeling, that he might at the leaſt purchaſe vnto himſelfe the commendation of conſtancie, though it be but in meere lewdnes, and ſhameleſſe impietie.
               Laſtly, for a full conſummation and accompliſhment of his prayſes, you are in all and eueryIn all, you are to conſider his fraudulēt dealings and impoſtures. particular of this his pamphlet throughout, to cōſider (that which hath bene heretofore in ſundry places noted vnto you) his fraudulent and indirect dealing, not onely in the fallacies and Sophiſtications of his arguments, but alſo in the opē falſhood of his affirmations, and eſpecially in his peruerting and wreſting of the holie hiſtories, and examples of Scripture, to his ſeditious and wicked purpoſes. Which if any (vpon the good opinion they haue conceiued of D. Allens
                  
integrity & zeale in religion) do thinke not to be intended by him to the deceiuing of them, they doHe that maketh it no cō
                     ſcience to abuſe Gods word, will not make it deintie to abuſe mens credulitie. therein vtterly deceiue themſelues. For it ſtandeth not with reaſon or common ſenſe, for anie man to beleeue, that he will make it nice or deintie, to abuſe the ignorance or credulitie of men, which maketh it no conſcience to abuſe the moſt ſacred and holie word of the eternall God.
               
               But herein hath he (I ſaie) duely and orderly accompliſhed his courſe, with ſuch equalitie, proportion, and vniformitie in all points, as the middle
                     D. Allens vniformitie in all points of his Pamphlet. appeareth in each reſpect anſwerable to the beginning, and the ende vnto both: inſomuch as the Authour hath effectually ſhewed himſelfe not to haue degenerated in anie point, from his firſt humour & diſpoſition: but that you may rightly ſay of him (forſomuch as he hath declared in this pamphlet,) that if there be one good zeale, motion, or affection in him, there is neuer a bad.
               If anie man thinke mee to haue been more earneſt and bitter in ſpeeches againſt the man, then INo hard ſpeech vſed againſt D. Allen, but againſt his malicious & wicked dealings. heretofore promiſed and profeſſed, let him impute it to the bitternes of the argument and occaſion, for I proteſt I haue not in any thing inueighed againſt the perſon, but againſt his wicked, malicious, and peſtilent practiſes: which I know no ſubiect well affected could with patience endure to think vpon, and I my ſelfe haue beene enforced to command my ſelfe temperancie, in repeating and anſwering them, labouring in no wiſe to diſcredit him, but endeuouring wholy to diſcouer his double and deceitfull

dealings, his irreligious and prophane policies, and his euident abuſes and impoſtures:Deceits and impoſtures, the onelie meanes to eſtabliſh their Antichristian Monarchy.
                   which hath been euer hitherto the onlie meanes, that not hee alone, but all the reſt of the ſame ſect haue vſed, to ſeduce men from the Truth to the following of their faction, for the ſetting vp of their Antichristian Monarchy. For that is the verie marke they ſhoote at, to make themſelues Lordes, and Rulers of the world, and to draw as well the authoritie of the ſwoord, as the cuſtodie of the keyes, into their owne handes, and to bring all Kinges, Princes, Emperours, and all Ciuil powers, vnder their ſubiection and obedience.
               Which knowing at the firſt that they could not by anie meanes bring to paſſe, if the word of God, (which is directly againſt their purpoſes, and beateth downe their intolerable pride, and ambitious deſire of Souereigntie) ſhould once bee made publike and common to the people, whereby they might be able to diſcerne their doctrine, and finde out their errors and abuſes: to keepe and reſtraine men from that knowledge, they endeuoured firſt toThe reſtreint of the Scriptures from the people, to hold them in ignorance. ſuppreſſe the holie Scriptures, by prohibiting them to be publiſhed in thoſe languages, wherin the people might read and vnderſtand them: teaching the people, that it was not conuenient for them to meddle with the Scriptures, but that it was ſufficient for them to relie wholy vpon their doctrine, and neceſſarie for their ſaluation to beleeue what they taught, and to fulfill what they commanded.

So by this meanes might they teach whatſoeuer they would, for who could controll them? and whatſoeuer they taught, the people were bounde to beleeue, vpon paine of damnation; for who durſt offende his Ghoſtly Father?
               If anie true member of the Church of Christ, ſtirred vp by the ſpirite of God, and an earneſt zeale of his word, to encounter their wicked proceedings, and to hinder the kingdome of Antichrist, did put himſelfe forwarde to reprooue their errors, rebuke their abuſes, and ſincerely to teach the word of God, and due adminiſtration of the Sacraments, according to the true inſtitutionWhoſoeuer taught the libertie of the Goſpell, & free vſe of the Scriptures, was proclaimed by the Papiſts for an Heretike.
                   of Christ, and the doctrine of the Apostles and the Primitiue Church, endeuouring to communicate vnto all men the knowledge of the trueth: they forthwith condemned him for an Authour of new doctrine, a ſower of ſedition, and (to make him the more odious vnto the world) proclaimed him for an Heretike, thundring out their Bulles, excommunications, and curſes againſt him, and all to the ende that men might not incline to him, nor giue anie credit or regard to his teaching, wherebyAll to couer their abuſes. they might come to the knowledge of the Scriptures, and to the diſcouering of their Popiſh abuſes, and impoſtures.
               Now, whē they ſee theſe policies no lōger auaile thē, but that mighty Princes & whole Natiōs, mooued by the invvard vvorking of the holie Spirite,
                  
haue caught hold of, and embraced the light of the Goſpel, and thereby haue begun to deſcry their iugling and tromperie, and to fall away from theirThe Papiſts proceed from policie to plaine force. obedience; they flie now from policie to plaine force, and ioyne the one with the other, and fall to inciting not only of naturall borne ſubiects, but of forreine Princes and nations, to ioyne in armes againſt the defenders of the true, ancient, Catholike, and Apoſtolike Faith, only to the intent to reduce them to their former ſubiection and obedience, and to eſtabliſh their owne Antichristian
                  Deceit, their only meanes to perſuade men to their purpoſe. 
                  Monarchie. And what other meanes vſe they to drawe them to the accompliſhment of their vngodly, and woorſe then barbarous deſignements, but euen their ancient and accuſtomed policie and practiſe of deceit, ſeducing them with falſe doctrine, and perſuading them, thoſe thinges to bee moſt lawfull, honourable and neceſſarie to bee done, vpon paine of damnation, which are expreſly forbidden by the word of God?
               
               And can anie man then bee ſo ſenſeles as to bee mooued by their perſuaſions, ſeeing how firſt they haue noozled them in ignorance, and barred them the meanes, whereby they might haue comeThe Papiſts reſtraine the knowledge of the Scriptures, only to binde men (by ignorance) to the beleeuing of their traditions. to the knowledge, to bee able to diſcerne of trueth, and falſhood, only to the intent to binde them wholy to the beleeuing of their traditions: and now (hauing ſo Captiued their vnderſtandings and iudgements with blindnes, as either they haue not the knowledge to deſcry their abuſes, or at

the leaſt haue it wholy reſtrained to the credit of their doctrine,) forbeare not to impoſe vpon them anie falſhood, that may further their ambitious purpoſes?
               There is no man but knoweth that the plaineThe Truth beggeth no credit, nor feareth ſifting. and ſimple Truth, which is euer able to iuſtifie it ſelfe, craueth no credit, nor feareth to be ſifted to the vttermoſt: but it is falſhood, that ſeeketh corners, and vſeth policie to creepe into credit, and refuſeth to come to open triall. And why ſhould then the Romiſh Church recommend ignorance vnto the people, and leade them on in blindneſſe with their own traditions, reſtraining from them the reading and knowledge of the Scriptures, which is the true touchſtone of Religion, if their doctrine were pure and ſounde, and able to abide the touch? Christ biddeth all men ſearch the Scriptures; why ſhould they then forbid or hinder anie man to reade the Scriptures, but that they know the Scriptures condemne both their doctrine and dooings, and therefore feare to haue their falſhood and wickednes diſcouered? Wherein they doe moſt of all, and moſtThe Papiſts owne doings condemne them. euidently condemne themſelues (to the iudgement of all men, in whom there is anie iote of iudgement or common ſenſe) bewraying themſelues to bee the children of darkenes, not of the
                  Matth. 15. 14. Matth. 7. 15. 
                  light, The blinde, leaders of the blinde, Wolues in Sheepes cloathing: And what better marke ſeeke ye to know them by, then the ſame verie marke, whereby Christ himſelfe hath notified them vnto

you, that is, by their fruites? their pride, theirIbidem. ambition, their malice, their deceit, their impoſture, their falſhood, their prophaneſſe, to conclude, their plaine Atheiſme? And can you (notwithſtanding all theſe notes of them (giuen you by Chriſt) beleeue them, or ſuffer your ſelues to be ſeduced by them?
               But mee thinkes I doe euen ſee D. Allen himſelfe proceeding on with the reſt of Dauus his part,
                     D. Allen is neuer weery of an ill worke. and ſaying to the Pope (his Maiſter) Deceptus ſum, at non defatigatus: Hac non ſucceſsit, alia aggrediamur via: I am diſappointed of my purpoſe, but not
                  Teren. Andri. 
                  weary of my worke: Since this trick hath not ſerued our turne, let vs trie another.
               
               In trueth I doubt nothing of his good will, nor of his endeuour, neither yet of the readines of the reſt of that crue, to purſue this argument: for neither is this the firſt aſſault, that D. Allen hath giuen to the ſubiects fidelitie and obedience, neither is D. Allen the firſt and onely Champion, that hath ſtriken the firſt blow in ſo bad a quarrell, though none of them euer yet anſwered the encounter. But the beſt hope is, let him, or anie other giue the aſſaie againe, when, and as often as they luſt, I truſt they ſhall bee ſtill diſappointed, and in the ende weery, or cleane worne out: and when they haue attempted all the waies they can, they ſhall bee as wiſe, as they were in the beginning, and in the beginning, midſt, and ending, neerer to their owne ende, then to the ende of their purpoſe.

For God will neuer giue ſucceſſe to ſo godles an enterpriſe.
               As for this ſlender puſh of D. Allens Pamphlet, I hope there is not the holoweſt hart of all her Maieſties ſubiects, in whom there is either feare of God, ſenſe of reaſon, or regard of his owne ſafetie, but that hauing ſeene his weake forces, his brittle weapons, his falſe fiers, and counterfeit engines, is ſufficiently armed in himſelfe with his owne honeſtie, faith, and loyaltie, to abide and withſtand and this feeble and forceleſſe batterie.
               But what ſhall I now ſaie to M. Allen, and the reſt of our fugitiue Countreymen, that haue left their Souereigne, their Countrie, and their duetie altogither, eſpecially ſuch as haue not onelie left them, but doe maliciouſly ſtirre vp all the meanes they can to ouerthrow, deſtroy, and vtterlyThe Engliſh Fugitiues ſeditious dealings deſerue more then to be inueighed againſt, of euerie true ſubiect. deface them? Shall I whet my ſelfe wholy to inueigh againſt them? I know their deedes haue not only deſerued it, but doe iuſtly prouoke me and euerie good ſubiect vnto it. But I will vſe Charitie, euen where it is not to bee ſhewed. Shall I then in Charitie reprooue them? I would they were as willing to heare reproofe, and as readie to bee reformed, as they haue been charitably, friendly, and brotherly admoniſhed. Shall I labour to exhort and perſwade them to theSmall hope of conuerting them by perſuaſion. conſideration of their duetie, the repentaunce of their grieuous offences committed againſte

their Souereigne and Countrey, and reſtauration of their due obedience and fidelitie? I feare I ſhall but looſe my labour, to cry to them Reſipiſcite
                  Pſal. 2. 10. 
                  & conuertimini, Be wiſe and turne, their eares are ſo cloſe ſtopped, their hearts ſo ouerhardened, their mindes ſo maliciouſly bent againſt her Maieſtie, their Countrey, and vs all. What ſhall I then ſay further to them? Alas, in ſo deſperate a caſe, I can ſay no more, then Doctor Allen in his Pamphlet ſaieth to his Countrey (but with a better minde and meaning towards them, then he doth towards vs,) Alas for them, and thrice Alas for them: for I doe euen from the bottome of my hart pitie their errour, I enuie not their Religion: I doe euen from the bottome of my heart bewaile their obſtinacie, I hate not their perſons▪ I doe euen from the bottome of my heart lament their their miſerable eſtate, I malice not the men: I wiſh better to them, then they doe vnto vs: I deſire neither the ſpilling of their blood, nor the ſpoiling of their ſubſtance, but I pray, & pray hartily for them, God amend them, God lighten their eies, if they be blinde and doe not ſee, open their eares, if they bee deafe and cannot heare, turne their hearts, if they bee obſtinate and will neither ſee, nor heare. God (if it bee his will) giue them grace to know his will, to acknowledge his will, and to conforme themſelues to his will, that they may be heires of his euerlaſting Will.
               
               
                  And to you (my brethren, countreymen, &An exhortation to all her Maieſties liege ſubiects. fellow-ſubiects) what ſhall I ſay more then hath bene ſaid? Shall I endeuour to exhorte you to obedience, and to the loue of your prince, and defenſe of your countrey? Why ſhould I ſeeme ſo much to ſuſpect your obedience, your loue to your Prince, or your zeale and care of your countrey? Becauſe D. Allen hath attempted by his perſwaſiōs to corrupt you, & withdraw you frō thē? Why, you ſee his perſwaſions are of litle force, grounded vpon falſhood, and contrarye to the word of God. But were they neuer ſo forcible, why ſhould you be corrupted by them? An honeſt faithfull mind may well be aſſaulted, butVertue moſt ſhewed in withſtanding the ſtrongeſt aſſaults of vice. will reuer be ouercome with the corruption of wicked perſwaſions: Nay, thêre is vertue moſt ſhewed, where againſt the hotteſt aſſault is made the ſtrongeſt reſiſtance.
               But why ſhould you diſobey, and reuolte from your princes ſeruice, and take armes againſt her and your countrey, as D. Allen exhorteth you to do? Whether vpon iuſt cauſe, or vpon diſcontentment? If vpon diſcontentment, you ſhewe yourſelues rebels▪ not to your Souereigne onely, but to God himſelfe, in that you are not contented with his ordinaunce, but will ſtriue to put it downe, and ſet vp a new ordinance of your own. This motion cannot proceede but of the deuill himſelfe, the rebellious ſpirite, and mouer of all ſedition.
               
                  If you ſaie vpon iuſt cauſe, you deceiue yourThere is no iuſt cauſe, to commit an vniuſt act. ſelues: for there can be no iuſt cauſe, to committe an vniuſt fact. If there might anie cauſe bee iuſt, who ſhall be iudge of the iuſtice thereof? Your ſelues? that were not fit: you are parties, and therefore partiall, and no competent iudges. Againe you are priuate men, and ſubiects, and therefore can haue no lawfull authoritie (in this caſe) to iudge? Who then ſhal be iudge to determine this cauſe? There is no lawfull power in this Realme, but your Souereigne, and her miniſters: then if there be anie cauſe, you muſt open it vnto her, and ſubmit both your ſelues and the cauſe to her iudgement, and reformation, and in the meane time continue in your due obedience, till the cauſe be decided.
               But (you will ſay) your Souereigne is a partie alſo, aſwell as you, in the cauſe. So may ſhe be, & yet a iudge. But to whoſe iudgement then will you appeale? there is none to be iudge ouer her, but God. Will you then be iudged by him? Indeed he is the higheſt iudge, and by him the whole world is to be iudged. And will ye be content to ſtand to his iudgement? I know you will not call him out of heauen, in perſon to iudge betwixt you: for you neede not: becauſe he hath left his lawes and iudgements amongſt you, here on earth, recorded in his owne bookes of the old & new teſtament, which may be ſufficient to determine

this cauſe, without any further aſſiſtance, ſeeing that by them the whole world is to be iuged. Looke then into his booke for his iudgemēt in this caſe, and you ſhal finde that he forbiddeth you abſolutely (without exception of any cauſe) to laye your handes vpon the Lordes annointed: and commaundeth you as abſolutely (without all manner exception) to ſubmit your ſelues aſwell to your Prince, as to her miniſters and inferiour gouernours,
                  1. Peter 2. Rom. 13. 
                  to obey her, and not to reſiſt her, for if yee reſiſt her, he telleth you that yee reſiſt his ordinaunce, and ſhall thereby receiue to your ſelues iudgement.
               
               You heare now, how God in his holy Scriptures
                  You may not reſiſt your▪ Souereigne. determineth this caſe directly againſt you, that you may not (for any cauſe) offer to lay your hands vpon your Souereigne, but that you muſt ſubmit your ſelues vnto her, obey, and not reſiſt her, vpon paine of iudgement. How then will you dare to lift vp your hands, and to take armes againſt her?
               But, if it were lawfull for you (as it is not) for any cauſe, to riſe in armes againſt the Queens Maieſtie, your liege & drad Souereigne, what cauſe (I pray you) would you pretend for your ſo doing? will you ſay Religion? Indeed Religion is the cauſe, for which D. Allen teacheth you, that it is lawful & honorable for you to take armes againſt your prince, & laboureth earneſtly to perſwade you therunto, ſuch as are of his religion. But what

kind of Religion call you that, that ſtirreth you vpA good Religion, that ſtirreth vp ſubiects to Rebellion.
                   to Rebellion? You haue receiued no ſuch religion from Chriſt, nor from his Apoſtles: for they teach you the contrary, both by their doctrine, and examples. They tell you that you muſt ſubmit your ſelues to your Souereigne, obey, and not reſiſt her. They, when they were impriſoned, toſſed, and
                     Chriſt and his Apoſtles ſuffered perſecution without either reſiſtance or mouing of ſedition. turmoyled from place to place, reuiled, & ſtriken, yet neuer offered reſiſtance againſt the Magiſtrates, neither moued, or attempted any ſedition, nor entred into any conſpiracy againſt thē, but endured all with patience, as conſtant witneſſes of the Truth: which is cleane contrarie to this Religion, which you profeſſe. From whom then receiue you your Religion? from your holy father the Biſhop of Rome? It may very well be; for it ſheweth it ſelfe from whence it cometh. And is this the Religion, for which you will take armes againſt your Prince? Why, you ſee it is a Religion taken from man, and not from God, and therefore cannot ſtand. You ſee it is a Religion contrarie to the doctrine and Religion of Chriſt, and the Apoſtles, and therefore not the true Religion. Will you then take armes againſt your Prince in the quarrell and defenſe of a falſe Religion? you know not what you do, and that is alſo the fault of your Religion. For if you had giuen your ſelues to the reading of the Scriptures, and ſtudie of knowledge, whereby you might haue bene able to giue an account of your faith, and

knowne the ground of your Religion, and not leaned ſo much, nor giuen ſo great truſt vnto mens traditions: you might (with Gods grace and aſſiſtance) haue found out a ſounder Religion. But then ſhould you haue fallen from the precepts of your Popiſh teachers▪ But yet ſhould you haue followed the commaundement of Chriſt, who biddeth you Search the Scriptures.
               
               What fault find you with our Religion? Wee teach nothing, but what we learne out of theThe Proteſtants Religion. 
                  Scriptures: we hold conſtantly the doctrine of our Sauiour Chriſt, and of the holie Apoſtles in all pointes vnchanged, and by them we offer our ſelues to bee tried, and our Religion. And do you condemne the Scriptures, the doctrine of Chriſt and his Apoſtles? If you do, the whole world will condemne you: if you do not, how can you then condemne our Religion? Compare it with your owne, and, if you bee not ouer partiall, ſenſeleſſe, or ſhameleſſe, be iudges your ſelues, whether of the two is the ſounder.
               We ground our Religion wholy on the wordThe compariſon of the Proteſtants Religion with the Papiſts.
                   of God, you, more vpon the traditions of men: we recommend vnto all men the knowledge of the Scriptures, for the direction of their life, and aſſurance of their ſaluation; your teachers reſtrayne from you the knowledge of the Scriptures, deliuering you their owne traditions, both for your inſtruction of life, and aſſurance of your

ſaluation: we commend vnto ſubiects obedience, and fidelitie, to their Princes, they commaund ſubiects diſobedience, and rebellion againſt their Princes. Denie anie part hereof, if you can: examine your owne conſciences, if this be not all true, and then iudge your ſelues by the true cogniſance of Religion, whether of the two is the true Religion. We flie not to armes to mainteine our Religion, for the truth is able to vphold it ſelfe, and hath God for her protector: Your Religion had neede to be aduaunced by armes, els muſt it ſoone decaie, hauing neither God, nor the Truth, nor reaſon to mainteine it And will you then take armes againſt your Prince for defenſeThey that take armes for the Romiſh religion, take armes againſt religion. of this Religion? No, no, if you doe, you deceiue your ſelues, you take armes againſt both your Prince and Religion, and (in defenſe of mens traditions and tromperies, vnder pretenſe of Religion) you ſeeke to ouerthrow the true Religion: wherein you rebell not onelie againſt your Prince, but againſt God himſelfe, who is the authour and defender of this Religion.
               
               
                  Chriſt teacheth you not to take armes, though
                     Chriſt teacheth ſubiects to flye, or ſuffer for Religion, not to rebell. ye were perſecuted for Religion, but to flie: and if ye will abide and ſtand in the Truth, he willeth you to ſuffer, like Martyrs, not to reſiſt, like Rebelles. But you haue no ſuch cauſe giuen you, either to reſiſt, or to flie; for ye are not perſecuted, but inſtructed: and if yee refuſe to

come to heare, ye are puniſhed for your diſorderThe Papiſts puniſhed for diſobedience, not for Religion.
                   and diſobedience, not for Religion: for what Religion teacheth you to refuſe, to heare the word of God preached? Chriſt ſaith, My ſheepe heare my voyce: whoſe ſheep are you then? for you are none
                     Papiſts refuſe to heare the word preached: Ergo they are not of Chriſtes flocke. of Chriſtes. If ye wil be of Chriſtes flock, you muſt renounce that Religion, which withdraweth you from the hearing of his voice: for till then you cannot be his ſheepe.
               Do you call th'execution of Iuſtice againſt your Ieſuits and Seminaries, perſecution for Religion? You do either ignorantlie miſtake it, or ſlaunderouſlie miſreport it. For none was euer executedThe Ieſuits and Seminaries executed for Treaſon, not perſecuted for Religion.
                   for Religion, but for expreſſe Treaſon againſt her Maieſties perſon, as hath bene ſufficientlie declared and publiſhed to all men. But (you will ſay) they did nothing but what Religion moued and bound them in conſcience to do. I beleeue it, and affirme aſmuch as you ſaie: & this is the fault, I warned you of before, in your Religion. A good Religion (ywis) that moueth and bindeth men to the committing of Treaſon againſt their Chriſtian Rulers. Can you confeſſe ſo much your ſelues, and yet are ye ſo blinde, that you will not ſee the impietie of your Religion? Yet ſee your owne daunger, how in profeſſing that Religion, you condemne
                     Papiſtry and Treaſon inſeparably vnited togither. your ſelues of treaſon. If your Religion tie thē neceſſarily to treaſon, that hold it, as in truth it doth, (for they muſt either diſobey her Maieſty, or not

obey the Pope:) how can you acknowledge your ſelues profeſſors of that Religion, and not condēne your ſelues for traitors to your ſouereigne?
               Leaue, leaue therefore that erroneous and vngodly profeſſion, and terme it not by the holie name of Catholike Religion, but meere blindnes and Superſtition, being grounded vpon the vaine inuentions and traditions of men, ſo directly oppoſite vnto the word of God, ſo contrarie to the doctrine of Chriſt and his Apoſtles, and ſo inſeparably combined and linked with Treaſon, as you cannot be either true Catholiks, Chriſtians, or loyall ſubiects, ſo long as you perſiſt in it. Pretend not the quarrell of Religion, againſt your Prince and Religion: for (aſſure your ſelues) if you will admit (as you ought) that onely to be the true Religion which is founded vpon Chriſt, the head Corner ſtone, there is no Religion, that alloweth ſo rebellious an action.
               If you giue any heed vnto outward and Ciuill reſpects, conſider with your ſelues the long, peacible and proſperous reigne of your Souereigne, the like wherof your forefathers haue not ſeene, nor any age doth record. If long peace,Peace, welth, and proſperity, the bleſſings of God, and aſſured tokens of his ſpeciall fauour. wealth, and proſperity, be the outward bleſſings of God (as vndoubtedly they bee) whereby hee declareth his ſpeciall fauour vnto that Prince & kingdome, which feare him▪ & worſhip him ſyncerely, and with whom he is well pleaſed, according to his word and promiſes in the Scriptures, al

theſe maie be to you an aſſured argument, both of the ſingular fauour of God, vnto your Prince and Countrie, and of the true ſincere Religion profeſſed by them, wherewith hee is well pleaſed.
               But looke yet further into the exceeding fauourThe ſingular fauour of God vnto her Maieſtie, particularly▪
                   of God ſhewed particularlie vnto her Maieſtie (I ſpeake not of her rare and ſingular giftes of wiſedome, learning, vertue, and other her excellent, and Princely qualities and perfections, both of bodie and minde, with all other Complements of nature, ſo abundantlie beſtowed vpon her, as few ages haue euer knowen her equall, all which wee muſt yet acknowledge to bee the ſpeciall graces of God) looke, I ſaie, into his gracious goodnes towardes her, in protecting her from the manifoldIn protecting her from the malicious attemptes of Traitors.
                   dangers and miſchiefes attempted againſt her own perſon.
               I know there is none of you ignorant, how often & ſundrie times her deare life hath bin ſought, and how neare the bloodie tortors haue been to the verie execution of their deuiliſh deſignement, ſome of them (more then once or twice) in neereſtHer Maieſties life ſundrie times ſought by Traitors, and miraculouſly preſerued by God.
                   and priuate place, with their murderous weapons in their hands, euen readie to ſtrike the deadlie and curſed ſtroake of our calamitie, and their owne vtter confuſion and damnation; had not God preuented it, by ſtriking them with a ſodeine trembling of heart, and aſtoniſhment of minde, for the preſeruation of his annointed ſeruant and handmaid. This you know to haue been attempted not

once, nor twice, nor thrice, but oftener then either memorie ſerueth mee to repeat, or horrour of the villanie will ſuffer mee to remember: and will you not acknowledge the Diuine prouidence, and the fatherlie and louing kindnes of God vnto her Maiestie, in ſo miraculouſlie deliuering her, euen out of the bloodie hands of the cruell Butchers, for the aduancement of his glorious Goſpell, and propagation of true Religion, by her faithfull and zealous Miniſterie: & on the other ſide, his iuſt iudgment
                     Gods iuſt iudgement vpō the Traitors. and vengeance vpon the traitorous Parricides, in not onlie defeating, but diſcouering moſt wonderfullie (euen by ſome of their owne mouthes) their accurſed and damnable purpoſes, and bringing them to a ſhamefull end, for an example to all others of that ſort, to take heede how they enter into ſuch wicked conſpiracies?
               And who haue bin the actors in all theſe tragicalThe murderous Traitors, all Papiſts, & ſet on by the Pope and his Adherents.
                   attemptes, but onlie ſuch as you terme Catholikes, profeſſors of the Romiſh Religion, and ſuch as the Pope and his adherents haue inueigled, and ſet on to execute their moſt impious and deteſtable deuiſes, and (to conclude) ſuch as Doctor Allen inticeth, and exhorteth you now to bee? But what Atheist is hee ſo irreligious, what monſter of nature ſo barbarous, what Tyger ſo fierce and cruell, as can finde in his heart to laie his hand vpon the Lords annointed, to imbrue his murderous blade in the blood of a Prince, of a Mayden Prince, in whom is nothing but mildenes, clemencie,

vertue, modeſtie, Religion, all kinde of Princely nature and exellencie? Whoſe royall Maieſtie ought to be a terror to all traitorous thoughts, whoſe tender ſexe ought to bee a ſafegard againſt all violent aſſaults, whoſe ſacred vertue, a protection againſt all villanous attempts.
               Let Gods eſpeciall fauours therefore miraculouſly ſhewed vnto her Maiestie, and his exceeding bleſsings abundantly powred out by him vpon her Countrey, bee vnto you (as it is indeed) an aſſured argument, that her Religion is the true Religion acceptable vnto God, and conformable to his word: and let the vngodly andThe vngodlie practiſes of the Romiſh Church, the verie badges of Antichriſtian Religion.
                   irreligious practiſes of the Church of Rome, to murther Princes, and mainteine Rebellion (contrarie to the word and will of God) be vnto you (as they ought to bee) infallible tokens of a falſe and counterfeit Religion: and let the greeuous iudgement, and iuſt vengeance of God, inflicted vpon thoſe abhominable Traitors, bee vnto you (as to your beſt behoofe it may bee) a terror from aſſenting vnto anie ſuch traitorous, or rebellious enterpriſe.
               Looke into the Hiſtories of ages paſt, either of forreine Nations, or your owne Chronicles, and tell mee where you euer reade, or heard, or founde written, that Rebelles did euer preuaile againſt their lawfull Souereignes. Looke neerer into the examples of your owne

Countrey and within your owne memorie, and namely the Inſurrections in the time of the late moſt vertuous Prince of famous memorie, Edward the ſixt, againſt whom a rabble of rebellious ſubiects in ſundrie partes aſſembled themſelues, ſome pretending the quarrell of Religion, ſome of a Common wealth, and gathered mightie forces of manie thouſands, to the great amazement of the whole Countrey, and the Prince a Child, yet what (I pray you) was the ende of their Rebellion, but
                     Rebels euer ouerthrowen. ſpeedie diſcomfiture, and confuſion?
               The hiſtories are ful of the like exāples of all ages for what age hath not brought forth of both ſorts, as well diſobedient Rebels and miſcreants, as honeſt and duetiful ſubiects? but how different ſoeuer the cauſes and quarrels haue been (as there was neuer anie ſuch action ſo bad, but had the pretence and colour of ſome good intent) for which the Rebels
                  
                     Rebellion euer coloured with a good pretence. haue entred into Armes againſt their lawfull Princes, yet the ende hath euer (for the moſt part) been alike. For they that reſiſt their Rulers, reſiſt God, Whoſe ordinance they are, and thoſe that reſiſt God, God will confound them, & (which is moſt wretched and miſerable) their infamie ſhall remaine vpon perpetuall record, for a ſpectacle to all poſteritie. What hope haue you then left, to encourage you to ſo godleſſe an action, to take armes againſt your gratious Souereigne? Doe you expect redemption (as you pretend Religion) through the meanes and aſsiſtance of forreine Forces? Nay rather aſſure

your ſelues of certeine Captiuitie or deſtruction. For, if forreine powers ſhould preuaile ouer your countrie, do you hope for aduācemēt at their hands in your countrie? No, no, your forrein Lordes willA ſtranger will neuer truſt him, which hath not been true to his owne Prince and Countrey. ſtand too much in doubt of your fidelitie towardes them, which haue not been faithfull to your owne naturall Prince, & Countrie, and therfore will keep you low inough for their own ſecurity: for though they loue your treaſon, yet they will not truſt your traitorous mindes. So ſhall you be faine with your Countrie to endure the loſſe of your libertie, and in your Countrie become vaſſals & bondmend vnto Strangers: A iuſt reward for your vniuſt rebellion: And this is the beſt iſſue you are to expect of ſo bad an action.
               For, if your forreine auxiliarie forces goe to the ground, as I truſt they ſhall, if euer they giue the attempt againſt her Maieſtie and this Realme, looke you to goe with them alſo for companie (as you are well worthie) if you goe not before them; euen when ſoeuer you ſhal firſt offer to ſtir. For (I know)
                     Engliſhmen naturallie faithfull to their Prince and Countrey, eſpecially againſt a forreine Enemy.
                   
                  Engliſh men, how ſoeuer ſome few of the ſkumme and dregges of them (as of other Nations) may either of a diſcontented minde, or deſire of alteration for hauock and ſpoiles ſake, or through the lewde inticements of others, be ſtirred vp to ſedition, yet they are all generally by nature moſt faithfull vnto their Prince and Countrie, and eſpeciallie againſt forreine enemies, in a caſe of Inuaſion, whereupon they ſhall ſee, lieth the hazard of the vniuerſal ouerthrow

of themſelues and their Countrey. And therefore whatſoeuer you bee, that beare a Rebellious minde againſt your Prince and Countrey, and an vnnaturall affection to the partaking and furtherance of a forreine enemie, make ſure account ofA good Caueat for Papiſts. this, that there ſhall not ſo ſoone be fiue Rebels gathered in a cluſter to runne to their confederates, but there will bee fiftie true harted Subiects rounde about them readie to cut their throates. And doubt you not but the Magiſtrates are circumſpect, prouident, and carefull inough, to ſet a good order and caution, for the timely preuenting of all ſuch your pernicious purpoſes.
               Seeing then the aſſured iſſue of your rebellious attemptes (if anie of you ſhould be ſo wickedly inclined) and the preſent danger and deſtruction hanging ouer your heads, mee thinks you ſhould haue but litle courage, or comfort to ſtir in ſuch a cauſe againſt your Prince & Countrie. But let not terror in theſe outward reſpects either onlie, or principally, driue you from diſobeying or reſiſting of your Souereign, whom you are expreſly commanded by God to obey, not for feare, but for conſcience: but ifRom. 13. 5. there be in you Religion (as you pretend) ſhew your religion in obeying his word, and feare his euerlaſting iudgements, if you diſobey him. So ſhal your obedience to your Prince bee a willing, a hartie, a cheerfull, a louing, & a faithfull obedience, acceptable to God, comfortable to your Prince, and healthfull to your owne ſoules.
            
            
               
               NOw to ſuch as are faithfull & true harted ſubiects to her Maieſtie (as I truſt all are) I ſhal not neede to vſe anie exhortation at all, becauſe I know you are already ſo wel affected in hart towards your gracious Souereigne, and ſo throughlie confirmed in your obedience and duetie, as there cannot bee more added thereunto by anie mans perſuaſions.
               Therfore will I onelie giue you in a word ſuchAn encouragement to all true faithfull Subiects. comfort & encouragement, as I haue receiued my ſelfe from mine owne conſcience, to perſeuer conſtantlie in that obedience, & in the defenſe of Gods truth, our Princes ſafetie, & the weale & libertie of our Countrie.
               You haue plainly vnderſtood by this diſcourſe, the malicious minde & purpoſe of D. Allen and his partie, againſt our Queene & countrey, & the ſeditious practiſes, and perſuaſions vſed by him in his Pamphlet, to the furtherance therof: which though (I know) they can take no hold of any of you, yet let vs take this benefit of our enemies, to make their doings our warnings, to arme our ſelues againſt their malice.
               That they wiſh ill to vs, we need not doubt: their owne writinges bewray it. That they intend il towardes vs, wee muſt needes ſuppoſe: their practiſes haue declared it. That they meane to attempt ill againſt vs, wee may well aſſure our ſelues: their preparations doe certeinlie confirme it. How then? ſhall wee bee diſmaied at it? that were not manlike. Shall Romiſh and Spaniſh forces appall vs? That were diſhonourable for

                  Engliſh men. Shall we be daunted with the feare of a forrein enemy? Then ſhould we degenerate from the courage of our forefathers.
               Their forces are great: ours greater. Their threatnings are terrible: our valour is tried. Their pride vnmatched: our courage vnmated. Their malice deadly: our mindes vndaunted. Their furieThe oddes of the quarrell. vehement: our quarrell iuſt, godlie, honourable. They fight for reuenge, wee for defenſe: they for the ſpoile, we for our liues, and liberties: they for the Pope, we for God, and our Prince. And what is hee, nay, what is ſhee, that will not take armes, that wil not fight, that will not die in this quarrel?
               Our fathers haue vanquiſhed forreine Princes:The examples of our anceſtors vertue. and ſhall not wee fight for our owne Prince? Our fathers haue conquered other Realmes: and ſhall not wee defend our owne Realme? Our fathers haue been Lords of other Countries: and ſhall we be ſlaues in our owne Countrie? What an alteration (or rather degeneration) would this bee in vs? how diſhonourable to the Engliſh name and Nation? How iuſtlie might all other Nations reproach vs, and all ſucceeding ages record vs, for vnworthie Subiects of ſo worthie a Prince, degenerate Children of ſo generous Parentes, and infamous Inhabitantes of ſo famous a Countrey? Let vs therefore all of vs (ſeeing the quarrell is generall and common to vs all, for the defenſe of true Religion, our Prince, and our Countrey,) let vs all prepare

our ſelues cheerefullie to th'encounter, let vs not reſpect the crie of wife, or childe, let vs reſpect their defenſe: let vs plucke vp our hartes, take vp our armes, and march hardilie to meete with our enimie; let vs fight with him, let vs die vpon him, yea let vs ſeeke him, if he ſeeke not vs.
               We do all owe God a death: how ſhall we better pay it, then in hîs quarrell? Our liues are all at our Princes commandement: how can they be better ſpent, then in hêr ſeruice? We are all borne for our countrey: why ſhould we then refuſe to die for our countrey? If we die in Gods quarrell, we ſhall liue in his kingdome: If we die in our Princes ſeruice, we ſhall liue in the memorie of all poſteritie: If we die in defenſe of our countrey, our renowme ſhall liue for euer. A Heathen Poet could ſaie to his heathen countreymen in his age, Dulce & decorum eſt pro patria mori:
               
               
                  It is a ſweete and honorable death,
                  In countreys cauſe to ſpend our vitall breath:
               
               And ſhall not we Chriſtians thinke it moſt diſhonorable for vs, to feare to die in the common cauſe of our God, our Prince, and our countrey?D. Allens own encouragement.
               
               Why, D. Allen himſelf, in his pamphlet, where he goeth about to diſcourage vs, by admoniſhing vs not to be emboldened by the Memory of our old Engliſh notorious battailes and victories, which in olde time were comparable to what prouinces or peoples were moſt famous, nor by th'eſteeme or opinion
                  
                  (either true, or partiall) of our preſent ſtrength and courage in England: what doth he but adde comfort and courage vnto vs, in ſtirring vs vp aſwell by the examples of our forefathers victories, to imitate their vertues, as by the knowledge of our own ſtrength and courage, to take hart and courage vnto vs?
               Let vs then not caſt away that encouragemēt which he giueth vs, rather let vs augment it by our own conſtancie of mind, and reſolution. If the ſtrength of our Realme were great in ourOur Realme neuer of greater ſtrength then now. forefathers times, it is now far greater: Nay, it was neuer ſo great in any Princes age, as it is now, God be thanked. And when our realme was not ſo ſtrong, yet hath it conquered other Nations, and was neuer conquered by any, ſo long as it was true within it ſelfe. And nowe, when our forces are greateſt, ſhall our faith bee leaſt? when our ſtate is moſt proſperous, ſhall wee bee moſt miſerable? when our quarrell is moſt glorious, ſhall we bee moſt infamous? No, no, let vs link togither in one mind, in one faith, in one force, let vs ſticke togither, fight togither, die togither, like men, like Engliſhmen, like true-harted Engliſhmen. Let vs all and euery one of vs ſhew ourſelues forward in aduauncing this ſeruice of the common cauſe, with our ſubſtance, with our forces, and with our bodies alſo to the vttermoſt, as a great number of our faithfull countreymen in diuers partes of the realme,

yea, whole countyes, cities, and townes, andThe duetiful, and honorable forwardnes of the Londoners namely the honorable citie of London, haue done moſt duetifully, louingly, and honorably. Which I do the more willingly remember, not onely for the comfort of my ſelfe, and them▪ and euery good ſubiect, and to their great honor and commendation, but alſo for an incitement vnto others by their example to be ſtirred vp vnto the like duetie and forwardnes. Wherein if we ioyne all, our hartes, armes, and forces togither, like true and faithfull ſubiects, I am fully perſwaded our, forrein inuadors, whenſoeuer they come, ſhall find England the hoteſt countrey that euer they ſet foote in: We are likely inough to meaſure their Spaniſh Caſſocks with our Engliſh bowes, and their ſhoulders with our browne billes, before they meaſure our broad cloth with their long pikes. And before it come to that, I doubt not but ſome thouſands of them (God being our guide) ſhall cary their laſt meſſage vnto their great grandfathers, the next way by water.
               But what do I vſe encouragement to thē, thatThe aſſurāce of Gods aſſiſtance, our greateſt cō
                     fort. are of themſelues moſt couragious, valiant, and euen eaguer to fight? Yet let me adde this to your greateſt comfort, If God bee with vs, who can bee againſt vs: And that God is with vs in this quarrell, let vs ſtedfaſtly aſſure ourſelues, howſoeuer D. Allen perſwade the contrarye: and let him and his partakers knowe that God is againſt them, and will bee, ſo

long as they oppoſe themſelues againſt the obedience of his word, the knowlddge of his Truth, & the light of his glorious Goſpell. And that God may be with vs ſtill, and continue with vs for euer▪ let vs humble ourſelues vnto him dayly and duely, with earneſt▪ and hartie prayer and repentance, let vs ſerue him continually with a zealous feare and obedience, let vs glorifie him inceſſantly with a liuely faith and conſtancie: laſtly, let vs giue ourſelues wholy to him, that we may winne him wholy vnto vs.
               So we being his, and he ours, let vs all, and euery one of vs, comfort ourſelues vpon his aſſurance, let vs fortifie our mynds vpon his aſſiſtance, and adde our endeuour to his encouragement: aſſuring ourſelues, that fighting in ſo godlie, ſo iuſt, ſo honorable a quarrell, the ſucceſſe cannot be but moſt happie, moſt proſperous, moſt glorious: that, if we defend our countrey, we ſhall remaine free and ſafe; if wee ouerthrow our Enimies, we ſhall abide victorious: if we die in this quarrell, we ſhall liue eternally. To which aſſurance of freedome, ſafety, victorie, & life, what comfort can be comparable?
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   