
      
         
            
            
            A
SERMON
PREACHED AT
PLIMMOTH IN
NEVV-ENGLAND
December 9. 1621.
In an aſſemblie of his
Maieſties faithfull
Subiects, there
inhabiting.
            
            VVHEREIN IS SHEVVED
the danger of ſelfe-loue, and the
ſweetneſſe of true Friendſhip.
            
               TOGETHER
VVITH A PREFACE,
Shewing the ſtate of the Country,
and Condition of the
SAVAGES.
            ROM. 12. 10.
            Be affectioned to loue one another with brotherly
loue.
            Written in the yeare 1621.
            
               LONDON
Printed by I. D. for IOHN BELLAMIE,
and are to be ſold at his ſhop at the two Greyhounds
in Corne-hill, neere the Royall
Exchange. 1622.
         
         
            
            
            TO
HIS LOVING
FRIENDS, THE
ADVENTVRERS FOR
NEVV-ENGLAND;
TOGETHER
WITH ALL WELL-WILLERS,
And well-wiſhers thereunto,
Grace and Peace, &c.
            
               NEW ENGLAND,
ſo call'd, not onely (to
auoyd nouelties) becauſe
Captaine Smith hath ſo
entituled it in his Deſcription,
but becauſe of the reſemblance
that is in it, of
England the natiue ſoile of
Engliſh-men; It being
much what the ſame for
heate and colde in Summer and Winter, it being
Champion ground, but not high mountaines, ſomwhat
like the ſoile in Kent and Eſſex; full of Dales, and meddow
ground, full of ryuers and ſweete ſprings, as England
is. But principally, ſo farre as we can yet find, it is
an Iland, and neere about the quantitie of England, being
cut off from the maine land of America, as England
is from the maine of Europe, by a great arme of the Sea,
which entreth in fortie degrees, and runneth vp North
weſt and by Weſt, and goeth out either into the South

Sea, or elſe into the Bay of Canado. The certaintie
whereof, and ſecrets of which, we haue not yet ſo found
as that as eye-witneſſes we can make narration thereof,
but if God giue time and meanes, we ſhall ere long, diſcouer
both the extent of that Riuer, together with the
ſecrets thereof; and alſo try what territories, habitations,
or commodities, may be found, either in it, or about
it.
            It pertaineth not to my purpoſe to ſpeake any thing,
either in prayſe, or diſprayſe of the country, ſo it is by
Gods prouidence, that a few of vs are there planted to
our content, and haue with great charge and difficultie
attained quiet and competent dwellings there. And
thus much I will ſay for the ſatisfaction of ſuch as haue
any thought of going thither to inhabit; That for men
which haue a large heart, & looke after great riches, eaſe,
pleaſure, dainties, and iollitie in this world (except they
will liue by other mens ſweat, or haue great riches) I
would not aduiſe them to come there, for as yet the
country will afford no ſuch matters: But if there be any,
who are content to lay out their eſtates, ſpend their time,
labours, and endeuours, for the benefit of them that
ſhall come after, and in deſire to further the Goſpell among
thoſe poore Heathens, quietly contenting themſelues
with ſuch hardſhip and difficulties, as by Gods
prouidence ſhall fall vpon them, being yet yong, and in
their ſtrength, ſuch men I would aduiſe and encourage
to goe, for their ends cannot faile them.
            And if it ſhould pleaſe God to puniſh his people in
the Chriſtian countries of Europe, (for their coldneſſe,
carnality, wanton abuſe of the Goſpel, contention, &c.)
either by Turkiſh ſlauery, or by Popiſh tyrannie, which
God forbid, yet if the time be come, or ſhall come (as
who knoweth) when Sathan ſhall be let looſe,Reu. 12. 14. 15 to caſt
out his flouds againſt them, here is a way opened for
ſuch as haue wings to flie into this Wilderneſſe; and as

by the diſperſion of the Iewiſh Church thorow perſecution,Act. 11. 20. 21.
the Lord brought in the fulneſſe of the Gentiles,
ſo who knoweth, whether now by tyrannie, and
affliction, which he ſuffereth to come vpon them, he
will not by little and little chaſe them, even amongſt
the Heathens,Luk. 2. 32. that ſo a light may riſe vp in the darke,
and the kingdome of heauen be taken from them which
now haue it,Math. 21. 43. and giuen to a people that ſhall bring forth
the fruit of it. This I leaue to the iudgement of the godly
wiſe,Amos 7. 14. being neither Prophet nor ſonne of a Prophet,
but conſidering Gods dealing of olde,2 King. 17. 23. and ſeeing the
name of Chriſtian to be very great, but the true nature
thereof almoſt quite loſt in all degrees & ſects, I cannot
thinke but that there is ſome iudgement not farre off,
and that God will ſhortly, euen of ſtones, rayſe vp children
vnto Abraham.
               Math. 3. 5.
            
            And who ſo rightly conſidereth, what manner of
entrance, abiding, and proceedings, we haue had amongſt
theſe poore Heathens ſince we came hither, will
eaſily thinke, that God hath ſome great worke to doe
towards them.
            They were wont to be the moſt cruelleſt and trecherouſeſt
people in all theſe parts, euen like Lyons, but to
vs they haue beene like Lambes, ſo kinde, ſo ſubmiſſiue,
and truſtie, as a man may truely ſay many Chriſtians are
not ſo kinde, nor ſincere.
            They are very much waſted of late, by reaſon of a
great mortalitie that fell amongſt them three yeares
ſince, which together with their owne ciuill diſſenſions
and blouddie warres, hath ſo waſted them, as I thinke
the twentith perſon is ſcarce left aliue, and thoſe that are
left, haue their courage much abated, and their countenance
is deiected, and they ſeeme as a people affrighted.
And though when we came firſt into the countrie, we
were few, and many of vs were ſicke, and many dyed
by reaſon of the colde and wet, it being the depth of

winter, and we hauing no houſes, nor ſhelter, yet when
there was not ſixe able perſons amongſt vs, and that
they came daily to vs by hundreths, with their Sachems,
or Kings, and might in one houre haue made a diſpatch
of vs yet ſuch a feare was vpon them, as that they neuer
offred vs the leaſt iniury in word or deede. And by
reaſon of one Tiſquanto, that liues amongſt vs, that can
ſpeake Engliſh, we haue daily commerce with their
Kings, & can know what is done or intended towards
vs amongſt the Savages; Alſo we can acquaint them
with our courſes and purpoſes, both humane and religious.
And the greateſt Commander of the countrie
call'd Maſſaſoit, commeth often to viſite vs, though hee
liue fiftie myles from vs, and often ſends vs preſents,
he hauing with many other of their gouernours promiſed,
yea, ſubſcribed obedience to our Soueraigne Lord
King IAMES, and for his cauſe to ſpend both ſtrength
and life. And we for our parts, thorow Gods grace,
haue with that equitie, juſtice, and compaſſion, carried
our ſelues towards them, as that they haue receiued
much fauour, helpe, and ayde from vs, but neuer the
leaſt iniury, or wrong by vs. Wee found the place
where we liue emptie,They offer vs to dwell where we will. the people being all dead & gone
away, and none liuing neere by 8. or 10. myles; and
and though in the time of ſome hardſhip wee found
(trauelling abroad) ſome 8. Buſhels of Corne hid vp
in a Caue, and knew no owners of it, yet afterward
hearing of the owners of it, we gaue them (in their eſtimation)
double the value of it. Our care alſo hath
beene to maintaine peace amongſt them, and haue alwayes
ſet our ſelues againſt ſuch of them as vſed any rebellion,
or trecherie againſt their gouernours, and not
onely threatned ſuch, but in ſome ſort payd them their
due deſerts; and when any of them are in want, as often
they are in the Winter, when their corne is done, wee
ſupply them to our power, and haue them in our houſes

eating and drinking, and warming themſelues, which
thing (though it be ſomething a trouble to vs) ye becauſe
they ſhould ſee and take knowledge of our labours,
orders, and diligence, both for this life and a
better, we are content to beare it, and we find in many
of them, eſpecially, of the younger ſort, ſuch a tractable
diſpoſition, both to Religion and humanitie, as that
if we had meanes to apparell them, & wholly to retaine
them with vs (as their deſire is) they would doubtleſſe
in time proue ſeruiceable to God and man, and if euer
God ſend vs meanes we will bring vp hundreths of their
children, both to labour and learning.
            But leauing to ſpeake of them till a further occaſion
be offered; If any ſhall maruell at the publiſhing of this
Treatiſe in England, ſeeing there is no want of good
bookes, but rather want of men to vſe good bookes,
let them know, that the eſpeciall end is, that wee may 
keepe thoſe motiues in memory for our ſelues, & thoſe
that ſhall come after, to be a remedie againſt ſelfe-loue
the bane of all ſocieties. And that alſo we might teſtifie 
to our Chriſtian Country-men, who iudge diuerſly
of vs, that though we be in a Heathen Country, yet the
grace of Chriſt is not quenched in vs, but we ſtill hold,
and teach the ſame points of faith, mortification, and
ſanctification, which we haue heard and learned in a
moſt ample and large maner in our owne country. If
any ſhall thinke it too rude and vnlearned for this curious
age,1 Cor. 2. 4. let them know, that to paint out the Goſpell in
plaine and flat Engliſh, amongſt a company of plaine
Engliſh-men (as we are) is the beſt and moſt profitableſt
teaching; and we will ſtudy plainneſſe, not curioſitie,
neither in things humaine, nor heauenly. If any
error, or vnſoundneſſe be in it, (as who knoweth) impute
it to that frayle man which endited it,Chap. 8. 2. which profeſſeth
to know nothing as he ought to know it. I haue
not ſet downe my name, partly becauſe I ſeeke no

name, and principally, becauſe I would haue nothing
eſteemed by names, for I ſee a number of euils to ariſe
thorow names, when the perſons are either famous, or
infamous, and God and man is often iniured; if any
good or profit ariſe to thee in the receiuing of it, giue
God the prayſe, and eſteeme me as a ſonne of Adam,
ſubiect to all ſuch frailties as other men are.
            And you my louing Friends the Aduenturers to this
plantation; as your care hath beene, firſt to ſettle religion
here, before either profit or popularitie, ſo I pray
you, goe on, to doe it much more, and be carefull to
ſend godly men, though they want ſome of that worldly
policie which this world hath in her owne generation,Luk. 16. 8.
and ſo though you looſe, the Lord ſhall gayne. I
reioyce greatly in your free and readie mindes to your
powers, yea, and beyond your powers to further this
worke,Pro. 3. 9. that you thus honour God with your riches,
and I truſt you ſhall be repayed againe double & treble
in this world, yea, and the memory of this action ſhall
neuer die, but aboue all adding vnto this (as I truſt you
doe) like freeneſſe in all other Gods ſeruices, both at
home and abroad, you ſhall finde a reward with GOD,
ten thouſand fold ſurpaſſing all that you can doe or
thinke, be not therefore diſcouraged, for no labour is
loſt, nor money ſpent, which is beſtowed for God,
your ends were good, your ſucceſſe is good, and your
profit is comming, euen in this life, and in the life to
come much more; And what ſhall I ſay now, a word
to men of vnderſtanding ſufficeth, pardon I pray you
my boldneſſe, reade ouer the enſuing Treatiſe, and
judge wiſely of the poore weakling,Pſal. 42. 1. and the Lord, the
God of Sea and Land, ſtretch out his arme of protection
ouer you and vs, and ouer all our lawfull and good
enterpriſes, either this, or any other way.
            
               Plimmoth in New-England.
December 12. 1621.
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            A
SERMON PREACHED
at Plimmoth, in New-England.
            
               1. Cor. 10. 24.
               Let no man ſeeke his owne,The Text. But euery man anothers
wealth.
            
            
               THE occaſion of theſe words of the Apoſtle
Paul,
               The connexion. was becauſe of the abuſes which were in
the Church of Corinth. Which abuſes aroſe
cheifly thorow ſwelling pride, ſelfe-loue and
conceitednes, for although this Church were
planted by Paul, and watred by Apollo, and
much increaſed by the Lord; yet the ſower of
tares was not wanting to ſtirre vp euill
workers and fleſhly minded hypocrites,Math. 13. 25. vnder a ſhew of godlines,
and with Angellike holineſſe in appearance to creepe in amongſt
them to diſturbe their peace,Iude 4. trie their ſoundneſſe, and proue their
conſtancie.1 Cor. 11. 13. And this the Apoſtle complaines of very often: as
firſt, in their carnall deuiſions, Chap. 1. then in their extolling
their eloquent teachers, and deſpiſing Paul, Chap. 4. Then in
their offenſiue going to Law, before the heathen Iudges Chap. 6.
Then in eating things offered to Idols, to the deſtroying of the
tender conſciences of their Brethren, Chap. 8. Then in their inſatiable
loue-feaſtes, in the time and place of their Church meetings,
the rich which could together feede to fulnes, deſpiſing and
contemning the poore, that had not to lay it on as they had, Chap
11.2 Cor. 6. 13. Finally in both the Epiſtles, hee very often nippeth them
for their pride, and ſelfe-loue, ſtraitneſſe and cenſoriouſhes, ſo
that in the laſt Chapter hee willeth them againe and againe to
proue,2 Cor. 13. 5. trie and examine themſelues, to ſee whether Chriſt were

in them or not, for howſoeuer many of them ſeemed as thouſands
doe at this day, to ſoare aloft, and goe with full ſayle to heauen:
yet as men that row in Boats,Similie. ſet their faces earneſtly one way,
when yet their whole body goeth apace another way: ſo there
are many which ſet ſuch a face vppon Religion,Iude 16. and haue their
mouthes full of great ſwelling words: as if they would euen blow
open the doores of heaven, deſpiſing all humble minded and broken
hearted people,2 Cor. 10. 10. as weake, ſimple, ſottiſh &c. when yet notwithſtanding,
theſe Bluſterers, which ſeeme to goe ſo faſt, and
leaue all others behind them, if like theſe gloſing Corinthians they
carry affectedly their owne glory with them,Ver. 18. and ſeeme thus to
ſtand for the glory of God, What doe they elſe but ioyne fleſh to
ſpirit,Iob 1. 9. ſeruing not God for nought, but for wages, and ſo ſeruing
their bellies,Rom. 16. 18. whoſe end will be damnation, except a ſpeedi
                  •
                and
ſound remedie be thought of, which remedie is euen that which
our Sauiour teacheth the rich young gallant, and which Paul
heere preſcribeth,Math. 19. 21. in willing them not to ſeeke their owne, but euerie
man anothers wealth, which Phyſicke is as terrible to carnall
profeſſors, as abſtinence from drinke is to a man that hath
the dropſie: and it is a ſure note, that a man is ſicke of this diſeaſe
of ſelfe-loue, if this be grieuous to him, as appeareth in the man
whom Chriſt bid ſell that hee had,Ver. 22. and hee went away very ſorrowfull,
yet ſurely this veine muſt bee pricked, and this humor
let out, els it will ſpoyle all, it will infect both ſoule and body, yea
and the contagion of it is ſuch (as wee ſhall ſee anone) as will euen
hazard the welfare of that ſocietie, where ſelfe ſeekers and ſelfe
louers are.
            As God then did direct this Apoſtle to lay downe this briefe
direction as a remedy for that euill in Corinth, ſo you may thinke
it is by Gods ſpeciall providence,Act. 10. 33. that I am now to ſpeake vnto
you from this text: and ſay in your hearts ſurely ſome thing is
amiſſe this way: let vs know it and amend it.
            The parts of this text are two.Diuiſion. 1. a Dehortation, 2. an Exhortation.
The Dehortation. Let no man ſeeke his owne. The Exhortation
But euery man anothers wealth.
            
            In handling of which,Order of handling. I will firſt, open the wordes. Secondly,
gather the Doctrine. Thirdly, illuſtrate the Doctrine by Scriptures,
experience and Reaſons. Fourthly, apply the ſame, to euery
one his portion.
            The proper drift of the Apoſtle heere is not to taxe the Corinthians,
for ſeeking their owne euill endes in euill actions,The Apoſtles drift. but for
aiming at themſelues, and their owne benefits in actions lawfull,
and that appeareth in the former verſe, where he ſayth. All things
are lawfull &c. viz. all ſuch thinges as now wee ſpeake of, to eate
any of Gods creatures, offered to Idols or not, to feaſt and bee

merrie together, to ſhew loue and kindneſſe to this or that perſon,
&c. but when by ſuch meanes wee ſeeke our ſelues, and haue
not a charitable louing and reuerent regard of others, then they
are vnexpedient, vnprofitable, yea vnlawfull, and muſt bee forborne,
and hee that hath not learned to denie himſelfe euen the
very vſe of lawfull things, when it tendeth to the contempt, reproch,
greife offence, and ſhame of his other Brethren and Aſſociats,
hath learned nothing aright, but is apparantly a man that
ſeekes himſelfe, and againſt whom the Apoſtle heere dealeth moſt
properly.
            The maner of the ſpeech may ſeeme as counſell left at libertie:Expoſition.
as Mat. 27. 49. and in our ordinary ſpeech, wee thinke they be
but weake charges, which are thus deliuered, let a man doe this,
or let him doe that. But wee muſt learne the Apoſtles modeſtie, and
know that whatſoeuer the termes ſeeme to imply, yet euen this
and other the like in this Epiſtle, are moſt abſolute charges: as
Let a man eſteeme of vs,
               Chap. 4. 1. 
               as the miniſters of Chriſt, that is, a man ought
ſo to eſteeme of vs.1 Cor. 11. 28. 
               Let a man examine himſelfe, that is, as if he ſayd
a man muſt examine himſelfe,1 Cor. 14. 34. 
               Let your women keepe ſilence in the
Churches. that is, they ought ſo to doe.
            The meaning then ſummarily is, as if hee ſayd, the bane of all
theſe miſcheifes which ariſe amongſt you is, that men are to
cleauing to themſelues, and their owne matters, and diſregarde
and contemne all others: and therefore I charge you, let this ſelfe-ſeeking
be left off, and turne the ſtreame another way, namely,
ſeeke the good of your Brethren, pleaſe them, honor them, r
                  •
               uerence
them, for otherwiſe it will neuer goe well amongſt you.
            
               But doth not the Apoſtle elſe whereſay?
               Obiect. That hee, which careth
not for his owne,1 Tim. 5. 8. is worſe then an Infidell.
            True but by (owne) there, he meaneth properly,Reſp. a mans kindred,
and heere by (owne) hee meaneth properly a mans ſelfe.
            Secondly, Hee there eſpecially taxeth ſuch as were negligent in
their labours and callings, and ſo made themſelues vnable to giue
releife and entertainement to ſuch poore Widowes and Orphans as
were of their owne fleſh and bloud.
            Thirdly, Be it ſo that ſome man ſhould euen neglect his owne
ſelfe, his owne wife, children, friends, &c. and giue that hee had
to ſtrangers, that were but ſome rare vice, in ſome one vnnaturall
man, and if this vice ſtay a thouſand, ſelfe-loue ſlayeth ten thouſand.
            And this the wiſedome of God did well forſee, and hath ſet no
caueats in the Scriptures either to taxe men, or forewarne them
from louing others, neither ſayth God any wher, let no man ſeeke
the good of another, but let no man ſeeke his owne, and euerie
where in the Scriptures he hath ſet watch words againſt ſelfe-good,

ſelfe-profit, ſelfe-ſeeking, &c. And thus the ſence beeing cleared,
I come to the doctrine.
            All men are to to apt and readie to ſeeke themſelues to much,Doct. 1. and
to preferre their owne matters and cauſes beyond the due and
lawfull meaſure,Amplific. euen to exceſſe and offence againſt God, yea
danger of their owne ſoules, and this is true not onely in wicked
men which are giuen ouer of God to vile luſts, as Abſolon in getting
fauour in his Fathers Court:1 Sam. 15. 2. 3. 4 
               Ieroboam, in ſetling his kingdome
faſt in Samaria,
               2 King. 12. 26. 
               Ahab in vehement ſeeking Nab
                     •
                  ths vineyard, but
men,And 21. 2. otherwiſe godly, haue through frailtie beene foyled heerein,
and many thouſands which haue a ſhew of godlineſſe,1 Sam 25. 13. are louers
of themſelues:2 Chron. 16. 10. 
               Dauid was about to ſeeke himſelfe when he was
going to kill Naball;
               And 35. 22. 
               Aſa in putting Hanani in priſon; Ioſiah when
hee would goe warre with Necho,
               Iſaiah 39. 2. againſt the counſell of God and
reaſon;Gal. 2. 11. 12. 
               Peter when hee diſſembled about the Ceremonies of the
Law,Phil. 2. 21. yea and Paul complaines of all his followers (Timothie excepted
that they ſought their owne to inordinately.
            
               And why elſe are theſe caueats in the Scriptures, but to warne
the godly that they bee not tainted herewith?
               Philip. 2. 4. 
               as looke not euery
man on his owne things,1. Cor. 13. 6. but on the things of another: Loue ſeeketh not
her owne things.Gal. 5. 26. Be not deſirous of vaine glory. &c.
            Yea and doth not experience teach,Illuſtration experimentall. that euen amongſt profeſſors
of Religion, almoſt all the loue and fauour that is ſhewed vnto
others is with a ſecret ayme at themſelues, they will take paines to
doe a man good, prouided that he will take twiſe ſo much for them
they will giue a penny ſo as it may aduantage them a pound, labor
hard ſo as all the profite may come to themſelues, elſe they are
hartleſſe and feeble.Simile. The vaine and corrupt heart of man cannot
better be reſembled then by a belly-god, Hoſt, or Inkeeper, which
welcommeth his gueſts with ſmilings, and ſalutations, and a thouſand
welcomes, and reioyceth greatly to haue their companie to
dice, card, eate, drinke, and bee merrie, but ſhould not the box be
paid, the pot be filling, and the money telling, all this while the
Epicures ioy would ſoone be turned into ſorrow, and his ſmiles
turned into frownes, and the doore ſet open, and their abſence craued:
euen ſo men blow the bellowes hard, when they haue an Iron
of their owne a heating, worke hard whileſt their owne houſe is
in building, dig hard whileſt their owne garden is in planting, but is
it ſo as the profit muſt goe wholy or partly to others, their handes
waxe feeble, their hearts waxe faint, they grow churliſh and giue
croſſe anſwers like Naball, they are ſowre, diſcontent, and nothing
will pleaſe them.Pſal. 112. 9. And where is that man to be found, that will ſparſe
abroad,Eccle. 11. 1. and caſt his bread vpon the waters, that will lend looking
for nothing againe,Luk. 6. 35. that will doe all duties to others freely and
cheerefully in conſcience of God,2 Cor. 11. 7. and loue vnto men without his

cloſe and ſecret ends, or ayming at himſelf? ſuch a man, out of doubt,
is a blacke Swanne, a white Crowe almoſt, and yet ſuch ſhall ſtand
before God with boldneſſe at the laſt day, when others which haue
ſought themſelues, though for loue of themſelues they haue ſought
heauen, yea and through ſelfe loue perſwaded themſelues they
ſhoulde finde it, yet wanting loue vnto others, they will be found
as ſounding braſſe,1 Cor. 13. 1. and as a tinkling Cimbale, and whilſt they haue
neglected others, and not cared how others liue, ſo as themſelues
may fare well,Mat. 25. 41. 42. they will be found amongſt them, that the Lord will
ſay vnto, I know you not, depart ye curſed into euerlaſting fi
                  •
               e.
            But that I may not walke in generalities,Particular amplific. the particular wayes by
which men ſeeke their owne are theſe, Firſt ſuch as are couetous,
ſeeke their owne by ſeeking riches, wealth, money, as Foelix pretending
loue vnto Paul, ſent for him often, but it was in hope of mony,
Many there are who ſay,Act. 24. 26. 
               who will ſhew vs any good, and pretend
Religion,Pſal. 4. 7. as ſome of the Iewes did the keeping of the Sabboth,
which yet cryed out when will the Sabboth bee done, that wee may
ſell corne and gaine,Amos 8. 5. if a man can tell them how to get gold out of
a flint, and ſiluer out of the Adamant, no paines ſhalbe ſpared, no
time ſhall bee neglected, for gold is their hope, and the wedge
of gold is their confidence,Iob 31. 24. their hearts are ſet vpon the pelfe of this
world, and for loue of it, all thinges are let ſlipp, euen all duties to
God or men, they care not how baſely they ſerue, how wretchedly
they neglect all others, ſo as they may get wealth: pinch who will?
and wring who will, all times are alike with them, and they runne
for the bribe like Gehazie,
               2 King. 5. 21. and this is the firſt way that men ſeeke
their owne.
            Now the contrary is ſeene in Nehemiah,
               Neh. 5. 14. 15. 16. who when the people were
hard put to it, and the land raw, he tooke not the dueties which
were due to him being a Magiſtrate, he bought no land, nor grewe
not rich, for it was no time: but he maintained at his table many of
his brethren the Iewes,Act. 20. and ſo ſpent euen his owne proper goods.
And Paul ſought not mans gold nor ſiluer,2 Theſ. 3. 9. but though hee had authoritie,
yet he tooke not bread of the Churches, but laboured with
his hands: And why? It was no time to take, ſome Churches were
poore and ſtood in want,Ver. 8. as Theſſalonica, others were in danger to be
preyed vpon by couetous belly-gods,2 Cor. 11. 12. as Corinth: and therefore hee
ſaw it no fit time now to take any thing of them.
            And indeede heere is the difference betweene a couetous worldling,
and an honeſt thriftie Chriſtian, it is lawfull ſometimes for
men to gather wealth, and grow rich, euen as there was a time for
Ioſeph to ſtore vp corne,Gen. 41. 49. but a godly and ſincere Chriſtian will ſee
when this time is, and will not hord vp when he ſeeth others of his
brethren and aſſociates to want, but then is a time, if hee haue any
thing to fetch it out and diſperſe it, but the couetous gather good, he

like Achan couets all that he ſeeth,Ioſh. 7. 21. and neglects no time, but gathers
ſtill and holds all faſt, and if it were to ſaue the life of his brother,
his baggs muſt not be miniſhed, nor his cheſtes lighted, nor his
field ſet to ſale, gather as much as he can, but its death to diminiſh
the leaſt part of it.
            
                The ſecond way by which men ſeeke their owne, is when they
ſeeke eaſe,Luke 11. 46. or pleaſure, as the Scribes and Phariſies, who would not
touch the burthen with one of their fingers; so, there is a generation,
which thinke to haue more in this world then Adams felicitie
in Innocencie,Gen. 2. 15. being borne (as they thinke) to take their pleaſures,
and their eaſe,Eccle. 10. 18. let the roofe of the houſe drop thorow, they ſtirre
not;Pro. 24. 30. 31. let the field be ouer-growne with weeds, they care not, they
muſt not ſoile their hand, nor wet their foote, its enough for them
to ſay, Goe you, not let vs goe, though neuer ſo much need; ſuch
idle Droanes are intollerable in a ſetled Common-wealth, much
more in a Common-wealth which is but as it were in the bud; of
what earth I pray thee art thou made, of any better then other of
the ſonnes of Adam? And canſt thou ſee other of thy brethren toile
their hearts out, and thou ſit idle at home, or takeſt thy pleaſure abroad?
Remember the example of Vriah,
               2 Sam. 11. 11. who would not take his
eaſe, nor his pleaſure, though the King required him, and why?
Becauſe his brethren, his aſſociates, better men then himſelfe (as he
eſteemed them) were vnder hard labours and conditions, lay in
the fields in tents, caues, &c.
            
                The third way is when men ſeeke their owne bellies, as ſome did
in the Apoſtles times, which went about with new doctrines and
deuices,Rom. 16. 26. knowing that the people had itching eares, and would eaſily
entertaine, and willingly feede ſuch noueliſts, which brought in
diſſenſions, ſchiſmes, and contentions, and ſuch were rocks, or pillars
in their loue-feaſts,Iude 12. as Iude ſpeaketh, they were ſhaddowes in
Gods ſeruice, but when feaſting came, then they were ſubſtances,
then they were in their element. And certainely there are ſome men
which ſhape euen their Religion, humaine ſtate, and all, euen as the
belly cheare is beſt, and that they muſt haue, els all heart and life is
gone, let all conſcience, care of others goe, let Lazarus ſtarue at the
gate, let Ioſephs affliction be increaſed, they muſt haue their diſhes,
their dainties,Neh. 5. 14. or no content. The contrary was ſeene in Nehemiah,
who would not take his large portion alotted to the gouernour,
becauſe he knew it went ſhort with others of his brethren; and Vriah
would not receiue the Kings preſent and goe banquet with his wife,
becauſe he knew the whole Hoaſt his brethren were faine to ſnap
ſhort in the fields.
            And the difference betweene a temperate good man, and a belly-God
is this:Iob 31. 17. A good man will not eate his morſels alone, eſpecially
if he haue better then other, but if by Gods prouidence, he haue

gotten ſome meate which is better then ordinary, and better then
his other brethrens, he can haue no reſt in himſelfe, except he make
other partaker with him. But a belly-God will ſlop all in his owne
throat, yea, though his neighbour come in and behold him eate,
yet his griple gut ſhameth not to ſwallow all. And this may be done
ſometimes, as well in meane fare as in greater dainties, for all countries
afford not alike.
            The fourth way by which men ſeeke their owne, is by ſeeking 
outward honour,1 Sam. 15. 30. fame, and reſpect with men, as King Saul when he
had loſt all reſpect and fauour with God, then thought to giue content
to his heart by being honoured before the Elders of the people;
and it is wonderfull to ſee how ſome men are deſirous of vaine
glory,
               Gal. 5. 26. and how earneſtly they ſeeke prayſe, fauour, and reſpect with
men, and can haue no quiet longer then their worldly fauour laſteth,
and that they will haue what diſhonour ſoeuer come to God,
or diſgrace vnto men, yea, they will diſgrace, reproch, and diſdaine
others, to gaine honour and aduancement to themſelues, yea, they
will make bold with the Scriptures and word of God, to wreſt and
wring, and ſlight it ouer for their credits ſake. And let a man marke
ſome mens talke, ſtories, diſcourſes, &c. and he ſhall ſee their whole
drift is to extoll and ſet out themſelues, and get praiſe and commendations
of men.
            Now the contrary was ſeene in Paul,
               2 Cor. 3. 2. he ſayth, He needed no letters
of commendations.
               2 Cor. 10. 12. And againe, He is not affected with mens prayſe;
and here is indeed the difference betweene an humble minded
Chriſtian, and a proud ſelfe-louer; an humble man often hath
prayſe,1 Sam. 18. 
                     〈…〉
                  
                as Dauid, Hezekiah, and Ioſiah, but he ſeekes it not, he deſires
it not,2 King. 18. 3. he is content to goe without it, he loues not the prayſe of
men, for he knowes it is but froth and vanitie: But a proud ſelfe-louer,
he ſeekes it ſtill, get it or not get it, and if he get it he is fully
ſatisfied, if he get it not he hangs the head like a Bull-ruſh, and hath
no comfort.
            The fift way by which men ſeeke their owne, is by ſeeking to haue 
their wils,1 Cor. 6. 8. as the wrong doers in Corinth, who thought it not enough
to doe wrong and harme to their brethren, but to haue their wills
enough of them, drew them before the Heathen Magiſtrates.
            And truely, ſome men are ſo Prince-like, or rather Papall, that
their very will and word is become a law, and if they haue ſaid it,
it muſt be ſo, els there is no reſt nor quietneſſe to be had, let neuer
ſo many reaſons be brought to the contrary, its but fighting with
the winde. They are like the obſtinate Iewes, who, when againſt
Gods law & reaſon,1 Sam. 8. 19. they had asked a King, though Samuel ſhewed
them that it would turne in the end to their owne ſmart, yet ſtill
held the concluſion, and ſayd, nay, But we will haue a King.
Thus men are caught by their owne words, and inſnared by the

ſtraitnes of their owne hearts, and it is death to them not to haue
their wils,1 King. 19. 2. and howſoeuer ſometimes (like Iezabell) they are cut
ſhort of their purpoſes, yet ſelfe-willed men will ſtrout and ſwell
like Abſolon,
               2 Sam. 13. 22. ſaying neither good nor bad, but hope for the day, and
threaten like prophane Eſall:
               Gen. 27. 41. Now the contrary is ſeene in Dauid,
though a Prince, a Captaine, a Warriour, who hauing ſayd, yea,
ſworne, that he would kill Naball, and all his family that day, yet vpon
reaſonable counſell giuen,1 Sam. 25. 34. and that but by a weake woman, he
changed his minde, altered his purpoſe, and returned, without
ſtriking one ſtroake, an example rare, and worthy imitation; and
when men are ſicke of will, let them thinke of Dauid, it was his
grace and honour to goe backe from his word and practiſe, when
reaſon came;Math. 14. 8. 9. So was it Herods diſgrace and ſhame to hold his word
and will againſt reaſon and conſcience.
            But ſome man happily will ſay vnto me,Queſt. It is true, that men ſeeke
their owne by all theſe wayes, But what ſhould be the reaſon and
cauſe of this? that men ſeeke ſo earneſtly themſelues, in ſeeking riches,
honour, eaſe, belly-cheare, will, &c. ſomething there is that
carrieth them.
            True, and the reaſons and cauſes are ſpecially theſe three;
            Firſt,Reſp. pride and high conceitednes, when men ouer-value themſelues:
And this made Abſolon to ſeeke his Fathers kingdome,Reaſon 1. becauſe
he thought himſelfe worthy of it.:2 Sam. 15. 4. This made Haman ſo ſore
vexed,Heſt. 3. 5. becauſe Mordecai bowed not to him, becauſe he highly valued
himſelfe.
            And ſurely, that which a man valueth at much, he giueth much reſpect
to, and ſo it is a ſure ſigne that a man loues himſelfe moſt
when he giueth moſt to himſelfe, and ſome intollerable proud perſons
euen thinke all the world is for them, and all their purpoſes
and endeuours ſhew what a large conceit they haue of themſelues.
            Secondly,Reaſon 2. want of due conſideration and valuation of other
mens endowments, abilities, and deſerts, when men paſſe thoſe
things by,Gen. 40. 23. though they haue both ſeene, heard, and felt them, as
Pharaohs Butler forgat Ioſephs eminency when he was reſtored to his
place, ſo men vſe to write their owne good actions in Braſſe, but other
mens in Aſhes, neuer remembring nor conſidering the paynes,
labour, good properties, &c. which others haue, and ſo they haue
no loue to them, but onely to themſelues; as if God had made all
other men vnreaſonable Beaſts, and them onely reaſonable men.
            Thirdly,Reaſon 3. want of a heauenly conuerſation, and ſpirituall eye to
behold the glory, greatneſſe, and maieſtie, and goodneſſe of God,
as the Queene of Sheba thought highly of her own glory, wiſedome,
and happineſſe,1 King. 10. 7. 8 till ſhe ſaw Salomons wiſedome and glory, and then
ſhe cryed out, not of the happineſſe of her owne ſeruants, but of his
ſeruants that ſtood before him; and verily, if men were conuerſant

Courtiers in heauen,Rom. 11. 33. they would cry out with Paul, Oh the deepneſſe
of the riches, wiſedome, and knowledge of God, &c. and would be aſhamed
of their owne ſinfulneſſe,Similies. nakedneſſe, and miſery; for, as country
men which neuer ſaw the ſtate of Cities, nor the glory of courts,
admire euen their owne countrey orders: And as the Sauages here
which are clad in skinnes, and creepe in woods and holes, thinke
their owne brutiſh and inhumane life the beſt, which if they ſaw and
did rightly apprehend the benefit of comely humanity, the ſweetnes
of Religion, and the ſeruice of God, they would euen ſhamefully
hide themſelues from the eye of all noble Chriſtians.
            Euen ſo, if men in ſerious contemplation, by the eye of faith,
would behold the glory of God, and what great riches, beautie,
fulneſſe, perfection, power, dignitie, and greatneſſe is in God, they
would leaue admiring of themſelues, and ſeeking of themſelues, and
would ſay with Dauid,
               2 Sam. 7. 18. 
               What am I? And what is my Fathers houſe?
that thou ſhouldeſt thus bleſſe me?
               Pſal. 8. 3. Yea, What is man? or the ſonne of
man that thou ſo regardeſt him?
            
            But it is time that we now come to apply theſe things more particularly
to our ſelues, and ſee what vſe is to be made of them.
            Is it ſo that God ſeeth a proannes in all the ſonnes of Adam,
               Vſe 1. to
ſeeke themſelues too much, and hath giuen them warnings and
watch words thereof, as we haue heard, and doth experience confirme
it? Then hence are reproued a number of men, who thinke
they can neuer ſhew loue enough to themſelues, nor ſeeke their own
enough, but thinke all coſt, charges, cheeriſhing, prayſe, honour, &c.
too little for them,Mat. 16. 22. and no man needeth ſay to them, as Peter did to
Chriſt, fauour thy ſelfe, but if they doe a little for another man, they
account it a great matter, though it be but a morſell of bread, or a
ſingle penny; but no varieties of dainties is too good for them, no
ſilke, purple, cloth, or ſtuffe is too good to cloth them, the poore
mans idleneſſe and ill huſbandry is oft throwne in his diſh, but their
owne carnall delights and fleſhly wantonneſſe is neuer thought vpon:
and why? Becauſe they thinke euen God and man owes all to
them, but they owe nothing to none. Why, thou fooliſh and beſotted
man, hath not the holy Ghoſt read it in the face of euery ſonne
of Adam, that he is too apt to ſeeke his owne, and art thou wiſer
then God, to thinke thou neuer ſeekeſt thine owne enough? or
dreameſt thou that thou art made of other, and better mettall then
other men are? Surely, I know no way to eſcape, hauing of corruption
to thy Father, and the worme to thy ſiſter and brother. And if
God had any where in all the Scriptures ſayd, loue thy ſelfe, make
much of thy ſelfe, prouide for one, &c. there were ſome reaſon for
thee to take vp the Nigards Prouerbs, Euery man for himſelfe, and

God for vs all; Charitie beginneth at home, &c. But God neuer taught
thee theſe things; No, they are Sathans poſitions: Doth God euer
commend a man for carnall loue of himſelfe?Rom. 13. 14. Nay, he brands it, and
diſgraceth it,2 Tim. 3. 4. as ſelfe-loue; taking thought for the fleſh; louing of pleaſure,
&c.
            
            It is a point of good naturall policie,Obiect. for a man to care and prouide
for himſelfe.
            Then the moſt fooles haue moſt naturall policie,Reſp. for ſee you not
the greateſt droanes and nouices, either in Church, or Common-wealth,
to be the greateſt ſcratchers,Pſal. 73. 5. 7. and ſcrapers, and gatherers of
riches? Are they not alſo, for the moſt part, beſt fed and clad? and
liue they not moſt eaſily? What ſhall I ſay? Euen hoggs, doggs, and
bruit Beaſts know their own eaſe, and can ſeeke that which is good
for themſelues; And what doth this ſhifting, progging, and fat feeding
which ſome vſe, more reſemble any thing then the faſhion of
hoggs? and ſo let it be what naturall policie it will.
            If God ſee this diſeaſe of ſelfe-loue ſo dangerous in vs,Vſe 2. then it
ſtandeth vs all in hand to ſuſpect our ſelues, and ſo to ſeeke out the
roote of this diſeaſe, that it may be cured. If a learned Phyſitian,
ſhall ſee by our countenance and eye,Simile. that we haue ſome dangerous
diſeaſe growing on vs, our hearts will ſmite vs, and we will bethinke
our ſelues, where the moſt griefe lieth, and how it ſhould come,
whether with cold, heate, ſurfeit, ouer-flowing of bloud, or thorow
griefe, melancholy, or any ſuch way, and euery man will beſtirre
himſelfe to get rid of it, and will preuent all wayes that feed the diſeaſe,
and cheriſh all courſes that would deſtroy it.
            Now, how much more ought we to beſtirre our ſelues, for this
matter of ſelfe-loue, ſince God himſelfe hath caſt all our waters,
and felt all our pulſes, and pronounced vs all dangerouſly ſicke of
this diſeaſe? beleeue it, God cannot lie, nor be deceiued; He that
made the heart, doth not he know it? Let euery mans heart ſmite
him, and let him fall to examination of himſelfe, and ſee firſt, whether
he loue not riches and worldly wealth too much, whether his
heart be not too iocand at the comming of it in, and too heauie at
the going of it out, for if you find it ſo, there is great danger; if thou
canſt not buy as if thou poſſeſſedſt not,1 Cor. 7. 30. 31. and vſe this world as thou
vſedſt it not, thou art ſicke and haddeſt need to looke to it. So, if
thou loueſt thine eaſe and pleaſure,Iob 2. 10. ſee whether thou canſt be content
to receiue at Gods hands euill as well as good; whether thou
haue learned as well to abound as to want,Phil. 4. 10. as well to endure hard
labour, as to liue at eaſe; and art as willing to goe to the houſe of
mourning as to the houſe of mirth;Edele 7. 6. for, els, out of doubt, thou loueſt
thy carnall pleaſure and eaſe too much.
            
               
Againe,Dan. 1. 15. ſee whether thine heart cannot be as merry, and thy mind
as ioyfull, and thy countenance as cheerefull, with courſe fare, with
poulſe, with bread and water (if God offer thee no better, nor the
times afford other) as if thou hadſt great dainties: So alſo whether
thou canſt be content as well with the ſcornes of men, when thou
haſt done well, as with their prayſes, ſo if thou canſt with comfort
and good conſcience ſay,1 Cor. 4. 3. I paſſe little for mans iudgement, whether
thou canſt doe thy duety that God requireth,Heb. 12. 2. and deſpiſe the ſhame,
referring thy ſelfe vnto God, for if thou be diſhartned, diſcouraged,
and weakened in any duety becauſe of mens diſprayſes, its a ſigne
thou loueſt thy ſelfe too much.
            So for the will,1 Sam. 25. 34. if thou canſt be content to giue way euen from
that which thou haſt ſayd ſhalbe, yea vowed ſhalbe, when better reaſon
commeth, and haſt that reuerence of other men, as that when
it ſtandeth but vpon a matter of will, thou art as willing their wils
ſhall ſtand as thine, and art not ſad, churliſh, or diſcontent, but
cheerefull in thine heart,1 King. 21. 4. though thy will be croſſed, it is a good ſigne,
but if not, thou art ſicke of a ſelfe will, and muſt purge it out. I the
rather preſſe theſe things, becauſe I ſee many men both wiſe and religious,
which yet are ſo tainted with this peſtilent ſelfe-loue,Eccle. 10. 1. as that
it is in them euen as a dead ſlie to the Apothecaries ointment, ſpoyling
the 
                  •
               fficacie of all their graces, making their liues vncomfortable
to themſelues, and vnprofitable to others, being neither fit for
Church nor common wealth, but haue euen their very ſoules in hazard
thereby, and therefore who can ſay too much againſt it?
            It is reported,A faire warning. that there are many men gone to that other Plantation
in Virginia, which, whileſt they liued in England, ſeemed very
religious, zealous, and conſcionable; and haue now loſt euen the
ſap of grace, and edge to all goodneſſe; and are become meere
worldlings: This teſtimonie I beleeue to be partly true, and amongſt
many cauſes of it, this ſelfe-loue is not the leaſt; It is indeede a matter
of ſome commendations for a man to remoue himſelfe out of a
thronged place into a wide wilderneſſe; to take in hand ſo long and
dangerous a iourney, to be an inſtrument to carry the Goſpell and
humanitie among the bruitiſh heathen; but there may be many
goodly ſhewes and gloſes and yet a pad in the ſtrawe,Pſal. 78. 5. 7. men may
make a great appearance of reſpect vnto God, and yet but diſſemble
with him, hauing their owne luſts carying them: and, out of
doubt, men that haue taken in hand hither to come, out of diſcōtentment,
in regard of their eſtates in England; and ayming at great matters
heere, affecting it to be Gentlemen, landed men, or hoping for
office, place, dignitie, or fleſhly liberty; let the ſhew be what it will,
he ſubſtance is nought, and that bird of ſelfe-loue which was hatched
at home, if it be not looked to, will eate out the life of all grace

and goodneſſe: and though men haue eſcaped the danger of the
ſea, and that cruell mortalitie, which ſwept away ſo many of our louing
friends and brethren; yet except they purge out this ſelfe-loue,
a worſe miſcheife is prepared for them: And who knoweth whether
God in mercy haue deliuered thoſe iuſt men which heere departed,Iſa. 57. 1.
from the euils to come; and from vnreaſonable men, in whom
there neither was, nor is, any comfort but greife, ſorrow, affliction,
and miſerie, till they caſt out this ſpaune of ſelfe-loue.
            But I haue dwelt too long vpon this firſt part; I come now to
the ſecond, which concernes an Exhortation, as I ſhewed you, in
the Diuiſion.
            
               But euery man anothers wealth.Text.
               
               IN direct oppoſition, he ſhould ſay,Expli. 
                  Let euery man ſeeke anothers, but
the firſt part being compared with the latter, and (ſeeke) being taken
out of the former and put to the latter, and (wealth) taken out
or rather implied, in the former, the whole ſentence is thus reſolued,
Let no man ſeeke his owne wealth, but let euery man ſeeke anothers
wealth.
               
               And the word here tr
                     •
                  nſlated wealth, is the ſame with that in Rom.
13. 4. and may not be taken onely for riches, as Engliſh-men commonly
vnderſtand it, but for all kind of benefits, fauours, comforts,
either for ſoule or body; and ſo here againe, as before, you muſt vnderſtand
an Affirmatiue Commandement, as the Negatiue was before:
and leaſt any ſhould ſay, If I may not ſeeke my owne good, I
may doe nothing; Yes, ſayth Paul, Ile tell thee, thou ſhalt ſeeke the
good of another, whereas now all thy ſeeking helps but one, by this
meanes thou ſhalt helpe many: and this is further enforced by theſe
two circumſtances, (no man) may ſeeke his owne, be he rich, learned,
wiſe, &c. But euery man muſt ſeeke the good of another.
               
               The point of inſtruction is taken from the very letter and phraſe,Doct. 2.
                  viz. A man muſt ſeeke the good, the wealth, the profit of others,
I ſay, he muſt ſeeke it, he muſt ſeeke the comfort, profit, and benefit
of his neighbour, brother, aſſociate, &c. His owne good he need
not ſeeke, it will offer it ſelfe to him euery houre, but the good of
others muſt be ſought, a man muſt not ſtay from doing good to others
till he is ſought vnto, pulled and haled (as it were) like the vniuſt
Iudge,Luk. 18. 5. for euery benefit that is firſt craued, commeth too late.
And thus the auncient Patriarkes did practiſe,Gen. 19. 1. 2. when the trauayler

and way-faring man came by, they did not tarry till they came and
asked reliefe and refreſhing,Iudg. 19. 20. 21. but ſat at the gates to watch for ſuch,
and looked in the ſtreets to find them,Iob 31. 32. yea, ſet open their doores
that they might freely and boldly enter in. And howſoeuer, ſome may
thinke this too large a practiſe, ſince, now the world is ſo full of people,
yet I ſee not but the more people there is, the larger charitie
ought to be.
               But be it ſo as a man may neglect, in ſome ſort the generall world,
yet thoſe to whom he is bound, either in naturall, ciuill, or religious
bands, them he muſt ſeeke how to doe them good: A notable example
you haue in Dauid, who, becauſe there was twixt him & Ionathan
a band and couenant,2 Sam. 9. 1. therefore he enquired, Whether there was any
left of the houſe of Saul, to whom he might ſhew mercy for Ionathans ſake;
So, this people of Corinth, to whom Paul writeth, they were in a
ſpirituall league and couenant in the Goſpell, and ſo were a body;
Now for one member in the body to ſeeke himſelfe, and neglect
all other,1 Cor. 12. 27. were, as if a man ſhould cloth one arme or one leg of his
body with gold and purple, and let all the reſt of the members goe
naked.
               Now brethren, I pray you, remember your ſelues, and know, that
you are not in a retired Monaſticall courſe, but haue giuen your
names and promiſes one to another, and couenanted here to cleaue
together in the ſeruice of God, and the King; What then muſt you
doe? May you liue as retired Hermites? and looke after no body?
Nay, you muſt ſeeke ſtill the wealth of one another; And enquire
as Dauid, how liueth ſuch a man? How is he clad? How is he fed?
He is my brother, my aſſociate; we ventered our liues together here,
and had a hard brunt of it, and we are in league together, is his labour
harder then mine? ſurely, I will eaſe him; hath he no bed to
lie on? why, I haue two, Ile lend him one; hath he no apparel? why,
I haue two ſuits, Ile giue him one of them; eates he courſe fare,
bread and water, and I haue better? why, ſurely we will part ſtakes:
He is as good a man as I, and we are bound each to other, ſo that his
w
                     •
                  nts muſt be my wants, his ſorrowes my ſorrowes, his ſicknes my
ſicknes, and his welfare my welfare, for I am as he is. And ſuch a
ſweet ſympathie were excellent, comfortable, yea, heauenly, and is
the onely maker and conſeruer of Churches and common-wealths,
and where this is wanting, ruine comes on quickly, as it did here in
Corinth.
               
               But beſides theſe motiues,Reaſons. 1. there are other reaſons to prouoke vs
not onely to doe good one to another; but euen to ſeeke and ſearch
how to doe it.
               
                  
As firſt, to maintaine modeſtie in all our aſſociates, that of hungrie
wanters they become not bold beggers and impudent crauers,
for as one ſayth of women, that, when they haue loſt their ſhamefaſtnes,
they haue loſt halfe their honeſtie, ſo may it truely be ſayd of
a man, that when he hath loſt his modeſtie, and puts on a begging
face, he hath loſt his maieſtie, and the Image of that noble creature,
and man ſhould not begge and craue of man but onely of God; true
it is,Iohn 4. 5. that as Chriſt was faine to craue water of the Samaritan woman,
ſo men are forced to aske ſometimes rather then ſtarue, but
indeede in all ſocieties it ſhould be offered them, men often complaine
of mens boldnes in asking, but how commeth this to paſſe,
but becauſe the world hath beene ſo full of ſelfe-louers, as no man
would offer their money, meate, garmentes, though they ſaw
men hungrie, harborleſſe, poore, and naked in the ſtreetes; and
what is it that makes men brazen faced, bold, bruitiſh, tumultuous,
mutinous, but becauſe they are pinched with want, and ſee
others of their Companions (which it may be haue leſſe deſerued)
to liue in proſperitie and pleaſure?
               It wonderfully encourageth men in their dueties,2 Reaſon. when they
ſee the burthen equally borne; but when ſome withdraw themſelues
and retire to their owne particular eaſe, pleaſure, or profit; what
heart can men haue to goe on in their buſineſſe? when men are come
together, to lift ſome weighty peece of tymber or veſſell; if one
ſtand ſtill and doe not lift, ſhall not the reſt be weakned and diſhartned?
will not a few idle droanes ſpoyle the whole ſtocke of laborious
Bees: ſo one idle belly, one murmurer, one complainer, one
ſelfe-louer will weaken and diſharten a whole Colonie. Great matters
haue beene brought to paſſe, where men haue cheerefully as
with one heart, hand, and ſhoulder, gone about it both in warres,
buildings, and plantations, but where euery man ſeekes himſelfe, all
commeth to nothing.
               The preſent neceſſitie requireth it,3 Reaſon. as it did in the dayes of the
Iewes,
                  Neh. 5. returning from captiuitie, and as it was here in Corinth. The
Countrey is yet raw, the land vntilled, the Cities not builded, the
Cattell not ſetled, we are compaſſed about with a helpleſſe and idle
people, the natiues of the Countrey, which cannot in any comely
or comfortable manner helpe themſelues, much leſſe vs. Wee alſo
haue beene very chargeable to many of our louing friends, which
helped vs hither, and now againe ſupplyed vs, ſo that before we
thinke of gathering riches,1 Sam. 30. 26. 31. we muſt euen in Conſcience thinke of
requiting their charge, loue, and labour, and curſed be that profit
and gaine which aymeth not at this. Beſides, how many of our deare
friends, did here die at our firſt entrance, many of them no doubt
for want of good lodging, ſhelter, and comfortable things, and many

more may goe after them quickly, if care be not taken. Is this
then a time for men to begin to ſeeke themſelues?2 Tim. 3. 2. 
                  Paul ſayth, that
men in the laſt dayes ſhall be louers of themſelues, but it is here yet
but the firſt dayes, and (as it were) the dawning of this new world,
it is now therefore no time for men to looke to get riches, braue
clothes, daintie fare, but to looke to preſent neceſſities; it is now
no time to pamper the fleſh, liue at eaſe, ſnatch, catch, ſcrape, and
pill, and hoord vp, but rather to open the doores, the cheſts, and
veſſels, and ſay, brother, neighbour, friend, what want yee, any
thing that I haue? make bold with it, it is yours to command, to doe
you good, to comfort and cheeriſh you, and glad I am that I haue
it for you.
               And euen the example of God himſelfe,4 Reaſon. whom we ſhould follow
in all things within our power and capacitie,Epheſ. 5. 1. may teach vs this leſſon,
for (with reuerence to his Maieſtie be it ſpoken) he might
haue kept all grace,Ioh. 1. 16. goodneſſe, and glory to himſelfe, but he hath
communicated it to vs,Pſal. 113. 6. 7. euen as farre as we are capable of it in this
life,2 Tim. 4. 5. and will communicate his glory in all fulneſſe with his Elect
in that life to come;Ioh. 17. 22. euen ſo his Sonne Chriſt Ieſus left his glory
eclipſed for a time,And 15. 13. and abaſed himſelfe to a poore and diſtreſſed
life in this world, that he might, by it, bring vs to happineſſe in
the world to come. If God then haue delighted in this doing good
and relieuing frayle and miſerable man, ſo farre inferior to himſelfe,
what delight ought man to haue to relieue and comfort man, which
is equall to himſelfe?
               Euen as we deale with others,5 Reaſon. our ſelues and others ſhall be dealt
withall,Iudg. 1. 6. 7. careſt thou not how others fare, how they toile, are grieued,
ſicke,Mat. 7. 2. pinched, cold, harborleſle, ſo as thou be in health, liueſt at
eaſe, warme in thy neſt, fareſt well? The dayes will come when thou
ſhalt labour and none ſhall pittie thee, be poore and none relieue
thee, be ſicke, and lie and die and none viſit thee, yea, and thy children
ſhall lie and ſtatue in the ſtreets, and none ſhall relieue them,
for it is the mercifull that ſhall obtaine mercy;
                  Mat. 5. 7. and the memory of the
Iuſt ſhall be bleſſed euen in his ſeede;Prou. 10. and a mercifull and louing
man when he dies, though he leaue his children ſmall and deſolate,
yet euery one is mercifully ſtirred vp for the Fathers ſake to ſhew
compaſſion, but the vnkindneſſe, curriſhneſſe, and ſelfe-loue of a Father,2 Sam. 21. 7. 8. 9.
is thorow Gods iuſt iudgement recompenced vpon the children
with neglect and crueltie.
               Laſtly,6 Reaſon. that we may draw to an end; A mercileſſe man, and a
man without naturall affection or loue, is reckoned among ſuch
as are giuen ouer of God to a reprobate minde,Rom. 1. 30. and (as it were)
tranſformed into a beaſt-like humor; for, what is a man if he be not

ſociable, kinde, affable, free hearted, liberall; He is a beaſt in the
ſhape of a man; or rather an infernall Spirit, walking amongſt
men which makes the world a hell what in him lieth; for, it is euen
a hell to liue where there are many ſuch men: ſuch the Scripture
calleth Nabals,
                  Pſal. 14. 1. which ſignifieth fooles and decayed men, which
haue loſt both the ſap of grace and nature; and ſuch merciles men
are called Goats,
                  Math. 25. 33. and ſhall be ſet at Chriſts left hand at the laſt day;
Oh therefore ſeeke the wealth one of another.
               
               But ſome will ſay,Obiect. it is true, and it were well, if men would ſo doe,
but we ſee euery man is ſo for himſelfe, as that if I ſhould not doe
ſo, I ſhould doe full ill, for if I haue it not of my owne, I may ſnap
ſhort ſometimes, for I ſee no body ſheweth me any kindneſſe, nor
giueth me any thing; if I haue gold and ſiluer, that goeth for payment,
and if I want it, I may lie in the ſtreete, therefore I were beſt
keepe that I haue, and not be ſo liberall as you would haue me, except
I ſaw others would be ſo towards me.
               This Obiection ſeemeth but equall and reaſonable, as did the
Anſwere of Naball to Dauids men,Reſp. but it is moſt fooliſh and carnall,
as his alſo was; for, if we ſhould meaſure our courſes by
moſt mens practiſes, a man ſhould neuer doe any godly dutie;
for,Luk. 13. 23. 24. doe not the moſt, yea, almoſt all, goe the broad way that leadeth
to death and damnation? who then will follow a multitude?
It is the word of God, and the examples of the beſt men that we
muſt follow. And what if others will doe nothing for thee, but
are vnkinde, and vnmercifull to thee? Knoweſt thou not that they
which will be the children of God muſt be kinde to the vnkinde,Mat. 5. 44. 47.
louing to their enemies, and bleſſe thoſe that curſe them? If all
men were kinde to thee, it were but Publicans right eouſneſſe to be
kinde to them; If all men be euill, wilt thou be ſo too? When
Dauid cryed out; Helpe Lord, for not a godly man is left. Did he himſelfe
turne vngodly alſo?Pſal. 12. 1. Nay, he was rather the more ſtrict: So,
if loue and charitie be departed out of this world, be thou one of
them that ſhall firſt bring it in againe.Rom. 12. 20.
               
               And let this be the firſt rule, which I will with two others conclude
for this time.
               Neuer meaſure thy courſe by the moſt,1 Rule. but by the beſt, yea, and
principally by Gods word; Looke not what others doe to thee,
but conſider what thou art to doe to them; ſeeke to pleaſe God, not
thy ſelfe: did they in Mathew 25. 44. plead, that others did nothing
for them? No ſuch matter, no ſuch plea will ſtand before
God, his word is plaine to the contrary, therefore, though all
the world ſhould neglect thee, diſregard thee, and contemne

thee, yet remember thou haſt not to doe with men, but with the
higheſt God, and ſo thou muſt doe thy dutie to them notwithſtanding.
               And let there be no Prodigall perſon to come forth and ſay,2 Rule.
Giue me the portion of lands and goods that appert
                     •
                  ineth to me,Luk. 15. 12.
and let me ſhift for my ſelfe; It is you too ſoone to put men to their
ſhi
                     •
                  ts; Iſrael was ſeauen yoares in Canaan, before the land was deuided
vnto Tribes, much longer, before it was deuided vnto Families:
And why wouldeſt thou haue thy particular portion, but
becauſe thou thinkeſt to liue better then thy neighbour, and ſcorneſt
to liue ſo meanely as he? but who, I pray thee, brought this
particularizing firſt into the world?Eſay 14. 12. 13 Did not Sathan, who was
not content to keepe that equall ſtate with his fellowes,Iude 6. but would
ſet his throne aboue the Starres?Gen. 3. 5. Did not he alſo entiſe man to deſpiſe
his generall felicitie and happineſſe, and goe trie particular
knowledge of good and euill? And nothing in this world doth more
reſemble heauenly happineſſe,Pſal. 133. 1. then for men to liue as one, being of
one heart,Act. 4. 32. and one ſoule; neither any thing more reſembles helliſh
horror, then for euery man to ſhift for himſelfe; for if it be a
good minde and practiſe, thus to affect particulars, mine and
thine, then it ſhould be beſt alſo for God to prouide one heauen for
thee, and another for thy neighbour.
               But ſome will ſay,Obiect. if all men would doe their endeuour as I
doe, I could be content with this generalitie, but many are idle and
ſloathful, and eate vp others labours, and therefore it is beſt to part,
and then euery man may doe his pleaſure.
               Firſt,Reſp. This, indeed, is the common plea of ſuch as will endure
no inconueniences, and ſo for the hardneſſe of mens hearts,
God and man doth often giue way to that which is not beſt,Math. 19. 8. nor
perpetuall,1 Sam. 8. 5. but indeede if wee take this courſe, to change ordinances
and practiſes, becauſe of inconueniences, wee ſhall haue,
euery day, new lawes.
               Secondly,2 Theſ. 3. 9. If others be idle, and thou diligent, thy fellowſhip,
prouocation, and example may well helpe to cure that maladie in
them, being together, but being aſunder, ſhall they not be more
idle, and ſhall not Gentrie and Beggerie be quickly the glorious Enſignes
of your Common-wealth?
               Thirdly,Rom. 1. 29. Conſtrue things in the beſt part, be not too haſtie to
ſay,1 Sam. 30. 10. 24. men are idle and ſlouthfull, all men haue not ſtrength, ſkill, facultie,
ſpirit, and courage to worke alike; it is thy glory and credit,

that canſt doe ſo well, and his ſhame and reproach, that
can doe no better; and are not theſe ſufficient rewards to you
both?
               Fourthly, if any be idle apparantly, you haue a Law and Gouernours
to execute the ſame, and to follow that rule of the Apoſtle,Act. 19. 38.
to keepe backe their bread, and let them not eate, goe not
therefore whiſperingly,2 Theſ. 3. 10. to charge men with idleneſſe; but goe to
the Gouernour and proue them idle; and thou ſhalt ſee them haue
their deſerts.Deut. 19. 15.
               
               And as you are a body together, ſo hang not together by ſkins
and gymocks, but labour to be ioynted together and knit by fleſh
and ſynewes; away with enuie at the good of others, and reioyce
in his good,1 Sam. 18. 9. and ſorrow for his euill, let his ioy bee thy ioy, and
his ſorrow thy ſorrow:Rom. 12. 19. let his ſickneſſe be thy ſickneſſe: his hunger
thy hunger: his pouertie thy pouertie: And if you profeſſe friendſhip,Pro. 17. 17.
be friends in aduerſities: for then a friend is knowne, and tryed,
and not before.
               Lay away all thought of former thinges and forget them,3 Rule. and
thinke vpon the things that are,Gen. 42. 1. looke not gapingly one vpon other,
pleading your goodneſſe, your birth, your life you haue liued,
your meanes you had and might haue had, heere you are by
Gods prouidence, vnder difficulties, be thankfull to God, it is no
worſe, and take it in good part that which is, and lift not vp your
ſelues becauſe of former priuiledges,Iob 2. 8. when Iob was brought to the
dunghill, he ſate downe vpon it. And when the Almightie had beene
bitter to Naomie,
                  Ruth 1. 20. ſhee would bee called Marah, conſider therefore
what you are now, and where you are, ſay not I could haue liued
thus and thus; but ſay, thus and thus I muſt liue: for God, and naturall
neceſſitie requireth, if your difficulties be great, you had neede
to cleaue the faſter together,1 Sam. 1. 6. 7. and comfort and cheere vp one another,
laboring to make each others burden lighter, there is no griefe
ſo tedious as a churliſh companion, and nothing makes ſorrowes
eaſie more then cheerefull aſſociates:Gal. 6. 2. Beareye therefore one anothers
burthen,2 Sam. 15. 33. and be not a burthen one to another, auoide all
factions,Heb. 10 29. frowardnes, ſingularitie, and withdrawings, and cleaue
faſt to the Lord,Gen. 13. 7. and one to another continually; ſo ſhall you bee
a notable preſide it to theſe poore Heathens, whoſe eyes are vpon
you, and who very bruitiſhly and cruelly doe dayly eate and conſume
one another, through their emulations, warres, and contentions;
bee you therefore aſhamed of it, and winne them to
peace both with your ſelues, and one another, by your peaceable
examples, which will preach louder to them, then if you could
crie in their Barbarous language:Coloſ. 4. 5. So alſo ſhall you bee an encouragement

to many of your Chriſtian friendes in your natiue
Countrey, to come to you, when they heare of your peace, loue,
and kindneſſe that is amongſt you:Heb. 13. 2. But aboue all, it ſhall goe
well with your ſoules, when that GOD of peace and vnity ſhall
come to viſite you with death, as hee hath done many of your
aſſociates, you being found of him, not in murmurings,
diſcontent and iarres, but in brotherly
loue,2 Pet. 3. 14. and peace, may bee tranſlated
from this wandring wilderneſſe,
vnto that ioyfull and heauenly
Canaan.
                  Heb. 4. 9.
(⸪)
               FINIS.
            
         
      
   