
      
         
            
            
            
               Pasquine in a Traunce
A Christian and learned Dialogue
(contayning wonderfull and
most strange newes out of Heauen,
Purgatorie, and Hell) Wherein besydes
Christes truth playnely set forth,
ye shall also finde a numbre of
pleasaunt hystories,
discouering all the crafty conueyaunces
of Antechrist.
            
            Wherunto are added certayne Questions
then put forth by Pasquine, to haue bene disputed
in the Councell of Trent.
               
            
            Turned but lately out of the Italian
into this tongue, by
W. P.
               
            
            Seene allowed according to the order appointed
in the Queenes Maiesties Iniunctions.
            
               Luke. 19.
Uerily I tell you, that if these should holde their
peace, the stones would cry.
            Imprinted at London by VVylliam
Seres dwelling at
the Weast ende of Paules
at the signe of the
Hedgehogge.
               
            
         
         
            
            
            To the Reader.
            
               SVCHE HATH
bene the miserie of
these latter dayes
(good Reader) euery
where, and yet is
in some places (the
more is the pitye)
wher iniquitie hath
gotten the vpper
hand, that the truth
findeth few friends,
and canne euill be
heard, especially the
truth of Gods holy Worde, but so odious it is to
mens eyes and eares, (suche is the nature thereof)
as any other thing else, (be it neuer so vayne, wicked,
or abhominable) might be muche soner allowed
and heard, than the truth of Religion, and
the more that such wickednesse tēded to deface, or
ouerthrow, the truth of Gods holy worde, the better
was the same welcome & the more ioyously receyued,
and embraced. So as the truth receyuing
this open iniurie (& though not suppressed by al,
yet oppressed by the most) was driuen therefore to
lye close, and secretly to walke with Nichodemus by
night for feare of Iewish Christians, and in caues,
dennes, and other vnknowne places (lyke as in
the tyme of former tirranny) to haue hir conuersation
and abiding, declaring still as she might, hir
naturall operation to many, and wayting in the
meane season, the appointed tyme of hir delyueraunce.

And if it so chaunced hir to be seene or
heard abrode (for the candell whelued vnder the
Busshell wil burne a hole throughe, and shewe it
selfe) then straight way must she so be scaled, ordered,
and prompted, by Pollicie who must be hir
Tutour, as she must not therefore seme so roughe
as to rippe vp matters that are raked long since in
the ashes, but muste talke a farre off, and either
cloth hir s
                  •
               lfe with the misty cloudes, of darke
and doubtfull speach, which few shal vnderstand,
and must offend no man, or else must appeare altogether
to be so plyaunt, and in such glaring garments
as least may become clawing and well pleasing
talke, and nothing else, and such as shall curry
all men, and cut no one.
            For the which cause, the authour hereof called
Celius Secundus Curio an Italian, a man surely zealous,
and godly learned, lamenting this great and
malicious kinde of blindenesse, as a thing moste
daungerous both for bodye and soule, thought
good and his bounden duetie, (to relieue thereby
the mindes, and consciences, of suche, as not wilfully
but for want of due knowledge, went groping
in by pathes at none dayes, and to confirme
suche other in the right path way of heauenlye
truth, as had tasted some little fruite of Gods holy
spirite) to write therefore this little worke, which
about XXV. yeares since, (or there vpon) he toke
in hande and set forth, what time Paule the thirde
of that name (a man of great worldely wisedome
and admiration with christen Princes, and a Religious
professour of that diuellishe knowledge of
Necromancie) sate & occupied Caiphas (I should
say) Peter Chaire. And so the authour following

in some parte, the politique councel of Saint Paule
the Apostle, (who sayeth, So that Christ be preached,
any maner wayes, whether it be vnder pretēcePhil. 1.
or sincerely, he reioyceth therein) hath published
the same his labour vnto the world, vnder the
pleasaunt name of Pasquine that aunciēt Romaine,
as a fit instrument to aduaunce Gods truth, who
for his same being acquaynted with all Princes estates
and affaires, and for his wonted mirth and
straunge newes, coulde the better spredde abroade
the same, and cause it to be more ioyefully receyued
and read, than if many great Potentates and
Princes had commended it to the worlde, with
their priuilege and authoritie. As to Pasquine, and
to tell thee what he is, shall not nowe be necessarie,
for I will not holde thee with so long a discourse:
if thou can not other wise learne of him, I shall referre
thee to the booke it selfe, where thou shall
finde him fully described.
            But nowe me thinketh I heare some nose wise
papist, make a very vnnecessarie obiection: what
sayeth he is Pasquine of Rome nowe become a preacher,
that was wont so to be talking alwayes, against
our holy Father and his colledge of Cardinals:
to whome, it may right well be answered in
this sorte, as in that he is come from Rome hither
to preach, is to fulfill the saying of Christ,Luk. 4. that no
Prophete is accepted in his owne country, and
therfore cannot be heard (no more was Christ among
his owne country men the Iewes) which is
straunge, that C
                  •
               ristes messanger, comming to
Christes Vicaire (if there be any suche on earth,)
shoulde be refused of audience, bringing a true
message, but much more is it, that for declaring

the same, (for their soule health and saluation) he
shoulde be in daunger. But to be banished his dominion
for saying as he is commaunded, passeth
all law of God and men, yea and ius gentium also.
And in that some will accompt him, suche one as
wil be alwayes talking at his pleasure, I will turne
suche ouer to the Poet Horace who sayeth, Ridentem
dicere verum, quid vetat? Why should not a Iester or a
mery fellow tel truth. And if that wil not serue to
stop their blasphemous mouthes, I will bring forth
Saint Paule, who sayeth,Gal. 1. If he himselfe or an Angell
preach any otherwise, than the Gospell which he
preached, let him be accursed, whereby he inferreth,
that the message shoulde not be the better
welcome or heard, for the messangers sake, but
the messanger for the truth, and worthinesse of the
message he bringeth, (yea, if he were a Diuell)
ought to be beleued. To the matter it selfe, I shal
referre to thy direct iudgement (so thou spoile thy
selfe in the reading therof, of all malice and affection)
wherein thou shalt see, vnder the wittie and
pleasaunte inuention of Pasquines going to heauen,
purgatorie, and hell, the whole packe of the
Popes pedlary wares, is opened & not set to sale,
bicause men shoulde buy therof, but rather to the
shewe and brought to the touchestone of Goddes
worde to be thereby tryed and seene what maner
stuffe it is: So as all men may see, howe the Romish
Apoticaries haue so conserued, confected, and
couloured, with the drugges & other the fine deuises
of their subtile Sophistrie, all their whole pelfe
and trumperie, as meritorious Masses, fayned miracles,
superstitious obseruances, hypocriticall
fastings, paynted holynesse, and Sodomiticall

chastitie, and that with their chauntings, pypings,
gaye glistering shewes and sightes, sweete smelles
and odours, (all deuised to feede and occupie the
outwarde senses of man, and to stuffe his head and
vnderstanding with the vaine gazing, and admiration
of their counterfeit Religion) so as manye
that tooke themselues to be verye nycenosed, and
coulde as they thought iudge colours, were ouertaken
in their folly, and toke quid pro quo, and Mercurium
sublimatum, for good and wholesome Suger.
And how this broode of smoth smiered shauelings
haue the inuentions, and dreames, of their owne
ydle and drousie braynes, sette vp to themselues
a mortall God, that mitred Monarche of Rome,
who with power and tirannie, shoulde maynetayne
them in a perpetuall, and flourishing kingdome,
and they for their part, euen from the seliest
hedge priest, or other most simple in degree vnder
them (being greased with the Popes Oyle) euen
to the proudest, and most princelie Prelate, euery
one in his kinde to labour, and apply themselues,
with tongue and pen, or rather with tooth and
nayle (if they doe not besides, vse any other more
violent weapons) to deuise, studie, serch and vse al
the fetches possibly how they may keepe all things
vpright, and cloute vp with stable straw, and such
paltry, the ruynes, breaches, and decayes, of this
their Chaos, or confused common wealth. Thou
shalt also see, as it were by an Antithesis or comparison,
the sacred Scriptures, set against their vayne
and fantasticall toyes and inuentions, and the
same Scriptures so aptely applyed, and truely alleaged,
as can not be desired to be better or more
effectually done, to the purpose. And betwene the

serious and fruitefull allegation of the scriptures,
and the necessary detection of their chast life and
holynesse, thou shalt finde some things (and I beleue
not fewe in number) that thoughe the same
be no meere nor malicious inuentiōs, yet can they
not be iudged to be Fables, but rather matters of
truth, bicause the worlde else hath in their seuerall
places, had the tryall and experience of the same.
And histories haue also in some parte set them
forth to the great cōmendation of the doers therof.
But one thing (gentle Reader) thou wilt not a
little maruell at, that their spirituall weapons,
wherewith they defend their Romish kingdome▪
(I meane their owne councels, and constitutions
herein alleaged) are so brought against them
selues, and so retourned home to their owne confusion,
and ouerthrowe, that there remayneth
now, no more spirituall defence, or resistence, but
that they lay hande on the Temporall sworde, and
vse the violent argumentes offyre, sworde, and
halter, which howe muche they haue done, in this
Realme of late dayes, that very Rome it selfe hath
abhorred. I leaue to thy iudgement, for the vnborne
children in the mothers wombe, and the
louing dogges with their masters haue witnessed
the same. Thou mayest chaunce to finde this
boke (beside that it is writtē in the Italian tongue)
in the Latine also, which seemeth to haue beene
done, by the authour him selfe, what tyme he saw
his laboure so well to be lyked and allowed, as he
wrote the same in the latine tongue also, for the
better edifying and calling home of the sheepe
that went a straye, and the more assured confirmation
of them in the truth of Gods worde. Yet bicause

this Italian copie is the larger, wherevnto is
added the voyage to Hell (which the Latine booke
hath not) I haue therefore chosen, and followed
the same, and tourned it into our tongue as nowe
thou seest.
            There follow in the ende therof, certayne questions
put forth by Pasquine, to be disputed (but not as
P
                     ••
                  adoxes) in the Councell holden in that holy fathers
dayes, Paule the thirde, at Trent, wherein he
scorneth priuily, the great and manifolde abuses
of the Churchmen, aswell of the proude Prelates,
as the single soled sir Iohns, the fat bellyed monks,
& lying Fryers, their false allegations of the Scriptures,
their idlenesse, their pride, their voluptuousnesse,
tiranny, hipocrisie, wyuelesse but not
womanlesse chastitie, and other their endlesse, and
abhominable doings, the which articles maye, (as
it were in a briefe) comprehende the whole discourse
of the booke afore going, and shewe forth
the spirituall fruites that spring of that Religion.
So as to conclude, gentle Reader, you may see, and
finde, that there is no matter of controuersie,
wherein the papistes differ from the true Church
of Christ, (and the heauenly doctrine taught before
and since by the Patriarches, Prophetes, and
Apostles) as in their purgatorie, their iustifying
workes, their corporall presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, their transubstantiacion, adoration,
& al the rest of their new found learning, but that
the same all, and euery of them are quite defaced,
and ouerthrowen by the manifest worde of God.
Thou canst therefore desire no more to the certifying,
and confirmation of thy conscience in the
truth, or otherwise to satisfie thy minde, with the

detection of popery, and the merie and pleasaunt
disposing of the matter: so as whether thy profite,
or pleasure shal be most, I know not, and therfore
will not take vpon me to iudge. This shall I one-desire
thee, to reade with iudgement, and lay aside
all affection and malice, (both which are partiall
Iudges,) and so to walke directly throughe the
whole worke, whereby thou mayest discerne betwene
the truth and falshode, to thy edifying and
comfort, so shal I think my labour & trauaile thus
to translate it for thee, well bestowed, and shall
sende thee to the booke to heare what he
sayeth himselfe, from the which
I thought good with no longer
Preface to withholde
thee.
            Farewell.
         
         
            
            B. G.
To the Reader.
            IF he that wrights a worke at first, doth merit fame:
            I déeme him worthy of no lesse, that doth translate ye same.
            For as the first (by toyle) doth vtter things vnknowne:
            The seconde doeth from forrein speach declare them in his (owne.
            The sequele sheweth a proufe, of skilfull Authour plaine,
            And of Translatour skilfull that to wright it toke such paine.
            If pleasure thou possesse, or profite thereby take:
            They haue the summe of their desire that pende it for thy sake.
            But though thou séeme to want of that thou wish at furst:
            Reade once againe with good aduise before thou iudge the wurst.
            Lay loue and hate aside, affection put to flight:
            So shalt thou iudge as Iustice wils, so shall thy dome be right.
            Remember Midas eares were framed lyke an asse,
            Bicause he sayde that Pan in skill Apollo farre did passe.
            So if thou shalt preferre some trifle more than truth:
            Thou shalt deserue (as Midas did) the Asse his eares forsouth.
            For learned was the man, that first the booke did frame:
            And learned he (I promise thée) that did translate the same.
            And learned is their worke, and honest too their fact,
            And honest men will honestly allowe eche honest act.
            But those that néedes will storme, and wot not well wherefore,
            Must néedes haue parte of that rewarde which is rehearst before:
            Which if thou will auoyde, as I would wish to shunne.
            Doe iudge with good aduised skill, and thus my tale is done.
            
               Ber. Gar.
            
         
         
            
            Faultes escaped.
            
               
                  
                     Leafe.
                     Side.
                     Line.
                     Faultes.
                     Correction.
                  
                  
                     20
                     1
                     4
                     practise
                     prayse
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                      
                     6
                     honor,
                     humour,
                  
                  
                     22
                     2
                     14
                     friers
                     frieries
                  
                  
                     26
                     1
                     32
                     Porzolo,
                     Pozzolo,
                  
                  
                     28
                     1
                     21 22
                     Putanies
                     Putaines
                  
                  
                     30
                     1
                     16
                     then,
                     that,
                  
                  
                     36
                     1
                     16
                     is
                     doth
                  
                  
                     39
                     1
                     17
                     none
                     woune
                  
                  
                     41
                     2
                     7
                     his
                     this
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                     1
                     26
                     was without
                     was not wtout
                  
                  
                     46
                     2
                     16
                     didst take
                     didst not take
                  
                  
                     47
                     1
                     7
                     his
                     the
                  
                  
                     51
                     1
                     14
                     Hostiences,
                     Hostiensis,
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                      
                     19
                     Cardinall
                     carnall
                  
                  
                     54
                     1
                     4
                     faction.
                     function.
                  
                  
                     56
                     2
                     19
                     breaching
                     bréeching
                  
                  
                     58
                     1
                     23
                     Sandanapalus.
                     Sardanapalus.
                  
                  
                     62
                     1
                     20
                     he in
                     here in
                  
                  
                     67
                     1
                     5
                     Bosarie,
                     Rosarie,
                  
                  
                     71
                     1
                     22
                     vessels,
                     Uassalles,
                  
                  
                     87
                     2
                     5
                     word
                     world
                  
                  
                     89
                     2
                     23
                     beggers
                     beggeries
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                      
                     29
                     all
                     a
                  
                  
                     92
                     1
                     28
                     which
                     with
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                      
                      
                     ruinesse
                     reuenewes
                  
                  
                     97
                     1
                     32
                     Swythians
                     Scythians,
                  
                  
                     111
                     1
                     21
                     heade
                     hearde
                  
                  
                     112
                     1
                     31
                     Whether the
                     Whether if the
                  
                  
                     ibidē
                     
                     2
                     9
                     dust, they
                     dust, if they
                  
               
            
         
      
      
         
            
            Pasquine in a Traunce
            
               Marforius.
               
                  GOD saue you
Mayster Pasquine my
most pleasant companion.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What
Marforius? and wherabout
goe you?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou diddest
so much delite me the
last yeare with thy cō
                  munication,
that I am
now come, purposely
to tarye with thée 
                     •
                  
while, that thou mayst
once again tell me of thy vision, wherof this other yere
thou toldest me, which pleased me so much, as it would
not grieue me to heare it a thousand tymes, much lesse
twise.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And I wil tel thée it againe with good
will, adding therevnto other things, which then I had
no time, nor remembred me to tel thée: aske on hardly,
and I will fully satisfie thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tell me firste
of all,Heauy thinges goe downward, and not vpwarde. howe it is possible that thou that arte of stone
shouldest get vppe into heauen?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Is it not a
greater maruell, that some of these lubberlye greasie
Fryers, Parsons, Bishoppes, Abbots and other foule
gorbellied fathers, shoulde get vp thither, which are so
heauye that Elephantes are scarce able to carye them?
            
            
               Marforius.
               What? these are men, but much more do I
maruell, when I thinke, what the Goddes should haue
to do with stones.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And I pray thée what haue

the Gods to do with Lions, Bulles, and Beares, which
are perillous Beasts? Yea and flying foules too, and
yet for all that, in our dayes are they caried aboute in
cōpanie of the Gods.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What, we talke of the
Goddes of the Christians, let vs nowe leaue Lucians
fables.The Gods of stone and wood, are the Gods of the Papistes, and not of Christians.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I am content that thou speake of the
Gods of the Christians, doest thou not sée, that they are
for the most part made of stone?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I take thē
for no Gods.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I know not how yu takest them:
but wel I wote, that the cōmon people now a dayes taketh
thē so.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And who I pray thée is so folish,
as to worship Gods of stone?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I can not tel
thée whether this be folishenesse or no,No simall nū
                     ber, nor that thi
                        •
                     ke them selues no smal fooles. but as farre as I
fée, this is of all men accoumpted godlinesse, and if we
loke well, we shall finde by their garmentes and furniture,
that they are worshipped, and this folly hath bene
alwayes in mens mindes, as we sée that among those
of olde time, was the God Terminus,
                  The God Terminus. of whom a man
may reade so many foolishe tales, that it woulde make
him weary.
            
            
               Marforius.
               By my truth thou sayst truly,
I wel remēber that I haue read of that God Terminus,
in what estimation the people of those dayes had him,
and yet for all that, me thinkes, that men of oure time
should not worship these stones, as they did.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea but let vs a while leaue this a part, and stand thou
stil and heare me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I heare thée wel, say on.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou knowest Marforius,
                  P
                        •
                     squines labor and good meaning. y• sith I was first
acquainted with the world, I haue alwayes sought with
my whole study, to bring men from euil to well doing,
and moste chieflye Princes,Flatterrers alwayes about Princes. and greate men, who haue
now a dayes their eares so full of flatterers talke, and
of those flies that Diogenes speaketh of,Diogenes flyes. that no voyce
except it be of stone, can any more enter into them. For

which cause so often and so loude haue I cryed, that I
haue enforced my selfe to enter into their eares.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But what a presumption is this of thée, that
will doe this without the Popes licence.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               God defende that I should be presumptuous, but thou
knowest, that it hath bene alwayes necessarie to say
and set forth the truth, the which sithe it lieth (as) buried,
and that there is none to declare it, it followeth
of necessitie by the saying of the gospel,Stones shall cry. that we stones
must cry out.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I knewe not that till now.
But I will therfore from henceforth so worke that I
will be no longer dumbe. But follow thou thy talke.Luc. 19.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And so, seing that I cast awaye and in maner
lost all my labour, I began somewhat to doubt,
in what sort the thinges of the world were gouerned,
and I doubted of the prouidence of God, & of his iustice,Pasquine doubteth of Gods prouidence.
seing the affliction of the iust, and the prosperitie
of the wicked, and within my selfe I sayde, what may
he be, that hath the gouernance of thinges amonges
men, and I thought, it shoulde be some other thing
farre different from that which gouerneth the thinges
of nature.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This is euen the right way to
become an Epicure.The high way to Epicures opinion. But what? diddest thou doubt,
whether there were one onelye, that gouerneth al?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea that I doubted.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And how
came that doubt in thy braine.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I saw that
God in nature is a thing moste orderlye beyonde all
maruell,The beholdīg of nature. I sawe all thinges in their times conceyue,
bring forth, flourishe, and giue fruite, rendering as it
were last of al, thankes to nature after this sort,The earth mother of all thinges. and
afterward againe to corrupt, and returne to their mother
and firste originall. I sawe the Heauen and the
Starres not a whitte to chaunge from their wonted

course, neither rather or later to rise or go downe, I
saw the earth, the sea, and the other Elementes to be
verye well deuided, and their chaunges from one to
another for the generation and corruption of things,
to be ex
                     •
                  eadinglye well ordered, and if I did but beholde
the workmanship of man, yea or of a flie, or of
an Empt:The gret wisdome of God in forming his creatures. I was astonished at y• proporcionate, comelye,
wonderfull & vnspeakeable cunning of the Creator,
moste of all seing all thinges done with so greate
reason, that nothing in the composition of the nature
of things, could either be put to, or taken away without
marring the whole worke, so that being drowned
in the consideration hereof,Psalme. 145. I cried. Great art thou
Lorde and maruellous vvorthy to be praysed, there is
no ende of thy greatnesse. Afterward if I considered
the life of men, and their companie keping, their states
and conditions, so without order and often tymes
euillye disposed,Man onely kepeth not order. I coulde not but nedes beleue, that
some blinde Diuell had had the gouernaunce hereof,
and that did Christ cause me so to thinke, who being
king of al together, sayeth notwithstanding, that he is
not king of this world, saying:Gods kingdome is hea
                     
                        •
                     enly. 
                  My kingdome is not
of this vvorlde, and if it vvere of this vvorlde, my ministers
vvoulde surelye fight. And in manys other
places the same sayeth,Ioan. 18. calling Sathanas king and
Prince of this worlde,Satan Prince of this world. and of this darkenesse, saying:
Ioan. 12. 
                  Novv shal the Prince of this vvorld be cast out. And
in the desert, Sathan promised him all the kingdomes
of the vvorlde,
                  Math. 4. 
                  if he vvould fall dovvne and vvorship
him.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I pray thée Pasquine enter not into
this heresie,Marc. 1. that Christ is not Lord ouer the world,Luc. 4.
hast thou not read, that in the name of Iesus al knées
shoulde bowe,Phillip. 2. of things in heauen, of things in earth,

and things vnder the earth?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou knowest
not yet, what this worde worlde meaneth in the
scripture.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what meaneth it else,
but this vnmeasurable frame or engine.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yes Marforius an other thing,What the world is after the Scripture the Scripture calleth
the world, the ambitiō, the couetousnesse, the lechery,
and all those other thinges that sauour of nothing else
but the flesh,1. Ioā. 2. &. 5. so that, the flesh, the worlde, & the diuell,
are those thrée furies that with their firebrandes and
their Serpentes, make an entermingling and confusion
of all thinges.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then these fatte
Friers, that say they forsake the worlde, 
                     •
                  arye it with
them into the Monastaries.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  Monasteries are the world it selfe. Yea out of
doubt, it is not possible to sée the worlde better, than
in the Monasteries: where a man shall sée nothing
else, but affections and passions of minde, with the
which they seke to aduaunce them selues, or to driue
the one the other out of the doores.Some fruites of monasticall life.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou
sayst truth, but follow on a little.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bicause
I coulde not therefore knowe the nature of this God,
that séemeth to gouerne worldlye thinges so blonderingly,
I sought to know him by his officers, and seruauntes,
for that it séemed to me, that he gouerneth al
thinges by meanes of certaine demigods.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Whom callest thou demigods?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Those that
the grosse people call Saintes.Saintes are Demigods.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Beware
I pray thée, that thou speake nothing against the saintes,
but well, for thou knowest in how great estimation
they be with the worlde.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               God kéepe
me from speaking euil of his frendes,Saintes in great estimation with the worlde. I go not about
to tell thée other than the truth, neither shall I at any
time be charged, to haue spoken any thing that
is euill, or wicked, except it be by suche as woulde call

the truth wickednesse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Lette it not séeme
straunge to thée, that there be nowe a dayes suche
men, as doe labour so to call it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               For suche
kinde of crueltie,Truth will be truth how so euer it be called. I care not, I knowe that the truthe
can not be but truth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Returne a little to
thy purpose, for me thought thou was framing an argument,
à minori ad mains, or to be better vnderstoode,
à delegato ad ordinarium.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou
speakest like a right Canonist.Marforius a Canō lawier And to satisfie thy desire,
I say, that finding no meane, to cleare my selfe
of this doubt, with my selfe I sayde, what the Diuell
of holinesse, goodnesse, or equitie finde I in these saintes,
that now a dayes are so worshipped of the world,
& that haue taken in hand the gouernment of worldly
things?Saintes are not as they are named. Who if they nowe be, or do, that which sometime
they were, or that is sayde they were or did, I
shall sone consider, what is the order of this gouernement,
if not, yet haue I cause to doubt. And forthwith
it came in my minde to make a comparison of the lynes
of Saintes,A very good way to try Saintes. and of their state, while they were lyuing,
with their presente 
                     ••
                  ate nowe, hoping by this
meanes to sée, if the Saintes that liued sometime, be
the selfe same, that they say raigne nowe in heauen,
and together with Christ doe gouerne al, or else whether
those be different, and haue there aboue, other nature,
and other condicions.True Saintes are Goddes frendes.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what an
arrogancie is this of thée? wilte thou be a iudge ouer
Saintes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No no frende Marforius, let it
neuer please God,Who be true Saintes. that I shoulde be a iudge ouer his
frendes, who can not sinne any more, neither be spotted
with any worldly affection:Some be but Saintes in 
                        •
                     ame. but I would séeke onlye
(as I sayd) if those be they, that gouerne so, or else
if there be other vnder their name, that haue none other

thing of the saint, but the bare name.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is that thou sayest? what a presumptuous
boldenesse shoulde this be? thinkest thou that there be
any that vsurpe the names of saintes, and vnder that
godly name deceiue the world?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               As though
the thing were to bée doubted.The deuil neuer becōmeth an angell but when he meaneth most mischiefe. Knowest thou not,
that the Diuell vnder the forme of an Angell of light,
worketh all his deceytes? for if he shoulde shewe him
selfe plainly as he is, none woulde beleue him. Knowest
thou not that Superstition and Hipocrisie are the
Diuelles Retorique, with the whiche,2. Cor. 11. he maketh the
worlde beleue, al that he listeth,The diuelles retorique. Beholde the Fryers,
I pray thée, thinkest thou, that they woulde euer haue
bene able, to make the worlde beleue so many manifest
falshoodes,Fryers the diuels scholers. and foolishe 
                     •
                  oyes, if they had not learned
this art of the Diuell?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then,
their coates, hoodes, and sundry colours, are they deuised
by the Diuel?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea out of doubt:The diuel
                        •
                      d
                        •
                     uise. for
if they were the same that they woulde be counted,
what nede shoulde there be of such disguised garmentes?
the whiche say they, do signifie that whiche they
ought to be. This is a cleare case, that while there is
shadowe & signification of the thing,Marke well. there is not the
thing it selfe. If they were in dede, what shoulde they
nede to séeke so to appeare?All is not gold that glistereth.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue heard
in dode, that outwardly they be one thing, & inwardly
an other.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou mayst be sure of y•, if thou
beleue the Gospell, whiche saythe. That there shall
come vvolues to deuour vs, clad in shepe skinnes, by
cause they vvill not be knovven: for righte well thou
knowest, y• one shepe eateth not another,
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou tellest me Pasquine greate matters, and suche
as I neuer heard before, and yet haue I studied many

yeares the Canon lawe, and in the subtil pointes of
Iohn Brokenshinne,
                  Iohn Brokenshinne a wryter vpon the Canon law. and yet did I neuer reade these
thinges, which haue in them somewhat more, than euery
man vnderstandes. Tell me now, how thou madest
this comparison, for I remembre I read in Plato,
that it is a goodlye way to finde out the truth,A good way to finde out the truth. to seperate
the thinges that are like, from those that are different.
And I thinke this same be it, that our Logitians
speake of, that contraries being layd together, are
the better discerned.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest wel, but
to come to the poynte. Take thou which thou wilt
                     •
                  , among
all the Saintes, yea if thou wouldest take the
Uirgin Marye, who hath the chiefest place, and then
consider well, after what sorte she was in tymes past,
while she liued, and in what sorte she is nowe, after
she became to be Diefied: And thou shalt finde, that
I doubt not without cause,No more like than fire and water. whether she that is set vpon
the Aultars, be the selfe same that was mother of
the Lord.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Make thou Pasquine this comparison,
for herein thou hast a better iudgement than
I,Comparisons odious. beside that, by vs Canonistes comparisons are coū
                  ted
odious.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So I wil, sith it pleaseth thée,
but aunswere me a little, to that I will aske thée, for
so the matter shall be the clearer: what deest thou
thinke, that the mother of the Lorde was in times
past?
            
            
               Marforius.
               If we will beleue the scriptures,The prayse of the Virgin Mary.
she was a Uirgin moste chaste, moste modest in behauiour,
moste holy, most humble aboue all other creatures.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And also very well learned in holy
scripture,The price of the dog what it meaneth, looke in Deut. 23. full of charity towarde the poore, without anye
iote of couetousnesse, without desire of gayne, or
ryches, not deuouring the price of the Dogge, not
estéeming Beades nor costly garmentes Is it not so

Marforius.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yea truely, but what callest
thou the price of the Dogge.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That which
by vowe,Greate oddes betwene Mary Christes mother, and Mary on the Aultar. for wicked requestes if they come to passe, is
giuen to hir.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstand thée well.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou séest therfore, what she was once, now
tel me what thou thinkst by this, y• with so much wax,
with so much golde & siluer, with so many chaynes &
brouches, & with so many perfumes, the world doth at
this day honor.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I can not tel what to say
of hir.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               I maruel of thée,Great hurt commeth of false religion once receyued y• thou sayest y• canst
not tel what to say of hir, in so cleare a matter.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Maruell not at all thereat. For this Religion
wherein I haue so long time liued, hath in such sorte
blinded me, y• albeit I would, I can not, nor dare not,Ianichers for the most part are christians borne, and denying that fayth, become Turkes, and are the garde of the Turke. Which is to cause a man to confesse by induction, that which he would not, and so ouerthrowe him selfe.
giue this iudgemēt. Thou knowest what a great matter
it is to be borne & bred vp in any Religion: & many
times it is of greater force to be bred vp in it, than
to be born in it: as we se of the Ianichers. Beside that
I doubt, that if I should say any thing against hir, she
would forthwith be reuenged vpon me.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If
thou wouldest continue in thy false Religion, approuing
it to be good by this mea
                     •
                  es: the Turkes and
Moores will continue in their owne, & yet shalte thou
not be able to say, that theirs is false. But yet for all
this thine opinion, doest thou not graunt me, that she
is not the very same?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou talkest with
me after the maner of Socrates in his disputatiōs, vnderstanding
not the end where about thou goest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Harkē therfore Marforius. Of force thou must
graunt me this, that all Sainctes ought to follow the
eternall father,Christ the example of saintes. and his sonne Iesus Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This can I neuer deny.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The father
is not desirons of reuenge as thou séest, for he maketh

his sonne to rise,Math. 5. vpon the bad & the good.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh what great g
                     ••
                  dnesse is that.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Beside
that, christ dyed for sinners,1. Cor. 15. of whom, he should rather
haue bene reuenged,Luc. 23. & prayed for them that put him
to death. Moreouer thou hast his mercifull promise cō
                  firmed
with an othe, which sayth: I will not the death
of a sinner,Ezech. 18. but rather that he repent and liue.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh true benignity and humblenesse of heart.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest well,Math. 11. thou wilte graunt me
also,Christ commaunded his Saintes to be meke and hū
                     ble. The Pope commaūdeth h
                        •
                     s to be cruel and seeke reuenge. that Christ commaunded those that be his, that
they should learne of him, to be méeke and humble of
heart.
            
            
               Marforius.
               It is true.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Wherfore
then art thou afrayd, y• the Sainctes, as cruel Tirans
desirous of reuenge, would doe thée harme?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Bycause I sée, that in manye places, they haue
done straunge and cruell miracles.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Doest
thou thinke, that if they had bene aliue, they woulde
so haue done?
            
            
               Marforius.
               No not I, for if their Historyes
be true, a man may sée, that they were moste
wonderfully pacient, euen vnto the death.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               How canst thou then beleue, that these Saintes that
I speake of, and those I spake of before, are due selfe
thing?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Their miracles make me to beleue
it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What? knowest not thou,Antichrist must worke miracles. that Antichrist
with his monstruous miracles, must put the
worlde in confusion?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue heard say
so: but this is yet looked for,Dan. 7. to come with the Messias
of the Iewes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And if he were here nowe,Apoc. 13.
wouldest thou any whit the better consider these myracles?Math. 24.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               And howe can I knowe, that he
is here nowe?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               By the signes that Christ
hath taught vs,Sygnes to know Antichrist by. among the whiche there is one moste
manifest, where he sayth: when you shall sée the abhomination

of desolation standing in the holy place.Math. 24.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what meaneth that?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It
meaneth,Antichristes temple disscribed. that whē we shall sée in the place where God
onely ought to be honoured, that other Goddes are
worshipped: That is the temple of Antichrist, and the
abhomination. For what thing can be more against
Christ, than to driue Christ out of his temple,Nothīg more against Christ than Antichrist. and to
put other in his place, to whome it is attributed to
worke miracles, and many other notable feates? And
why doe these miracles so much moue thée? knowest
thou not, that where they are ryfest,Miracles are tokens for the vnbeleuers. there is the lesse
signe of faith, and commonly those signes are foretokens
of the destruction of common wealthes, and decay
of Cityes. For these Gods seing the most high god
angry for their naughty Religion, and that he will altogether
ouerthrow this worldly common wealth, to
the ende the people should not waxe wyser,An old practise of the prelates. & so espye
their doinges, they kéepe them entangled with these
miracles, to the which they runne like shéepe for their
last refuge in their troubles: And euen so was it by
Baal in the olde Testament, that the more the Lorde
was by that kinde of worshipping honoured by the
prophets, so much the more did the miracles increase,
& it was sene, y• 
                  Baals miracles had thē greater force,
than the worde of the Lorde,Iniquity shall haue the vpper hande. so that vntill the captiuitie
of Babilon, for feare and for the Religion of miracles,
the Iewes could not rid them selues of the worshipping
of Baal, nay,Superstition and Idolatry are vehement persuasions to the ignorant. they said sometime, that bicause
they had left of worshipping of him, that was cause of
all their miseryes, as may be sene in Ieremy, where he
sayth: Since we lefte of to do sacrifice to the Quéene
of heauen, we haue had scarsitie of all thinges. And to
the ende thou knowe it,Hier. 44. these Goddes hurte none but

such as beleue in them, but to those that dispise them,
they can do no hurt at all,Gods of small power, that would hurt and can not. for if they could they would
long sithens haue destroyed all Almaine, and all the
townes of the Svvychers, who haue destroyed these
Goddes, and chaunged the prices of them into a better
vse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sith thou sayest that Antichrist
raigneth now: couldest thou shewe me what he is?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I can righte well shewe thée him, if thou
canst and wilte abide the hearing of it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That I can, for I am redy to dye for very lust to heare
it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Antichrist is so called by this effect,Antichrist what he is. bycause
he is against Christ. But the name of this kingdome1. Io. 2. &. 4.
(with the which) as happy and fatherly he couereth
the vnhappy name of Antichrist, that he may the
more safely deuour, and slea Christes shepe, this name
I say is called the number of man, by the Prophet in
the newe Testament.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstand thée
now lesse than I did before.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  
                     •
                  ast thou not
read in the Apocalips,Ap. 13. et. 16. of the marke, and of the name
of the beast, and of the number of man?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I
haue some time heard men striue vpon that place, and
vpō that whore clothed in Scarlet,Apoc. 17. and droncke with
the bloude of Sainctes,The great whore. whome they called the great
whore, and they sayd she had in hir hande, a Cuppe of
golde full of abhominations, and hir filthy lustes, and
if I remember me well, they called hir also Babilon,
                  Babilon.
the mother of the fornications of the earth. But by
cause I heard not the beginning of the disputation: I
could not vnderstand what that whore was.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               All this that thou hast sayd, belongeth to Antichrist,
and to his kingdome, which thinges thou shalt clearlie
vnderstande, by that time I shal haue declared vnto
thée, the name, with the which that wicked person

doth nothing else, but sel him selfe to the worlde. But
hearken to this.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I am here al redy thereto.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The letter of his name is.The beastes name discribed. 
                  P A the nū
                  ber
is. P P A A. and the name is made by putting ech
of those letters amids his two felowes. For as Pythagoras
Disciples say, the number of man is double or
two fould, the which doth clearely appeare, sith there
are in the name contayned but two letters onely, as
thou haste séene in the number. And albeit euery of
those letters is twice formed, they are not for all that
any more than two figures of letters, & two sillables.
Understādest thou it yet or no?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstande
it very well, for this name & these letters come
often in my way in the Canon lawe. But beware
Pasquine that thou seeke not to knowe to much,Ignorance breadeth deuotiō the P
                        •
                     
                     pistes say. thou
shouldest doe better to beleue simply as I doe, hauing
bene so taught by a cunning Frier.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What
callest thou to beleue simply?
            
            
               Marforius.
               This, not
to labour to much in holy scripture,The doctrine of Monkes and Friers. and to leaue those
thinges to the Diuines.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That is to beleue
ignorantly, and not simply, knowest thou not that
place of the Gospell,Ioan. 5. which sayth? Search the Scriptures?
if thou beleue so Marforius, thou deceiuest thy
selfe fowlly, for this is not simplicitie, but rather a folishe
and carelesse credulitie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I will tell
thée true, I did beleue, that simplicitie and ignorance
were both one thing.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou deceyuest thy
selfe I say, for there is a greater difference betwene
them. SimplieitieSimplicitie what it is. is not ignoraunce, but a certaine
clearenesse and singlenesse of minde, whose contrary
is doublenesse: if thou know therfore what it is to be
of a double minde, thou shalt also vnderstande what it
is to be of a single minde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I knowe well

what it is to be of a double minde, for this often times
happeneth vnto me,Canonistes cōmmonly are not acquain
                        •
                     ted with simplicitie. but suche maner of simplicitie as
thou speakest of, I know not.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I beleue i
                     •
                  
well, for you Canonistes, can not be both subtile and
simple together, but would to God that your craftinesse
might be turned into simplicitie,Canonistes subtile but not simple. for then should
there not be among you so many disceytes, wayes to
entangle men in, and suche deuises and delayes, and
there should be no maner disputing. De Iure stricto
& largo, but onely that which is iust and good shoulde
raigne in you.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is simplicitie then?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Simplicitie is a vertue,Who is a simple man. the which who so
euer hath, sheweth with the effectes what he is, he is
no hipocrite, but in euery thing, and in euery act, is
séene a great clearnesse and singlenesse, and he is such
that in him thou mayst trust any thing that thou hast,
for being sincere, he doth sincerelie behaue him selfe.
Moreouer concerning the knowledge of thinges and
their experience, he wil haue a sincere and sure iudgement,
without any colour or disguising of Hipocrisie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               If the matter be so, it must nedes be, that
the simple man be replenished, not onely with great
goodnesse,What he must be that wil vnderstād the scriptures. but also with great learning & iudgement
together, for these things are requisite to him that will
diligently search, and vnderstande the Scriptures.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest truth.Luc. 12. & 21.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Then are
there in these dayes many simple without simplicitie.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is true,Mar. 13. in these dayes, and there is little
godlinesse amongst Christen men, they were in olde
time simple, those true Sainctes, who * lacked not
what to aunswere to the Iudges, bycause they beleued
simply,Simplicitie and constancie are companions. and this beleuing simplye, can not be without
a very great stedfastnesse: for this simplicitie hath alwayes

wayes in company,cie are companions. a certaine most firme constnancie
of minde, and about it a wall of brasse, & such as these
be, put on no visours, nor strange garmentes, but wil
be knowen of euery man for y• they be. But this masking
and disguising, is neuer without some suspicien
of deceite. And what thinkest thou this saying meaneth,
be ye simple as Doues? but that ye haue that
singlenesse of mind, that belongeth to a Christian,Math. 10. and
shewe the same in your coūtenaunce,What is meant by the simpliciti
                        •
                      of Doues. in your maners,
in your apparell, and in your workes, as Doues doe,
the which faine not one thing, and do an other, as doe
the Foxes, but openlye shewe their naturall whitenesse,
and mildenesse in all their life.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is
there not then one Frier that is simple?Friers be foxes, and 
                        〈◊〉
                      Doues, for all they seeme so simple.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               As thou thinkest of thē, they are al so, but as I thinke,
there is not one so.
            
            
               Marforius.
               In very déede I did
euer beleue till now
                     •
                  , that we must be simple, that is
to say, ignorant, doltish, & very Asses.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Such
opinion haue they had, whome the shéepish foolishnesse
of our time hath nouseled vp, but I say to thée, that the
Christian should be very well learned,The Christiā ought not to be ignorant. & wel exercised
in his owne lawe: for so shall he not be able to be moued
by any maner argument, being wel grounded vpon
that sure stone, whereas he that shall be ignorant,
shall be redy to fall into alher
                     •
                  sies,Psala. and to al disceites:
for ignorance, agreing with all thinges,Ignorance cause of many e
                        •
                     rours. and lacking
of iudgement, at one instant taketh holde of truth, &
of falshoode, without making at any time any distinction
at all. And hereof are risen so may heresies, and
sectes among the christians. For being ignorant,The colour of religion hath deceyued manye. they
haue bene deceyued by crafty créepers, most of all vnder
the colour of Religion. And therefore some folowing
the rule of that man, & some of this man, those other

of an other man, and not one there is, that foloweth
the rule of Christ, the which without superstitions
and falshoods,Math. 22. commaundeth vnto vs, the loue of God,
and of our neighbour:Mar. 12. it is therefore no maruel, that
the Iewes and Turkes become not Christians,Why the Iewes & Tur
                        •
                      become not Christians. seing
the Christians deuided into so many sectes, with the
which also, they dare take vpon them, to call them selues
spirituall, being altogether carnall. Paule in the
first to the Corinthians, cryeth out against these sects,
saying: If any of you say I holde of P
                        •
                     ule,
                  i. Cor. 1. 
                  an other, I
holde of Appollo, an other I holde of Cephas, the
fourth I holde of Christ, are ye not carnal, is Christ deuided?
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I knowe these errours very wel,Meaning he should expoūd to him the scripture, as they do the law to other. A drianns for Atrianus
I will that from henceforth thou be my Grat
                        •
                     an, and
my Panormitan, but thou shouldest preach this about
the streates.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I woulde gladly do it, but I
feare the decrée of that flemish Pope.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Peraduenture
thou meanest Adrian. Thou canst not
speake Dutch wel.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  Atrian thou must say,
for so a man may sée in his Epitaph.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou
nedest not doubt any more of him, for he is dead.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So woulde God,Pasquine wissheth the ouer throw of the Pope, and his kingdome. that this that now is, and all
that shall come after, were with all their traine and
trash that belong vnto them: but yet for al this, there
want no priute watchers. I haue heard say, y• 
                  Chietti
hath spoken the Diuell and all againste me, in that
théeuishe consistorie.Pasquine euil spoken of, by Card. Chietti, bycause he called him by his right name.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               And why?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bicause I tolde him his true, proper & natural name,
that is to say h
                     •
                  pocrite, but let him doe and say what
he will, for I set not a turde by him, sith I am made
immortall, and become a God, aswell as he is besp
                     •
                  
                  rited
and become a Diuel.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But now returne
a little, and tell me the cause of thy going to

heauen.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was this that I haue tolde thée,The cause why Pasquin went to heauē
                  
for that I sawe these Saintes to be so farre different
from that they were sometime, I would nedes goe to
heauē purposely to sée, whether they haue there aboue
the selfe same nature. For me thought it a thing vnlikelye,
that this Saint Mary here belowe,The Image of Mary compared for hir gay attire, to the heathen Goddesses. that hath
the painting on hir face, that hath crownes full of
Iewels on hir heade, that hath Chaynes aboute hir
necke, that hath Ringes on her fingers, that hath so
costly and so many sortes of garmentes vpon hir, like
one of those yong Girles of olde time, me thought it
not I say, that this was al one, with that most humble
mother of the Lorde, and so much the more I confirmed
my selfe in this opinion, bicause I sawe this Lady
to be most couetous,A couetous and cruell mother that suff
                        •
                     reth hir sonne to beg and she hath so much. moste desirous to heape vppe
treasure, and most nigardly in spending it, and if she
let any thing of hir owne goe out of hir handes, shée
delt it most wickedly, so that I sayd often to my self, if
this be th
                     •
                   Lords mother, why hath she not compassiō
vpon her sonne, whom she séeth euery day in ye church
where she is,The poore rep
                        •
                     esent christ. goe aboute asking almes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What sayest thou? hath Christ nede then?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, in the poore that represēt his person, for he sayeth.

                     Math. 25. Loretto is with them, as Walsingham was with vs, a place to which much gayne was brought, and and no goodnesse caryed thence. 
                  In as much as you haue done it, to one of the least of
these my brethren, ye haue done it vnto me. Yet notwithstanding,
if this hir some aske hir but one Dotkin,
she doth not giue it him, but standeth vpon hir
grauitie, and looketh bigge, without once chaunging
hir countenance, nor shewing any maner signe of cō
                  passion.
But when the holy Father goeth to Loretto,
when those most reuerend Cardinals, when the spirituall
fathers goe vnto hir, she geueth to these generations
all that she hath, to spend vpon whores, dogges,

horses, and Ganimedes, whiche I shoulde haue sayde
first, the which things I am right well assured, were
al farre wide (without all comparisō) from that true &
most pure virgin the Lords mother, y• which aboue all
other things hated this filthy kinde of men, beside that
I was right well assured, y• those that be the very saintes
in dede, being with God, who is most riche, haue
no nede of our goodes,The true saintes s
                        •
                     ke n
                        •
                     yther good
                        •
                     s, nor glo
                        •
                     ious Churches. The treasures of the papistes are a pray for the Turkes. nor of our offeringes, nor that
they be so gréedy of glory, nor sake not for such goodly
Churches, nor so riche Aultars and other ornaments,
whiche are in daunger to be one day robbed by the
Turkes, sithens suche as be the greate men in the
worlde, take not the same them selues. These thinges
are rather for the satis
                     •
                  ying of vaine & witl
                     •
                  sse men,
than of Saints, who neuer called them selues Kings
nor Quéenes of heauen,Math. 6. but the seruantes and handemaydes
of God,The treasures of true s
                        •
                     intes layd up in heauen. and woulde haue their dwellinges &
treasures in heauen, (where there is no daunger of
Turkes, for they goe not vp thither) whiche treasures
are not golde and siluer, but iustice, peace and ioy,
in the holy ghost. And perceyuing newe by all these
wayes aforesayd, that these be no Saintes, and seing
that the worlde would enforce me to beleue, that they
be Saintes,Deady sinne to speake euill of these false Saintes. and that it were deadly sinne to speake euill
of them, I determined to goe to heauen, to cleare
me of this double.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I maruell that none
hath sought this before thée.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               All haue lefte
of, for a certaine foolish, and light beliefe, and bycause
they had holy thinges in small estimation, being content
with a false and wicked Religion,Couetousnesse and cruel
                        •
                     y a hinderance to the truth. the which hytherto
(I know not by what meanes) hath holden the
worlde sore bewitched. And if there were founde any
one, that had begon to discerne the truth, by and by

haue they had their eyes closed, that they should sée no
further, nor wade déeper for knowledge therin.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou hast tolde me y• cause of this thy voiage,
tell me now how thou wentest vp, and by what way,
and then what thou sawest there aboue. For there
must nedes be thinges farre diuers from ours, & from
al that we can imagine or thinkeof.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will
tell thée the whole, so that thou hearken wel vnto me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I hearken to thée, say on.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Séeking
the way to go to heauen, I coulde not finde it,
albeit I had red many things of Protheus, Icarus, and
Menippus, who (men say) wente vp thither, but they
tell not by what way. Wherevpon I determined to
aske one of these Angelles of it, whiche all day goe vp
and downe, and they tolde me, that there was none other
way but by death: that way I liked not, bicause
life is deare to euery man, but by chaunce I found an
other way.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what way was that?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That being in a traunce,Pasquines way to heauē. all these things
should by reuelation be shewed vnto me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who taughte thée that way, some Negromancer?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Holde thy peace, for this practise was deuised
by holy fathers, haste not thou read in the liues of
holy fathers, that Hilarius the Abbot,Hilarius an aduocate at the generall Iudgement. standing on his
féete in his chamber, founde him selfe to be before the
iudgement seate of God, and there aunswered Pro &
contra?
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I neuer read it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Hast
thou not also read that booke intituled: Memorare nouissima
tua. &c.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               This title is in none of
all my bookes, but tell me, who hath taught thée this
thing.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This other day I was called to the
monastery of the Charter house Friers, by a certaine
Frier there, that began to vnderstande the matter, &

(as it oft happeneth) séeking not for it,Pasquine found that which he sought not then for. I founde this
thing.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what matter haddest thou to
doe with that Frier?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He prayed me that
in certaine workes that I then had in hande, I would
somewhat nippe the Prior of his house.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What had he done, that thou shouldest so nippe him?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I can not almost tell thée, but he alleaged
certaine Sophisticall foolishe tryfles, which I did not
very well vnderstande.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Do
                     •
                  st thou not
remember them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He complayned that his
father Prior commended muche more that parte of
Aristotle called posteriora,
                  The old Frier meaneth some mystery therby. than the other called priora,
& that being in this prepost
                     •
                  rous opinion, he neuer
vsed demonstrations, but onely induction.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What meant he by that f
                     •
                  ndenesse?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I knowe not why he lefte the demonstrations, except
it were, bicause they are taken from the principles of
nature.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstande what thou mea
                  
                     •
                  est,
followe on.A busteling among the Friers in the Cloyster.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               while I was with this
Frier, I hearde in the Cloyster a great busteling, for
thou knowest well that they make their Celles one
harde by an other, like Waspes and Harnettes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What doest thou tell me? I thought these
Friers had bene of the kinde of the Frogges of Seriphia,
bicause they make a conscience to salute any that
commeth in to them, so muche (men say) they estéeme
silence, but thou sayst thei brawlled?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They
did not onely brawle,Fryers together by the eares. but were together by the eares,
and if I had not come, they would haue layde handes
on their staues.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Whervpō brawled they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They disputed of these Traunces, and of
their vaine visions, and of the maner howe they sawe
them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Did they striue vpon a thing that

they accompt so certaine?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea for when
a certaine yong Frier sayde, that these were the dreames
of olde sicke men, and that they haue in them no
maner of truth, and that he himselfe had bene already
thrée yeares in the Monasterie, and there neuer happened
any such thing to him, an other old Frier tolde
him that he neuer coulde skill of that practise, and the
yong Frier laughing at that, bycause he called speculation,
practise, the other excused him selfe saying, that
he called not the vision practise, but the preparation,
and the thinges that goe before the vision: the yong
Frier then being desirous to heare thereof, began to
demaunde of this practise. Then began I also to hearken,How Pasqui
                        ••
                      learned the practise of these visions.
to the end I might also learne this prety conceyt,
and so I vnderstode al the meane, howe a man should
prepare him selfe to these visions.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is it
lawfull to knowe so greate a practise? may it be done
without the bloude of a blacke shéepe?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It
ought not to be opened, yet will I tel it thée, that thou
mayst do the same, if by chaunce studying a little better,
thou shouldest peraduenture maruel how it commeth
to passe, that the Cannons of the Apostles,The Cannons of the apostles, farre differēt from the Popes Canons. that
are so godly, are so farre different from the Cannons
of the Romishe Byshops that came long afterwarde,
and that are so wicked. And for all this a man must
beleue, that they are all in one selfe heauē.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This is good to be noted, & therfore I pray thée tel me
the whole story,The beginnīg of the votage. point by point.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He would
that first of all, the Frier shoulde keepe a moste abstinent
fast, eight dayes together.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This is
but a leane beginning, chieflye for Friers that are so
well prouided for the Kitchin, and I heare say that
these pale faced father Friers, will eate like Cormerants.
            
            
               
               Pasquine.
               Then that he should be confessed.The way to clymbe vp to the Popes heauen.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               That is a very denout thing.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Then that he shoulde not meddle with any fleshe of
male or female kinde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is this?A priuy nip. why
then do these mayden Friers that make this vow of
chastitye, vse such matters.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And many of
them vse the matter worse, who knoweth not that?
but why doest thou put me out of my tale.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Procéede therefore.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Then must he heare
seuen Masses of the holy ghost: and being thus prepared,
at midnight on the Fryday,Monkish astrologye. when the Moone is
in the last degrée of Cancer, he must lay him self down
vpon a Matte, vpon whiche, some other Frier (that
hath bene in a traunce) hath slept before.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This they accompt as true as the Oracle of Appollo.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Iust, euen so. Then must he haue on his
heade an other Friers hoode that hath bene before in
the like traunce, and a stoale about his necke, folded
vpon his breast in forme of a crosse, and Saint Iohns
Gospell IN PRINCIPIO ERAT VFRBVM.
hanging at his necke, written in redde letters,
& he must perfume the place with holy perfume,
and kepe there by him a Lampe burning with holys
oyle, that done, he must draw a circle about the Mat,
of red earth and white, and the circle must be double,
leauing a little space betwene the outter line and the
inner line of the circle, and betwene these two lynes,
must be written these wordes.A Coniuration.
                  ✚ 
                  Pater 
                  ✚ 
                  Filius 
                  ✚
                  Spiritus Sanctus 
                  ✚ 
                  Nox visions 
                  ✚ 
                  Nox reuelationis
                  ✚ 
                  Nox veritatis. And thus being prepared, after he
hath sayd a certaine charme, he falleth on sléepe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What charme is that.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A charme
that con
                     •
                  ureth all spirites, that are appointed for reuelations

and must be thereat, to declare the truth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               By what names calleth he them.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               By Hebrew names,Ignorant spirites that vnderstand but one tongue. for they say these kinde of
spirites vnderstande none other tongue.
            
            
               Marforius.
               These spirites therefore are verye ignoraunt.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I knowe not what they be, it suffised me that
I knew that they are good for this purpose.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And haste thou also Pasquine learned this practise?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And why not. I haue vsed it, and haue tryed
the whole matter.
            
            
               Marforius.
               He that had séene
thée in that attyre, might well haue made a Pasquine
vpon Pasquine.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Peace Marforius,
                  Meaning tho
                        •
                      a man might haue made a least on Pasquine. thou
makest a iesting thou knowest not wherat, when thou
shalt haue heard the whole case, thou wilt be of an other
minde, and to sée such maner thinges, thou wouldest
desire not onely to be hooded, but also to be of the
thirde order of Saint Frances, and also of the straytest
order of all called the Scapuchines.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tell
me I pray thée before I forget it, if these Friers haue
so many visions, what meaneth it, that they are drowned
in so many superstitions and falshodes
                     •
                   What is
the cause that they vnderstande not true godlinesse?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause they desire not to haue the truth
of sacred thinges to be opened vnto them, but other
tryfling toyes, that are rather contrary to godlinesse:
and herein they offende, that they binde good spirites
to doe vile seruices.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I praye thée tell me
some one of these tryfling toyes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Some
one desireth that he be shewed vnto him, y• hath stolne
his mony: for this purpose is appointed the Aungell
Colamiachel,
                  The A
                        •
                     gell for lost mony. who sheweth him selfe in the forme of
him that hath stolne it: albeit they say that Saint Anthony
of Padoa, hath begon to take charge him selfe

of these thinges,The Saint for thefe stolne goodes. whereof his Friers receyue greate
gaine.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh cursed sorte of rascalles, that
dare be so bolde to constrayne a good Aungell, to take
vpon him the shape of a théefe.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Beside that
they desire to know whether the wife loue hir husbād,
or the swete heart hir louer, or the Ganimedes his holy
father. To all which thinges, there is no Aungell
appointed but Saint Helene mother of Constantine,
who if the loue be like & equall,The Saint for 
                        •
                     oue matters. sheweth hir selfe with
certaine faire Damosels, and at a table plenteouslye
furnished, eateth with the Frier that is fasting: but
if the loue be fa
                     •
                  ned, and naught worth, she feareth
the Frier with weapons, with fiers, & with chaūging
hir selfe into dy
                     •
                  ers shapes, as into a wilde Boare,
into a Lion, into an Asse, who euil fauouredly crying,
séemeth to say, that this loue is not to be trusted vnto.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh poore saint Helene, is this thy reward
for finding the Crosse, that thou shoulde be driuen to
search for the loues, and for such foolish toyes of men?
Those examples be nowe sufficient for me, I vnderstande
the euill vse of things. Tell me now the rest of
our first talke.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               With a good will Hauing
therefore marked all these thinges well,Pasquine goeth about his businesse. Coliseo. I setled my
selfe to do all that herevnto was nedefull. Here nere
vnto the Coliseo is in the olde ruines, a certaine hole
vnderground, whiche I thinke no man else knoweth
of, faire wrought with printed fygures of earth, cast
in mouldes, & with maruellous trim printings that
yet remaine, thether I resorted, and brought with me
my Matte, the Hoode, the holy Oyle, the Stoale, the
Chaulke, the Bole Armoniacke, the perfume of Storax
Beniamin, and setting my things in order, and
after the coniuration once read, I layde me downe

to sléepe,Pasquinc salleth into a traunce. & forthwith was I drowned in a most sounde
slepe, like vnto that which they haue, which be troubled
with the Lethargi. Then me thought the heauen
and earth came together, and that euery thing returned
to the olde Chaos, and so I lost my memorie, that
me thought I was no more that Pasquine that I
was wonte to be, me thought that I had dronke the
iuyce of Poppy.The begining of the Popes Apocalips While my braynes went thus whirling
about, I saw come flying from far of, a great fire,
sore flaming and sparckeling. It was of the fashion of
the manifolde impressions of fire, whereof Aristotle
speaketh in his Meteora,
                  The discription of Pasquines guid. but the stirring of it was like
the Rockets and Squibbes, and whirling wylde fiers
of Castell Angelo, what tyme they celebrate the dismoll
day of the Popes creation. After it was come
nere me, it shedde it selfe all about me, stretching out
his beames in suche sorte as the Sunne is painted, amids
the which there was a man in a white garment,
who demaunded of me what I woulde haue, I being
thus moued, partly for the straungenesse of the thing,
and partly for feare, comming afterwarde by little &
little to my selfe, thus with much a do, I aunswered,
who art thou Lord,The Angell for true and holy visions. he sayde that he was Hierusatanael
appointed for true & holy visions: and if I would
haue any thing, that I should aske him. Then did I in
the best maner I could, shewe vnto him the occasion
of this my comming vnto him, demaunding of him
pardon for my presumption,Pasquines request to the Angell. for that I a mortal man,
was so bolde to commaund one that is immortall, affirming
further that it shoulde doe muche good to the
world, if Pasquine who is counted a narrow searcher
out of things, might enter to see heauē. My talke pleased
him wel, & herevpon I begon to take a little heart

of grace, and the more for that he forthwith shewed
him selfe to me with a countenance altogether pleasant,
he asked me into which heauē I would go, affirming
that there were two heauens,Two heauens. into one of the
whiche Christ ascended, when he departed from the
worlde, from the which he shall also discende accompanied
with his Angels,Mark. 16. to iudge the worlde. The other
Math. 16. was sithens builded by the handes of Popes and
mortall men, who had small skill in building. When
I heard that, I was exceding glad, seing I had found
the meane to be out of doubt of the truth. And I prayed
the Aungel if it were possible, that he would cause
me to sée them both, & he promised me I should. Then
did the flame that compassed me aboute, turne it selfe
into the fashion of a Charet,Pasquine goeth to heauen in a fiery Charret. like vnto that which did
cary away Helias, vpō the which, the Angel sat down,
and then made me sit downe beside him. As we were
moūted, the Charet caried vs away through the aire,
vnto the Sp
                     •
                  re of the Element of the fire, there chaū
                  ging
our Charet, we followed our v
                     •
                  yage, and drawing
already nere to the Spere of the Moone, the Aungell
sayde he would passe no higher, & turned the raynes
toward the North, going much further from the
Sunne, I sayd vnto him whither goe we Lorde? he
aunswered me,The situation of both the heauens. to the Popes heauen, which is on this
side, for the Lordes heauen is towarde the Southeast,
which is the highest parte of the heauen,The Lordes heauen and the Pop
                        •
                     s dyrect contrary. as this is the
lowest, and this standeth right ouer against the other,
as the Antipodes are vnto your Citte, so that they
be directly contrary. And thus talking, I saw a farre
off a City so great,The desc
                        •
                     iption of the Popes heauen. that it séemed that Venice, Constā
                     tinople,
Rome, Cairo, and Paris, had bene al ioyned together,
the forme thereof was as it had bene a Maze.

And the same so mounting vp like a winding snaile,
made newe deuisions, newe market places, and new
streates, and in the toppe it had a great Castle, so that
standing without the Citie, it was séene euery whitte
within,There be many within the Popes heauen but none can be seene without. and all the streates of it might be casely counted:
but there coulde not one body be séene in it, and
that was, bycause all the streates, and all the Market
places were inuironed with highe walles that stopped
the sight, but the walles of the Citie were full of
Towers, and euery Tower had his gate, made wyth
such wonderfull craft, that there is no Maze in all the
worlde that may be compared vnto them. I sawe goe
in & out through these gates many spirites, who onely
can skill what subtile deuises the same be that are in
them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou paintest me out rather a
Do
                     •
                  ecoote than a heauen frende Pasquine, but what
businesse haue those spirites to doe?
            
            
               Pasquine,
               When
they went in, they went loden, some with Supplications,
some with Rosaries, some with Beades, some
with Waxe, some with Oyle, some with Incense,
some with Golde, some with Siluer, some with Chaynes,
some with precious Stones,Chopping and chaunging in the Popes heauen. but when they came
out, they came lodē, some with peace, some with warres,
some with raine, some with haile, some with windes,
and suche other like thinges, desired to be had, or
not to be had,The couetousnesse of the Popes heauen. by foolishe men.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Did they
neuer bring forth no money?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No that I
sawe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh couetous heauē. But I thought
that this heauen had had but one gate onely, and that
Peter had kept it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause thou mayest
the better vnderstand the matter, besides the gates of
the Towers, made in such forme as thou hast hearde,
there was an other great one, through the which th
                     •
                  
                  
men onely entred,The false donation of Cō
                     stantine. the whiche is but botcherly made,
and in the same is grauen the false donatiō of Cōstā
                     tine,
and those first signes of victory of the Popes, and
how by little and little, they haue brought kings and
Emperours, to be vnder them, and haue vsed them to
kisse their féete. Among other things, I sawe a Pope
set his foote on an Emperours throte. There were also
many other thinges, the whiche I understoode not
very well. As we were nowe come to this gate, after
we had a while behelde the caruings therof: the Angell
knocked, by and by, an olde hoarse Carle asked
who we were, the Angell answered, that there was a
Citizen of Rome that desired to sée those holy places,
the olde man would nedes know his name, and when
he had hearde the name of Pasquine, with a churlishe
countenaunce he sayde, and art thou he, that doth so
great hurt vnto this our kingdom with thy writings,
pulling men backe from our Religion, and from offering
vnto vs? get thée packing, for here within wil
we haue no suche raylers nor scoffers, and so saying
shut vpon vs a little piece of a windowe that was in
the gate,Pasquines iudgement of the Popes heauen. then laughed I at it, saying with my selfe,
here must nedes be within, many things to be laughed
at, and to be scorned: sith they will haue none to
enter in that may marke them. Yet was I sory that I
could not sée them, & I asked of the Angell what was
to be done, doubting I had lost both my time and my
labour.Luther and Zwinglius digged a Myne to ouer throw the Popes heauen. The Angell stoode a whyle studying with him
selfe, and then sayde that he knewe a certaine Myne,
knowen to very fewe, which Luther and Zvvinglius,
had made to ouerthrowe this heauen, whiche Myne
was afterwarde made bigger by many other.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh that angel was an honest fellow.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               
                  Yea truly and (for as much as I saw) he was no great
frende to this heauen, he went therefore to the Myne,
the which had the mouth therof very little & straight,
and couered with thornes & boughes in such sorte, as
no man would thinke that there is any such thing as
there is in dede. We entred in, and there came against
vs a Pioner, clothed after the Dutch fashion,
that had vpon the sleues of his garment these letters,
V. D. M. I. AE. that is to say. Verbum domini manet in
aeternum, which in our tongue as thou knowest, is as
much to say, as the worde of the Lorde endureth for
euer.Esay. 40. And there harde by, were two little banners,
in one of the whiche was written in letters of golde.
IN QVIETNES AND CONFIDENCEEsay. 30.
SHALL BE YOVR STRENGTH. and
in the other. COME VNTO ME ALL YE
THAT LABOR AND ARE LADENMath. 11.
AND I WILL REFRESH YOV. This
man asked vs who we were, I tolde him I was Master
Pasquine the Romaine, my Christen name pleased
him better than my Surname. Then saide he, y•
this way entreth no man, that maketh not the same
confession of fayth that he him selfe confessed,Pasquine examined of his beliefe. and his
felowes also. Thē I asked him what confessiō I must
make, he demaunded of me, which of these two things
I beleued, whether Christ were y• head of the Church
or the chiefe Byshop. Whereat I laughed and sayde,
both, he maruel
                     •
                  ed much at such a maner of answere,
and sayd, how can that be? hath the Church then two
heades, like the Eagle in the Emperours armes? I
ieasted with him and sayde, if thou graunt me,Hebr. 6. that
Christ is the chiefe Byshop,Ephe. 5. thou must nedes graunt
that the heade of the Church is Christ, and the chiefe

Bishop of the same, but if thou wouldst that I should
haue answered thée otherwise, thou shouldest haue asked
me, whether I beleued that Christ is the heade of
the Church, or the Pope? he then perceyuing my ieasting,
said to me, it can not be denied, but that thou art
the same pleasant Pasquine that I haue heard so many
tymes cōmended, but tel me in good sadnesse, what
thou confessest vpō this matter: speaking then in good
earnest,The confession of Pasquine. I confessed that I beleued that Christ onelye
and solely is the head of the Church, and that to haue
so many heades, and so many bodyes, is a thing méete
for Cerberus, Briarius, and the diuell and such like, and
not for heauenly bodyes: for asmuch as the Church,
hath onelye one heade,Ephe. 5. 1. one onely spouse Iesus Christ,
and that al other are members of the Church.Cor. 3 He hearing
this,Psal. 45. made so muche of me, that he constrayned
me excéedingly to loue him, and most of all, when I
hearde him call me brother in Christ. Then led he me
into a place lyke a Dorter, into the which the further
I entred, the more the same became larger & larger, &
it was a great building, & all the walles thereof were
vndermyned so beneath, that all the whole worke
might easely haue bene ouerthrowē.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who
dwelled there?The inhabitantes of the Popes heauen.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In the first entering in, we
hearde a wonderfull noyse, of Shéepe, Kine, Goates,
Asses, Hartes, and suche lyke beastes, and entring in
further, we sawe them in such number as can not be
tolde, but among them, was there not one Woulfe,
Lyon, Beare, nor other lyke.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is
that I heare thée say? wherefore were these Beastes
there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause they had eaten herbes in
the Lent, and other euill things, and neuer had eaten
any fleshe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why were there no Wolues

nor Lyons there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               For two causes, the
one for that they had eaten fleshe on Fryday and Saturday,
and in the Lent, the other bycause in their
places were the Friers, who dwelled there euen hard
by.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What are not the Fryers aware of
that daungerous building, they were wont to be in al
things vengeable subtile and crafty.Friers craftye hipocrites.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euen
so they be, but nowe they song merely, that saying of
the Psalme. That vve should be saued from our enimies,
and from the handes of all that hate vs.
                  Luc. 1.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Didst thou know none of those Pioners.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe many wyly fellowes, and a great part
of them spake Dutch, yet were there very many Italyans
and French men. Of those that I knewe, one
was Fredericke Duke of Saxon,
                  Pioners that labor to ouerthrow the Popes heauen. who séeing the Gospell
come abrode, set open his gates vnto it, there was
Zvvinglius, Oecolampadius, Luther, Odoricus Cogellus,
Fabritius, Capito, Lambert, Iacobus Faber, Ierome
Galateus a Venetian, y• for the Gospel sake, was
pined in a most cruell prison ten yeres long, & a Spaniard
called Iohn Valdesse, being one of Cesars knightes,
now became Christes knight, and many other, all
whiche, with much strength were digging away the
foundation.This heauen is in great daunger of falling.
               
            
            
               Marforius
               This heauen then standeth
in great daunger of falling.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I thinke surelye
that it will shortly come to naught, bycause it hath
the foūdations of it very weake, and made with little
skill for so great a building.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Diddest thou
sée I pray thée of what stuffe those foundations were
made.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What I saw inough of it, for those
that digged shewed me of it for a miracle, wondering
how it shoulde be possible, that so great a City should
stand so long vpright.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tel me I pray thée

a little, what stuffe was it, whereof the foundations
were made?The 
                        ••
                     uffe whereof the foundation of the Popes heauen is made.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               There were Hoodes, Beades,
sluttishe and filthy Garmentes, knotted Coardes for
girdels, shauen Cr
                     •
                  wnes, Nonnes vales, and a thousand
sundry sortes of garmentes, as many of shooes,
as many of Cappes, a thousand sundry colours: there
were also, rotten fishe, al sortes of hearbes, al kindes
of graine for potage, Byshops Myters, triple Crownes,
Hattes redde and gréene, Pardons, Candels, dyuers
bookes, and such other thinges, all which were
tempered together with a softe kind of stone, & with
Lime, and this was the base or foote of all their foundations,
the which bycause it shoulde not come out belowe,
for that it is a very soft kind of stuffe, was therfore
holden vp with foure rankes of walles, the firste
of which walles,The foure walles that holde vp the Popes kingdome. was called Superstition, the seconde
Pride, the third Ignorance, the fourth Hipocrisie, and
betwene the one and the other of these walles, was it
full of that stuffe whereof the foundations are. It is
not therfore to be doubted but that this building must
nedes come to ruine, for there is a wonderfull disconuenience
betwene the sleightnesse of the stuffe wherewith
it is builded, and the greatnesse of the waight of
the whole building: & besides that, bycause there raigneth
an exceding couetousnesse among them, and thei
bestow no more mony in building: but all heape together
great summes of mony,The Popes Marchantes are afeard of a fall. like suche as are sone
ready to forsake their owne Cuntrey, and to go dwel
else where. To returne nowe vnto my first purpose,
sith thou hast nowe vnderstode the whole matter concerning
the Mynes, & of the buildings of this place.
This Pioner ledde vs to a certaine Caue, through the
which a man might beholde al the City, and it was so

croked, that it would not make any man suspect, that
matter which before I tolde thée. Being come thither,
I began to say to my selfe, what if the olde Carle espy
that thou arte entered in at this caue, sith he woulde
not let thée come in at his gate, howe wilte thou then
do? and thinking thus I bit my nayles, the Aungell
perceyued it, and after he had both demaunded and
vnderstoode the cause of my standing so in a study, he
byd me, that I shoulde be of good chéere, affirming,
that here men must be past shame,Courtiers reproued of vnshamefastnesse as courtiers are,
who runne without shame to the Table, and without
any reuerence, euen so must he do, that will goe and
beholde these places. His counsell lyked me, and so taking
courage, I came out of the Caue.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I
am glad thou foundst so commodious an entring, but
tell me, are they all Saintes that be there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In name they are all Saintes that be there, but by
their looke and by their maners, they be very vnlyke
Saintes.Diuels in forme of saintes.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is the cause?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I know not, but by that the Aungel tolde me, they are
Diuelles, in forme of Saintes, that vnder this couerture
deceyue the worlde. And if we will consider wel
the place, it séemed rather to be a Market, or a Court,
than a heauen: for there were dyuers broade places,
where Fayres and Martes were kept, as a man may
sée in this Towne, in Milaine, in Venice, and in great
Cities.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Paint me out I pray thée, the
Citye, and the occupations of those that dwell in it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  The order of Monkes and Eremites. Being now entred through the Mynes, we
founde that in the firste streate dwelled Monkes and
Eremites, as in the lowest parte of the City.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh thou must nedes haue séene there many worshipfull
fathers.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou mayst be sure of

that.Friers names and Surnames. There were all the Manducantes or Mendicantes,
the Augustians or Augustinians, Carnalitanes or
Carmelitanes, Demonicanes or Dominicanes, Fraudiscanes
or Franciscanes, and the Cerui or Serui, the Benebibenes
or Benedictines, Caprusianes or Cartusianes,
and an infinite sorte of such.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But
diddest thou sée Sainct Fraunces?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe
him not,Saint Fraunces become a fisher. one tolde me that he was gone to fishe for
soules out of purgatory, angling for them with his
girdle of Corde, and an other tolde me that he was
called to the counscll, where there was talking of a
Monasterie that was erecting in the honour of hym.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who made him that Monastery?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A certaine Gentlewoman of Pulia,
                  A pleasant storye. who hauing
hir husband in great hatred, went and made hir
self of the thirde rule of saint Fraunces, that she might
be the more at large from hir husband: and by the order
of the same rule, she tooke for hir Sonne by adoption,
a certaine yong lusty Frier, who handled hir in
such sorte, as both hir heart fayled hir, and hir pursse
shronke, when the Monastery was half way onward.
            
            
               Marforius.
               The selfe same thing happened when I
studied at Bononie, that a sonne adopted in this sorte,
consumed al his mothers substance.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Was
he not punished therfore by the iustice?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I
can not tell thée,Bentiuoli sometime Lordes of Bononie. but this I knowe wel, that the gentlewomā
caused him to appeare before the Bentiuoli,
who were then Lordes of Bononie, there was good
laughing at it, but what afterwarde came to passe, I
knowe not
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Oh, that a man might with
honestie, tell that whiche those Nunnes doe; I coulde
then tel many gay things, but it is not possible honestlye
to speake of that whiche they so vnhonestlye doe.
            
            
               
               Marforius.
               I shall be very glad to heare it at some other
tyme. But nowe let vs speake of this matter,
sawest thou Saint Dominicke, Saint Bernard, Saint
Thomas of Aquine, Saint Bennet, Saint Albert the
great?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I saw some of them and some not.
I sawe Saint Dominicke was in his shoppe,Saint Dominicke kepeth a Turners shoppe. working
at Turners craft, and made new Beades for our Lady.
Saint Bernard (as farre as I vnderstoode) was very
busie about his Hilles and his Ualleys, for whē I
asked for him,Saint Barnard busie about his hils and valleyes. one sayd he was in Clere Ualley, an other
sayd in the goldē Ualley, other sayd he was gone
to his hil, & other, y• he was climbde vp to the rocke, to
haue some of our Ladyes milke.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What
doest thou tell me? hath he so many businesses?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So it was tolde me, but that which kept him
moste occupyed,Among the Swichers is a moūtain called by his name, where as foles prate, saint Bernard tied the diuel. was that he doubted sore, least the
Svvychers,
                  Saint Bennet. being now become Gospellers, would let
lose the Deuill that he tyed vp,Si non castè tamen cautè, Aurelius Augustine. who would afterward
go, and all to beshite all his Ualleys.
            
            
               Marforius.
               By
my fayth, it is much to be doubted.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe
afterwarde Saint Bennet, who cursed his Friers, for
that if they coulde not liue chastly, they wrought not
closely.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sawest thou in that place Aurelius
Augustine? who (men say) did in his Sermons
institute Eremites and Monkes, and that for
this cause, his Monkes are called Eremitanes.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They lye falsely, those Asses that say that those
Sermons be Saint Augustines, which euery one that
is learned, cōfesseth y• they be rather of some ignorant
Doltes making, and those Eremitanes also lye falsely,
in that they say they be his Friers. For Augustine
(more than many other) liued in the felowship of men,
and was full of true fayth, true holinesse, & true doctrine.

And God graunt, that those that say they be his
Disciples, would follow him herein, then would they
not care for these vanities of tytles.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sawest
thou Ierome of Stridonia,
                  Saint Ierome. who (men say) lyued in
the Wildernesse of Seria?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This Ierome
in dede was a Monke,Saint Ierome a monke by will and not by vowe. that is to say, one that of his
owne frée choyse liued solitarily a certaine tyme, and
not for any vow sake, as these Cloysterers do, he was
bound to the vowe onely of Christen religion, and to
none other. None of them must therefore séeke to defende
his secte with the Authoritye of this holy man,
who was a most bitter enimy to all sectes, and ambition.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I perceyue that thou sayest true, for
that I haue séene in. Can. 12. quest. 1. Cap. Necess. that
Monasteries in olde time were nothing else,What monasteries were in the olde time. but Colledges
for learning, and scooles for to bring vp youth,
albeit that sith that tyme, Superstition and couetousnesse
hath corrupted all thinges, and brought liberty,
into bondage and prison. But thou hast not yet made
me aunswere whether thou sawest them or no.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I saw them not.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sawest thou
then Amadio Duke of Sauoy?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What
he that liuing an Ermites life in Sauoy harde by the
lake of Geneua,
                  Amadio first a Duke, then a Pope, and last a Puppy. stoode gaping on the snowe?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Of him I aske.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I heard that he was
banished, I knowe not whither, bycause he suffered
himselfe to be made Pope, and did not obey Eugenius
the fourth, and so was he put both from his Popedome,
and his Dukedome.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Then might
he retourne to gaze vpon the Snowe at his pleasure.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, as he that hauing lost all his goodes
sayde, now shall I haue more commodity to giue my
selfe to contemplation.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What other good

thing canst thou tell me concerning these Eremites.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I heard say, that they were in lawe with
the townes men of Lucca.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what haue
they to do with those of Lucca? are they become Marchauntes
those Eremites?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, not of
Ueluet,The story of an holy Eremite of Lucca but of women, for about fiue yeares ago, an
Eremite in Lucca, a notorious false knaue, desirous to
get money, vnder colour of Religion, enticed away
one Camilla a wydow, one of the chiefest of the town,
and caried hir away with him.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And whither?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To Montalciue where these swine
as thou knowest haue their stye.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I know
it well.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The woman remayned a wydow
with a great dower, and therfore this Eremite sought
to haue hir, that both the woman & hir dower might
leade an Eremites life.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou meanest
he would not haue the shéepe without the woll.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The womans brothers sayde, that the dower
ought to remaine to the house, but they will giue hir
the interest and encrease thereof while she liueth. The
matter came to Rome, there was openly proued the
manifest deceyt and knauery of the Eremite, and yet
for all that, was the sentence giuen against them of
Lucca, & they were interdicted vnlesse they giue forth
the whole dower.All cast in one mowlde.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               As these smered shauelinges
be al false knaues, so must they of force fauour
suche false fetches. This matter was brought to my
hands, but seing the vntowardnesse of the Cardinals,
to whom it was cōmitted, I would not meddle with
it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou diddest wisely, for what maner
of men they be,Pasquine refuseth to be a Iudge. by one thou shalt knowe them all, and
if we should speake of them all, we had nede to haue
the voice of a Lyon, and the tongues of a thousande

Aduocates, to speake but of one of them (their naughtinesse
I say vnderstande me soundly) might make a
booke greater than the Digestes, and the bookes of the
Chauncery. Thinke thou therefore whether to speake
of them all, there shoulde be somewhat to do.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Let vs nowe therefore leaue these particulars,
for the talke should be to long, and tell me somewhat
of them altogether. What did those holy fathers, whē
thou were there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euery one of them laboured
sore,The studies of the holy fathers. that his owne order might be holden for
the most holyest: knowing this to be the best way, to
gather great riches together, and to cause this to be
the better vnderstoode, eche one trauayled to séeke out
some newe toy, to drawe therewith the common people
vnto him, who are full of wondering. I sawe that
they prepared new fashioned hoodes, straunge and horrible
ceremonies, not séene in the worlde past, but reserued
to fight therewith against the Gospell, for they
knowe, that fayth can not with any other thing more
easely or sooner be ouerthrowen,Superstition ouerthroweth fayth. than with superstitition,
couered with the cloke of true holinesse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And can this opinion of holinesse do so much?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou séest y• examples therof euery where.
Knowest thou not, that at what time y• order of saint
Fraunces began, those that were the first setters forth
thereof, so inveigled the worlde with this opinion of
holinesse, that they that had not a Monastery of saint
Fraunces, in their towne or nere there about, thought
them selues vnhappy? Nay, so grewe in the mindes
of the siely simple soules,Remedy against the quartane Ague. this wicked opinion of these
mōstruous marked Friers, that to weare their wede,
or to goe clothed in that colour, was good against the
quartane Ague, and other diseases, and (that worse is)

that to be buried in that Habit, was the verye righte
way to go to heauen. And therfore that conning man
Longolius,
                  Longolius buryed in a Friers weede. leauing the name of a Citizen of Rome, (in
whose practise he had so long laboured) would be layed
in his graue a Fraunciscane, rather than a Romane.
This selfe same honor, had the LordAlbert of Carpi. 
                  Albert of Carpi
in his heade, Rodolphus Agricola,
                  Agricol
                        •
                     . and other innumerable.
But what nede so many words? These Friers
are come to that point, with that opinion of holynesse,
that they haue ridde them selues out of all other
mennes handes and autoritie, and haue brought all
other men vnder their féet. Who knoweth not, that in
olde times past, when learning and good studies were
layd to sléepe,Holy horesons that were taken for Gods kinsemen. that al men helde them for God almightyes
kinsemen? and estéemed more their commaundementes
than the commaundementes of God. And
they knewe not Christ, whom the Gospell doth plainly
set forth vnto vs, whiche they kepe in prison.The Gospell hath bene lōg in pryson. And
sith they onely had the handling of the booke of peace,
and liberty, the common people thought that they had
taken all thinges out of that booke, and they with cursed
and abhominable lyes, tooke out here a piece and
there a piece, and with straunge and fearefull miracles,
and with fayned dreames of purgatorie,How Superstition first began. kept the
poore people in so greate feare and wonder, that they
were constrayned to beleue their wicked deuises, and
lyes. If thou do consider their lawes, and the waightes
and heauy burthens, that they haue layd on mens
shoulders, thou wilt sweare that the Iewes law is an
hundreth tymes more pleasaunt and easy than theirs.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What haue we therefore to doe herein?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  The counsell of Pasquine. To haue recourse to the Gospell, and not
suffer our selues to be led by the nose: for the Gospell

hauing bene hytherto through these mennes councels
dead, and now rysing againe, it behoueth them to run
to the same their olde remedies. And (therefore as I
sayde not long since) do they deuise straunge fashions
of Masking garmentes, that they may the better vnder
colour of them, kepe the Doltes and Asses of the
worlde still deceyued, and subiect to their diuelish and
stinking Religion.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Do they then séeke other
wayes to bring such as beleue them into distruction?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So I heard say there aboue, nor it
can not be otherwise beleued,The Gospell must cut the enimies throtes. for that they sée their enimy
Christ already come abrode, with his simple and
plaine Gospell, whiche is the sworde that must cut all
their throtes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Ah tell me I pray thée my
god Pasquine,
                  Ephe. 6. (sithe we are entered into this talke)
howe Christ being now come abrode,Hebr. 4. hath made these
men so much to suspect thē selues.Apoca. 19.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What?
knowest thou not then?
            
            
               Marforius.
               No.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Hast thou euer read the Gospell.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Neuer,
for I gaue my selfe wholy to the study of the Clementines,
the decrées of Popes Ilface, the decretals and extrauagantes
of Popes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou haste good
cause therefore to be ignorant. Now will I tell thée,
bycause thou mayst vnderstand the whole matter, that
good Iesus Christ teaching a certaine Pharisie the
way to eternall life,The doctrine of Christ. taught it him, to doe it all in two
pointes, in the whiche two, the whole way, that is
to say, all the lawe and the Prophets are contayned.
Which two pointes who so euer doth obserue, doth al
that the lawe and the Prophets commaund:Deut. 6. and the
two poyntes are these.Math. 22. 
                  Loue the Lord thy God vvith
all thy heart,Mar. 12. vvith all thy minde, vvith all thy soule,
and vvith all thy strength,Luc. 10. and thy neighbour as thy

selfe. To loue God therefore and thy neighbour, is
the way that bringeth thée to heauen,The true wa
                        •
                      to heauen. the which way,
Christ onely knewe, that came downe from heauen,
and then againe went vp thyther. And bycause euery
man desireth to knowe it, some haue sought it, and hauing
founde it out, haue minded to follow this onely,
accomting all other for false and euill wayes, and so
haue they begon to forsake their whorish pilgrimags,
to scorne their scrupulous fastings, & to hate all their
abhominable superstitions, & haue reformed all their
whole life, in the loue of God, & in loue toward their
neighbor.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Then Christ hath not cōmaunded
their order of Friers?What Christ requireth to be in vs.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I haue told thée
already that Christ requireth sinceritie and puritie in
those y• be his, & to leaue counterfeyting and outward
shewes to the wolues, & to y• mōstruous beasts y• haue
nede to disguise them selues, if they wil not with their
true countenaunce vncoūterfeyted, make those afeard
whom they séeke to deuour?What we ought to desire.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               If the thing
be so, what thing is there in the worlde more to be desired,
than the Christian life? the which (forsaking al
vanities, that haue no respect vnto godlinesse) studieth
onely to haue the loue of God, and of his neighbour.
If the true bishops and preachers, did preache as they
ought to doe, this shoulde be the very health of cōmon
wealthes, and the conseruation of the felowshippe of
men, and the true life of our soules. For what thing
could be more dere to mankind, than that man should
be a God to man?Homo homin
                        •
                      deus.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest well Marforius,
but thou séest that the simplicity of Christ is an
offence to men in these dayes, euen as it was to the
Iewes, while they were in the desert. To whom God
meant not to giue any other than these two commaū
                  dements,

nor to burthen them with outward things,
as he had done with them in Egipt,The occasion of Moses law. and before, in the
tyme of y• Patriarks, who without any Ceremonies,
without any Churches of stone, & without any other
maner of Superstition, did highly please God. But
they began to rebell, and would nedes be laden with
Ceremonies, as they had séene the Egiptians, and
forthwith they fashioned a Calfe, and began to honor
it, and to make vnto it the it bankettes, and their pastimes
with their Ceremonies, séeking to folowe the
Egiptians, which the Lord God when he sawe, determyned
to burthen them with so great a number and
waight of Ceremonies, that neyther they nor their fathers
were neuer able to beare:The burthen of the lawe. Act. 15. as Saint Peter sayth
in the Actes of the Apostles. Euen so iust is it come to
passe at this present, that forthwith when mans folly
would not be content with Christ onely, with those
two plaine precepts, the deuine iudgement let mans
folly fall into so depe a sea of Ceremonies and Superstitions,
that if y• infinite goodnesse of Iesus Christ
had not succoured vs, we should all haue bene drowned
therin.
            
            
               Marforius.
               O wretched, O vnhappy men,
nay dull beastes, that when they may be the seruauntes
of Christ, will rather become slaues to so euident
follyes as these, which are not of any maner profite,
nay rather of suche hurt as can not be imagined. And
(for asmuch as I sée) Christ doth not stirre vs to any other
thing than this.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Truely he doth not
stirre vs vnto any other thing, nor séeketh any other
thing at our handes, for when he shall come to gyue
iudgemēt, he wil not say to vs, haue ye bene at Masse?
haue you obserued the thirde rule of Saint Fraunces?
are ye Uirgines? nor suche other thinges, but he will

aske vs, whether we haue obserued that which with so
great diligence he lefte vs written in his Testament,What acc
                        •
                     ptes we must make.
while he sayde. Peace I leaue vvith you, my peace I
giue to you,Iohn. 14. vnto the end that you loue one another.
And this shall be knowen, whether it haue bene obserued
of vs,Math. 25. when he shal say vnto vs. I vvas hungry,
and ye gaue me no meate, I vvas thirstie, and ye gaue
me no drinke, and suche thinges like vnto these, the
which who so euer hath done, shal go with him to heauen:
who hath not done them, shall goe to hell: although
he had heard all the Masses of the worlde, and
though he were more than a virgin, & though he had
done all those other Ceremonies and Superstitions.
For he shall say. I haue not fought these thinges at
your hande.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               As farre as I can perceiue,
they that do the commaundements of men,The differen
                        ••
                      betwene mens commaundemēts & gods commaundementes. séeke their
owne profite, but they that do the commaundements
of Christ, are bound to seeke the profite of their neighbour.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euen so it is, this is the beginning
of all the mischiefe, for ech man séeketh his owne profite
and aduauncement, from hence it is come, that
there were deuised so many sectes, so great diuersitye
of garmentes, so great diuersities of Ceremonies, and
so many deuises to shewe them selues different one
from an other. But if vve follovve the rule of Christ,
vve are allMath. 23. brethren andGala. 4. Tit. 3. heyres a like, vveMat. 22. go all
in one selfe garment, vvhich is loue: vve are all of one
selfe nature, that is to say, milde and humble of heart:
vve are all moste obedient to Princes of the vvorlde.
In matters of the spirite we are all a like, nor there
is among vs no contention who shoulde be highest,
or who lowest, as was among the Apostles, when
they imagined that they hadde a Iewishe Messias.
            
            
               
               Marforius.
               Thou hast satisfied me very muche, but
yet of this I much maruel, that sith thei haue lost that
opiniō of holinesse, that thou diddest speake of before,
they wil yet vse their olde practises, that are already so
well knowen to al men.All wayes to the woode are sought to 
                        •
                     atch money with.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Who so euer séeketh
narrowly any thing, vseth euery way to the wood
that he can: euen so, these men goe now to one thing,
now to another, agréeing to the tymes & humors of
men.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Haue they then other instruments
yet to worke their feat withal?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               As though
they had lacked any time, wherewith to catch men
ere they be ware. Hast thou neuer cōsidered the great
nūber of miracles that haue bene wrought by Leger
demaine? so many Friers? so many open Markets
of merits and good workes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Oh what abhominable
wickednesse is this, and what good workes
can they sell, where when they doe the best they can,
they shote euer short, & neuer neither ouer nor home?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They say that they reade their canonicall
houres, they kepe their saintes éeuens, say their Masses
for the dead, and that they fast as some Dutch men
do, that eate for two men, and drinke for thrée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               To heare thée thus among their other foolishe
toyes, recken vp Saintes éeuens, and Masses for the
dead,Masses for the deade. putteth me in a great doubt. And it séemeth to
me a thing verye straunge to see, that thou estéemest
not for good, these holy Sacrifices for the soules of the
dead. But bycause I sée that thou speakest with so
good grounde, and shewest by proufe, that thou canst
discerne verye well betwene truth and falsehoode: I
would that thou shouldst cléere me of this doubt.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will with all my heart. Here beginneth the
doubt, that it is not yet knowen, whether those that

be deade, are saued throughe these Masses or no, and
therefore their Masses are endlesse. Lo euen I, (to giue
thée an example thereof) before I was chaunged into
this stone,The 
                        ••
                     ory of Pasquine and his transformation. was a barber, and had this selfe same name
that I nowe haue, and made likewise verses and many
other works: albeit I then vsed the art of flattery
the whiche I forthwith forgat, as sone as I was tourned
into this stone, & when my houre was come, that
I should be transforned into this stone, bycause I had
bene such maner of man, and hauing a Frier at mine
eare y• tempted me thereto, I bequeathed by my Testament,
somewhat for Masses to be sayd for my soule.
Mine heyres at a certaine tyme afterwarde, hauing
perceiued y• I was from Purgatory,The opinion of Pythagoras was, that whē a mans soule departed from his body, it entred into the next body that it met, were it of mā or beast. (as they thought
after Pythagoras opinion) become thus a stone, and
séeing therefore, that I had no more nede of Masses,
they asked ofte tymes of the parishe Priest, howe long
those Masses shoulde continue, who aunswered, that
they muste yet still be sayde, bycause they knewe not,
whether I were in purgatory or in Paradise, they said
they woulde beleue the best, and that so many yeares
now being passed, and that Mayster Pasquine was a
good honest soule, and then being a drye bodye as he
was they could not beleue, that he could so long continue
in the fire. The good Parson in this point put
them out of doubt: be it as be may (quoth he) we will
say our Masses, and we will haue your mony. And yet
mine heires alleaged that I was not in Purgatory,
but that I was become a stone, and that I did make
and write as I did before. Tushe (quoth he in the end)
that is no matter to me, these be my rentes. Thou
that art a Canonist, oughtest to knowe, that this is a
donation for the respect of death, made with cōdition,

that if Pasquine dye, the Priest should haue this mony
to say Masses for his soule, so long as till he come
out of Purgatory. For this donation is as it were
the vse of a profite limitted, with condition of a thing
to come. If this now that is in this condition can neuer
be knowen, neyther by the dead mans heires, nor
by the priest, (for no deade man hath at any time come
backe againe hither) what nedeth it therefore, to giue
so great goodes to these Massemumblers? or giue so
great credite to their Masses? what a mad folishnesse
is this, to giue so great credite to a thing so vncertaine.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What, doest not thou beleue, that
some of those that be dead, haue come hither again, to
tell their frendes some newes of the other worlde.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yes, if thou wilte beleue the dreames and
lyes of Friers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               If thou wilte nedes that
other be lyers, yet shalte thou not for all that make
Saint Gregorie a lyer.Pope Gregory was a Frier if he were no lyer.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And yet was he a
Frier also, and if he lyed not, yet shamefully lyed that
deceitfull dead, or wicked spirite, who made him beleue
that he was the soule of a deade man, and he was
but a beast to beleue any such thiing, contrary to the
commaundement of God,Deut. 18. who forbiddeth to seke the
truth,Esay. 8. (much lesse any other thing) at the dead. But I
wil tel thée also an other,Luc. 16. that by one thou mayst learn
them all.Iugling of Ipocrite Friers espyed at Orleaunce. In Orleaunce a Citye in Fraunce, it is not
long sith the Presidentes wife dyed, a noble and great
woman, who ordayned by hir Testament, that they
should cary hit to be buried without lighte, without
Masses,Loke Sleydane in his ninth boke of his Cronicles. and without any maner pompe. And so was
she buried in the Monasterye of the Friers of Saint
Fraunces. Anone after, they began to heare in that
place horrible noyses, vntill one of those Massemumblers,

turning his arse to y• people, shewed them their
round God made of Dowghe. When this was once
spred abroade, euery man ran thither, one sayde he
heard it, one other said he vnderstode it, & an other said
he sawe all. The husbande hearing this, came thyther
him selfe. Then doth the coniurer binde the spirite
to aunswere to his questions, and he asked him if
he were in Paradise, & there was no aunswere made,
he asked if he were in hell, and yet there was no aunswere,
he asked him if he came from Purgatory, and
then the spirite made a great rushing against the wal,
then did the coniurer aske, whether he was such a one
or such a one, naming many and sundry persans that
dyed long ago, and yet was there no aunswere heard,
nor no maner of noyse, but when he named that woman
that was buried without pompe, the spirite then
made two great rushings against the wall. Then did
the coniurer aske whether she were condempned for
this or that cause: and in the ende it sayd, bycause she
was a Lutherane, then was there heard thrée greate
rushes against the wall. The husbande being a wyfe
and circumspect man, marked euery thing, and made
as though he had much maruelled at the matter, and
desired those Wolues to supper, & the day following
caused an hundreth Masses to be sayde, and to light a
whole worlde of Candels. The Wolues howled, they
sent their Gods into Purgatory, wet the graue with
vnholy water, and they perfumed it with Frankincense,
and when this was done, caryed the Friers to
dinner, and in the meane season sent the officers to
the place where the deceyt was done, where they foūd
certayne vaultes, and there within thrée spirites hidden,
whom they toke & caried away.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And

how could they take the spirites, that haue no bodies?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               These were of those spirites that haue bodyes,Some kinde of spirites haue bodies. Monasteries are spiritual, for sprites dwel in them.
of whom Saint Augustine speaketh of, of which
sorte are almost all those that dwell in Monasteries.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Were they spirites in dede?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou art very grosse, they were thrée Friers of those
that they call Nouices, that is to say, such as knowe
not yet verye well the sleightes and falshoodes of the
Friers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               In dede the Monasteries are euen
full of deceytes, and the worlde is very blinde in
that they espy them not. In Turine also there happened
of late the like matter.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Well, the officers
hauing found the Bugs that made men afeard,
ledde them away like thrée little Diuels as they were,
By Belsabub here ye may vnderstande the Prior of the place. into the place where the other great Diuels were at
meate, whom when Belsabub and his brethren sawe,
they knewe their knauery bewrayed, and as men all
dumbe, they began to looke one vpon an other.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But were they not punished for their labour.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yes afterwarde with shame inough, they
were rewarded according to their demerits.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I maruell muche, that the king hearing that
these traytours did so shamefuly abuse the true Religion,
did not suffer that the Gospell might be fréelye
preached.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou must not maruell at this,
but thou must maruell rather when thou séest,A rare thing to see Princes do well. that any
Prince doth any thing that is good, they receyue
with good will the true Christian Religion, for eating
fleshe on dayes forbidden, and for the other commodities
of the fleshe, but they persecute, imprison, and slay,
other that in eating of flesh, & in other thinges, folow
the liberty of Christ, and condemne the bondage of
Antichrist.Apoca. 17. They will fight against the Lambe, but

the Lambe shall ouercome and confounde them all.
Lo, now are the Wolues all in maner come to confusion,
and shall or euer it be long be at an euil point,
except such as are on ye Lambes side none shal escape,
but this they beleue not, but thou shalt sée it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I beleue it certainly, for me thinketh that hereof
Saint Iohn speaketh in his Reuelation. But to returne
to Purgatory, of the which I remaine not altogether
satisfied, tell me, ought we not to hope the
best?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thinkest thou that to hope the best,
is to beleue, that one abideth for euer in Purgatory?
And wherfore hope they not rather, y• he is in heauen,
and so make an ende of all their Massing?
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what can this hoping hurte?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It hurteth
the pursses and goodes of the heires & executors
of men, but if they haue so great a lust to say them,In the Popes Church no Penny no P
                        •
                     
                     ter noster. to
do good vnto the deade, why doe they not satisfie their
luste without any taking of money? but yet for all
this, I will for my part beleue, that he that dyeth in
the fayth of Christ, goeth straight to heauen, and not
into purgatory. And this it is to hope the best. What
a crueltie is this of our shepeheards, who haue so euil
an hope of our saluation, that they rather beleue we
be stil in purgatory than in heauen: Alas this is euen
a token that they know before hand, that the doctrine
taught vs by them, is not able to bring vs to heauen.
But if they fed their siely shepe with y• holesome word of God,What shepeherdes of soules should do.
& saw them depart hence ful fed with faith in
Christ, what should they nede, to giue so euil a iudgement
of them? and beate their braynes about so many
sacrifices, which bycause they neuer make an ende
of, shewe an euident token that they neuer haue sufficient?
And thus to procéede still without end, is an

argument, to be holden for certayne, that in Purgatory
there is no redemption.
            
            
               Marforius.
               They haue
for al that an end many tymes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea when
paying of money hath an end.
            
            
               Marforius.
               So would
I haue sayd vnto thée. But sith thou art come to speak
of Purgatorye, I pray thée tell me, whether thou hast
séene it, and howe thou camest out of it, for as thou
hast well sayde, the deade come neuer backe hither, to
tell vs ought of it.Pasquine ne
                     
                        •
                     er dyed.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I (to tell the truth) neuer
dyed, but was chaunged from fleshe into a stone,
so that, the name of Pasquine is yet aliue, how
                     •
                   wouldest
thou therefore, that I should haue séene Purgatory,
when I tell thée I was in heauen? Exc
                     •
                  pte thou
meanest by Purgatory, the bloude of Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This is a playne heresie.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euen so
in dede say the Friers, but certainelye it is an heresie
to say or beleue otherwise. Paule in his Epistle to the
Heb
                        •
                     ues affirmeth,Hebr. 9. that it is impossible, that remission
or purging of sinnes shoulde be done with out
bloud. In Purgatory there is no bloud but fire, therfore
is it not possible,A good argument to ou
                        •
                     rth ow purgatory. that in Purgatory should be any
remission, or purging of sinnes. And that there is
no bloude there, thou mayst be assured thereof by this,
for they say, that there are soules without bodyes, and
soules haue no bloud. But this haue they taken out of
Poets fables,The opinion of Purgatory therefore it 
                        •
                     ueth. and haue fayned that there is a fire, the
more to feare the mindes of the poore simple people,
and chiefly such as be sicke of the Feuer, who féeling
the heate of the Feuer, haue thought, that that heate of
Purgatory is ten tymes greater, or else bycause those
people that are towarde the North, are very colde, to
the ende they should not so goe frosen to God, it was
méete that they should first be heate a little. And therefore

was Saint Patrikes Purgatory deuised in Scotland.
                  The A
                        •
                     tho
                        •
                      would say in Ireland
                        •
                     .
And it is yet to be sene in certaine old paintings,
that the Angels plounge the soules into this fire, as
it were into a baine, and thē forthwith hoyst them vp
alofte, and many are séene with their armes stretched
out, with their beardes, with the haires of their heade
safe and sounde, and their whole body cleane,Purgatory fire can do no harme. whiche
betokeneth, that that fire doth not burne. But this
so terrible a fire, that made the whole worlde for feare
to quake, while it was thus kindled, by good chaunce
is nows quenched.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Would God it were
so. But how knowest thou it?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               As I came
from Geneua, vpon the way I found an Inkeper, that
tolde it me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What did he tell thée.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Doest thou not remember that yere, in which
the Secretaries of the newes sayd, that there woulde
come so many raynes & flouds of water?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I remember it well, & it was in the yeare of our Lord
1524.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euen so it was, doest thou remember
what prayers were made to God, that he woulde
delyuer vs from so great distruction?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I
remember it well.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               God then being moued
with compassion,Neptunus is fayned of the Poetes to be the God of the Sea. cōmaunded Neptunus to cary those
waters into some other place. Neptune therefore sith
he could not bestowe where he woulde, so great store
of waters, which he had prepared for the drowning of
the whole world,Purgatory fire was quē
                     ched by Neptune. let a great part therof soake through
into Purgatory, & quenched the fire in such sort, that
sith that time hitherto, it neuer gaue no great flame.
A great part therof remayned vtterly quenched. Another
part thereof eschewing the water as his contrary,
retyred first to Cicilia, and after to Porzolo, whereas,
after it had by little and little made his waye, it

burst forth,Purgatory fire came frō Rome, and thither it will againe. with wonderful great hurt to the country,
and nowe is in the way to goe to Rome, where first it
began to burne.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then, will so wicked
a fire assayle so holy a City?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He that
with good reason returneth to his owne countrey, it is
not to be sayd, that he doth assault it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Wel,
tell me, how did this straunge chaunce please the people
of that heauen, of which thou speakest?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou couldest not beleue what griefe they féele thereby.
They do nowe nought else, but stirre vp Vulcane
to make such an other,Whence purgatory fire first came. for they knowe that from his
Shoppe in the hill Atna, a certaine Abbot called Odilus
brought the first fire to Rome to saint Gregory.
And if Vulcane make not such an other, they doubte,
that so great rentes, as they receyue by this forge, wil
all come to nought.
            
            
               Marforius.
               They haue good cause
to doubt, for if it be knowen abrode that this fire is
put out, what will he be, that wil take from his owne
children and heires, to giue to these lazy lubbers? wh
                     •
                  
will builde any Chappels? who will builde any Monasteries?
who will any more fat these Hogges? who
wil haue any more estimatiō of them? I for my part,
haue hytherto estéemed and reuerenced them, for feare
onelye of this fire. For they made me beleue that it
burneth euen the stones. But bycause they sée that
mē are not afeard of this their imagined fire of Purgatory,
they make them féele the fire of this worlde:
and all to maintaine their tirannicall kingdome. Yet
profite they little for all that, for those men whom they
so burne liue in the fire, and of their ashes do increase
and multiply infinite numbers. But leaue we this, for
I am out of doubt thereof, and let vs returne to the
Quéere where the Friers be, of whome thou spakest

not long since. Sawest thou any of those Scapuchines?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou meanest those y• haue alredy begon
to nestle thē selues in al y• townes of Italy,
                  Scapuchines and their garmentes. with
filthy garmentes & 
                     •
                  roked conditions, with their hoode
drawen vp with a peake in the toppe, after suche fashion
as the Diuill is painted * tempting Christ inMath. 4.
the desert?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Those I aske for.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe one or two, but they wente all alone, hated of
al men,Scapuchines defenders of freewill. and they mumbled to them selues I wote not
what, touching fréewil.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I beleue that, for
in this towne, and in Padoa, I haue heard them at the
Shrouetide, beat it into the heads of the Fackins. But
what was the cause they were so hated?Faccini be such as the Porters of Billings gate. that garmēt
of theirs shoulde giue them some credite, at the least
with these poore whoresons.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They were
hated, bicause that with their filthinesse, & with their
wéede, they did so magnifie & set forth Ipocrisie, that
they made some suspect, that therby they would whollye
withdrawe the people from the other Religions,
and allure thē to theirs.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then, doth
enuy raigne among them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Not enuy only,
but hatred also.Enuy and hatred raigne among Friers. 
                        •
                     arn. Ochine the inuētor of Scapuchines. For they so deadly hate the inuentour
of this order Barnardine Ochine, that it can not
be spoken, séeing him now to be become a Rebell to
this heauen, and that he doth so valiantly assaulte it,
and layeth to the walles so ruinous a battery. And beside
that doest thou not remember, that I tolde thée,
that it was the heauen of Popes & fooles, where those
that are immortall are a great deale worse than those
that be mortall? But thou shalt vnderstande me better,
by that time, thou haue hearde the whole of me,
point by pointe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Followe on therefore I
pray thée: for I take great pleasure to heare thée discouer

so great wickednesse, and to shew the truth naked
& plaine.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               We left therefore the streate
of the Friers: whereas all these sectes disputed together
of their dyuers customes, Habits and Institutions,
that the Tower of Babilon was neuer fuller of
confusion, and came to the second streate.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tary I pray thée, doe they agrée so well together in
this heauen?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They do all agrée in séeking
to preferre them selues before Christ, in the rest they
are as wyde as East and West.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I can
not beleue that.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Canst thou not beleue it?
O Marforius Marforius, thou takest little héede to
thinges, I knowe wel that thou findest not this in the
Comentaries of Gratian, nor Accursius,
                  Gratianus & Accursius. but wherefore
serue so many Churches, so manye sacrifices, so
manye Frieries, so many Monasteries, made in the
honour of this Saint, and of that, but to banishe by
little and little the memory of Christ out of the world?
The increasing of these Frieries,The increase of the Frieries hath diminished the faith. The order of of the Virgines. hath bene the diminishing
of the Christian fayth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That is
like inough to be true, out of doubt. But procéede on a
little, and tell me what followeth.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Then
commeth the order where the Urrgines be, where are
to be séene many thousandes of foolishe women.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why, and are the women there aboue men,
and in a more worthy place?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was requisite
that they shoulde be put in betwene the Monkes
and the Confessours, for the Monkes teach them
how to put the diuel into Hel, how he must be fought
with, and the maner how to fall into a traunce. And
on the other side the confessours, vnderstand all that
they doe in sight, thought, worde, and dede, and then
laying their handes on their heade, and the displing

rodde, as the penitentiaries here do they assoyle them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstande thée well. They are put in
the mids bycause they shall not runne away, but this
séemeth to me very straunge, that in the Letany they
are last, and here they are aboue the Monkes,A wonderful disordered heauen. vnder
whom (me thinketh) they would do much better.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The fault is in the bookes and not in the matter,
and he that made the Letany knew not al, for then
woulde he not haue set the women in the rerewarde,
for they ought to be kept and not to kepe other, nor let
it not séeme straunge to thée, that they be aboue the
Monkes, for the Monkes can bring them vnder them
when they list?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Are they all after one fashion?
haue they al one kinde of garment?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So full of diuersitie is this diuision or Quéere; as the
rest are,The sundry sortes of Nū
                     nes. for asmuche as some are called Celestines,
some Clarines, some Vastalines, some Martirines,
some Brigidines. Other are called Barbarines, other
Lucianes, other Marianes, other Marthanes, other Benedictanes,
other Franciscanes, other Dominicanes, other
A
                        •
                     gustinianes, other Carmilitanes,
                  Putanies be those Nūnes that we call the greene Friers on strawbery banke. and some Putanies
also.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What did they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               First of all they gloryed in their goodly title, and next
they reioyced, that they had drawen into that opinion
the chiefest part of Christēdom. And of this most especially
they boasted The opinion of virginity what it hath done., that the opinion of Uirginitye: or
to say better, the hatered of Matrimony, had builded
from the foundations vpwarde, a great parte of that
heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               They diseeyued them selues neuer
a deale; for if the Prelates and Priestes, had not
forborne wyues, the Popishe Religion shoulde long
sithens haue bene broughte to nothing, for the multiplying
of their children woulde haue deuided their

reuenewes into many portions. If thou wilt sée how
much mariages are hurtfull to this Church, take example
of that,If the Pope giue such gubbes away he wil leaue Saint Peter but a leane patrimony. which this other yeare Pope Paule did
when he maried his sonnes sonne to the Emperours
bastard daughter, which he solde to the Pope. If all
Popes were of that minde, and then begat children apase,
it woulde sone come to passe with them as it did
with the Marquises of Lunigiana, who in the end had
neyther Marchandize, money, nor lande, lefte them,
and therefore they passe, not for any other thing than
the commodities of the fleshe, and hate Matrimony as
a verye plague.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou vnderstandest it
Marforius and so doe I.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But I maruell
much, how there can be so many Uirgines, this being
so rare a gift, and most of all sith it is lost by the desire
only.Virginity lost by desire. 
                  For vvho soeuer loketh on a womā to lust after
hir, hath commtited adultrye vvith hir already in his
heart.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The matter is, that they take not
virginity after this sorte,Math. 5. but for a virgin they meane
hir that is without a husband,Such were the virgins of strawbery banke. The Popes Virgin
                           •
                        s.
                   or him that is without
a wife.
            
            
               Marforius.
               By this meaning Fornicatours
and single women also may be Uirgines, ah?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea out of doubt, so that they sweare neuer to
mary, & remember that if they lyue not chaste, they
may take a whore secretly.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I doubt least
by this opiniō, many are become dishonest virgines.
But sawest thou there Saint Katherine, Saint Barbara,
Saint Iulian.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I saw them, and they
were very full of cursed ambition.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What
is that I heare thée say? are those virgines ambitious,
that dispysed all thinges of the worlde?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A
man may reade in some storyes that they dispysed all
thinges, and I thinke it well done to beleue godly,

and learned hystories, whereas a man may not sée any
thing that is superstitious or wicked, but there,
(well I wote) they haue chaunged both countenance
and conditions.What the saintes of this heauē can do. Saint Katherine promised to him
that hath in remembraunce hir passion, to deliuer him
from lightnings and tempestes. And Saint Barbara,
to make him in the Warres kill his enimyes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Diddest thou neuer heare that fine toy, of this
Saint Barbara, how she gaue a gifte to certaine souldiers
that had fasted on. Saturday in the honour of
hir,Bylike they had no meat, souldiers fast else seldome. that they might with most stout courage fall vnto
the spoyle? There are also many deuout souldiers,
that beare hir painted on their Harquebushes, and vpon
their Morions, or vpon their Curasses, that she
may defende them from Gunshot.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               O Marforius
howe many tymes haue I maruelledA maruell, that Saintes would hurt men. (and yet
could I neuer beleue it) that the good Saints had any
desire to do hurt to men: and that they had this ambition,
to desire to get credite in the worlde, and to do
it by these meanes. For I knewe it was the foolishest
thing in the worlde, to beleue that that which they eschewed,
while they were subiecte to the affections of
the fleshe, they seke so nowe, that they are out of bondage
of those affections. If we will please Saintes,How to please true Saintes.
that are the true Saintes in dede, let vs do that, which
they (while they liued) commaunded vs, that is to say,
let vs loue God, and let vs vse charitye to our neighbour:
for doing otherwise, we do highly offend them,How to displease them▪
                  
that is to say, we make them ambitious, desirous of
reuenge, cruell and proude, the which thinges in their
life time they so muche abhorred and hated. As might
right well be séene in their storyes, if the Friers by
their presumption, and for that cursed rage of gaine,

had not corrupted and peruerted the same. And therefore
let vs séeke to Christ onelye:Christ onely is to be folowed. 
                  for he onelye is the
Iohn. 14. vvay, he onely is the truth, he onely is the life, he only
is theIohn. 9. light, he onely is theMath. 23. Master, he onelye is
theIohn. 10. shepherde, he onely is theHebr. 10. hye Priest, he onely
is the1. Iohn. 2. Aduocate, he onely is our fullEphe. 1. redemption
and saluation. Let vs therefore sollowe Christ onely,
forsaking those things that are the causes of so many
inconueniences. For we sée right well, that bycause
we follow not Christ only, there are sprong vp so many
sundry sectes, so great diuersities of rites & customes,
so many superstitions which haue led away the
Christians so far from Christ, y• of his,The fruit of deuotion to Saintes. they haue now
no more but onelye the bare name, and this is the
fruite that is gotten by deuotion to Saintes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               To returne therefore to the purpose, this virginitye,
is it not so holy a thing, as the worlde taketh
it to be?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou hast heard that it hath bene
the foundation of a great part of this heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue heard so, and for ought that I haue heard,
I sée also,Vices clad with vertues clothes. that vices are clad with the clothes of those
vertues that are their contraryes, for I sée that fornication,
is called virginity. But much I maruell that
Saint Ierome did so much extoll this virginitye, that
he durst make this conclusion. It is good for a man to
be without a wyfe, therefore is it euill for a man to
haue a wife. And in an other place he sayth: that God
hath promised heauen to virginitye, and the earth to
them that be maried.Saint Ierome spotted with the heresie of Mo
                        •
                     ta
                        •
                     us.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This is euen the ful
and flat heresie of Montanus. The which, Ierome foloweth
also in condempning altogether the seconde
mariage, as is to be séene, in that he wryteth to Iouinian,
where he affirmeth, that the seconde and thirde

mariage is naught, and where he taketh holde for the
confirmatiō of his opinion, he wresteth the scriptures
to his meaning, without purpose, as a man may sée
in the Epistle that he wryteth, to that gentlewoman
of Rome, who bycause she was a wyddow, and but a
yong woman, to obey Saint Paules councel was maryed
agayne: the beginning of his Epistle is this.
Thou art become shamelesse, and hast put on the face
of a Harlot.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Me thinketh therefore that
his workes shoulde haue shewed with great aduisement,
what is the cause, that being a man of so great
learning, he taketh things so cleane contrary, & that
he is so stubburne in his opinions?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What?
bycause he was a man,Dalmatian
                        •
                      obstinate people. and a Dalmatian.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou meanest somewhat, in that thou callest him a
Dalmatian.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I meane then, that Nation
is most obstinat, in that which once entreth into their
braynes, and setteth nought by the opinion of al other
Nations. Knowest thou not that olde frende of Cardinal
Chietti, that commeth oft times to sée him?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Ha, yes yes, I know him, he speaketh Gréeke
very oft, bycause he would séeme to vnderstand much
of it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That is he. When this man talketh
of any thing of his owne, thou neuer heardest a prouder
man, nor a greater boaster speake, nor that more
disprayseth all thinges that come not from him selfe,
or from his countrymen, nor a more stubburne in his
opinions: and therefore maruel not at Saint Ierome,
for they are all suche kinde of men.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This
also maketh me much more to maruel, that these men
haue so much extolled this virginity, sith there is not
in all the holy scripture, any one precept that forbiddeth
to any kinde of men mariage, and where there

are so many places that comaunde and commende it.
For by this meane, God would that the world should
be maintayned. And this was defended by the good
Byshop Paphnutus in the councell of Neece,
                  Paphnutius defendeth Priestes mariage. against
thrée hundreth Byshops.This heauen hath many Virgines but no Maries.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I beleue that it
is for the Uirgin Maries sake, that these men woulde
haue so many Virgins.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yet can they not
for all that, bring to passe, that there should be many
Maries, the which was verely a Phoenix.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I like it well that thou beginnest to vnderstande the
matter.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sée Pasquine, I haue done as
Thelemachus did in Homer, who sayde, that by other
mennes wyse communications, he had learned much.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I muche reioyce, that this my talke hath
brought forth so good fruit in thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And I
reioyce much more thereat. But to returne to the purpose
of this virginitie, I say, that the Uirgine Mary
neuer made accoumpt that hir Uirginity should be of
any merite towards God, for she had determined, to
haue a husband, & would before haue had him, but that
the Aungell of the Lorde declared to hir that high and
heauenly determination, that God had made concerning
hir. And God had regarde not to hir virginity,
but to hir humility, as may be séene in hir owne song,
where she sayde.Luc. 1. 
                  He hath regarded the lovvlines
                        •
                     e of
his handemayde, and sayde not, to the virginity of his
handemayd, for lowlinesse is it that pleaseth the Lord,
and that is by him commaunded vnto vs, whyles he
sayeth.Math. 11. 
                  Learne of me, for I am meeke and lovvlye of
heart, and sayde not,Humilitie preferred before virginitie. learne of me, for I am a Uirgin.
And if thou wilt sée this more clerelye, loke that place
of the Gospell, where the Disciples sought to knowe
who shoulde be greatest in the kingdome of heauen.

Christ set there in the middest among them a childe,Christ techeth humilitie by the example of a childe.
saying: That they must humble them selues and become
as that childe, if they vvould enter into the
kingdome of heauen. And if he had made so great an
accoumpt of Uirginity,Math. 18. or had knowen it to be so necessary,
he might haue sayd,Luc. 18. that they must be virgins
as that childe was, if they would enter into the kingdome
of heauen. And see moreouer, the greatest prayse
that is giuen to Christ, is, for that, (as the Scripture
sayth) He made him selfe of no reputation,Phil. 2. taking vppon
him the shape of a seruaunt: and not bycause he
was a Uirgin. But herevpon the Lordes saying putteth
me in some little doubt,Math. 19. which sayth. That some
do make them selues chast for the kingdome of God.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Let not this trouble thee,Chastity and what it is. for this worde to
make chaste in that place, meaneth nothing else, but
to take away euery euill affection, not onely of fleshly
luste, but also of all maner euill desire therto. As
also where he sayeth.Math. 5. 
                  That thou shouldest pull out
thine eye, a
                        •
                     d cut of thine hande, he meaneth nothing
else, but that thou shouldest take from thée that vice,
which ouercommeth thée, by meanes of that member
of thine. And the gift of chastity,Math. 19. is not giuen to euery
one that vvoulde haue it, but to vvhome God vvill.
This therfore ought not to be giuen as a commaūdement,
but they that are called thervnto by god, ought
to vse this as a councell.Origen mistooke Christes wordes.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then Origen
much mistooke this matter, in cutting away his
instrumēt of generation.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Without doubt
he should better and more holily haue made him selfe
chast, if he had asswaged his hote desire with an honest
wife of his owne. For this thing God commaundeth
vs, and not the other.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But he should not

haue bene chaste after that sorte.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Nay rather
he could not be chaste, after the other sorte, as Logitians
define,Whether Eunuches be cha
                        •
                     te or no. who cal not the Eunuches chast, bicause
they can do nothing. But that he hauing a wife might
also be chaste, the booke of wisedome doth playnely dedeclare,
where he sayth:Sap. 4. 
                  O, hovv faire is a chaste generation
vvith vertue. Lo, he calleth chaste, the generation
of children. And to ye 
                  Hebrues, thus it is written:
Mariage is honourable among all men,
                  The prayse of mariage. and the
bed vndefiled, but Fornicators & adulterers, God vvil
iudge.Hebr. 13.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I woulde it were Gods will that
thou mightest be a Preacher to the worlde but euen a
fewe yeares, then shoulde it not be halfe so blinde as
it is.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Such was Gods pleasure, that those
that haue bene delited with lyes, and foolishe toyes,
should in lyes and foolishe toyes be drowned & buried.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sithe we are entered into this talke, I
woulde haue thée tell me, what it is, that hath deceyued
so many great learned mē, to set forth so carefully
this virgintiy:A learned Byshoppe of Fraunce.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A French Byshop, full
of great learning, of great iudgement, and of muche
godlynesse, opened myne eyes in this poynt that thou
nowe demaundest, saying: that very many errours
are sprong vp by the deceytfulnesse of such as to curiouslye
sifte the scriptures, who finding in the same,
some one thing in especiall, or that particulerly hath
bene commaunded to one man, haue gone aboute to
make it generall,Math. 19. as this: If thou vvilt be perfect, goe
and sell all that thou hast,Marc. 10. and giue it to the poore.
Here Christ speaketh to that yong man,Luc. 18. that boasted
that he had alwayes kept the commaundements, and
gyueth this lesson particulerly to him, to beate downe

                     •
                  lat his presumption, in that he sayde, he had alwayes

kept the commaundements of God. And it is no generall
precept, for Christ denyeth not, but that a man
may serue God hauing ryches,Not the riches but the abuse of it spoken against. for a man may sée in
the olde Testament, that infinite Patriarkes and
Kinges, and other seruaunts of God were excéeding
ryche. Likewise where Saint Paule sayth to the Corinthians:
not commaunding, but saying his aduise,
and speaking condicionally:1. Cor. 7. 
                  That it is good for a mā
for the present necessity, to be vvithout a vvife. These
men haue made this place generall, and yet Saint
Paule sayth, for the present necessity,The reason why Paule counselled to so beare a wyfe. bycause that thē
the Christians were dryuen to and fro, and if they had
wyues and children, they had more greater charge to
cary aboute after them, than if they were vnmaryed.
And thus sayth he, bycause of y• afflictions of the fl
                     •
                  sh,
and the persecutions of those tymes, and not for any
other cause. And therefore sayde he afterward,1. Cor. 7. 
                  that
he spake for their profite, not to tangle thē in a snare.
Many other places there are in the Scripture,A great absurditie. which
albeit they be most speciall, these fellowes haue gone
about to make most generall. And euen so is it of virginitie,
the which being a gifte graunted to very f
                     •
                  we
by especiall priuiledge from 
                     •
                  od, they notwithstanding,
haue sought to haue it of euery man, as a thing
generall, bycause they are not of capacitie to vnderstande
that saying as Christ spake it.Math. 19. 
                  
                     •
                  ut these precepts
are particuler, as that was of Abraham to kyll
his sonne.An example of Abraham to kill hys Sonne. And as it shou
                     •
                  e be a great absurditie to
go about to make that precept generall: euen so is it
no lesse absurditie to commaund and commende this
other also.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This discourse of thy 
                     •
                  yshop
pleaseth me very well:Gene. 32. he is 
                     •
                  arre differ
                     •
                  nt from the
Duncysh Sorbones, of Paris, who say if they had saint

                  Paule in their handes they would burne him. I perceyue
that the light of Gods truth burneth in y• heart
of this Bishop.The order or Queere of widowes. But sawest thou there neuer a widow?
was there not Iudith of Sarepta, * Anne the Prophetesse,
that so openly confessed Christ in Saint Lukes
Gospell,Luc. 2. nor that other that † offered the two Mytes,
and was therfore so much cōmended of Christ?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  Marc. 12.
There was none of all these there, for they (as
it was tolde me) were in the other heauen. But in
this heauen were some that none durst be so bolde to
name them, and they were of those, that saint Paule
calleth idle,
                     
                        •
                     . Tim. 5. euer babling, busy bodyes, and speaking
things which are not comely.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And why
are they in this heauen?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The Aungell
tolde me bycause some of them had founded Monasteries,
and erected sundry sectes, and enryched the places,
and became Nonnes: and especiallye Englishe
women, Hungarians, Dutch women, and Frenche
women. Of Italians and Spanyardes there were very
fewe. Albeit there be in our dayes of countrey women
of Italy, that for superstition séeke to passe those
of olde tyme.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who be these?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou must nedes haue hearde speaking of them: for
that they séeke to be knowen for Saintes, méete in
very dede for this heauē: hast thou neuer heard speak
of the Countesse of Vastalla?
                  Vastalla erecteth a newe sect of Religious people. and of hir that causeth
hir selfe to be called the holye Ladye Saint Camill?
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yes, but I neuer tooke héede therevnto,
what be they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I can not tell what they
be. For they do that which Paule doth disalowe, being
idle, gadding from Citie to Citie, and from house to
house. But yet hath Vastalla founded hir sect in Millaine.
Camilla was of late in Pauia, and nowe is in

                  Venice, for into the déepe waters,Where the caraine is, thither do the Eagles resort. the great fishe alwayes
goeth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tell me somewhat of the
same Vastalla, whether she bring forth any monsters.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest very well, for who soeuer forsaketh
God & nature, can doe nothing but bring forth
monsters.The storie of Vastalla. Vastalla reuiueth the heresie of the Adami
                        •
                     es. This Vastalla being a wydowe, rich, wealthy,
and of great byrth, and therefore called a Countesse,
hath ordayned a secte of women and men, who
must séeke to atta
                     •
                  e to that puritie & 
                     •
                  nocencie that
was in Adam and Eue, before they offended, and to be
such as can sinne no more, and to be without all féeling
of affectiō or passion, and the mean to come herevnto,
is long prayers, muche silence, continuall fastings,
and to be shriuen euery day, shewing and opening
what soeuer it be eyther good or euill, that they
haue done, sayd, or thought, without leauing behinde
any iote or tittle of any thing. Moreouer they muste
receyue their maker euery eight dayes, and they call
their maker that rounde Cake in the which they saye
is the body of Christ: which is in heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Alas what sayest thou Pasquine, beleuest thou not,
that the consecrate breade is the body of Christ?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And doest not thou beleue that Christ is very
man?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yes, I doe beleue it, and that he
was borne of the Uirgin Mary, and that he suffered,
dyed, and was buried.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Beleuest thou not
that he afterwarde rose againe, very man, and that he
ascended into heauen, bearing with him his body full
and whole, and that he shall come thence (in the same
fashion, that he was sene go hence) to iudge the quicke
and the deade?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yea, I doe beleue it, and
do looke for it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If thou beleue this, wherefore
wilte thou beleue, that that breade is the 
                     •
                  ody of

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
what gladnesse hast thou brought me vnto. I do right
well beleue, that thou haste bene in heauen, and haste
brought from thence, these so high mysteries. For this
knowledge is not of men, but heauenly. Now haue I
let go the Woulfe, and by thy labour and dil
                     •
                  gence,
a
                     •
                   come out of great daunger, wherfore I giue 
                     •
                  od
thankes without ende.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Al that which this
secte of the Countesse of Vastalla, and all the Popishe
route else,The papistes vnderstand not Christes Institution. do goe about concerning this Sacrament,
bycause (they are so farre wyde frō the institution of
Christ, & from the truth) al that I say is nothing else
but that which the scripture calleth, the cursed Idol, &
abhomination.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And I was euen nowe
thinking therevpon, and muche I maruelled howe it
shoulde come to passe, that some whiche vnderstande
these thinges, shoulde remayne still blinded, in the errour
of these so wicked Sacrifices, and be partakers
of them, the which (surely) can not be without moste
haynous offence against god.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What man,
some doth it for feare,Ma
                        •
                     y lette
                        •
                      therebe to kepe mē back from God. some for vaineglory, and other
some for couetousnesse, and deceytes of the diuel. But
yet can the Lord kepe safe those that he his.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I perceyue that thou sayest truth, and I see that
this secte of Vastalla, and suche like, become so muche
the worse, as that they doe the oftner vse that Sacrameat,
and other wicked Sacryfices. But is there any
thing else to be sayde of hir?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The best is
yet behinde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is that?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               When she will knowe, whether any be come to
the purposed pointe of this puritie, this way she tryeth
it,Proper deuises to bring men to purit
                        •
                     e. she causeth him to weare about
                     •
                   his nocke, or
vpon his heade, or in some other notable place of his
body, some thing of much shame, as a Frying panne,

or a Kettle, or else the hornes of an O
                     •
                  e, or of a Ram,
or else his garments with the wrong side outwarde, or
otherwise euill fauouredly put on, & sometyme wrapped
in a Nette, or halfe naked, and somewhile altogether
naked, be it mā or woman. And so doth she make
them go through the City, for sayth she, our firste fathers
were in the beginning naked, and afterwarde
did couer their dishonest partes with leaues, and then
went halfe clothed, and last of al, (as euill did encrease
together with their shame) they did wholly couer thē
selues with beastes skinnes. Who so euer doth therefore
desire to returne to that former sincerity, muste
come backewarde by the selfe same degrées, and from
clothing him selfe, must returne to nakednesse, and if
of these things they be not ashamed, then is it a manifest
token▪ that they be already in Paradice.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh what a shamefull thing is this.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Hearke, there is worse yet. Then putte they Adam
and E
                        •
                     e in the night season alone in a bedde,Horsses and mares turned loose togither. who if
they eate not of the Fruites, if they speake not together
thereof, nor haue thereof no maner of thinking,
for as muche as of euerye thing they are afterwarde
strayghtly examined, and muste of force confesse it,
then are they alredy become Aungels,A very chast religion. & made Gods.
But if they eate of the fruites, (for that, for the moste
part, she that went to bed a 
                     •
                  irgin, arose from thence
spedde with hir errande) then are they driuen out of
Paradice, and condempned to perp
                     •
                  tuall torments.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I knowe not who deserueth herein moste
blame, whether they that doe this, or the Princes, or
Magistrates, that winke at it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The Magistrates
of Christendom in these dayes, neyther condempne
nor persecute any, but such as séeke the h
                     •
                  
                  nour

of Christ, that giue all prayse to Christ, & that
maintaine the Gospell of Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Alas alas,
thou sayest euen the truth, oh how great accompt
shall they make to Christ, God lighten them if it be
his pleasure.The rule of Camilla Pallauicine. But tel me somewhat of that Lady saint Camilla. Wherefore is she called both a Lady and a
Saint?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Lady for hir pride, and Saint for
hir Ipocrisie, for she was not contented to be of the
house of the Pallauicini, the which thou knowest is famous
& noble in Italy, but would by hir cursed pryde,
make hir self a mōgrel of the bloud Royal of Fraunce,
and sayth, that she is the daughter of king Levves the
thirde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And how?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               She said,
that the King making warre in Italy,
                  An honest woman to make her mother a whore. had then to doe
with hir mother, and so was she begotten.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That was a terrible warre in dede, but yet was there
no bloude shedde. And doth she then reioyce in this
goodly tytle, to be a bastarde, the daughter of a whore,
both borne and begotten in adultery.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea
out of doubt, but not without cause, for thou mayst sée
that that good fellowe of Millaine in his Paradoxes,
sheweth that it is better to be a bastarde, than lawfully
begotten.Better to be a Bastard than lawfully begotten.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh howe muche it displeaseth
me, to sée how goodly wittes are occupyed about
vaine vnprofitable vile and shameful exercises, which
else might better be imployed in better studyes. But
this Camilla was a bastarde before that the Authour
of those Paradoxes was borne. But what lyfe leadeth
shée?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Mary shée gaddeth now here, nowe
there, vnder colour of Religion.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Of what
Religion?A good religion of her owne making
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Of a Religion of none other
bodyes making but of hir owne. She hath with hir
thrée women of the selfe same Ipocrisie, and superstition.

Shée abideth not in any Monasterye, as Nonnes
doe, but dwelleth in a priuate house, and chaungeth
it often (such is hir womanishe ficklenesse) & shée
haunteth places pleasant and solitary, albeit she haue
no greater pleasure in any one thing, than in the cō
                  uersation
of men, as may well be seene, for his house
is continually haunted with women, and gentlemen
and Lordes, as if it were the house of a conning Doctor,
or rather of the Oracle of the City.The great blindness of the worlde. And the world
is such, as more easely doth suffer it self to be drawen
away, with the gay glistering of superstitiō, and fayned
holinesse, than with the true and humble religion.
Sometyme shée shutteth vp hir selfe in a Chamber, so
straight and so darke (which shée often vsed at Pauia,)
that it rather séemeth a graue than a Chamber, and
this she sayth, she is the more familiarly to enioy the
cōpany of Angels. On the Fryday, she wil not speake
to any man, nor let hir selfe be séene, for she sayth, that
on that day she remayneth altogether occupied in the
contemplation of the Crosse of Christ, and of his nayles,
through the meditation whereof, shée sayth,Camilla hath the fyue woundes that Christ had. No Ipocrisie. shée
hath receyued the markes of the fiue woūds of Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then, she doth counterfaite Saint
Katherine of Siena, and Saint Fraunces?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Nay, rather is shée Saint Fraunces wife, for shée loueth
his Friers as hir owne children, and preferreth
his secte before all other, and goeth also cladde in his
wéede. And moreouer, she hath hir hands and hir féete,
wrapped in cloutes, that the eyes of sinners shoulde
not sée those holy woundes, which are onely méete to
be seéne of Aungels.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Are they woundes
in good sadnesse?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I can not tell, but I wil
shewe thée what (merily and paraduenture truly) an

Ambassadour of the French Kings sayde, talking one
day of this woman, and of hir woundes. There was
one that sayde, he maruelled that shee kept them couered.A wittie saying of a frenche Ambassadour.
Maruell not at all quoth he) for things that are
filthy, ought to be kept conered, & paraduenture they
are the plaine markes of the French Pockes, whiche
disease is wonte to breake out in these places, albeit
sometime in the foreheade, but not altogether, nor after
one sorte to all men.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What aunswered
that other good fellow?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He was blank,
he knew not what to say.
            
            
               Marforius.
               No more could
I tell what to say, if I sayde not, that those woundes
are made by arte of man, or the crafte of the Diuel, as
happened in Berna a towne of the Svvychers, where
certaine Dominicane Friers did ye like to a poore simple
soule.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest truth, for I hearde
speak of it, whē ye newes therof was brought to Pope
Iulie the seconde, albeit this be also written in a faithfull
story, and yet escaped they not vnpunished therefore,Foure Fryers burnte at Berne for Ipocrisie.
for foure of thē which were priuy to this, and other
so great sacrileges were burnt aliue. And this
was before y• 
                  Berne had the vnderstanding of the gospel.
But those Lords of Berne haue bene alwayes enimies
to deceytés, and to these knauish deuises, whom
if the Venetians would follow, and not suffer so many
false miracles, and other deceytes, of gredy Ipocrites,
as the body of saint Roch, which is made of toawe
and of Chaulke, & of so many Ladyes y• for gredinesse
of gaine,Gredynesse of gayne worketh miracles are made to worke myracles, not only they,
but y• rest of Italy, & the other parts of Christendome
would open their eyes, and espy out so many & so manifest
deceytes, that who so euer doth not finde them
out, is well worthy of all blame and shall in the ende

be punished therefore of Christ. But to returne to the
woundes of Camilla, I haue heard say, that being desired
to supper by certaine Nonnes, in the euening
after supper, when she should goe to bed, she asked for
a little Malmesey, & when a woman of the Monastery
had giuen hir some, being desirous to knowe what
she would do with it, she stoode and looked throughe a
little hole of the dore, and sawe,Marke well. that she cast the Malmesey
droppe by droppe, vpon hir hande, and she groned,
but she coulde sée nothing else.
            
            
               Marforius.
               By
like she did kepe those woundes open, with this subtile
deuise, & euen so wyth the same subtile deuise, did
make them at the first.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I could say also of
hir, howe she entermedleth hir selfe, with making of
Mariages, moued thereto for the zeale of hir pursse,Camilla a broker of mariages.
for she will be well payed. Then vseth shée many other
brybing fetches, there are many presents sent vnto
hir, and she sendeth them couertly to sell, she playeth
the Phisitian,Camilla vseth many fine shystes and all for money. and asketh this thing & that thing,
to make Medicines withall, & then sendeth the things
to sell, as happened to a poore woman for a great many
poundes of waxe. And such one as thou hearest is
shée, and yet is accompted a most holy one.
            
            
               Marforius.
               God be he that prouide therefore, for of men I sée not
howe remedy may be hoped for. But if there be nothing
else to be sayde of this deuision or Quéere, goe
on forwarde.The Quere or order of the confessours.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In the thirde streate, were
the confessours. This was a great route, and wonderfully
out of frame, full of rytes, & different customes.
Some had thrée Crownes, some Myters, some Hats,
some were shauen, some couered faced, some laie brothers
in gray coates, some blewe, some redde, some
white, some blacke, some gray, some hooded like the

                  Scapuchines, some of the order that Chietti made. All
had some sundry signe of Ipocrisie,Chiettines are the rankest Ipocrites. & most of all those
Chiettines.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               What a thing is this, that
they euer speake of Christ, and neuer séeke the honour
of Christ, but of them selues?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I haue alwayes
séene, that these that haue Christ still in their
mouthes, neuer haue him in their heartes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               It is true. But what made these men with so many
sundry liueryes.The Gods sore troubled.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I can not tell thée of certainty,
but for as much as I perceyued, they were also
in greate trouble.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And wherefore?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Least they should be forsaken of their deuout
Clients.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is that I heare thée
say? why are these Gods afeard of men?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If
they be made and inuented by men, wilte thou not,
that by them they may be also ouerthrowen? of these
Gods speaketh the Scripture, where he sayth: They
are the vvorke of mens handes,
                  Psal. 115. and therefore are they
afeard.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Wherefore are they called Confessours.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause they haue spent al their
whole life in hearing confessions,wherefore they are called conf
                        •
                     ssours. and other mennes
sinnes, or in confessing them selues to other as commonly
they do.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou laughest Pasquine?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I laugh in dede, but yet it followeth not,
but that I say the truth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I thought they
had bene called Confessours, bycause they should confesse
Christ,What true confessours should doe. False confessours. with their tongues, with their lyues, and
with their deathes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou art deceyued,
vnlesse thou wouldst say, that to confesse, y• the Pope
is the head of the Church, and that saluatiō is gotten
by mannes merites, is to confesse Christ. But that is
not in the Crede or Simbole of the Apostles.
            
            
               Marforius.
               As farre as I can perceiue, this is rather a denying

of Christ, than a confessing of him. But me thinke
thou makest a mocke of confession, whiche is a thing
very holy and necessary.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Doe I make a
mock of confession? Nay I confesse my selfe very often
tymes, didst not thou say euen now, that they are
true cōfessours, that confesse Christ, and professe him
with their words, and with their déedes?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yes, and I thought that for this cause they had bene
called confessours. For of this confession I think our
maister Christ spake, when he sayd: He that shal confesse
me before men,Math. 10. him vvill I also confesse before
my father vvhich is in heauen.
                  Math. 5. And so let your light
shine before men, that they may see your good vvorkes
and glorisie your father vvhich is in heauen. But
I aske thée of that other confession, that is called Sacramentall,
and Auriculer,
                  Eare confession. which is made to man, and
of him, is had the absolution of sinnes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I
shoulde stande to long, to aunswere thée to all that
that thou demaundest me. But of this I will in fewe
words put thée out of doubt. Thinkst thou that Christ
was perfectly wise?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I beleue, that he was
most wise,Luc. 11. & very wisedome it selfe.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thinkest
thou, that his doctrine was absolute and perfect?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I beleue it, for he was God, vnto whome
can be ascribed none imperfection, without great and
heynous offence.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Doth there wante any
thing in his doctrine, deliuered vnto vs by his Apostels?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Nothing, that is necessary to liue
well, and to goe to euerlasting life.Eare confessoures not spoken of in th
                        •
                      scripture.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Syth
he hath therfore, made no maner mention of this eare
confession, it is not necessary for our blessed life.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This is it that I woulde so faine knowe: for
many affirme that it is allowed by Gods worde, and

many deny it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou must nedes knowe
what thine owne doctour Panormitanus sayth concerning
it, to whom I am sure, thou giuest credite.
            
            
               Marforius.
               He sayth playnely,Panormitanus Iudgement of eare confession. that such confession is not
founde in all the holy scripture, nor that the Greekes
were therfore by our Churches neuer holdē as Heretiques,
who deny the same, and wil none of it, and yet
doth the Pope condempne and holde him as an Heretique,
that refuseth and denieth it to be commaunded
by Gods lawe.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Oh maruell not at that,
for he condēneth also him that confesseth: That christ
is our onelyLuc. 2. Sauiour,1. Iohn. 4. our onely redemer, and our1. Iohn. 2.
Aduocate, thā the which, there is nothing more clere
in the holy Scriptures. It is no maruel therfore if he
condempne such and accompt them as Heretiques, as
will not receiue mennes deuises, in steade of Goddes
lawes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yet it semeth, that it is cōmaunded
in the holy Scriptures, most chiefly in that place
(leauing al other aside, which in dede do little approue
it,) where heMath. 16. giueth to the Church,A wonderfull clubstanciall reason of the papistes ye power to binde
and to loose, and to remit and retaine sinnes. And how
shall the Church remitte sinne, say they, if the sinner
tel it hir not? and how shal she loose him, if she sée him
not bounde?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               IfMarc. 16. thou beleue the gospel,What it is to bind and lose syanes.
thy sinnes are forgiuen thée, thou art assoyled, if thou
beleue not, thou art bounde, andIohn. 8. and art in sinne, &
the seruaunt of sinne, and of the Diuell. And this it
is to binde and loose, to remit and retayne sinnes, and
it nedeth not that other know thy sinnes. It is mough
for thée, that thou knowe them and consider them, and
that thou féele the waight of thine owne sinfull nature.
Lo, we reade that the woman that sinned, was
sorowfull within hir selfe, and she heard that healthful

saying, Thy sinnes are forgiuen thee, nor we doe not
reade,A comfortable example for euery sinner. that she reckened vp hir sinnes. Haue thou also
thy sinnes in defiance, and beleue the gospel, and thou
art assoyled.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And Saint Iames sayth, not
he? Knovvledge your faultes one to another,Iac. 5. & pray
one for an other, that you may be healed?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This whiche Saint Iames speaketh of here, is that
which Christ our master had before spokē, of brotherly
loue, that if we haue offended any man, we ought
to seke to reconcile our selues to him, and this can not
be done, except he that offendeth, do confesse to the other,
that he hath done amisse.The true confession. This is the true confession
and reconciliatiō which among Christians, from
one to another ought to be done, the which Christ accepteth
before all sacrifices, and euery other holy act.
We néede not talke with Sir Iohn of the matter, he
must be none that is offended. And if thou haue offended
God only, and not man,Luc. 7. confesse thy fault to God
onely, who onely forgiueth sinnes, and health the infirmities
of the soule. It is not therefore euill done, if
thou aske councell for the infirmities of thy soule, at
some man that is honest, and kn
                     •
                  weth the truth, as
thou docst for the infirmities of thy body, mingling
therefore with it no maner superstition, and shall
we (leauing the holsome coūcels, & precepts of Christ)
consent to a confession,Confession better called confusion. that ought rather to be called
confusion, deuised by the shau
                     ••
                  ngs, to knowe the secrets
of the world, and so with 
                     •
                  cc
                     •
                  ytfulnesse to bring
the world vnder their féete,Confession wherefore it was inuented. as they haue done already.
But Christ shall as leaues, confounde all inuentions
of men,Psal. 1. and ouerthrowe the deuisers thereof with the
breath of his mouth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Theu haste deliuered
me out of a maruellous scruple, that did sore holde

my minde entangled.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Shall I therefore
speake of the other, sith thou haste vnderstande what
these confessours be?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I pray the heartily.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In the same Quéere, sawe I also Doctours
mingled with cōfessours.The order or quere of Doctours.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I would
that thou wouldst name them vnto me.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I
doe euen scarcely remember thē, so dyuers were they,
and so mad headed. Some were called Magistri nostri,
some Nostri magistri, some Rabini, some Scotistae, other
Illuminati, other Cherubici, other Seraphici, some
Extatici, and some also Apostatici, and Lunatici, and
their seuerall names were, Holcot, Briccot, Triccot,
Scot, Capriuol, Zabarel, Lira, Hoccam, Barbazza, all
obscure, but when the worlde was ignorant accompted
most excellently learned.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Out vpon
thée, what Doctors are these? thou makest me afeard,
onely to name them. But what did they.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               All were labouring, to enrich that heauen, with both
the Testamentes. There sawe I Saint Gregory with
other Popes,The olde testamēt more profitable than the newe. who had hyred fouretene Porters, to
cause the tenthes of the olde Testament to be caryed
into the newe Testament, and in like maner the Myters,
the Bendes or Fillets, the Sacrifices, y• offrings,
the Perfumes, the Lightes, and almost all the things
that were in the Iewes Temple.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And
did they not also bring the wyues of ye holy Fathers?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No, but their handmaydes. For they sayd
that wyues belonged not to the newe Testament.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Therefore haue they nowe for this cause,Priestes may kepe whores but mary no wyues.
in steade of wyues, whores?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, for they
say, that it is not lawfull for them to haue wyues, but
if they haue whores and bardasses, it maketh no matter.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what if any of them were maried?
            
            
               
               Pasquine.
               They woulde persecute him, they
woulde kill him, they woulde vndoe him.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But for keping of whores, & worse thā that they would
neuer blame him.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No, knowest not thou
that Priest of Placentia,
                  A Priest of Placentia. that this other day was accused
to haue a wife and children, & straight way, the
Pope depriued him of the Benefices he had, & he went
to Rome and shewed, howe she neyther was nor could
be his wife, bycause she had a husband, but hir he kept
as his Concubine, and by and by, the Pope restored
him to his benefices again.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh vnspeakable
abhomination, and detestable generation, y• stink
of them must nedes ascende euen vp to heauen. Howe
is it possible that God shoulde suffer them any longer
to cōtinue? I can not beleue, that they can last much
longer thus. But follow on the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In
conclusion I sawe all the olde Testament brought into
the newe,All was brought that brought any gayne. sauing onely matrimonye.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That may be the cause, that so many Iewes in these
dayes doe become Christians?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is in
dede, and yet there woulde be many more of them, if
the Popes would not then confiscate their goodes, for
thou knowest how couetous and gredy they be of mony.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But how is it possible, that the new
Testament that is so narrow & straight, could receiue
so great spoyle as they brought from the olde.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They play as the Shoomaker,The Popes cle
                        •
                     gie can str
                        •
                     tche thinges for aduantage. Old pulling and all for aduantage that retcheth
his Leather with his téeth, & Dyers that strech y• clothes
at the Sunne vpon the Tenters, and as marchaūts
that thrust the wolles that occupy great rowmes,
into a little corner of the Shippe, one haled on
the one side, an other heaued on the other side, one
stole awaye a piece here, an other putte to a patche

there some stamped it very fine, & some mingled this
piece, and some other that other piece, so that ech man
serued his owne turne.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But in transporting
the Byshops, from that Testament to this, in
that place where it sayth:1. Tim. 3. 
                  That the Byshop must be
the husbande of one vvife: Howe did they vse the
matter?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Well I wote, there was harde
holde. For Paule will in any wise, that the Byshoppe
haue his wife, and that, for to take away all suspition
of him selfe. As they were therfore al in a great sturre,
a Romane Abbot stode vp and sayd: heare ye fathers,
know ye not,All the thinges of the old testament were good sauing wyues. that it is not lawfull, to bring the wiues
of the olde Testament into the newe? but it behoueth
vs, that in steade of wyues we haue benefices and fat
liuings inough. Therefore will I that ye vnderstand
that place thus:1. Tim. 3. 
                  Let the Byshop be the husbande of
one vvife, that is to say, let him haue at the least one
benefice. And so shall we finde a place for our Byshop.
And as for the rest that troubleth you so muche, care
ye not at all, for he néede not care whether he hath one
wife of his owne, that may haue wiues inoughe of other
mens.
            
            
               Marforius.
               O there was a good Doctour.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euen such as be all. But among the rest, I
sawe one, that is accoumpted a piller of the Church,
who ranne so at randon,A bold Doctour. through out the whole Gospell,
and with such boldnesse, that he set all at hauocke.
Afterward he gaue him selfe to write against Matrimony,
then after that, he opened his clothes before
him, and began to knock him selfe on the breast: and
that done, he stoode vp, and helde the forme or proportion
of a Church in his hande.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why did
he beate him selfe?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause he did that
which God commaunded not, as he had done against

that which God had cōmaūded, that is to say, speaking
against Matrimonie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Knowest y• not the
names of any of them.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yes, and if I recken
them to thée, thou wouldest wonder at it, but I
will name one or two of them to thée, bycause I will
not léese so much time, for I haue many other things
to tel thée. There was Thomas of Aquine,
                  Thomas of Aquine. who sought
if it were possible to defend his disputation De Dulia
& Hyperdulia.
                  Dulia and Hyperdulia.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I remember that disputation.
It is vengeaunce subtile.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Who
knoweth not, that he had nede worke subtillye, that
will make all men beleue, that vnder the forme of the
Diuell a man may worship Christ? And that is, when
as vnder the figure or Image of the diuel, which thou
séest before thée,Sound doctrine of the diuelles deuising. thou doest for all that Imagine with
thy selfe, that there is Christ, and yet meanest thou
not to worshippe that figure or stocke which is in thy
sight, but Christ whom thou hast (vnder that figure)
conceyued in thy minde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               How can that
be done?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Howe coulde it be done in the
olde time, that when they offered an Oxe, conceyued
God in their imgination, and vnder the Image of
that Oxe worshipped him? Thinkest thou that men
haue at any tyme bene so foolishe, that they thought
that an Oxe was God? and notwithstanding that
there was no maner of resemblaunce in the worlde,
betwene an Oxe and God, they conceyued (for al that)
God in their imagination, through the Image of that
Calfe, and being so conceyued, did worship him. And
this is y• subtile Hyperdulia of Thomas Aquine, that
thou ioyne God with a stocke, and that thou worship
the stock as God, euen as the Iewes worshipped
the Oxe for God.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This is in dede a very

subtile but no Christian opinion.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And yet
is it defended in these dayes as an article of our faith.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I knowe,The prepo
                        •
                     erous doinges of the papistes that they will maintaine all
such things as ought to be condempned, & cōdemyne
all such as ought to be maintayned.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This
therfore was it which Saint Thomas of Aquine so
botched vp, for if the truth of his matter mighte be
knowen abrode, their carued stockes, their pictures,
their Images, their paintinges, and their Idolls all
would be in great daunger, & the gaine that is gotten
thereby, would sone he at an ende.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou
sayest the very truth,All for mony. for euen for the religious care of
their gaine, & not for any other cause, doe the Priestes
séeke to maintaine all that which God so much forbiddeth.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Harde beside Thomas Aquine, I saw
his master sit, to whome all the rest of his order vsed
much reuerence.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Howe was he called?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Me thought they called him Albertus Magus.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I know not who that should be.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is that holy Doctor whiche so profoundlye
disputch of the secrets of women.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou
vnderstodest them not wel, he is called Albertus Magnus,
and not Magus,
                  Albertus Magnus better called Magus. who wrote also of the wonders
of the worlde.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It may be that I mistoke it,
albeit he may be called, after which sorte you will, for
he was without cause called Magnus, being a maruellous
great Doctor and a great Magician.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what did his Disciples there with him.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               They were entreating of him, that he would goe Ambassador
to the City of Coleyn.
                  A godly Bishop that reformeth his Churche.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               For what
purpose?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause it was sayde, that the
Byshop there, fauoured to much the Gospell, and did
as became a true shepherde, and went about (with the

helpe of Bucer & Melanchton) to reforme his Church,
according to the rule of the Gospell.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But
what would they haue had Maister Albert doe there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That he should séeke if it were possible, to
let y• going forward of so holy a worke. But he might
haue gone thither, and haue lost all his labour, for albeit
the City stande somewhat stiffe, the shéepe for all
that will follow their good shepherde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Of
such good Bishops should they much nede, who hitherto
haue bene deceyued by these false Gods. But sawest
thou any of those newe Doctours?New Doctours.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Whom meanest thou to be the new Doctours.
            
            
               Marforius.
               
                  Fysher, B. of Rochester, Ecchius, Pighius, Albert
of Vdine Byshop of Chioggia.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  Rochester
is not only a Doctour, but also a Martir, therfore
shall we finde him in the Quéere of the Martirs.
But Iohn Ecchius and Pighius I saw not, and by that
I coulde learne, they were yet kept in their Purgatory,
which they so stoutly defended.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why
are those defendours of Purgatorye serued with the
same sause for their labour?The rewarde of the purgatorie Champions.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I pray God,
they be not cast into the bottomelesse pitte of euerlasting
fire,No purgatorie but Christes bloud. for none can defende other Purgatory than
Christes bloude, without cruell iniurie and blasphemie
to Christ, for so it happeneth to such as serue cruel
Tyrannes turnes, that they them selues first féele the
smart of their wicked deseruings. Perillus Bull may
teach them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But doest thou thinke that
they shall at any tyme come vp hither, and be placed
among the Gods?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Of Pighius I dare not
say, bycause he is much estéemed among those Gods,
for his eloquence and singuler learning: But sure I
thinke that Ecchius shall neuer be able to climbe to

heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And why not?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause
he had a fowle great paunch, that hong a foote &
a halfe ouer his Codpiece, and that will be a great let
to him. And thou knowest Marforius that naturall
writers affirme, that heauy things of their owne nature
go down to the Centre, which thing he right wel
vnderstoode that made his Epitaph saying.

                     Here lyeth Ecchius buried full lowe,Ecchius Epitaphe.
                     
                     That loued well wyne and belly chere:
                     Where his soule is seeke not to knowe,
                     For those were his Gods while he was here.
                  
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               A pleasant Epitaphe, and méete for such
a paunche. This that thou sayest, maketh mée the
better to beleue it bycause I haue séene Pope Lion
the tenth, for his great fatnesse had much a doe to goe
vp three steppes in Saint Peters Palace, whereby I
conclude that muche lesse therefore shall be able to
flye to heauen, and especially when he hath no wings.
But what canst y• tell me of Albert Byshop of Chioggia?
                  Albert bishop of Chioggia
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I saw him in the middest among Pelagius,
Arrius, Manichaeus, and many other, & he was
altogether ful of hepinesse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Knowest thou
the cause why?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I would nedes vnderstand
the matter. And it was tolde me, for there was come
thyther a Fryer of Saint Fraunces of the Uine, who
had tolde him, that he had séene in Venice a Shoppe
where they sell Pilcherdes,Cood ware to stoppe mustard pottes. full of his workes, which
were solde by waighte to them that kepte Shoppes.
            
            
               Marforins.
               I think, that y• like wil hap one day to al
the writings of the founders of this heauen. But tel
me, was there none other loked for there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Many were looked for,Cocles canonized a saint. but most chiefly was one Iohn
Cocles looked for, bycause he was already canonized

a Sainte by the Pope, and appointed to this heauen.
There was looked for also, one Costazarus, and one
Cornelius, who with his Phariseicall and frierish opinions,
stoutly fighting against Christ, had gotten
the Bishoprike of Bertinoro, or to saye more truely of
Bruteonor.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               What was spoken of them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Of Costazarus,
                  Costazarus. I hearde, that these Gods
were all wonderously offēded with him, for he had deceyued
his God the Pope.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And how?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will tell thée. Preaching in a Lent season in
Spoleti,
                  Spoleti a Citie in Italie. he made a bargain with the Serattanes (who
are all cōmon pickepurses) to part the gaine betwene
them, and so published certain false bulles, of the pardones
of Clement the .vij. the which pardoned al maner
of sinne and mischiefe,A friers fine deuise to get mony. Friers and Pick purses holde together to him that woulde paye a
piece of mony therefore. But first he let passe halfe the
lent, before he published his Bulles, that the length of
the tyme shoulde not discouer his knauerie, therefore
when he sawe it was time, he cast forth his nettes, and
drewe a great quantitie of golden fyshes. The Citizēs
of Spoleti,
                  Il halting before a Crepill. who are as craftie as the Deuill, smelled
oute the deceit, and he no lesse craftie than they, was
ware that they perceyued it, and so withoute bidding
his hoste farewell departed, and lefte the nettes, but
the fishe he caried away with him.
            
            
               Marforius.
               There
was a conning Fisher, but what was concluded by
these Gods concerning him?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To forgyue
him, so that he follow his old wickednesse, and aboue
all things to beware that he deceiue y• Pope no more
nor speake ought against him.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And of Cornelius,
what was said?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They commended
him much seing him so valiauntly in the Councell defende
the Popes cause against Christ. And they were

                     〈2 pages missing〉
                  
                  
led away to the great glory and renowme of this heauen.
And euen very then, was come a letter of his, in
the which he shewed his diligence, and made those reuerend
fathers vnderstand, how Venice, and all Italy,
was ful of Lutherans, & y• they did cōtinually increase.
            
            
               Marforius.
               These newes must nedes much displease
those that were aboue.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou mayst be sure
of that. And they were also vengeance angry against
the Pope.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Alas man, against the Pope,
and why?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               For they looked for an other to
come to this heauen, that had built so many Churches
of stone, so many Chappels, so many Aultars, so many
furnitures for them, and so many other things for the
conseruation, prayse, and glory of this heauen, that
fewe were like vnto him.A foule faulte in the Pope to loose suche a benefactour. And the Pope, bycause
he gaue him not the Byshopricke of Verona, hath
nowe lost him altogether, and as the letters of the
little Gréeke sayde, this gentleman is now aboute to
forsake them, and to ioyne him selfe to Iesus Christ,
their mortall enimye.Christe and the Pope mortall enimies.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               If these newes
displeased them, it doth the more please me, for (to tell
the truth) they are growen into suche a deadly hatred
with me, (bycause they are so bitter enimies to my
Lorde God) that I feare I shall not liue to sée them all
destroyed. But followe on the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               We
came to the fourth streate,The quere or order of the Martires. where the Martirs are.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What doe they there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               All of
them muche disdayning their deathes, sought by all
meanes to giue to men the punishement which they
them selues suffred. O, I will tel thée a mery pastime
that happened while I was there, I hearde a great
noyse, I saw euery man run & I runne for company,
and I saw Saint Rocke, and Saint Bastian that were

together by the eares,Vnqui
                        ••
                      Saintes tha
                        •
                      fight in heauen. Saint Rocke had his lefte hand
vpon the nose, and all ouer Saint Bastians face, and
with his right hande, bobbed him about the head with
his Palmers staffe, Saint Bastian on the other side,
he had with one hande caught holde of Saint Rockes
bearde, and with the other hauing drawen oute of his
thighe one of his Arrowes, was about to haue thruste
it through Saint Rockes sides, and if the other blessed
Saintes had not come betwene them, there must nedes
haue bene the Diuell and all to doe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Wherefore fought they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause eche of
them pretended to be Master ouer the plague.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Howe agréed they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was concluded
that one of them shoulde haue the Plague, and
the other the Pestilence. As I tolde thée therfore a little
before,Cruel and reuenging Saintes. all these Martyrs thinking scorne of their
deathes, sought to giue to men that punishment, that
they them selues 
                     •
                  ad suffered. And therefore Saint
Anthony thought to fasten his fire vpon some one,
Saint Rocke his plague, Saint Bastian his Pestilēce,
Saint Apolonia the Toothaches, Saint Blase the disease
of the throte.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What straunge things
be these? I haue heard, that they haue helped suche as
had these diseases, but what profite get thei by this cruelty
of theirs?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What thing is it that maketh
thee so muche to estéeme the Pope?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Feare, for with sworde, fire and water, he punisheth,
who so euer abateth one 
                     •
                  ote of his power and kingdome.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest true,The Popes violent argumente
                        •
                      in Disputacion. & these be the arguments,
with the which he disputeth against the Gospell.
But if he had no power to do this to thee, howe
muche then, wouldest thou esteeme him?
            
            
               Marforius.
               But little.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               May feare therefore of other

mens power doe so muche among men, as to make
one, of a man a God?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yea out of doubt,
for feare made the first Gods in the worlde.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Much more therefore oughtest thou to thinke that this
commeth to passe concerning Saintes, who are other
maner of fellowes than the Pope.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou
meanest therefore, that they vse this feate, that they
may be both feared & worshipped in the worlde?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Who doubteth of that?
            
            
               Marforius.
               And who
hath giuen them so great power against men?God vseth his Saintes as Ministers of of his wrathe.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The most high God who sendeth his plagues
by these saintes, that are 
                     •
                  uil Angelles, that is to say
Diuels.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And after what sort?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If men forsaking the true God, do runne to false saintes,
wilt thou not, that God doth leaue them in the
power of those, whom they haue chosen to be their defendours?
            
            
               Marforius.
               And me thinketh it good reason.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If I therfore choose to my selfe, Saint
Rocke, or Saint Bastian, or Saint Anthony, to whom
I beare my deuotion, and in my missehaps & aduersities
runne to them, and stande in feare of them, am
not I as a slaue vnto them?
            
            
               Marforius.
               No Pasquine
we pray them,The blinde opinion of the ignorant concerning Saintes. that they will sue vnto God for vs, and
there obtayne for vs. Then we pray vnto them, that
they wil not vse against vs that power, that they haue
of God to do vs hurte, but that they will delyuer vs
from the same.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Tell me, thinkst thou that
God is become so olde, that he can nowe no more gouerne
the whole worlde alone, and that he must deuide
his kingdom, and his power among his Saints?
Beside that, when thou prayest to Saint Ro
                        •
                     ke▪
                   doest
not thou euidently shew y• thou beleuest, y• he is more
merciful than christ & that herein he can do more than

christ? for else thou wouldst go to christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Albeit
I sayd no, the effect sayd yea.
            
            
               Pas.
               Doing therfore
this, séest thou not, that y• doest iniury to Christ.
            
            
               Mar.
               And wherein?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In preferring man before
God,How Iniurie is done to Christe. in beleuing that a mā hath more mercy, & can do
more than Christ: to whome the scripture sayth, that
God hath giuen al power in heauen, and in earth,Math. 28. and
that he is altogether mercy. In that thou wilt haue an
other aduocate than Christ, who as the scripture saith
in many places, is our only Aduocate,1. Iohn. 2. & only mediator
betvvene God & man.
                  1. Tim. 2. What vnexcusable foolishnesse
is that therfore of them, y• forsaking so mercyful
a Lorde, so gentle and liberall a defendour, so mighty
an Aduocate, in whom only God the father is pleased,
they run backe from God and his sonne, to certaine
Saintes, whom they knowe not whether they be in
heauen or no, nay rather is it to be thought, that they
be in the Diuels Codware, and thus leaue they that
onely Mediatour, that onely Aduocate, that God hath
prepared for vs,Math. 3. 
                  in vvhom onely God is pleased. Oh
how many are vpon the Aultars and worke miracles,
whose soules are tormented in Hell.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh
my Pasquine, how much am I bound to thée, that makest
me to vnderstande the greatnesse of my grosse ignoraunce.
Nowe am I sory for the time that I haue
lost about Iohannes Andreas and Speculator.
                  Wryters vpō the law Canō. But tel
me, are Anthony & Rocke Martyrs?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou
askeste me euen in time, for I my selfe maruelled
much at it,Bonner and Story lacked when martir dome was so hard to come by. when I sawe them in that Quéere. But
séeking more curiouslye to be out of doubt thereof, it
was tolde me, that they were not Martyred, but they
earnestly sought to haue bene, and that they roamed
throughe many Cities to be offered to the Lord, and

coulde finde no man that would kil them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This did suche at all tymes finde, as neuer sought for
it in dede, thinke thou nowe, whether he might lacke
it, that sought for it, & most chiefly then, among those
Diocletanes and Maxentij,
                  Cruell tirauntes like Bonner and his Babes. that were waxed fat therwith,
as do in these dayes the Popes and their mitred
Mahoundes, who if they knew these our communications,
I can assure thee, that they would easely graunt
vs to be martyrs. But thou sawest not there Saint
Peter and Saint Paule?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe them,The Apostels of Saint Iohn Late
                        •
                     ane. and
I sawe them not. For they were behinde a certayne
Courtine, the which was by and by let downe so lowe
that a man might sée to their breastes, and anone it
was drawen vppe againe in the turning of a hande.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But Saint Christopher was he there?Christophe
                        •
                     
                   If
he were, thou didst take much payne to sée him, and to
knowe him among the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe him, &
beholding so monstrous a Giant, I asked mine Aungell,
if this Giant were euer in earth, much maruelling,
that none that hath written hystories, nor none
of those that with so great diligence, haue written the
doings of the Greekes and Romaines, and of others of
olde time, hath made any mention of so huge a giant.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What did the Angell answere thée?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He laughed at it: and desiring him to answere
me, thus he beganne. Beleue not Pasquine (quoth he)
that there hath bene at any time, so great a Giant in
the world: but this is a deuise ef those wise men of the
first christian common wealth, who meaning to sette
forth the life of a christian man, cōprehended the whole
vnder this Image,The fable of Saint 
                        〈◊〉
                      topher is a figure of 
                        •
                      Christian mans life. the which they after warde called
Christophorus, for Christophorus is no more to saye,
but, Bearing Christ. They faine therefore, that he is

a Giant, for that he must be strong that beareth Christ
and his truth in the presence of men. They fayne also
that he carieth men ouer a water: for our life is as a
water, ouer the which we can not passe, vnlesse we be
caried, that is to say, we can not passe to heauen, except
he that is of Christ doe carry vs with the truth of
his Gospell. They faine also that he hath in his hande
a trée to stay himselfe by, this signifieth fayth, y• which
if it did not holde vs vp, full ofte should we fall to the
ground: they fayne that after he had vsed this work of
charitie, the trée waxed gréene agayne, for fayth without
good workes, is as it were drie and withered. And
thus is he paynted at the entrie into the church,Why Saint Christopher is painted without the Church dore as in Italie is vsed and other where. The fable of Saint George is the example of Christes life. to the
ende eche christian man should remember, whether he
be as he ought to be. There were also other Saintes
(mine Angell tolde me) that were likewise fayned, to
set forth vnto vs (vnder that representatiō) some truth
As Saint George that killeth the Dragon, to deliuer
the Kings daughter from that terrible beaste that destroyed
a
                     •
                  l Cappadocia. This Cappadocia is as much
to meane, as the world: the Dragon is the Diuel, that
deuoureth al that come to his hands, the kings daughter
is the Church of God, saint George is Christ, who
seing his church in peril, s
                     •
                  ayeth that Dragon, and deliuereth
his most faire daughter. And so he tolde me
many other like.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This doe I beleue right
well, for I remember that the Decretal holdeth these
two hystories of no authoritie, and not allowed by the
Churche, albeit the Friers haue sithens drawen all
things to their owne gayne, partly through false dealing,
and partely through ignoraunce. If this be true
(as I well beleue it h
                     •
                  w do lyes swarme in Frier Iames
of the Synkehole,Writinges of lieng legende? and Anthonie of Florence, and

many other such like, who haue deuised not hystories,
which ought to be the lightes of truth, but fables of
Lucian, not liues of men, but lies of Diuels, & with a
barbarous & yrkesome style haue intreated therof. And
he that taketh them not to be true, woe be to him: he
is an Heretique, let him go: nay rather kyll him. And
so say I also of those doltishe deuises lately written of
saint Katherine, and of saint Thomas Aquine at the
instance of that Ipocrite the Marques of Vasto.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou séest therefore, that we must not folishly
beleue euery thing. I coulde recken vnto thée a number
of Gods of the aunciente heathen,The Gods of the Heathen are become our Gods. Sancta Maria Rotunda in Rome. transfourmed
into our Gods, with the same errour and falsehode, &
without changing any other thing than the name only,
and often times without changing the name at al.
Beholde the Rotunda, which in the olde time was called
Pantheon (bicause it was the dwelling house of al
the Gods) nowe haue they made it the dwelling house
of all Saintes: and in place of Cibele mother of al the
Gods, haue they set the virgin Marie, for heade of al
                     •
                  
the Saintes. And here harde by thou knowest is the
Minerua,
                  Minerua. whiche was in the olde tyme the temple of
Minerua, and nowe haue they dedicated it to Saint
Minerua the Uirgin,Romulus and Remus. Castor and Pollux. euen as Pallas Minerua was a
Uirgin. The Temple whiche in the olde tyme was
of Romulus and Remus, they haue made nowe the
Church of Saint Cosmus and Damian. The temple
that was of olde time of Castor and Pollux,
                  A number of heathenishe ceremonies conuerted into necessarie articses of beliefe. haue they
nowe made the Church of Saint Geruays & Prothays.
Those of old tyme that had Lucina to heale their eies,
these of our time haue Saint Lucie. Those of old time
had Ceres to be the Goddesse of Corne, these of oure
time haue Pancras. Those of old time had Mars and

                  Pallas to be Gods ouer the warres, these of our time
haue Saint George and Saint Barbara. The Scafaring
men in the olde time, sawe Castor and Pollux,
in the ende of a tempest: these of our time sée Saint
Eremus. Among those of olde tyme, it was not lawfull
for the Uirgins of Vesta, to marry: with these of our
time, it is not lawf
                     •
                  ll for Nunnes to mary. Among
those of old time,A vengeable long leape, or a vengeable lowde lye. the Church of Diana departed from
Zante, and together with the builders miraculouslye
went into Spaine, as a man may reade in Plinie, with
those of our tyme the Church of our Lady at Loretto,
came out of Sclauonie, and is maruellously come into
Italy,
                  These Ladies be at Rome, & at Venice they haue, our Lady the faire, our Lady of the garden our Lady of the beanes, and our Lady of the Snowe. as is to be read in the lying Legendes of these
pickpurse priestes deuising. Those of old time washed
selues with fayre cleare water, to clense them selues
frō sinnes: these of our tyme fillip with their finger a
little holy water on their forehead. They of old time
had Iuno Feronia, Iuno Lucina, Iuno Saturnia, Iuno
Curites: these of our time haue our Lady of grace, our
Lady of the myracles, our Lady our Lordes mother,
our Lady of the people. They of olde time filled their
Churches with little Tables, conteyning the vowes
they made: these of our time fill their Churches full
of little Tables conteyning their vowes. Those of old
time said, that in beanes dwelled the soules of y• dead:
these of our tyme giue Beanes for the soules of the
deade. And euen so,The Paganes and the Popish religion al one, or els but little difference betwene. he that will go and search, pointe
by pointe the Popishe Religion, eyther shall he find it
altogether like to that of the olde Paganes, or if there
be any difference, it differeth but in the names onely.
So that if wee will worshippe these oure Saintes,
bycause we will not be accoumpted Heretiques, we
fall to worshyppyng of Iuno, Minerua, Mars,

Hercules, Polyphemus, Briarius, and an infinite nū
                  ber
of Diuelles,This Nafissat was made a Saint by the Pope, byc
                        ••
                     se she did prostitute her selfe not for mony nor carnall lust, but for pure deuociō to God and meere necessitie of the partie, hauing none other almes to giue for Gods sake. vnder the name of Saint Anthony,
Saint Nichodeme, Saint Christian, & Saint Nafissa,
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh Pasquine thou haste well opened my
vnderstanding, nowe certainly thou sayest the truth,
these things are very clere, I thought euer till nowe,
that I had done wel following y• worshipping of those
diuels.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I haue other things without nūbre
to say, & when I shal vtter thē, I wil make al y• world
wōder.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh happy day, whē y• trueth shalbe
sene to shine abrode.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               Happy therfore is this
day, for y• seest how it is sprōg vp & how it goeth shewing
it selfe abrode, to the worlde in despite of the shauen
Crownes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Now proceede on a while
to the other Quéeres.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I wil so, but first I
must tell thée a fewe things, that here I sawe & heard.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tel me them therefore.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe
one of these martirs, y• warned the rest of his fellowes
that they shuld do nothing against the Heretiques,
excepte they would beare the paynes therof thēselues
& that they should take example by him,The Charitablest Saint in al that Heauen. who had felte
the vengeaunce of God, for that he had accused of heresie
suche as he knew not, and of suche thinges as
he vnderstoode not, & if there be any they should rather
be wonne by admonishing them to leaue it, than with
fire and tormentes to make them awaye. For they be
not al Heretiques, that be so called, but such as iudge
contrary to the holy Scripture, and that leaue the cō
                  maundementes
of God,Who be heretiques. and follow those of men, and
defende the same as heauenly commaundements, and
also preferre them before Gods commaundements,
these b
                     •
                   Heretiques. And heauēly things are the same
onely, that are contayned in the olde and newe Testament,

which if they wil not beleue, the day of the Lord
shall come, that shall discouer all things, & shal make
them repent it, and their repentaunce shall not then
helpe them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who was that, that was so
honest?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was Rochester, about whome,
were two Martyrs, the one was Peter Martir of the
order of Fryers Bréechers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou wouldest
say Preachers.Pasquine alludeth to these wordes, Pedi
                        •
                     
                     catores and Predicatores. Saint Thomas Becket.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I alwayes misse in
dede. The other was Thomas of Canterbury, eche of
them confirmed Rochesters talke.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But
had Rochester his redde Hat?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He had in
dede his heade red, and his shoulders, but it was with
bloude, & not with a Hatte.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And I heard
say that the Pope sent him a Hatte.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea,
but when the King of England vnderstoode it,Rochester lept without his hatte and his head also. he caused
his head to be cut of, before he shoulde haue to doe
with that Romish harlotte, whervpon the Papistes,
for that they thought he dyed for their defence, and bycause
he had written against the Lutheranes, they put
him in the number of these holy Martyrs.
            
            
               Marforius.
               It is very well. And for one selfe cause, as farre as I
can perceyue, both Peter Martyr, a Dominicane
Frier in Italy, and Thomas of Canterbury in England
dyed, the one for persecuting after their Frierish
fashion, certaine poore Countrey men, as Heretiques,
betwene Milaine and Como was slayne. The other,
stryuing with the King for certaine iurisdictions, was
condemned, to haue done against the estate.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest truth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Followe on then.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Suche maner of Martyrs are these of the
Popes.The Order o
                        •
                      the apostles and Euan
                        •••
                      listes.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Say on the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               From
this Order, we went vppe to that of the Apostles, and
Euangelists.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I like well to heare of this.

Thou wilte anone put me out of doubt, whether there
be .xij. Apostles or more. For if Paule of Tharsus were
a true Apostle, then are there .
                     •
                  i
                     •
                  j. Apostles, leauing
also the other, that are by him in his Epistles called Apostles.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This question might well haue
bene put among th
                     •
                  se,Tit. 3. whiche Paule called vnprofitable
and superfluous, but to satisfie my frende Marforius,
I will aunswere in two sortes. First, therefore
thou must remember, that we are in the Popes heauen:
where al things are contrary and preposterous,In the Popes Heauen all thinges are contrarie.
& therfore is there not y• nūber of Apostles egall with
that number y• Christ had, as thou shalt vnderstād afterward.
There was neither y• true Peter, nor Iames,
nor Iohn, nor Paule, nor none of y• rest, but other of an
other maner of sort.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who were they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Those y• are called Cardinals,Cardinales are Apostles in the Popes Heauen Court of Rome & this Heauen all one. y• which in this
heauē are in the place of y• Apostles.
            
            
               Marforius.
               So it
is also in Rome, but I thought y• there had bene some
other thing different one frō another.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               Nay, one milke is not so like another, as this heauen is like
the court of Rome, in y• which eche man knoweth that
the Apostles and disciples are made for money, & not
twelue,The Apostles and Desciples are made for money. but ther may be made of them without number.
But concerning the true number of the Apostles,
know thou, that they are taken in two sortes. Apostle
is as much to say,Phil. 2. as a messanger, Ambassadour, or
one that carieth glad tidings. And so Paule doth call
Epaphroditus an Apostle, whome the Philippians
haue sent vnto him. But proprely those twelue are accompted
Apostles,Math. 28. whome Christ our king and God
sent in the beginning to beare his gospel through the
whole worlde. But speaking of Paule,
                     Mar. 16. Paule a true and faithefull Apostle.
it is not to be
doubted, that he is not a true and faythfull Apostle of

Christ,Act. 1. for euen as those twelue, (of which number Iudas
failed, and in whose place was by the Apostles appoynted
Matthie, by diuine inspiration) were chosen
by Christ, being then mortall: euen so by the same
Christ,Act. 9. being since immortal and glorious, was Paul
called to the office of the Apostleship. Wherefore the
Apostles were verely .xiij.xiij Apostles and not xij. and not .xij. except they wyll
take those twelue onely that were chosen by Christ, all
after one maner, and Matthie as chosen by the Apostles,
but yet (as I haue sayde) by the spirite of God.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I sée in déede that it is no greate matter,
whether a man knowe these things or not: yet is it
right pleasaunt to me, that I haue vnderstode them.
But tell me, was saint Ierome in this number? for I
sée, that they painte him like a Cardinall, and so they
say he was.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Saint Ierome was not there,Saint I
                        •
                     rome was neuer no Cardinall.
neyther coulde he be there, for it is an euidente thing,
that in his time there were no Cardinals, but as that
Poet sayth, Painters & Poets haue alwayes had authoritie
to deuise what they liste themselues. And notwithstanding,
in these dayes men builde vpon y• dreames
of Painters, the chiefe matters of our religion,
and they accompte that which is paintedlie as an Article
of Faith, and him that speaketh against it, for an
Heretique. But I say, that Ierome would neuer haue
suffred, no such maner of titles deuised by men, thorow
the prouocation of the Diuell.Saint Ierome an enimie to the Romishe Churche. For he was religious,
and learned, and farre from all ambition: and a
most mortall enimie to the Romishe Church of Antichrist,
that then began to grow, as in all his writings
may well be séene.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then haue they
fayned him to be a Cardinall?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I wyll tell
thée. When the Church of Rome began to make Cardinals:

séeing that y• order nor title could not be foūded
vpon any place of the Scripture,Ierom was called a Cardinall and was none. bycause it excelled
neyther in any great learning or holinesse, to the ende
it might yet haue the greater authority and reuerence
they began to paint saint Ierome (that was long before
dead) with a red Hat, and set him forth as a Cardinal.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That was well done, but then it behoued
the rest to follow him, in learning and holinesse.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Is it not inough that they haue followed him,The order of Cardinalles more abhominable than honorable. How the degree of Cardinalles is growen to so great authoritie.
in speaking against matrimony?
            
            
               Marforius.
               But
bycause there hath not bene one honest man at any
time sithens, is not that order therefore more shamefull
and abbominable, than honourable?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Howe wilt thou that they should be honest, if in their
cursed othe, they rebel from Christ, and do deny him,
and ioyne them selues to Antichrist, and worshippe
him?
            
            
               Marforius.
               By my truth thou sayest true, who
readeth that othe, shall finde that it is so, I neuer toke
héede of it before.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               But sith they could not
giue dignity, and authoritie, to that degrée, with holinesse
of liuing, and with sincere goodnesse, they haue
giuen it to the same with their superfluous rychesse,
and like very Tyrannes by force, & not by loue, haue
they gotten to them selues authority, and reuerence,
or as we may say,This worde sauing your reuerence is vsed of vs when we speake of some thing that is vnclenly or filthie, for men vse some time to saye sauing your reuerence he is a knaue, or a Cardinal, and so the Author m
                        •
                     aneth that this word reuerence belongeth to ther riches and highe estate, and this worde sauing your reuerenc
                        •
                      to their vile and filthy life. sauing your reuerence also.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou must nedes sée also Bonauenture, that
made the comētary vpō the Master of the Sentences,
and Vincent y• 
                  Dominicane Frier, that left certaine
Sermones behinde him, for they are both Saintes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I saw them, and they were wrangling together
as they had bene mad.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And whervpon?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Of that foolishe question, that hath

alredy bred so great discordes and tragidies,Brabling and contencion betwene the Saintes. betwene
the Friers of Saint Fraunces, and Saint Dominicke.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Of the conception of our Lady thou meanest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is not that fonde
foolishnesse yet layde to soake?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It will be
layde to soake when all sectes of Friers, shall be layd
to soake, or (to say better) ouerthrowen and brought to
nought, the which is already begon, and with the help
of Christ shal shortly be ended.
            
            
               Marforius.
               God graūt
it be quickly. But knowest thou whence this name
Cardinall was taken? for Barbazza will nedes that
Cardinall shoulde be deriued from this worde Cardo
Cardinis,
                  The originall of this word Cardinall. which in our tongue is the hooke or hendge
of a doore. And Hostiences, will nedes that they be foū
                  ded
vpō that place in the booke of kings.1. Reg. 2. Epenthesis. 
                  The pillers
of the earth are the Lordes, and he hath set the world
thereon.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               But I founde in an excellent
Gramarian, that Cardinall is so called by the figure
called Epenthesis, in stead of Cardinall, as they say,
Induperator, for Imperator, & for to alleage thée two
Authors, to set against thy two, I found in Ruzzante,
that this worde Cardinall commeth from the Canker,
for the Cardinals are the very canker of y• church,
the which disease if it be not altogether taken away,
with some edge toole, or with fire, it will neuer be
whole. Another exposition haue I also founde in Calapine,
who sayth that Cardinal,Carneuale is shrouetide. is euen the selfe same
that Carneuale, for neither the one nor the other doth
attende to any other thing, than to eate, drinke, slepe,
commit whordome,The. wickednesse o
                        •
                      Cardinalles is vnspeakeable. fall to banketting, and last of al,
to do al those goodly valiant actes, that to declare them
all, would wery Demosthenes, Cicero, Virgill, Homer,
Horace, and Pindarus. All tongues are dombe to

speake of them euen the thousandeth parte. Better
it is to be still than say little of them. And although a
man wrote of th
                     ••
                  r vile naughtynesse more thā Saint
Augustine wrote, yet should he haue sayde but little,
for the stinke of them reacheth euen to the Scytheans,
and to the Hiperboryans, and to the furihest parts of
the newe worlde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               They are therefore Apostates
and not Apostles. But tell me somewhat of
Cardinall Coutarine,
                  Cardinalles that fauored the Gospel. and Cardinall Fregoso, called
Salernitano,
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe them not, for my good
Aungell tolde me, that they were not receyued into
this heauen, for they had fauoured the doctrine of the
Gospell, more than was the duety of Cardinals, and
that if the waight of their Cardinalship haue not pulled
them downe: he thought, that they were ascended
to the true heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               God is strong inough,
he might easely haue drawen thē vp thither, if it were
his will.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I knowe that well, for all things
are possible with God.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I pray thee heartily
talke no more to me of these men, but follow on the
rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will: but I doubt that we shall go
from euill to worsse,The order of of the Euangelistes. for after these come the Euangelistes,
whom when I saw, me thought I felt my soule
to be torne, as it were out of my body, for very sorow.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Alas, what is that I heare thée say?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is as I tell thée, for in place of those foure
Euangelistes, and of their Gospels, (albeit the Gospel
be but one onely, be it eyther written by the Apostles,
or the Euangelistes) I saw that there were foure coū
                  cels
receyued, that is to say, that of Nice, that of Constantinople,
that of Ephesus, & that of Calcedon. And
then foure Doctours of the Churche, that is to we
                     •
                  e
Ambrose, Augustine, Ierome, and Gregorie. And after

these, other innumerable, whome we had sene in the
Quéere of the Doctours. And moreouer, were added
the bookes of the Decrées, Decretalles, Sectes, and
Clementines: neyther did all this suffise, but it was
also graunted to euery one, so that he had eyther a
Cowle or a shauē Crowne, to write what him lusted,
and the same to set forth in steade of Euangelical and
Apostolicall Doctrine:What shauen Crownes may doe. In so muche, that the Pope
hath drawen all things to him selfe, and hath placed
him selfe in the steade of Christes Gospel, and of God
him selfe, nay rather aboue God,2. Thes. 2. The Pope is aboue al, both God and men. and aboue al lawes,
of God or men, affirming that all consisteth in his
owne breast. Beholde therfore, what maner of Euangelistes,
and what Gospels they be. And yet I tell thée
nothing of the Belles, of the carued, of the painted,
and of the molten Images of the Church, of the Crosses,
of lightes,Howe the Popes 
                        •
                     altrie must be estemed. of waxe, of vesselles, of garments, and
other ornaments, all whiche things they will nedes
haue to be taken for true Euangelists: Wherefore I
pray thée cause me not to speake any more of this so
abhominable and detestable a Quéere.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Procéede therefore to the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A little of
from hence,The order of the Preistes and Leuits. was the order or Quéere of Priestes and
Leuites.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Newe or olde?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               New
made of the olde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Howe?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Remembrest
thou not, that we said before that I sawe in
y• Quéere of the Doctours, they caryed the old Testament
into the newe?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I remēber me well
of that, but I thought that our Priesthoode had come
from Christ, and not from the olde Testament.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What did make thée thinke so?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Many things: first,Num. 1. they were Priestes, by nature, &
by succession: for the Trybe of Leui had this priuiledge

of God: wherfore Leuiticus, was called y•
                  A comparison betwene the priesthode of the olde lawe and the Popes prieste
                        •
                     . priesthoode.
Our Priesthoode consisteth not in any familie
or kinred, but they are Leuites and Priestes, that are
by the Byshop thervnto chosen and greased. Beside
that, they sacrificed brute beastes, but our Priestes do
offer and sacrifice Christ to God.
            
            
               Pasquine,
               Thou folowest
the errour of the Papistes Marforius, that is
to say of the Romishe Church, but a remedy must be
founde for this errour.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What remedy is
that?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The Philosophers sayd, that Philosophie
was the medicine of the minde,Errours the infirmities of the minde. True wisdom the medicine of the minde. for it tooke away
errours and purged the mind. But we that haue
receyued y• truth from the true God, say not that Philosophie,
(that is to saye, the desire of worldely wisedome)
but the wisedome it selfe, giuen vnto vs in the
wrytings of the Apostles, is the medicine of the mind,
and a most sure remedy against al errors which are y•
diseases of y• mind.
            
            
               Mar.
               Why thē, is y• an error of our
priestes.
            
            
               Pas.
               It is a fowle error, & a madnesse of mind
very daungerous.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I muche desire to be
healed of this infirmitie, and to haue agayne y• health
of minde, which is the wisedome of Christ.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou shalt sone be hole, for thou knowest thy disease,Christes wisedom the helth of the minde.
and desirest the medicine. I wil therfore begin to cure
thée. All that thou hast spoken of Priesthode, shall be
ouerthrowen, if thou wilt thinke, that neyther the Apostles,
nor the Euangelists haue written so much as
one tittle of such kinde of Priesthode and Sacrifice:
But where they haue spoken of Priesthode, and of
Priests, they haue not meante it of those that are annointed
by Byshops,A discriptiō of the true Priesthode. but of that Priesthode that maketh
all Christians, to be Priests, consecrating them
with the vnction of the holy Ghost, and not wyth oyle

coniured and consecrated by Byshops. Peter the Apostle
sayth,1. Pet. 2. that all Christian man are a spirituall
housholde, and a holy and royall Priesthode, to offer
spirituall offrings acceptable to God,Al Christians are Priestes. through Iesus
Christ. And so saint Paule, prayeth the Romanes, and
other the true worshippers of Christ, that they offer
their bodies in a liuing sacrifice,Rom. 12. holy & acceptable to
God, which is your reasonable seruing of him. Wherfore
thou séest, that we are al the temple of God, Priestes,
Offrings, and Sacrifices most acceptable vnto
God, for our Lord Iesus Christ, the high Priest and euerlasting
Byshops sake.Induction. I would therefore knowe
of thée nowe, if thou beleue that Iesus Christ the high
Priest and Lambe,Heb. 10. haue taken away the sinnes of the
worlde, as sayth saint Iohn,Iohn. 1 and all the whole scripture.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yea I beleue it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I would
know of thée, for what occasion thou thinkest that the
Priestes of the olde testament so often times renued
those sacrifices, and heaped so many offrings one after
another.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Bicause God had commaunded
it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That is true, but yet for an other
cause, sayth Paul,Sacrifices of the olde lawe could not take awaye Synne. that is, bycause those sacrifices did
not take away sinnes, and therfore were they so often
renued: for else there shuld haue bene an ende of their
sacrifices, as Paule sayth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstand
thée nowe, but I knowe not to what ende thou speakest
this.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To what end thinkest thou thatHeb. 10.
the Priestes and other of the olde lawe,Why Priestes in the olde lawe were instituted. were instituted
by God?
            
            
               Marforius.
               For sacrifices I thinke.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Priests therefore were instituted for sacrifices,
and the sacrifices and the altares for sinnes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               So it séemeth to me.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Take away therfore
sinne, & thou shalt sée, that there is no more priesthode,

aultare, nor sacrifice. For as much as Paul sheweth
vs the reasō therof, by that which the holy ghost
spake. This is the Testament,
                  Heb. 10. 
                  that I vvill make vvith
you.
                  Iere. 31. 
                  After those dayes I vvil giue my lavves into their
hartes, & vvil vvrite thē in their mindes, and vvil no
more remember their vvickednesse: Thus doth he
conclude, where as remission of sinnes is made, there
is no more oblation for sinnes, and to shewe that we
are true priestes,Hebr. 10. he addeth exhorting vs. Sith vve haue
therefore my brethren thorovv the bloude of Iesu, libertie
to enter into the holy place, by the nevve and
liuing vvay, vvhich he hath prepared for vs, throughe
the vaile, that is to say, his flesh. And seing vve haue
an high priest, vvhich is ruler ouer the house of God,
lette vs dravve nere vvith a true heart in a sure faith,
hauing our heartes vvashed, and the euill conscience
put avvay. But as touching that thou hast sayd,The Popishe Priestes can not offer Christe. that
our Massemūblers offer euery day Christ in their sacrifice
to God: thou art not able with any little authority
of the Scripture, to confirme it. Nay rather is
it against the Scripture, and is deuised to the blasphemie
of Christ, and of his Sacrifice. For it is wrtten to
the Hebrues. That vve are sanctisied,
                  Heb. 10. 
                  by the offering
vp of Christes body once onely done. For he hauing
offered one onely offering for sinnes, is set dovvne for
euer, at the right hande of God, and from hence forth
tarieth till his enimies be made his fotestole, for vvith
one onelye oblation, hath he made perfecte for euer,
those that are sanctified. Wherefore there nedeth no
more any other sacrifice, to pourge sinnes. For Christ
to whome it was sayd. Thou art a priest for euer, hath
once only & sufficiently offered him self for our sinnes,
an euerlasting, vncha
                     •
                  geable, perpetual offring, & sacrifice.

But these mates calling their Masse a sacrifice,
go about to shew, that the sacrifice of Christ once
onely done, is not of perfection to washe away al sinnes.
The which howe great an offence,The great blasphemie of the Popishe Priestes. howe great a
blasphemie & iniurie it is against the bloud of Christ,
all godly men doe knowe, and not onely do they this
outragious offence, but they do also commit sacriledge
these Massemumblers of ours, who affirme, that they
offer Christ to God, whom the father gaue to vs. And
Christ sayde to Wall: Take ye,
                  Math. 26. 
                  eate ye, drinke ye of this
all of ye. And these for all that do the contrary,Luc. 22. and
will séeme to be more rich than God, sith they say, that
they giue that, whiche they receyue, or rather that
they might receiue, if they beleued the holy scriptures.
But the matter is far otherwise, for they neyther giue
nor receyue nothing,The Priestes say they giue Christe. they giue not, for no man can
giue that he hath not, and that they haue not Christ, by
this it may be séene, in that they haue not fayth, the
which only maketh of the heart of man, the temple of
Christ. And for the same cause can not they receyue
Christ,How Christe is giuen. whiles he is offred vs. For with the only faith
and assured stedfastnesse in y• goodnesse of God, and of
the sacrifice of Christ, Christ is to be receyued. And if
they can giue any thing,The Papistes giue the Diuell and 
                        〈◊〉
                      Christe. they can giue the Diuel, whō
they haue receyued: euen as Iudas the traytour into
whom Sathan entred when Christ offred him y• piece
of the mysticall breade. But if thou haue any thing to
say herevnto,Iohn. 13. say on, for I wil say nothing else.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What wouldest thou that I should say against
so open testimonie of the Scripture? Wilt thou haue
the sicke man stryue with the Phisitian? I haue taken
this holsome drinke that thou hast giuen me, and
I hope, that hauing well digested it in the bowels of

my soule, it will purge me, and heale me, not onely
of this, but of many other diseases. But one doubt
sticketh yet in my stomacke, whether thou w
                     •
                  lte haue
in the Church of Christ, any orders or any holy factiō.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I deny not,Orders necessarie in the Church. nor refuse not, (my Marforius)
the ministerie of the Church, nor any order, that may
be brought in by the Testimonie of the newe Testament.
For I learne by S. Paule, that Christe hath
giuen vnto his Church,Ephe. 4. Some to be Apostles, some
Prophetes, other to be Euangelistes,Rom. 12. other pastors, and
some teachers,1. Cor. 12. that the Saintes might haue all things
necessary to vvorke & minister vvithall, to the edifying
of the body of Christ till vve euery one in the vnitie
of faith, & knovvledge of the sonne of God, grovv
vp to a perfect man after the measure of the age of the
fulnesse of Christ.
            
            
               Mar.
               This must nedes be a very
goodly order: but I vnderstand it not very well.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will declare it vnto thée. Apostles are those,Apostles what they be. Prophetes what they be. Euangelistes what they be.
that beare the Gospel vnto dyuers people & Nations.
Prophets are those y• being inspired by the holy ghost
do forwarne the Church, of the things that are like to
happen vnto hir. Euangelistes are those, that best are
able to shewe forth and declare the Gospell, and are
good Oratours in Christian knowledge. Pastours
that also are called Byshops,Pastors what they are. are those that haue the
authority wel to gouerne the congregations, and that
féede their flockes with good example of life, and with
true doctrine, & are watchfull to vnderstande the maners
and the lyues of their congregation, and the names
of eche of their sh
                     •
                  pe. Doctours are they,Doctours what they are. that in
the congregation teach good sciences, whether they be
holy or prophane. And this is it, that thou demaundest
of me. Albeit I doe not seperate from the body of
Christ, neyther Magistrates, nor the duetye of good

Princes, nor any other offices of the Christian common
weale, which Paule him selfe in many places declareth.
But I haue declared to thée briefly, these fiue
principall offices.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But what sayest thou
of Priestes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A Priest is as much to say
as an Elder,Prieste
                        •
                      what they are. and they were the selfe same, that the byshops
were, or Senatours of the church, of no lesse respect
for their age,Priestes were no sacrificers in the primitiue Church. than for their godlinesse. But yet
were they neuer Sacrificers, nor Massemumblers,
what soeuer our smeared shauelings prate thereof, be
they eyther the highest, the lowest, or the rude sorte of
Sir Iohns.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I stande nowe hearkening
that thou shouldst shew me, what thou sawest in that
Quéere of Priestes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe a shamefull
and disordered rable of Priestes, of whom some were
Canonnes,A disordered rable of shaued Priestes. some Parsons, some Chaplaines, some
Archedeacons, some Archepriestes, some Prouostes,
some Singlesoled priestes, some Deacons, some Chaū
                  ters,
and some of a thousande other sortes of names,
which haue bene founde out, sith the name of a minyster,
(through the pride of the wicked) began to stinke,
as nothing honourable, and yet too burthenous.
            
            
               Mar.
               What were all they doing?The consultacion of the Popes clergie. The Popes clergie is craf
                        •
                     ie and subtill.
               
            
            
               Pasq.
               They were consulting
of their ryches, of their tythes & pensions.
            
            
               Mar.
               What might be the cause therof?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               Bicause y•
pope demaūded y• tēthes of their benefices,Fat Priestes fell to packing for feare of sacking. & not once
onely, but euery yere once, yea twice a yeare, & they
were deuising meanes, how to scrape home to thē selues,
by some other fine fetches, all y• which they were
cōstrained to giue to y• Pope. There shuldst thou haue
heard diuers opinions, some there were y• said, that it
was good coūsel to deuide amōg thē selues, y• riches of
their churches, as Chalices, Patēs, siluer plate, & the
gay Copes, & other ornaments, alleaging, that if they

did it not the sooner, the Pope, or the Turk, or else the
Lutherans would sone after do it: sith they haue their
weapons ready. Here against spake certaine poore
hedge Priestes,The hedge Priestes for feare they shall licke no part, worke an other way. doubting, that they should not haue
their part of the Pye, and sayd, that it should be much
better for euery mans purpose, if eche of them in his
owne towne and Church, would first shewe forth outwardly
great holynesse, in their church garmentes, in
their owne apparell, in their countenaunce, in their
gestures, and aboue all things, in Massing deuoutly,
and to attend diligently to all their outward ceremonies.
And that done, that eche of them finde out some
goodly Image, or of the bones of some deade man, and
some newe Reliques, or to make some drops of bloud
come oute of a crucifixe, or of some other Image, or
else to make the Uirgin Mary wéepe, or finde some of
hir milke,The way to bring Priests in credite & estimation. or say that their God leapeth, and is in form
of a childe: or else say, that they haue séene, straunge
and wonderfull things in their Massing, or haue sene
some straūge vision, or to faine some other prety feate:
affirming this to be the way, to cause them to be reuerenced,
and obeyed of the people, & to recouer that
reputation, which for their abhominable naughtinesse
they haue lost, and not onely to mainteyne, but also to
encrease their ryches. But such as most commende
this deuise,Ipocrites cō
                     mende moste this deuise. Chietti setteth vp a new sect of Ipocrites. were of the Ipocritish order, instituted by
Cardinall Chietti.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I remember, that I
heard while he dwelled in Venice, that he had set vp a
newe secte of Priestes, founded altogether in Ipocriste
and outward shewe of holinesse, whereof it is come
to passe, that all Ipocrites are called Chiettines, the
which secte he forsooke, as sone as he had caught that
he fished for, for he had lefte his Bishopricke, that he

might get him a Cardinals Hatte, as Arettine sayde.
Forthwith therfore as his deuise came about, he came
flinging hither, to infect the Court of Rome with his
Ipocrisie.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Diddest thou neuer heare, how
he aunswered his Priestes at his departing from Venice,
when they asked him whither he wente.
            
            
               Marforius.
               No,Iohn. 8. I heard it neuer.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Whither I go
quoth he, thither can you not come, meaning that he
lefte them in pouerty, and in their filthinesse, and that
he wente to Rome, to that great dignitye, as to his
owne heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               He vsed the words of christ
to good purpose vile Uarlet that he was.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In
such like sorte do they interprete the scriptures all the
packe of them, and so by abusing it, find they out Purgatoryes,
Popes powers, & all other reasons for their
defence.The order or Quere of Patriarches and Prophetes. But let vs come to the Quéere of the Patriarches,
and Prophets.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Mary I besech thee
heartily, & say on. Whether there were in that place
the .xij. sonnes of Iacob, for they were all called Patriarches.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No but those that I sawe, were of
the newe Testament.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why, are there
also Patriarches of the new Testament?Patriarches of the newe Testament.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To tel thée the very truth Marforius, the Patriarches
of the newe Testament, are none other, than Popes,
Cardinals, Friers, Priestes, and such lyke, of whom
thou shalte not finde one iote in the holy Scripture.
But our forefathers, who were the deuisers of this so
great a misterie of iniquity, and of deceyte, to the end,
other should not perceyue, that they altogether played
the Iewes, caryed not the Patriarches of the olde
Testamente into the newe, but into their owne
Sinagoge.
            
            
               Marforius.
               
                  Two sortes of Patriarches. And who are these.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               There are two sortes of Patriarches, of the one sort,

are the Patriarches of the foure Regions that is to
say, that of Rome, of Antioch, Alexandria, and of Ierusalem.
And the seate of the Empire,The one sorte. being afterwarde
remoued to Constantinople, to the rest of the

                     •
                  atriarches was adioyned he of Cōstanstinople, and
afterwarde other, as that of Aquiligia, and that of
Venice. And they haue 
                     •
                  btayned this degrée, bycause
they are heades and rulers of other Byshops, as they
also are Byshops them selues. There was an other
sorte of Patriarches,The other sort who had no maner superioritye
or dignity of the Patriarch
                     •
                  ships while they were aliue.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why, and are they made Patriarches
when they be deade?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea out of
doubt,When Peter was made Pope. euen as Saint Peter was made Pope after
his death, which neuer was, nor neuer could be, nor
yet was he at any time in Rome. And euen so was
Saint Ierome made a Cardinall. Among these Patriarches
are accopmted Saint Iohn Baptist, Saint
Dominicke,
                  Dominicke & Fraunces are Patriars ches. who instituted the order of breaching, I
would say preaching Friers, and Saint Fraunces the
order of Friers Minores, or vnderminers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why are they called Patriarches?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause they are the chiefe of the Fathers, and the
deuisers of sectes,Friers are no lyers that call them selues Fathers. that is to say of the Friers who call
them selues Fathers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then, by this
reason, euery order and house of Friers may call his
Authour or foūder Patriarch.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That they
may, but these Families of Friers haue bene more
ambitious than the rest.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sawest thou there
Dominicke and Fraunces.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe them,Fraunces & Dominicke clad like shepeherdes.
but in other apparell, than they were in the Quéere of
the Friers, for there were they both cladde like shepeheardes,
with a wéede of rough course cloth, and in the

middes thereof a hole, to thrust out their heades, and
a hoode made fast thereto to kepe them from the raine,
and from colde, for so were the shepeheardes of Italy
and Spaine wont to be clad. But here I sawe them
in Pontificall apparell, and with Crownes on their
heades.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Two things there are, that make
me muche maruell, the one is that I sée, their successours,
and followers go clad in so fine clothes, and to
be so lofty and proude, the other is, how it is possible
that they may be in two places at once, here & among
the Friers.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou must not maruel at that,Fraunces and Dominicke are Gods.
for they are Gods, & occupy no place at all, but where
and when they list, they are séene, and do suffer other
to looke on them, as (if thou vnderstandest not what I
meane,) I wil shewe thée by a similitude. Euen so are
they in dyuers places at one instante of tyme,Iust as Ierman
                        •
                      lippes. as
Christs body with his natural length & breadth is contayned
in a thousand Hostes & Masses at one instant.
            
            
               Marforius.
               If I did not vnderstande thy similitude, I
shoulde with the Logicians conclude, that if they be
not in some place, ergo, they be not at all, for there is
nothing but hath a place proper to his nature, but
these things I let passe, and desire to heare what these
Patriarches did.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou askest me not of
Saint Iohn Baptist.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I had forgotten, that
he was accompted among the Patriarches, for I toke
him to be only a Prophete and more than a Prophet.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Knowest thou not,Iohn Baptist Iohn. 11. in the Letanies of saint
Gregorie, he only is placed there vnder the title of Patriarches
and Prophetes?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue heard
a thousand tymes, but I remember it not.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               I
sawe him in that place, but (oh Lorde) how farre different
from that which the Euangelistes describe him.
            
            
               
               Marforius.
               Thou tellest me of wonderfull alterations,
and farre more straunge than Ouide writeth
of.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I tell thée as the truth is, if thou wilte
beleue the Gospell, thou mayest sée, that the same Iohn
Baptist vvas Cladde in a garment of Camelles haire,
                  Math. 3.
                  and called all men to repentaunce,
                  Luc. 3. 
                  he baptised, and
shevved forth playnely the Lamb of God,
                  Iohn. 1. 
                  that taketh
avvay the sinnes of the vvorlde. But this Iohn Baptist
that I speake of was a terrible fellowe and had in
his hande a fayre sharpe glaiue,A newe Iohn Baptist Patrone of the Knightes of the Rodes. Knightes of the Rodes. and was armed at all
pieces, and was followed after, not by a number of
sorowfull sinners, but by a ro
                     •
                  te of sea rouers, that
call themselues Knightes of Therodes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou meanest Knightes of the Rodes: so called by
the Isle of Rodes, that they lost.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I haue alwayes
heard them called Knightes of Therodes by
suche: as speake clarkely and within booke, and now
are they called Knights of Malta,
                  Malta a fretting stone. according to the nature
of the stone called Malta, which is to freate and
consume: for suche is the nature of those Knightes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh what a wonderfull oddes in condicions
is there. But what doth this Iohn Baptist?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This also doth baptise, but by violence and in
the water of the sea.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou meanest, whē
he sinketh the shippes of pore Maryners?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               he maketh many to repent themselues,Iohn Baptist f
                        •
                     rceth men to, event, not by preaching but by 
                        •
                     iracie. and sendeth
them into the wildernesse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yea, when
with his Mates he falleth to rouing & spoyling this
man, and that, and leading away the siely soules, as
prisoners.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So I say, for he followeth Saint
Iohn Baptist in al things and that couragiously.
            
            
               Marforius.
               If Christ had sente this Iohn Baptist before
him, he shoulde more easely haue brought the Iewes

to subiection,Iohn. 18. for feare of him.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The
Kingdome of Christ our God, was not of this world,
as thou knowest, for the Iewes looke for a Messias,
that shoulde be lusty, and that with weapons, & mischiefe
shoulde destroye all.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What badges
weare they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               All weare in their vpper garment
a crosse, some whyte, some redde, some greene,
some playne and straight, some gathered, and some
toothed lyke a saw, and those I toke to be Spanyards,
not onely by their apparall, and by the Palabras,
                  Palabras in Spaynishe is to say, words. but
also bicause they stoode next of all to their God Saint
Iames.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Wherefore weare they that crosse
in the vpper garmentes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bicause they
can not cary it in their heartes, and if thou wilt haue
an other reason therefore, bicause they crucifie and
trouble manye from tyme to tyme.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But
what haue these fellowes to doe with Iohn Baptist?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What? they make, manye desertes in the
honor of Saint Iohn Baptist.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               But Saint
Iohn neuer made no desertes, but dwelled in them.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And these Mates make them, and leaue other
to dwel in them, and dwel in more ease and pleasure
than Sandanapalus.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue in déede
heard, that when they had Rodes, they did such things
as Turkes woulde not haue done,The filthie life of the Knightes of the Rodes. and for this cause
I think, by Gods iustice they were driuen from their
old abiding place.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So commeth it to passe,
when w
                     •
                   will with force and crueltie, bring men to
Christ, and not with loue, righteousnesse, fayth, and
true Christian doctrine: as did our olde Fathers in
tymes past.
            
            
               Marforius.
               For oughte I sée, in these
Knightes thou speakest of, there is no more Christianitie
in them but in the names, onely.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  Nay nor yet in the name,Knights neyther Christians in deede nor in name. for they are not called
the Knightes of Christ of Heauen, but of Saint
Iohn of the Rodes. But in this point they séeke to be
lyke him, in that they mary no wyues and lyue lyke
single men.
            
            
               Marforius.
               If they haue no Wyues, they
haue the more Harlottes, and though they lyue lyke
single men yet lyue they not chaste, but this is not, to
be lyke Saint Iohn, but rather some vile filthy Ruffian.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou hast hit it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Followe
on to the other Patriarches.The Popes Patriarches conspire the death of gods seruaunts.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Saint Dominick
had called to Chapter all his Priours, Subpriours,
and the Uicares of all other nations, and most
chieflye of the Spaniardes, and was treating with
them for the burning of Heretiques, or how by some
other deuise to make them away.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But this
is not done lyke a Prince, but lyke a Tyrant, not like
a Saint but rather a Deuil,A wrong way to winne men to Christ. for this is not the way to
winne men, but to destroy them, nor the waye to follow
Christ, but Sathanas, who was a murtherer
from the beginning. Beholde vvhat Christ sayth,
                  Iohn. 18. 
                  suffer
them both to grovv vntill the haruest, that vvhile
ye weede out the tares,
                  Math. 13. 
                  ye pull not vp the corne also.
But these men wéede not out the tares, but pull vp
the good corne: for if they woulde roote out the cockle
and tares, they muste of force roote out themselues,
who take for Heretiques all suche as speake against,Why Lutherans are condempned for Heretiques.
their Hipocrisie, wickednesse, and curssed Idolatry, as
the Lutheranes, who are in déede true christians, and
they themselues Antichristians.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sée now,
that thou vnderstandest the matter: but couldest thou
shew in fewe wordes, and with any effectuall reason,
which are the Christians, and which the Antichristians.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I doe in déede in my self vnderstand

it, but I shoulde not be able to shew the same playnely
to an other.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will doe it then. Let this
be vnto thée an euident token,How to know Gods enimies from his freinds. to knowe thereby these
y• haue alwayes persecuted, are Gods enimies, & those
that are persecuted be his friends. And to begin at the
beginni
                     •
                  g of the worlde, thou séest thatGen. 4. 
                  Abell did
neyther persecute, nor slay Caine, but was persecuted
and slayne by Caine, Iacob did not persecute Esau, but
Gen. 27. 
                  Esau persecuted Iacob: Moses dyd not persecute
Pharao, butExo. 14. 
                  Pharao persecuted Moses: christ did not
persecute the Pharisies,Iohn. 15. but the Pharisies persecuted
Christ. The Apostles, and all the true Martyrs of
Christ did neuer persecute the Tirantes, but the Tirantes
persecuted them, and stewe them. And yet for
all that, Abell, Iacob, Moses, Christ, the Apostles,
and Martyrs,christ church hath bene persecuted from the beginning. were Gods Friends, & so contrarywise
Caine, Esau, Pharao, the Pharisies, and the Tirantes,
were Gods enimies. And euen so nowe Saint Dominicks▪
                  
Fryers and the rest, Priestes, Prelates, and
Princes, that persec
                     •
                  te suche, as giue all prayse to
Iesus Christ, and followe his holy gospell, are his vtter
enimies, & the pore that are persecuted, his frends.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh what a manifest reason is this, who is
so blinde that can not sée this?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I wyll tell
thée of some other, Paule▪
                   writing to Timothe,
                  1. Iohn. 4. sayth.
The spirite speaketh manifestlye, that in the latter
tymes some shall depart from the fayth, (marke vvell
all I tell thee) and shall giue heede to spirits of errors,
and the deuilish doctrine of them, (marke) that speak
false through Ipocrisie, and haue their cōscience marked
vvith a hote yron (marke, marke if thou vvilte
knowe them) forbidding matrimonie, and meates.
What sayest thou by this, Marforius? Who shal excuse

himselfe with God, that he hath not knowne
them,None▪ excuse can serue with God. who forbiddeth matrimonie? who forbiddeth
meates? who woulde haue the matter more cleare?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tel me no more of this I pray thée heartily,
for I am cleared therof ynough and ynough, they
maye goe about to excuse themselues, but they make
but a foolishe piece of worke. Saye on I beseche thée.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A certayne Spaniard one of the Inquision
for heresie, accused certayne Spaniards and of the
best of them for Lutheranes, and by this he sayde he
smelled them out, bicause they gaue to the pore great
almes, and to the Friers they gaue nothing, and afore
tyme they were wont for euery trifeling matter
to sweare, in dispite of God, and to blaspheme God,
Christ and his saintes outragiou
                     •
                  ly, to fall to play, to
runne on whore hunting,
                     
                        •
                     en tak
                        •
                     n for heretikes bycause th
                        •
                     y will not swere and doe euill. and to do the deuill and all
of mischiefe: and nowe they will prayse God and lyue
soberly, chastly and godly, and absteyning from euill
applye onely thinges graue and profitable. But the
worst is, they wil al day long reade the holy scripture,
and therfore were they taken for stinking heretiques.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What answere made Saint Dominicke?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He sayde, they muste follow him, and doe
as he did, at Tholosa, where at the procuremente of
Innocent the thirde,Dominicke burned and played the Deuil, therefore was he made a saint. Some became gods for playing the Di
                        •
                     el. he quenched that heresie wyth
maruellous spéede.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And how?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He sayde that the must not dispute the matter, but fall
to this businesse with fyre and sworde, & for this cause
was he made a saint.
            
            
               Marforius.
               So came it to passe
with those of olde tyme, that many for their euill doings,
and with slaughter of men, are also made Gods.
As Iupiter, Mars, Romulus, and many Cesars. But
concerning the counsell that Dominicke gaue, the

selfe same did Alexander Cardinall of Brundusio aduise
not onely the Pope, but also the Emperour, and
Ferdenando of Austriche,
                  Good gostly counsell. bicause they should not differ
from Turkes. And therefore in Spaine and in Almaine,
where their authoritie is greatest, this good
counsell is very straightly obserued.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is
obserued in déede. But the Lorde will ouerthrow and
destroy all greatnesse and power, which setteth vp it
selfe against his maiestie and greatnesse. And therfore
thou séest, that now of his iustice he sendeth y• Lantzgraue
graue to plague them bothe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh God
graunt it. But Saint Fraunces what was he doing?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Saint Fraunces kept a stirre with his Friers,Of the Patriarche Fraunces.
that they had not with more diligence, sowen his
Conformities, abrode in the worlde, which if they had
done, it might haue happened, that he should not only
haue bene taken for as good as Christ, but also better.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What Conformities are they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is a booke made & deuised by Saint Fraunces
Friers, with the which if thou compaire the Alcoran
of Mahomete,Alcoran is the whole Booke of the Turkes lawe. thou wilt saye, that the Alcoran is
in comparison of it, most holy, albeit in many things
they are lyke.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue heard say, that when
Saint Fraunces was required by his disciples to giue
them a rule of lyuing, he gaue vnto them the gospell.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               So it is sayd: but his followers haue very euil
obserued it, which if they had wel done, they should
not haue dreamed out so many lyes, and monstrous
tales of him, as if they woulde make hym another
Christ, for they say, that their Saint Fraunces, is aboue
all, thrones, dominations and powers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               How can that be?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Whether it can be,
or can not be, it is ynough, that in the very Pulpits

they are so bolde to preach it, and to tell also this notable
shamlesse lye, that is,Deuine Doctrine drawne out of Legenda Aurea, or such lyke. that one that desired once
to know in what place Saint Fraunces was, ran out
of his wittes, and was ledde rounde about all the
partes of Heauen, and neuer founde him, at the last,
he came to the throne of the diuinitie, where demaū
                  ding
for Saint Fraunces, Christ then rose vp from his
seate, on the right hand of God the Father, and opening
his clothes vpon his brest, and forthwith came
Saint Fraunces out of his side, then came he to his
wittes againe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who was that?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was a Frier.
            
            
               Marforius.
               It was a false Knaue
thou wouldest haue sayde. I beleue thée well, that he
ranne out of his wittes, but I beleue not that he
came afterwarde to himselfe againe, for if he had not
bene altogether beside himself, he woulde neuer haue
letten escape his mouth, so grea
                     •
                   a blasphemie, and so
beastly a foolishe tale, méete for Mahomet or Lucian
to tell: and it séemeth there is so great blindenesse in
the world, that there are suche that will soner beleue
this deuilish deuise, than the truth of the Gospell. But
what did those head Patriarches?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They
did striue for the primacie of the Church,The Patriarches striue who should be chiefe. for he of
Canstantinople sayde, that to him appertayned the
title of vniuersall and chiefe Bishop, bicause there
with him was the sée of the Empire. He of Ierusalem,
he would haue it for himselfe, alleaging, that in that
place,Peters see, at Antioche. One Pope speaketh against another. the highe Bishop Christ had triumphed. He of
Antioch, he woulde néedes haue it, alleaging that
Peter chief of the Apostles, there had kept his sée, and
that he was neuer at Rome. He of Rome(not regarding
the saying of Saint Gregorie, who sayde, that he
shoulde be Antichrist, who woulde be called the vniuersall

or chiefe Byshop ouer other Byshops) partly
by deceite, and giftes, and partl
                     •
                   by force, obtayned
at the last,The Popes vaine gloriou
                        •
                      titles. to be called the chiefe Byshop, the greatest,
the higest, vniuersall, most blessed, most holy, and the
lawful successour of Peter, and of Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What sayest thou, that Peter was neuer at Rome?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That matter is to cleare: and if thou doe
not beleue me, reade that boke intitled. Quod Petrus
nūquam Romae fuit. To which author I referre thée,
bicause I will be briefe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I will séeke to
haue it, as soone as I can, and wil reade it ouer. But
what sayde the Patriarche of Alexandria?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And he also alleaged reasons, and shewed, that foras
much as he is nere to Babylon,
                  Babylon the hea
                        •
                      of al abhomination. and that Babylon
hath bene alwayes the head of all abhomination, and
bicause Babylon is the greatest of all other Cities, it
was good reason, that he shoulde be the head: and so
much the more, that if Rome woulde so fayne be the
head, it must needs be called Babylon,
                  Petrarke cal
                     
                        •
                     eth Rome Babylon. as in Petrarke
the Poet is to be séene, who had learned the same in
the schoolehouse of Saint Iohn the Euangelist.
            
            
               Marforius.
               By my fayth he sayde not amisse in his kinde.
But let vs speake a little of the Prophets, sawest thou
Esay,
                  Prophetes. 
                  Ieremie, Daniell, and the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Not
one of them, but the sonnes of Balaam,
                  Num. 22. who loued the
rewarde of iniquitie, and was therefore reproued by
the Asse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Are there no Prophetes in the
newe Testamente?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yes that there are.
Doest not thou remember that heretofore, we reckned
the Prophetes, among the offices of the Church
of Christ? for I meane nothing of the olde Prophets,
but of those that haue followed and yet doe the way of
false Prophetes, and of such as haue prophecied for

rewarde. But thou muste learne, that these wordes
Prophete & prophecie signifie two things,This worde Prophete hath two meanings. the one is,
he that by diuine inspiration foretelleth thinges to
come, and discouereth such things as are hidden, and
that can not be knowne by mans witte or cunning,
these are called Prophets and séers. This worde Prophete
also signifieth a Doctor, or teacher, not euerye
Doctor, but him that is sente by God to instructe the
Churche, and to reforme it, being better reple
                     •
                  ished
inwardly in spirit, thā furnished with worldly knowledge,The differēce betwene the Prophete and the Doctor.
and in this poynt is the Prophet different from
him that is but simply a Doctor, for the Prophet, teacheth
onely heauenly things, and the Doctor embraceth
also humaine sciences, and the artes liberal: the
Doctor may teache, those things, which he hath learned
out of bookes, and at the mouth of men. But the
Prophete must be inspired of God, and instructed in
the hard meanings of the scriptures, the better to expound
them. In this Heauen sawe I, both sortes of
Prophetes, sauing that,The Popes Prophetes are not inspired by God. neyther those that fortolde
things to come, nor those that taught religion to the
Church, were not inspired by God, nor by the spirite
of Christ, but by the Prince of darknesse, and the spirite
of Sathan. And they that foretolde the thinges
to come, were Wysardes, Southsayers, Sorcerers,
Enchanters, Negromancers, Astrologiens, and such
as followe the damnable art Magique, among the
which, there were Popes, Cardynalles,A blessed companie if a man should rake Hell. Byshops,
Abbottes, and all sortes of Friers, but moste chiefely
the Friers of Saint Dominick, and Saint Fraunces,
who with socery & witchcrafte, (the which they chieflye
apply) learne euill and deuilish artes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This thing is moste true, for a man maye read, that

                  Siluester the seconde, gatte to be Pope by the helpe of
the Diuell, & with this condition, that after his death
he shoulde be wholly the Diuels owne. And in our
dayes Paule the third called Pope Farne se or Fransie
whether ye will,A vertuous studie of a holy Father. in Astrologie and diuination hath
not left his lyke behinde him.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is no lye
at all, and therfore, bicause he woulde haue a companion
in this arte, he made Denis a Frier of the order
called Serui,
                  Like will to like. a Cardinall. And this Paule chalengeth
the praise of this art wholly to himselfe, and by good
reason is it due to him, for in this arte he hath spente
al his lyfe. But a man can not say whether by this his
art, he could tell aforehand what would come to passe
when he sente to wake the waspes of Germanie, that
were on sléepe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I beleue right well, that
in this poynt, he is yet still wyde, and deceyued in his
Almanacke which he accompteth his Gospell.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thinkest thou then, that by his art he can tell
whether he must goe when he is dead?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I
do not beleue, that he thinketh therevpon, for he in
Rome, it is certainely sayde, that he beleueth that the
soule is mortall:The Pope doubteth of the immortalitie of the soule. and I in his talke haue ofte tymes
perceyued it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yet dothe not Peter Levves
his sonne doubte, that the soule is immortall.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yet yea, no more than the Epicures and the Saduce
is, and his Father,Quali
                        •
                      Pater talis filius. and also Cardinall Chietti al
his whole lyfe doth witnesse.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Iust euē so,
and sithe we are nowe come to talke of Cardinall
Chietti, me thinketh, he is well worthye to be numbred
among the Prophets of this heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And for what occasion?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will tell thée the
whole matter A Gentleman of Venice, fel in contention
with his wyfe vpon a certayne doubte to be declared

in foro conscientiae, the matter was suche as
troubled them both,A very proper practise not vnlyke the deuises vsed by the holy mayde of Kent. the woman being more curious
than the man, as women lightly haue spiced consciences,
was the first that would be cleared of this doubt,
she goeth to the Church of these Chiett
                        •
                     ines, and there
confesseth hir selfe to one of them, that was a subtill
Ipocrite, openeth all the matter, and prayeth him to
resolue her of this doubt, he did as well, as he could,
then goeth he to the Arch Ipocrite Chietti,
                  The Knaues will tell tales out of the schole. himself,
and openeth to him the whole confession, (as it is the
olde vse of so many as be Chiettines) when he had wel
vnderstode it, he commaunded him to be secrete, and
finding out the resolution thereof in the Canon law,
marked the place, and taried til this gentleman came
vnto him, who was wonte to come for like matters
to him very often, the morowe after he came, and being
alone with Chietti, after foure or fiue words, whē
he was comming to his demaund, that did so burthen
his conscience, Chietti commaunded him to holde his
peace, tooke him by the hande, put his hande into the
booke, and shut it fast in the place which he before had
marked for that purpose: and then byd him tell his
tale, and when he had ended, this Coll Prophete
Chietti sayd to him,Marke the knauerie of this Coll Prophete. looke there, where you haue your
hande, the Gentleman opened the booke, reade, and
founde that he sought for, and not thinking that any
other creature had knowne it but his wy
                     •
                  e, forthwith
fell downe on his knées, and worshipped him, as it had
bene an other Christ,These knaues haue manye such knackes in their Bougets. that had knowne the secretes of
mens hearts.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I know a thousande other
such trickes of blinde prophecies, whereby learning
the secretes of simple siely soules, they shewe thereby
themselues so be Prophets. For the great profite therfore,

which they get thereby, do they with suche rage
séeke to mayntayne this confession.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If thou
knowe a thousande, I knowe ten thousande. But bicause
there is at this present other matter to talke of,
we will retourne to speake of these Prophetes, which
there had the charge to teache religion. They taught
no maner things y• were heauēly,No true Prophets. but things worldly,
nay rather Deuilish: and sought to please men, and
praised themselues, and their owne things, and aduaunced
them vp to heauen, & to conclude, they were
all of those of whome the Lorde by his Prophete complayneth,Iere. 14.
saying: They preach lyes vnto them in my
name, I haue not spoken with them, neyther gaue I
them any charge neyther did I send them. Of whome
oure onely Mayster and Sauiour Iesus Christ, warneth
his Church,Math. 7. saying: Bevvare of false Prophetes
that come vnto you, cladde in shepes clothing, but invvardly
they are rauening Wolues, ye shall knovve
them by their fruites. Loe, the Lorde sayth playnely
vnto vs, that we should beware of them. And bicause
we shoulde not be deceyued, he teacheth vs to knowe
them by the fruits they work. What maner of fruits
those be, of the Court of Rome,
                  The goodnesse of these Romish fruites. & of all the followers
therof, how bitter, rotten, Worme eaten, sowre, ful
of poyson, and how muche to be auoyded, euery man
may without controuersie confesse. From these therfore
we ought to beware, by the commaundement of
our Lorde and Sauiour, who shall say vnto them in
the day of iudgement. I neuer knevv you,
                  Luc. 13. 
                  depart frō
me you that vvorke vvickednesse.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Let
vs therfore let them alone. But whether wentest thou
afterwarde?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               We went into a maruellous
great courte,The court of the Popes heauen. which had many rowmes seuered one

from an other, where satte most seuere Iudges, there
were many matters treated of, and there was suche a
scolding among the Proctors and aduocates, that demaūding,
who those Iudges were, I could not heare,
what answere was made me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Howe didst
thou to vnderstande it afterward?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I withdrew
my selfe a little out of the noyse, and then I asked.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who coulde tell thée the order and
forme of that Courte?Iust iudgement and voyde of feare when sentence was giuen against the Diuell.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               A Deuill against
whome his matter passed, wente his waye iombling
to himselfe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Who did he saye that these
Iudges were?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He spake Gréeke, I vnderstoode
him not well, whether he sayde, they were Apostles
or Apostates.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I did neuer beleue
before nowe that there were Diuels in Heauen, nor
that there was any néede of other aduocates, than of
Christ.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Whence doest thou gather this opinion?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Out of the middes of the Gospel.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Art thou of a popish Lawyer so sone become
a Gospeller?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou art cause therof, that
hast warned me to search the Scriptures.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Tell me therefore the place.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I remember
Christ sayeth, that he is the
                  Iohn. 14. 
                  vvay, the truth, and the
lyfe, if Christ be the truth, and if he beAct. 10. Iudge of the
quicke and the deade, as the Scripture sayeth, what
néede is there then of so manye aduocates? for by the
lawes I terme y• the aduocate is not ordeyned for any
other purpose,The office and duery of an aduo
                     
                        •
                     ate. than to enforme y• Iudge of the truth,
wherby I conclude mine argument, that if the Iudge
be the very truth it selfe, what néede is there of any to
declare the same vnto him?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If I shal shew
vnto thée, that in this place this worde Aduocate is as
much to say as Mediator, howe wilte thou aunswere

me?
            
            
               Marforius.
               
                  Paule sayeth, that we haue an1. Iohn. 2. aduocate
appointed vs by the Father, to be a1. Timo. 2. Mediafor
vs towarde him. In an other place, the father sayeth,
that Christ is his vvelbeloued sonne, in vvhome
onely he is pleased.
                  Maht. 3. If Christ be appointed by the father
to be a Mediator for vs, and if Christ onely be acceptable
to God, wherefore will we séeke other aduocates?
Do not we commit great iniurie to the father
and to the Sonne,Great iniurie done to Christ when any other aduocate is sought. putting in his place, an other aduocate,
as though he were more acceptable to the Father,
than Christ, or if he were more sufficient than
Christ. Are not we verye fooles in that we will haue
those to be our aduocates, that haue néede of an aduocate
themselues? Christ onely is righteous, and all
men are sinners. And this is it that Saint Iohn sayeth
in his canonicall Epistle,1. Iohn. 2. 
                  My little ones, if any
man sinne, vve haue an aduocate vvith the Father Iesus
Christ the righteous: If there were other aduocates,
they had néede to pray for themselues, for they
also had néede to be made righteous: But Christ only
is the aduocate that is righteous, and hath no néede
to praye for himselfe, butIohn. 17. prayeth onely for vs, all
other had néede to pray for themselues, and to sacrifice
for themselues: and their prayers and sacrifices are
not perfect,Heb. 10. therefore are they often tymes renewed.
But Christ hath once onely and for euer prayed, and
sacrificed for vs, and for his owne merite sake hath
bene heard.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Oh Marforius, this disputation
of thine, maketh me thinke, that thou are no more
Marforius, and I hope surely, that this nexte spring
thou wilt, as the serpents doe, cast thine olde skinne.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I desire with the Gospellers, and not with
the serpentes,Math. 10. to cast awaye mine olde learning.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  That is it, that at Easter the petie shauelings
were wont to yel
                     ••
                   out to the grosse and Ignorant
people, in a tongue that neyther parte vnderstoode.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And good reason it is, that to him that vnderstandeth
not, things be spoken, yea and not vnderstoode
by them that speak them.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               But now
let vs follow on our story.
            
            
               Marsorius.
               I desire it much.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Heardest thou not what was done before
these Iudges.
            
            
               Marsorius.
               I heard, but I haue forgotten
to aske thée, what allegations they bring forth in
defending their causes: doe they vse Bartolus,
                  Bartolus and Baldus. and
Baldus, and suche other spill causes to set men togither
by the eares?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I wyll tell thée, the
Iudges giue not sentence, when they haue heard the
matter, as they do with vs, but euen as if they had
heard neyther party, they sende them both to the balaunce
to be tryed.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is that balaūce?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In the middes of this Courte, standeth a
great Saint,Saint Michaell wayer of soules. that is wynged, and in the one hand he
holdeth a huge payre of Balaunce, and in the other
hande a sworde, and when the matter hath bene well
brawled,A vengeance craftie aduocate that could match the Deuill. before the Iudges betwéene the Deuill and
the Aduocate, they come to this Saint, as to an Arbytratour
who setteth his balaunce euen, and in one
of them the aduocate putteth all his clients things, as
Masses, Bulles, Pardons, Prayers, sundry seruices of
our Lady,Masses and such trash shewed forth in euidence. and of the holye crosse, and Dirges for the
dead, Beads, Rosaries, Pilgrimages, Fastings, Friers
Hoods, Friers Coates, as gray, whyte, asure, and
blewe: vowes, abstinences, whipping of themselues,
garments of haire, and such like Trumper
                     •
                  e, and in
the other scale of the balaunce, they put the wretched

                     ••
                  ely soule, and to this scale of the balaunce to make

it way the more, taketh hold and hangeth fast a foule
great Deuill and a fatte, such as commonly the Priors
and Prouincialles of the Friers are.
            
            
               Marforius.
               O what a craftie parte is that,The crafte of the Diuell. méete in déede for the
Deuill, that to make the balaunce waye the more,
hangeth thereat rather a fatte Deuill than a leane.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Nay this is not ynough, for that Deuill
that clingeth so fast, shaketh, stirreth, and moueth the
cordes of the balaunce, puncheth the soule, and doth
all that he can to make his parte way downe the heauier.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And that great winged Saint what
doth he when he séeth this?Michaell beateth the deuil.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Then is he in a
great rage, and layeth vpon the Deuill flatling with
his sworde, and threateneth him with a redde Crosse
that he weareth on his breast, where vpon the Deuill
coucheth and is somewhat more still, hanging downe
his heade lyke the Fox, that the country man ouer taketh
from whome he had stolne a Henne, and though
he be well beaten, yet letteth not goe his Henne for al
that.
            
            
               Marforius.
               A prety similitude, but what followeth
then of this waying?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If the workes
way downe, then is the soule ledde with great pompe
to some one of those places aforesayde,Great honor and ioy, when the Pope winneth a soule. and there is cō
                  mitted
to the chiefe gouernour, who placeth him, eyther
higher or lower, according as he hath deserued,
but if the Deuils parte of the balaunce waye more, he
goeth straight to Hell or to Pagatorie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why callest thou it Pagatorie?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bicause
the rude country people,Purgatorie iustely called Pagatorie. and such as is voyde of witte
and vnderstanding pay swéetely, to be deliuered from
that horrible and fearefull inuention.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I
vnderstande thée, but tell me the name of the wayer.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They sayde it was Saint Michaell.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               
                  Is that he that they sayde was in loue with aMichaell in loue with a Bul, looke Legenda aurea.
Bull in the hill of Garganus?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is euen he.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is he not weary of so hatefull an office?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yes sometyme, but that country man that
gaue the name to the hill Garganus at tymes helpeth
him.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What, did a man of the countrye
giue the name to that hill?The fable of Saint Michaell.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So is it to be
read in y• historie of Saint Michaell.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               How
can this hang together, for it is to be séene that long
before this fable of Saint Michaell was heard of or
knowen, this name of the hill Garganus was? as I
remember I haue séene in the Poete Lucanus,
                  Lucanus the Poete. who
sayeth. In Pulia a hill that Gargan hight into the sea
doth reache.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That is out of doubt, for I aleaged
also this verse once against a Frier, who had
in the Pulpit recited this foolish tale, and he aunswered
me, hauing nothing else to say, your Poetes (ꝙ he)
are all lyers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               O what a wise answere he
made,Fryers and lyers shaped both in one moulde. méete and worthie for a Frier, nay rather worthy
of halfe a dosen good stripes with a quodgell: and
what sayedst thou to him agayne.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I looked
about me, if I coulde finde anye thistles, to giue the
Asse for his labour,Draffe good ynough for Hogges. for this kinde of beastes, if a man
giue them any deintier meate, they can not sauour it,
and suche as they sauoure not, they vtterly dispise.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Couldest thou tel by any meanes, whence
this same Saint Michaell had his beginning?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euen from the verye ignoraunce of Friers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Peraduenture it is fayned, as thou haste
sayde before of Saint Christofer?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Euen so
it is.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then, vnder this representation
or Image, is conteyned somewhat else, than that
which is outwardly séene?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               Yea out of doubt.
            
            
               
               Marforius.
               And what is it?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Gods iustice,
for so did those aunciēt Christians,Saint Michael
                        •
                      fable▪ a figure of Gods Iustice. set forth this same,
taking it from the Gentils, who did almost in the selfe
same sort, set forth iustice.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What the Diuell
meaneth it, that they haue chaunged so holy a representation
into so foolishe and wicked a fable?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bicause the worlde hath giuen so great authoritie
vnto these lying Friers,The worlde abused by Friers. that al maner of falshoode
is both beleued and graunted to, at their hands.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I maruell muche at this one thing, that
the Christians haue suffered themselues hitherto, to
be so mocked with these false and foolish histories,
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I knowe not howe it commeth to passe, but I
am sure, if Lucian had knowne them,Lucian. he would haue
put them in his booke De veris narrationibus. And euery
man woulde haue laughed at them. But bicause
the Friers say, and affirme, that Saint Michaell had
to doe with a Bull in the hill Garganus, all men take
it for the Gospell,What the Gospell causeth. or rather to be better beleued than
the Gospell, for the Gospell maketh vs to perceyue
and vnderstande their lyes and deceytes, and it commaundeth
vs to beware of them, and not to beleue
them, and yet for all that, are they beleued. For there
is not in the world any thing so farre past all beliefe,
that being spoken by the Friers,Friers vse violent persuasions. is not fully & wholly
credited. And if any man doubt therof, they crye, that
we rather ought stedfastly to beleue, than to go curiously
searching,Beati qui non rid
                        •
                     runt et credideru
                        •
                     t. or else they cry, downe with him for
he is an Heretique.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I will therfore, from
hence forth stedfastly beleue, that they are all false
Knaues, rather than go search whether they be so or
no.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou shalt do well so. But for to follow
our historie, I tell thée, from this courte, which

was very great, we went to the Pallace, which was
in the middest,The Pallace of the Popes Heauen. and in the highest part of the Citie, this
Pallace séemed not to be very olde, but a man might
sée, that it was begonne with so great cost, y
                     •
                   it could
not as yet be finished, euen as Saint Peters Churche
at Rome that hath filled so many Popes Purs
                     •
                  es, the
fashion of this Pallace was like to that of the Coliseo,
                  The fashion of it.
but yet with this difference, that it was all couered
ouer.
            
            
               Marforius.
               It muste néedes therefore be verye
darke.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               It was in déede excéeding darke,The Popes Saints can not abide the light. but
knowest not thou that the Saints of this Heauen can
abide no light, and rather will they haue the light of
Candels, than of the sonne? For as soone as we were
entred in, we saw, all things smoked with the lay of
the Candels & Lampes, and the walles & the Pillers,
were laden with little painted tables of vowes, & with
Golde and Siluer.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This séemeth to me to
be an Alchimistes shoppe.The Popes heauē resembled to an Alchimistes shoppe.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               There was onely
one difference betwéene them, for this place was
full of Gold and siluer in déede, which the Alchimistes
haue not. And to say more, in the heart of the Pallace
in a highe seate sate a Quéene, of a duskishe coloure,
which had at her backe the Sonne,The Sonne and the Mone shine both at once. and at her féete the
Moone.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Howe can it be therefore, that the
place should be so darke, as thou sayest, if there were
both the Sonne and the Moone?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will tell
thée how it can be. This Sonne that closeth ye Quene,
hath not his beames at libertie,Straunge vertue of Bead
                        •
                      that can darken both Sonne and Mone. for if it had, out of
doubt it would giue light to all the whole place.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what letteth it?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This Sonne
is compassed about with a payre of Beads, the which,
Saint Dominicks Friers haue put rounde about it,
so y• it can not spread forth his light: & for this cause

the place remaineth dar
                     •
                  e, and néedeth candels and
lampes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What payre of Beades is that?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is that,The discription and vse of Beades. which they call our Lady Psalter,
that which the hoggish herde of Friers, do also cal
the Bosarie, that with the which the Paternosters, or
rather the Anemaries, are giuen by tale to God, nay
rather to the Deuill, that which euery foolishe woman
caryeth in her hande, when she goeth out of her dores
in the morning, that which is sayde more with the
hands then with the heart, that which is paynted alwayes
in the hande of Ipocrisie,Ipocrisie alwayes carieth Beads. that which souldiers
make more conscience to leaue of, than they do to kill
a man, that is it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstand thée well.
I haue béene also of this opinion hitherto my selfe,
that he coulde not be saued, which had not mumbled
ouer his Beades, at the least once euery daye. But I
maruell yet of an other thing, howe is it possible, that
the sonne which is so great (as they y• write of the Mathematicall
sciences affirme) can be comprehended in
so little a space, and about a Quéene, it muste néedes
be, that that Pallace shoulde be an other worlde, and
that that Quéene should be mōstrously great without
measure, if this could be.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou must vnderstande,
that there is a great difference betwéene
that Sonne and the Moone, which we sée in this world,
and them that clothe this Quéene.
            
            
               Marforius.
               If there
be that difference, which is betwéene a thing that is
true, and a thing that is fayned, it is very great.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou hast hit the truth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Followe
on the rest sith I vnderstand this so wel. In this great
Hall, al full of benches (as that is of the great counsel
at Venice),The Counsell of all Saints. was assembled a counsell of all sortes of
Saintes, a number infinite
            
            
               Marforius.
               Came they

therefore in this heauen call
                     •
                   Counsell without anye
businesse: and in earth neither by somoning, nor no
other way, can it assemble?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, but the
cause is, that these Saintes doubt lest if there shoulde
be a counsell called in earth, there shoulde somewhat
be done in it, that might not wel please them: but in
their counsell,The scope and end of their counsell. there is no daunger at all for them, for
all with one will and careful studie séeke to maintaine
and increase their Kingdome, and (if it were possible)
to ouerthrowe the Kingdome of Christ. It is
true in déede that in the olde tyme,Why in olde tyme so many counsels were so easily called. counselles were
easely called togither in earth, and for this cause, for
that there was not one, that tooke Christes part, or if
he toke his part, durst discouer himself, for then would
they haue burned him quicke, as they did Iohn Husse
and Ierome of Prage, and manye other, bicause they
defended the truth of the Gospell against the falsehode
of Poperie:Why counsels in these dayes can not be assembled. But now, that they sée a good parte of the
people of Christendome, and of other nations, haue a
good opinion of Christ, and an euill of the Pope and
his followers, they are so Slowe to the counsell, that
thoughe the Emperour desire it, and all the worlde
looke for it, yet can it not be had: in so great hatred
haue they y• truth, for feare, that it be not knowen abroade.
I speake not this, as if the good and Godlye
men had néede of counsels, nor of the helpe of men,
but bicause their doctrine should be knowne for true,
holye,The effect of 
                        ••
                     unsels. and godly as it is, and bicause it shoulde not
seeme, that they fly, or auoyde the remedies of strife
and contention, vsed by those of old tyme, and bicause
the consciences of the weake shoulde be satisfied, and
last of all that hauing
Campofranco. That is to saye
frée ground, they may enter into the listes to combate

with their aduersaries, armed, not with yron nor
stéele, but with the sacred Scriptures, and the holye
ghost▪ and there staying al deceyte and falsehoode, make
the truth open and manifest. But as for the godly,
they haue had the counsell of Iesus Christ, with the
ioynt assent of all the holy Apostles,Verbum dominiman
                        ••
                      in eternum inspired by the
holy Ghost, the which counsell shall endure for euer.
But in this Popishe counsell are gathered together
the Kings of the earth, the chiefe Priestes and al sorts
of these Saintes,Psal. 2. against the Lorde and Christ his
Sonne.
            
            
               Marforius.
               A man may sée in effect, that the
Pope will néedes haue the counsell kept at Trent, to
the which for all that, the Dutchmen neuer resorted.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Howe can it be Marforius, that y• shouldest
not vnderstand the subtiltie and falshood of the Pope?
knowest thou not, that when two will fight the combatte
togither,Equalitic woulde be vsed in tryall of waightie matters. it is first requisite that they haue frée
grounde, and that then they be in Armour, Horsses
and in euerye other things equall, that the one haue
not one iote of aduauntage of the other? Tell me,
wouldest thou goe to fight with thine enimy, at home
in his owne house, with disaduauntage, nay rather
when thou couldest not occupie thine owne weapons,
nay, with one, who beside that he is thy mortall enimie,
were both the one party that shoulde fight, and
also Lorde of the soyle wherein the listes are? The
Pope kepeth his counsell at Trent, and to whome
belongeth Trent? to a member of the Popes, and beside
that, it is subiect to Ferdinando, a most bitter persecutour
of the Gospell. Beholde for the first parte,The Pope neuer fighteth on euen hand.
there is no frée grounde, then afterwarde, that this
counsell is kept, where the Pope beareth so great a
swaye and maintayneth his tirannicall authoritie, the

which while it endureth, there is no speaking against
him, and he that speaketh against him, is but a deade
man: And thoughe they graunted saufeconductes,
they breake them as faithlesse people, couering themselues
with their curssed lawes, which saye, that promise
must not be kept with Heretiques,Who be Heretiques, and who be no Heretiques after the popes iudgement. and they call
Heretiques, not such as speake against the Gospel, as
they doe, but such as speake against their curssed constitutions.
And I wil tel thée further, that the Dutchmen
haue discouered all this geare, and if they had
gone to the councell, they had bene dispatched out of
the waye,The Dutchmen first smelled out the Popes craftie conueyaunce. & thou wouldest néedes haue them go home
to there Enemies, which is Lorde of the listes? but to
hold a councel in a frée place, and with equall match,
they will not heare of.
            
            
               Marforius.
               In déede thou sayest
the truth. But in this councell of Saints that thou
speakest of, didst thou come in.
            
            
               Pasquin?
               I came in,
I sawe and heard all the whole.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But how
did they suffer thée so to doe?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They coulde
not sée me, for my good Angel as long as pleased him,
had made me inuisible.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What heardest
thou in the beginning?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               All cryed with one
voyce,The song of the Popes Saints. 
                  Let vs breake their bondes, and cast awaye
their yoke from vs.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               What bonds? what
yoke ment they.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               The bonds of peace & loue,
& the yoke of our Maister & Sauior Christ, that is to
say his doctrine, for he sayeth,Psal. 2. 
                  Take my yoke vpon
you. &c.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why,Math. 11. & did they séeke to break,
so sweete and holy bandes? and to cast awaye so light
and so pleasaunt a yoke?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, for to the
wicked and to the euill lyuers, the precepts of righteousnesse
are bitter and vnpleasaunt, but vices are to
them swéete and pleasaunte, and vnder the colour of

well doyng, they followe all maner of wickednesse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               This do I know right wel, but what other
thing were they doing?Politique fetches vsed in the Counsell.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They were treating
howe they might bring Germany into the lappe
of the Romishe Church, eyther for loue, money, or by
force.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Speake they nothing of deceites
and treasons?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               These men rather do them,
than talke of them. Then called they for one Saint
Ioyce,
                  Saint Ioice patrone of fruitefull succession. and they all besought him, that he would cause
the Princes of Germany to haue many sonnes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               For what occasion?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To the ende,
(the better to maintayne so many sonnes in estate and
reputation,) they should be constrayned to séeke at the
Popes handes, some good benefice, Bishopricke, or
Cardinalship.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue hard say, that many
Flemings goe to this Saint Ioyce, who hath a
Church in Fraunce, that they maye haue children,
and they spéede of their purpose.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is true,Spiritually begotten children meete to maintaine the Popes spiritual kingdome.
for whyle they be on their voiage, saint Ioyce vseth y•
priests and Friers as instruments with their wiues.
They were treating also, howe the learned men of
Germanie, might be corrupted with rewardes & with
letters, and with the deuises of certayne Cardinals,
that séeme to be better learned, and better than y• rest.
But that which in this counsell with greatest studye
was sought to be prouided for,The weighti est matter of all the counsell. was to cause the Pope
forthwith, without any other consideration, to giue al
his whole help to Charles y• fifth, for they doubt much
that Charles wyll fall to some agréement with the
Lutherans,
                  Charl
                        •
                     s the
                        ••
                      suspected by the Pope. to the great hurte of this heauen, or else
least the Lutherans shoulde haue the better hande,
which if it shoulde come to passe, eyther the one way,
or the other, this heauen is ouer throwen and destroyfull

and whole. They were treating also, that great
aide should be giuen to Ferdenando, who hath a great
many children,Ferdenando vpon condicion shal haue ayde from the Pope. and a sore warre euē at hand, and hath
his dominion very weake, but with this condiciō, that
he shoulde fal to playe, make warres, vse good chéere,
earely and late, and suche lyke things, rather than
to the studie of searching out the truth, naye that he
shoulde rayther put to death all suche as confesse it,
and after this sort shoulde bring vp his children: and
besyde all this, that he shoulde not kéepe in his Court
other than such as Faber, Ecchius, and Hosius.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou must not maruell,Popishe Doctors. that these spitefull (I
would haue sayde spirituall) men, will not haue men,
and chiefely Princes, to meddle with holy scripture,
for their heauen is builded altogether vpon ignoraunce,The Popes heauen builded vpon Ignoraunce.
and wouldest thou haue them desire anye
other thing, than Ignoraunce to al other men, which
is the mother of all errors and euill? Of pleasures I
speake not,Ignoraunce mother of all errors. for therein they farre excéede Sardanapalus,
and Zerxes. But aboue al other things, the duetie
of a king or Prince is, to feare God, and defende
the true religion,The duetie of a king. which is contayned in the Gospell,
to loue wisedome, and in al goodnesse and good gouernaunce
of himselfe, to be so muche the more better,
than other, as he is higher in degree and dignitie, and
yet for all this, is euery one of them become a greater
persecutour of the Gospell, than any Nero: for the
which, they shall haue of God their iust punishment,
and soner than they thinke for. But what, was there
nothing determined concerning Fraunces the French
King?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               They were al of this opinion to send
him some Flatterer,Fraunces the French King. or other stale courtier, throughly
instructed with the fine fetches of the court of Rome,

who for euery thing that the king shoulde doe, or say,
were it neuer so foolishe or euill, shoulde saye, oh well
done Sir, and to cause him still to remember the title
of most Christian King, which his progenitors receyued
from the Bishops of Rome, & therefore should
with all his power defende the dignitie of those that
gaue so goodly a title, and if he woulde that the name
of moste christian King shoulde be truely verefied on
him, he should not fayle to persecute Christians euen
to the death, vnder the colour of Heretiques, and Lutherans,
and those that are contrarie to such as gaue
him that title. For other things, that he shoulde fall
to dauncing,The Popes counsell to Kings and rulers. to banketting, to serue Venus, and to
hunting, rather than to fauoure learning, as it séemed,
he would doe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Let him beware that
the fyre of the Lutherans (that he hath burned) do not
kindle and burne vp his whole realme. He,Marke howe Pasquine prophecieth of Fraunce. and other
princes his followers shoulde take héede, how many
kings there haue bene, (that soner than they thought
for) hauing washed their handes, in the bloude of the
Martiyrs of the highe Lorde of all, haue bene by him
sharply punished: for the very ashes of them that haue
bene persecuted and haue dyed for Christes sake,Apoc. 20. crye
vengeaunce. But if he wil appease Gods wrath,The way to appease Gods wrath and
be worthily called most Christian King, let him cause
Christes pure Gospel, to be fréely set forth within his
realme, let him caste downe Images, let him restore
the true vse of the Sacramentes,
                  Ioan. 4. 
                  and vvorship God
vvith spirite and truth, and not with the handes, nor
with incense. And so say I, of other Princes, if they
will be (truely) Christians, and if they will not euen
shortly feale the scourge of God, who hath giuen them
power, to the ende they shoulde defende his Gospell,

and not y• they should persecute such as defend it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Were not these Saints affeard,Auignion vsurped by the Pope. that the King
woulde take agayne Auignion from the Pope, and
the other places, that he vsurpeth, or that he woulde
giue ayde to the Lutherans in this warres: or else
would do these Saints some other harme?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They doubted this nothing, all the whyle the King
was in league with the Turke,Machomet and the Pope are brothers. for Machomet and the
Pope are brothers, and hereby thou mayest perceyue
it, that when the Turkes armie passed along the Sea
coastes, of the Popes dominion, it did there no maner
hurt, nor domage: but rather good, but if the French
King shake off the league with the Turke, then are
they in a wonderfull suspicion.The King of Englande.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               What
was sayde of the King of Englande?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They
were sore in doubt least other Princes woulde follow
this Kings example in taking away the possessions of
the Church.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is it lawfull to doe it?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, if it be done, to put them to better vse,
naye rather,How the possessions of the Church shuld be bestowed. Princes are bounde to haue regarde,
that the possessions of the Churches vnder their subiection
be dispensed to the pore, impotent, for the mariage
of honest maydens, to the godly ministers of y•
true Churches, and not to lying Fryers and idle
priests, enimies to the Gospel, as thou mayest sée, In
Codice Iurisconsultorum. And saint Paule sayeth,
                     
                        •
                     . Thess. 3. 
                  He
that laboreth not let him not eate. The same do I say
also, of the treasures of the Church, as vessels, vestements,
Images of Golde and Syluer, Iewels, bā
                  ners,
crosses and such lyke, which eyther idle priests
and Fryers (enimies of the pure gospell of Christ) do
enioy, and eyther do vnprofitably reserue for ambition,
consume in letcherie, or else for superstition doe

worship.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I surely thinke that these possessions
were left to the Churche,Why possessions were giuē to the Church. to the ende they should
be disposed in such sorte as thou haste sayde: and to
say y• truth, what doth Gold in the Churches? as that
Poet sayde. But was there any other thing in doing.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was decréed to encrease the number of
the Cardinals, & to cause that of al the chief houses of
Italie,
                  A pollicie vsed to preserue the Popes Kingdome. and else where abroade, there shoulde alwayes
one or other of them be a Cardinall, by this mecanes
to kéepe them alwayes in the deuotion of the Church
of Rome, the which they nowe, through the reading
of holye Scriptures, beginne to knowe and forsake,The reading of the Scripture bringeth knoweledge.
that they may enioye the libertie of the Gospel. But
aboue all other things, that their shoulde be alwayes
vj. or .iiij. at the least of the Venetians, Cardinals, and
this they ment, bycause they knowe,Why so many Venetiās are made Cardinalles. what a number
of those Senatours are wyttie men, and of profound
iudgement, doubting least they should slip their heads
out of the coller, and most of all, seing that sacred Senate,
(when it hath bene often tymes by the Popes
Legates, pricked forward to the destruction, & slaughter
of their vessels, bicause they withdraw themselues
from the Popes tyrannie) hath shewed euidently that
they take more care of their true,Carefull magistrates ouer their people. and faithfull subiects,
than to haue giuen eare to the presumption of
him that taketh vpon him to commaund them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou hast told thy tale, but I haue heard say,
that they bury men quicke.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               How doe they
burie them quick?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thrusting them into
prisons, as into graues.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The Legate condem
                     •
                  neth
them, and not they.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Truely I
muche maruell, sith there hath bene at no tyme any
power so great, that hath bene able by force to s
                     •
                  bdue

them, they wil for al that so wilfully submit themselues
to the seruice of the Pope,The Pope abuseth al magistrats. and suffer for his
sake that within their Territorie, Iustice shoulde be
defaced or blemished, which being driuen from all
men, is come to séeke succours at them.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I
would vnderstande thée better, and then I will aunswere
thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               They are great Lordes,The Pope maketh all Princes his Butchers and hangmen. and
neuer knewe what bondag
                     •
                   meant, and yet they suffer
that a vyle scuruy priest shall in their owne dominion
giue sentence against their subiectes, and they
muste execute other mens sentences. Thinkest thou
that this is not great bondage? I speake not of the
Tenthes of their Dominion, the which they giue the
Pope,The great iustice of the Venetians. and many things else. And furthermore, there
is not a man condempned in that iuste Citie, that is
not iudged by fortie Iudges, neither is there any one
so euill or heynous an offendor, but maye alleage for
himselfe the best he can, and yet they suffer, that a legate
onely,The spiritualtie doth rule & raigne eche where. shall condempne whome he lyste, and the
person accused, shall not come to his purgacion, for
this false Iudge refuseth the Testimonies of thē that
speake in the defence of him that is accused, and alloweth
such, as for hatred or any other dampnable occasion
speake euill against him. And they perceiue not y•
if I beare displeasure to one, I may go and accuse him
to the Legate, of heresie, and cause him to be banyshed,
or committed to some place to abyde during his lyfe,
and forfeyte his goodes, and yet shall not he haue once
so much fauour,Truth can not be heard where such 
                        •
                     irannie r
                        •
                     ygneth. as to say for himselfe what he can, &
peraduenture, he is an honest man, & faithfull to his
estate. Doest thou not thinke, that it were a thing
very requisite for them, to prouide better for this case?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               Thou knowest Marorius, y• there haue euer

bene, and shall euer be, membres of Antichrist. And
they be the cause of these and such like disorders.Antichrist and his members the cause of disorders. But
be thou fast and sure of it, they can not long continue
thus, for there are among thē that are very wyse mē,
and many more than I speak of, who haue depely considered
the great tumults, and the great seditions and
flaughters, y• in times past haue bene in Germanie,
for persecuting such as were faithfull subiects & men
that in all points were honest, and therefore are very
lothe, that the like should come to passe, in their countries,
for they sée aforehand, the scourge that God hath
prepared for the Emperor and his brother, for these
causes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               God knoweth,The Chariti
                        •
                      of Pasquine. that I wishe their
well doing, as much as any of themselues, & do therfore
wishe they did as thou sayest, and I woulde haue
them thus to consider, that when any of them is made
a Cardinall, he should be forthwith banished, for these
be they, that cause all their secrets to be knowen to y•
Pope, and are the very occasion that they are kept in
such vile bondage.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Doubt not thereof, they
will haue greater regard to the publique weale,Good members of a common wealth. than
to their priuate commoditie, and when néede shall be,
will leaue all these considerations, and open the waye
to all Italie. And the saints of whome we speake, are
much in doubt hereof, and do therefore séeke by making
many of them Cardinalles, to kepe them styll in
bondage, for if they had not had so great respecte to y•
Tyranne the Pope, they shoulde long sithens haue
bene Lords of all Italie. The which thing might easily
come to passe,By what way the Venetians might become greater. if they would embrace the Gospell
of Iesus Christ, the giuer of all power, dominion, &
all other good things, as I hope they will.
            
            
               Marforius.
               folowe on I pray thée, the other determinaciōs of this

counsell.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Cōcerning Spaine, it was decreed,
that the Inquisitors shoulde not henceforth be seuere
with the Marranes who denye the Diuinitie of
Christ,Godes enimies fauoured and his frendes persecuted. but should be most cruell againste the Lutheran
                        •
                     s,
who deny the Diuinitie of the Pope, and most
constantly confesse the Diuinitie of Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That is euen as much, as to desire that Barrabas
be deliuered,Iohn. 18. and Innocent Christ crucified, but what
was else decréed there?Luc. 23.
               
            
            
               Pasquin.
               One thing horrible,
fearefull, and to make all Christendome quake.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Alas what may that be?A diuelishe decre of the Popes saintes.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               First they
decréed to make league with the Turke, to make therby
all their enemies affearde, and that done to sende
all their Angels, through all the parts and Cities of
Christendome, and most chiefly, such Angels as sowe
wilfull warres, dissentions, deceits, mischieues, & offences,
and calling therefore one of them, that had the
face of a Uirgin, and the féete, and hands of a Lyon, &
his bosome full of Serpents: after whome went one
laden with weapons, fyre, and sworde, & one of these
Gods thus spake vnto hir. O virgin daughter of the
night;
                  The oration of one of the Saintes to this Diuell their Messanger. 
                  take thou this paine for vs, and so vvorke, that
our honor & fame do no vvhere decay. Thou that arte
able to set louing brothers to cruell vvarre, and fyll al
houses vvith mortal hatred, one of an other: thou that
canst if thou vvilt, bring into all houses distruction &
death: thou that hast a thousand names to colour thy
self vvith, & as many vvayes to vvorke mischief, styr
vp thy noble heart hereto, that hath suche stuffe in
store ouerthrovv the peace that is already made,
                  
                     
                        〈…〉
                     
                   
                  sovv
nevve causes of vvar
                        ••
                      let eche man crye for vvarre,
let euery ma
                        •
                      haue his hands full. When the Angell
heard this, he promised fully to obeye it, and away he

getteth, flying throughe all the seuerall Quéeres of
the other Aungels, and out of them tooke all suche, as
was skillfull in murthers,The Popes saints fil al the worlde with warres and mischief. deceyts, and all kindes of
mischief, & carieth them with him, and part he sendeth
into Germanie, parte into Fraunce, and parte into
Spaine, and the messanger selfe goeth into Italy.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               This is like that, which Iuno in great rage said
to Alecto. Sith I can not (
                     •
                   she) moue the gods to pity,
I wil stir by y• diuels to michiefe. But is it possible
that these saints be such maner of felowes?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               They are much worsse and farre doe passe the wicked
spirits & furies of Hell in all kinde of crueltie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Where then did that furie Alecto abide?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In this Citie,Rome the Diuels dwe
                        •
                     ing place. which hath bene the heade of the
worlde, and from hence sendeth his other Aungels abrode
into other townes and places of Italy, and somtime
goeth him selfe in person, as to Bologna, to Ferrara,
and leaueth some of his serpents there, to infecte
& poyson that place.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Woe be to the worlde
therefore, sith so cruell a plague, is sent vnto it: but
wherefore do they this?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Firste,The cause of this diuellys
                        •
                      decre. for to kindle
the hatred and wrath of all kings and Princes, against
the defenders of the Gospell, & moreouer, that
they being occupied in warres, discords, & discentiōs,
shoulde not so muche as thinke vpon the restoring of
this decayed religion, not to cal a generall Councell,
and they in the meane time, should lyue in pleasures
and stand to beholde this tragedie, and enioy the fruit
of other mennes harmes, yet reioyce they neuer a
whitte, of thys newe warre of Germanie, doubting
least it should be turned altogyther vpon their necks.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh what a wonderfull blindnesse of men
is this, that such as are the causers of so many euils,

of so greate warres, and of so manyfold errors, men
ceasse not yet, to call most holy, most blessed, and most
reuerend, and to thinke their wayes to be so good and
holy, to the which things God send redresse, as ryght
néedefull, for the soules of such shéepishe fooles as wyll
beleue such maner of people. But say on the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Al these things were written in their Authentique
Authorities, for a pretie Ganimedes called them
all to supper, and so the Councell brake vp. And my
good Aungell, sayde to me: Come with me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Whether led he thée? to the Quéere of Aungels?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No,The Order or Queere of the Aungels. for he told me he had businesse to do, &
therefore it behoued him to make haste, and go out of
this heauen, but so as we went together, he talked to
mée of them.
            
            
               Marforius.
               How are they placed? what be
their names?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He tolde me that there is so
great a confusion of their names, that with much a do
can their offices be rehersed, yet the best he could, he
tolde me, & these were their names, Penitentiaries,
Procuratours,The 
                        〈◊〉
                      orders of the Popes Aungelles. Abbreuiatours, Auditours, Prothonotaries,
Chamberlaines, Suffraganes, Abbots, and
Cardinalles, euen as a man woulde saye Angels,
Archangels, Thrones, Dominations, Principates,
Uertues, Powers, Cherubines, and Seraphines.
Thus standeth this heauen my Marforius, as thou
hast hearde, which when I had vnderstoode, I came
my way following my guide.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou haste
tolde me nothing of Christ,Christ is not in the councell. sawest thou him there in
the councel among those Saintes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe
him not, but as I came out afterward, I sawe before
the Pallace a little childe that played with certaine other
children there,Christ goeth to playe like a childe. of whome, when I had asked, it
was tolde me that it was Christ, who fell to playing,

and therefore came not to the Councell, for his mother
had the whole charge of all things.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then is Christ alwayes a childe in this heauen?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea alwayes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sawest thou any
other thing there?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               As I went from that
place, going for to sée the rest, I founde onely a great
voyde market place,The marcha
                        •
                      dises of the Popes store houses. whereas were aboue .vj. hundered
storehouses, or barnes, as great as those that Ioseph
builded in Egipt.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What was there
in them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Some of them were ful, but not
with corne, but of Waxe, some ful of Copes and vestments,
some with chaynes, some full of little broken
pieces of Golde and Syluer, some other of those store
houses, were emptie, and vpon the dores of these emptie
houses, was set a little writing, that sayde: The
storehouses of Germanie, and of Englande: and they
were altogether emptie, for it was now a great while,
sith any thing was brought into them, and that which
was wont to be there, was all spente in almes vpon
the Nunnes of Pozzo Bianco,
                  God graunt they be neuer better stored. and Strada Iulia, and other
places, but moste of all vpon the marring (I
would say marrying) of pore boyes. And whyle I was
there,Pasquiue meaneth that our Peter pēs and other our proffits the pope had hens were spent vpō the mayntenāce of wheres and bardasses in Rome loe, there commeth forth the olde man, (that
woulde not open the dore vnto me) with his great rusty
keyes in his hande, and his great euill fauoured
myter on his head.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What saide he to thée,
I pray thée hartily?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He sawe me not, nor he
spake not to me, for he was busie about other things.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What did he?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He went as one
all ful of sorrowe, and heauinesse, viewing those storehouses,
and other places of the pallace, and he sawe in
many places that the walles gaped for the riftes they
had, the foundations were so decayed and ruinous,

that all the whole building loked as though it woulde
shortly fall.The Popes keyes are the keyes of the storehouses.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I thought first, y• those keyes
had bene the power and authoritie to ass
                     ••
                  le and condempne,
but as farre as I could perceyue, they were
the keyes of y• store houses, but wherfore was he so ful
of heauinesse?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Wherefore? thinkest thou it a
questiō to ask wherfore? he saw the store houses emptie,
and saw no hope how to fil them, he saw y• building
almost falling, and saw no hope how to repayre it,Gods worde must destroye the Popes heauen. he
sawe that not onely Germanie went about (all that it
might) to ouerthrowe this his heauen, but almost all
Italie had layde hand on the sworde that must destroy
it, the which sworde issueth forth of the mouth of the
sonne of Man,Apoc. 1. as the Reuelation sheweth. But when
I sawe the buylding, in so manye places looke as it
woulde fall, I determined not to tarie anye longer
there, and by the same way that I came, I retourned
backe,Pasquine goeth out of the Popes heauen and goeth vp to Gods heauen. running away from this heauen, as fast as I
coulde, for feare it shoulde fall vpon me, hauing yet
alwaies my guide with me. And whē we came to the
place where our Chariot was left, I gate vp into it,
and so we take our way towardes Gods heauen, and
mounting vpwarde, mine Aungell tolde me, that he
that wil go into the true heauē, must haue his minde
pure, and lifted vp, where al things are vnspotted and
full of all cleanenesse, and altogither contrarie to the
first heauen. And being nowe passed the sphere of the
Moone,A wonderful straunge sight as we came to that of Mercurie, we founde a
number of soules tormented in sundry sorts, amongs
which was one, that was tyed betwene two Postes,
with a corde made fast about his middle, so that he
hong, and coulde touche no grounde: he had vpon his
head two great harts hornes, & betwene the hornes

was fastened a linnē cloth, after the maner of a saile,
and at his féete hong a great pursse full of crownes,
and so went this ghost continually whirling about,
for as any winde blew, it stroke in the sayle, that was
betwene the hornes, and tourned him with his féete
vpwarde, and as the winde ceassed,Pasquine setteth forth the punishment of the Neuters. the contrepoise of
the Pursse tourned him with his féete downe agayne,
and so the pore wretch was stil whirled about,
and one whyle was hys heade and another tyme his
héeles turned vp on high to heauen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Diddest
thou knowe who that was?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I knewe
him not, but myne Aungell tolde me, that it was
Erasmus of Roterodam.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Alas what is this
thou tellest me? and why was he that was so learned,
and so honest a man, in this miserable case?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               The harts hornes signifie his fearefulnesse, and the
Pursse his couetousnesse, which two things were so
muche in him, that the one whyle the one, an other
whyle the other, made him bowe, now this way, now
that waye, so that it coulde not be discerned whether
he drewe néerest to Gods heauen, or to the Popes
heauen, & therfore is he placed in the middes betwene
them both.
            
            
               Marforius.
               In very déede no man muste
thinke to hold one foote in heauen & another in earth.Neutralitte must be vtte
                        ••
                     ly auoided.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               O if it were Gods wil, I would this thing
were knowen beneath in the earth, that so manye
might not goe into that place, where the paynes are
much greater, than any man thinketh for.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou sayest that there were manye other: who were
those?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The most part were preachers,Weather
                        •
                      cocks and turncotes are not to be beleued. that
knowing the truth gaue all laude and prayse to God
by Iesus Christ, and al blame and confusion to men,
and afterwarde, at a sodaine, for feare of the Inquisitour,

they preached of eare confession, of Purgatorie,
of the false authoritie of the Pope, and of a thousande
other Heresies and deceiptes to their pore hearers.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And how wouldest thou haue them
doe?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I woulde rather haue them suffer banishement
from their country, imprisonment, or shed
their bloud, to mayntayne y• honor of Christ against
Antichrist,Certain Italians true christians. as of our country men, Augustine, Maynard,
Benardine, Oclime of Siena, Iulius of Myllaine,
Peter Martir the Florentine, Paulus Lazisius
of Verona, Peter of Cittadella, Baldus of Cherso,
and infinite other, as well Frenchmen and Flemings,
as Dutchmen and Spaniards also haue done.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I haue hearde say, that there are suche in
Fraunce as will holde with the Hare and runne with
the Hounde.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is true, and I knowe one
of them, that is a man of great name, vpon whome I
feare,Hebr. 6. that the fearefull sentence, that Paule writeth
to the Hebrues, wil one day fall, That such as hauing
once knovvne and receiued the truth, haue afterward
forsaken it, who sayth he, it is not possible that they
shoulde repent, nor enioy the kingdome of God, and
so doe they offend against the holy ghost, which sinne
shall neuer be forgiuen as Christ affirmeth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Maye he be named who he is?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Whye
wouldest thou haue me be affeard to name him, who
is not affeard to doe suche iniurie to my Lorde and
Sauiour Iesus Christ, and his holy church? he is called
Peter de Charles,
                  Peter de Charles a wether cocke. he is a Piccarde borne, and hath
played many leud partes, in Geneua, and in Losanna.
He hath alwayes bene very inconstant, an euil speaker,
furious in all his preachings, that one whyle
hath defended one part, an other whyle an other part,

and at an other tyme neyther of them both, one that
hath sought to corrupte the Churches euery where,
and bicause he coulde not doe as he would among the
                     •
                  
                  Svvychers, he ranne to Mets,
                  Farellus a true preacher (where he heard that
good man Farellus a sincere preacher, had preached
Christ) to take awaye from thence the holesome séede
of Gods word, before it should take roote in the hearts
of those of the Citie, but let them take good héede what
they doe,Num. 22. lest they bring vpon thē the cursse of God, as
Balaam did, who was hiered for to cursse.
            
            
               Mar.
               Now
I pray thée, let vs leaue these Ribaldes, knaues, and
théeues, wicked and stinking Antichristes, for I can
not abyde anye longer to heare them to be spoken of,
and followe on thy voyage.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Passing the
Sphere of Mercury,
                  The heauenly harmonie. we were caried vp higher thorow
other spheres. And there I began more clearely to sée
the maruellous workemanship of the circles and bodies
celestiall, and to tast with mine eares the harmonie
and most pleasaunt concordaunce, that is caused
by the mouing of those circles, the which concordaunce
Plato affirmed, and Aristotle denyed, bicause he beleued
rather his corporall senses,Plato and Aristotle differeth in opinion. than the capacitie
of the ymagination, and the diligent working of the
minde, the which whyle I considered, there came into
my minde a very sincere and profounde cogitation
and thinking of God, as it behoueth such to haue that
search these places, euen as myne Aungel (at my first
ascending vp thither) had tolde me, and being so occupied
in beholding the varietie, beauty and swéetenesse
of those things, (almost before I was ware therof,) I
sawe that I had passed all the planets, and was come
to the firmament, whereas there begonne to appeare
thinges muche more maruellous.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I am

also, of this opinion, taking myne argumēt from this
visible heauen, that those things are much more beautifull
and maruellous, that are furthest off from the
sense of séeing, bicause that they doe most néerest approche
to things that are true & heauenly.Christen philosophie.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest well Marforius, and I doe not thinke
that this is the last or least part of Christian Philosophie
and diuinitie, that is to saye, to séeke & search out
by the things that are creat and subiect to our senses,
the great goodnesse, power and wisdome of god, & therfore
to praise, & magnifie the maker therof. And therfore
it is, that certaine foolishe & grosse Fryers, which
vnderstand not the working and heauenly cunning of
God in al his things (but attende rather to féede their
belly, than their mynde) can not loue or haue God in
any admiration.The way to knowe God Psal. 19. For by the things created in this
worlde, do men come to the knowledge of God, euen
as Christ teacheth vs. And Dauid also sayth, That the
heauens declare the glory of God, & the firmament
shevveth forth his handy vvorkes. And wherby canst
thou better knowe God, whether by a stone set vpon
an altare that cā neither speake, nor moue, nor be profitable
for any purpose, or else by ye ordre of al things
created?The varietie of Gods works declare his greate power. Behold therefore among the Elementes,
first doth ye earth shew forth hir selfe with hir hearbs,
floures, frutes, swéete sauours, beastes of so many
sorts, so many sundry regiōs, & the natures, & custōes
of men so diuers, then the mayne Sea spred about the
earth, and within the lande also, for our great cōmoditie,
with so great diuersitie of Fishes: then if thou
consider the nature of the ayre & of the fyre, and also
of the mouinges of the planets, and most especially of
the Sunne, and of the Moone, so well ordayned for the

commodities & nedefull seruice of man. If thou waye
all things diligently, thou shalt féele a meruellous delectation
& singuler pleasure. For the cōsideration and
beholding of nature, is a féeding to y• mind.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I beleue in déede, that through the consideration hereof,
mā may approche nerer to God, but yet for al that
say they,The P
                        •
                     pe would haue his dead Images to be our liuely scholemasters. that the stone nor the Image is not to be cō
                  sidered,
but that thing, which the stone or Image signifieth.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If thou be of that opinion, wherefore
doest thou not, when thou wilte haue the Image
of Peter, set before thée, some holy Pastor, that maye
in conditions, lyfe, and doctrine, be like vnto him, rather
than a stone, which can not instructe thée in anye
heauenly knowledge, nor can not so much as speake?
And euen so, when thou wilte haue the Image of the
Uirgin Mary, why doest thou not rather behold some
holy yong virgin that moste maye be like hir, rather
than a stone wrought by some whoremonger or adulterer,
made ofte tymes to the lykenesse of his harlot?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou sayest truth,The dead picture of the vergin Marie liuely counterfeited after a Popes whore. knowest thou that picture
of our Lady, which standeth ouer the dore of Cardynall
Farnese his chamber, where as sometyme
Pope Alexander Borgias dwelled?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That same is the natural & liuely coūterfaited
picture, of yc sister of Alexander Farnese, which
late was Pope, Paule the thirde, for she was Pope
Alexanders cōcubine, & she by her honorable meanes,
caused Alexanders Farnese hir brother, to be made a
Cardinall, who sithens was Pope, for the greater
plague to the worlde.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               What thinkest thou
by this therefore?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Mary starke nought.
But where shall a man finde eyther such a Bishop or
such a Uirgin as thou speakest of?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               Where?

euen where the gospel flourisheth, where Christ doth
bestow his heauenly treasures in these our dayes, as
in Svvycherland,
                  Christian Regions. in Sauoy, & in Germany, albeit there
wante none in Italie, and in Fraunce, for al that they
be oppressed by the Popes tirannie. And I say vnto
t
                     •
                  ée, that there are in these dayes, through the great
goodnesse of God, both women and men, full of holynesse,
and of the knoweledge of the truth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               God for his great mercy be praysed for it, that giueth
so great giftes, and so great light to this our tyme.
But if thou thinke good, follow on thy voyage.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               When we had passed the firmament,Apoc. 4. we came
to the skye of Ise, called the Cristall skie, not bicause
that there is any Ise there, but bicause the purenesse
of it, is like vnto moste pure Ise, or of moste antique
Cristall, and much more also, from thence, we went
vp to the highest heauen, and there for the brightnesse
of the great light) we were fayne to stay a whyle, that
our eyes might begin a little to be enured to abide it,
as he doeth that is brought forth vpon a sodaine out
of the darkenesse into the sunne shyne, and so hauing
a little whyle acquaynted our eyes with that brightnesse,
we began to approche the Citie of the Lorde.The description of the true Heauen. I
call it a Citie Marforius, for that I knowe not by
what other name to call it, for it was rather a whole
country, shyning with so great maiestie, that I my
selfe am not able with thought, much lesse with tong,
to expresse it vnto thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Tell me yet, as
muche as thou canst expresse of it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Haste
thou euer read the Apocalipse?
            
            
               Marforius▪
               
               Yea, but
I vnderstand it not.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Whereas Iohn speaketh
of the City of God, he sayth, That in the middes
of the throne sitteth God,Apoc. 5. and the Lamb, hauing seauen

seales, that is to say, all povver, and dominion ouer
all things that are in heauen and in earth, for in
the number of seauen, is contayned the infinite and
perfect number. About the throne, are infinite numbers
of Saintes, of all nations, and of all tongues,
who singing continually to the most highest, make an
harmonie of such swéetenesse, as can not be told.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What sing they?The song of true saintes.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Alleluya, to God
onely, and euerlasting, the God of Hostes, great and
maruellous, who hath wrought mercy on the worlde
by the bloude of the Lambe Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Did
they sing all this song?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea al Marforius,
and him onely did they all beholde, he onely is King,
and the ruler of his fathers Kingdome, the aduocate
and defendour of all miserable wretches, euen Iesus
Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Were there here, no seuerall
Quéeres or orders, as in the other heauen?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               No,1. Peter. 4. for here is no difference of persons, for as muche
as I coulde perceyue, there was a certayne equalitie
among them all,Equalitie among the true Saintes. without any enuye, and most aptyly

                     •
                  ente to perpetuall continuaunce of that kingdome.
This one thing saw I also beside the rest, y• the Lamb
helde his Testament sealed with his owne bloude,Apoc. 5. in
the which, all the Saintes were written as heires alyke,
neyther was there anye one among them that
desired to be greatter than the rest, but all with one
voyce, song laude and glorye to God onely, and to the
Lamb that was offered vp.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And was there
none of those things here in this heauen,Christ is the way and the gate to Heauen. that was in
the other heauen?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               None at all.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And is not then, Saint Peter porter there?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               This heauen hath none other gate but Christ,Iohn. 10. who is
the way,Iohn. 14. the gate, y• truth, & the true lyfe, there is here

no maner daunger, but peace, sure and euerlasting.
There Michaell, Gabriel, the Cherubi
                     •
                  es and Scraphines,
are of an other maner of fashion, than here
beneath with vs they are accōpted, or painted. If thou
sawest these things, thou wouldest wonder at the folly
of men,Dionis
                        •
                     us and at the dreames they make of them,
and especially of Denis the Areopagite,
                  Areopagita. a d
                     •
                  uisour
of foolishe thinges, that he neuer sawe nor knowe.
God who is euen the same that we call father, is couered
with a certayne lyght, which no man may attayne
vnto,1. Tim. 6. euen as it were with a garment. From
hence are the ministers of the God of Sabaoth (which
are spirites and powers) sente forth, for the saluation
of his Churche, nor it is not possible to make any distinction
in their Orders and degrées, neyther wyth
place, nor with name. For God onely can make distinction
of them, when he sendeth them, where it pleaseth
him, for they al are as the breath of Gods mouth,
all are of fire, all are flying and winged, for the great
desire they haue to obey God, vpon whom onely they
are bent, and whose wil onely they doe most feruently
desire to doe. And in fine, here are all things one,
and one all things.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And is there neuer a
Quéene there?The Quene of Heauen.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               One I saw clothed in that
garment, that the Psalme speaketh of. My hart hath
indyted a good matter.
                  Psal. 45. Hir espouse was Christ, and
I tooke hir to haue béene the virgin Mary,
                  The Quene of Heauen i
                        •
                      the Churche and not the virgin Mary. but myne
Aungel tolde me, that it was the Church.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why then, the virgin Mary beareth no rule in heauē?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No but shée for hir part, and after hir maner,
adourneth & garnisheth the body of the espouse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Those things therefore that are sayde of
our Lady in the Prime and houres, and other seruice

of hirs, doe rather appertayne to the Church, than to
the virgin Mary.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That do I well knowe,
for I haue sene it is so.
            
            
               Marforius.
               But how cōmeth
it to passe, that this Quene, y• is the espouse of Christ,
is so little knowen and estemed among men?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause the Popes haue aduaunced them selues
aboue hir,Popes haue vsurped the authoritie of the Churche. and haue vsurped vnto them selues hir
authority, and made lawes after their 
                     •
                  wne deuises,
without hauing any regarde vnto hir. And bycause
the things should not be applyed vnto them, whiche
the holye scripture speaketh of the Church, therefore
haue they thrust into the place of the Church, the virgin
Marye, and haue attributed all things vnto hir,
and haue called hir Quéene and Empresse of heauen,
and our Aduocate, so that y• name of the true Quéene
is vtterly abolished and lost.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Doest thou
remember what this Quéenes apparell was.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I remember it well,The Quenes apparell. she had the whole shewe
of a most chaste Matrone, and albeit she consist of dyuers
mēbers,1. Cor. 12. they are notwithstanding with so great
proportion ioyned to their heade Christ, that nothing
can be more agreable. And this Quéene from day to
day was better garnished. And albeit the handfasting
haue bene long 
                     •
                  ithens made, yet is the maryage day
looked for to be at the last day, in the whiche all men
must ryse agayne.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Truelye, it is a maruellous
matter,Of mariage. that Priestes doe so much dispise maryage,
seing that Christ wyll fynishe his kingdome
with the mariage of his Churche.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And I
maruell muche at it, but I feare they be no Christans,
albeit they haue the name, for they dispyse the example
of christ, vnto ye which Paule also exhorteth vs
saying.Ephe. 5. 
                  Ye husbandes loue your vvyues, as Christ loued

his Church.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Whereof commeth it
therfore, that we do not content our selues with christ
onelye?Io. 1. & 3. & 15.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Bycause the worlde is at that
poynt, that it is alwayes contrary to Christ, for euery
beast setteth more by straw,Iac. 4. than by gold.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh I would it were Gods wil,The worlde contrarie to Christe. that our Countrey of
Italy might once haue some vnderstanding, and not
be so without knowledge as it is, then woulde it not
suffer so many superstitions as it doth, nor peraduenture
shoulde féele so many warres.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Feare
thou not, it is not altogether without knoweledge.
The Lorde hath reserued seuen thousande men,3. Reg. 19. that
haue not bovved their knee to Baal.
                  Rom. 11.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               And
doth Christ then rule and gouerne al things, and giueth
he no authoritye or charge to his Saintes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He doth all things him selfe, he onely prepareth
the place for his Saints,Iohn. 14. they 
                     •
                  e at rest,The saintes be at reste. wythout
busying them selues in any of those things, that are
done here beneath. And they are all of one mynde,
that Christ be praysed, & that he raigne in all things.
So sayth the virgin,Ap. 4. et. 7. 
                  Mary so sayth Saynt Peter, so
doe the Martyrs, and all the rest. And in the base or
lower part of the diuine Maiesty, I sawe written. I
WILL NOT GIVE MY GLORY TO
AN OTHER.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Was therein thatEsay. 42.
place no diuersity of garmentes?The wedding garment.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No dyuersity
at all,Esay. 61. for all had on the wedding garment, the
which out of fayth,Mat. 22. is chaunged into perfect Charity,
the whiche here beneath among vs can not be done.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And doth not this worldlye gouernaunce
of things come from the true Saintes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No I tell thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Knowest thou whence it

commneth.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, I know, it commeth from
vncleane spirits, that with gay glorious titles deceiue
men Knowest thou not that the Lorde sayde in the
Gospel,Antichrist. that Antichrist with miracles should destroy
the fayth?2. Thess. 2. and that by Goddes sufferance, that those
which beleue not the truth, should be cōfirmed in vnbeliefe.
Knowest thou not,3. Reg. 22. that a spirite departed once
from the presence of God,2. Para. 18. and sware to become the
spirite of lyes, in the mouthes of all the Prophetes of
Achab?
                  2. Cor. 11. And moreouer, it is a thing most certayne,
that Sathan can transforme him selfe into an Angell
of lyght. And sith there are so many Legerdemaynes,
and we so easely drawen to all false Religion, it is no
maruell, if so manye fonde dreames be receyued as
truth. And doest thou thinke that our mayster Christ
and his Disciples,Watchwords giuen in the Scripture. haue without cause, so oftentymes
(foreseing these things) cryed vnto vs? Take hede, bevvare,
looke vvell to your selues, consider.
                  1. Thess. 5. 
                  Try all
things, & kepe that vvhich is good.
                  1. Ioh. 4. 
                  Try the spirirs,
vvhether they be of God or no? Howe many tymes
haue these shauelings tolde thée,Demaundes of our Ladie. that the virgin Mary
hath appeared, and demaunded of foolyshe men, that
Churches & monasteryes shoulde be builded by them
for hir? Thinkest thou, that it is to be beleued, that
this most modest handmayd of the Lorde, that being
of such a singuler humility, and hath the chiefest place
in the body of the Church, which is Christes espouse,
and that intierly loueth hir espouse, hath at any tyme
desired that, which she knoweth doeth belong to hir
only espouse? Wherfore hath she not when she so appeared,
demaūded that the gospel should be prcached?
that the Lordes vineyarde should be well looked vnto?

that the Wolues should not be made she pheardes, nor
such dogs as can not 
                     •
                  arke? nay rather these mates
will nedes haue hir to fauour and nourish both wolnes
and swyne.
            
            
               Marforius.
               The more thou talkest to
me Pasquine, the more is the truth opened vnto me,
would god,Marforius wisheth Pasquine to be Pope. y• thou were Pope once, that thou mightst
cause all these things to be opēly shewed to the whole
world, which are in déede no lesse true, than necessary
to be knowē.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou wishest me a 
                     •
                  ery good
turne Marforius, in that thou wouldest haue me become
Antichrist. If I were Pope, I shoulde be euen
as the rest were, for the Papacye would make me to
be as it is, and I should not make it be as I say. And
besyde that thou knowest, that they can not abide me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I wonder much that in so great a scarcity
of Gods worke, the people doe not learne of thée, the
way to knowe God.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Feare not, for there
are so many spiritual scholes,The scholes of Pasquine. both of men and womē,
(albeit they be not séene abroade) that euen very shortly
thou shalt sée so many true gospellers come abrode,
that the worlde shal much wonder whence they come.
            
            
               Marforius.
               We wil therefore call thée mayster, sithe
thou hast so many Christian scholes.Christ the onely Mayster.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The
maister of al is christ only, whose doctrine this is that
I teach. But to knitte vp our communication, I say
vnto thée br
                     •
                  e
                     ••
                  y,Mat. 23. that Christ is the heade of all, & the
espouse of the Church.Coloss. 1. And the Churche is made of
many and dyuers members,Ephe. 1. et. 4. ioyned together in one,
to the which, by the espouse onely, is the waye made
vnto the father. There is no maner of ambition, nor
desire of the vain & 
                     〈◊〉
                   things here on earth, al giue
thē selues wholly to prayse god,Apoc. 5. & 7. through Iesus Christ
for euer and euer Amen. To him is their onely desire

that all glory prayse and honour be attributed and giuen,
none séeketh there for his owne things, but for
the Bridegrome, they séeme al to haue forgotten thys
worlde, to the which they are deade, and lyue onelye
to one God,Christ onely gouernour. and all things there are onely gouerned
by Christ, who onely prayeth for vs, who maketh continuall
intercession for vs, whose onelye Sacrifice is
alwayes before his Father for vs, who sendeth daylye
hys holye Spirite to bys electe, and by it he gouerneth
his Church, he onely is King and Lorde, the
beginning and ende, the heade of all the Saintes,
of all godlynesse,Mat. 8. of all sincerity, and of all true Religiō,
he is the light of the world,Io. 14. for he séeth all things,
none can make him beleue one thing for an other, for
he is the truth it selfe, without him if thou walk, thou
goest out of the way, for he is the way, by him doe all
things stande and fall, for he is the life of all things,
for his sake only doth the father heare vs,Mat. 7. for as much
as all that we aske for his sake, and in his name, he
graun
                     ••
                  th it vs, that which we aske through him, we
are sure to haue, for the father hath promysed for hys
sake, who can not lye. He hath not promised ought to
suche as aske in the name of anye other, nay he is rather
angry with them that thinke that any Saint, is
more mercifull then Christ, or better, or more careful
ouer vs, or more acceptable to the father. For if we
wil haue an aduocate,1. Io. 2. who is more merciful, better, or
more acceptable to y• father thā Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I se
that al the fault procedeth hereof,Heauenly thinges must not be measured according to mans brayne. in that we measure
heauenly things according to our owne brayne. And
therfore doe we thinke that the Virgin Mary is more
mercifull than Christ, whome we imagine to be some
cruell T
                     •
                  raunt and fierce Iudge, (an error growen

of the diuersitie in nature betwéene man and womā,
bicause we sée, that Women are more pitiefull than
men. But what a diuellish madnesse was that, to
take away the gouernement from Christ, and gyue
it to hir?Luc. ii. as though Christ who is the wisdome of the
Father, doted or coulde not tell what he had to doe.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It pleaseth me muche Marforius, that of a
craftie Popishe Lawier,A maruelous yea almost a miraculous chaunge. thou art become a good and
playne Gospeller.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I thanke thée for it, good
Pasquine, nay, rather Christ, who hath by thy meanes
delyuered me out of so great Ignoraunce. And nowe
at this tyme hast thou tolde me manye things more,
than the other time thou diddest. Is there anye thing
behinde to be sayde, of other matters.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No,
as touching heauen, but if thou haue leysure to heare
me, I will declare vnto thée, the voyage I made into
Hell.The 
                        ••
                     iage to Hell.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               What, and hast thou also gone that
voyage?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It is but eyght dayes past, since I
was there.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I woulde leaue all other bu
                  
                     •
                  nesse
to heare thée tell of that, for I was not aware,
that thou haddest bene there, and I woulde fayne vnderstande
the truth of thinges done in those partes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will shew thée, of hell and of Purgatorie,
things no lesse maruellous,Pasquine a farre trauailed man. than true and Godlye.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Beginne therefore I praye thée heartily,
for me séemeth eche houre a yere til I heare thée.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou knowest, that this other tyme that we
talked together of the voyage into heauen, I tolde
thée, that the Aungell at his departing promised me,
that if at any tyme, I would make a voyage into hell,
he woulde beare me companie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I remember
it well.Pasquine a Curious searcher of thinges.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Being therefore desirous to vnstande
what possibly might 
                     •
                  e knowne of heauen, of

the earth, and of the bottomelesse places, a few dayes
fithens gate me vnto the caue, that in the beginning
I tolde thée of, and there, without making anye more
a doe, sayde my prayers, and prayed the Aungel that
he woulde come, he came, I then humblye besought
him, that he woulde kéepe his promise, that he made
me, that is to say, to bring me to sée the lower partes:
He sayde,Pasquine goeth to s
                        •
                     e hell. with a good wyll, and bad me followe him,
and so tooke on his way, and I after him. And we were
no soner departed, but I knowe not howe, euen in a
sodaine with more spéede than I can tell thée the tale,
we came to a maruellous great gate, and a way wonderfull
large and broade, and there the Aungell bid
me, be of good courage, and feare nothing that I
shoulde see or heare, declaring vnto me, that that
was Hell gate.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I heare thée beginne much
otherwise, than that I haue sometyme reade of in dyuers
Authours, thou diddest not first sacrifice shéepe,
and blacke bullockes, thou didst not offer vp a blacke
Lambe to the mother of the Furies, nor the baraine
Cowe to the Lady Proserpina, thou soughtest not for
the braunche of Golde.The way to Hell is sone found out. No thou gauest not thy selfe,
so much as a little holy water, nor markedst thy selfe
with the signe of the crosse, and couldest thou so sone
finde the gate, and then thou sayest, that it is so great,
and the way so broade and large, where as it séemeth
that other say the contrarie. I pray thée tell me the verye
truth of all things, that reporting the same again
to other, I be not laughed to scorne for my laboure.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If I haue begon farre otherwise than the
olde Authours speake of, I haue so done, to tell thée,
the matter as it is, and not to féede thée with fables
and lyes, for I must not worke any of those superstitious

ceremonies, that thou toldest of, for albeit that
all suche as do them, doe finde the waye, (for it is an
easie matter to goe to Hell, as euery man knoweth,
as Virgil sayth. Facilis descensus Auerni,) that I haue
then so lightly founde the gate, and sayde that it is
great, bicause thou mayest be sure that it is so, hearkē
what Christ sayeth.Math. 7. 
                  Enter ye in at the narrovve gate,
for vvyde is the gate and broade is the vvay that leadeth
to destruction, and many enter in thereat.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou hast satisfied me in this point, but tell
me, where foundest thou the gate, at the lake Auernus?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I founde it where it is, it is ynough
for thée to knowe, that he that goeth thither shal finde
it without any businesse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Follow on therfore
the rest, for I am with childe till I know it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               When we came vnto this gate, I felt suche a
terrible feare and horror (bicause of the things I saw
and heard) enter into my brest, that I could not vtter
it, for euen forthwith I felt myne eares to be stricken
with certaine horrible & fearefull outcryes, like vnto
those that he maketh that is vnder the handes of the
hangmā, or that is beset with theeues or murtherers,
or that is in a Citie that is put to the fyre and sword,
well I wote, the haires of my head stoode vpright, and
I was euen almost at the point to haue repented me,
that I was so curious to knowe thinges, but that the
Aungell, who was ware thereof, put me in good comforte
remembring vnto me,Math. 16. that Hell hath no maner
of power, ouer the elect children of God. Wherevpon
taking good courage, I began with more heede to beholde
al things,The description of Hell. and I saw so great a rable of Fryers,
and Priestes, following the Nonnes and the lay sisters,
as are the Bées, that being dryuen by a sodayne

shower of rayne, do by swarmes hasten them to their
hiues, or as are the birdes when they take their flight
ouer the sea. In fine, they were so manye in number,
that I would neuer haue beleued, that there had bene
so many in the worlde And the Angell séeing me maruell
thereat, sayde vnto me, let it not seme straunge
vnto thée, for hither come al they that be in the world,
excepting such as eyther forsake there coate, and olde
Customes also, or if they kepe their coate still, lyue
no more in that Fryerish filthinesse, bicause they are
washed by the pure worde of the gospell,What and whome Pasquine sawe in Hell. there sawe
I also all the Ipocrites, (althoughe the more parte
were Fryers) al the couetous men, al the Sodomits,
all persecutours of the Gospell, all those that put their
trust in pardons, & haue foll
                     •
                  wed the Popes wayes,
& finally all those that haue had any trust or affiaunce
of their saluation in anye other thing, than in Iesus
Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Howe diddest thou knowe them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               All their sinnes were open and manifest,
and they were séene outwardely, as their garments
are knowen here.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Diddest thou not know
any one of them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I wil not tell thée of any
persone perticulerly at this tyme, I will shewe thée
afterwarde in due place, where I sawe them all, one
by one, I haue now other matter to say to thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Saye on then.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               After I had stande a
whyle diligently beholding suche as entred in, I began
afterward to consider and marke the gate: it was
as thou hast heard,Hell gates neuer shutte. great and large, and stoode daye
and night continually open.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Howe commeth
it therefore to passe, that those that are in such a
miserable place, do not come out?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If thou
hadst let me haue made an end of my talk, y• shouldest

haue h
                     •
                  ard, that it standeth alwaies opē for them that
wil go in,Al may goe into hell that will, but none may come out. & alwayes shut for those y• are already gone
in: beside that, there are certayne waters, as thou
shalt heare hereafter, which take away al power to retourne
backe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And how camest thou then
backe againe?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               If thou stande stil and hearken,
thou shalt vnderstand altogyther.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Of
what stuffe was y• gate?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Amongest vs there
is no such maner of stuffe,Of what stuffe belgates were made. a thing it is that lasteth for
euer.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Of what worke was it made?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Neyther of Dorique, nor Ionique, Corinthian,
nor Rustique, nor of no Compounde, but of a
worke Diabolique.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sawest thou no notable
thing in it?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe it full of armes, among
whiche, there was one in the toppe of the forefronte
aboue al the rest,Caine the first that entred his father the deuilles Kingdome. Caines and his successors bloudy armes & that was the armes of Cain,
who was the firste that entred in thereat.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What armes were those of his?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Murther
in a fielde red.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Peraduenture it was bycause,
he was the first that did commit it, and bycause
that of Murther cōmeth bloude, whiche is redde?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou vnderstandest the matter.
            
            
               Marforius.
               The other armes whose were they?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was
well knowen, that there had bene other armes verye
auncient, but they were all taken away excepte those
of Cain.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Wherfore were they takē away?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To place there, the armes of Popes, as
those that better deserued the place,Popes armes triumphantly placed ouer Hel gate. for it coulde not
holde so many. So that thou mightest there haue séene
the gate all con
                     •
                  red with great huge keyes, set tw
                     •
                  
and two a Crosse, wyth a Myter betweene them,
and vnder the Myter, the name of the Pope, and
the yeare of our Lorde what time he entred: so that
there was leste but a litle voide space, wherein were

certaine letters, & vnderneth, so much space, as might
holde one armes, or very few more.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What
letters were those?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They were written in
Caldey, I could not reade them, bycause I was then
in this mortall body: but the Aungell tolde mée, that
all those soules that go thither, can reade them, & the
effect of them,The Inscription ouer Hell gate. is this, That that place is prepared for
the vessels of Gods wrath, and that eche one that entreth
therein,Mat. 25. spoyleth hymself of all ioye & gladnesse,
and putteth vpon him all miserie and sorowe, for ther
is wéeping and gnashing of téeth.Apo. 14.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               If there
be so little roome left, vpon that gate, where shal the
armes of the other Popes be hanged, that shal come
hereafter?Pasquine prophecieth that there shal be but fewe popes more.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               There muste be but a certaine
numbre, so many as that their armes maye serue that
roome.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I wyshe therefore that the roome
were very little, but are there y• armes of al y• Popes?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Of all, and they had already set vp the furnyture
to place therein the armes of Pope Paule the
thirde that sone after,When this booke was written Pope paule was loked for in Hell. shoulde make his entraunce
there.
            
            
               Marforius.
               He that woulde therefore write of
them, might there finde a long beade roll.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That might he better do in Hell, where they are all
in propre person.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Say on I pray thée, for I
feare y• wilt neuer come to an ende.Hell waye lesse occupyed than it was wont to be.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Then
began I to consider the waye, the whiche, for ought y•
I could perceiue, was sometime much more trodden
than it is at this present, for a man might sée, euen in
some parte of it, the grasse growen vp, I thought at y•
first beginning, that this had bene caused by y• springtime
which then was at hand, then remembring, that
there was neuer no spring, I asked the Aungell the

                     •
                  ause therof, who tolde me, that euen as a man might

haue séene long agone the people come from al partes
of the worlde into this Citie for the Iubilie: with the
self same throng.The Pope and his people runne hedlong to Hell. and greater also, went they to Hel,
sent thither by Popes, and among other, these Popes
them selues with their Iubilies, but sythens that prophecie
was fulfilled whiche saith: That oute of the
North shall come a plague vpon all the dvvellers of
the lande,
                  Iere. 1. the grasse hath begon to growe vp in this
broad hie way.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I am wonderous glad, that
y• art come to talke of this saying, for I desire múche
to vnderstand it of thée. These Priestes of ours, vnderstande,
that it thus signifieth: That those nations of
the North parts, are cause of all euill, & heresie.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Those Préestes of yours vnderstand the scripture
quite awrye,The Popes pri
                        •
                     ts areigno
                        ••
                     unt and w
                        ••
                     st the Scripture. and for the authority they haue, they
cause it to be declared after their owne fashion. But
I saye to thee, that this worde, (Al euil,) is in the scripture
as muche to saye, as, That which is contrarie to
the Gospell,What this word all Euil signifieth in the scripture. or to tell thée it more plainely, it signifieth
Antichriste, for euen as by the Gospell, Christ
(which is al goodnes) is giuen vnto vs, euen so againe
it must néedes be, that all euill is his directe contrary.
In the same signification saint Paule said, that couetousnesse
is the roote of al euill,1. T
                        •
                     mo. 6. Coloss. 3. for thou séest that Antichrist
which is all euill, hath his rootes so fastened in
Couetousnesse, and al his membres also, that for this
cause, many of them,Couetousnesse causeth the Scripture to be kept vnder y• know y• truth of y• gospel, either
thei hide it, or else wt stand it, bicause they wil not loose
their liuings. For the selfe same cause also doth Antichrist
with al his whole power séeke to destroy it. This
prophecy therfore, was thus much to say, as: That frō
y• North should blo
                     •
                   a wynde with so great force, y• it
shuld take away frō the Wolfe his shepe skin, & make

him to be knowen as a Wolfe, or to tell thée the same
more plainely, that from those parts, the Pope should
be discouered for to be Antichrist.Frō the north the pope is discouered to be Antichrist.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               I perceyue
that God hath made thée to speake for my soule
healthe, I sée, that thou sayest the truth.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Sythens therefore that he who tooke him selfe to be y•
shepeherde, is discouered to be the Wolfe, the shéepe
being affearde of his cruell looke, knowing him to be
their enemie,Io. 10. haue fled away from him, and haue folowed
the good and true shepeherd Iesus Christ,Why the Popes pathes growe grene. who is
the waye, that leadeth to the swéete pastures. And this
waye therefore that leadeth to perdition, begynneth to
shoute out grasse, for it is not any more trodden but
by the members of Antichrist, who albeit thei be many,
(as I tolde thee a lyttle before) yet are they fewe in
respect of those,The Popes folowers fal frō him. that sometime did folow him.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I rest fully satisfied in this point. Nowe woulde
I know, how the walles were made, that compasse in
that place.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               There are no maner of walles
at all.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What néede is there then to haue a
gate? can not euery one come in and oute that wyll?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou knowest that Venice,
                  Venice. hath no walles
& yet cannot euery one come in and go out that will,
albeit, the strength of this place is cōtrary to others,
for other are made, that none should come in, and this
is made, that none should go out, for as thou hast herd
the entrie is frée to euery man.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is y• place
compassed about with waters, as Venice is?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               It is compassed about with waters, but not as Venice
is,Venice compassed with sal
                        •
                      waters and hell with waters of fire. for Venice is compassed with waters of the
Sea, and this place is compassed with waters of fyre.
            
            
               Marforius.
               How can this hang togither? the water &
the fyre are directe contraries, howe is it possible that

they shoulde agrée togyther?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               How is it possible
that soules, whiche can not feele nor be felte,
should burne in the fyre, and that the bodies should abide
in the fyre,Great contradiction in the Popes Doctrine. and not be burned? and yet this happeneth
in Hell. Euen as we sée,Luc. 16. that Christe witnesseth
in the parable of the riche man and Lazarus the
begger, saying: That the riche man was in Hel fyre,
& yet his body was not in Hell, for mens bodies must
remaine in the earth vntil the daye of Iudgement, after
the which, the bodies shal go togither with y• soules
into euerlasting fyre. As may be séene in all the whole
scripture, and in that place, where Christ saith: That
thou cut away thy hande that offendeth thée,Math. 5. for better
shall it be for thée, that thou lacke a membre, than that
all the whole body shoulde be cast into Hell fyre. The
thinges of Hell are of an other manner of sorte, than
those of this worlde, he that coulde tell howe to make
these things, of this nature, knew also how to make
those of an other nature: so that thou must not maruell,
if I tolde thée, that this place is compassed with
waters of fyre.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Are these waters so broad,
as those of Venice?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               These be not all of thē
togyther, but are diuided into fiue great dyches. The
first whereof is called Lethe,
                  The waters of Hel and their significations. which is as much to saie
as, The forgetting of goodnesse, the seconde Phlegeton,
that to saye, desire of euill, the thirde Acheron,
which is to say, the vtter forsaking of al gladnesse, the
fourth Cocytus, that is to saye wéeping, the fifth is
Palus stigia,
                  Charons boat. which is to wéete, Euerlasting hate and
miserie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               How do they passe, in Charons
boate?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               As I haue told thée of the gate, euen
so I tel the of these waters, for, to go thither, thei passe
without any businesse, but to returne againe, it is not
possible to passe them. Euen as thou séest, that it fareth

by the Ryuer Danubius,
                  Danubiu
                        •
                     . and of many other waters
that downe the streame they sayle wonderous
easily, but vp against the streame, it is impossible. In
fine, I tell thée, that to go thyther, there is no maner
of let by the way,No stoppe nor staye in Hell waye. no, whether they haue their peny to
paye Charon for his ferye, nor whether thei haue ben
buried or no, nor of none other thing.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What a foolish deuise was that of them, that thoughte
that Charon must be paide,The folishe opinion of Charon and his boate. and therefore put a peny
in the deade mannes Mouth? And of these other,
that thought, that the soule could not passe ouer on the
other side in an hundreth yeres, vnlesse the body were
buried?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               That was without comparison
lesse harme, than that of our Priestes, who herevpon
haue founded a lying and dampnable Purgatory, and
haue made the foolysh people beleue, that not he that
putteth a single penny in the mouth of the dead man,
but who so euer putteth not a great gubbe of money
into their pursses,Purgatory
                        •
                      deuised topick al mens pursses. or leaueth not to them good possessions,
can not so sone be delyuered from the paynes of
that Purgatory of theirs.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh thou canst
now tel me certaine newes of this purgatory, if it be
there thou must nedes haue sene it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will
fully declare vnto thée the truth, and that thou mayst
the better beleue me, I will alleage so many reasons,
& authorities of y• scripture, that thou shalt be assured
that it is as I shall tell thée. But first I will rehearse
vnto thée,To hel is eue
                        •
                      company going. péece by péece, that little that yet remaineth
for me to tell. We entred in at that gate, and walked
along by that broade way, being still among a greate
multitude of people, that passed thitherward, and hearing
still more and more, those dolorous and lamentable
outeryes, all those people went with great hast,
being dryuen by their cruell destinye, and forthwith,

were they all seuerallye put to dyuers punishments
and torments, as afterward I shall shewe thée. But I
(that was not come thither, to suffer any of those punishments,
but to learne thinges, by the declaring
whereof afterwarde, I might cause, that other should
not indure them) went on faire and softly, cōsidering
eche things, and prying in euery corner, to sée where
Purgatory was.The description of Purgatorie. And I sawe on the one syde, a huge
Lake, that with the lower ende of it touched the tormenting
places where the dampned soules be, wherof
when I had much maruelled, I demaūded the Angell
what it might meane: he aunswered me, that the
Purgatory which the priestes had made, began at the
vpper ende of that Lake, and reached vnto those tormenting
places, which were deuided from Purgatorye,
but with a thinne wall. And when Neptune let
droppe his waters (that before I tolde thée of) downe
into this place, this Lake was then made, which for
all that did not fill vppe all Purgatory, but that part
which ioyned to those tormenting places, remayned
set on fire, and at the same verye tyme, the fire tooke
holde on eche side of the wall,Purgatorie quite consumed. and burnt it quite, and
so was it made all one place with Hell, and this parte
that remayneth yet on fire, is for them that beleue in
Purgatory, and the other that was quenched, altogether
by Neptunes waters, is for them that beleue not
in it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               All that thou talkest, I hold as thinges
true, yet notwithstanding, if I shoulde at anye
tyme proue vnto other, the vanity and falshoode of this
deuyse, with other testimonies than thine owne only,
I pray thée to alleage me also those of the scripture, &
together with them, all those reasons that not long agoe,
thou saydest thou wouldest bring forth.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  I will with al my hart, stande stil and giue good eare.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I will giue good eare, say on hardly.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               By the worde of God,None other Purgatorie but Christes bloude. thou shalt neuer finde
other Purgatory, than the bloud of Iesus Christ, thorowe
the which onely, all sinnes are perfectly pardoned,
and therefore do they committe grieuous sinne,
that say there is other Purgatory than this,Hebr. 
                        •
                     . et. 9. and it is
a blasphemous and Diuelishe fondnesse, of them that
beleue it. And that thou mayst know, howe false thys
diuelishe deuise is, I will first alleage certaine places
of the scripture that goe against it,Places of the Scripture to ouerthrowe Purgatorie. in Saint Mathew,
and Saint Marke, thus we reade: He that beleueth
and is baptised, shall be 
                        •
                     aued, and he that beleueth
not shall be dampned.
                  Mat. 28. By the whiche wordes
thou mayst perceiue,Mar. 16. that saluatiō is giuē vs by fayth,
and dampnation for lack of fayth. Therefore eyther
we dye in fayth,Who dieth in fayth is saued. or without fayth, if we dye in fayth,
we are saued, for it is written. He that beleueth shal
be saued. If we dye without fayth, we are dampned,
for it is written. He that beleueth not shall be dampned.
Besydes this,Iohn. 3. Saint Iohn sayth. So God loued
the vvorlde that he gaue his onely begotten Sonne, to
the ende that al that beleue in him, should not perish,
but haue lyfe euerlasting. For God hath not sent hys
sonne into the vvorlde to condemne the vvorlde, but
that the vvorlde might be saued by him, he that beleueth
in him shal not be condemned, and he that beleueth
not, is condemned already, bycause he beleueth
not in the name of the onely Sonne of God. Thou séest
that the father, hath giuen vs his sonne, to the ende
that he that beleueth in him, should haue euerlasting
lyfe, and that euerlasting lyfe followeth him that beleueth.
What thinkest thou now, that this euerlasting

life is?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I thinke it is heauē out of doubt.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou sayest well, but if the beleuer be iudged
to go to Purgatory, what a heauen is this? doest
thou not sée, how this is contrary to the word of God?
Moreouer y• word being saued by Christ, nedes must
it be that he which beleueth, haue a life without pain,
and he that beleueth in him is not iudged. But if he
wente to Purgatory, he shoulde be iudged to go thyther,
the which can not be to him that beleueth. For
Saint Paule sayth,Rom. 8. that there is no condempnation
to him that beleueth in Iesus Christ. And Christ hym
selfe sayth. Verely, verely I say vnto you, he that heareth
my vvordes,Iohn. 5. and beleueth on him that sent me,
hath euerlasting lyfe, and shall not come vnto dampnation,
but is escaped from death to lyfe. But if any
man wēt into Purgatory, séest thou not, that he shuld
not haue euerlasting lyfe, that is to say heauen, but y•
he should be condempned, and that he should not passe
from death to lyfe, the whiche is cleane contrary to
Christs owne saying?
            
            
               Marforius.
               What, this is not
condempnation?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Nay, the traditions of
these men saye manifestlye,Traditions are good trashe when they treade scripture vnder 
                        •
                     eete. that the soule for euerye
deadely sinne is iudged to abyde seauen yeares in the
fire of Purgatory, the whiche is a most horrible lye,
for in all the holye scripture is not founde one onelye
iote spoken of seauen yeares, nor of no suche foolyshe
brabling; nay rather is the contrary found in y• whole
scripture, as in the Parable of the rych man and poore
Lazarus:
                  Luc. 16. eche of them dyeth, the one is buryed in hel,
and the other is caryed into Abrahams bosome, without
touching any whit of the paynes of Purgatorye.
And the theefe that was crucified with Christ, was neuer

in Purgatory to doe penance for his sinnes, and
yet Christ sayde vnto him. This day shalt thou be
vvith me in Paradise.
                  Ioh. 16. If there were any suche false
Purgatory, it must nedes be, that some mentiō must
be made of it in these places of the scripture. But there
is none other purgation, than the bloud of Christ,Ephe. 5. the
l
                     •
                  uer of regeneration, which is sufficiently shed vpon
vs. But tell me, this Purgatory, was it before the incarnation
of Christ,A hard question. or since onelye?
            
            
               Marforius.
               In
good fayth, I can not aunswere thée, for if I saye, since
Christ onely, I should be brought to shew, that Christ
hath bene a cruell exactour, and not a gentle Redemer,
the whiche should be a moste horrible blasphemie.
And if I saye, that it was from the begynning of
the world, I haue no place at al in the auncient scripture
to proue it, Moses in his booke Leuiticus. Hath
described so manye sacrifices, oblations, washings,
purgings, for the sinnes of the lyuing: but he speaketh
not one iote of the deade, nor of this purgatorie,
naye rather doth he forbid the priestes to stande and
wéepe, and lament the dead, as doth also Saint Paule,
to the Thessalonians.1. Thess. 4.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Therfore, is there
no maner of certayntie of this Purgatorie, throughout
all the Scripture,Purgatorie is not found in the scripture. for the Scripture is cleane against
it, as maye be séene in this text of the Apocalipse:
Blessed are the deade that dye in the Lorde:
Therefore must it néedes be,Apoca. 14. that whosoeuer dyeth,
eyther dieth in the Lorde, or not, if he die in the Lord,
he must néedes be by this testimonie,Sophisterie brought in to maynteyne Purgatorie. blessed, but if he
dye not in the Lorde, he must néedes be accursed, for
there are but two wayes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Distinguo, sic,
Quantum ad poenam, nego, sed quantum ad culpā,

concedo.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What meanest thou by this beggerly
Sophistrie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I meane that God pardoneth
the offence, but not the punishment.
            
            
               Pasquin.
               O what great folishnesse art thou in, and where findest
thou,God forgiueth al or nothing. that God pardoneth the one, without the
other? The workes of God are perfect, he pardoneth
all or else nothing, without mangling or cutting of
his frée gift, as witnesseth Ezechiell, where he sayeth.
What tyme soeuer a sinner vvyll repent hym of hys
sinnes,
                  
                     
                        •
                     zech. 18. et 33. 
                  I vvill no more remember any of his iniquities
sayeth the Lorde. And Saint Iohn sayeth.1. Io. 2. 
                  If vve
confesse our sinnes, he is faithfull and iust to pardon
vs, and make vs cleane from all vvickednesse, and if
vve vvalke in the light, euen as he is light, vve haue
fellovvship with him, and the bloud of his sonne Iesus
Christ doth cleanse vs, from al sinne, for he sitteth
on the right hande of God, making intercession for
sinnes, and by one onely oblation hath he made perfect
for euer, those that are sanctifieth. More ouer the
Psalme sayeth.Psal. 32. 
                  I haue confessed my sinne vnto thee,
and haue not hidden myne vnrighteousnesse, I sayde
I vvill knovvledge myne offence, and accuse my selfe
vnto the Lorde, and thou hast forgiuen the vvickednesse
of my sinne. If therfore the Lorde forgiue vs all
our sinnes, when we pray earnestly to him for it, we
can be no more troubled for them: for they are forgiuen
vs for the faythes sake, that we haue in the death
and passion of Iesus Christ, the which is eyther perfect,
or vnperfect:Blasphemie against Iesus Christ. If it be perfect, there nedeth none
other thing to make it more perfect, but to say that it
is vnperfect, is to blaspheme Iesus Christ, and his
passion, as doe these monstrous soule Merchaunts,
which will haue them to make satisfaction for their

sinnes in the fyre of Purgatorie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Dauid
sinned,An obiection of the papistes and his sinnes were forgiuen concerning the
offence, but not concerning the punishment due for
the offence, for he remayned for all that bound to one
of those thrée plagues, that were offered vnto him.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And I tell thée, that God eyther pardoneth
all or else nothing, for he that forgiueth the greater,
will not stricke to forgiue the lesser, it is a more matter
to forgiue the offence, than the punishment. If therfore
he forgiue y• offence,To what ende we are left in troubles. he reserueth not the punishment.
But to kéepe vs vnder, here in this world, and
to exercise vs in pacience, and to make vs knowe his
mighty power, he leaueth vs ofte tymes in troubles,
so doth he also those that haue not offended, as we sée
in Iob, and Ieremy, and many others. For as Saint
Paule sayeth,Rom. 5. Tribulation bringeth forth Patience,
and patience bringeth forth proufe, proufe bringeth
forth hope, and hope is not confounded. And euen so
albeit God had forgiuen Dauid, both the offence and
the punishment,Dauid an example of patience. yet woulde he bring him lowe, and
try him, that the worlde might knowe, howe full of
fayth he was. The punishment therefore is not it,
that purgeth our sinnes, but faith, the which Saint
Paule sayeth, is the purging of sinnes. And so if they
will haue anye other purgatorie, than the bloude of
Christ,Rom. 3. it is none other, but to make his passion of
none effect,Hebr. 1. and to saye that his workes are vnperfect.
This is plaine,To affirme purgatorie is to denie Christes bloud. that al the elect are members of Christ
and if they be his members, it followeth, that his
vertue, and the infinite merits of his passion be common
vnto them, whereby they are assoyled from all
punishment,Gala. 2. and consequently from purgatorie. And
Saint Iohn sayeth.Iohn. 1. That they that beleue in Christ,

are the Sonnes of God, and heyres of the inheritaunce
that is gyuen them by promise, and not by
workes. What néede haue we therefore of this Purgatorie
to gyue vs that inheritaunce? Oh Lorde
streatch forth the arme of thy mighty power, & destroy
and bring to naught these false Prophets, Seducers,
and Ipocrites, y• deceyue thy people, with Trentals,
and Quarentals, and other foolishe inuentions full of
all couetousnesse. But to sée plainlye with thine eye,
the vncertayne holde that this Purgatorye standeth
on (albeit that whiche I haue already alleaged vnto
thée might suffice thée) heare what Salamon sayth. If
the tree fal tovvard the South,
                  Eccl. 11. 
                  or tovvard the North,
vvhere he falleth, there it abydeth. To fall towarde
the South is to dye in fayth, and towarde the Northe
without fayth, he therefore that dyeth in fayth, hath
euerlasting lyfe, and he that dyeth without fayth hath
dampnation, here is no maner of meane or middle
place, where to fall betwene these two.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why, hath this Purgatory in very dede no maner of
foundation in the Scripture?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               None at a
                     •
                  .
            
            
               Marforius.
               Where haue they founde it then?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               
                  The iauent
                        •
                     urs of purgatorie.
Among the blinde beggers of Hildibrand the
Sorcerer, afterward called Gregorie the seuenth, glosing
vpon that place of Virgil. Centum erant annos,
or else in Plato, in his Timèo, or else in Macrobius, in
the dreame of Scipio, or els among the false miracles,
visions and illusions wrought by Sathan, transforming
him selfe into an aungell of lyght.2. Cor. 11. For albeit all
true Angels of heauen should tel vs any other thing,Gala. 1.
then y• which is in y• word of god,The Apostles neuer hearde of purgatorie. let him be accursed.
But if there were such a Purgatory, how much were
the Apostles worthy to be blamed, that haue not spoken

one worde thereof? Saint Peter wryteth fully
to the instruction of the Churches, yet maketh he no
maner mention of the deade. Saint Iames, who commendeth
so much good workes, maketh no mention of
Masses, nor of offeringes for the soules of the deade.
Saint Iohn in his Epistles doth highly set forth charitye,
and yet speaketh not a worde of Charity for the
deade. But what shall we say of the great diligence of
Saint Paule in teaching the Romanes, faith and good
workes? and yet teacheth he none other purging of
sinnes,Hebr. 9. but by the bloude of Christ. Reade his epistles
to the Corinthians,
                  2. Cor. 9. thou shalte finde, that he maketh
collections, requestes, and recommendations, for the
poore brethren, that are in captiuity and nede, so that
he sayth, he hath taken awaye from the other Churches
to sende to the poore at Hierusalem, and yet
maketh he no maner of collection or other thing for y•
deade.Purgatorie pence how they are bestowed. As these théeues do all day long whereby they
are become rycher then Craesus, and fall to Iolye good
chere, with whores and bawdes, and the poore dye for
hunger. vvoe be to you Scribes & Pharisies, Ipocrites,
                  Math. 15.
that laye a syde the commaundement of God,
(which is to helpe the poore), for your cursed traditions
of Purgatorie the which hath swalowed vp almost all
the goods of the worlde.Purgatorie neuer satisfied. It is that sacke whereof the
Prophete speaketh, that is neuer full, and that horse-leach
(wherof Salomō saith) that hath two daughters
that crye: Bring hyther bring hyther.Prouer. 30 So saye these
théeues bring hyther for y• soules of your dead friends
and parents.Priestes crye bring bring. Forget not the poore that be deade, that
crye vnto you Miseremini. Oh slaunderous and trayterous
falsifiers, what a presumptuous boldenesse is
this of you, to maintaine such lyes, & deceiue the people?

this is that fyre y• neuer crieth hoa. If you should
giue all the whole worlde to these false theues, they
woulde neuer saye hoa: for they are the very insatiable
Hell it selfe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               How vnderstandest thou
that place of Saint Mathew y• saith. Agree with thine
aduersarie quickely while thou art on the vvay vvith
him,
                  Mat. 5. 
                  that he giue thee not to the Iudge, & the Iudge
gyue thee vnto the handes of the Minister, & thou be
cast in prison, verily, I say vnto thee, that thou shalt
not come out from thence vntil thou haue payed euē
to the vttermoste farthing?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Doest yu finde
any purgatorie in this speaking?
            
            
               Marforius.
               I will
not affirme it,Sophisticall reasons f
                        •
                     r proufe of purgatorie. hauing heard of thée so many probable
reasons to the contrarie, but I will tell thée, how the
Sophisters proue the same vpon this text, they saye
that oure aduersarie is synne, who gyuethe vs vnto
the Iudge, whiche is God, and he putteth vs in prison
which is purgatorie, out of the which we shall not
come, vntill we haue made full satisfaction, suffering
the fire of it.The deuil the chiefe doctor to teach purgatorie.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It was the diuell, that in this
sorte did interprete, these words, & his ministers seke
to maynteyne the same interpretacion. But if thou
wilt haue the true exposition of these wordes, thou
must take good heede wherof Christe speaketh: there
he speaketh, of leauing of hatred, and that a man
ought to reconcile him selfe to his neighboure, the
whiche who so doth not, is in daunger to take the
ouerthrow, and to be cast into Prison, from whence
he shall not come out, vntill he haue made full satisfaction,
and the same doth Saint Luke confirme saying.Luc. 12.
                  Whyle thou goest vvith thine aduersary to the
ruler, as thou art in the vvay, giue diligence that thou
mayest be delyuered from him. He sayth plainely, vnto

to the Ruler, before whome men goe to pleade their
causes, and to receiue iustice. Thus doth Chrisostome
and Theophilacte vnderstande that place, and Ambrose
which sayth,The opinions of diuers auncient doctours concerning purgatorie. 
                  vvhen thou goest to the Magistrate.
And Hillarie also in his Cannones where he
sayth. That in this place it must be vnderstande, of
the reconciliation, and sayth not, of the satisfaction for
sinnes in Purgatory. Thou séest therefore, that these
interpretations of thine can not stande with the meaning
of the Scripture, for it is rather a sense cūningly
wrested, which (as Saint Ierome sayth) is not good
to proue the rules or grounds of our fayth.
            
            
               Marforius.
               There are also other textes, with y• which, they proue
Purgatory.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What be those?
            
            
               Marforius.
               That of Saint Mathew, where Christ sayth. That the
kingdome of heauen is like vnto a King,
                  Math. 18. 
                  that vvould
take accompt of his seruaunts. &c. And saith that one
of them vvas brought before him, vvhich ought him
tenne thousande Talents. &c. And the Lorde vvas
vvroth, & deliuered him to the kepers of the prison,
vntil that he had paid the vvhole debt that he ought.
They say this text meaneth that he shoulde be put in
Purgatory, and there lefte, vntill the full satisfaction
of the debt, whiche when he hath payed, he shall come
out.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This text is so cleare, that it is not
possible otherwise to be vnderstanded, than according
to the matter that Christ speaketh of. And if it were
possible to giue this place anye other interpretation,
yet is it most impossible to interprete it for Purgatorye.
Consider a little, wherefore Christ vseth thys similitude:
He sayth, Thou euill seruaunt, haue not I
forgiuen thee all the debt thou oughtest me,
                  Math. 18. 
                  euen as
thou hast prayed me: shouldest not thou likevvyse

haue had compassion on thy fellovv, and shovv mercy
vnto him, euē as I haue shevved it vnto thee? This
therefore hath none other meaning, but to exhorte vs
to forgiue one another, if we wil that god forgiue vs,
and meaneth nothing of Purgatory, nor of no suche
foolish toyes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou meanest therfore that
this debtour was cast into Hell, and not into Purgatory?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               So I meane.
            
            
               Marforius.
               He that
is cast into Hell, can neuer come from thence, and yet
it séemeth that this debtour, of whom Christ speaketh
shal come out, for he saith vntill he pay the debt. Therfore
when he hath payed the debte he shall come out.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               All thy doubt standeth vpon this word vntill,
doth it?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yea,What this word (vntill) signifieth.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               And I tell
thée, that that word vntill, in this place signifieth not
a tyme that hath end, or is definitiue, but a time without
ende, and that is infinite.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Beware
that thou interprete not also things cleane contrary,
as our Priestes doe.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will proue it vnto
thée, all that I haue sayde, with the authorityes of the
Scripture, and not with Sophistrie, nor with mans
authorityes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Doest thou find in other places
of the Scripture, that this worde, vntill, signifieth
a tyme infinite?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea,Mat. 1. out of doubt. Saint
Mathew sayth that Ioseph knew not the Uirgin Marye,
vntill she had brought forth hir sonne, wilte thou
perhaps say, that, that most pure virgin after hir deliuerance
was knowen by Ioseph?
            
            
               Marforius.
               God
kepe me from so thinking. I beleue that she was alwayes
a Uirgin.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This worde therfore vntill,
signifieth not any time that hath ende.Apoc. 110. The same
shalt thou finde also in the .Cx. Psalme. And who so
would otherwyse vnderstande it, should confound al

the whole meaning of the Scripture. And furthermore,
I would fayne know of thée, what he is that can
at any tyme make god amendes for his sinnes,No man can make amends for his sinnes. truely
not one, for we sée, that Christ is become our righteousnesse,
bycause that by our owne righteousnesse we
could not be saued.1. Cor. 1. If it had bene possible for vs to
haue gone vp to heauen, it should not haue bene nedeful
for Christ to haue come downe into the earth. And
if we must for the purging of our sinnes be boyled in
Purgatory, what good doth Christes passion vnto vs?
Howe are we then saued by grace,Ephe. 2. as all the whole
scripture testifieth?Rom. 11. how go we to the father by Christ
onelye as he him selfe affirmeth? Doest thou not sée
how great a blasphemie, this is against Iesus Christ,
to say that with the boiling in Purgatory, that thing
is done, which Iesus Christ onely wrought? as these
murtherers say, wherein they are much like the Ceretanes,
who the better to sell their Poticary ware,Ceretanes the common pickepursse
                        •
                      of Italie. say,
that there is a great plague comming,Priestes as common pickpursses as they. but they haue
the remedy therof, and they swere and stare, that they
haue proued the same a thousand times. Euen so haue
these marked Monsters deuised their Purgatory, and
then they say, that the remedy thereof is their Masses,
their almesse, their prayers, and Pilgrimages, as a
man may sée in the decrée of their owne handyworke,
and al this is for the welth of their kitchin. They find
out great sweetenesse in their Masses that are payde
for, which ready money, and their great ruinesse lefte
vnto their Monasteries to pray for the soules of them
that bequeth them. Oh what good doe their prayers,
their fastings, their recomendation of soules, theire
seauen Psalmes, their Dirige by note, and their De
profundis ouer the graue. They pray stil for those that

be dead, for those I meane that paye swéetely, for otherwise
there is not a worde,No peny no Pater noster. and if there be a pore
man that hath nought to pay, he must séeke some money,
yea, though he burst his heart for it, for they say.
Est ad pias causas. Oh cormoraunt theues, God once
destroy you, for the health of the pore séely ones.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Upon that other place also of Saint Mathewe
they grounde this their deuise, where he sayeth. That
vvhosoeuer shall speake a vvorde against the sonne
of man,
                  Math. 12. 
                  it shal be forgiuen him:
                  Mar. 13. 
                  but he that speaketh
against the holy ghost, shall not be forgiuen, neyther
in this vvorlde nor in the vvorlde to come. Nowe, if
there be forgiuenesse in the worlde to come,The papistes will haue a thirde place beside heauen and Hel. it can not
be sayde, that it is in heauen, for vp thither entreth
no sinne, nor in hell it can not be, for there is no redēption:
it followeth therfore, that there is an other
place where sinne is forgiuen, and that is Purgatorie,
how answerest thou to this?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I answere
that this saying, neyther in this worlde, nor in the
worlde to come, is as much to say, as neuer, as may
be sene in the Apocalipse, where he sayeth, that those
beasts had no reast,Apoca. 4. neyther daye nor night, which is
nothing else to say, but that they neuer rested.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I giue great credite to thy saying yet.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               What meanest thou by (yet) I tell thée, that
those wordes are as muche to say, as (neuer, worlde
without ende, doest thou not beleue Saint Marke?
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yes marye doe I beleue him.Mar. 3.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Reade therefore this selfe same text in Saint Marke,
and thou shalt finde, that he sayeth, that the sinne against
the holy ghost shall neuer be forgiuen.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sayeth he playnely, neuer?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               He sayeth
most playnely thus.Mar. 3. 
                  He that speaketh against the

holy Ghost shall neuer be forgiuen, but shal be giltie
of euerlasting iudgement. Wilte thou haue a more
playner saying? Go looke in the thirde chapter & thou
shalt finde it as I tell thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh theues you
Priestes,Pasquine criethout vpō the popish priestes. Oh Traytours, deceyuers and murtherers,
from henceforwarde I will not beleue them, if they
say their Pater noster.
                  Luc. 12.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Saint Luke also
affirmeth the same, saying flatly, that he shall not be
forgiuen. Beholde therefore how well they interprete
the Scriptures.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I am already at a point
with them, but thou shalt do me great pleasure to expounde
also vnto me, certaine other places, vpon the
which, they grounde this deceyte, one is, in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, where he sayeth.1. Cor. 3 
                  If anye
man builde vpon this foundation, Golde, Siluer, Precious
stones, Tymber, Hay or stouble, euerye mans
vvorke shall appere, for the daye shall declare it, and
it shall be shevved in fyre, and the fyre shall trye
euery mans vvorke vvhat it is. If anye mans vvorke
that he hath built vpon, do abyde, he shall receyue a
revvarde, if anye mans vvorke burne, he shall suffer
losse, but he shall be safe himselfe, Neuerthelesse, yet
as it were throughe fyre. Here a man maye sée, that
in this place the Apostle speaketh of fyre.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thinkest thou therfore,Fyre in the scripture what it signifieth. that he meaneth in this place
materiall fyre? he speaketh by a Metaphor or figure,
for by fyre here in this text are meant, troubles afflictions,
temptations, and perilles of death, as is to be
seene in that psalme of Dauid, which saith: Thou hast
tryed me with fyre, which is nothing else to say,Psal. 17. but
with troubles, for a man shall neuer reade, that Dauid
was at any tyme in materiall fyre. And in an other
place,Psal. 66. we haue passed throughe fyre and water,

and thou haste brought vs to a resting place.1. Peter. 1. Saint
Peter also in y• first chapter of his first Epistle sayth,
euen the same so doth also Esay, and the other prophetes,
and euen so doth Saint Paule. And bicause
thou shalt well vnderstande this péece of Scripture,
I say to thée,What this worde (to build) meaneth. that to builde, is as muche to say, as to
preache Gods worde, the foundation is Christ, the
worke built therevpon, are those that haue receyued
the worde, the fyre, is temptation and persecution
iustlye sent by God, the Golde, Syluer, and precious
stones, are they, that haue in suche sorte receyued the
fayth of Christ, that they will rather dye then denie
him, the tymber, hay, and stouble, are those that beleue
for a tyme, and make a shewe, as thoughe they
did beleue, but if they féele afterwarde any persecution
or affliction, they forsake Christ, and bring forth
no fruite bicause they haue no roote. This is the true
meaning of the Apostle, and of Saint Ierome vpon
Ezechiell the thirde Chapter.The offices of a true and false preacher. If therfore the preacher
of the truth, hath wholly builte any man vpon Christ,
so that perscutions doe none otherwise to him, then
doth the fyre, to the golde, siluer, and precious stones,
it is a signe, that he hath faithfully administred the
worde, and built strongly, when his hearers are more
ready to léese their lyfe, than their faith, but if anye
man doe so coldly handle the worde of God, that hys
hearers féeling the persecution, doe denie their fayth,
they shall be consumed by persecution, as tymber,
hay, and stouble, are con
                     •
                  umed by fyre. And then shal
be knowē the negligence, of th
                     •
                   
                  
                     〈◊〉
                   minister & of his hearers,
for the daye of the Lorde, (which is not to be vnderstande
of the daye of iudgement,The daye of the L
                        •••
                     . but when it pleaseth
him to visite vs with troubles) shall reueale and

open those things that were not knowne, and so euerye
mans doctrine shall be tryed. And yet if the minister
during the fyre of persecution, shall conti
                     •
                  ue
to 
                     〈◊〉
                   it, he shall be safe: but he shall passe throughe
the fyre, that is to saye, he shall patientlye beare his
persecution. The Apostle therefore in that place, speaketh
of y• trying of faith, and of doctrine, in the time of
persecutions. And so doth Saint Ierome declare it,
whereby thou mayest knowe wha
                     •
                   doltes and asses
those are, that gather that he speaketh of a Purgatorie,
that neuer was, but the Deuill mayntayneth his
kingdom, by such as these are, that he that is in filthinesse
should in filth
                     •
                  nesse cōtinue.
            
            
               Marforius.
               The other
foūdatiō of theirs, is vpō the booke of Machabees.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               By this thou mayst knowe howe well learned
they be,2. Maca. 12. that know not which be the bookes of the
Bible:The ignorance of the Popes Clergie. the bookes of the Machabees are al re
                     •
                  ected and
not allowed as Saint Augustine, Eusebius, Ierome
and other auncient doctours saye, and therefore are
not read to confirme the authoritie of the doctrine of
the Church. But I woulde aske Iudas Machabeus,
where he hath founde, that God commau
                     •
                  ded him,
to offer two thousaund Drammes of Syluer in sacrifice,
for the sinnes of the deade, and where 
                     •
                  e hath
founde that Syluer is a Sacrifice.Leui. 3. et. 5. The sacrifice was
offered of beastes that were commaunded in the law▪
and not of Siluer,Sacrifice for sinnes wherof it was made. Craftie conueyaunce of false knaues. nor Golde. And therfore haue these
false knaues the Priests, full of all crafte, and sub
                     •
                  ltie,
in their Masse for the deade, thrust in this place
for the Christle, and haue craftily taken awaye from
it this worde, Sacrifice, for they knowe well ynough,
that Sacrifice was neuer made with Golde, nor with
Syluer, and yet coulde they not cary so cleanely, but

that their iuggeling and deceyte hath bene espied, so
thou mayest sée, with what falsehoode they worke, and
then call they him an Heretique, that beleueth not
their knackes of knauerie.Apo. 14. 21.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               They haue also
an other grounde, vpon that place of the Apocalipse,
that those that follow the Lambe are without spotte,
before the throne of God, and that no foule thing shal
enter into that holy and heauenly Citie. And they say
that he that purgeth not him selfe in this worlde with
good workes, must néedes 
                     •
                  e purged in ye other worlde
with the fyre of Purgatorie, that he may enter cleane
and pure into heauen.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Who knoweth not,
that none can enter into heauen, that hath anye spot?
but where haue they founde, that fyre can purge
sinnes? let them answere, if they can, let thē alledge
but one texte onely of the Scripture. Thomas of Aquine,
                  Thomas Aquine dr
                        •
                     uen to a harde pointe.
sought it narrowely, but at the last, he was
constrayned to saye, that Purgatorie is not to be
founde in al the whole Bible, but yet we must beleue
it, for certaine balde reasons, that he maketh grounded
vpō the Churches & miracles of Antichristes. And
euen in the same maner haue they also deuised Saint
Patricks Purgatorie,Saint patrickes purgatorie. where manye horrible things
are séene, as the Fryers of that place tel with lye and
all. But if thou wilte sée their lyes ouerthrowne by
their owne selues, aske of them I pray thée, whether
the soules worke in Purgatory, or no. If they would
say yea, thou mayest shewe them that they lye falsely:
for Christ sayth,Iohn. 9. 
                  Worke vvhyle it is day, for the night
vvill come, vvherein none can vvorke. And hereby the
day is meant life, and by the night death. And yet whē
they sée, they can not withstande this place, they say,
that they doe nothing else but satisfaction. Aske them

then, if there can be any satisfaction, without workes,
I speake according to their owne false doctrine,None can worke for satisfaction, nor worke but in the day. they
can not say, but no, vnlesse they will lye vpon themselues
saying, that man can doe all things with his
owne good workes. If therefore they will saye, that
soules worke in Purgatorie, they fall to gainesaying
of Christ, who sayth, that in y• night none can worke,
that is to saye in death. And so, to which side soeuer
they turne them, they are in an euill case. Sée nowe
vpon what sure foundations, these traytours haue
builded, a thing of so greate deceyte, the which notwithstāding,
many thinke they cōmit a great offence,
yea, thinke themselues heretiques, if they doe not beleue.
But this thing is clere, certayne, vndoubted,
and infallible, that in matters of fayth, it is not lawfull
for vs,Nothing must be folowed but Goddes word onelye. to follow the thoughtes and imaginations
of men, but the onely, onely, onely word of God, clere,
euident, and open. Following the whiche, man nede
not feare going amisse. But who could at any time
declare, the greatnesse of the errors and blasphemies,
that are sprong of this théeuish deuise?What fruits spring of the opinion of purgatorie. First it is an
open & plain renouncing of Iesus Christ, & a denying
of his merites, & a not beleuing of the Gospell: which
sayth. That Iesus Christ onely hathAo
                        •
                     . 1. washed vs, and
Heb. 
                        〈◊〉
                     . purged vs perfectlye by his blo
                     •
                  de, and that he hath
Heb. 9. offered vp him selfe without spotte, to God, to clense
our consciences from deade workes, and that he hath
Esay. 53. borne our paynes, and suffered our sorrowes, and
that he is theIohn. 1. Lambe of God, that taketh awaye the
sinnes of the worlde. Oh what an horrible blasphemy
and error springeth of this detestable deuise, and more
ouer, hereof groweth it, that through this deuise, many
are become thée
                     •
                  es, many murtherers, many cruell

traytors, full of all filthynesse and mischiefe. Thorow
it many are become vserers, and chiefly those of
Bergomo in Lu
                        •
                      bardie:
                  A people of a Citie vnder the venetians naturally wise 
                        〈◊〉
                      subtle muche giuen to trauell and traffick. who gather together so
greate store of goods, by hooke or by crooke, they care
not howe, for say they, when we shall be olde, the will
we confesse our selues to the Priest, who will giue vs
absolutiō, through the which the euerlasting punishment
which we haue deserued, shall be made temporall,
that is to say, to last but for a tyme, and that punishment:
shall we suffer in purgatory, from the which
we shall be forthwith deliuered, by the power of Masses,
an
                     •
                   holy water, and of our witles & Testaments,
by the which we shall bequeath that Chappels, Churches,
and Monasteries, be built, by which meanes we
shall of force come to Heauen. And thus they die, and
forthwith goe into that place, whiche (as I tolde thée
before) is vnder the Lake, where thinking themselues
to be in Purgatorye,Wilie 
                        〈◊〉
                      them selues that think they goe to Pargator
                        •
                     e & go streight to Hell. they are in Hell, for the wall
(which I tolde thée of before) is quite burnt vppe, and
hath made it all one rowme. If I hadde (I saye to
thee) an hundreth tongues, an hundreth mouthes and
a voyce of yron, I should neither be of skill, nor power
sufficient to shewe vnto thée, the horror, the miscrye,
the greatnesse, and number of tormentes, and fearefull
things, that I sawe there, and so much the more
should I coufound my selfe in the imagination therof.
If I went about to shew them,Where no orde
                        ••
                      th
                        •
                     re is confusion. as y• I found all the
same so confused and disordered.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is there
no differēce betwene the dampned soules, in such maner
as Danthe or Virgill speaketh of? are not y• princes
(at the least) deuided from the base people? or is
there no order at all?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The best obserued
order that there is, is the disorder and confusion that

alwayes and euery where, is there to be séene.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Is there at the least no difference in paynes,
some in more, some in lesse?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, that
there is, for thou knowest that the Lorde sayth.Mar. 12. 
                  You
shall receyue the greater iudgement. And many there
are that are more tormented then other, that in thys
worlde were accompted happye men.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I
pray the declare vnto me the whole, euen in such sorte
as thou thinkest best.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The nerer still that
we approched to these places of miserye the more did
we féele our eares, eyes, and nose, to be stricken with
straunge and dolefull noyses, with thicke and troublous
smoke, with stinke of Brimstone that could not
be abidden, and when we were come to those places,
we saw on euery syde, woes, there the pleasaunt noise
of Insturmentes, are woes,Nothing but woes in Hell. swéete songs are woes,
feasting and bāket
                     •
                  ing are woes, there, discourses and
loue toyes are woes, playes and pastimes are woes,
huntings and goodly painted storyes are woes, sights
and triumphes are woes, occupations and marchandises,
all sortes of pleasure and exercise, and of euery
other thing, is nothing but woes, and among all
these woes,One wo greater then the rest. there is one as if it were king and Prince
of the other, which is the vtter depriuation of al hope,
to come out of these woes. All are tormented wyth
fire and Brimstone,Apo. 14. as Saint Iohn sayth in his reuelation,
and the smoke of their tormentes,The paynes of Hel described ascendeth vp
for euer and euer. And they neuer haue rest, neyther
day nor nyght, and they cry pieteously to the Lorde,
and the Lorde heareth them not. Then knewe they
playnly, that all worldly thinges, that were causes to
bring them thether, are but vanityes, and they would
repent, but there repentance helpeth them not: wherfore

they blaspheme the name of God,Apoc. 16. feling the dolor
of their tormentes, & gnawe their owne tongues
for sorowe and rage,Apo. 14. and féele an intollerable thriste,
and in so greate burning they drinke of the cuppe of
Gods wrath, & for their greater torment, they sée the
happynesse of the blessed, and from their eyes continually
raine teares, & from their mouthes issue gnasshing
of téeth, and they still burne, and neuer are burned,
and they séeke death, and death flyeth from them,
and yet are they still in death, and shall be for euer, so
that they styll dye, and neuer giue ouer to death. And
in effect, there is no trouble, sorowe, miserie, vnhappinesse,
nor afflection what so euer it be in this worlde,The paynes of of this life are nothing to those of Hell.
that (in comparison of that they féele in hel) is not pleasant.
And this know for truth, that I can not by talke
make thée vnderstād, the very least part of that which
by sight I comprehended: thinke thou then, what that
is, that they must nedes continually comprehende by
féeling.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou makest me tremble from
toppe to toe, hearing thée tell such horrible and fearefull
torments, the which do so much y• more put me in
feare, as that I knowe them to be true, for in the Apocalipse,
and in manye other places of the scripture, a
man may reade, the things that agrée iust with thy
saying: But I woulde fame learne of thée, whether
they were naked or clothed.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They are all
naked,Apoc. 16. and do shew the filthinesse of their nakednesse.
            
            
               Marforius.
               How can this hang together? Didst thou
not say, that their bodyes are yet in the earth? Howe
do they then shewe the filthinesse of their nakednesse?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               Thou knowest that while we be in our mothers
wombe, we haue about vs a certayne fleshe that
couereth vs, the which, so sone as we come forth, into

the light of this worlde, it doth leaue vs and goe from
about vs, it is called in Latine
            
            
               Secundina.
               That same
is our owne laweful and naturall clothing, the which
for al that serueth vs not, but while we be in the darknesse
of our mothers wombe: but as sone as we come
into the light,The misterie of man comming into this world. we remayne naked, if we prouide vs not
things from other: and if therefore we wil couer our
nakednesse, we clothe our selues wyth the Woll of
the shéepe. Euen iust so, is it of the nakednesse, that
nowe I tell thée of, for while we be in the darkenesse
of this worlde, we may well couer our selues wyth
our owne proper merites, and good works: but forthwith
as we enter into the light of gods presence, these
merites of ours, which are nothing else but flesh and
sy
                     •
                  ne, goe from vs and forsake vs, and we come to
remaine naked,We are all naked of good works and therfore must be clothed with Christs rightuousnes. vnlesse we cloth our selues wt the wol
of that moste méeke shepe, that without opening his
mouth, was led to the slaughter, to cloth vs with hys
woll, and féede vs with his flesh, and to giue vs drinke
with his bloude, euen with the bloude of that méeke
Lambe of God, that taketh awaye the sinnes of the
worlde. These men therefore, of whom we spake,Esay. 53. bycause
they were not clothed with this woll,Psa. 53. that is to
wete, the merites of Iesus Christ,Act. 8. shewe forth the filthinesse
of their nakednesse,Io. 6. not that nakednesse of the
body, but that of the soule, for as much as their sinnes,
mischieuous déedes, there euil thoughts, and all other
their filthynesse are openly shewed and seene.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What kinde of people be they, shewe me some
particularity.)
            
            
               Pasquine.
               There are some Hebrevves,
                  In hell are of all sorts of men.
some Caldeans, some Arabiās, some Indians, some Africanes,
some Svvithians, some Turkes, some Moores,
some Christians, as Dutchmen, Frenchmen, Spaniards,

Italians, riche, poore, men, women, and finally a
                     •
                  
sortes of people.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Of which sorte, is there
the greatest number?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Of those that haue
worshipped the beast,Apoc. 14. and his Image, and haue receyued
his marke, and haue committed fornication with
hir, and are dronken with the wine of hir whoredome.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstand not this talke of thine.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               In the middes of the bottomlesse pitte, I sawe
a very great Dragon,Apoc. 12. of redde colour, which had seuē
heades, and euery heade had a crowne, and ten great
hornes, and a tayle of an vnmeasurable length, with
the which he had drawen to the bottomlesse pit, an vnspeakeable
& incomprehēsible nūber of the people of y•
world. Beside this Dragon, I saw a beast with seauen
heades,Apoc. 17. & ten hornes, and euery horne had a crowne, &
with a skinne like a Leoparde, and hauing the féete of
a Beare, and the mouth of a Lyon, and to thys beast
the Dragon had giuen his full power, his seate and
great authority, wherby y• Dragon was worshipped,
bycause he had giuen power to the beast, and the beast
was worshipped, for that it was estemed aboue all other
beastes, for the wonders it wrought, while it was
vpon earth. All those therefore, that haue worshipped
the beast, and haue receyued his marke, haue bene by
the beast drawen downe with him into y• bottomlesse
pytte, whither Goddes iustice hath committed them,
for euer.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I vnderstand thée now lesse than
I did before.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This beast, is the sonne of
perdition,2. Thessal. 2. of whom Paule speaketh to the Thessalonians.
That is exalted aboue all, that is called God, &
that sitteth in the temple of God, as God, and shevveth
himself as God. This beast is that monstrous
wicked beast, of whom Saint Iohn speaketh so plainly

in the .xvij. Chapter of hys Reuelation, & the Dragon
is that olde Serpente, that from the beginning
hath with his poyson brought death into the worlde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I pray thée, if thou wilt haue me to vnderstande
thée, speake a little more plainelye.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This beaste (to speake so as thou mayest vnderstande
me) is the Pope,What the beast is. What the dragon is. and the Dragon is the Diuel.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What, the Pope? Why is he not in Rome?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I speake not of one perticuler man, but I
speake generally.
            
            
               Marforius
               What doe not all Popes
generally dwell in Rome?
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, while
they be a lyue,The Popes dwelling place. and after their death in the bottomlesse
pitte.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou meanest therefore that all
those, that haue put their confidence in the Pope, and
haue followed his wayes, are dampned, and that the
Pope, hath no power from God, but from the Diuel?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Now thou vnderstandest the matter, it nedeth
not that I declare the same any better vnto thée.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou shalt doe me great pleasure to tell
me the meaning of those things, that thou hast shewed
vnto me.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It woulde aske to much tyme,Gene. 3. to
open to thée the whole.Psal. 17. 73. 90. 103. But I will tell thée brieflye as
the tyme will serue. The Dragon as thou hast heard,
is the Diuell:Iohn. 8. he is redde, through the bloud of Martyrs,
for he was euer a murtherer frō the beginning.
The seauen heads he hath,The description of the dragon. are seauen sundry beasts,
whose nature they signifie. By y• crowne & Diademes,
are ment the Kings and Princes, that are the Diuels
ministers, to kil and persecute such as defende y• honor
and glorye of Iesus Christ: the number determinate,
signifieth the multitude: the taile signifieth his folowers,
and Ministers, through whose labour and dilygence
he draweth vnto him so many wicked persons.

The beast, that standeth by him, is (as I haue told thée)
the Pope,The description of the beast. his confiderate and good Minister. The seuen
heades are seuen hilles of Rome, where his seate
is, the hornes and Crownes, are the Kings, and great
Lordes, that for his sake and respecte, persecute the
true seruaunts of Christ, that defende the Gospel. The
Leopardes skin signifieth his vnstedfastnesse, and inconstrancie,
his Beares féete and hys Lyons mouth,
signifieth his gredinesse, his rauening, and his crueltie,
the power that he hath of the Dragon, meaneth
the force and efficacye of hys deceyuing, the seate signifieth
his kingdome, and domynion, the power he
gaue, betokeneth the vertue to worke wonders, and
great signes: that with these thrée thinges he maye
kepe the worlde drowned in darknesse. And euen as
Christ was sente from GOD into the worlde to saue
it,Ioh. 3. euen so was he sent from the Diuell to destroy it.Antithesis.
And as Chryst sytteth in the Throne of GOD in
heauen,Apo. 4. euen so sitteth he in the Throne of the Dyuell
in Hell. Those therfore, that worship the Pope, &
take him so, as he will be taken, & follow his wayes, &
confesse him for Christes Uicar,Who haue the beastes marke & wrap themselues in
his benefices, and for his sake, kill the defendours of
the Gospell: these are they y• haue the beastes marke,
and that haue committed fornication with the whore,
and all these are with the Deuill. And if thou wilt be
sure, that it is as I tell thee, read the Apocalipse, and
especially the .xiij. and .xvii. Chapters, where thou shalt
finde that he sayeth playnely, that the seate of Antichrist
shall be in Rome,Rome the seate of Antichrist. saying: That, that whore is
a great city, that in Saint Iohns time had the whole
dominion ouer the kings of the earth, the which can
be none other but Rome.
            
            
               Marforius.
               That is y• matter,

that in certayne olde bookes, printed long before
Luther was euer spoken of, a man maye sée this beast
painted with a Popes Miter on his heade, I thinke
surely, he that painted it so, did Prophecie euen in
those dayes.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Ye so he did,Apoc. 14. but Saint Iohn
did more playnely prophecie, who sayth, y• he that hath
worshipped the beast, and receyued hys marke, the
same shall drinke of the Cup of Gods wrath and shall
be tormented with fyre and brimstone, euerlastingly.
Euen as on the other part he sayeth,Apoc. 20. that those that
haue suffered for the Gospell, and those that haue
not worshipped the beast, nor receyued his marke,
shall lyue and raigne with Christ for euer.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou sayest then that all Popes goe to the Diuell,
for besides the proues that thou hast alledged, if those
that followe them goe to the Deuill, it muste néedes
be, that they also that leade them,If the blind lead the blind both fall into the dytche. goe thither themselues
also, but me thinketh it a harde matter to beleue,
that they be there al of them.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               It ought
rather to thée a harder matter to beleue, that they
shoulde not be there all of them: for thou knowest,
that two contraries can not stande togither. Christ
and Antichrist are contraries, howe wilt thou haue it
therefore, that they may be togither? That the Pope
is Antichrist, thou shouldest not nowe be in doubt, as
well for the authorities that I haue now alledged vnto
thée out of the Apocalipse: as also for that I tolde
thée before in my voyage to heauē, and for y• that Maister
Bernardino Ochino,
                  Bernardin, Ierome, and Theopila
                        ••
                     . plainely pro
                        ••
                      Rome to be the seat of Antichrist. sayeth, who paynteth hym
out vnto thée and for that, which Saint Ierome sayeth,
who plainely affirmeth that his seat is in Rome,
and for that, which Theophilactus sayeth who sheweth,
that the Empire of Rome, the conquerour of all
other Empires, shall be possessed by Antichrist, and by

his manifest workes shewed vnto vs,A plaine proufe who is Antechrist. that he is the
very same, to persecute the defendours of the gospel,
is among many other, an vndoubted token.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yet shoulde not (me thinke) Pope Gregorie be
there,Pope Gregory confesseth that the Pope is Antechrist for he confessed, that, he that shoulde call himselfe,
Pope, & superiour ouer other Bishops, shoulde
be the fore runner of Antechrist.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Loe, there
is an other testimonie, that the Pope is Antechrist,
and albeit he sayde the truth in this point, yet deuised
he afterwarde so manye lyes, and dreames, as Purgatorie,
Masses, the v
                     •
                  sitations of Rome (commonly
called the stations) sole lyfe in Priestes and Churchmen,Pope Gregory for his lies & blasphemies accompted among Antechristes. and so many other blasphemies against y• bloude
and merites of Christ, that he may without al doubt,
be accompted also among the other Antechristes, who
thou must vnderstande are infinite: albeit for his notorious
worthynesse he shall be called Antechrist, that
shall be worsse than al the rest, and al the Popes state,
put them all together, yet will he say that Antechrist
must come, as Gregorie sayde. It is true that there
haue bene dyuers Gregories, and it may be, that some
one of them hath bene good and honest, but all such as
haue bene Popes, are in the lake that burneth with
fyre and brimstone in the bottomelesse pit. They that
were the first, were lesse wicked, but sithens haue
they growen worsse and worsse, and the last shal be y•
worst of all,Pasquine prophecieth truly of Chietti, for neuer was there nor can be a worsse than Paule the fourthe. and I thinke that shall be the Cardinall
Chietti, except the dutch Launceknights come into
Italic before, and so make Pope Paule the thirde to
be the last.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And yet perhappes they wyll
not be taken for the verye maisters, or heads, for they
call themselues, Serui seruorum Dei, and Prouidentia
diuina Papa. P. tertius, and a number of such gaye

glistering titles, they outwardly shewe.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               This was the cause,Math. 7. wherefore Christ sayde, that outwardely
they should be like shéepe, but inwardly they
shoulde be Wolues, and Saint Paule sayeth, that
they shall haue a shewe of Godlynesse,2. Tim. 3. but in effectes
they shall be quite voyde of it. And marke well whether
they be made Popes by Gods diuine prouidence
or no,A woman made Pope. when there was a woman once made Pope,
they are made in déede by the prouidence of the Diuel,
and not of God: for Gods prouidence knoweth well
ynough,He. 5. 6. 7. 8. men from women, and hath made one onely
highe Bishop, which is Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Sawest
thou that she Pope?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea mary did I sée hir.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And what canst thou tell me of hir?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou must vnderstande, that those thinges,
that in this worlde, are in greatest highnesse, greatest
felicitie, and greatest glorie, there beneath, are in
so much the more basenesse, wretchednesse, and shame,
the Popes therefore, that in this worlde coulde not
satisfie their hungry and gréedy desire of honor, being
in the estate of Kings, and Princes, but woulde be
estéemed aboue al other men, and aboue great Lords,
and being not contented with this, haue lift vp themselues,
aboue the gospel,Popes haue there Heauen in this worlde and made themselues Gods
in earth, in how great déepenesse of miserie they are
their beneath passeth all mens imagination. And
they are therefore so muche the more cruelly tormented
than other, as that they haue bene the greatest occasion
of the losse of so many people. Thou mightest
there haue séene them with Myters of glowing brimstone
on their heads,The description of the Pope in his pontificalibus in Hell. & their other ornaments of their
body all of glowing Brimstone, with their Chaires
of glowing Brimstone, and they haue about them as

seruaunts, woes and Diuels, and before them haue
they infinite hostes of those gracelesse people, that following
their wicked steppes, are drowned with them
in euerlasting miseries, al which of them doe nothing
else, but cursse them and ban them. And before this
shée Pope stande all those Rascalles, and séely fooles,
that sith her tyme,Deuilles can abide no popes espsciallie no shee popes. haue beleued in the Popes authoritie,
and their are they cast in y• téeth with it, and cursed
by the Deuils themselues, for that after so manifest
a token, giuen by her from God to the worlde, as
that they shoulde not meddle with Popes, woulde
they yet néedes beleue them, and follow their curssed
wayes.
            
            
               Marforius.
               And haue Popes then euen in
hell, seruantes to waite vpon them.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea,
suche maner ones, as I tolde thée of before.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Wherein, doe they any seruice vnto them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To torment them euerlastingly.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What torments vsed they to them?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               To go
about to shew the torments of those that be dampned,
shoulde be euen muche as to tell thée, howe manye
graynes of sande are in the sea, and thou agayne to
stande to heare them, wouldest be so stricken with
feare, that thou wouldest not any more giue eare vnto
me. But let thys suffice thée, to knowe also that
which Saint Iohn telleth thée,Ppoc. 14. that is to were, that
they are tormented with fyre and brimstone for euer
and euer. Thē saw I,Pageauntes set vp for popes in Hell. The decrée of Pope bonifaco the eyght. in sundry places, diuers Arches
of triumph, (or Pageaunts as we may cal them) One
was of Boniface the eyght of that name, for that
goodly decree he made, that euerye worldly creature
shoulde be obedient to the Pope as they wil be saued.
And therein was grauen that decrée in euerye point
as it standeth, sauing the laste worde, which is. (As

they wil be dampned,) an other there was of Hildebrande
the Sorcerer, which afterwarde was, Pope
Gregorie the seauenth,Pope Gregorie the seuenth. for his many and sundry new
deuises, throughe the which, so manye seely wretches
are gone headlong to the Diuell, and bicause also he
did so malapertly stande against the great Princes of
the worlde, as Boniface and many other, and almost
all of them haue done. An other there was of Alexander
Borgias,
                  Alexander Borgias. in the which, beside his other notable
and famous factes,Incest committed by a Pope (and his brother) with his owne daughter. was grauen also that worthy and
holy acte of his, to lye with his owne naturall daughter
Lucrece, with whome also Duke Valentine his
brother lay. An other there was of Iulius the seconde
full of horrible bloudsheddings and adulteries. Another
there was of Leo the tenth,Iulius the 
                        〈◊〉
                      Leo the tenth. Peter Lewes. Paule the .iij. in the which a man
might sée, how the tributes of y• great cities of Sodome
& Gomorre were brought vnto him. And yet was there
one much fayrer, y• was preparing for Peter Levves,
some to Pope Paule y• third, and one for his father also
            
            
               Mar.
               And of y• great princes of y• worlde, whom sawest
thou?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The greater part, and within a fewe
of all.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What is the cause, that so many of
them be dampned?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               The causes are many,
but the principall cause is, that for as muche as they
haue receyued their powers and dominions frō God,
as the Scripture sayeth: By mePro. 8. Kings doe raigne
&c.:Rom. 13. There is no power but of god, the powers that
are, are ordeyned of God. &c. He it is that maketh the
wicked to rule for the sinnes of the people. This haue
not they acknowledged frō God, nor haue with their
good example, and good gouernement, kept their people
in the feare of God, nay thinking rather that they
did highe seruice to God, haue slayne suche as defend

the Gospell,The office of Kinges and Rule
                        •
                     s. and the honor of Christ. Whereas they
ought rather to haue abolished all the sundry se
                     •
                  es of
Friers, all Idolatries, the carcasses and bones of
the dead, such as they call Saints, in the which, they
put all their religion, and should rather haue regarde
and care to honest maydens, to the poore, olde, sicke
and impotent persones, relieuing them with that infinite
richesse, that vniustely and wickedly are possessed
by the smered swarme of shauelings, and ought
to suffer or rather to cause Iesus Christ to be preached.
But they doe contrarywise persecute, and suffer
to be persecuted such as preach him, and worsse do
those of these dayes, than those of foretymes, for these
are some for one wordely respecte, and some for an
other, so ioyned in league with this wicked beast, that
they haue more regarde to Antechrist, than to Christ.
In Christes cause there is not one, that will once
speake a worde,Antechrist more regarded than Christe. doubting least he shoulde be called a
Lutherian: but for Antechristes cause ech man will
discouer himselfe what he is, against suche as defend
Christ, calling them Herctiques, and persecuting thē
euen to the death: Maruell not therefore, if they also
be condempned by their head, whome they haue persecuted
in his members.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Canst thou not
tell me anye one sundry sorte of torments, that these
great princes had different from the other? Yea,The punnishment of Kings in H
                        •
                     ll. that
I can, thou knowest that they will, still aboue al other
things, be honored, magnified, flattered, and
fedde with the smoke of clawing talke: In Hel therfore,
they are a good parte of the tyme, hanged vp in
the smoke of that cursed brimstone.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What,
& are not the Popes serued with the same sause?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               More they, than the other.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Whom

diddest thou sée particularly? Talke to me a little of
some one namely among the rest.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Herein
will I doe, not after thyne, but after Plato his minde,
who willeth that when a man commeth to particularities
he ought to make a staye, for if I woulde come
to those particularly, there shoulde be fewe alyue,To tell truth bredeth hatred. but
they woulde banishe me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Why and are
men for saying the truth, banished by Princes and
great men?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Yea, and with the worst kinde
of banishment that they can, and most of all, those
that most speake the truth, for they are not content to
banish them out of their countreys that confesse the
way of Christ, (which onely is true,) but they banishe
them out of the worlde.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Let them therefore
remayne with the Diuell, sith they are there already,
and being such maner of men as they be. But
tell me, how diddest thou know them, being confusely
scattered among other, and being naked, as thou
hast sayde before? thou couldest neyther knowe them
by their apparell, nor yet bicause they were not placed
in order.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I knewe them by their sinnes, the
which (as I tolde thée) are al playnely séene. In them
a man might sée the sinnes of great men,Sinnes wher
                        •
                      to Kings and great men are most euclined as for crample,
neuer to forgiue iniuries receyued, to worke reuenge
for euery trifle, to be occasion of the death, of
numbers of their people, to fulfill their appetite, to
defile their Uassals wyues, to punishe the good, to rewarde
the euill, to dispise vertue, to fauoure vice, and
suche other small pieuish faultes, and beside that, they
were all castin the téeth by the Diuelles, with these
wordes among other.Psal. 49. 
                  The man that vvas in honor
hath not thankfullye receyued the same, but vvas as
beastes vvithoute vnderstanding, beholde his glorye

commeth not dovvne vvith him hyther belovve.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               This was the way, to make them to be
knowen to thée for great men, generally: but howe
didst thou knowe them one from an other particulerlye?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I knewe them by the selfe same token,
that I tolde thée, for as much as their sinnes are
discouered, and the names of euery one of them, and
this is done fo: their greater torment, for what matter
were it, if sinnes were séene, & it were not knowen
whose sinnes they were? I tell thée,Esa. 47. they shewe the filthinesse
of their nakednesse,Apo. 16. and euery one is knowē
what he is.
            
            
               Marforius.
               The Fryers therefore,Friers and Nounes sore asshamed in Hell. the
Nunnes, the lay Sisters, and all the other Ipocrites,
must nedes be full of sorrowe, séeing so manye, and so
grieuous of their abhominable wickednesse discouered,
which in this worlde they haue had so great care
to kepe close.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Thou mayest be sure of that.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Saint Benets Monks should there find thē
selues much deceyued, in that they obeyed their holye
Abbot, in that godly saying. Sion caste, tamen cautè.
               
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They are them selues deceyued, and all other,
that haue sayd, that a faulte closely done, is halfe
pardoned.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Thou shouldst me thinke therfore
sée, many goodly things of Fryers, and of their louers.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Nay I sawe things that were so filthy,
that they were to shamefull euen in very Hell.
There mightest thou haue sene howe Fryers medled
with Nunnes and laye sisters,A beadroll of the vnspeakable filthinesse & other mischieues dayly committed by the Popes religious 
                        •
                     able. and with worsse, thou
mightest haue sene the murthering of yong babes, and
bycause their dishonesties should not be discoured, y•
mightest haue sene that they were cast into the Iakeses.
Thou mightest there haue sene also one Fryer
teach, one woman the way howe she shoulde not conceyue

with child, an other, Fryer taught an other woman
the way to destroy the child in hir body, an other
Fryer taught an other woman, the way to poyson
hir husbande. This Fryer gaue to his woman some of
hys holye Oyle, to worke inchauntmentes to those
of the house. One Fryer gaue to hys Leman one
of hys consecrate Hostes, for the same purpose. An
other kylled a whole householde, wyth gyuing them
things to eate that shoulde make them sléepe, bycause
he would not be sene go into the house, to play y• knaue
with the good wyfe. One false priest fayned that our
Lady had wrought miracles, bycause there might be
some offerings brought to hir by the foolishe ignorant
people. An other persecuted the Christians, and preached
against the truth, bycause he woulde be made a
Byshop or a Cardinall. An other false knaue in confession
caused a simple foolishe woman to giue him hir
money in keping, and afterwarde denyed it to hir. An
other Frier sat tooting in the bosome of a simple yong
Maid (whom hir foolish mother had brought to be shriuen)
that she might begin to learne some of the friers
knauery. An other in confession persuaded him that
was sicke (peraduenture more in his soule than in hys
body) to leaue his goodes vnto their Monasteries, depriuing
therof the true and lawfull heyres. This good
sonne wished his owne fathers death, that he mighte
do after his owne minde. That Nephew killed maister
Parson his vncle, the soner to succéede him in the benefice,
that afterwarde he must leaue vnto him. That
woman defiled hir husbandes bed, and this good man
his wyues. That wicked and naughty seruaunt betrayed
his mayster, to whom he oughte by Gods commaūdement
to be obedient, and faithful. Thou mightest

there haue sene, Simonies, Sodomies, Ipocrisies
Robberies, Scismes, Apostasies, and those, more in
the polleshorne Prelates than in al y• other. Then saw
I in dyuers parts, dyuers signes of victorye. There
was to be séene, grauen the glorious cognisaunce, of
the Chanon of Turney: who after his death lefte a
booke, wherein he had noted, the name and house of
two hundreth womē of the chiefest of that City whom
he had enioyed at his pleasure.A chast chanon. There was also to be
sene, how a false théefe a Fryer in Friseland, had put
into the heades of the foolish women this opinion, that
they must giue to the Church the tenth of all things,
and euen in lyke maner,Tenth nights payde to the Church men. the tenth night as they do to
their husbandes. And howe also an other trayterous
Frier with an host poysoned, brought to his death
Henry the seuenth Emperour of that name. Then
hearde we a noyse, a busteling, and such a confusion,
that we thought,An Emperour poysoned with an hoste. they would haue made a Pope.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Whence came that noyse?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               From y•
Diuelles,Diuels kepe Consistorie. who kept consistorye.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Knowest
thou what things were treated of?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               They
treated of those selfe same thinges, that I tolde thée,
were treated of in that councell, that was kept in the
Popes heauen. They cryed al with one voyce, downe
with the Lutheranes, as Rebels, enimes, and destroiers
of the infernal kingdom. And one of them, proclaming
silence, (such as in that place coulde be,) sayde.
Cursed Diuels, you knovve, that from the beginning
of the first man hitherto, vve haue had alvvayes trybute
of the vvorld,
                  An oration of a diuell. 
                  and vvhen our kingdom did most
flourish in ryches, came that greate enimye of ours,
vvhome here belovve vve can not name, and vtterly
destroyed vs: vve then vvith our subtilty, and earnest

trauaile, stirred vp so many sundry sortes of Fryers, &
thervvithal our vvicked brother Antechrist, by vvhiche
meanes, so manye and great trybutes so freshlye
came from all partes vnto oure kingdome, that it is
novve become more ryche, than euer it vvas before.
But last of al hath our enimy, begīning on the north
parts, raysed vp so many of his faythfull in all Europa,
and almost throughout the vvhole vvorlde, vvho
haue discouered the Pope to be Antechrist, and hys
Fryers to be Ipocrites, that you see, that the vvay, that
leadeth dovvne hyther, and that in tymes past vvas,
vvonte to be so vvell troden, is novve become full of,
grasse, and thornes, and if vve do not prouide the better,
vvill be altogether shutte vp. True it is, that our
brothers the Dominicanes, and other manye, and
our vvicked brother Antechrist vvith his mēbers the
Cardinals, Prelates, and all other vvith shauen crovvnes,
and the princes also of the vvorld, do all their endeuour,
in our furtheraunce and fauour, killing the
vvelbeloued of our enimy. This notvvithstanding, it
is your office and dutye, to pricke forvvarde vvith all
the povver you can make, our ministers, the Fryers,
priestes, and all such as be ioyned in league vvith our
faithfull brother Antechrist, that they (more novve
than euer they did before) do persecute, imprison, and
dryue out of the vvorlde, all those, that giue to our enimy
onelye the prayse, that (vnder dyuers Images,)
vvas vvont to be giuen to vs, those also that haue charity,
that doe forgiue iniuries receyued, that doe giue
great almesse & other like vvorks, to vs most cōtrary,
that by these meanes the number of our enimyes may
be deminished, & the number of our cōfederats incresed.
Here against spake the other diuels, saying: that

things must not so be done, for we sée already quoth
they by plaine experience, that the more those men are
slayne and destroyed, the more they do increase. Then
spake an other Diuell. And why quoth he, take we
such thought for this matter? Haue not we our ministers
the Market monsters, that worke better for vs,
than we oure selues can desire? Is not the Citye of
Rome yet in his chiefest glory, the which we may call
our infernall Ierusalem? One Diuell spake againste
this, an other against that, so y• being al full of wrangling,
& cōfusion (euen as is it the vse in Fryer houses)
they departed all without any agréeing. Yet did they
all apply them selues, some in one sorte, other in an other,
to cause the number of the dampned soules still
to be increased, albeit not one of Christes shéepe can
perishe. How fowle these things were to be sene, how
great feare and horror they brought with them, there
is no tongue that can expresse it.
            
            
               Marforius.
               I beleue
it well, but sawest thou any other thing, that may be
tolde?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sawe many other thinges but amongst
the rest,The catholike Church, Christes espouse. euen as in Gods true heauen, I sawe
the Catholike Church of the faythful, to be the espouse
of Christ, euen so sawe I in the bottomlesse pitte, the
Malignant Church of Rome, to be the Diuels whore.
And as that was in the world,The malignaunte Church, the diueles whore. in so great trouble, & is
now with hir most swete espouse Christ in vnspeakable
happynesse: euen so, this malignant Churche,
that was in the world in so great feliciie, is now with
the most cruell diuell in vnspeakable payne and sorrowe.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Didst thou knowe there belowe no
one friend of thine.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               No friend of mine, but
I knew in dede a great number of these siely shéepishe
siely women, that thou séest go all day vp and downe,

with a Réede in their hand, of whom if thou demaund
whyther go ye good mother B? they aunswere,Stations are certaine churches where pardons bee graunted. I goe
to the Stations, for the soules of my father & my mother.
I knew there Iohn Ecchius, I knew ther Pighius
I sawe there Albert Byshop of Chiozza, there saw I
Gilbert Bishop of Verona, I sawe there many of the
Sorbonists of Paris, and I saw there, to tell thée at a
worde, all those y• in my traunce I sawe in the Popes
heauē, I saw them (in their right being) in Hel, where
they are in so greate a depth of miseries, tormentes,
and sorowes, that we whyle we be tormented by them
in this world, ought yet to haue great cōpassion of thē,
& pray to the Lord for thē, that he vouchsafe to deliuer
them out of so great miserie.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Was there
nothing sayde to thée, by anye one that knewe thée?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               There were many of them, that desired
me that I woulde tell their kinsfolkes that are here,
that they should not follow their footesteps, that they
might not come afterwardes into those tormentes,
and the Bergamaschi prayed me heartily that I would
giue warning to their heires, that they should spende
no more money in Masses, nor in anye other thing,
for their soules, for in any wise the Money is caste away.
            
            
               Marforius.
               What answere madest thou to thē?
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I sayde, they haue the Gospel,Luc. 16. to the which
if they giue no eare, lesse wil they giue eare vnto me.
            
            
               Marforius.
               So answere Abraham to the riche man,
but what sayde they to this?
            
            
               Pasquin.
               They gaue me
most boyling sighes, for answere: they renewed with
double force, the dolefull woes, their torments were
doubled, their flames of fyre increased, the smoke and
stinke grewe still greater, their sorrowe waxed more
vehement, they cryed our Misericordia, and were not

heard, their wéeping and gnashing of téeth augmented,
they called and cryed for death, and all in vayne,
euery thing was death, their howlings grew greatter:
euery thing was fyre, euery thing was smoke,
euery thing was Diuels, euery thing was sorrowe,
tormenting, miserie, rage, and so great infelicity, that
bicause I was neyther able to sée it, nor heare it, sith
the very Deuils, thēselues were weary of it, I prayed
myne Aungell that he woulde bring me backe hither
agayne, and so it was done.
            
            
               Marforius.
               When
thou begānest to talke, of thy going to Hell, thou diddest
promise me to tell me, how thou diddest to come
backe agayne. Nowe it is tyme, that thou tell me it.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               Knowest thou not, that the scripture sayth.
That the gates of Hell haue no maner of povver against
the Church of Christ?
                  Math. 16.
               
            
            
               Marforius.
               Yea,
            
            
               Pasquine,
               The gates of hell coulde not therefore hold me
in, but that I did come out.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Did the Angell
then forthwith leaue thée?
            
            
               Pas.
               No, for he came
along with me, euen vnto Prima porta, talking with
me of the things we had séene: and he promised me,
to cause me in the like traunce also, to sée the destruction
of the worlde, and the dreadefull doome of Iesus
Christ.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Oh I praye thée, when that tyme
shall be, make me partaker thereof I heartily besech
thée.
            
            
               Pasquine.
               I will without doubt. It is now tyme
for me to be going my wayes. Adewe good brother.
            
            
               Marforius.
               Goe in the Lordes peace. To whom wyth
all heart, tongue and pen, be giuen al praise and glory
both nowe and for euer. Amen.
            
            FINIS.
         
         
            
            Questions of Pasquine to be
disputed in the Councell
nowe holden at
Trent.
            
               
                  PAsquine hauing now of late
yeares put for the many matters
and in dyuers maners, bicause he
hath spente his wordes in vayne,
doth nowe therefore propone certayne
questions to be disputed, of
the which he desireth to be better
satisfied, for that he heareth, that they are verye often
called in controuersie. And firste
            1 Whether the 
                  •
               inginge that Fryers make
euery daye, maye rather be called labour and toyle of
Asses: and a trauaile of the bodye rather than of the
minde.
            2 Whether the Canōs (or Prebendaries as we cal
them) comming to sitte in the Quéeres and Churches
for the gayne they haue thereby, doe receyue their rewarde
in this worlde.
            3 Whether Resignations, permutations, chopping
and chaunging, and suche comming to benefices
as nowe is dayly vsed, be Simonie.
            4 Whether such as say and sel Masses for money,
may be compared to Iudas that solde Christ, or to the
Porters of Paris that in euery streat offer themselues
to hire, and crie. A newe mayster a newe.
            5 Whether it be to be suffered, that Fryers and
Nonnes shoulde marry, sith Christ sayde that all men

coulde not comprehende that saying.
            6 Whether it be perillous and not to be suffered
by Citizens, that the fatte and well fedde Priestes, &
such as are ful of idlenesse, & lasciuious lyuing, should
dwell so néere them without wyues of their owne.
            7 Whether it be néedefull in any Citie to haue so
many thousād of Massemombling priestes, of which,
fewe or none, teache or can teache the Gospell, sith
Christ commaunded his Apostles, as their very duety
and office, saying. Go ye preach the gospell. &c.
            8 Whether suche as instruct not the people, that
is to say, which doe not the very true office, that belongeth
to the Church, maye receyue and enioye the
goods of the Church, or are to be called Theues and
Robbers
            9 Whether that, graunting the iustification by
fayth in Christ, Purgatorye be ouerthrowne and all
that is built therevpon.
            10 Whether there be in all Europe any one Bisshop,
that doth his office in suche sorte, as was prescribed
by the Apostles.
            11 Whether the Bishops that are carelesse of their
flocke, & fall only to flaying their shéepe, may be called
true Pastours, or Hyrelings, as Christ sayeth.
            12 Whether the shauen crowne, and the smearing
of Priestes hands, be the beastes marke, whereof the
Apocalipse speaketh.
            13 Whether the Schole doctours, that take no
payne with their doctrine, but are euer vp with Cherubin
and the Angels, ought to be called rather Speculatours,
than Practicioners.
            14 Whether suche as woulde not haue the holye
Scripture to be readde by the people, doe freat and

rage with in themselues? that such bookes are abroad.
            15 Whether the .xxi
                  •
               j. Chapter of Mathew may be
applied to the Diuines, Fryers, Priestes, and al the
rest of the Popes rable, of our tyme.
            16 Whether the persecutours of the Gospell and
the truth in our tyme, may be compared to the Pharisies
which sought the death of Christ & his Apostles.
            17 Whether, the lyke matter doe not nowe in
these dayes stirre vp the Papistes against the truth of
the Gospell, as is recited in the Actes of the Apostles,
concerning Diana of Ephesus.
            18 Whether that saying of the Gospell. Beware of
false Prophets:Math. 7. And that also of Peter. That through
couetousnesse they shall make marchandise of you
with fayned wordes,2. Peter. 2. and manye other lyke places of
the Scripture, do rightly belong to the whole swarme
of shauen Papistes.
            19 Whether that which Christ speaketh in the .xxiiij
of Mathewe, of many false Prophets that shall come,
may be vnderstand to be the sundry sectes of Monkes
and Fryers, who, some by one way, some by an other,
some by the helpe of this saint, and some by that saint,
go about to come to heauen.
            20 Whether that whiche Paule foretolde should
come,1. Tim. 4. that in the latter tymes shoulde aryse men of
euill conscience, forbidding matrimony and meates,
(which God hath created to be taken with thankes giuing,)
may be ment to be of the Pope, which hath forbidden
all these things.
            21 Whether Fryers and all the rest of the smeared
shauelings, hauing bene so often taken with the
maner to vse deceyte, and to mocke the simple people
with newe founde miracles, be therefore any more to

be trusted afterwarde, according to the olde rule: he
that is once a false knaue, it is maruell if euer he be
honest man after.
            22 Whether that saying of Daniel of the Abhomination
of desolation standing in the holy place,Math. 14. maye
be aptly applyed to ye Churches of our tyme, in which
the Pope s
                  •
               lleth heauen for mony, which is sene to be
the greatest & moste vnspeakeable abhominatiō that
can be.
            23 Whether it be true that their Church as they
say can not erre, and yet they cōfesse them selues that
there are many abuses, whiche their Church hath hytherto
brought in, and also encreased.
            24 Whether the Pope with all his religious rable,
be the true Church of Christ, sith they folow christ
neyther in doctrine nor liuing.
            25 Whether the Pope be the man of sinne, & the
Sonne of perdition, that sitteth in the temple of God,
& exalteth him selfe aboue all that is called God, as
Paule sayth in the second epistle to the Thessolonians
the second Chapter▪ Sith that place can not be vnderstande
of any Tyrant, that by force of armes rageth
or spoyleth, but of him that vnder colour of Religion,
putteth in vre his infinite Tiranny vpon the mindes
and consciences of men, y• vnder pretence of holinesse
doth make and determine what he listeth: which long
time hath flourished and triumphed in his ruffe, bicause
he was not knowen, till at the laste in his due
tyme, he is discouered & reuealed by the spirit of Gods
mouth: y• is to say, through the preaching of the gospel.
            26 Whether the Pope be that greate whore wyth
whom the Kings of the earth haue committed fornication:
and with whose cuppe of hir abhomination,

all nations are dronke as the Apocalipse sayth.
            27 Whether the Pope be that litle horne that hath
eyes and a mouth speaking great things,Apoc. 17. 18. that Daniel
speaketh of.
            28 Whether the Pope being Antechrist, maye be
Christes U
                  •
               are.
            29 Whether Monkes, Fryers, and all the rest of
the polleshorne Papists, be those marchants of whom
the Apocalipse speaketh.
            30 Whether the Popes Sea, and the Courte of
Rome, which is so defiled with al maner of filthinesse,
may be called Babylon.
            
            31 Whether a man maye beleue, that the Pope
meaneth or can call, a godly and frée generall Councell,
in the whiche so great an ouerflowing of euilles
and mischiefes, as he himselfe hath brought vpon the
worlde, may lawfully be purged.
            32 Whether Pope P. who is reported to be most
couetous, doe at any tyme thinke of God, sith Christ
sayth. Where your treasure is there is your hart also.
            
            33 Whether the Pope that is guilty of heresie,Math. 6. Idolatry,
and blasphemie, may be heade and Iudge ouer
a Councell.
            34 Whether Peter Luis the Popes sonne, whom
all men say to be a moste filthy Sodomite, be worthy
to be chiefe Champion and capitaine of the Church.
            35 Whether it be expedient for the Christian common
weale, to take awaye from the Pope his kingdomes
& dominions, that thereby it may be sene whether
he will returne to the aunciēt office of the church.
            36 Whether the Pope would haue Germany, yea,
rather all the worlde destroyed by warres; than that
his tyranny & power should be any whit diminished.
            
               37 Whether it may be doubted, that the Papa
                  •••
               ,
and y• great beast will not shortly haue an ouerthrow,
as the Scripture sayth, sith long sithens Boheme, and
almoste all Germany, all Denmarke, Englande, and
Scotlande, haue fallen from hir, and secretly France,
and Italy.
            
            38 Whether the Frenche king haue iust cause to
forbidde that no more money henceforward be caried
to Rome, sith Popes haue in tymes past being furnished
with the ryches and armure of Fraunce, made
warre vpon the Frenche.
            39 Whether the Pope dispensing all things for
money, may be called Pope penny Father, and therefore
be suspected of Couetousnesse.
            40 Whether there maye be any hope of goodnesse
conceyued of the Popes recouerie, and of his sworne
shauelings, sith Christ denyeth, that blasphemers and
suche as withstande the truth against their consciences,
can be healed.
            41 Whether the primacie of the Popes sée, be lawfully
come by, sith it was gotten of Phocas the Emperor,
who was a murtherer, & secretely and with great
treason slewe the Emperour Mauritius his Lorde.
            42 Whether the Pope, Cardinals and Bishops be
or ought to be called Christes spouse, sith they kéepe
at home so many whores and boyes.
            43 Whether if Christ were in these dayes among
the Papistes, he should be crucified againe as he was
by the Scribes and Pharisies.
            44 Whether that Pope that made the decretall
De duobus luminaribus magnis, be to be compared
with them that built the Towre of Babilon.
            45 Whether Pope Innoce
                     •
                  t the eyght, that was

vtterly ignoraunt and vnlearned, might be dispensed
with, to say masse.
            46 Whether Pope Iulius the seconde who was a
warriour, did playnely shewe that Antechrist was already
come, and that it néeded not any longer to looke
for him.
            47 Whether Pope Lyon the tenth a verye Sardanapalus,
might be compared with the riche glutton.
            48 Whether Pope Clement the seauenth, who
was the match to kindle the fyre of warres betwéene
Princes, filled vp the measure of his forefathers.
            49 Whether Pope Paule the thirde who wholly
was giuen to Necromancie, may be excommunicate.
            50 Whether it be to be beleued, first that the Pope
wisheth from his heart ye concorde of Princes, sithens
his foregoers, were euer the beginners of warres:
Then, if 
                  •
               he wishe it, whether it be for the common
weale sake, or for his owne priuate cause: Lastly, whether
peace made by his request maye eyther be of any
continuance, or else haue any good successe. For that
Christ sayeth,Mat. 7. that an euyll tree can bring forthe no
good fruites.
            51 Whether the Popes purpose, when he séemeth
to goe about to reconcile Princes, be lyke vnto that
counsell which the Diuell put into Pilates wyues
minde,Mat. 27. and that was, not bicause the death and torments
of Christ did anye whit grieue hir, but bicause
she sawe that hir kingdome and tirannie suffered violence,
and suche hurt as coulde not be recouered.
            52 Whether the ende of this alteration of our
tyme can be anye other than sorowfull, horrible and
lamentable, 
                  •
               ithe the filthinesse of the Antechristian
and Popish kingdome is so terrible and incomprehensible,

and the obstinacie so outragious as can not
be spoken.
            53 Whether the writings of Sadoletus: and other
that hytherto haue valiauntly defended the Popishe
church be to be accompted suspect, sith now they suffer
honors and dignities to be giuen by the Pope, whether
they will or no.
            54 Whether the Pope, that nowe at the last hath
graunted a legate to Fraunce, coulde wel skill of that
which was wont to be sayde, that is to saye: Of two
euils (that is to meane the Patriarch and the Legate)
the least is to be chosen.
            55 Whether the Pope if he knewe that it woulde
come to passe that the Emperour and the French
king woulde not ioyne their forces togither, and help
him against the Protestaunts, that he woulde once
speake of peace or of a generall counsell.
            56 Whether it may be confessed that God for our
wickednesse and ingratitude, is not highely offended
with vs, sithe we sée all our counsels and deuises haue
so euil successe, and warre to arise in an others necke,
one mischiefe after an other, and all our purposes,
vpon ye sodaine to quaile, & so to be eftsones confounded
with newe lettes, that we cannot sée which ende
to begin at.
            57 Whether that kings and Princes, who albeit
in this moste cleare light in these dayes can not but
néedes knowe Antechrist, and yet doe not onely dissemble,
but also séeke by all wayes & meanes to pleasure
him, and be at the becke of so open an enimy to
the truth) ought to feare y• as in time past God tooke
from many Kings both their kingdome and people,
so he will therefore deale with them.
            
               58 Whether it be to be beleued, that Monkes and
Fryers doe purpose or can finde out a true and godly
reformation, as long as to their counsels and deliberations,
they admit suche as for many causes are the
Popes owne dearelings, and that they will rather
suffer any thing, than eyther to léese any iote of their
riches and commodities, or else to haue their wickednesse
and knauerie discouered.
            59 Whether the Pope, who by Cardinall Contarine,
at Ratisbona after long contention in matters
of religion, willed that all things shoulde be referred
to a generall Counsell. And when the Princes of the
Empire determined to haue a Nationall Counsell,
if the same general Counsel began not within seauen
Monethes, stoutly withstanding their decrée, did euidently
shewe what might be looked for at his handes,
and what his meaning was.
            60 Whether when the same Cardinall Contarine
saide in a certayne writing of his to the Princes
of the Empire, that he hoped that it woulde come to
passe that the Protestaunts woulde retorne to the lap
of the church of Rome, and they likewise in a wryting
of theirs made answere againe in a wryting of theirs
that of al men they woulde neuer doe so: whether afterwarde
I saye néeded anye talke betwéene them for
the matter.
            61 Whether any ought in these dayes to be offended,
bicause the doctrine of the Gospel séemeth to bring
dissentions and alterations, sith that Christe saith,
that the same is a singuler token and most plaine demonstration
of his worde,Math. 10. which is to sende the sword,
and not peace, and to set the sonne agaynst the father,
and the daughter against the mother.
            
               62 Whether that argument be of force, which many
in these dayes do holde▪ that it is not to be beleued
that God woulde haue our forefathers to erre vntyll
this tyme, and to be without the true doctrine, for as
much as by the same reason it may be asked, why the
same God hath suffred Africa, and all Asia, to fall into
so horrible darknesse▪ after they lost the lighte of the
Gospell and newe doctrine brought in. For it muste
be confessed, that all that remayned after the preaching
of the Gospell was onely in Europa the thirde
and least parte of the worlde.
            63 Whether such as are in these dayes put to death
in many places, be verye heritiques in dede: and albeit,
they be suche, whether they ought to be putte to
death or no, for that Christ doth expresly commaund,
that we suffer the cockle to grow with ye corne, & not
to roote the same vp.
            64 Whether the decrées of the Fathers & of the
Counselles ought to be referred and examined by the
prescript rule of the gospel,1. Cor. 3. syth Paule so plainly said,
That other foundation than that was already ought
not to be layed, & yet shoulde it come to passe that many
ther vpon would buylde, some golde, some stouble,
some woode.
            65 Whether those solepmne and ordinarie disputacions
of the Sorbonists, doe any thing profite to the
vnderstanding of the holy scripture, syth they are altogether
idle questions of vayne things, crooked, more
than supercelestiall, crabbed, and Seraphicall, the
which neither they that speake, nor those that heare
them, do at any tyme vnderstande, and albeit they do
vnderstande them, yet are they neuer a deale the better
by them, or the better learned.
            
               66 Whether if the Pope woulde at any tyme
suffer in a generall counsell (if any shall hereafter be)
any one article to be pulled away from him, that then
it might not be truely saide & affirmed, that he is not
the Churche, forasmuche as hitherto he standeth stiffe
in defence, that the Church can not erre.
            67 Whether the Church, that is to saye, a congregacion
of people may erre, forasmuche as it is propre
to mans nature to erre & fal. Then if it can not erre,
for that they allege, where
                  •
               two or thrée are gathered
togyther in my name &c. Whether then the Consistories
of Popes, Cardinalles, and Byshops may erre,
syth these many yeares they haue called theyr counselles,
not to sette forthe Christes glory, but more &
more to confirme and stablish their ryches and dignitie,
syth y• the scripture telleth that in the latter times
should spring horrible errors.
            68 Whether in matters perteyning to faith and
our Saluation, any other thing ought to be commā
               ded
beside the gospell,Math. 7. 24. 61. syth Christ cōmaunded that his
onely sonne should be heade and none other. And sithe
also that Christe commaundeth vs to beware of men
and of their doctrine.
            69 Whether syth we plainely sée into howe fowle
stincking abhominable errours we are fallen, synce
we lefte the prescript rule of the Gospell, and opened
the way to al mans traditions: we ought not to haue
great cause, seing so many mischieues and incōueniences
before our eies, to become wyse, to giue place, &
casting aside al hautinesse of minde, giue ouer our selues
wholly to him, whiche onely cannot erre, & who
commaunded that in his commaundements we neyther
tourne asyde to the right or left hande.
            
               70 Whether it ought to be confessed, that it is a
great miraculous misterie, that religion, (which now
is in disputacion, hath of so small & f
                  •
               eble beginnings
as by one man only who was notoriously condempned
in the beginning and counted as an abiected to ye
whole world or rather as a praye layed forth to al mē)
hath so sprede it self and growne to such a greatnesse,
that such as haue bene against it & withstoode it, may
not iustely be affearde, if they haue any witte at all.
            71 Whether such as will séeme to fauour the gospell,
thereby to be thought that they know much, and
do for all that flatter such as styre vp persecutions,
may be compared to Herode who made more conscience
to breake his vnlawfull promise to a Harlotte,
than to saue the lyfe of so holy a man.
            72 Whether that saying of the Gospell who loueth
his soule in this worlde, shall loose it. &c. may not
aptly agrée with the fyne worldly wise heads of oure
tyme, who for the doctrine of the Gospell, will not for
any little suspicion therof receiue losse or displeasure
but liue pleasauntly, and quietly, & kepe their riches
and promotions vntouched.
            73 Whether suche as in these dayes do confesse y•
there are errours, and in the meane tyme do not only
contempne, but also condempne such as do shewe
them those errours: be lyke vnto the Pharisies that
said to him that was borne blinde and had receyued
his 
                  •
               ight,Iohn. 9. of Christ, we know that God spake to Moyses,
but who this is (meaning Christe) we know not,
nor whence he commeth.
            74 Whether suche as for certeine opinions in religion
haue styrred vp horrible persecutions, & are become
so madde therein, that more crueltie cannot be

deuised: may not very wel, (if they wil acknowledge
their offence, confesse that they are the begynners &
authors of so outragious & mercilesse butcherie and
slaughter.
            75 Whether that saying of the Gospell (least haply
the Romaines come & take away oure place) Iohn
xj. do hytte iuste, such Kings and Princes, as will be
borne in hande, that if they receyue the gospell, it will
come to passe, that their people will rebel and not be
obedient.
            76 Whether that whiche Paule speaking of the
doctrines of Diuelies, whiche he in spirite foresawe
shoulde arise, do serue right for the Papists? who for
their tradicions,1. Tim. 4. slea, and in sundry sortes do torment
men, which is the very nature of Sathan▪ who is delyted
with murther and blonde, and whether the Protestants
who persecute not their enimies, are not
much to be preferred before the Papists, especially
syth they haue both strongth and rychesse, wherewith
if they were so disposed they might shew violence and
crueltie as the Papists do.
            77 Whether the Pope in this of all other the most
pestilent tyme of warres, calling his Cardinalles and

                  •
               hieflye the Frenche to Rome, for a counsell (as the
show is made) to be holden, d
                  •
               o penly mocke y• world,
syth in tyme of peace he made no maner mention of a
Counsell, and now he doth it bycause he séeth & knoweth
that it is impossible to call them togyther, & especially
syth he vsed the selfe same fyne fetche, the last
warres now past.
            78 Whether the olde and newe Testament did
euery where of it, beate into mennes heades, or commaunde
suche maner of Articles, as the Sorbonistes
               
of Parys of late yeares made and caused 
                  〈…〉
               
by Parlamēt, whether the same diuines wo
                  •••
               
forbydde that the Bible shoulde not be printed in th
                  ••
               
french tongue.
            79 Whether the Sorbones of Parys, (who as it is
sayde wrote to the Pope, and grieuously complayned
that in restoring and vpholding their Church, which
was about to fall, and would very shortly haue lyen in
the dust, they were forsaken by those that should moste
chiefly haue holpen them) deserue that punyshmente,
that in tymes past, Bede the Diuine had.
            80 Whether ye same Diuines, (in despite of whom
though they gayne sayd it as loude as they could cry,
the french king willed and commaunded the Bible to
be translated, printed, and set abroade in the vulgare
tongue) may not now be affearde, that their king conceyueth
an euill opinion of them, and thinke that they
(bycause they went about by a thousande s
                  •
               eights and
deuises to hinder so Godly and necessary a worke)
are in breding some monster, and that they can not abyde
the truth: especially sith the saide king is not ignoraunt,
howe grieuously they tooke it a fewe yeares
past, when by his bountifull liberalitie, professours of
dyuers tongues were instituted and appointed: & that
he heareth not often tymes as occasions serue, what
trouble & busynesse these vnlearned & witlesse doltes,
put the good & the learned men vnto, which Asses whē
they write or speake any thing, do cause
all men to scorne, and make
men lothe and also abhorre
them.
         
      
      
         
            Imprinted at London by William Seres
Cum priuilegio ad imprimendum solum.
            
            
         
      
   