
      
         
            
            
               
THE WARRES OF CYrus King of Perſia, againſt Antiochus King of Aſſyria, with the Tragicall ende of Panthaea.
            Played by the children of her Maieſties Chappell.
            
            LONDON Printed by E. A. for William Blackwal, and are to be ſold at his ſhop ouer againſt Guild-hall gate. 1594.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               
The warres of Cyrus king of Perſia againſt Antiochus king of Aſsiria.
            
               Enter Cyrus, Hiſtaſpas, Ch
                     •
                  yſandus, with other.
               
                  Cyrus.
                  
                     YE Perſians, Medians, and Hircanians,
                  Truſtie aſsiſtans, aſsiſters in this happie war,
                  Ye ſee the banded power of Aſia,
                  Whoſe number ouerſpread the Aſsirian fields
                  And in their paſſage dranke maine riuers drie,
                  By fauour of the gods, and our deuoire,
                  Are ouerthrowne and ſcattred through the plaines,
                  Like Autumne leaues before a Northren winde.
                  Creſus is foild, and fled to Lydia,
                  The Arabian prince is whelmde amidſt the ſands,
                  And laſt, the old Aſsyrian king is ſlaine.
                  Now triumph in the fortune of your hands,
                  Whoſe fame hath directed theſe affaires.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  O Cyrus when I ſaw the Lydian king▪
                  
                  
                     Creſus that daſtard and reproch of Aſia,
                  Shining in armour forgde of Indian gold.
                  Braue mounted on a prauncer of Eperus,
                  So ſhamefully to forſake the field and flie,
                  I enuied that ſo cowardly a king,
                  Should vſe ſo good an armour and a horſe.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  
                     Chriſandas, like to Creſus be our foes,
                  
                     
Glorious in ſhew, but cowardly in minde.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  
                     Cyrus thoſe armes which daſtard Creſus were,
                  And horſe of pride and courage paſt compare,
                  What heart ſo baſe that would deme to fight,
                  Might I but liue to backe ſo braue a ſteed.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  
                     Creſus is gone, and gone with him his ſteed,
                  This wiſh of yours Chriſantas is in vaine,
                  But of two hundred horſes of mine owne,
                  Of gallant raſe and courage ſingular,
                  Take you the choiſe and furniture withall,
                  The bridles bit of maſsie ſiluer wrought,
                  The boſſes golde, the reynes of Perſian ſilke,
                  The ſaddles all embrodered purple worke,
                  Armde through with plates, with fine ingrauen golde,
                  And golden trappers dangling to the ground.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  So liue my Lord and flouriſh ſtill,
                  As I regard this honourable gift.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Now Lords we haue gotten the honor of the day
                  And with our feet trod downe the Thraſian pride,
                  While I doe ſacrifie for victorie,
                  and choſe the holy aultars of the gods,
                  Doe you betwixt the armies part the ſpoiles,
                  and glad our men with fruits of our conqueſt.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  What portion of the golde ſhall we reſerue
                  To be employed in your highneſſe vſe?
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  
                     Araſpas none for me, diuide it all,
                  It pleaſeth me to ſee my ſouldiers rich. Exit Cyrus.
                  
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  The Perſian horſ-men that did giue the charge
                  Shall haue fiue hundred talents for their ſhare.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  The Medians that did enforce the fight,
                  and ſeconded the Perſian men at armes,
                  Allot to them ſix hundred arming coates.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  The archers of Hercania ſerued ſo well,
                  as not to giue them paiment with the reſt,
                  Were open wrong to their approude deſerts.
               
               
                  
                  Chr.
                  You know that in the ſacking of Aſſyrians tents
                  we found three thouſand Scithians bowes in ſtore,
                  finiſht with quiuers readie to the field,
                  Let them be lotted to the Hercanians part.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  And truth Chriſantas you know well,
                  That bowes and quiuers gree with archers beſt,
                  
                     Cyrus himſelfe you ſee refuſeth golde,
                  And onely ſeekes to make his fellowes rich,
                  what reſtes amidſt the conquered ſpoiles,
                  wherein his highneſſe may be gratified?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis there is a proud Aſſyrian tent,
                  Wherein the king was wont to ſleepe and banket in,
                  I thinke if that were offered to his hands,
                  
                     Cyrus would take it in moſt gracious part.
               
               
                  Chr.
                  But is the pride and brauerie thereof,
                  worthie to be preſented to our Lord?
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Aſia hath not ſeene a richer priſe,
                  The couering is of blew Sydoman ſilke,
                  Imbrodered all with pearle and precious ſtones,
                  They glimmer brighter than the Sunne it ſelfe,
                  On euerie point of the pauilion,
                  There ſtandes a princely top of Phenix plumes,
                  which trickt with ſpangles and with ſiluer belies,
                  And euerie gentle murmur of the winde,
                  delights the day with euerie harmonie.
                  The ſtakes wherewith t'is faſtened to the ground,
                  are maſsie ſiluer of the pureſt proofe,
                  The ropes are all of chrimſon ſilke and golde,
                  Hung from the top with wreſts of Iuorie,
                  Vnder a Vine where Bacchus bruſeth grapes,
                  and twentie cubits houer in the leaues,
                  Beleeue me Lords, when I behold the thing,
                  The worke appearde ſo glorious to the eie.
               
               
                  Chr.
                  
                     Araſpas you deſcribe a princely thing▪
                  
                  Worthie to be preſented to a king.
               
               
                  
                  Hiſt.
                  And here is a tent, though far from ſuch a tent,
                  This ſhall be mine, the owner's fled or ſlaine,
               
               
                  Cri.
                  O beautie rare▪ and more than mortall ſhape,
                  What goddeſſe oweth this earthly tabernacle.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  
                     Nicaſia ſings while Panthra ſits and ſighes.
                  But ſinging ſings of Panthras wretchednes.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  What are ye Ladie?
               
               
                  Pan.
                  What I would not be.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  Faire you are, what would ye more?
               
               
                  Pan
                  I would be free.
                  Ye Perſian Lords I am a wofull dame.
                  Expoſed to wretchedneſſe and fortunes wrath,
                  And thus I haue reſolude you what I am▪
                  
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Ladie, the graces that adorne your preſence,
                  Deſerues a fortune milde as it your face.
                  But howſoeuer Fortune enuies you,
                  Yet we will vſe you honourable ſtill.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  You vſe me then but as you ought to doe.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  Nay Ladie we may vſe you otherwiſe,
                  For voluntarie fauours be no debt.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  But Lords what ere you ought is debt,
                  you ought to vſe me well, and therefore debt.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Madam, you are a captiue in our hands,
                  And captiues are not to command the conquerours.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  No Lords▪ if captiues might command the conquerors,
                  I would command you to releaſe me hence.
                  But captiue as I am▪ honour commands,
                  That you intreate and vſe me honourably.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  Such honour as to captiues doth belong,
                  Such honour Ladie we intend to you.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  My ſex requireth more then common grace.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  And eke ſo doth that liuely face.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Let be my vſage as ſhall pleaſe my conqueror,
                  And now Ile learne to craue with ſeruile tearmes.
                  My lords, though captiue, yet I am a Queene,
                  
                     
And wife vnto the abſent Suſan king.
                  My lord and heare Aſſyrian Abradate,
                  And noble prince and mightie man at armes.
                  Vpon ambaſſage of the king of Batria.
               
               
                  Chr.
                  But madam what perſuaſion moou'd your mind,
                  To thruſt your ſelf vnto the Aſsyrian campe.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Weying the double fortune of the warres,
                  And in my thoughts foredreading theſe miſhaps,
                  What likelier reſcue to preuent my harmes,
                  Then to be garded with a mightie campe,
                  Since that an armie of vnited hearts,
                  Is ſtronger then a fort af brazen walles.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Madam, your fa l is great and lamentable,
                  Thus of a Queene a captiue to become,
                  This reſts to ſhew your princely fortitude,
                  In bearing theſe miſhaps with patient minde▪
                  
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Philoſophy hath taught me to embrace,
                  A meane and moderation in miſhaps,
                  Long ſince I learnde to maſter all affects,
                  And perturbations that aſſaile the minde,
                  Onely I haue not learnde to maſter chaunce,
                  yet haue I learnde to ſcorne the vtmoſt ſpight▪
                  
                  Onely the pangue that moſt torments my thought,
                  Is abſence of my beſt beloued lord.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  Learne henceforth to forget your lord,
                  There liues an other lord to enioy your loue,
                  Victorious Cyrus he ſhall be your lord.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Victorious Cyrus though I be his thrall,
                  Shall know my honour is inuincible.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  But they that once in ſtate of bondage bee.
                  Muſt yeeld to heſt of others that be free.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Lords dreame of me or Cyrus as you pleaſe▪
                  
                  Onely this outward perſon is his thrall,
                  My minde and honour free and euer ſhall.
               
               
                  Chriſ.
                  For that agree with Cyrus as you may,
                  
                     
Till then Araſpas take her to your tent.
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Come Ladie, you muſt walke apart with me,
               
               
                  Pan.
                  So fortune and my deſtinies agree.
               
               Enter Gobrias and his page.
               
                  Go.
                  Perſians conduct me to your generall.
               
               
                  Chr.
                  What art thou that thus armde with ſword and ſpeare,
                  Dares craue acceſſe vnto our generall▪
                  
               
               
                  Go.
                  I come to yeeld, bring me to Cyrus tent.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  Thy habit ſhowes thou art an enemie,
                  And we may ſuſpect thou meaneſt but ill,
                  Therefore if thou wilt yeeld vnarme thy ſelfe,
                  And we will bring thee vnto Cyrus tent.
               
               
                  Go.
                  The Aſſyrian king whom ye haue put to death,
                  Making me leader of a thouſand horſe,
                  Buckled the armour with his gracious hands,
                  Nor ſhall it be vnlooſed but by asking.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  How hautie minded is this conquered man,
                  
                     Cyrus ſhall know vpon what tearmes he ſtandes.
                  Aſſyrian captaine as thou loueſt thy life,
                  Stand not vpon thy guard, but yeeld to vs.
               
               
                  Go.
                  Smal guard haue I to ſhield me from your ſwords,
                  Moſt of my region is ſlaine in fight,
                  And of a thouſand onely theſe are left,
                  Whoſe wounds yet bleeding proues thē faint & weak,
                  Yet rather will we runne vpon your ſpeares,
                  Then with diſhonour yeeld our weapons,
                  Theſe if ye iniure vs muſt be our friends,
                  And either make vs liue or die like men.
               
               Enter Cyrus.
               
                  Cyr.
                  Of whence art thou that craues acceſſe to vs?
               
               
                  Go.
                  By birth great Cyru: an Aſſyrian,
                  
                     
And of the nobleſt houſe in Babylon.
                  Sometime commander of a thouſand horſe,
                  But thoſe thy men haue ſlaughtered and ſurpriſed,
                  And therefore I haue loſt the ample ſhle,
                  yet I am mighty Gobrias, rich in reuenues, ſtrong in fortreſſes
                  That can command a campe of fighting men,
                  As reſolute (be it ſaid without offence)
                  As thoſe that had theglorie of the day▪
                  
                  All which with me the gouernor of all,
                  I yeeld vnto your mightie patronage.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  This ſtout Aſſyrian hath a liberall looke,
                  And of my ſoule is farte from trecherie,
                  Albeit Gobrias I miſtruſt thee not,
                  yet tell me being ſo wealthie and ſo ſtrong,
                  Why rather yeeldſt thou to thy enimie,
                  Then liue with freedome in Aſſyria,
               
               
                  Gob.
                  O know my lord, whileſt the Aſſyrian king,
                  Which in this warre was ſlaine, enioyed the crowne,
                  Being highly fauoured of his maieſtie,
                  He ſent vnto me for mine onely ſonne,
                  Meaning to grace me with the nuptiall,
                  Of his faire daughter louely Carmela.
                  
                  I glad to haue alyance with the king,
                  Sent him my ſonne. Who comming to the court,
                  Was faire entreated, gently entertained,
                  And well was he that might he his copere,
                  For faire he was and full of ſweete demeanour.
                  Pleaſant, ſharpe, wiſe and liberall,
                  And were he not my ſonne, I would ſay more,
                  Though his remembrance makes me weepe outright.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Noble Aſſyrian either leaue to weepe,
                  Or ſpeake no more▪ 
                     Cyrus is full of ruth,
                  And when a man of thy eſtate laments,
                  He cannot chuſe but weepe for companie,
                  Drie vp theſe teares and tell the reſt.
               
               
                  
                  Gob.
                  Began to grow familiar with my ſonne,
                  And with him rode a hunting in the woods,
                  where firſt the hounds put vp a ruſſet beare,
                  At which the king floong ſoone his hunting dart,
                  And miſſed▪ But mine threw and pearced his heart.
                  Then ſodainly a Lion did ariſe,
                  At whom likewiſe he let his Iauelin flie,
                  And hit him not: which when my ſonne perceyude,
                  He ouerthrew the Lion as the beare.
                  which done, ſaid he, twice haue I throwne and ſped,
                  whereat the prince ſnatcht from his page a ſpeare,
                  And in a rage murdered my guiltleſſe ſonne.
                  And that (which greeues me more) when he was dead,
                  Albeit the old king wept m oſt bitterly,
                  He neither did repent nor ſhed a teare,
                  Nor would conſent to giue him buriall,
                  but left him in the field vntill I came,
                  And tooke his bodie in theſe aged armes,
                  which eke for griefe made me to let him fall,
                  And then a freſh made him to bleed againe,
                  And me to weepe vpon his haked breaſt,
                  Oh iudge my lord, if you haue had a ſonne,
                  How heauily I brooke his timeleſſe death.
                  Oh iudge my lord, whether that I haue cauſe
                  To offer ſeruice to that murtherer,
                  On whom I cannot looke, but in his face
                  as in a glaſſe I ſee my ſlaughtered ſonne.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  
                     Gobrius thou haſt iuſt cauſe to reuolt,
                  And we to truſt thy welcome vnto vs,
                  And for the thouſand horſe which thou haſt loſt,
                  we will requite them with a greater gift,
                  be thou lieutenant of the Archaniaus.
               
               
                  Gob.
                  I humblie thanke your royall maieſtie,
                  And here in preſence of the Perſian lords,
                  adopt you heire of all my prouinces,
                  
                     
My holdes and caſtels, villages and townes,
                  Conditionally that I may be reuenged,
                  On this archtyrant murderer of my ſonne.
                  Sauing one daughter I haue neuer a child,
                  And ſhe endued with iewels, plate and golde,
                  ſhall be beſtowed as you my lord thinke beſt.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Aſſirian I haue captaines worthie here,
                  She ſhall be matched as beſeemes a princes borne,
                  And for reuenge vpon the Aſsirian king,
                  We will girt in Babylon with our high hoſt,
                  Or either ſtarue them with a lingring ſiege,
                  Or rip his bowels with our Perſian ſwords,
                  But in the meane time ſrolicke in our tent,
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis lead the Aſsyrian to our campe.
                  And entertaine him as beſeemeth a prince,
                  
                     Armuchus and Chriſantus follow him.
                  
                     Araſpas, as I lately gaue in charge
                  Is all the ſpoile diuided equally?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  It is my Lord, and euerie ſouldier pleaſed,
                  Where is encloſed a iewell of ſuch worth,
                  As Aſia hardly can affoord the like▪
                  
                  The Suſian king ſtout Abradates Queene,
                  A woman ſo richly imbelliſhed
                  with beautie and perfection of the minde,
                  As neuer any mortall creature was.
                  Her haire as radiant as is Tagis ſand,
                  And ſofter than the ſtreame on which it runnes.
                  Her lillie cheekes all died with ruddie bluſh,
                  Caſtes ſuch reflection to the ſtanders by,
                  As doth the vnion of ten thouſand ſunnes.
                  Through her tranſparant necke the aire doth play,
                  And makes it fairer then a Chriſtall glaſſe,
                  And from her eyes it ſeemes nature herſelfe,
                  Bids euerie▪ ſtarre receiue his proper light.
                  For with her glaunce ſhe caſteth ſuch a brightneſſe,
                  
                     
As makes the night more brighter than the day.
                  And day more fairer than is Eliziur.
                  But when ſhe talkes ſo pleaſant is her voice,
                  As were ſhe blacker then the pitchie night,
                  She would entiſe the hardeſt maſſagite.
                  Or wildeſt Scythian in your highneſſe campe.
                  And when ſhe lookes vpon you, were ſhe dumbe
                  Her beautie were in ſtead of eloquence.
                  And had ſhe neither louelineſſe nor wit,
                  The harmonie ſhe makes would rauiſh you,
                  She weepes and plaies while both her handmaids ſing.
                  And ſighes at euerie ſtraine vſing that note,
                  Which Orpheus ſings for Eruditus.
                  with wringed hands her waiting maids keepe time,
                  Vpon their mournefull breaſts, as were we flint,
                  we could not chuſe but melt to heare their ſongs,
                  wherefore my lord comfort this captiue dame.
                  And with your preſence comfort her diſtreſſe.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  
                     Araſpas wouldeſt thou haue me viſit her,
                  when by her beautie I may be enthralled?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Your Grace may looke on her, and yet not loue.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Doſt thou not thinke that loue is violent?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Nay rather voluntarie my gracious lord,
                  you know that womans beautie is like fire,
                  And fire doth alwayes burne each thing alike,
                  Therefore if nature were of ſuch great power,
                  Should euerie man by beautie be enflamed?
                  But beautious things are not in equall powers,
                  For ſome loue that which others do abſtaine.
                  Either for feare or loue, to proue this true,
                  The ſiſter of the brother is not loued,
                  The daughter of the father not deſired,
                  And yet ſome one loues any of them both.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  If loue be voluntarie as thou ſaieſt,
                  why cannot louers leaue it when they will?
               
               
                  
                  Ara.
                  They may.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Haue you not ſeene them weepe and waile for death?
                  Emptie their purſe of coine, their braine of wit,
                  Sending both gifts and letters to their loues?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  They yeeld too much vnto affections.
                  T'is follie and not beautie makes them die.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Men are in folly when they are in loue,
                  Vrge me no more, I will not viſite her.
                  For by the eie loue ſlips into the heart,
                  Making men idle, negligent.
                  Nothing can more diſhonour warriours,
                  Then to be conquered with a womans looke.
                  
                     Araſpas I reſigne my part to thee,
                  Thou ſhalt be keeper of that Suſan Queene,
                  Vſe her as fits a woman of ſuch birth▪
                  
                  Excuſe me for not comming to her tent,
                  Bid her be merrie with her ſinging maides,
                  And ſay that Cyrus will entreate her faire. Exeunt.
                  
               
               Muſicke. Finis Actus primi.
            
            
               Enter Cteſifon and Nobles.
               
                  Nob.
                  
                     Antiochus king of Aſsiria,
                  So Lord of Euphrates and Babylon,
                  How long wilt thou lament thy fathers death?
                  Caſt off thoſe mourning weedes.
               
               
                  Anot.
                  How long will I lament my fathers death?
                  Vntill proud Perſia weepe for Cyrus death.
               
               
                  Cteſ.
                  Oh that will neuer be, Cyrus is ſtrong,
                  So ſtrong my Lord, that were not Babylon,
                  Fortifyed with vittailes for twentie yeeres,
                  Garded with ſouldiers that will neuer yeeld.
                  Sooner would he expell you from your ſeate,
                  Then you with open armes could anger him.
               
               
                  
                  Ant.
                  What is reuenge but open warres,
                  As were Antiochus a priuate man,
                  And one of you king of Aſſyria,
                  I would not faile to worke his ouerthrow,
                  But you that are not toucht with inward griefe,
                  will not in that attempt be reſolute.
               
               
                  Ct ſ.
                  Vouchſafe O Lord to tell me what it is,
                  If I attempt it not then let me die.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Why this it is, feigne I haue iniurde thee,
                  And offer ſeruice to the Perſian king.
                  Then being receiued as late Gobrias was,
                  How eaſſie maiſt thou ſlea him and eſcape.
                  For in the night he walkes about his campe,
                  Without a guard euen as a common man.
               
               
                  Cteſ.
                  Yet he that killes him ſuer is to die.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  I thought the feare of death woulde daunt him quite
                  A thouſand talents would I freely giue,
                  To him that vndertakes this enterpriſe.
               
               
                  Cteſ.
                  My Lord I am reſolude, giue me the gold.
                  And I will venture life in this exploit.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  My treaſurer at armes ſhall giue it thee,
                  And Ctiſifon when I receiue his head,
                  Beſide this ſumme thou ſhalt haue annuall pay,
                  As much as thy reuenues mount vnto,
                  And where thou art by calling but a knight,
                  Ile make thee Lord of many prouinces.
               
               
                  Cteſ.
                  As for the gold keepe it till I returne,
                  and if I die deliuer it to my friend.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Well Cteſiphon manage this glorious act,
                  Let me embrace him ere I take my leaue.
               
               
                  Cteſ.
                  Fare well my lord▪ Now you Aſſyrian gods,
                  To whom we ſacrifice our ſo-mens blood,
                  Giue fauour to my lookes, faith to my ſpeach,
                  That being gracious with the Perſian Lord,
                  By me Aſſyria may be free from bands,
                  
                     
And both the king and ſubiects death reuengde.
               
               
                  Nob,
                  Fare well braue minded Cteſiphon.
                  
               
               
                  Ant.
                  While this is doing we will march from hence,
                  Vnto the countrey where Gobrias dwelt,
                  He hath a caſtell well repleniſhed,
                  with vittailes, men and furniture,
                  And as our ſpies giues vs to vnderſtand,
                  His onely daughter ſtayes within the hold,
                  Not knowing of her fathers late reuolt,
                  Therefore will we ſurpriſe her vnawares,
                  and thou ſhalt be lieutenant in his ſtead,
                  when we haue made his ſouldiers yeeld the fort.
               
               Enter Araſpas ſolus.
               
                  Ara.
                  Muſt I confeſſe that loue is violent.
                  By doting on my captiue Panthea,
                  
                  I will not loue, Ile bridle thoſe affects.
                  It cannot be reſiſted, I muſt yeeld,
                  Oh what a tyrant is this cruel loue,
                  That drinkes my blood, and makes me pale and wan,
                  That ſucks my ſpirits, and makes me weake and faint,
                  That teares my heart, and makes me almoſt dead.
                  That reuels in my braines and makes me mad.
                  I am a ſouldier, and will conquer loue,
                  Ile mount me ſtraight▪ giue me a horſ-mans ſtaffe,
                  Proud loue, ſit faſt, for now Araſpas runnes,
                  Runne, and ſcarcely ſtand: O Panthea,
                  
                  Thou ſets my idle fantaſie thus a worke,
                  and makes me ſpeake and thinke I know not what.
                  I would I might forget faire Panthea,
                  
                  I cannot name her but I muſt ſay faire,
                  And that word faire makes me remember her.
                  
                     Panthea is vglie, blacke, ill fauoured, fowle,
                  And who is ſo beautifull as ſhe?
                  
                     
And I muſt weepe for this miſterming her,
                  Why ſhould I weepe? aske I the reaſon whie?
                  I haue abuſde my loue, weepe not but die.
                  Die not but liue and enioy thy loue.
                  What contrarietie conſiſteth in my words.
                  O reconcile them, louely Panthea.
                  
                  Thy lookes hath made me lunatike.
               
               Enter Panthea and Nicaſia.
               
                  Pan.
                  I haue intelligence that our Lord is ſicke,
                  we come to comfort him as captiues may.
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Oh welcome Panthea, ſhall I tell my griefe?
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Sit ſtill my Lord,
                  why change you colour thus, what troubles you?
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Something ſtands by and whiſpers in my eare,
                  A kiſſe of Panthea will recouer me.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  O leaue theſe idle words, they make you worſe
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Nay they recouer me, I am halfe well.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  So ſay they that are going from the world.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  
                     Panthea ſit downe, but ſit ſo Panthea,
                  
                  As I may view thy face, or elſe I die.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  
                     Nicaſia commaund the muſicke play,
                  It may be muſicke will alay the ſit.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  
                     Nicaſia cauſe the muſicke ceaſe, Muſick plaies.
                  
                  For it is harſh and mars the harmonie,
                  Come Panthea ſit downe by me, and let vs talke.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Talke is naught, turne ye about and ſleepe.
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Oh loue?
               
               
                  Pan.
                  How now my Lord, a ſouldier and loue-ſicke?
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  I cannot keepe it in, it bruſts my heart,
                  For thee ſweete Panthea is Araſpas ſicke.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  For me, my Lord.
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Fling not away, celeſtiall Panthea,
                  
                  Though I were halfe dead I ſhould follow thee.
               
               
                  
                  Pan.
                  The aire will hurt thee, whither wilt thou go.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Where Panthea goes, oh frowne not my faire loue.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Then loue me not, elſe I will more then frowne.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  What will a captiue woman threat her loue.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Oh giue poore Panthea leaue to thret her ſelfe.
                  I meane my Tragedie ſhall end the loue.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  No louely Queene▪ Ile rather end my loue▪
                  
                  Then anger Panthea, much leſſe lether die,
                  And yet God knowes my loue can neuer end,
                  Being infinite in meaſure and in time.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  What wordes bee theſe that cut my eares with griefe,
                  Oh Abradates little doſt thou know,
                  What miſerie poore Panthea doth ſuſtaine,
                  wicked Araſpas periſh in thy loue. Exit Panthea▪
                     
                  
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Cannot I winne her, O vnhappie man?
                  
                     Araſpas thou wantſt eloquence to wooe,
                  Againſt chaſtitie no eloquence preuailes,
                  It was becauſe I offered her no gift,
                  She is a Queene what gifts can compaſſe her,
                  I ſhould haue courted her with better words,
                  But here doth loue and threatning diſagree,
                  Nothing but Magicke can obtaine her loue,
                  If Magicke will, then Panthea ſhall be mine.
               
            
            
               Actus ſecundus.
               Enter Hiſtaſpis and Chriſantas.
               
                  Hiſt.
                  
                     Chriſantas, when I looke into the life,
                  The maners▪ deeds, and qualities of minde,
                  The graueneſſe power, and imperiall parts,
                  wherewith yong Cyrus is ſo full adornde,
                  My thoughts foreſee that he is ordained of God,
                  To enlarge the limits of the Perſian raigne.
               
               
                  Chr.
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis, rare it is to ſee thoſe yeeres,
                  So furniſhed with ſuch rare experience,
                  As is not common in the grayeſt haires.
                  Beſides his bodie hath of theſe rare gifts,
                  
                     
Vſed to labour, hunger, thirſt and colde,
                  Giues true foretokens that the prince will proue,
                  A famous warriour and a conquerour.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  And of the ſundry vertues that abounds
                  Dayly increaſing in her princely breaſt,
                  Religion to the gods exceedes them all.
               
               
                  Chr.
                  And reaſon good for of all humane workes.
                  The care of them ſhould chieflie be preferred.
                  Enter Cyrus.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Is this Aſſyrian friend or fo to vs?
                  That dares approch ſo neare the Perſian campe.
               
               
                  Cte.
                  In bending of my ſpeare to Babylon,
                  And breaking it againſt the Aſſyrian ground,
                  I came a friend, not foe to Cyrus campe.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  What reaſon moues thee an Aſſyrian borne.
                  To beare ſuch rancour to thy countrey ſoyle.
               
               
                  Cte.
                  That ſecret I reſerue for Cyrus eares,
                  Vnto whoſe ſecret fauour, I ſubmit
                  My perſon, honour, fortune, fame and life,
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  Informe the king certainly I will,
                  O Perſians truely fortunate are you,
                  Vnder ſubiection of ſo ſweete a prince,
                  That meaſures all the actions of his life,
                  By mercie, iuſtice, and reſpect of right.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  It ſeemes th' Aſſyrian prince hath iniured this man,
                  with ſome notorious great indignitie.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Man of Aſſyria, what wouldeſt thou with me?
               
               
                  Cte.
                  O gracious Lord great and inuincible,
                  Receiue into protection of your grace,
                  A wretched man vndone by tyrannie,
                  And lawleſſe rigour of a cruell prince,
               
               
                  Cy.
                  What prince is he that thou accuſeſt thus?
               
               
                  Cte▪
                  
                  The new Aſſyrian king, a man diſtainde
                  
                     
With endleſſe markes of villanie and blood.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Diſcend vnto the purpoſe of thy tale,
                  And make thy ſtate and fortune plaine a
                        ••…
                     nce
               
               
                  Cte.
                  I am, (I am ſaid I) I was a man,
                  Earſt noble, now baniſht reprobate,
                  Highlie in fauour with the Aſſyrian prince,
                  Till ſenſuall rage of his vnbrideled luſt,
                  Did lay my ſtate and honour in the duſt,
                  And thus great Lord begun my Tragedie,
                  One onely virgin daughter had your thrall,
                  Of yeares inclining now to mariage ſtate,
                  Her face and beautie (if I ſeeme not vaine)
                  were equall to the beſt Aſſyrian dames,
                  And ſhe ſuppoſde the flower of Babylon.
                  The bruite of which her rare perfections ran,
                  Swifter than Fame through all th' Aſſyrian land,
                  And laſtly reſted in the princes eares,
                  Who wounded with report of beauties pride,
                  Vnable to reſtraine his derne deſire,
                  A trended by a band of armed men,
                  Inuades my caſtell when I was at reſt,
                  And bare my daughter thence with violate hands,
                  Vnto his pallace where ſhe doth remaine,
                  As concubine allotted to his bed.
                  Striuing her deſperate honour to preſerue,
                  I came in frantike ſort to Babylon,
                  Exclaiming on this villainous deſpite,
                  Banding the prince with many a bitter view,
                  My iuſt complaints when once he vnderſtood,
                  He ſortes me out a damned bloudie crew,
                  Of ruſtians, ſwearers, murderers, and theeues,
                  Profeſſed men for gaine and lucre ſake,
                  To make no conſcience whom they ſlay and kill,
                  Thoſe men by ſolemne othe had vowed my life,
                  A ſacrifice vnto their curſed ſwordes,
                  
                     
And houre by houre they ſought to reaue my ſoule,
                  Liuing in hazard of continuall death,
                  I knew no ho
                        •…
                     e for me at Babylon,
                  Other then my graue and dumleſſe ſepulchre,
                  And ſo for refuge to my wretched life,
                  I h
                        •
                     ue abandoned countrey, friends and all,
                  And proſtrate my eſtate at Cyrus feete,
                  O puiſſant Lord whoſe great and conquering ſworde,
                  was forgde by Mars and made for victorie,
                  Protect the life of thy vnhappie thrall,
                  And make him follower of the Perſianarmes,
                  That in the fortune of thy mightie hand,
                  The fall of Cteſiphon may be reuengde.
               
               
                  Gob.
                  O Cteſiphon this tale of thine reuiues
                  The wofull memorie of my deareſt ſonne,
                  Slaughtered by that moſt barbarous tyrant hand.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  
                     Gobrias ye haue heard the Aſſyrian tale.
                  What great complaints he makes againſt the prince,
                  And thoſe not cauſeleſſe if his wordes be true,
                  Now Cyrus is not raſhly credulous,
                  Nor bindes his faith on euerie ſtrangers vowes.
                  Tell me Gobrias, doſt thou ſimplie thinke,
                  That this diſcourſe is naught but naked truth,
                  Or elſe ſome forged or diſſembled gloſe,
                  To ſound our ſecrets, and bewray our drifts.
               
               
                  Go.
                  
                     Cyrus the diſpoſition of this prince▪
                  
                  Solde vp and ſworne to endleſſe villanies,
                  May proue the griefes of Cteſiphon vnfained,
                  Vpon my conſcience Cyrus truſt the man,
                  No doubt his ſorrow and complaints are true.
               
               
                  Cte.
                  O Cyrus ſo it pleaſde the immortall Gods,
                  How happie were thy ſeruant, if his words
                  proceeded from a vaine diſſembling tongue,
                  So were my daughters honor vndefiled,
                  And Cteſiphon her father not exiled.
               
               
                  
                  Cyr.
                  Be valiant Cteſiphon and follow me,
                  Follow the fortune of a haphie campe,
                  Not doubt thou, but thou ſhalt ſee the ende,
                  Shall rue the ininries of his barbarous life,
                  Among the damned ſoules in darkeſt hell.
               
               
                  Cte.
                  Then ſhould my ghoſt with ſeaſeleſſe wordes oppreſt.
                  Paſſe and diſcend into the graue in reſt.
                  Exeunt omnes.
                  To the audience.
                  We gentle gentlemen deuiſe of late,
                  To ſhunne the vulgar and the vertuous,
                  Preſent to you worthie to iudge of vs,
                  Our workes of woorth and valiantnes at once.
                  What wants in vs imagin in the workes,
                  What in the workes condemne the writer of,
                  But if the worke and writing pleaſe you both,
                  That Zenophon from whence we borrow write,
                  Being both a ſouldier and philoſopher,
                  Warrants what we record of Panthea,
                  
                  It is writ in ſad and tragicke tearmes,
                  May moue you teares then you content, our muſe
                  That ſeemes to trouble you againe with toies
                  Or needleſſe antickes imitations,
                  Or ſhewes, or new deuiſes ſprung a late,
                  we haue exilde them from our I ragicke ſtage,
                  As traſh of their tradition, that can bring
                  nor inſtance, nor excuſe. For what they do
                  In ſtead of mournefull plaints our Chorus ſings,
                  Although it be againſt the vp ſtart guiſe,
                  Yet warranted by graue antiquitie▪
                  
                  we will reuiue the which hath long beene done.
                  Exit.
               
               
                  
Enter Alexandra like a page, Libanio in Alexandras apparell.
               
                  Lib.
                  Madame you ſee your page doth vndertake,
                  A coſtly peece of ſeruice for your ſake,
                  For well that ſeruice coſtly may be called,
                  The ende whereof of force muſt coſt my life,
                  For when th' Aſſyrian king ſhall vnderſtand
                  My forged habit, and diſſembling ſex,
                  And in theſe female weedes ſhall find Libanio,
                  
                  And Alexandra freely ſcapt his handes,
                  What hope but certaine death remaines for me,
                  And that with torments rare and exquiſite.
                  Yet madame for the reuerence to my Lord,
                  And dutie that doth bind me to your ſelfe,
                  I will be Alexandra for this once,
                  and die to ſaue your honour and your life.
               
               
                  Alex.
                  O truſtie ſeruant, ſeruant of ſurmounting faith,
                  Worthie to attend the perſon of a god,
                  Rather then daughter of poore Gobrias,
                  
                  This ſacred ſeruice to a ſillle dame,
                  Shall be ingrauen in tables of my heart,
                  with letters and charecters ſo perfourmde▪
                  
                  That when this bodie is beſtowde in graue,
                  No time nor yet corruption ſhall deface,
                  The print thereof from Alexandras breaſt.
               
               
                  Lab.
                  Thankes Ladie, And for your further meede,
                  Sufficeth me the honour of the deede.
                  Me thinkes I ſee the Aſſyrian ſtout at hand,
                  Now madame carie a couragious heart,
                  And truſt your page for Alexandras part.
               
               
                  Alex.
                  A Tragicall part I feare Libanio.
                  
               
               Enter Antiocbus, Seleueus, Critobulus with others.
               
                  
                  Ant.
                  Bird of a traitor I preſumde at laſt,
                  Your lot would be to light into my handes,
                  Although of cankred heart you would not yeeld,
                  Vntill your caſtell ſhaked about your eares.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  O ſouereigne Lord ſtand gracious to this dame,
                  That neuer treſpaſt in offence to you.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Thy fathers treaſon in reuolting backe,
                  From due alleageance to th Aſſyrian crowne,
                  I will reuenge vpon his daughters life.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  What honour in a ſillie virgins death?
                  That nere had power or will to harme your grace.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Becauſe the plants of ſuch corrupted ſtockes,
                  wil fructifie according to the roote,
                  And for Gobrias treaſon to his prince,
                  I will preuent like miſchifes in his raſe.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  Admit Gobrias might be reclaimed,
                  Vnto his firſt allegiance to my Lord,
                  Would you remit the offence of his reuolt,
                  And take him to your former grace againe?
               
               
                  Ant.
                  So let the gods ſtand gracious to my ſoule,
                  If he forſake thoſe hatefull Perſian armes,
                  And firme his faith and loyaltie to me.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  Then prince before you wreake reuenge on me,
                  Grand paſſeport and ſafe conduite to my page,
                  That he may goe and ſignifie to him,
                  The deſperate ſtate wherein his daughter ſtandes,
                  When once my father ſhall perceiue my plight,
                  And that my life muſt pay for his reuolt,
                  I know that inſtant houre he will returne,
                  And yeeld himſelfe to mercie of my Lord.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Scribe giue her page ſafe conduct through my campe,
                  And boy when you ariue before Gobrias,
                  
                  Tell if he returne I pardon him,
                  If other wiſe, off goes his daughters head.
               
               
                  Alex.
                  I will dread Lord: O madam grant the gods▪
                  
                  
                     
Theſe eyes once more may ſee your libertie.
                  Exit Alexander.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  As pleaſeth their dieties Libanio.
                  
               
               
                  Ant.
                  
                     Dinon take you this damſell to your charge,
                  And vſe her noblie though ſhe be a thrall.
               
               
                  Dinon.
                  To vſe her worſe the honour were but ſmall.
                  Exeunt omnes.
               
               Enter Cteſiphon.
               
                  Cte.
                  I murther Cyrus, farre be ſuch a thought,
                  Much more the execution of the deed,
                  Like as the Sunne beames to the gazers eye,
                  So is his view to daunted Cteſiphon,
                  
                  During the rancor of my wicked minde,
                  And melting all in thoughts of ſweet remorce,
                  How wiſe and gracious is this Perſian king,
                  Who by his wiſdome winnes his followers hearts,
                  Letting them march in armour wrought with gold,
                  And he girt in a coate of complete ſteele.
                  O Cyrus politique and liberall,
                  How honourable and magnanimious?
                  Rewarding vertue, and reuenging wrongs,
                  How full of temperance and fortitude,
                  Daring to menace Fortune with his ſworde,
                  Yet mercifull in all his victories, Enter Cyrus.
                  
                  See where he comes, Ile falle vpon the ground,
                  And aske for pardon at his highneſſe feet.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Riſe vp Aſſyrian, Cyrus is no God.
               
               
                  Cte.
                  O Cyrus, know Antiochus my Lord,
                  My Lord, ſaid I, no I will renounce him quite,
                  Subornd me wretch with his perſuaſious wordes,
                  To doe a deed of ſuch impietie,
                  As I God knowes ſuborne to thinke vpon,
                  It was thy death victorious Cyrus,
                  But mightie Lord your vertues conquered me,
                  And or an enemie falſe and trecherous,
                  
                     
Am I become a vowed friend to Cyrus health,
                  And in that reſolution preſt to die.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Liue long to waile for thy pretended ill,
                  As free from puniſhment as for reward,
                  The liues of kings are garded by the gods,
                  Nor are they in the hands of mortall men,
                  Aſſyrian, though thy ſword were at my breaſt,
                  The gealous angell that attends on vs,
                  Would ſnatch it from thy hands, and fling it downe.
                  And therefore muſe not at this accident.
               
               
                  Cte.
                  Seeing knightly Cyrus is thus mercifull,
                  Vouchſafe this ſeruice at thy vaſſals hands,
                  Giue me but letters from your Maieſtie,
                  To ſignifie how faine you would haue peace,
                  And draw your legions from Aſſyria,
                  And bearing them vnto Antiochus,
                  
                  In the deliuerie I will murther him.
                  So highly do I honour Cyrus name,
                  So vildlie thinke on baſe Antiochus.
                  
               
               Enter Gobrias with Alexandra.
               
                  Cyr.
                  Thou ſhalt haue letters to th' Aſſyrian king,
                  Free libertie to paſſe from this our campe,
                  And conduit monie from our Treaſurie.
                  Attend our leyſure, I will ſend thee ſtraight.
                  What virgin is it that Gobrias leades?
               
               
                  Go.
                  My daughter mightie Cyrus, and your child,
                  For I commit her to your patronage.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Then princely virgin welcom to our campe.
                  But why ſigh you, why hang you downe the head?
                  And in your pale lookes burie beauties pride,
                  T'is pitie theſe lookes ſhould be ſtainde with teares.
               
               
                  Alex,
                  Euen as a doue late rifeled by the Eagle,
                  Whoſe breaſt is tainted with his forked talents,
                  So ſtands poore Alexandra terrified.
                  
                     
And almoſt dead to think of her eſcape,
                  If thou be Cyrus of whom Aſia rings,
                  Reſcue, O reſcue poore Libanio.
                  
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  From whom faire madame ſhould I reſcue him,
               
               
                  Alex.
                  O from Antiochus that bloodie king.
                  Who when he heard my father ſerude your grace,
                  Beſiegde his fortreſſe with his men at armes,
                  Where onely I and that Libanio ſtaide.
                  By whom I liue▪ For when the hold was loſt,
                  He being bondman and of a baſer birth,
                  would needes conſtraine me to put on his weedes,
                  And he diſguiſde as I was woont to go,
                  would be Gobrias daughter in my ſtead,
                  And ſo was thought of king Antiochus.
                  and all the nobles of his warlike campe,
                  But I abondman and at his requeſt,
                  whoſe care was onely to preſerue my life,
                  Sent hither as a meſſenger from him,
                  To will my father whom they thought my Lord,
                  To leaue your campe, and come to Babylon,
                  Or elſe Libanio his beloued childe
                  ſhould die for his ſo traitorlike reuolt,
                  And die he muſt, leaſt Gyrus giue him life.
               
               
                  Cyr,
                  The deed was full of honor and deceit,
                  If gold will pay his raunſome, he ſhall liue,
                  And therefore Alexandra be not ſad.
               
               
                  Gob▪
                  
                  So ſhall Gobrias beat Cyrus becke,
                  And for his ſake make lauiſh of his blood.
               
               
                  Alex.
                  And when they know how he deluded them,
                  I feare theyle rate his raunſome at his head.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Then blood and death Bellonas waiting maid,
                  ſhall ghaſtly marchin Babylons waſte ſtreetes,
                  And neuer was a bondmans death reuengde,
                  as Cyrus meanes for this Libanio.
                  
                  Exit omnes.
               
               
                  
Enter Araſpas, and a Magitian, to Panthea aſleepe.
               
                  Ara.
                  Giue me the charme, for now doth Panthea ſleep
                  If it preuaile this iewell ſhall be thine,
               
               
                  Mag.
                  Doubt not the operation of this charme,
                  For I haue tride it on Dianas nymph,
                  And made her wanton and laſciuious,
                  If Panthea be a Goddeſſe ſhe muſt yeeld.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  But tell me firſt, how muſt it be applied?
                  And in what time will it begin to worke?
               
               
                  Mag.
                  Lay it vnder the pillow of her bed,
                  and in an houre it will make her wake and yeeld.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  I will. Now fauour me infernall Joue.
                  
               
               
                  Mag.
                  So, wake her not till ſhe begins to ſmile,
                  Now loue begins to ſeate him in her braine.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  A way I will not, you are impudent.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Tell me Magitian, what importes this ſpeech?
               
               
                  Mag,
                  Why now ſhe thinkes ſome ſolicites her.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  You are deceiude, I am not beautifull.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  O giue me leaue to court her in her ſleepe,
                  It may be when ſhe wakes ſhe will not loue?
               
               
                  Mag.
                  Softly Araſpas, if you talke, ſhe wakes.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  O let her wake, I long to talke with her.
               
               
                  Mag.
                  Now ginnes her eyes to open, and ſhe ſtirres.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Stand thou aſide vntill I call for thee.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  What dreames and fond illuſions haue I had?
                  How comes this word Loue, in Pantheas minde?
                  I loue, nay rather will I die then loue,
                  and yet againſt my will I thinke on loue,
                  O Panthea thinke vpon thy funerall,
                  For thou art withered with exceſſiue griefe,
                  Loue and deformitie cannot agree.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  If Panthea be faire and beautifull,
                  Then loue and Panthea doe well agree.
               
               
                  
                  Pan.
                  
                     Araſpas, Panthea and her ſelfe will iarre,
                  when ſhe ſhall yeeld to loue. Or what is loue
                  But gall and aloes to my martyred ſoule,
                  Now Abradates is not in my ſight.
               
               
                  Araſ.
                  Here is Araſpas louelie Panthea,
                  For thee Ile leaue the field, then leaue thou him,
                  For thee Ile leaue the world, then loue thou me.
                  Let Cyrus ioy in pompe and emperie,
                  Sufficeth me to conquer faire Panthea.
                  
                  Let others glorie in their ground and golde,
                  
                     Panthea to me is twentie thouſand worlds.
                  And without Panthea all the world is traſh,
               
               
                  Pan.
                  For thee Araſpas will I curſe my ſtarres,
                  That ſuffers thee ſo to ſolicite me,
                  For thee I will count the world as hell,
                  Except thou leaue thus to ſolicite me.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  How figuratiue is Panthea in her ſpeach?
                  Reſembling cunning Rethoritians,
                  who in the perſon of ſome one deceaſde,
                  Perſwades their auditors to what they pleaſe,
                  I cannot thinke that theſe be Pantheas words,
                  She is ſo faire to giue ſo ſharpe replie.
                  But if theſe be the wordes of Panthea,
                  
                  Then muſt ſhe change her face, and ſeemeleſſe faire,
                  For know that beautie is loues harbinger,
                  Then being beautious, Panthea needes muſt loue.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Would I were changde into ſome other ſhape,
                  That I might fright thee with my hideous lookes,
                  I in the perſon of my ſelfe deceaſde.
                  Proteſt this heart ſhall neuer harbour loue,
                  But if my lookes be this preparatiue,
                  Ile beate my face againſt the hapleſſe earth,
                  Or deeply harrow it with theſe my trembling hands,
                  which I hold vp to heauen to chaunge thy minde,
                  Or haſten death to rid me from this ſute.
               
               
                  
                  Araſ.
                  Nay then if amorous courting will not ſerue,
                  Know whether thou wilt or no Ile make thee yeeld,
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Though fortune make me captiue, yet know thou
                  That Pantheas will can neuer be conſtrainde.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  But torments can enforce a womans will.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Then ſhould thy importunitie enforce,
                  The ſight of thee Araſpas ſhould conſtraine,
                  For I proteſt before the gods of heauen,
                  No torment can be greater in my thought.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  I, ſay ſo till ye feele them Panthea.
                  
               
               
                  Pan.
                  I feele more torments then thou canſt inuent,
                  who adde the more ſhall eaſe that I ſuſtaine,
                  All torments be they neuer ſo exquiſite,
                  Are but aſcending ſteps vnto my ende,
                  And death tu Panthea is a beneſite,
                  what are thy threates but ſugred promiſes.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Then ſhalt thou liue and Ile importune thee.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  I, now is Panthea menaced to the proofe.
                  Yet euery word thou ſpeakes ſhall wound my heart,
                  And in deſpite of thee Ile die at laſt,
                  The earneſter thou art the ſooner too,
                  But to preuent it thus I will flie from thee,
                  Cyrus ſhall know Araſpus villanie.
                  Exit Panthra.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Thus therefore ſhall I pine, abandou loue,
                  O t'is inherent to Araſpas ſoule.
                  And thereby claimes an immortalitie.
                  So it ſhall nere begin, nor neuer end,
                  A curſed Magitian, are theſe thy wicked ſpels?
               
               
                  Ma.
                  O pardon me my honourable Lord,
                  For Pantheas vertues fruſtrated all my art.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Muſt Magicke yeeld to vertue? wherfore then
                  Didſt thou aſſure me ſhe ſhould be in loue;
               
               
                  Ma.
                  So was ſhe being a ſleepe, as did appeare.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  And why not being wake, ſpeake villain ſpeake
               
               
                  
                  Mag.
                  Reaſon my Lord was the predominant,
                  Her intellectuall part ſtriued againſt loue,
                  and Magicke cannot commaund the ſoule,
                  while appetite and common ſenſe remained,
                  You ſaw I made her ſmile, embrace the aire,
                  and ſhew the affects of amorous conceits,
                  Few women vſe to skirmiſh with ſuch thoughts,
                  and had this Panthea beene at libertie,
                  ſhe would haue yeelded to your honours ſute.
                  But in captiuitie is nought but greefe,
                  and loue with greefe will keepe no reſidence.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Smooth are thy wordes, but rough and harſh thy ſenſe,
                  For they import Panthea cannot be forced.
                  Canſt thou with inchauntations make her die?
                  That ſhe being gone my loue may follow her.
               
               
                  Mag.
                  Life is adiunct vnto our hamane forme,
                  Exempt from Magicke and Magitians,
                  And thats the cauſe we ſooner hurt brute beaſts,
                  Then ſuch as haue the ſemblance of our ſelues.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Deceitfull Artiſan thy words are ſleights,
                  Thy wordes deceitfull and full of guile,
                  Wit is a witch, ſweete words muſt conquer her,
                  Out of my ſight, yet conceale this attempt,
                  If thou bewray it, maugre all thy skill,
                  This ſworde ſhall ſend thee to eternall hell.
                  Exeunt.
               
               Enter Dinon and Libanio.
               
                  Dinon.
                  Now are we at the bankes of Euphrates,
                  Farre from the campe where ſoul diers haunt,
                  and here may we vnder this poplar ſhade,
                  Diſcourſe vpon the ſweetneſſe of our loue.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  You know my Lord I am too yong to loue,
               
               
                  Dinon.
                  Faire Alexandra, if thou loue not me.
                  Thou art compact of adamant and yron,
                  
                     
Thy yeares are fit for loue, ſo are thy lookes,
               
               
                  Lib.
                  How fit ſo ere my yeares be and my lookes▪
                  
                  I Alexandra am vnfit to loue.
                  Is not my father with the Perſian king,
                  And I Alexendra as captiue in his ſtead,
                  And giue me leaue to waile my hard eſtate.
                  and make a riuer with my flowing teares,
                  That mingled with the ſtreame of Euphrates,
                  May ſwiftly runne vnto my fathers ſeate,
                  And make him haſt to great Antiochus.
               
               
                  Dinon.
                  Nay rather ſit vpon this ledgie bankes,
                  That I ſeeing thy ſhadowe in the ſtreame,
                  May feede my fancie with thy pleaſant view,
                  If not enioy the ſweetneſſe I deſire,
                  and leape into the waues and drowne my ſelfe,
                  That thou maiſt pittie Dinon being dead.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  O I could pittie Dinon being aliue,
                  But that I feare my father will not come,
                  and then ſhall Alexandra ſuffer death.
                  and being dead Dinon may pittie me.
               
               
                  Dinon.
                  Loue, may I call thee loue, loe ſhee doth not frowne,
                  Her lookes giues warrant for that Epitite,
                  For thee Ile kneele before Antiochus,
                  and rather then thou ſhalt be toucht by him,
                  Ile beare thee hence as farre as Tanais,
                  Or keepe thee cloſe in theſe Aſſyrian woods,
               
               
                  Lib.
                  No place is ſecrete to Antiochus,
                  Doſt thou not know that kings hath reaching hands?
               
               
                  Dinon.
                  I do yet know my ſworde is ſharpe and keene
                  which when I drawe and brandiſh in the aire,
                  all Babylon will fight in my auaile,
                  who hononr me more than Antiochus.
                  I will not ſay how great thy dowre ſhall be,
                  Nor boaſt what cities I commaund,
                  Let this, though not a king in name,
                  
                     
In wealth and friends I am an Emperour.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  If I ſhould yeeld your honour might ſuppoſe,
                  That dignitie and wealth ſhould conquer me,
                  Therefore I bluſh to ſay I loue my Lord.
               
               
                  Dinon.
                  And when thou bluſhes Dinons heart is fired,
                  Therefore to quench it giue a gentle grant.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  My honor being preſerude, my grant is giuen.
               
               
                  Dinon.
                  Thereof am I as chairie as thy ſelfe,
                  And of thy loue as of my proper life,
                  O Alexandra thy wordes rauiſheth me,
                  Lull me a ſleepe with ſweetneſſe of thy voice.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  Then ſhall my ſong be of my Dinons praiſe,
                  Sleepe Dinon, then Libanio draw thy ſword,
                  And manly thruſt it in his ſlumbring heart.
                  There is no way to ſaue thy life but this.
                  And therefore feare not, ſhall I ſlaughter him
                  That intertained me with ſuch amorous wordes,
                  Such bounteous gifts and golden promiſes▪
                  
                  When he ſhall know I am Libanio,
                  
                  And go I cannot but I ſhall be taine,
                  Vnleſſe I ſlay him in his hapleſſe ſleepe,
                  For he will quickly wake and follow me,
                  Now Dinon dies, alas I cannot ſtrike,
                  This habit makes me ouer pitifull.
                  Remember that thou art Libanio. 
                     She killes him.
                  
                  No woman but a bondman, ſtrike and flie.
                  Exit.
               
               Enter the Aſſyrian king and his Nobles.
               
                  An.
                  Now that Gobrias fortreſſe is our owne,
                  His daughter priſoner, and his Countrie burnt,
                  Lets march from hence to welthie Babylon.
                  And muſter thoſe reſolued Citizens,
                  To meete the Perſian in the open field,
                  Twice hath he led his forces by our gates,
                  Yet neuer durſt to mount his battring Ramme,
                  
                     
Or warlike engine againſt the rampred walles,
                  Therefore we he no more in garriſon,
                  But buſſell out and fight for libertie,
               
               
                  Nob.
                  My Lord behold where Dinon ſlaughtred lies
               
               
                  Ant.
                  
                     Dinon, thou art deceyde it is not he,
               
               
                  Nob.
                  It is my Lord I know him by his ſcarres.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Theſe ſcarres were giuen him in my fathers dayes,
                  And now he is dead, ere I could guerdon him▪
                  
                  The greateſt honour I can doe thee nowe,
                  Is to lament and kiſſe thy liueleſſe cheekes,
                  And that will I performe for Dinons ſake,
                  O that I could reuiue thee with this kiſſe,
               
               
                  Nob.
                  Doubtleſſe Gobrias daughter murdered him▪
                  
                  I ſawe them in the morning walke abroad,
                  And ſince they ne're returnde into the campe,
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Then ſhe hath done this execrable fact,
                  And ſo is fled vnto her traiterous ſire,
                  O that a ſillie Maide ſhould ſlaughter him,
                  Which not a world of Perſians could ſubdue,
                  Is there no ende of my calamitie?
                  My father done to death by Cyrus ſword,
                  Wicked Gobrias and his daughter fled,
                  Falſe Cteſiphon reſolude to murther me,
                  And now Dinon my chiefeſt captaine ſlaine,
                  Why runne we not vpon theſe Perſians,
                  which are the authours of theſe miſeries?
                  Come ſouldiers take him vp and march away,
                  Weele emptie Babylon to meete our foes,
                  And be reuengde vnto the ninth degree,
                  Both of Gobrias and his familie. Exeunt.
                  
               
               Enter Cyrus, Panthea, Gobrias, Hiſtaſpis.
               
                  Pan.
                  O Cyrus if the fortune of thy hande,
                  Haue turnde my freedome to captiuitie,
                  
                     
And of a Queene made me a captiue dame,
                  Yet thinke that vertue is not thrall to chaunce,
                  Nor honour ſubiect to vnhappie time,
                  But like a gallant conſecrated ſhip,
                  That in extreameſt wrath and ſtormes of ſeas,
                  Vaunts all her ſailes and fights the battaile out.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Madame the reaſon of theſe vehement tearmes,
                  
                     Cyrus doth neither know, nor can coniect,
                  It ſince the time of your captiuitie,
                  You haue not beene intreated as you ought,
                  The gods can tell t'is farre againſt my thought.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Then know my great Lord, the man that tooke the charge▪
                  
                  To gard my honor, and my perſon free,
                  Long ſince doted on my perſon ſo,
                  That doting he hath ſought my bonors wreake,
                  A tedious ſiege (God knowes) I haue endurde,
                  More hedious vnto me then haſtie armes,
                  While vilde Araſpas with his lewde deſires,
                  Ceaſeleſſe ſolicited my vnlawfull bed,
                  without repulſes I haue quailed his hope,
                  which he renued with charge of freſh aſſaults.
                  But my denials made his purpoſe vaine,
                  In fine, when no intreatie could preuaile,
                  To frame my fancie to his wicked will,
                  He falles to threatnings from perſuaſious termes,
                  And vowes to purchaſe his deſires by force,
                  And therefore Cyrus (as thou art a king)
                  Protect a Ladies honour from the ſpoile,
                  And let thy bondmaid liue and die vnſtaind,
                  And if there reſt no other hope for me,
                  But hauocke wrake and ruine of my fame,
                  O Cyrus on thy ſworde let Panthea die,
                  And ſo preuent the daunger of my ſhame,
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Ladie, how farre your vſage diſagrees,
                  From Cyrus meaning, records be the gods,
                  
                     
As for my ſelfe (not vainly be it ſaide)
                  I holde my eyes in bondage to my will,
                  And keepe my thoughts in yoke to reaſon loue,
                  My ſight on beautie neuer ſurfetted,
                  And where her beames were likely to infect,
                  My iudgement was a vaile before mine eyes
                  To beare ſuch pearcing fancies from my heart,
                  Such as I am, ſuch muſt my followers be,
                  Elſe let them packe they ſhall not follow me.
                  The man that offered to diſhonour you,
                  ſhall be ſo throughly chaſtiſed for his fault,
                  As you ſhall reſt ſufficiently reuenged,
                  and knowledge me a gracious conquerour,
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis carie her to your pauilion.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  So ſtand the gods aſsiſtant to your armes,
                  as you ſtand pittifull to my miſhaps.
                  Exit Hiſtaſpis and Panthea.
               
               Enter Gobrias, Libanio in womans attyre.
               
                  Lib.
                  My Lord, the gods and fate reſerues your page,
                  To doe you further ſeruice ere he dies.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  
                     Gobrias goes your page in that attyre?
               
               
                  Go.
                  My Lord, ſhe is no page of mine.
                  Some ſhameleſſe ſtrumpet and laſcioious trull.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  And hath my Lord forgot his ſeruant then?
               
               
                  Gob.
                  Firſt muſt I know before I can forget,
                  Thee haue I neither ſeene nor knowne till now.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  O ſay not ſo my Lord, for oft ere this
                  I haue beene ſeene and throughly knowne to you,
                  And you I know to be my gracious Lord.
                  
                     Gobrias that renowmde Aſſyrian.
               
               
                  Gob.
                  Fond girle it ſeemes thy wits be not thine owne.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  What hath my Lord forgot Libanio?
                  
               
               
                  Gob.
                  I know thee now thou art my ſweet Libanio,
                  
                  Thy borrowed habite made me to miſtake,
                  
                     
I knowe thee nowe thou art my ſweea Libanio,
                  
                  A vertuous boy and of a noble ſpirit,
                  To whoſe deſerts and courage I aſcribe,
                  The reſcue of my daughters libertie,
                  O Cyrus this is he that to preſerue
                  My daughters freedome from the Aſſyrian king,
                  Choſe to diſguiſe himſelfe in her aray,
                  In fearefull doubt and hazarde of his life,
                  To ſaue her honour from the tyrants wrath.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  My boy, what ere thy birth and fortune be,
                  Great doth this mind and thoughts of honour taſte,
                  Expreſsing markes of true Nobilitie,
                  And to excite thee to commended workes,
                  which are the pathes that to aduauncement ledes,
                  Receiue this chaine of golde from Cyrus necke.
                  And weare it in the face of all the worlde,
                  Not as a fauor to thy perſon giuen,
                  But as in honour to thy vertuous minde,
               
               
                  Lib.
                  Great and ſurpaſsing is the kingly grace.
                  Yea farre beyond the compaſſe of my hope,
                  Gods grant me life and fortune to deſerue,
                  This part of bountie at your royall hands.
               
               Enter Alexandra.
               
                  Alex.
                  
                     Libanio then I haue not prayed in vaine,
                  Nor callde vpon the gods with fruſtrate vowes,
                  If thou once more be rendred to my ſight,
                  The teares of whoſe ſuppoſed funerals,
                  Did houre by houre bedew my blubbered face.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  Madame, the bleſsing of my ſtrange eſcape▪
                  
                  I attribute alone vnto the gods,
                  If paſt ſo farre the reach of humane ſenſe.
               
               
                  Alex.
                  And for thy ſake their aultars I will ſmoake.
                  with ſweete perfume of thankefull ſacrifice.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  But boy expres in brief what means thou madeſt
                  
                     
To ſcape ſo ſafely from th' Aſſyrian campe
               
               
                  Lib.
                  This meane I found and pleaſe my Lord & king,
                  vpon ſuppoſe of Alexandra ſelfe,
                  I was committed to a noble man.
                  Hight Dinon, to be guarded in his tent.
                  The glorie of my counterfet attire,
                  And maners framed according therevnto,
                  Did ſo inflame Dinon that with my loue,
                  That waking▪ ſleeping, or what euer elſe,
                  He felt a reſtleſſe combate in his thoughts,
                  In fine, more ſafely to commence his loue,
                  He led me quite beyonde th' Aſſyrian campe,
                  And brought me to the bankes of Euphrates,
                  There ſate we downe and he with amorous plea,
                  Not onely fild, but cloyde my wearie eares,
                  ſo farre that what with long continued talke,
                  And heate of ſunne reflecting on the bankes,
                  Or happlie with the ratling harmonie,
                  which Euphrates his gliding ſtreames did keepe,
                  Which ſeeing I imagined that the gods
                  Had offred this occaſion to my hands,
                  For ſweete recouerie of my freedome.
                  Short tale to make, withdreadfull hand I drew,
                  The ſworde that hangde looſe dangling by his ſide.
                  And with the full of my extended force,
                  I ſheathd it home amidſt the owners ribbes,
                  He wounded fet an inwarde grone or two,
                  Then turning on his face breathes forth his life,
                  The deed diſpatcht▪ I hied me thence a maine,
                  And ſcaping cleane without impeach or ſtay.
                  Now ſtand before the Perſian king this day.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Preſident of manly fortitude,
                  Exceeding farre the opinion of thy yeares,
                  
                     Gobrias haue an honourable care,
               
               
                  Alex.
                  
                     Libanio now leaue Alexandras weedes,
                  
                     
That partisplaid▪ and be your ſelfe againe,
                  That part poore boy with danger thou haſt plaid.
               
               
                  Lib.
                  Madame, no daunger can be ſo great,
                  That Ile refuſe for Alexandras ſake,
               
               
                  Cy.
                  
                     Gobrias ſay, is Alexandra ſhe,
                  For whom your page theſe hazards hath ſuſtainde?
               
               
                  Gob.
                  It is my Lord. Cy. Then let vs to your wiſhed for place.
               
               
                  Gob.
                  That place O Cyrus I deſire to ſee,
               
               
                  Cy.
                  This is the place the men that follow me.
               
               
                  Gob.
                  Then wample both my eyes that with this turfe,
                  I may be ſure to hit a vertuous man.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Shall ſhe be his on whom this turfe ſhall light?
               
               
                  Gob.
                  So that the man be good and vertuous,
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Then throw at random when you pleaſe Gobrias,
                  
                  You cannot miſſe a good and vertuous man.
               
               
                  Gob.
                  Then Alexandra at thy husbands head.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis you are hit. Hiſt. I am my Lord,
               
               
                  Go.
                  Then Alexandra if you pleaſe is yours.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  Happie were I if Alexandra pleaſe.
               
               
                  Alex.
                  My Lord the fortune of my fathers hand,
                  Becommeth not his daughter to withſtand.
                  To pleaſe my Lord and father I am yours.
               
               
                  Gob.
                  Your fathers pleaſde, Hiſtaſpis ſhe is yours.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis take your loue at Cyrus hand,
                  this is our guiſe, and this the Perſians do,
                  they wooe and wed within a worde or two. Exeunt.
                  
               
            
            
               Actus tertius.
               Enter Antiochus, Hircanus, Ariſtobulus, and Cteſiphon.
               
                  Ant.
                  No Cteſiphon vnſheath thy bloodie ſworde,
                  And ſhew it ſtaind and cankred with the gore,
                  that iſſued from that vaunting Perſians heart.
                  What draw man, and ſhew thy iuſt conceale.
                  thy pay is preſt in readie numbred golde,
               
               
                  Cte.
                  My Lord and king I beare no bloodie ſworde,
                  Nor ſtaind with gore of Perſians Cyrus heart,
                  
                     
A prince he is farre from delite in blood,
                  Milde, louely, vertuous, wiſe and bountifull,
                  Able to reconcile his greateſt foes,
                  And make great princes of his meaneſt friends.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Thy going was to compaſſe Cyrus death.
                  How haps thy purpoſe ends without effect?
               
               
                  Cte.
                  The Perſian prince inclines to tearmes of truce▪
                  
                  and craues the friendſhip of Antiochus,
                  So pleaſe my Lord the king to firme a peace,
                  For briefe whereof his letters I preſent,
                  Signed and deliuered with his royall hand,
                  Sincerely tending to the ſame effect,
                  Whereto if once your highneſſe condiſcend,
                  He will withdraw his armies from Aſſyria,
                  And on the couenants ſealde diſſolue his campe.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  In caſe the Perſian prince be ſo inclinde,
                  thy anſwere ſhall leſſe offend my mind.
                  Cyrus to Antiochus, health,
                  This bearer cōming to my camp armd with reſolution to kill me, and intreated more honorably then either his trecherie or thine could deſerue. Apprehend Cteſiphon.
                  
               
               
                  Cte.
                  What reades my Lord aright, or doth he faine?
               
               
                  Hir.
                  That you ſhall know before you ſtart againe.
                  Vpon the inſtant purpoſe of his interprice, it pleaſed God to confound him with ſuch horror of conſcience, that vncōſtraind he cōfeſt the treaſon, & intreated pardon, vowing himſelfe ſo far forth friend to Cyrus, that for his ſake he would kill Antiochus. I was content to ſooth the man in his villanie, becauſe I would haue thee know the difference twixt an open ſo & a diſſembling friend, I giue thee this notice, not becauſe I loue thee, or regard thy life but becauſe a villain ſhall not triumph in the murder of him whom I account an honorable conqueſt of my ſelf▪ Reward him according to his merits, & prepare to fight with me for thy own honor. Farewell.
                  
               
               
                  
                  C e.
                  Theis thankleſſe Perſian whom I ſpared from death,
                  Bequites me with the betraying of my life,
               
               
                  Ant.
                  What anſwere maketh traiterous Cteſiphon?
                  
               
               
                  Cte.
                  O prince my guilt is plaine before my face,
                  And witneſde with a princes ſeale,
                  To ſlande vpon deniall were but vaine,
                  where open proofe conuicts me of offence,
                  I ſay no more, but proſtrate at your feete,
                  Submit my ſelfe to mercie of my Lord,
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Such mercie as to traitors doth belong,
                  Such, and no better Cteſiphon ſhall finde,
                  Diſarme him of his martiall abiliment.
                  Diſgrade him of all titles of regarde,
                  And then referre his attachment to your prince,
               
               
                  Hir.
                  This cote of armes, the badge of honor w
                        •
                     n,
                  Through praiſe and vertue of thy aunceſtors,
                  We rent it from that traiterous backe of thine,
                  And as an honour ſtainde with villanie,
                  In deepe diſdaine we ſtampe it vnder foote,
               
               
                  Ariſt.
                  This ſworde that once was girt vnto thy ſide,
                  To be employde in ſeruice of thy prince,
                  Now vowde to gore the bowels of his grace,
                  we breake it here vpon thy traiterous head,
               
               
                  Hir.
                  Theſe ſquares of knighthoode that preſent the pride,
                  and honour due, to chiualrie and armes,
                  whoſe prickes ſhould force the proud couragious ſteed
                  with thundering race to breake the riders launce,
                  Thus doe we hew them from thy traiterous heeles,
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Thou art no man of honour nor of armes,
                  Thou haſt no title of Gentilitie,
                  Nor ſtile of honour, left hereof to vaunt,
                  But art become inferiour of regarde.
                  Then is the baſeſt bondman of Aſſyria,
                  Or vileſt ſlaue that hauntes the Lidian dames.
               
               
                  Ariſt.
                  Diſhonoured traitor, now prepare thy ſelfe,
                  
                     
To yeeld thy head vnto the hangmans axe,
               
               
                  Cte.
                  Not fate but my demerits makes me die,
                  O now I finde Niltutum proditor. 
                     Exeunt.
                  
               
               Enter Hiſtaſpis Araſpas.
               
                  Ara.
                  I feare the furie of the Perſian prince▪
                  
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis, Cyrus furie I doe feare,
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  And wrath of princes, what is it but death?
                  
                     Araſpas on my honour make a proofe,
                  And neuer ſhunne the preſence of our Lord,
                  A prince he is moſt milde and mercifull,
                  Soone mollified with vowes and penitence,
                  And though with great impacience he endure,
                  Your threatned violence to the Suſan Queene,
                  Yet your ſubmiſsion and deſire of grace,
                  Will pearce him with compaſsion of your ſute,
                  And purchaſe pardon at his royall handes.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  O ſpitefull beautie that bewitcht my minde,
                  And led my fancie to ſuch foule extreames,
                  I will aſſay the mercie of my Lorde,
                  And yeeld my life to bazzard of his grace,
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  And doubt not but of Cyrus you ſhall finde,
                  A pitifull and paſsing gracious prince.
                  Enter Cyrus.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis and the reſt, with draw your ſelues,
                  Onely Araſpas ſtay behind with me.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  My ſouereigne Lord in trembling feare I ſtay,
                  And proſtrate fall before your highneſſe feete,
                  The fraile affects and errours of my youth,
                  Enforſed through follies of a wanton will,
                  Hath caſt my life in perill of your wrath,
                  Blinded with charmes of beautie I haue falne,
                  And made my iudgement ſubiect to deſire.
                  And in purſute of loues vnbrideled rage,
                  I haue tranſgreſt the bounds of honours lawes,
                  
                     
O gracious Lord impute my error paſt,
                  Vnto the power of proud commanding loue,
                  That led my minde and thought ſo farre aſtray,
                  Forgiue thoſe frailties of my youth, O king,
                  And take your ſeruant once againe to grace,
                  with feare of your diſpleaſure almoſt ſlaine.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Force to a Queene, and ſhe a captiue too,
                  A Perſian Lord ſo farre miſled with luſt,
                  Intend diſhonour to a ſillie dame,
                  Araſpas they that would be conquerors,
                  Should chiefly learne to conquer their deſire,
                  Leaſt while they ſeeke dominion ouer others,
                  They proue but ſlaues and bondmen to themſelues.
                  Now where are thoſe your big and braue diſputes,
                  Wherein you pleaded loue was voluntarie,
                  And fancie left and intertaind at will,
                  When you imbrace it in ſuch raging heate,
                  That where intreaties faile of your deſires,
                  You fall from vowes to violence with the dame,
                  Araſpas for the excuſe of this offence,
                  You find no preſident in Cyrus life
               
               
                  Ara.
                  I know and grant my Lord, the prince abounds
                  with peareleſſe gifts and graces of the minde,
                  wherewith the gods haue fild his kingly breaſt,
                  There nought but vertuous motions taketh roote,
                  Nothing but honour harbours in that ſeate,
                  And holy thoughts direct his royall deedes.
                  That ſo his grace might euerie way be found,
                  worthie the glorie of ſo hie a charge,
                  Yet ſince theſe frailties that diſgrace your thrall,
                  are humane faults and incident to minde,
                  Where ſtrong deſires hold reaſon vnder yoke,
                  The wonted mercie of my Lord the prince,
                  So prone in fauour to the penetent,
                  May mittigate the ſhame of this my fault.
                  
                     
With ſweete compaſſion to his princes thrall.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Araſpas I remit thee this amiſſe,
                  although blame worthie in the hieſt degree,
                  and for your tried deſerts in martiall praiſe,
                  I am content this follie to forget,
                  Yet would I haue it ſeeme vnto the world,
                  That my diſpleaſure made you flie from me,
                  And ſo reuolted to the Aſſyrian armes,
                  There this ſuppoſe ſhall make you intertainde,
                  and highly fauoured of that graceleſſe king,
                  By meanes whereoffull ſafely you may learne,
                  The garriſon and ſtrength of Babylon,
                  The vtmoſt force and puiſſance of our foes,
                  With euerie purpoſe of Antiochns,
                  The time and place where he intents to fight,
                  Then hauing learnde the full of euerie thing,
                  In ſecrete you may ſcape againe to me.
                  With iuſt relation of the▪ Aſſyrian campe.
                  This ſeruice if you pleaſe to vndertake,
                  You ſhall effect a ſinguler good turne,
                  and reape mortall thanks at Cyrus hands.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  No longer let Araſpas liue and breath,
                  Then with the vtmoſt venture of his life,
                  He will performe what Cyrus ſhall command.
                  And ſacred price for this extended grace,
                  Though in the compaſſe of this hard affaire,
                  I leaue th' Aſſyrian faction to maintaine,
                  yet vow to beare a truſtie Perſian heart.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Then go with fortune, and returne with health
                  and grant the gods this enterprice of thine,
                  May end and proſper with deſirde effect.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  And grant the gods that Cyrus ſtill may liue,
                  happie in peace, and in armes victorious.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  To pacifie the angrie Pantbeas moode,
                  I will perſwade her of Araſpas flight.
                  
                     
That he is reuolted to the Aſſyrian king. Enter Panthea.
                  
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Readie the humble handmaid of my Lord.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  To calme the heate of your offended mind,
                  Thus haue I loſt as braue a warriour,
                  As euer trode vpon the Perſian fields.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  What warrior means my Lord and conqueror?
               
               
                  Cy.
                  
                     Araſpas, who in feare of my diſpleaſure,
                  I fled from me vnto th' Aſſyrian campe,
                  And hath forſooke the Perſians colours quite,
                  Thus madame for your ſake hath Cyrus done,
                  Euen loſt the worthieſt ſouldier of his band.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  
                     Cyrus let not his loſſe perplex your minde,
                  If you will let me ſend a meſſenger,
                  Vnto my Lord and husband Abradates,
                  
                  I know for theſe your princely fauours done,
                  To me his wife in this my captiues plight,
                  He will attend your fortune in the warres.
                  With more ſincere affection, loue and zeale,
                  Then euer that vngracious perſon did.
                  Againe, my Lord my husband is a knight,
                  As forward treads, and fortunate in armes,
                  As euer ſpred his colours in the field.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Is it likely Abradatus will forſake,
                  His natiue prince to follow for raine armes,
               
               
                  Pan.
                  The father of this king by Cyrus ſlaine,
                  was highly loued and honourde of my Lord,
                  This now that reignes affected Pantheas bed,
                  Sought to prucure a moſt vniuſt diuorce,
                  Betwixt my beſt beloued Lord and me,
                  who therefore beares him an immortall hate,
                  The ſtarres of which incurable diſpight,
                  Remaine ſo deepe inprinted in his thought,
                  That ten times bleſſed would he thinke himſelfe,
                  To finde a fit occaſion for reuenge.
               
               
                  
                  Cy.
                  Beleeue me Madam, if your Lord be armde,
                  With ſuch ſore grounded malice to the prince,
                  His helpe may greatly further my affaires,
                  And therefore if you can procure the man,
                  To ſtand aſsiſtant to the Perſian armes,
                  You ſhall deſerue great thankes at Cyrus hand,
               
               
                  Pan.
                  
                     Cyrus, I will preſume to make my Lord
                  A truſtie follower of the Perſian armes,
                  And him your highneſſe ſhall not faile to finde,
                  A noble friend and valiant gentleman.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  And Madam, he ſhall want at Cyrus hands,
                  No praiſe, nor honour due to good deſerts. Exeunt.
                  
               
            
            
               Actus quartus.
               Enter Antiochus, Araſpas, and Nobles.
               
                  Ant.
                  
                     r Aaſpas though thy birth and parentage,
                  Seeme deadly to the Aſſyrian eares,
                  Being diſcended of our chiefeſt foes,
                  who purchaſte gentrie by our ouerthrow,
                  And in their inſignes beare the Aſſyrian armes,
                  Yet ſeeing thou commeſt as confederate,
                  In token that I loue and honour thee,
                  Receiue this ſworde, and fight couragiouſly.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Antiochus Ile weare it for thy ſake,
                  And for the wrong that Cyrus offered me,
                  Vnleſſe my deſtnie preuent my drift,
                  Ile quicklie hanſell it with Cyrus blood.
               
               
                  Nob.
                  Wherein hath Cyrus wrongd thee Perſian ſay.
               
               
                  Ard.
                  In barring me of her whom I eſteeme,
                  Aboue the value of his Diademe.
                  
                     Panthea my Lord.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  What Panthea, Abradates wife?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  I louely Panthea Abradates wife,
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Speake not of Panthea if thou loueſt me,
                  
                     
For her remembrance wounds my heart afreſh,
               
               
                  Nob.
                  His grace is alwayes paſsionate and ſad,
                  If ſhe be mentioned, therefore name her not.
               
               
                  Ara,
                  Not that alone, but manie iniuries,
                  Inſenſt me to attempt his ouerthrow,
                  For in the field wherein your father fell,
                  I got rich armour, golde, and ſumptuous tents,
                  all which he tooke vnto his proper vſe,
                  and gaue vnto his ſpeciall fauourites,
                  Nor had I where withall at Cyrus hands,
                  To heale thoſe wounds which I receiued in fight.
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Then ſee thou make as deepe wounds in his fleſh,
                  And ſo crie quittance with the couetous king,
                  I giue thee to this ſword, armour and horſe,
                  a horſe as fierce as proude Bucephalus,
                  armour of truſtier proofe then Thetis found,
                  Therefore Araſpas fight couragiouſlie.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Albeit I haue not Alexanders skill,
                  To manage him, nor yet Achilles armes,
                  to charge as brauely, yet as good a heart,
                  as Alexander or Achilles euer had.
                  And when I ſhrinke for feare out of the field,
                  Let me be torne in peeces with that horſe,
                  Or hewed to death with this bright cortelaux,
               
               
                  Ant.
                  Thy wordes Araſpas tiſe me to the field,
                  and makes me thinke I ſhall be conquerour,
                  Come let vs march from wealthie Babylon,
                  and then towards Cyrus with our royall campe. Exeunt.
                  
               
               Enter Panthea, and Cyrus.
               
                  Pan.
                  My husband mightie Lord, from Bactria,
                  Where he lay legar for th' Aſſyrian king,
                  Is come to ſerue vnder your highneſſe flagges,
                  and in your aide hath brought two thouſand horſe,
                  Backt by his friends Aſſyrian Gentlemen.
                  
                     
all which will die at conquering Cyrus feete.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Is Abradates come from Bactria,
                  Then will I leaue to mone Araſpas loſſe,
                  and thinke on conqueſt and ſweete victorie?
                  
                     Gobrias go with louely Panthea,
                  
                  and bring him preſently vnto our tent,
                  With thoſe braue horſemen of Aſſyria,
                  You warlike and victoriouſmen,
                  Marſhall your ſeuerall bands in equipage,
                  That Abradates king of Suſia,
                  May wonder at the hugeneſſe of our campe,
                  and be the willinger to league with vs. Enter Abrdates with other.
                  
                  Here he comes, and if by his aſpect,
                  I may coniecture of his qualities,
                  He is valiant, wiſe, truſtie and liberall,
               
               
                  Ab.
                  I need not aske which is the Perſian king,
                  The vertues ſhining in his glorious lookes,
                  Say this is Cyrus, and in ſigne of loue,
                  will Abradates thus ſalute his grace,
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Sweete Abradates thou imbraſing me,
                  Hath ſtolne my heart, I loue and honour thee,
               
               
                  Ab.
                  Faire Lord was neuer captiue gentler vſde,
                  Then Panthea of this gracious conquerour.
                  For Panthea, Cyrus I and this my traine,
                  Of which the meaneſt Soulder may take charge,
                  and be commander of a campe of men,
                  So able, wiſe and venterous they are,
                  Doth reſt for euer at your highneſſe becke,
                  Our horſes which are graſing on the plaine,
                  In winter gallops, and in Iſie ſeas,
                  and in the ſommer ſwimmes the deepeſt ſtreames,
                  Swifter are they in pace then lightfoot Hart,
                  Surer they are then Cammels dlodding on the wayes,
                  Fiercer then Tygres, and as
                  
                     
Olephants with Caſtles on their backes,
                  And if they were compaſt with arming pikes,
                  They knew which way to make their paſſage forth,
                  And when their ſides is painted eke with blood,
                  they pull their reines, and lookes downe to the ground
                  As if they vaunted of their ſeruice done,
                  The rider being diſmounted they ſtand ſtill,
                  And kneele vpon the ground to take him vp,
                  But if he chaunce to die, they pine to death.
                  Theſe are Cyrus and the riders too,
                  Souldiers as good as euer ſunne behelde,
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Theſe horſes thou ſpeakeſt of makes me glorie more,
                  Then Lydian Creſſusin his heapes of gold,
                  And of them all doth Cyrus make account,
                  As of the ſtrengthes and ſinewes of the warre,
                  We haue intelligence the Aſſyrian king
                  Is come from Babylon to meete vs ſtraight,
                  Therefore if Abradates fauour vs,
                  Mount and away for we'le aſſaile them firſt.
               
               
                  Abra.
                  For that comes Abradates, lets away.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  But Abradates I will arme thee firſt,
                  Seeſt thou theſe pouldrons they are golde,
                  Theſe vanbraces and currets maſsie golde,
                  The gorget and thy helmet beaten golde,
                  The belt imbrodered golde, yet all to baſe,
                  For Abradate louelier then the golde,
                  May neuer ſpeare be broken on this breaſt,
                  But that the point thereof may ſoone returne,
                  And ſtrike him dead that durſt to giue that charge,
                  This helmet ſhunne thee from the ſling sand darts,
                  This kiſle make thee turne with victorie,
                  As for this garland made of loſtie palme,
                  
                     Panthea reſerues it for her conquering Lord,
                  Vpon whoſe head will Panthea faſten it,
                  And hanging on hit necke like Hectors wife,
                  
                     
Inquire the maner of the battell paſt.
               
               
                  Abr.
                  Faire be my fortune for my Panthea,
                  
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  My Lord Araſpas in th' Aſſyrian armes,
                  Doth craue ſucceſſe vnto your Maieſtie.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Araſpas, let him come, he is our friend.
                  And brings vs tidings from our enimies. Enter Araſpas.
                  
               
               
                  Ara.
                  Health vnto the perſon of my gracious lord.
               
               
                  Cyr.
                  Welcome Araſpas, brings thou chearful newes?
                  Is Antiochus reſolued to fight?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  This day he meanes to encounter with your hoſt.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  What is the number of his fighting men?
               
               
                  Ara.
                  In all two hundred thouſand at the leaſt,
                  And thus in order lies his noble campe.
                  The foreſtont is ten chariots,
                  Of purpoſe to diſranke the approching ſo.
                  Next them are fiftie thouſand horſmen placde,
                  To breake in where the chariots breake the way,
                  Next them fiue thouſand ſtaues being lightly
                  laden with ſpeares, helmet, naked ſwordes,
                  To go along to ſerue the horſmens vſe.
                  Then twentie thouſand Scythians runagates,
                  with venomde darts, whoſe heades are tipt with ſteele,
                  And laſt the battell of th' Aſſyrians,
                  Being hedgde with launces, as a wood with Briers.
                  On whoſe heades the croſſe bowes and the ſlings,
                  will ſhoote and throw bullets of maſsie yron,
                  Whoſe verie fall would ſtrike Aclipos downe,
                  In middeſt whereof Antiochus will march,
                  Before whom doe a thouſand bondmen draw
                  A brazen wall built vpon turning wheles,
                  To gard him ſure and his concubine,
                  All theſe vpon my honour I a duer.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  If euery ſouldier had a wall of braſſe,
                  It could not daunt vs, we are reſolute,
                  
                     
And vowed and ſworne vnto our ſwordes,
                  which teacheth vs to ſcorne a brazen wall.
               
               
                  Abr.
                  Renowmed Cyrus, honour me thus farre,
                  To haue the leading of your vauntgard forth.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  Nay it belongs vnto a Perſian.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  If to a Perſian, it belongs to me.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  I ſerued Aſtiages your highneſſe ſire.
                  But if a ſtranger may deſerue the place,
                  I hope my ſeruing merits it my lord.
               
               
                  Pan
                  My husband is a king, Cyrus I hope
                  will therefore grant it, if not for deſert,
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Had I foure to encounter with,
                  you all ſhould lead the vauntgard of the field,
                  But onely one muſt haue the charge▪
                  
                  Though all deſerue it, therefore draw you all.
               
               
                  All.
                  Content.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Cryſantas make the lots.
               
               
                  Hiſt.
                  Pardon me Cyrus though I do repine,
                  why ſhould we draw lots for our proper right?
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Ile haue it ſo, Hiſtaſpis be content.
               
               
                  Cry.
                  The lots are readie.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  
                     Hiſtaſpis I commaund thee to begin,
                  Now Abradates and the reſt.
               
               
                  Abr.
                  Fortune hath fauoured me, the lot is mine.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Then thou ſhalt lead the forefront, let vs match,
               
               
                  Ara.
                  The enemie is neare, make haſte my Lord.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Here Abradates, Cyrus placeth thee,
                  Leade warily, and fight couragiouſlie.
               
               
                  Abr.
                  As mine owne life ſo tender I theſe men,
                  Now to the battell, Panthea Farewell. Exeunt.
                  
               
               Enter Panthea and Nicaſia.
               
                  Pan.
                  Farewell, and my good angell follow thee,
                  And euerie ſtarre that raignd when I was borne,
                  Whoſe influence hath kept me yet from harme,
                  
                     
Vnfortunate be to make thee bleſt▪
                  
               
               
                  Ni.
                  And miſerie ceaſe on Nicaſia,
                  
                  So Abradates be kept from harme.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Ye Perſian Deities for Cyrus ſake,
                  Aſſyrian Gods for Abradates ſake,
                  Giue victorie vnto the Perſians,
                  That I may ſee my husband weare this wreath.
               
               
                  Ni.
                  Madam, Bellonas ſhrine is heare at hand,
                  O let vs go to offer ſacrifice,
                  To make her more propitious to his grace,
                  For now he is amongſt th' Aſſyrian troupes.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Ile offer all my iewels on the ſhrine,
                  And make ſweet fumes of Ambergreece and Myrrhe,
                  Of Indian Caſsia, Muske and Frankinſenſe,
                  That Abradates may be conquerour,
                  Firſt at her aulter let vs ioyntly ſing,
                  For Mnſicke is a ſacrifice to her.
               
            
            
               Actus quintus,
               Enter Cyrus. Panthea, and the armie.
               
                  Pan.
                  Great lords to whom the Aſſyrian ſcepter yeelds
                  and Babylon through right of victorie,
                  Lies open to thoſe conquering ſwords of yours,
                  How fares my lord, my lord and louing feere,
                  My Abradates, liues he conquerour,
                  Or left by deſtnie numbred with the dead?
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Faire Ladie, vertuous, chaſt, and amiable,
                  I truſt your loue among the liuing dwels,
                  and like a champion and a knight at armes,
                  will ſhew himſelfe or manie houres expire,
                  His temples adornde with victorious palme.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  When to the ſight my lord adreſt his bands
                  Deuoutly entred I Belonas fame,
                  And there before the aultar of the Saint,
                  Perfumde the ayre with ſmoke of holie fire,
                  
                     
And breathed forth my plaints and eke my mones,
                  Thrice I me ſeemed the Goddeſſe turnde her face,
                  Offending-like frowning with angrie browes,
                  Againſt my prayers and my holie vowes,
                  O Cyrus, if my iealous thoughts diuine,
                  Some diſmall ſequell to this fantaſie,
                  Yet pardon me ſeeing womens wittes are weake,
                  And loues aboundes with ſuperſtitious feare.
               
               
                  Cy.
                  Madam, I truſt the preſence of your Lord,
                  Returning backe in triumph and renowme,
                  Shall ſoone remoue thoſe thoughts out of your mind,
                  So graunt the Gods my countries preſidentes,
               
               Abradates borne in dead.
               
                  Cy.
                  What ſlaughtered bodie do you Perſians bring?
               
               
                  Captain.
                  
                     Cyrus the bodie of the Suſian king,
                  Stout Abradates by the Egyptians ſlaine.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Now let my Lord the prince of Perſia iudge,
                  whether vnhappie Panthea feared in vaine,
                  O noble loue whoſe manly heart deſerude,
                  To ioy the benefite of longer life,
                  And richer Trophes to enlarge the ſame.
                  But tell vs now after what ſort he died?
               
               
                  Cap.
                  Mounted aloft his chariot armed with ſithes,
                  Beating the ſtrong Egyptians downe,
                  A few of his familiar truſtie friends,
                  With dreadfull race inſiſt his chariot Wheeles,
                  While the other in the battaile turning backe,
                  Abandoned him among the Egyptian pikes,
                  Yet Abradates with the few remained,
                  By force and vertue of his puiſſant hand,
                  Sendes thouſand of the heathniſh foes to hell,
                  Till at the laſt diſmounted from his ſeate,
                  And round enuironed with his enemies,
                  
                     
After ſo many mortall wounds receyued,
                  He fell and yeelded vp his kingly ghoſt.
                  The Egyptians as their barbarous cuſtome is,
                  when he was dead cut off his ſtout right hand,
                  And left it lying by the breathleſſe corps.
                  But with a band of Perſian men at armes,
                  we reſcued him, and brought him to your grace,
                  Here to receiue ſuch worthie funerals,
                  As fits the honour of ſo great a Lord.
               
               
                  Pan.
                  Now Euphrates whoſe ſad and hollow bankes,
                  Haue ſuckt the ſumme of Abradates blood:
                  which from his wounds did iſſue with his life,
                  Now ceaſe thy courſe of thy diſdained teares,
                  And let thy courage turne againſt the tide,
                  Of mere remorſe of wretched Pantheas plaints.
                  Is this the hand that plighted faith to me,
                  The hand, that aye hath managde kingly armes,
                  And brought whole troops of mightie warriors down,
                  Now ſended from the bodie of my Lord,
                  Cleane voide of feeling, ſenſe and vitall breath,
                  So Gods and cruell deſtnies commaund,
                  Malignant of poore Pantheas happineſſe.
                  Liue Cyrus. You Lords of Perſia,
                  Command my honour to poſteritie,
                  That ages hence the world report may make,
                  That Panthea died for Abradates ſake. She ſtabs her ſelfe.
                  
               
               
                  Nic.
                  Gone is my Ladie pearleſſe Panthea.
                  
                  Slaine with ſelfe griefe for Abradates ſake,
                  
                     Nicaſia loathes to liue when ſhe is gone,
                  The pride and Phenix of Aſſyria,
                  Ile not preſume to touch the fatall ſteele,
                  Wherein my Ladies ſacred blood do ſmoake,
                  Receiue me in thy bowels Euphrates,
                  And let thy bottome be Nicaſias graue.
               
               
                  
Enter Cyrus, Araſpas, and Gob
                     •
                  as, to Abradates dead
               
                  Cy.
                  O Perſians ſee if any breath remaineth.
               
               
                  Ara.
                  
                     Cyrus alas all ſenſe of feeling is gone,
                  His ſenſeleſſe lims with ſtiffeneſſe ouergrowne,
                  No rubbing warming, ought auaileth vs,
                  But pale death ſits as conquerour ouer him.
               
               Let Araſpas kneele downe by Abradates.
               
                  Cy.
                  Mirrour of honor and true Nobilitie,
                  No age, no time ſhall euer race thy fame,
                  Whileſt Euphrates doth keepe his running ſtreame.
                  What Abradates, and chaſt Panthea too,
                  O Abradates worthie man at armes,
                  O Panthea chaſt vertuous and amiable,
                  This office Cyrus to your wandring ghoſt,
                  Reſerues in ſtore to grace your funerals,
                  with monuments of fatall Elonie,
                  Of Cedar, Marble, let, and during braſſe,
                  That future worlds and infants yet vnborne,
                  May kiſſe your tombes wherein your bodies lie,
                  And wonder at the vertues of your minde,
                  Aſſyrian Lord, ſuch honour thou ſhalt haue,
                  As neuer had Aſſyrian at his graue.
                  Six hundred head of cattell ſhall be ſlaine,
                  And ſacrificed vpon the funerals day.
                  Twelue thouſand horſes being manned each one,
                  Trapt all in blacke ſhall goe before thy hearſe,
                  The towred battlements of Babylon,
                  Bend in contempt of heauen and earth, and men▪
                  
                  Thoſe markes of pride ſhall be abated downe,
                  To make a ſhew of mourning for thy death.
                  Such honour as you both receyude in life,
                  Such honour ſhall you both receiue in death.
               
            
            FINIS.
            
         
      
   