
      
         
            
            
            
               Ludus Scacchiae: Cheſſe-play.
            A Game, both pleaſant, wittie, and politicke: with certain briefe inſtructions therevnto belonging; Tranſlated out of the Italian into the Engliſh tongue.
            Containing alſo therein, A prety and pleaſant Poeme of a whole Game played at Cheſſe.
            Written by G. B.
            Printed at London by H. Iackſon, dwelling beneath the Conduite in Fleetſtreet. 1597.
         
         
            
            
            
               ❧ To the Reader greeting.
            
               
                  STrange (perchance) may it ſeeme to ſome (curtcous Reader) that anie man ſhould employ his time, and beſtow his labor in ſetting out ſuch bookes, whereby men may learne to play, when indeede most men are giuen rather to play, than to ſtudie and trauell: which were true, if it were for the teaching of Games vnlawfull, as dice-play, or cogging, or falſhoode in card-play, or ſuch like. But foraſmuch as this Game or kingly pastime, is not onely void of craft, fraud, and guile, ſwearing, ſtaring, impatience, fretting and falling out, but alſo breedeth in the players, a certaine ſtudy, wit, pollicie, forecast and memorie, not onely in the play thereof, but alſo in actions of publike gouernement, both in peace and warre: wherein both Counſellers at home, and Captaines abroade may picke out of theſe wodden peeces ſome pretty pollicy, both how to gouerne their ſubiects in peace, and howe to leade or conduct liuely men in the field in warre: for this Game hath the ſimilitude of a ranged battell, as by placing the men, and ſetting them forth in the march, may very eaſily appeare. The King ſtandeth in the field in the middest of his Army, and hath his Queene next vnto him and his nobilitie about him, with his ſouldiers to defend him in the forefront of the battell. Sith therefore this Game is pleaſant to all, profitable to moſt, hurtfull to none, I pray thee (gentle Reader) take this my Labour in good part, and thou ſhalt animate me hereafter to the ſetting forth of deeper matters. Farewell.
            
            
               Thy friend G. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            
               ❧ 
               The Cheſse-play.
            
            
               THe firſt principle is to know the peeces, to wit, the names, the number, and the ſeate of euery one. As for the faſhion of the peeces, that is according to the fantaſie of the workman that makes them after this maner: Some make them like men, wherof the King is the higheſt, and the Queene (which ſome name Amazon) is the next, both twoo crowned. The Biſhops ſome name Alphius, ſome Fooles, ſome Archers, being placed next to the King and the Queene. The Knights ſome call horſemen, and they are men on horſebacke. The Rookes ſome call Elephants, carrying Towers vpon their backes, and men within the towers. The Pawnes ſome doe call footemen, and they are ſouldiours on foote, carrying (ſome of them) pikes, and otherſome harquebuſhes, otherſome halberdes, and otherſome the iaueline or target. Our Engliſh Cheſſemen are commonly made nothing like to theſe foreſaide faſhions: to wit, the King is made the higheſt or longeſt: the Queen is longeſt next vnto him. The Biſhop is made with a ſharp top, and clouen in the mids, not much vnlike to a Biſhops Miter. The Knight hath his top cut aſlope, as though he were dubbed Knight. The Rooke is made likeſt to the King and Queene, but that he is not ſo long. The Pawnes be made the ſmaleſt and leaſt of all, and thereby they may beſt be knowen. This haue I added hereunto (good Reader) for the better vnderſtanding and knowing of the ſaide Cheſſe men.
            
               I will not therfore now figurate them, but only in ſpeaking of euery place particularly I will name them according to the moſt frequent phraſe in the Engliſh tongue: To wit, the King (being the head of the play) I will name King. The Queene (being the beſt peece in the Game) I will name Queene. The Biſhoppes next vnto the King and Queene, I will name Biſhops. The Knights being next vnto the Biſhops I will name Knights. The Rookes being next vnto the Knights, and ſtanding in the two corners, I will call Rookes. The Pawnes (ſtanding in a rowe before them all) I will call Pawnes.
            
               Of the Rooke or Towre.
               The Tower is named among the Spaniardes, Portingales; and Italians, Rocho, which is as much to ſay in their language as a fortreſſe, becauſe it is a great vpholding to the game. Alſo the Towers are ſet in the vttermoſt ends of the Cheſſe boord, as a ſtrong rampire in the front. Their office is not to remooue, but in neceſsitie, and moſt chiefly for the ſuccour of their King.
            
            
               Of the Knight or Horſman.
               The Horſeman is alſo named, as repreſenting a man of Armes, which fighteth on horſebacke, and his ſeate is next vnto the Tower, from whence hee muſt come into battell, and place himſelfe where hee may moſt offend, for there is no peece in the Cheſſe boord that more readily may do hurt then he, becauſe of his marching forth, which is made from three into three

places: to wit, from white to blacke, and from blacke into white, and ceaſeth not to make his aſſault or his leape, although he be inuironed; prouided that hee haue roome to place himſelfe in.
            
            
               Of the Biſhop or Archer.
               In ancient time, the Frenchmen named him Foole, which ſeemeth to me an vnproper name. The Spaniards named him Prince with ſome reaſon: for (as Prince of the blood) hee is nearer vnto the King and the Queene then any other of the Cheſſe men. And ſome name him Archer, becauſe his draughts drawe alwayes aſide, and neuer forth-right: as it is the office of a good Archer or harquebuſier in warre, which neuer planteth himſelfe right againſt his enemie, but in skirmiſhing or in plain fight, make ſemblāce to ſhoot at one, and hit another, not remaining long in place.
            
            
               Of the King.
               The King is the head of the conduct, according to the Spaniards, he hath liberty to aſſault three roomes or ſteppes, as he liſteth: yea he may make the aſſault of the Knight, ſo that he haue not the way, but it muſt be then, whileſt he is yet in his lodging, and that he is not remooued, otherwiſe hee can make no more but one ſtep. Although in Italy the King (if he haue the way open) may run al the length of the Cheſſeboord, or may remooue a Pawne to ſet himſelfe in his place. And in France, they cauſe him to make two ſteppes along his front: prouided, that there be no peeces betweene him and the Rooke, and ſet the Rooke in the place of the King. Behold here his marching and his liberty, prouided, that he haue had no checke. And to

ſay the trueth, the King was played no otherwiſe in the antient time, but after the maner of the Frenchmen: yea the moſt part of the Spaniardes and Portingales (who are counted the beſt players) did play it ſo.
            
            
               Of the Queene or Amazon.
               Some name her Queene, otherſome Lady, and it is the beſt peece in the Cheſſe boord. hir lodging is next vnto the Kings, & hath as great a traine as the King. Briefly, ſhe repreſenteth a Kings Lieutenant in an army: ſhe doth (when ſhe will) the office of the Rooks, and alſo of the Biſhops. And becauſe the firſt women that vſed to go to the warres were the Amazons, therefore ſome name her Amazon white, and Amazon blacke. But aboue all, the players ought to keepe her well, becauſe that the game is ſeldome wonne, after that ſhe is once loſt.
            
            
               Of the Pawne or footeman.
               The footman is the rapier and the target, as it were of the great Cheſſe men, and the Kings eſpecially for this cauſe, that when he can proceede ſo well in warre as to arriue at the laſt ranke of his enemies, he is choſen and made the beſt peece of the play, to wit, hee is the Queene. And if in making himſelfe Queene, he can giue checke, he is ſo much the more to be eſteemed. The marching foorth of the Pawne, for the firſt time is to make two ſteppes, if he will, or one onely, if he liſt, marching alwayes right before him, and not aſide. And the beſt Pawnes are next vnto the King. Therefore when checke is giuen to the King, the Pawne cannot paſſe the barres of his way, for to ſuccour

him: that is, if checke be giuen to the King, the Pawne cannot march aſide, be it on the left, or on the right, for to couer his King: for his way is beſet on both ſides, and cannot go but right forth, and alwaies ſtep by ſtep: prouided, that his way be not ſtopped. It is true, that in taking he marcheth awry one onely ſtep, of what ſide ſoeuer it be, and can not take that which is right againſt him. It ſhall be alſo beſt for the Pawne, not to aduaunce himſelfe much within the campe of his enemy.
            
            
               
                  
                     The Checker or Cheſſe boorde, whereon are placed the peeces, euery one in his order.
                     
                        The blacke ſide.
                     
                     
                        QR
                        QKn
                        QB
                        Q
                        K
                        KB
                        KKn
                        KR
                     
                     
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                         
                     
                     
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                        P
                     
                     
                        QR
                        QKn
                        QB
                        Q
                        K
                        KB
                        KKn
                        KR
                     
                     
                        The white ſide.
                     
                  
               
               
                  Beholde here the forme of the Checker or Cheſſeboorde, and how the Cheſſemen ought to be placed in euery houſe whereof there are in all, threeſcore and foure: to wit, thirty two on either ſide or halfe, wherof the eight vppermore oppoſites (or one againſt another) are full of principall peeces on both ſides. The other eight alſo next them on both ſides, are full of Pawnes. So that there are thirty two peeces, which is to each player ſixteene, whereof there be eight great ones and eight little. The roomes where euery one of them are ſet, I will name ſeates: the other which bee empty, I will name places or houſes. Thorowe the which (as well ſeates as places) the great Cheſſe men and ſmall do runne in their order, forward or backeward, to giue the mate to the contrary King. And to tell you, why there be ſo many houſes, and why neyther more nor leſſe, it paſſeth my intelligence: and I thinke there will be found no other reſolution, but the wil of him that made the play, whom the beſt Hiſtoriens record to be Exerſes the philoſopher, otherwiſe called Philometer, who to reproue the tiranny & bad maners of Euilmerodach K. of Babylon, firſt deuiſed this game. Some ſay, the inuēters therof, were two brethren Libius and Terrhenus, who being afflicted with great hunger and famine, did inuent this play, to the end, that in playing it, they might imploy their ſpirites ſo vehemently, that they might the more eaſily paſſe ouer the affliction of famine. But whoſoeuer it was, no doubt the inuention and wittineſſe thereof is greatly to be commended and followed.
            
            
               
               Certaine generall rules chiefly to be vſed in the Cheſſe play.
               Firſt, you muſt play nocaſt or draught in vaine, if it be not vpon great neceſsitie.
               Secondly, You muſt not make a fault.
               Thirdly, You muſt not be too haſtie to play.
               Fourthly, If you haue a good draught to make, looke if you haue not a better.
               Fiftly, If you haue aduantage, you may wel make a change, and yet not looſe it.
               Sixtly, If you haue aduantage, wherewith you may win the game, take heede that you ſpoile not your game, nor to abandon your King to win onelie a Pawne.
               Seuenthly, the principall thing is, to ſet your king in a ſure place, when he marcheth forth.
               Eightly, The two Pawnes which be on that ſide where the King is tranſported, muſt not be remoued but in great neceſsitie: for that, oftentimes the game is loſt by remoouing the Rookes Pawne or Knights Pawne one roume, becauſe that there the contrarie King findeth the way of the mate.
               Ninthly, Then you muſt goe abroad with your peeces, and not keep them incloſed at home.
               Laſtly, it is good, that the twoo Pawnes of the King and the Queene, be vpon their fourth houſes, and alſo thoſe of the Biſhops.
               It is to be noted for the well vnderſtanding of the marching forth of the Cheſſe men, that the Cheſſeboord ought to be ſet in ſuch ſort, that the Rooke on

the right ſide bee ſette in a white place, and take the Cheſſe men which you will white or blacke. Further you muſt knowe the names of the peeces and of the places: for the Cheſſe men that are on the kings ſide, be named the Kings Cheſſe men, and likewiſe the kings houſes vnto the middeſt of the Cheſſe boorde. And from thence forward are the contrary kings houſes. As for example: The Pawne which is before thy king, is in the ſecond houſe of thy king. And if thou remoue him one ſtep, he ſhall be in the third, or if he go further, in the fourth houſe of the king: But afterwardes and if he doe goe further yet, hee ſhall be in the fourth houſe of the King of the contrarie parte. And ſo of all the other Cheſse men on that ſide. The other ſide is that of the Queene, as well in Cheſse men, as in houſes, therefore for this cauſe is it needefull to haue before you a Cheſse boorde with the Cheſse men, for to ſee with your eyes the Arte which briefly ſhall be declared in this Treatiſe. And ſo, after preſuppoſing the game, you may beginne after two ſortes to play it as foloweth.
               
                  The firſt maner of playing.
                  The firſt manner is to beginne with the Kings Pawne: and the ſecond is to begin with the Queens Pawne. The firſt (according to my iudgement) is the beſt: that is to wit, to beginne with the Kings Pawne as farre as he may goe. And if the contrarie party play the kings Pawne as farre as he may, thou ſhalt play thy Kings knight to three houſes, from the kings biſhop. And if he play his kings knight to three houſes from the kings biſhop thou ſhalt take with

thy knight his kings pawne, and if hee take alſo thy pawne with his knight, play thy Queene before thy king.
                  And if he retire his knight into the third houſe of his kings biſhop, thou ſhalt giue him check with thy Queene, in turning her away from thy knight, the which thou ſhalt remooue into the third houſe of his Queenes biſhop. And then hee can not play ſo well, but that he ſhall looſe his Queene.
                  And if hee remooue not his knight, but play his Queene before his king, thou ſhalt take his knight with thy Queene: then hee will play his Queenes pawne one roume againſt thy knight, to the end that if thou remooue it from thence, hee may take thy Queene. Therefore thou ſhalt play thy Queenes Pawne as farre as he may go, and if he play the pawne of his kings biſhoppe one ſteppe, thou ſhalt play the pawne of thy kings biſhop as farre as he may go, and if he take thy knight with his Queenes pawne, thou ſhalt take his pawne, with that of thine, and if he play his other knight to the ſecond houſe of his Queene, thou ſhalt remooue thine to the third houſe of thy Queenes biſhop, by that meanes thy Queene ſhal remaine ſafe.
                  And if the pawne of his kings biſhop do take thy pawne, thou ſhalt play thy knight to the fourth place of his queene, to take her, but if he ſet her in her third houſe, then ſhalt thou take his pawne with thine.
                  And if he take thy pawne with his knight, thou ſhalt ſet thy queens biſhop in the fourth houſe of thy kings biſhop, and ſo of force he ſhall loſe his knight: but if he take not thy pawne with his knight, hee is

like to leeſe his owne.
                  If in ſteed of taking thy pawne with his knight he take it with his queen, thou ſhalt take his with thine, which after ſhall bee taken with his knight. This done, thou ſhalt giue him checke with thy knight, in taking the pawne of his queenes biſhop, and he ſhall be forced to looſe his queenes rooke.
                  And if hee take not thy pawne, but (to ſaue his queene) placeth her in the third houſe of his queenes biſhop, thou ſhalt play thy kings biſhop, to the fourth houſe of his queenes knight for to take her, and if inſteede of taking her, ſhe take thy biſhop, thou ſhalt giue him check with thy knight in taking the pawne of his queens biſhop, then ſhalt thou take his queene, for the gaine is much greater than of the rooke.
                  And if in ſteede of placing his queene in the third houſe of his biſhop, he place her in the fourth, thou ſhalt ſet thy queens biſhop in the third roome of thy King for to take her.
                  And if hee giue the checke with his queene in the fourth houſe of his rooke, thou ſhalt couer it with thy biſhop, by which meanes hee can doe no more but remooue her into the third houſe of his biſhop, and thou ſhalt play the pawne of thy queenes knight, as farre as he may goe, for to take his queene, then he ſhall be forced to ſet his queene in the third houſe of his biſhop, and thou ſhalt play thy kings biſhop into the fourth houſe of his Knight, to take his Queene, and if ſhe take it, thou haſt thy inſtruction in the laſt Article before. Then can he not play it well, for if it become to pillage or ſpoile of queenes, thou ſhalt haue ſtill the aduantage of the checke of thy Knight

for to take his rooke. So ſhall he be weaker both in ſmall and great peeces, as ſhall be declared in the Article following.
                  And if hee ſet his queene in the third houſe of his King, thou ſhalt yet giue him checke with thy Knight, according to the laſt inſtruction. But if he ſet her in the third place of his Kings Knight (which is the beſt that hee coulde play) yee ſhall ſpoile together your Queenes, then ſhalt thou giue the checke with thy Knight, in taking the pawne of his queens biſhop, to take his rooke.
               
               
                  The ſecond maner of playing it.
                  The ſecond manner of play, is to beginne with the Queenes pawne. If therefore thou beginne, thou ſhalt remooue thy Queenes pawne, as farre as he may goe, and if hee play his as farre as hee may, thou ſhalt play the pawne of thy queenes biſhop as farre as he may goe: and if he take it, play thy Kings pawne as farre as hee may goe: he then will play the pawne of his queenes Knight, as farre as hee may to ſaue his other pawne, and thou ſhalt play the pawne of thy Queenes Rooke two ſteppes: and if he take it with his pawne, thou ſhalt take his other pawne with thy Kings biſhop, then muſt hee of force take that Knights pawne, in playing thy Queenes knight into the third houſe of thy biſhop, on that ſide: for thou ſhalt haue three peeces all prepared to his deſtruction.
                  But if he take not thy rookes Pawne, but play the

Pawne of his Queenes biſhop, thou ſhalt take his pawne with that of thy rooke, and he will take thine with that of his biſhop. Then play the Pawne of thy Queenes knight, and if hee take it, thou ſhalt take with thy kings biſhop his knights Pawne, and ſhalt ſay checke, which hee will couer with his queenes biſhop, and with thy queene thou ſhalt take his other Pawne. And if he take thy biſhop with his, thou ſhalt take his with thy queene, and ſhalt ſay checke, and if he couer it with his queene, it will be no great daunger to ſpoile them both together, becauſe the pawne of his queenes rooke, being without company, ſhal leeſe himſelfe of force, if thou prepare thither thy Knight or thy biſhop.
                  But if with his biſhop he take not thine, but play his queenes Knight to the third houſe of his biſhop, to take thy queens pawne, thou ſhalt play thy queens biſhop to the third houſe of the King: and if hee play his queenes Rooke in the ſeate of the Knight, then remooue thy queene (out of the diſcouerie) to the fourth houſe of thy queenes Rooke, and if he ſet his Queene in the third houſe of his Knight, thou ſhalt remooue thy Queenes Knight to the third houſe of the biſhop.
                  This done, thy biſhop ſhall kill his Knight, and his Queene ſhall put to death thy Biſhop, then thy Queene ſhall take his Rookes pawne who will ſet himſelfe out of the way for feare of feeling the heauy ſtrokes of thy queene. And in ſo doing ſuffereth his King to fall into checke, and yet for ſome other conſiderations, thou ſhalt remoue thy Kings Knight into the ſecond houſe of thy King, then ſhalt thou

ſerue thee of the rookes in looſing the one, to winne the other, and in ſo doing thou ſhalt not faile to win the game.
               
            
            
               THus haſt thou here (gentle Reader) for thy better inſtruction a few ſhort precepts, onely for a taſte, becauſe I would not haue thee ingorged at the firſt, leſt thou feeling thy ſelfe cloyed with the tediouſneſſe of the precepts in proſe thou mighteſt alſo loathe the folowing verſes which I haue written for thy more delight, of a whole game played out at Cheſſe. And thus briefly I bid thee farewell, til better opportunitie ſhall cauſe me to ſet it downe heereafter more at large.
            
            Finis
            
               G. B.
            
         
         
            
            SCACCHIA LVDVS: Cheſſe Play.
            
            
               
                  FOnd ſhapes of warre and fained fight,
               loe (heere) Wee doo report:
               Wee tell of Souldiers framde of Box,
               and Battailes fought in ſport.
               How boxen Princes ſtriue for praiſe,
               in colours blacke and white:
               And how in partie coloured Armes
               each one with other fight.
               Ayd mee ye ſweet Sereian Nymphes
               (by arte of learned Lore)
               To ſpeake of that, which Poets Pen
               did neuer touch before.
               Hard is the way, yet will I proue,
               as Furie doth me lead,
               In heate of youth, to trace the path
               that neuer none did tread.
               Yee ſacred Nymphes and Goddeſſes
               that in Sereia dwell,
               Vouchſafe to guide my artleſſe Pen,
               This fained Fight to tell.
               You firſt of all did bring this Play
               vpon th'Italian Shore,
               
                  Scacchis your Siſters Monument,
               found out in yeres of yore.
               A time there was when Iupiter
               
               (as Poets tell vs plaine)
               
                  Arriu'd on th'Ethiopian ſhore
               where Memnon prince did raigne,
               To viſite olde Oceanus,
               
               and taſte of his good cheere,
               Who then was ioynde in marriage
               to Tellus faire and cleare.
               Thither the Gods did all repaire,
               to ſee olde Oceans choice,
               The waues that beat vpon the ſhore
               did ſeeme for to reioyce.
               Here Mercury Ioues meſſenger
               did firſt himſelfe aduance.
               Then Phoebus with his golden harpes,
               that Muſes taught to dance,
               Thither the Sea-god Neptune went
               with his three forked mace,
               Whoſe chariot two mighty Whales
               did draw vnto the place:
               On him the Tritons all did waite,
               and Sea-Nymphs on a row:
               
                  Thetis and Glaucus on the ſhore
               their watry cheekes did ſhow.
               Then mighty Mars the God of warre
               a caſtle great did holde,
               Carried vpon an Elephant
               all couered with gold.
               Next after him comes Venus faire
               ſet out vnto the proofe.
               
                  Vulcan with hammer in his hand
               comes limping on aloofe.
               Here Ceres was, and Pallas wiſe
               renowmed for her wit:
               
                  Both Pluto and Proſerpina
               
               did here together ſit.
               
                  Ioues wife and ſiſter Iuno faire
               was preſent at the feaſt:
               
                  Himen the God of marriage
               was there among the reſt.
               The Muſes nine and Graces three
               were likewiſe there in place,
               With pleaſant voyce and nimble feete
               the Meaſures for to trace:
               Firſt Iupiter, then all the reſt
               of hie gods that were there,
               Each one in his degree ſits downe
               to taſte of Oceans cheare:
               There wants no kinde of dainty meates
               that land or ſea imparts,
               Here Nectar and Ambroſia
               
               did comfort all their harts.
               No kinde of muſike there did want
               to make them merriments.
               For Phoebe himſelfe and Mercurie
               
               did vſe their inſtruments:
               When all the Gods and Goddeſſes
               that ſate at wedding boord,
               Were well refreſhed with ſuch fare
               as Tellus could affoord.
               Behold aged Oceanus,
               
               to pleaſe the Gods withall,
               Did cauſe a Cheſſe boorde be brought out
               that hangd vpon a wall:
               Wherein were threeſcore ſeates and foure
               ſet downe in blacke and white,
               
                  Foure ſquare the boord, and euery way
               eight rankes appearde in ſight.
               Each ſeate had equall forme and ſhape,
               each ſeate had equall ſpace,
               And yet in colour different,
               which quite contrary was.
               For as the white ſucceedes the blacke,
               ſo blacke ſucceedes the white,
               Which parti-coloured, like a ſnaile
               appeered to their ſight.
               When gods did wonder at the thing,
               olde Ocean gan declare,
               Here may you ſee the field, quoth he,
               and forged tents of warre:
               Here with their enſignes oppoſite,
               and here with ſpeare and ſhield
               You may behold the ſouldiers fight
               and muſter in the field.
               Which ſight the Sea-gods loue to ſee,
               and Sea-nymphs on a row,
               When neither Neptune ſeemes to rage,
               nor Eolus to blow.
               And here beholde the ſouldiers preſt
               this fained fight to ſhow.
               Which ſaid, out of a box of woode
               he powres vpon the bord,
               His men of Boxe, ſuch as the Art
               of Grauers could afford.
               Theſe ſouldiers were in white and blacke,
               whoſe equall force in fight
               And number was ſixteene in blacke,
               and ſixteeene more in white.
               
                  As ſhapes were diuers, ſo their names
               and office diuerſe were,
               For mong the reſt, two crowned Kings
               and Queenes there did appeare.
               Here footemen were and horſemen both,
               archers ſome white, ſome blacke:
               Here Elephants that vſe to beare
               a Caſtle on their backe,
               Now one againſt another place
               their battels in the field:
               And armies both in battell ray
               aduaunce both ſpeare and ſhield.
               The higheſt line containes the Kings,
               in fourth ſeate oppoſite,
               The white King ſtandeth in the blacke,
               the blacke ſtands in the white.
               Next are the Queenes, which by their Kings
               full louingly do ſtand:
               And this vpon the right ſide ſittes
               that on the other hand,
               Blacke Queene the blacke field doth containe,
               the white Queene ſtands in white,
               And in their roomes, their colours both
               they doe maintaine by right.
               Next them in either field doe ſtand
               the Archers blacke and white:
               Who Mars doth loue aboue the reſt,
               as fitteſt for the fight
               Betweene them twaine both King and Queene
               in middle part do ſtand,
               Then come the braue and luſty Knights
               their footemen to withſtand.
               
                  Next them are plac'd the Elephants,
               with Caſtles on their backe:
               Which ſtand like Champions to defend
               the Kings both white and blacke.
               Laſt ranke conteineth Foot-men eight,
               well armde with ſword and ſhield:
               Who in their Kings defence doo fight
               the firſt ſtroke in the field.
               One ſide much like the white-facde Galles,
               
               thus ſtanding in aray,
               To fight againſt the Blackamoores,
               
               old Ocean thus gan ſay:
               Ye ſee, great Gods, the pitched Campe,
               and Souldiers of the Band.
               Now learne their Lawes (for Lawes they haue)
               which they muſt not withſtand.
               Firſt either King doth ſend abroad
               the Battaile to begin,
               Whom they ſhall thinke the fitteſt man,
               the Game or Field to win.
               If firſt a Souldier blacke doo moue
               to fight in Field alone,
               Then ſtraight doth meete him one in white:
               thus fight they one by one.
               But all of them one purpoſe haue,
               both Princes to offend,
               Or els to take them priſoners:
               and thus the Fight doth end.
               They ſpare not one, but murder all
               that in their way doo ſtand,
               That they might ſooner checke the Prince
               when he is badly mand.
               
                  By dint of ſword dead carkaſes
               lye murdred on the Plaine,
               The Campes wex thin, and as they ſlay,
               ſo likewiſe are they ſlaine.
               Who anie kills, muſt ſtraightway ſtand
               within his dead foes place,
               And ſtoutly muſt both beard and braue,
               his foemen to the face.
               If he be out of Enemies reach,
               and voyd the preſent blow,
               Backward he may retire againe,
               and ſaue himſelfe below.
               The Footmen onely are forbode
               by law, among the reſt,
               Not to retyre within the Field,
               becauſe their loſſe is leaſt.
               Nor is their Marching all alike,
               nor order of their fight:
               The fighting Pawnes goe ſtep by ſtep
               againſt their Enemies right.
               Yet at firſt meeting may they make
               two ſteps their force to trie:
               But when they doo aſſaile the Foe,
               then muſt they goe awrie.
               The Elephants right on may goe,
               on right or on left hand,
               Or backe againe, to murder thoſe,
               that in their way doo ſtand.
               Yet muſt they not goe ouerthwart,
               their foe-mans force to proue,
               As Archers vſen for to doo,
               whom Mars doth chiefly loue.
               
                  Both Archers may march ouerthwart,
               one ſtandeth in the blacke,
               In white ſpace th'other ſeated is
               with arrowes at his backe.
               Nor muſt they change their wonted courſe,
               though they by law may moue
               And range abroad ore all the field,
               and euerie ſeate to proue.
               The horſman Knight rides through the Campe
               with ſoft and equall pace,
               He leapes aloft, yet may not paſſe
               aboue a double ſpace.
               If firſt in white he takes his place,
               the blacke field muſt he range:
               And muſt by law keepe equall ſteps,
               but colour ſtill muſt change.
               The luſtie Queene, rightſide or left,
               forward or backe may goe▪
               
               Right on ſhe goes, not ouerthwart,
               as horſmen vſe to doe.
               No certaine ſteps or courſe ſhe hath,
               but goes without all ſtay:
               Except that ſome of either ſide
               doo ſtand within her way.
               For by the orders of the Field
               it lawfull is for none
               To ouer-leap anothers backe,
               but for the Knight alone.
               More warily the Prince doth fight
               on whom the reſt depends▪
               
               He being ſafe, the Battaile holds,
               he dead, the Battaile ends.
               
                  If Prince be taken priſoner,
               then ſtraight the Field is loſt:
               Therefore in his defence they ſtand,
               and him they honour moſt.
               Their Prince to ſaue, to dint of ſword
               their bodies oft they yeeld:
               He hauing no deſire to fight,
               ſtands quiet in the Field.
               He onely ſeekes his owne defence,
               not others to offend,
               But if they come within his reach,
               a blow he will them lend.
               The Prince may hurt on euerie ſide,
               yet farre he may not paſſe:
               For when he once remoued is,
               and changed hath his place,
               Whether he checked be himſelfe,
               or wound his deadly foe,
               Or wander harmleſſe in the Field,
               but one ſtep muſt he goe.
               This is the order of the Field,
               theſe Lawes they haue in Fight:
               Now may you ſee the Armies both,
               how they will vſe their might.
               Thus ſaid good old Oceanus.
               
               But ſeeing oftentimes,
               When Men or Gods together fight
               for iniuries or crimes.
               It ſo falls out that Gods or Men,
               that fauour either ſide,
               Doo fall at oddes among themſelues,
               till that the Field be tride.
               
                  
                  Ioue riſing from his princely Seate,
               and Chaire of high Eſtate,
               Forbids the Gods to vſe their armes,
               or foſter anie hate.
               And threatens them with angrie words,
               and with his thundring Dart,
               That all the Gods them quiet keepe,
               and fauour neither part.
               This ſaid, he calls Apollo foorth,
               and Mercurie in place,
               Old Atlas Sonne, both yong in yeres,
               and beautifull in face.
               Old Atlas Nephew Mercury
               
               yet had no wings at all
               Vpon his heeles, nor charming Rod,
               which Caducee men call.
               Nor yet did faire Apollo rule
               the Sunne within the skyes:
               His Bow he vſde, his golden Haire
               did hang about his eyes.
               Then Loue commaunds to fight the Field,
               as Battaile ſtood prepar'd.
               And promiſed the Conqueror
               to haue a iuſt reward.
               The great Gods ſit, the leſſer Gods
               ſtand round as in a Ring:
               Forbode by law in word or ſigne
               to further either King.
               Then lots were caſt, which of the twaine
               ſhould firſt begin the Fight:
               The lot vpon Apollo fell▪
               
               which choſen had the white.
               
                  Then muſing where to gin the Game,
               that Pawne he firſt did moue
               Which from the Foe deuides the Queene,
               the blacke Mens force to proue:
               Two ſteps he goes, then Mercury
               
               remooues out of his place
               A pawne that ſtood iuſt oppoſite,
               to beard him face to face.
               Thus ſtand theſe two in Battaile front,
               offring to fight in vaine.
               For Pawnes their foemen cannot hurt,
               if they goe right on plaine.
               On either ſide their fellow Pawnes,
               march on to meet their foes,
               And fill the Field with armed men,
               thus on the Battaile goes.
               And yet they came not to hand blowes,
               but march like, Men at Armes:
               And make but ſhort excurſions,
               to keepe themſelues from harmes.
               But now behold, the foot, man blacke,
               that firſt did meet his foe:
               On left hand ſtroke his enemie,
               and kild him with the blow.
               And boldly ſtands with in his roome,
               but did not ſee, alas,
               His foe at hand, who with one ſtroke
               did kill him in that place.
               Which done, the blacke Prince then remooues
               from place where he did ſtand,
               And kept himſelfe inuironed
               with all his Princely Band.
               
                  Then ſodenly, the warlike Knights
               that on the left hand ſtood,
               Did rouſe themſelues, and bathe their ſwords
               in ſlaughtred foemens blood.
               Meane time the Paunes goe ſtill to wracke,
               for backe they cannot goe:
               The Horſmen vaunt it in the Field,
               and ſtill offend their foe.
               But whiles Apollo ſeekes the ſpoyle
               of Pawnes that armed ſtand,
               And makes his Knight runne ouer all,
               to waſt the blacker Band:
               Falſe Mercuri: doth goe about
               by ſubtiltie and ſleight,
               To daunt his foe, and makes his Knight
               runne ouer foot-men ſtreight,
               Who ſeeking to intrap the King,
               now here, now there doth range,
               And ouer-runnes his enemies,
               and ſtill his place doth change.
               But hauing found a place moſt fit,
               he ſtands as in a Ring,
               And ſeekes by all meanes poſsible
               to counterchecke the King.
               And therewithall ſets on the Rooke,
               which on the right Wing ſtands:
               While Phoebus ſeekes to aid the King,
               and rid him from his hands.
               He ſees the Rooke in danger great,
               which makes him for to raue:
               Sith one of them he needes muſt loſe,
               for both he can not ſaue.
               
                  He therefore ſeekes to ſaue the King
               remoouing him a ſpace:
               Meane time the blacke Knight takes the ranke,
               and ſtandeth in his place.
               Great loſſe (alas) for none there is
               (the prowd Queene ſet apart)
               That in the field doth better good,
               or vſeth greater Arte.
               Thou ſhalt not vnreuenged goe
               quoth Phoebus, full ofire,
               And with his Pawnes doth compaſſe him,
               which makes him to retire,
               And quake for feare, for danger great
               his ſoule doth vndertake,
               While that he ſees no hope of helpe,
               nor any way to ſcape▪
               
               For on that ſide the armed campe,
               on this, the Queene did ſtand,
               All armed like an Amazon,
               and ſlew him with her hand.
               The army white beginnes to rage
               much like a furious Bull,
               Who hauing loſt one horne in fight,
               yet beates his horned ſcull,
               Againſt his raging ennemy,
               begored all in blood:
               So they inforſt, with greater force
               their furious foes withſtoode.
               But Phoebus on the other ſide
               beganne to rage amaine:
               And bends his forces to his foes,
               to put them to more paine:
               
                  But while he ſeekes to ſpoile his foes,
               two companies he loſt▪
               
               The ſlaughter of his enemies
               full deare his army coſt▪
               
               Falſe Mercury doth looke about,
               but ſtayes his hand from ſtroke,
               And now he ventures here, now there
               his foemen to prouoke,
               And that the Queene he might ſurprize,
               a Pawne he doth preſent,
               Which natheleſſe the ſuttle God
               doth ſeeme for to repent.
               The Archer then for right ſide ſeekes
               the white Queene to intangle,
               Which heedeleſſe foe, not marking, thruſt
               a Pawne in left ſide angle
               When Venus faire foreſaw the loſſe
               that thereby ſhould enſue,
               She warning gaue to Phoebus milde,
               by ſignes and tokens true.
               
                  Apollo thus admoniſhed
               did caſt his eyes about,
               And viewd the campe, and ſodainely
               he ſpied among the rout,
               One of his foes that ready was
               to ſwallow vp the Pawne,
               And checke the Queene, he with his hand
               did pull him in againe.
               And thus he both did ſaue the Pawne,
               and rid the Queene from thrall,
               Which elſe had brought deſtruction
               to King and army all.
               
                  Then Mercury began to chafe,
               and chide Latonaes ſonne:
               Affirming that the Queene was tane,
               and that the game was wonne.
               The Gods themſelues beginne to iarre,
               and ſpeake on either part.
               Then Phoebus anſwers for himſelfe,
               and vſeth all his Art.
               What wrong (quoth he) is offered,
               if playing ſuch a game,
               We mend a ſodaine ouerſight,
               what law forbids the ſame?
               Then make a lawe, that whoſo touch
               a man, or white or blacke,
               That forward he do play the ſame,
               and not to pull him backe.
               This ſentence pleaſed all the Gods,
               yet with a ſecret becke,
               
                  Ioue Venus chid, but Mercury
               
               did not perceiue the checke.
               But yet it greeu'd him to the hart,
               that Phoebus vſde ſuch play,
               And ready was Cheſſe boord, and all
               the men to caſt away.
               Then did he purpoſe with himſelfe
               to vſe ſome cunning ſleight:
               If not by force to quell his foe,
               to foile him by deceit.
               Then doth he make the Archer faine
               the paces of the Knight:
               He ſtanding foorth doth threaten death
               vnto the Queene in white.
               
                  When Phoebus did perceiue his drift,
               he ſmiling turn'd his face
               To all the Gods, and vide theſe wordes▪
               
               in Mercuries diſgrace.
               Though thou be ſuttle Mercurie,
               
               and vſe to filch thy pray,
               Yet ſhalt thou not deceiue me ſo,
               and therefore mend thy play.
               The lookers on beganne to laugh,
               then Mercury, though loath,
               Pulld backe his man, and made him goe
               euen as the Archer doth.
               
                  Apollo then beganne to watch,
               and marke the ſuttle ſleights
               That Mercury did vſe in play,
               and gan to ſhunne his baites.
               And now beholde the Archer white
               againſt the Knight in blacke
               Oppoſde himſelfe, who went about
               to ſpoile the Queene, alacke.
               The right hand Rooke goes here and there▪
               
               and gliſters in white armes
               And in the middſt gainſt King and Queene
               he threatens mighty harmes.
               The Knight likewiſe armed in white
               as prowde of former ſpoile,
               Beganne to glory in his actes,
               not fearing any foile.
               The Archer blacke ſeeing his pride
               no longer could abide,
               But bent his bowe, and ſhot his ſhaft,
               and pierſt him in the ſide.
               
                  There lies he tumbling in the duſt,
               both horſeman, horſe, and all:
               Then ſteppeth forth a Pawne in white,
               and killes the Archer tall:
               Him killes another Pawne in blacke,
               the battell waxeth hot:
               The Rookes doe rage, and euery man
               doth ſtand vnto his lot.
               The Archers ſhoote their arrowes thicke,
               the horſeman or the Knight
               Beginne to rage and range the fielde,
               in colours blacke and white▪
               
               Headlong they runne and ruſh in armes,
               both armies blacke and white,
               The captaines and the ſouldiers ſtout,
               pel mel in fury fight.
               Now this ſide gets the vpper hand,
               now that doth ſeeme to yeelde:
               Vertue and Fortune meete in one,
               and ſtriue to winne the field.
               The white Queene like an Amazon,
               doth fight with furious hand,
               And going forward killes a Rooke
               that in her way did ſtand:
               Retiring backe vnto her place
               the Biſhop blacke ſhe foiles,
               And raging thus on euery ſide
               her enemies ſhe ſpoiles:
               Much like a raging Lioneſſe
               the furious Queene doth ſtampe,
               On euery ſide ſhe ſleys her foes,
               and ſpoiles her enemies campe.
               
                  At length the army all in blacke,
               and blacke Prince gan to quaile,
               And of his blacke Queene aide he craues
               his foemen to aſſaile▪
               
               Who layes about as ſhe were mad,
               and rageth here and there,
               And helpes her friends, and hurtes her foes,
               and puts them all in feare.
               The Pawnes are ſlaine on euery ſide,
               the Archers goe to wracke,
               And there lay weltring in their blood
               the horſemen white and blacke▪
               
               For both the Queenes like Amazons
               do either ſtrike amaine,
               Not meaning to forſake the Field
               till one of them be ſlaine.
               Meane time the rulers of the hoſte
               did keepe the bodies ſlaine,
               And watch the captiue priſoners
               leſt they ſhould fight againe.
               But Mars a friend to Mercury,
               
               ſtanding by Phoebus ſide,
               Did ſeeke by all meanes poſsible
               to help his friend that tide.
               And from the heape of dead men ſlaine,
               blacke Rooke and Pawne he takes,
               And put them in the campe againe,
               which a freſh battell makes.
               Thus ſecretly the priſoners,
               that lately gan to yeeld,
               Did ſtowtly fight, and vſed now
               their weapons in the field.
               
                  But Iunos ſonne lame Mulciber
               
               who onely ſpide the act,
               Cries out aloude▪ and Phoebus warnes
               of this vnlawfull fact.
               The Thracian Knight Don Mercury
               
               thus taken, wexed pale,
               
                  Phoebus began to fret and fume
               till Ioue had heard his tale,
               Then Iupiter angry with Mars,
               
               did Mercury checke plaine,
               Commaunding him to throw them out
               where they at firſt lay ſlaine:
               And bids him caſt thoſe men away
               that Mars had giuen of late,
               And cauſeth them to bring their game
               vnto the former ſtate.
               Both captaines now began to rage,
               and furiouſly to ſtampe.
               And both their Queenes they ſend abroad,
               to ſpoile each others campe.
               Their blades are both imbrewd in blood,
               whiles here and there they fling,
               At laſt placed iuſt oppoſite,
               both ſeeke to ſaue their King.
               But whiles blacke Queene leſſe for her ſelfe
               than for her husband cares,
               Behold the white Queene ſodainly
               did kill her vnawares.
               But not long time the Queene, alas,
               enioyde the victory:
               For Biſhop ſhot a deadly ſhaft,
               and ſlew her preſently.
               
                  Both armies now beganne to faile,
               the ſouldiers wept, alas,
               When either ſide ſaw both their Quee
                     •
                  
                  ▪
               
               lie ſlaine before their face.
               Then gan they for to guarde their King,
               and ſtand about them round,
               Both armies now beganne to feare
               each ſouldier had his wound.
               Yet were they not quite voyde of force,
               ſome helpes were yet behinde,
               Which liu'de as yet to trie the field,
               as Fortune had aſsignde.
               
                  Phoebus had yet three footemen left,
               which ſtoode on the right wing,
               One Biſhop and a Rooke beſide
               for to defend his King.
               So many Pawnes had Mercurie
               
               one Biſhop and a Knight,
               For both his Rookes and all the reſt
               were ſlaine in former fight.
               Then Mercurie gan to diſpaire,
               for loſſe of men at armes:
               Yet warily gainſt Phoebus fought
               for feare of future harmes.
               And ſeekes by all meanes poſsible,
               his foemen to offend,
               And bide the fortune of the field,
               hoping a better end:
               
                  Apollo then triumphantly
               did march within the field,
               Reioycing in the bloody ſpoiles
               of thoſe whom he had killd
               
                  Both Princes ſpoyled of their Queenes,
               though former loue remaines:
               Yet ſeeke they now new mariages
               to eaſe their former paines.
               Therefore the white King firſt of all,
               of wayting Maids I weene,
               Doth ſeeke to chuſe a ſecond wife,
               and make of her a Queene.
               But firſt he meanes to trie their force
               and courage in the Field:
               And plant his loue on one that makes
               her Enemies to yeeld.
               For none the Princes loue may gaine,
               except with courage bold▪
               
               She harmleſſe paſſeth to the place
               which aduerſe King doth hold.
               Straight on doo go the wayting Maids,
               yet one among the reſt,
               That on right hand the third place held,
               in ſwiftnes was the beſt:
               And hopes by valor to obtaine
               the marriage of the King,
               For th'other twaine were caſt behinde,
               and thought of no ſuch thing.
               She marcheth on with courage bold
               the foe-man King to greete:
               For due reward, and hope of fame,
               gaue wings vnto her feete.
               The blacke Prince likewiſe doth attempt
               a ſecond marriage:
               Which cauſeth Mercury to ſtep
               all forward in a rage.
               
                  Moouing a Pawne from left hand ſide,
               which on the fourth ranke ſtood,
               But by a ſtep he was too ſlow,
               which made him mad and wood.
               But now behold the Pawne in white,
               on top of Fortunes Ball:
               Racing the Campe, did there poſſeſſe
               the higheſt place of all.
               This done, the King adorned her
               with dead Queenes braue attire:
               And takes her to his louing wife,
               which was her whole deſire.
               Now gan the white Campe to reioyce,
               and blacke men gan to frowne:
               And Mercury began to weepe,
               till teares did runne adowne.
               The blacke Pawne now from higheſt place,
               one onely ſtep did lacke,
               But Rooke in white was readie preſt▪
               
               to haue her by the backe.
               So that for feare ſhe durſt not ſtirre
               from place wherein ſhe ſtood,
               Leaſt that her deadly Enemie
               ſhould triumph in her blood.
               Meane time the ſtately new made Queene
               her force in Battaile tride,
               And raging ſo, ſhe ſlew her foes
               that ſtood on either ſide.
               The blacke Campe at her verie ſight,
               began for feare to tremble:
               For Theſtilis the Amazon
               
               in Field ſhe did reſemble.
               
                  The Souldiers gan to runne away,
               afraid of euerie thing:
               And running all vpon a heape,
               inuironed their King.
               Much like a Heard of Oxen faire
               or Heyfers on the Plaine▪
               
               When as they ſee the Wolfe approach,
               their legges begin to ſtraine,
               And ſtand about the maſter Bull,
               all round as in a Ring:
               Euen ſo theſe ſeely fearfull Swaines,
               ſtood round about their King.
               But furious Queene, as Conqueror▪
               
               ranne vp and downe the Field,
               And ſets vpon the King himſelfe,
               which now began to yeeld.
               And had ſhe not too haſtie been
               in running of her race,
               No doubt ſhe might haue tane the King,
               or ſlaine him in his place.
               That day had brought a fatall end
               to blacke Prince at a blow▪
               
               And Mercury Ioues Meſſenger,
               had had an ouerthrow.
               But Atlas Sonne did well perceaue
               
                  Apolloes ouer-ſight:
               And mocked him, and bade the Queene
               looke better to her fight.
               Thus while Apollo went about
               a ſilly Pawne to catch,
               He loſt that oportunitie
               which he before did watch.
               
                  And Mercury, to ſaue the King,
               his Knight he did oppoſe
               To fight againſt the new made Queene,
               and to defend her blowes.
               Then ſeeking to offend the Rooke
               that ſtaid the Pawne in blacke
               From being Queene: he drawes a ſhaft,
               and ſhootes him in the backe.
               Thus while Apollo ſought in vaine
               his foe King to offend,
               His luſtie Rooke he loſt, alas,
               and brought him to his end.
               The blacke Pawne then without all feare
               in higheſt place was ſeene:
               Nor could Apollo hinder her
               from being made a Queene.
               Now both of them with equall force
               did fight within the Field.
               And valiantly their new made Queenes,
               did vſe both ſpeare and ſhield.
               And though the fortune of the Fight,
               and hope vncertaine was,
               Yet Mercvry began to vaunt,
               and take new hart at graſſe.
               As certaine of the victorie,
               he gan for to inſult:
               And vſeth all his ſubtilties
               to make a new tumult.
               When Phoebus did perceiue his drift,
               theſe words he vſed hot:
               Why Mercury dooſt thy triumph,
               before the Field be got.
               
                  When thou haſt gotten victorie,
               then vſe thy brauing words:
               Meane time let vs not braggarts bee,
               but fight it out with ſwords.
               Thy words I will confute with ſwords,
               thy braues with future blowes:
               This ſaid, he animates his Queene,
               to ſet vpon his foes.
               Straight-waies begins a Battaile great
               and furious in the Field:
               Both ſides are bold, and neither part
               is purpoſed to yeeld.
               They runne vpon their foemens blades,
               great feare is in the Campe,
               Their hands imbrude in blood, their feete
               through thicke and thin doo ſtampe.
               The blacke Queene now begins to ſpoyle
               her foes before her face.
               The Queene in white withſtood her not,
               but runnes another race:
               Vntoucht of all her Enemies,
               a ſecret way ſhe takes,
               Ceaſing to fly at ſmaller game,
               toward the King ſhe makes▪
               
               And ſetting firſt vpon the Guard
               that round about him ſtood,
               She ſeekes to checke the King, and bathe
               her hands within his blood.
               The blacke Queene then, when as ſhe ſaw
               the white Queenes whole intent,
               Leauing the Battaile as it ſtood,
               to helpe the King ſhe went.
               
                  For rather doth ſhe ſeeke to runne
               vpon her preſent death,
               Than ſee her King, before her face
               bereft of vitall breath.
               But then there chaunſt another thing
               that grieued Phoebus ſore:
               For Mercury ſent out his Knight
               to vex him more and more.
               The Horſman furiouſly doth fight,
               nor ſtayes he in his race,
               Till fearing neither King nor Queene,
               he got his wiſhed place.
               And brauing in his armour blacke,
               a ſtout Knight was he ſeene:
               And threateneth deſtruction
               both to the King and Queene:
               Which when Apollo did perceiue
               it grieu'd him verie ſore,
               And now the hope began to faile
               which he conceiud before.
               Now Mercury began to vaunt
               of hoped victorie,
               And glad in minde, both hart and voyce
               did lift vnto the skie.
               And with his Souldiers compaſsing
               the white Queene round about,
               He ſtrikes her dead, and doth enioy
               her ſpoyles with courage ſtout.
               In which Conflict by white Kings ſtroke
               he loſt his valiant Knight:
               
                  Phoebus (though grieued at the loſſe)
               yet fiercely held him Fight.
               
                  And with his Biſhop all in white
               and Pawnes that were but twaine
               He fights the Field, and doth renew
               the Battaile once againe.
               The leſſer hope they haue of helpe,
               the boulder are they found:
               To ſaue their King, they yeeld themſelues
               to manie a fearfull wound.
               But all in vaine: for Mercury
               
               gan furiouſly to fight,
               And ſends abroad his Queene in blacke,
               to checke the King in white.
               She rangeth here and there about,
               not meaning once to yeeld,
               Till ſhe hath got the victorie
               of white King in the Field.
               And hauing ſlaine the foot men both
               that on the King did tend,
               She ſets vpon the King himſelfe
               to bring him to his end.
               Now had the King no hope of helpe,
               but as a captiue ſtands:
               Yet loath he was to yeeld himſelfe,
               into his Enemies hands.
               But meanes by flight to ſaue himſelfe,
               and runs now here now there:
               And ſeekes by all meanes poſsible
               to rid himſelfe from feare.
               As one forſaken of his frends
               he rangeth all about:
               His foes purſue him in the chaſe,
               and fight with courage ſtout.
               
                  The blacke Prince doth purſue the white,
               and vſeth all his ſtrength,
               And euer kept behinde his foe
               about a weapons length.
               But when he ſee him ſet his foote
               vpon the higheſt ſeate:
               He bids his Queene to watch him well,
               that he away ne get.
               The King thus brought into a ſtraight,
               beſet of all his foes,
               Doth faintly fight: yet to their blowes
               himſelfe he doth oppoſe.
               The blacke Queene watching well her time
               purſude the King ſo faſt,
               That he no place of refuge had
               to ſaue himſelfe at laſt.
               For as he ranne into a nooke
               himſelfe for to defend,
               The blacke Queene pierſt him to the heart,
               and ſo his life did end.
               The Gods and all the Goddeſſes
               that ſtoode them round about,
               At Phoebus loſſe and ouerthrow
               began to giue a ſhoute.
               And Mercury the conquerour
               thus hauing wonne the Field,
               Beganne to ſcoffe Apollo faire,
               who now of force muſt yeelde.
               
                  Phoebus was greeu'd that all the Gods
               ſo ill did him regard:
               And Mercury Ioues meſſenger
               did looke for his rewarde.
               
                  Whom mighty Ioue the king of Gods,
               doth call vnto him ſoone:
               And giues to him a iuſt rewarde,
               for that which he had done.
               The gift was ſtrange, a coniuring rod,
               which Caducee men call,
               Whoſe vertue was of great effect
               to raiſe the dead withall.
               To caſt a man into a ſleepe,
               and wake him vp againe,
               To raiſe the ſoules from Limbo lake,
               and rid them from their paine:
               To make men liuing dead, and ſend
               their quicke ſoules downe to hell,
               Which cauſed him in Magickes Artes
               all other to excell.
               Nor wanted Phoebus his rewarde,
               though Mercury had wonne,
               For Ioue did giue him leaue to rule
               the Chariot of the Sunne.
               This done, the Gods and Goddeſſes
               that ſaw this pleaſant game,
               Went euery one vnto the place
               from whence at firſt they came.
               And Mercury long afterward,
               in trauell, as I geſſe,
               Did teach the men of Italie
               
               to play this game at Cheſſe.
               For landed on th'Italian ſhore,
               as ancient ſtories tell:
               He ſpied by chance a louely Dame,
               that likte him paſsing well,
               
                  And ſeeing her, and liking her,
               he loued her withall:
               This was a braue Sereian Nymph,
               whome Scacchis men did call:
               Who while ſhe kept her ſnowie ſwannes
               about the riuers wilde,
               He ſpyde, and lou'd and lay with her,
               and got the maid with childe.
               And to requite ſuch curteſie
               ſhewd by ſo kinde a Dame:
               To driue away the time withall,
               he taught her firſt this game.
               And for the loſſe of libertie,
               and maidenhead withall:
               Of her name Scacchis Scacchia
               
               this play at Cheſſe did call.
               And that this God in memorie
               the Laſſe might longer haue,
               A Boxen Cheſſe boord gilded round
               vnto the gerle he gaue,
               And taught her cunning in the ſame,
               to play the game by Arte.
               Which after to the country ſwaines
               this Lady did impart:
               Who taught their late poſteritie
               to vſe this kinde of play,
               A game of great antiquitie
               ſtill vſed at this day.
            
            Finis
            
               W. B.
            
         
      
      
         
            
            To the Reader.
            
               THus haue you here, as I do geſse,
               The order of the game at Cheſse:
               With all the precepts leſſe or more,
               As it was vſde in yeeres of yore:
               Which game the Gods did firſt inuent,
               To paſse the time in merriment:
               And that we mortall men on earth
               Might imitate their heauenly mirth,
               And driue all ſorrowes from the hart,
               Which now and then come ouerthwart,
               I thought it good to ſet downe plaine
               This Game, which Arcas did ordaine
               To be a ſolace to the Gods,
               When as their hearts were farre at ods.
               Wherein if you do take delight,
               And vſe the ſame by day or night,
               To driue away your ſorrowes past:
               I ſhall be pleaſed at the last,
               Requeſting you with all my hart,
               To take my verſes in good part;
               And to remaine my louing friend,
               For this time thus I make an end.
            
         
      
   